                                           $11.00

During the nearly quarter of a century that
Europe required to crush the military might
of the French Revolution and Napoleon,
Britain aided her allies of the coalitions by
furnishing them with subsidies. From Bri-
tain’s financial effort emerged the legend of
“Pitt’s gold,” which figures prominently in
the historical literature dealing with that ti-
tanic contest.

This book goes behind the legend and
examines the evolution of the British for-
eign aid program from its beginnings in 1793
to the Battle of Waterloo. In many ways
that subsidy program was the prototype of
the great foreign aid systems which, in the
present century, contributed to allied vic-
tories in two World Wars.

The author shows that Britain’s subsidy
policy was decidedly evolutionary in char-
acter  — reluctantly undertaken and really
massive only in the closing years of the
struggle. In 1793, for example, virtually her
only use of subsidies was to hire German
mercenaries   — a traditional policy dictated
by her limited manpower resources and her
heavy involvement in the naval war with
France.    Under steady pressure from the
continental   allies, however,   Britain   was   fi-
nally forced to share her wealth with them,
and by the formation of the Third Coalition
in 1804-1805 William Pitt the Younger was
ready to subsidize all his country’s war part-
ners as a matter of course. Even when so
financed, the Coalition was speedily shat-
    25. 007.1971
  4//S #I/S4
   SUBJECT TO




fl Hoole KA blasG
  for Wha lews
  SUBJECT       TO
GARLIER      RECALL
LOAN FROM 2
   28 NOV 1996!



AUTHOR      CHERWIG,                 JM.            CLASS     No.




   This   book must   be returned    on or before    the date shown   above
                      LANCASHIRE       COUNTY       LIBRARY
                  COUNTY     HALL,     PRESTON,      PR1    8RH




            NTE |
            3011806883508
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
              in 2023 with funding from
              Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/guineasgunpowder0000john
    Cann              IN        OSCE
                                  OW DER

BRITISH   FOREIGN   AID    IN   THE   WARS   WITH   FRANCE
                      1793-1815
William   Pitt   the   Younger,   by   John   Hoppner
GUINEAS                        AND
GUNPOWDER

     BRITISH     FOREIGN          AID


IN   THE    WARS       WITH     FRANCE

           1793-181


        JOHN     M.    SHERWIG




     HARVARD    UNIVERSITY       PRESS

        Cambridge,    Massachusetts
© Copyright 1969 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
                        All rights reserved
 Distributed in Great Britain by Oxford University Press, London


       Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 69-12736
             Printed in the United States of America
TO   THE   MEMORY   OF   MY   MOTHER   AND   FATHER
                            PREFACE




During the century and a half since the Battle of Waterloo, a vast
literature has appeared dealing with almost every aspect of the
Wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon. This book is
concerned with an important but strangely neglected feature of
that struggle: Britain’s financial aid to her continental allies
between 1793 and 1815. Every serious account of the war makes
peripheral reference to British subsidies, but the subject has never
received the attention it merits. It is hoped that the work here
offered will meet that need.
   In examining Britain’s use of subsidies as an instrument of war,
answers will be sought to two major questions. Did subsidization
involve any clear policy? If so, did that policy undergo any change
between the outbreak of war and its conclusion twenty-two years
later? This is primarily a study of diplomatic and military history.
The economics of subsidization is an important subject in itself,
but its history has yet to be written.
  Much of the research for this work was done at the Public
Record Office, and I gratefully acknowledge the kindness of the
Keeper of Public Records for permission to make use of the
British government archives for the period. Transcripts of Crown-
copyright records in the Public Record Office appear by permis-
sion of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. The time
I spent at the Record Office was all the more profitable thanks to
the invaluable assistance given me by H. N. Blakiston and E. K.
Timings, Principal Assistant Keepers. They helped me find my way
through the archival maze and brought much important material
to my attention which I would otherwise have overlooked. Two
other members of the Record Office staff, S. R. Bickell and E. E.
Coleman, also made me their debtor. They cheerfully produced
                               Preface


many hundreds of bundles and volumes of material for me. The
many kindnesses of all the Record Office staff made my two
sojourns in Chancery Lane a delight.
   I am grateful to the Trustees of the British Museum for
permission to make use of the collections of private papers
deposited there. Acknowledgment is also due Howard H. Peck-
ham, director of the William L. Clements Library, the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, for the opportunity to examine the
typescript copies of the unpublished correspondence of George
Ill. The editor of the Journal of Modern History, published by the
University of Chicago, has kindly permitted me to incorporate in
this work parts of my article, ‘‘Lord Grenville’s Plan for a Concert
of Europe, 1797-1799,” which appeared in vol. 34 (1962) of that
periodical.
   To the late Professor David Owen of Harvard University and to
Professor William B. Willcox of the University of Michigan I owe a
special debt. They initiated me into the mysteries of the
historian’s craft and their suggestions led me to take up the
problem of British subsidies in earnest. The late Sir Charles K.
Webster also took a kind interest in my endeavor and gave
generously of his time in sharing with me his vast knowledge and
understanding of the period.
   In bringing to completion a work which has occupied so many
years, I cannot hope to acknowledge all of the many debts I have
incurred. The staff of my college library merit a special mention,
however.   I have   often   taxed     their   patience,    but   never   their
resources. I am also particularly obliged to the Widener Library at
Harvard University for the opportunity to use their rich store-
house of material. My faculty colleagues have been unsparing in
their encouragement and assistance. Professor George A. Schnell
kindly prepared the maps and graphs. The manuscript was read in
its entirety by Professor Lawrence W. Sullivan who offered many
helpful suggestions. Mrs. Lester F. Tubby typed the final
manuscript and her sharp eyes saved me from a number of pitfalls.
   Finally, I acknowledge a particular debt to my wife, Mary Jane,
whose courage and confidence at a critical moment helped me
complete this study.
Waterloo Day, 1968                                        John M. Sherwig
State University of New York
New Paltz, New York
                                    Viii
                          CONTENTS




Introduction
The Formation of the First Coalition
The Prussian Subsidy
A New Orientation for the Coalition
The Collapse of the First Coalition
Origins of the Second Coalition
The Second Coalition                                               116
The Third Coalition                                                143
The End of an Epoch                                                166
A New Direction for British War Policy                             184
British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula                     216
Victory in the Peninsula                                           239
Britain and the Rising of the Nations                              ay)
Forging the Grand Alliance                                         294
The Final Coalition                                                Bl
Conclusion                                                         345

Appendix                                                           ee)
Table of Events in French History, 1789-1815                       Se!)
Subsidy Payments to the Allies, 1793-1816                          362
Comparison of Subsidy Payments, Cost of British Army in Europe,
  and the Total Costs of British Army, Navy, and Ordnance, 1793-
  1803 and 1804-1816                                               369
Bibliography                                                       370
Index                                                              38]
                            ILLUSTRATIONS




William Pitt the Younger, by John Hoppner                               Frontispiece
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London


Lord Grenville, by John Hoppner                                                  42
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London
Lord Malmesbury, by Sir Joshua Reynolds
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the British Museum
Sir Charles Whitworth, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By courtesy of the Louvre Museum
George Canning, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By courtesy of the Governing Body of Christ Church, Oxford


The Duke of Wellington, by Thomas Heaphy
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London
William Carr Beresford, by Thomas Heaphy
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London
Spencer Perceval, by George Joseph
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London
The Marquess Wellesley, by J. Davis
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London


Viscount Castlereagh, by Sir Thomas Lawrence                                    281
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen
Lord Liverpool, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By courtesy of the Trustees of the National Portrait Gallery, London
Francis I, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen
Frederick William III, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen
                                 Illustrations


Alexander I, by Sir Thomas Lawrence                 207
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen
Prince Metternich, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen
Prince Von Hardenberg, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen
Count Nesselrode, by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 By gracious permission of Her Majesty, the Queen




                                      MAPS
Campaign Area of the First Coalition                 38
Campaign Area of the Second Coalition               122
Campaign Area of the War in the Peninsula           220
Campaign Area of the Final Phase                    278




                                         i
                                                                   bs
                                                                  an

=                   TT      a                  r   7          -
               ry       yews         he                staal 3

                    cb esol of pfs                 ‘fab
                7? ml OE A @ Pasties
           oz a0            2            ae                              v
           é             Anak sai §      yatta
            WWE Eerie!               Gap! tans in
          ee        a                  a nna  heel =

                                                         =*,


                    ,                          "   a     it
         as)                     5                                Te
                     a           i   ’    er   Ay > 0a             ie)

                             hier @2 ini           ———
           ‘sce           gyi"           im    or




    ‘?
GUINEAS   AND   GUNPOWDER
The character of this country had suffered by its inflexible
perseverance in the present war; even our allies had said, that the
English covered Germany with blood and gold.
—Mr. Nicholls in a speech to the House of Commons, July 9, 1800


If you...could open the eyes of the continental nations to their
true interests, if you could clearly shew them that not only their
interests but their salvation depended upon their joining you in
opposing an enemy whose object it was to destroy you both, then
surely it was not only not unjust, but it was even meritorious, to
secure their co-operation if possible.
—William Pitt, speaking to the House of Commons, June 21, 1805




                                Xiv
                            INTRODUCTION




As February     1, 1793 drew to a close, the Reverend James
Woodforde of the parish of Weston Longeville, Norfolk, set down
in his diary the few events of that quiet day which seemed worth
recording. He noted with regret the death of one of his
parishoners, “beloved by all that knew him it is said as being a
very good natured, inoffensive Man.”’ The brief entry ended on a
happier note since that evening the good parson had won sixpence
from his niece at cribbage. Woodforde had no idea that on that
same day the French National Convention had declared war on
Great Britain.! At first neither the Norfolk parson nor his prime
minister, William Pitt, suspected how much that war was to affect
their lives and their country. Victory over France was won only
after both had passed away, but parson and premier lived long
enough to see the contest turn into a struggle for existence far
more perilous than any their nation had ever known.
  When the French Revolution broke out in 1789 there was no
reason to believe that it would finally engulf all Europe. So far as
Britain was concerned, every consideration of national self-interest
warned her away from involvement in French affairs. Pitt’s
program of fiscal reform was just beginning to bear fruit, and
nothing ought to be allowed to imperil the harvest. Furthermore,
disagreements with Spain and Russia were threatening to develop
into major diplomatic crises of far more immediate concern to
Britain than France’s struggle for constitutional government. By
the spring of 1792, however, the Revolution had become a
whirlpool which threatened to draw Europe into its vortex. In
Britain the Revolution had inspired a political reform movement
which aroused the worst fears of the conservatives. France’s
  1. The Diary of a Country Parson:     The   Reverend   James   Woodforde,   ed. John
Beresford (London, 1924-1931), IV, 5.
                                        1
                        Guineas and Gunpowder


declaration of war against Austria in 1792 prompted Pitt’s
government to issue a declaration of neutrality in an effort to
escape the coming violence.
   Less than a year later, Britain and France were at war. The
creation of the French Republic in September 1792 had little
effect on Pitt’s foreign policy, but the unexpected victories of the
Revolutionary armies in the Low Countries presented him with a
crisis. Before the close of that year, the French controlled a large
part of the Austrian Netherlands and crowned their success by
opening the Scheldt river to navigation. This not only violated a
long-standing international agreement, it virtually guaranteed a
French attack on Holland. Pitt hoped to meet the Republican
threat by diplomacy, but each passing week proved this wishful
thinking. Only the strongest countermeasures could check Re-
publican aggression in Europe and French-inspired treason in
Britain itself. War was now inevitable. The February | manifesto
by the Revolutionary Convention in Paris settled the matter and
thrust upon Pitt the unwanted mantle of a war leader.
   The events leading to the war defined the goals which Britain
must now seek on the battlefield; the balance of power had to be
restored and the sanctity of international agreements upheld. Such
was the prime minister’s position in his first war speech to the
House of Commons: “England will never consent that France shall
arrogate the power of annulling at her pleasure, and under the
pretence of a natural right of which she makes herself the only
judge, the political system of Europe, established by solemn
treaties, and guaranteed by the consent of all the powers.’
Despite the eloquent urging of Edmund Burke and the Royalists,
Pitt steadily refused to take up the cause of the ancien régime. For
the remainder of his life, he insisted that Britain’s paramount
concern was the restoration of the balance of power as the best
hope for an enduring peace. In 1805 Pitt embodied this viewpoint
in a concrete plan for the reconstruction of Europe, a plan which
profoundly influenced Lord Castlereagh’s diplomacy during the
final stages of the war.
   What part was Britain to play in this contest with France which
had now begun? Her troops were soon on their way to Flanders to
  2. The Parliamentary History of England, from the Earliest Period   to the Year
1803... , ed. William Cobbett (London, 1806-1820), XXX, 283.


                                       2
                            Introduction


join with the German powers in driving back the enemy, but even
when enlarged by recruitment and the employment of mercenaries
they would play a subordinate role to the Prussians and the
Austrians. The Royal Navy was sent out to destroy the enemy’s
fleets, seize her colonial possessions, and protect friendly shipping.
An important war function was assigned to Britain’s diplomatic
service: the negotiation of treaties with the other powers at war
with France, binding all of them together in an effective coalition.
Once formed, this grand alliance would have to be enlarged to
include Russia. Anxious as Pitt was to create such a league, he was
not ready to pay for it by sharing his nation’s wealth with the
major allies. The war would probably be brief, surely not long
enough to strain unduly the resources of the continental powers.
For that matter, it could be argued that Britain and Holland, as
powers attacked by France, were entitled to claim military
assistance from Prussia by the terms of their defensive alliance of
 1788.
   Nearly all the assumptions which shaped Britain’s war plans in
 {793 soon proved false. The allied armies were powerless to stem
 the advancing French tide in the Low Countries, and soon even
Holland was overrun. All Britain’s diplomatic skill was insufficient
to create the great war confederacy which Pitt desired. In the end
he was finally forced to pay Prussia and Austria in order to keep
alive Britain’s war partnership with them. One by one, the easy
assumptions of 1793 had to be abandoned and more realistic ones
found to take their place.
   By the time the war reached its climax in 1813-1814, Britain’s
role was dramatically different from what it had been twenty
years before. Several of these changes deserve special comment.
The Grand Alliance, which finally broke Napoleon’s hold on
Europe, was largely the creation of Pitt’s pupil and successor, Lord
Castlereagh, whose leadership contrasts sharply with the in-
effectiveness of British diplomats during the initial stages of the
war. Equally impressive was the important role played by the
British army in overturning Napoleon. Wellington’s force in the
Peninsula was no auxiliary unit but the embodiment of Britain’s
resurgent military power. To say that it contributed to Napoleon’s
defeat is to do simple justice to the men who triumphed at
Badajoz and Vittoria.
                            Guineas and Gunpowder


     One of the most significant changes in Britain’s war program was
  the evolution of her subsidy policy between 1793 and 1815. Pitt
  had no desire to subsidize his country’s major allies in 1793, but
  by 1805, circumstances obliged him to pay them all as a matter of
  general policy. During the final year of the war, Britain spent
  £10,000,000 on her allies in a massive aid program which would
 -have astounded Pitt. Nor was this all. In 1808 the British aid
  program took on a different character when arms and supplies, in
  addition to money, were sent to support the Spanish and
  Portuguese uprisings. Four years later, the other European powers
  rose against France and looked to Britain for weapons as well as
  subsidies. In response to this appeal, Britain sent them nearly one
  million muskets during the year 1813 alone. The changing
_ character and expansion of Britain’s foreign aid program mate-
  rially added to her war debt. More than £1,500,000,000 had to be
 raised in loans and taxes betv’een 1793 and 1816 to finance the
  struggle with France; only the nation’s rapidly expanding
_ economy made it possible for her to do this.*
     The development of the British foreign aid program cannot be
  studied in isolation. That the early coalitions against France
  quickly weakened and fell apart was due in large measure to
  rivalries whose origins antedate the war. The methods of Britain’s
  diplomatic service must at least be summarized since it was an
  important ingredient in the formation of nearly every coalition.
  Something ought also to be said of Britain’s war economy, which
  made it possible for the government to help its allies with money
  and arms. Finally, Britain’s ability to wage war on land and sea
  deserves comment, for by the time the war ended, the goverment
  had coordinated its military effort and its foreign aid program.

   To some degree, the wars of the French Revolution represent
 simply an extension of the drives for territorial aggrandizement
 which characterized international politics in the eighteenth cen-
 tury. Austria and Prussia were at least as anxious to plunder
 France as they were to make the world safe for absolute
 monarchy. When the chance for easy victory faded, they were
 tempted to withdraw from that profitless struggle and look
 elsewhere for gain.
   3. Leland H. Jenks, The Migration of British Capital to   1875 (New York and London,
  LOD apa lids
                                           4
                              Introduction


  The Austro-Prussian alliance against the Revolution was an
uneasy marriage of powers who had been deadly rivals for nearly a
century. In 1742 Frederick the Great wrenched Silesia from
Austria’s hold and thereafter blocked all her efforts to find
compensation elsewhere. Thanks to Prussia’s opposition, Vienna
was never able to carry out her favorite plan of exchanging
Belgium for Bavaria. Disappointed in the west, Austria joined
forces with Russia in 1788 to make war on the Ottoman
Empire—only to meet with failure again. From her contest with
Revolutionary France, which began in 1792, Austria hoped to win
the territorial prizes which had hitherto been beyond her grasp. As
for Prussia, the First Polish Partition (1772) climaxed Frederick
the   Great’s   ambition,   and   he spent   the remainder   of his life
protecting the loot. Under his successor, Prussia again grew land
hungry and joined with Austria in waging war against France in an
effort to satisfy her appetite. Of all the powers, Russia alone came
closest to realizing her territorial ambitions in the decade before
1792. Catherine the Great’s gains at the expense of Turkey
inspired the envy of her neighbors. While Austria and Prussia
undertook to pillage the French Republic, the Tsarina remained at
peace in order to consolidate the position of strength she had won
in eastern Europe.
   Britain played little part in this continental scramble for land
and influence. The American War had left her friendless and
financially exhausted to such a degree that she was powerless to
prevent France from meddling in the political affairs of Holland.
By 1787, however, Pitt was able to take a stronger line when a
crisis developed between the supporters of the Stadtholder and the
French-directed ‘‘Patriot”’ party. Joint intervention by Prussia and
Britain forced France to release Holland from her orbit. To cap
this victory, Pitt threw up a barrier against future French
aggression by uniting Britain, Prussia, and Holland in a defensive
compact. The Triple Alliance of 1788, largely the work of the
British diplomat, Lord Malmesbury, was a major diplomatic
triumph for the prime minister, but events soon made clear how
small a community of interest existed among the allies.
   Britain hoped to use the Triple Alliance to restrain France;
Prussia regarded it as a useful tool to further her own territorial
ambitions. When Frederick William II demanded another slice of
Poland to offset any gains Austria and Russia might obtain from
                                   5
                      Guineas and Gunpowder


their war with Turkey, he found Britain reluctant to support him.
If Prussia must go empty-handed, then the eastern powers should
be forced to end their war with Turkey on a status quo ante basis.
Austria would probably agree; should Russia refuse, Frederick
William hoped Pitt would join him in threatening her with war.
The proposal seriously divided the British Cabinet, but it finally
agreed to send such an ultimatum. A few days later, London
learned that Austria might support the Tsarina in the event she
found herself at war with the Triple Alliance. Parliamentary
approval of the government’s Russian policy, never enthusiastic,
soon evaporated. Pitt had no choice but to suppress the ultimatum
which he had already sent to St. Petersburg. The “Humiliation of
Oczakoff”? embarrassed Pitt at home and shattered his diplomatic
union with Prussia. Incensed by what appeared to be British
perfidy and cowardice, Frederick William refused to cooperate
with her any longer and turned toward union with Austria against
Revolutionary France in the hope of territorial gains along the
Rhine.
  These diplomatic struggles profoundly affected the fate of the
coalitions. The German powers were soon disappointed in their
contest with France, and Prussia began to cast covetous glances
toward Poland. In 1792 Catherine the Great and Frederick William
agreed on terms of a new Polish partition, but no provision was
made for Austria to share the plunder. Early in the following year
Prussian troops moved into Poland, thereby relieving pressure on
the Revolutionary armies in the West. Since Austria was to have
none of Poland, she demanded compensation elsewhere. Not only
did Prussia refuse to placate her partner, but arrogantly declared
that Austria was entitled to nothing. By the time Britain entered
the war with France, the German allies were at each other’s
throats.
  The military reverses of 1793 heightened Austro-Prussian bicker-
ing, and Pitt was forced to take up the delicate role of mediator.
Prussia’s heart was no longer in the war with France, while failure
to obtain territory clouded Austria’s outlook. The apparent ease
with which Britain picked up French colonies did not pass
unnoticed by her partners. When Prussia finally abandoned the
war   in 1795,   the coalition   began   to crumble;   two   years later,
Vienna made her peace with the French Revolution. Compelled to

                                    6
                                 Introduction


yield Belgium, which the Hofburg had long wanted to be rid of,
Austria at least found some solace in the north Italian lands
France allowed her to annex.
   Jealousy among the allies hastened the death of the First
Coalition and thereafter plagued Britain’s efforts to create new
and more effective leagues. Austro-Prussian rivalry was so virulent
that the two powers did not again stand together against France
until 1813. Russia’s reluctance to become involved in the war
against France proved especially difficult for Britain to overcome.
Indeed, it was not until 1813 that the lengthening shadow of the
French imperium forced the continental powers to see that their
only hope was in union. Until then, British subsidies could do
little more than briefly prolong the life of alliances doomed as
much by internal discord as by the military prowess of the enemy.

  Pitt enjoyed considerable freedom in directing the British war
program, but there were certain political and constitutional
restraints on his power. A broad area of agreement had always to
be maintained between prime minister and foreign secretary, while
major war plans regularly went before the Cabinet for discussion
and approval. Significant policy decisions also required royal
consent, and to secure it Pitt sometimes had to spend long hours
in conference with George III.4
  The excesses of the French Revolution made King George III a
zealous supporter of any plan to break its hold on Europe. For
that reason, Pitt’s fondness for colonial expeditions was coldly
regarded by his sovereign, who foresaw from the beginning that
the contest would finally be decided on the battlefields of Europe.
When the prime minister hinted at the desirability of peace
discussions, George III reacted with characteristic Hanoverian
stubbornness. So long as ministers shared the King’s determination
to crush France, however, he allowed them a free hand in the
management of the war. Even so, George III insisted on being kept
well informed concerning their plans.
  As for the Cabinet, Pitt was careful to keep his colleagues in
touch with the latest developments, and they often held their
meetings at the Foreign Office in order to have easy access to
  4. The King’s role in the formulation of war plans has been examined in detail in
Donald G. Barnes, George III and William Pitt, 1783-1806 (Stanford Calif., 1939), pp.
269-301.
                        Guineas and Gunpowder


documents and dispatches. The Cabinet usually supported its
leader, but his subsidy proposals sometimes aroused opposition.
In cases of severe disagreement, Pitt usually yielded and either
modified or withdrew his plan.
  Provision for the payment of subsidies was the business of the
House of Commons. There, ministers were obliged to defend their
requests for appropriations. Even the opposition was willing to
allow the government to hire German mercenaries, but any
proposal to subsidize a major ally always found them ready to give
battle. The whigs opposed subsidies because they opposed the war,
but one of their leaders confessed during a debate on a proposed
grant to Russia in 1799 that, in his opinion, “if more blood is to
be shed, it should be any other than English blood.”* During the
closing years of the war, the number of allies receiving money
grew so large that legislative action on each subsidy treaty proved
cumbersome. To obviate this difficulty, the government often
asked for a general “‘Vote of Credit” for foreign aid which would
leave the allocation of the money to ministers themselves. So
strong was the government’s position throughout the war that the
Commons approved every request made to it for subsidies.
   Between 1793 and 1801 Pitt shared the direction of the war
with Henry Dundas and Lord Grenville. Dundas was secretary of
state for war, with major responsibility for military operations and
colonial affairs. War diplomacy was of little interest or concern to
him, but in this area Grenville’s role was as important as that of
the prime minister.
  It has been said that an appreciation of the Grenvilles ‘‘is
certainly an acquired taste,’ and even their defenders admit that
they were a troublesome tribe.® William, the youngest son of
George Grenville, author of the ill-fated American Stamp Act,
entered Parliament in 1782 and attached himself to the fortunes
of his cousin, William Pitt. Thereafter, he enjoyed a succession of
offices and in 1790 was created Baron Grenville. A year later, he
became foreign secretary and served his cousin until Pitt left office
in 1801. Grenville’s ties with the Pitt family were strengthened by
his marriage to Anne Pitt, a distant relative of the prime minister.

  5. Parliamentary History, XXXIV, 1045.
  6. The expression appeared in a book     review   published   in the   Times   Literary
Supplement, December 31,1954, p. 851.
                                     Introduction


The bride’s father, Lord Camelford, described his new son-in-law
as “‘one of the most sensible, most honourable, and best temper’d
of human beings.’”’ Unlike Camelford, whose own opinion may
have changed in time, Grenville’s associates found him stiff, dour,
and unimaginative. They never had occasion, however, to question
his honesty and diligence, and only rarely his good sense.
   The organization of the Foreign Office, which Grenville headed,
 had attained considerable maturity by 1793, but its staff was very
 small. Provision was made for two undersecretaries whose appoint-
 ment was pretty much within the gift of the foreign secretary they
 were to serve. The clerical business of the office was handled by a
 staff of clerks responsible for the preparation of fair copies,
 ciphering, and filing. The name of only one of these scriveners
 survives: a Mr. Rolleston, who engrossed every treaty negotiated
 by Great Britain between 1793 and 1815.® For carrying dis-
 patches, the three secretaries of state had the service of a pool of
 about thirty couriers. Romantic as the life of a King’s Messenger
 may have been, it was full of perils, and more than one set out on
 a mission from which he never returned.
   Delay in communication was one of the most vexing problems
 for the Foreign Office. In peacetime, dispatches to British
 embassies in northern Europe were usually sent via The Hague, but
 the French conquest of Holland in 1795 forced the Foreign Office
 to use a north German port (usually Hamburg), and the resulting
delays were serious. During the winter, London was often out of
 touch with its embassy in St. Petersburg for months at a time.
   The quality of service performed by British envoys varied
greatly, but it could seldom be described as excellent. Even though
salaries for foreign service had been increased, diplomatic appoint-
ments usually went to men who regarded them as stepping stones
to more attractive positions at home. Quite exceptional was the
case of Sir William Hamilton, who represented Britain at Naples
for thirty-six years. Naples was one of the most attractive posts,
however, and its duties were not usually exacting. Far more
typical was the career of Sir Morton Eden, an unexceptional
time-server, whose service at numerous capitals was climaxed in

  7. Lord Camelford to an unknown      correspondent, July 21, 1792; from a manuscript
letter in the author’s possession.
  8. John Tilley and Stephen Gaselee, The Foreign Office (London, 1933), p. Sil


                                           9
                     Guineas and Gunpowder


 1794 by his appointment as British minister at Vienna. The fact
that Eden was related to Lord Auckland may explain why he
ended his career with an Irish peerage and an annual pension of
two thousand pounds. Berlin appears to have been the least
attractive foreign embassy; nearly every minister sent there soon
requested a transfer. By the standards of the time, Britain was well
served by Charles Whitworth, her envoy to Russia between 1789
and 1800. On leaving the service in 1803, he was sent to Ireland as
Lord Lieutenant in possession of the prize which all diplomats
sought, an English peerage. Downing Street often entrusted
negotiations with allied governments to special agents rather than
to resident ministers. Training and experience seem not to have
been regarded as essential in a special agent. Assignments of major
importance twice went to the foreign secretary’s brother, Thomas
Grenville, who at best was an intelligent amateur.
   Foreign representatives in London were generally no better than
their British counterparts abroad. Throughout the period, Prussian
interests were represented by Baron Jacobi Kloest, for whom
Grenville had an ill-concealed dislike. The Austrian ambassador,
Count Louis Starhemberg, was personally more acceptable but his
abilities were slight. Between 1785 and 1806 Russia was served by
Count Simon Vorontzoff, the only foreign diplomat of the period
who merits special attention. Vorontzoff was so ardent an
Anglophile that his government often had to remind him that his
duty was to represent Russia’s interests. Pitt’s death was a severe
personal loss to Vorontzoff. and shortly thereafter he retired into
private life. Completely westernized, he remained in London until
his death in 1832.
   Only a few changes in detail are required to apply this
description of the British diplomatic machine to the decade of war
which remained after Pitt died in 1806. Following the incapacity
of George III, the Prince Regent supported Perceval and Liverpool
as earnestly as his father had their great predecessor. George
Canning’s leadership of the Foreign Office between 1807 and
1809 maintained the traditions which Grenville had established in
that department. By 1812 the rapid spread of French power had
reduced the number of British embassies in Europe to only six.
Lord Wellesley’s negligence and sloth during these years left the
Foreign Office badly in need of reorganization when he resigned as
foreign secretary in the spring of 1812.
                                  10
                           Introduction


  Appointed to succeed Wellesley, Castlereagh held a position in
the Cabinet such as no foreign secretary before him had enjoyed,
not even Grenville. The Cabinet’s confidence in Castlereagh was
never more striking than when, at the end of 1813, it decided that
he must go to the Continent for direct negotiation with the allied
foreign ministers. The era of ‘‘personal diplomacy” which fol-
lowed was unique, although as early as 1798 Grenville had
glimpsed the possibility of a central council of foreign ministers.
Direct negotiation with the allies, taking place almost on the
battlefield itself, ended at once the problem of communication
which had hampered British diplomacy in the past. It also allowed
for an ease of interchange among the allied governments such as
had never before been possible.

   A forceful allied offensive undertaken even as late as the autumn
of 1793 might have swept the Revolutionary armies from the
field. In default of such a campaign, the scales of war turned
slowly against France’s enemies. Prussia’s withdrawal from the war
in 1795 left Austria alone to struggle with the Republican forces
that came pouring across the Rhine into Germany. Twenty more
years of desperate fighting would be needed to defeat France, and
then it would require an allied military force much larger than any
that would have been possible at the outset. In 1793 the combined
armies of all France’s opponents numbered about 350,000 men;
during the climactic campaign of 1814, Russia and the German
powers    alone threw nearly twice that many troops against
Napoleon. Without British aid in money and arms, this tre-
mendous expansion of the allied war effort would scarcely have
been possible.
  The economic weakness of the continental powers in 1793 made
their war with France less of an unequal struggle than it appeared.
Prussia was on the verge of bankruptcy, while Austria had to
borrow heavily abroad to meet her current expenses. Thanks to
Catherine the Great’s wars with Turkey, Russia’s economic health
was even worse than her neighbors’. The Tsarina staved off disaster
only by massive loans from Dutch bankers and by flooding her
country with paper money.
  By the end of the first year of the war, the resources of the
continental allies began to dry up and they turned to Britain for
help. Thereafter, Britain had to bear not only her own war costs,
                                   14
                           Guineas and Gunpowder


but a part of her allies’ burden as well. Assuming at first that the
war would be brief, Pitt planned to meet his country’s financial
needs by heavy reliance on loans. A succession of military and
economic crises in 1796-1797 made clear that a new system of war
finance would have to be devised to support a long and expensive
struggle. The Bank of England suspended payments in specie and a
host of new taxes were introduced in order to minimize the
Treasury’s dependence on high interest-bearing loans. Even so, the
government still had to borrow heavily, and by the end of the war
the national debt was close to £700,000,000—considerably more
than twice what it had been when Pitt came to power.”
  Survival in the war with France depended on the strength of
Britain’s economy and her world trade. The rapid growth of
industry during these years provided the nation with the means of
victory. Expansion of the iron and steel industry freed her from
dependence on imports. The value of cotton textiles sent abroad
rose at a phenomenal rate; by 1815 it was fifteen times greater
than at the beginning of the war. Curiously, Britain lagged badly in
the production of arms, artillery, and gunpowder until the turn of
the century, when steps were taken to insure an ample supply of
equipment for her own army and those of her allies.
  Britain’s export trade paid for a large part of her war costs in
Europe between 1793 and 1815. Three of these expenses were
especially important: the cost of her military operations, subsidies
to the allies, and the purchase of foreign grain to make good
deficiencies in the home harvest. For reasons peculiar to the
military service, the army always had to be provided with a large
amount of hard money. Subsidies and grain purchases, however,
could be paid for by drawing on whatever credits British trade had
accumulated on the Continent.
  Thanks to the rapid expansion of British trade with Germany
between 1788 and 1801, the government could pay its bills on the
Continent without resorting to heavy export of specie. The
introduction of Napoleon’s Continental System in 1806 disrupted
the normal channels of British commerce, forcing her merchants
to undertake major adjustments. Probably the most important of
these was the entry of the British trader into the colonial markets

 9. Elie Halevy, A History of the English People in the Nineteenth Century, trans. E. 1.
Watkin and D. A. Barker (New York, 1945), I, 370.

                                          i)
                                 Introduction


of South        America.    Another   step taken   to frustrate Napoleon’s
design was the establishment          ot entrepOts for British goods along
the perimeter of Europe. Adjustments in trading practices such as
these enabled Britain to prosper, and by the end of the war the
value of her exports exceeded £51,000,000 a year.
  Students of the Continental System disagree about the effective-
ness of Napoleon’s blockade in reducing the flow of British goods
into Europe. One thing is certain, however; after 1808 Britain’s
war expenses on the Continent shot upward. The maintenance of
Wellington’s army in the Peninsula between 1808 and 1814 wasa
special strain since a large part of its bills had to be met by specie
sent from Britain. To offset this drain, subsidies and food
purchases could be financed by drawing on British trade credits on
the Continent. The final years of the war were characterized in
Britain by high taxes, shortage of hard money, and great difficulty
with the balance of payments. Because subsidies to foreign powers
were unpopular in England, the government’s critics indicted the
foreign aid program as the primary cause of these problems. Final
judgment on this question must await answers to two questions.
First, how did the cost of foreign aid compare with the money
Britain spent to maintain her own army, navy, and ordnance
services during the war years? Second, how important were
subsidies in causing the balance of payment problem, as compared
to the cost of British military operations abroad and the purchase
of foreign grain?

  At the conclusion of his skillful analysis of the British navy
during this period, the French historian Elie Halévy shrewdly
observed,       “It was    that they had the country    behind   them,   and
they knew it.”! Presumably this did not apply to the army, which,
at least until the Peninsular War, suffered from deplorable morale.
Accepting this generalization, it seems possible to supplement it in
certain particulars.
  The navy was in good condition when war came in 1793, due
largely to the careful attention Pitt had given it during the years of
peace and retrenchment. Twenty-five ships of the line and twice as
many frigates were already in commission in home waters, while
several times that number of vessels, now in ordinary or under
construction, would soon be ready for sea. New operational
 10. Ibid., 1, 65.
                                        i)
                        Guineas and Gunpowder


techniques had recently been developed which were soon to be
tried out in war. In 1790 the navy adopted an improved signaling
system which allowed greater flexibility in fleet control than in
the past. Naval officers were also coming to believe that in fleet
action the chances of success would be greatest if, after breaking
the enemy line, the work was finished off by bringing on a general
melee. Lord Howe’s victory on the Glorious First of June, 1794,
proved the theory; Trafalgar was its classic exemplification.
   After Trafalgar, France never again challenged Britain’s control
of the open seas. The possibility that the French might do so,
however, combined with the duties of blockade, condemned the
British navy to constant surveillance of Europe’s coasts. Nelson
embodied the fighting spirit of the pre-Trafalgar navy. Thereafter,
the navy was symbolized by Lord Collingwood, who commanded
the Mediterranean fleet on blockade until his death in 1810 ended
five years of unexciting service on that station.
   Why did the army operate so often in the shadow of defeat, at
least during the first half of the war? Part of the answer is to be
found in the government’s persistent misuse of its land forces. Pitt
dribbled away manpower in expeditions to Flanders, the West
Indies, Toulon, Corsica, and in amphibious attacks on the coast of
France. The prime minister had no monopoly on military
mismanagement. Henry Dundas proved that political skill alone
did not qualify a man to be a successful secretary of war. There is
some justice in the verdict passed on the amiable Scot by the
historian of the British army: “Yet so profoundly ignorant was
Dundas of war that he was not even conscious of his ignorance.”’!!
  Confusion at the Horse Guards was only one of the army’s
troubles. The quality of the officers who led the raw recruit of
1793 inspired no confidence. Whatever the Duke of York’s
capacities might have been, his conduct of the Flanders campaign
during the first years of the war proved that he lacked elements of
greatness as a field commander. Incompetence was more con-
spicuous at the higher levels, but was not confined there. While
serving in the West Indies, General Sir John Moore saw how
disastrous poor leadership could be for troop morale. “Indeed, if
the War continues,” he wrote, ‘“‘some strong measure must be

 11. John W. Fortescue, A History of the British Army (London, 1899-1930), IV, 72.


                                       14
                                 Introduction


adopted for the Army in general. For with blockheads at the heads
of regiments and the bad condition of the officers, the Army has
degenerated to such a degree that we shall lose, very soon, even
our character for spirit.’’!?
   Before the century ended the army began to show improvement,
although    poor management,      bad training, and incompetent
officers never entirely disappeared. The Duke of York finally
found his proper niche as commander-in-chief of the forces, an
administrative post he first held between 1798 and 1809. At the
Horse Guards, he undertook a long overdue reform of the
operational functions of the army and its supply service. A new
era of military development began at the tactical level with the
formation of the experimental Rifle Corps. The Light Infantry,
under Moore’s enlightened leadership, ultimately redeemed the
army’s reputation by its successes on the battlefields of the
Peninsula. The war years cost the lives of many good officers, but
many poor ones were also driven from the service. By the time a
new front opened in Portugal in 1808 there was a respectable
supply of leaders who had learned their trade in the years of
adversity. The names of Moore, Wellington, Picton, Hill, and
Graham     were to become monuments to the renaissance of
Britain’s military power.
   In Wellington’s hands, the army in the Peninsula became a
deadly weapon, but it was not exclusively a British force. By 1814
nearly half the men in that army were Portuguese and Spanish
levies. The nationalists fought side by side with their British allies,
and received their arms, clothes, food, pay, and supplies under the
British foreign aid program.
  The British expedition to the island of Walcheren in 1809
exhibited nearly every fault which had marked the army’s history
since the beginning of the war, but the same year also witnessed a
British victory over the French at Talavera in Spain. This victory
taught the British and their Spanish allies that, having beaten the
French once, they could do it again. The road from Talavera was
neither straight nor easy, but Wellington’s men were now ready to
follow it until, five years later, they came to the crest of the
Pyrenees from which they could look down and behold France.

  12. Carola Oman, Sir John Moore (London, 1953), p. 153:


                                         is)
                                                                ona ee
                                                                                         ~ a
                                                 aah             nh binge eae                                    ies   _—     ao

                                                       ,         ae bia                     elt             7
                                                                                                                        *    Per
                  .                  ai                    om      Sit             bigar co literal

                                                                  im: one                                                    -
                                                           » seston.   | pay
                      it                              ('        Pettohia &                        vas tom
ean                                                         &           beans                     nen            laee -
                  :                                          Poy             oh      ete           7a           aot   <i)            ‘

                                                 “Seed                               Ol gil                 sy ei tias
              7                                   y                »>                erry               >        sae
                                                 :               (i                                Wa) ex! *.14)                 ;
                                         yg                                  ima                     eet. Feel              Ui om:
                  eT                      ee ove                               CL                 ee      1m
EE                              a)                    Peli’                   ee                                oe

                           ,                 :              Sly                   S&S oN;           yh (ind
                                 ;                                      qb         Gis       7
                                     ®                     A            eo

’                                        ey:                                 Lite
          =                              '                  wi               Oh Ps
                       Care                                              aS
                                                                 bye



                                                 es                              eis’
     bt                         WT -tererits                                 OOO                    ert
                       10 |aqing                                 gr               iiine
     4                 i                                   Ld    Dh          Wwree       ours Cee

                      ‘e                     Pee                 ee                         lh ot
                                                                             +



                                         in                      2                       Shane
                                ee                               We
                                                     7A weiss                            GE ep
                                             JU                  Se peasaD
                           ‘|        CGD                     1s eRe. O88) 4h
              airs                               71                                          int

     v                     edie EoD,                                                        oe aes
                                oe                         ee


                                     oF?
                                          I
     THE     FORMATION              OF    THE      FIRST      COALITION




As a February afternoon yielded to dusk, the embarkation officers
at Greenwich hurried aboard ship the last of the troops which had
come down from London. Early that morning, February 25, 1793,
two thousand Foot Guards marched out of the capital on their
way to the embarkation point. The head of the column reached
Greenwich in fairly good condition, but many in the rear drank
too freely of the refreshment offered them by patriotic well-
wishers along the way. Those who fell by the roadside finished
their journey in carts stacked like cord wood. By nightfall all were
at last on board the transports, and the first British expeditionary
force of the war was ready to sail for Flanders.!
   The hiring of German mercenaries was the cheapest and fastest
means by which the government could enlarge its contribution to
the allied cause. Within a month after the outbreak of war,
Hanover agreed to send 10,000 infantrymen, together with units
of artillery and cavalry, into Britain’s pay and service.2 A year
later, the Electorate furnished an additional 5,299 men on the
same terms, thus bringing to more than 16,000 the total of the
King’s German subjects in Britain’s service.?
   During the American War, the German states of Hesse-Cassel and
Hesse-Darmstadt had rented men to fight in King George’s army
and they were ready to do so again. The negotiation with
Hesse-Cassel was entrusted to the Earl of Elgin who, in April 1793,
  1. Fortescue, British Army, IV, 65-66.
  2. George Martens and Charles Martens, Recueil des Principaux Traités d’Alliance .   .
Conclus par les Puissances de l'Europe... , 2d ed. (Gottingen, 1817-1835), V, 422-429.
  3. Treaty with Hanover, January 7, 1794, Journal of the House of Commons, XLIX,
197-198.

                                          ey
                                         1793

concluded a treaty which added 8,000 men to the Duke of York’s
command in Flanders.* To mobilize this force, Britain undertook
to pay levy money at the rate of £7 4s. for each foot soldier and
£19 5s. for each cavalryman. The Hessians were to serve Britain
for three years, during which time they would be paid and
maintained by their employer. While the landgrave’s troops were
away Britain would give him £54,140 each year for his own use.
On the expiration of the treaty, Britain would make a final
payment to replace lost equipment and meet the expense of
bringing the corps back to its original strength.° The Hessians were
good soldiers, and in August 1793 another 4,000 men were hired
on the same terms. Like most German princelings, the landgrave
refused to have his men serve in the West Indies, but he did offer
to rent Britain a “‘Body of Foreigners”’ for this purpose. Since they
were suspected to be French deserters living in Cassel, London
declined the offer.’
  Arranging subsidy agreements with the German states soon
required the services of a special agent, and Pitt assigned this
responsibility to Lord Yarmouth.® The ruler of Wurttemberg
refused the terms Yarmouth offered him, but Baden was eager to
strike a bargain. In return for the customary levy money and an
annual subsidy of £5,013, Baden sent 754 men to serve under the
British flag.? Yarmouth     moved   on to Hesse-Darmstadt and
obtained 3,000 men             on essentially the          same terms as in the
agreement concluded           with Hesse-Cassel.!?         By August 1793 more
than 17,000 hired German troops were under the Duke of York’s
command, which numbered only 6,500 British soldiers.!! The
German princes saw to it that their men were well clothed and
generously supplied with equipment, but Yarmouth suspected that


  4. Thomas Bruce, seventh Earl of Elgin (1766-1841) was to have a long career in the
diplomatic service, but is today best remembered as the collector of the Elgin Marbles.
  5. Treaty with Hesse-Cassel, April 10, 1793, Public Record Office, London, MSS.,
Foreign Office (hereafter cited as ‘““FO”’), 93/43(2).
  6. Treaty with Hesse-Cassel, August 23, 1793, FO 93/43(3).
  7. Yarmouth to Grenville, September 5, 1793, FO 29/2.
  8. Francis Seymour Conway (1719-1794) was Sir Robert Walpole’s nephew, and at one
time, had served as British minister to France. He was made Earl of Yarmouth in 1793.
His health soon collapsed under the strain of traveling in Germany.
  9. Treaty with Baden, September 21, 1793, FO 93/12(1A).
 10. Treaty with Hesse-Darmstadt, October 5, 1793, FO 93/44(1).
 11. Fortescue, British Army, IV, 120n.


                                           18
                    The Formation of the First Coalition


the Hessian landgraves secretly encouraged their subjects to desert
so that they could again be offered to Britain for hire.!?
   Nearly all the mercenaries were sent to Flanders, but some were
employed elsewhere. In September 1793, 4,000 Hessians were sent
to help hold the French port of Toulon which had fallen to the
allies. During their transfer from the Low Countries, some were
temporarily put in barracks at Portsmouth and on the Isle of
Wight. When this was announced to the House of Commons,
Charles James Fox and Charles Grey (the future Earl Grey of the
Reform Bill) protested that their presence violated the Bill of
Rights and threatened English liberty. Despite the vigor of their
attack, the whig leaders won little support for their motion.
   The opposition was ready to raise a storm over Hessians in
Hampshire, but it did not oppose their employment as soldiers. No
debate occurred on the appropriation of £455,851 in the 1793
Budget to pay for the Hanoverians, and in the following year the
Commons voted £1,169,000 to meet the cost of all “Foreign
Troops.”4 Thereafter, the expenses of the mercenaries usually
appeared as a part of the ““Army Extraordinaries” rather than
being included as a separate budget item. So well established was
the practice of hiring German troops that the whigs never seriously
attacked it.
   Mercenaries permitted a rapid buildup of the British army, but a
prolonged war would force the government to rely increasingly on
its own national manpower resources. Between 1793 and 1795 the
British military establishment for home service increased from
 17,344 to 119,380 men; by 1795 the ratio of British troops to
mercenaries was about four to one. The invasion of Germany by
the French forced many of the German princes to make peace,
and by 1798 the total of all foreign troops in Britain’s service fell
to less than 5,000.19
  Hiring mercenaries to swell her army was certainly important to
Britain, but her major diplomatic goal was the creation of a grand
alliance against France. Austria and Prussia were bound by their


  12. Major   William   Gunn   to Grenville,   October   27, 1793,   FO   29/3; Yarmouth   to
Grenville, December 6, 1793, FO 29/3.
   13. Parliamentary History, XXX, 1363-1391.
   14. Ibid., XXX, 559-560, 1355.
  15. Fortescue, British Army, IV, 938-939.


                                               iS
                                       L795,

war pact of 1792, but Britain’s only tie with the belligerents was
her 1788 alliance with Holland and Prussia. What was needed was
a coalition of all the powers in arms against France that would be
founded on specific war goals acceptable to all the allies. If Russia
could be persuaded to adhere, then the French Republic would
surely go down to defeat before a united Europe.
   British plans to create such a coalition were doomed from the
start by the side effects of the Second Polish Partition. Prussia and
Russia had made their arrangements for the partition only a few
months before Britain entered the war. Austria’s consent to these
arrangements had apparently been won in exchange for a Prussian
promise no longer to oppose Hapsburg efforts to exchange
Belgium for Bavaria. In January 1793 Prussian troops invaded
Poland to divide the loot between Frederick William and the
Tsarina. When the robber-rulers’ gains far exceeded what Austria
had been led to expect, the Hofburg grew suspicious. All doubt
disappeared after the partition was complete, when Prussia
declared that she would oppose any sort of territorial compensa-
tion for Austria.!®
  The Polish crisis may have saved the life of the French Republic.
Had Prussia thrown all her military might against the enemy in the
West, instead of becoming involved in Poland, the campaign in the
Low Countries would probably have ended in an allied victory.
Thanks also to the Polish problem, Austro-Prussian relations were
now worse than ever. How much interest was Russia likely to
show in the war against France now that she was heavily involved
in Polish politics? In February 1793 Catherine instructed her
envoy in London to propose an alliance and, as proof of her zeal
for the good cause, she also offered fourteen Russian warships for
service with the Royal Navy against France.!’? The Tsarina’s
motives were probably less obvious than they appeared. An
outward display of friendship for Britain at this time might
neutralize Pitt’s well-known opposition to the Polish Partition.
Charles Whitworth, the British minister at St. Petersburg, sensed

  16. Heinrich von Sybel, History of the French Revolution,   trans. from the 3d ed. by
W. C. Perry (London, 1867-1869), II, 355 and passim; A. W. Ward and G. P. Gooch, eds.,
The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1783-1919 (Cambridge, 1922), I >
236-239.
  17. Copy of instructions to Count Vorontzoff signed by Catherine, February 7, 1793,
FO 65/24; Whitworth to Grenville, February 7, 1793, FO 65/24.


                                         20
                      The Formation of the First Coalition


the direction in which Russian policy was moving and warned that
Catherine’s only real interest was in Poland.!8
  Lord Grenville’s negotiation with the Russian minister, Count
Vorontzoff,          got   off        to   an       excellent      start    when         the   latter
announced that the Tsarina had also empowered him to sign a new
commercial treaty. Renewal of the Anglo-Russian trade pact of
1766 was greatly to Britain’s interest. When the foreign secretary
turned the discussion to the matter of joint military action against
France, he found Vorontzoff hesitant and evasive. Catherine was
anxious to conclude a defense agreement with Britain, but
Vorontzoff confessed that his instructions left it unclear whether
she was ready to send troops against France at this time. This was
exactly the point closest to Grenville’s heart. Under pressure, the
Russian envoy admitted that he could not go that far. As a
stopgap measure, however, he offered to conclude a general
alliance with Britain at once, leaving the negotiation of a specific
agreement to Whitworth and Catherine’s ministers at St. Peters-
burg.!? There was little the foreign secretary could do but agree,
and on March 25, he signed two conventions with Vorontzoff.
One renewed the commercial treaty of 1766; the other was a loose
pact pledging both powers to carry on the war with France “‘as far
as the circumstances in which they may find themselves shall
permit.”2° This loose language left Catherine free to do as much or
as little as she might wish. The next day instructions were sent by
Grenville to Whitworth directing him to arrange a firm military
treaty with Russia. Catherine’s offer of warships would have to be
politely declined. What Britain needed was the service of 12,000
Russian troops in the Low Countries. “His Majesty’s principal
object,” Grenville explained, “is to obtain the co-operation of a
body of troops which may act in conjunction with His against the
common Enemy. You will urge this point to the utmost, and make
use of every argument.””*!
  The Second Polish Partition had been carried out by the time

  18. Whitworth to Grenville, February 12, 1793, FO 65/24.
  19. Duke     of   Richmond     to    Grenville,    March   15,   1793,    Historical    Manuscripts
Commission, Report on the Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Esq., Preserved at Dropmore
(London,     1892-1927),   Il, 384-385;      Minute of a conference        with Count Vorontzoff,
March 15, 1793, FO 97/342.
 20. Treaties with Russia, March 25, 1793, FO 97/342.
 21. Grenville to Whitworth, March 26, 1793, FO 65/24.


                                                    Zu
                                           Ve

these instructions reached St. Petersburg. Since Britain was now a
suitor for Catherine’s favor, Whitworth could hardly protest
Russia’s part in that affair. The diplomatic advantage was now all
with Catherine, who could maintain Britain’s goodwill indefinitely
by holding out the hope of her eventual cooperation in the war
against France. At Whitworth’s first meeting with Vice-Chancellor
Ostermann, he was amazed to learn that Catherine expected a
British subsidy of between £500,000 and £600,000 in return for
sending 10,000 troops to the West. Not only was the demand
unexpected, it was exorbitant. Whitworth rejected it at once and
confessed his amazement at such a request from a ruler “who has
not only constantly taken the lead in exciting others, to put
themselves above personal considerations... but who had also
begun by indemnifying Herself so amply.” Ostermann had nothing
to say beyond the obvious fact that affairs in the West were of
more immediate concern to Britain than to Russia. Since there was
no basis for any negotiation, the matter was referred back to
London.??
  Grenville was in no mood for diplomatic niceties when he
resumed his meetings with Vorontzoff in mid-June. The Russian
demand for money was outrageous! More than half-persuaded to
this opinion himself, Vorontzoff used his discretionary authority
to reduce the price from £600,000 to £300,000. The foreign
secretary was unimpressed and demanded to know why Britain
should pay the Tsarina even £300,000 when for a fraction of that
sum she could hire 50,000 German mercenaries? At this point
Vorontzoff poured oil on the troubled waters by predicting that
Catherine would finally settle for a smaller subsidy. Rather than
abandon the negotiation, he urged Grenville to give the matter his
cool consideration before making any decision. Privately, the
Russian envoy found the whole business distasteful and predicted
that Britain would never yield. Writing to his brother Alexander,
he sadly observed, “The whole thing was quite impossible. I
foresaw it, I wrote about it, and the minister’s reply confirmed
ituees
  22. Whitworth     to Grenville, April 29, 1793, FO 65/24; Fedor F. Martens, Recueil des
Traités   et   Conventions   Conclus   par la Russie   avec   les Puissances   Etrangeres   (St.
Petersburg, 1874-1909), IX, 363-364 (hereafter cited as F. Martens, Recueil des Traités).
  23.F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, IX, 364; Simon Vorontzoff to Alexander
Vorontzoff, June 14, 1793, in Arkhiv Kniazia Vorontsova, ed. P. I. Bartenev (Moscow,
1870-1895), IX, 303-304.
                                                22
                   The Formation of the First Coalition


  Vorontzoff was right. Almost at once, Grenville informed
Whitworth of his decision: the Tsarina must be told ‘that unless
the idea of a subsidy is abandoned, all possibility of a future
concert is at an end.”’2* This ultimatum put an end to all
discussion of an Anglo-Russian alliance, and Whitworth was now
convinced more than ever that the Tsarina would remain aloof
from the war. “All which we have seen happen,” he wrote
Grenville, “seems to justify the Opinion I entertained from the
Beginning, that it would be the Policy of this Court to engage as
many    as it could in the Broil, and to keep as clear as possible of it,
itself.”’?> Ostensibly, Catherine’s refusal to take arms was the result
of Britain’s unwillingness to finance her. In fact, it is hard to
believe that she had ever meant to become involved.
   The Polish Partition was also responsible in large measure for
Grenville’s failure to form a diplomatic union with Austria and
Prussia. Originally he hoped to create a single alliance binding all
three powers to remain at war until France had restored her
conquests.© This emphasis on a status quo ante settlement partly
grew out of Britain’s desire to keep Austria in the Low Countries
as a barrier against France. The possibility that Austria might
someday succeed in exchanging Belgium for Bavaria had always
made the Foreign Office uneasy.?’ In the spring of 1793 Vienna
searched feverishly for some territorial compensation to match
Prussia’s recent gains in Poland. She might force a defeated France
to yield Alsace to her or agree to a generous enlargement of
Belgium’s frontier. Both possibilities were attractive, and in April
1793 the new head of the Austrian foreign department, Baron
Johann Thugut, told the British ambassador that he was seriously
considering giving up the Belgium-Bavaria exchange plan.78
London responded eagerly to this announcement by proposing
that any territorial settlement with France must provide for an
important cession of land to Belgium. By such an enlargement of
Belgium, it might be possible for Britain to wean Vienna away
from any thought of exchanging it for Bavaria.
   24. Grenville to Whitworth, June 14, 1793, FO 65/24.
   25. Whitworth to Grenville, June 28, 1793, FO 65/24.
   26. Grenville to Sir James Murray, February 6, 1793, FO 29/1.
   27. Austria’s victory at Neerwinden (March 18, 1793) encouraged hopes that the
French would finally be driven from Belgium. In such a case, the Belgium-Bavaria
exchange plan might be revived.
   28. However, he added that he was unwilling to “bind himself down never to resume
it,” Morton Eden to Grenville, April 15, 1793, FO 7/33.
                                         D8)
                                        E793:

   British plans overlooked the fact that Prussia was determined to
see that Austria got nothing at all. The quarrel between the
German allies in the spring of 1793 waxed so violent that Grenville
abandoned all thought of arranging a single alliance with them. All
he could hope for was to negotiate separate treaties. The
negotiation with Prussia was assigned to Lord Yarmouth, who
reached Frederick William’s camp at Mainz in June to find his
hosts elated by the prospect of early success in their siege of that
city. Frederick William received the British diplomat cordially and
their discussion of terms ended in prompt agreement. When his
ministers protested that the country could not afford another
campaign, the King brushed aside their objections, and on July 14
the treaty was signed. It consisted of five brief articles binding
both powers to continue the war until France had returned all her
conquests.”? The alliance with Austria was negotiated by Grenville
himself, in conjunction with Count Louis Starhemberg, the
Hapsburg envoy in London. On August 30 the two men affixed
their names to an agreement much like the one Yarmouth had
signed at Mainz one month before.*”
  What Grenville’s diplomacy achieved hardly bore any relation to
his original plan for a grand alliance of all the powers. That plan
had been wrecked by Catherine’s dissimulation and by Austro-
Prussian jealousy.    Instead of a firmly knit coalition, there was
only a confused combination of interlocking agreements. Possibly
even this precarious confederacy might succeed in spite of its poor
foundations. During July 1793 the French suffered a serious
reversal in Belgium and the Prussians at last captured Mainz. With
the approach of autumn, France’s borders were more exposed to
her enemies than at any time during the past year.
  Britain gave highest priority to the negotiation of treaties with
Russia, Prussia, and Austria, but she did not neglect bringing the
smaller states into the coalition. During the first year of the war
she undertook engagements with Spain, Portugal, Naples, and




 29. Treaty with Prussia, July 14, 1793, FO 93/78(4C).
 30. Treaty with Austria, August 30, 1793, FO 93/11(1A).




                                          24
                      The Formation of the First Coalition


Sardinia. Of these, only that with Sardinia called for the payment
of British subsidies.*!
   The Anglo-Sardinian alliance, signed on April 25, 1793, almost
exactly recreated the union which had existed between the two
powers nearly a century before. During the War of the Spanish
Succession, Britain paid Sardinia to help maintain an army of
45,000 men against Louis XIV. When France invaded Nice and
Savoy in 1792, the government at Turin turned to Britain for help.
By the terms of their alliance, Britain promised to provide an
annual subsidy of £200,000, to be paid quarterly, in return for
which Sardinia was to maintain 50,000 soldiers in the field against
the French Republic. The first quarterly payment of the Sardinian
subsidy, amounting to £50,000, was remitted to her envoy in
London the following June. Payments made during the remainder
of the year brought the total to £150,000, while in the following
year, she received £200,000.22 In this way, Britain helped finance
the counteroffensive which Sardinia launched in the summer of
1793. Successful at first, the Sardinians were finally forced back
and escaped destruction only because the French suspended the
campaign. London grew uneasy at reports that her ally’s army was
far below the 50,000 quota specified in their treaty, and Grenville
threatened to suspend subsidy payments until the Sardinian force
was increased to that figure.*?


  31. Britain’s alliance with Spain of May 25, 1793, FO 93/99(SA), provided for joint
cooperation in the war and the exclusion of French commerce from the ports of both
nations. Spain still smarted from her defeat at Britain’s hands in the Nootka Sound affair
three years before. Grenville was not pleased with the treaty of alliance and feared that it
“cannot be considered as a very solid foundation of friendship” (Grenville to Lord St.
Helens, June 21, 1793, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 398). The treaty with Portugal
of September    26,   1793,   FO   93/77(1A),    simply renewed   the old Anglo-Portuguese
alliance and bound Portugal to break off trade relations with France. The Treaty with
Naples, signed by Sir William Hamilton on July 12, 1793, FO 93/96(1A), obliged Naples
to maintain at least 6,000 troops at her own expense. Should it be necessary for those
troops to serve outside Naples, they would be provided with transportation by the
British navy. These treaties have been examined both in their protocol form and as they
were finally ratified. None of them made any provision for the payment of British
subsidies.                                                                         apes
  32. Treaty with Sardinia, April 25, 1793, FO 93/87(1A). Payments of the Sardinian
subsidy are recorded in the King’s Warrant Books, part of the Treasury Papers (hereafter
cited as “‘Ty.’’) in the Public Record Office, London, 52/80,351; Ty. 52/81, 13; Ty.
52/82, 31, 103-104;   Ty. 52/83, 91.
  33. Grenville to John Trevor, October 8, 1793, FO 67/13.




                                                Ds
                                     UES)


  The Sardinian treaty provided the only opportunity for the
House of Commons to debate the question of foreign aid during
the first year of the war. Although the treaty was presented to the
Commons in June 1793, it was not until the following January
that Pitt requested the necessary appropriation of funds. Fox
opposed the agreement, not because it involved a subsidy, but
because he ‘‘had never conceived that it could be wise to enter
into any treaty by which we were to receive nothing and to give
everything.” So far as subsidies were concerned, the whig leader
admitted that he had nothing against them in principle. “‘He knew,
that in every war to be carried on by a confederacy, we must pay
the weaker powers whom we engaged in that confederacy.”*4
  Pitt took no part in the debate, but his views were doubtless
those of the young member who replied to Fox. In this, his
maiden speech, George Canning upbraided the whigs for their
limited vision and declared that the treaty, as well as the war itself,
could be justified on the same grounds: the salvation of England,
as well as the European equilibrium, would be decided by the
outcome of the present contest.*> The course of the debate clearly
showed that the Sardinian treaty was in no danger and the
government’s request for money was finally adopted without
division.
  Examination of Britain’s treaties with her war partners now
makes it possible to define the role of subsidies in the formation
of the First Coalition. British money was spent generously to hire
German mercenaries, but this was a time-honored device to
expand the British army as rapidly as possible. On the other hand,
no financial aid was offered to the allies other than to Sardinia.
Britain’s refusal to act as paymaster to the coalition is clearly
revealed in her summary rejection of Russia’s demand for money,
even though that decision gave Catherine the Great an excuse to
remain at peace. Pitt and Grenville must surely have seen this as a
pretext; Russia had nothing to gain from a war with France.
British diplomacy encountered       difficulties with Prussia and


  34. Parliamentary History, XXX, 1310-1313.
  35. Ibid., XXX, 1317-1329; Dorothy Marshall, The Rise of George Canning (London,
1938), pp. 53-54.




                                       26
                     The Formation of the First Coalition


Austria, but not over the question of subsidies.*© The treaties with
the German      allies, concluded         during the summer of 1793, made no
provision for any British financial assistance. Except for the pledge
of aid given Sardinia, Britain was not ready to underwrite the war
expenses of any of the major powers who were now her allies.


   Britain’s refusal to subsidize the major allies reflected her
leaders’ confidence that the war would not last long. In the late
summer of 1793 the fortunes of war turned in favor of the
coalition, and the road to Paris at last lay open to their armies.
However, a new outbreak of Austro-Prussian jealousy blighted this
last chance for easy victory over France. It began at the Prussian
headquarters in August when the Marquis Lucchesini, Frederick
William’s trusted advisor, provoked a violent quarrel with the
Hapsburg envoy, Count Lehrbach. In recent months, the Polish
Diet had attempted to recover some part of Prussia’s share in the
recent partition, and Lucchesini now charged Lehrbach’s govern-
ment with secretly encouraging the Poles. In vain, Lord Yarmouth
intervened to bring the rival ministers back to what seemed to him
the immediate      question: agreement on the campaign against
France.
   Thoroughly alarmed at the turn affairs had taken in Poland,
Frederick William decided to intervene. Henceforth, he would give
highest priority to the protection of his Polish interests, rather
than to the war with France. Orders were issued transferring a
large part of his army to Poland. Troops now being mobilized at
home would be sent to join units already in the East rather than
toward the Rhine. To dramatize this change of policy, the King
left for Posen to take personal command of his forces.?7
   A few     days after these decisions had been announced,
Lucchesini explained to Lord Yarmouth why the King had been
forced to make them. Frederick William’s heart was still in the war
with France and he was anxious to remain a principal, but the

  36. Two   months   after the Prussian   treaty was signed, Lord Yarmouth   admitted that
during its negotiation the Prussian ministers broadly hinted that British funds would be
welcome. Yarmouth ignored the hint, however, and the matter was not pressed;
Yarmouth to Grenville, September 29, 1793, FO 29/2.
 37. Sybel, French Revolution, U1, 135-148.




                                             BY
                                       phyA

recent Polish troubles, combined with the oppressive expense of
maintaining armies on two fronts, were sapping his resources. For
Prussia to continue to play a major role in the war against the
Republic, two new articles must be added to her recent alliance
with Britain: first, Britain must formally guarantee Prussia’s Polish
lands against attack by another power; and, second, she must give
Prussia a subsidy and urge the other allies to follow her example.
Yarmouth refused to discuss these demands, although he promised
to send them on to London at once.*®
  Prussia’s appeal for money was not unexpected in Downing
Street; for the past few months, the British chargé d’affaires at
Berlin had warned that something of the sort was in the wind.
Frederick William’s advisors were pressing him to end the war with
France as the only means of averting bankruptcy. Equally
disturbing was their insistence that the contest with France served
no important Prussian interest.°? Grenville had little sympathy for
Prussia and her problems. Early in October Frederick William’s
demands reached him and his response was immediate: the Polish
guarantee was inadmissable and he urged Pitt to reject the demand
for subsidies.
  Pitt’s reaction to the Prussian note was more considered and
thoughtful than his foreign minister’s. He entirely agreed that
Britain could do nothing to help defend her ally’s Polish lands. An
outright rejection of Prussia’s request for money, as Grenville
recommended,      would only antagonize the volatile Frederick
William and play into the hands of the peace faction at Berlin.
Would it not be wiser to accept at face value the King’s protest of
good faith and then consider what could be done to help him?
This approach would cost nothing and it might put him in a mood
to be reasonable. After all, there was one side of the problem
which no one had yet considered: the mutual defense obligations
undertaken by Prussia, Britain, and Holland in the Triple Alliance
of 1788. So far nothing had been said about that treaty even
though it clearly had application to the present war. As the parties
attacked by France, Britain and Holland had a right to ask Prussia
to provide 32,000 troops (20,000 for Britain and 12,000 for

  38. The Prussian memorandum is to be found in FO 29/2. See also J. B. Burges’ letter
to Grenville of September 30, 1793, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, U1, 430-431.
  39. George Rose to Grenville, July 20,27, September 17, 1793, FO 64/28.


                                         28
                   The Formation of the First Coalition


Holland). In return, they were treaty-bound to supply these troops
with ‘“‘bread and forage.’”’ Much the same arrangement was
included in the Austro-Prussian alliance of 1792, which entitled
Austria to call on her ally for 20,000 troops in the event of attack.
By the terms of these two conventions, Prussia was obliged to
furnish her three allies with a total of 52,000 men whose ‘“‘bread
and forage’? expenses would be a charge on Britain, Holland, and
Austria. Pitt estimated that on this basis the three powers would
owe Prussia somewhat more than £1,000,000 a year.
  Careful consideration of the question led the prime minister to
propose that Prussia be invited to meet her obligations to the allies
under these treaties. Should Frederick William then be able to
supply additional troops for the war against France, the allies
ought    to   underwrite       their    total    expense.     In   such    a case,   the
subsidized corps must be completely at their disposal. In effect,
Pitt recommended that once Prussia had met her debts to the
allies, they ought to hire a second Prussian army on nearly the
same basis as Britain employed Hessian mercenaries. He urged
Grenville to consider whether it might not be wise to offer such a
counterproposal: “I think this mode will be less likely to produce
a coldness between us and the Court of Berlin; and if he
 [Frederick   William]   agrees to the idea, it would be more
advantageous than any co-operation he has yet afforded in the
war. The expense will be comparatively speaking no object, if it
produces a real and efficient force at our disposal, in a quarter
where it is essential to act with vigour, as part of the general plan
for the next campaign.’’4?
   Grenville admitted that Britain was clearly obliged to provide
‘“‘bread and forage”’ for any Prussian troops she might claim under
the terms of the 1788 alliance, but the idea of subsidizing
additional Prussians was repugnant to him. Unable to agree, Pitt
and Grenville decided to submit the question to the Cabinet at its
meeting on October 9. The Cabinet listened to the arguments
advanced on both sides and, in the end, supported Grenville’s
position. Pitt accepted his defeat, but urged that the foreign
secretary’s reply to Prussia be temperate. There was no point in
giving unnecessary offence. As finally drafted, the British note
sent to Berlin rejected the requested Polish guarantee and called
  40. Pitt to Grenville, October 2, 1793, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 433.


                                            29
                                         LTDSs,


on Prussia to meet her obligations under the Triple Alliance. At
the same time, Britain acknowledged her obligation to pay the
“bread and forage’’ expenses of the force to be furnished.*!
   So far, Prussia’s request for subsidies had been expressed only in
general terms, but early in November Frederick William’s envoy in
London announced that the King would require £3,500,000 from
his allies to finance another campaign. Britain was expected to
furnish half this sum, while Austria and the Empire would be
asked to supply the balance.** Grenville responded to Baron
Jacobi’s announcement by informing him of the decision which
the Cabinet had already reached on this question: to invite Prussia
to fulfill her obligations under the 1788 treaty. On hearing this,
Jacobi turned petulant and declared that his government no longer
considered that treaty operative. The foreign secretary took up the
point in a flash since it was basic to the entire British position.
Would Jacobi be willing to put that statement in writing? The
Prussian backed off at once. Grenville put an end to the meeting
with the forceful declaration that Prussia’s obligations to Britain
were clear-cut and that George III “never would submit to
purchase succours which He had a right to from the treaty of
Alliance.’’43
   Frederick William returned from Poland to his capital early in
November 1793, to discover how profitless his appeal to the allies
had been. Austria’s refusal to help came as no surprise, but there
was something about the cool British demand for implementation
of the 1788 alliance which infuriated the King. After all he had
done for the cause, it was the worst sort of cheese-paring for her
to demand fresh exertions under a treaty whose meaning had been
rendered obsolete by events since 1788. The King’s vexation was
eagerly cultivated by those of his ministers who were anxious for
him to end the war. Prussia was nearly bankrupt and the nation
cried for peace. All this was reported by the British chargé
d’affaires who warned Grenville that not one voice was heard at
Berlin in favor of continuing the war against France.“4
  41. Pitt to Grenville, October 10, 1793, ibid., II, 441-443. The official British reply to
Prussia, dated November 13, 1793, is to be found in FO 97/324.
  42. Frederick William to Jacobi, October 26, 1793, FO 97/324.
  43. Minute respecting Lord Grenville’s conversation with Jacobi, November 7-8, 1793,
FO 64/28.
 44. Rose to Grenville, November 3, 1793, FO 64/28.


                                            30
                  The Formation of the First Coalition


   Prussia’s reply to the British demand took the form of a letter
from the King to Jacobi which the latter was expected to lay
before Pitt and Grenville. London’s ungenerous attitude did him
less than justice, Frederick William wrote, since it entirely
overlooked his exertions in the good cause for nearly a year before
 Britain entered the war. The allies could not honestly deny that he
had already done more then enough to meet his obligations to
them. Therefore, he must reject Britain’s demand. Unless Austria
and Britain provided the money he required, he would be forced
to limit severely his part in the spring campaign.*
   The rapid collapse of the allies’ position in Flanders during the
closing months of the year underscored the threat contained in the
King’s letter. In September 1793 the Revolutionary armies
regained the offensive and forced the Duke of York to abandon
his siege of Dunkirk. A month later, the Austrians also suffered a
severe setback. The Prussians had taken Mainz during the summer
and moved on to attack Landau, but before the year ended, they,
too, were forced to fall back. With the arrival of the New Year,
France held a position from which her rejuvenated armies would
be able to launch an offensive against the allies.
   Frederick William’s ultimatum presented the British Cabinet
with what was essentially a military problem: was there any
chance of victory over France without the support of Prussia as a
major ally? Austria could not enlarge her forces to make up for
the withdrawal of the Prussians, and Russia was as far as ever from
taking any part in the war. There was no choice but to work out
some sort of agreement with Berlin. In mid-November, the prime
minister brought forward the plan the Cabinet had rejected one
month before. Prussia must be persuaded to honor her treaty
obligations to the allies who, in turn, would pay her at least
£1,000,000 in “bread and forage’? money. Once that had been
done, Pitt recommended that Prussia be asked to bring forward
another army to be entirely paid for and used by her partners.
Circumstances left the Cabinet no choice but to endorse this
proposal and authorize a special mission to Berlin.
   There were clear advantages in carrying on the negotiation at the
Prussian capital, rather than in London. The Prussian envoy,
Jacobi, was a time-server who could not speak with any real
 45. Frederick William to Jacobi, November 10, 1793, FO 97/324.


                                        aha!
                                      17S


authority; furthermore, Grenville found it hard to bear with him.
Much to be preferred was a special British agent working with
Prussian ministers at Berlin. Lord Yarmouth was certainly not the
man for this mission, even though he was now in Germany. His
steadily worsening health was seriously eroding what little talent
he possessed. All agreed that the special assignment at Berlin must
be entrusted to Lord Malmesbury. Still less than fifty years old,
Malmesbury had spent nearly half his life in his country’s service
at Madrid, Berlin, St. Petersburg, and The Hague. The Triple
Alliance had been his masterpiece, and since Britain’s approach to
Prussia involved that treaty, Malmesbury’s qualifications for this
service were indisputable. By now, the ways of diplomacy were
second nature to this dean of the British diplomatic service. In
semiretirement since 1788, Malmesbury was anxious to resume his
career, and when Pitt offered him the Prussian post, he gladly
accepted.
  Grenville carefully prepared instructions to guide the new envoy.
Malmesbury’s immediate goal was to bring Prussia to recognize
that not only was the 1788 treaty still binding, but that it
specifically applied to the present war. “If the King of Prussia,”
Grenville explained, ‘“‘admitting the force of all His Treaties, and
actually furnishing the contingents respectively due to the Empire,
to the Emperor, to His Majesty [George III] and to Holland, is yet
willing to concert measures for a further co-operation in the War
against France, there could be no objection to discuss with Him
the means of facilitating such further exertions by the supply of
whatever pecuniary assistance might be necessary.’ There must be
no misunderstanding on one point: any additional force subsidized
by the allies must ‘‘act under their direction and control.’’ London
would make no specific offer until after receiving Malmesbury’s
report on conditions at Berlin.4 Privately, Grenville urged his
envoy to carry on discussions so far as possible with the Prussian
king himself, “from whose sense of his engagements more may,
perhaps, be expected than from the principles or policy of those
by whom he is advised.” Obviously, Prussia’s complaints of
poverty must be carefully investigated. Finally, since the British

  46. Instructions for Malmesbury, November, 1793, FO 64/31.



                                        3:2
                   The Formation of the First Coalition


plan to aid Prussia looked to a joint effort by all the major allies,
Malmesbury ought to discuss the question with Dutch leaders at
The Hague on his way to Berlin. He would certainly invite the
support of the Austrian minister to Prussia, even though “‘the
utmost jealousy prevails between the two Courts of Vienna and
Berlin.’’47
  Prussia’s conduct had been a puzzle to British leaders for nearly
a year. The wretched business of Poland had combined with
Austro-Prussian antagonism to dash to pieces Grenville’s plan for a
grand alliance of all the powers. Still, even that did not explain
Frederick William’s odd conduct toward Britain. Perhaps Malmes-
bury could find some solution which would enable the coalition to
make war successfully against France in the spring of 1794. When
Malmesbury came to the Foreign Office to take his leave, Grenville
tried not to appear pessimistic. Only in a private letter to his
brother did the foreign secretary admit his fears: ““Lord Malmes-
bury is going to Berlin, to bring our good ally to a point—ay or no.
I think it will end in no.”8

  47. Grenville to Malmesbury, November 20, 1793, Diaries and Correspondence of
James Harris, First Earl of Malmesbury ..., ed. by his grandson, the third Earl, 2d ed.
(London, 1845), III, 1-5 (hereafter cited as Malmesbury).
  48. Grenville to the Marquis of Buckingham, November 21, 1793, Memoirs of the
Court and Cabinets of George the Third, ed. the Duke of Buckingham and Chandos
(London, 1853-1855), II, 247.




                                          3he)
                                          I]
                       THE     PRUSSIAN             SUBSIDY




Lord Malmesbury reached Berlin in time to have his first audience
with Frederick William on Christmas Eve. Darkness had come,
wrapping the northern capital in the cold winds of a winter night
when the envoy was ushered into the presence of the Prussian
monarch. Frederick William had not seen his English friend since
their meeting five years before at The Hague when they had
concluded the Triple Alliance, and he now greeted him with
sincere warmth. Malmesbury was shocked to see what a toll these
years had taken of the King’s health even though he was still not
fifty. It was more than the fact that he had lost a few teeth.
Unmistakable signs of both physical and moral decay were
stamped on this man who, indeed, had only three more years to
live.!                                                              |
  Unlike   his predecessor,   the great Frederick, this Prussian
monarch was totally lacking in self-discipline. Warm and impulsive
by nature, he had never learned to master his passions and, on
coming to the throne in 1786, he gave up the unequal contest
altogether. Even worse than his personal immorality was the
coarseness which characterized it. In preparing for a journey he
carefully selected several female traveling companions as another
man might choose books from his library to ease the tedium of
travel. The King flew from one diversion to another, stunning his
court more by his lack of discrimination than by his fickleness.?

  1. Malmesbury, Ill, 27.
  2. The Journal of Elizabeth, Lady Holland, 1791-1801, ed. Earl of Ilchester (London,
1908),   I, 168-169;   Malmesbury   to Grenville,   January   9, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B.
Fortescue, 1, 492-494.


                                            34
                          The Prussian Subsidy


He would dabble with Rosicrucianism for a while and then, losing
interest, feed his hunger for music by creating one of the finest
court orchestras in Europe. Sustained effort and enduring interest
were foreign to him. In the person of the king of Prussia was the
heart and mind of a spoiled and very bored child. Malmesbury
might well have wondered whether this ruler was really master of
his own state.
   Although their first meeting was brief, Malmesbury went to the
heart of his business at once by asking the King whether he still
considered the Triple Alliance binding. Frederick William seemed
astonished at the question. Without a moment’s hesitation he
replied that, so far as he was concerned, the treaty was as effective
now as on the day it had been signed. Let there be no doubt about
that. The hard fact was, however, that without money from the
allies, Prussia could no longer make war on France. Very solemnly
the King assured Malmesbury that ‘‘on the faith of an honest
man... I have not in my treasure enough to pay the expenses of
a third campaign.’ So completely was he dedicated to the good
cause that not even Austria’s treacherous conduct toward him had
weakened his zeal.
   In the days that followed this interview, Malmesbury carefully
studied conditions at Berlin. He made a special point of discussing
the war with the three Prussian foreign ministers and found none
of them an enthusiastic supporter of the coalition. From what
Malmesbury could discover, Prussia’s financial condition was every
bit as bad as Frederick William claimed. Of £13,000,000 left by
Frederick the Great, less than £3,000,000 remained, and the
annual revenue regularly fell short of expenses. The British envoy’s
conversations with officers of the Prussian army revealed that they
were more interested in discussing the errors of the last campaign
than in planning for the next. Some insisted that at least three
months would be required to put the army in shape to move
against the French. What had happened to the military traditions
of Frederick the Great?*
   News of allied defeats along the Rhine and the French recapture
of Toulon alarmed Malmesbury and he at once began negotiations

 3. Malmesbury to Grenville, December 26, 1793, Malmesbury, III, 28-31.
 4. Malmesbury to Grenville, December 26, 1793, FO 64/31; and Malmesbury,   Ill,
34-38.


                                     39
                                                 1794

with the King. Frederick William assured him that with financial
support from his allies he could put 100,000 effective troops in
the field by the spring. He eagerly suggested ways by which the
allies could raise the money he needed. Funds could surely be
obtained by means of an international loan with the French nation
offered as collateral. Another possibility suggested to the King by
the Dutch was that the allied powers issue a paper currency to be
redeemed after the war ended. Malmesbury wisely refrained from
asking for further details, nor did Frederick William supply them.
Instead, with his imagination now fired by warlike visions, the
King vowed, ‘‘That at the head of this army he would begin the
campaign, by acting in such a manner as he trusted would leave
no doubt of his sentiments on the present war, or of his invariable
wish to fulfil his engagement to the utmost of his power.”
   On January 9, 1794 the British agent sent Pitt a detailed report
of his findings. It was impossible to exaggerate the wretched state
of affairs he had found at Berlin. Frederick William’s intentions
were good enough, but they surely could not be relied on. “The
irresolution and weakness of his character,” Malmesbury observed,
“is indeed such that I cannot venture to pronounce that, if he is
allowed to cool, this disposition will last.”” Malmesbury went to
the heart of the matter by asking, “‘Can we do without the King of
Prussia or can we not. If we can, he is not worth the giving a
guinea for; if we cannot, I am afraid we cannot give too many.”
Certain of the answer to this question, Malmesbury made his own
recommendation: ‘“‘We must only look to the making the best and
quickest bargain possible, to the purchasing him as reasonably, and
to the binding him as fast and as securely as we can.” Even if this
was done, Pitt must remember that “The greatest difficulty is to
secure the hearty co-operation of His Prussian Majesty till the end
of the war, and on this point I am quite at a loss what is to be
done.’’®
   Parliament reconvened early in 1794, and the King’s Speech
made clear the government’s decision to carry on the war with

  5. Malmesbury       to Grenville,    January    5, 1794,   Malmesbury,   III, 38-41.   See   also
Grenville   to Lord    Auckland,      January    16, 1794, The Journal and Correspondence of
William, Lord Auckland       (London, 1861-1862), III, 168-170 (hereafter cited as
Auckland). The proposal that the allies issue a paper currency to pay their war costs was
finally adopted during the last phase of the Napoleonic war.
  6. Malmesbury to Pitt, January 9, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 11, 494-495.


                                                   36
                               The Prussian Subsidy


renewed determination. Fox’s motion for peace provoked a
spirited response from the prime minister who declared that his
policy was “‘to resist, where resistance alone can be effectual, till
such time, as by the blessing of Providence upon our endeavours,
we shall have secured the independence of this country, and the
general interests of Europe.”’ This was also the spirit of the
Cabinet, which authorized the subsidy proposal Grenville sent to
Malmesbury on January 28. Strategy for the 1794 campaign called
for the Austrian and British forces to resume the offensive in
Flanders, while at least 100,000 Prussians provided support along
the Rhine. Holland had decided not to claim the 12,000 Prussians
due her under the Triple Alliance and Grenville therefore fixed at
40,000 the force Frederick William was treaty-bound to furnish
Britain and Austria. If he could enlarge this force to 100,000 men,
then the allies might be willing to pay him a £2,000,000 subsidy.
The foreign secretary recommended that the allies undertake this
financial obligation jointly since ‘““The whole burthen of the above
mentioned Sum is far beyond what it is possible to propose that
His Majesty should take upon himself.’’® Britain was willing to pay
two fifths of the total (£800,000) but Austria, Holland, and
Prussia would each have to contribute one fifth.
  Strange as it might seem to require Prussia to pay £400,000
toward her own subsidy, Pitt and Grenville were both firm on this
point. From the outset the prime minister feared that subsidizing
Prussia might have the effect of making her appear to be merely a
troop-renting agency.” Less sensitive to Prussia’s feelings, Grenville
argued that for Prussia to share the financial burden would give
her ‘‘a direct and immediate interest in the success of the War.”
Frederick William might be more energetic if he thought that a
defeated France could be made to reimburse him.!? Writing
confidentially to Malmesbury, Grenville complained that ‘“‘“German
Princes think England a pretty good milch cow.”’!1
  7. Parliamentary History, XXX, 1045-1047, 1286.
   8. In Grenville’s first draft, he described the £2,000,000 subsidy as ‘“‘beyond what it is
possible.”’ In the final draft, he altered this to read “far beyond what it is possible.”
  9. Pitt to Grenville, October 2, 1793, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 11, 434-435.
   10. Pitt’s biographer aptly describes this device as “suggestive of that of the rustic who
tempts his beast of burden onwards by dangling a choice vegetable before his nose”
(John Holland Rose, William Pitt and the Great War {London, 1911], p. 202).
  11. Grenville to Malmesbury, January 28, 1794, FO 64/31; Grenville to Malmesbury,
January 17, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 497.


                                             Soy)
           NORTH       SEA




                                                   > HAMBURG



                                                                       ° BERLIN



      DUNKIRK                                      ior
        MAASTRICHT                             i
    FLEURUS

                   x
                                Mae      ° DARMSTADT
                       o\ KA/SERSLAUTERN
                               LANDAU » PMANNHEIM
                                         fo}




    PARIS
   Seine

            20


                                 BASEL
                                                                        LEOBEN       o

                 GENEVA      °
                                                               CAMPO        FORM/O
                                                                        °




                                                   MANTUA
                                                     °




                                                                 ADRIATIC
                                                                            SEA          |

. Campaign Area of the First Coalition
                              The Prussian Subsidy


  The British proposal was based on foolish hopes, and it was also
contrived and complicated. Prussia refused to contribute to her
own subsidy unless the total was increased to provide her with the
means to do so.!* The Dutch were willing to bear that part of the
burden Britain had assigned to them, but in February Grenville
learned that Austria would pay nothing.
   By this time, the Prussian government had produced a subsidy
plan which Malmesbury sent to London in February. Not only did
the Prussians want vastly more money than they had previously
asked for, but they demanded that the monthly payments be
made retroactive to the first of the year.!4 So extreme were these
demands that Grenville was sure they had been “brought forward
for the purpose of being negatived,” and his notes on the proposal
are generously sprinkled with such phrases as “highly objection-
able,” ‘“‘wholly inadmissible,” and finally ‘‘utterly inadmissible.”!5
   Within a few weeks the spring campaign against France was due
to begin, and the Cabinet had no choice but to produce a
counterproposal. In the middle of March Grenville forwarded this
new plan to Malmesbury and described it as “‘Final.’”’ If Prussia
would maintain 62,000 troops against the enemy (including the
32,000 men Holland and Britain were entitled to by the 1788
alliance), Britain would pay her a subsidy of £1,000,000 a year.
Malmesbury was empowered to offer two additional concessions if
they were needed: first, to accept the demand for monthly
payments retroactive to the first of the year; and second, to offer
still an additional sum to meet the “‘bread and forage”’ costs of the
20,000 troops Prussia was bound to furnish Britain by the terms
of the Triple Alliance. This second concession would add about
£400,000 a year, bringing the total subsidy close to £1,500,000.16
   The coming of spring found Frederick William ready to
compromise his differences with Britain, and even before Gren-
ville’s final offer reached Berlin, Malmesbury was presented with a
new Prussian plan more reasonable than the last. Sixty-two
  12. Malmesbury to Grenville, February 16, 1794, Malmesbury, Ill, 51-66.
  13. Thugut was horrified by the prospect of 100,000 subsidized Prussians operating in
an area from which they might launch an attack on the Hapsburg possessions; Grenville
to Malmesbury, February 3, 1794, FO 64/31.
  14. The Prussian proposal is found in FO 64/32.
  15. Grenville to Malmesbury, March 7, 1794, Manuscripts ofJ. B. Fortescue, I, 516;
Grenville’s notes on the Prussian proposal, FO 64/31.
  16. Grenville to Malmesbury, March 7, 1794, FO 64/32.


                                          aS)
                                        1794


thousand troops would be mobilized for service in the Low
Countries, for which the Maritime Powers (as Britain and Holland
were referred to) must pay £800,000 a year, together with an
extra sum to meet the expenses of this force.!7 The Prussian offer
was no bargain, but Grenville wearily instructed Malmesbury to
continue negotiations and resolve the differences between the two
governments.!® Meanwhile, Malmesbury had proposed to Count
Kurt von Haugwitz, his Prussian counterpart, that their future
discussions be continued at The Hague. Ostensibly this would
permit the Dutch to take part in the final settlement of terms. In
fact, Malmesbury feared that the growing antiwar sentiment at
Berlin would prove fatal to his mission if he remained there much
longer.!?
  Hard bargaining marked the closing phases of the negotiation at
The Hague, but by April 1, 1794 terms had been agreed to which,
in general, fell within the limits Grenville had prescribed. Gone
entirely was the clumsy distinction Pitt had made between the
troops Prussia was treaty-bound to supply and an additional
contingent. Now it was simply agreed that Prussia would place
62,400 men at the disposal of the Maritime Powers who would
pay her a monthly subsidy of £50,000 to be counted from April 1.
An additional sum would be due for the upkeep of this force,
bringing the total monthly payment to £150,000. To gain this
much, Malmesbury had been forced to go beyond Grenville’s offer
in certain respects. In order to escape Haugwitz’ demand that
monthly subsidies be made retroactive to January 1794, Malmes-
bury had to agree to the payment of “preparation money.” After
much haggling, the British envoy offered £400,000 for this
purpose and it was accepted.” Prussia balked at the demand that
the Maritime Powers have absolute control of the subsidized force,
as if it were a corps of Hessian mercenaries. The text of the treaty,
which was signed on April 19, left this important question in some
confusion. Provision was made for the creation of a military
commission, representing Britain and Holland, to arrange with the
Prussian commander for the employment of the subsidized army
  17. Malmesbury to Grenville, March 13, 1794, FO 64/32.
  18. Grenville to Malmesbury, March 28, 1794, FO 64/33.
  19. Moving to The Hague would also bring Malmesbury into closer communication
with London. See Malmesbury to Grenville, March 13, 1794, Malmesbury, III,75-80.
  20. Malmesbury to Grenville, April 19, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 552.


                                         40
                              The Prussian Subsidy


“where      it   will   be    judged     most      agreeable      to   the   Maritime
Powers.”’7!
  While at The Hague, Malmesbury also reached an understanding
with the Dutch regarding their responsibility for subsidy pay-
ments. The Stadtholder’s government consented to pay £100,000
of the “preparation money” due Prussia as well as £400,000 of the
annual subsidy of £1,350,000. Privately, the Dutch ministers
confessed that this obligation would be difficult for them to meet.
To save the Dutch embarrassment, Malmesbury promised that his
government would sponsor a £400,000 loan for the Stadtholder
from the Bank of England. This courteous gesture greatly annoyed
Pitt when he later learned of it.??
   On hearing that the Prussian subsidy treaty had finally been
signed, Pitt declared that he was “‘sincerely glad.’’ George III’s
reactions are in some respects more interesting and penetrating.
On the whole, the King was pleased with the result, but added that
“perhaps a little more firmness in Ld. Malmesbury’s manner of
treating might have in some particulars rendered the terms more
Advantageous; but as the main object is so essential, I think it best
not to look out for any objections.”*? The King’s advice was
sound, for the treaty could hardly be considered as a diplomatic
victory for Pitt. In fact, the agreement did violence to each of the
four major points on which the prime minister had insisted at the
outset of the negotiation.
  First, the treaty ignored entirely the distinction Pitt had made
between the troops due Britain under the 1788 alliance and the
additional corps she was willing to subsidize. Instead, the Maritime
Powers acknowledged that the subsidy treaty of 1794 in fact freed
Prussia from her obligations to them under the Triple Alliance.
Second, nothing at all remained of Pitt’s original insistence that
any subsidy for Prussia must be financed collectively by the allies.
The entire expense was now to be borne by Britain and Holland
with every likelihood that the Dutch would pass on their share to
Britain.

  21. Treaty with Prussia, April 19, 1794, FO 94/183(3),(4).
  22. Treaty with Holland, April 19, 1794, FO 93/46 (1D); and Pitt to Grenville, April
24,1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Ul, 552.
   23. Pitt to Grenville, April 24, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, U1, 552; George
Ill to Pitt, April 28, 1794, in the papers of William Pitt included in the Chatham Papers
on deposit at the Public Record Office, London, 30/8, vol. 103.


                                           41
   Lord Grenville, by John Hoppner         Lord Malmesbury,    by Sir Joshua
                                           Reynolds




Sir Charles   Whitworth,   by Sir Thomas   George   Canning,   by Sir Thomas
Lawrence                                   Lawrence
                            The Prussian Subsidy


  Third, throughout the negotiation Pitt had been forced to offer
Prussia more and more money. In January an annual subsidy of
£800,000 was considered to be the limit, but the April treaty
saddled   Britain with a bill which would amount to about
£1,500,000 by the time the year ended. Finally, Britain had all
along   insisted   that   the   subsidized    Prussians   must   be under   the
control of the allies who provided the money. Whether or not the
military commission,       created by the treaty, would actually
exercise this sort of control remained to be seen.
   Important as these considerations are, they must not obscure the
main point: Britain could find no other way to carry on the war
without Prussia’s cooperation as a principal partner. Military
necessity was the determining consideration before which lesser
interests had to yield. This was the point the prime minister
stressed when, on April 30, he presented the Prussian treaty to the
House of Commons. He frankly confessed “that it would be much
more satisfactory to me to be able to state that the king of Prussia
still continued to take part in the war asa principal, acting on his
own bottom, and from his own resources.” That was no longer
possible. “‘How much soever we may regret, or disapprove the
secession of the king of Prussia from the common cause,” he
continued, “‘there can be no doubt that if his efforts can at all be
effectual to the purposes of the war, it is still desirable to secure
the use of them.’ The House should note that it would cost
Britain much more to add 62,400 men to her own army than it
would to obtain the service of as many Prussians by a subsidy. Pitt
readily conceded that Britain could not hope to control the
subsidized Prussians as if they were German mercenaries. It was,
perhaps, as well that he neglected to mention it was exactly that
sort of control he had originally hoped to obtain.74
   Although Fox had no hope of defeating the treaty, he was
anxious to make as good a fight as possible. With the skill of an
experienced debater, he fastened tenaciously to the weakest part
of the government’s case. If military necessity compels us to
submit to Prussia’s demands, then “Spain, Austria, and all the
other powers, might come to the same resolution.” Could the
prime minister “‘give the people of this country any ground to

  24. Parliamentary History, XXX1, 437-442.


                                         43
                                      1794


hope that the same difficulty would not be felt by the other
powers as had been expressed by Prussia?” Certainly not! “What,
then, was to be expected to be the result of all this?” Fox asked.
“Why, that the whole expence would eventually fall on Great
Britain.”’’> Had members known how accurate this prediction was
to prove, perhaps more than thirty-three of them would have
voted in favor of Fox’s motion to deny the subsidy. Instead, the
treaty was upheld by more than a hundred votes, and Pitt might
have congratulated himself on carrying off the business with so
little trouble.
   Grenville’s defense of the agreement, made the same day in the
Lords, dealt at length with the principles which justified the
payment of subsidies. War with France had always obliged Britain
“to seek for aid on the continent; for though our superiority over
France, in point of national vigour, of naval power, of commerce
and of wealth was manifest, yet in point of population, and of the
means of raising armies, Britain must yield to her rival; and thus it
had always been our system to seek on the continent for
additional land force.” The employment of mercenaries and
subsidy agreements with the allies had ‘‘at all times, been our
policy, not merely from necessity, as we could not raise great land
armies ourselves, but also from economy, as it was certainly
cheaper and more politic to pay foreign troops, than to take our
own youth from the plough, and the loom, and thereby not
merely put a stop to all domestic industry, but also drain the
island of its population, and diminish our natural strength.’ This
had certainly been the case with the 1758 Prussian subsidy treaty
which Grenville pointed to as a precedent.7°
  Even though Britain’s population was more than double that of
Prussia, she had chosen to pay Frederick William to maintain
62,400 men under arms against the French Republic.’ Not only
would it have cost her more than the subsidy to enlarge her own
army by that number, but such a diversion of manpower would

     25. Ibid., XXXI1, 442-451.
     26. Ibid., XXXI, 452-455.
  27.It has been estimated that at the close of the eighteenth century the combined
population of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland was about 15,600,000 while the
population of Brandenburg—Prussia was only around 6,200,000; see Herbert Moller, ed.,
Population Movements in Modern European History (New York and London, 1964), p.
De


                                        44
                            The Prussian Subsidy


impair Britain’s ability to create wealth. In the face of such a
double loss, the Prussian subsidy treaty might seem a bargain. The
point probably struck most peers as self-evident, for when the
House   of Lords finally voted, only six members expressed
themselves as ““Not-content”’ with the subsidy to Prussia.

  The   subsidy    treaty   with    Britain   renewed    Frederick     William’s
commitment      to the war in the West, and for that reason, some of
the King’s advisors bitterly opposed it. Prussia’s real interest, they
insisted, was territorial expansion in the East, not war with the
French Republic. Shortly before the signing of the treaty, events
took a turn in Poland which added weight to their argument. Ever
since the partition of the previous year, Poland had been restive,
and in March 1794 a revolt flared up which quickly turned into a
war of liberation against Prussia and Russia. Within a month,
Polish patriots drove their oppressors from Warsaw and reasserted
the independence of their nation. Had the conclusion of the
subsidy agreement       with Britain been delayed much _ longer,
Frederick William’s ministers might have persuaded him to end the
negotiation. As it was, the Berlin peace party now set about to
convince the King that, regardless of his new obligation to Britain,
his chief responsibility was to suppress the Polish rebels and then
preside over a final partition of that country. Torn between the
arguments of his ministers and his own sense of obligation to the
allies, Frederick William compromised: the forces subsidized by
Britain and Holland would remain on the Rhine, but the rest of his
army would move into Poland. This decision reflected the dualism
of Prussia’s policy which soon reduced her subsidy treaty with
Britain to scrap paper.78
   Pitt unwittingly played into the hands of the Prussian peace
faction by his careless tardiness in remitting the subsidy payments.
At the signing of the treaty, Malmesbury promised Haugwitz that
the preparation money and the April subsidy would be sent from
England at once.2? On his return to London a few weeks later he
discovered that Pitt and Grenville were so absorbed in rooting out

  28. A. W. Ward, G. W. Prothero, and Stanley Leathes, eds., The Cambridge Modern
History (Cambridge, 1934), VII, 542-544.
  29.In March Malmesbury was told that Prussia’s military chest would be exhausted
within another month; Malmesbury to Grenville, March 8, 1794, FO 64/32.


                                        45
                                      1794

sedition at home       that they had altogether neglected their
responsibility to Prussia. The diplomat was horrified and begged
ministers to attend to the Prussian business at once.°?
  It was not until May 20, one month after the treaty had been
signed, that Pitt directed the Bank of England to supply £600,000
in specie to pay Prussia the preparation money and the subsidies
for April and May.*! Arrangements were also made with the
London bank of Harman, Hoare, and Harman to handle the
remittances in return for a commission of 1/3 d. percent.*? By the
terms of the treaty, Britain was to appoint a member of the special
military commission which would direct the operations of the
subsidized force. For this post the prime minister selected Lord
Cornwallis who had just returned from service in India. All
Britain’s obligations under the treaty had been met by the end of
May when Malmesbury left England to resume his diplomatic
duties at the Prussian headquarters.
  At Maastricht the British envoy encountered Count Haugwitz,
from whom he learned that Frederick William was still in Poland
but was expected to return to the Rhine within a few weeks.
Malmesbury indicated that the Cabinet wished the subsidized
Prussians to take a new position between the Meuse and the sea in
order to cooperate with the allies in the defense of Holland.
Although Haugwitz approved this plan, he noted that the Prussians
could not be moved until after the receipt of the subsidy money.
So far no payment of any kind had been made. Malmesbury
ruefully admitted that Prussia was entirely within her rights. This
was exactly the danger about which he had warned Pitt; not a
Prussian soldier would stir until at least the first subsidy
remittance was at Berlin.*4
  On June 7, H.M.S. Active worked her way up the Thames and
dropped anchor near the Tower of London in order to take aboard
a quantity of kegs packed with Spanish silver dollars. She was soon
joined by H.M.S. Syren under orders to take delivery of 231 kegs
of silver. The crew of the Active was more fortunate, for, in
addition to the specie, they loaded thirty puncheons of beer. Both
  30. Malmesbury, IIl, 93.
  31. Pitt to the Governor of the Bank of England, May 20, 1794, and Pitt to Jacobi,
May 28, 1794, Chatham Papers, vol. 195.
  32. Treasury Minute, May 31, 1794, Ty. 29/66, 466-467.
  33. Malmesbury to Grenville, June 2, 1794, FO 64/33.


                                        46
                                The Prussian Subsidy


vessels     sailed
                 with the tide on June 9, outward bound for
Hamburg, carrying between them £600,000 in silver. Ten days
later, both ships were in the Elbe and the silver was conveyed by a
guard of marines to the Hamburg bank of Parish and Company,
correspondents of Harman and Hoare.** The Hamburg bankers
made arrangements for the specie to be sent to the Prussian
treasury at Berlin.
   Meanwhile, Malmesbury and Haugwitz remained at Maastricht
awaiting the arrival of Lord Cornwallis. The British general joined
them early in June, bringing with him Brook Watson, commissary
general to the Duke of York’s army.*> Watson offered to help the
Prussian army get moving at once by lending them sixty days’
rations from his own stores. Haugwitz curtly rejected this offer,
pointing out that it was a shortage of money, not rations, which
kept the army immobilized.** So forcefully was the point made
that Cornwallis began to doubt whether Prussia had any intention
of joining in the defense of Holland.?7
   A few days after this unhappy meeting, Malmesbury and
Cornwallis set out for the Prussian headquarters at Mainz to confer
with the commander of the subsidized army, Marshal Mollendorf.
They    were accompanied      by Baron Kinckel, who had been
appointed as Holland’s representative on the military commission.
Arriving at Mainz, the envoys discovered that instead of the
62,400 troops called for by the treaty, the Prussian army
numbered     only about 40,000 men in deplorable condition.*®
MOollendorf provided a chilly reception for his visitors, making
clear that he really wished they had not come. Overlooking this
discourtesy, Malmesbury turned at once to business and informed
Mollendorf that the military commission wished him to move his
troops toward Flanders. The aging marshal bristled. No one but
  34. Master’s   Log for H.M.S. Syren,   1794, Admiralty   Papers deposited in the Public
Record    Office, London   (hereafter cited as ““Adm.”), 52/3427; Master’s Log for H.M.S.
Active, 1794, Adm. 52/3520.
   35. Brook Watson (1735-1807) had gone to sea as a boy and lost a leg to a shark while
swimming in Havana harbor. The incident inspired a painting by John Singleton Copley.
Watson served as commissary to the British army in Canada during the Seven Years War,
after which he went into business in London. A member of Parliament and a director of
the Bank of England, he was later elected Lord Mayor of London.
  36. Malmesbury to Grenville, June 11, 1794, FO 64/34.
  37. Cornwallis to the Duke of York, June 18, 1794, Correspondence of Charles, First
Marquis Cornwallis, ed. Charles Ross (London, 1859), II, 248.
  38. Fortescue, British Army, IV, 292.


                                            47
                                    1794

the King could give such an order and he had not done so. The
army would remain at Mainz. Malmesbury’s patience had been
worn away by the disappointments of the last few weeks, and he
now lashed out at Mollendorf’s refusal to abide by the clear
meaning of the treaty. The military commission was present and
demanded the right to decide where the Prussians were to fight.
Mollendorf was not open to argument on this point. Until orders
came from the King, the army would stay where it was.°?
   Malmesbury was now at his wits’ end. The Prussians refused to
move even though the subsidy had been paid. With Frederick
William still in Poland, weeks of correspondence would be needed
to clear up this tangle. To make matters worse, Cornwallis had
begun to get on Malmesbury’s nerves; the phlegmatic general had
not uttered a word to support his colleague during all the
discussions with Haugwitz and Mollendorf. In fact, Cornwallis was
thoroughly weary of the whole business and when he announced
his decision to return to England, Malmesbury offered no
objection. By now, the Prussians were nagging the British minister
about the subsidy payments for June and July. The first
remittance of £600,000 brought the payments due only to the end
of the month of May. Again the familiar refrain was heard:
nothing could be done until the account was paid up to date.
Malmesbury relayed their complaints to Grenville, adding with
obvious weariness, “‘I am persuaded the same game will be play’d
over again at the beginning of each month.’’*”
  The June subsidy was a month late in being sent from England.
Early in July the Bank of England supplied £120,000 in Spanish
dollars to be shipped aboard H.M.S. Mermaid. To complete the
payment, Harman and Hoare purchased £30,000 in specie at
Amsterdam for delivery at Hamburg. The treasure carried by
Mermaid was delivered to Parish and Company in mid-July and
was to have a significant part to play in the worsening of
Anglo-Prussian relations.*!
   Malmesbury’s reports from Mainz created a dismay in Downing
Street which quickly turned to fury. While the Prussians did guard

 39. Malmesbury to Grenville, June 21, 1794, FO 64/34.
 40. Malmesbury to Grenville, July 12, 1794, FO 97/324.
 41. Thomas Cotton to Grenville, June 27, 1794, FO 64/29; Master’s Log for H.M.S.
Mermaid, 1794, Adm. 52/3215.

                                      48
                               The Prussian Subsidy


duty   on   the Rhine,       the Austrian army         had been badly beaten at
Fleurus on June 25. Unless the Prussians quickly moved to
support the allies, all of Belgium would fall to the enemy.
Grenville ordered Malmesbury to insist on the right of the
Maritime Powers to use the troops they were paying: ‘‘This is a
point in every light so important, and which was so clearly
understood during the whole negotiation, and so plainly expressed
in the Treaty itself, that it can never be given up.’’*? Pitt was even
more upset and bewailed the fact that ‘“‘we are condemned to a
wretched defensive” if Mollendorf did not soon move. At first, the
prime minister was tempted to declare that Prussia’s inaction had
nullified the treaty, but he soon recognized that such an act would
be foolish.43 Certainly, there was much talk in government circles
about stopping subsidy payments until the Prussians moved. At a
Cabinet meeting in mid-July someone (it may have been Grenville)
proposed such a step. Pitt and the Duke of Portland, however,
argued that at this stage such a decision would probably do more
harm than good.* In the end, this view prevailed, and on July 19
Grenville dispatched an appeal to Mollendorf to send at least
20,000 men to help the allies stem the onrushing French tide
which threatened to engulf Holland.**
  During this same month, a comedy of errors which nearly ended
the Anglo-Prussian alliance was played out at Berlin involving the
subsidy money brought by H.M.S. Mermaid. Early in July,
Haugwitz informed George Rose, the British chargé d’affaires at
Berlin, that a rumour was going around to the effect that London
had stopped subsidy payments. If this were so, Haugwitz declared
that all Prussian troops would be withdrawn from the western
front.*© Rose knew nothing of the matter. He had resigned his post
and was only awaiting the arrival of his successor, Arthur Paget. A
few days after Paget reached Berlin, Haugwitz had a stormy
interview with him in which he announced that Parish and
Company had refused to turn over the June subsidy money to the
Prussian treasury. Paget protested that there had been a misunder-
  42. Grenville to Malmesbury, July, 1794, FO 64/34.
  43. “We ought to insist on an immediate order for the Prussians to march, or consider
the treaty as broken” Pitt to Grenville, June 29, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il,
§92-593.
  44. Portland to Malmesbury, July 23, 1794, Malmesbury, I, 120.
  45. Grenville to Malmesbury, July 19, 1794, FO 64/34.
  46. Rose to Grenville, July 5, 1794, FO 64/29.

                                            49
                                         1794


standing which he would correct. Despite Paget’s eagerness to set
things right, he could not appease Haugwitz, who forced him to
accept a very stiff ministerial note of protest.47
   Hurried enquiries revealed that Parish and Company had indeed
refused to pay the June subsidy brought by Mermaid.             As
justification, the Hamburg bankers produced a letter from Harman
and Hoare forbidding them to make any further payments without
specific instructions from London.*® What had happened now
seems fairly clear. With rumours circulating in London that the
subsidy was to be suspended, Harman and Hoare had ordered their
Hamburg correspondents to delay payment until they could
discover the truth. The matter was soon cleared up and the
Prussians received their money. Haugwitz’ conduct had perhaps
been the most significant feature of the entire incident: the only
major Prussian minister to support the subsidy treaty, he now
appeared to have joined its opponents.”
   Before July ended the French had driven the allies from
Belgium. The Duke of York fell back into Holland, while the
Austrians withdrew eastward toward the Rhine. With the allied
armies now separated, the French turned against Mollendorf’s
Prussians and forced them to abandon Kaiserslautern. Under this
pressure, the Prussian marshal bestirred himself and offered to
unite with the Austrians in the defense of the Rhine. The British
Cabinet endorsed Mollendorf’s plan and agreed to continue the
subsidy. This was just as well. Late in July Malmesbury learned of
Frederick William’s decision regarding the direction of the
subsidized Prussians; it was left to Mollendorf to decide where
they were to fight.
   The proposed union of the Prussian and Austrian armies never
took place. With the French daily growing stronger in his front,

 47. Paget to Grenville, July 26, 1794, FO 64/30.
 48. Harman   and Hoare’s instructions to Parish and Co., dated July 11, 1794, read “‘be
pleased to observe, that no part of the Silver is to be sent away until you shall have our
instructions for it’’; Paget to Grenville, July 26, 1794, FO 64/30.
  49. If Pitt felt that Harman and Hoare were guilty of misconduct, he did nothing more
than insist that for the future they act only on the government’s instructions. For the
details, see Grenville to Paget, August 16, 1794, FO 64/30; Harman and Hoare to Pitt,
August 15, 1794, FO 64/30; and Harman and Hoare to Pitt, September 17, 1794,
Chatham Papers, vol. 142.
   50. Malmesbury to Grenville, July 29, 1794, Malmesbury, Ill, 118-119; Grenville to
Malmesbury, August 16, 1794, and Malmesbury to Grenville, July 29, 1794, FO 64/34.


                                           50
                               The Prussian Subsidy


  Mollendorf decided against moving north to join with the Imperial
  army. The Austrians were therefore obliged to continue their
  withdrawal, and early in October Mollendorf himself sought
  refuge by crossing to the right bank of the Rhine. Meanwhile, the
  French stabilized their position by uniting their scattered armies
  into a single arc, stretching from Mannheim roughly north and
  west through the south of Holland. Malmesbury remained with the
  Prussians, but his role was now that of an observer rather than an
  envoy. Each day made him more disgusted with the Prussians and
  their duplicity, and he compared them to the Algerian pirates
  “whom it is no disgrace to pay, or any impeachment of good sense
  to be cheated by.” He longed only for release and confided to
  Grenville, “I lament every hour that I remain near them.”*!
    When Pitt learned of Mollendorf’s refusal to unite with the
  Austrians, fear overcame the little of his patience which remained.
  Since May more than £1,000,000 had been paid to the Prussians
  with absolutely no return. As early as August, Grenville was ready
  to wash his hands of the whole business and he told Malmesbury,
  “‘We have given the thing the best chance of success. . . It has not
  succeeded, and I am convinced that no further endeavours will
' obtain more from the Prussians than we have had for the last
  twelve or fourteen months, until events put us in a situation to
  speak in a higher tone.’°? Now the prime minister agreed. At the
  end of September, he informed Jacobi that the subsidy would be
  suspended until Modllendorf joined forces with the Duke of York
  in Holland.»
    The blow which Britain had threatened all summer now fell on
  the Prussians, but circumstances made it anticlimactic. Berlin
  responded by declaring that the British decision put an end to
  their alliance.*4 Certainly, the Prussian peace faction was anxious
  to end the connection with London. Since spring nothing had
  quite gone as they wished. Operations against the Polish rebels had
  completely bogged down, and only the intervention of Russian
  troops ended the uprising. Catherine thereby won the right to
  dictate the terms of the final partition. Frederick William feared
   51. Malmesbury to Portland, August 7, 1794, Malmesbury, III, 121-122; Malmesbury
 to Grenville, September 26, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 636.
   52. Grenville to Malmesbury, August 16, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Ml, 621.
   53. Grenville to Malmesbury, September 30, 1794, FO 64/35.
   54. Malmesbury, Ml, 143.


                                            Sl
                                             1794

that the Tsarina would favor Austria and grant him only a small
share of Poland. This is what happened. For a time, the King was
tempted to improve his position in the East by renewing his
entente with Britain.*> Pitt was always prepared to resume the
subsidy if Prussian troops were sent to help defend Holland.
During the autumn, Count Haugwitz tempted Arthur Paget by
declaring that Prussia only waited for the payment of one more
month’s subsidy before sending her army to Holland. In the end,
even Haugwitz wearied of the game and told Paget, “Pay the
subsidies and then we will talk.’
  Grenville would have none of it. He was barely civil to the
Prussian minister, Jacobi, when the latter called on him in late
October to express Frederick William’s displeasure. So far as
Grenville was concerned, the union with Prussia was broken, and
on the following day, he sent Malmesbury permission to abandon
the post which had become intolerable.>’
  The £1,200,000 paid to Prussia since June accomplished none of
the things Pitt expected.*® It is difficult to see how it could have
been   otherwise.      When      the treaty had been signed, British leaders
hoped that the addition of 62,400 Prussians to the allied force in
the Low Countries would bring victory. The Prussian argument
that such a concentration would expose Germany to attack is
probably valid from a military viewpoint. Even so, why did

  55.The   several communications        made by Hardenberg to Malmesbury during the late
summer of 1794 seem to bear this out; see Malmesbury, III, 131-133.
  56. Paget to Malmesbury, October 20, 1794, The Paget Papers; Diplomatic and Other
Correspondence of the Right Hon. Sir Arthur Paget,            G. C. B., 1794-1807,       ed. Sir
Augustus Paget (London, 1896), I, 70-71.
  57. Grenville’s minute on a conference with Jacobi, October 23, 1794, FO 97/324; and
Grenville to Malmesbury, October 24, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, U1, 642.
  58. The King’s Warrant Book (Ty. 52/81, 283) records warrants issued between June 4
and October 4, 1794, for a total of £1,306,495 for the Prussian subsidy. Of this sum,
£720,000 was paid the Bank of England in June for the silver used in the first two
remittances. The balance was paid to Harman and Hoare. In December 1794 that firm
presented their final statement showing a credit of £80,000 to the British government,
after deducting bankers’ commissions and incidental expenses (Army Ledgers, Papers of
the Pay Master General’s Office, deposited          in the   Public   Record   Office,   London
[hereafter cited as ““PMG”’] , 2/45, 330).
  The fact that a warrant for the Prussian subsidy was signed on October 4 suggests that
the payments to Prussia were resumed. However, the October warrant was to cover
payments made to Harman and Hoare prior to the suspension in September (Pitt to
George III, October 4, 1794, The Later Correspondence of George III, ed. Arthur
Aspinall   [London, 1963],   II, 249).




                                               a2
                        The Prussian Subsidy


Mollendorf remain totally inactive until the end of the summer
when the French forced him to defend himself?
  The answer to this question lies in the ambivalence which
characterized Prussian policy throughout the entire year. Freder-
ick William was torn between his interests in Poland and _ his
obligation to the allies. His emotional attachment to the coa-
lition’s cause is beyond dispute. The hard fact was that the war
with France offered Prussia very little opportunity to satisfy her
craving for territorial gain. The Polish rebellion, coming almost at
the same time as the subsidy treaty with Britain, placed him in a
dilemma. If he devoted himself to the war in the West, Russia
would doubtless settle the Polish crisis to Prussia’s disadvantage.
To renege on his treaty with the Maritime Powers would bring on
him the charge of betrayal and, at the same time, deprive him of
any share in the prizes which France might be obliged to yield to
the allies. Because Prussia kept a foot in both camps she failed to
meet her goals either in the East or the West. The performance of
the Prussian army during the summer of 1794 nearly destroyed its
reputation as one of Europe’s finest military weapons. Mollen-
dorf’s inept operation along the Rhine was matched by the failure
of Prussia’s expedition against the Polish rebels. Victories could
not be won by appeals to the memory of Frederick the Great.
   Pitt contributed to the failure of the Prussian treaty by failing to
pay the installments of the subsidy when they were due. From the
very beginning, this provided Frederick William’s ministers with
the opportunity to charge Britain with bad faith. The ground was
thus prepared for the bickering over pay and performance in
which the allies engaged until the treaty was mercifully suppressed
in October. One point is beyond all dispute: until Britain and the
powers she assisted were of one mind regarding the purpose of the
war, subsidies would make no contribution to victory, although
they might postpone defeat.




                                  a3
                                     Il
   A NEW        ORIENTATION                FOR     THE      COALITION




Prussia’s withdrawal from the war disturbed Grenville far less than
might be imagined. In one of his final dispatches to Malmesbury,
the foreign secretary explained his lack of concern: “I am far from
thinking it a disadvantage that the resolution of withdrawing the
army has been so decisively and abruptly taken at Berlin. The
season is, I trust, too far advanced to allow of any considerable
impression being made on the German frontier in the course of
this year; and we have the whole winter before us to take our
measures for the next campaign, knowing what we have to trust
to.”! British and Dutch troops began to dig in behind the Waal
river in a desperate last-ditch effort to hold that line against the
French. By now, Pitt’s confidence in the Duke of York had
vanished and he pressed the Duke of Brunswick to accept the
command. Brunswick declined the offer, but he did agree in
November, to rent 2,289 of his soldiers to Britain for service in
Holland. For this he would receive the customary levy money and
an annual subsidy of £15,565.”
   The formation of the coalition in 1793 created a partnership in
arms among Britain, Prussia, and Holland—the powers who five
years before had formed the Triple Alliance. By the opening of
 1795 Prussia had abandoned the coalition and French armies
threatened to overrun Holland. For the future, Britain would have
to carry on the war in closer cooperation with Austria, her only
remaining major ally. Information had reached Grenville indicating
that the Tsarina might soon be ready to take an active part in the
 1. Grenville to Malmesbury, October 24, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 642.
 2. Treaty with Brunswick, November 8, 1794, FO 93/20(1).


                                         54
                         A New Orientation for the Coalition


contest with France. With the old Triple Alliance of 1788 in
shambles, the foreign secretary proposed to provide the coalition
with a new focus in the form of a British alliance with Austria and
Russia. To accomplish this, Britain would certainly have to agree
to supply her partners with money.
  Austria’s finances began to collapse in the autumn of 1793; at
the same time Prussia made her first bid for British subsidies. Since
the Prussian appeal initially had been rebuffed by London, Thugut
seems to have concluded that an Austrian call for help would meet
the same fate. Therefore, the Hofburg decided to borrow the
money     it required. With the Dutch money market almost
destroyed by the war, application would have to be made to the
bankers of England. Early in 1794 the Austrian minister in
London, Count Starhemberg, was instructed to negotiate a private
loan of £1,000,000, a sum soon raised to £3,000,000.?
  Acting on these instructions, Starhemberg opened the matter
with one of the City’s leading banks: Boyd, Benfield and
Company. Walter Boyd, senior partner in the firm, was highly
regarded in financial circles, although some thought him more
reckless than was desirable in a banker.* Boyd readily agreed to
manage the Austrian business and he offered suggestions as to how
£3,000,000 could be raised. As finally settled, there would be a
£2,500,000 issue of Austrian 3 percent bonds. Bonds with a face
value of £100 would be sold for £60 in cash, thus bringing Austria
a total return of £1,500,000. The remaining half of the loan would
take the form of twenty-five-year annuities yielding a 10 percent
return. Before going further, Boyd took the precaution of
discussing the question with the prime minister.        So far the
government had remained out of the matter, although a foreign
loan of this size was obviously a matter of concern to the
Treasury. Certain City financiers had already urged Pitt to forbid
the transaction. On May 6, 1794 the prime minister replied to
Boyd’s         enquiry      and   indicated      that     he would       not oppose       the
  3. Starhemberg to Thugut, April 1, 1794, in Alfred von Vivenot, Quellen zur
Geschichte der Deutschen Kaiserpolitik Oesterreichs wahrend der Franzosischen Revolu-
tionskriege,    1790-1801   (Vienna,   1873-1890),    IV, 175; Karl F. Helleiner, The Imperial
Loans: A Study in Financial and Diplomatic History (Oxford, 1965), pp. 2-16.
  4. Walter Boyd (1754[?]-1837) began his banking career in Paris, but returned to
England on the outbreak of the Revolution. Between 1796 and 1802, he was a member
of Parliament and a regular supporter of Pitt’s government.
  5. Parliamentary History, XXX1, 1561-1564; Helleiner, Imperial Loans, pp. 8-9.


                                                S15
                                   1794-1795


Austrian loan. So far as Pitt knew, there was nothing in British law
to prevent a foreign government “in Amity with this country”
from undertaking such a transaction.®
   When the books on the Austrian loan were finally opened, the
response was sluggish. Loans to foreign governments were always
risky, and the security offered (the Emperor’s hereditary revenues
in Belgium) seemed inadequate, especially in view of Austria’s
setbacks in Flanders. Following the defeat of the Imperial army at
Fleurus in June 1794, the loan came to a halt. The few who had
agreed to buy now reneged, while some bondholders offered their
securities to speculators at a 4 percent loss.’ By July only
£300,000 had been realized from a transaction intended to bring
in £3,000,000.8 At this point, Boyd proposed a remedy to rescue
the loan and restore it to robust health; let the British government
guarantee both the interest and the principal of its ally’s loan and
then potential investors would snap it up. Starhemberg doubted
whether Pitt would agree to such a plan and nothing was done for
the moment.”
   During the summer of 1794 the collapse of the allied defense of
the Low Countries brought Downing Street close to panic. With all
hope of victory gone for the present year, plans had to be
prepared for operations in 1795. Pitt had no genius for strategy
and his proposals for future operations were unrealistic in the
extreme. If Prussia increased Mollendorf’s army to the 62,400
figure provided in her subsidy treaty with Britain and sent them
into the Low Countries, Pitt intended to hire 30,000 more
Prussians on the same terms. Austria was to be asked to enlarge
her army in the Low Countries to 100,000 men and to find a new
commander to replace Coburg. Pitt knew that Vienna was already
suffering financial misery and conceded that he would have ‘‘to
ascertain whether any pecuniary arrangements are necessary and
practicable to enable Austria to prosecute the war vigorously for
at least two campaigns after the present.”!9
  6. Starhemberg to Thugut, May 6, 1794, Vivenot, Quellen, IV, 211; Pitt to Boyd, May
17, 1794, Chatham Papers, vol. 195.
  7. Starhemberg to Thugut, June 27, 1794, Vivenot, Quellen, IV, 306.
  8. Notes (in Pitt’s handwriting) on a conversation with Desandrouin, July 25, 1794,
Chatham Papers, vol. 195.
  9. Starhemberg to Thugut, July 11, 1794, Vivenot, Quellen, IV, 332.
  10. Minute of Mr. Pitt on Military Operations, July 15, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B.
Fortescue, Il, 599-600.


                                         56
                    A New Orientation for the Coalition


   Britain could immediately aid Austria by guaranteeing the loan
now languishing in Walter Boyd’s care. Such a step was premature,
however. No major commitment could be undertaken without the
Cabinet’s knowing more about Austria’s resources, her willingness
to name      a new commander, and her real intentions toward
Belgium. To obtain this information Pitt decided to send Earl
Spencer on a special mission to Vienna for discussions with
Thugut. Scion of one of the great whig houses, Spencer had no
diplomatic experience at all. He was one of the most intelligent
and effective defenders of the government in the Lords, however,
and Pitt had great confidence in him. At the last moment, Spencer
asked that the foreign secretary’s older brother, Thomas Grenville,
be named with him in a joint commission. The elder Grenville was
agreeable and George III appointed both men as his envoys to the
Hapsburg court.!!
   Pitt carefully explained to Spencer and Grenville the part he
wished Austria to play during the next campaign. To help her
undertake     this assignment,  Britain might agree to lend its
“superior credit’’ to back the Hapsburg loan in London, but so far
as a subsidy was concerned, “no encouragement can... be given
to the Austrian Ministers which should lead them to form such an
expectation.”’ The envoys were to say nothing to Thugut about
money and wait for a specific offer to be sent from London.!
   The amateur diplomats arrived at Vienna in early August and at
once conferred with Thugut, whom they found to occupy a
commanding position in the Emperor’s councils. Territorial gain
was Thugut’s lodestar and he was determined to see that Austria
shared generously in the final Polish partition which was in the
offing. As a step in that direction, he eagerly sought for a
diplomatic entente with that giver-of-all-good-gifts in eastern
Europe, Catherine of Russia. The formation of the Austro-Russian
alliance was achieved early in 1795 and brought his plans closer to
realization. Spencer and Grenville had the misfortune to be sent to
Vienna at the very time Thugut was trying to disentangle his
country from involvement in the Low Countries. The Hofburg was
now far more interested in the possibility of expansion in Poland,

  11. Grenville to George III, July 18, 1794, Later Correspondence,     Il, 225; George II
to Grenville, July 19, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, II, 601.
  12. Grenville to Spencer, July 19, 1794, FO 7/38.


                                           ST
                                      1794-1795

Turkey, and Italy than it was in recovering Belgium. If Britain
expected Austria to spend her blood and treasure in rescuing the
Low Countries, she must be prepared to pay well for it. This was
the message which Thugut’s agent, Count Mercy d’Argenteau, now
en route to London, had been ordered to deliver to the British
ministers.
  Spencer and Grenville quickly discovered that only British
money would induce Thugut to keep Austria’s armies in the Low
Countries. The expansion of that force, proposed by Pitt, was
virtually impossible since Vienna ‘‘had neither money nor credit &
could not without a subsidy hope to carry on any vigorous war.”
When the British envoys announced that they had no subsidy offer
to propose, Thugut’s disappointment was unmistakable. Until
Britain had such a proposal to make, the Austrian foreign minister
saw no point in carrying on any discussions with Pitt’s agents.
Thomas Grenville understood this immediately and warned his
brother, “‘till they can hear the money jingle in Count Mercy’s
courier’s portmanteau we shall not yet advance.’’!?
  The two Englishmen should have found Vienna in late summer a
pleasant place to pass the time, but their letters home revealed
that they were miserable. Held at arm’s length by Thugut, Spencer
and Grenville conscientiously gathered information and dutifully
sent it on to London. No one in Vienna had any enthusiasm for
the war and, so far as Belgium was concerned, its fate seemed to
be a matter of indifference. It would be pointless to transfer the
Prussian subsidy to Austria as the Hofburg desired, for as Thomas
Grenville plainly warned, Britain “‘cannot buy what they have not
to sell.”!4 Within a month after their arrival, both agents were
thoroughly weary of Vienna and Spencer requested permission to
return to England.
   Throughout August Thugut waited impatiently to learn what
promises Count Mercy had been able to wring from Pitt, but fate
intervened and that message never came. Mercy reached London
about the same time that Spencer and Grenville sent home their

  13. Spencer and T. Grenville to      Lord Grenville, August 12, 1794, FO 7/38; T.
Grenville to Lord Grenville, August    15, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 618.
  14. T. Grenville to Lord Fitzwilliam, August 30, 1794, Memoirs of the Court, II, 281.
See also T. Grenville to the Duke of Portland, August 24, 1794, ibid., Il, 259-267;
Spencer and T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, August 12, 1794, Cornwallis Cor-
respondence, II, 255-256.


                                           58
                  A New Orientation for the Coalition


first reports from Vienna, but he was too ill to attend to business.
His condition turned critical and he finally died. On August 26
Count Starhemberg, the resident Hapsburg minister, presented Pitt
with the three demands Mercy had been instructed to make:
immediate financial help for the Austrian army in Flanders, a
British guarantee for the Hapsburg loan, and a promise of a
subsidy during 1795. Without this minimum aid, Starhemberg
warned that Austria would have to give up the war in the Low
Countries.!>
   Pitt’s response to this ultimatum was powerfully influenced by
recent events on the battlefields of Flanders. Once again the
Imperial army had been driven back and was now desperately
trying to stabilize its position along the Meuse. If this effort failed,
the effect would be catastrophic. The prime minister was prepared
to guarantee Austria’s loan, but this would require legislation and
Parliament had recessed for the summer. To provide immediate
assistance, Pitt ordered the Duke of York to turn over as much as
£150,000 in bills of exchange to the Austrians on condition that
they hold their Meuse position. This would be considered as an
advance which Austria could later repay from the proceeds of her
loan in London.!®
     With Austria’s immediate needs provided for, the Cabinet
considered a long-range program of aid for her ally. Grenville had
such a plan and he now offered it. To begin with, supreme
command over all British, Dutch, and Austrian troops in the Low
Countries must be vested in Lord Cornwallis. This was a ‘“‘sine qua
non,” in return for which Britain would guarantee Austria’s
£3,000,000 loan as soon as Parliament assembled. As a further
help, the subsidy now being paid to Prussia would be transferred
to Austria. Two conditions were attached to this, however: that
the Hofburg increase its army in Flanders to 160,000 men, and
that the Empire undertake to pay Prussia during the coming year a
subsidy of the same size she was now receiving from Britain.
Ungenerous as the proposal was, Grenville had great difficulty in
getting the Cabinet to approve it. Recent experience with Prussia
had soured ministers on foreign aid. In the end, the plan was

  15. Lord Grenville to Spencer and T. Grenville, August 26, 1794,           FO   7/38;
Starhemberg to Thugut, August 26, 1794, Vivenot, Quellen, IV, 403-407.
 16. Lord Grenville to Spencer and T. Grenville, August 26, 1794, FO 7/38.


                                         Su,
                                     1794-1795

adopted, but with the clear understanding that Austria must
accept Cornwallis as generalissimo of her forces.”
   Britain’s offer of help, which Thugut had long awaited, was so
niggardly that he treated it with open contempt and poured out
his wrath on Spencer and Grenville. It was outrageous to ask that
the Imperial forces accept a British commander; to do so would
oblige the Emperor ‘‘to disgrace himself by proclaiming to all
Europe that he had not a General fit to command them.”’!8
Furthermore, Pitt must be totally out of touch with reality if he
expected Austria to accept a subsidy and then pressure the
Imperial Diet to pay Prussia. If the Diet had such resources,
Austria would have appealed there for help rather than to Britain.
Further discussion was clearly pointless and the two British agents
prepared to leave for home.!?
  Pinchpenny though the British offer was, the Cabinet pared it
down almost immediately. The collapse of the Austrian defense
along the Meuse so frightened the Cabinet that it was at first
inclined to cancel the proposal. With great difficulty, Grenville was
able to salvage one of its parts: Britain would still agree to
guarantee the Austrian loan if Vienna enlarged its army in the Low
Countries to at least 80,000. Nothing was now said about the
transfer of the Prussian subsidy or of Lord Cornwallis as supreme
commander. The Duke of York had so far remitted only £50,000
to his Austrian allies and London now ordered him to pay no
more. When Starhemberg pressed for an explanation, Grenville
tartly told him that the Austrian army was not being paid to
retreat.20
  On the eve of their departure from Vienna, Spencer and
Grenville were given a counterproposal by Thugut which he
declared was his final offer. Let the British government guarantee

  17. That the Cabinet seriously meant this is clear from Lord Grenville’s letter to
Spencer and T. Grenville of August 29, 1794, FO 7/38. See also Starhemberg to Thugut,
August 26, 1794, Vivenot, Quellen, IV, 408-409.
  18. On September 9, 1794, George III warned Pitt that Austria would never accept
such a demand.   See Lord Stanhope, Life of the Right Honourable William Pitt (London,
1861-1862), Il, appendix, p. xxi.
  19. Spencer and T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, September 15, 1794, FO 7/38.
  20. Grenville’s responsibility for saving this much of the original proposal is clear from
a letter written by Lord Auckland to Lord Henry Spencer, September 18, 1794, in
Auckland, Ill, 241. See also Starhemberg to Thugut, September 26, 1794, Vivenot,
Quellen, 1V, 454.


                                            60
                   A New Orientation for the Coalition


an Austrian loan of £6,000,000 (double that now pending) and he
would provide an army of 100,000 for cooperation with her
during the coming year. Without at least this much help, the
envoys reported to London, “the Government here [Vienna] very
explicitly state their utter inability to act in the war with any
degree of vigour.”
   Britain and Austria were now so close to agreement on terms
that the remaining differences could certainly be compromised.
Pitt’s reluctance to abandon his connection with Prussia prevented
this, however. While Grenville was ready to let the Prussians depart
in peace and repair the damage by forming a strong union with
Austria, the prime minister hesitated to take that decisive step. He
postponed any decision on Thugut’s latest offer, although he
authorized the Duke of York to resume monthly cash advances to
the Imperial army.22 For months the prime minister’s policy
drifted. Unwilling to accept the fact that Prussia was now
irretrievably lost to the coalition, he hesitated to effect the
rapprochement with Austria which Grenville regarded as essential.
   By the close of 1794 it was clear that Britain must come to some
understanding with Austria if she meant to continue the war.
Nothing short of a miracle could prevent the enemy from
completing the conquest of Holland, and even George III
recommended that his army be brought home. The campaign to
save the Low Countries was over; henceforth, the war would be
fought in Germany. Since nothing could be expected from Prussia,
Britain must strengthen her union with Austria.*? This had been
Grenville’s policy ever since the collapse of Britain’s partnership
with Prussia, and in December 1794 he proposed to the Cabinet a
fundamental shift in military strategy involving close Anglo-
Austrian cooperation. In line with the King’s recommendation,
British national troops would be recalled from Holland while the
mercenaries would be sent to serve with the Imperial army.
Austria must expand her force to 200,000 men and launch a major
offensive against France’s eastern frontier. Meanwhile, Britain

  21. Spencer and T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, September 22, 1794, FO 7/38.
  22. By May 1795 the Duke of York had advanced a total of £550,000                 to the
Austrians, which they finally repaid out of their loan; Grenville to Starhemberg, October
3, 1794, FO 7/37; Clerfait to Starhemberg, October 30, 1794, FO 7/37; Grenville to
Eden, August 25, 1795, FO 7/42.
  23. George III to Grenville, December 7, 1794, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 650.


                                           61
                                      1794-1795

would invade the Republic along her Atlantic coast, thus forcing
her to fight a war on two fronts. To finance the Austrian
campaign, Grenville recommended that Britain sponsor her loan
for £6,000,000. Pitt acquiesced in this scheme, and on December
18 it was sent to Sir Morton Eden, recently appointed as British
minister at Vienna.* Shortly afterwards, Grenville learned that
Thugut had also realized the vital necessity of closer agreement
between London and Vienna; he was now ready to offer 160,000
Imperial troops for service along the Rhine in return for a British
guarantee of a £4,000,000 loan.2> The difference between the
British and Austrian plans was so slight that Grenville instructed
Eden to conclude a treaty on the basis of either plan.76
  Agreement between Britain and Austria could not come too
soon. France’s military victories of 1794 had gained greater
stability and security for the Republic than it had known since its
birth; her armies now numbered more than three quarters of a
million men who had planted the tricolor far beyond their
country’s natural frontiers. In January 1795, during the worst
winter within memory, Jourdan and Pichegru swarmed over
Holland, forcing the Duke of York’s army to withdraw into
Germany.     At the same time, London had positive information
that Prussia had begun peace negotiations with France.
  Since time was of the essence, Pitt agreed to ask Parliament at
once to guarantee the Austrian loan without waiting to learn
whether it would finally be for £4,000,000 or £6,000,000. On
February 5 the prime minister explained to the Commons the
stage which the Austrian negotiation had reached and requested
support for the government’s policy. While there was no question
of the Emperor’s good faith or sincerity, he admitted that some
day Britain might have to pay the annual charges on the loan. This
must not be a deterrent. The risk had to be taken unless the war
with France was to be abandoned.2’
   Fox at once took issue with the prime minister and urged
members to recall the history of the Prussian subsidy. Less than a
year before, when the issue was before them, he had warned that

 24. Grenville to Eden, December 18, 1794, FO 7/39.
 25. Eden to Grenville, December 18, 1794, FO 7/39. Thugut actually offered 200,000
men   but 40,000 of these would be for service in Italy.
 26. Grenville to Eden, January 13, 1795, FO 7/40.
 27. Parliamentary History, XXXi, 1294-1300.

                                            62
                      A New Orientation for the Coalition


other nations would surely follow Prussia’s example. Then the
prime minister had said as much about the good faith of the King
of Prussia as he had just said about the Emperor. Lending money
to the Emperor would only enable him to plunder Poland. If help
must be given, let it be in some other shape. Subsidies were
infinitely preferable to a loan guarantee because they “‘were paid
by monthly instalments, and if the services stipulated for were not
performed, we could stop farther payments, as in the case of the
king of Prussia. But could we do so here? By no means; for if the
Emperor should fail at any time to fulfill his engagement, we
should still be obliged to pay the whole amount of the loan.” The
first lord of the Treasury counted upon France’s resources to fail,
‘““but it was the great business of that House to take care that the
resources of England should not fail in contending with France.””®
When the House at last divided on the question, 173 members
supported the government while only 57 joined with Fox.
   The way was now open for the completion of Grenville’s plan
for a firm union with Vienna. More than ever he believed that such
a war league could be expanded to include Russia, a development
which would easily cancel out Prussia’s loss to the coalition. Pitt
had so far’ followed Grenville’s lead in working for a new
orientation     for    the   coalition,   but   his support    had   never   been
enthusiastic. In February 1795 the prime minister convinced
himself, on very slender evidence, that Prussia might yet resume
her place in the coalition against France. He fanned this feeble
ember with such complete concentration that once again the
Austrian negotiation was allowed to dangle. With all his work now
imperiled by Pitt’s devotion to Prussia, Grenville threatened to
resign from the government. A crisis in the Cabinet, as well as in
the coalition, greeted the arrival of spring, 1795.

  The same night that Pitt and Fox clashed in debate over the
Austrian loan guarantee an obscure Prussian diplomat was dying in
Basel. Count von der Goltz came to the Swiss city in December to
discuss peace terms with a French emissary. The Prussian was
already ailing on arrival, and overindulgence in good food and
drink sealed his fate.2? From the start of the negotiation it was
  28. Ibid., XXXI, 1300-1307.
  29. The performance of an autopsy was needed to quiet Prussian fears that von der
Goltz had been poisoned by Austrian agents. See Sydney S. Biro, The German Policy of
Revolutionary France (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), I, 326-327.
                                          63
                                    1794-1795

clear that France would make Frederick William pay a high price
for peace, and the King was sorely tempted to re-enter the war.
Lord Malmesbury was still on the Continent, and this information
was passed on to him, along with the report that even Marshal
Mollendorf was hot to do battle again. Malmesbury forwarded this
report to London, but he doubted whether it was worth much.
The Prussian king might be ready to draw the sword again, but the
peace policies of his ministers would finally prevail.°°
  That Baron Hardenberg was selected to replace von der Goltz at
Basel perhaps was significant; during the past year he had been one
of the few Prussian ministers to favor the alliance with Britain. En
route to Basel, Hardenberg informed Malmesbury that he would
delay the peace negotiation in order to allow Britain to make a
new approach to Berlin. Renewal of the subsidy was recom-
mended as an important step in bringing Prussia back into the
coalition. Malmesbury’s response to this overture was encouraging,
but privately he doubted whether anything would come of it.*!
Evidence of a stiffening Prussian policy also reached London from
another source. As early as January 1795, the newly appointed
British minister at Berlin, Lord Henry Spencer, reported that
Frederick William was ready to end the peace talks with France.
Even Haugwitz was anxious “to prove his Prussian Majesty’s
readiness to forget all past misunderstandings, & to support the
common cause.”°2 If London wished to take advantage of this
turn in the tide, Spencer urged that instructions be sent him
without delay.
  Pitt was overjoyed when he learned that Prussia might rejoin the
coalition against France. The intervention of 60,000 fresh troops
could prove to be the miracle needed to save Holland. To
accomplish this he proposed to resurrect the 1794 subsidy treaty:
£1,600,000 a year in return for a Prussian army to operate in
Holland. This would be supplemented by a series of bonuses to
spur Frederick William on to greater exertions. An additional
£400,000 would be paid as soon as the Prussians crossed the river

  30. Malmesbury to Grenville, February 3, 1795, and Malmesbury to General Harcourt,
February 8, 1795, Malmesbury, Ill, 232-235.
  31. Malmesbury to Harcourt, March 16, 1794, ibid., III, 244-245.
  32. Lord Henry Spencer to Grenville, January 20, and February 10, 1795, FO 64/37.
Lord Henry Spencer (1770-1795) was a son of the Duke of Marlborough. Named British
minister to Holland at twenty, he later served at Stockholm and finally at Berlin.    His
death in July 1795 prematurely ended a successful career in the diplomatic service.
                                          64
                    A New Orientation for the Coalition


Yssel, with £400,000 more due when the French were driven south
of the Waal. Finally, a grateful Britain would turn over £1,200,000
upon the restoration of the Stadtholder’s authority in Holland.
Assuming that all this could be accomplished during 1795, and
Pitt clearly believed it could, Frederick William would earn
subsidies of more than £3,500,000.°3
   A comparison of Pitt’s latest Prussian bid with the several offers
made to Austria during the past year reveals his striking partiality
for Prussia. Vienna had never been offered a subsidy, except on
terms which were self-defeating. The most generous proposal ever
sent the Hofburg, the one currently being considered, amounted
only to a British guarantee for a £6,000,000 loan. Even this was
conditional to Austria’s maintaining an army more than three
times larger than that for which Pitt intended to lavish gifts of
money on Berlin. There was considerable justice in Thugut’s
complaints of Pitt’s favoritism for Prussia.
   This partiality for Prussia, so characteristic of Pitt, can be
explained in several ways. As the lost sheep is always dearest to
the shepherd, so the prime minister was ready to pay almost
anything to halt Frederick William’s drift toward peace. A vital
strategic issue was involved as well. Unless Prussia returned to the
coalition, Holland’s doom was sealed. Only Prussia could be
counted on to support Britain’s plan to drive the enemy from the
Low Countries. Proximity and dynastic connection with the
House of Orange gave her an interest in the fate of the Dutch
which Austria could never have. A coalition geared to Austria
virtually committed Britain to fighting the war against France in
Germany and northern Italy, areas which were of secondary
interest to Pitt. In the latest news from Berlin, the prime minister
found reason to hope that Prussia might yet be saved for the
cause, Holland (now at the last gasp) preserved, and the old
diplomatic union of Prussia and the Maritime Powers restored. A
British entente with Austria, perhaps necessary as a last resort,
would accomplish none of these goals.
  Grenville regarded the proposed overture to Prussia as a
dangerous threat to his own plan to reorient the coalition. In an

  33. Pitt probably devised this plan during the last half of February. Its terms are clear
from a reading of Grenville’s analysis of it in a paper entitled Minute of Lord Grenville
on the Project of a New Convention between Great Britain and Prussia, n.d., Manuscripts
of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 26-30.
                                           65
                                   1794-1795


impressive paper, prepared late in February or early March, he
marshalled every possible argument to demonstrate that Pitt was
being lured by a Prussian will-o’-the-wisp. Surely, the prime
minister had not forgotten Frederick William’s treacherous deser-
tion less than six months before? He would use any offer Pitt
might make him to win better terms of peace from France.
Parliament had so far steadily supported the government’s war
program, but if Prussia once again accepted Britain’s bounty only
to turn about and repeat her desertion of the previous year, “‘the
discredit it would throw upon Government must be such as to
weaken if not destroy any hope of obtaining the support of
Parliament for another campaign, supposing it should be found
necessary to continue the war.”
  The gravest objection to the prime minister’s plan was that it
would end all chance of union with Austria and Russia. Agreement
with Vienna was assured while recent dispatches from St.
Petersburg encouraged the hope that Catherine would soon join
forces with Austria and Britain.*4 Pitt must choose between union
with Prussia and the two Imperial governments. Granted that he
did not regard the Prussian plan as a substitute for alliance with
the eastern powers, Grenville insisted that the schemes were
mutually exclusive. “The danger that by negotiating at all with
Prussia under the present circumstances,” Grenville warned, ‘‘we
alienate the Austrian and Russian Governments, with whom it
should be our policy to endeavour to form the closest union;
which can never happen while they are persuaded that we are
ready at any moment to resume our former connections and
intimacy with Berlin.” Unless Pitt abandoned his plan, Grenville
would resign.?>
   In the face of the foreign secretary’s ultimatum, Pitt hesitated to
make a decision. To make matters worse, the King joined with
Grenville in disapproving the Prussian proposal and felt sure that
Parliament would refuse to support it.°° The prime minister was
now at dead center. Unwilling to abandon the scheme, but
opposed both by the King and Grenville, he could not make up his
  34. In February Whitworth concluded a new alliance with Russia to take the place of
the vague 1793 treaty.
   35. Minute of Lord Grenville on the Project of a New Convention, and Pitt to
Grenville, March 2, 1795, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Ill, 26-30.
   36. George III to Pitt, March 3, 1795, Later Correspondence, Il, 309-310


                                         66
                   A New Orientation for the Coalition


mind. A series of small incidents finally broke the deadlock early
in April. Lord Henry Spencer’s urgent appeals for positive
instructions increased rapidly. Meanwhile, London learned that
Thugut, with the worst possible timing, had begun to haggle over
the financial terms of the Austrian loan. Finally, Malmesbury
returned to England now completely convinced that Prussia was
indeed ready to go to war. George III reluctantly agreed to
withdraw his opposition to the Prussian plan, whereupon Pitt felt
free to bring the matter before the Cabinet. On April 8 the
proposal was approved and Grenville immediately announced that
he would resign from the ministry.*” To avoid embarrassment to
the prime minister, he agreed to postpone a public announcement
until the Parliamentary session ended. Meanwhile, the handling of
the Foreign Office correspondence with Prussia was assigned to
Dundas.78
  Two days after the Cabinet gave the Prussian plan its approval,
instructions were on their way to Lord Henry Spencer. Details of
the proposal were also explained to Harry Calvert, aide-de-camp to
the Duke of York, who was ordered to Berlin to support
Spencer.*? It was already too late. On April 5 Prussia and France
signed a treaty of peace at Basel. Reporting this to London,
Spencer ruefully observed, “Had I received them [details of the
British offer] a few days sooner, I may venture to assert that
England would have had at her disposal the best appointed Army
in Europe.’”*?
  When Grenville learned of the Peace of Basel, he withdrew his
resignation and threw himself into the work of bringing the
Austrian negotiation to a quick conclusion. Naturally, he was
vexed at Thugut’s last-minute attempts to bargain for lower
interest rates on the Austrian loan. The time had come to pull the
Hofburg up short, and Eden was ordered to be stiff with the
Austrian    foreign minister:  ‘“‘You will apprize him, without
  37. George III to Pitt, March 29, 1795, and Cabinet Minute, April 8, 1795, Later
Correspondence, II, 323-324, 330-331.
  38. Ephraim D. Adams, The Influence of Grenville on Pitt’s Foreign Policy, 1787-1798
(Washington, 1904), pp. 29-36.
  39. The British offer was essentially the one Pitt first proposed. See Dundas to
Spencer, April 10, 1795, FO 97/324; Dundas to Calvert, April 10, 1795, papers of the
War Office, deposited in the Public Record Office, London (hereafter cited as “WO”),
1/408.
  40. Spencer to Grenville, April 21, 1795, FO 64/37.


                                          67
                                          1794-1795


reservation that, unless, on the Receipt of this Messenger, You are
enabled to return the Treaty signed, concluded, and ratified...
the whole Business [must] be considered as having fallen to the
Ground.” In a private letter to Eden, the foreign secretary was
even more forceful: ‘‘For God’s sake, enforce these Points, with all
the Earnestness which I am sure you will feel, upon them. The
People with whom You have to deal require a little spurring.”’+!
   Matters now moved swiftly, and a month later, London learned
that Sir Morton Eden had concluded the business. On May 4 he
signed a treaty with Thugut binding Britain to guarantee an
Austrian loan of £4,600,000 on condition that the Emperor
maintain 170,000 troops in Germany.** The loan was to be raised
in London on the terms originally proposed and it would be
secured by all the hereditary revenues of the Emperor. Austria also
agreed to repay the advances made by the Duke of York during
the past winter, although it was uncertain what the exact amount
was. The £600,000 added to the loan of £4,000,000 was surely
enough to provide for reimbursement. Britain was also to have the
right, on which Grenville had all along insisted, to appoint
inspectors to determine whether the Imperial Army in Germany
actually reached the figure specified in the treaty.*?
  The signing of the Loan Convention cleared the way for the
negotiation of a new mutual defense pact between Britain and
Austria. In April Grenville had sent Eden a project of such a pact,
which he hoped would ultimately be enlarged to include Russia.
Austria and Britain mutually guaranteed their possessions against
attack by a third party during the present war and thereafter. In
the event of attack, the aggrieved power could expect her ally to
provide her with a supporting army of 26,000 troops, or its
equivalent in money. At first Thugut was inclined to boggle at the
terms proposed, but on May 20 he accepted the British plan and
signed a new alliance with Eden. Following the ceremony, the
  41. Grenville    to Eden, April 8, 14, 1795, FO 7/40; and Grenville to Eden, April 17,
1795,FO 7/41.
  42. Austria     actually   was   to furnish   200,000   men,   of whom   30,000   were   to be
employed in the Italian campaign.
  43. Eden to Grenville, May 4, 1795, FO 7/41; Loan Convention with Austria, May 4,
1795, FO 93/11        (1B). Strictly speaking, the treaty obliged Britain to guarantee the
original loan of £3,000,000 and a new one for £1,600,000. The terms of both loans were
the same. It seems less confusing to express them as a single loan. See Helleiner, Imperial
Loans, pp. 48-50.


                                                 68
                       A New Orientation for the Coalition


British minister handed Thugut £400,000 in bills of exchange as
an advance on the Austrian loan. Boyd, Benfield and Company
would repay this amount to the Treasury from the yield of the
loan.
   Only a few details concerning the loan remained to be settled.
On June     15 the House of Commons enacted the legislation
providing for the loan guarantee. Should Austria default on her
payments, Britain was now legally obliged to meet those pay-
ments, which amounted to £345,000 a year. As Walter Boyd had
all along predicted, the success of the loan was now assured. The
Hofburg kept its word and returned to the Treasury the £550,000
which the Duke of York had advanced to the Imperial Army
during 1794—1795S. In 1797 Vienna reneged on its obligation and
never again resumed      payments on the loan. Thus, as Fox
prophesied, the entire charge fell on the Treasury, which carried
the burden until 1823 when a final settlement of the matter was
made with Vienna.*
   The high hopes of a two-front assault on France which the loan
was intended to finance proved a disappointment. Late in the
summer of 1795 the French crossed the Rhine and drove the
Imperial armies back in disorder. The seaborne invasion of France,
undertaken by British and émigré troops in June, ended in disaster
and despair at Quiberon. Grenville refused to allow these setbacks
to deflect      him     from     his course,     however.   His attention   was now
riveted    on    St. Petersburg,        where       his envoy   worked   tirelessly to
bring Catherine           into      a military      partnership   with   Britain   and
Austria.

  Grenville’s hope of bringing Russia into the coalition was as
unrealistic as Pitt’s feverish pursuit of Prussia. Catherine could win
neither profit nor honor by sending troops to fight the French in
western Europe, as Britain wished. She therefore created diplo-
matic obstacles in the path of her British suitors, being careful not

  44. Grenville to Eden, April 24, 1795, FO 7/41; Treaty with Austria, May 20, 1795,
FO 93/11(2); Memorandum of Walter Boyd, April 10, 1795, FO 7/40.
  45. Parliamentary History, XXXII, 45-46; There was also an extra yearly charge of
£4,312 for the management of the loan; see William Newmarch, “On the Loans Raised
by Mr. Pitt during the First French War, 1793-1801... ,” Quarterly Journal of the
Statistical Society,   18 (1855),   246. The King’s Warrant Book (Ty. 52/82, 396) shows
that Boyd, Benfield and Co. repaid the £550,000 on October 23, 1795.


                                               69
                                      1794-1795


to discourage them to the point of abandoning the chase. The first
of these was the demand she made in 1793 for British subsidies.
Within a year she constructed another: Britain must undertake to
defend her against a Turkish attack and guarantee her possessions
in Poland. These terms were hard, but Grenville was ready to
accept them if Russia joined the coalition. The outbreak of the
Polish rebellion in the spring of 1794 enabled Catherine to
withdraw         her   offer; she could      not go to war      with   France     until
Poland had been reduced to order.*°
  Failure to budge the Tsarina was not the fault of Charles
Whitworth, who zealously urged his country’s cause at the Court
of St. Petersburg. In 1793 George III decided to reward his
envoy’s loyalty by granting him the Order of the Bath and he
invited the Tsarina to perform the investiture. At the end of the
ceremony, Catherine suggested to Sir Charles that his sovereign
reciprocate the courtesy by allowing her to obtain an astronomical
telescope from William Herschel. For years she had wanted such
an instrument, but British law prohibited the export of scientific
apparatus without special permission. She had made this request
of Whitworth’s predecessor, but nothing had come of it.*” The
newly made knight quickly took the hint. Earlier, he had sent
home a request from a member of Catherine’s family for a
collection of seeds and plants ‘“‘which have lately been discovered
in the South Seas.’ Now he urged Grenville to give the Tsarina’s
personal request the attention it obviously deserved.
  At once, the Foreign Office directed the great astonomer to
produce a ten-foot telescope for Catherine as a gift from George
11.48 Meanwhile, the nation’s foremost botanist, Sir Joseph Banks,
was making a selection of tropical plants from the conservatory at
Kew. In the spring of 1795 the telescope and plants were shipped
aboard H.M.S. Venus, along with a company of gardeners. The
precious cargo reached St. Petersburg that summer and the plants
were set out in a conservatory especially built to protect them


 46. Grenville    to Whitworth,   January   17, 1794, FO 65/26; Whitworth   to Grenville,
February 7, 1794, FO 65/26.
  47. D. B. Horn, The British Diplomatic Service, 1689-1789 (Oxford, 1961), p. 192.
  48. Herschel’s bill for the telescope and its packing came to £214.




                                             70
                    A New Orientation for the Coalition


against the frosts of the northern capital.4? George III’s act of
generosity was symbolic, for at this same time his ministers were
undertaking another campaign to win Catherine as an ally.
  All the signs surrounding the arrival of the year 1795 seemed to
favor Grenville’s plan for a military partnership with Austria and
Russia. His negotiation with Austria was moving toward a
successful conclusion, and in January he learned that Russia and
Austria had signed a treaty of alliance (January 3, 1795). Perhaps
it was as well that the foreign secretary did not know that the
basis of this entente was joint action against Turkey, rather than
against France. Early in February he instructed Whitworth to
renew efforts to obtain an alliance with Russia. The Tsarina’s
troops were badly needed to support the campaign against France
in the West and Britain could now use the warships she had
offered     for service      in    1793.59       Meanwhile,        at St. Petersburg,
Catherine had decided to open very slightly the door she had so
far kept shut against earlier British appeals. In February her
ministers offered Whitworth a specific alliance to take the place of
the loose convention Britain and Russia had concluded in 1793.
   By the terms of the treaty Whitworth signed on February 18,
Britain and Russia assumed joint defense obligations against an
attack by a third nation for a period of eight years. In the event of
attack, Britain could count on 12,000 Russian troops, while the
Tsarina was entitled to claim twelve British warships to defend
her. No part of the treaty applied to the current war against
France except a separate article which bound Russia to send
twelve ships of the line and six frigates to act with the British
Navy in the Atlantic.>!



  49. Details of this pleasant episode will be found in numerous letters contained in FO
65/29, 30, 31, and FO 97/342. Unfortunately, Catherine’s gratitude was slender. In
1794, she presented Britain with a bill for £9565. Her brother, the ruler of Anhalt-Zerbst
had recently died and, as his heir, Catherine     claimed   that Britain still owed   him this
amount for the service of mercenaries rented from Anhalt-Zerbst during the American
Revolution. The claim does not appear to have been honored. See Vorontzoff to
Grenville, September 22, 1794, FO 65/28.
 50. Grenville to Whitworth, February 6, 1795, FO 65/29.
   51. Either party could claim an annual subsidy of 500,000 rubles in place of the
military aid specified. The protocol form of the treaty, together with the separate
articles, will be found in FO 65/30.



                                           Wil
                                       1794-1795

  The alliance fell far short of Britain’s desires, but as Whitworth
pointed out, Catherine’s involvement in the naval war with France
might ‘“‘lead Her further than She perhaps is at first aware of, so
that we may find Her a powerful and _ persevering Aliya
Grenville learned of the treaty at the same time his negotiation of
the Austrian loan convention was reaching a climax. He therefore
welcomed the Russian pact as an important step toward the
creation of a new Triple Alliance.°? Whitworth must persuade
Catherine to send troops to the West during the coming summer
and, to help with the expense, Grenville authorized him to offer
the Tsarina a subsidy: £500,000 a year, plus all expenses, for the
cooperation of 55,000 Russians. If this was not enough, Whit-
worth could double the offer.°* Even though Catherine had the
promise of a subsidy, she refused to consider Grenville’s plea for
armed intervention. For the moment, she would do nothing more
than meet the naval commitment she had undertaken in the
February alliance. The Russian flotilla was to sail from Kronstadt
in June under orders to join Admiral Duncan’s fleet in the North
Sea. Whitworth warned London not to expect too much of the
squadron, which he described as “complete in every point, as it
can be considering the state of the Navy of this Country, which is,
at best, but in its infancy.” The performance of the Russian ships
more than justified this caveat.>>
  The Anglo-Russian alliance, on the basis of which Grenville built
such extravagant hopes, was more a reflection of changes in the
diplomatic balance of eastern Europe than any wish on Catherine’s
part to aid the coalition. The Tsarina’s Polish policy had always
been geared to close cooperation with Prussia. With Poland soon
to be partitioned for the last time, it was to Russia’s advantage to
free herself from Prussia and seek an entente with Austria, looking
to a partition of the Ottoman empire. This shift in the Tsarina’s
policy   was at the heart of her alliance with Austria of January
  52. Whitworth to Grenville, February 19, 1795, FO 65/29.
  53. Simon   Vorontzoff   to Alexander   Vorontzoff,    March   24, 1795,   Vorontsova,   IX,
Shey
  54. Grenyille to Whitworth, no. 4, March 9, 1795, FO 65/29.
  55. Whitworth   to Grenville, June   14, 1795, FO     65/30.   For the performance of the
Russian squadron, see the account contained in Edward P. Brenton, The Naval History
of Great Britain ... (London, 1837), I, 271. A recent study of the question is Eunice H.
Turner, “The Russian Squadron with Admiral Duncan’s North Sea Fleet, 1795-1800,”
Mariner’s Mirror, 49 (1963), 212-222.


                                           2
                   A New Orientation for the Coalition


1795. In that agreement the two powers decided that Prussia was
to have a much smaller share in the final Polish partition than she
was expecting. Such a maneuver exposed Catherine to the threat
of Prussian retaliation; her rapprochement with Britain throughout
1795 may have sprung from her search for security. Certainly, this
was the motive behind the curious proposal she sent to London in
June 1795. Would Britain provide Russia with subsidies in the
event she became involved in a war with Prussia? After all, since
the Peace of Basel, Prussia might as well be regarded as a French
ally. This logic left Grenville cold, and in his reply he reasserted
what had all along been his position: subsidies would be given
Russia whenever she took arms against France, but not otherwise.
As a major step in that direction, the foreign secretary proposed
that Britain, Russia, and Austria merge their separate alliances of
 1795 in a single system.°© Grenville’s suggestion was received in
silence by Catherine’s ministers and remained unanswered for the
rest of the summer.
   Early in August Prussia learned of the terms on which Russia
and Austria had agreed to partition Poland. Frederick William
blustered, but finally accepted the decision when a few face-saving
modifications were made for his benefit. Significantly, it was
during this critical period that Catherine finally acted on Gren-
ville’s proposal that the alliances negotiated by Britain, Russia, and
Austria during 1795 be codified into a single Triple Alliance. On
September 28, Russia issued a formal declaration to this effect, a
declaration which Whitworth followed up with a request that
Catherine send her troops to the support of her allies.°’ The
Tsarina’s only reply to this entreaty was that ‘‘as soon as the
dispute with the Court of Berlin should be adjusted . . . it was Her
intention to take such steps as should upon mature deliberation be
judged most conducive to the great object in view.’’>8 Whitworth
had heard this sort of language for the past two years and he
doubtless recognized how empty and meaningless it was.
   The new Triple Alliance was a hollow victory for Grenville’s
diplomacy, for it was merely the form and not the substance of

  56. Grenville to Whitworth, June 23, 1795, FO 65/30; Starhemberg to Thugut, June
12, 1795 and July 10, 1795, Vivenot, Quellen, V, 237-239, 287-288.
  57. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, 1X, 385-387.
  58. Whitworth to Grenville, September 29, 1795, FO 65/31.


                                        es
                                     1794-1795


what he had sought for nearly a year. Only Austria had supported
the idea of a three-power alliance as the nucleus of a rejuvenated
coalition against France. Despite Catherine’s treaties with Britain
and Austria, she was nearly as free from involvement in the war as
ever. On the other hand, she now had promises of military support
from her two allies in the event of an attack on her possessions by
Prussia or Turkey. Viewed from St. Petersburg, the war with
Revolutionary France was a thing apart, and not even the offer of
British subsidies could tempt the Tsarina to share the burden of
that remote contest.°?
  By 1795 Britain was playing a major part in the management of
the coalition she had joined two years before almost as a junior
partner. Concern for the safety of Holland led Pitt, in 1795, to
undertake a singlehanded effort to bring Prussia back into the war
and save the Low Countries from the French. Only after Prussia
made peace with the enemy, did the prime minister support
Grenville’s plan for a firm union with Austria and Russia.
  If Britain wished to lead the coalition, she would have to buy
that right either by greater participation in the continental
campaigns or by providing her allies with the means to make war.
The supply of German mercenaries was by now nearly exhausted,
and she could play a major part in the European war only by
reducing her overseas operations or by mobilizing a larger part of
her own manpower. Neither of these steps was consistent with her
interests. Therefore, Britain had no choice but to make her wealth
available to those of her continental allies who were able to
maintain large armies in the field.
  If Pitt was prepared to spend British money, he wanted to use it
where it would do the most good. So much importance was
attached to bringing Prussia back into the war that the prime
minister offered £3,500,000 in subsidies to Frederick William.
Vienna’s growing interest in eastern Europe and Italy was at
cross-purposes with Britain’s concern over the fate of the Low
Countries. When an Anglo-Austrian agreement at last became
essential, Pitt helped the Hofburg by means of a loan rather than a
  59. In October 1795 Grenville was ready to give Catherine subsidies in the event of a
Prussian attack on Russia. By now Frederick William had accepted the terms of the final
Polish Partition, and the eastern diplomatic crisis was over. Consequently, Catherine was
not interested in this latest British offer. See Grenville to Whitworth, October, 1795, FO
65/32.


                                           74
               A New Orientation for the Coalition


subsidy. For the time being, this cost Britain nothing. The
importance of coming to terms with Russia finally led him to offer
Catherine the subsidies she had all along declared to be indispens-
able, but British and Russian goals were still too far apart for the
offer to make any difference.
   By the close of 1795, the First Coalition had indeed been
reoriented, but not in such a way as either Pitt or Grenville
preferred. Its focus now, and for the remainder of its existence,
was in the union of Britain and Austria. Unless Prussia or Russia
took up arms, Britain could remain at war with France in Europe
only so long as Austria was willing to keep her armies in the field.
Henceforth, Vienna would be able to demand additional British
funds as the price of keeping the coalition alive.




                                 fhe
                                           IV
      THE      COLLAPSE            OF      THE    FIRST       COALITION




The First Coalition had suffered so many grievous wounds during
1795 that it was hard to see how it could survive much longer.
Prussia had made peace with France in the spring, and a few
months later Spain followed her example. Downing Street feared
that France would soon absorb the Spanish fleet into her own
navy, as she had that of the defeated Dutch.! For the time being,
however, Spain chose to remain at peace, and more than a year
passed before she became France’s ally and England’s enemy.
  Grenville’s attempts to offset the loss of Prussia by rebuilding
the coalition on the basis of a firm union among Britain, Austria,
and Russia had ended in complete failure. The coalition’s
misfortunes in diplomacy were matched by its military reverses.
Britain’s invasion of Brittany in June availed nothing and its
failure dangerously crippled the counterrevolutionary movement
in the Vendée. Later that year, the Imperial forces regained the
initiative in Germany and drove the enemy back across the Rhine,
a gain which the Hapsburg commander tossed away by offering an
armistice to his defeated opponent. In the mountains of Savoy,
Austrian and Sardinian troops fought bravely, but in vain, to deny
the French possession of those strategic passes which controlled
the north Italian plan.?
  1. Grenville greatly feared such an increase in French naval power. On September 19,
1795 he informed Whitworth that, in the event of a Spanish attack on Britain, the
Cabinet wished Catherine to fulfill her treaty obligations to Britain by sending her
warships rather than troops, (FO 65/31).
  2. Grenville had long been annoyed by Sardinia’s refusal to keep her army up to the
50,000 figure specified in their 1793 treaty. In the autumn of 1795, he withheld the
quarterly subsidy in an effort to prod her into enlarging her forces. However, the close of
the year found no more than 15,000 Sardinians under arms; Eden to Lord Auckland,
December 7, 1795, Auckland,    III, 324.

                                            76
                     The Collapse of the First Coalition


  The rebirth of France’s national vigor during this same period
contrasted dramatically with the ineffectiveness of the coalition.
At the beginning of the war, Pitt was sure that the chaos generated
by the Revolution would finally destroy the Republic and its
military ambitions. By 1795 all chance of such a development had
vanished. The overthrow of Robespierre in the previous year was
followed by a determined search for national stability which
culminated in the creation of the Directory in November 1795.
Not only was the Republic now safe, but its military power had
grown more dangerous than ever to its foes abroad. Three years of
war had forged the armies of the Republic into a case-hardened
weapon capable of dealing the coalition a fatal blow. Bonaparte’s
invasion of Italy in the spring of 1796 marked the beginning ofa
new phase in the war; the Republic was now on the offensive.
   Britain’s army in Europe had grown rapidly since 1793, when it
numbered only about 17,000 men. By 1795 her home establish-
ment included nearly 120,000 troops together with 35,820
mercenaries. Elsewhere in the world more than 50,000 other British
soldiers fought to take the colonies of France and her new ally,
Holland. The collapse of the Netherlands campaign in March 1795
led the Cabinet to call home what remained of the Duke of York’s
army and to direct the mercenary forces to join with the Austrians
in the defense of Germany. One month later, British plans for the
employment of her mercenaries were wrecked by the Peace of
Basel, which provided for the creation of a German neutral zone
with the Main river as its southern boundary. Prussia was obliged
to guarantee the neutrality of this area. Since Hanover lay within
the zone, Britain had either to demobilize her Hanoverian units or
risk a Prussian invasion of the Electorate. Reluctantly, George III
decided to send the Hanoverians home, although some                       were kept
there under arms to defend the state. With the departure of the
Hanoverians, Britain lost the services of nearly half the mercenary
corps which had fought her battles since 1793.
  In 1795 France forced the landgrave of Hesse-Cassel to make
peace, and as a part of the treaty he agreed to recall the 12,000

  3. The final British payment for the Hanoverians was made on July 10, 1795, when
£79,866 was remitted for their pay; King’s Warrant Book, Ty. 52/82, 213. Additional
payments were made in 1796 and 1803, but these were to cover invalids’ pensions and
claims arising out of the 1793-1795 period of service; ibid., Ty. 52/83, 50; Ty. 52/88,
24, 91.
                                          UY
                                        1796-1797


troops he had rented to Britain.* By the time the campaign opened
in the spring of 1796, less than 5,000 men out of the original
mercenary corps were in British pay. These were troops from
Brunswick and Hesse-Darmstadt, of which only the latter re-
mained in Britain’s service a year later.° This withering away of
Britain’s military strength on the Continent left nearly the entire
burden of the war to Austria—a condition which Vienna would use
to justify her claim for more extensive financial aid.
  Six months after the signing of the Austrian Loan Convention in
1795, Thugut informed Sir Morton Eden that the Hofburg must
have a second loan of £3,000,000 to finance the war effort during
the coming year. Considering how much the coalition now
depended on the Imperial forces, Downing Street could not ignore
this request. The war had put a great strain on Britain’s economy,
however, and a £3,000,000 loan to Austria at this time was more
than it could bear. Three years of heavy remittances abroad for
war expenses had eaten into British trade credits in Europe, a
condition which resulted in a serious deficit in her balance of
payments. As a sign of what was to come, the Bank of England’s
specie reserve dropped sharply during the last half of 1795. By the
end of the year, conditions had become critical and Grenville
recommended that Austria raise her new loan on the Continent
rather than in London.®
  Given all these circumstances, it is not surprising that Pitt began
to consider the possibility of a peace negotiation with France. A
hint of this had appeared in the King’s Speech at the opening of
Parliament in October 1795, and a month later the government
sent a special agent to Vienna for a discussion of the matter with

  4. Grenville to Colonel Charles Craufurd, September 18, 1795, FO 29/6; Biro, German
Policy, I, 381-385. The last payment to Hesse-Cassel was in August 1795, when £68,850
was sent to settle the landgrave’s claim for the service of his troops during the American
Revolution; see King’s Warrant Book, Ty. 52/82, 272.
  5. The final payment    to Baden     was in June   1795; King’s Warrant Book, Ty. 52/82,
175. Payments to Brunswick were continued until December 1796; ibid., Ty. 52/83,
au An additional payment of £15,565 was made in 1797 to settle claims; ibid., Ty.
52/83, 103.
  Fortescue’s   table (British Army,   IV, 938) shows 12,000 “Foreign Troops” in British
service in 1797. These consisted largely of émigré troops who had thrown in their lot
with Britain. In 1797, Britain sent some regiments of French émigrés (about 4,000 men)
to help with the defense of Portugal.
  6. Eden to Grenville, October 10, 1795, FO 7/43; and Grenville to Eden, nos. 72 &
73, December 22, 1795, FO 7/43.


                                              78
                      The Collapse of the First Coalition


Thugut.’ Meanwhile, Grenville considered what measures ought to
be taken if peace proved unattainable. The only direction in which
he could turn was toward Prussia, and in November he asked the
new British minister, Lord Elgin, for a report on conditions at
Berlin. Elgin’s reply, which reached London in January 1796, was
most discouraging. Prussian policy had undergone no change since
the Peace of Basel and she would certainly not go to war again
unless she was sure it would be profitable. “If it is wished to
secure to the coalition the assistance of Prussia,” Elgin wrote, ‘‘it
will be found requisite to afford some pecuniary aid, or hold out
some positive indemnification, without which any favourable
dispositions which exist here can certainly not obtain a decided
superiority.”8 Elgin’s language was complex, but his meaning was
unmistakable: Prussia could be bought only at a very high price.
   In February 1796 the Cabinet met to decide whether to initiate
peace talks with France. During the course of the discussion,
Grenville offered a rough plan for reviving the coalition should the
negotiation prove abortive. To bring Prussia back into the war, he
suggested that she be given Belgium and the Westphalian prov-
inces. As compensation for the loss of Belgium, Austria would be
allowed to annex Bavaria.? The plan included no specific subsidy
offer, but Prussia might rely upon reimbursement for her actual
expenses by the British or Dutch governments at the end of the
war.!° This was surely a desperate measure for the foreign
secretary to propose and there is some question how serious he
was about it. The Cabinet agreed to consider the question again if
peace could not be concluded. For the moment, highest priority
would go to opening a discussion with the Directory.
  It soon became clear that France would not agree to any peace
terms that Britain could afford to accept, and Grenville should
now have brought forward his Prussian plan once more. He did not

  7. Unfortunately,   Thugut   took   an   instant   dislike   to   the   British   envoy;   Eden   to
Auckland, November 8, 1795, Auckland, III, 320-323.
  8. Elgin to Grenville, December 26, 1795, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Ill, 163.
  9. When Thugut first learned of the plan, he raised an interesting point. Austria had
always been ready to give Belgium to the Elector of Bavaria in exchange for Bavaria.
Grenville’s plan made no provision for him. Thugut asked Eden whether Britain intended
to dispose of the Elector by strangling him, or sending him to Botany Bay; Eden to
Auckland, December 9, 1796, Auckland, III, 368.
  10. Grenville to Elgin, February 9, 1796, FO 64/39; George III to Grenville, February
9, 1796, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Wl, 173.


                                              WS
                                       1/7 96-3 727.

do so. Elgin’s latest dispatches were most discouraging. Haugwitz
had frankly declared that Prussia’s only policy was “‘to mediate
amicably; and that, in no event would Prussia make hostile
demonstrations at this conjuncture, still less actually take up arms,
in the cause of Holland.’’!! Grenville’s scheme had also encoun-
tered resistance at home. George III regarded it with the greatest
distaste; dividing up innocent states to satisfy Prussia’s land hunger
struck him as “immoral and unjustifiable.”!2 Less concerned with
the morality of the matter, Grenville saw its real weakness: it was
simply not attractive enough to tempt Prussia.
  A more      important matter demanded London’s immediate
attention in the opening months of 1796. The Foreign Office had
received one dispatch after another from Vienna demanding that
arrangements be made for floating Austria’s new £3,000,000
loan.!3 Despite the urgency of these appeals, Pitt hesitated. During
the past year, the Bank of England’s specie supply had fallen by
more than half and the directors begged him not to guarantee a
new Hapsburg loan.!4 Rumours were also circulating that the
Emperor would soon undertake separate peace negotiations with
France.!> It would be disastrous for the government to sponsor a
new Austrian loan only to have her ally turn about and leave the
coalition.
  The opening of the spring campaign made it impossible for Pitt
to delay a decision any longer. By the end of April 1796 the prime
minister devised a workable scheme to pay Austria on the
installment plan. Small monthly advances would be made to
Austria which she was to repay from the proceeds ofa loan to be
arranged in the future. Britain’s specie shortage, he hoped, would
end by the close of 1796, at which time the loan could be
negotiated.!© Until then, monthly advances would meet Austria’s
immediate needs and strain Britain’s balance of payments less than
  11. Elgin to Grenville, February 23, March 10, 1796, FO 64/39.
  12. George III to Grenville, February 9, 1796, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, WI, 173.
  13. Eden   to Grenville, January   22, February   19, 1796, and April 27, 1796, FO 7/44
and 45.
  14. Starhemberg to Grenville, April 12, 1796, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 192;
John Clapham,    The Bank of England: A History (New York, 1945), I, 297;
Parliamentary History, XXXII, 322-333.
  15. Grenville to Eden, May 24, 1796, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 11, 206-207.
  16. Grenville to Eden, May 20, 1796, FO 7/45.




                                             80
                     The Collapse of the First Coalition


a £3,000,000 loan. Since London’s financial leaders bitterly
opposed any loan to Austria, Pitt decided not to give his decision
publicity. He therefore chose not to consult Parliament on the
matter, even though it was in session. On April 29 Grenville
instructed Colonel Charles Craufurd, on service with the Imperial
forces in Germany, to give the Austrian commander £100,000 in
Treasury Bills. A month later, Craufurd was ordered to pay an
additional £150,000.!7
  Britain’s specie supply shrank so rapidly that Pitt abandoned all
plans of negotiating an Austrian loan in 1796. The monthly
advances were continued at the rate of £150,000 a month, and by
the close of the year the Treasury had remitted £950,000 to
Vienna’s account with Boyd, Benfield and Company. All this was
forwarded to Vienna in bills of exchange, except for £172,500
which    the bank     used to pay the interest on the first loan, which
fell due in November.!8
   The war continued to go against the allies, especially in Italy
where Bonaparte now led France’s armies. Sardinia was defeated
and removed from the contest, and soon all Italy south of the Po
lay open to the enemy. One by one the Italian ports were closed
to the British navy, and in October 1796 Spain’s declaration of
war forced the fleet to abandon the Mediterranean. Grenville
believed that Prussia’s intervention was so desperately needed that
he was ready to pay any price Berlin might set. In this spirit, he
revived his Prussian plan of the previous February. Pitt was
lukewarm     to this counsel of despair. “I can conceive no
objection,” he wrote to Grenville on June 23, “‘in the mind of any
of our colleagues to see whether the arrangement to which you
have pointed can be made acceptable... But though I think it
should be tried, I do not flatter myself with much chance of
success.”!? The foreign secretary was just as pessimistic, but he

  17. Grenville to Craufurd, April 29, 1796 and May 20, 1796, FO 29/9 and 10. Charles
Gregan Craufurd (1761-1821) had a distinguished military career before being attached
to the Austrian army in 1795. However, his professional life was ended by an accident
which befell him while on service there.
  18. Grenville to Eden, June 10, 17, 1796, FO 7/45; Statement of Remittances and
Payments by Boyd, Benfield and Co. for the Account of the Imperial Government,
1796, Chatham Papers, vol. 115.
  19. Pitt to Grenville, June 23, 1796, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, II, 214.




                                         81
                                     1796-1797


believed that the overture would have to be made. A personal
appeal by both ministers was needed to overcome the King’s
opposition to the plan.”°
  The Berlin mission, undertaken by George Hammond in the
summer of 1796, was a lamentable failure. Haugwitz received the
British agent very coolly on his arrival early in August, and a
month of fruitless parleys convinced Hammond that he would not
succeed. Throughout the discussions, Haugwitz carefully concealed
the fact that Prussia had just concluded a secret neutrality
agreement with the Directory.”! With the failure of the appeal to
Prussia, Pitt once again proposed to negotiate peace with the
enemy,      and    early in September        the Cabinet      invited Denmark         to
arrange the necessary preliminaries. Ordinarily the last to yield.
even Grenville admitted that there was no other choice.
   A few days after this decision was taken, dispatches reached the
Foreign Office from Whitworth announcing that Russia was ready
to send 60,000 troops to Austria’s assistance. London had waited
three years for such a change in Catherine’s policy. Now it was too
late. At least five months would be needed before any army sent
by Catherine could reach the western front. Furthermore, the
price which the Tsarina attached to even this modest help was
enormous; a preparation subsidy of £300,000 was required at
once, together with a promise of an additional £120,000 each
month. Britain was also expected to pay the “bread and forage”’
expenses of the army and undertake to make a final payment of
£300,000 at the close of the war as “return money.” Should the
war last for another year, Britain would have to pay the Tsarina
more    than £3,000,000.22 The more Grenville considered the
Russian offer, the less he was impressed with it. Britain’s best hope
was in negotiation with the Directory.?3
   Paris was now the center of all attention, even though the
inauspicious way the peace talks began foreshadowed their failure.

  20. Grenville to George III, July 31, 1796, and George III to Grenville, July 31, 1796,
ibid., Ill, 228-230.
  21. George Hammond      to Grenville, August 17, 22, and September 6, 1796, FO 64/41.
  22. Whitworth    to Grenville, August 23, 1796, FO 65/34; Ostermann to S. Vorontzoff,
August 10 [0.s.], 1796, FO 65/34. On September 13, Whitworth informed Grenville that
6,000 cossacks were to be included in the Russian force. They were being trained so ‘‘as
to render them more dangerous to the Enemy, and less to the Country through which
they pass” (FO 65/34).
  23. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, 1X, 412.


                                            82
                      The Collapse of the First Coalition

 By October Grenville was sure that the negotiations would soon
 collapse and he sent off a counterproposal to St. Petersburg, which
 he hoped the Tsarina would accept in place of her original offer.
 Britain would pay the £300,000 preparation subsidy she required,
 but she could promise no more than £100,000 a month by way of
 a subsidy. If Whitworth found that it was absolutely necessary to
 raise this bid, he could offer up to £1,000,000 in “‘return money”’
 payable at the end of the war.?* The foreign secretary still hoped
 that Prussia might be persuaded to come back into the ranks of
 the coalition. Unaware of the recent Franco-Prussian neutrality
 agreement, he proposed to revive his plan to offer Belgium and the
 Westphalian provinces to Frederick William—the plan Hammond
 had carried to Berlin during the past summer. Before going
 further, however, Grenville decided to sound out Austria’s feelings
 on the matter.
    Catherine’s sudden death in November brought the foreign
 secretary’s schemes tumbling down like a house of cards. Her
 successor, Paul I, was unwilling to embark on any major
 diplomatic undertaking, and a few weeks after his accession,
 Whitworth learned that Russia would remain at peace.”© At Paris,
‘news of Catherine’s death encouraged the Directory to end its
 peace talks with Britain.2? There was a good deal ofjustice in Pitt’s
 bitter observation on Catherine’s passing: “‘It is difficult to say
 whether one ought to regret the most that she had not died sooner
 or lived longer.”?® As the year waned, British leaders faced the
 cheerless prospect of continuing the war with only Austria’s
 support.
   In this dark mood Pitt presented his budget for the new year to
 the House of Commons on December 7, 1796. Military and naval
 appropriations were to be higher than ever before; each of the
 services would cost more than £10,000,000. He also announced
 that, since the dissolution of Parliament in the spring, the
 government       had advanced        about £1,200,000 to Austria. Nothing

   24. Grenville to Whitworth, October 7, 1796, FO 65/34.
   25. This caution was justified. On learning of the plan, Thugut declared that Austria
 would resist the proposed territorial redistribution by force if necessary; Eden to
 Grenville, November 26, 1796. FO 7/47.
   26. Whitworth to Grenville, November 26, 1796, FO 65/35.
   27. Malmesbury to Grenville, December 20, 1796, Malmesbury, III, 351.
   28. Pitt to Dundas, December, 1796, Stanhope, Pitt, Il, 405.


                                            83
                                  1£796-1 797

was said to reveal that the advances had actually begun prior to
Parliament’s dissolution. He justified the advances on two grounds.
First, the Emperor’s needs were so pressing that they required
extraordinary measures. “I am persuaded,” the prime minister
declared, ‘“‘no man will be of opinion that we ought to have
withheld from a brave and faithful ally, the assistance necessary to
preserve his independence.” Second, advances were preferable to a
new Austrian loan which might have upset the state of Britain’s
money market at the time. It was hoped that the House would
empower the government to continue these advances and consent
to the inclusion of £3,000,000 in the new budget for future aid to
the allies.??
  The next night, Fox unleashed a fierce attack on the King’s
ministers. If the House was not in session when the government
began to advance money to Austria, why had ministers kept silent
after the new session began in October? Nearly two months had
passed without a single word being spoken on this question. “If
parliament had not been sitting,’’ Fox asked, ‘‘and ministers had
thought it prudent to grant pecuniary assistance to the Emperor, I
say it ought to have been assembled for the purpose of
deliberating upon it; but when parliament was sitting, in God’s
name, why was not application made to the House?” To the whig
leader the answer was clear and beyond dispute: ministers desired
to establish the precedent that public money was at their absolute
disposal.*9
   Never before had the whigs a more opportune moment to attack
Pitt’s war program. The decline of the nation’s supply of specie
was causing panic in financial circles. It was also becoming nearly
impossible to believe that the allies could win the war in Europe.
Even now a French armada was believed to be at sea, under orders
to invade the British Isles. On December 13 Fox rose in the House
to move a vote of censure against the government. Once again he
scourged Pitt for the Austrian advances and ended by moving that
ministers “‘have acted contrary to their duty, and to the trust
reposed in them, and have violated the constitutional privileges of
this House.” Immediately, one of the City of London members
announced that his constituents had instructed him to support the
 29. Parliamentary History, XXXII, 1256-1264.
 30. [bid., XXXII, 1273-1277.


                                        84
                    The Collapse of the First Coalition


motion as an expression of their discontent with the mischief the
government’s policies had done British trade.?!
   It was now Pitt’s turn to speak, and he defended his conduct in
one of the finest speeches of his career. Was the real complaint
that he had given away the nation’s money without the consent of
its representatives? This was demonstrably false. The money had
not been given away. This was no subsidy, but an advance on a
future Austrian loan from which the Treasury would be repaid.
There had been good reason for making the advances, rather than
undertaking a loan. “‘I felt,” Pitt said, “that in consequence of the
extraordinary extent of the drain of money, some time would be
necessary before the influx of trade would be such as to render a
measure of that kind practicable in its execution or safe in its
impression.” This had not been his opinion alone. He had
conferred with City financiers and bankers (“‘monied men,” as he
termed    them)    and        “submitted   whether   a public loan would     be
prudent in such circumstances, but they were unanimous in
preference of the adopted mode.”’ Ministers were not seeking to
establish a dangerous precedent. Military necessity had dictated
the step they took. What had been the result? Thanks to the
advances, the Imperial armies still held the foe in check in Italy,
while in Germany they had recovered the ground lost during the
summer. “I appeal to the justice of the House,” the prime minister
concluded,    “I rely on         their candour;   but to gentlemen who can
suppose    ministers      capable     of those    motives   which   have   been
imputed    to them       on    this occasion, it must   be evident that I can
desire to make no such appeal.”?? The government’s conduct was
finally upheld by a vote of 285 to 81, but on this question the
opposition mustered considerable more support than was usually
the case.

  Although the whigs failed in their attack on the government’s
policy of advancing money to Austria, they were able to return to
the charge two months later. The financial crisis which had been
threatening for a year finally broke in February 1797. When the
government ordered a suspension of cash payments, the antiwar
party immediately         indicted subsidies in general and the Austrian
 31. Ibid., XXXII, 1297-1310.
 32. Ibid., XXXII, 1310-1332.


                                           85
                                     1796-1 797

advances in particular as the cause of the specie shortage. At best
the charge was a half-truth.
   On the outbreak of war in 1793, the Bank of England’s bullion
reserve was adequate, and during the year, it increased to nearly
£7,000,000. From that point, however, a steady decline set in
which caused increasing anxiety. The bullion drain slowed down
during 1796, but business and government leaders waited in vain
for the tide to turn.*? For this reason, the Cabinet refused to
sponsor a new £3,000,000 loan for Austria and chose, instead, to
aid her with small monthly advances. Pitt’s announcement to
Parliament in December 1796 that such advances had been made
and would continue, alarmed British bankers already concerned
about the shortage of hard money. Even more disturbing was the
threat of invasion which resulted in heavy demands on the Bank’s
specie early in 1797. Fear turned to panic when reports reached
the City that the enemy had landed in Wales. The government
moved at once, and on February 26 an Order in Council was
issued suspending specie payments.
   The House of Commons learned of the Order the next day,
whereupon Sheridan at once charged that the crisis was due to the
heavy export of specie to the allies. He therefore moved that until
the matter had been thoroughly investigated the government be
prohibited from sending bullion abroad for foreign aid. Defeat of
the motion did not discourage the whigs, who continued to blame
subsidies, loans, and the Austrian advances for the present
troubles. Their clamor reached such a pitch that Pitt finally agreed
to the creation of a committee          to investigate the Bank’s
condition.34
   Probably the amount of bullion in Britain at the time of the
crisis was much greater than the Bank’s dwindling stock suggested.
Before the end of the year, even the Bank’s treasure had risen to
its normal level. No doubt, the Bank of England had been the
victim of abrupt and excessive demands upon it by provincial
  33. According   to Clapham   (Bank of England,   I, 297), between   1793 and   1797 the
specie reserve of the Bank of England was as follows:
      1793    Feb. £ 4,011,000                Aug.      £ 5,136,000
              Aug.    5,322,000        1796 Feb.          2,540,000
       1794 Feb.      6,987,000               Aug.        2,123,000
              Aug.    6,770,000        1797 er            1,086,000
       1795 Feb.      6,128,000               Aug.        4,090,000
  34. Parliamentary History, XXXII, 1518-1562.


                                           86
                       The Collapse of the First Coalition


  banks acting in a panic mood.*> The causes of the panic went
  deeper than this, however. Since the beginning of the war,
  Britain’s trade with the Continent had suffered a balance of
  payments problem.*° To make matters worse, a considerable
  amount of gold was being smuggled from Britain to France in
  order to take advantage of the higher prices which prevailed there
  by 1796. The French monetary           system was undergoing a
  reorganization which, in effect, restored the gold standard and
  established premium prices for bullion. How important this illegal
  export of hard money was in bringing on the 1797 crisis is a
  matter of dispute, however.”
    Beyond dispute is the fact that, during the four years of war
  leading to the Bank Crisis of 1797, Britain’s involvement in the
  coalition forced her to make heavy remittances to the Continent,
  which worsened the balance of payments problem. Even her
  healthy trade with the Continent was unable to make up for these
  outlays, of which subsidies was only one. More than £8,000,000 in
  specie or bills of exchange had to be sent to the Continent
  between 1793 and 1797 to pay and maintain the British army.*8
  The purchase abroad of supplies and equipment for the use of the
~ Royal Navy during the same period involved an additional expense
  of about £4,700,000.2? Taken together, the needs of the two
  services   alone   obliged  the government    to remit    at least
  £13,000,000,     either in specie or bills, during the period
  1793-1797.
    The total of all subsidies, the Austrian loan of 1795, and the
  advances made to the Imperial government in 1796 is just over
  £10,000,000—that is, about three quarters of the total foreign
  remittances for Britain’s army and navy. The relative importance

   35. George Rose, A Brief Examination into the Increase of the Revenue, Commerce,
 and Navigation of Great Britain during the Administration of the Rt. Hon. William Pitt
 (London, 1806), p. 79.
   36. Trade figures for these years are available, but their interpretation is subject to
 considerable disagreement. See Norman J. Silberling, “Financial and Monetary Policy of
 Great Britain during the Napoleonic Wars,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 38
 (1923-1924), 229. A more extensive and technical analysis of the question is A. H.
 Imlah, ‘‘Real Values in British Foreign Trade, 1798-1853,” Journal of Economic
 History, 8 (1948), 133-152.
   37. Ralph G. Hawtrey, Currency and Credit, 4th ed. (London, 1950), pp. 274-277.
   38. Silberling, ‘““Financial and Monetary Policy,” p. 227.
   39. Thomas Tooke, A History of Prices and of the State of Circulation from 1793 to
 1837 ... (London, 1838-1857), I, 208.


                                            87
                                   1796-1797

of British aid to foreign powers in exhausting the nation’s trade
credits in Europe is even less than this figure suggests. During the
year preceding the Bank         Crisis, Britain spent more       than
£4,000,000 overseas for the purchase of grain.*9 This was the only
occasion prior to 1797 when an inadequate home _ harvest
compelled her to import such a large quantity of food. Although
not a war expense, the grain purchase of 1796 clearly contributed
to the balance of payments problem.
   It was natural for Pitt’s opponents to seize on subsidies as the
chief cause for the nation’s troubles in 1797. The debate on the
Austrian advances had occurred only two months before the Bank
Crisis. Payments to foreign powers were unpopular in England,
and the whigs doubtless saw the political advantage to be gained
by raising the issue. Even at the time, some thoughtful observers
objected to singling out foreign aid as the chief cause of the Panic.
Sir Francis Baring, a member of Parliament and a leading financier,
correctly observed: “It must be indifferent to the country, if
bullion is exported, to what service it shall be applied; but it is of
infinite importance whether the magnitude of the sum shall
exceed, or fall short, of the balance of trade. Whether money so
exported shall be applied for the payment of British troops in
Germany, for the foreign expenditure of fleets in the Mediterra-
nean or Lisbon, or whether it shall be for an Imperial loan . . is
exactly the same to the country.””*!
   The House of Commons Committee on the Bank Crisis naturally
paid much attention to the recent export of specie. So far as aid to
the allies was concerned, it discovered that most of it had been
remitted in the form of bills of exchange rather than bullion.
Silver had been used sparingly; gold hardly at all. Of the
£1,200,000 sent Prussia in 1794, only £720,000 had been in silver.
The £4,600,000 Austrian loan of 1795 had entailed the remittance
of about £1,193,000 in hard money, the balance being paid in
commercial paper. To be sure, a distinction between subsidies paid
in specie and those remitted in bills of exchange was of limited
value. The effect on the balance of payments was the same in both

  40. Silberling, “Financial and Monetary Policy,” p. 227.
  41. Francis Baring, Observations on the Establishment of the Bank of England and on
the Paper Circulation of the Country . . . ,2d ed. (London, 1797), pp. 50-51.




                                        88
                   The Collapse of the First Coalition


cases.42, Even more satisfying to the government            than the
Committee’s Report was the rapid recovery of the Bank’s specie
reserve. By the end of 1797 it had risen to the level which it
occupied on the outbreak of war. Notwithstanding, the govern-
ment refused to rescind its suspension order, and Britain remained
off the gold standard during the rest of the war.
   The Bank Crisis had very little effect on the government’s
subsidy program. Pitt continued advancing money to Austria, the
only ally with whom he could share the nation’s bounty. Even
these advances stopped in the spring of 1797, when Vienna made
peace with France. Subsidies would not again be an important
British war expense until the formation of the Second Coalition
two years later. By that time the Bank of England reported a
bullion reserve of more than £10,000,000. This remarkable
recovery can be explained in various ways. However, it should be
observed that during the two years between the Bank Crisis and
the formation of the Second Coalition, British foreign remittances
for subsidies and military operations fell to the lowest level since
the outbreak of the war.*?
   Four years of war had destroyed all of the First Coalition except
Britain’s union with Austria, and even that was beginning to
disintegrate.*4 Thugut bitterly resented Pitt’s Prussian bias and
believed that Austria’s military efforts, if not her accomplish-
ments, deserved more generous recognition. In 1796 the Imperial
armies received the full shock of the French attack in Germany
and Italy. Each month, Britain advanced money to her ally, but
scarcity of specie and foreign credit sometimes forced the
Treasury to send less than the £150,000 Vienna expected. Thugut
protested loudly on such occasions and threatened a proportional
reduction in the Hapsburg war effort.** The stage was thus set for
the bickering between London and Vienna which marked the
  42. See particularly the appendices of the Third Report from the Committee of
Secrecy on the Outstanding Demands on the Bank..., presented to the House of
Commons on April 21, 1797, Reports from Committees of the House of Commons
(London, 1803), XI. Appendix No. 3 is most important; ibid., XI, 168.
  43. Arthur Gayer, W. W. Rostow, and A. J. Schwartz, The Growth and Fluctuation of
the British Economy, 1790-1850 (Oxford, 1953), I, 52; Silberling, “Financial and
Monetary Policy,” p. 227.
  44. Camb. Hist. Brit. For. Pol.,1, 269-272.
  45. Eden to Grenville, October 23, 1796, FO 7/47.




                                       89
                                    L7I0-1797.

coalition’s final days. By the time their alliance collapsed in 1797,
the two powers parted in the worst possible humor.
  With the approach of autumn, 1796, Thugut made an estimate
of the financial help he would need from Britain to carry on the
war during the coming year. Since a large part of any new loan
would go to repay the money she had advanced, Thugut
recommended that the loan be set at £5,000,000. In forwarding
this request to the Hapsburg minister in London, he loftily
reminded him that ‘“‘the wealth of England does not lack resources
when it is a question of the most essential interests of her
prosperity.’’4°
   If Grenville once thought German princes grasping, he now knew
they were petty bandits when compared with the empires of
eastern Europe. The Tsarina expected £3,000,000 for the service
of 60,000 Russians, and now Vienna was demanding a £5,000,000
loan. Even if these requests were reduced to reasonable propor-
tions, Britain would still have a crushing load to bear. Starhem-
berg’s endless pleas that the monthly Austrian advances be raised
from £150,000 to £200,000 wore away the foreign secretary’s
small stock of patience. In November 1796 he sent that envoy an
ill-tempered note stating: “‘I would have wished that you had been
spared the very useless task of once again requesting an increase of
assistance already in excess of what had been thought possible.’’47
The    government        soon    decided        to   be   more   generous,   and   in
January Grenville announced that the advances would be increased
to £200,000.*8 Scarcely had this decision been made when the
Bank Crisis occurred, making it impossible for London to carry
out its pledge.*9
  Troubles overwhelmed Pitt in the opening months of 1797.
Barely had the Bank Crisis been weathered when mutiny broke
out in the British fleet at Spithead and the Nore. On the
Continent, the French broke through the Austrian defense of
Mantua, and in February they occupied that important strong-
hold. By spring the enemy held positions in Italy and along the

  46. Thugut to Starhemberg, September 10, 1796, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue    1,
249.
  47. Grenville to Starhemberg, November 13, 1796, ibid., III, 267,
  48. An additional £100,000 was to be added to each of the payments for January and
February; Grenville to Eden, January 3, 1797, FO 7/48
  49. Grenville to Eden, May 2, 1797, FO 7/49.


                                           90
                     The Collapse of the First Coalition


Rhine, from which they would launch a fatal assault at Austria’s
heart.
   London expected any day to learn that her ally had concluded
an armistice as a preliminary to peace negotiations, in which event
Pitt was anxious to join Austria in arranging a general peace.
George Hammond was sent to Vienna in April to confer with
Thugut regarding the terms which the allies should demand. In
order to guarantee that they would negotiate from the strongest
possible position, Pitt was ready to pour forth Britain’s wealth in
Austria’s support. Time was fast running out. On April 7 the
Austrian commander concluded an armistice with Bonaparte. The
prime minister moved quickly and on April 29 he asked the
Commons to guarantee a new Austrian loan.~9
   During the debate on the government’s proposal, Pitt announced
that a total of £1,620,000 had been advanced to Austria.” The
government wished to continue these monthly remittances until
£3,500,000 in all had been paid, the whole to be returned to the
Treasury from the proceeds of an Austrian loan of that same
amount. Fox attacked the plan along predictable lines: since
Austria had already made an armistice, was it wise to endorse the
government’s scheme when at any moment we might learn that
the Emperor had concluded peace? Pitt responded to this by
  50. Parliamentary History, XXXIII, 463-464.
* Despite the government’s official statement that the Austrian advances of 1796-1797
totaled £1,620,000, there is reason to believe that they were actually somewhat larger
than that. The question turns on whether the official figure includes the £250,000
advanced, on Grenville’s order, by Colonel Craufurd during the spring of 1796.
  The evidence is contradictory. A statement of all advances, prepared by Grenville for
Sir Morton Eden’s information (enclosed in Grenville to Eden, May 2, 1797, FO 7/49),
shows that £920,000 was advanced in 1796 and £700,000 in 1797. The sum,
£1,620,000, is the amount which the government claimed Austria received. A statement
prepared by Boyd, Benfield and Co., entitled “Statement of the remittances and
Payments by Boyd, Benfield & Co. for the Account of the Imperial Government, 1796”
(Chatham Papers, 115) bears out the claim that the 1796 advances amounted to
£920,000. At the bottom of that statement, however, there is a notation in a different
hand indicating that this did not include the £250,000 in advances made by Colonel
Craufurd in the spring. Pitt’s announcement to the Commons in December 1796,
referred to £1,200,000 having been already advanced to Austria. This figure approx-
imately represents Boyd, Benfield’s remittances, together with those of Craufurd.
  Probably the total amount advanced to Austria was £1,870,000. Given the confusion
of the time, Pitt may have made an honest error in citing the smaller figure. However, it
is just as likely that he deliberately chose to suppress all reference to Craufurd’s
advances. These two payments, totaling £250,000, had been authorized by London
before the end of the Parliamentary session. For that reason, the government may have
chosen to conceal them.


                                           oF
                                   LT 0-1 797,

making clear that the government’s overwhelming concern was to
end the war on the best terms attainable for both Austria and
Britain. ‘Will any one deny,” he asked, “‘that a vote of the
parliament of England, passed with unanimity and decision,
granting ample pecuniary succours to our ally, may materially
affect the terms on which peace may be concluded? Does it not
immediately affect the question of the Emperor making a separate
peace? And if he is unfortunately driven to that extremity, will it
not enable him to conclude a peace on better terms for himself,
and consequently on better terms for this country? For it ought to
be recollected, that whatever additional concessions he extorts
from the enemy for himself, it is so much gained to us, since they
will help strike a balance of power more favourable to Great
Britain.””>!
  Even though the House adopted the motion, Pitt lost his gamble
against time; on April 18 Austria signed a preliminary peace treaty
with France at Leoben. On learning this, the prime minister
announced that he would advance no more money to the
Emperor. Instead, the government made arrangements to sponsor
a new Austrian loan for £1,620,000, the proceeds of which would
reimburse the Treasury for the 1796-1797 advances. Grenville
encountered no difficulty in negotiating a treaty with Starhemberg
along these lines, since it had been clearly understood from the
outset that the advances would be repaid by an Imperial loan.
Although not specifically empowered         to conclude such an
agreement, Starhemberg willingly signed the treaty on May 16.
Austria was now bound to borrow £1,620,000 in London, on the
same terms as the 1795 loan, and give the money to the British
Treasury. In return, Britain would stand security for the Em-
peror’s annual payments of £112,000 to meet the interest and
amortization charges.>”
   Pitt was greatly upset by Austria’s negotiation of a separate
peace in violation of her treaty obligations to Britain. He was still
more troubled by the Hofburg’s mysterious conduct in the weeks
which followed. Thugut absolutely refused to disclose the terms of
  51. Parliamentary History, XXXII, 471.
  52. Starhemberg to Grenville, May 6, 1797, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Il, 321;
Grenville to Starhemberg, May 14, 1797, FO 7/49; Starhemberg to Grenville, May 14,
1797, FO 7/49 (however, see Helleiner, Imperial Loans, pp. 98-99); Treaty with Austria,
May 16, 1797, FO 93/11(3).


                                         92
                     The Collapse of the First Coalition


the Leoben agreement either to Sir Morton Eden or Pitt’s special
envoy, George Hammond. This naturally aroused Pitt’s fears that
the Hapsburg foreign minister was engaged in some profitable
double-dealing with the Directory. Worse yet was the news Eden
sent to London early in June: Vienna refused to ratify Starhem-
berg’s treaty of May and announced that she would make no more
payments on the 1795 loan!*?
  Austria’s decision to renege on her debts probably came as no
surprise to the prime minister, but he was deeply shocked to learn
that the new loan convention was not to be ratified.°* He had so
often declared that the 1796-1797 advances were to be repaid,
that it was the worst sort of humiliation for that proud man now
to admit that he had been duped. Grenville shared this view
completely and warned Starhemberg that his government was
making a tragic mistake. ““We will lose some money,” he declared,
“for having believed in the good faith and probity of the Austrian
government. The Court of Vienna will forever lose its credit, its
honour, and the chance of finding here any financial aid which it
might require in the future. All things considered, I really believe
that if we are the dupes, it is the Duper who will be the loser.’
  Eden was ordered to insist upon immediate ratification of the
treaty as the necessary first step in the re-establishment of good
relations between London and Vienna.*° At first the tone of
Grenville’s dispatches was moderate, but as the time approached
for the reassembling of Parliament it grew more angry. In
September he instructed Eden to inform Thugut that by his
persistent refusal to ratify the convention “‘he is deciding at once
and for ever the possibility not only of any future assistance of a
pecuniary nature from Great Britain to Austria, but of any
intercourse of Councils or confidential Concert between them, at a
Moment when perhaps upon some such Intercourse and Concert
being established depends the common safety of the Two
Monarchies, and the fate of the rest of Europe.’*’ Language of
this sort had little effect on Thugut, whose policies were better
 53. Eden to Grenville, June 1, 1797, FO 7/49.
 54.See Pitt’s statement on this matter to the Commons,          Parliamentary   History,
XXXIII, 429.
 55. Grenville to Starhemberg, July 4, 1797, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, II, 332.
 56. Grenville to Eden, July 7, 1797, FO 7/50.
 57. Grenville to Eden, September 26, 1797, FO 7/50.


                                          ie
                                     L201             a7.


served by his final peace treaty with France, signed at Campo
Formio in October 1797.
   Austria’s withdrawal from the war left Pitt no choice but to
undertake a new peace negotiation with France in the summer of
1797. The failure of the discussions which ensued at Lille cast a
still darker shadow over Britain. Her relations with Vienna were
now hopelessly deadlocked by the unratified loan convention.
Appeals to Russia for the assistance provided in their mutual
defense pact of 1795 fell on deaf ears.*® Prussia’s policy sank into
the deepest lethargy as her court waited for Frederick William to
die. Of all the members of the First Coalition only one remained
at Britain’s side: her oldest ally, Portugal. Except for Admiral
Duncan’s victory over the Dutch fleet at Camperdown in October,
the autumn of 1797 was a period of unrelieved gloom for Pitt.
   Since it was Britain’s destiny to continue the war with France,
her leaders had to determine how to fight it with the greatest
chance of success. Certain considerations must have been very
clear to Pitt and Grenville at this time. To begin with, obviously
Britain could not singlehandedly undertake a continental cam-
paign against the Directory. She had virtually ceased to participate
in the European war since the loss of Holland in 1795.5? By the
time Austria left the coalition, Britain’s only continental army was
a small force of uncertain value which had been sent to defend
Portugal. Paradoxically, the British military establishment in 1797
was nearly four times as large as it had been in the first year of the
war.” A large part of this force was tied down at home, however,
by the threat of rebellion in Ireland, and many units were involved
in colonial campaigns. Spain’s declaration of war in 1796 had
enlarged the theater of operations in the West Indies, while
campaigns in India made new demands on the nation’s man-
power.°®!
  The failure of Britain’s efforts to negotiate peace underscored
the fact that only defeat on Europe’s battlefields would put the

  58. F. Martens, Recueil   des Traités,   1X, 412.         In December   1797,   Paul I formally
announced that he was unable to meet his obligations to Britain under the 1795 defense
agreement; Whitworth to Grenville, December 8, 1797, FO 65/38.
  59. Except for the mercenaries who were left to cooperate with the Austrians.
  60. Fortescue, British Army, IV, 938-940.
  61. Heavy demands   for troops obliged Britain to reduce its military commitment in
Portugal in 1798. See Fortescue, British Army, IV, 605.


                                            94
                    The Collapse of the First Coalition


Directory in a mood to listen to reasonable terms. Since Britain
could not accomplish this by herself, she had to win the support
of the continental powers in a new league. There was no other
way. The counterrevolutionary movement within France was
undependable. Unless Pitt was ready to surrender, he must take
the initiative in arousing the European powers to act with Britain
once again.
  Past experience proved that the members of any new coalition
would expect British subsidies. Pitt’s early hope that subsidies
would be needed only as an emergency measure broke down well
before the First Coalition collapsed. At one time or another,
Prussia, Austria, and Russia had all insisted on receiving British
financial support. In any new alliance, Britain might be forced to
accept subsidization of her partners as a regular war expense, to be
borne in addition to her own heavy outlays for military and naval
purposes.
  This consideration  provided still another argument in favor of
restructuring the British system of war finance which had
prevailed since 1793. So far, the war had been fought largely on
borrowed money. To escape the ruinous interest charges which
resulted, the Treasury would have to transfer a larger part of the
war burden directly onto the shoulders of the British taxpayer.
During the final years of the century, Pitt introduced an imposing
collection of new taxes for this purpose. Results began to appear
almost at once; between 1797 and 1799 the revenue rose from
£23,000,000 to more than £35,000,000.® The new tax program
would make it easier for the government to provide its future allies
with the subsidies they would surely expect.
  No matter how well financed, a new               coalition would fail unless
built upon a realistic and mutually acceptable set of goals. First,
the European powers would have to be awakened to the dangers
which hovered over them. At the moment, Prussia was blind to the
massive power of the Directory which hung over her, while
Austria’s delight in the acquisition ef Venetia (Treaty of Campo
Formio) helped her forget her losses in the Low Countries. How
could the eccentric Tsar be made to see that French hegemony in
the West imperiled his own domain? British diplomacy must rouse

  62. Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz, British Economy, 1, 44.


                                         OS
                           1796-1797

these powers from their sleep and guide them toward agreement
on war aims. No one was more aware of this than Grenville. He
had seen Austro-Prussian rivalry tear the league apart in 1794.
During the final phase of the coalition, Austria’s ambivalence
concerning her real interests had weakened her partnership with
Britain. A new league would have to be created by British
diplomacy and financed by British subsidies. In the long run,
however, it might be easier to satisfy the allies’ demand for money
than to bring them into agreement on their war goals.




                                96
                                          V

            ORIGINS          OF    THE      SECOND          COALITION




Lord Grenville was not surprised when the peace negotiations at
Lille fell apart in September 1797.! More than ever he was
convinced that only a union of all the great powers could restore
the European balance. They must confront the Directory with a
proposal for a comprehensive territorial settlement backed by the
threat of war. Late in 1797 Grenville undertook to form such a
concert, and his plan, as finally matured, anticipated the system
Castlereagh was to create at the close of the Napoleonic Wars.” If
possible, such a concert should be established before the Directory
stabilized its recent territorial gains. In this way, France would be
obliged to accept its terms. If war was to be the destiny of the
league, however, Britain must be ready to lead it and subsidize its
members as generously as her resources permitted.
  The broad outline of such a scheme was probably already in
Grenville’s mind when he received a most interesting dispatch sent
by Lord Elgin from Berlin on October 8. Frederick William II was
dying and Elgin felt sure that the Prince Royal, who would ascend
the throne within a matter of weeks, was ready to take a
determined stand against France.? Even assuming that Elgin’s
estimate of the prince’s character was too optimistic, Grenville

  1. Grenville had no confidence in the Lille negotiation and tried to dissuade Pitt from
undertaking it. See Malmesbury, III, 366; Rose, Pitt and the Great War, pp. 322-326.
  2. Once France had been forced to accept a territorial settlement, Grenville proposed
that the four Great Powers remain united in order to guarantee it. Should the concert be
forced to go to war, he recommended the creation of a central council of ministers
representing the allied powers. For an examination of the proposal, see John M. Sherwig,
“Tord Grenville’s Plan for a Concert of Europe, 1797-1799,” Journal of Modern History,
34 (1962), 284-293.
  3. Elgin to Grenville, October 8, 1797, FO 64/45.


                                           oF
                                     Lie         iee

knew that Prussian policy was as shifty as running water. Haugwitz
and his fellow-ministers would cheerfully abandon their entente
with France if it could be done with much profit and little risk.4
Britain could not ignore even the slight possibility that a young
and patriotic king might make his influence felt at Berlin.
   The foreign secretary decided to sound out the Prince Royal,
although the obvious delicacy of the situation obliged him to use a
secret agent. The assignment fell to an unlikely member of George
III’s household, an emigrant Swiss scholar named Jean de Luce
Grenville’s instructions to his emissary were general, but they
made clear that Britain desired a union with Prussia as the nucleus
of a concert to include all the major powers. Special emphasis was
placed on the liberation of Holland as mutually advantageous to
Britain and Prussia. The Prince Royal must be made to see how
little real security his country derived from its 1796 neutrality
pact with France. De Luc’s instructions made no mention of any
war alliance, but referred instead to a “union of all the great
powers” as the only means of re-establishing the European
equilibrium. Specifically, Prussia was invited to join with Britain in
creating a counterweight to French power. Should war come,
Prussia could count on British subsidies, but only for “services
rendered and not to be rendered.””®
   De Luc’s mission was a disappointment from the start. On
November 16, Frederick William III succeeded to the Prussian
throne, but foreign affairs interested him so little that he asked
Count Haugwitz to respond to the British overture. That minister
regarded the proposal rather like an offer of help from a dying
man. In his reply, which reached London in January 1798, he
  4. Grenville had every right to this opinion. During the last days of the First Coalition,
Haugwitz had discussed with Elgin the possibility that Prussia might renew her
connection with England. Elgin believed that Berlin would demand both subsidies and
the promise of territorial rewards. See Elgin’s dispatches to Grenville of February and
March, 1797, FO 64/43.
  5. Jean de Luc (1727-1817) was a native of Geneva who came to England in 1773. He
held the position of reader to Queen Charlotte. Presumably, he was chosen for the Berlin
mission because, as a traveling man of science, he would attract little attention. Much of
his correspondence with Grenville, written in French and in a very small hand, has been
published in vol. IV of Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue. The foreign secretary found him
an exhausting correspondent and even George III described De Luc’s letters as ‘‘very
raat though most tedious” (George III to Pitt, January 11, 1798, Chatham Papers,
vol.   104).
  6. Grenville to De Luc, November 10, 1797, and De Luc to Grenville, December           25,
1797, Manuscripts of J.B. Fortescue, IV, 8-10, 47.


                                            98
                     Origins of the Second Coalition


reaffirmed his belief that ‘‘the system adopted by Prussia since the
peace of Basel is the only one agreeable to her true interests.”
Only overt French aggression against the north German neutral
zone would justify Prussia in going to war and then only for
defensive purposes. In such an event, Britain would be expected to
provide subsidies, which Haugwitz called the ‘‘nerve of war.’’ For
the foreseeable future, cooperation between the two governments
either for diplomatic or military purposes was out of the
question.’
   Grenville did not grieve over the failure of his bid to the new
Prussian ruler. France was now making her intentions so clear that
even Europe’s most obtuse statesmen would soon be able to read
in them his country’s doom. In December a congress assembled at
Rastadt to settle terms of peace between France and the Empire.
Negotiations had hardly begun when the Directory’s envoys
demanded the cession of the entire left bank of the Rhine.
Meanwhile, French intrigue in Switzerland gave advance notice
that the Directory intended military intervention there.
   Haugwitz’ memorandum brought from the foreign secretary a
stern warning against the dangers of complacency. If the Directory
had not yet threatened north Germany, it was only because it
wanted to lull Berlin into a false sense of security. The day would
soon come when French armies would smash through the line of
demarcation. When that happened, Britain would provide Prussia
with subsidies to help her against the common enemy. With this
pledge went the grim reminder that the security of north Germany
was only one part of a far larger issue. No nation would be safe
until French imperialism had been halted and that could be
accomplished only by a union of all the powers. “In its present
crisis,” Grenville explained to Haugwitz, “‘Europe can be saved
only by a reunion of the Great Powers, which would have for its
purpose the re-establishment of the general peace, and thereupon
the maintenance of the common tranquillity, and the guarantee of
possessions by the respective governments. As long as war exists in
part, the interests will be divided; as long as a general concert does
not exist for the maintenance of peace, nothing can halt the
designs of a government which dominates by disunion.”
  7. Memorandum of Count Haugwitz for Lord Grenville, n.d., enclosed in De Luc to
Grenville, December 21, 1797, ibid., IV, 41-43.


                                       Ne,
                                     1797-1799

  If Haugwitz wanted to promote his country’s welfare, he should
join with Britain in working for that union. “England and
Prussia,’ Grenville declared, ‘‘concerting together, and establishing
(if it is still possible) a real and sincere understanding with the two
other Major Courts [Russia and Austria], would put all four of
them in a position to present in an imposing manner to France the
bases of the future tranquillity of Europe, founded on whatever
arrangements may issue from their discussions.” In a private letter
to Elgin, Grenville conceded that each passing day made it less
likely that the league could have its way with France without war.
The Cabinet had already earmarked £1,000,000 for a Prussian war
subsidy.”
   The foreign secretary attached the greatest importance to
winning Russian support for his concert plan. Aside from the fact
that no union would be complete without the Tsar, his adherence
might be a powerful inducement for Prussia to join.!° Hopefully,
the Tsar would also be able to impose some degree of cooperation
on Prussia and Austria, thereby sparing the concert that bitter
rivalry which had weakened the First Coalition. So far Russia had
remained aloof, but French aggression in Germany might prod her
into action. Under the Treaty of Teschen (1779), Russia was one
of the guarantors of the Empire’s boundaries, which the Directory
insisted on revising at Rastadt. A brief summary of the concert
plan was sent to Whitworth in December 1797, along with
instructions to do everything possible to attract the Tsar’s interest
and support.!!
  Britain’s eager courting of the northern powers contrasted
sharply with her marked coolness toward Austria, a contrast
heightened by the fact that, so far, only Vienna had shown any
interest in union with Britain. Although Thugut still refused to
reveal the terms of the Campo Formio treaty, he was willing to
talk with Eden about a new Anglo-Austrian alliance. As early as
November 1797, Eden reported that the Hofburg “might find it
expedient to have again recourse to Arms.” In fact, Thugut had

  8. Grenville   to Haugwitz, n.d., enclosed in Grenville    to De Luc, January    14, 1798,
ibid., 1V, 58-60.
  9. Grenville to Elgin, January 14, 1798, FO 64/47.
  10.So the Duke of Brunswick wrote              George   III on   November   27, 1797.   See
Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV, 25-26.
  11. Grenville to Whitworth, December, 1797, FO 65/38.


                                           100
                      Origins of the Second Coalition


gone so far as to direct his envoy in London to hint that a promise
of British subsidies would be a powerful inducement for Austria to
go to war./2
   Distrust of Austria colored the Cabinet’s outlook throughout
this important period. Thugut’s refusal to ratify the 1797 loan
agreement destroyed what little faith Pitt and Grenville had in
Hapsburg sincerity. Nor were they inclined to accept the justifica-
tion Thugut offered: Austria’s penury and the fear that ratifica-
tion would prejudice the outcome of the Rastadt Congress. The
foreign secretary considered this transparent dishonesty, and early
in 1798 he threatened to sever diplomatic relations with Vienna
unless the treaty was ratified.!> More was involved than the
disputed loan agreement, however. The liberation of the Low
Countries was a major goal of Britain’s war policy; so long as
Austria was indifferent to that goal, Downing Street must give
highest priority to winning Prussian support. Furthermore, if a
concert could be formed which included Prussia and Russia, then
Austria could not possibly remain aloof. In such a case, Grenville
believed, the Hofburg must either petition for admission, or “‘leap
into the arms of the Jacobin government of France.”’!4
   Events soon bore out this prediction. Early in 1798 an Austrian
agent was sent to England in a futile effort to borrow money to
pay the interest due on the 1795 Imperial loan. Grenville stonily
refused to consider this as evidence of good faith, and described
the mission as “perfectly insignificant, and calculated only to gain
time.”!5 A few months later, the unfavorable nature of the
Rastadt negotiations prompted Thugut to attempt an accommoda-
tion with Britain. On April 1 Starhemberg informed Grenville that
his government was ready to support a union of the great powers.
With this went an Austrian request for the return of the British
navy to the Mediterranean and a guarantee of subsidies in the
event of war.!®


  12.Eden to Grenville, November     1, 1797, FO 7/50; Thugut to Starhemberg,
November 2, 1797, in Hermann Huffer, Quellen zur Geschichte der Kriege von 1799 und
1800 (Leipzig, 1900-1907), III, 478-480.
  13. Grenville to Eden, January 16, 1798, FO 7/51.
  14. Grenville’s Memoir for the Duke of Brunswick, November 10, 1797, Manuscripts
of J. B. Fortescue, IV, 9.
  15. Grenville to Eden, March 13, 1798, FO 7/51.
  16. Grenville to Pitt, April 1, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 1V, 150-151.


                                        101
                                     1797-1799

  The Cabinet took two weeks to consider Austria’s appeal. Pitt
was full of misgivings, and the Admiralty frankly doubted whether
it would be safe to send the navy back to the Mediterranean.!” So
far as Grenville was concerned there could never be any agreement
with Vienna as long as the 1797 loan treaty remained unratified.
The British reply given to Starhemberg fell far short of Vienna’s
expectations. An Anglo-Austrian union must be preceded by
ratification of the 1797 pact, ‘“‘an indispensable preliminary to all
discussions on this point.” Thugut’s pleas for money could not
even be considered. Only one of Austria’s requests was granted:
the fleet would return to the Mediterranean provided Naples
opened her ports for its service. !8
   A few days after this British response had been delivered to
Starhemberg, Grenville confided to Eden that there was more to
the Cabinet’s decision than had been disclosed. To be sure, Britain
could have no confidence in Austria until the 1797 convention
had been ratified, but once that had been done she would
welcome alliance with her and promise a £1,000,000 subsidy in
the event of war. Past experience ruled out a third loan. “If the
present discussions should terminate in the establishment of the
concert proposed,” Grenville explained, “the King will send a
Commissary to the Austrian army who shall have instructions that
whenever that Army shall be actually put in motion, and
hostilities be commenced with France, he is to supply the
Commander of it with monthly bills on the Treasury in the
proportion of one million Sterling for the twelve month—such
payments...to continue for so long only as hostilities shall be
carried on between Austria and France.”’!?
   Grenville never doubted for a moment that Austria would finally
join the allies. On April 13 an attack by a Viennese mob on the
French ambassador brought the Hofburg close to war—a war she
could not fight without allies. Before the month ended, Starhem-
berg informed Grenville that he had been instructed to declare
“officially and solemnly” that the 1797 treaty would soon be
ratified. The foreign secretary insisted on performance rather than
this promise, which he regarded ‘“‘as very little if at all more
  17. Pitt to Grenville, April 1, 1798, ibid., IV, 152; Lord Spencer to Grenville, April 6,
1798, Rose, Pitt and the Great War, pp. 366-367.
  18. Grenville to Starhemberg, April 18, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV,
171-172.
  19. Grenville to Eden, April 20, 1798, FO 7/51.
                                          102
                       Origins of the Second Coalition


satisfactory than those which have been received before.”2°
Meanwhile, Starhemberg tried to borrow money in the City to
meet the charges on the 1795 loan only to discover that he could
not raise a shilling without a British guarantee.”!
  France’s conduct during 1798 provided the strongest argument
in favor of European union. At Rastadt, the Empire finally
accepted the Rhine river as her boundary. The long-expected
French intervention in Switzerland occurred, resulting in the
annexation of Geneva and the formation of the Helvetic Republic.
Meanwhile, the Directory’s armies poured southward into Italy
and took Rome. This rapid spread of French power made a deep
impression on the Tsar, whose attitude toward the Directory had
undergone a steady change since the beginning of 1798. Whit-
worth skilfully employed every argument to engage Paul’s interest
in the concert, and early in May he was able to report some
success to London. The Tsar was ready to support the concert’s
aims even though it might involve him in war. It must be
understood, however, that Russia’s participation in any war with
the Directory would depend upon a generous grant of British
subsidies. As proof of his dedication, the Tsar was sending a
personal emissary to Berlin to persuade Frederick William III to
declare for the good cause.” With the Tsar’s mind at last made up
and Austria soliciting for membership in the evolving concert,
Grenville turned his full attention to winning Prussia’s support.
Elgin was sent the necessary powers to conclude a treaty which
would bring Prussia in as a member of the four-power alliance.”
  Britain’s plans seemed headed for fulfillment in the spring of
1798, but it was the only bright spot on the horizon. The steady
rumblings of discontent that had been heard for years in Ireland
suddenly erupted into revolt in May. At almost the same time
London learned that a major French armada was loose in the
Mediterranean.2* Clearly, any four-power concert to be formed


  20. Starhemberg to Grenville, April 26, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV, 178;
Grenville to Eden, April 27, 1798, FO 7/51.
  21. Even Boyd, Benfield and Co. would do nothing for Austria. See Starhemberg to
Grenville, May, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 1V, 203-204.
  22. Whitworth to Grenville, May 4, 1798, FO 65/39; Elgin to Grenville, April 6, 1798,
FO 64/48.
  23. Grenville to Elgin, April 20, 1798, FO 64/49.
  24. Grenville correctly guessed that the French fleet was bound for Egypt. See
Grenville to Buckingham, June 13, 1798, Memoirs of the Court, II, 401.
                                           OE
                                   1797-1799


must be a war coalition. With the Directory in control of
Switzerland and fast extending its power in Italy, Vienna could
not postpone a commitment much longer. All that now remained
was for Frederick William to come forward manfully and close the
circle around the common enemy.

   As the clouds of war gathered in the summer of 1798, Berlin
became the nerve center of European diplomacy. Emissaries of
Britain, Russia, and Austria joined forces to persuade Prussia to
declare for the emerging concert. In this they competed with
French agents pressing for closer ties between Berlin and Paris.
Count Haugwitz was placed in a position where one false step
might prove disastrous. With a delicate sensitivity to the high
stakes involved, he tried to avoid offending either camp. It was to
his advantage to play for time until it became clear what course
would be most profitable for him to take. There was always the
danger, however, that by delaying too long, Prussian support
would lose its value both to the Directory and the concert
powers.2> Throughout the summer Haugwitz deftly parried un-
wanted offers of alliance thrust at him from both sides. When the
allied representatives finally admitted defeat, they at least found
consolation in the fact that the French envoy, Abbé Sieyés, had
been just as unsuccessful in moving Prussia from the dead center
of neutralism.?°
   Quite different from Prussia’s indecision was the Tsar’s conduct
on learning of the Directory’s aggression in the Mediterranean. For
the first time since 1793 French imperialism directly threatened a
vital Russian interest. The seizure of Malta and Bonaparte’s
invasion of Egypt removed Paul’s last doubts regarding union with
Austria and Britain.?” He ordered the mobilization of his army and
instructed Vorontzoff to resume         discussion of the subsidy
proposal Catherine had made to Britain in 1796.28 The French

  25. For a discussion of Haugwitz’ policies see Guy Stanton Ford, Hanover and Prussia,
1795-1803: A Study in Neutrality   ... (New York, 1903), p. 56 and passim.
  26. Elgin’s correspondence during this period makes clear that the question of
subsidies played no part in his discussions with Haugwitz.
  27. As late as June the Tsar was carrying on secret conversations with France looking
to a settlement of their differences. See Andrei A. Lobanov-Rostovsky, Russia and
Europe, 1789-1825 (Durham, N.C., 1947), p. 18.
  28. Whitworth to Grenville, July 24, 1798, FO 65/40.


                                         104
                      Origins of the Second Coalition


threat to Naples seriously alarmed Thugut, and Eden reported that
the Austrian leader had pledged his unqualified support to defend
her.?? Prussia’s continued evasiveness was a disappointment, but
Grenville was encouraged by the reports reaching him from St.
Petersburg and Vienna. In a rare mood of good humor, he wrote
his brother, ““my Emperors are going to war like good boys, but
they have been a long while bringing themselves to it.”2°
  The conclusion of an Anglo-Russian subsidy pact was unlikely to
be difficult since Vorontzoff found the Cabinet ready to go “‘as far
to meet this overture as our pecuniary resources will allow.” Pitt
renewed his offer of 1796: in return for 60,000 Russians, Britain
would pay a preparation subsidy of £300,000, monthly payments
of £100,000, and a final postwar bonus amounting to £50,000 for
each month the treaty was in effect. Vorontzoff was delighted
with the proposal, and in August Grenville empowered Whitworth
to sign a treaty with the Tsar on these terms.*!
  The foreign secretary took advantage of his conversations with
Vorontzoff to touch on other problems related to the concert.
Without the adherence of at least one of the major German states,
an Anglo-Russian alliance would be of limited value. Since Prussia
was likely to remain neutral, Grenville proposed that Britain’s
subsidy agreement with the Tsar become operative only after
Austria broke with France and entered into alliance with London.
In-short, the foreign secretary wanted Paul to bring Austria into
the concert and to persuade her to ratify the disputed loan treaty
of 1797.
  Even if Austria satisfied Britain on both points, Grenville could
offer her neither subsidies nor a new loan. Four months before,
the Cabinet had been ready to give Vienna £1,000,000, but
changing circumstances now made that impossible. The return of
the British fleet to the Mediterranean, an indirect but important
benefit to Austria and her Neapolitan ally, would cost the
government      at least £1,500,000        a year. About      as much     would be
required to pay the subsidies the Tsar needed. Smaller sums were
allocated to aid Portugal and Switzerland. Finally, if Prussia
  29. Eden to Grenville, August 18, 1798, FO 7/52; Eden to Auckland, June 19, 1798,
Auckland, IV, 23.
  30. Grenville to Buckingham [August] , 1798. Memoirs of the Court,Il, 407.
  31. Pitt to Grenville, August 16, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue,      IV, 283;
Grenville to Whitworth, August 29, 1798, FO 65/40.


                                         105
                                     IIIT AS99


decided to enter the war, she too would expect financial aid. It
was completely beyond Britain’s resources to undertake all this
and, at the same time, help finance Austria’s war program. In
asking the Tsar to win Austria’s support for the concert, Britain
regretted she could not facilitate his task by guaranteeing any
direct financial aid to the Hofburg.*”
   What accounts for this steady hardening of Britain’s heart
toward Austria? Financial considerations were unquestionably
involved, as Grenville claimed. The nation’s economic health was
infinitely better than it had been in 1797, but Pitt hoped to limit
the total of all foreign aid to £2,000,000 a year.’ To satisfy both
 Russia and Austria would cost him about £2,500,000, in which
case there would be nothing left for Prussia. Certainly, Frederick
William could not be turned away because of a lack of funds. More
was involved in the British attitude toward Austria than economic
 necessity, however.     Thugut’s conduct    during recent months
 aroused deep suspicion regarding his real intentions toward
 France.°4 Grenville counted on the Tsar to bring Austria into the
 coalition and ratify the 1797 treaty, all of which he hoped could
 be done without costing Britain anything.*>
   If London could appeal to the Tsar to intervene in her quarrel
 with Vienna, Vienna could do so as well. Following the signing of
 a new Austro-Russian alliance at St. Petersburg in July 1798, the
 Hapsburg envoy, Count Louis Cobenzl, urged Paul to support

   32. Note by Lord Grenville on the heads of a conference with Count Vorontzoff,
August, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 1V, 297-298. Grenville informed Eden of
this decision on September 4, 1798 (FO 7/53), and observed, “‘the King’s Servants have
felt that this Mode of assisting Austria by procuring for Her the Cooperation ofa large
military aid from Russia would probably be more effectual in its result, and is after what
has passed infinitely less objectionable in other respects than any Plans of direct subsidy
to that Power [Austria] .”
   33. Pitt to Grenville, October 6, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 1V, 337-338.
   34. Cambridge Modern History, VUII, 642 and passim.
   35. There is good reason to believe that if Grenville could have won Prussian support,
he would have abandoned Austria altogether. Near the close of August, he summarized
his recent talks with Vorontzoff in a dispatch to Whitworth. Britain still wished to see
the formation of a four-power concert, but Austria might refuse to join. “If for this
reason,” Grenville continued, ‘‘or from any other circumstance the establishment of such
a concert as is now proposed should become impracticable, there is another idea which
might be suggested to the Court of Petersburgh, and which indeed if it could be rendered
palatable there, would in any case be very much preferred by His Majesty to the
establishment of any concert for a cooperation in the military plans of Austria.’”’ What
Grenville had in mind was a Russo-British invasion of Holland which might shake Prussia
from her languor and bring her into alliance with the two governments. See Grenville to
Whitworth, no. 20, August [29?], 1798, FO 65/40.

                                           106
                       Origins of the Second Coalition


Vienna in this contest of wills. Whitworth immediately sensed the
direction in which events were moving and challenged Cobenzl to
prove the Hofburg’s good faith by ratifying the disputed loan
convention. The Austrian envoy refused. Instead, he declared that
his government would do so only after receiving positive assur-
ances of British financial aid.*®
   The fate of the concert now rested in the hands of Paul, acting
as arbiter between London and Vienna. By the end of September
he had decided in favor of Vienna, and Whitworth was told that
the conclusion of the Russian subsidy treaty would be delayed
“until the so much wished for Concert between His Majesty
 [George III] and the Court of Vienna shall be re-established.’’>” In
short, London must make her peace with Vienna as the price of a
Russian alliance.
   Nelson’s Victory of the Nile was still being celebrated in
Downing Street when Whitworth’s latest dispatches arrived with
news of Britain’s diplomatic defeat. Grenville regarded this as
further proof of Hapsburg treachery, and when Vorontzoff and
Starhemberg called on him, he received them with austere dignity.
He asked the Austrian minister one question: was he empowered
to ratify the treaty the 1797 treaty? When Starhemberg admitted
that he had no such instructions, the foreign secretary ended the
meeting by reaffirming his original position that ratification was a
preliminary to all further discussion.78 What was now to be done?
Grenville’s recommendation        to Pitt was straightforward and
simple: “‘It sounds whimsical, but I am inclined to think that in
this state of things, urgent as the moment is, the best resolution
we can take is to do nothing; to declare that we consider the
negotiation at Vienna as at an end; and to say, but without the least
tincture of ill-humour, that we must now wait for proposals from
our allies, those which we had made having failed.”*? The prime
minister was nearly as unyielding as his cousin. Nothing could be

  36. Whitworth to Grenville, September 5, 1798, FO 65/40. See also Eden to Grenville,
September 1, 1798, FO 7/53.
  37. Russian ministers explained this decision to Whitworth by pointing out that “such
an Employment in favour of Russia, of the Resources destined by His Majesty for
carrying on the War, may put it out of His Majesty’s power to assist the Court of Vienna,
as much as may be necessary, when that Court shall have satisfied His Majesty on the
subject of the present Misunderstanding” (Whitworth to Grenville, September 25, 1798,
FO 65/40); see also Whitworth to Grenville, October 4, 1798, FO 65/41.
  38. Grenville to Whitworth, October 23, 1798, FO 65/41.
  39. Grenville to Pitt, October 28, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV, 354.

                                          OG
                                      1797-1799

done for the Austrians, he agreed, “‘till they have, at least, ratified
expressly the convention [of 1797]; I think, not till they have
begun to execute it.”” Once that point had been gained, it might be
possible to give Vienna something. Pitt confessed, however, that “I
am not...very sanguine in my hopes of any thing, but our
continuing to fight well our own         battle, and Europe must
probably be left for some time longer to its fate.”"40
  The Cabinet decided to stand its ground on the question of
Hapsburg ratification.*! Austria’s unwillingness to honor her debts
was evidence of bad faith, especially since she was not required
immediately to repay the £1,620,000.% Since Britain had failed to
create a concert of the powers, there was nothing left but to invite
the Tsar to try. On November 16 Grenville informed Whitworth of
this decision: ‘“‘His Majesty would therefore recommend that the
Russian Ministers at Berlin and Vienna should be instructed to
propose the immediate conclusion of a treaty between the four
great Powers: the basis of which should be the employment of
their united efforts to reduce France within her ancient limits...
and to which every other Power should afterwards be invited to
accede.’’43 Let the Tsar see what he could accomplish!
   Although the initiative had been handed to St. Petersburg, it was
not in Grenville’s nature to sit idly by and await the result. This
was especially the case now that the weathervane of Prussian
policy was beginning to veer toward the allies. The first hint of
this change came in September.“4 A month later, Haugwitz
confided to the Russian minister, Count Panin, that Prussia might
soon intervene to liberate Holland. He was anxious to learn ‘“‘the
price which England attaches to the operation, and what she
would give to help with its means.” Panin at once communicated
this to London.* Encouraging though such news was, Grenville
admitted to Vorontzoff that the kaleidoscopic character of
 40. Pitt to Grenville,   October   6, 1798    and   October   29, 1798, ibid., IV, 337-338,
354-355.
  41. Only the chancellor, Lord Loughborough, seems to have been willing to yield to
Austria; Loughborough to Pitt, October 5, 1798, ibid., IV, 335-336.
  42. Grenville to George III, October 10, 1798, the transcript copies of the unpublished
correspondence of George III, deposited in the William L. Clements Library, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, VIII, 3954-3956 (hereafter cited as “Unpublished George III Letters’’).
  43. Grenville to Whitworth, November 16, 1798, FO 65/41.
  44. B. Garlike to Grenville, September 23, 1798, FO 64/51.
Pope to S. Vorontzoff, October 18, 1798, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV,
  6-348.


                                              108
                       Origins of the Second Coalition


concert diplomacy made him dizzy: ‘‘Prussia will act only with
our help; and after seeing Austria go ahead of her. The same
applies to Russia, while Austria delays action until assured of our
pecuniary assistance, Russia’s cooperation, as well as Prussia’s
neutrality. We do not have resources enough to put in motion the
armies of three Great continental Powers.’’4® Notwithstanding,
Britain had a responsibility to promote the concert, and the
Cabinet decided to send a special agent to Berlin to help win
Prussia to the cause.
   The Berlin mission was given to the foreign secretary’s oldest
brother, Thomas Grenville, who had gone to Vienna with Lord
Spencer in 1794. His immediate task was to support the efforts of
the Russian minister at Berlin to bring the German powers into
some degree of harmony. If that could be accomplished, Britain
desired the formation of ‘“‘a general and extensive concert, in
which the objects to be pursued shall be previously explained and
agreed upon, and in which the means to be employed shall also be
regulated by positive stipulation.’’47
   Pitt’s subsidy policy had changed greatly in recent weeks, and
this change was reflected in Thomas Grenville’s instructions.
Should a four-power alliance be formed, Britain would provide
Prussia and Austria with an annual grant of £1,000,000 each. Of
course, the Austrian subsidy was conditional upon the ratification
of the 1797 treaty. The aid offered the German allies was in excess
of the money already pledged to the Tsar. Pitt had finally been
compelled to abandon his original limit of £2,000,000 for all
foreign aid.*® Lord Grenville explained this by observing that it
was subsidies “to which the Continental Powers look with the
greatest anxiety, and which may unquestionably be of the greatest
importance to the success of the intended operations.” If subsidies
could make the coalition, it was folly for Britain to withhold
them. The raising of the subsidy limit to more than £3,500,000
probably influenced Pitt’s decision to propose a new tax on
  46. Grenville to Vorontzoff, November 2, 1798, ibid., IV, 358.
  47. Grenville listed the terms of a proposed territorial settlement,    which closely
resemble those finally achieved at the Congress of Vienna. See John Holland Rose “Pitt's
Plan for the Settlement of Europe,” which appears in his Napoleonic Studies, 2d ed.
(London, 1906), pp. 41-84.
  48. Dundas strongly opposed this decision and recommended that the total of all
foreign aid be kept below £1,200,000 a year. See his letter to Pitt of December 1798,
Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, 1V, 433-435.


                                          109
                                    T7ITALT Oo

incomes (December 3, 1798). But if Britain had to be generous,
she would not be prodigal. Subsidies to Austria and Prussia would
be paid monthly by British commissaries “‘who will continue the
payment so long only as the troops continue to act on the footing,
& for the objects, which may be pointed out by the treaty.””4? The
experience of the 1794 Prussian subsidy treaty was not to be
repeated.
  Thomas Grenville’s mission began under the worst possible
auspices. Violent storms and fog delayed his sailing from Yar-
mouth for weeks and it was not until the end of January 1799
that H.M.S. Proserpine, the frigate assigned him, was able to get
to sea. Bad luck shadowed the voyage. Proserpine was destroyed
by a storm in the Elbe estuary, although no lives were lost. It was
not until mid-February that the British envoy reached Berlin.
Nearly all his personal belongings and papers had been lost in the
wreck.>9
  The cheerless arrival of the New Year, 1799, found Lord
Grenville ill-prepared to receive the bad news which Whitworth
had sent from St. Petersburg. From dispatches received in
Downing Street early in January, the foreign secretary learned that
his envoy had signed a treaty with Cobenzl binding Britain to
sponsor a new Austrian loan of £3,600,000. Uncertain whether he
was still in his right mind, Grenville took a few moments to
comprehend what he had just read. At last, the meaning was
inescapable: Whitworth had been tricked into an unauthorized act
by the wily Austrian minister. The foreign secreatry’s fury was not
lessened at all by learning that Whitworth had also signed a
subsidy pact with Russia.
   Whitworth’s position at St. Petersburg had grown increasingly
difficult after Cobenzl won the Tsar’s sympathy and support for
the Hofburg. In December Cobenzl presented him with a
compromise plan which had already been approved by Paul: in
return for a British guarantee of a £3,600,000 loan, Vienna would
ratify the 1797 convention and repay that loan from the proceeds
of the forthcoming one.*! The British envoy resisted vigorously for
 49. Lord Grenville to T. Grenville, December 1798, FO 64/52.
 50. For an account of Thomas Grenville’s voyage, see J. D.             Spinney,    “Some
Vicissitudes of a ‘V.I.P.,’ ” Blackwood’s Magazine, 265 (1949), 301-312. See also William
James, The Naval History of Great Britain . . . (London, 1822-1824), II, 373-377.
  51. Whitworth to Grenville, December 4, 1798, FO 65/41.


                                         161-0)
                       Origins of the Second Coalition


more    than   a week,    but on December          13 he at last gave way and
signed, sub spe rati, the treaty offered by Cobenzl.>* Whitworth
knew very well that Grenville’s orders postivitely prohibited such
an act. However, the latest dispatches from London were weeks
old and perhaps no longer reflected the foreign minister’s thinking.
He therefore decided to gamble. If his treaty was acceptable, the
Cabinet could ratify it; if not, they were free to reject it. In
justifying his decision to Grenville, he described the intense
pressure put upon him by the Tsar. ““God knows,” he wrote,
““what may be the real intentions of the Court of Vienna, but it
certainly is felt here, that unless some solid assurance of support is
held out, such is its want of confidence . . . it will in despair listen
to the tempting offers now proposed by the Directory.’’>?
   With Austria at last satisfied, the Tsar was ready to conclude a
subsidy agreement with Whitworth. On December 29 Russia
promised to send 45,000 troops to cooperate with Prussia when
that power declared war on France. These troops would be in
addition to the army Paul had already sent off to help Austria. By
the terms of the treaty, Britain agreed to provide subsidies in line
with Pitt’s offer of the previous August. The preparation payment
was fixed at £225,000, in addition to which monthly subsidies of
£75,000 would be paid as soon as the corps left Russia. A final
sum, amounting to £37,500 for each month the treaty was in
effect, would be given by Britain at the close of the war.>4
   Downing Street’s reaction to Whitworth’s two treaties was
mixed. That with Austria, providing for a new loan, would not be
ratified. Whitworth’s act was disavowed and Grenville seriously
considered recalling him in disgrace. Thanks to Vorontzoff’s
kindly intervention, however, the foreign secretary curbed his
anger and sent instead a most severe reprimand to his agent.°> The
Russian subsidy treaty was certainly acceptable even though its
implementation was conditional on Prussian cooperation.°© As yet

  52. The treaty is to be found in FO 65/41.
  53. Whitworth to Grenville, December 13, 1798, FO 65/41.
  54. Treaty with Russia, December 29, 1798, FO 94/206.
  55. Vorontzoff to Grenville, January 22, 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV,
447-449; Minute of the Cabinet, January 10, 1799, Unpublished George III Letters, 1X,
10-12. Grenville’s dispatch to Whitworth of January 25, 1799 (FO 65/42), is probably
one of the most stinging rebukes ever sent a British envoy from the Foreign Office.
  56. Paul made clear in his letter to Vorontzoff of December 30, 1798 that this
condition was to be taken seriously ; Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, IV, 428.


                                        (ik
                                  Lah oo


there was no indication that Berlin was ready to act, and Grenville
decided not to ratify the Russian convention for the time being.
   By now Austria’s duplicity had bred a hatred in the foreign
secretary for which there was at least some justification. Despite
the Hofburg’s alliance with Naples, it refused to lift a finger to
save that Italian state from the French assault which was launched
in December 1798. Furthermore, it was hard to have faith in a
government     which, within the space of one week, could welcome
the arrival of Russian troops in Vienna and engage in secret
conversations with the Directory.*’ The unratified loan treaty
remained a painful thorn in Britain’s side, and Thugut refused to
remove it. More and more Grenville’s hopes turned on the
outcome of his brother’s mission at Berlin. If Britain could win
Russia and Prussia to the concert, he was ready to let Vienna
follow its own devious course in isolation. In such a case, British
subsidy money would be divided between the Tsar and Frederick
William
      .>®
  For the third time within a year Britain bent every effort to pry
Prussia loose from her neutrality. In this she was zealously
supported by the Tsar. Less than a week after the signing of the
Anglo-Russian subsidy treaty, Paul instructed his minister at Berlin
to urge Prussia to act openly against France. Panin set to work
immediately only to discover that Haugwitz would discuss nothing
until the long overdue British envoy appeared. The Prussian leader
was especially anxious to learn what subsidies London would
offer.°? Almost a month passed before Thomas Grenville reached
Berlin, nearly exhausted after his harrowing experience. He needed
only a few days to understand conditions at the Prussian court:
Haugwitz was ready to unite with Britain and Russia, but his
colleagues and the King were reluctant to follow this lead. Most of
the Prussian ministers feared that union with the coalition would
bring down the Directory’s wrath on their heads. Why take such a
risk when past experience proved that Britain was always ready to
come to Prussia’s support in time of need? “There is some
disposition here,” Thomas Grenville wrote his brother, “to deny
the necessity of any active concert with England under the loose
  57. Eden to Grenville, December 26, 29, 1798, FO 7/53.
  58. Lord Grenville to T. Grenville, January, 1799, FO 64/53.
  59. Paul I to Panin, January 3, 1799, and Panin to S. Vorontzoff, January 14, 1799,
Vorontsova, XI, 273, 59.

                                       WAN)
                          Origins of the Second Coalition


notion that the hour of immediate attack on Prussia will always
find Great Britain interested in [a] treaty to co-operate for the
defence of Prussia.’’©
   Everything Grenville learned at Berlin strengthened his belief
that Prussia would do nothing. Even the offer of generous
subsidies had no effect on ministers who were convinced that
neutrality best served their interests. The blindness of the King
and his advisers to the danger of their folly filled Thomas Grenville
with contempt.®! Even France’s attack on Austria in March 1799
failed to arouse Prussia from her languor, although it did bring
from Haugwitz a proposal that Britain, Prussia, and Russia join to
protect the north German neutral zone against French aggression.
Thomas Grenville disliked the plan, even though Haugwitz pointed
out that “such a concert... might probably at no very distant
period lead to offensive measures.” Should such a three-power
combination     be formed, Prussia would require subsidies to
maintain her forces on a war footing. In a word, Britain was
expected to finance a Prussian army which might never have
occasion to fire a shot in anger.®?
  These reports from Berlin filled Pitt and Lord Grenville with
despair. The-idea of a defensive combination was disappointing to
ministers who sought Frederick William as an active ally against
France. In any event, Britain would not subsidize a Prussian army
to help it eat the bread of idleness. The foreign secretary was
clearly tiring of the game and gloomily concluded “‘it will still be
much more advantageous to know with certainty that nothing is
to be expected from Prussia than to remain in a state of doubt.”
  The coalition had yet to be formed by the time the War of the
Second Coalition broke out. France’s attack in March finally cut
the Gordian knot for Vienna and forced her into a war she did not
  60. T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, February 28, 1799, FO 64/53.
  61. ‘‘Their fear of France . . . engrosses all their attention, and furnishes to them great
and constant disquietude in the present, and serious apprehension for the future. But as
there is no man of leading and commanding talents enough to show them the greatness
of their danger . . . there is nothing done by the Government, and they are living on from
day to day ... but destitute of energy and activity” (T. Grenville to Buckingham, April
17, 1799, Memoirs of the Court, I, 437).
  62. T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, March 10, 1799, FO 64/53. This proposal grew into
a labyrinthine   scheme   to supplement a public defense pact with a secret convention
setting forth the conditions under which Prussia would make war on France (T. Grenville
to Lord Grenville, March 18, 1799, Manuscripts ofJ. B. Fortescue, 1V, 501-503). See
also Confidential Notes by De Luc, March 31, 1799, ibid., [1V, 524-527.
  63. Lord Grenville to T. Grenville, March 15, 27, 1799, FO 64/53.

                                            PS)
                                   1797-1799


really want. Logically, the next step was for Britain, Russia, and
Austria to unite against the Directory. The creation of such a
confederacy was to be especially difficult, since diplomatic
channels were clogged with the debris of Grenville’s now defunct
concert plan. Austria and Russia were united in an alliance which
the Tsar had already honored by sending 17,000 troops to Vienna
under the command of Suvoroff. Relations between Britain and
Austria were worse than ever. Ratification of the disputed loan
agreement was a point of honor which Pitt could not yield.
Thugut’s refusal to comply with this demand cast grave doubts on
his sincerity. The future of Britain’s recent subsidy treaty with
Russia was likewise uncertain since it was conditional on Prussian
adherence. Even if the Tsar waived this condition, how could
45,000 Russian troops be effectively employed? Probably they
would have to be sent to support the Imperial army in central
Europe. An Italian campaign, however, would do nothing to effect
the liberation of Holland, which was always close to Pitt’s heart.
That could be accomplished only by bringing Prussia to join with
Russia and Britain in a northern campaign.
   In the spring of 1799 British leaders were forced to make a
major policy decision. On the one hand, it could be argued that
since the Prussian negotiation was clearly unprofitable, Britain
ought to forge a war union with Russia and Austria. Such a
decision would oblige Pitt to compromise his quarrel with the
Hofburg and provide subsidies. More important, Britain would
commit herself to a war in Italy and the Rhineland. On the other
hand, if there was the slightest chance of securing Berlin’s active
cooperation, Pitt might justifiably concentrate all his energies on
achieving that goal. This would mean leaving Austria to her own
fate and forming an Anglo-Prussian-Russian league to drive the
French from Holland. Subsidies spent to finance such an alliance
would at least go to promote a vital British interest. But there was
always the danger that, in the end, Prussia would again prove false
and leave her allies to shift for themselves.
   Britain’s use of subsidies between 1797 and 1799 makes clear
how basically selective her policy was. The traditional idea of Pitt
using bright British guineas to tempt any and all powers to fight
  64. For the reasons why Thugut may have been reluctant to ratify the 1797 treaty, see
Helleiner, /mperial Loans, pp. 110-122.
                     Origins of the Second Coalition


his war with France certainly does not apply here. The nation’s
resources were far too limited to permit such prodigality. At the
outset, £2,000,000 a year was set as the limit for Britain’s foreign
aid program—a limit which the prime minister finally had to
increase to £3,500,000. Russia’s decision to take arms against
France, together with a growing uneasiness about Vienna’s plans,
forced a revision of that plan. Austria’s success in winning the
Tsar’s sympathy compelled Pitt to modify his plan once more, this
time in favor of a division of the subsidy money among the three
allies. But Britain’s burning wish was for an alliance with the
northern powers, and when, at the beginning of 1799, it appeared
that Prussia might finally rally to the cause, the prime minister
abandoned all idea of aiding the Hofburg. It was almost axiomatic
that Britain’s generosity toward Austria waxed or waned depend-
ing upon whether reports from Berlin were bad or good. If both
German powers could not be brought into the concert, Pitt did
not hesitate to choose between them.
   While no nation was willing to fight France without British
financial help, the offer of subsidies had little effect on their
decision to take arms. Prussia could easily have commanded at
least £1,000,000 in British money at any time. The various
negotiations which occurred at Berlin make clear that what Prussia
lacked   was   not   the means,   but the will. Britain’s   1796   subsidy
proposal to Catherine the Great lay dormant at St. Petersburg for
nearly two years until French aggression in the East sparked a
response from her successor. Because Austria’s position was
unusually delicate, her policy was more devious and unsteady.
Balanced precariously between peace and war, Thugut regarded
the pledge of British money as a valuable card to play in his
diplomatic game with the Directory. That game abruptly came to
an end in March 1798 when the French attack on the Empire left
Vienna with no choice but to fight. Of all the great powers, Britain
and Russia alone were committed to war with France in order to
restore the European equilibrium. Separated by an entire con-
tinent, they could do little without the cooperation of either
Prussia or Austria.
                                    VI
                    THE     SECOND           COALITION




Britain’s diplomatic plans were in no way altered by the fact that
Austria and France were now at war. An alliance with Prussia and
Russia to free Holland remained the pole star of Pitt’s policy.
Before the year ended, events blasted the basis on which the prime
minister had built his plans; Prussia refused to give up her
neutrality, while the Tsar, infuriated by Austria’s obscurantism,
abandoned     the contest. Britain was thus forced into tardy
agreement with Austria, the one power whose support she had
hitherto valued least.
  Although the Hofburg had gone to war without enthusiasm, the
Imperial armies fought well and scored unexpected victories over
the enemy. Still more surprising was the striking power of the
17,000 Russians sent by the Tsar to support his ally. This army
reached Vienna in March and was joined by 33,000 Imperial
troops. Supreme command was given to the Russian general,
Count Suvoroff, who at once pushed forward into Lombardy.!
The French were stretched dangerously thin along a line running
from the Rhine to Naples. Suvoroff struck at the weak midpoint
of that line and drove the enemy back under a succession of
sledgehammer blows. Within a few weeks Verona, Turin, and
Mantua had all fallen to the allies. Suvoroff then turned on the
enemy’s armies fleeing northward from Naples. Once they had
been crushed, he proposed to invade France. The myth of French
invincibility had finally been exploded, and hopes ran high that
the war would be over before the end of the year.

 1. Lobanov-Rostovsky, Russia and Europe, pp. 31-33.


                                       116
                              The Second Coalition


  The Tsar was caught up in the enthusiasm of the moment, and in
March he informed London that he was ready to implement their
recent subsidy agreement, regardless of what Berlin might finally
decide.* Paul’s offer presented the Cabinet with a difficult
problem. What was the best use Britain could make of 45,000
Russian troops at this moment? Should they be held in reserve
until Prussia agreed to join in liberating Holland, or should they be
sent to swell the ranks of Suvoroff’s legions? A Prusso-Russian
expedition against Holland was much to be preferred, but Thomas
Grenville’s latest reports made clear that Berlin was not yet ready
to act.? In the end, the Cabinet accepted the Tsar’s offer and
requested that the subsidized troops be sent to drive the enemy
from Switzerland. Once that had been accomplished, they could
join Suvoroff’s army and take part in the invasion of France.4
   Lord Grenville hoped that the succession of defeats which
France had suffered in Italy would soon prove a powerful
inducement for Prussia to draw the sword. If Suvoroff’s victories
continued, he predicted that they might “rouse the Prussians, in
order that they may come in for their share of the fruits of
victory; but although this would not be a very magnanimous
motive    of action,     I should     be well content to take the war, and
leave the motive to shift for itself.’
  This prediction was not merely wishful-thinking. Late in April
Count Haugwitz was so impressed by the allied successes that he
initiated discussions with the British envoy regarding the future of
Holland. Thomas Grenville seized this opportunity to make a
strong appeal to Prussia’s cupidity. Britain had all along been
ready to subsidize Prussia, but that guarantee could not be held
out indefinitely. The Cabinet was already financing the Tsar and it
might soon be necessary to subsidize Austria, too.® If Prussia
delayed her decision much longer, she might find the                            British
Treasury empty. Grenville warned that Haugwitz must                             decide

   2. Grenville to Whitworth, March 15, 1799, FO 65/42.
   3. On March 18, 1799 Thomas Grenville informed the foreign secretary that “the
 immediate co-operation of the Court of Berlin in open hostilities to France is now not to
 be relied upon” (FO 64/53).
   4. Grenville to Whitworth, March 27, 1799, FO 65/42.
   5. Lord Grenville to T. Grenville, April 16, 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V,
 11-12.
   6. This was probably a calculated maneuver to exploit Prussia’s jealousy of Austria.
 The Cabinet was certainly not considering offering subsidies to Austria at this time.


                                           117
                                     1799-1801

quickly ‘“‘whether Prussia would now avail itself of the pecuniary
assistance of Great Britain for an enterprize which Prussia itself
will probably be calling for six weeks hence.”
  Thomas Grenville’s arguments were effective, and a few days
later Haugwitz offered him a scheme for Anglo-Prussian coopera-
tion to drive the enemy from Holland. Since the Directory had
reduced its garrisons in that country to a minimum, Haugwitz
estimated that 60,000 Prussian troops could free the country
within six months. If Russia joined in the campaign, the time
required might be considerably less. Britain would be expected to
pay Prussia £200,000 in preparation money and additional
subsidies amounting to £1,000,000 for a six month campaign.
However, it must be clearly understood that Prussia was only
interested in liberating Holland, after which she would return to a
defensive policy.’ Haugwitz’ offer was immediately sent to
London, along with a private warning from the British minister. So
far, Frederick William had. not approved the plan, although
Haugwitz believed that he finally would. Thomas Grenville was
not so sure. He admitted, however, that if the King did adopt the
plan, it would doubtless achieve its purpose before the close of
1799.8
  This latest news from Berlin sent London’s hopes for victory
soaring; £1,200,000 was an outrageous price to pay for six months
of Prussian cooperation, but the expense would be trifling if
Holland could be wrenched from the French.’ Pitt had visions of
allied armies invading France’s northern and eastern frontiers
before the summer turned to autumn. Such enthusiasm was bound
to be infectious, and the Cabinet immediately accepted the
Prussian offer.!9
   More than ever Pitt was determined that the Low Countries
must be free. Joint operations undertaken by Britain, Prussia, and
Russia would surely accomplish it, probably within the time limit
specified by Haugwitz. In the event Prussia drew back, as Thomas
Grenville warned    might be the case, Pitt was prepared to

 7. Thomas   Grenville sent the foreign secretary a detailed report of his conversations
with Haugwitz, dated April 28, 1799 (FO 64/53).
  8. T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, April 30, 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V,
33-36.
 9. T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, May 9, 1799, ibid., V, 45-46.
  10. Lord Grenville to T. Grenville, May 7, 1799, FO 64/54.


                                          118
                             The Second Coalition


undertake an Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland by sea. This
represented no reversal of the earlier British decision to use the
subsidized Russians in Switzerland. That force, commanded by
General Rimsky-Korsakoff, was now on its way and would
probably reach Switzerland by July. The prime minister pro-
posed to hire a second Russian corps for operations against
Holland during the summer. Whitworth was therefore ordered to
obtain an additional 40,000 to 45,000 Russians, to be paid for at
the same rate specified in the 1798 subsidy treaty.!? It was just as
well that Pitt’s plans did not depend upon Prussian support. In
May Haugwitz confessed that Frederick William would run no risk
of war with France. Thomas Grenville remained at Berlin
throughout the summer, hoping for a change in Prussian policy. In
September he finally admitted defeat and left for home in
disgust.!9
   Meanwhile, Austrian and Russian policies had clashed violently
in the wake of Suvoroff’s Italian victories. Thugut’s wish to absorb
the Italian lands taken from the French was at cross-purposes with
Paul’s plan to restore them to their legitimate rulers. The quarrel
reached    dangerous   proportions    when    the Hofburg blocked
Suvoroff’s attempt to re-establish the House of Savoy. Unless
quickly resolved, this conflict of wills would destroy the Austro-
Russian alliance. At this point, Britain intervened and proposed
that Suvoroff’s forces be sent to join those of Rimsky-Korsakoff
in Switzerland. With the assistance of the units of the Imperial
army already there, the Russians could liberate Switzerland and
then invade France by use of Franche Comté.!4 Undertaken in
conjunction with the proposed invasion of Holland, such a
campaign would materially contribute to victory over the French.
  Pitt snatched enough time during these weeks of planning
strategy to arrange for the subsidy payments due Russia for
Korsakoff’s army. The Tsar had insisted that all payments be made
into his account in London since this would benefit Russia’s rate
  11. Rimsky-Korsakoff’s army was expected to cross the Russian frontier on May 4, at
which time the first subsidy payment would fall due. See Whitworth to Lord Grenville,
April 30, 1799, FO 65/42.
  12. Lord Grenville to Whitworth, May 3, 7, and 23, 1799, FO 65/42.
  13. T. Grenville to Lord Grenville, May 13, 1799, FO 64/54. For an account of
Thomas Grenville’s mission see D. C. Elliot, ““‘The Grenville Mission to Berlin, 1799,”
Huntington Library Quarterly, 18 (1954-1955), 129-146.
  14. Grenville to Whitworth, June 26, 1799, FO 65/43.


                                         Wah)
                                    1799-1801


of exchange. On June 6 the Treasury remitted the first subsidy
installment, amounting to £75,000, to the Tsar’s London bankers,
Harman, Hoare and Company. This was the same firm which had
handled the Prussian subsidy of 1794.!5 Two days later the prime
minister requested the Commons to vote £825,000 for the Russian
subsidy during the balance of the year. By now Fox had ceased to
attend Parliament and his colleague, George Tierney, led the fight
against Pitt’s proposal. So far as paying Russian troops was
concerned, Tierney frankly admitted that “if more blood is to be
shed, it should be any other than English blood.” The whig
spokesman directed his fire chiefly against the government’s war
goals. This prompted Pitt to make a spirited defense of his policy
which he described as “‘security, just security, with a little mixture
of indemnification.’”’ Debate on the war soon overshadowed the
subsidy issue and the House finally granted the government’s
request without a division.!®
   Whitworth found the Tsar eager to support the British plan for a
joint invasion of Holland, but he could not spare as many troops
 as Pitt desired. After some negotiation, Russia offered 17,583
 soldiers for this service in return for a preparation subsidy of
 £88,000 and monthly payments of £44,000. Britain also agreed to
 furnish at least 8,000 of her own troops to cooperate with the
 Russians.!? The only difficulty Whitworth encountered had to do
with arrangements for the transport of the Russian force. Tsar Paul
was ready to supply the ships for this purpose, but he insisted that
Britain pay generously for them. After much sharp bargaining,
Whitworth finally promised Russia an additional £19,642 each
month for the use of the Tsar’s transports.!8 Payment of all
subsidies under this treaty would begin as soon as the force
embarked at Revel.
  Britain had done everything possible to launch two major
  15. Grenville to Whitworth, no. 36, June, 1799, FO 65/43; Whitworth to Grenville,
June 29, 1799, FO 65/43; King’s Warrant Book, Ty. 52/85, 125, 137. All payments
made to Russia under the 1798 treaty appear to have been to the Tsar’s London bankers.
See Harman, Hoare and Co. to Charles Long, September 18, 1800, FO 65/47.
  16. Parliamentary History, XXXIV, 1043-1055.
  17. Treaty with Russia, June 22,1799, FO 93/81(1). A secret article (FO 93/81 (2])
expressed the hope that Sweden might be persuaded to join in the invasion. Britain
applied to Sweden, but that country refused to furnish troops unless heavily paid. See
Grenville to Whitworth, August 1, 1799, FO 65/44.
  18. Grenville believed that valuable time would be lost if British transports had to be
sent to the Baltic for this purpose. See Grenville’s Minute on the Expedition to Holland,
July 10, 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V, 130-133.
                                         120
                               The Second Coalition


campaigns which hopefully would crush the enemy before the
Close of 1799. At a cost of about £140,000 a month (not
including preparation payments) she financed the mobilization of
two Russian armies which, at least on paper, totaled more than
62,000 men. In fact Korsakoff’s army in Switzerland amounted to
only 27,000, rather than the 45,000 specified in the 1798 subsidy
treaty. On learning this, Grenville insisted that the Tsar either
bring that army up to force, or accept a proportionate reduction
in the subsidy.!9
  On August 27 British troops commanded by General Sir Ralph
Abercrombie made an unopposed landing in North Holland. A
week later they were joined by 6,000 Russians, the first of the Tsar’s
contingents to arrive. Nearly a month passed before the allied
army, now led by the Duke of York, moved against the French
near Alkmaar. The assault was a costly failure in which more than
3,500 allied troops fell, the bulk of them Russians. From this
point, the fortunes of the invaders declined and the Duke of York
finally had to evacuate his force from Holland. The allied troops
were withdrawn to Yarmouth, where the Russians startled the
townspeople by drinking the oil from the street lamps. In time,
the Tsar’s soldiers were transferred to winter quarters in the
remote Channel Islands.”?
  19. The foreign secretary was especially irked by the fact that subsidy payments,
which had begun in June, were based on the assumption that Korsakoff’s army actually
numbered 45,000. At the moment he chose not to make an issue of the overpayment.
Instead, he ordered Whitworth to persuade Paul to bring the army up to 45,000
(Grenville to Whitworth, August 1, 1799, FO 65/44). Paul admitted the justice of the
complaint, but explained that he had no more troops to spare. Instead, he proposed to
attach to Korsakoff’s command a small Russian force of about 10,000 under General
Rehbinder which had been sent to aid Naples. This would bring the total to about
35,000.
  Grenville accepted this offer, but noted that it left two problems yet unsolved. First,
the overpayment of the preparation money and the monthly subsidies begun in June.
This overpayment could be deducted from the postwar debt Britain had agreed to pay.
Second, Grenville demanded that all future subsidies be paid on the basis of an actual
monthly muster of Korsakoff's and Rehbinder’s troops (Grenville to Whitworth,
November, 1799, FO 65/45). The Tsar vigorously opposed this since it would result in a
steady decrease    of the monthly subsidy (Whitworth   to Grenville, September 24, 1799,
FO 65/44). No satisfactory solution to either of these problems was ever reached. In a
small way, this disagreement contributed to the deterioration of Anglo-Russian relations
which marred the closing months of 1799.
  20. Fortescue’s account of the invasion (British Army, IV, 639-710) should be
supplemented      by A. B. Piechowiak,   “The   Anglo-Russian     Expedition   to Holland   in
1799,” Slavonic and East European Review,       41 (1962-1963),    182-195. It is impossible
to disagree with the latter’s conclusion that the failure of the expedition “was due to
military mismanagement preceded by political misconception” (p. 190). See also John A.
Lukacs, “Russian Armies in Western Europe; 1799, 1814, 1917,” American Slavic and
East European Review, 13 (1954), 319-337.
                                          a
                                                               1)


                                                                          BALTIC       SEA
        NORTH       SEA
                                                                    Eee §S Augen
                                                              STRALSUM

                                                 HAMBURG



            ALKMAAR °
                                                                         ° BERLIN




 BOULOGNE                                             JENA °




                                                                                AUSTERLITZ       °



                                         ULM
                                                                                        VIENNA
                                                          HOHE} LINDE: N

                                               L. Constance




               GENEVA

       LYONS    ©
                                                         o VERONA
                                       °M/ILAN
                                                     oMANTUA


                          VOLTR/   ©
                                                                                   b
                                                                     ADRIATIC    SY
                                                                                SEA


2. Campaign Area of the Second Coalition
                             The Second Coalition


  Disaster of a different sort befell the Russian armies in central
Europe. In August Rimsky-Korsakoff’s corps reached Switzerland
and joined the Austrians under the Archduke Charles. On the
approach of Masséna’s army, the Archduke withdrew, leaving his
allies to defend Zurich as best they could. Masséna fell on the
Russians and mercilessly drove them back to Schaffhausen.
Meanwhile, Suvoroff’s men were making their way northward
through the Alpine passes in what was probably the most heroic
undertaking of the entire war. Only on reaching Muotta did
Suvoroff learn that he could expect no help from Korsakoff. The
position of the Russians was now desperate. Deserted by the
Austrians, who either could not or would not supply them with
food and ammunition, the Tsar’s army was in no condition to
encounter Masséna. Suvoroff therefore decided that he must avoid
the enemy by turning to the East, even though this would force
his men to travel the dread Panixer pass. On October 8 what
remained of the exhausted Russian force finally straggled into
Chur. Burning with resentment at Austria’s treatment, Suvoroff
left Switzerland behind him and went into winter quarters on the
north shore of Lake Constance.?!
   Grenville -was undaunted by the collapse of operations in
Holland and Switzerland and at once began to salvage from its
remnants     the   materials     needed      to undertake     a new     campaign.
Austria’s failure to aid the Russians filled him with “rage and
despair”; the Hofburg’s treachery was unforgivable.2? The next
campaign must not depend on Hapsburg cooperation for suc-
cess.2? Victory could still be won if Russia was willing to pour
forth her manpower. The Tsar’s troops now wintering in the
Channel Islands would join with British units in the spring for an
invasion of Britanny. Reinforcements should be sent from Russia
to swell the battered armies of Korsakoff and Suvoroff to between
70,000 and 100,000 men. If all went as planned, France would
soon be forced to defend herself against invaders in both Brittany

  21. Lobanov-Rostovsky, Russia and Europe, pp. 43-64. The 1799 campaign ruined
Suvoroff’s health. The Tsar turned against him, and he died in St. Petersburg the
following May. The British minister, Whitworth, was the only dignitary to attend his
funeral.
  22. Grenville to Vorontzoff, September 14, 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V,
400.
 23. Grenville to Dundas, October 19, 1799, ibid., V, 487.


                                         123
                                    1799-1801


and Franche Comté. To help Paul carry out his part in this grand
design, the Cabinet proposed to give him £3,500,000 during the
coming year. Illconceived and unrealistic as these plans were,
Grenville ordered Whitworth to present them at St. Petersburg as a
firm offer. The foreign secretary never seemed to doubt that the
Tsar would be both willing and able to agree.7+
   Paul’s displeasure with the failure of the Dutch invasion was
trivial in comparison to his rage on learning of the Hofburg’s
perfidy.2 The quarrel over Sardinia had already damaged his faith
in Austria, and he now held her responsible for the debacle which
had befallen him in Switzerland. Late in October he renounced his
alliance with Vienna and swore that he would never again
cooperate with her. Paul assured Whitworth that he would remain
at war with France, but only in alliance with Great Britain.
   By the time London learned of this decision, the Cabinet was
having serious misgivings about the value of the Anglo-Russian
entente. If Paul meant that Britain must work with him to the
exclusion of Austria, Grenville doubted whether the government
should agree. What had happened during the last few weeks to
lessen the value of that Russian cooperation for which the foreign
secretary had offered £3,500,000 a year? Recently, Pitt, Grenville,
and Dundas had been studying the reports on the Dutch
expedition and from them they concluded that the fighting
quality of the Russians had been grossly overrated.2” At the same
time, dispatches arrived from British agents which described in
glowing terms the increasing effectiveness and morale of the
Imperial armies. The movement of the Austrians toward the lower
Rhine suggested that the Hofburg might at last be ready to fight
for the freedom of the Low Countries.”8
   Grenville prepared new instructions for Whitworth on November
 12, greatly modifying those sent to him two weeks before. The


   24. Grenville to Whitworth, November 1, 1799, FO 65/45. The Cabinet had approved
this war plan on October 26. See Minute of the Cabinet, October 26, 1799, Unpublished
George III Letters, IX, 307-308.
  25. Paul was frankly unhappy with the selection of the Duke of York to command the
Dutch expedition. See F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, IX, 429.
  26. Whitworth to Grenville, October 27, 1799, FO 65/44; Paul I to S. Vorontzoff,
October 15 [0.s.], 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V1, 35-36.
  27. Pitt to Grenville, November 21, 1799, ibid., VI, 35-36.
  28. Wm. Wickham to Grenville, December 13, 1799, ibid., VI, 72-74.


                                          124
                            The Second Coalition


latest British war plans assumed that Austria and Russia would
continue to work together in the coalition. Referring to his
previous offer of a £3,500,000 subsidy for the Tsar, the foreign
secretary made clear that “You are therefore to consider the
whole of these Instructions as made void by any event which
might arise in the meanwhile to separate that Power [Austria]
from the General System which it has hitherto pursued in concert
with Russia and England.””? If the Tsar carried through his threat
to break with Vienna, Austria would probably be driven to make
peace with the enemy. Even if that did not happen, Britain did not
want to be forced to choose between Vienna and St. Petersburg.
    In the best of times life for a British envoy at the Russian court
was difficult enough, but the assignment given Whitworth by
London made his situation unbearable. Paul’s instability grew
almost daily, and it was usually unsafe for anyone to discuss the
war with him. In such a climate, Whitworth needed all the courage
he could command to bring London’s latest policy statement
before the Tsar. Paul’s reaction was unexpectedly temperate. Since
Britain attached such importance to Austrian support, he would
continue his alliance with the Hofburg on two conditions: Thugut
must be dismissed and Austria would have to agree to a status quo
ante territorial settlement in Italy.2}
   This decision put the British Cabinet in the very position it was
most anxious to avoid. Austria would never accept the Tsar’s
demands,     and Britain would       be forced to choose between
cooperation with Russia or Austria. Early in February the Cabinet
reached a decision: plans for extensive military cooperation with
the Tsar were canceled. The subsidies due under the 1798 treaty
for the service of Korsakoff’s army would be paid in full, but
Britain would continue the 1799 agreement only if the Tsar agreed
to allow his troops now in the Channel Islands to be used in forays
against the French coast. Should Paul resent Britain’s decision to
strengthen her ties with Austria, rather than Russia, Whitworth
was to tell him that London must use its money “‘in the support of
that Power [Austria] which alone continues to act offensively and

  29. Grenville to Whitworth, November 12, 1799, FO 65/45.
  30. Grenville to Whitworth, November 23, 1799, FO 65/45.
  31. Whitworth to Grenville, November 28, December 5, 1799, FO 65/45; Paul I to S.
Vorontzoff, December 2 [0.s.], 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V1, 109-110.


                                       125
                                    1799-1801


vigorously against the irreconcilable Enemies of His Majesty & of
the General tranquillity of Europe.”*?
  This only rubbed salt into the Tsar’s wounds, and he rejected
with contempt the suggestion that his soldiers be employed in
assaults on Brittany. Orders were issued for the immediate recall
of Russian troops abroad. By April 1800 they were all once more
in their homeland and the British alliance was at an end.
Inevitably, Whitworth was the target for Paul’s scorn and he was
soon declared persona non grata. Relief for the harassed emissary
finally came in the form of a recall from Grenville, made sweeter
by announcement of his elevation to the Irish peerage as Baron
Whitworth of Newport Pratt.°3
  All that now remained was for Britain to close the Russian
subsidy accounts under the treaties of 1798 and 1799. Monthly
payments were made until the Tsar’s troops all returned to their
country.*4 Still to be settled was the problem of the postwar debt,
which the 1798 treaty obliged Britain to pay. Russia insisted on
receiving the full amount due, but the Treasury contended that
the overpayment of subsidies for Korsakoff’s armies first be
deducted. Disagreement on this matter was acrimonious and the
issue was not finally settled until 1802 when, out of deference to
the new Tsar, Alexander I, Britain offered £263,000. The re-
mittance of that sum in 1 802-1803 finally closed the account. *

  On the same day the Foreign Office notified Whitworth that
Britain’s war union with Russia was at an end, dispatches were
sent to Vienna with an offer of £1,600,000 during 1800. Thanks
to the Tsar’s conduct, London and Vienna were obliged to end the
quarrel which had kept them apart for nearly three years. The

  32. Grenville to Whitworth, February 8, 1800, FO 65/46.
  33. Whitworth’s recall ended eleven years of service at the Russian capital. During the
brief period of peace which followed the Treaty of Amiens he served as British minister
to France. He was finally given an English peerage and enjoyed it until his death in 1825.
   34. Charles Long to George Hammond [?], July 29, 1800, FO 65/47.
   35. Lord Hawkesbury to Lord St. Helens, June 5, 1802, FO 65/50.
  *Between June 1799 and June 1800 the Treasury paid £1,934,459 in subsidies to
Russia to cover Britain’s obligations under the treaties of 1798 and 1799. This does not
include £263,000 paid as a postwar debt in 1802-1803. However, it does include the cost
of the Russian transports arranged for in the 1799 agreement. It also includes
commissions   to the banking firms which handled the subsidy, as well as miscellaneous
charges. Excluding these extra charges, where they can be determined, subsidy payments
under both treaties were as follows:
                                  The Second Coalition


future of the coalition now depended on whether they would be
able to create a partnership of trust to carry on the war.
   Austria’s refusal to ratify the 1797 loan treaty was as repre-
hensible as Pitt’s insistence that there could not otherwise be any
cooperation    between    the two governments.°6 Thugut’s inex-
plicable perversity greatly annoyed Grenville, especially when
compounded by the Austrian’s quarrel with Russia in the summer
of 1799. “The thing that perplexes me most,” the foreign
secretary wrote his brother, “‘in this and in every other part of my
business is the conduct of Thugut. If he were paid to thwart all
Our measures, and to favour those of France, he could not do it
more effectually.”37 For some time the Foreign Office had been
less than satisfied with Sir Morton Eden’s conduct of the Vienna
mission. Eden was not by nature a forceful person and he had
fallen under Thugut’s influence. In June 1799 he was allowed to
retire from the service and Lord Minto was named to take his
place.38 The foreign secretary reminded the new envoy that a


       Treaty of 1798 (paid by Harman and Hoare)                 £     796,938
       Treaty of 1799 (paid by Thornton and Smalley)                 1,126,258
                 ;                                               £1,923,196
The payments made each year by both banks were as follows:
       1799               £1,386,070
       1800                  $37,126
       1801                     none
       1802                  200,000
       1803                   63,000
  The data on which these calculations are based is as follows: C. Long to George
Hammond, September 20, 1800, FO 65/47; Harman and Hoare to C. Long, September
18, 1800, FO 65/47; An Account of subsidies paid by Thornton and Smalley, August
23, 1800, FO 65/47. Treasury remittances to both banks are recorded in the King’s
Warrant Books as follows: Ty. 52/85, 125, 137. Payment of the postwar debt in
1802-1803 is recorded in the following volumes of the King’s Warrant Books: Ty. 52/87,
364; Ty. 52/88, 22.
  36. Eden    doubted   whether   Austria would   ever ratify the treaty; Eden   to Grenville,
April 10, 1799, FO 7/54.
  37. Lord Grenville to T. Grenville, July 16, 1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V,
147.
  38. Eden’s retirement was not without honor and profit. He received an Irish peerage
as Lord Henley, as well as an annual pension of £2,000.
  Sir Gilbert Elliot (1751-1814) was a Scot who had served as British viceroy in Corsica
between 1794 and 1796. There he had clashed with Sir John Moore, who found him
difficult and unreliable (Oman, Moore, p. 85 and passim). In 1798 Elliot was created
Earl Minto. His Viennese mission was his only diplomatic experience, and he is better
remembered for his service as governor-general of India between 1807 and 1813.


                                            Le
                                    1799-1801


restoration of good relations between the two governments hinged
upon Austria’s ratification of the disputed treaty. Privately, he
warned Minto to beware the blandishments of the Hapsburg court
and insisted that he be “very stout” with Thugut.*?
   Minto’s first dispatches from Vienna held out no hope for any
significant change in Hapsburg policy. Thugut was always willing
to discuss the 1797 treaty, but he showed no inclination to ratify
it. When pressed for an explanation, the Austrian statesman
declared that the terms of the 1797 loan had been grossly unfair.
Dutifully, Minto reported this to London but added his own belief
that “Baron Thugut appears not to have acquir’d the first elements
of the science of finance.’’ The Austrian minister’s chief interest
was in swallowing Italian land, and Minto correctly guessed that
this was “‘the pivot, on which their whole system would hereafter
turn.”’ Should Britain and Russia thwart this ambition, it might
throw the Hofburg into the arms of France.*° Here was the real
source of trouble between London and Vienna, rather than the
wretched 1797 loan treaty. Pitt and Thugut looked in opposite
directions; the one toward the liberation of the Low Countries,
the other toward gains in northern Italy.
  The breakup of the Austro-Russian alliance and the imminent
withdrawal of the Tsar’s armies from central Europe made it
impossible for the Hofburg to keep Britain at arm’s length much
longer. In November 1799 Thugut announced that a mercenary
force must be recruited in Germany to replace the Russian troops
who were soon to withdraw. Since Austria lacked the means to
recruit such a corps, she must look to Britain for the money.
Minto seized this opportunity to reopen the question of the 1797
treaty, a maneuver which led Thugut to end the conference. A few
days later, however, the British envoy was told that the Emperor
had at last decided to ratify the loan treaty of 1797. Almost at
once, Thugut explained to Minto the aid which Austria would
require of Britain in the coming year. To begin with, London must
hire 30,000 German         mercenaries to serve with the Imperial forces.
  39. Grenville to Minto, June, 1799, FO 7/56; Grenville to T. Grenville, September 29,
1799, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V, 431. Grenville himself was ready to be “very
stout” with Austria. During the summer of 1799 Starhemberg had the temerity to
request a subsidy for Austria. The foreign secretary cut him very short. See Grenville’s
account of the incident in his letter to Lord Mulgrave of August 3, 1799, ibid., V, 234.
  40. Minto to Grenville August 11 and 17, 1799, FO 7/56.


                                         128
                             The Second Coalition


She must also continue the payments on the loans of 1795 and
1797 and make fresh advances toward a third, which Austria
would undertake at the close of the war. The size of the advances
would depend on whether Britain was willing to allow Austria to
mobilize and pay the 30,000 mercenaries, the arrangement which
Thugut preferred. In that case, Vienna would require a total of
£2,400,000 for the year. Should Britain prefer to deal with the
mercenaries herself, then Vienna would need only £1,600,000. In
either case, all remittances must be made to Austria on the
Continent in specie.*!
   The bitter winter weather delayed the arrival of Thugut’s
proposal in London until early February 1800. It could scarely
have been more welcome. One month before, Pitt had spurned a
peace proposal offered by the new French government under
Bonaparte as First Consul. At the same time, there were serious
doubts whether Britain’s alliance with the Tsar could last much
longer. Since the future of the war clearly depended on coopera-
tion between London and Vienna, the Cabinet promptly accepted
the Austrian plan. Grenville informed Minto that Britain would
undertake the formation of the mercenary corps and advance
£1,600,000 to Austria during 1800. Although the foreign sec-
retary was delighted with Thugut’s decision to ratify the 1797
treaty, his suspicions had not been entirely removed. Minto must
insist on two conditions in return for Britain’s promise of support:
“The first that no negotiation shall be entered into nor overture
entertained except in common-—and the second that the Archduke
[commanding the Imperial forces] shall not be restrained by any
Secret Instructions from His Court from following up to the
utmost any Successes which He may obtain.’’” Later that month
Grenville and Starhemberg formally exchanged ratifications of the
1797 loan convention, thereby bringing that tiresome issue to an
end. Informing Minto of this, Grenville expressed an opinion
doubtless shared by all parties concerned:          “It is no small
satisfaction to me to reflect that I shall have no more to write, nor

  41. Minto to Grenville, November 12, December 1, 10, 13, 1799, FO 7/57. Minto
believed that the money hitherto used to help Russia would be better spent in employing
mercenaries. See Minto to Wm. Wickham, December 4, 1799, The Correspondence of the
Right Honourable William Wickham from the Year 1794. edited by his grandson, William
Wickham (London, 1870), II, 341.
  42. Grenville to Minto, February 8, 1800, FO 7/58.


                                         i DE,
                                    1799-1801

you to read, on the subject of the eternal dispute about the
ratification. We are now to begin a new score with our Austrian
friends and we must hope the best.’
  Since London had accepted Austria’s terms, a treaty of alliance
and subsidy should have been concluded at once. It was not.
Thugut’s fondness for intrigue drew him along a different course,
which confirmed all Grenville’s deep-seated fears. In March, when
Minto informed the Austrian leader that London had accepted his
proposal, the chancellor received this news with what seemed to
Minto ‘‘the greatest possible coldness in language and manner.”
Instead of £1,600,000 in advances, Thugut announced, Austria
would require £2,000,000. Certain that Austria was secretly
negotiating with France, Minto now charged Thugut with double-
dealing. The Austrian admitted that France had offered him
virtually a free hand in Italy.44 The heated exchange which
followed ended all hope of alliance between the two governments
for the moment. Grenville was not surprised when he learned of
this, for he had already predicted that “‘it will all end in a separate
Austrian peace, whenever Bonaparte feels himself sufficiently
pressed to think it worth his while to give the conditions, whatever
they are, which Thugut means to require.’
   In spite of this setback, Britain went ahead with the mobiliza-
tion of the German mercenaries. The handling of the many
complex problems involved required the service of an agent of
unusual capacity. Grenville knew the one man the government
could count on to undertake the mission with perfect confidence:
the onetime British envoy to the Swiss cantons, William Wickham.
Between 1795 and 1797, Wickham had served his country well in
Switzerland, both in his official capacity and secretly as chief
British espionage agent. His conduct won Grenville’s respect for
his ability and integrity. It also won him the hatred of the
Directory, which finally forced the Swiss to expel him. Wickham
returned to Switzerland in the summer of 1799, and the following
  43. Grenville to Minto, February 13, 1800, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue,
                                                                           V1, 124. On
February 17 Pitt informed the House of Commons that £2,500,000 would be needed to
carry out plans for cooperation with Austria during 1800. Only nineteen members voted
against giving the money. See Parliamentary History, XXXIV, 1438-1458.
  44. Minto to Grenville, April 10, 1800, FO 7/58. As early as February 23, 1800, Minto
warned Grenville that secret discussions were taking place between Vienna and Paris. See
Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, V1, 139-140.
  45. Grenville to Minto, March 28, 1800, ibid., VI, 186.


                                         130
                                    The Second Coalition


February he was instructed to recruit the 30,000 troops needed by
Austria. One million pounds were set aside for his use in hiring the
mercenaries.*®
  Wickham first applied to the Elector of Bavaria for 12,000
troops, and after much intrigue and haggling the Elector finally
agreed. By the treaty of March 16 Britain promised to pay the
Elector the traditional preparation money and to maintain the
troops while in her service. The Bavarian treaty was the prototype
for all other engagements Wickham made with the German states.
In one important respect it differed from the treaties for the
employment of mercenaries Britain had concluded during the First
Coalition: the Elector received no subsidy other than the specified
preparation money.*’ Early in April the Circle of Swabia under-
took to provide between 6,500 and 8,000 infantry on the same
terms. Agreements signed that same month with Wirttemberg and
Mayence added another 8,000 men to the growing corps. By the
time the summer ended, Wickham had sent more than 30,000
auxiliaries to serve with the Imperial army at British expense.*8
   Austria’s victory over Masséna at Voltri in April 1800 placed
Thugut in a truly enviable position. On one side, Britain was ready
to pay £1,600,000 to obtain an Austrian alliance. On the other,
France offered Vienna extensive lands in northern Italy. London
would have to pay dearly for her alliance with Austria, and early
in’ May Thugut announced that the price would be increased.
Britain must advance £2,000,000 to Austria during the present
year and agree to support Vienna’s plans for annexation of Italian
land.*”
  Under the circumstances, Grenville had to submit to this
blackmail. He informed Minto that Britain would agree to almost
any Austrian demands, provided only that she were really in
earnest about the war. “But while we remain in total uncertainty
 46. Grenville’s instructions       to Wickham,    February   11, 1800, are to be found in FO
74/29. William Wickham is one of the most interesting figures of this period, and he has
at last begun to attract the attention he deserves. See Harvey Mitchell, The Underground
War Against Revolutionary France: The Missions of William Wickham, 1794-1800
(Oxford,   1965),   and   W.   R.    Fryer,   Republic   or Restoration   in France,   1794-1797
(Manchester, Eng., 1965).
 47. Wickham    to Grenville, March 5, 1800, FO 74/29; Treaty with Bavaria, March 16,
1800, FO 74/29.
 48. Wickham to Grenville, April 5, 1800, FO 74/30; Wickham to Grenville, July 14,
1800, FO 74/31; Wickham to George Rose, August 4, 1800, FO 74/31.
 49. Minto to Grenville, May 2, 8, 1800, FO 7/58.


                                                 13
                                           TI 9OTSOL


as to the Main           Question     of Peace        and War and see the Austrian
Minister at the same moment professing a desire of intimate union
and concert with this Government and on the other hand carrying
on Negotiations with the common Enemy which he refuses to
communicate to you, all our Measures and Resolutions are
necessarily at a stand.’’ Even so, Minto was given no blank check;
he was to sign no treaty without London’s prior approval. As
proof of Britain’s goodwill, £150,000 would be remitted to the
Austrian treasury to replace military stores lost by the Imperial
forces in the spring.~?
  Austria’s response to the British offer was decided on the
battlefield. In May Bonaparte led 40,000 troops across the Alps
and within a month they had taken Milan. Thugut kept Minto at a
distance while awaiting the results of a counteroffensive launched
by the Imperial army. On June 14 the Austrians fell upon the
enemy with such force that at the end of the day a message was
sent to Vienna announcing a major victory. Although the French
were badly beaten, Bonaparte refused to yield the field of
Marengo. He returned to the attack and so badly mauled his
opponent that the Hapsburg commander was forced to sue for an
armistice.
  Marengo put an end to Thugut’s pirouette. On June 23 he and
Minto     hastily concluded an alliance agreeable to the terms
endorsed by Grenville one month before. In line with Minto’s
latest instructions it was understood that the pact would not be
binding until the Cabinet had approved it.>! The first of the three
  50. Grenville to Minto, May 13, 17, 21, 1800, FO 7/58.
  51. The treaty was composed of three separate agreements. The public treaty (FO
94/14) contained the important terms. The second instrument (FO 94/15) was a joint
declaration by the allies that they would take from France none of the lands which she
had held prior to the Revolution. The third (FO 94/16) was a secret article setting forth
in great detail the Italian territory Britain was ready to allow Austria to absorb. At
Thugut’s   insistence,   the   agreement    omitted   the fact that Austria bound   herself to
maintain the Imperial army at 200,000 men. See Minto to Grenville, September 7, 1800,
FO 7/60.
  The dating of the alliance presents a curious problem. The text of the treaty indicates
that it was signed on June 20, 1800, two days before the results of Marengo were known
at Vienna. From this it has been concluded that the outcome of the battle had no effect
on the conclusion of the treaty (Camb. Hist. Brit. For. Pol., 1, 296-297). However, on
June 24 Minto explained to Grenville that while the treaty was dated June 20, it had
actually been signed on June 23, the day after Vienna learned of Marengo (Chatham
Papers, vol. 339). There is a gap in Minto’s official correspondence in the Foreign Office
papers. None of Minto’s letters between May and September 1800 (including the
dispatch just cited) are to be found in the Austrian volumes of the Foreign Office papers.
The missing dispatches were discovered in vol. 339 of the Chatham Papers.

                                               1532
                             The Second Coalition


advances, amounting to £666,666:13:4, would be paid to Austria
only when Downing Street had authorized it. For the moment, the
Hofburg had no obligation to its ally and was free to do as it
wished. The Italian campaign was over, but a second Austrian
army was locked in combat with the enemy in southern Germany.
A Hapsburg victory there would cancel out the defeat she had
suffered at Marengo. Under the circumstances, Vienna might be
well advised to enter into peace discussions with France. A few
days after the Anglo-Austrian pact had been signed, Thugut
informed Minto that an emissary had been sent to Paris for this
purpose, although nothing was said about the instructions given
him. When the British minister expressed concern over Austria’s
action, Thugut assured him that the real purpose of the mission
was to gain time. Minto was not convinced.*
  Although the Cabinet shared Minto’s anxiety, it promptly
approved the convention with Austria. On July 17 Grenville
instructed Minto to pay the first installment of £666,666 due the
Hofburg. Whether the two remaining advances (due in September
and December) would be forthcoming depended upon Austria’s
future conduct. In the event Austria and France undertook a
peace negotiation, the foreign secretary hoped that Britain would
be invited to participate. Uncertain as to what Thugut would
finally do, Pitt had no alternative but to assume that the recent
alliance would hold fast. Minto’s treaty was presented to Parlia-
ment on July 18 and the Commons voted £1,500,000 to help
finance the government’s policy.*
  The Treasury encountered serious difficulty in remitting money
to the Continent during the summer of 1800. For seven years
England’s great volume of trade with Germany helped her meet
her war costs, but in 1799 the German money market collapsed
and British exports sagged dangerously. Heavy subsidy payments
to Russia in 1799-1800 reduced the volume of British credits in
Germany. By the spring of 1800 bills of exchange issued by British
agents on the Continent were being heavily discounted. Wickham,
for example, complained that the commercial paper he used to
pay for the mercenaries was being discounted at 10 percent and
more. Unless the government sent specie to Hamburg to cover
 52. Minto to Grenville, July 1, 1800, Chatham Papers, vol. 339.
 53. Grenville to Minto, July 17, 1800, FO 7/59; Minto to Grenville, August 7, 1800,
Chatham Papers, vol. 339; Parliamentary History, XXXV, 433-454.
                                        19333
                                     1799-1801

these bills, the discount rate would go even higher.°4 Pitt came to
the same conclusion. Over the stiff opposition of the Bank of
England, the prime minister ordered specie sent to Hamburg for
Wickham and Minto to use. Although Spanish silver made up the
larger part of these shipments, the government was obliged to ship
guineas as well.°> For the first time, the legend of Pitt’s guineas
had some basis in fact. Fortunately, a rapid increase in Britain’s
export trade with the Continent soon ended the exchange
problem—at least for the moment.>°
  The collapse of Austria’s campaign in Germany settled the fate
of her alliance with Britain. By the end of June, Munich had fallen
to the enemy and the war was over. The best that Britain could
now hope was that she might join her ally in arranging a general
peace with France. Since the future was so uncertain, Minto was
told to delay paying the second advance to Austria until orders
were sent from London.>’ Thugut had been driven from power in
the wake of Austria’s debacle, and his position was now held by
Count Louis Cobenzl, formerly Austria’s minister to Russia. Early
in November 1800 Cobenzl wrote directly to Grenville, explaining
that so far he had resisted Bonaparte’s demand that the Emperor
conclude a separate peace. However, he warned that the war could
begin whenever the French chose to renounce the armistice.%®
Within less than a month this prediction was borne out.
  Cobenzl’s good faith made a deep impression on the Cabinet.
Since France clearly did not want peace, Britain must stand firm
by her ally. In this spirit, Minto was directed to pay the second
advance to Austria immediately upon the renewal of hostilities.>?
These instructions were dated December          2. That same day,
General Moreau completed his preparation for the French attack
on the Imperial army at Hohenlinden, scheduled to begin at dawn

 54. Wickham to Grenville, March 26, 1800, FO 74/29.
  55. On May 9, 1800 Pitt sent a sharply worded letter to the governor of the Bank
reminding him that “The Expediency of making any remittance and the Amount to
which it should be made are Points which I conceive to rest solely with the Direction of
the Government, and the Legislature, and no part of the Responsibility which I consider
thrown upon the Court [of the Bank] (Chatham Papers, vol. 195). The export of specie
was handled by Thornton’s bank. The government’s payments are recorded in the King’s
Warrant Book, Ty. 52/85, 7; Ty. 52/86, 4, 109-110. See also Samuel Thornton to Charles
Long, September 24, 1800, FO 7/60.
 56. Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz, British Economy, I, 34-35.
  57. Grenville to Minto, October 31, 1800, FO 7/61.
 58. Cobenzl to Grenville, November 8, 1800, FO 7/61.
 59. Grenville to Minto, December 2, 1800, FO 7/61.
                                         134
                            The Second Coalition


the next day. In that battle, the Austrians, together with
Wickham’s mercenaries, were badly beaten. The total collapse of
the Hapsburg war effort on all fronts forced Cobenzl to yield to
the inevitable. In February 1801 a spearate treaty of peace
between France and Austria was signed at Lunéville.
   The circumstances     leading to Austria’s surrender made it
impossible for the Cabinet to blame her for the decision to
negotiate separately. Even before the Lunéville treaty was con-
cluded, Grenville advised Minto that the ministers considered
Austria guiltless: ““The necessity under which the Emperor has
acted, being unquestionably such as fairly to come within the
description of those circumstances which release a Power from any
engagements of this Nature however direct or positive.’©° On the
other hand, the foreign secretary considered the payment of the
second advance due Austria a waste of money, and he explained
the simple logic of the matter to Minto: “It surely cannot be
contended that it would be the same thing either in principle or in
effect if, now that Austria is about to conclude an immediate
peace, and when this aid is consequently no longer wanted for
exertions in War, nor can be so applied, Great Britain left alone in
the contest were obliged to distract and divide Her efforts, and to
diminish her own defence by furnishing in any shape pecuniary
relief to the finances of Her Ally no longer engaged in the War.” If
Minto’s judgment on this matter was muddied by generous
impulses, let him remember that Britain was still at war.®!
   Britain’s brief and unsuccessful reunion with Austria cost her
just over £2,000,000. Nearly two thirds of this went to pay for the
mercenary     corps created by William Wickham.         Aside from
Britain’s gift of £150,000 to replace Austria’s loss of war
materials, the Hofburg received only £666,666:13:4. This was the
first and only advance which Britain made under the short-lived
alliance of June 1800. Since Vienna was never asked for re-
payment, it may be regarded as a direct subsidy.®


 60. Grenville to Minto, January 13, 1801, FO 7/62.
 61. Grenville to Minto, January 30, 1801, FO 7/62.
  62. A total of £2,083,333:6:8 was remitted by the Treasury to Thornton’s bank
during 1800-1801 (King’s Warrant Book, Ty. 52/85, 7; Ty. 52/86, 4, 109-110). This
covered payments to Austria and the expenses of Wickham’s mercenaries.
                Austria             German princes and army expenses
   1800        £816,666                       £1,066,667
   1801                                          200,000
                                        SIS
                                  1799-1801

   In addition to subsidizing Prussia, Russia, and Austria during the
first two coalitions, Britain also had to assist her Portuguese ally.
While this program was never more than a matter of secondary
importance, its examination is worthwhile. In several important
respects it foreshadows the vastly more ambitious policy Britain
was to follow in the Peninsula after 1807.
   In 1793 Portugal and Spain joined forces to make war on the
French Republic, but the allies soon had their fill of fighting and
two years later Spain made peace with the enemy. Given a free
choice, the Portuguese Regent, D. Jofo, would happily have done
the same. However, the Directory was unwilling to allow Portugal
to withdraw quietly into a state of neutrality; she must be
subjugated and her alliance with England dissolved. France drew
Spain into her plans in 1796, and shortly thereafter the two
powers agreed to partition Portugal. Driven to distraction by
visions of the enemy’s hordes massed along Portugal’s frontiers,
the Regent appealed to Britain to save him from destruction.
   Both treaty obligation and self-interest prompted London to
answer this appeal. The alliance of 1793 had renewed all of
Britain’s obligations toward Portugal. Moreover, she simply could
not afford to allow her ally to fall into enemy hands. The forced
withdrawal of the British navy from the Mediterranean in 1796
underlined Portugal’s strategic value as a base for future British
military operations in that area. It was also vital for Britain to
retain access to Portugal’s harbors, which the French were so
anxious to close. England’s growing textile industry depended on
the purchase of Brazilian cotton at Lisbon. The rapid increase of
trade with Portugal in recent years was another compelling reason
for keeping those ports open.©
   In July 1796 the Portuguese minister in London asked for arms
and war supplies to outfit 16,000 troops. Since gunpowder and
saltpeter were virtually nonexistent at Lisbon, Britain was urged to
give as much of both as she could spare. The Regent also hoped
that 12,000 British troops could be sent to help the Portuguese
army defend the kingdom. Inspired perhaps by the Austrian loan

  63. Alan K. Manchester, British Preéminence   in Brazil: Its Rise and Decline (Chapel
Hill, N. C., 1933), pp. 52-53.
                                  The Second Coalition


Table 1. Military supplies to Portugal and credit to her agents, 1796-1801°

Year    Muskets     Carbines   Pistols   Swords   Powder      Saltpeter   Cannon     Credit
                                                  (Barrels)    (Tons)

1796     12,000        3,300   1,300      3,300       -         200         =
1797        -          7,000   2,000      6,000     4,000       200         20     £ 10,009
1798          500       -        ~          -       4,228        -           -      103,004
1799     16,000        1,000     -        5,000     D2           -           =       87,675
1800      3,000         -        ~          -        -           =          =        10,000
1801       ~            ~        -          -        -          100         =           =

Total    31,500      11,300    3,300     14,300    10,000       500         20     £210,688
                                                  (900,000
                                                    Ibs.)

  > Compiled on the basis of data contained in two reports from the Ordnance Office to
the Foreign Office: that for 1800, dated December 27, 1800, is found in FO 63/34; that
compiled in the following year is found in FO 63/38. The only aid in money paid
directly to Portugal was the £200,000 subsidy in 1801. The King’s Warrant Book (Ty.
5$2/84, 199-202) shows that in March 1798, £459,205 was paid by the Treasury to the
Ordnance Office, the Paymaster General to the Army, and the Navy Treasury for the use
of British forces in Portugal. The credit given to Portuguese agents was to enable them to
purchase materials for direct shipment to Lisbon.


of the previous year, Portugal announced that she too wished to
borrow money in London.
  Lord Grenville complied       with Portugal’s demand for war
materials immediately. Within a few weeks the first consignment
of arms, drawn from Britain’s own arsenals, was on its way to
Lisbon. By the end of the year Britain had sent its ally 12,000
muskets, 3,300 carbines, 1,300 pistols, 3,300 swords, and 200
tons of saltpeter. Additional shipments were made in the next year
to insure that the Portuguese would want for nothing. (See Table
1S)
  The dispatch of a British army to Portugal proved more difficult
and it was not until November that Grenville announced that
6,000 men would soon leave for the Tagus. One third of this force
would be drawn from garrisons at Gibraltar and Corsica, while the
remainder would be made up of what the foreign secretary
described (with great license) as “the choicest Foreign Regiments

  64. R. Walpole to Grenville, July 13, 1796, FO 63/22; Almeida to Grenville, July 27,
1796, FO 63/22; Grenville to Walpole, August 24, 1796, FO 63/23.
                                      1799-1801


in His Majesty’s Service’—that is, units of French émigrés.
Command of the army was assigned to General Charles Stuart,
who was ordered to place himself at the disposal of the Portuguese
commander-in-chief.© The first troops reached Lisbon in February
1797, but it was June before the force was complete.®
  Raising a Portuguese loan in London presented serious problems
which were never solved. Money was scarce in the City and
Portugal’s reputation so poor that even such a speculator as Walter
Boyd refused to manage the Regent’s loan. Quite possibly, Pitt
privately discouraged Portugal’s efforts in view of the effect which
such a loan might have on England’s troubled money market.®/
The Bank Crisis of 1797 put a halt to the project, but in July Pitt
persuaded the Commons to vote £500,000 for Portugal’s service.
This would cover the cost of supplies already sent to Lisbon and
enable the government to provide such future help as might seem
desirable.®8
  The Cabinet’s policy was to defend Portugal, rather than launch
an offensive campaign against France and Spain. Within limits,
that policy was successful for five years. The role of the British
commander in Portugal was especially difficult. The French émigré
regiments under his command gave Stuart nothing but trouble,
and he bluntly declared, “I never in the course of my service saw
two regiments more disgraceful to the British name.” Orders sent
from the Horse Guards were usually confusing and sometimes
contradictory. Something of Stuart’s feeling is reflected in a letter
he sent to Dundas stating, “I am determined to be guided by your
instructions so long as they are within the reach of my
comprehension.” More important than these vexations was the
uncertainty of the British commander’s position relative to the
Portuguese army. Although Portugal was a small country, its army
enjoyed the luxury of three commanding officers, no one of
whom was accepted by his colleagues as the supreme commander.
Stuart’s unhappy experience would lead Britain, during the

  65. Grenville to Walpole, November 25, 1796, FO 63/23.
  66. Walpole to Grenville, February 1, 1797, FO 63/24; Fortescue, British Army, IV,
601-602.
  67. Walter   Boyd   to Almeida,   September   6, 1796, FO   63/23. As early as January 4,
1796, Pitt wrote Boyd urging him to discourage Portugal’s efforts to borrow money
(Chatham Papers, vol. 102).
  68. Journal of the House of Commons,      LII, 715-716.


                                            1S.)
                             The Second Coalition


Peninsular War, to insist that a British officer be named as the
Portuguese generalissimo.©?
   In spite of Britain’s generous help, relations between London
and Lisbon were often troubled. The Regent came to see himself
as a pawn in the struggle between England and the Directory. He
was naturally anxious to free himself from the tangle. The
Anglo-French peace negotiation at Lille in 1797 encouraged Jodo
to undertake discussions of his own with the enemy. The result
was a secret peace treaty signed at Paris in August, in which
Portugal agreed to close her ports to Britain. When Grenville
learned of this he ordered his agent at Lisbon to persuade the
Regent to withhold ratification of the pact.’? Jodo reluctantly
disavowed the Paris agreement to the great annoyance of France.
Now Portugal was more than ever bound to Britain’s cause.
  The meagre contribution Portugal made to her own defense
irritated Grenville even more than the unceasing demands of her
envoy for British arms and troops.’! Convinced that the Regent’s
lassitude had now gone beyond all reasonable limits, the foreign
secretary halted the flow of war materials to Portugal early in
1798. He explained his decision in straightforward terms: “But as
our Own pfessure increases, and while on the other hand all
exertions of the Portugueze Government continue so languid as to
indicate a fixed persuasion & certain expectation of Peace, the
drain upon this Country must cease.”’? At once the Regent gave
assurances of greater energy in the future. This pledge apparently
satisfied London, for the following July shipments of arms were
resumed. Between July 1798 and February 1800 when British aid
ended, Portugal was sent 19,000 muskets, 1,000 carbines, 5,000
swords and quantities of gunpowder which brought to 900,000
pounds the total sent since 1796.
  The successful opening of the War of the Second Coalition
strengthened the belief that Portugal was safe for the future, and
Grenville ordered a reduction of the British garrison there.”
However, the picture changed completely by the close of 1800.


  69. Fortescue, British Army, IV, 602-604.
  70. Grenville to Walpole, August 18, 1797, FO 63/25.
  71. Cornwallis to Grenville, March 19, 1798, FO 63/27.
  72. Grenville to Walpole, April 17, 1798, FO 63/27.
  73. Grenville to Walpole, June 18, 1799, FO 63/30.


                                          aye
                                1799-1801


Now that France had triumphed over Austria, the Regent feared
that Bonaparte’s forces would certainly strike at Portugal. Gren-
ville minimized the possible danger of a Franco-Spanish invasion.
So far as Madrid was concerned, he declared, ““The means which
the Spanish Government possesses for carrying on such a War, are
not of a nature to create any very serious alarm to any
Government which was possessed of more energy than that of
Portugal.’’’4 In October 1800 the Cabinet had to decide whether to
use its available manpower in the Mediterranean to defend
Portugal or drive the French from Egypt. A month later, the
Egyptian expedition was decided on and all British troops were
withdrawn from Portugal except the émigré regiments. >
   This decision sealed Portugal’s fate, and the following February
a Franco-Spanish army poured across her borders. Renewed
appeals for help fell on deaf ears in London. Given the vast
quantity of arms sent to Lisbon since 1796, the Portuguese ought
to be able to do something to defend themselves. In effect, the
government had abandoned Portugal in order to drive the enemy
from Egypt. Early in 1801 the new foreign secretary, Lord
Hawkesbury, explained the government’s policy to his envoy at
Lisbon. The Regent should make peace with France on the best
terms he could obtain. If Portugal continued the struggle,
however, Britain would give her a £300,000 subsidy and support
the Regent’s efforts to borrow another £500,000 in London.’
Hawkesbury was as good as his word. In May the House of
Commons voted £300,000 for Portugal, of which £200,000 was
remitted before the Regent’s defense collapsed. No arms were
sent, but one hundred tons of saltpeter was delivered at Lisbon in
the spring of 1801.77
   Without British troops to help him, the Regent had to make
peace with his enemies; the Treaty of Badajoz (June 6, 1801)
ended the war and compelled Portugal to shut her ports to Britain.
 Bonaparte’s refusal to ratify this agreement prompted Lisbon to
 beg Britain for troops. Hawkesbury had nothing to offer beyond
 the suggestion that the Regent transfer his government and navy,

  74. Grenville to John H. Frere, October 1800, FO 63/34.
  75. Grenville to Frere, December 15, 1800, FO 63/34.
  76. Hawkesbury to Frere, February 27, 1801, FO 63/36.
  77. Parliamentary History, XXXV, 1420-1427; King’s Warrant Book, Ty. 52/86, 380.


                                      140
                             The Second Coalition


under British protection, to Brazil and carry on the war from
there.’8 France’s decision to ratify the Badajoz treaty saved Joao
from having to take action. Hawkesbury continued to regard
removal of the Portuguese government to Brazil as eminently
desirable, and he returned to the idea in 1803 when Portugal was
again threatened by France.’? Four years were to pass before
circumstances forced the Regent to accept this recommendation
and abandon Lisbon for Rio de Janeiro.
   Several features of considerable importance mark the history of
this early British aid program for Portugal. The shipment of arms
is the first instance of such British aid to her allies. During the last
years of the Napoleonic war, the allied powers were to regard the
arms given by Britain as important as her financial assistance.
General Stuart’s difficulties in establishing effective liaison with
the Portuguese commanders foreshadows in small the problem
which Sir John Moore and Wellesley encountered in the Peninsula
ten years later. Finally, it is worth noting that as early as 1801
Hawkesbury saw the wisdom of moving the Regent’s government
to Brazil. Experience proved that without a major British army in
Portugal the country could not be successfully defended against
the French and Spanish. Since Britain could not assume a large
military    commitment         in Portugal,      she   must      think   in terms    of
getting the Regent to Rio. In 1807 George Canning and Lord
Strangford saw the question in exactly the same light as it had
appeared to Hawkesbury.
   The experience of the Second Coalition drove home the fact
that Britain must be ready to finance the war programs of all her
allies. Pitt’s attempts to give shape and direction to that league by
granting or denying subsidies was a complete failure. No offer of
money was attractive enough to break the paralysis which had
gripped Berlin since the Peace of Basel. Only Russia responded to
Britain’s call for a concert with anything like the determination
required to gain victory. But even the Tsar could do nothing
without the £2,000,000 given him by Britain between 1799 and
1800. Distrust and a diversity of interests, symbolized by the
  78. Hawkesbury to Frere, July 14, 1801, FO 63/37.
  79. Writing to Lord R. S. Fitzgerald in October 1803, Hawkesbury recommended that
the Regent leave for Brazil. “This Proposition,” he explained, “would have the double
Effect not only of securing the Portugueze Settlements but under possible circumstances,
the Portugueze Navy against the designs of France” (FO 63/42).

                                           141
                            LPO 101


unratified loan convention of 1797, held Britain and Austria apart
until they alone were left to carry on the war. Even then the
British offer of alliance and subsidy went begging at Vienna for
nearly six months while Thugut used it as a counter in his secret
parleys with France. Only Austria’s defeat at Marengo finally
brought him to accept the British proposal. By then the game was
up. The ineptitude of Austria’s commanders gave the victory to
France in the last days of the war. The mercenary corps, with
which Britain had strengthened the Austrian army, was wasted as
completely as the £1,200,000 its service cost the Treasury.
  Circumstances alone saved Britain from the necessity of paying
more than one of her allies at a time between 1797 and 1801. By
now, the pattern was well established, however. With their own
treasuries empty, the European powers expected to be helped by
Britain. Should there ever be a third coalition, no allied army
would take the field without British money.
  The Portuguese aid program represented Britain’s first attempt
to meet an ally’s deficiencies in war materials. In the end, Portugal
was left to her fate because no British troops could be spared to
protect her. The years of unsuccessful war which lay ahead would
exhaust both the coffers and the arsenals of the major powers,
leaving them dependent on Britain for muskets as well as money.
   Although the Second Coalition was a failure, Britain at least
emerged from it with new glory for her arms. Abercrombie’s
Egyptian campaign restored to the army some of the luster it had
lost in the Low Countries. The navy made good its claim to
supremacy in the Battle of the Nile and went on to confirm it by
its victory at Copenhagen. Due in part to these successes, Britain
was in a favorable position to seek peace through negotiation by
1801. But Pitt was to have no share in it. His health gave way in
the autumn of 1800 under the strain of unsuccessful war and the
vexing problems of Irish union. The tangled question of Catholic
emancipation placed him in an impossible position with George
III, and early in 1801 he announced his decision to resign.




                                142
                                      Vil
                        THE       THIRD         COALITION




If it was true, as Lord Rosebery said, that Henry Addington
“carried into politics the indefinable air of a village apothecary
inspecting the tongue of the State,” it could be argued that in
1801 Britain sorely needed the services of a skilful physician.!
Eight years of unremitting war had left the patient in a state of
exhaustion. The new prime minister was confident of recovery
once the source of the trouble had been removed. Peace talks were
begun and finally led to a preliminary agreement in October 1801.
Britain was to restore most of her overseas conquests and hand
back the island of Malta to the Knights of St. John. In return, the
First Consul would recall his forces from Naples and Egypt and
promise to respect the neutrality of Portugal and the Ottoman
Empire.
  These terms were not universally approved in England. Some
thought Addington had given up too much in return for too little.
Lord    Grenville    was    one   of these, but Pitt observed that “if once
the question of peace or war is looked at only as a question of
terms, I am far from thinking that those now agreed to can, upon
the whole, be denied to be honourable and reasonably advanta-
geous.””” The nation’s crying need for peace outweighed concern
for the details, and in March 1802 the definitive Treaty of Amiens
was signed.
  During the months which followed, Addington was appalled by
the ruthless measures Bonaparte took to consolidate his position
  1. Lord Rosebery, Pitt (London, 1915), p. 230.
  2. Pitt to Grenville, October 5, 1801, Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, VII, 49. Pitt’s
opinion had changed by the time the definitive peace was concluded. See Malmesbury,
IV, 78-79.

                                          143
                                    1801-1505

of supremacy in Europe. The prime minister decided to sound out
Russia’s reaction to this new expansion of French power. In
October the foreign secretary prepared instructions for the British ,
minister at St. Petersburg, Sir John B. Warren.° “The system of
Ambition and Aggrandizement which has been manifested by the
French Government since the conclusion of the General peace... .,”
Hawkesbury explained, ‘“‘render it indispensable that the Inde-
pendent Powers of Europe should concur in some plan for
opposing a barrier against such Encroachments.” If Russia showed
any interest, Warren was to propose a defensive alliance which
Austria should be invited to join.4
   The climate at St. Petersburg in 1802 was unfavorable to this
call for joint action. Good relations between the two governments
had recently been restored, but the new tsar, Alexander, was in no
position to take any decisive action. After the experience of the
Second Coalition, Russian leaders wanted as little to do with
western Europe as possible. The chancellor, Count Alexander
Vorontzoff, was vaguely sympathetic with Warren’s proposal, but
confessed that Russia and Austria were powerless to oppose
France.°
   A few months later, the tension between London and Paris
reached new heights when it became clear that Bonaparte was
planning some move in the East. Addington therefore decided to
retain Malta and proposed that Britain and Russia jointly
guarantee Turkey against French aggression. For the second time,
Russia declined to cooperate with Britain.® Disappointed though
he was by the Tsar’s reaction, Addington was convinced that
Britain could afford no further delay. On May 18 he obtained
 from Parliament a declaration of war against France. For the better
part of another year, during which Britain fought alone, Adding-
ton served as war leader. This lack of allies was not the prime
minister’s fault; until 1804 there were simply no materials out of
which he could create a coalition against France.

  3. Sir John Borlase Warren (1753-1822) was a naval officer with a good war record. He
was sent to St. Petersburg in 1802, but found the service uncongenial. Shortly after the
outbreak of war he requested permission to return to sea.
 4. Hawkesbury to Warren, October 27, 1802, FO 65/51.
 5. Warren to Hawkesbury, November 17, 27, 1802, FO 65/51.
 6. Hawkesbury to Warren, February 1, 1803, and Warren to Hawkesbury,         March 25,
1803, FO 65/52.


                                          144
                                The Third Coalition


   Even the most perceptive observer of the European scene would
have found little evidence of any spirit of continental resistance.
 In the Peninsula there was no hint of that national fury which
would some day flame forth against Bonaparte. Austria had been
plunged into a kind of stupor by the military disasters of the
Second     Coalition,     and     she   now     stood   helpless and       confused   as
Bonaparte turned Switzerland and the Italian republics into vassal
states. When French troops seized Hanover, the British envoy at
Vienna angrily reported that ‘‘not even a remonstrance has been
made by the Court of Vienna to the French Government.’”’
Prussia was as firmly attached to the policy of neutrality as ever,
especially since Bonaparte was now in a position to dangle
Hanover before her eyes as a bribe. For several more years Prussia
was to remain in an uneasy state of equipoise while her leaders
pondered the riddle of Hanover.
   Regardless of the bleak prospects for success, Addington had to
promote a coalition against France. In the summer of 1803 he
made a third overture to St. Petersburg. If Russia would join with
Britain and at least one of the major German states, London
would provide her with subsidies at the same rate as during the
Second Coalition.® At the same time a firm proposal was sent to
Berlin: £250,000 would be given her as soon as she went to war
with the promise of a second payment of the same amount once
Bonaparte had been forced out of Hanover and across the Rhine.?
   Both British bids fell on fallow ground. The Russian chancellor
exactly caught the mood of his government when he observed
with brutal frankness: “It is not for us alone to leap into the
flames to save Hanover.”!9 At Berlin, the British minister saw so
little chance for success that he did not even present Hawkesbury’s
proposal. !! The hard fact was that no major power would even
consider alliance with Britain. The only subsidy paid by Adding-
  7. Arthur Paget to Hawkesbury, June 23, 1803, Paget Papers, II, 91-93.
  8. Hawkesbury to Warren, July 12, 1803, FO 65/53.
  9. Hawkesbury to F. J. Jackson, June 28, 1803, FO 64/63.
  10. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, X1, 71.
  11. Jackson to Hawkesbury, July 16, 1803, FO 64/63. Francis James Jackson
(1770-1814) was a career diplomat who went to Berlin in 1802. He remained there for
four years and was then sent as Britain’s representative to the United States. Francis’
brother, George Jackson, was with him at Berlin. For a vivid description of Frederick
William III, see George Jackson’s Diary for May 4, 1803, The Diaries and Letters of Sir
George Jackson, K. C. H., from the Peace of Amiens to the Battle of Talavera, ed. Lady
Jackson (London, 1872), I, 138.


                                          145
                                       1801-1805

ton was a small one to Naples to help strengthen her defenses
against the oncoming tide of French power.!2
  Prospects for a new coalition remained dim until evidence of
French ambition in the Balkans effected a change in Russia’s
attitude. The activities of French agents in Corfu and the Morea
finally aroused Russia’s fears, and in the autumn of 1803 a quarrel
broke out between the two powers over the status of the Ionian
Islands.!3 Symbolic of this reawakening of Russia’s interest in the
world outside was the entrance of Prince Adam Czartoryski into
the Tsar’s councils. Within a year the fiery young Pole succeeded
Count Alexander Vorontzoff as foreign minister. Convinced that
France seriously threatened Russia’s eastern interests, Czartoryski
argued warmly in favor of cooperation with Britain. In November
1803 Russia invited Britain to join her in diplomatic action against
France.!4
  Downing Street showed less interest in the Russian offer than
might have been expected. By now the Addington government was
suffering from those internal ills which soon would end its life.
Perhaps the Cabinet felt it was in no position to do more than
listen to what the Tsar had to propose. In discussing the matter
with Vorontzoff, the foreign secretary made quite clear that while
the cause of European unity was dear to Britain, the Tsar must
take responsibility for bringing the powers together. London was
ready to subsidize the allies on two conditions: first, that any
coalition      include both Austria and Prussia; and, second, that all
members        accept a status quo ante territorial settlement as their
common         objective. Hawkesbury would be ready to discuss the
question of subsidies for the allies in detail once the Tsar had won
agreement from the German powers on these points.»
  If the foreign secretary counted on mounting tension between
Paris and St. Petersburg to spur Russia on to greater efforts, his
judgment was sound. By the spring of 1804 Czartoryski was
rapidly winning the Tsar to the cause of European union.!© The
 12. On November 11, 1803 Hawkesbury authorized the British envoy at Naples, Hugh
ene i up to £170,000 from the military chest at Malta for the service of Naples

  13. Vernon    J. Puryear, Napoleon   and the Dardenelles   (Berkeley   and Los Angeles,
OSL) pane le
  14. A. Vorontzoff to S. Vorontzoff, November 20 [o.s.], 1803, FO 65/54.
  15. Hawkesbury to S. Vorontzoff, February 26, 1804, FO 65/54; Czartoryski to S.
Vorontzoff, April 30, 1804, FO 65/54.
  16. Czartoryski to S. Vorontzoff, March 20, 1804, Vorontsova, XV, 168-171.

                                           146
                                The Third Coalition


major obstacles in the way of success were the conditions set by
Hawkesbury. To insist that a new coalition include both Prussia
and Austria was unrealistic in the extreme. Prussia could not be
counted on at all, and, so far as Austria was concerned, she would
require a very generous British subsidy. Russia herself could not
possibly accept Hawkesbury’s demand that the allies agree on a
status quo ante territorial settlement.!”
  At the end of April Czartoryski drafted new instructions for
Vorontzoff in which he reviewed the difficulties involved in
forming a concert. The conditions Britain had imposed simply
could not be met. Would the foreign secretary reconsider the
matter?!8 By the time Czartoryski’s letter reached London, the
Addington government had fallen. It was, therefore, with Pitt that
Vorontzoff reopened the question of a new European concert
against what had just become the Napoleonic Empire.

   The problem of forming a new government in the spring of 1804
left Pitt with hardly any time for other business. His attempt to
bring Fox into the Cabinet was vetoed by the King and, as a direct
result, the Grenvilles went into opposition.!? As finally construc-
ted, the Cabinet was a poor one even by the standards of the day.
The selection of Lord Harrowby as foreign secretary was especially
unfortunate. Plagued by ill-health and melancholia, he had no
capacity for managing that important department. Grenville may
have been a difficult colleague at times, but Pitt soon had reason
to regret his absence from Downing Street. An even worse
appointment was that of Dundas (now Lord Melville) to head the
Admiralty; within a year, charges of financial irregularity drove
the genial pluralist from office.?° Except for the young Viscount
Castlereagh at the Board of Control, the ministers were a
   17. Czartoryski himself considered the status quo ante condition distasteful. His own
goals could not be achieved simply by setting the clock back. See Marian Kukiel,
Czartoryski and European Unity, 1770-1861 (Princeton, N. J., 1955), pp. 41-60.
   18. Czartoryski to S. Vorontzoff, April 30, 1804, FO 65/54. Writing privately to
Vorontzoff the same day, Czartoryski especially stressed the fact that “If war breaks out
again, [Britain] should intervene by the payment of subsidies to those powers who by
their strength and position, are alone capable of checking on land the torrent of the First
Consul’s ambition” (Vorontsova, XV, 180).
   19. During Addington’s ministry, Grenville and Fox had joined in an alliance which
Pitt hoped to respect by bringing both men into the government. The King’s opposition
to Fox obliged Grenville to remain in opposition with his ally.
   20. Pitt’s appointment of Charles Middleton (Lord Barham) to replace Melville at the
Admiralty was a fortunate one.
                                           147
                                     1801-1805

lackluster group with little to contribute. As a result, the prime
minister was obliged to handle more of the details of administra-
tion than should have been the case.
  A heavy concentration of French troops at Boulogne conjured
up the spectre of invasion which hung over England in the spring
of 1804. To meet this threat the new government hastily threw
together a scheme to expand the army. The plan was presented to
the Commons in June, and although the general purpose of the
measure was acceptable, many of its details encountered opposi-
tion. The bill was finally passed by a vote of 265 to 233, thereby
saving the new government by a narrow margin from defeat at the
 outset.
    . With the army bill successfully launched, Pitt took time to
  ‘iets: Czartoryski’s appeal for help in building a new coalition.
  ‘(On June 26 the British reply was handed to Vorontzoff in the
 ‘form of a letter bearing Harrowby’s signature. This important
 policy statement (which was really Pitt’s own work) made plain
  ‘that the new Cabinet did not insist on the conditions put forward
  by Hawkesbury a few months before. Although a coalition would
be
1
        the stronger for including both Prussia and Austria, ‘“The
co-operation of either, even for the limited object of preventing
the further progress of French arms is of great importance in itself,
and with a view to ulterior consequences.” Nor did Pitt insist that
| the allies agree to a status quo ante settlement, desirable though it
  might be.
   yf Once the concert powers had decided to wage war, Britain
   would provide them with £5,000,000 a year in subsidies.7! Should
  the coalition include Russia and both the German powers, a fair
   division of that sum might be for Austria to receive £2,500,000,
   with £1,000,000 each going to Russia and Prussia. Troops could
   be hired from the smaller states with the remaining £500,000.
   Austria’s wretched financial condition justified giving her a
 disproportionate       share.   Should     Prussia remain neutral, the entire
 amount    would be divided evenly between         Vienna and St.
 Petersburg. Tsar Alexander was perfectly at liberty to refer to this
offer in any discussions he might have with the Prussian and
 Austrian governments. In conclusion, the memorandum made
    21. Subsidies for a defensive union were out of the question. The letter to Vorontzoff
 is very clear on this point.


                                           148
                               The Third Coalition


explicit what its tone had implied throughout: Russia must take
the lead in bringing the continental states into concert. For the
 time being, Britain would           do no more       than indicate the financial
 assistance the other powers might expect.”
¢ Never before had Pitt offered £5,000,000 in subsidies to the
\continental powers. It was as much as the government could spare
‘a foreign aid and the prime minister was ready to spend it all in
order to finance a war coalition against France.”? This unprece-
 dented generosity was only made possible by the dramatic increase
 in the government’s revenue which had occurred in recent years.
 Thanks to the war taxes Pitt had introduced five years before, the
 annual revenue now exceeded £46,000,000. Nor had this trend
 lost its momentum; revenue receipts would rise steadily until a
 peak of £67,000,000 was reached in 1810.% Not only were
 Subsidies to be awarded generously, but they were to be offered to
 all powers prepared to make war. Gone forever was the policy of
  elective subsidization which Pitt had followed earlier. By 1804 no
government would take arms against France without direct aid.
‘Loans were out of the question. Britain’s experience with the
Austrian loans of 1795 and 1797 justified abandoning that device
(entirely.       .
  Pitt’s decision to leave the work of forming a new concert to
Russia contrasts sharply with his eager search for allies during the
Second Coalition.» This decision may have been inspired partly
by the belief that Russia would be more effective in this work
than Britain. Alexander had already gained an impressive personal
ascendancy over Frederick William, which he was now ready to
use in the cause of European union.”° At Vienna Russian influence
was far greater than anything the British envoy possessed.’ If
Alexander really meant to build a concert, he now knew the
extent to which Britain would finance it. Quite possibly, Pitt may

  22. Harrowby to S. Vorontzoff, June 26, 1804, FO 65/55.
  23. Vorontzoff to Czartoryski, June 29, 1804, Vorontsova, XV, 231.
  24. Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz, British Economy, 1, 44, 76, 103.
  25.In July Harrowby sent instructions to the British ministers at Berlin and Vienna
explaining the government’s position. These instructions make clear that Russia was
expected to take the lead. See Harrowby to Paget, July 24, 1804, FO 7/70; Harrowby to
Jackson, July 24, 1804, FO 64/65.
  26. Louis A. Thiers, History of the Consulate and Empire of France under Napoleon,
trans. D. F. Campbell and J. Stebbing (Philadelphia, 1893-1894), III, 162-166.
   27. Paget to Harrowby, April 9, 1804, FO 7/70.


                                          149
                                      1801-1805


    have been unsure what Russia’s intentions really were. St.
    Petersburg had ignored Addington’s three invitations to joint
    action until French imperialism threatened her interests in the
    Balkans. Perhaps Russia’s real goal was a continental union,
    financed by Britain, to protect her interests in the East. Pitt would
    not pay British money, to support such a strategem. However, he
    was prepared to spend £5,000,000 to finance a war league against
    France. It was now up to the Tsar to prove his zeal for the cause
    by rallying the European powers.
sl
nin



      Even though Pitt had withdrawn all conditions to alliance, the
    important policy statement of June 26 was not well received at St.
    Petersburg. Czartoryski described the offer of £5,000,000 in
    subsidies as “‘nugatory’—far below what was required.2® With
    Franco-Russian relations worsening daily, Czartoryski chaffed at
    the difficulties he encountered in forming a European league.
    Russia’s efforts to win Berlin’s unqualified support for the
    concert dragged on throughout the autumn of 1804 and proved
    especially discouraging.?? Czartoryski also attempted to enlist the
    support of Sweden whose king, Gustavus IV, was probably
    Europe’s most violent enemy of the French. While Sweden could
    contribute only a few troops, Russia needed access to her
    Pomeranian possessions in the event of war.°9
      Agreement with the Hofburg was vital, especially since Russia
    could not rely on Prussia. Count Cobenz]l lived in such great fear
    of France, however, that he hesitated to take a firm stand against
    her. It was out of the question for Austria even to consider going
    to war without a pledge of at least £6,000,000 in British subsidies.
    Knowing that this was more than double the aid Britain was ready
    to give, Czartoryski urged Cobenzl to moderate his demands. As
    part of a new Austro-Russian alliance, Czartoryski had to promise _
    to do everything possible to persuade Britian to pay the Hofburg’s
    price.) Russia at last had obtained an ally. Significantly, the
   28. Warren to Harrowby, July 24, 1804, FO 65/55.
   29. The question of British subsidies appears to have played no part in Russia’s
 negotiation with Prussia. See F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, V1, 308 and passim.
   30. Czartoryski hoped that Britain would provide Gustavus with a subsidy. See Warren
 to Harrowby, August 14, 1804, FO 65/55.
   31. Czartoryski to A. Vorontzoff, November, 1804, Mémoires du Prince Adam
 Czartoryski et Correspondance avec | ‘Empereur Alexandre Tha (Paris, 1887), II, 57;
 Czartoryski to S. Vorontzoff, October 28, 1804, FO 65/56. Article IX of the
 Russo-Austrian alliance of November 6, 1804, obliged the Tsar ‘“‘to use his good offices to


                                            150
                                The Third Coalition


British minister at Vienna had never been invited to participate in
the discussions leading to the treaty.*”
  It was now imperative for Russia to reach an understanding with
Britain on the goals of the coalition and the subsidies to be paid
the allies. For this purpose Czartoryski decided to send a special
envoy to London rather than rely on the resident Russian envoy.
The assignment was given to Count Nicolai Novosiltzoff, a young
Russian diplomat whose Anglophilism guaranteed his favorable
reception in Downing Street. While the Tsar’s instructions to his
envoy dealt at great length with half-mystical, half-realistic plans
for the reorganization of Europe, they offered no concrete
suggestions for the formation of the concert. In a word, Russia
invited Pitt to bring forward a plan for organizing and financing
the league.*?

   Novosiltzoff conferred with British leaders immediately on his
arrival in London in mid-November. The burden of representing
the British viewpoint soon fell entirely on Pitt, since Lord
Harrowby suffered an accident at this time which completely
unfitted him for business. Lord Mulgrave was soon named to take
his place at the Foreign Office, but he was in no position to
contribute much.*4 Occasionally, Vorontzoff would take part in
the meetings between Pitt and Novosiltzoff. Such sessions offered
a curious interplay of personalities and ideas. Vorontzoff had been
in England so long that he sometimes forgot he was Russian. If
Alexander’s selection of Novosiltzoff for this mission hurt him,
Vorontzoff was too much of an aristocrat to allow it to show. He
had little to say at these meetings, in which Novosiltzoff played
the role of an enthusiastic advocate of the Tsar’s plans. Perhaps
Novosiltzoff sensed the historic nature of his mission; perhaps it

obtain from the court of London... subsidies alike for the opening of the campaign and
annually for the whole duration of the war, which shall as far as possible meet the
expectations and wants of the court of Vienna” (Thiers, Consulate and Empire, Ill,
344-357 gives the text).
  32. Paget to Harrowby, November 1, 1804, FO 7/72.
  33. Novosiltzoff’s instructions, dated September 11 [o.s.], 1804 are printed in
Czartoryski, Mémoires, I, 27-45.
  34. Henry Phipps, first Earl of Mulgrave (1755-1831) seems to have been regarded as a
temporary head of the Foreign Office. However, he held the post during the remainder
of Pitt’s life. Mulgrave’s management of that office, like that of his predecessor, was far
below the standards set by Grenville.
                                    1801-1805

was the energy and self-confidence of a fledgling diplomat. His
reports exhibit boyish enthusiasm and optimism.*> Although Pitt
was only eleven years older than the Russian emissary, his
responses were those of a worldly statesman listening with marked
deference to the Tsar’s ideas. Naturally, he took pains to stress
how close Alexander’s thinking came to Britain’s own interests
and aspirations. If Novosiltzoff alluded to the future of Malta or
the problems of Britain’s Maritime Code, Pitt would gently steer
their discussion into less troubled areas.
   Stripped of its generalizations, Alexander’s proposal aimed at
the re-establishment of a European balance and the creation of a
permanent concert to guarantee it. Pitt must surely have seen the
close connection between this scheme and that conceived by
Grenville in 1798. Clearly, the time had come for the prime
minister to prepare a specific plan for the formation of the new
coalition. The result of Pitt’s work was a major policy statement,
dated January 19, 1805, addressed to Count Vorontzoff. Al-
though the document was signed by the new foreign secretary,
Pitt’s responsibility for the text is clear.
   In that masterful state paper, the prime minister examined three
major propositions: first, that Europe could be saved only by
rolling France’s boundaries back to where they had been before
the war. Second, provision should be made for creating barriers
around France to insure against future aggression. Finally, some
system must be developed to guarantee the future security of
these arrangements.     Russia and the German          powers would
probably be able to back up their ultimatum to France with a
combined army of at least half a million men, but it was
unrealistic to expect either German state to act “‘without the pros-
pect of obtaining some important acquisition to compensate for
its exertions.” That is, Prussia and Austria would expect territorial
rewards as well as British subsidies. Pitt recommended that Austria
be invited to look for her gains in Italy, while Prussia might absorb
the larger part of Belgium. Such territorial readjustments would
not only be inducements for them to act, but would also build an
effective system of barriers to hold France in check once the war
had been won. The ideas contained in the January 19 paper

 35. See Czartoryski, Mémoires, Il, 47.
                               The Third Coalition


dealing with the resettlement of Europe constitute the most
comprehensive plan Pitt ever proposed. In a very real sense, it was
his legacy—a legacy which would profoundly influence Castle-
reagh’s work ten years later.*°
  Pitt also took this occasion to bring his subsidy policy into
sharper focus. Two days after the memorandum to Vorontzoff
was finished, instructions were sent to the British minister at St.
Petersburg to guide him in negotiating subsidy treaties with Russia
and Austria. These instructions, together with the foreign policy
statement of January 19, are in fact two sides of a single program
which Britain would generally follow during the remainder of her
war with France. If Russia and Austria found that they could
impose their will on France only by making war, Britain would
subsidize them at the annual rate of £1,250,000 for every 100,000
troops they put into action. Remittances would be made monthly
on the basis of the actual number of effective troops each power
had in the field. To help Austria overcome her financial handicap,
she would receive an advance equal to four months’ subsidies upon
the outbreak of war. However, £5,000,000 was the most the two
powers could expect since “‘it will not be possible to carry the
relative proportion of men and money to any higher scale.”
Subsidy treaties with the allies ought also to incorporate details of
the territorial gains they were to make at the end of the war. Pitt
clearly conceived of such gains both as rewards and as the
foundation of that barrier system he wished to forge around
France.?7
  Britain was ready to pour £5,000,000 into the war chests of
Austria and Russia in order to promote a coalition. Should Prussia
throw in her lot with the allies and offer 100,000 men, Pitt would
subsidize her at the same rate.°8 The desperate need to find allies
forced the prime minister to anticipate an annual outlay of
£6,250,000 in subsidies. Impressive as this figure is, it involved a
   36. Mulgrave to Vorontzoff, January 19, 1805, FO 65/60. All but a small portion of
this document is printed in Charles K. Webster, British Diplomacy, 1813-1815 (London,
1921), pp. 389-394. Castlereagh himself claimed that he had assisted Pitt in the
preparation of this paper. See Castlereagh to Lord Cathcart, April 8, 1813, Correspond-
ence, Despatches, and Other Papers, of Viscount Castlereagh, Second Marquess of
Londonderry, ed. by the 3rd Marquess (London, 1851-1853), VIII, 356.
  37. Mulgrave to Lord Granville Leveson Gower, January 21, 1805, FO 65/575
  38. Mulgrave’s instructions of January 21, 1805 to Leveson Gower (FO 65/57) make
this quite clear.


                                          35
                                    1801-1805


rate of subsidization considerably less than that of Britain’s
previous aid treaties. The 1794 agreement with Prussia, the first
major subsidy treaty, provided for payments at an annual rate of
£29 for each soldier Prussia was to supply. The 1798-1799
conventions with Russia called for subsidies at a rate of £35 for
each of the Tsar’s soldiers. By comparison, the latest proposal,
involving an annual rate of £12 10s., seems less generous than the
total sum suggests. The difficulty is easily resolved. The earlier
agreements were to secure the service of troops in addition to
those Prussia and Russia had already put into the field. The 1805
proposal, on the other hand, offered subsidies for all the troops
the allies were able to bring forward. For the first time, Britain
was ready to help underwrite the total war expenses of her allies.
A special concession was made to Austria’s penury, but otherwise
the proposal was based on the principle that financial aid should
be given in direct proportion to the number of troops each power
supplied. This principle continued to influence Britain’s subsidy
policy throughout the remainder of the war. Castlereagh respected
it in negotiating the treaties of alliance and subsidy with Russia,
Austria, and Prussia at Chaumont in 1814.39
   The decisions Pitt took at the beginning of 1805 make clear how
anxious he was to hasten the formation of a coalition. Although
Alexander was expected to take the lead in forming such a union,
the prime minister put a powerful tool in his hands. Pitt had been
forced to take a more active part in coalition-building than he had
intended during the previous summer. Over a year and a half had
gone by since Britain declared war on France, but the enemy was
as far from beaten as ever. Britain had driven her foe from the sea,
but ultimate victory could only be won on land. Napoleon’s
position in Europe was stronger than before. Thanks to Spain’s
declaration of war on England at the close of 1804, he had the use
of her ships and ports in his struggle with the island power. Pitt’s
decision to flood his allies with British money was a desperate
measure, but it was         the only contribution he could make to the
formation of a new          league.*? With the British proposals now on
   39. The Chaumont Treaty of 1814 divided £5,000,000 equally among the three major
allies on the assumption that each of them would maintain at least 150,000 effective
troops in the field. This represented a rate of about £11 per man. Castlereagh agreed to
supplement this at the end of the war, however, by the payment of “return money.”
   40. See Pitt’s statement to Vorontzoff, as reported by the Russian envoy in his letter
of October 10, 1804 to Czartoryski (Vorontsova, XV, 273-274).

                                          154
                                  The Third Coalition


their way to St. Petersburg, the prime minister presented his
budget for the coming year to the House of Commons. He drew
members’ attention to a provision calling for £5,000,000 as an
“extraordinary expence,” an amount intended to provide subsidies
“in case they should be called for.’’*!

   His Majesty’s envoy at the court of the Tsar, Sir John Warren,
watched impatiently as the Russian autumn turned too quickly
toward winter. London had finally granted his request to resume
his career in the Royal Navy, but he would have to remain at St.
Petersburg until his successor arrived. Warren had not been happy
in the diplomatic service. It was no life for a man whose heart was
at sea in pursuit of French prizes. Early in November 1804 his vigil
ended with the arrival of Lord Granville Leveson Gower. Within a
week, Warren brought the new emissary up-to-date, sent off his
final dispatch, and left for England.4?
   The King’s new representative was as delighted in the possession
of the Russian embassy as Warren had been glad to see the last of
it. Leveson Gower celebrated his thirty-first birthday en route to
St. Petersburg. The appointment of an inexperienced youth to this
very important position may have caused comment even among
those who knew that he was the younger brother of the influential
Marquess of Stafford.47 But Leveson Gower had the talents
required for diplomatic success and he was soon to have the
experience.
   In February 1805 a Foreign Office courier delivered to Leveson
Gower the important instructions which Pitt had prepared one
month before. These proposals were the groundwork for alliance
with Russia and Austria, the details of which remained to be
settled at St. Petersburg. The British minister carefully prepared
for his conference with Czartoryski, who, Leveson Gower knew,
had received a detailed account of the plan from Vorontzoff.
   Czartoryski began the first meeting by announcing that he was
distressed    with some           features of the British scheme. The subsidy
  41. Hansard’s   Parliamentary    Debates,   1st Series, II] (1805),   544   (hereafter cited as
Hansard).
  42. Warren’s return to sea service was fully as satisfying as he hoped it would be. By
the end of the war he reached the rank of admiral and had been awarded the Order of
the Bath.
  43. Lord Granville Leveson Gower (1773-1846) became a career diplomat and in 1824
was named ambassador to France, a position he was to hold for nearly twenty years. In
1833 he was raised to the peerage as Lord Granville.
                                              155
                                 1801-1805


proposed for Austria fell far below what the Hofburg required.
Britain must respond more generously to her pressing needs. The
Russian minister sharply vetoed Leveson Gower’s suggestion that
the Tsar share his subsidy with the Hofburg. There were important
parts of Pitt’s plan which Russia considered even more objection-
able. Certainly, Alexander would never support the offer of
territorial rewards to the German powers. “It was not to be
expected that His Imperial Majesty should exhaust his own
resources in rendering over-powerful the only two great States
whose frontiers were in contact with his own empire.” Reporting
this first meeting to Lord Mulgrave, Leveson Gower admitted that
its general tone was discouraging.          Perhaps the return of
Novosiltzoff would ‘produce a more just estimation of the
fairness and liberality of our propositions.”
   Leveson Gower’s conversations with the Austrian envoy, Count
Stadion, were equally disappointing. Stadion was willing to discuss
the British proposal, but pointed out that he had no instructions
from Vienna on the matter. In the event of war, Austria could
mobilize 250,000 troops, but she would require a generous British
subsidy. Leveson Gower sensed a trace of hesitancy in Stadion’s
responses, which suggested that Austria’s cooperation might be
harder to win than he had anticipated. There was also something a
little ominous in the fact that during the following weeks Stadion
heard nothing at all from Vienna.*4
   Nearly a month passed before Czartoryski again conferred with
the British emissary and disclosed his other objections to Pitt’s
plan. The prime minister’s terms for the three-power ultimatum to
be presented to France were too extreme; unless materially
modified, Russia could not accept them. To insist, as Pitt had, that
France withdraw from Italy was unreasonable. Would it not be
better to compromise this issue? Furthermore, the terms to be
proposed to France would certainly be more palatable if Britain
offered to cede her some small territory in India. Leveson Gower
at once protested these alterations and declared that his instruc-
tions allowed him no room to modify Pitt’s terms.*

  44. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, March 6, 1805, FO 65/57. Stadion received no word
from Vienna between February and mid-May 1805. See Leveson Gower to Mulgrave,
May 12, 1805, FO 65/57.
 45. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, March 22, 1805, FO 65/57.


                                       156
                                 The Third Coalition


   It was abundantly clear that the three powers were dangerously
at cross-purposes. Pitt aimed at winning allies in the war against
France on the basis of a mutually acceptable set of war goals.
Russia, however, regarded hostilities with Napoleon as a last
resort, a solution to be adopted when all else failed. Infinitely
preferable was a negotiated territorial settlement which would
reduce France’s threat to Russia’s eastern interests. Russia’s
motives in this were not entirely selfish. Czartoryski knew how
unwilling Austria was to go to war. With British and Austrian
interests poles apart, he must find some common ground on which
all three powers could unite to form a counterpoise to France.
Even at that, war might be impossible to avoid. Vienna would
never run that risk without positive assurances of far greater
subsidies than Pitt had offered. Czartoryski’s role was clear. While
working to stiffen Austria, he must persuade Pitt to temper the
demands contained in his January state paper. Furthermore,
Britain must also be induced to pledge more extensive aid to the
continental powers should they be forced into war by France’s
rejection of even a moderate demand for territorial adjustments.
Leveson Gower’s stubbornness presented a problem. He must be
brought to accept major changes in the terms the three powers
would offer Napoleon as an alternative to war—a war which two of
those powers were most anxious to avoid.
   For more than two weeks, Czartoryski hammered away at
Leveson Gower to prove that it was impossible to form a coalition
without modifying Pitt’s peace terms. By now, Novosiltzoff had
returned to St. Petersburg only to join with the Tsar’s foreign
minister in pressuring Leveson Gower. The British minister
defended his government’s policy bravely, despite the excruciating
agony of an ulcerated tooth.4® On April 7 the diplomat finally
yielded and agreed to fundamental changes in the manifesto the
allies would offer France. The most important of these was that, if
Napoleon insisted, British troops would be withdrawn from Malta
to be replaced by a Russian garrison.*’ Bad as this provision was, it
could have been still worse. At first Czartoryski not only insisted

 46. On March       31 he wrote to Lady Gower, “I can neither walk about, nor sit still”
(Lord   Granville    Leveson   Gower    (First    Earl   Granville),     Private   Correspondence
1781-1821, ed. Castalia, Countess Granville [London, 1916],            II, 70).
 47. These changes are summarized in Camb. Hist. Brit. For. Pol., 1, 338.


                                             oy
                                    1801-1805

that Britain give up Malta, but also agree to submit her Maritime
Code to an international congress for revision. Only by accepting
the Malta provision, Leveson Gower explained to the foreign
secretary, had he been able to protect the Maritime Code. All
concessions had been made on one condition: the British envoy
would sign the treaty with Russia sub spe rati. No ultimatum
would be sent to Paris without prior approval by the Cabinet. This
understanding, Leveson Gower rather brightly observed to Mul-
grave, “renders the provision itself [regarding Malta] quite muil.?7"8
  Now the time had come to negotiate the three-power alliance
which was to support the modified ultimatum. Since the Austrian
minister remained uninstructed, Czartoryski and Leveson Gower
agreed to conclude a treaty to which he could accede as soon as
the Hofburg sent him authority. It was expected that, in the event
of war, the three powers could mobilize half a million men.
Alexander would provide 115,000 (a number later increased to
180,000), while Austria was expected to offer 250,000.*? The
balance would consist either of British troops or mercenaries hired
from the lesser powers. Leveson Gower offered subsidies to Russia
and Austria according to Pitt’s formula: that is, £1,250,000 for
each 100,000 men under arms. Czartoryski, however, took strong
exception to the demand that subsidies be paid monthly on the
basis of an actual count of each power’s troops in the field. It
would be humiliating to have a British officer make a monthly
muster of the allied armies to determine the subsidy money due
the powers. Furthermore, this would penalize the army which
fought the hardest and, as a result, suffered the heaviest casualties.
In the end, Leveson Gower agreed that payments would be made
on the basis of the total force each power brought forward at the
beginning of the campaign.°° He also pledged his government to
advance a large part of the subsidy due Russia and Austria to help
them meet their mobilization costs. Austria was to receive

  48. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, April 7, 1805, FO 65/57. What can one make of the
letter Leveson Gower sent Pitt a few days later (April 12, 1805) which contains the
following? “Upon the Question of Malta, he [Novosiltzoff] assures me that you said to
him, ‘trouvez nous le moyen de la render neutre et nous serons contents,’ and it was this
Assurance   that in some degree induced me to agree to any mention of Malta” (The
papers of Lord Granville, deposited in the Public Record Office, London, vol. 384).
  49. The increase was provided for in an additonal article to the Anglo-Russian alliance
of May 10, 1805, FO 93/81(8).
  50. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, April 12, 1805, FO 65/57.


                                          158
                                   The Third Coalition


£1,000,000         as    soon    as she   acceded     to the   convention;    Russia
would be entitled to about £360,000.°! At Czartoryski’s insist-
ence, the treaty of alliance virtually ignored Pitt’s wish to use
territorial rewards as an added inducement to the German
powers.»
   The Anglo-Russian pact, setting forth the terms of the ulti-
matum to France and the subsidy agreement, was signed by
Leveson Gower and Czartoryski on April 11.°° Novosiltzoff’s
signature also appeared on the treaty. He would soon leave for
Berlin to await a passport which would allow him to carry the
allies’ ultimatum to Paris. Once again, Leveson Gower reminded
Mulgrave that the Cabinet was perfectly at liberty to reject the
changes made in that ultimatum. Perhaps it was just as well that
the British emissary did not know that the courier carrying the
treaty to London also bore a letter from Czartoryski to Vor-
ontzoff. Unless Britain accepted the Malta provision, the Tsar
would not ratify the agreement.*4
   No part of the April treaty corresponded exactly to the original
British proposal. However, the slight modifications Leveson Gower
had made relative to subsidies were unimportant compared to his
revision of Pitt’s plans for a territorial settlement. The prime
minister was dumbfounded when he learned from Vorontzoff that
the Tsar regarded the evacuation of Malta as a sine qua non. He
assured the Russian envoy that public opinion in Britain would
never tolerate the surrender of Malta. Even if the new alliance died
stillborn, Malta could never be given up.”
  During     the        days    which   followed,     Pitt considered   the   matter
again. Deeply discouraged and physically spent, he made an
agonizing search for some way out of the impasse. By the first
week of June, he produced what might prove a workable solution.
Britain would agree to the Malta provision if Alexander accepted
four conditions. First, Malta must be garrisoned by Russian
troops. Second, Spain must cede Minorca to Britain as a naval base
  51.In this, Leveson Gower anticipated new instructions sent him by Mulgrave on
March 15, 1805 (FO 65/57).
  52. The Convention merely declared that Austria would be allowed to enlarge her
frontiers, while Prussia might regain the lands on the left bank of the Rhine she had
yielded the French in the Treaty of Basel.
 53. Treaty with Russia, April 11, 1805, FO 93/81(6), (7).
 54. Mulgrave to Leveson Gower, June 7, 1805, FO 65/58.
 55. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, X1, 109-111.


                                             ilsye)
                                  1801-1805

in place of Malta. Third, France must agree to an unconditional
restoration of Piedmont under the House of Savoy. Finally,
Napoleon would be required to accept the erection of a land
barrier between France and Holland under Prussian control.*©
  After sending off this counterproposal to St. Petersburg, Pitt
undertook to finance the coalition which he soon hoped to see
take shape. On June 21 he asked the Commons to vote
£3,500,000 for subsidies to the allies during the remainder of the
year. The ambiguities which hung about the recent negotiation
with Russia and Austria gave Fox an excellent chance to charge
the government with fomenting troubles in Europe. The prime
minister brushed aside the indictment and insisted that Britain had
a moral responsibility to arouse the continental powers to their
danger: “If you... could open the eyes of the continental nations
to their true interests, if you could clearly shew them that not
only their interests but their salvation depended upon their
joining you in opposing an enemy whose object it was to destroy
you both, then surely it was not only not unjust, but it was even
meritorious, to secure their co-operation if possible.”*’ The plain
truth was that, as yet, Pitt had failed to convince Russia and
Austria of this fact.
  The character of fantasy which so often clung to coalition
diplomacy was never more evident than in June 1805. Pitt had
obtained,   without a division, a vote of £3,500,000 to subsidize a
league which would probably never be born. The conditions on
which Britain was prepared to yield Malta were certain to be
unacceptable to the Tsar. In June the Hofburg broke its long
silence to announce its refusal to adhere to the Anglo-Russian
alliance. Vienna found even the modified terms of the ultimatum
to be offered France too likely to involve her in war.°® The French
Empire had nothing to fear from three governments whose tragic
diversity of interest made it impossible for them to unite.
  Only Napoleon’s sword could cut through the twisted and
snarled knot of coalition diplomacy. Throughout the spring, the
Emperor hovered over Italy like an eagle in search of prey. On
May 26 he seized upon an Italian crown to add to that of the
  56. Mulgrave to Leveson Gower, no. 16, June 7, 1805, FO 65/58.
 57. Hansard, V (1805), 541-542.
 58. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, June 10, 1805, FO 65/58.


                                        160
                              The Third Coalition


French Empire. Nine days later he startled Europe even more by
annexing the Genoese Republic. This rapine shocked the Tsar, and
he recalled Novosiltzoff from Berlin at once. The British alliance
was revived, and in July Alexander ratified it, having first struck
out the offensive Malta provision.°?
   The Italian crisis also jolted Austria into acting with uncharacter-
istic energy: Stadion was ordered to accede to the Anglo-Russian
convention.® Predictably, the Hofburg asked for more British
money than had been specified in that pact. Stadion informed
Leveson Gower that his government planned to mobilize 320,000
troops instead of the 250,000 expected. The British envoy
hesitated to accept this gift (which would increase the Austrian
subsidy by more than £850,000) since the extra troops were
intended solely to defend the Rhine. However, the Hapsburg plan
was adopted, and Britain pledged £4,000,000 a year in subsidies to
Austria. Stadion had other demands which Leveson Gower found
more difficult to accept. Austria must receive £3,000,000 during
the remainder of the present year, of which half must be paid at
once as preparation money. The British minister appealed to
Czartoryski for help in moderating Austria’s greed, but the
response was disappointing. Until Vienna was satisfied, the Tsar
could undertake no campaign. In desperation, Leveson Gower
offered to advance Austria £1,666,665 as preparation money. The
offer was grudgingly accepted, and on August 9 Stadion and
Leveson Gower exchanged solemn assurances and declarations
which summarized the terms of their agreement.°!

  The strategic position of Naples and Sweden made it essential
for the new coalition to secure their cooperation. Naples was the
only possible bulwark against the rising tide of French imperialism
in Italy. Furthermore, the British navy needed access to her ports
to enable it to maintain its vigil in the Mediterranean. Russia
would be better able to check Napoleon’s Balkan plans if southern
 59. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, July 31, 1805, FO 65/58.
  60. Harold C. Deutsch, The Genesis of Napoleonic Imperialism (Cambridge, Mass.,
1938), p. 284.
  61. Leveson Gower summarized his discussions with Stadion in a letter to Mulgrave,
dated August 14, 1805. Copies of the declaration which Leveson Gower and Stadion
exchanged on August 9 are to be found in FO 94/17. Mulgrave accepted the subsidy
concessions made to Austria, but indicated that the Hofburg need expect nothing more.
See Mulgrave to Gower, September 10, 1805, FO 65/59.


                                        161
                                   1801-1805


Italy could be kept from his grasp. The contribution which
Sweden could make to the coalition’s success was quite different.
Russia’s participation in a war in Germany would be infinitely
more effective if she could use the Swedish port of Stralsund or
the island of Rugen as a supply depot, especially during those
months of the year when the upper Baltic was choked with ice.
During 1804-1805 Pitt made every effort to insure that the
coalition would be properly supported on both its southern and
northern flanks.
  Since the Second Coalition, Britain and Russia had both made a
point of helping Naples. In 1803 Addington quietly paid her
£170,000, and a year later, Pitt pledged an annual subsidy of
£150,000. When the shadow of French aggression once more fell
across Italy, London promised to double that subsidy in the event
of war.®” In the autumn of 1805 France attacked Naples and both
Britain and Russia went to her defense. Not only was the British
subsidy increased, but 7,000 troops were brought from Malta
under the command of General Sir James Craig to help halt the
enemy. The British force was joined by a Russian army, but their
efforts were in vain. Craig finally withdrew to the island of Sicily,
accompanied by the Neapolitan royal family. Thanks to the
British navy, Sicily was safe, and King Ferdinand soon established
his government at Palermo. The Bourbons now became trouble-
some pensioners of the British government which, in turn,
converted the island into a military and naval base.
   Efforts to win Sweden as a partner in the Third Coalition were
beset with complications. The most dramatic of these was the
eccentricity of the king, Gustavus Adolphus, who insisted on
personally conducting all negotiations with the envoys sent by
Russia and Britain. The excessively high monetary value Gustavus
placed on his support made it all but impossible for Britain to
reach   agreement      with    him.   To make       matters    worse,    the British
minister at Stockholm was constantly plagued by his Russian
colleague’s reminders that the success of the Tsar’s military plans
depended on Swedish cooperation.
  In the autumn of 1804 Pitt offered Sweden £60,000 for
permission to use Swedish Pomerania as a base for military
  62. Harrowby to Hugh Elliot, July 3, 1804, FO 70/22; Mulgrave to Prince Castelcicala,
March 2, 1805, FO 70/24.
                           The Third Coalition


operations. It was also expected that British merchants in the
Baltic would be allowed to establish a commerical depot at
Stralsund. A treaty along these lines was concluded in December.
Since Gustavus feared French reprisals, the agreement was kept
secret and the subsidy paid from Secret Service funds.©
  Gustavus was ready to fight in any coalition organized against
France, but he expected to be well paid. In December 1804 he
offered England the service of 25,000 of his soldiers. The subsidies
which he required were astronomical: preparation money and the
monthly payments would come to more than £2,000,000 a year.
London refused to take this proposal seriously. Pitt was ready to
subsidize Sweden, but only at the rate already established for the
major allies—that is, £12 10s. a year for each soldier offered.™
   Stung by Britain’s rejection, Gustavus now played his trump
card. He would allow the Tsar’s soldiers access to Stralsund only if
Britain signed a subsidy agreement with him. Since Alexander had
now decided to make war, his envoy at Stockholm urgently
pressed the British minister, Henry Pierrepont, to submit to
Gustavus’ terms. Russian troops were expected to sail soon from
Kronstadt to Stralsund and it was vital that they be allowed to
land. To move things along, the Tsar’s emissary grandly announced
to Gustavus that Alexander himself would pay the difference
between what the King demanded and what Britain offered.
Privately he told Pierrepont that, of course, the Tsar would expect
Britain to reimburse him for his largesse.©
  Pierrepont’s resistance gradually collapsed, and in August 1805
he offered Gustavus £7,200 a month to maintain 8,000 troops at
Stralsund. A month later Sweden agreed to send 12,000 men
into battle with the allies in return for an annual subsidy of £12
10s. per man. On the surface it seemed that Britain had gained a
victory since the subsidy rate was that on which Pitt had always
insisted. However, other provisions of the treaty, together with a
secret article, make clear that Gustavus was enriching himself
outrageously at Britain’s expense. Although Sweden would be paid
£150,000 a year for the service of 12,000 troops, she would not in
  63. Treaty with Sweden, December 3, 1804, FO 93/101(2).
  64. Lord Camden to Henry Pierrepont, December 7, 1804, FO 73/32; Mulgrave to
Pierrepont, June 25, 1805, FO 73/33.
  65. Pierrepont to Mulgrave, September 1, 1805, FO 73/34.
  66. Treaty with Sweden, August 31, 1805, FO 93/101(3).


                                     163
                                   1801-1805

fact be expected to furnish more than 10,000. In that number she
could include the 8,000 men           at the Stralsund garrison, for which
Britain was already paying £7,200 a month. Over and beyond this,
Gustavus would be given a preparation subsidy of £62,500 and a
special grant of £50,000 toward the upkeep of the already
over-financed Stralsund garrison. In return for supplying 10,000
troops, Sweden would receive an annual payment of nearly a
quarter million pounds sterling, the rate of subsidy being almost
twice the £12 10s. Pitt originally offered.®’
  Necessity alone justified Pierrepont’s treaties. Twenty thousand
Russians were already en route from Kronstadt, and to guarantee
that they might land at Stralsund, the British envoy had to yield.
The Russian transports reached Stralsund just two days after the
subsidy treaty of October 3 was signed. In London, Mulgrave read
the text of the Swedish treaty with grave disapproval, but
admitted that his envoy had really no choice in the matter.®8
Swedish Pomerania and Stralsund were now available to the allies
for whatever use they might be able to make of them, together
with the 10,000 Swedish auxiliaries whose service Britain had
bought at a scandalous price.
  The ineffectiveness of Britain’s leadership in coalition diplomacy
was never more apparent than during the formative period of the
third alliance against France. Her call to union against Napoleon
awakened no response except at St. Petersburg. Even Russia took
strong exception to the proposal for European reconstruction
proposed by Pitt in January 1805. A desperate need for allies
finally forced Britain to yield to Russia’s demands, even to the
point of giving up Malta. However, only Napoleon’s Italian
thunderbolt finally jarred Russia and Austria into making common
cause with Britain. That the three powers were at last allies could
not hide the fact that each of them viewed the purpose of the war
in a different light.
   If Pitt was not the architect of the Third Coalition, he was
certainly its paymaster. For the first time, Britain agreed to
subsidize her partners in proportion to the effective fighting force
each was to supply. The standard rate of £12 10s. for each soldier,
laid down by Pitt in 1805, would cost Britain more than ever
 67. Treaty with Sweden, October 3, 1805, FO 94/306.
 68. Mulgrave to Pierrepont, October 23, 1805, FO 73/34.


                                        164
                             The Third Coalition


before. Originally, Pitt hoped to limit subsidies to £5,000,000 a
year, but the heavy and insistent demand of the continental
powers finally forced him to raise it to nearly £7,000,000. An
extra £1,000,000 would undoubtedly have to be added if Prussia
finally supported the cause.
  The anticipated £7,000,000 expenditure for subsidies during
1806 amounted to nearly half Britain’s entire naval expense for
the year which witnessed Trafalgar.°? Never before had she
undertaken such heavy responsibilities to her allies. In return, they
had promised to put in motion armies which, at least on paper,
would exceed half a million men. Weeks would pass before the
military plans of Russia, Austria, and Sweden could be coordi-
nated. Meanwhile, Napoleon would have to decide whether to
persist in his plans for an invasion of Britain, or turn about and
challenge the scattered armies of his continental enemies—armies
created not by British gold, but by his own ambition.
  69. The cost of the three services during 1805 was as follows: Army, £18,581,127;
Navy, £15,035,630; Ordnance, £4,456,994.        See Pablo Pebrer, Taxation, Revenue,
Expenditure, Power, Statistics, and Debt of the Whole British Empire ... (London,
1833), p. 154.
                                  Vill
                      THEFEND           OF     AN   BPOCH




At the end of August 1805 the Grand Army broke camp at
Boulogne and began its march to the upper Rhine; plans for an
invasion of England had been shelved. Napoleon summoned his
distant army corps to join him and moved quickly to grapple with
the Austrians.      He forced his new          ally, the Elector of Bavaria, to
place his army at France’s disposal. Treaties of alliance, yielding
another 16,000 troops, were imposed on the German states of
Baden, Wutrttemberg, and Hesse-Darmstadt. Undoubtedly, the
German recruits included some who had served the British as
mercenaries ten years before. However, Napoleon’s treaties with
the German princes made no provision for subsidies.
  Most of the Austrian army was in southern Bavaria, awaiting the
arrival of their Russian allies. Predictably, the progress of the
Tsar’s army fell behind schedule. The vanguard of 50,000 men
crossed into Galicia at the end of August, to be followed by
70,000 more        Russians    a month       later.! War had come       so swiftly
that the usual delays in the remittance of British subsidy money
were more aggravating than ever.2 It was not until the battle of
Ulm had been fought and lost that Mulgrave decided how the
Austrian subsidy should be paid. All remittances would be made
by Britain’s agent at Hamburg, Edward Thornton, who had been
ordered to turn over £1,000,000 at once to Austria’s treasury.
Additional payments of £250,000 each were scheduled for
December and January. Since the size of the Austrian subsidy

  1. Stroganoff to C. J. Fox, June 30, 1806, FO 65/66.
  2. In August 1805 the British minister at Vienna responded to Cobenzl’s appeals for
money by giving him £200,000 in bills of exchange. See Paget to Mulgrave, August 30,
1805, FO 7/74; Jenkinson to Mulgrave, October 12, 1805, FO 7/75.
                                         166
                             The End ofan Epoch


depended upon the number of men the Emperor had in the field
(a figure unknown to London), these first payments were made on
account.?
   Remittance of the Russian subsidy was delayed still longer since
the first installment was not due until the Tsar’s forces had crossed
their frontier. Even then a technicality intervened to complicate
matters. When Leveson Gower concluded his agreement with
Austria in August, he and Czartoryski exchanged notes formally
recognizing that all three powers were now united within the
framework of the April convention. Unaccountably, the Russian
government neglected to ratify this note, and Mulgrave would
make no payments of the Tsar’s subsidy until the oversight had
been corrected.*+ Russia’s immediate needs were so urgent,
however, that Leveson Gower took it upon himself to provide her
with £300,000 in bills during the closing months of the year.
Another £50,000 was paid in February when the Tsar finally
ratified the agreement.°
  With the outbreak of war, Pitt was again tempted to undertake a
major campaign in north Germany. A well-aimed blow now might
free Hanover and open the door to an allied invasion of Holland.
At the moment there were about 30,000 Russian and Swedish
troops at Stralsund which could cooperate with any force Britain
might send. If only Prussia could be persuaded to join, success
would be almost certain. The idea of creating a massive army in
the north strong enough to destroy the Napoleonic Empire so
charmed the prime minister that he decided once more to appeal
to Prussia’s greed. On September 10 the British envoy at Berlin
was instructed to offer an annual subsidy of £1,250,000 in return
for 100,000 Prussian troops. As an added inducement, the
  3. Mulgrave to Paget, October 25, 1805, FO 7/75. The agent sent by Britain to count
the Austrian army did not reach his destination until about a week after Ulm; General
John Ramsay to Mulgrave, November 9, 1805, FO 7/78.
  Thanks to Napoleon’s curtailment of British trade in north Germany, Thornton had
great trouble in finding money at Hamburg with which to make subsidy payments.
Heavy shipments of silver from England enabled him to remit £1,000,000 to Austria’s
bankers by the end of the year. See Thornton to Mulgrave, November 12, 1805, FO
33/30. See also Memorandum respecting the Austrian Subsidy, October, 1805, FO
120/1.
  4. Mulgrave to Leveson Gower, December 21, 1805, FO 65/59.
  5. Leveson Gower to Mulgrave, October 15, 1805, and February 1, 1806, FO 65/59,
FO 65/62.
  6. Since Prussia had been so long at peace, Pitt offered her no preparation money.
However, if it was insisted on, Britain would pay her the equivalent of five months’
subsidy.
                                         167
                                   1805-1807                                  7


Cabinet would agree to support Prussia’s claim for territorial
expansion in the west at the close of the war.!
   Prussian policy was so evenly balanced between peace and war at
this time that the British plan had some chance for success. On the
ministerial level, Hardenberg and Haugwitz were in bitter opposi-
tion on the question. Haugwitz was by now a firm advocate of
neutrality, but Hardenberg was thoughtful enough to see that
Prussia might reap a generous reward from forceful intervention in
the war at the strategic moment. The final decision was in the
hands of the King, whose friendship with the Tsar encouraged the
hope that he would decide in favor of the allies. Napoleon placed a
realistic value on Prussia’s support, and in August he offered her
Hanover in return for a military alliance. Once again Prussia was
pressed by two suitors, each of whom made attractive offers. At
the      moment,    Frederick      William     was    undecided.      Hardenberg,
however, was greatly interested in Britain’s latest proposal and
urged her minister to obtain more precise instructions from
London.® Austria’s defeat at Ulm left even more of the responsi-
bility for the war on the Tsar. Late in October, Alexander went to
Potsdam to confer with Frederick William, hoping to win from
him a promise of military support.
  Encouraged by this apparent stiffening of Prussia’s policy, Pitt
decided to open a second front in northern Europe. On October
16 orders were prepared for the dispatch of 11,000 British troops
to the Elbe. Before the end of the year, reinforcements brought
the British expeditionary force to 60,000.? Downing Street would
now have to guarantee that this army have Prussian support.
  To accomplish this, Pitt sent Lord Harrowby to Berlin with full
power to conclude a treaty of alliance and subsidy. It is hard to
imagine a worse choice than Harrowby. Melancholy and hypo-
chondriac, he had no qualification for the mission other than the
fact that he enjoyed the prime minister’s confidence. The offer

  7. Mulgrave to Jackson, September 10, 1805, FO 64/68.
  8. Jackson to Mulgrave, September 20, 1805, and October     7, 1805, FO 64/68, FO
64/69.
  9. The largest unit in this force was the 5,000 men of the King’s German Legion. This
group was formed in England in 1803 of Hanoverian exiles. Later, the legion fought well
with Wellington in the Peninsula. It was disbanded in 1816. Its history was written by
North Ludlow Beamish, History of the King’s German Legion, 2 vols., (London,
1832-1837).


                                        168
                            The End ofan Epoch


Harrowby was to make was merely a more generous version of the
plan Pitt had proposed one month before. At that time, it was
hoped that Prussia would mobilize 100,000 men. Now she was
asked to go to war with double that number, in return for which
Britain would pay her £2,500,000 a year. At the end of the war,
Britain would do everything possible to see that Prussia received at
least a part of Belgium, with such additional territory as would be
required to connect her to her new possessions. If Prussia was
unwilling to take an active part in the war, Harrowby was to offer
her £1,250,000 for her armed mediation.!®
   Harrowby’s instructions were almost entirely out-of-date even
before he reached Berlin. At Hamburg he learned that the previous
week Alexander and Frederick William had concluded an alliance.
Prussia was to present France with an ultimatum embodying the
terms of a territoral settlement roughly similar to those agreed to
by Britain and Russia in the spring. Should Napoleon reject it,
Frederick William would send 80,000 men into battle against him.
To obtain this much, the Tsar had agreed that Prussia was to
receive Hanover. Reporting this to Downing Street, Harrowby
observed, “I do not conceive any part of the instructions which
were given me under very different circumstances can apply to the
present case.”’ He would go on to Berlin, traveling slowly so that
any new instructions sent would reach him before his arrival at the
Prussian capital.!!
  When Pitt learned that Alexander had bartered Hanover in
return for Prussian support, he could not comprehend the news.
Britain had all along accepted, even advocated, territorial rewards
for Prussia as an inducement for her to act. Belgium, yes; Hanover,
never! With Nelson’s splendid victory at Trafalgar only one month
ago, why should Britain be asked to yield her King’s patrimony?
The bitter truth was that glorious as Trafalgar had been, it in no
way affected France’s dominant military position in Europe. Pitt
struggled to adjust himself to this latest turn of events. At the end
of November new instructions were sent to Harrowby: Britain
would never give up Hanover, but she was ready to enlarge the
reward in the ‘Low Countries she had already offered Prussia.
Presumably, this meant that all Belgium would go to Frederick
 10. Mulgrave to Harrowby, October 27, 1805, FO 64/70.
 11. Harrowby to Mulgrave, November 10, 1805, FO 64/70.


                                       ee)
                                    1805-1807

William. Otherwise, Harrowby was to consider his original instruc-
tions still applicable. !?
  Once more the fortunes of war intervened to make nonsense of
Pitt’s plans. On December 2 Napoleon’s army, now refreshed from
its exertions at Ulm, fell upon the allied armies at Austerlitz.
Within a matter of hours Russia and Austria ceased to be military
powers. Shocked at the disaster which had overtaken him, the Tsar
agreed to an armistice binding him to withdraw the remnant of his
army behind his own frontier. By the end of the year all Russian
troops, excepting only those in north Germany, had been
removed.!> Meanwhile, the Austrian emperor, a fugitive from his
own capital, accepted the humiliating terms of peace dictated by
France at Pressburg. Austria undertook to pay her conqueror
£4,000,000 in reparations. In all probability the £1,000,000 she
had received in British subsidies found its way into Napoleon’s war
chest.
  Austerlitz extinguished the tiny ember of hope that Prussia
would join the allies. At Berlin, Harrowby desperately tried to
resurrect that hope by showering Hardenberg with extravagant
offers of money. He offered to make subsidy payments retroactive
to the previous October, even though the Prussian army could not
possibly complete mobilization until February at the earliest. He
promised an additional four months’ subsidy to be paid as a bonus
at the end of the war. In ultimate despair, he may even have
offered to let Prussia have Holland as well as Belgium if she would
only intervene on the side of the coalition.!4 Few sights could have
been more pitiful than Lord Harrowby, sick and probably
demented, dangling before Hardenberg subsidies and the promise
of lands Britain did not possess. The Prussian minister was almost
embarrassed    by Harrowby’s      absurd    conduct  and, in mid-

   12. Mulgrave to Harrowby, November 23, 1805, FO 64/70.
   13. Stroganoff to C. J. Fox, June 30, 1806, FO 65/66.
   14. Harrowby to Mulgrave, December 7, 1805, FO 64/70. In his memoirs (Denkwiirdi-
gkeiten des Staatskanzlers Fiirsten von Hardenberg, edited by Leopold von Ranke
[Leipzig, 1877], II, 353), Hardenberg claimed that Harrowby offered Holland to Prussia.
This offer, if it was really made, had not been authorized by Pitt. It is entirely possible
that Harrowby did make it, only to be badly shocked later when he realized what he
had done. This would at least explain the very mysterious letter he sent Pitt on
December 12, 1805S. It is printed in full in Rose, Pitt and the Great War, pp. 545-546.
Harrowby was probably suffering a physical and mental breakdown at this time. See
Jackson, Diaries, 1, 377 and passim.
                             The End of an Epoch


December,      he   curtly     told   him     that   he    must     see   ‘“‘the   total
impossibility in which the King finds himself of taking at this
moment any positive engagement.”!> Prussia would yield to that
suitor who could deliver what he promised.
   During the last weeks of the year, Pitt’s health broke down
completely, forcing him to seek recovery at Bath. Meanwhile, his
Cabinet colleagues salvaged what they could from the wrecked
coalition. Thornton was ordered to pay no more subsidies—the
war was over.!® Even Nature favored the French emperor. Storms
in the North Sea badly battered the British troop transports bound
for the Elbe, causing a heavy loss of lives. Should Frederick
William accept Napoleon’s offer of Hanover and join with him in
arms, British units already in the Electorate would have to defend
themselves against a Prussian attack. Surveying the disaster which
had fallen on every part of Britain’s war plans, Lord Mulgrave
could find no good news to send the ailing premier at Bath. Only
Prussia’s intervention could save the allies. ““No bribe,” the foreign
secretary wrote Pitt, “seems to me too high for Prussia at this
moment.” It might be as well to offer her Holland as a reward.1”
Frederick William’s decision to accept Hanover as a pourboire
from Napoleon’s hand put a merciful end to Harrowby’s futile
mission at Berlin. By mid-January he was on his way home.
  The tragedy of the Third Coalition brought Pitt within the
darkest shadow of despair. Everything to which he had set his
hand had failed. The coalition itself was a monstrous travesty of
his original plan. His decision to open a second front in north
Germany had exposed the British expeditionary force there to
possible disaster. His scheme to win Prussian support failed
because it bore no relation to that country’s real goals. What little
benefit Pitt found in the waters of Bath was wiped out by news of
Austerlitz. On January 9 he set out on his return to London, still
unaware that his last hope for good news from Harrowby was
gone. Five days later he collapsed; the end was not far off.
  During the evening of January 22 an east wind, heavy with the
promise of rain, enfolded the unpretentious villa on Putney Heath
which Pitt and his niece had occupied for a little more than a year.

  15. Hardenberg to Harrowby, December 15, 1805, FO 64/70.
 16. Harrowby to Thornton, December 12, 1805, FO 64/70.
 17. Mulgrave to Pitt, January 6, 1806, Chatham Papers, vol. 162.


                                         ibyAl
                                     1805-1807

Inside, a small group of friends ministered to the dying man, but
he required little of them. In his final moments of consciousness,
some thought stirred him to ask the direction of the wind. On
being told that it came from the East, from the Continent, from
the direction of Berlin, he quietly replied, ‘East; ah! that will do;
that will bring him quick.” In the final moments of life, Pitt clung
to the hope that his country did not fight alone. But Harrowby
was no longer in Berlin. Seven tragic years were to pass before
Prussia and the other powers would finally unite, as he had vainly
urged them to do. Just before dawn of the new day, the
twenty-fifth anniversary of his entrance into the House of
Commons, William Pitt’s life ebbed quietly away./8

   The ministry which Pitt led could not survive without him, and
upon its collapse in February 1806 Lord Grenville was invited to
form a government. Prominent in the new Cabinet were some of
the late premier’s opponents, including Charles James Fox, who
became foreign secretary. The new regime was committed to peace
with France, if it could be had without too great a sacrifice of
national interests. That Grenville should lead such a government
seems strange, given his earlier zeal for the war against France.
Since 1804, however, he had grown hostile to foreign alliances,
perhaps the result of his bitter experience as Pitt’s foreign
minister. This conversion to isolationism was hastened by his
personal break with Pitt and thereafter he became a severe and
sour critic of the government’s war program in the Lords. Distrust
of continental alliances strengthened his partnership with Fox,
who hated the war. Under their joint leadership, the new ministry
set out to win lasting peace for the war-weary country.
   Even if the Cabinet had been pledged to continue Pitt’s war
program, it would have been hard-pressed to do so. Fox found the
Foreign Office almost barren of any information about the latest
events on the Continent. It was known that Prussia had reached
some sort of agreement with France, but the details were a matter
of guesswork. Whether Austria would accept the humiliation of
Pressburg or go to war in order to erase it was unknown. No
information had reached London regarding Russia’s future course
of action. Communication with Leveson Gower broke down
  18. Stanhope, Pitt, IV, 378-382.
                                    The End ofan Epoch


completely        when that envoy decided that duty required him to
accompany         the Tsar into the field. By January he was back in St.
Petersburg.         Despite     Russia’s    dreadful      losses, Czartoryski        assured
him that Alexander meant to continue his alliance with Britain.!?
   Both British armies sent to the Continent by Pitt had been
recalled before Grenville came to power. The dangerously exposed
British force in Hanover had been withdrawn just before Pitt’s
death. In Italy General Craig had been obliged to abandon the
defense of Naples and remove his forces to Sicily. Although the
new government was pledged to peace, it decided to continue its
war alliance with Sweden. Fox ordered the subsidy arrears paid up
and thereafter his envoy saw to it that the monthly payments were
punctually made.?°
   Within less than a month after taking office, Fox initiated
discussions with Napoleon’s government. The peace negotiation
which followed continued until Fox’s death the following Sep-
tember. However, the foreign secretary was too intelligent and
responsible to ignore the obligation to prepare for war should
peace prove beyond his reach. Replying to Leveson Gower’s report
that Alexander meant to stand by the allies, Fox declared, “A
good understanding among the principal Powers in Europe is of
the utmost importance, and will greatly contribute to add weight
to their representations in time of Peace, as well as power to their
Arms, if they should be driven to the necessity of War.”’?!
   Fox’s plans were rudely shaken when he learned that France
insisted on negotiating separately with Britain and Russia. This
was expressly forbidden by the terms of the Anglo-Russian
alliance. While Britain sincerely desired peace, the foreign secre-
tary insisted that it must be arranged conjointly with the allies.
Painful though it was, Fox now had to consider what steps should
be taken to renew the war. During the past month, major changes
had occurred in the European situation. Prussia had at last
annexed Hanover and closed the north German ports to British
commerce. London retaliated by seizing her shipping and block-

  19. Leveson    Gower    to Mulgrave, January 26, 1806, FO 65/62. This information was
not worth   much.      Three days later Czartoryski    announced   to Napoleon’s agent that
Russia   would   not    be averse   to a rapprochement.    See   Puryear, Napoleon   and the
Dardenelles, p. 69.
  20. Fox to Pierrepont, March 14, 1806, FO 73/35.
  21. Fox to Leveson Gower, February 25, 1806, FO 65/62.


                                             Ika3)
                                   1805-1807

ading   her coasts.    In June     Britain    declared     war   on Prussia,      thus
holding as an enemy not only Napoleon but also his ally and
vassal, Frederick William HI. Meanwhile, there were unmistakable
indications of a resurgence of French intrigue in the Balkans.
Rumours reached London that Napoleon’s agents were urging the
Porte to join in an attack on Russia.??
   Any British attempt to storm the salients of French power
which Napoleon had thrown up in Germany and Turkey required
Russia’s cooperation. As early as the first week of April, Fox
directed Leveson Gower to invite the Tsar to join in applying
pressure to Prussia. “The Emperor might decide to lend His Aid by
Sea as well as by Land to blockade the Prussian Ports, and to
attack the Frontier of the Enemy. In such a project the King of
Sweden . .. might be particularly useful.”
   A few weeks later, Fox completed his plans for stepping up the
war with France. “It is the opinion of His Majesty,” he informed
Leveson Gower, “that nothing remains for the Allied Powers
[Britain and Russia] but to carry on the most vigorous War.” The
Tsar ought to invade Prussia’s Polish lands at once. If Napoleon
came to Berlin’s aid, the foreign secretary pledged that ““The
English will assist [Russia] in the manner that shall appear most
desirable[?], either by such land forces as she can spare, by naval
exertions, or by pecuniary aids, if the amount required be not too
exorbitant; or by all, or any, of these means.” Should Turkey
attack Russia, the allies must “‘act vigorously against the Porte as
well as against France, and the further Russia can push her
conquests the more this Country will be satisfied.” Britain did
not ignore Austria in these plans, although there was little
likelihood that she would rejoin the coalition. Robert Adair was
ordered to take Paget’s place as British ambassador to Austria, but
Fox hesitated to give him any special instructions. “I have none to
give you,” he told Adair on the eve of his departure, “Go to
Vienna, and send me yours.’

 22. Puryear, Napoleon and the Dardenelles, pp. 71-125.
 23. Fox to Leveson Gower, April 7, 1806, FO 65/62.
 24. Fox to Leveson Gower, nos, 11 and 12, April 29, 1806, FO 65/62.
  25. Robert Adair, Historical Memoir of a Mission to the Court of Vienna in 1806
(London, 1844), pp. 11-13. Adair was a good personal friend of Fox, although Fox
appears to have had some doubt about the loyalty of Adair’s French-born wife.
According to Lord Malmesbury (Malmesbury,     IV, 414), the foreign secretary refused to
let her accompany her husband to Vienna.

                                        174
                              The End ofan Epoch

   Napoleon’s recent conduct convinced even Fox that Britain
must prepare for war. To this end, he offered the Tsar subsidies
and virtually invited him to despoil those of his neighbors who
were now Napoleon’s henchmen. Basically, it was Pitt’s old war
policy, although the late prime minister might have hesitated to
urge Alexander to partition the Turkish empire.2° The Russian
government had modified its policy by the time these instructions
reached Leveson Gower. A recent entente with Prussia had given
the Tsar stronger cards to play than any Fox could offer.2” He
therefore sent an emissary to Paris to discover what peace terms
Napoleon was ready to propose. Thus, Britain’s war plans were out
of joint with Alexander’s desire to negotiate a settlement with the
enemy. Even Fox was now more optimistic since France had
indicated that she would be willing to negotiate jointly with both
Russia and Britain. There soon began that long and tortuous peace
conference at the French capital which, dragging on into the
autumn, proved such a bitter disappointment to Fox.
   The foreign secretary now turned to consider Austria’s claims
for subsidies still due on the basis of her 1805 treaty with Britain.
In January 1806 the Hofburg had put in a claim for £1,600,000.
Unquestionably Britain owed something beyond the £1,000,000
already paid by Thornton, but the amount was in dispute. No
acceptable data was available to Britain showing the exact number
of men Austria had under arms before Ulm. The Hofburg claimed
that her army then numbered 315,060—a figure which was
probably too high. Furthermore, Britain had counterclaims for the
value of supplies sent Austria during the First Coalition. After
months of haggling, Fox offered Austria £500,000 and the matter
was so arranged.”®
  Russia’s claim proved more difficult to settle. The new Russian
envoy, Count Stroganoff, contended that the Tsar was entitled to
receive £1,176,425 on the basis of the 1805 treaty.?? Of this sum,
  26. Fox himself appears later to have had misgivings on this point. On June 19, 1806
he reminded Leveson Gower that this was only to apply in the event Turkey made war
on Russia (FO 65/62).
  27. Lobanov-Rostovsky, Russia and Europe, pp. 116-124.
  28. Stadion to Starhemberg, January 1,1806, FO 7/82; Charles Stuart to Mulgrave,
January 6, 1806, FO 7/79; State of the Austrian Army ..., October 1, 1805, sent to
Fox by Starhemberg on February 3, 1806, FO 7/82; Declarations signed by Fox and
Starhemberg, August 23, 1806, FO 7/82; Fox to Adair, August 29, 1806, FO 7/80.
  29. Following Pitt’s death, Vorontzoff resigned his post. Stroganoff’s memorandum,
dated June 30, 1806, is found in FO 65/66.

                                         TiS
                                    1805-1807


Britain appears so far to have paid only £350,000. During the
course of Fox’s discussions with Stroganoff, he learned that on
July 20 Russia and France had signed a peace treaty at Paris. Since
this was contrary to the Anglo-Russian alliance on the basis of
which subsidies were now being demanded, Fox seems to have
postponed a settlement of her claim.2° Although the Tsar
disavowed the peace treaty with Napoleon, relations between
London and St. Petersburg remained strained. It was not until
1807 that £500,000 was given Russia to dispose of her claim
against Britain.>!
   Russia’s peace agreement with France placed Britain in a most
difficult position. Unless Fox was ready to accept any terms
France offered, the war would have to go on. Where could Britain
turn for help except to Austria? At the end of July Fox instructed
Adair to assure the Hofburg “‘that whatever measures of vigour the
Emperor may be inclined to adopt, from which there can arise any
reasonable probability of Advantage, this Country is ready to
support Him.’?? But Vienna was not interested and Fox was
forced to watch helplessly as his negotiation with Napoleon
dragged wearily to an end.
   In searching for peace, Fox never lost sight of the fact that in
the end it might elude him. In such a case, Britain would have to
renew her war union with Russia. When Alexander appeared to
play his ally false by negotiating a unilateral peace treaty, Fox
turned in desperation to Austria. Ironically, the only power ready
to take up arms against Napoleon was Britain’s latest enemy,
Prussia. Fox died on September 13, the very moment when Berlin
was preparing to draw the sword which had hung idle at her side
for more than a decade.
  Lord Grenville intensely disliked Prussia, and her unexpected
belligerency frankly provoked him. Still hopeful of peace, he
regarded her last-minute decision to take arms as an unwelcome
complication.*? What did Berlin hope to accomplish? Only a union

  30. This is conjectural, but it seems likely that Fox would delay a settlement so long as
the peace treaty remined an area of dispute between the two governments.
  31. In January 1807, £500,000 was shipped to Russia in specie.
 32. Fox to Adair, July 28, 1806, FO 7/80.
 33. As late as the end of September Grenville still hoped for general peace in Europe.
ee Seto to Howick, September 29, 1806, Manuscripts ofJ. B. Fortescue, VIII,
   -368.
                                The End ofan Epoch

of all the powers could defeat France. If Prussia really wished to
topple Napoleon, she would have reached prior agreement with
Russia and Britain. Grenville knew of no Russo-Prussian war
alliance, and Frederick William had not offered to return Hanover
to George III. All evidence led to a single conclusion: Prussia’s
policy was really more “directed to the object of extending the
dominions of Prussia than to that of limiting those of France.’’*4
Of course, he would maintain an open mind in the unlikely event
that Berlin meant to do something more. However, Grenville
would certainly not shower her with promises of subsidies and
land as Pitt would have done.
   To obtain up-to-date information, the government sent Lord
Morpeth to Germany as its special agent. On September 24, Lord
Howick, who had taken Fox’s place at the Foreign Office,
prepared his instructions.*> If Prussia was ready to restore
Hanover, Morpeth was to conclude peace with her. He might even
discuss terms of alliance, but Britain would offer no subsidies until
“the necessity of it shall be proved & the prospect of advantage
shall be such as to justify the Demand.”’*6
   Shortly before Morpeth’s departure, Grenville learned that a
Prussian envoy was en route to London to request a renewal of the
1794 subsidy pact. Unfortunately, Frederick William gave this
assignment to his onetime minister to Britain, Baron Jacobi, for
whom Grenville had little use. A letter from Jacobi preceded his
arrival in England. Although this appeal for British help was
touching, Grenville immediately noticed that its references to
Hanover were equivocal.*’? At their first meeting the Prussian
diplomat proposed that any discussion of Hanover’s future be
deferred until the end of the war. Grenville would have none of it.
The immediate and unconditional restoration of the Electorate
was a sine qua non to peace between the governments. Reporting
this to Morpeth, Howick predicted, “I cannot doubt that the
necessity of receiving assistance and support from Great Britain
  34. Grenville to C. Stuart, September 12, 1806, ibid., VIII, 325.
  35. George Howard (1773-1848) was the eldest son of the Earl of Carlisle and known
as Viscount Morpeth until his father’s death. Lord Howick is better known by his later
title of Earl Grey. He became prime minister in 1830 and sponsored the Reform Bill of
1832.
  36. Howick to Morpeth, September 24, 1806, FO 64/73.
 37. Jacobi   to Grenville,   September   23, 1806,   FO   64/72; and Grenville to Jacobi,
October 3, 1806, FO 64/72.
                                    1805-1807


will speedily oblige her [Prussia] to comply with it. The Question
of Subsidies may then, and not till then, be entertained.’’*8
   Debate over Hanover soon became pointless. Napoleon repeated
his masterstroke of Ulm by falling on the Prussians before they
could obtain help from the Tsar. The Battle of Jena-Auerstadt
overturned all Prussia’s plans; what remained of her army streamed
eastward to join with the Russians. Lord Morpeth was at Weimar
when he learned of Prussia’s tragedy. Concluding that his mission
was now pointless, he promptly returned to London.*? With
Napoleon’s armies now occupying all Prussia’s lands in the West,
Jacobi accepted Britain’s demand that Frederick William relin-
quish his claim to Hanover.*?
  Almost against his will, Grenville began to consider military
reunion with Prussia and Russia, but first he would have to know the
condition of the allied armies, as well as the war plans of their
governments. It was useless to send the unenterprising Morpeth on
such a mission. Instead, the assignment was given Lord Hutchin-
son, whose long military record qualified him for employment.*!
Hutchinson was not to carry any subsidy offer to Frederick
William. It was understood in London that £2,000,000 in specie
had been removed from the Prussian treasury before Berlin was
captured. “If this be true,” Howick observed, “‘no immediate
pecuniary supply can be necessary, and time will be afforded for
your Lordship to communicate with this Government upon the
amount of Subsidy which may be required by Prussia for the
future prosecution of the War.”’ Hutchinson could give Prussia as
much as £200,000 if he found her army in urgent need, however.*2
  A month later, Hutchinson         caught up with Prussians at
Konigsberg and was shocked to see the shattered remnants of what
had once been a first-class army. Thesurvivors of Jena had lost all
self-confidence and were poor spiritless things. Frederick William
  38. Howick to Morpeth, October 11, 1806, FO 64/73. See also Howick to Charles
Stuart, October 22, 1806, FO 65/64.
  39. Morpeth to Howick, October 21, 1806, FO 64/73. Morpeth’s mission had at least
one distinction: he was the only British envoy of the period whose entire correspond-
ence with the Foreign Office amounted to only three dispatches.
 40. Howick   to Morpeth,    October   28,    1806,   FO   64/73;   Howick   to   Hutchinson,
November 20, 1806, FO 64/74.
  41. John Hely-Hutchinson (1757-1832), first Baron Hutchinson, had served in the
British army since 1783. Although inclined to undue pessimism, he was well qualified for
this military mission to allied headquarters.
  42. Howick to Hutchinson, November 20, 1806, FO 64/74.


                                             178
                             The End ofan Epoch


still hoped that Britain would renew the 1794 subsidy treaty.
Estimating that this would cost the Treasury about £3,000,000 a
year, Hutchinson concluded that “this would be buying the
remainder of the Prussian Army at a dear rate indeed.” In sending
the Prussian request to London, he admitted that he had strong
misgivings: “I feel myself unwilling to engage for the payment of
any sum or sums of money—the Sincerety of Prussia is still in my
Opinion doubtful, her resources are not only weakened and
exhausted but can scarely be said to exist.’’43 However, Prussia’s
needs were so great that Hutchinson did agree to give bills of
exchange for small amounts of money during the winter months.“
   These reports from Konigsberg strengthened Grenville’s belief
that Prussia was a weak reed on which to lean, and, certainly, what
she had to offer was not worth a subsidy. Since there was now a
chance that Austria might enter the war, the government would
make no financial commitment to Prussia for the moment.*> One
year before, Pitt had offered her nearly £3,000,000!
   Grenville was just as cautious in his dealings with Russia, even
though Alexander was reported to have 140,000 troops in the
field.*© Since this army was now in East Prussia, it could be argued
that the 1805 subsidy treaty was again operative. However,
Russia’s needs were both greater and different from what they had
been two years before. Muskets were in especially short supply
and Britain was urged to send at least 60,000. Since Russia was
now bearing nearly the entire burden of the war, it was vitally
important for Britain to open a second front in western Europe.
Finally, Russia desperately needed at least £6,000,000 to continue
the campaign. The British government was invited to guarantee a
Russian loan in London for this amount as she had once done for
Austria. To meet the Tsar’s immediate requirements, would
Britain advance £1,000,000 of that loan in specie now?47


 43. Hutchinson to Howick, December 23, 29, 1806, FO 64/74.
 44. Hutchinson to Howick, January 29, 1807, FO 64/74.         The   remittances   were
handled by Robert Adair at Vienna and totalled £87,613; Adair to Howick, January 14,
February 17, and March 25, 1807, FO 7/83.
  45. Howick to Hutchinson, February 20, 1807, FO 64/74.
  46. Charles Stuart to Howick, November 1, 1806, FO 65/64.
  47. Stuart to Howick, November 4, 1806, and November 19, 1806, FO 65/64, FO
65/65; Budberg to Stuart, November 27, 1806, FO 65/65; Stuart to Howick, November
28, 31, and December 18, 1806, FO 65/65.


                                           179
                                     1805-1807


  Grenville’s response to Russia’s appeals for help was dis-
appointing. The request for arms presented no problems; 60,000
stand of arms would go to the Baltic as soon as shipping could be
provided.*® Britain’s heavy military commitments outside Europe,
however, made it impossible for her to send an expedition to the
Continent. The proposal of a Russian loan aroused all sorts of
unpleasant memories in Grenville, growing out of his experience
with Austria. This request was refused. Howick explained the
government’s decision to Lord Douglas, the newly appointed
minister to Russia.*? Should Russia default on her obligations, the
Treasury would have to pay at least £500,000 a year to meet the
loan charges. ““The Examples of the Austrian Loans,” the foreign
secretary explained, “are too recent to allow any one to doubt
that a Loan thus secured must in effect be considered as a
Subsidy, and would be so regarded by Parliament were such a
proposition brought forward there.” He went on to underline
what was in fact the major objection: “It would not be wise,
whatever may be our reliance on the Honour, the Good Faith, &
the Steady Friendship of Russia, to implicate ourselves in an
arrangement, which, if our present good understanding should at
any time cease, might enable that Power in a moment of great
difficulty to throw upon us the additional burthen of so large
an annual taxation, as that which I have already stated.’ However,
the Cabinet was not indifferent to Alexander’s plight and would
send £500,000 in silver to him at once. This would cover the
balance due the Tsar under the 1805 subsidy treaty, the claim for
which had never been settled. H.M.S. Quebec was to take the
money to Goteborg in Sweden, where arrangements would be
made to convey it to the Russian treasury.°?
  Coming at a time when Alexander was trying desperately to halt
Napoleon’s advance, the British response to his call for help
appeared even more pinchbeck than it was. The Russian minister
in London coldly asked Grenville “if it was no longer the intention
of this Country to make common cause with Russia.’’>! Bitterly
 48. R. Crewe to G. Walpole, January 4, 1807, FO 65/72.
 49. Leveson   Gower   returned   to England   in 1806.   Alexander   Hamilton   (1767-1852)
was the heir of the Duke of Hamilton and known as Lord Douglas. A wealthy eccentric
of no capacity, his service at St. Petersburg was valueless. Upon the collapse of the
Grenville government, he was recalled.
 50. Howick to Douglas, January 13, 1807, FO 65/68.
 51. Howick to Douglas, January 13,1807, FO 65/68.

                                           180
                            The End ofan Epoch


disappointed with the prime minister’s lack of sympathy, Alexan-
der could hardly be blamed for regarding him as a false friend.
Even the king of Sweden turned treacherous. When H.M.S. Quebec
landed her cargo of silver at Géteborg, Swedish authorities helped
themselves to £80,000 of it, claiming that this sum had been owed
them by Russia since 1791. Alexander did not condescend to take
notice of this banditry.** However, he was stung to fury when the
new British minister, Lord Douglas, tactlessly pressed him to
renew his commercial treaty with England. The Tsar positively
refused.*? What manner of government was it that denied help toa
faithful ally in her darkest hour and then asked for commercial
concessions? Grenville had no opportunity to reply to that
question. Early in March 1807 his government tottered and fell.

   Beginning with the Prussian subsidy treaty of 1794, Britain’s
policy of aid to her war partners had grown steadily more
generous under the pressure of events. By the time of the Third
Coalition, Pitt was ready to set aside £7,000,000 a year for foreign
assistance and, in the winter of 1805-1806, he tempted Prussia
with impressive offers of money and land. His death brought
about less of a change of policy than might have been expected.
Even while seeking for peace, Fox recognized that the allies would
require subsidies should the war continue. These he was ready to
provide, if ‘the amount required be not too exorbitant.” Lord
Grenville was far less generous and, following Fox’s death, he
nearly stopped the stream of money which had flowed steadily to
the allies since 1794. During the winter of 1806-1807, when
Prussia and Russia called for massive help, he doled out subsidies
by the spoonful.
   This pinchbeck response confirmed the allies’ belief that
Britain’s policy was utterly selfish. Early in 1807 Lord Howick
laid down certain principles of subsidization which go at least part
way to justify that conclusion. Writing to Robert Adair, the
foreign secretary promised that Austria would be given some
money should she go to war. “But even then,” Howick went on,
“it is to be observed, that the state of affairs will be very different
from that in which subsidies have formerly been granted by this

 52. Alexander Stratton to Howick, April 5, 1807, FO 73/39.
 53. Douglas to Howick, March 7, 1807, FO 65/68.
                                        181
                                    1805-1807

Country. These were given to different Powers to induce them to
send large armies into the field, and to maintain them for the
purpose of offensive operations, at a distance from their own
frontiers. Austria will now be engaged at home, in her own cause,
& in support of her own independence.” Continental powers must
not rely too much on British money. With almost an air of
unctuousness, Howick observed that, “if the great Powers now at
war, or threatened by France, cannot find in themselves the means
of such Exertion, it is in vain to expect that this Country, by any
supplies which we could afford, would be able effectually to support
them. It is now indeed more than ever necessary that we should
husband our own resources.””>4
  A more generous subsidy policy would probably have done
nothing to check the onrushing French tide in East Prussia during
the early months of 1807. However, Grenville’s miserliness
contributed to Alexander’s growing sense of betrayal, a feeling
clearly reflected in his statement to Napoleon at Tilsit, “‘I hate the
English as much as you do.”
  An epoch was coming to an end in the spring of 1807. Prussia
and Russia would finally make peace with Napoleon and take their
places on the fringe of his expanding empire. Except for a brief
interlude in 1809, Britain’s ties with her allies of three coalitions
were severed and would remain so for another five years. During
that interval, the major problem facing the nations of Europe
would be to preserve what was left of their national integrity
against Napoleon’s steady pressure.
   Prior to 1807 generous British trade credits on the Continent
helped the government provide the allies with subsidies. However,
the Continental System which Napoleon was creating would alter
this and oblige future British leaders to rely heavily on the export
of specie to implement their foreign aid program. How to provide
subsidies and yet not exhaust Britain’s specie supply was a
constant problem after 1807.
   Finally, the conduct of the war was passing to new hands. Pitt
and Fox had both fallen, while Grenville withdrew to the House of
Lords wearing the mantle of a prophet of doom. This cleared the
stage for a new generation of actors. In the emergence of George
 54. Howick to Adair, January 13, 1807, FO 7/83.
 55. Albert Vandal, Napoleon et Alexandre I& . . . (Paris, 1891-1896), I, 58.


                                         182
                        The End ofan Epoch


Canning and the steady, if less dramatic, rise of Lord Castlereagh,
we find the heirs of Pitt—fresh, yet dedicated to their teacher’s
historic concept of Britain’s role in the war with France. Disgusted
with the old coalitions and their sad record of failure, they tried to
forge new instruments or improve old ones. The national uprisings
in the Peninsula gave Canning the chance to modify Pitt’s policy
of foreign aid and make it fit the needs ofa new era. In so doing,
he created a force against France which his teacher would have
applauded. Castlereagh inherited the vision of a great continental
alliance which Pitt had glimpsed in 1805, but nearly a decade
would pass before he was able to graft its principles onto the final
coalition which would overthrow Napoleon.




                                  183
                                     [Xx
  A NEW       DIRECTION            FOR        BRITISH       WAR      POLICY




The ministry formed by the Duke of Portland in the spring of 1807
was the most loosely knit regime to govern wartime Britain. Pitt
and Grenville had been dominant figures, but Portland presided
over a Cabinet he did not lead. The government’s strength lay in
the ability of several of its ministers whose rivalries the prime
minister tried hard to moderate. Spencer Perceval, who served as
chancellor of the exchequer, described the arrangement: “It is not
because the Duke of Portland is at our head that the Government
is a Government of Departments, but it is because the Government
is and must be essentially a Government of Departments that the
Duke of Portland is at our head.””!
   Two of those departments, vitally important in the conduct of
the war, were headed by men whose antagonism finally brought
them to the dueling field. At the Foreign Office, George Canning
undertook to prove his claim to be Pitt’s political heir. That claim
was not without some foundation, but Canning’s unquestionable
ability and leadership qualities were marred by restless ambition.
As Pitt’s protégé, he had served briefly as undersecretary for
foreign affairs to prepare himself for the larger roles he expected
to play. A fondness for intrigue and lack of steadiness cost him his
mentor’s confidence. In his last years, Pitt relied increasingly on
Lord Castlereagh. As Portland’s secretary of war, Castlereagh
would have to work with his rival in at least some degree of
harmony. Mutual distrust prevented the two men from being
genuine partners, but each contributed to the revision of Britain’s
war policy, which the Portland government initiated.

  1. J. Steven Watson, The Reign of George III, 1760-1815 (Oxford, 1960), p. 444.

                                        184
                     A New Direction for British War Policy


   Grenville had left behind a clutch of problems whose solution
would require all the ability the new Cabinet possessed. His
military expeditions to South America and the Mediterranean
were proving costly failures. On the Continent, the war had been
squeezed into a small arena where Prussia and Russia were vainly
trying to hold back France. Thanks to Grenville’s puny contribu-
tion to this work, Britain’s influence and prestige had waned in the
eyes of the allies now locked in mortal combat.
   The Portland ministry was anxious to reverse Grenville’s
shortsighted policies and throw the nation’s resources behind its
allies, but impressive obstacles blocked the path. With so large a
part of the army overseas, no more than 12,000 troops could be
spared to open a new front in western Europe.” Sending financial
help to Prussia and Russia also presented problems. The Continen-
tal System was rapidly shrinking Britain’s export trade to Europe,
thereby cutting into the credits she needed to pay subsidies.?
Fortunately, the 1807 grain harvest would prove adequate, if not
abundant; no heavy purchase of food overseas would be called for
this year.* Of course, subsidies could always be paid for by the
export of hard money, but the government was naturally reluctant
to do so.
   Far worse than Britain’s military weakness or the shrinkage of
her continental trade was the fact that time was fast running out
for the allies. The French capture of Danzig in May signaled the
opening of a campaign to decide the fate of the Russo-Prussian
armies. If Britain was to intervene effectively, arrangements would
have to be made at once. Castlereagh worked feverishly to prepare
a British expedition to Stralsund; at the Foreign Office, Canning
moved heaven and earth to send the allies the money and arms
they needed.°
   One of the most important features of Canning’s policy
appeared in his first dispatches to Lord Hutchinson, who was still
  2. Memorandum for the Cabinet, relative to the State of the Military Force, March,
1807, Correspondence of Castlereagh, VIII, 46-52.
  3. The value of British products sent to northern Europe fell from £10,320,000 in
1805 to £5,090,000 by the end of 1807. Even that was cut in half during the following
year.    See Eli Hecksher,   The Continental System; an Economic Interpretation,     ed. H.
Westergaard (Oxford, 1922), p. 245.
  4.W.     F. Galpin, The Grain Supply of England during the Napoleonic Period (New
Vork,1925),ps257-
  5. Richard Glover, Peninsular Preparation:       The   Reform   of the   British   Army,
1795-1809 (Cambridge, 1963), pp. 246-254.

                                            185
                                     1807-1809


at allied headquarters. The Prussians were to be given £100,000 at
once to provide for their needs until a regular subsidy agreement
could be concluded. The shortage of continental credits and the
disruption of normal banking services would make it difficult for
Britain to remit large sums to the allies. “It is possible,” Canning
observed, “‘that these difficulties might be in some degree removed
by an agreement on the part of the Continental Powers, to receive
a proportion of what might be given (or lent) to them, in arms,
clothing, and such other Manufactures of this Country, as may be
applicable to their immediate wants.’© No effort would be spared
to send arms to the allies, but Britain wished to count their value
as part of the subsidy they also expected.
  Although the foreign secretary was eager to put muskets in the
hands of the allied armies, it soon became clear that Britain’s
resources were severely limited. In April Jacobi gave the Foreign
Office a list of supplies needed by Prussia, and within a month, 40
howitzers and cannon, together with 10,000 muskets, 3,000,000
ball cartridges, and 100,000 flints were on the way to the Baltic!
By June nearly 100,000 British muskets had been sent off and still
the allies called for more.’ Lord Chatham, Master General of the
Ordnance, threw up his hands in despair. With only 2,000 pistols
remaining in stock, he simply could not meet Prussia’s latest
request for 15,000. Russia had asked for 1,200 rifles of a type
which the Ordnance could not supply. Very patiently, Chatham
explained why he was unable to comply with such requests. The
Ordnance Office had always relied on continental gunsmiths to
supplement the home production of weapons. With the Continent
now cut off, Britain was thrown on her own resources. Efforts
were being made to boost arms production, but no material
improvement could be expected for at least a year.?
  The fresh point of view Canning brought to the Foreign Office is
clearly seen in his negotiation of a subsidy treaty with Jacobi.
That envoy, whom Grenville had so badly browbeaten, proposed
  6. Canning to Hutchinson, no. 4, April 5, 1807, FO 64/74.
  7. Jacobi to Canning,   April   14, 1807, FO 64/77; Castlereagh   to Canning, May   16,
1807, FO 64/74.
  8. Seventy thousand muskets had gone to the Baltic since the first of the year, while
24,000 had been sent to Sicily. Memorandum . .. on the subject of Military and Naval
Succours, May 26, 1807, Correspondence of Castlereagh, VII, 66.
  9. Chatham to Castlereagh, June 19, 1807, FO 64/77. See also R. Glover, Peninsular
Preparation, pp. 61-67.
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


terms of such an agreement to Canning late in the spring: to
maintain an army of 100,000 men, Prussia required £600,000 as a
preparation subsidy together with monthly payments of £90,000.
This scheme was based on the terms of the 1794 pact, which
Prussia had all along wished to revive.
   Canning rejected it. The time was long past for any agreement
based on the outmoded principles of 1794. Then, Prussia was
renting an army to Britain and Holland to do with as they pleased.
The present situation was altogether different since ‘‘His Majesty is
now called upon to assist the King of Prussia in the Recovery of
his Dominions, and in the Defence of his Crown and Kingdom.”
Were it not for precedent, Canning would have had no treaty at
all. During the Seven Years War, England subsidized Frederick the
Great’s desperate struggle for survival. Since the present state of
affairs was exactly the same, the foreign secretary proposed to
take the 1758 treaty as a model.!° He then made a refreshingly
simple offer: Britain would pay Prussia £1,000,000 in three
installments during the year in return for her pledge to employ all
her resources in the war against France.!! This proposal threw
Jacobi into some        confusion,      but there was little room           for him to
object. On June 27 the two men signed the simplest subsidy treaty
of the entire war.!* Happily, the foreign secretary also departed
from the practices of his predecessors in another particular. Even
before the treaty was signed, arrangements were made for the
shipment of specie to cover the first installment of the Prussian
subsidy. Silver was to be bought in Denmark for delivery at
Kronstadt.!?
  The Tsar’s demand for a British loan complicated the Cabinet’s
plans to aid him. Canning was as reluctant as Grenville to endorse
such a transaction and he explained his ideas to Leveson Gower,
who had again been named as Britain’s envoy to Russia. During
the balance of the year £3,000,000 was available for aid to the
allies. Prussia and Sicily had already been promised help and

   10. Canning was referring to the elder Pitt’s treaty with Prussia of April 11, 1758. See
Albert von Ruville, William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, trans. H. J. Chaytor (London, 1907),
II, 184.
   11. Canning to Jacobi, June, 1807, FO 64/77.
  12. Treaty with Prussia, June 27, 1807, FO 93/78(SA).
  13. Wm. Huskisson to Lord Fitzharris, May 20, 1807, FO 65/72; Memorandum          of Wm.
Huskisson, August 4, 1807, FO 65/73.
                                        1807-1809


doubtless Sweden would require something. ““What might remain
unapplied ... would be cheerfully contributed by H. M. in aid of
the military expenditure of Russia.”!4
  Canning selected the Earl of Pembroke as the new British
minister to Austria and ordered him “‘to counteract an impression
which is known to have been entertained at Vienna of an
indifference on the part of this Country to the concerns and
interests of the Continent.”’ The Hofburg was not to be offered
subsidies      as a bait      to enter the war,            but whenever           Austria     was
“unequivocally committed against France and embarked in the
common cause...       His Majesty will not then be backward to
consider the necessities of His Ally.””!
  Since a British force was soon to sail for Stralsund, Downing
Street must reach a clear understanding with Sweden. There were
other reasons for maintaining the best possible relations with
Stockholm.    Access to Sweden’s ports was more than ever
important to British merchants who found themselves shut out of
other harbors by Napoleon’s decrees. Increasing dependence on
Sweden for naval stores furnished still another reason for
remaining on good terms with Gustavus Adolphus. If the Swedish
king enlarged his army and joined Britain in an attack on France,
it might materially affect the outcome of the East Prussian
campaign. Canning was ready to be generous with Sweden. In
return for adding 4,000 men to his army, Gustavus was offered an
annual subsidy of £50,000 a year in addition to the payment of
preparation money. A treaty incorporating these provisions was
signed at Stralsund on June 23.!© One week later, the van of the
British expeditionary force, under the command of Lord Cathcart,
sailed from England to that port. By that time, however, the
campaign in East Prussia had already ended.!”

  14. Canning to Leveson Gower, May, 1807, FO 65/69. Leveson Gower was empowered
to give Russia bills on England to meet her immediate requirements.
  15. George Augustus Pembroke        (1759-1827), eleventh Earl of Pembroke, was another
military   figure   temporarily   pressed   into    diplomatic   service   for a special   mission.
Canning’s instructions, dated May 15 and 16, 1807, are to be found in FO 7/85.
  16. Gustavus was to receive the equivalent of three months’              subsidy as preparation
money, with an extra month’s payment               due at the end of the war. See Canning to
Pierrepont, May 30, 1807, FO 73/40;                Treaty with Sweden, June 23, 1807, FO
93/101(6A).
  Kis The King’s German Legion was the first unit to sail for Stralsund, just as it had
been first to leave for the Elbe in 1805.
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


  The Battle of Friedland (June 14, 1807) dashed all Canning’s
plans to pieces. Even the arms sent by Britain arrived too late to
help the allies.!8 Leveson Gower reached Russian headquarters a
few days after the battle and found Alexander bitterly resentful at
Britain’s failure to sponsor his loan. The envoy did his best to
explain Canning’s position, but admitted, with remarkable under-
statement, “I cannot say that the Emperor appeared perfectly
satisfied.” The Russian minister, Budberg, went to the heart of the
matter when he grimly observed to Leveson Gower, “It is not
money, it is men we want.’!? A few days later Alexander and
Napoleon met on a raft in the river Niemen, and shortly thereafter
France concluded      peace treaties with the defeated powers.
Leveson Gower grew anxious about the silver now deposited in the
Imperial Bank at St. Petersburg. Since it was no longer needed to
pay Prussia a subsidy, he had it carried on board H.M.S. Astrea at
Kronstadt. By August it was safely at sea and the British minister
breathed more easily. “I thought it my duty,” he explained to
Canning, “to take it out of the hands of this Government as soon
as possible.”’??
   By the end of July, Napoleon had swept all the pieces from the
continental chess board except the Anglo-Swedish army at
Stralsund. Britain’s change of policy had come too late to halt, or
even delay, the coalition’s death. In line with the principle
adopted by Pitt three years before, Canning had offered help to
any power ready to fight Napoleon. However, he distrusted the
complicated and unrealistic details of the treaties Pitt had
negotiated. France could be defeated only by an inexorable will to
victory on the part of the allies. There was no room for the careful
numbering of soldiers as the basis for determining subsidies. Fight
with all your might, he told Prussia, and we will not fail you. In
this spirit, Britain offered to supply her allies with needed war
materials. If British commerce and industry proved equal to the
  18. This seems to be the meaning of Hutchinson’s letter to Canning of July 20, 1807,
FO 64/74.
   19. Leveson Gower to Canning, June 17 and 18, 1807, FO 65/69.
   20. Leveson Gower to Canning, August 2, 1807, FO 65/69. Master’s Log for H.M.S.
Astrea, 1807, Ad. 51/1662. Vienna learned of Friedland before the arrival of Britain’s
new envoy. Adair undertook a last-minute plea and told Stadion that he would guarantee
“any sum that might be wanted to put their army instantly into motion.” Stadion did
not even bother to reply. Adair’s proposal was sheer lunacy. See Adair to Canning, June
27, 1807, FO 7/84.


                                         189
                                    1807-1809


challenge, Canning was ready to promise unlimited support to any
power animated by the will to victory. Guineas and gunpowder
were henceforth to be the prime ingredients of Britain’s subsidy
program.

   Napoleon used his new friendship with the Tsar to further plans
to create a bloc of Baltic powers hostile to Britain. Canning was
powerless to prevent Denmark from being forced into that league,
but he could at least insure that her fleet would not fall to the
French. Late in the summer of 1807 a British military and naval
force attacked Copenhagen and returned home with the Danish
ships in tow. This brilliant, if controversial, stroke was not without
its cost. Russia declared war on Great Britain even earlier than she
had planned. Meanwhile, a trembling Austria sought by all means
to avoid the fate which had befallen Prussia as the penalty for her
temerity. The French systematically plundered Frederick William’s
kingdom in order to keep it in a state of perpetual dependence.!
   In order to survive, Britain would have to strengthen her ties
with the few European powers still beyond Napoleon’s grasp and
use them as trade entrepOts to breach the Continental System. It
was uncertain how long Portugal could be kept from Napoleon’s
clutches. Should France succeed in closing her ports, Canning
would surely offset this loss by gaining admission to Portugal’s
colonial markets. The independence of Sweden and her alliance
with Britain were also of paramount importance to London.
British goods exported to Sweden had a way of being sent on to
those parts of Europe behind Napoleon’s blockade. Between 1 807
and 1810 the value of Britain’s exports to Sweden increased
fourfold, thereby providing her with the means of obtaining much
needed timber and naval stores from the Baltic area. Gibraltar,
Sicily, and the Ionian Islands also served as entrep6ts through
which British goods passed on to continental consumers.?? Both
  21. In August 1807 Prussia requested a loan of £1,000,000 from Britain to help her
pay the indemnity which Napoleon had imposed. The British government refused to
help. See Garlike to Canning, August 26, 1807, FO 64/76.
   22. Hecksher, Continental System, p. 245. For an account of Britain’s use of Sweden
and Heligoland as trade entrepOts, see ibid., pp. 178-180. Sweden sent little timber to
Britain, but her ports were entrepdts for timber quietly brought from other Baltic
harbors under the Continental System. See Robert G. Albion, Forests and Sea Power;
es Timber    Problem   of the English Navy,   1652-1862   (Cambridge,   Mass.,   1926), pp.
  2-343.
                   A New Direction for British War Policy


economic and military considerations made it essential for Britain
to keep Portugal, Sweden, and Sicily free from French control.
  During the summer of 1807 Napoleon put immense pressure on
the Portuguese Regent to break with England and adhere to the
Continental System. Joao only hoped that Britain would allow
him to submit. From Lisbon, the British minister, Lord Strang-
ford, sent home discouraging reports regarding the Regent’s
conduct. In order to make peace with Napoleon on the best
possible terms, Joao was reported to be sending packets of
diamonds to France’s leaders. “I cannot help declaring my firm
conviction,” Strangford observed, “that any attempt on the part
of England to save Portugal by any Military Succours, would be
utterly unavailing.”*? Experience proved that only the dispatch of
a major British army could help Portugal. Since this was out of the
question, Canning fell back on the remedy prescribed by Lord
Hawkesbury in 1801: the transfer of the Portuguese government
and fleet to Brazil. But the Regent was reluctant to go. Caught
between a Franco-Spanish army of invasion on one side and a
menacing British fleet in Lisbon harbor, Jodo finally yielded to
Strangford’s demands.** With the Portuguese court now en route
to Brazil, Canning could affordto be generous; £80,000 in gold
was sent to Rio for the Regent’s use and he was given a £20,000
credit in London.”
  Britain expected to enjoy the right of direct trade with Brazil,
and in January 1808 the Regent responded by throwing open his
New World ports to ships of friendly nations. Even though Britain
would have the lion’s share of that trade, Canning sought
preferential treatment. Various difficulties intervened to delay the
conclusion of the necessary commercial treaty for two years.
However, by 1811 Britain had gained an impressive hold on
Portugal’s overseas markets—seventy-five British firms were doing
business at Rio. In exchange for manufactured goods, England
  23. Strangford   to Canning,   August   20, 21, 1807, FO   63/55. Percy Clinton   Sydney
Smythe, sixth Viscount Strangford (1780-1855) was one of the youngest British
diplomats of the period. He accompanied the Regent to Rio and there won fame as
Britain’s spokesman in Brazil.
  24. On October 22, 1807 Canning signed a treaty with Portugal’s envoy calling for the
removal of the Regent to Rio and the conclusion of an Anglo-Portugese trade agreement
(FO 93/77 [1B]).                                           .
  25. Canning to F. Hill, January 16, 1808, FO 63/63; Canning to Strangford, August 5,
1808, FO 63/59.
                                  1807-1809


obtained specie, raw cotton, and other colonial raw materials,
which somewhat offset the losses she suffered from the Continen-
tal System.”6
   It had been impossible to save Portugal from the enemy, but
Canning hoped that something might be done to guarantee
Sweden’s independence. Following the Battle of Tilsit, Gustavus
had been forced to abandon Stralsund. Now he found himself
threatened on three sides by France’s allies and henchmen:
Denmark, Prussia, and Russia. In the East, the Tsar’s army moved
menacingly toward the Finnish frontier, while a French force in
Denmark clearly intended to strike. In December 1807 Gustavus
Adolphus called on London for help.
   Sweden’s importance to Britain guaranteed a favorable response
to this appeal. No troops could be spared, but Canning promised
to strengthen the British fleet in the Baltic as soon as possible.
Subsidies were also offered on the basis of the type of agreement
the foreign secretary always preferred. If Sweden would do
everything possible to defend herself, Britain would pay her
£100,000 a month during the coming year. These were the
instructions handed to Edward Thornton, who would go to
Stockholm as Britain’s new plenipotentiary. To avoid needless
delay, £100,000 in silver was sent to Goteborg for his use as the
first installment of the subsidy.27 Under the circumstances,
Gustavus was not inclined to bargain, and on February 8, 1808 he
accepted the British proposal.7® A few days later, Russian troops
crossed the border into Finland, and shortly thereafter, Denmark
joined the war against Gustavus.
  The rapid Russian advance prompted Stockholm to call on
England for still more money and a supply of weapons. Canning’s
response was as vigorous as ever. Although additional subsidies
could not be given, 35,000 muskets together with powder,
cartridges, and sabres, all valued at £94,023, would be sent at

  26. Manchester, British Preéminence, p. 69 and passim.
  27. Canning to E. Thornton, December 30, 1807, FO 73/45. Edward Thornton
(1766-1852) was one of Britain’s more successful career diplomats. He was to have an
important part to play in the formation of the final coalition against France.
  28. Since all Britain’s earlier subsidy treaties with Sweden involved the use of
Stralsund, they were nullified when Gustavus abandoned Pomerania. See the treaty with
Sweden, February 8, 1808, FO 93/101 (6B); and Thornton to Canning, February 9,
1808, FO 73/46.


                                        EI?
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


once. As a special concession, the value of these arms would not
be deducted from the monthly subsidy.2? Sweden’s extreme
danger finally led the Cabinet to decide on military intervention,
and in May, 10,000 British troops commanded by General Sir
John Moore sailed for Goteborg. Canning was ready to aid Sweden
by the same means he had offered Prussia and Russia one year
before: subsidies, war materials, and finally military force.
  Although it was desirable for Britain to clarify her relations with
Sicily, the Foreign Office felt little urgency to do so. The exiled
government of Naples was now safely ensconced at Palermo under
the strong protection of the British fleet. Originally there had been
some hope of using the island as a springboard for an invasion of
the mainland, but that scheme had been abandoned. By the time
Canning came to the Foreign Office, Sicily figured very little in
Britain’s war plans.
   If Canning took the trouble to review the Foreign Office
correspondence relating to Sicily during the past five years, he
might have concluded that no amount of labor would make sense
of it. Anglo-Sicilian relations involved three separate problems,
each one of which was a Gordian knot. The records of the British
subsidy payments to Sicily, which began in 1804, were now
hopelessly confused, never to be set straight. Addington had
started the payments on an informal basis in 1804. They were
continued by Pitt who, without the benefit of a treaty, promised
Naples £300,000 a year. After Ferdinand fled to Sicily, subsidy
payments were made irregularly by the British minister, Hugh
Elliot.2° Not only were Elliot’s records incomplete, but he and the
Palermo government never could agree on the value of such
remittances as he did bother to note. Payments were usually made
by means of bills of exchange, but the shortage of hard money in
the island produced severe discounting when the bills were
converted into cash. Should payments be figured in terms of the
  29. Canning to Thornton, March 24, April 1, 1808, FO 73/45; R. Crewe to C. Bagot,
April 21, 1808, FO 73/53. A small part of the Swedish subsidy was used to create a
credit for her government in London, but the bulk of it went to her in specie.
Thornton’s Account, in the papers of the Audit Office, deposited in the Public Record
Office, London (hereafter cited as “AO’’), 1/12(31) shows that between January and
October 1808, £855,050 in silver was sent to Sweden.
  30. Hugh Elliot (1752-1830) was a minor diplomat who began his career at Munich in
1773. Lack of interest and ability prevented him from reaching the top positions and he
ended his career as a colonial governor.
                                  1807-1809

face value of the bills of exchange, or of the specie they produced
when negotiated? On giving up his post in November 1806, Elliot
was obliged to send London an account of his payments. That
account, showing a total expenditure of £424,657, was at best an
estimate—at worst, a wild guess. Elliot abandoned the island with
relief, leaving responsibility for future subsidies to the British
commander, General Henry Fox, until the arrival of the new
envoy, William Drummond.*! Elliot, Fox, Drummond, and the
Sicilian government agreed on only one point: British payments
were in arrears. Drummond         estimated these arrears to be
£267,799, a figure which the Palermo court vociferously pro-
tested.22 How the two parties were ever to reach agreement on this
question was beyond Canning’s understanding.
  Quite a different problem was the Queen, Maria Carolina, who
exerted a commanding influence over her husband’s government.
Disliking Sicily intensely, she schemed to recover Naples either by
arms or diplomatic intrigue. The refusal of British officers to
enter wholeheartedly into her harebrained plans inevitably won
them her hatred, whch often verged on the paranoid. Maria
Carolina easily achieved a remarkable record: she quarreled
bitterly with every British military and civil official of first rank
who came to the island. Elliot’s successor dangerously under-
estimated his regal opponent. Not long after his arrival, Drum-
mond decided to end her meddling and announced that he would
pay no more subsidies until the Queen resigned from the Council
of State. Victory came easy for the British envoy—too easy. The
Queen did resign and Drummond renewed the payments. How-
ever, Maria Carolina’s power was as great outside the council as it
had ever been, a fact which Drummond’s pride prevented him
from admitting. Having thoroughly duped her antagonist, the
Queen openly defied him by resuming her place on the council.
There was more than a little sense in the suggestion privately made
by General Sir John Moore that the Queen be shipped off to

  31. William Drummond (1770?-1828) was capable of arousing strong feelings in those
with whom he worked. Unquestionably, he was vain and inclined to self-deception.
Conditions in Sicily were hardly of the sort to bring out his better qualities.
  32. An Account of the different Payments made to the Neapolitan government up to
November, 1806, FO 70/29; George Harrison to Hammond, December 9, 1807, FO
70/31; Drumniond to Canning, October 29, 1807, FO 70/30. The total payments made
by Elliot and (ox, prior to Drummond’s arrival, seem to have amounted to £579,002.


                                       194
                    A New Direction for British War Policy


Trieste. Thoughtful observers saw her as a symbol of the wretched
relations that existed between the Bourbons and the people of
Sicily. Reforms were desperately needed to check a growing
tendency to revolution on the island.*?
   Finally, what ought to be the relation between Ferdinand’s
government, nominally sovereign, and his British protectors?
During the Grenville ministry, Drummond had been instructed to
demand important concessions from Sicily in return for a subsidy
treaty. These included placing the Sicilian army under a British
commander, a reform of the Bourbon government, and exemption
from Sicilian custom duties of supplies sent the British garrison.
Drummond did not press the matter and his treaty of March 23,
 1807 obtained very little in return for the promise of an annual
£300,000 subsidy.*4
  The Sicilian treaty remained unratified on Canning’s desk for
nearly six months. In December 1807 he finally approved it but
insisted on a change in the text. One of the articles obliged Britain
to pay all subsidy arrears within six months after ratification.
Parliament had never voted any money for the Sicilian subsidy in
the past; it had been taken from the Secret Service fund.
Therefore, this article must be made a secret provision and thus
expunged from the text to be laid before Parliament.* The foreign
secretary took pains to underscore the fact that, henceforth,
Palermo would be obliged to submit a quarterly account showing
how it had spent the subsidy. “A constant and scrupulous
observance of that Article’? was recommended to Drummond. The
House of Commons approved the agreement, but embarrassing
questions were asked about unauthorized payments made in the
past. Exception was also taken to the fact that no concessions had
been obtained from Ferdinand’s government.*©
  Like Elliot and Drummond, Canning failed to reach agreement
with Palermo on the matter of subsidy arrears. His patience now
sorely tried, he proposed to settle the business by increasing the
  33. John     Rosselli, Lord   William   Bentinck   and   the British   Occupation   of Sicily,
1811-1814 (Cambridge, 1956), pp. 158-163; Oman, Moore, p. 389 and passim.
  34. Howick to Drummond, October 3, 1806, FO 70/30; Drummond to Howick, March
11, 1807, FO 70/30; Treaty with Sicily, March 23, 1807, FO 93/96 (1B).
  35. Canning    to Drummond,       December   26, 1807, FO     70/30. To carry out Canning’s
orders,   Drummond     negotiated    a new   treaty with Sicily on March     30, 1808. See FO
93/96(2, 3).
  36. Canning to Drummond,          June 25, 1808, FO 70/32; Hansard, X1 (1808), 861-863.


                                               WS)
                                 1807-1809

annual subsidy to £400,000. To prevent further disputes, all
payments would be made in London, rather than Palermo. The
offer was accepted.’ The Byzantine conduct of Ferdinard’s
regime soon drove Canning to fury, and only his resignation in
October spared Palermo from feeling his wrath.?8 Canning’s
successors at the Foreign Office probably did well to forget Sicily;
the strategic value of the island had greatly diminished during the
past year. However, two important questions would soon force
Downing Street to take action: the divided command over British
and Sicilian troops on the island and the execrable conduct of the
Bourbon government toward its long-suffering subjects.
  During the first year of the Portland ministry, British foreign
policy tried to conserve what little remained of her continental
connections; it was a policy dictated as much by economic as
military considerations. Unable to save Portugal, Britain obtained
some equivalent for her loss in the opening of Brazil. Canning
struggled to hold Sweden by sending her money, arms, and troops.
If relations with Sicily were still uneasy, military and financial
support for the island had at last been put on a regular basis. None
of this was exciting, but it was necessary. Canning’s experience
with foreign aid and its attendant problems prepared him for the
far more important work which came to hand with the outbreak
of the national revolts in the Peninusla during the spring of 1 808.

  Instead of being rewarded for her part in the conquest of
Portugal, Spain discovered that collaboration with Napoleon
would cost her dearly. In the spring of 1808 more than 100,000
French soldiers were in Spain to back up the Emperor’s decision
to place his brother Joseph on the throne of the degenerate
Bourbons. Fires of revolt against French oppression blazed forth
in Madrid and quickly spread to every corner of the land, even
leaping the border into Portugal. By June representatives from
three Spanish juntas were in London in search of arms and money
which, they insisted, were all they required to drive the usurper
from their country. Reports of French defeats in the Peninsula

 37. Canning to Drummond,   August   5, 1808, FO   70/32; Canning to Lord   Amherst,
March 7, 1809, FO 70/36; Treaty with Sicily, May 13, 1809, FO 93/96 (4).
  38. Canning to Amherst, August 16, 1809, FO 70/36; Amherst to the Marquess
Wellesley, February 5, 1810, FO 70/39.


                                       196
               A New Direction for British War Policy


encouraged the hope that, properly supported, the uprising might
indeed topple Napoleon.
   Canning sensed the excitement of this historic moment, and on
June 15 he explained the government’s policy to an enthusiastic
House of Commons. While his remarks deal with the Spanish
crisis, they reflect the viewpoint which had marked his leadership
of the Foreign Office for the past year. ‘‘We shall proceed upon
the principle,” he declared, “that any nation of Europe that starts
up with a determination to oppose a power which...             is the
common enemy of all nations, whatever may be the existing
political relations of that nation and Great Britain, becomes
instantly our essential ally.”39 His heart leaped at the prospect of
victory now opening before him. With a British army in Sweden
and the French on the defensive in the Peninsula, Napoleon might
soon have his wings clipped. The foreign secretary instructed his
agent at Stockholm to persuade Russia and Denmark to abandon
their war with Sweden. Surely they must now see the folly of
cooperating with the tyrant. Once free from France’s orbit, they
should unite with Britain in a defensive coalition, ‘“‘while the
Flames continue spreading in the South from Spain to Italy and
thence perhaps to Austria.”*° Canning’s dearest wish was to weld
the nations along the edge of Napoleon’s empire into a steel chain
with which to strangle the tyrant.
   The Cabinet’s enthusiasm kept pace with the foreign secretary,
and it agreed to send British troops to the Peninsula. Command
over this force, which finally numbered 15,000 men, went to Sir
Arthur Wellesley, with orders to secure a foothold in Portugal. A
month later the government learned, to its dismay, that more
troops were available for this service than it had anticipated. The
expeditionary force sent to Sweden was returning to England with
an account of its luckless adventure which was almost beyond
belief. On reaching Goteborg, Sir John Moore had conferred with
Gustavus Adolphus regarding the employment of the British
troops. By this time the Swedish king was verging on insanity and
so extreme were his views that Moore had to object. As a result
Gustavus refused the British permission to land and threatened

 39. Hansard, XI (1808), 890-891.
 40. Canning to Thornton, June 10, 1808, FO 73/45.


                                      WOT
                                    1807-1509


Moore with arrest. Upon returning to England, the corps was sent
to join the expedition already en route to Portugal. Command
over the now enlarged army in the Peninsula was vested in Sir Hew
Dalrymple.
   In June Canning met with the representatives of the Spanish
juntas, who vied with each other in pressing their claims for British
help. The Asturian envoys, the first to reach London, asked for at
least 5,000,000 Spanish dollars (about £1,000,000). Those from
Galicia submitted a request for only $3,000,000, which they
promptly raised to $5,000,000 on learning of the Asturian
demand. Uniformity was achieved with the arrival of a delegation
from Andalusia with a plea for $5,000,000. Canning returned the
same answer to all of them: Britain would send as much specie and
 arms as she could spare.*! No time was lost in making good that
pledge. Early the next month, Charles Stuart sailed for Corunna
with £200,000 in Spanish dollars for the junta of Galicia.*” Before
the summer ended £1,100,000 in silver had been given the five
major juntas with the promise that more would be forthcoming as
soon as a Supreme Junta for all of Spain was formed. Payments
made to the provinces fell short of their original demands, but
they were solid proof of Britain’s determination to support the
national revolt. Portugal did less well since her petition reached
London only after the British government had undertaken
commitments to the Spanish. At the end of July Canning learned
that the Bishop of Oporto, leader of the resistance movement in
that city, needed arms, equipment, and money to outfit 40,000
men. At the moment Britain could spare only about £60,000,
which was given at once.*3
  41. The value of the Spanish dollar varied between four and five to the pound sterling
(Canning to John Hunter and Charles Stuart, July 27, 1808. FO 72/57). Canning’s
replies to the envoys from the Asturias (June 12, 1808) and from Galicia (June 29,
1808) are found in FO 72/66.
  42. Charles Stuart (1779-1845) was a son of General Sir Charles Stuart, who
commanded the British troops sent to Portugal during the Second Coalition. The
younger Stuart remained in the diplomatic service and in 1828 was created Baron Stuart
de Rothesay.
  Payments to the local juntas were all in silver as follows: Galicia, £500,000; Asturias,
£200,000; Seville, £200,000; Leon, £100,000; Cadiz, £100,000. In addition, £50,000
was given to the troops of the Spanish Marquis de Romana (Memorandum of Supplies
furnished by Great Britain to Spain .. ., FO 72/137).
  43. Canning to John H. Frere, November 16, 1808, FO 72/60; Bishop of Oporto to de
Souza, July 7, 1808, FO 63/65; Canning to de Souza, August 4, 1808, FO 63/65. In
November   1808 Britain advanced £95,000 to Portugal on a loan which she planned to
float in London; Canning to Strangford, November 26, 1808, FO 63/60.

                                          198
                   A New Direction for British War Policy


  Arms were sent the Spanish as quickly as they could be loaded
aboard ships; more than 30,000 muskets accompanied the British
troops    when      they    sailed   for   the    Peninsula       in mid-July.         Lord
Chatham promised to deliver 70,000 more before the end of the
year, but under the ceaseless proddings of Canning and Castle-
reagh, the languid Master General did even better. In November he
reported that at least 160,000 muskets had already been sent, with
another 30,000 to 40,000 due to follow within a month.“ Most of
these arms were consigned to Britain’s military agents in Spain
with orders to distribute them to the local juntas.* Portugal’s
needs were not neglected. During the last half of 1808 Britain sent
her 26,766 stand of arms along with 17,000 pikes. Britain also
shipped to the insurgents in the Peninsula enough clothing to
outfit 100,000 men.*°
   Results on the battlefield quickly confirmed the wisdom of
British support of the nationalists. In July a Spanish army soundly
beat the French at Baylen and forced 18,000 of them to lay down
their arms. A month later, Britain celebrated the first victory of its
own army in Portugal. At Vimiero, thirty-five miles north of
Lisbon, Wellesley repulsed a heavy French attack, but the fruits of
victory were snatched away by his superior’s unfortunate Con-
vention of Cintra with the enemy.*” Although the French agreed
to withdraw from Portugal, several features of the Convention
aroused bitter opposition in England. Dalrymple and Wellesley
were called home to answer charges, leaving Sir John Moore in
command of the British troops in Portugal. Across the frontier in
Spain, a series of defeats compelled the French to withdraw to a
defensive position along the Ebro River. This so encouraged
London that it ordered Moore to enter Spain and join the
nationalists in driving the enemy from the Peninsula. In mid-
October, the British expeditionary force marched out of Lisbon
on their way to Salamanca in Spain, commanded by a general who

  44. Chatham   to Canning, July 17, 1808, FO 72/68; Canning to Frere, November            16,
1808, FO 72/60.
  45. Fortescue, British Army, V1, 257-261.
  46. An account of the arms issued for the Service of the Portuguese Government from
the Commencement of the War in the year 1808, March 24, 1813, FO 63/102;
Memorandum      of Supplies furnished... to Spain, FO 72/137. Sir William F. P. Napier
(History of the War in the Peninsula ..., {[London, 1890],     I, 87) claimed that very little
of this equipment ever found its way to the Spanish soldier.
 47. Michael Glover, Wellington’s Peninsular Victories (London, 1963), pp. 14-15.

                                           tO
                                   1807-1809


was frankly disturbed by the uncertainties which lay ahead. As
yet, no Spanish commander had been given authority to co-
ordinate the several armies which the Junta had in the field.
Furthermore, Moore was troubled by the lack of any reliable
information as to where he might find the Spanish and how many
of them were actually under arms.
  In London, Canning was trying to reach formal agreements with
Britain’s new allies before the first flush of enthusiasm passed. His
efforts to persuade the separate Spanish juntas to unite finally
bore fruit with the formation of the Supreme Junta at Aranjuez in
September     1808. To no one’s surprise, one of its first acts was to
ask Britain for an annual subsidy of £2,000,000, together with
arms and equipment for 300,000 troops.*8 The foreign secretary
appointed John Hookham Frere as his envoy to the Junta and
explained the policy he was to follow.*? The money and arms
already sent Spain would be considered as a gift, although future
British aid must be on a somewhat different basis. Frere was given
£650,000 in silver to help the Junta, pending the conclusion of a
formal subsidy agreement. Britain’s supply of hard money had
been nearly exhausted by the massive shipments to the Peninsula
during the last few months, and future aid would depend upon
Britain obtaining access to the markets of Spain and her colonies.
““An intercourse with South America,” the foreign secretary
declared, “‘is indispensably necessary for the obtaining, by this
Country, the means of continuing its Aid to the Spanish cause.”>?
  Canning stressed this point in his meeting with Admiral
Apodaca, the Junta’s envoy in London, and proposed that any
alliance between the two governments incorporate both subsidy
provisions and a commerical agreement. Apodaca protested that
he had no authority to revise commercial relations between Spain
and Britain. The foreign secretary decided not to press the point;
perhaps Frere could accomplish more by dealing directly with the
Junta. Consequently, the Anglo-Spanish treaty, signed in London

  48. Count Florida Blanca to C. Stuart, October 5, 1808, FO 72/59.
  49. John Hookham Frere (1769-1846) was an intimate friend of Canning and had
enjoyed some success as a writer. However, he had no capacity for diplomacy. See
Fortescue’s harsh judgment on his services in Spain in British Army, VI, 300.
  50. Canning to Frere, October 5, November 16, 1808, FO 72/60. The high Spanish
tariff of 1806 caused British merchants much trouble. See John Holland Rose, “Canning
and the Spanish Patriots in 1808,” American Historical Review, 12 (1906-1907), 47.


                                        200
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


on January 14, 1809, merely expressed the intention of the two
powers to conclude a commercial convention at some future time.
Under the circumstances, Canning decided to avoid any specific
subsidy commitment and the alliance simply provided that “A
Treaty shall forthwith be negotiated, stipulating the amount and
description of Succours to be afforded by His Britannick
Majesty.”>! For five years this loose pact was Britain’s only
diplomatic tie with Spain. The Junta was unwilling to follow
Portugal’s example and Frere’s reports offered very little hope that
she would ever throw open her markets to Britain.>”
  Britain’s problems with Portugal were different from those
which troubled her Spanish negotiation. To begin with, the Regent
had already opened Brazil to England’s merchants, althrough
Canning had yet to win the preferential trade agreement he
desired. By now, enemy troops had been driven from Portugal and
it seemed unlikely that the country would again be the scene of
military operations. London believed that Portugal could con-
tribute most by sending all her available manpower to fight beside
the British and the nationalists in Spain. This was the point
Canning urged upon John Charles Villiers, whom he named as
British minister to the newly created Council of Regency at
Lisbon.*? The council had already begun to mobilize a Portuguese
army, even though this imposed a heavy burden on the tiny
country. To help with the work, Canning offered to provide
completely for the expense of 10,000 Portuguese troops who
would be incorporated in the British army as auxiliaries. The
council would receive additional British aid to help it maintain its
own national force. In return, Canning insisted that Villiers be
given a seat on the Council of Regency so that he might there
represent London’s views. The intrigue and bitter infighting which
had taken place in the formation of that body was a poor augury
for its future. Unless the Council agreed to allow Villiers a voice in
its deliberations, British aid to Portugal might be reduced or cut
off entirely.°4
 51. Canning   to Frere, January   14, 1809, FO   72/71; Treaty with Spain, January 14,
1809, FO 93/99 (6).
  52. Frere to Canning, January 21, 1809, FO 72/72.
  53. John Charles Villiers (1757-1838) held the Lisbon post for only two years and did
not distinguish himself. In 1824 he succeeded his brother as Earl of Clarendon.
 54. Canning to Villiers, nos. 1, 2, and 3, November 22, 1808, FO 63/74.


                                          Ze
                              1807-1809


  By 1809 Canning had developed a policy of aid to the Peninsular
powers based on several assumptions which still remained to be
tested. It was expected that a joint effort by the British army and
the Spanish nationalists would drive the enemy from the Pen-
insula. Portugal would help with this work by sending her men to
serve with the allies in Spain. In return for British financial
assistance, Canning expected to exert a considerable degree of
influence on the Portuguese Council of Regency through his
emissary at Lisbon.
  The first of these assumptions, on which the others depended,
was proved false in the opening weeks of 1809. Early in the
previous November, the British army entered Spain and a month
later it reached Salamanca, where Moore found a heavy budget of
bad news awaiting him. At least one of the Spanish armies on
whose support he was counting had been destroyed, while the
location and condition of the other nationalist units were
unknown. With all hope gone for the success of his campaign,
Moore decided to fall back into Portugal. On learning this, the
British minister to Spain, John H. Frere, protested that such a
withdrawal would have a disastrous effect on the Junta’s plans and
the morale of the Spanish insurgents. Political considerations, he
argued, were more important in this case than any others. Moore
hesitated, but early in December he reached a decision: he would
continue his advance and tempt the enemy to pursue him. In the
end, of course, he would have to retreat, but it was just possible
that he could draw the French after him and thereby save the
south of Spain from conquest. At best, it was a calculated risk, but
it could be justified. “I was aware,” Moore explained, ‘‘that I was
risking infinitely too much but something I thought was to be
risked, for the honour of the Service, and to make it apparent that
we stuck to the Spaniards long after they themselves had given up
their cause as lost.’>>
   The army moved out of Salamanca and, as Moore predicted, the
French came storming after it. By the end of December 1808 the
British were at Sahagun, about one hundred miles north of
Salamanca. So far, Moore’s timing had been perfect, but to
postpone his retreat any longer might prove fatal. He therefore

 55.   Oman, Moore, p. 559.


                                 202
                 A New Direction for British War Policy


ordered his forces to fall back toward Corunna in the west, where
British transports were expected to evacuate them. Thanks to
Moore’s superb leadership, the withdrawal was a success and by
January 11, 1809, the army reached Corunna. The French were so
close on their heels that Moore had to turn about and give battle
in order to buy time for the evacuation. The Battle of Corunna on
January 16 gave Britain victory, but at a heavy price: in the last
hours of the engagement, Moore was cut down. The 10,000 troops
left behind to hold Lisbon were all that remained in the Peninsula
of the largest army Britain had sent to the Continent since
Marlborough’s time. After Corunna, the French turned south to
destroy this remnant      of Britain’s power, but they were so
exhausted by the chase Moore had led them that it was spring
before the tricolor was carried into Portugal.
   Although   the long-range value of Moore’s campaign         was
enormous, at the time the evacuation of Corunna seemed a
disastrous setback for hopes which had been unrealistically high.>®
Gone forever was the dream of a quick and victorious union in
arms with the Spanish patriots, its place now taken by an equally
uncritical condemnation of all things Spanish. During the past six
months, Britain had sent money and arms to the Peninsula valued
at more than £2,500,000. Never had so much been spent in such a
short time only to yield a bitter return. On the same day that
Moore’s exhausted veterans disembarked at Portsmouth, Canning
wrote scathingly to Frere: “‘In addition to the claims which this
Country had already acquired to the confidence of Spain, we have
now that of having shed some of our best blood in its cause,
unassisted, (I am concerned to say) by any efforts of the
Spaniards, or even by the good will & good offices of that part of
the country through which our army passed!””57
  Canning’s enthusiasm for Spain now turned to a cold resentment
from which he was never thereafter entirely free. The British aid
program to the Junta ended abruptly in February 1809.°8 In an

  56. Fortescue’s analysis of Moore’s work (British Army, VI, 394-413) still seems
eminently fair.
  57. Canning to Frere, January 23, 1809, FO 72/71.
  58. Memorandum of Supplies furnished . . . to Spain, FO 72/137. About £7,000 worth
of arms and ammunition was sent to the patriots in Galicia between February and June,
1809. See statement no. 47, Payments on Account of the Spanish Government, AO
3/756.


                                        203
                                  1807-1809


effort to mollify Britain, the Junta offered to begin discussions of
a trade agreement with her, but with this went a request that
Downing Street guarantee a loan of between £10,000,000 and
£20,000,000 which the Junta hoped to raise in London. Canning
was incredulous and responded with biting sarcasm: ““The Under-
signed confesses himself to have been . . . for a long time in doubt
whether there must not have been some mistake in the translation
of the phrase.” He consigned the Junta’s request to oblivion with
the observation that ‘“‘A loan of twenty, or ten millions could not
be raised in the City of London           for any Foreign Power
whatever.’°? Spain’s poor showing on the battlefield and the
hopeless obscurantism of her government put an end to the
foreign secretary’s sympathies.
  The Cabinet had to decide whether to retain Britain’s remaining
foothold in Portugal. The decision to remain came easier when the
Council of Regency, terrified at the prospect of French invasion,
begged that a British officer be named to command Portugal’s
army. At the close of February Canning instructed Villiers to
hasten the mobilization of the 10,000 Portuguese auxiliaries to
serve in British ranks and, if possible, obtain another 10,000 on
the same terms. Nothing was now said of Villiers’ admission to the
council as a sine qua non. The Lisbon Regency had protested
when   the matter was first raised; this was not the moment                to bring
it up again. One of Canning’s goals was attained when General
William Beresford of the British army took command of all
Portugal’s troops, except the auxiliaries, and began the hard work
of turning them into an army. That same month, Villiers reported
that 9,000 Portuguese auxiliaries were now serving under the
British flag, and he hoped the number would soon increase.
  Having decided to remain in Portugal, Britain had to give her
government some promise of financial help. Equipment, supplies,
and pay would be provided for the 20,000 auxiliaries Villiers had
been ordered to obtain to serve the British. Money and supplies
would also be given to the council to raise and maintain its own
national army, now commanded by Beresford. Canning had strong
reservations about entering into any concrete subsidy agreement

 59. Canning to Don Pedro Cevallos, April 19, 1809, FO 72/86.
 60. Canning to Villiers, February 28, 1809, FO 63/74; Villiers to Canning, March 20,
1809, FO 63/75.


                                       204
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


with Lisbon, however. Assurances of a regular monthly payment
would only encourage the council to relax its efforts. Without a
treaty to bind her, Britain could use her control of the purse
strings to goad the Regency into action whenever it showed a
tendency to lassitude. Furthermore, as Canning frankly explained
to Villiers, “There is no corresponding Engagement which the
Regency could take with an assurance of being able to fulfill it.”
   London decided to send Sir Arthur Wellesley back to Lisbon,
along with 9,000 British troops to reinforce those already there.
He was to command all British troops in Portugal, as well as the
Portuguese auxiliaries, which now numbered 13,000.°2 The coun-
cil’s own army, under Beresford, was expected to cooperate with
Wellesley. The instructions prepared for Wellesley reveal how the
disaster of Corunna had affected Downing Street’s outlook: his
immediate task was to defend Portugal—a general campaign in
Spain was to be undertaken only on instructions from London.®
   Britain’s decision to defend Portugal was no commitment to
all-out war in the Peninsula. Relations with Spain, tangled since
Corunna, were still very unsatisfactory, while Portugal was being
held on a strictly limited liability basis. Canning had almost
written off his early plans of crushing the French in Spain where
the heavy expenditure of British blood and treasure had so far
accomplished nothing. He turned with relief from the frustrations
of the Peninsula to Germany where, in the spring of 1809, he
believed that materials existed for the construction of a new
coalition against France.

  The    early successes      of the Peninsular revolts in 1808 did not
blind the Foreign Office to the fact that it was fast losing its only
friend in northern Europe. Sweden’s defenses in Finland were
being pounded to pieces by the Russian army and nothing could
be done to save her. The increasingly irrational behavior of
Gustavus Adolphus made it almost impossible for Britain to treat
with him. Late in the summer of 1808 Sweden was forced to buy
an armistice from the Tsar by abandoning nearly all of Finland to

  61. Canning to Villiers, May 19, 1809, FO 63/74.
  62. Wellesley to Castlereagh, April 27, 1809, The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke
of Wellington... , ed. Lieut.-Col. John Gurwood (London, 1837-1838), IV, 272.
  63. Fortescue, British Army, VII, 129.


                                           205
                                   1807-1809


him. The Russians could be relied on to renew hostilities as soon
in the coming spring as conditions permitted.
  Britain’s 1808 subsidy treaty with Sweden would expire at the
end of the year, and in November the British minister at
Stockholm, Anthony Merry, was instructed to renew itsalt
Gustavus wished to make peace with the Russians, however,
Britain would not object.© Merry was not prepared for the violent
reception he received on reaching Stockholm in December 1808.
Gustavus demanded that the subsidy for the coming year be
increased from £1,200,000 to £2,000,000. Since the King’s needs
for money were so pressing, Merry must pay him £300,000 at
once. If that amount was not delivered within six days, Gustavus
would break with Britain and forbid his subjects to trade with her.
Merry had not expected to negotiate with a pistol at his head, but
he was wise enough to see that such was the case. Sweden’s ports
were now filled with shipping ready to sail for England with
much-needed timber and hemp as soon as navigation reopened in
the spring. To save these precious cargoes, the British envoy knew
that he must submit. Early in December he gave Gustavus’
treasury £300,000 in bills of exchange. It was unquestionably
blackmail, but the British minister had no choice.®©
  Canning was furious when he learned of Gustavus’ profitable
treachery; it was the sort of “‘outrage”’ which could be repeated on
any occasion which suited the King’s lunatic whims. If Britain
were not so dependent on Gustavus, Canning would have been
pleased to throw him to the Russians. The foreign secretary
informed Merry that Britain would not yield to Sweden’s demand
for a subsidy increase. Britain would still make available
£1,200,000 for Gustavus during 1809, but the £300,000 extorted
from Merry must be considered as the first quarterly payment.
Unless this offer was immediately accepted, Merry was to leave
Stockholm.®?       Armed    with   these orders, the British minister took
his revenge upon Gustavus Adolphus and demanded compliance.
The King was sane enough to know when his bluff had been
  64. Thornton   had recently become   non grata at Stockholm   and Merry was sent to
replace him.
 65. Canning to Merry, November 10, 1808, FO 73/50.
 66. Merry to Canning, December 6, 1808, FO 73/50; Account of Anthony Merry with
the Audit Office, AO 1/12 (32).
  67. Canning to Merry, December 23, 1808, FO 73/50.


                                         206
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


called; without British money he could not continue his war with
the Tsar. His submission was as ungracious as possible, but on
March    1 he approved the new subsidy treaty which exactly
accorded with London’s demands.®8
  Twelve days later, a palace revolution swept Gustavus from his
throne and plunged Sweden into a political crisis from which she
emerged with a new monarch and a written constitution. The new
king, Charles XIII, was well disposed toward Britain, but it was
impossible for him to continue in alliance with her. Weary of a war
which had already cost her Finland, Sweden was ready for peace
with Russia on almost any terms. Canning could scarely object to
Sweden’s search for peace and the British diplomatic mission was
soon withdrawn from Stockholm.®? Peace with Russia obliged
Sweden to adhere to the Continental System against British
commerce, but Napoleon was never able to obtain her strict
compliance. British goods continued to find their way into
Sweden’s markets under the protection of the Royal Navy, which
retained control over the Baltic.’° The loss of the northern timber
market    was    more    serious,   but Britain soon        found     compensation
for this by turning to new sources in British North America.”!
  Long before the collapse of the Swedish alliance, Canning had
turned his attention to Austria, where there was a steadily growing
demand for war with France. In recent years a war party had
developed at Vienna intent on wiping out the humiliation imposed
on the nation by the 1805 Treaty of Pressburg. At the head of this
movement was the Hapsburg minister, Count Philip Stadion, who
wished to recreate the old German empire under Austrian
control.’ France’s entanglement in Spain encouraged the belief
that the hour was fast approaching for Austria to strike. Secret
appeals for support went to Berlin and St. Petersburg, but the
responses were most discouraging. At the end of 1808 Metternich
returned from Paris, where he had been serving as Austrian envoy,
and threw all his influence on the side of war. Even without help

  68. Merry to Canning, February 24, 1809, FO 73/54; Treaty with Sweden, March       1,
1809, FO 93/101 (7).
  69. Canning to Brinkmann, April 3, 1809, FO 73/59.              ;
  70. See A. N. Ryan, “The Defence of British Trade with the Baltic, 1808-1813,”
English Historical Review, 74 (1959), 443-466.
  71. Albion, Forests and Sea Power, pp. 346-349.
  72. Enno E. Kraehe, Metternich’s German Policy (Princeton, N. J., 1963), I, 80.


                                          207
                                      1807-1809


from Prussia and Russia, Austria could put at least as many men in
the field as Napoleon. This argument clinched the Hofburg’s
decision to act, even through hostilities could not be undertaken
until the spring.”
  Austria might be able to do without military support from
Prussia and Russia, but she could not succeed without British
subsidies. As early as October 1808 a proposal was sent to
Downing Street: the Hofburg would mobilize 400,000 men in the
spring if Britain supplied £2,500,000 in preparation money
together with the promise of an additional £5,000,000 to be paid
during the year.’* The Austrian bid remained on Canning’s desk
for nearly a month before he replied. British hopes were still high
for a successful conclusion of the war in Spain. Moreover, the
Hapsburg request for £7,500,000 in aid was breathtaking, espe-
cially in view of Britain’s heavy expenditures in the Peninsula.
When finally drafted, the foreign secretary’s response was cautious
and noncommital. Naturally, Britain would be happy to renew her
old ties with Austria, but the financial help requested was “‘utterly
beyond the power of this Country to furnish.” Instead of offering
a counterproposal, Canning restated his well-known position on
subsidies: if Austria goes to war, she may rely on all the support
Britain is able to give. No money was offered her as an inducement
to take arms, however. ““The British Government is . . . intimately
persuaded,” Canning argued, “that the only assurance of success in
War, would be found in the general Conviction of its necessity,
and in the Efforts which such Conviction must command.”’’>
  The failure of Sir John Moore’s campaign in Spain led Canning to
renew communication with the Hofburg, and in February 1809 he
sent Benjamin Bathurst to Vienna as his secret emissary.’© At
almost the same time, two Hapsburg agents were beginning their
journey to England:    Ludwig von Wallmoden, a Hanoverian
nobleman well known and trusted in London, and Lieutenant
August Wagner. On their arrival the two envoys presented Canning
    73. Ibid., 1, 68-70.
Sey          doa    of a Communication from the Austrian Government, October 11, 1808,
7       89.
    75. Canning’s reply to the Austrian government, December 24, 1808, FO 7/89.
  76. Canning to Benjamin Bathurst, February 16, 1809, FO 7/88. Benjamin Bathurst
(1784-1809) was a distant relative of Earl Bathurst, at this time head of the Board of
Trade. Young Bathurst seems to have taken his time getting to Vienna, for he did not
reach the Austrian capital until the end of April.


                                           208
                   A New Direction for British War Policy


with an elaborate “tableau” indicating how Vienna was prepared
to put 443,000 soldiers into action at a moment’s notice. Since
Britain had objected to the first Austrian subsidy request, it had
been reduced to the bare minimum: a preparation grant of
£2,000,000 to be followed by a £400,000 monthly subsidy.”
Canning was willing to discuss the matter with the Hapsburg
envoys, but he seemed reluctant to make a decision.
  Part of this hesitancy was due to the fact that Vienna’s demands,
even as modified, were still excessively high. But there was more
to it than that. At this same time, Canning had been called on by
another German, Ludwig von Kleist, who claimed to be the secret
agent of the central insurrectionary committee of Berlin. The
Austrian resistance movement had its counterpart in Prussia but,
lacking Frederick William’s blessing, it was obliged to work
underground. Gneisenau and other Prussian leaders were prepared
to cooperate with Austria in what they hoped would be an
all-German uprising against Napoleon. Kleist did not claim to
represent    the    entire   Prussian    resistance      movement,        but   such
credentials as he offered seemed valid.’® The foreign secretary
questioned him closely and insisted that he answer in writing.
From the memorandum prepared by Kleist on March 25 it was
clear that the Prussian resistance movement wanted Britain to
establish an arms depot at Heligoland. A British invasion of
Hanover, timed to coincide with the Prussian uprising, was also
desired. Naturally, money was needed and Kleist asked for at least
£50,000 in specie for immediate expenses.’?
  Canning had to decide whether the German insurrection
movement was promising enough to justify British support. In
several important respects it differed from that in Spain which had
burst forth the year before. So far as Canning knew the Austrian
and Prussian uprisings were still in the planning stage; hostilities
had yet to begin. Kleist presented a special problem since he
clearly did not speak for the Prussian government, but rather for a
secret movement. What assurance was there that the real object
might not be the overthrow of the Prussian monarchy? The
  77. Wagner to Canning, March 12, 1809, FO 7/90; Wallmoden to Canning, March 29,
1809, FO 7/90.
  78. Fortescue, British Army, VII, 40.
  79. See Kleist’s memorandum to Canning,     March   13, 1809, and his two letters to
Canning of March 13 and April 11, 1809, FO 64/80.


                                        209
                               1807-1509

Austrian proposals made Canning uneasy, but for different
reasons. Aside from the fact that Britain would be hard-pressed to
supply even half of what Austria asked for, Canning disliked the
Hofburg’s proposal with its demand for preparation money and
monthly subsidies. This was precisely the sort of arrangement he
had always opposed in the belief that its folly had been amply
demonstrated by Pitt’s subsidy treaties.
   Early in April 1809 Canning announced his decision to the
envoys of Austria and Prussia. Britain would send £250,000 in
silver to an Austrian port in the Adriatic, while a military chest of
between £750,000 and £1,000,000 would be established on the
island of Malta for Vienna’s use in the event of war. The foreign
secretary was ready to conclude a subsidy agreement with Austria
at once, provided its terms corresponded to Britain’s present
subsidy policy. The original Austrian proposal was unacceptable,
based as it was on a concept of subsidization now outmoded.
   “His Majesty will be prepared,” Canning explained, “‘to give
cheerfully whatever he can give consistently with the vast and
complicated demands upon the resources of this Country: in the
confidence that in a War, into which Austria enters in defence not
only of Her interest and Her honour, but of Her very existence as
an independent Power, She will not calculate the extent of Her
efforts by any rule of imaginary proportion to the Assistance
which she may expect to receive from an Ally, but will put forth
bona fide, and without reserve, the whole Strength of Her
Monarchy in a struggle, on the issue of which Her Monarchy itself
depends.”’ Any assistance given Austria beyond £1,000,000 in
specie, Canning   insisted,   must   be in some   form   other than hard
money. Bills of exchange had obvious drawbacks, especially now
that Britain’s trade with the Continent had shrunk. The foreign
secretary proposed a device, never before employed, to provide
the Hofburg with between £3,000,000 and £4,000,000 during the
coming year. British 5 percent Exchequer Bills would be offered
for sale at Vienna with the proceeds to go directly to the Austrian
treasury. Purchasers would be guaranteed the payment of interest
twice a year at Vienna, with redemption to be undertaken at the
end of the war. In this way, British credit would call out money in
Germany which was clearly unavailable to the Austrian govern-
ment. This arrangement obviated the need for a heavy export of

                                     ALG)
                  A New Direction for British War Policy


British specie to the Continent; only modest remittances would be
required to meet the biannual interest payments.®”
  Canning’s offer went far beyond anything Wallmoden had been
authorized to accept. Since it was now known that Austria had
gone to war with France, the two men agreed to conclude an
alliance between their governments at once. Settlement of the
terms of the subsidy agreement would be postponed until Vienna
had responded to the British proposal.8! For the moment, the
£250,000 in silver, already on its way to the Adriatic, would cover
the Hofburg’s immediate expenses and be proof of Britain’s desire
to assist her.
  At the same time, the foreign secretary informed Kleist how far
Britain would go to assist the Prussian patriots. An arms depot
would be established immediately at Heligoland for their use.
Kleist must return to Prussia at once, going by way of Hamburg
where he would be given a letter of credit for £20,000. He would
be accompanied by a British agent who was to learn all he could
about the Prussian movement and its plans, as well as to discover
whether the movement was “independent of and unknown to the
legitimate Government of Prussia.”’ In such a case, no further
British help could be expected, but if the movement had the
blessing of the Prussian government, London would do everything
possible to support it.8?
  Far from spurring on the German nationalists, Canning had been
cautious and even slow in responding to their appeals for support.
Events moved so swiftly that Britain could do nothing to save the
Prussian and Austrian patriots from the disasters which befell
them in the summer of 1809. Stirred by word of Austria’s attack
on France, the standard of revolt in Prussia was prematurely raised
by Major Ferdinard Schill on April 29. Successful at first, Schill
and his supporters were denounced by their king, whose fear of
Napoleon had crushed nearly all his spirit. The insurgents fell back
to the crumbling fortress of Stralsund in Swedish Pomerania,

  80. Canning to Wallmoden, two letters of April 20, 1809, FO 7/90. On April 7
Canning informed Bathurst of the sending of £250,000 in silver to Malta for Austria’s
use.
  81. Treaty with Austria, April 24, 1809, FO 93/11 (SA).
  82. Canning’s response to Kleist is undated, but it is to be found in FO 64/80 together
with his instructions of April 24     to Lieutenant   Maimburg,   the British   agent   who
accompanied Kleist on his return.
                                     1807-1809


where they were finally destroyed by the troops Napoleon sent
against them. The Austrian War of Liberation opened badly, but in
May the battle of Aspern ended in a victory for the Imperial forces
which they were too exhausted to exploit. Hostilities were
suspended for seven weeks while the opposing armies prepared to
seek a final decision on the battlefield.
   Austria was severely handicapped by the lack of British money
and devised a unique expedient to meet her needs. The Hofburg
obtained cash from several continental banks by offering them
bills amounting to £300,000 drawn on the British Treasury.
Hopefully, Britain would honor these drafts when presented for
payment. Canning took the matter up with Starhemberg shortly
after the latter’s return to London to resume his role as Austria’s
minister. The bills would be honored, the foreign secretary
explained, but Vienna must never again resort to such a device.
Starhemberg quietly accepted the reproof and then announced
that he had been instructed to renew his government’s request for
a £2,000,000 preparation subsidy together with an additional
£400,000 each month.          The Hapsburg finance minister had
declared unworkable Canning’s plan to sell Exchequer Bills at
Vienna.®?
   The foreign secretary refused Starhemberg’s request for a
massive subsidy, and for the time being British aid to Austria
remained on an informal basis. In addition to the £250,000 in
silver sent in April, bar silver valued at £337,500 was delivered to
Austria’s agents at Fiume in July.8* The collapse of the Continen-
tal System in Germany which followed the outbreak of war in
 1809 resulted in a marked upswing of British trade there.85 Once
again the British government was able to use bills of exchange, and
£300,000 was given Austria in that form. On July 5, 1809 the
Imperial Army was decisively defeated at Wagram, whereupon all
British subsidy payments were ended. So far, £1,187,500 had been

  83. Starhemberg to Canning, May 22, 1809, FO 7/90. The Austrian finance minister,
Count Joseph Odonell (surely the descendant of an expatriate Irishman) explained to
Lord Bathurst that the agrarian economy of Austria made the British plan impractical
(Bathurst to Canning, June 6, 1809, FO 7/88).
 84. Bathurst to Canning, July 16, 1809, FO 7/88.
 85. The value of colonial and domestic goods sent by Britain to northern Europe in
1809   was   £14,570,000,   as compared   with £5,430,000   during the previous year. See
Hecksher, Continental System, p. 245.
                          A New Direction for British War Policy


remitted in specie and paper to help finance the Hapsburg war
effort.*®
  When the war began in the spring, Austria had urged Britain to
launch a diversionary attack on the north German coast where
smouldering resentment against France gave promise of support.
Instead, the Cabinet decided to undertake an amphibious assault
on the French naval base at Antwerp, which was regarded as a
serious threat to British security. At the end of July a British force
occupied the island of Walcheren in the Dutch province of Zealand
which was to be used as a base of operations for the advance up
the Scheldt river. The invaders attempted to move forward, but by
the      time      Austria          withdrew         from     the    war     in the       autumn,         the
Walcheren expedition had completely bogged down.
  Military decisions made at Wagram, Walcheren, and Talavera in
Spain determined the course of the war against Napoleon for the
next three years. Wagram crippled the national spirit which had
inspired the Austrian War of Liberation and led to the downfall of
Count Stadion. Thereafter, the spirit of the Hofburg was that of
Metternich, who now became the leading exponent of Hapsburg
coexistence with Napoleon. The cost of the war and the crushing
indemnity imposed by France weakened Austria’s economy by a
third of what it had been.®’ Vienna’s tie with Britain was now
broken, and the murder of the British agent, Bathurst, while
making his way back to London was an appropriate finale to the
short-lived Anglo-Austrian alliance.8* Austria’s fate was a dreadful
object lesson to German nationalists who now despaired of even


  86. Canning          to the    Lords   of the Treasury,     June   24,   1809,   FO    7/91; Harrison    to
Hammond,        October         14, 1809, FO 7/95; Canning to Starhemberg, July 29, 1809, FO
7/90.    See    also    Francois    Crouzet,   “La   Crise   Monétaire     Britannique    et la Cinquieme
Coalition,” Bulletin de la Société d'Histoire Moderne,                11th ser., no. 8 (Oct.-Dec. 1953),
14-19.
  87. Kraehe, Metternich’s German Policy, 1, 119.
  88. Metternich was wise enough to see the value of maintaining secret contact with
London, even though formal diplomatic relations were suspended. For a detailed study
of how this contact was established and maintained, see C. S. B. Buckland, Metternich
and the British Government from 1809 to 1813 (London, 1932), pp. 18 and passim.
  With the ending of the war, Benjamin Bathurst had to leave Vienna. The French now
held the Adriatic port by which he had entered the country, and he was therefore
obliged to make his way overland through Prussia. At Berlin he obtained a Prussian
passport and headed for Hamburg, but he never reached there. Probably he was slain by
French agents or brigands, thus becoming the only British diplomat to lose his life during
this period.
                                  1807-1809


ultimate success.®? Late in July the British army in Spain, acting
with Spanish nationalists, threw back a heavy French assault at
Talavera. Wellesley was finally compelled to part company with
his allies and withdraw into Portugal, but Talavera came as close as
anything in the summer of 1809 to qualify as a victory over
France. The collapse of the war in Germany and the failure of the
British thrust against Antwerp led to a single stark conclusion: if
Britain meant to continue her war against Napoleon, she must
fight him in the Peninsula.
   During the two years he served at the Foreign Office, Canning
redirected Britain’s subsidy policy along lines which it would
follow during the remainder of the war. By a series of forceful
decisions he made clear that any nation ready to take arms against
Napoleon could count on Britain for support. Canning was too
late to save the Third Coalition, but his generous response to the
Peninsular uprisings in 1808 materially strengthened the Spanish
and Portuguese. Here was a war spirit which had no room for
subsidy treaties based upon the counting of allied troops. What
Canning wanted was a total commitment on the part of both
Britain and her allies to wage war with all the strength they could
muster. If the first fruits of the Peninsular War were disappointing,
the fault did not lie in the British aid program. The particularism
of the juntas and the chaotic condition of the nationalist armies
were problems which would require dedication and hard work to
solve.
   Napoleon’s Continental System seriously hampered Britain’s
ability to meet her allies’ financial requirements. Short of specie
and continental trade credits, Canning sent the arms, ammunition,
and supplies which the allies needed as much as money. British
industry stretched itself to produce the vast quantities of cloth
and commodities needed in the Peninsula, while an increasingly
efficient ordnance service guaranteed that there would be no lack
of guns, powder, flints, and shot. Even so, help in the form of
British money remained important, a fact made abundantly clear
by Austria’s pleas in 1809. To repair the damage caused by
Britain’s declining trade in Europe, Canning looked to the colonial

  89. After Austria’s collapse, several insurrections against France took place in the
Tyrol and Switzerland. The effect of these movements on Metternich’s policy is
examined by Buckland, Metternich, pp. 222-260.


                                        214
             A New Direction for British War Policy


markets of the New World. Portugal responded generously to his
appeal for free trade, but Spain’s refusal to follow this example
was to trouble British foreign ministers for the duration of the
war.
  No longer could it be argued that while Britain was ready to
send money to Europe, she was unwilling to spill her blood there.
The expeditions to Sweden, Portugal, and Walcheren made clear
that the British government was ready to use what military
strength it could command for more important purposes than
“‘filching sugar islands.’’ Thanks largely to Canning, Europe knew
by 1809 that Britain would support any defiance of France by
supplying money, arms, and military assistance. By now, the tide
of the Napoleonic Empire was running stronger than ever before.
If Britain hoped to turn that tide, she must pour her treasure and
her manpower into the Peninsula—the only arena in Europe
remaining to her.




                                211.5)
                                       x
             BRITISH        SUBSIDIES           AND      THE      WAR
                          IN THE        PENINSULA




After a stormy passage of one week from Portsmouth, H.M.S.
Surveillante entered Lisbon harbor on April 22, 1809, and let go
her anchor. On board was Sir Arthur Wellesley with orders to take
command of the British troops defending Portugal against the
French. No one in the spring of 1809 could foresee that almost
exactly five years later Wellesley’s legions would drive the enemy
from the Peninsula and carry the war into France itself. At the
moment British operations were frankly exploratory, intended to
feel out the enemy and exploit such opportunities as might be
found.! The tragedy of Corunna, three months before, had blasted
all hope that Anglo-Spanish cooperation in arms would easily
brush Napoleon back across the Pyrenees. Now the Peninsular War
was about to enter a more active phase, but it was still essentially a
war of improvisation whose outcome no man could predict.
   The absence of long-range planning was evident also in the
informal nature of Britain’s subsidy arrangements with the
Peninsular powers. No subsidy treaties were ever negotiated with
Portugal or Spain, although Britain did promise to send them as
much money and arms as she could spare. Portugal was expected
to maintain her own army and, in addition, to send at least 20,000
troops to serve in the British ranks. Hopefully the time would
come when Spanish troops could join with the Anglo-Portuguese.
The attainment of even these general goals involved problems of
which British leaders had no inkling in 1809. Subsidies to the
Peninsular powers, in addition to the expense of Britain’s own

 1. Castlereagh to Wellesley, April 2, 1809, Correspondence of Castlereagh, VI, 47.


                                         216
              British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


military operations, would oblige London to spend more liberally
than at any time since the war began in 1793. To help Britain bear
this burden, Downing Street urged the Junta to allow her free
trade with the Spanish colonies, a boon she was still soliciting
when the war ended. Military operations in the Peninsula carried
on by three allied but sovereign governments proved especially
difficult since success in the field required unified command.
These problems were never really solved, but the necessity of
prosecuting the war against France forced the allies to compromise
their differences at least enough to maintain their union in arms.
Regardless of what the future might hold, the Cabinet decided to
carry on the war in the Peninsula, and in June 1809 the House of
Commons appropriated £3,300,000 for subsidies to the allies
during the year ahead.”
   By the time Wellesley reached Lisbon, Portugal had made
considerable progress in girding herself for war. For more than a
month, General Beresford had been hard at work training the men
drafted into military service by the Council of Regency. Of the
20,000 Portuguese Canning had offered to take into British
service, only 13,000 had been mobilized so far. Since these
auxiliaries were still raw, they could not be formed into separate
line-of-battle regiments. Instead, Wellesley decided to send the
Portuguese batallions to serve as components of the larger British
brigades.* Meanwhile, reinforcements from England brought Brit-
ain’s own army in Portugal to nearly 30,000.
  Portugal’s war effort was hindered by the fact that she had so far
received very little money       from Britain, although generous
quantities of arms and supplies had been sent her. In April 1809 a
special department of the British Military Commissary was
established at Lisbon to pay subsidy money to the council. This
department, known as the British Aid Office, was supplied with
money by the British Commissary General from his war chest.
  2. Payments of the 1809 Austrian subsidy were to come out of this appropriation. On
June 7, 1809 the bill passed its final reading in the Commons. One of its opponents,
General Banastre Tarleton, sarcastically referred to recent British victories in the
Peninsula as “skirmishes.” Noting that Castlereagh had chosen to attend the House that
day in his militia regiment uniform, Tarleton observed that people would say “that we
were the animal in the lion’s skin—and that the noble lord was the daw in borrowed
feathers” (Hansard, XIV [1809], 919).
  3. For Beresford’s work, see Fortescue, British Army, VII, 428-429.
 4. Ibid., Vil, 149.
                                       1809-1811


Payments to the Portuguese government were made by the Aid
Office at the direction of the British minister at Lisbon. On April
12 the first remittance of the year (amounting to £15,378) went
to the Portuguese Commissary General for the use of the council’s
own troops.°
  Help of a different kind was given to Portugal when, on April
21, Britain agreed to guarantee a £600,000 loan the Regent
proposed to raise in London. Although the loan was intended to
finance the government at Rio, one third of the yield was to go to
the Lisbon Council of Regency for its use. Canning had long
wished to have the British minister to Portugal named as a member
of the council, and shortly before the signing of the Loan
Convention he again brought this matter to the Regent’s atten-
tion.© Jodo took the hint and made some effort to meet his ally’s
wishes. He named Wellesley generalissimo of all Portugal’s troops
with the right to attend the council whenever it dealt with military
or financial matters.’
  Two important features of the Anglo-Portuguese alliance had
taken shape by the summer of 1809. All Portugal’s troops were
now either directly or indirectly under British command.® Machin-
ery had also been set up for supplying Portugal with British money
and supplies, although as yet it operated sporadically. Such was
the nature of the military union between the two powers soon to
be tested on the battlefield.
  By the time Wellesley led his army out of Lisbon, three French
armies were in the field to challenge him. The major threat was
from Soult, who held Oporto, and Wellesley moved north to strike
at him. On May 12 the Anglo-Portuguese forced a crossing of the
Douro river at Oporto and compelled the French not only to
abandon the city, but to withdraw into Spain. This victory revived
Downing Street’s hope for success, and Wellesley was soon
authorized to cross into Spain for combined operations with the
nationalists.
  5. Portuguese Subsidy Account, 1809, AO 3/746.
  6. Treaty with Portugal, April 21, 1809, FO 93/77 (5); Canning to Strangford, April 5,
1809, FO 63/69.
  7. Strangford to Villiers, July 10, 1809, FO 63/77; Wellesley to Stuart, January       1,
1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 98.
  8. Money for the pay and maintenance of the auxiliaries came from the British
Commissary, but was handed over to the Portuguese Commissary for distribution. The
Portuguese Commissary     was   also   responsible   for the upkeep   of its forces   under
Beresford’s command.

                                            PRS
            British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


  Almost at once the changed character of the war was reflected in
the British aid program. On June 24 the British Aid Office
resumed subsidy payments to the Lisbon Council of Regency and
made them regularly during the balance of the year, by which time
a total of £270,538 had been paid. In July 30,000 muskets with
cartridges, flints, and accoutrements were shipped from England
to Lisbon on board three merchant vessels, aptly named ‘‘Hope,”’
“Experiment,” and ‘‘Fame.” The flow of supplies which followed
soon    became   a flood; boots, uniforms, caps, blankets, and
greatcoats, valued at £109,082, were shipped for the use of the
Portuguese auxiliaries.”
  The decision to send a British army into Spain once again forced
London to take stock of its relations with the Junta, which had
been strained since the first of the year. No money had been given
the Junta since February, but plans for a renewal of military
cooperation obliged London to be generous. In June 1809,
£213,750 in Treasury Bills was turned over to the Junta at Seville,
and in the following month supplies and field equipment for
30,000 men, together with 10,000 muskets, were sent for the use
of the Spanish nationalists.!° In an effort to improve relations with
Spain, Canning recalled John Hookham Frere from Seville. That
envoy’s reputation had been damaged by his unfortunate role in
Sir John Moore’s campaign, and he had offended the Junta by the
imperious manner in which he urged them to appoint Wellesley as
supreme commander of Spain’s armies. To replace Frere, Canning
named the Marquess Wellesley (Arthur’s older brother) and at the
end of June presented him with his instructions. Although Britain
was still unwilling to make a long-term subsidy commitment to the
Junta, money, arms, and supplies would be sent as circumstances
permitted. The Anglo-Spanish alliance of 1809 looked to the
prompt conclusion of a formal subsidy engagement, but Lord
Wellesley was warned not to discuss this matter at Seville.
Clearly, caution and improvisation continued to regulate the
Foreign Office’s thinking about future help for Spain.
  9. Portuguese Subsidy Account, 1809, AO 3/746.
  10. Statement no. 28, Spanish Subsidy Account, AO 3/765; Memorandum of Supplies
furnished by Great Britain to Spain, FO 72/137.
  11. Canning to Lord Wellesley, June 27, 1809, FO 72/75. These instructions are
printed in The Despatches and Correspondence of the Marquess Wellesley K. G. during
His Lordship’s Mission to Spain...in 1809, ed. M. Martin (London, 1838), pp.
183-191.
                                       29
               A        pe                      BISCAY
                                            SANTANDER    ~®
                  °
               CORUNNA

                                                                   Eo VITTORIA

                                                         BURGOS
                                   SAHAGUN      ©          e


                                                                                              BARCELONA



                                      o SALAMANCA
                         ALMEIDA
                             \ e¢/UDAD                   MADRID
               BUSACO        |   RODRIGO

                                           TAL AVERA           ARANJUEZ


                                                                                 VALENCIA



 OCEAN
 ATLANTIC
     L/SBON.

                                                              °BAYLEN
                                                                                            MEDITERRANEAN

                                                                                                 SEA
                                     °SEVILLE




be
3. Campaign Area of the War in the Peninsula




                                                                    220
            British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


  In July 1809 Wellesley’s army entered Spain and joined the
patriots under General Cuesta. Shortly thereafter, they were
attacked by the French at Talavera, but at the end of two days of
battle, the bulk of which fell on the British, the enemy fell back
exhausted. Wellesley was unable to take the offensive, however,
since the failure of the Spanish to provide supplies had brought his
troops close to starvation. He also found it utterly impossible to
reach any agreement with Cuesta as to future operations. Prudence
required the British to fall back to the Portuguese frontier, despite
Spanish charges that this was desertion. A month later the army
was once more in Portugal, and Wellesley (now Viscount Welling-
ton of Talavera)      was   as bitter about        the conduct   of his Spanish
allies as Moore had been under similar circumstances.
   If the Spanish army and its commander annoyed Wellington, the
Junta’s latest diplomatic maneuver trenched dangerously on what
little of Canning’s good-will remained. With some justice, the
Junta protested the informal basis on which British aid was still
being given, and shortly after the Battle of Talavera, the Spanish
minister in London proposed terms of a formal subsidy agreement.
Britain was invited to place an army of 30,000 men at Spain’s
disposal for use either in Europe or South America, where
rumblings of colonial revolt were already being heard. In addition,
the Junta demanded arms and supplies for 500,000 men and asked
Britain “‘to accommodate H. C. M. [Ferdinand] during the whole
of the war & as long as he may want it with two millions of
Dollars every month by way of loan.” Canning rejected this
“utterly extravagant’? demand at once and refused to consider it
even as a basis for further discussion. British support for Spain
would remain on an informal basis for the foreseeable future.
Shipment of arms and supplies were continued, but the Junta
received no more British money during the remainder of 1809.
With specie hard to come by, London had difficulty enough
providing for the minimum needs of the Anglo-Portuguese army.
The Junta must realize that future British aid depended upon the
“opening to British commerce the Ports of Spanish America; and
thereby enabling this Country to recruit the Stock of Specie which
has been exhausted in the service of Spain.”’!?
  12. Treaty project offered by Apodaca, August 7, 1809, FO 72/85; Canning to Lord
Wellesley, September 16, 1809, FO 72/75.


                                           MPD |
                                   1809-1811


   The appeal was fruitless. By the end of 1809 the Junta had done
nothing beyond lowering the duty on salt fish imported from
Britain and her colonies. Spain’s refusal to make concessions came
at a time when the Junta’s need for help was as great as ever. Soult
had overwhelmed the nationalist army at Ocana in November
1809, and the French were now pushing south of the Sierra
Morena to suppress the rebellion in Andalusia. Except for the
guerrilla forces and a few scattered units of the Spanish army, the
Junta had nothing with which to defend itself. Viewed in
retrospect, the Battle of Talavera seemed less of a victory than it
had five months before. Wellington’s army remained in Portugal,
where it seemed incapable of doing anything other than licking its
wounds. As the year ended, the Cabinet once more had to decide
whether to continue the war in the Peninusla. Before any
intelligent decision could be made, certain military and financial
factors had to be carefully considered.
   The military evidence available to the Cabinet at the end of
 1809 was most discouraging. Seville had fallen to the French and
the Junta was now at Cadiz, which would certainly come under
enemy attack. Support for Spain in 1810 would oblige Britain to
spend her money, arms, men, and seapower in the defense of that
city. So far as Portugal was concerned, Wellington believed that it
could be held if the Anglo-Portuguese army were enlarged.!? One
conclusion was inescapable: even a defensive war in the Peninsula
would require far greater military and financial exertions on
Britain’s part than before.
   Britain had spent about £2,600,000 on the war during 1809, and
the Cabinet’s best estimates were that at least twice that amount
would be needed for the coming year. Britain’s own army would
cost at least £1,700,000 and Wellington urged that the Portuguese
subsidy be much enlarged.!4 Although the Lisbon Council of
Regency had received £270,538 in subsidies during 1809, it was
ending the year with a deficit of nearly £1,000,000. Unless
Portugal were to go bankrupt, Wellington calculated that London
must give her nearly £1,000,000 during 1810.5 Aid to Spain,
  13. Wellington to Liverpool, November 14, 1809, Dispatches of Wellington, V, 275.
  14. Wellington to Liverpool, November 14, 1809, January 3, 1810, ibid., V. 275, 408.
  15. Portuguese Subsidy Account, 1809, AO 3/746; Wellington to Villiers, December 6,
1809, Dispatches of Wellington, V, 338. See also Wellington to Liverpool, November 14,
1809, ibid., V, 276-278.


                                        po)
               British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


which     in   1809   amounted        to £473,919,     would     also have to be
increased.!®
  Even    if Parliament     could be persuaded        to vote these vast sums,
there was another grim problem to consider. Would it be possible
to send enough bullion to the Peninsula to cover those British
expenses which could be paid in no other way? Hard money was
needed to pay Wellington’s soldiers, and nearly all his bills for
supplies and transport must also be met in coin. Scarcity of specie
had already forced the Treasury to limit cash shipments to the
army in the Peninsula. About three quarters of the 1809 war costs
there had been paid by using bills of exchange.!”
  The problems of remittances to cover military expenses and
those needed for subsidies to the allies are so intermingled that
they may be treated as one. Nearly all subsidy payments to
Portugal were made from the British Military Chest under
Wellington’s control. Each month the British commander trans-
ferred a portion of the money in this chest to the British Aid
Office for payment to the Lisbon council. Wellington varied the
monthly allocation so that in any month when the Military Chest
was low, the amount of money remitted as a subsidy to the
council would be reduced. Occasionally specie would be sent from
England for Portugal’s use, but this was exceptional. In general,
the size of Portugal’s monthly subsidy depended on how much
cash Wellington felt he could spare her from his Military Chest.
Payments to the Spanish Junta were handled in a different
manner: acting on instructions from Britain’s envoy to Spain, the
British consul at Cadiz would pay either specie or Treasury Bills to
the Junta’s treasurer.
  The     Military    Chest,   from    which    the   bulk   of the Portuguese
subsidy came, was the responsibility of the Commissary General
acting under Wellington’s orders. The chest was supplied in two
ways: by specie shipped from England or by hard money obtained
locally in exchange for bills drawn on the Treasury. The
Commissary General’s agents were regularly employed in obtaining
coin in exchange for Treasury Bills at Lisbon, Cadiz, Gibraltar, and

  16. Spanish Subsidy Account, AO 3/765.
  17. During 1809, £465,667 was sent to the Peninsula in specie, while £2,174,097 was
paid out in commercial paper. See Account of Money sent to Spain and Portugal, FO
63/120.

                                         22
                                      1809-1811


other commercial centers in the area. The balance of payments
between Britain and the Peninsula was so unfavorable, however,
that Treasury Bills found few buyers and such as did appear
insisted on massive discounts. As specie became difficult to
procure in the Peninsula, the Commissary General called increas-
ingly on London for shipments of coin. But the Treasury found it
difficult to meet his demands. Consequently, the Military Chest
shrank, the army went into debt, and the British Aid Office at
Lisbon had nothing to pay the Portuguese government. !8
  The Treasury could not be blamed for the fact that very little
hard money was available in Britain. During the early days of the
Spanish uprising in 1808, London had flooded the Peninsula with
more than £2,500,000 in silver.!? Having spent their majority like
gentlemen, the ministers were now hard-pressed to lay hands on
more. Commerical difficulties during 1809 made it impossible for
them to recoup this loss of coin. Britain’s rapidly expanding trade
with Brazil yielded less hard money than had been expected; the
bulk of British goods sent there were bought on credit or paid for
in colonial raw materials. Because of the Continental System,
these colonial goods accumulated in London’s warehouses await-
ing buyers.?° Despite all Canning’s pleas, no material opening had
been made for British trade in Spanish America. On rare occasions,
the Junta allowed the Treasury to purchase silver at Vera Cruz in
return for bills of exchange.”! With specie so hard to come by, the
government simply could not send Wellington all that he asked
for. The British commander’s outspoken criticism of the Treasury
for this failure finally provoked one of its officials, William
Huskisson, to ask him, ““How can you expect us to buy specie here
with the exchange thirty percent against us, and guineas selling at
twenty-four shillings?”’2?
  18. Shortage of hard money forced Wellington to delay his march on Talavera for five
weeks until coin was received from England. The operation of the Commissary General’s
ree ee is discussed in S. G. P. Ward, Wellington’s Headquarters (Oxford, 1957), pp.

  19. During 1808 Britain spent £2,778,796 in the Peninsula, of which all but £185,520
was in specie. See Account of Money sent to Spain and Portugal, FO 63/120.
  20. Hecksher, Continental System, p. 241.
  Pee In April 1809 the Junta agreed to allow Britain to buy $3,000,000 in silver at Vera
See           ores for £593,750 in bills of exchange; Frere to Canning, April 25, 1809,

  22. Huskisson   to Wellington,   July 19, 1809, in Fortescue, British Army,   VII, 435.
During the autumn of 1809 an improvement of conditions enabled the Treasury to send


                                           224
             British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


   In determining whether to continue the war in the Peninsula
during the coming year, the Cabinet had to consider three major
problems. First, what were the prospects for military success?
With Spain almost at the mercy of her oppressor, and Wellington’s
army immobilized in Portugal, it required a cheerful optimism,
bordering on foolhardiness, to believe that the prognosis was good.
Second, would Parliament be willing to approve requests for still
larger amounts of money to underwrite a war program which so
far had failed to produce results? Finally, would commercial
conditions during the coming year enable the Treasury to make at
least minimal remittances of coin to the British army and its allies
in the Peninsula? Given questions such as these, it required great
courage for the Cabinet to decide to persist in the contest.

  A political crisis late in the summer of 1809 precipitated a major
reorganization of the Cabinet which had been in the making for
some time. The disastrous Walcheren expedition, the duel between
Canning and Castlereagh, and the prime minister’s fatal illness all
played important parts in the breakup of the Portland regime.
Responsibility for forming a new administration fell to the former
chancellor of the exchequer, Spencer Perceval, who sought in vain
for Lord Grenville’s support.
  Failure to reach agreement with Grenville saved the new
ministers from having to soften their war policy, but it left their
parliamentary strength weaker than that of any government since
the outbreak of the war. Castlereagh and Canning had both
withdrawn from office, leaving the new Cabinet to get along as
best they could without their skills. Perceval himself was an
effective debater and floor-manager, but not even his friends saw
him as a dynamic war leader. Castlereagh’s place at the War Office
was now held by Lord Liverpool, who had once served as
Addington’s foreign secretary. Uninspired and plodding though he
was, Liverpool was a steadfast supporter of the war in the
Peninsula. The Foreign Office went to the Marquess Wellesley,
although the year was nearly over before he returned to London

more specie.to the Peninsula, but this condition proved only temporary. See Wellington to
Huskisson, August 30, 1809, Dispatches of Wellington, V, 98; Wellington to Liverpool,
December   13, 1809, ibid., V, 369; and Wellington to Liverpool, May 16, 1810, ibid., VI,
ite


                                          PID)
                                     1809-1811


from his diplomatic post at Seville. For nearly two years Wellesley
presided over the Foreign Office, where his indolence appeared
even worse than it was in contrast to the force and energy of his
predecessor. Lacking oratorical ability, he was a poor spokesman
for the government in the Lords, where he had to face Grenville’s
tireless attacks on the conduct of the war.”
   Short on talent and glamour, the new Cabinet derived vigor from
its determination to wage war against France with all the strength
it could command. Whether this agreement would have been quite
so firm had the ministers foreseen the years of disappointment and
mounting expense which lay ahead is another question.24 AL
though the war in the Peninsula was to be supported to the hilt,
the Cabinet recognized that circumstances might force them to
reverse that decision and even withdraw their armies. Perceval’s
caution struck Wellington as a sign of weakness and indecision, but
the charge seems unfair given the many hazards threatening the
new government.
  Early in 1810 Liverpool informed Wellington that 5,000 British
troops would be sent to reinforce him. The government had also
decided to assist with the defense of Cadiz, the only important
city in southern Spain not in enemy hands. British troops,
together with some of Wellington’s Portuguese, would be sent to
strengthen the Cadiz garrison. For nearly two years the city
defended itself successfully and, in so doing, tied down a French
army which might have been more effectively employed else-
where.
  The Cabinet was also ready to increase its aid to Portugal, a step
which Wellington regarded as absolutely essential. During 1810 the
Lisbon Regency could depend on receiving £980,000 in return
for which the Portuguese auxiliaries should be increased from
20,000 to 30,000.% Parliamentary approval for this step was
difficult to obtain, and in the Lords, Grenville attacked ministers
for their prodigality in supporting Portugal at a time when there
was not “the least ground of rational expectation of success.” On
an amendment         offered by Grenville, which Liverpool declared to
  23. Charles K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh (London, 1947-1950), I, 44;
The Wellesley Papers (London, 1914), II, 7-8.
  24. Spencer Perceval to Wellington, July 5, 1810, in Spencer Walpole, The Life of the
Rt. Hon. Spencer Perceval (London, 1874), I, 131.
   25. Lord Bathurst to Villiers, January 5, 1810, FO 63/74.


                                          226
              British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


be nothing other than a no-confidence proposal, their Lordships
approved     the government’s policy by a fairly close vote.?6
Although the Commons finally voted the £980,000 required for
Portugal, Opposition speakers made an unusually vigorous effort
to bring down the government.2’ Perceval succeeded in weathering
a serious legislative crisis, but his position was still far from secure.
  With the future of the war in Spain so uncertain, the government
hesitated to make any commitment to its ally beyond assistance in
the defense of Cadiz. Arms and supplies would be shipped to local
Spanish resistance centers, but improvisation remained the key-
note of the British aid program. Henry Wellesley was named to
replace his brother as British minister to Spain, an assignment
which the youngest member of the Wellesley family was probably
happy to have. The new envoy was to make a special effort to
obtain the right of free trade with the Spanish colonies, a
concession considered essential to a continuation of British aid to
the Junta.*8
  In 1810 the Junta delegated its authority to a Council of
Regency set up at Cadiz. The fact that Cadiz was a major center
for the South American trade partly explains the Regency’s
reluctance to surrender its commercial monopoly in the New
World. Almost at once the council impressed on the new British
emissary its desperate need for funds, a condition which Henry
Wellesley tried to turn to his advantage. Confident of the support
of his brother,         the foreign   secretary,    he advanced       money     to the
Regency       for repayment      as circumstances         might permit.       By July
1810 these advances amounted to about £400,000.”? This generos-
ity left the Regency in no position to refuse Wellesley’s invitation

  26. For Grenville’s amendment see Hansard, XV, (1810), 511-525.
  27. Ibid., XVI (1810), 15**-11****. Writing to Wellington on September 10, 1810,
Liverpool admitted that in the Commons “the Portuguese subsidy was carried by a small
and unwilling majority” (Charles Duke Yonge, The Life and Administration of Robert
Banks, Second Earl of Liverpool {London, 1868}, I, 335).
  28. Lord Wellesley to Henry Wellesley, January 4, 1810, FO 72/93. Henry Wellesley
(1773-1847)   was a neophyte   in diplomacy.   In March   1809 he suffered a severe blow
when his wife abandoned him and their two children to elope with Lord Paget. Wellesley
may have welcomed the Spanish mission as a means of helping him overcome his grief.
He remained in Spain until 1822, and six years later he was created Baron Cowley.
  29. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, July 11, 1810, FO 72/96. Perceval was a little
annoyed that H. Wellesley’s advances made it difficult for Wellington to obtain hard
money   in Spain. See Perceval to Lord Wellesley, July 14, and 23, 1810, in Walpole,
Perceval, I, 124-128.
                                     1809-1811


to discuss terms of a commercial agreement. Wisely, the British
envoy asked for only modest concessions, but even these elicited a
Spanish demand for massive financial aid. At first, the Regency
spoke of a loan of £2,000,000 from Britain, but within a month
they asked for £10,000,000.*" Discussions went on fitfully for a
while but came to nothing in the end. The hard fact was that the
Regency gambled that Britain’s involvement in the Peninsula
would force her to tolerate Spain’s refusal to abandon her trade
monopoly.?!
  As a matter of fact, British commerce with Spanish America was
more extensive than Canning and Lord Wellesley ever admitted. A
considerable amount of illegal trading had been going on for some
time, and in 1809 the Junta reluctantly acquiesced in the decision
taken at Havana to open that port to foreign traders.?* The
outbreak of revolt in Venezuela also brought improvement, for in
1810 the Caracas junta declared its harbors open to all shipping. If
the South American uprisings benefited Britain’s trade, they
caused her some embarrassment as well. However, Lord Wellesley
deftly threaded his way between the demands of the colonists and
the Spanish authorities without committing his government to any
policy which would hopelessly antagonize either.?>
  The flow of British war supplies to Spain in 1810 went chiefly
to Cadiz, where British soldiers and the Royal Navy took part in
the defense of that port city. Other centers of Spanish resistance
also depended on Britain for arms. In the spring, 12,000 muskets
with accoutrements and equipment were given to patriot forces in
Galicia and the Asturias, while shipments also reached the
insurgents in Catalonia, Guadalajara, and the Eastern Provinces.
Ordnance supplies sent to Spain during 1810 were valued at
£291,991, while money given the Regency and its agents was
somewhat in excess of £445,000.34
  30. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, June 29 and July 15, 1810, FO 72/95, FO
72/96. See also C. W. Crawley, “French and English Influences in the Cortes of Cadiz,
1810-1814,” Cambridge Historical Journal, 6 (1938), 176-206.
 31. William   W. Kaufmann,     British Policy and the Independence of Latin America,
1804-1828 (New Haven, Conn., 1951), p. 48.
  32. Dorothy B. Goebel, “British Trade to the Spanish Colonies, 1796-1823,” American
Historical Review, 43 (1937-1938), 298.
  33. Kaufmann, British Policy, p. 54.
  34. Memorandum of Supplies... , FO 72/137; An Account of the value of .. . Ord-
nance ...supplied...for   the    Service   of Spain   and   Portugal,   March   27,   1811,   FO
63/120. The Spanish Subsidy Account shows that during 1810 £445,155 was paid to the
Spanish government (AO 3/765).

                                            228
            British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


   The Spanish subsidy was intended to help the nationalists hold
out against the French, but more significant results were expected
from the recently expanded aid program to Portugal. The British
Aid Office in Lisbon was able to make regular payments to the
Council of Regency since Wellington was now giving the Aid
Office half of all the money received in his Military Chest.°>
Management of the subsidy payments entailed heavier responsibili-
ties for the British envoy at Lisbon than before. In 1810 Villiers
returned to England and was succeeded by Charles Stuart, an able
and forthright agent who had been in the Peninsula for two years.
Under     Stuart’s  direction,  the  Aid Office paid more      than
£1,000,000 to the council during 1810, but even this amount fell
short of meeting the expenses of the Portuguese auxiliary troops.
It was expected that the council, on receiving money from the Aid
Office, would turn it over to the Portuguese Commissary General,
which was responsible for feeding and paying the auxiliaries.
Often, the Portuguese Commissary had neither food nor pay to
issue the auxiliaries, in which case Wellington was compelled to
supply their deficiencies from his own commissary. Stuart would
sometimes purchase food in Portugal or abroad for delivery to the
Portuguese Commissary, the value of the purchase being con-
sidered a part of the subsidy.*° Much of the difficulty arose from
the fact that during 1810 food prices in Portugal increased at a
fantastic rate; Stuart estimated that they had doubled during the
first half of the year.*’ Bad harvests and the diversion of such a
large part of the nation’s manpower into military service accounts
for this state of affairs. By the close of 1810 the total of all
payments      in money      and provisions to Portugal    exceeded
£1,800,000—twice what Wellington had estimated Portugal would
require.°®
   Although the Portuguese auxiliaries might go without food and
pay, they never lacked arms and ammunition. By August 1810,
the year’s shipment of ordnance stores for Portugal had been
completed. These included 51,200 muskets and nearly 7,500,000
cartridges, along with smaller quantities of other weapons.
Shipments of clothing and supplies during that year were valued at
 35. Wellington to C. Stuart, June 11, 1810, Dispatches of Wellington, VI, 184-185.
 36. Napier, War in the Peninsula, Ill, 48.
 37. Stuart to Lord Wellesley, June 16, 1810, FO 63/91.
 38. Portuguese Subsidy Account, 1810, AO 3/746.


                                         ABD
                                   1809-1811


about £142,000 and consisted of 30,000 uniforms for the
auxiliaries, 40,000 shirts, and two pairs of shoes for each man.
Also included were 42,000 knapsacks, which Wellington thought
to be of unusually poor quality.°?
  The Anglo-Portuguese army spent the spring of 1810 preparing
for the expected French invasion. Wellington carefully supervised
the construction of heavy fortifications around Lisbon, although
the casual observer could not tell whether they were intended for
a last-ditch stand against the enemy or simply as a cover for a
British evacuation. Under Beresford’s fierce eye (he had only one),
Portugal’s own army was being trained mercilessly for the part it
would soon have to play.4° Meanwhile, in Spain, Masséna put in
motion the 100,000 troops under his command with which he
expected to crush the Anglo-Portuguese. Wellington relied on the
two border fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Almeida to delay the
invader. Ciudad Rodrigo was garrisoned by Spanish troops, whose
zealous defense cost Massena more than a month’s siege. Almeida,
on the Portuguese side of the frontier, was less fortunate. About
5,000 Portuguese troops under a British officer were determined
to hold the fort for as long as possible, but the explosion of their
powder magazine ended resistance. With the border now open,
Wellington withdrew his army toward Lisbon. The forces he
commanded were almost equally composed of British and Portu-
guese.*! The latter had a chance to prove themselves when, late in
September, the allied army faced about to offer battle to the
pursuer at Busaco. Masséna suffered a bloody repulse when he
attempted to drive his opponents from the heights which they
occupied. Although the engagement only delayed the French
advance, it gave tangible proof of the fighting quality of the
Portuguese.’
   39. The 1810 arms shipment to Portugal also included 2,000 rifles, 3,000 pairs of
pistols, 6,000 swords, 30,000 sets of accoutrements, and 512,000 flints. See An account
of Arms and Ammunition issued to Portugal..., March 22, 1811 [the Account is
misdated “1810"], FO 63/120. Wellington sent 20,000 of these muskets for the use of
the Spanish. See Wellington to Henry Wellesley, August 30, 1810, Dispatches of
Wellington, V1, 394-395; Wellington to Liverpool, June 20, 1810, ibid., VI, 217;
Portuguese Subsidy Account, 1810, AO 3/746.
   40. Wellington to Villiers, June 5, 1810, Dispatches of Wellington, VI, 170.
   41. Charles Oman, A History of the Peninsular War (Oxford, 1902-1930), II, 547.
   42. Wellington declared that at Busaco the Portuguese army had “‘shown itself capable
of engaging and defeating the enemy” (Wellington to Liverpool, September 30, 1810,
Dispatches of Wellington, V1, 476). British and Portuguese casualties in the battle were
exactly the same: 626 killed, wounded, or missing. See Oman, Peninsular War, III, 551.

                                         2310
              British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


   The summer of 1810 also witnessed the first serious outbreak of
hostility toward Britain in the Lisbon Council of Regency. The
storm had been brewing for some time before it broke out into an
ugly quarrel between the council and Wellington. To all appear-
ances, the British commander seemed to have no other plan than
to fall back on Lisbon and leave the country to the invader. The
capital was crowded with refugees who added to the rapidly rising
hysteric fear that the British would evacuate Lisbon as they had
Corunna in 1809. To make matters worse, the war was plunging
the Portuguese government        into hopeless debt. Despite the
enlarged British subsidy, the council would end the year 1810
with another £1,000,000 deficit.43 Anti-British feeling in the
council found a spokesman in Jose de Souza e Coutinho, usually
known as the Principal de Souza.“ In alliance with the Bishop of
Oporto, himself a member of the council, De Souza tried to
recover control over Portugal’s military operations before Welling-
ton’s apparent cowardice lost them the war. Secret appeals for
support were sent to England, backed by the argument that
Portugal could only be saved by abandoning Wellington’s dis-
astrous strategy.*5 Responsibility for resisting the De Souza
faction fell to the British minister, Charles Stuart, who had just
been named to the Council of Regency. Thoroughly outraged by
the council’s conduct, Wellington showered Stuart with com-
plaints against De Souza and the Bishop. They were obstructing
his defense plans by refusing to carry out orders to destroy
everything in that part of the country through which the enemy
must pass on his way to Lisbon. The council had only itself to
blame if it was in debt, since it was unwilling either to impose an
effective tax system or properly enforce the one now operative.*°
Left to himself, Wellington would have removed De Souza from
the council by force. Fortunately, Stuart had the temperament
and skill for negotiation, and he was able to hold the influence of


  43. Stuart estimated that the council had spent £2,000,000 of its own money during
1810; Stuart to Lord Wellesley, February 2, 1811, FO 63/106.
  44, Three De Souza brothers were active in Portuguese affairs at this time. In addition
to Jose (the Principal), Domingos was Portugal’s minister to London, and Rodrigo was
with the Regent at Rio.
  45. Napier, War in the Peninsula, 11, 48-57; Fortescue, British Army, Vil, 497; Oman,
Peninsular War, I, 415-418.
  46. Wellington to Stuart, October 6, 1810, Dispatches of Wellington, V1, 494-495;
Wellington to Liverpool, October 27, 1810, ibid., VI, 545-546.
                                          Ayaye
                                          1809-1811


the malcontents in check. Should the situation become unmanage-
able he had a powerful weapon in his hands: the suspension of the
British subsidy without which the Regency could not survive more
than a few days. Wisely, this weapon was reserved for a more
critical period.
   In mid-October, Wellington brought his army into the lines of
Torres Vedras near Lisbon where he was joined by about 8,000
Spanish under the Marquis Romana.*’ During the following winter
the operations at Torres Vedras developed into one of the major
turning points of the war. Short of supplies and living in a country
almost stripped of provisions, Masséna was condemned to conduct
a siege in which the besiegers suffered the greatest deprivation.
   Wellington’s greatest deficiency was not food but specie, which
was now in shorter supply than ever. The Commissary General’s
agents had to accept extremely heavy discounts in converting bills
drawn on England into hard money. Although the Treasury was
sending more specie to the Peninsula than before, the proportion
of the war expenses it paid for fell sharply. Rocketing military
expenses, together with greater aid to Portugal and Spain,
frustrated the government’s efforts to maintain a healthy balance
between specie and Treasury Bills in paying its debts in the
Peninsula.48 Meanwhile, the army’s bills piled up, and pay for the
troops was again several months in arrears. “If you cannot supply
us with money,” Wellington angrily wrote to Liverpool, “‘you
ought to withdraw us. We are reduced to the greatest distress.’”4?

 47. Romana’s troops cost the British Commissary about £110,000 to maintain during
1810. See Oman, Peninsular War, Il, 432; Spanish Subsidy Account, AO 3/765.
  48. Wellington to Liverpool, May 16, 1810, Dispatches of Wellington, V1, 121. Account
of Money sent to Spain and Portugal (FO 63/120) shows the relation of paper and specie
sent to the Peninsula during this period:
                                  1809                         1810
   Paper                      £2,174,097                    £5,382,166
   Specie                        465 ,667                      679,069
  Hecksher (Continental System, pp. 354, 362) contends that the British Commissary’s
cumbersome methods had much to do with its difficulty in procuring specie at this time.
The relative ease with which Rothschilds Bank accomplished the work in 1813 seems to
him a further argument in favor of the efficiency of such transactions when handled by a
private bank. One might wonder whether the improved prospects of victory in 1813
made it easier for Rothschilds to call out hard money than it had been for Wellington’s
Commissary in 1810.
  49. Wellington to Liverpool, May 23, 1810, Dispatches         of Wellington, Vi, 147; for the
government’s   point     of view,   see   Liverpool   to Wellington, June, 1810, in Yonge,
Liverpool, 1, 330-331.


                                               Zaye
             British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


  The worsening of Britain’s financial health naturally excited
much speculation as to its causes. Heavy outlays for military
operations and subsidies in the Peninsula was a fairly common
explanation offered, but some observers were unwilling to accept
this as the only answer. The poor grain harvest of 1809 had
necessitated heavy purchases of food abroad, while grain importa-
tion during       1810    rose   to more     than 2,321,000 quarters—not         far
from an all-time high. Expansion of British trade might have paid
for both the military expenses and food imports, but the
Continental   System and the American        Non-Intercourse Act
restricted it considerably. The new South American markets
offered compensation, but a large part of Britain’s exports there
were bought on credit. By 1810 three closely related phenomena
caused uneasiness among Britain’s economic leaders: the shortage
of specie, the unfavorable balance of payments between England
and the rest of the world, and the dangerous degree of speculation
which marked her trade with Latin America.
  The shortage of hard money was most dramatic since it
manifested itself in the premium which gold commanded over
paper in the money market. One school of thought found the
cause for this in the 1797 Restriction Act, which freed the Bank
of England from the obligation of redeeming its notes in specie.
Without this healthy check, the Bank had outrageously over-issued
notes    which,    in turn, had     driven     hard money    from    the market.
Such was the argument effectively set forth in a pamphlet entitled
The High Price of Bullion; a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank
Notes,   which     came     from   the pen of David      Ricardo    late in 1809.
Ignoring war expenses, subsidies, and foreign food purchases,
Ricardo fastened on the expansion of Bank notes as the basic
cause for the shortage and offered an easy solution. Repeal the
Bank Restriction Act and the specie shortage would end.
   Ricardo’s pamphlet supplied a powerful and cogently argued
case for those who had never ceased to oppose the 1797
suspension of specie payments. Now the cry for “conversion”’ was
renewed by many, including Francis Horner, who had long been in
the forefront of the movement.°? From his seat in the House of
Commons Horner pressed for the creation of a committee to
  50. Horner’s work and that of other opponents of the 1797 Restriction Act has been
examined by Silberling, ‘Financial and Monetary Policy,” p. 397 and passim.


                                           M3)3)
                                       1809-1811


inquire into the causes of the specie shortage. Perceval was
reluctant to agree, knowing well the views and remedies of Horner
and his supporters. At last the demand for action proved too
strong, and in February 1810 such a committee was formed with
Horner as its chairman. It included George Canning and William
Huskisson among its members. Four months later, the Bullion
Committee     presented its report and, to no one’s surprise,
recommended the resumption of specie payments as early as
practicable, a date finally identified as 1813. The report greatly
alarmed Perceval, and he confided to a friend that should
Parliament adopt its recommendations it would be “‘tantamount
to a... declaration that we must submit to any terms of peace
rather than continue the war.’>! Whether or not this view was
sound, debate on the Bullion Committee’s Report inevitably
turned into a debate on the war itself.°?
  One month after the appearance of the report, the bubble of
commercial speculation which had been growing for a year finally
broke and plunged the country into the worst panic since 1797.
As if this was      not enough,           the Cabinet      faced a new        crisis in the
closing weeks of 1810 when George III entered what proved to be
the final stage of insanity. The threat of a Regency which had
hovered over Pitt on several occasions, only to pass on, now
became a reality for Perceval. Since the Prince of Wales was
expected to call on Grenville and the antiwar faction to form a
new government, the future looked grim for the Cabinet. The
Regency Bill, however, as finally enacted, limited the Prince’s
power to make certain fundamental changes for one year, during
which time the King might recover.
  Under the circumstances, the government naturally hesitated to
commit itself to another year of war in the Peninsula, but this
hesitancy was swept away by Wellington’s successes before the
lines of Torres Vedras.°? Certain now that the French siege must
 51. Perceval to   J.   W.   Croker,   November      11,   1810,   The   Croker   Papers:   The
Correspondence and Diaries of the Late Right Honourable John Wilson Croker, ed. Louis
Jennings (New York, 1884), I, 31.
  52. Compare Silberling’s views (‘Financial and Monetary Policy”) with those of
Hecksher (Continental System, pp. 359-362).
 53. In a letter to Wellington,   dated   February   20, 1811, Liverpool pointed out how
expensive the war had become. The 1808 campaign in the Peninsula had cost Britain
£2,778,796; that of 1809, £2,639,764; that of 1810, £6,061,235. “I am under the
necessity of stating it to be the unanimous opinion of every member of the Government,


                                             234
             British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


fail, the Cabinet decided to continue the war, and on March 6
Liverpool informed Wellington that £2,000,000 would again be set
aside for Portugal’s use during 1811.54 Twelve days later Perceval
asked the Commons to support this decision by voting that
amount as a subsidy for Portugal. Wellington had not only
checked the enemy, but he hoped soon to resume the offensive.
Furthermore, Portugal was the best theatre in which to fight the
war, since it provided Britain with an opportunity “‘to carry on
operations      with   most     advantage     to ourselves,      and    most    incon-
venience to the enemy.” Opposition speakers derided this asser-
tion, but the House finally granted the government’s request for
funds. In the Lords, Grenville argued zealously against the measure
and urged the government to conserve its resources rather than
waste them in a war which could never be won.°>
   News which justified the government’s courageous decision soon
reached London:      Massena had abandoned operations against
Torres Vedras and was now in flight toward the Spanish frontier.
For the first time since the Battle of Talavera, Wellington was
ready to take the offensive, and the arrival of spring saw the
Anglo-Portuguese marching eastward, determined to recover the
border fortresses lost during the previous year. Possession of
Ciudad Rodrigo, Almeida, and Badajoz would open the passage
through which Wellington proposed to lead his army into Spain.
This news inspired enthusiasm on both sides of the House of
Commons, and the thanks of the House was voted to Wellington,
Beresford, and the men under their command without a dissenting
voice.°©
  Thanks to Wellington’s victory, Perceval looked forward with
greater confidence to the debate on the Bullion Committee’s
Report, which began on May 6. Rather than oppose the economic
theories of that report, the government simply argued that a
return to specie payments by 1813 would have a catastrophic
effect on the war which had now begun to turn in Britain’s favor.


and of every person acquainted with the finances and resources of the country, that it is
absolutely impossible to continue our exertions upon the present scale in the Peninsula
for any considerable length of time” (Yonge, Liverpool, 1, 365).
  54. Liverpool to Wellington, March 6, 1811, FO 63/120.
 55. Hansard, XIX (1811), 393, 453.
 56. Ibid., XIX, 774.
                                   1809-1811


Speaking to this point, Nicholas Vansittart, who would soon
replace Perceval as chancellor of the exchequer, declared: “To
carry on the operations of the war for the next two years, not
only without the accommodation afforded by the Bank . . but
under the pressure of a circulation so contracted and cramped, as
it necessarily must be, is a task which no minister has yet been
compelled to attempt, and which . . . can be accomplished only by
a pressure upon the people far greater than they have yet
experienced. I suspect that it could not be effected at all, and that
if we were not compelled to sue for peace, we should at last be
obliged to recall our forces from abroad, and abandon the
continental war, just at the moment when the concurrent opinion
appears to be, that fairer prospects than we have yet known are
opening.”°’ On this crucial question, the government was sup-
ported by Canning, himself a member of the Bullion Committee.
As the man most responsible for taking up the cause of the
Peninsular powers in 1808, the former foreign secretary could
hardly have taken any other position.>8
  By the time the committee’s recommendations were put to a
vote, the Cabinet had gained wide support. The proposal to force
the Bank of England to resume specie payments by May 1813 was
defeated by more than three to one. This vote of confidence in
Perceval was confirmed a few weeks later by legislative approval of
the new Budget. In addition to £2,000,000 in aid for Portugal, the
Budget provided for a £3,200,000 vote of credit which would
yanlement the government’s aid program for Spain in the coming
year.

  With the opening of Wellington’s campaign against the border
fortresses in the spring of 1811, the Peninsular War entered a new
phase. Britain was now committed to the contest she had
resumed with such uncertainty following the failure of Sir John
Moore’s campaign in 1809. Ahead lay hard fighting and dis-
appointment, but the character of the war had undergone a major
change. Never again would Portugal be invaded by the enemy. In
Spain, the nationalists were still on the defensive, but all of

  57. Ibid., XIX, 965-966.
  58. Ibid., XIX, 1125-1128.
  59. Ibid., XIX, 1169; XX (1811), 210-211.


                                         2316
             British Subsidies and the War in the Peninsula


France’s efforts to subdue Andalusia had proved barren. Now
there was some reason to hope that the time would soon come
when British, Portuguese, and Spanish troops could unite in a
single force strong enough to drive the enemy from the Peninsula.
   Subsidies had materially contributed to the change in the
fortunes of war which marked 1811. For three years Britain had
sent arms, money, and troops to help Spain withstand Napoleon’s
juggernaut,   while during the same period she financed the
formation of a Portuguese army nearly as large as her own force in
the Peninsula. When the work was undertaken, the Cabinet had no
idea of the expense it would involve. The original modest grant to
Portugal had to be increased to £980,000 in 1809, while in the
following year it was more than doubled.
   Britain’s ability to supply her Peninsular allies with vast
quantities of arms and supplies is one of the most striking features
of the period. In 1808 the Master General of the Ordnance had
been overwhelmed by the demand for muskets to be sent to the
Peninsula, but in the years which followed, it became easier to
meet such demands. Accounts prepared early in 1811 revealed
that the Ordnance Office had achieved a record of which it could
be proud. Shipment of muskets to Spain and Portugal since the
beginning of the war amounted to more than 336,000, along with
60,000,000 cartridges.©® The Storekeeper General had done every
bit as well in supplying the allies with the uniforms, cloth, shoes,
and countless other items they needed.
   More than 45,000 regular Portuguese troops were serving under
Wellington by 1811, thus making up roughly half of that force
 60. These   two     accounts   (one   for   Portugal;   the   other   for Spain) are both   dated
February 28, 1811, and are found in FO 63/120.
                                Portugal                         Spain
  Artillery                      6 pieces                        342 pieces
  Artillery Amm.                 2,000 rounds                    128, 040 rounds
  Muskets                            114,116                        222,141
  Carbines                                600                          2,600
  Rifles                               ZAZO                             =
  Pistols                              6,916                           5,640
  Swords                              15,024                          87,229
  Pikes                               17,300                         68,530
  Accoutrements                       50,000                          99,000
  Cartridges                     16,607,200                      43,358,455
  Balls                               60,000                      8,459,142
  Powder (barrels)                     3,009                          28,924
  Flints                            783,680                       3,996,500
                                  1809-1811

which won the respect of Masséna’s veterans at Torres Vedras. The
Anglo-Portuguese alliance inevitably bred disagreements, which
Charles Stuart had so far been able to keep within harmless limits.
It remained to be seen whether his task would be quite so easy
now that Portugal was free from the danger of French invasion.
  Britain fought the war in the Peninsula with money as well as
muskets—the former usually proving the more difficult for her to
supply. The scarcity of specie available for remittance to the
Peninsula was a serious problem after 1808, and the government
was convinced that a return to specie payments in England would
force it to abandon the war. Happily, Wellington’s victories came
in time to permit the Cabinet to exorcise this threat for the
duration of the war.
  What ultimate goal did Britain hope to achieve in the Peninsula?
The foreign secretary, Lord Wellesley, considered it a “diversion,”
the success of which might encourage Russia to break with
Napoleon. Should the Tsar do so, he would probably be supported
by Prussia, Sweden, and Denmark.            Thus, victories in Spain would
spark a revival of Britain’s old plans for a northern coalition to end
the Napoleonic menace.®! Nothing could be accomplished in this
direction until Wellington completed the work begun at Torres
Vedras. To that end the Anglo-Portuguese army was now moving
toward the Spanish frontier.
  61. Notes on the General State of Europe by the Marquess Wellesley, May 15, 1811,
Wellesley Papers, Il, 44-45.
                                      Xi
                 VICTORY           IN THE        PENINSULA




The three keys needed to open the gate into Spain proved harder
for Wellington to win than he had expected. Almeida fell to the
Anglo-Portuguese in May 1811, but Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz
remained beyond his grasp for another year. Only in the spring of
1812 was it possible for the allies to advance into the heart of
Spain. Until the French were driven from the frontier, the goals of
Britain’s subsidy program remained modest: maintenance of the
Portuguese serving with Wellington and support for the Spanish
resistance movement. A massive effort to mobilize a Spanish army
to cooperate with the allies would have to wait at least until
Wellington had won a firm bridgehead in Spain. During the year
needed to accomplish this, the British aid program encountered
difficulties in the attainment of even its limited objectives.
  Anglo-Portuguese relations, always uneasy, grew steadily worse
during 1811. Wellington’s quarrel with the Regency reached the
point where heavy British pressure was required to compel the
council to reform the management of its war program. Portugal’s
surrender bred an ill-will which blighted relations between the two
governments for the remainder of the war. Experience with the
Portuguese Regency led Wellington to hope that when Spanish
troops were joined with his own, he might have direct and
effective control over them. To accomplish this he proposed to the
Cabinet that he be given the management of all British aid to
Spain. “I must have the power,” he wrote in January 1811, “‘to
tell the Spanish Government, that, unless these troops co-operate
strictly with me, the assistance shall be withdrawn from them.”’!
 1. Wellington to Lord Wellesley, January 26, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 194.


                                         yeh)
                                    1811-1814


Henry Wellesley’s experience with the Spanish Cortes, which
convened at Cadiz in the autumn of 1810, raised serious doubts
whether it would ever be possible for Wellington to have this much
control. Although the Cortes was now completely dependent on
British support, it stubbornly refused to make any of the
concessions Wellesley sought. Refusal to invest Wellington with
command over Spanish troops was as vexing as the Cortes’
insistence that Britain respect its trade monopoly in South
America. Under the circumstances, London had no choice but to
bear patiently with Spanish pride and obstinacy.
   The increasing tension between Britain and Portugal arose from
two major causes: disagreement over the 1810 Commercial Treaty
and the Lisbon council’s management of Portugal’s war program.
The first of these problems did not bear directly on the war except
to the extent that it was another source of irritation between the
allies. For years Britain had wished to end the trade monopoly of
the Oporto Wine Company. Believing that the Anglo-Portuguese
trade treaty of 1810 obliged the Regent to abolish the company,
London resented his unwillingness to do so. Downing Street also
charged that Joao was lamentably lax in carrying out the
provisions of the treaty calling for suppression of the Portuguese
slave trade. Neither of these difficulties was resolved by the time
the war ended. The urgency with which Britain pressed her
demands seriously damaged her prestige both at Rio and Lisbon.”
   Far more important was Wellington’s persistent charge that the
Lisbon Council of Regency was mismanaging the war and wasting
the British subsidy. Each year Portugal received £2,000,000 in
British help to meet all the costs of its auxiliaries serving with
Wellington and to support its own army under Beresford. The
council was responsible for supplying all Portuguese troops with
pay and provisions through its own commissary, the Junta de
Viveres. Wellington had long complained of the inefficiency of the
Junta de Viveres, but the frequency of these complaints, as well as
their sharpness, increased dramatically during 1811. Failure of the
Junta to get pay and food to their troops in the field was
positively criminal, hunger, sickness, and desertions were reducing
the Portuguese regiments faster than French bullets.2 The Council
  2. Manchester, British Preéminence, p. 99 and passim.
  3h “Although there are, I understand, provisions in Lisbon in sufficient quantities to
last the inhabitants and army for a year, about    12,000 or 14,000 Portuguese troops,

                                         240
                            Victory in the Peninsula


of Regency had also failed miserably to provide the army with
transport at times when it was desperately needed. Wellington did
not conceal the fact that, in his opinion, Britain should have
assumed direct control of all branches of the Portuguese govern-
ment at the outset of the war.*
  Serious as such charges were, the council was not entirely
without defense. It could hardly be blamed for the shortage of
food in Portugal, which was the cause of much of the trouble.
Furthermore, in its search for provisions the Junta de Viveres had
to compete with Wellington’s own commissary agents, whose
superior credit gave them a marked advantage.° It was almost
impossible for a poor country of two and a half million people to
bear the heavy burden imposed by the war. With nearly 100,000
men either in the army or in the militia, Portugal’s revenue was
unequal to the expense, especially since British financial help was
proving such a weak reed.® Throughout 1810 a large part of the
Portuguese subsidy had been paid in the form of food and
commodities     shipped   from   Britain—only     about    half the
£2,000,000 due the council had been given in money.’ If London
complained of a shortage of cash, how much more Lisbon had to
suffer! Arguments such as these made no impression on Welling-
ton, who was convinced that Portugal’s troubles were the result of
the council’s mismanagement. Undoubtedly the council was lax in
requiring the wealthy classes to pay their fair share of taxes. Until
the tax system was reformed and then stringently enforced,
Wellington was sure that the Portuguese treasury would always be
short.®
  The running battle between Wellington and the Council of
Regency was only one side of a problem which grew increasingly
serious throughout 1811. The British envoy, Charles Stuart, was
finding it more difficult to maintain his good humor in dealing
with De Souza and the Bishop of Oporto. One of the most
controversial questions which produced heated disagreement was

which I have on the right of the Tagus, are literally starving” (Wellington to Lord
Wellesley, January 26, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 192). See also Wellington to
Liverpool, May 1, 1811, ibid., VII, alae
  4. Wellington to Lord Wellesley, January 26, 1811, ibid., VII, 193.
  5. Memorandum on British Aids to Portugal, March, 1813, FO 63/162.
  6. Oman, Peninsular War, V, 147-149.
  7. Portuguese Subsidy Account, 1810, AO 3/746.
 8. Wellington to Stuart, January 28, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 201-202.

                                         241
                                    1811-1814


the exact state of the British subsidy account with Portugal. While
there was no doubt as to the precise amount of aid Britain had
agreed to provide each year, difficulties quickly arose when efforts
were made to determine what had actually been paid. Aside from
the usual question as to which party would bear the loss resulting
from discounts on bills of exchange, there were perplexing details
peculiar to the Portuguese subsidy. Stuart often purchased grain
for delivery to the Portuguese auxiliary troops. Should such
foodstuffs be counted as part of the year’s subsidy? If so, what
value should be placed on them?? Disagreement on points such as
these accounts for the wide discrepancy between the Council’s
subsidy accounts and those kept by the British emissary. Stuart’s
claim that the subsidy was in fact overpaid was challenged by the
Portuguese, who produced figures showing that the reverse was
true. Efforts to disentangle these accounts were still being made
fifteen years after the guns fell silent at Waterloo.!°
   During the summer of 1811 Stuart grappled with another
problem which raised Portuguese tempers even more. Payments
made by the British Aid Office went directly into the Portuguese
treasury for the use of the Junta de Viveres. With British subsidy
money thus intermingled with Portugal’s own funds, a suspicion
arose that the treasury was using the subsidy for other than
military purposes. Stuart was reluctant to charge peculation,
although the present arrangement clearly encouraged carelessness.
Wellington was less cautious; he frankly declared that Portuguese
officials were embezzling the subsidy. !!
   The hot summer months of 1811, which witnessed Wellington’s
unsuccessful assaults against Badajoz and Rodrigo, also saw a
stormy battle fought out around the council board at Lisbon. A
British appeal to the Regent at Rio for help yielded the curious
suggestion that he would remove De Souza from the council if
London recalled Stuart.!2 From the battlefield, Wellington sent his
prescription for Portugal’s ills: replace the Junta de Viveres with a

  9. The British Treasury took the position that food purchases were to be counted as
part of the subsidy; Wm. Hamilton to Stuart, July 17, 1811, FO 63/105.
  10. At least as late as 1830 the Audit Office was working over the Portuguese subsidy
accounts.
  11. Wellington to Stuart, April 15, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 472.
  12. Napier, War in the Peninsula,    WW,   295;   Wellington   to Stuart,   May   6, 1811,
Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 519.


                                          242
The Duke     of   Wellington,   by Thomas    William   Carr   Beresford,   by   Thomas
Heaphy                                       Heaphy




Spencer   Perceval,   by   George   Joseph   The   Marquess   Wellesley,   by   J. Davis
                                    1811-1814

new commissary under British control and overhaul the national
tax system. !4 To save his Portuguese regiments from starvation, he
would continue to supply them as best he could from his own
commissary, but the value of such supplies must be credited to the
British subsidy.'4
  Wellington may have been right in contending that Britain ought
never to have undertaken to work with the council as an equal,
but it was now too late to correct that error. Far better that Stuart
should employ his patience and tact in urging reforms on the
council. Encouraging progress was made when the Rio government
at last ordered a reform of the Junta de Viveres and the
Portuguese tax machinery. Results were sufficiently hopeful to
bring from Wellington a promise that he would work with the
Council of Regency in a new spirit of good-will and cooperation.
This came to an abrupt end a few months later when Stuart
proposed that the council create a separate Military Chest into
which the subsidy would be paid, rather than into the general
treasury. Incensed at the implications of this suggestion, the
council refused. Since both Stuart and Wellington now agreed that
the step was essential, the British minister felt justified in
employing coercion. On August 17, 1811 he announced that the
subsidy would be suspended until the council adopted his
recommendation. Within a week, the council yielded; clearly
Stuart had the means needed to enforce his will.!®
  A few months later, a chastened council was obliged to submit
to still another British demand: that they accept a substantial part
of the subsidy in commodities other than military supplies, to be
sent from England for Portugal’s use.!’7 In view of London’s
difficulties in finding hard money, it was obviously desirable to
remit as large a part of the subsidy in supplies as possible.
Unwittingly, Wellington made his government’s problem worse by
announcing that the value of arms and clothing given Portugal
  13. See Wellington’s memorandum    of June 25, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VIII,

a       arate to Liverpool, May 30, 1811, and Wellington to Col. Gordon, June 12,
1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 625; VII, 7.
  15. Wellington to Liverpool, June 25, 1811; Wellington to Gordon, August 21, 1811;
Wellington to Stuart, October 21, 1811; ibid., VIII, 52, 212, 351-352.
  16. Stuart to Lord Wellesley, no. 161, August 17, 1811, and no. 164, August 24, 1811,
FO 63/112.
  17. Stuart to Lord Wellesley, no. 199, October 12, 1811, FO 63/113.


                                         244
                             Victory in the Peninsula


would not be counted as part of the subsidy. Given the delicate
state of Anglo-Portuguese relations, the Cabinet decided to accept
this obligation.!8
  The Treasury quickly took advantage of the concession Stuart
had won, and in January 1812 it contracted with Matthew
Boulton’s firm to produce a quantity of copper blanks for
shipment to Lisbon where they would be stamped and used as part
of the national coinage. The value of these blanks was £2,800,
which was applied to the Portuguese subsidy account for the
year.!9 Shipments were made of other goods Lisbon had indicated
it could use—timber, coal, medicines, tools, canvas, nails, iron,
paper, and a host of other items. The proportion of the British
subsidy sent Portugal in this form was never unduly large. At its
greatest, in 1813, it amounted to only a little more than 10
percent of the total £2,000,000 due for the year.”
  Benefits anticipated from the council’s reform of its commissary
and tax system failed to materialize. In the last analysis, the nation
simply could not support the great military effort. Consequently,
Wellington’s commissary increasingly had to provide pay and

  18. Wellington to Stuart, August 18, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VIII, 208. The
final account of the British subsidy to Portugal (AO 3/746) omits the value of arms and
clothing sent after 1811.
   19. The great industrialist died in 1809, but his business continued. It had a reputation
for the production of machinery to stamp and mint coins. See an unsigned letter from
the Foreign Office to George Harrison, January 28, 1812, FO 63/140.
  20. The Portuguese Subsidy Account for 1812 (AO 3/746) indicates that during that
year twenty-four vessels sailed from England to Lisbon with cargoes of goods for the
Council of Regency. The cargoes of two of these vessels, given below, are typical:
              St. Andrew                                   Plough
2,822 Dozen files with handles                    3,840 lbs. of Nails
4,400 Melting Pots                                3,840 Ibs. ditto-smaller
5,000 lbs. of pewter                              3,840 Ibs. ditto-2% inch
3,000 Ibs. of steel                               3,840 Ibs. ditto- 1% inch
1,200 Ibs. of ditto-fine                          700 chests of tin
5,000 Ibs. of ditto-do.                           50,000 rivets 3% inch
2,559 % yds. of sacking                           5,000 Ibs. of lead
2,800 hoes                                        1,471 bullock hides
1,800 axes
Total value - £2,985:19:4                         Total value £4,084:17:1

  The value of these goods, in relation to the total subsidy, can be determined from the
Portuguese Subsidy Account (AO 3/746).
                  Goods                          Total Subsidy
   1812           £160,039                        £2,276,833
   1813            276,756                         2,486,012
   1814             61,561                         1,345,082


                                           245
                                    1811-1814

supplies for the Portuguese troops. The arrangement was not
without advantage, since it gave the British commander some of
the control over those troops which he had all along insisted must
be his. With the bulk of the Anglo-Portuguese forces now supplied
from the British Commissary, there was also less occasion for
British and Portuguese agents to bid against each other in
obtaining such provisions as were available in the country.
   By 1812 the British subsidy to Portugal was fast becoming a
military aid administered by Wellington’s Commissary General.
Nearly all payments of the subsidy fell under one of three
headings: (1) provisions, supplies, and pay furnished the Portu-
guese troops either directly from Wellington’s commissary or
indirectly through their own; (2) goods shipped from England to
Lisbon; and (3) money payments to the Council of Regency by
the British Aid Office. About one half the 1812 subsidy passed
through the hands of the British commissary for the service of
Portugal’s army. During the following year, these payments rose to
70 percent of the total subsidy, while in 1814 they amounted to
more than 80 percent. This change worked to the disadvantage of
the council, which received a correspondingly smaller share of the
annual subsidy in money. In 1812 and 1813 cash payments to the
council amounted to only about one quarter of the year’s subsidy,
while in 1814, the last year of the war, they dropped to a mere 7
percent. Since Britain was now responsible for maintaining the
Portuguese auxiliaries from her own commissury resources, there
was no need for heavy remittances of money to the Lisbon
council.?!
  At the outset of the war Britain had undertaken to subsidize
Portugal to help her maintain a force under Wellington’s com-
mand. By 1812 this arrangement broke down. Portugal’s financial
weakness and administrative inefficiency obliged Wellington to dip
into his own resources to maintain her units in the field. The


 21. The relation of these three forms of aid to the total subsidy was as follows:
                                   British Commissary
      Money to council     [Paid in Field]         [To PortCom.]   Goods      Total Subsidy
1812 £595,079              £699,593                £511,348        £160,039      £2,276,833
LSU SOs 7.109               918,061                 634,791         276,756       2,486,012
1814    98,472              522,969                 649,146          61,561       1,345,082
1815    50,908                 SA ter7/                  950           =             54,915
These figures are taken from the Portuguese Subsidy Accounts, AO 3/746.

                                             246
                            Victory in the Peninsula


resulting advantages of this arrangement to the British commander
were numerous. In the end, the British subsidy became almost
entirely a direct military aid program administered by Wellington’s
commissary. While the council was free from all obligation to the
auxiliaries, it still had to provide for the upkeep of its own army
commanded by Beresford. Direct payments of British money to
the council shrank rapidly after 1811, and before the war ended
Portugal’s leaders openly wondered whether they had been
Britain’s allies or her victims. London never seemed to understand
that, regardless of the subsidy, Portugal had nearly bankrupted
herself to supply Wellington with troops.

  The early months of 1811 were probably the most discouraging
period in the Spanish war of liberation. Although Cadiz still held
out against the enemy, elsewhere the war went badly. France’s
plan to reduce Catalonia took a long step forward on the first day
of the New Year, when the city of Tortosa surrendered. This
enabled the French to deal separately with the resistance forces in
Catalonia and Valencia. The capture of Tarragona in the late
spring brought them even closer to their goal. For practical
purposes, the Spanish government at Cadiz was hardly effective
beyond the walls of the besieged city. Efforts by the Cortes to
draft a consitution for the kingdom ended in violent disagreement
among its members, while South American troubles added still
another burden which the government could well have done
without. This civil strife, now virtually a colonial rebellion,
seriously interfered with the shipment of specie to Cadiz, thereby
making the Cortes more reliant on British money than ever.
  Britain’s Spanish policy remained what it had been since 1808:
support in money and military supplies for the Spanish resistance
movement. The effectiveness of the local guerrilla units justified
the high priority which Britain assigned to seeing that they were
well supplied. Wellington was able to help with this since the
heavy arms shipments to Portugal during 1810 left him with a
surplus. In January 1811 he forwarded 16,000 muskets to the
British minister at Cadiz for distribution to the patriots in eastern
Spain.?* The British government never faltered in its support of
  22. Wellington to Liverpool, January 12, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII, 135.
Late in the summer of 1811 Wellington offered another 4,000 muskets to the Spanish.
See Wellington to Henry Wellesley, September 4, 1811, ibid., VIII, 259%
                                          247
                                    1811-1514


the guerrillas, and for those in hard-pressed Catalonia it made a
special effort. During 1811-1812 they received money and arms
valued at more than £88,000.”27 The Cortes had invited several
British officers to take command of some of the units of the
regular Spanish army and London promoted this by undertaking
to provide money and equipment to maintain these troops.4
   Spain’s financial condition grew so perilous that in January 1811
her government proposed to resume negotiations for a commercial
treaty with Britain. Only desperation could bring the Regency to
this step, and Henry Wellesley informed London that “without
pecuniary assistance no very considerable efforts toward the
prosecution of the War are to be expected from this Govern-
ment.’ Wellesley took this opportunity to recommend to the
Regency that his brother be given command of its armies. The fact
that Spain’s generals were held in low esteem added weight to his
argument. ‘“‘There is not a General in the service of Spain,” he
confided to the foreign secretary, ““whose character has not, in
some way or other, suffered in the opinion of his Countrymen by
the events of the Revolution.”“° Recalling how Frere had offended
the Spanish by urging Wellington’s appointment as generalissimo,
Wellesley proceeded with caution. In March he suggested that the
Regency invest his brother with command over those Spanish
troops operating in areas contiguous to Portugal. The Regency at
once rejected the suggestion and Wellesley fared no better when he
carried the matter to the Cortes.?/
   Irritating though Spain’s obstinacy was, Wellesley could not
allow her to fall for lack of money. In April 1811 he directed the
British consul at Cadiz to give her treasury about £16,000 in
specie. London had not authorized the payment, but Wellesley felt
sure it would be approved. “‘The Treasury is entirely empty,” he
  23. Statement no. 48, Spanish Subsidy Account, AO 3/765.
  24. The British officers who accepted these commands were Samuel Ford Whittingham
and Sir Philip Keating Roche. The former had a distinguished career in Spain which won
Wellington’s praise. Whittingham’s devotion to his troops was especially strong, and he
took sharp exception to certain passages in Napier’s History of the War in the Peninsula.
A duel between these veterans was narrowly averted.
  25. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, January 12, 1811, FO 72/109.
  26. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, March 25, 1811, FO 72/110.
  27. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, March 30, 1811, FO 72/110. Wellington’s
experience as supreme commander of the Portuguese forces led him to doubt the value
of Henry’s efforts. Unless real authority went with the title, it would prove almost
useless. See Wellington to Liverpool, February 2, 1811, Dispatches of Wellington, VII,
224.

                                          248
                                    Victory in the Peninsula


explained to the foreign secretary; “the Government have not
credit sufficient to raise a Dollar in the Town, nor is there any
prospect of their soon receiving a supply from the Colonies.’’28
The Regency’s needs continued to be so pressing that during the
next two months Wellesley turned over an additional £79,179.7?
He also lent $500,000 (about £132,000) in return for which
Britain was to receive an equivalent value of silver in Peru.20
   Even after Wellington’s victories over Massena in Portugal, the
Foreign Office followed a cautious policy toward Spain. Lord
Wellesley approved Henry’s occasional payments to the Cortes,
but warned him against allowing this to become a regular practice.
He specifically instructed his brother to conceal the fact “‘that you
have received such authority; but you will state to them that you
are induced, by their urgent Representations of Their Pecuniary
Distresses, to make advances for their Relief, upon the Principles
which you know to be those which actuate this Government in
assisting Spain in her present exertions.’ During 1811 arms and
supplies for 30,000 men would be sent to Spain, in return for
which     Lord Wellesley hoped that the Cortes would name
Wellington as commander of all the troops which he was likely to
encounter during the campaign.?!
   Britain did everything possible to help Spain defend herself
against the common enemy, but nothing could be done to enable
her~ to undertake     a serious offensive campaign so long as
Wellington’s progress was checked by the enemy at the frontier.
Cadiz considered this policy halfhearted and Henry Wellesley
reported that many Spanish leaders were openly asserting that
Britain would do nothing more than defend Portugal. Spanish
resentment was aggravated by London’s refusal to provide the
Cortes       with     more          money,       a      policy     which        Henry     considered
  28. The exact sum        was £15,937; Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, April 15, 1811,
FO 72/110.
  29. Statement no. 30, Spanish Subsidy Account, AO 3/765.
  30. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, April 18, 1811, FO 72/110. In July Henry
advanced another $350,000 to Spain on the same terms; Henry Wellesley to Lord
Wellesley, July 17, 1811, FO 72/112. The practice was continued during the next year.
A letter from    Lord     Bathurst to Henry Wellesley of September               27, 1814 (FO 72/158)
suggests that the arrangement did not work well.
  31. Lord    Wellesley    to Henry Wellesley, May            3, 1811, FO   72/108.     Doubtless,   Lord
Wellesley had already received Wellington’s views on this matter. The foreign secretary
pressed Henry to demand a clear understanding with the Cortes that “all civil & military
officers   in those     Provinces    and   Districts,      shall be subjected    to his [Wellington’s]
Authority.”

                                                     249
                                    1811-1814


shortsighted.°? Several times during 1811 the Cortes renewed its
petition for a British loan, but Downing Street refused to consider
the matter. Clearly, everything must wait until Wellington’s army
was in Spain.
  Early in January 1812 the Anglo-Portuguese army began their
attack on Ciudad Rodrigo. Once before Wellington had tried in
vain to capture it and now he was determined to succeed. On the
night of January 19 an assault was carried out by the light of a
frosty moon which ended with the attackers in possession of the
citadel. Now only Badajoz obstructed their advance into Spain.
Even before learning of the fall of Rodrigo, London had decided
to increase its aid to Spain. Trusting that the New Year would see
a union of the British and Spanish forces, Lord Wellesley sent new
instructions to his brother at Cadiz. During 1812 Spain would
receive supplies and arms sufficient for 100,000 troops, and Henry
Wellesley was authorized to pay her £600,000 as a subsidy. Only
one issue clouded the future of relations between the two
governments. Recently the Cortes had sent troops to quell the
South American insurrections armed with weapons originally given
by Britain for Spain’s own war for independence. The foreign
secretary insisted that “the Spanish Government must be dis-
tinctly informed that this Govt. will not permit any part of the
Succours so liberally afforded to Spain to be perverted to the
injurious purpose of prosecuting Hostilities against the Spanish
Colonies.” Forceful on this point, Lord Wellesley was conciliatory
on others. Nothing should be done to prejudice the success of the
Anglo-Spanish union in arms which was in the offing. To that end
Henry was not to press for Wellington’s appointment as supreme
commander of the Spanish armies.*?
   Preparation of these instructions was one of Lord Wellesley’s last
acts as foreign secretary; the day before signing them, he had
announced his intention to resign.*4 This was only one of several

  32. Henry Wellesley to Lord Wellesley, July 26, 1811, FO 72/112.
  33. Lord Wellesley to Henry Wellesley, January 17, 1812, FO               72/127;    Oman,
Peninsular War, V, 337.
  34. Wellesley’s motives in resigning remain somewhat of a mystery. His public
explanation (Hansard, XXII   [1812], 367-372) lacks conviction. It may be that he
found it impossible to work easily with his colleagues. Certainly, most of them were
happy to see him go. Lord Liverpool doubted whether he had bothered to appear at
more   than half the Cabinet   meetings   (Liverpool   to Wellington,   February,     1812, in


                                           ASD)
                            Victory in the Peninsula


elements in the complex political upheaval which troubled Britain
in the spring of 1812. The restrictions in the Regency Bill having
lapsed, the Prince Regent, later George IV, was free to make
overtures to Grenville and Grey, but in the end he decided to
stand by Perceval. In March the prime minister selected Lord
Castlereagh to take Wellesley’s place at the Foreign Office, but
scarcely had the matter been settled when Perceval’s assassina-
tion reopened the whole question of the government’s future.
Despite strenuous efforts by Canning and Lord Wellesley to
succeed the fallen premier, the final settlement of the question
found Lord Liverpool in that position. The reorganization of the
Cabinet left Castlereagh and Vansittart, the chancellor of the
exchequer, as the only important ministers with seats in the
Commons. Thus Castlereagh served not only as foreign secretary
but chief government spokesman in the lower house.
  Despite signs of an impending rupture between Napoleon and
the northern powers, Castlereagh believed that Britain must give
highest priority to the war in the Peninsula. With Wellington now
hammering at the last border citadel held by the enemy, the time
had come to enlarge British aid to Spain even beyond the limit
recently set by Lord Wellesley. Within less than a month after
taking office, Castlereagh won the Cabinet to this view, and on
March 30 he instructed Henry Wellesley to increase the Spanish
subsidy from £600,000 to £1,000,000. The wisdom of this policy
was confirmed a few weeks later when London learned that
Wellington had at last taken Badajoz. Parliament willingly en-
dorsed the subsidy appropriation for Portugal and Spain.*>
  By June 1812 Wellington had fought off attempts by the French
to regain control of the border, and he was now ready to move
against Madrid. Several units of the Spanish army had recently
joined forces with the Anglo-Portuguese and Wellington could
expect to encounter others on his march into Spain. Predictably,
the Spanish relied on the severely strained British commissary to


Yonge, Liverpool, 1, 378). For an example of Wellesley’s personal peevishness, see
Walpole, Perceval, II, 238. While one might question Webster’s verdict that Wellesley
“proved a gigantic failure in the Foreign Office” (Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 17),
there is no doubt that his resignation made way for a better man.
  35. Castlereagh to Edward Thornton, March 13, 1812, FO 73/71; Castlereagh to Henry
Wellesley, no. 11, March 30, 1812, FO 72/127; Hansard, XXIII (1812), 559-584.


                                          Zor
                                   1811-1814


supply them with provisions and equipment.*° Wellington quickly
discovered that his power to grant or refuse such requests gave him
more real control over the Spanish than formal appointment as
their general.?7
  This fact took on greater significance when the British com-
mander learned that his government had undertaken to pay Spain
£1,000,000 during the year. Sure that the Cortes would take the
money and rely on him to provide for its troops, Wellington
decided to intervene. He wrote Lord Liverpool in May urging that
‘all the supplies sent to this country for the Spanish Government
should be at the disposal of the Commissary in Chief of the King’s
troops.” Britain’s unhappy experience with the Portuguese subsidy
must not be repeated with the Spanish. If London granted his
request, Wellington would guarantee that every shilling given by
Britain would be spent to support the Spanish military program.
Furthermore, it would give him a powerful weapon to make the
Spanish forces do his bidding.?8 None of this implied any criticism
of Henry Wellesley, but it was a condemnation of the Cortes with
which Henry had to work as British minister. The corruption and
waste which characterized the Cortes’ expenditure of British
money was reason enough to bypass that body in the future.
Writing to Henry Wellesley in May 1812, the British commander
frankly declared: ‘‘] admit, that it is not very easy for the King’s
Ambassador to give the King’s aid in any other manner than
through the Spanish Government... but the difficulty he would
experience in giving the pecuniary aid direct to those who are to
enjoy the benefit of it, is the principal reason why I think that the
whole ought to be at the disposal of the Commander in Chief.’’°?
  Wellington’s proposal was logical, but it involved certain
practical difficulties which he did not appreciate. At least a part of
the subsidy must be given to the Cortes, which now depended on
Britain for its financial survival. Some money would also have to

  36. Wellington had already been joined by Don Carlos de Espana’s division. Before
leaving for Madrid, he detached a part of Hill’s command to join with other Spanish
troops in guarding the important Tagus River crossing at Almaraz. See Fortescue, British
Army, VIII, 446.
Bee Wellington’s letter to Espana of April 29, 1812, Dispatches of Wellington, IX,

  38. Wellington to Liverpool, May 6, 1812, ibid., IX, 124-126.
  39. Wellington to Henry Wellesley, May 14, 1812, ibid., IX, 146-147.


                                         AS}
                           Victory in the Peninsula


be set aside for the use of the local guerrilla units operating at a
considerable distance from the main theatre of the war. As
Castlereagh studied Wellington’s plan, the obvious solution to its
difficulties occurred to him: the £1,000,000 subsidy should be
divided between Wellington and Henry Wellesley. For the mo-
ment, the British commander would have to be satisfied with this
compromise.*?
   Management     of the £1,000,000     subsidy expanded      Henry
Wellesley’s normal diplomatic duties to include those of paymaster
and accountant. The number who looked to him for help was
legion. In addition to paying the Cortes and sending money to
Wellington, he had to supply the Spanish guerrilla leaders and the
British officers in command of Spanish units. All his remittances
were either in Treasury Bills drawn on London, or in specie.
Occasionally, he followed the example of his Lisbon colleague and
purchased food for delivery to Spain’s troops. By the end of the
year, Wellesley had almost exhausted the £1,000,000 grant, of
which about 8 percent had gone for Wellington’s use.*!
  Hopes for victory, so low at the beginning of 1812, went soaring
in midsummer. Wellington’s triumph at Salamanca in July threw
open the road to Madrid, and within a month the allies occupied
the Spanish capital.42 The position of the French was now
dangerous, and they abandoned their useless siege of Cadiz.
Anxious to attack before the scattered enemy armies united,
Wellington decided to strike at Clausel’s force in the north.
Leaving a part of the allied army          at Madrid, the British
commander moved against his opponent at Burgos. If Clausel
could be beaten, the rest of Napoleon’s legions might be in flight
toward the Pyrenees by the time the year ended.
  Wellington’s operations during 1812 involved problems of
military administration bearing directly on the British aid pro-

 40. Castlereagh to Henry Wellesley, June 2, 1812, FO HANIA.
  41. Wellesley’s account of his 1812 expenditures (Account of Money advanced to the
Spanish Government ...under the authority of the Right Honble. Sir Henry Welles-
ley ... between the 31st of December, 1811 and the 31st of December, 1812) enclosed
in Henry Wellesley to Castlereagh, February 16, 1813, FO 72/143, itemizes his
payments. Exclusive of the money lent to the Cortes to be repaid in specie, these
remittances totaled $3,503,118. At the prevailing rate of exchange, this amounted to
about £945,000.
  42. Fortescue (British Army, VIII, 631) states that at Salamanca the allied army
consisted of 30,562 British troops, 18,017 Portuguese, and 3,360 Spaniards.


                                        Jaye)
                                     1811-18514

gram. His commissary had to provide for the British forces, as well
as issue pay, provisions, and equipment to the larger part of the
Portuguese and Spanish units serving with them. Difficulties in
finding an adequate food supply in the war-torn Peninsula made
the commissary’s job even harder, and he turned for help to his
superior, the commissary-in-chief, who directed operations in
London. John Charles Herries had been named commissary-in-
chief in October       1811, and he held that position for the remainder
of the war. Working closely with Wellington and his commissary
general, Sir Robert Kennedy, Herries often found himself the
target of their complaints, but he was, fortunately, thick-skinned
and their grumblings hurt him little.
  The commissary-in-chief was responsible for the collection and
shipment of the arms and supplies Britain had undertaken to send
her allies in the Peninsula. Early in 1812 the Cabinet had promised
Spain equipment for 100,000 troops and, thanks to Herries’
industry, the bulk of these supplies were on their way within ten
weeks.*3 One of Herries’ most aggravating problems was caused by
the defaulting of British manufacturers on their contracts to
provide him supplies. Almost as vexing was the fact that uniform
patterns sent by the Spanish and Portuguese were often so
carelessly done that when the finished product was delivered by
literal-minded British tailors, the jackets were much too small and
the trousers would fit only giants. The commissary-in-chief
struggled cheerfully with these difficulties, but he was distressed
that the Spanish were so unappreciative of his accomplishments.
   Providing an adequate food supply for Wellington’s army was
Herries’ constant nightmare. Conditions improved a little in 1813
when he began to buy food and forage in Britain for shipment to
the Peninsula, thereby relieving Wellington from the necessity of
using his scanty supply of specie to obtain them locally. Winter
storms and privateers made such shipments of foodstuffs un-
  43. Memoir of the Public Life of the Right Hon. John Charles Herries ..., ed. Edward
Herries (London, 1880), I, 60; Bunbury to Hamilton, March 10, 1812, FO 72/138.
  44. Herries, Memoir, 1, 34. On July 1, 1812 Herries wrote the British Storekeeper-
General at Cadiz: “In truth we have supplied their [Spanish] wants so liberally and so
readily that we have misled them into exaggerated notions of our powers, and they
receive our loans rather as the proofs of inexhaustible means than of generous efforts in the
common cause. Instead of being surprised at our furnishing the equipment for 100,000
men in a few months, they wonder why we do not produce them in a few days” (ibid., I,
61-62).
                            Victory in the Peninsula


dependable,    however.*>  Wellington    regularly complained    of
Herries’ shortcomings, but the commissary-in-chief never lost his
government’s confidence. During the closing years of the war, he
was given the added responsibility of handling nearly all subsidy
payments to the allies. Herries’ services as commissary-in-chief
between 1811 and 1816 surely justify his title as “‘the unsung
Carnot of Whitehall.”’*¢
   The scarcity of hard money, which had troubled Wellington
from the beginning of the war, grew steadily worse throughout
1812. The troops who stormed Badajoz and drove the French
before them at Salamanca had not been paid for several months,
while the army’s bills multiplied so fast that Britain’s creditors
despaired of repayment.*’ Without the rapid increase of British
trade with the Peninsula, conditions would have been still worse.*8
Even so, Britain’s expenditures for military operations in the
Peninsula rose at a fantastic rate. The 1809 campaign had cost
about £3,000,000, while double that amount was spent by the
government on the Peninsular War in the next year. In 1811 the
war cost had jumped to nearly £11,000,000, of which three
quarters had been paid for in bills drawn on England. Discount on
this paper was not far from 25 percent, while the exchange rate
dropped so low that one pound sterling would buy only 3.5
Spanish dollars, rather than 5 Wellington devised numerous
plans for obtaining hard money in Spain, but the Treasury found
none of them workable.*? When the allies entered Madrid in the
summer of 1812 the specie shortage was critical, and Wellington
sternly warned the new secretary of war, Lord Bathurst, “The
want of money in the army is become a most serious evil; and we
may trace to this want many of the acts of plunder and
indiscipline by which we are disgraced every day. We must be

  45. Ward, Wellington’s Headquarters, p. 94.
  46. Denis Gray, Spencer Perceval:        The Evangelical Prime Minister, 1762-1812
(Manchester, 1963), p. 330. Herries’ work deserves more attention than it has received.
His papers are deposited in the British Museum, but as late as the autumn of 1965 they
were not available to students.
  47. Inevitably this led to wild speculation in British paper, about which there was so
much complaint during the last years of the war.
  48. Francois Crouzet, L’Economie Britannique et le Blocus Continental, 1806-1813
(Paris, 1958), II, 688.
  49. Castlereagh to the Duke Del’ Infantado, March 25, 1812, FO 72/134.
  50. Fortescue, British Army, IX, 92-94.
                                      1811-1814


regularly supplied, or we cannot go on.” London would have to
send him at least £100,000 in coin each month.>!
  In recent years, the British Treasury had resorted to nearly every
known means to obtain specie, but the results never came up to
expectations.°7 To meet Wellington’s latest demand, the Cabinet
would have to strip the country of its specie and even send guineas
to him—an act prohibited by law. It would, however, be criminal
to withhold the help the British commander called for at a time
when    the war was nearing its climax. Over the strenuous
opposition of the Bank of England, the ministers resolved that,
come what may, Wellington would have his money. By means of
an Order in Council £100,000 in guineas was obtained at the Bank
for shipment to Spain. During the last half of 1812 a total of
£775,213 in gold was sent to Spain by a government which had
now staked everything on victory.
  Wellington did not provide that victory. His campaign in
northern Spain bogged down completely when Clausel defied his
best efforts to take Burgos. French armies commanded by Soult
and Joseph Bonaparte had at last united and were moving against
the allies. The hunter was now the hunted. Wellington abandoned
operations against Burgos in October and withdrew         to the
Portuguese frontier. His army now included about 12,000 Spanish
troops.*4
  The British retreat was a crushing blow, but the situation was
not nearly as bad as it appeared. All of Spain south of the Tagus
was now free, and the French position in the north was seriously
threatened by guerrilla action along its perimeter.» In desperation,
the Spanish Cortes offered Wellington command of all its armies.
If Henry Wellesley is to be believed, the offer was made without
pressure or persuasion on his part.*® Perhaps the appointment
strengthened   Wellington’s position with the 46,000 soldiers

  51. Wellington to Bathurst, August 18, 1812, Dispatches of Wellington, IX, 369.
 52. Some of these methods are discussed in Gray, Perceval, pp. 323-352.
 53. Herries, Memoir,    1, 78-79;   Fortescue,   British   Army,   IX,   12-13.   The   gold sent
Wellington in 1812 included French, Portuguese, and Spanish coin, as well as bar gold.
See Memorandum of Consignments of Specie to Portugal since August 10, 1812,
Historical Manuscripts Commission, Report on the Manuscripts of Earl Bathurst
Preserved at Cirencester Park (London, 1923), pe 219:
  54. M. Glover, Wellington’s Victories, p. 94.
  55. Ibid., pp. 96-97.
  56. Henry Wellesley to Castlereagh, September 20, 1812, FO 72/132.


                                            YS
                           Victory in the Peninsula


making up the Spanish army, but it was not clear gain. The Spanish
general, Ballasteros,  commanding     in Granada,     resented  the
appointment and refused to obey Wellington’s orders. Although
Ballasteros’ attempt at a coup d’état ended in failure, it revealed
how deeply the pride of some Spaniards had been hurt.°’ Less
dramatic, but in the long run more important, events bore out
Wellington’s original prediction: now that he commanded                            the
Spanish, the Cortes expected his commissary to feed and                            pay
them.*8
  Since coming to the Foreign Office, Castlereagh had grown
increasingly annoyed at the Spanish habit of offering too little and
asking too much. Scarcely had he assumed that post, when the
Spanish minister reminded him that three years had gone by
without any subsidy treaty between Britain and Spain. A specific
proposal for such an agreement was now offered: Britain should
provide her ally with arms and equipment for 100,000 men and
lend her £10,000,000. In return the Cortes would allow Britain to
share in the South American trade for three years. Castlereagh
very patiently explained why this offer could not be accepted. So
far as arms were concerned, Britain planned to send the requested
quantity to Spain during the coming year, in addition to which she
would give the Cortes £1,000,000. For the time being the
government preferred to give Spain all the help it could rather
than to undertake a specific obligation which it might find
impossible to meet. Spain’s request for a £10,000,000 loan was
excessive. As Castlereagh explained, ‘““The mere                statement of such
a proposition is sufficient to demonstrate its impossibility.” The
puny trade concessions offered by Spain as an inducement for a
treaty were too insignificant to be seriously considered.*?
   Although Castlereagh’s support of the Peninsular War never
wavered, the events of 1812 made it impossible for him to give it
his undivided    attention. The   long-awaited  break   between
Napoleon and the northern powers had come at last, and by
midsummer, the Grand Army had crossed the Niemen river on its

 57. Oman   (Peninsular War, V1, 753) gives the strength of the Spanish army at the end
of the summer of 1812 as 46,292. For Ballasteros’ activities see ibid., VI, 59-62.
  58. Wellington to Don Estevan Mexia, December 11, 1812, Dispatches of Wellington,
IX, 623-624.
  59. Del Infantado to Castlereagh, March 2, 1812, FO 72/134; Castlereagh to Del
Infantado, March 25, 1812, FO 72/134.
                                    1811-1814

way to Moscow. Before the year ended a new coalition was in the
making, one which Britain would have to support with money and
arms. This might strain the nation’s resources to the bursting
point, but Castlereagh did not propose to finance such a coalition
at the expense of his commitments in the Peninsula.
  In February 1813 the foreign secretary explained to Henry
Wellesley the government’s Spanish policy for the coming year.
Spain would again be given £1,000,000, in addition to which there
would probably be a supplementary subsidy of between £300,000
and £400,000.     Clothing, arms, and supplies would also be
furnished in sufficient quantity to meet all reasonable expecta-
tions which the Spanish government might have. Since Britain also
was expected to arm the northern enemies of France, he hoped
that Spain could make do with only 50,000 muskets. If Wellington
believed that more than that number was needed, however, the
government would see that they were sent.
   Britain had undertaken obligations to Portugal and Spain which
might require her to lay out £3,400,000 during 1813, in addition
to paying for her own military operations in the Peninsula. Over
and above this, she would also have to provide equally massive
subsidies for her new allies in northern Europe. In view of this
unprecedented degree of aid to Spain, the foreign secretary urged
Henry Wellesley once more to request the Cortes to open its
colonial markets. With commendable restraint he reminded his
envoy that “Spain ought to do something to conciliate the feelings
of this Nation: continued Sacrifices, & no return, may shake the
popularity of the War.”

  Since the aid program for Portugal and Spain was almost entirely
military in character, the British government had always been
willing to take into account the opinions of its commander. By
1813 Wellington’s reputation stood so high that the Cabinet was
ready to leave the management of that program in his hands.
Accumulating experience strengthened his belief that, so far as
  60. Castlereagh to Henry Wellesley, February 15, 1813, FO 72/142. In the end Britain
supplied clothing for 100,000 Spanish (Hamilton to Bunbury, October 8, 1813, FO
72/155). So far as arms were concerned, Wellington believed that 60,000 muskets would
be sufficient for the year. Fernan Nunez to Castlereagh, August 22, 1813, FO 72/149.
For the development of Castlereagh’s thoughts on the Spanish subsidy, see his letters to
Henry Wellesley of January 26, March 4, and April 14, 1813, FO 72/142.


                                         258
                               Victory in the Peninsula


possible, the subsidy should be used exclusively to meet the needs
of the Spanish and Portuguese forces in the field, and this was the
goal he now set out to attain. Before the war ended, nearly all
British money given the Peninsular powers passed through the
commissary general’s department to provide pay, provisions, and
equipment for the allied troops.
   With his army safely settled into winter quarters on the
Portuguese frontier, Wellington left for a brief visit to Cadiz in
December 1812. He wanted to reach a clear understanding with
the Spanish government regarding his authority before he accepted
its recent offer of supreme command.         Even this would be
meaningless unless Cadiz undertook the major reforms in its
military supply system that he was anxious to propose. Wellington
also wished to confer with Henry Wellesley. During the past year,
Henry had given him only a small part of the British subsidy to
spend and he must persuade his brother to enlarge his share during
 1813.
   Wellington’s meeting with Spanish officials at Cadiz ended in
agreement over the nature of his authority as supreme commander
of their armies. Although it fell short of what the British general
desired, he was satisfied that it would serve if only the Spanish
honored it.®! His discussions with Henry Wellesley were still more
satisfying. Wellington may have pointed out that with a large part
of Spain now liberated, the Cortes would find it easier to raise its
own revenue. There was therefore no reason why most of the
British subsidy should not go to the support of the Spanish troops
he was to command.
   The result of these discussions was an agreement between the
two brothers that Wellington would control the spending of most
of the subsidy for 1813. No record of this understanding appears
to have survived, but its details are not difficult to infer.
Wellington was to have as much of the 1813 subsidy as he wished
for his own commissary to use in maintaining the Spanish units
under his command. What remained would be spent by Henry
upon Wellington’s recommendation. Finally, the brothers seem to
have understood that the value of arms and war materials sent
from England was not to be counted as a part of the total Spanish
  61. Fortescue,   British   Army,   IX, 74-75; Wellington   to Bathurst,   January   27, 1813,
Dispatches of Wellington, X, 51-55.
                                     1811-1814


subsidy. When Wellington later learned that London proposed to
spend £1,400,000 on Spain during 1813, he was doubtless pleased
to know that nearly all of it would go to the support of the
Spanish soldiers.°2 That this was in fact the case is clear from
Henry Wellesley’s account of his own payments during 1813,
which amounted to only about £545,000, the bulk of which went
to help Spanish forces operating apart from Wellington’s army.
The chief loser by this arrangement was, of course, the Cortes,
which received only about £65,000 in British money during
1813.2
  When the allies began their advance into Spain in the spring of
1813, Wellington’s prediction was quickly fulfilled. The Spanish
troops attached to his command depended almost entirely on the
British commissary     for their supplies and pay. Provincial
authorities refused to make provisions available, and such food
and pay as the Cortes had collected remained at remote magazines
for   lack   of transport.      On    the   eve    of the     battle   of Vittoria,
Wellington informed the Spanish war minister that the 24,000
Spanish troops in the north had so far received nothing from their
own government. “If it were not for the sums which are given to
these troops from the military chest of the British army... ,” he
observed icily, “‘these troops would not have a shilling to pay.
Their provisions are forced from the country by a description of
plunder.’ The British commissary general did his best to provide
the Spanish with what they needed, but his resources were limited.
Lacking sustenance and transport, Wellington found it impossible
to unite the scattered Spanish units with his own army, and at the
Battle of Vittoria on June 21, only about 7,000 Spanish troops
shared the honor of that victory with their allies.©

  62.The description of this agreement is based on evidence which, although
circumstantial, seems valid. On January 8, 1813 Wellington wrote Generals Whittingham
and Roche that Henry Wellesley ‘thas been so kind as to leave to me, in a great measure,
the decision on the application of the pecuniary funds applied by Great Britain for the
support of the cause of Spain.” Dispatches of Wellington, X, 24. See also Henry
Wellesley’s letter to Castlereagh of January 20, 1813, Supplementary Despatches and
Memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur, Duke of Wellington, K. G...., ed. 2d Duke of
Wellington (London, 1858-1872), VI, 529-530.
  63. See Henry Wellesley’s account of his payments during 1813, enclosed in his letter
to Castlereagh, March 4, 1814, FO 72/159.
ee Wellington to Don Juan O’Donuju, June 14, 1813, Dispatches of Wellington, X,

  65. Jac Weller, Wellington in the Peninsula, 1808-1814 (London, 1962), p. 268.


                                         260
                              Victory in the Peninsula


  Vittoria virtually destroyed Napoleon’s power in the Peninsula,
and the Spanish Cortes was less inclined than ever to make the ex-
ertions in the cause which Wellington urged. The Spanish regi-
ments marching with their allies toward the Pyrenees depended
almost completely on the British commissary. By the close of the
year that department had issued nearly £400,000 in pay, provis-
ions, and field equipment to Wellington’s Spanish units.®
   The    British     commander’s      resentment       toward     the Cortes grew
with each passing week. Not only had they neglected to provide
for their soldiers, but they had reneged on the agreement which he
had made with them at Cadiz in January. Wellington’s recomm-
endations were either ignored or treated with haughty indifference
by a government no longer fighting for survival. On entering
France, the Spanish troops supplemented with plunder the meagre
allotment of provisions issued them by the British commissary.
Convinced that such troops were more of an embarrassment than a
help, Wellington decided to be rid of them before going into
winter quarters.           In November 1813 he ordered 20,000 of them
back into their            own country, keeping with him only Morillo’s
division of 4,500 men.°’
  Wintering the Spanish troops south of the Pyrenees solved an
immediate problem, but Wellington knew well that success in the
spring campaign might depend on those very troops. No reinforce-
ments could be expected from England, and for reasons still to be
examined, his Portuguese regiments were rapidly dwindling. To
defeat Soult and push on to the Garonne, he must rely on the
Spanish; which meant, in effect, that he would have to devise
some means of supporting them. On November 24, 1813 he wrote
Henry Wellesley explaining the only plan which could accomplish
this. The 1813 subsidy had been divided almost equally between
the maintenance of the Spanish units serving with the allies and
those engaged against the enemy in the eastern part of the
country. During the coming year, he recommended that the entire
subsidy go to upkeep of the Spanish forces serving under his
immediate command in the south of France. If the Cortes wanted
to continue operations against the remaining pockets of enemy

  66. Statements nos. 14 and 19, Spanish Subsidy Account, AO 3/765.
  67. Oman, Peninsular War, VII, 216-218. For Wellington’s difficulties with the Cortes,
see ibid., VII, 142-143.


                                          261
                                    1811-1814

resistance in Spain, it ought to pay the cost itself. All the British
subsidy for 1814 should be used by the British commissary to
support the Spanish army which Wellington intended to collect
north of the Pyrenees. In this way the money would not only be
spent exclusively for military purposes, but it would finance the
campaign which, above all others, must prove decisive.®®
  Making provision for a large Spanish army was all the more
important now that Britain’s military alliance with Portugal was
fast falling apart. The farther the war moved from Lisbon, the
greater grew Wellington’s difficulties with the Council of Regency.
He bitterly complained that while the Portuguese commissary at
Lisbon was well supplied with provisions, very little was sent to
Portugal’s troops in Spain. Like the Spanish, the Portuguese forces
depended on the resources of Wellington’s commissary. Charging
that the Lisbon council was using subsidy money to pay off past
debts rather than maintain its soldiers, he again proposed his old
remedy: replace the Portuguese commissary with a new supply
system under direct British control. The Council of Regency
violently objected and added fuel to the fire by charging that
Wellington intentionally played down the achievements of its
troops in his battle reports. Once again, as in 1811, letters flew
between Lisbon and headquarters with increasingly shrill charges
and countercharges.
   The approaching end of the war created new difficulties for the
Lisbon council, leading it to follow the Cortes’ example and relax
its military efforts. Lisbon’s wartime prosperity abruptly ended in
the summer of 1813 when the British supply base was transferred
from there to the northern Spanish port of Santander in order to
serve Wellington better. This deprived the Council of Regency of
the revenue from customs duties on which it had long relied.
Furthermore, Portugal again feared the likelihood of Spanish
aggression, and in an effort to conserve the national resources for
use in the future, the council allowed the Conscription Laws to
lapse. As a result, no replacements were sent to make good
Wellington’s losses from death and desertion. At Vittoria, the

  68. Wellington to Henry Wellesley, November        24,    1813,   and   March   11,   1814,
Dispatches of Wellington, X1, 315-316, 570.
pes        Wellington’s letter to the Portuguese   Regent   of April 12, 1813, ibid., X,
   -287.


                                         262
                            Victory in the Peninsula


allied army included 30,000 Portuguese, but six months later,
their effective strength had fallen to about 18,000.”
   Funneling the British subsidy through Wellington’s commissary
made one long-standing problem still worse: how could the
Military Chest be supplied with the greater quantity of hard
money now required? With ever larger numbers of Portuguese and
Spanish to feed and pay, the British commander needed every bit
of specie the Treasury could send. Now that the allies were in
France, he argued that it was essential that provisions bought from
the French be paid for in coin. In 1812 the Cabinet had promised
to send Wellington at least £100,000 a month in specie. They had
done even better than that: £400,000 in coin had been sent from
England during the one month of January 1814.7! Wellington now
asked ministers to do still more.
   The crumbling of the Continental System made it easier for
Britain to remit money to her allies in northern Europe, but it did
not materially help conditions in the Peninsula. Fortunately, a
considerable amount of gold coin in India became available in
1813, which, when brought to England, was converted into the
last issue of guineas ever to be struck. Since most of these coins
were sent to Wellington, they were usually referred to as “military
guineas.”’’* The upswing in the fortunes of war made it easier for
the commissary’s agents to exchange Treasury Bills for specie at
Cadiz and elsewhere in the Peninsula, but now shortage of
transport often delayed the delivery of this coin to Wellington’s
headquarters in the north.’? More than £2,500,000 passed through
Wellington’s Military Chest during 1813, but his insatiable demand
for still more led the Cabinet to solicit the assistance of
Rothschilds bank in London.”*                  By the end of 1813 Nathan
Rothschild and the commissary-in-chief were cooperating to
obtain gold coin on the Continent for Wellington’s use. Gold
pieces (many of them French in origin) were bought in Holland
   70. Oman, Peninsular War, VII, 145-146; Weller, Wellington, 266-268; Fortescue,
British Army, X, 425. So far as desertion was concerned, Wellington had this to say
about the Portuguese: “The Portuguese (to their honor be it recollected) do not desert
to the enemy. When they go, it is to return to their own country” (Wellington to
Bathurst, November 9, 1813, Dispatches of Wellington, X1, 273).
  71. Oman, Peninsular War, VII, 288.
 72. Ibid., VU, 147, 288.
 73. Wellington to Bathurst, December 22, 1813, Dispatches of Wellington, XI, 389.
 74. Wellington to Bathurst, January 8, 1813, ibid., XI, 426-427.


                                         263
                                      1811-1514

and Germany for shipment to Spain from the port of Helvoetsluys
in the Low Countries. In time Rothschild was able to buy gold in
France itself for direct overland shipment to the allied army in the
southern part of the country.”
  When the campaign resumed in February 1814, control of the
subsidy enabled Wellington to recall the Spanish troops which had
wintered south of the Pyrenees. The withering away of the
enclaves of French resistance in eastern Spain justified his decision
to order all of the Cortes’ forces to join him in France. With a
military chest overflowing with guineas, Commissary General
Kennedy was able to provide for the Portuguese and Spanish units
which made up the larger part of the allied army. By the time
Toulouse fell in April, Wellington had 40,000 Spanish under his
command in France, although the Portuguese levies had shrunk to
only 13,000.7°
  Military considerations account for the British decision, taken
during the last years of the war, to divert most of the subsidy from
the governments of Spain and Portugal to the service of their
armies with Wellington. Ever since 1812 the British commander
had pressed for this diversion. How completely he attained that
goal is clear from the accounts of his commissary general.’7 About
70 percent of the £3,900,000 paid as a subsidy to Portugal in
1813-1814 was disbursed by Wellington either directly to Portu-
guese troops in the field, or indirectly through Portugal’s own
commissary and paymaster departments. The case of the Spanish
subsidy was even more striking. Of the £1,820,932 given Spain
during the final year of the war, about 80 percent passed through
the hands of the British commissary. Because of London’s
unlimited confidence in him, Wellington was given almost com-
plete control over the spending of the subsidy to the Peninsular
powers. But the Cabinet’s support of their general went far
beyond acquiescence. By providing him with a steadily increasing
flow of hard money and vast quantities of arms and supplies, the

  75. Herries, Memoir, 1, 85-86; Hecksher, Continental System, pp. 354-362.
  76. Oman   (Peninsular   War, VII, 556-557, 563) states that only about   10,000 Spanish
troops were with Wellington at the capture of Toulouse. The remaining 30,000 were
either at Bayonne or elsewhere in southern France.
  77. The Portuguese Subsidy Accounts for 1813 and 1814 (AO 3/746) and statements
15 and 20 of the Spanish Subsidy Account (AO 3/765) provide the data on which the
following is based.


                                           264
                      Victory in the Peninsula


ministers guaranteed the success of his operations. Final victory in
the Peninsula was won with the help of the Portuguese and
Spanish soldiers who, before the war ended, were almost entirely
clothed, fed, paid, and armed by Great Britain.

   Consideration of the Sicilian subsidy in connection with the
Peninsular War is more appropriate than might appear. The only
military advantage Britain gained from that subsidy was the
participation of Sicilian troops in the Spanish campaign after
 1812. In one respect, the subsidization of Spain and Sicily are
much alike: in both cases, British money came to be used almost
exclusively for the upkeep of their armies. Sicily was remote from
the center of military operations, however, and British authorities
were able to deal more forcefully with its government than was
possible in the case of the Spanish Cortes.
   When the Bourbons and their British protectors were forced to
flee to the island of Sicily in 1806, it was hoped the exile would
be brief. Events soon demonstrated that Naples was not to be
recovered easily, and for the time being the British subsidy became
merely a pension for the Bourbon court at Palermo. Dissatisfac-
tion with this state of affairs led Canning to place the subsidy ona
more satisfactory footing in 1809, and he insisted it be used solely
to support the Sicilian army which should be placed under the
diréction of the British commander on the island. The Bourbons
vigorously opposed these demands, and a crisis was only averted
by Canning’s resignation as foreign secretary. His successor was
content to continue the subsidy without asking much in return,
but the arrangement was not really satisfactory. Should the
French invade the island, lack of unified command over British
and Sicilian troops might prove disastrous. Furthermore, Queen
Maria Carolina’s intrigues to recover Naples, even at the cost of an
accommodation with France, cast serious doubts on the value of
the Anglo-Sicilian alliance.
   Sicily’s problems were forcefully brought to London’s attention
in the autumn of 1810 when the French attacked the island.
British troops threw back the invaders with the assistance of
Sicilian peasants. The inactivity of the Sicilian army during the
crisis, together with the ambiguous conduct of the Palermo
government, convinced the British envoy, Lord Amherst, that the

                                265
                                       1811-1814

court was in league with the enemy. A new complication appeared
during the following winter when Bourbon disregard for the rights
of the island’s parliament called forth a vigorous protest from
some members of the Sicilian nobility. ’8
  Downing      Street could no longer close its eyes to these
difficulties, and in the spring of 1811 Lord Wellesley took the first
step toward their resolution: the amiable but ineffective Lord
Amherst was relieved of his duties as British minister at Palermo.
As his replacement the government selected Lord William Ben-
tinck and gave him supreme command of all British troops on the
island.’? Even before taking up his post, Bentinck had reached
certain conclusions regarding Sicily which went far beyond what
Canning had vainly tried to achieve two years before. Britain must
control the Sicilian army and demand a major reform of the
Palermo government. Wellesley was unwilling to go so far without
more information, however, and the instructions given Bentinck
were more limited than the new minister desired.®°
  On reaching Sicily in July 1811, Bentinck learned that Maria
Carolina had exiled five members of the island nobility who had
protested against her tyranny. Two months spent on the island
convinced the British envoy that his original recommendations had
been correct, and he returned to London to urge them on the
foreign secretary. Bentinck added force to his argument by
pointing out that Italy was fast moving toward a national uprising
against the French similar to that which had taken place in Spain.
If Britain created a strong army under her control in Sicily and
promoted a reform of the island’s government, it would materially
promote the cause of Italian liberation.®!

  78. Rosselli, Bentinck, pp. 12-15.
  79. Lord William Cavendish    Bentinck   (1774-1839)   was the second son of the Duke of
Portland. An early military career was climaxed by his appointment as governor of
Madras in 1803. His experience in India had already made him a controversial figure by
the time he was given the Palermo post. Bentinck’s rule in Sicily has usually been viewed
in a critical light. Sir Charles Webster characterized him as “‘a brilliant and unbalanced
egoist, all the more dangerous because he was also imbued with a species of idealism”
(Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 75).
  80. Wellesley to Bentinck, May 30, 1811, and June 12, 1811, FO 70/44. Wellesley still
expected to keep the Sicilians well supplied with arms. During the summer of 1811 arms,
ammunition, and supplies to the value of £40,058 were sent them. See W. Griffin to
Robert Peel, August 16, 1811, FO 70/49.
 81. Rosselli, Bentinck, pp. 24-25.




                                           266
                          Victory in the Peninsula


   Lord Wellesley was now prepared to impose this program on
Palermo, and on October 7 he suspended payment of the Sicilian
subsidy until King Ferdinand agreed to adopt a program of
reform. For the future, Bentinck was empowered to halt subsidy
payments whenever he found it necessary to do so. If indisputable
evidence came to hand showing that the Bourbons were in league
with the French, he could use the full authority of his dual
position as envoy and military commander to correct the situation
in whatever manner might seem appropriate.®”
   Bentinck now had all the authority required to bend the
Bourbons to his will when he returned to the island in December.
The contest between the all-powerful, if erratic, British viceroy
and the malevolent Maria Carolina reached its climax a month
later. Bentinck was on the verge of seizing control of the island’s
government when he learned of the Queen’s surrender. Within a
short time, he was able to inform Wellesley that his victory had
been complete. Changes were being made in the government and
the exiled    barons    were   free to return. More important,           Bentinck
had been named Captain General of the Sicilian army. In view of
Palermo’s unconditional surrender, he resumed the subsidy and
sent the Bourbon treasury £66,666 to cover the two months
during which payments had been suspended.*3
   The experiences of an earlier British envoy under similar
circumstances should have warned Bentinck that Maria Carolina’s
capitulation was more apparent than real. She was no more
prepared to withdraw from the government to please Bentinck
than she had been to comply with William Drummond’s ultima-
tum in 1807. In some respects, the present situation was more
complicated. King Ferdinand had finally been persuaded to name
his son, the Hereditary Prince, as Vicar. Despite the King’s
nominal retirement, he continued to play a significant if devious
role. Since he had not formally abdicated, Ferdinand might
reappear on the scene at any moment and resume his full
authority. For the time being the Hereditary Prince was left to
carry on the government and to mediate the quarrel between his
mother and the British minister. This well-meaning but weak

 82. Wellesley to Bentinck, nos. 12 and 13, October 7, 1811, FO 70/44.
 83. Bentinck to Wellesley, January 29, 1812, FO 70/51.




                                        267
                                    1811-1514


young man ran the risk of being crushed between these towering
antagonists for his trouble. So far as Bentinck was concerned the
road was now open to attain the major reforms on which he had
set his heart: a revision of the Sicilian constitution and a
thoroughgoing reorganization of the island army which he now
nominally commanded.
   On both these points the British proconsul met with resistance
from the Hereditary Prince, and his dispatches to London were
filled with detailed complaints. When Castlereagh came to the
Foreign Office in March 1812 he immediately promised Bentinck
to support him to the hilt. If Maria Carolina was in communica-
tion with the French, as Bentinck claimed, then the treaty with
Sicily would be abrogated and war declared. Bentinck’s control of
the subsidy was confirmed, and Castlereagh made clear that he
could use that control in any manner required to gain his point.*4
As yet, the £400,000 paid Sicily each year had accomplished
nothing. The war in the Peninsula had reached a point where good
use could be made of the Anglo-Sicilian army in Spain. From his
position on the Portuguese frontier, Wellington could do nothing
to help the Spanish check enemy operations in Catalonia. Since
Sicily was in no danger, the foreign secretary proposed that at
least a part of the Anglo-Sicilian army be sent to help the Spanish
nationalists in Catalonia.
   Bentinck now had carte blanche at a time when strong measures
were most needed. The Hereditary Prince delayed the calling of
the Sicilian parliament, which was to prepare a new constitution,
while Ferdinand worked from behind the scenes to frustrate the
constitutionalists. Worst of all, Bentinck had not yet persuaded
the Prince to authorize a reorganization of the Sicilian forces.
Almost every mail reaching Sicily brought Bentinck letters from
London and from Wellington calling on him to send at least a part
of the Sicilian army to Spain. The time had come to prod Palermo
into action. As a foretaste of what the Hereditary Prince might
expect if he continued to be stubborn, Bentinck did not pay the
subsidy for the month of June.®> The hint was too gentle. Early in
July he formally announced that the subsidy would be suspended

 84. Castlereagh to Bentinck, March 6, 1812 and May 19, 1812, FO 70/50.
 85. Whether Bentinck’s failure to pay the June subsidy was intentional is not positive,
but it seems likely that it was no accident. Bentinck to Castlereagh, March 10, 1813 (FO
70/57) shows Bentinck’s payments for 1812.
                                         268
                             Victory in the Peninsula


until the Sicilian army had been remodeled along the lines set
forth by Britain. For the second time within the year, Bentinck
and the Bourbons were at war. With the purse-strings in the hands
of the British viceroy, the outcome was not long in doubt.
  When    the Hereditary Prince finally made his peace with
Bentinck in September, the British minister seized the opportunity
to revise the entire character of the Anglo-Sicilian alliance. The
treaty of alliance, concluded in 1807, was to be replaced by one of
Bentinck’s invention. One division of the Sicilian army, amounting
to about 7,000 men, would be placed under the absolute control
of the British commander. All their expenses would be met by
Britain, but the money would be deducted from Sicily’s £400,000
annual subsidy. Another deduction would be made to provide the
Sicilian forces with the arms, artillery, and equipment it desper-
ately needed. A third and final deduction would be made to
reimburse Britain for her expense in maintaining the Sicilian
flotilla. What remained of the subsidy would be given the Palermo
government to use as it wished. By a conservative estimate, this
would leave the Hereditary Prince with only about £150,000 a
year. The Prince had no choice but to agree, and on September 12
a new Anglo-Sicilian alliance was signed incorporating these
provisions. In effect, Britain had acquired the service of 7,000
mercenaries.®”
  Bentinck was now able to present London with a well-armed and
trained force of 7,000 Sicilians for use in the Peninsula. In June
1812 he had sent a part of the British garrison on the island to
Spain, but London continued to call for more. Although still
enchanted by the dream of leading a force to liberate Italy,
Bentinck finally agreed to send a part of his Sicilian troops to
Catalonia. During the last half of 1812, 9,000 men were sent from
Sicily to Spain, of whom a large number seem to have been drawn
from the Sicilian division.**
  86. Bentinck to the Hereditary Prince, July 4, 1812, FO 70/52.
  87. The Treaty with Sicily of September 12, 1812 (FO 93/96 [5]) refers to the
division as numbering 7,314 men. The monthly deductions are itemized, but they are
expressed in ounzes, the Sicilian monetary unit. On April 12, 1813 Castlereagh told the
Commons that nearly two thirds of the annual subsidy to Sicily was spent on the upkeep
of the Sicilian division; Hansard, XXV (1813), 790.
  88. The 6,638 troops sent from Sicily to Spain in June 1812 all seem to have been
British, except for 353 Calabrians. See Fortescue, British Army, VII, 555-556.
  Bentinck’s army in Sicily consisted of three kinds of troops: British, Sicilians, and
Neapolitans. Although Castlereagh claimed that by the end of 1812 there were 6,000

                                          269
                                      1811-1814

  By the spring of 1813 Bentinck at last felt free to go to Spain to
take command of his Anglo-Sicilians. The new Sicilian Constitu-
tion of 1812 was well launched and its chances for success had
been immeasurably improved by Maria Carolina’s announcement
that she would soon leave the island forever. The British proconsul
sailed for Spain in May, but he could not shake himself of the
notion that Italy was on the verge of revolution against the
French.®?
  The Anglo-Sicilians won no glory on the battlefields of Spain;
bad luck and poor management haunted them throughout the
remainder of the war. An outbreak of political turmoil at Palermo
forced Bentinck to cut short his military career and return to the
island in the autumn of 1813. No notice need be taken here of his
violent quarrel with the Palermo government, since it did not
involve Britain’s subsidy policy. When, at long last, circumstances
permitted Bentinck to lead an expedition to the Italian mainland,
conditions there had completely changed.         In March 1814 he
landed at Leghorn with 14,000 British and Italian troops to join
with the Austrians and Murat in breaking France’s hold.           His
conduct, increasingly eccentric and unsure, embarrassed Castle-
reagh’s Italian policy and ultimately led to his recall to England.”
  The Anglo-Sicilian alliance of 1812 left Palermo in an extremely
tight financial position and Bentinck had occasionally to lend it
money in order to meet daily expenses.?! Although the Sicilians
regarded the word “loan” as a euphemism for a gift, the British
minister fully expected repayment. Before leaving the island for

Sicilians in Spain, it seems likely that he included the Neapolitans in his count, as well as
the Sicilians (Hansard, XXV [1813], 790). Fortescue, (British Army, IX, 27) makes
clear that the two expeditions Bentinck sent to Spain in November and December 1812
consisted of British troops, Sicilians, Neapolitans, and the “Italian Regiments.”
  89. Fortescue, British Army, IX, 31.
  90. Fortescue (ibid., X, 61) believes that by the time Bentinck went to Italy he had
“Jost his mental balance.” Even Rosselli (Bentinck, p. 169) concedes that his conduct
showed signs of ““muddle-headedness.”
   91. These “loans” began at least as early as 1812. See Bentinck to Castlereagh, March
10, 1813, FO 70/57. The money was needed by Sicily for various purposes. Bentinck
was probably happy to grant Sicily’s request for funds to pay Maria Carolina’s debts in
preparation for her departure from the island. Money was also advanced to ransom
Sicilians from the Barbary pirates. In 1812 the Palermo government conducted a lottery
to raise money, but the prizes were drawn in such a way that the government ended by
owing the winners more money than it had collected. Bentinck advanced the additional
money required to relieve Palermo of its embarrassment. See Bentinck to Belmonte, May
5, 1812, FO 70/51.
                             Victory in the Peninsula


the last time in the summer of 1814, Bentinck suspended the
subsidy to remind Palermo of its obligation, but his successor,
William A’Court, seems to have resumed the payments. When the
war ended London instructed A’Court to continue the monthly
payments at a half-rate through February of 1815, when the
subsidy would end.? ‘“‘Loans” were made at least until November
1814, by which time they totaled about £280,000. So far as
repayment was concerned, A’Court came close to the truth of the
matter when he observed to Castlereagh, “Our only chance of
payment rests upon the liberality and justice of the Parliament of
Sicily, and a worse security could not be offered.’ In the end,
nothing seems to have been accomplished toward recovering the
money.

  92. Rosselli, Bentinck,   pp. 210-211;   Bathurst   to A’Court, September   7, 1814, FO
70/65.
  93. A’Court to Castlereagh, August 14, 1815, FO 70/70; British Commissary General
in Sicily to A’Court, November 14, 1814, FO 70/65.
                                   Xi
    BRITAIN         AND      THE     RISING      OF   THE   NATIONS




Lord Wellesley often annoyed his Cabinet colleagues by de-
manding that they throw even more money and men into the
Peninsular War. He did not claim that the French empire could be
destroyed on the battlefields of Spain, but British victories there
would certainly inspire the northern powers to turn on Napoleon.
Britain must, therefore, wage total war in the Peninsula and, at the
same time, encourage any spirit of resistance which might appear
elsewhere in Europe. The latter was especially difficult to
accomplish since the collapse of normal diplomatic channels of
communication in 1809 left London woefully ignorant of conti-
nental affairs. Reports from Hanoverian envoys at Berlin and
Vienna and from British agents elsewhere in Europe were of
limited value. Incomplete and unreliable as such intelligence was,
it was preferable to silence.
   Efforts made by the Foreign Office to obtain accurate and
up-to-date information were seldom entirely satisfactory and, on
occasion, they proved embarrassing. In 1810 Wellesley sent John
Harcourt King to Vienna to gather news and promote the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between London and the
Hofburg. King remained at Vienna for nearly two years but his
fondness for intrigue finally led Metternich to expel him.! A
premium was placed on news from St. Petersburg, and in the
autumn of 1811 a Portuguese army officer passed through London
on his way to the Russian capital and agreed to send Wellesley
reports written in sympathetic ink. The secret agent was as good as

  1. Buckland, Metternich, pp. 261 and passim.


                                        PARP:
                           The Rising of the Nations


his word, but a few months later, the Foreign Office had to inform
him that, thanks to some defect in the ink, the invisible writing in
his dispatches was clearly visible.”
  What little information reached London made clear that when
the time came for a rising of the nations against France, Britain
would be expected to support it with both arms and money. When
Napoleon occupied Vienna following the Battle of Austerlitz in
1805, he removed 100,000 muskets from the Hapsburg arsenals.
Russia had suffered a great loss of equipment in her last war with
France, while Prussia was especially short of powder and artillery.*
   During the winter of 1810-1811, Wellesley learned from the
London banker, Samuel Thornton, that the Russian government
wished to receive 500 tons of gunpowder from England. Thornton
explained that the request had been sent him by Henry Cayley, his
financial correspondent at St. Petersburg. The foreign secretary
appears to have done nothing until Thornton relayed another such
appeal the following spring. This time Russia proposed to
exchange naval stores for British powder and lead. Wellesley
submitted the proposal to the prime minister and Perceval
approved it.* In July 1811 four merchant ships carrying 500 tons
of gunpowder and 1,000 tons of lead sailed for the Baltic under
the protection of H.M.S. Grasshopper, an eighteen-gun ship
commanded by Captain Henry Fanshawe. The cargo, valued at
about £90,000, was consigned to Henry Cayley with instructions
to exchange it for 2,500 tons of Russian hemp. The whole
business was so fantastic that probably no one was surprised when
Russian authorities refused the flotilla permission to land.°
   Of more substance were the appeals reaching London at this
time from the secret Prussian resistance movement. Four years
before, Canning had responded to a similar request. The call for
help which now lay before Wellesley bore the endorsement of
Gneisenau, the great Prussian leader.© The foreign secretary
quickly made his decision, and orders flew from the pen of his
secretary directing the Ordnance Office, the Transport Office, and
  2. C. C. Smith to Capt. Antonio Guedes, January 10, 1812, FO 65/77.
  3. William O. Shanahan, Prussian Military Reforms,    1786-1813 (New York, 1945), pp.
179-180.
  4. Perceval Memorandum, June 15, 1811, FO 65/76.
  5. Documents relating to this operation are to be found in FO 65/76.
  6. Gneisenau to General Decken, September 10, 1811, FO 64/84.


                                         BUA
                                    1810-1813

the Treasury to make the necessary arrangements. At least 60,000
stand of arms with powder and accoutrements,                    as well as cannon,
were sent to the Prussian coast between September and November
1811.7 On returning from the Baltic, H.M.S. Grasshopper was
ordered to take her convoy to Prussia and there deliver the powder
and lead originally intended for Russia. How much of these war
materials were landed is uncertain, but probably a large portion
found their way into Prussian army arsenals.®
   In the autumn of 1811 Wellesley undertook a secret overture to
Sweden, with whom Britain had been nominally at war for the last
year. By this time, Bernadotte had appeared in the curious role of
Prince Royal of his adopted country. His desire to annex Norway
as compensation for Sweden’s loss of Finland puzzled Wellesley, if
it did not discourage him. Nevertheless, in October 1811 he sent
Edward Thornton to Stockholm to promote peace between
Britain and Sweden. Although Thornton was to hold out a general
assurance of British financial aid, he had no specific offer to make.
He conferred with the Swedish ministers, but it soon became clear
that the Prince Royal would take no step which might antagonize
France.”
   For a foreign secretary best remembered as indolent and careless
of detail, Wellesley had been energetic in paving the way for a
continental uprising. His hopes and plans ran far beyond the
available opportunities, however; conditions for a real resistance
movement did not yet exist. Premature as these efforts were, at
least they made clear to the northern powers that Britain would
support them when they were ready to act.
   A decisive break between the Baltic powers and Napoleon was in
the making by the time Castlereagh came to the Foreign Office in
March 1812. To turn it to Britain’s advantage would call for all the
skill and patience which Pitt had taught him were essential in
coalition diplomacy. Although the rift between Napoleon and
Alexander was widening, Britain was in no position to influence

 7. Stores ordered for Prussia, November   1, 1811, FO 64/84.
  8.C.C. Smith to Croker, October, 1811, FO 64/84. Some of these arms were probably
deposited on the island of Heligoland, which Britain later used as a major arms depot.
FO 64/84 contains many documents relative to this enterprise.
  9. Wellesley to Thornton, October 9, 1811, FO 73/70; Camb. Hist. Brit. For. Pol., {,
382.
                           The Rising of the Nations


Russian policy in any material way.!° Sweden was a different case.
Napoleon’s seizure of Swedish Pomerania in January 1812
produced an immediate change in Bernadotte’s policy. A Swedish
envoy was sent to St. Petersburg to obtain an alliance with the
Tsar, while the Prince Royal informed London that he was now
ready to make        common      cause with her in return for money, arms,
and British support for his territorial ambitions.!!
  Bernadotte’s message was the first strong bid sent Britain by any
of the northern powers, and Castlereagh now had to respond to it.
For the second time within a year Thornton was ordered to
Sweden. The foreign secretary explained that any proposal of a
subsidy for Sweden was premature at this time, especially in view
of Britain’s very heavy commitments to Portugal and Spain.
Nonetheless, Thornton was to assure the Prince Royal that Britain
would send him arms and supplies in the event he found himself at
war with France. Sweden’s territorial aspirations presented a
problem. London was willing to part with a West Indian island, as
Bernadotte seemed to wish; under certain circumstances, the two
powers might even agree on a plan to transfer Norway from
Denmark to Sweden. At the moment, however, it was far too early
for Britain to undertake anything on this question.!?
  Thornton’s reception at Stockholm justified the cautious line
Castlereagh had adopted. The Swedish ministers happily accepted
Britain’s pledge of war materials, but they were disappointed that
Thornton could offer them no money. For Sweden to make peace
with Britain would inevitably involve her in war with Napoleon
and she must, therefore, insist on a prior guarantee of £1,200,000
a year in subsidies.!? Sweden had recently won an alliance with
Russia which bound the Tsar to work for her annexation of
Norway. Before breaking with Napoleon, Bernadotte must have
the same promise from London, together with a pledge of
generous subsidies.
  10. Russian agents were in England during the spring of 1812 to buy muskets and
saltpeter. As an inducement to Britain to second their efforts, they proposed to include
in such shipments to Russia British trade goods of equal value. See S. Cock to
Castlereagh, April 21, 1812, FO 65/81.
  11. Franklin D. Scott, Bernadotte and the Fall of Napoleon (Cambridge, Mass., 1935),
pals.
  12. Castlereagh to Thornton, March 13, 1812, FO 73/71.
  13. Thornton to Castlereagh, April 9, 16, 1812, FO TEV IPL




                                          Dis
                                     1810-1813


  For the time being, Castlereagh could only allow events to take
their course. Even if the Prince Royal could be trusted, and there
was serious doubt about that, he was obviously more interested in
annexing Norway than going to war with France. Russia’s conduct
was so ambiguous that it was impossible for Britain to approach
her with any specific proposal. While at Stockholm, Thornton
conferred with some of the Tsar’s agents and learned that
Alexander was ready to make peace with Britain as the first step
toward diplomatic reunion. One of the agents, Baron Nicolai,
suggested to Thornton that Britain could promote this develop-
ment by assuming responsibility for the repayment of Russia’s
indebtedness to certain Dutch banks. Acknowledging receipt of
this   news,    Castlereagh       pointed      out    that    these     overtures      were
hardly strong enough to justify any British reply. After all, the
Tsar was still carrying on discussions with Napoleon.!4
   As had happened so often, French military action cleared the air
and provided a new framework for continental diplomacy. Napo-
leon’s invasion of Russia cut the ground out from under attempts by
Alexander and Bernadotte to make Britain pay for peace treaties
with them, and in July 1812 Thornton concluded formal
agreements with both powers without having to concede any of
the demands they had originally made. The formation of a
three-power concert for joint action against France would prove
more troublesome in view of Castlereagh’s reluctance to lavish
subsidies on Russia and Sweden. Bernadotte attempted to reduce
the difficulty by lowering his demand for British money from
£1,200,000 to £1,000,000, but he now brought forward a new
condition which was bound to heighten Castlereagh’s suspicion:
that he be allowed to occupy Norway before undertaking military
operations against Napoleon.        The foreign secretary rejected
Sweden’s demand and told Thornton, “till Sweden has arrived at
that Point in Her exertions, which is to bring Her Army in contact
with the Enemy, She cannot expect to enter into Competition, in
Her claim for Pecuniary Aid, with Powers at this moment actually
opposed in the Field to France.”!5

 14. Thornton   to Castlereagh,   April   29, 1812,   FO   73/72;   F. Martens,   Recueil   des
Traités, X1, 157-161; Castlereagh to Thornton, May 7, 8, 1812, FO 73/71.
  15. Thornton to Castlereagh, June 25, 1812, FO 73/73; Castlereagh to Thornton, July
18518127 ROWS) 71.
                              The Rising of the Nations


  Although Castlereagh was not yet ready to pay Sweden, he
regarded Napoleon’s attack on Russia as justification for Britain to
arm Bernadotte. Even before learning of Thornton’s peace treaty
with Stockholm, the Cabinet allocated £500,000 to cover the cost
of war goods for the Prince Royal. On July 25 the Ordnance Office
was ordered to send 20,000 muskets and 23 pieces of artillery to
Sweden, while Bernadotte’s agents in London were given credit
with which to purchase gunpowder.!®
  The time had come for the re-establishment of direct relations
with Russia, and Castlereagh appointed Lord Cathcart as the new
British minister to St. Petersburg. Lacking any accurate informa-
tion regarding conditions in Russia, the foreign secretary’s
instructions to Cathcart were necessarily general. Although the
new envoy might ultimately receive authority to offer a subsidy,
Castlereagh had nothing to say on the subject at the moment.
However, Cathcart was positively to discourage any hope that
Britain would assume Alexander’s debts with the Dutch banks.
Estimating          this   indebtedness       at about       £4,500,000,         Castlereagh
flatly declared that Parliament would never assume such a burden.
Should Cathcart find either Sweden or Russia in need of
immediate help, he was authorized to spend £500,000. The new
envoy was to proceed to Russia by way of Sweden in order to
confer with Thornton and any of the Tsar’s envoys who might be
in Stockholm.!7
  Lord Cathcart was not the only agent the Foreign Office sent to
Russia during the critical summer of 1812. A second mission was
launched which, while not diplomatic in character, was to have a
significant effect on Britain’s subsidy policy. With Russia now
fighting for her life, it was obvious that the wretched condition of
the Tsar’s finances would hamper his ability to survive. Residing in
London was a financial expert of some reputation who had
already offered to reform the Russian fiscal system and place it on

  16. Castlereagh    to Thornton,   July   18, 1812,   FO   73/71; Castlereagh   to the Master
General of the Ordnance, July 25, 1812, FO 73/77.
  17. William Schaw, first Baron Cathcart (1755-1843)            was a professional    military
officer who had seen service in the American Revolution. He had commanded the
expedition against Copenhagen in 1807 and for his service, his Scottish peerage had been
exchanged for an English one. Cathcart’s selection for the Russian mission in 1812 was a
poor one. Although a career officer, he had no skill in diplomacy. See Castlereagh to
Cathcart, nos. 1 and 2, July 24, 1812, FO 65/78.


                                             Oil
                                                                 BALTIC     SEA
            NORTH      SEA
a’
                             Heligoland
                                     °




        AMSTERDAMo                                              eBERL/N



                ANTWERP

                                                   a      o LEIPZIG                  y
                                                                                  PLASWITZ
            WATERLOO                             LUTZEN °                              °
                              oS)                                                      °
                                                                P, °                REICHENBACH
                                    FRANKFORT                  Teen
                                       °                           PRAGUE




     CHAUMONT
CHATILLON




                                                             ADRIATIC
                                                                      SEA



4. Campaign Area of the Final Phase




                                                278
                              The Rising of the Nations


a sound footing. Sir Francis d’Ivernois, a native of Switzerland,
had won the confidence of the British government, and it now
proposed to send him to St. Petersburg.!8    These envoys, one a
soldier-diplomat, the other a monetary expert, were both to play
major parts in the formation of Britain’s alliance with Russia.
  At Stockholm, meanwhile, Edward Thornton had convinced
himself that only the lack of British money prevented the Prince
Royal from going to war with France.!? On his own initiative he
decided to return to London in order to press Bernadotte’s claims
on the foreign secretary. On August 8 Thornton’s vessel was
beating its way out of the Baltic when it encountered another ship
with Cathcart aboard. The two envoys conferred at sea, thus giving
Cathcart a chance to bring his colleague up-to-date. In this way
Thornton    learned that London      had decided to appropriate
£500,000 to aid Sweden: £300,000 would be used to furnish arms
to Bernadotte while Thornton was to pay him the remainder in
cash as it was needed.” Encouraged by this latest news, Thornton
returned to Sweden with Cathcart, and thereafter made small
advances to the Swedish treasury which totaled £200,000 by the
end of the year.?! The first shipment of arms sent by Castlereagh
arrived in Sweden in September 1812, to be followed during the
winter by clothing and gunpowder.2* The major question of an
Anglo-Swedish alliance continued to drag, however. The season
was now too far advanced for a Swedish army to take the field.
More important, Castlereagh was not yet ready to pay the price
which the Prince Royal had attached to his cooperation against
Napoleon.
   Lord Cathcart’s search for the Tsar ended in late August at Abo
in Finland where Alexander had gone to meet Bernadotte.?? For a
ruler whose land was overrun by an invading army bent on
destruction, Alexander seemed almost unconcerned about his own
peril. Instead of asking help for himself, the Tsar explained to
  18. Vansittart   to D’Ivernois,   July 14, 1812.   Otto Karmin, “Les Finances   Russes en
1812 et la Mission de Sir Francis D’Ivernois a St. Petersbourg,” Revue Historique de la
Revolution Francaise et de l’Empire, 8 (1915), 180.
  19. Thornton to Castlereagh, June 25, 1812, FO 73/73.
  20. Castlereagh to Cathcart, no. 1, July 24, 1812, FO 65/78.
  21. Thornton to Castlereagh, September 12 and November 20, 1812, FO 73/74.
  22. Castlereagh to Baron de Rehausen, December 11, 1812, FO 73/76.
  23. While at Abo, Alexander and Bernadotte concluded a more refined version of their
original alliance, which had been signed in the prevous April.


                                             279
                                        TSLO0-1313


Cathcart why Britain ought to allow Bernadotte to annex Norway
before intervening in north Germany on behalf of Russia.
Alexander’s own danger was serious, but Britain could help him
most by sending a supply of arms.24 Unknown to the Tsar,
Castlereagh had already ordered 50,000 muskets sent to the Baltic
for the use of the Russians along with a half ton of ‘‘Peruvian
bark” for their medical service. When the foreign secretary learned
of the French capture of Moscow, he ordered off another 50,000
stand of arms with the offer of still another shipment of the same
size. Unfortunately, the second consignment of 50,000 muskets
could not be delivered before winter shut fast Russia’s Baltic
ports.>
   Alexander’s indifference to British money, which had impressed
Cathcart at Abo, continued to amaze him in the months which
followed. During the historic winter which witnessed Napoleon’s
retreat, the British envoy had no occasion to draw on any part of
the £500,000 given him at the beginning of his mission. This
seemed so remarkable that Cathcart made a special point of it in
writing to Castlereagh: ‘No mention has been made to me by the
Emperor or His Government of Subsidy, on the contrary, in times
of the greatest difficulty ...the Emperor said that a supply of
arms in the North and in the Black Sea would be more valuable to
him than any possible supply of Guineas.’’26
   Cathcart completely misunderstood the Tsar’s refusal to men-
tion subsidies in their discussions. Had the British envoy not taken
such a marked dislike to Sir Francis d’Ivernois, whom he met at
St. Petersburg, possibly the Swiss financier would have been
willing to enlighten him on this matter.2” D’Ivernois was warmly
welcomed by the Tsar on his arrival at the Russian capital in
September 1812. Alexander created a special committee to solve
  24. Alexander was particularly anxious to obtain some of the new shrapnel shot from
Britain. See Cathcart to Castlereagh, August 30 and September 22, 1812, FO 65/79.
  25. Castlereagh to Cathcart, October 20, 1812, FO 65/78. On their return from the
frozen Baltic, the vessels carrying the muskets were ordered to sail for Russia’s Black Sea
coast (E. Cooke to Croker, December 23, 1812, FO 65/82). The Turks denied the vessels
passage through the Dardenelles and, once more, the guns were returned to England.
They were finally delivered to the Russians at Riga in the summer of 1813 (Castlereagh
to Lieven, July 31, 1813, FO 65/89). See also Castlereagh to Cathcart, August 30, 1812,
FO 65/78; E. Cooke to S. Billingsley, August 31, 1812, FO 65/81.
  26. Cathcart to Castlereagh, December 6, 1812, FO 65/80.
   27. D’Ivernois   to Vansittart,   November   7, 1812.   Karmin,   “Les Finances   Russes,”
jo, 1G),
 Viscount   Castlereagh,   by    Sir   Thomas   Lord Liverpool,by Sir Thomas Lawrence
 Lawrence




Francis   I, by   Sir   Thomas     Lawrence     Frederick   William   III, by Sir Thomas
                                                Lawrence
                                      1810-1813

the nation’s financial problems and included in its membership
five Russians, D’Ivernois, and the Prussian Baron vom Stein who
was then in St. Petersburg.28     At one of the early meetings, the
Russian members pointed out that, without massive financial help
from Great Britain, their country must soon abandon the war.
Some of the Tsar’s advisors were using this as an argument to
persuade him to give up the contest as soon as the French had
been driven from Russia. D’Ivernois reported all this to Vansittart,
the chancellor of the exchequer, and added that his Russian
colleagues seemed oblivious to the fact that Britain herself was
staggering under a tremendous financial burden.?? During the final
months of the year, D’Ivernois and Stein tried to devise some
method by which Britain could aid Russia without bankrupting
herself.
   Alexander much preferred to deal directly with London on the
matter of subsidies, rather than with Cathcart who had no
proposal to make. The instructions given to Count Lieven, whom
he appointed to represent him in England, especially stressed
Russia’s need for money. Lieven arrived in London in December
1812 and soon discussed the matter with Castlereagh. Out of
special consideration for Britain, the Tsar would not insist on
resurrecting the terms of the 1805 Anglo-Russian subsidy pact.
Instead, he asked only that Britain give him £4,000,000 a year,
which was the bare minimum required to finance Russia’s war.
Castlereagh declared this sum excessive. Clearly it would not be
easy to bridge the gap between what Russia asked and what
Britain could pay.*”
   Although the continental situation had improved by the close of
 1812, it was difficult to see in it the making of a grand alliance.
Napoleon’s invasion of Russia had turned into a disorganized rout,
which might end in the destruction of the Grand Army if the Tsar
could only be kept steady.2! Bernadotte seemed ready to draw the
sword as soon as Britain paid his price. Reluctantly, Castlereagh

  28. Otto Karmin, Sir Francis D'Tvernois 1757-1842 (Geneva, 1920), pp. 493-494.
  29. D’Ivernois to Vansittart, January 10, 1813. “Les Finances Russes,” pp. 54-55.
  30. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités,   X1, 167-168; Alexander    to Lieven, January 20,
1813, FO 65/89.
  31. As late as the spring of 1813 Lieven reported that the Cabinet was haunted by the
fear that Russia     might make   a separate peace with France    (F. Martens, Recueil des
Traites, XI, 168).
                         The Rising of the Nations


was now ready to meet most of the Prince Royal’s demands in
order to involve him as an active belligerent against France.
   On the other side of the ledger, the picture was far less bright.
Wellington’s retreat to the Portuguese frontier after his failure at
Burgos blasted hopes for victory in the Peninsula this year. The
failure of the German powers to respond to the turning of the tide
against Napoleon was also most discouraging. Even at this historic
moment, Prussian policy was marked by languor and inactivity.
Powerless to overcome this inertia, Britain was forced to grab at
straws. In January 1813 Castlereagh studied a plan sent him by
Gneisenau to win over the Kolberg garrison and arouse Pomerania
against the French. Britain agreed to furnish the Prussian leader
with 20,000 muskets and supplies to help him raise a partisan
army to cooperate with the Russians in northern Germany.”
   Prussia’s conduct appeared weak and cowardly, but that of the
Hofburg was maddeningly devious. The British agent, John
Harcourt King, tried in vain to speed Austria along the road to
resistance by his intrigues with the Archduke John and the patriot
leaders in the Tyrol. The Tsar begged Cathcart to do something to
pry Austria loose from her obstinate neutrality. In the autumn of
 1812 Cathcart sent his own personal agent to Metternich with an
offer   of £500,000      if it would      help   Austria   take the field, but
Metternich had no intention of giving up his alliance with France
and Cathcart’s envoy accomplished nothing.*? Almost the last
hope for Austria’s intervention was extinguished by a message
Metternich sent to London at the close of 1812: if Austria
intervened at all it would be to persuade the belligerents to
negotiate a general peace in Europe.
   By the opening of 1813 British war diplomacy had identified
three major goals. First, the Peninsular War must be given all the
support needed to guarantee Wellington’s success. Second, a major
army must be created in north Germany to aid the Russians.
Swedish intervention would go a long way toward attaining this
goal. Pressure on the French would be still greater if British troops
or Gneisenau’s partisans could be united with the Swedes. Finally,

  32. Gneisenau’s memorandum of January 17, 1813, FO 64/94; E. Cooke to Gneisenau,
January 25, 1813, FO 64/94.
  33. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 112-113; Buckland, Metternich, pp.
412-423.
                                    1810-1513


some firm agreement would have to be reached with the Tsar in
order to guarantee his continued participation in the war.
   Attainment of each of these goals would require a heavy
expenditure of British money. Subsidies to Portugal and Spain
during the coming year would cost at least £3,000,000. Berna-
dotte’s cooperation could not be had for anything less than
£1,000,000, while the formation of a north German corps to join
with the Prince Royal would cost about the same.*4 It was
impossible to guess how much Russia would finally be willing to
settle for in British subsidies. If the war was to be carried on
during 1813 according to London’s plans and expectations, she
might have to lay out more than £7,000,000 in subsidies.
   Castlereagh never closed his eyes to the difficulties involved in
building a coalition against France, or to the strain it would put on
Britain to finance it. The calm and steady policy he would follow
during the all-important year which lay ahead is clearly fore-
shadowed in a letter he sent to Cathcart in January 1813. “The
crisis is of that magnitude,” he declared, “that we must not starve
the cause by suffering any great object to fail, which can by an
effort be brought within our grasp.”’*

  Castlereagh had no way of knowing that, within a few weeks
after the arrival of the New Year, the character of the war against
Napoleon would be dramatically altered by Prussia’s decision to
throw her weight into the balance. Until then his plans were based
on the expectation that Russia and Sweden would carry the
burden of the war in northern Europe. High priority in Britain’s
plans was assigned to the conclusion of a firm military pact with
Bernadotte, who had followed such a slippery policy during the
past year.
  Mutual need brought Sweden and Britain so close to agreement
that the foreign secretary was ready to bridge the narrow gap
which remained. Denmark’s stubborn refusal to cut her ties with
Napoleon made it easier for Castlereagh to agree that the Prince
Royal should have Norway,         although he was unwilling to
 34. Castlereagh to General Alexander Hope, January 17, 1813, FO 73/79.
ioe Castlereagh   to Cathcart, January   22, 1813, Correspondence of Castlereagh, VIII,
  By




                                          284
                             The Rising of the Nations


guarantee him in the possession of his loot.*® Britain was likewise
ready to cede to Sweden her right of possession to the island of
Guadaloupe; the sacrifice of that war prize taken from France
would not be painful.3” British subsidies were more than ever
needed    to insure the effectiveness of Bernadotte’s military
intervention, for real distress had fallen on Sweden as a result of
the near failure of the 1812 grain harvest. Furthermore, Berna-
dotte had already spent nearly £1,000,000 on military prepara-
tions during the past year.*® Since the Prince was now acting as if
he really meant to break with France, Castlereagh was willing to
go a long way to satisfy him.
   Because Thornton was so easily swayed by Bernadotte, Castle-
reagh decided to entrust the negotiation of the Swedish alliance to
a special envoy. Union with Sweden must be accompanied by
agreement as to the role she would play in the spring campaign.
Therefore the services of a British military officer at Stockholm
were especially desirable, and the mission was entrusted to General
Sir Alexander Hope.*? Castlereagh’s instructions to Hope make
clear that the principal goal of the alliance was to obtain Swedish
military assistance for Russia in Germany, for which Hope was to
offer £1,000,000 in subsidies for the current year. Bernadotte was
also to be told that Britain was ready to spend another £1,000,000
on the formation of a German volunteer corps to cooperate with
the Swedes.*® Hope reached Stockholm in February 1813, and he
spent nearly a month haggling with Bernadotte before a treaty was
finally concluded. Sweden’s decision to accept the British offer
probably was hastened by Prussia’s entrance into the war.
  The treaty of March 3, 1813 obliged Britain to pay her ally
£1,000,000 by October, when a new agreement would be arranged

  36. Castlereagh was never happy about the Norwegian cession. In a letter of April 28,
1813 to Cathcart he admitted, “We never have disguised from ourselves the
embarrassments of the Norwegian point; but it was an engagement made in the day of
adversity, for the preservation of Russia” (ibid., VIII, 383).
  37. In the final peace settlement France regained Guadaloupe and Britain met her
obligation to Bernadotte by a grant of money.
  38. Hope to Castlereagh, February 24, 1813, FO 73/79.
  39. General   Sir Alexander   Hope   (1769-1837)   was a career army   officer who   was
serving   as governor   of the Royal Military College at Sandhurst   at the time   of his
diplomatic appointment.
  40. Castlereagh to Hope, January 17, 1813, FO 73/79.
                                            1810-1813


if the war had not ended. Bernadotte was to put 30,000 men into
the spring campaign against Napoleon in accordance with opera-
tional plans to be worked out with General Hope. The treaty also
included some important trade privileges for Britain which would
benefit her commerce in the Baltic.*! Bernadotte proved a hard
bargainer, especially when it came to the money he was to receive.
Not only did he insist on receiving £1,000,000 during the coming
eight months, but also that a sizable part of the subsidy be
remitted immediately to cover his mobilization costs. Hope and
Thornton both agreed that there was some justice to this last
demand, and even before the formal signing of the treaty, they
turned over £215,000 in bills of exchange to the Swedish
treasury. This was to be regarded as the preparation advance
provided for in the treaty.4” Considering that Bernadotte was only
bound to put 30,000 men into the campaign, the British subsidy
was certainly generous, even lavish. It involved a payment of about
£33 per soldier for eight months’ service, a rate far in excess of
Britain’s grants to other powers in 1813. Such liberality was
justified by the necessity of bringing Bernadotte into overt
opposition to France. Only time would tell whether the benefits
to be derived from Swedish intervention would repay Britain’s
efforts to secure the alliance.*3

  41. Britain obtained the right of entrepOt at three Swedish ports while Sweden agreed
to keep her tariffs on British colonial products to a specified minimum.
  42.The Treaty with Sweden, March 3, 1813, FO 93/101 (9), (10); Thornton to
Castlereagh, February 24, 1813, FO 73/81; Castlereagh to Thornton, March 26, 1813,
FO 73/80; An Account of the Bills of Exchange... issued for the Service of the
Swedish Government..., FO 73/87. An extra financial benefit for Sweden, not
provided in the treaty, arose from Britain’s desire to promote peace between Bernadotte
and the legitimate government of Spain. The conclusion of such a pact had long been a
British   goal,   since    it would   involve   a formal   break   between   the Prince   Royal   and
Napoleon. In November 1812 a treaty of peace between Sweden and Spain had been
signed but never ratified. The troubled course of Sweden’s relations with Spain
particularly annoyed Castlereagh. Part of the difficulty arose from Bernadotte’s demand
that the agreement be loaded with conditional clauses and that Spain give him a small
subsidy. In February 1813 the foreign secretary proposed that if Sweden would only
sign a simple peace treaty, Britain would agree to pay the sum Bernadotte demanded of
the Cortes. The arrangement seemed reasonable since the Spanish government had
almost no money except what it received from Britain. On this basis agreement was
reached, and in March 1813 a treaty was concluded between Sweden and Spain. Spain’s
obligation to Bernadotte was finally fixed at $500,000 (about £137,300), which sum
Britain assigned to Sweden’s credit in London for the purchase of war supplies. See
Scott, Bernadotte,        31; Castlereagh to Thornton, February       16, 1813, FO 73/80; Foreign
Office memorandum           to the Treasury, July 7, 1813, FO 73/77; Castlereagh to Rehausen,
July 31, 1813, FO 73/86.
  43. Scott, Bernadotte, p. 34.

                                                  286
                           The Rising of the Nations


   Prussia’s abrupt entry into the war was soon followed by her
conclusion of an alliance with Russia at Kalisch in February 1813.
This enlargement of the coalition improved the chances of victory,
but it presented Castlereagh with a new set of problems. Some
could be solved quickly and easily, while others would prove more
difficult. Prussia naturally expected British subsidies. For Britain
to furnish them and, at the same time, satisfy the Tsar’s demands
would prove particularly difficult. Formal alliances had yet to be
negotiated uniting the belligerents in a single war league. Most
important of all, Castlereagh had to act immediately to insure that
the Swedes, the Prussians, and the Russians had all the arms and
ammunition they required to crush the enemy. Unless this was
done, there might be no coalition for British diplomacy to create.
   Britain had begun to ship arms to the northern powers during
the summer of 1812. Notwithstanding the heavy demands made
by the war in the Peninsula, the Ordnance Office sent 120,000
muskets to Sweden and Russia before the year ended. With the
arrival of 1813 the government determined to expand this flow of
arms and equipment. The first shipment of the year was made in
February and included 50,000 stand of arms consigned to the
Russians. Almost immediately, 54 cannon, together with arms,
ammunition, and stores for 23,000 men were sent to be shared by
the Prussians and the Russians.#
   During the spring and summer of 1813 an almost steady stream
of transports sailed from England for Baltic ports to guarantee
that the three powers lacked nothing. The Prussians received at
least 100,000 muskets with powder, accoutrements, and flints—
the last being in especially short supply.* An identical shipment
reached the Tsar’s armies and included, in addition, 116 field
pieces and 1,200 tons of ammunition and shells. That same
summer, more than 40,000 muskets with powder and uniform
cloth were delivered to Bernadotte’s troops.4° A depot was
established at Stralsund to receive the war supplies brought from
England. One shipment alone made to Stralsund in the summer of
  44. Half the muskets sent Russia in 1812 were not delivered until the following year.
See An Account of the Value of ... Supplies . . . afforded to the Foreign Powers... in
the North of Germany during the present year, December 24, 1813, FO 64/95.
  45. Castlereagh to Stewart, September 6, 1813, FO 64/86; Shanahan, Prussian Military
Reforms, p. 211.
  46. War Department Memorandum      on Supplies to Russia, Prussia, and Sweden, July 7,
1813, FO 65/91.
                                         287
                                   1810-1813


1813 consisted of 2,000 barrels of powder, 5,000,000 musket
cartridges, carbines, pistols, flints, and 20,000 muskets.*? Con-
sidering the pressure on the Ordnance Office to maintain this flow
of war equipment, it was small wonder that Castlereagh hoped the
Russians could salvage some of the muskets left behind by the
French in their flight.48 Five years before, the Ordnance Office
had found it difficult to send 200,000 muskets to the Spanish and
Portuguese. In November 1813 Castlereagh informed the Com-
mons that nearly 1,000,000 muskets had been sent to Britain’s
allies in the Peninsula and in northern Europe during that year
alone, “‘an exertion which . . . reflected the greatest credit on the
head and all the members of that department of the public service
by which it was effected.’’4? No tribute was ever better earned.
   In spite of Britain’s original plan, it was never possible for her to
send an expeditionary force to join the allies in northern
Germany. Wellington could spare no men from the Peninsula, and
the war with the United States made it necessary to send troops to
the North American theatre. With no men of her own available,
Britain resorted to hiring mercenaries. In the spring of 1813 she
offered to take the Russian German Legion into her pay. This unit
was made up of Germans from Napoleon’s army whom the
Russians had captured during the winter of 1812-1813. Castle-
reagh proposed to take over the legion, which numbered about
4,000 men, and increase it to 10,000 by the addition of
Hanoverians. It could then join forces with Bernadotte or continue
operating as a part of the Russian army. Arrangements were finally
made along these lines and a formal Anglo-Russian treaty was
concluded on July 6, 1813.%°
  Britain had little difficulty in supplying the allies with arms, but
the creation of a four-power war alliance proved troublesome.

  47. Bathurst to Rear Admiral Hope, July 5, 1813, FO 73/87.
  48. Castlereagh to Cathcart, April 6, 1813, FO 65/83.
  49. Castlereagh referred to 900,000 muskets having been sent abroad; Hansard, XXVII
(1813), 134.
  50. The Russian German Legion should not be confused with the older King’s German
Legion (Russian German Legion Treaty, July 6, 1813, FO 93/81 {13]). Britain
transferred the Russian German Legion to Hanoverian service at the end of 1813. When
the war ended it was transferred to Prussia. Additional troops from Hanover and the
Hanse towns were taken into British pay during the summer of 1813 for service with the
allies (Charles Stewart, 3d Marquess of Londonderry, Narrative of the War in Germany
and France, in 1813 and 1814 [Philadelphia, 1831], pp. 18-19, 263-264).


                                        288
                           The Rising of the Nations


Near the heart of the problem was the vast financial aid which the
northern powers demanded. The Swedish subsidy and the cost of
the Russian German Legion together would amount to about
£2,000,000, while aid to the Peninsular powers might require
nearly £4,000,000. Russia and Prussia certainly expected to be
generously financed. If Austria finally entered the war and
solicited British money, ministers might find themselves with
empty pockets.
   The financing of the emerging coalition hung heavily over the
heads of Castlereagh and Vansittart during the spring of 1813.
Lieven had already asked for £4,000,000 for the Tsar, and he
hoped that the Cabinet would appropriate an additional £500,000
for the maintenance of the Russian squadron Britain had seized at
Lisbon in 1808.5! The Prussian envoy, Jacobi, had also warned
that generous British aid was “‘indispensably necessary” for his
government to remain at war.°? Desperate for some means by
which to satisfy the allies without impoverishing Britain, Castle-
reagh and Vansittart seriously considered a scheme recently sent
them by Sir Francis d’Ivernois. This plan, developed jointly by
D’Ivernois and Stein, proposed to finance Prussia and Russia by an
issue of paper currency to be redeemed by the allies at the end of
the war.
   Although the details of the “federative paper” proposal were
complicated, its four basic principles can be simply stated:
   1. An issue of paper money would be made each month to
Russia and Prussia, which they would use to pay their military
expenses.
   2. Of each monthly issue, Russia was to have two thirds, while
Prussia would receive the remaining one third.
   3. Once in circulation, the paper would yield no interest during
the remainder of the war, but upon the return of peace it would
bear a specified interest until redeemed.
  4. At the close of the war, Britain, Prussia, and Russia would
jointly redeem all paper in circulation. Britain would be respon-

  51.In 1808 Britain had occupied Lisbon and taken possession of a squadron of
Russian war vessels in that harbor. In return for providing £500,000 a year for the
upkeep of these ships, Lieven proposed that Britain should employ them with her own
navy (F. Martens, Recueil des Traites, XI, 151-152; James, Naval History, 1V, 323).
  52. Hardenberg to Jacobi, March 26, 1813, FO 64/87.


                                          289
                                     1810-1813


sible for three sixths of the total redemption    costs, Russia, two
sixths, and Prussia, one sixth.°?
  The use of scrip for the payment of subsidies was not a new
idea, as D’Invernois admitted. The Dutch government had made a
similar proposal at the time of the Prussian subsidy treaty in 1794.
In 1809 Canning had offered to pay the Austrian subsidy by using
interest-bearing Exchequer bills. Neither of these plans had ever
been put into operation.
  Vansittart and Castlereagh carefully studied this latest proposal
by which the three governments would merge their credit in order
to provide aid for Prussia and Russia. The major weakness of the
scheme, as Vansittart saw at once, was that any paper put in
circulation would be heavily discounted. Russia and Prussia might
find that the purchasing power of the scrip would be only a thin
shadow of its face value.*4 The use of ‘‘federative paper” would,
however, solve two problems currently troubling the British
Treasury. It would enable Britain to subsidize Prussia and Russia
on credit and make it unnecessary for her to send specie to those
powers. Probably the most attractive feature of the D’Ivernois
proposal was that it would postpone the actual payment of British
money until the war was over. This was the view which most
appealed to the Cabinet and it endorsed the scheme, provided that
certain safeguards were incorporated in the final arrangements.
  In April 1813 Castlereagh made known his plans to assist Russia
and Prussia during the present year. He included this information
in his instructions to Cathcart and the newly appointed minister to
Prussia, Sir Charles Stewart. The latter, Castlereagh’s half-
brother, enjoyed the foreign secretary’s full confidence, and
undoubtedly the two men discussed the proposals at length before
Stewart’s departure for Germany in April. The opening of the
  53. Karmin, D’Ivernois, pp. 510-512. The plan went through many modifications,
which can be traced in the correspondence of D’Ivernois, Stein, and Vansittart,
published in Otto Karmin, ““Autour des Négociations Financiéres Anglo-Prusso-Russes
de 1813,” Revue Historique de la Révolution Francaise et de l’Empire, 11 (January-June
1917), 177-197; 12 (July-December 1917), 24-49, 216-252.
  54. Suggestions respecting the proposed Federative Paper by .. . N. Vansittart, [June],
1813; Correspondence of Castlereagh, VIII, 405-406.
  55. Sir Charles Stewart   (1778-1854)   had   served   in the British Army   since 1794 and
been involved in the Peninsular War. Aside from the fact that he was related to
Castlereagh, Stewart had no particular qualification for the Prussian appointment. He
and Cathcart did not work well together. On Castlereagh’s death, Stewart became
Marquess of Londonderry.
                            The Rising of the Nations


Baltic to British trade would make it easier for the government to
make foreign remittances, but the Cabinet could give no more
than £2,000,000 for both Prussia and Russia during 1813. Even
this might have to be reduced unless those powers revised their
tariff policies in favor of British commerce.°© The £2,000,000
subsidy was to be divided between          Prussia and Russia in
proportion to the number of troops each had agreed to maintain
by the terms of their alliance: that is, Russia would receive two
thirds of the entire amount          (£1,333,334) and Prussia the
remaining one third (£666,666). Since the allies needed British
weapons as well as money, Castlereagh hoped that ‘‘as large a
portion of the value [of the subsidy] be taken in military effects
as possible.” As a special aid to the Tsar, Britain would spend
£500,000 a year on the maintenance of his warships now in British
ports, provided that Britain was allowed to use these vessels. All
subsidies would be paid in London so that any loss from
unfavorable exchange rates would be borne by those receiving the
money.
   Russia and Prussia, for their part, must maintain 200,000 and
100,000 effective troops respectively, not including forces on
garrison duty. To guarantee this, “the three Powers are to be
respectively entitled to receive satisfactory proofs that the said
quotas are kept constantly complete.” Finally, the allies must
“engage to unite their arms and their councils” and solemnly
promise not to negotiate separately with the enemy.
  In addition to the £2,000,000 subsidy, Stewart and Cathcart
were to offer help to Prussia and Russia by means of a separate
‘“‘federative paper’ convention to include the following specific
provisions:
   1. The total of all paper issued must not exceed £5,000,000.
  2. The monthly issue of scrip was to be divided between Russia
and Prussia at the rate of two thirds and one third respectively.
  3. All paper issued must be used exclusively by the recipients
for their military expenses.

 56. In his instructions to Cathcart of April 6, 1813, Castlereagh explained that “it has
been in expectation of a considerable extension of British exports being the result of the
total expulsion of the enemy from the north of Europe, that His Majesty’s Govt. have
felt themselves justified in recommending so large & unexampled an aid to our allies in
that quarter” (FO 65/83).


                                          ENA
                                    1810-1813


  4. All paper in circulation at the end of the war would begin to
bear interest, but no more than 5 percent. Responsibility for
redemption would be shared by the three powers in the following
proportion: Britain, three sixths; Russia, two sixths; and Prussia,
one sixth.
   5. Britain must never be asked to redeem more than three sixths
of the total issue; i.e., £2,500,000.°”
  Stewart carried Castlereagh’s instructions with him when he set
out for his new assignment. The negotiation of the subsidy treaties
with Prussia and Russia would take place on the battlefields of
Germany. While awaiting the results, Castlereagh turned his
attention to other phases of the war program.
  The Swedish subsidy convention was something of an embarrass-
ment to the government, especially since Bernadotte showed little
zeal for grappling with the French. It was not until the end of
April 1813 that his troops reached Stralsund, and even then they
did remarkably little. The foreign secretary hesitated to lay the
treaty before Parliament until the Swedes had accomplished
something. The provisions in that agreement relating to Norway
and Guadaloupe would not be well received. Furthermore, the
government had no desire to admit that subsidy payments had
actually begun before Parliament had voted the money. Re-
sponding to a question asked in the Commons in May, the foreign
secretary confessed that this had indeed happened. This admission
exposed Castlereagh to the same charge which had been made
against Pitt in 1796: that of advancing money to a foreign power
without parliamentary approval at a time when the legislature was
in session.°°
   Bernadotte’s inactivity severely vexed Downing Street and gave
rise to serious doubts whether he could be trusted. At one point,
Castlereagh was tempted to stop the subsidy until the Prince
Royal had done something to earn it.°? This mood passed, and less
than a week later, on June 11, he presented the Swedish treaty to
the House of Commons. A few days later he defended the
convention and effectively dealt with an opposition charge that

 57. Castlereagh to Cathcart, April 9, 1813, FO 65/83; Castlereagh to Stewart, April 9,
1813, FO 64/86.
 58. Hansard, XXVI   (1813), 406-407.
 59. Castlereagh to Hope, June 6, 1813, FO 73/79.


                                        Dow
                         The Rising of the Nations


Britain “was always eager and anxious to furnish money as long as
any other country was ready to take it.’®? That same month, the
chancellor of the exchequer explained to the Commons the major
items in the new budget which would involve heavier expenses
than in the previous year. Supplies which would have appeared
incredible two decades before were asked for the army and navy.
Nor was this all. An additional £6,000,000 was requested for war
purposes in the form of a special Vote of Credit.®!
  British plans for 1813 grew out of the hope that France must go
down to defeat before the united military strength of the three
northern powers, aided by the steady progress of Wellington’s
army in Spain. Money, arms, and men had been sent to the
Peninsula to guarantee that progress, and by the spring of 1813
results were clearly visible. Meanwhile, Britain was sending
mountains of war materials to equip the Swedes, the Prussians,
and the Russians who even now were pushing into the heart of
Germany. As well as arming Napoleon’s enemies, London was
supplying them with the money they needed to complete the
work. Bernadotte was to have £1,000,000, and twice that sum had
been offered Russia and Prussia in subsidies. By means of the
‘“‘federative paper’ proposal Britain was prepared to provide those
powers with an additional £5,000,000 in credit, a sum she was
unable to spare from her current resources. If the war could be
won by generous gifts of British arms and cash, then the Cabinet
would never have to apologize for its policy. The broad lines of
that policy were now established. It remained for Cathcart and
Stewart to complete the formation of a grand alliance of the three
great powers.

 60. Hansard, XXVI (1813), 874-880.
 61). Ibid., XXVI,STT-




                                      ZO
                                XII
             FORGING         THE     GRAND         ALLIANCE




The war in Germany had reached a critical stage by the time Sir
Charles Stewart arrived late in April at allied headquarters in
Dresden. Napoleon had won the initiative and was about to hurl
his forces against the Prussians and Russians in Saxony. His success
drove the allies back in confusion, and the two British envoys were
often obliged to conduct their business within the sound of guns.
Stewart’s discussions were chiefly with Hardenberg and Stein
representing the Prussian government, while Count Nesselrode
dealt with Cathcart on behalf of the Tsar.!
   Several important features of Castlereagh’s subsidy proposal
were bitterly protested by the Russian and Prussian ministers.
They particularly objected to the British demand            that all
payments be made in London. With hard money almost unavail-
able in Germany, Prussia and Russia insisted that Britain send
them specie. The quotas of troops specified by Castlereagh were
unacceptable to Nesselrode. Prussia had about 100,000 men in the
field, but Russia would be hard-pressed to maintain more than
 150,000. Notwithstanding, the Tsar expected to receive twice as
large a subsidy as Prussia.”
   The “‘federative paper” scheme proved especially troublesome
and much time was wasted wrangling over its details. In May Sir
Francis d@Ivernois arrived at Dresden and offered his services to
the diplomats, but it is doubtful whether this was much help. At
least Stewart was honest enough to admit that the whole business

  1. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 130-132.
  2. Stewart to Castlereagh, May 17 and 24, 1813, FO 64/87; Stewart to Castlereagh,
May 20, 1813, Correspondence of Castlereagh, 1X, 14-16.


                                       294
                             Forging the Grand Alliance


of paper money was far beyond his understanding; if Castlereagh
wanted to get the matter settled he should send a financial expert
from London.* More was at issue, however, than the technical
details of the plan. From the start of the negotiation, Prussia and
Russia asked to be relieved of responsibility for the redemption of
any part of the federative paper. There was more to their request
than mere self-interest. The wretched financial condition of the
two governments would unquestionably prejudice the acceptance
of the federative paper if it was known that they were to meet half
the redemption costs. This difficulty would disappear if Britain
undertook to redeem the entire issue. Such was the arrangement
which Russia and Prussia favored.4 There was another possible
solution: that the paper issue be reduced to £2,500,000 (half the
original amount projected), with Britain bound to redeem the
entire amount.* Discussion of the plan finally broke down
completely, and all parties wearily agreed to refer the business to
London for final settlement.
   By June the representatives of the three powers had reached
general agreement on all other important points at issue relative to
subsidies. Russia and Prussia were ready to pledge themselves to
maintain armies of at least 160,000 and 80,000 troops respec-
tively, with the £2,000,000 British subsidy to be divided between
them in the same proportion. Russia would therefore receive
£1,333,334 and Prussia £666,666 during the remainder of 1813.
This division was unfair to Prussia since her army in Germany was
nearly as large as the Tsar’s, and Prussia’s resentment over this
discrimination caused Castlereagh considerable difficulty during
the months which followed. Stewart and Cathcart refused the
allies’ demand    that all subsidy payments be made on the
Continent in hard money. Russia and Prussia finally agreed to
accept payments in London, but they subsequently put great
pressure on Castlereagh to modify this. Remittance of the


  3. Stewart   to   Castlereagh,   May   17,
                                         1813, ibid., VIII, 390-392.
  4. Stewart   to   Castlereagh,   May   1813, FO 64/87; Stewart and Cathcart to
                                         17,
Castlereagh, May 24, 1813, FO 64/87. See also D’Ivernois’ memorandum of May 6, 1813
in Karmin, “Autour des Négociation Financieres,” Revue Historique de la Revolution,
XI, 188-191.
  5. Castlereagh was willing to accept this. See his letter to Stewart of June 22, 1813, FO
64/86.
                                   1513-1514


£2,000,000 subsidy was to be completed by the end of the year; if
the war continued into 1814, Britain would make a new financial
arrangement with her allies. Since a separate “‘federative paper”
convention was to be negotiated in London, only a passing
reference was made to the matter in the treaties now being
prepared for signature at Reichenbach. That with Prussia was
signed by Stewart on June 14, while the Russian treaty was
concluded by Cathcart on the following day.© Since Hardenberg
claimed that Prussia’s need for money was desperate, Stewart gave
him £100,000 in bills upon the conclusion of the treaty.
Informing Castlereagh of this the British envoy explained, ““The
fact is, Prussia cannot go on just now without a lift; the machine is
really at a stand for want of oil.””7
  The Reichenbach alliances proved troublesome from the very
beginning. Instead of a single pact, the three powers were now
joined in separate, but interlocking, engagements. Still worse, the
future of the alliances was at once cast in doubt; a few days before
the formal signing, Prussia and Russia agreed to a six-week
armistice with the enemy. They had done this without any
reference to the envoys of that power with whom they were now
officially united. The Plaswitz armistice had been the work of
Metternich, who hoped that it might lead to a general pacification
among the continental belligerents. Stewart and Cathcart had no
part in arranging the armistice, nor were they invited to participate
in the discussions which followed. Troublesome as this latest
development was, Cathcart was confident that it was a necessary
preliminary to Austria’s adherence to the allied cause. His
colleague, Sir Charles Stewart, took a different view and regarded
the armistice as proof of Metternich’s treachery.®
   If the two British agents on the spot disagreed as to the meaning
of the armistice, how much more difficult it was for Castlereagh to
evaluate it. This turn of events caused great uneasiness in London,
but Castlereagh believed that all would finally be well. Certainly
the suspension of hostilities ought not to impair the flow of
  6. Treaty with Prussia, June 14, 1813, FO 94/184; Treaty with Russia, June 15, 1813,
FO 93/81 (11). The Russian treaty obliged Britain to pay an additional £500,000 a year
for the upkeep of the Tsar’s ships in her ports.
  7. Stewart to Castlereagh, June 16, 1813, in Archibald Alison, Lives of Lord
Castlereagh and Sir Charles Stewart . . . (Edinburgh and London, 1861), I, 669.
  8. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 137-139.


                                        296
 Alexander   I, by Sir Thomas    Lawrence   Prince Metternich,   by Sir Thomas
                                            Lawrence




Prince Von   Hardenberg,   by Sir Thomas    Count Nesselrode,    by Sir Thomas
Lawrence                                    Lawrence
                                    1813-1814


British arms to the allies.? Furthermore, at the end of June the
foreign secretary announced that at least a part of the subsidy due
Russia and Prussia under the Reichenbach agreements would be
sent to them in coin as they wished. Both Jacobi and Lieven had
strongly impressed on Castlereagh how important it was for their
governments to receive specie.!° Recently the Treasury had
obtained £100,000 in coin and bar silver, which the foreign
secretary dispatched to the Prussian port of Kolberg on board
H.M.S. Amphion, a thirty-two gun frigate. This specie was to be
divided between Prussia and Russia. Since Britain’s Baltic trade
was expanding, Stewart and Cathcart were empowered to give bills
of exchange in partial payment of the subsidy money due the
allies, but they were not to draw for more than £200,000 a
month. The remainder of the subsidy debt would be paid in
London, as provided for in the treaties.!!
   For the moment, the conclusion of the Plaswitz armistice
suspended the operation of the subsidy provisions of the Reichen-
bach alliances. Considering the nature of the discussions the allies
were carrying on with the enemy, the British envoys decided to
make no further payments beyond the £100,000 in bills given to
Prussia at the signing of the alliance. Thus the money brought by
H.M.S.. Amphion was allowed to lie idle for the time: nor did
Stewart and Cathcart draw any bills on England. Castlereagh
approved their decision and informed Cathcart that “it has been
found necessary ...to make a Reserve as to the continuance of
the Instalments in the Event of a prolongation of the armistice.”
As the foreign secretary feared, the armistice was finally extended
to August 10.

   No phase of coalition diplomacy was more disturbing to the
Cabinet than Austria’s conduct. Metternich’s proposal that Austria
intervene to arrange for a general peace had been coldly received
in London at the end of 1812. In the spring of 1813, Baron de
Wessenberg arrived in England as the Hofburg’s unofficial spokes-
man and announced that Metternich was prepared to take a
slightly stronger line involving “‘armed mediation.” .Would Britain

 9. Bathurst to Rear Admiral Hope, July 5, 1813, FO 73/87.
 10. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, X1, 177.
 11. Castlereagh to Stewart and Cathcart, June 25 and 29, 1813, FO 65/83.
  12. Castlereagh to Cathcart, July 13, 1813, FO 65/83.

                                          298
                          Forging the Grand Alliance


provide subsidies to support this strengthening of Hapsburg
policy? Castlereagh vetoed the suggestion; if Britain was to dip
into her shrinking war chest to help Vienna, it would have to be
for better reasons than those Wessenberg proposed.!3
  The motives which inspired Austria’s policy continued to give
Castlereagh great concern throughout the summer. Wessenberg was
useless as a source of information since Metternich neglected even
to write him. Late in June, when the continental picture was
especially confused, the foreign secretary decided to undertake a
direct overture to the Austrian leader. On June 30 he sent
Cathcart a letter to be forwarded to Metternich inviting the latter
to make known “the views and intentions of the Austrian
Cabinet.” Cathcart was reminded that, on leaving England the year
before, he had been authorized to draw on London for as much as
£500,000 for “extraordinary purposes.” So far, he had used none
of that money. Now he was instructed to turn the entire sum over
to Austria “in the event of the Austrian army being actually
engaged in hostilities against the enemy; as an aid to assist their
first efforts.’”!4
   Even   before     receiving   these instructions,       Stewart     and Cathcart
had sent Metternich assurances of British aid if and when Austria
joined forces with the allies in war. It is possible that they went so
far as to pledge money and arms to the value of £1,000,000.!5
Metternich refused either to see Cathcart or to accept Castle-
reagh’s letter, but he maintained indirect communication with the
British envoy during the armistice through the agency of the
Hapsburg minister, Count Stadion. Late in July Cathcart received
a visit from General Nugent at Reichenbach. Lavall Nugent was a
shadowy figure who had already served as Metternich’s inter-
mediary with London.!® Now he asked Cathcart for money to help
  13. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 122-124; Buckland, Metternich, p. 496.
  14. Castlereagh to Cathcart, June 30, 1813, with a letter for Metternich enclosed, FO
65/83.
  4s In May 1813 Cathcart requested Nesselrode to assure Metternich of British help in
the event of war. See Cathcart to Castlereagh, June 1, 1813, in Webster, British
Diplomacy, p. 4. Nesselrode met Metternich at Czaslau on June 2, 1813. See Memoirs of
Prince Metternich 1773-1835,   ed. Prince Richard Metternich and trans. Mrs. Alexander
Napier (New York, 1881), I, 108. According to Alison (Castlereagh, 1, 668-670), Stewart
and Cathcart agreed on June 16 to pledge Metternich £1,000,000.
  16. Lavall Nugent (1777-1862) was a native of Ireland who entered Austrian service in
1793. He fought with the Austrians in the first two coalitions, whereupon he appears to
have entered British service for a time. He was well known in London and respected by
Wellington. He lived long enough to serve as a volunteer in the Battle of Solferino.

                                         MENS,
                                     1813-13814

arm the Austrian Tyrol, and after discussing the matter with
Stadion the British envoy gave Nugent £30,000 in bills.!7
   The great question of peace or war which was at the heart of the
allies’ conferences with France during the summer of 1813 almost
overshadows the problem of British subsidies. Except for the
£100,000 given Prussia in June, the British agents made no
payments under the Reichenbach treaties, pending the outcome of
the armistice. To what extent was Austria’s decision to join the
allies influenced by the offer of British money made by Stewart
and Cathcart? Probably very little. Metternich knew that he could
rely on Britain for help, but only after Austria had gone to war.
To regard this offer as a bribe seems to overstate the case.18
Castlereagh would do as much for Austria as he had already done
for Sweden, Russia, and Prussia, but only after she had “actually
engaged in hostilities against the enemy.” The Austrian leader
knew,      at   least   as   early   as   June,       that   such   help   would    be
forthcoming,         and the knowledge          was    doubtless    valuable   to him.
Two other developments, however, were probably of greater
significance: Wellington’s victory over the French at Vittoria (June
21), and Napoleon’s stubborn refusal to accept any reasonable
settlement of the issues at stake between himself and the three
great continental powers.      Had Wellington been defeated at
Vittoria and Napoleon inclined to show the same disposition to
compromise which he had exhibited earlier in his career, the
emerging coalition against France might not have survived the
summer.     Instead, when hostilities resumed in August        1813,
Austria was now counted as one of the allies.
  Once the scene of action had shifted from the conference table
to the battlefield, Stewart and Cathcart were ready to pay Russia
and Prussia the Reichenbach subsidies. On August 12 Hardenberg
and Nesselrode proposed that the £100,000 brought by H.M:S.
Amphion be equally divided between them—a suggestion Cathcart
happily accepted.!? During the next few months, an additional
£200,000 in specie was received from England and was also evenly


  17. Cathcart to Castlereagh, July 26, 1813, FO 65/86; Webster, Foreign Policy of
Castlereagh, 1, 150.
  18. Buckland (Metternich, p. 522) states: “warned by the armistice, England resolved
to bribe in time.”
  19. Cathcart to Castlereagh, August 12, 1813, FO 65/86.


                                          300
                           Forging the Grand Alliance


shared by the two powers.2” The allies were given an additional
£300,000 in bills of exchange by the British agents, while the
balance of the year’s subsidy was paid them in London. Britain’s
debt to Prussia was almost entirely cleared off by the end of the
year, but the balance due Russia was not remitted until the spring
of 1814.7!
  In addition to these subsidies, the allied powers expected to
receive at least £2,500,000 by means of the ‘‘federative paper”
plan. Following the renewal of the war in August, the British
government undertook to arrange the details of this with Jacobi
and Lieven. To assist in the work, Vansittart invited D’Ivernois to
come to London. Although the Swiss financier did appear in order
to advise the Treasury, he was by now thoroughly disenchanted with
the scheme he had originated.?2
  The “‘federative paper” treaty, signed in London on September
30, 1813, differed materially from the plan originally proposed
earlier that year. To begin with, the issue would be limited to
£2,500,000, the whole amount to be redeemed by Britain when
the war ended. Russia and Prussia were to receive bills of credit in

  20. Castlereagh   to Cathcart   and   Stewart,   September   3, 1813,   FO   65/83.   Three
shipments of specie were made for the use of Prussia and Russia, the last being in
Hanoverian coins in April 1814. See the Account of Lord Cathcart, AO 1/11 (20). The
value placed on the specie produced disagreement. Lieven insisted that Russia had
received a total of £150,000 in specie (Lieven to Wm. Hamilton, January 21, 1814, FO
65/95), while the Treasury valued it at £156,229 (C. Arbuthnot to Wm. Hamilton,
December 31, 1814, FO 65/97). In the end the Treasury accepted Russia’s figure.
  21. The preferential treatment Britain showed Prussia in making these payments may
have been in an effort to appease her justifiable resentment with the unfair division of
the £2.000,000 subsidy between her and Russia. Payment of the Reichenbach subsidy to
Prussia was made as follows (Treasury Minute, January 21, 1814, Ty. 29/127, 350-351):
       Paid in specie on the Continent by Stewart (1813-1814)             £150,000
       Paid in bills of exchange on the Continent by Stewart                    283,373
       Paid in London (1813)                                                    216,666
       Paid in London to close the account (1814)                                 16,627
                                                                     £666,666
Payment of the Reichenbach subsidy to Russia was made as follows (C. Arbuthnot to
Wm. Hamilton, December 31, 1814, FO 65/97):
      Paid in specie on the Continent by Cathcart (1813-1814)        £150,000
      Paid in bills of exchange on the Continent by Cathcart             7,500
       Paid in London (1813-1814)                                              1,175,834
                                                                               £1F3 33,004
   22. D’Ivernois had turned sour on the federative paper plan and on August 19, 1813 he
correctly predicted to Vansittart that, in the end, Britain “would be called on... to ful-
fill the engagement of others” (Karmin, “Les Finances Russes,” Revue Historique de la
Revolution, 1X, 70).


                                            301
                                        1813-1514

fifteen monthly installments to be counted from the signing of the
Reichenbach        treaties in June        1813. Of each monthly issue, Russia
and Prussia were to receive two thirds and one third respectively.
In this way Russia would get £1,666,666 and Prussia £833,333 in
all. A special commission representing the three governments
would be created to handle the monthly issue of bills.
   The treaty made special provision to prevent the discount on
bills in circulation from reaching extravagant heights. It was
assumed that the allies would convert the monthly bills into cash
by offering them to continental banks. To make acceptance easier,
the convention provided an option for those to whom the bills
were offered: they could either hold them or immediately
exchange them in London for interest-bearing British bonds
especially issued for this purpose. These bonds would be redeemed
as quickly as possible after the end of the war. Only then would
the Treasury begin to redeem the bills of credit still in circulation,
which were to bear one-half percent interest per month from the
end of the war to the date of their redemption. In effect, those
accepting “‘federative paper” were invited to gamble whether the
returns would be greater by converting them at once into
short-term bonds, or holding on to the paper in order to benefit
from extended interest payments. The device was not only
complicated but may also have been unsound. In any event it was
never actually put into operation.
   Since the “‘federative paper’ issue was to be counted from the
conclusion of the Reichenbach agreements, the allies were entitled
to receive slightly more than one third of the entire £2,500,000
issue by the close of 1813. But no paper could be issued until
Parliament had approved the plan and the necessary administrative
machinery        been established.       To provide immediate                 relief, a secret
article bound Britain to offer the allies promissory notes equiva-
lent to the value of six fifteenths of the entire issue. Stewart and
Cathcart were instructed to issue such notes on demand, and in
order to secure them the government deposited £900,000 in
Exchequer Bills with the Bank of England.?? Thus the promissory
notes were offered as an interim substitute for ‘‘federative paper,”
which itself was a substitute for British subsidy money!

 23. Identical   Treaties   were   concluded    on   September   30,   1813    with   Prussia   (FO
93/78[6],[7]) and Russia (FO 93/81[14],[15]);              and   Castlereagh    to Stewart      and
Cathcart, October 18, 1813, FO 65/83.
                                               302
                         Forging the Grand Alliance


   Before 1813 ended, the ‘‘federative paper’ arrangement began
to fall apart. Although Stewart and Cathcart were sent the
promissory notes, the allied powers seem not to have requested
their issue.7+ Conversion of these notes into cash on the Continent
would probably cost the allies a large part of their face value in
discount. Early in 1814 Prussia asked the British Treasury to
substitute a cash payment to her of £225,000 for the ‘‘federative
paper” and promissory notes to which, by then, she was entitled.”
   The discount problem proved fatal to the “‘federative paper”
treaty, which finally evolved into an outright subsidy. Early in
 1814 Amsterdam was selected as the place where the three-power
commission, provided for by the treaty, would be established. The
French had already withdrawn from Holland, and Dutch financial
facilities were now available to the allies. In January 1814 Sir
George Burgmann arrived in Amsterdam as the British representa-
tive of the “‘federative paper” commission. While waiting for the
Prussian and Russian members         to appear, Burgmann made
enquiries of the Dutch banks to which the allies were likely to
offer the bills of credit. Nearly all of the banks made clear that
they would prefer to have nothing to do with federative paper. A
few were willing to accept it, but would insist on at least a 25
percent discount. Responses which Burgmann received from
German banking houses were much the same.26
   By the time the Prussian and Russian commissioners reached
Amsterdam in March, Burgmann had concluded that issuance of
the bills of credit would be unwise. Since the prevailing rate of
discount on bills of exchange drawn on England was considerably
less than that which would be applied to the bills of credit, he
recommended that all payments to the allies be made in bills of
exchange.”’ The war with France was drawing to a close and the
British Treasury would soon have to redeem such federative paper
as might be issued. It was, therefore, more economical and
practical simply to give bills of exchange to the allies rather than
‘‘federative paper.”
   The Treasury had reached the same conclusion, and in February
1814 it granted Prussia’s plea for £225,000 in place of “‘federative
  24. Treasury Minute, February 11, 1814, Ty. 29/127, 725.
  25. Treasury Minute, February 22, 1814, Ty. 29/127, 848.
  26. Burgmann to the Lords of the Treasury, February 18, 1814 and March 7, 1814;
yet   /13765 Lye Assi
  27. Burgmann to the Lords of the Treasury, March 8, 1814, Ty. 1/1381.
                                        303
                                      1813-1814

paper.”” Burgmann’s suggestion was adopted and the Treasury
empowered him to issue bills of exchange to the allies for the
amounts due them under the “federative paper” treaty.78 Over-all
management of the remittances to Prussia and Russia was assigned
to the commissary-in-chief, who, with the ending of the war, was
able to obtain cash on the Continent with which to supplement
bills drawn on England. By the autumn of 1815 Prussia and Russia
had received the entire amounts due them by the terms of the
1813 treaty.” None of the bills of credit provided for by that
convention appear ever to have been issued.??


  28. Treasury Minute, March 8, 1814, Ty. 29/128, 141-143; Burgmann to the Lords of
the Treasury, March 11, 1814, Ty. 1/1381.
  *Payments to Prussia and Russia under the “Federative Paper” Treaty are recorded in
the final subsidy account of the commisary-in-chief, AO 3/1088. This account reveals
that all remittances were either in cash or bills of exchange. Since payments were not
completed until after the fifteeen-month period provided for in the treaty, the Treasury
was liable for interest on its debt to the allies. Herries account shows how the sums were
paid and reveals the wide range of banking facilities which he and Nathan Rothschild
used to handle the transaction. The account is expressed in thalers (Prussian) rather than
sterling. The total issue of £2,500,000 was the equivalent of 15,000,000 thalers. Thus,
the thaler was equal to about .1666 of the pound sterling.

Russia
          Amount owed under the 1813 Treaty                       10,000,000 thalers
          Interest due for delayed payment                            31,666
          Total debt                                              10,031,666 thalers
                                                                  (£1,671,922)
          Paid by Commissary (1814) in Warsaw                      1,000,000 thalers
                                       Hamburg                     1,750,000
                                       Dresden                       750,000
                                       Amsterdam                   1,198,333
          Paid by Treasury in London (1815)                        5.3395,005
                                                                  10,031,666 thalers
Prussia

          Amount owed under the 1813 Treaty                        5,000,000 thalers
          Interest due for delayed payment                           227,500
          Total debt                                               5,227,500
                                                                  (£871,099)
          Paid by Commissary in Amsterdam
                             (1814)                                  339,167 thalers
                             Berlin (1814)                         2,070,000
                             Berlin (1815)                         2,818,333
                                                                   $5,227,500 thalers
  29. By the end of 1814      the House of Commons    had voted a total of £2,650,000 to
discharge Britain’s obligations under the federative paper treaty; Journal of the House of
Commons, LXIX, 345; LXX, 497.


                                             304
                         Forging the Grand Alliance


   Within a few days after Austria declared war on France, Lord
Cathcart met with Metternich at Prague. The British envoy had
already given £30,000 to General Nugent for Austria’s use, and he
now turned over £470,000 in bills of exchange as an advance on
the British subsidy Metternich expected.*° Nearly a month before,
Castlereagh had decided to send a special agent to Metternich, and
on August 6 he handed his instructions to Lord Aberdeen.*! It was
assumed that when Austria went to war, Cathcart would give her
the £500,000 in his keeping. Therefore, Aberdeen was to offer
another £500,000 if, on reaching Germany, he found that Austria
had in fact joined the allies. At the moment, £1,000,000 was as
much as Britain could spare for the Hofburg, but more would be
provided if the war lasted into the coming year. Concern for
British commercial interests prompted the foreign secretary to give
his envoy special instructions. In view of the large subsidy Britain
was ready to provide, it was hoped that Austria would “admit...
British Colonial Produce and Manufactures upon the footing of
the most favored nations.”’>2
   Aberdeen reached Teplitz early in September and discussed the
terms of an Anglo-Austrian alliance with Metternich. The crucial
question was whether the two governments could agree on the
specific goals they were to fight for. By comparison, negotiation
of the British subsidy was a secondary matter. Metternich was
disappointed to learn that London could add only £500,000 to
the money already given by Cathcart, but he gracefully accepted
the terms Aberdeen had no authority to alter. Austria desperately
needed arms and military stores. When Metternich proposed that
the value of such goods sent by Britain be considered as over and
beyond the subsidy Austria was to have, Aberdeen was obliged to
object. Castlereagh had always insisted that war materials sent the
allies be regarded as a part of their subsidy, and Austria must
accept this principle which had already been applied to Russia and
Prussia. This difference of opinion ended in a heated two-hour
argument at the close of which Metternich conceded the point at

   30. Cathcart to Castlereagh, nos. 85 and 86, September 1, 1813, FO 65/86.
  31. George Hamilton Gordon, fourth Earl of Aberdeen, was only twenty-nine at this
time. His youth and inexperience were a great handicap to him in his negotiations with
Metternich.
  32. Castlereagh to Aberdeen, August 6, 1813, FO 7/101.


                                         305
                                       1813-1814


issue, but insisted on giving Aberdeen a strong note to send to
London.*? The Austrian leader was on stronger ground in rejecting
the British request for commercial preference and he informed
Aberdeen that “it was wholly out of his power to enter into
discussions on this subject; that it was one on which the Emperor
himself had very strong opinions, and he saw no prospect of their
being changed.”’*4
   The Austrian alliance signed by Aberdeen at Teplitz on October
3 conformed to the subsidy proposal Castlereagh made two
months before. Austria was to maintain 150,000 effective troops
in the field in return for a British subsidy of £1,000,000. The
£500,000 still owed the Hofburg (beyond what Cathcart had
already paid) would be remitted at the rate of £100,000 a month.
New arrangements would be made when the final installment was
paid in April 1814, if the war had not ended by then.*
  Even before Aberdeen reached Teplitz, Stewart and Cathcart
had sent home Austria’s urgent appeal for arms. As always,
Castlereagh’s response was generous and prompt; in September he
announced that muskets, accoutrements, and ammunition for
60,000 men would be sent for Austria’s use. Various delays
occurred, however, and it was not until November that five
transports carrying these supplies sailed for Fiume.*© By then,
London had received a second Austrian request for arms as well as
a large quantity of uniform cloth and 10,000 hides for use in
making shoes. This list of requirements was sent to the Ordnance
Office and the Storekeeper General, which arranged for the
dispatch of the goods during the coming winter.?’? The foreign
secretary also approved Aberdeen’s recommendation that, as a
good will gesture, nothing be deducted from the 1813 subsidy to

   33. In sending Metternich’s note, Aberdeen urged that Castlereagh be as generous as
possible with his new ally. He recommended that the value of all arms and stores sent
Austria be deducted from the 1814 subsidy, rather than from the £1,000,000 promised
for 1813 (Aberdeen to Castlereagh, October 9, 1813, in Lady Frances Balfour, The Life
of George, Fourth Earl of Aberdeen K. G. [London,     1922], 1, 113).
  34. Aberdeen to Castlereagh, September 13, October 9, 1813, FO 7/102.
  35. Treaty with Austria, October 3, 1813, FO 93/11 (6),(7).
 oh Castlereagh to Aberdeen,       September   21, October 6, and November 5, 1813, FO
7/101.
  37. Aberdeen   to Castlereagh,   October   10, 1813, FO   7/102. The uniform   cloth and
hides were shipped early in 1814, but the second shipment of arms (including 50,000
muskets) did not arrive until after the war had ended (Bathurst to Merveldt, September
21, 1814, FO 7/113).


                                             306
                            Forging the Grand Alliance


Austria, but the value of all supplies sent her (about £590,000) be
counted as a part of the 1814 subsidy.*8

   The course of the war in Germany during the late summer was
disappointing, but no part of it gave Castlereagh greater pain than
the ambiguous role played by Bernadotte. The Prince Royal
commanded a mixed force of Swedish, Russian, and German
troops and his handling of that army was open to serious criticism.
Although it was true that in September he had thrown back a
French army which had been sent to take Berlin, the fact that
Bernadotte managed the campaign so that his Swedish units were
not exposed to danger aroused suspicion both at the allied
headquarters and in London. The Anglo-Swedish subsidy treaty
was due to expire in the autumn of 1813, and the foreign
secretary was reluctant to renew it until the last possible moment.
For some time the Swedish minister in London had been pressing
for an increase in the subsidy, pointing out that the Prince’s
military expenses in Germany amounted to £150,000 a month.
Late in September Castlereagh authorized Thornton to offer
Bernadotte £1,000,000 for the coming twelve months. This
represented a reduction of the 1813 subsidy which had amounted
to £1,000,000 for a period of only eight months. Thornton could
increase the offer to £1,200,000 if it was “indispensable” to a
renewal of the alliance.*?
  By the time Thornton               received these instructions, the allies had
scored     a major victory at Leipzig.            Bernadotte        and his army had

  38. Castlereagh to Aberdeen, November 5, 1813, FO 7/101. The first shipment of arms
was valued at £186,851; the second (which arrived after the war ended) was valued at
£142,120. See the Ordnance account, dated August 17, 1814, in FO 7/115. The value of
all cloth and hides sent was £262,234 (Storekeeper General to Wm. Hamilton, August
11, 1814, FO 7/115).
   Aberdeen paid the £500,000 owed to Austria in two issues of bills of exchange:
December 1813 (£200,000) and March 1814 (£300,000). See Aberdeen to Castlereagh,
December 21, 1813, and March 10, 1814; FO 7/103, FO 7/107.
  39. Castlereagh   to   Thornton,   September   24,   1813,   FO   73/80.   Payment   of the
£1,000,000 subsidy for 1813 was made as follows:
         Payments in bills by Thornton                                          £214,992
         Payments made to Swedish minister in London                             735,008
         Payment made in October 1813 to close account                            50,000
                                                                              £1,000,000
See Copy of a Treasury Minute of October         1, 1813, sent to the Foreign Office, FO
73/88.


                                           507
                                   1813-1814

been involved in the engagement and the Prince was full of
importance with the part he had played. He was, therefore,
shocked and dismayed at the British offer of only £1,000,000 for
the coming year. In the excitement of his discussion with
Thornton, Bernadotte may have doused himself liberally with
cologne water and waved his handkerchief with unusual vigor.*0
He finally accepted the offer of £1,200,000 which Thornton held
out as the final proposal, but he was far from being satisfied. The
shabby manner in which Britain had treated him justified his
withdrawal from the war altogether. Instead, he would give the
world proof of the nobility of his motives by zealously supporting
the great military drive through Germany with which the allies
planned to follow their success at Leipzig. When the Anglo-
Swedish treaty was finally signed, Thornton probably breathed a
sigh of relief. Thoroughly aroused, this Gascon prince of Sweden
was likely to prove difficult for a mere British diplomat to deal
with.*!
  The opening of Parliament on November 4, 1813 was an historic
occasion, for on that day victory seemed closer than at any time in
the past twenty years. Napoleon’s power in the Peninsula had
vanished in the gunsmoke of Vittoria, and Wellington was even
now pushing his way into the Pyrenees. News of the Battle of
Leipzig reached London only a few days before Parliament met,
and it filled the nation’s cup of rejoicing to the brim. The Prince
Regent’s speech at the opening of the session held out the
brightest prospects for the future, marred only by the continua-
tion of war with the United States. While acclaiming Wellington’s
latest victory, the Regent paid his allies a graceful compliment by
the manner in which he referred to their triumph at Leipzig. “‘The
annals of Europe,” he declared, “afford no example of victories
more splendid and decisive than those which have been recently
achieved in Saxony.” So infectious was this spirit of optimism
that, in the Upper House, it brought from Grenville a statement of
congratulation and support for the government such                         as their
lordships had not heard from him in nearly a decade.*”
  40. Stewart noted that Bernadotte usually appeared at conferences armed with a
handkerchief and a cologne bottle “inundating lavishly every thing around him with the
perfume” (Londonderry, War in Germany, pp. 72-73).
  41. Renewal of the Anglo-Swedish alliance took the form of an article signed on
October 22, 1813, which was appended to the March 1813 treaty (FO 93/101    [9]).
 42. Hansard, XXVII (1813), 3, 11-20.

                                        308
                          Forging the Grand Alliance


  Two weeks later Castlereagh explained to the Commons how the
government planned to promote the formation of what all hoped
would be the final coalition against France. He briefly described
the subsidy treaties already negotiated with Prussia, Russia,
Austria, and Sweden and called on members to vote the money
needed to bring the war to a successful conclusion.*? Canning
spoke in favor of granting the £3,000,000 which the foreign
secretary had asked and summed up the feeling of the House when
he declared, “Is it nothing, to look back upon the fallen, the
crouching attitude of enslaved Europe, at a period not long distant
and compare it with the upright, free undaunted posture in which
she now stands?—Living memory can recal no period when she
was entitled to hold her head so high, and to bid such bold
defiance to her enemy.’“4 A few voices protested the govern-
ment’s prodigality, but the Commons would have none of such
grumbling. Clearly, the Cabinet could count on Parliament’s
support if it could bring France to her knees by sending arms,
supplies, and money to the allies.
  Between March and November 1813, the British government had
undertaken subsidy obligations which would involve the payment
of more than £11,000,000. A good share of this had already been
paid with the balance due during the coming year:
      Sweden (March Treaty),       £1,000,000
      Sweden (October Treaty),       1,200,000
      Sicily,                          400,000
      Spain,                         1,000,000
      Portugal,                      2,000,000
      Prussia,                         666,666
      Russia,                        1,333,334
      Federative Paper,              2,500,000
      Austria,                     _
                                   1,000,000
                                   £11,100,000
The tremendous expansion of the British subsidy program is one
of the most dramatic features of the final phase of the war with
Napoleon. The £11,000,000 pledged to the allies in 1813 nearly
equals the sum of all subsidies and loans paid by Britain during the
first two coalitions, 1793-1801. Nor was the end in sight. Within a

 43. Ibid., XX VII, 132-143.
 44. Ibid., XX VII, 146.
                                     309
                                    1813-1814


few months, Hanover, Holland, and Denmark joined the growing
list of subsidized powers. There was some truth to the remark that
God was the only ally Britain did not have to pay
   Britain’s help to the allies must be measured in other units than
the pound sterling. Huge stores of ammunition and arms were sent
to outfit the Swedes, the Prussians, the Russians, the Austrians,
the Spanish, the Portuguese, and Britains’s own army in the Euro-
pean theatre. Arms sent to the allied powers in 1813 cost the
government nearly £2,000,000.4° The Ordnance service groaned
under the demands made of it by the War Office and the Foreign
Office, but happily, the worst was over by the close of 1813.
Requests for guns and supplies dropped sharply during the final
months of the war although they did not altogether cease.*7
   Castlereagh’s subsidy policy closely resembles that which Pitt
followed during the formation of the Third Coalition. Like his
great teacher, he was ready to help all France’s enemies, but the
piecemeal manner in which the 1813 coalition was formed made it
impossible for him to adhere to Pitt’s principle of a standard rate
of aid to the allies. The overwhelming importance of involving
Sweden in the campaign forced him to be prodigal with Berna-
dotte. Even the subsidy arrangements with Prussia and Russia had
to be adjusted to meet the Tsar’s demand for preferential treat-
ment. Least generous of all was the British subsidy to Austria: the
Hofburg received the same subsidy as Sweden in return for main-
taining an army three times as large. This was not a matter of
policy. By the time Austria entered the war, Britain’s resources for
the year were nearly exhausted; £1,000,000 was all she could
afford to give. Castlereagh knew that the distribution of subsidy
money among the allies in 1813 had resulted in flagrant inequities.
In making financial arrangements with the allies for the coming
year, he intended to employ Pitt’s principle of dividing the avail-
able money in proportion to the size of their armies.

 4S. Sydney    Buxton, Finance and Politics: An Historical Study   1783-1885 (London,
1888), I, 6.
  46. An Account of the Value of all Arms. . . supplied by the Ordnance Department to
any Foreign Power .. . between 31 December, 1812 and 31 December, 1813 ..., dated
March 21, 1814, gives the total value as £1,963,581. See the papers of Nicholas
Vansittart, deposited in the British Museum, Add. Mss. 31231.
  47. Eighty thousand muskets with ammunition were issued to the allies during 1814
(Crewe to Bunbury, January 27, 1815, WO 1/795).


                                        310
                          Forging the Grand Alliance


   In 1807 Canning had proposed to make good the deficiencies of
the allied powers by sending them British arms as well as money.
From that time on a steady stream of muskets and ammunition
went to the Continent, chiefly to help the Spanish and the Portu-
guese. The 1812 rising of the nations found Castlereagh ready to
increase that flow of arms to benefit the northern powers as well.
By the winter of 1813-1814, British muskets made up a large part
of that ring of steel which was being drawn around France.
   Britain’s outlay of money and arms materially contributed to
the success of the final coalition. Even when awarded with a free
hand, subsidies did almost nothing to effect any change in the
commercial, military, and diplomatic policies of the allied powers.
Only the marked upswing in British exports to Europe which
followed the collapse of the Continental System enabled her to
remit the massive subsidies which Castlereagh had promised.*®
British efforts to improve conditions still more by persuading the
continental powers to liberalize their tariff policies were generally
disappointing. Economic interdependence accounts for the trade
privileges which Sweden granted Britain in their 1813 alliance.
This was exceptional. Spain steadily denied Britain unrestricted
access to her home and colonial markets even though the Cortes’
life depended on British military aid and subsidies. London’s
efforts to pry open the Austrian market were a total failure.
Metternich accepted £1,000,000 in British subsidies, but refused
even to discuss the commercial question with Aberdeen. Of the
major allies, only Prussia was willing to make some concessions to
British goods entering her ports.”
   Russia’s system of trade protection was especially irritating in
view of the Tsar’s lofty demand for British money. In 1810 a
ukase had virtually prohibited the importation of certain goods
and imposed heavy duties on others. Especially hard hit were re-
fined sugar, textiles, and decorated china—all important British
trade items. Since the ukase operated on all imports regardless of
national origin, the ““most favored nation” clause contained in the
Anglo-Russian peace treaty of 1812 did not alter this situation.
  48. Crouzet, L’Economie Britannique, I1, 845-846. Trade statistics dealing with British
commerce for 1813 were destroyed by fire, but it seems likely that the upswing which
marked 1812 continued during 1813 (ibid., II, 883).
 49. Londonderry, War in Germany, pp. 259-261.
 50. Crouzet, L’Economie Britannique, II, 660.


                                          B)IAI
                                     1813-1814


Now      that   the   two    nations       were   partners-in-arms,        Castlereagh
hoped that the offending decree would be either modified or
abolished. During the summer of 1813 he repeatedly urged
Cathcart to demand significant trade concessions in return for the
liberal financial aid given the Tsar.°! Cathcart made no headway at
all; the most Russia would offer was a temporary suspension of
the ukase. By the time the war ended, the foreign secretary was
still trying to persuade Alexander to abolish the decree.°?
   Britain’s relations with Sweden during the closing months of
1813 make plain that subsidies bought London no real influence
over her allies’ military plans. Following the renewal of the
alliance in October, Bernadotte joined the other allies in a drive
toward the Rhine. The Prince Royal was to spearhead the advance
into the Low Countries, and he adhered to that plan up to the
time his troops occupied Hanover. Instead of moving on to the
Rhine as planned, Bernadotte swung north and attacked the
Danes. By this means, he hoped to force Denmark to cede Norway
to him. Castlereagh was furious when he learned this, especially
since a few weeks before he had lavishly praised the Prince Royal
in the House of Commons for his willingness to subordinate
Swedish interest to the greater good of the allied cause.°? On
Christmas Eve, 1813, the foreign secretary bitterly complained to
Thornton that the Swedish diversion had probably ended all
chance of driving the enemy from the Low Countries during the
winter. The Swede was not being subsidized to take Norway!
Unless Bernadotte immediately resumed his march to the Low
Countries, Thornton was to declare that “the Issues of Subsidy
will be suspended.” By the time these instructions were handed to
Thornton, the Prince Royal had compelled Denmark to make
peace with him. The British envoy therefore withheld Castle-
reagh’s ultimatum and Bernadotte led his army toward the Low
Countries without knowing that Britain had meant to cut off his
funds.>4
 S1.On    April 6, 1813   Castlereagh warned Cathcart that “If the allied courts do not
assist us in improving the exchange, they will sacrifice a serious proportion of the Credit
placed in London at their disposal” (FO 65/83).
  52. Castlereagh to Cathcart, September    18, 1813, FO 65/83; Cathcart to Castlereagh,
July 18, 1814, FO 65/93.
  53. Hansard, XX VII (1813), 135.
  54. Castlereagh to Thornton, December      24, 1813, FO 73/80; Scott, Bernadotte,     pp.
141-142, 146-147.
                          Forging the Grand Alliance


   Castlereagh fumed and grumbled at the economic obscurantism
of his allies and their stubborn refusal to welcome British trade.
Bernadotte’s aberrations both vexed and embarrassed him. Al-
though he occasionally threatened to force compliance from the
allies by withholding their subsidies, he hesitated to do so. In the
last analysis the major goal was to win the war against France and
it could not be jeopardized by quarrels between Britain and her
partners over what were, after all, secondary issues.
   Far more dangerous was the tendency of the continental allies to
overlook the interests of their British ally in the diplomatic
discussions they carried on with Napoleon. In part this was due to
the absence of any agreement among them as to the specific
objectives they hoped to obtain. In order to supply this
deficiency, Castlereagh sent his agents in Germany a plan of union
based on a clearly defined set of war goals. Cathcart found the
Russian ministers cool to the idea and insistent that the existing
collection of treaties was entirely satisfactory for the purposes of
the coalition.*> When Aberdeen explained the British proposal to
Metternich, the Austrian statesman listened with marked attention
and courtesy. But even then he was opening a new channel of
communication with France which he hoped would result in a
renewal of peace discussions.
   Castlereagh was driven to despair by the cavalier manner with
which the great powers treated Britain’s proposals and ignored her
interests. Clearly, Cathcart, Stewart, and Aberdeen were powerless
to check this trend, which threatened the future of the alliance.
On December 20, 1813 the Cabinet decided that Castlereagh
himself must go to allied headquarters to bring the belligerents to
agreement.
   Difficult as the foreign secretary’s mission was to prove, he had
one card to play which might prove useful. The 1813 subsidy
treaties with the allies were now expiring and they had already
begun to inquire what they might be able to count on in 1814.
Castlereagh was ready to exploit this ‘“‘power of the purse”’ to gain
his objective. He had already told Lieven as much, and before the
end of 1813 he was able to measure the effect of his words.°® In
the closing weeks of the year, Pozzo di Borgo arrived in London as
  55. F. Martens, Recueil des Truités, X1, 197.
  56. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 162-163.


                                           313
                                    1S13-1814


a special envoy of the Tsar to join with Lieven in demanding a
prompt decision on the question of subsidies for the coming year.
Castlereagh was pleased to learn from Pozzo that Alexander was at
last ready to support the formation of a single alliance among the
four great powers if Britain really insisted upon ite’
   The instructions Castlereagh carried with him on his mission had
been prepared by himself, endorsed by the Cabinet, and signed by
the Prince Regent. They set forth the limits within which he was
to work to bring the four powers into a union strong enough to
attain its goal either by diplomacy or arms. Subsidies to be paid by
Britain during the coming year were specifically mentioned, but
the subject was given little space. Achievement of an effective
union against Napoleon was the prime object and to finance such a
union the foreign secretary was authorized to divide £5,000,000
among the three great powers.>8

 57. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, X1, 197-198.
  58. Castlereagh’s Instructions, dated December 26, 1813, are to be found in FO 139/1.
The document is printed in Webster, British Diplomacy, pp. 123-126.
                                 THE     FINAL          COALITION




H.M.S.Erebus waited at Harwich to convey the foreign secretary
to Holland, but a dense fog smothered the coast and the New Year
had arrived before the frigate at last stood out to sea. Castlereagh
probably attached no significance to the fact that the vessel
carrying him was named for that cheerless zone through which the
Greeks believed all souls passed on their way to Hades. His
destination was allied headquarters, not Hades, but he could only
guess what fate awaited him there. One month before, Napoleon
had accepted an invitation sent by Metternich in the name of the
great powers to renew peace talks with them, but the Frankfort
proposals, which offered peace to France on the basis of her
natural frontiers, were now considered too generous by some of
the allies. Some sort of negotiation would probably take place and
the Cabinet was anxious that Castlereagh take part in order to
protect Britain’s interest and obligations. Should the discussions
prove      fruitless, the allied powers                 would    have to press on with the
war in hope either of toppling Napoleon or forcing him to accept
such terms as they might decide to impose.
  So long as the issue of peace or war was still in doubt, Britain
must overlook no opportunity to strengthen the striking power cf
the allied war machine. Before leaving London, Castlereagh
concluded an agreement with Hanover binding the Electorate to
send 15,000 men into the field in return for an annual subsidy of
£600,000.! Britain was also anxious to support the Dutch war of

  1. The Treaty with Hanover,            December     5, 1813 (FO 93/40 [1]), enabled Britain to
transfer   the     Russian   German      Legion    to the Hanoverian     service.    This    corps,   now
numbering        about   6,000    men,   would    be counted    as part of the      15,000   troops    the
Electorate had undertaken to supply.

                                                    Salis
                                      1814-1815


liberation which had broken out in November 1813. An expedi-
tionary force, under Sir Thomas Graham, was sent to Holland with
a generous supply of arms for the Dutch. The Prince of Orange
was given £200,000 on leaving for his homeland at the close of the
year to head the liberation movement.” On reaching The Hague
early in January, Castlereagh assured the Prince of continued
British support in money and arms during the months ahead.? By
this time, Bernadotte had forced the Danes to surrender Norway
to him and he was now reported to be on his way to help drive the
enemy from the Low Countries. Castlereagh was a little annoyed
to learn that the Prince Royal’s army included 10,000 of his
former enemies, whose service Thornton had obtained, without
authority, by granting a £400,000 a year subsidy to Denmark.4
   After a few days at The Hague, Castlereagh pushed on to Basel
where he arrived on January 18 to find the division in the council
of the allies even greater than he had feared. At the moment, the
major question was whether to enter into peace discussions with
Napoleon. Russia and Prussia now scorned the Frankfort proposals
and argued that their recent military successes had nullified that
offer. Metternich lived in fear that Alexander would try to
substitute Bernadotte for Bonaparte as ruler of the French. If the
Tsar persisted in this madness, Austria would withdraw from the
war. Castlereagh’s immediate task was to mediate this quarrel so
that the allies could at least present a common front to the enemy.
After a few days of discussion with Metternich and Hardenberg at
Basel, he set out for the Tsar’s headquarters at Langres where he
finally achieved an agreement which at least temporarily closed
the rift within the coalition. Peace talks would be undertaken with

  2. By the end of 1813 the Dutch had received arms and equipment for 20,000 men
valued at £219,996. See An Account of the several payments made in the year ended Sth
January, 1814... , FO 83/25. See also G. J. Renier, Great Britain and the Establishment
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, 1813-1815 (London, 1930), pp. 144-145.
  3. On learning that Britain expected to be repaid for the money and supplies given the
Dutch,   the Prince of Orange   declined   to accept   further assistance.   See Renier,   Great
Britain and the Netherlands, p. 145.
  4. Thornton signed a treaty of peace and subsidy with Denmark on January 14, 1814
(FO 93/29[2]). The day before, Castlereagh had written from Mihlheim warning
Thornton to undertake “no pecuniary arrangement” with the Danes “without express
authority for so doing” (Correspondence of Castlereagh, 1X, 161). The Cabinet disliked
the treaty, but grudgingly approved it (Bathurst to Thornton, April 14, 1814, FO
73/89). For Liverpool's objections to the treaty, see his letter to Castlereagh of February
4, 1814, in Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1,519.


                                            316
                                   The Final Coalition


France, but hostilities would not be suspended. As a basis for
these discussions, the four powers proposed to offer France her
pre-war frontiers rather than the natural boundaries contained in
the Frankfort proposals. Because of numerous delays, the confer-
ence at Chatillon did not begin until February 7. Since the allied
foreign ministers were not themselves to participate, Britain was
represented    in the negotiation    by Cathcart,   Stewart,    and
Aberdeen.
  Castlereagh, meanwhile, turned to a consideration of the new
subsidy agreements with the allies which would be called for in the
event the Chatillon meetings came to nothing. He had already
discussed     the matter in general terms with Nesselrode,                    but it was
not until February 9 that he put on paper a proposal to create a
single alliance among the four powers, financed by British
subsidies.” A copy of this plan was sent the Russian foreign
minister, but none went either to Metternich or Hardenberg.
   There was good reason for Castlereagh’s decision to open the
matter with Nesselrode in advance of the other ministers. In the
Reichenbach treaty of 1813, the Tsar had received the larger share
of British subsidy money greatly to the annoyance of Prussia. It
 was now Castlereagh’s intention to provide for an equal distribution
of the 1814 subsidy among the three major powers. This could be
justified on several grounds. It would correspond with the spirit of
the Teplitz Treaty (September 9, 1813), which bound each of the
three continental allies to maintain at least 150,000 troops in the
field against France.® It would also provide some redress for
Prussia who had received less than her due in the distribution of
 the Reichenbach subsidy.’ No matter how valid such considera-
tions might appear, Castlereagh would have to make a special effort
to persuade Russia to yield the preferred position she had enjoyed
in the division of the 1813 subsidy.
   The sketch of an alliance which the foreign secretary sent
Nesselrode on February 9 included most of the features finally
  5. Castlereagh to Nesselrode, February 9, 1814 (Chatillon), FO 92/2.
  6. F. Martens, Recueil des Traités, VII, 105-112.
  7. Accurate figures on the size of the allied armies are difficult to obtain. The
following figures show their size at the time of the invasion of France and represent the
total number of soldiers, including reserves and those outside the major battle area:
Russia, 278,000;   Austria,   230,000; Prussia,   162,000. See Archibald Alison, History of
Europe from the Commencement          of the French Revolution to the Restoration of the
Bourbons in MDCCCXV (Edinburgh and London, 1849-1850), XII, 639.


                                             Daley)
                                   1814-1515


incorporated in the Chaumont treaty. The four powers were to
join in a single league, binding themselves to act together in
military operations or in peace discussions with the enemy. Rather
than specifying the actual number of troops each power was to
supply, Castlereagh simply proposed that each undertake to exert
“the utmost energies...in the vigorous prosecution of the
present war against France.” Equal division of British subsidies
among the allies was specified, but the total amount Britain would
provide for the year was left blank. There was also provision for
mutual protection against renewed French aggression after the
return of peace. Each power was to send 60,000 troops to the aid
of any of her partners attacked by France. Britain would have the
right to meet her obligation either by hiring troops or by making a
money payment to the attacked power.®
   Before Nesselrode could respond to this proposal, the allies were
thrown into confusion by the Tsar’s decision to suspend the
Chatillon discussions. The course of the war was now so favorable
that Alexander soon hoped to enter the enemy capital and dictate
his own terms of peace. Metternich threatened to make a separate
peace with France unless the Tsar gave up this folly. Once again
Castlereagh worked to hold the allies together, and the Tsar was
finally persuaded to take a more reasonable position. By now,
however, the fortunes of war were beginning to favor France and
it was Napoleon’s turn to delay the negotiation. The balance on
the battlefield soon tipped once more toward the allies, and by the
end of February 1814 they demanded that France either accept
their terms or end the Chatillon conferences.
  The time had come for Castlereagh to discuss the future of the
war alliance with all the foreign ministers, and on March | he sent
each of them the proposal made a few weeks before to Nesselrode.
The plan was discussed by the four ministers two days later and it
was accepted in principle. On the evening of March 9 at
Chaumont, they signed the treaties which made up their new
alliance.
  The Chaumont agreements specifically bound each of the four
powers to keep at least 150,000 effective troops in the field
against the enemy. Britain would divide £5,000,000 equally among

 8. Castlereagh to Nesselrode, February 9, 1814 (Chatillon), FO 92/2.


                                         318
                                The Final Coalition


her three allies during the year. Payments were to be made in
London each month, retroactive to the first of the year. Should
peace be concluded with France, subsidies would be due to the
end of the month in which the treaty was signed. One provision
appeared which had not been a part of Castlereagh’s original
proposal: the three allies were to be given an additional grant of
money at the close of the war to help meet their demobilization
costs. This “return money” would equal a two months’ subsidy in
the case of Prussia and Austria, while Russia would be given twice
that amount out of consideration for the greater distance her
armies were from their own country. A twenty year mutual
defense pact was also provided binding each of the four powers to
put 60,000 men under arms in the event of a French attack ona
member nation. Britain was to have the option either of supplying
the specified number of men (which might include mercenaries),
or paying the attacked power an annual subsidy of £1,300,000.?
   Creation of the four-power alliance was a personal triumph for
Castlereagh since it achieved most of the goals which he originally
desired!     He   had not haggled      over  subsidy   money;   the
£5,000,000     promised the allies was the entire amount the
Cabinet had empowered him to offer. In fact, he had exceeded his
instructions by promising that Britain, too, would maintain an
army of 150,000 men in the coming campaign. This had been
urged on him by the allies, and most especially by the Tsar.
National pride compelled him to agree, even though this obli-
gation, together with the pledge of £5,000,000 in subsidies,
imposed-a double burden on Great Britain.!! The only really new
feature having to do with subsidies in the Chaumont agreement
was that calling for an equal division of British money among the
three continental allies.!* Austria and Prussia naturally approved
this, but how had Russia been brought to agree?

  9. Although dated March 1, 1814, the Chaumont treaties were actually signed on
March 9. Castlereagh concluded separate but identical treaties with Russia (FO 93/81
[16], [17]); Austria (FO 93/11 [8], [9]); and Prussia (FO 93/78 [8], [9]).
  10. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 229.
  11. Castlereagh to Liverpool, March 10, 1814, FO 92/3; Castlereagh to W. Hamilton,
March 10, 1814, Correspondence of Castlereagh, 1X, 335-336.
   12. Webster failed to note that the equal division of British subsidies provided for in
the Chaumont treaties was different from the subsidy agreements of the previous year.
He observed that the Chaumont treaties represented ‘“‘only a consolidation of subsidy
treaties such as were already in being” (Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 227).


                                          ByINE)
                                   1814-1815


  When     Nesselrode  first learned of the British proposal to
subsidize the allies equally, he entered a strong protest. The
maintenance of the Russian army in western Europe imposed an
especially heavy strain on the Tsar’s resources, still suffering from
the devastating effects of the 1812 invasion.!3 Nesselrode’s
description of Russia’s economic        misery  was supported by
independent evidence which the foreign secretary could not
discount. Letters reaching him from Lord Walpole, the acting
British minister at St. Petersburg, painted a gloomy picture of the
Tsar’s finances.!4
  Russia’s distress was the major topic of a conversation Castle-
reagh had at this time with Count Razumovsky, the Tsar’s
representative at the Chatillon conference. Razumovsky reminded
the foreign secretary that two years before Russia had invited
Britain to assume responsibility for the repayment of her debt
with the Dutch banks. Then the British government declined the
invitation. The matter was now brought forward once more, but in
a somewhat different form. Since Russian troops were currently
driving the enemy from Holland, the Dutch were under some
obligation to the Tsar. What better way for the Prince of Orange
to show his gratitude than by taking over Alexander’s £6,000,000
debt to his own country’s bankers? Should the Dutch find the
burden too heavy to bear, perhaps Britain would be willing to
assume some share of it herself.)
  Castlereagh’s immediate reaction to this ingenious suggestion
was hostile. The obvious plea for preferential treatment was at
cross-purposes with his own wish to aid the three allies equally.
Prussia and Austria likewise had large debts with Dutch bankers.
“And why pay Russia rather than Austria and Prussia?” he
asked. Parliament would never support such a plan.!®
  In spite of Castlereagh’s rebuff, Nesselrode brought the matter
up again two weeks later and hinted that unless Britain assumed
the Russian debt, Alexander might refuse to renew his alliance
with her. The foreign secretary ignored this empty threat for he
knew that Alexander’s need for subsidies was so pressing that he

  13. Nesselrode to Castlereagh, March, 1814, FO 139/5.
  14. Some of Walpole’s letters are printed in vol. 1X of Correspondence of Castlereagh.
See especially his letter to Castlereagh of March 22, 1814, pp. 374-376.
  15. Castlereagh to Clancarty, February 20, 1814, ibid., IX, 284.
  16. Castlereagh to Clancarty, February 20, 1814, ibid.

                                        320
                                The Final Coalition


would not dare make the debt assumption a sine qua non.
Considerations   of a different    nature, however, were slowly
bringing Castlereagh to take a more sympathetic view of the
question. He was beginning to see how the Tsar’s debts might be
used to further his own plan to create an enlarged Kingdom of the
Netherlands.       If repayment        of the £6,000,000             debt was made   a
joint obligation on Britain, Russia, and Holland, Alexander would
have a very real interest in insuring the success of the Dutch
kingdom that Castlereagh was anxious to establish. On the day
before the Chaumont agreements were signed, he decided to sound
out Lord Liverpool on the matter: “I am aware,” he wrote the
prime minister, “that this transaction differs essentially in its
character from any aid which the Parliament of Great Britain has
hitherto been prevailed upon to afford to a foreign State; and yet
practically, in its political influence, it may be of more real
importance, both upon the war itself and upon the future happy
construction of the Continent, than a greater sum provided in the
ordinary shape of a subsidy.” Castlereagh left no doubt of his own
view: “If I am enabled to give encouragement to these views on
the part of Russia, I am of opinion that it may be attended with
the most beneficial consequences, in bringing the contest in which
we are engaged to a satisfactory issue.”?47
  The conclusion of the Chaumont alliance could not wait until
the problem of the Tsar’s debts had been settled, however. On the
eve of the signing of that alliance, Castlereagh sent Nesselrode an
official note on the subject. He promised to bring the question
before the Cabinet at the earliest possible moment and declared
that, ““Whatever may be the difficulties attending the suggestion |
am confident it will be considered in that spirit of friendship &
liberality which has invariably marked the auspicious alliance
between our respective Courts.’”!8
  For the moment, Russia must be satisfied with this assurance
together with the promise of twice as much “return money” as the
German powers were to receive. On this basis Nesselrode accepted
the equal division of subsidies provided for in the Chaumont
alliance.!?

  17. Castlereagh to Liverpool, March 8, 1814, ibid., 1X, 327-329.
  18. Castlereagh to Nesselrode, March 8, 1814, FO 139/S.
  19. The Russian treaty also continued the additional £500,000 British grant for the
upkeep of the Tsar’s squadron in her care.
                                           321
                                            1814-1515


     Russia was to be disappointed with the sequel. Despite Castle-
  reagh’s warm endorsement, Liverpool and Vansittart strongly
  opposed the Russian debt assumption plan. With Britain groaning
  under a massive indebtedness of her own, Parliament was in no
* mood to absorb the Tsar’s deficit. The prime minister quietly
  shelved the matter in hopes that it would die. Fortunately, the
  ending of the war in April freed London from further Russian
  demands for financial aid.”°
     Subsidy arrangements with the allies for 1814 were essentially
  the same as in the previous year, except for the fact that the three
  major allies were to share equally. In this Castlereagh simply
  applied the principle laid down by Pitt almost ten years before. On
  the eve of the Third Coalition, the prime minister hoped to create
  an army of 400,000 to be subsidized at the standard rate of
  £1,250,000 for every 100,000 soldiers the three powers provided.
  The Chaumont treaties almost exactly followed this idea since the
  £5,000,000 British subsidy was to be equally divided among the
  allies on the assumption that each would furnish at least 150,000
 troops.
   Pitt would have been astounded at the extent of Britain’s total
 subsidy commitment for 1814. In addition to the £5,000,000
 pledged to the major powers, Castlereagh had undertaken to pay
 at least that much again to the other allies. Since 1812 Sweden,
 Hanover, Holland, Denmark, and Sardinia had been swept into the
 coalition, thereby giving each of them a claim on Britain’s
 bounty.”! More than £3,000,000 was spent to help the Peninsular
 powers during the last year of the war, the larger part of which
 went to pay and support their troops serving with Wellington.
   With the signing of the Chaumont treaties, a renewal of the war
 with Napoleon was a certainty. The breakdown of the Chatillon
 discussions occurred ten days later, by which time the noose had
 been drawn still tighter around France. Bordeaux declared for the
    20. Liverpool to Castlereagh, April 14, 1814, Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, I,
  532-533. Castlereagh did not bother to seek the opinion of the Dutch on this issue. In
  May 1814 The Hague learned of the business for the first time. When pressed, the foreign
  secretary admitted to the Dutch that he had conducted discussions with Russia on the
  matter (Renier, Great Britain and the Netherlands, p. 296).
    21. On   February   3, 1814   Britain   signed a treaty with Sardinia (FO 93/87   [1B]) by
  which she agreed to pay and equip a force of 3,000 Sardinians who had fallen into her
  hands as prisoners of war. This corps was to be sent to Italy for service against the
  French.
                             The Final Coalition


Bourbons in the middle of March, and before the month ended,
Wellington’s army      appeared  before Toulouse.  Two hundred
thousand allied troops, commanded by Blucher and Schwarzen-
berg, stormed the heights of Montmartre on March 30, and the
next day the Tsar and the King of Prussia entered Paris. The
conclusion of a formal treaty of peace with France took longer
than Castlereagh expected, but it was finally signed on May 30.
Britain was thereby spared the necessity of paying her Chaumont
allies an extra month’s subsidy.

   Now that the war was over, Britain was anxious to stop the
payments to the allies as quickly as possible. The Treaty of Paris
automatically halted her debt to Russia, Prussia, and Austria
although they were still entitled to the ‘“‘return money” provided
by the Chaumont agreement. Closing out engagements with the
other powers would require more time since each had to be
handled separately. The settling of all accounts involved two steps:
first, the amount of money owed each ally must be exactly
determined; and second, arrangements would have to be made to
remit these sums. With only a few unimportant exceptions, all
subsidy treaties had been extinguished by the close of 1814 and
nearly all final payments had been made.
   Since the Treaty of Paris had been signed in May, the Chaumont
allies were entitled to five months’ subsidy, together with ‘“‘return
money.” Austria and Prussia would each receive £972,222 while,
thanks to the promise of double “return money,” Russia could
expect to receive £1,250,000.72 All that remained was for the
Treasury to pay these sums. Even before the war formally ended,
the Cabinet began to close out the smaller subsidy agreements.
The first to go was the unpopular obligation to Denmark which
Thornton had undertaken in January 1814. Denmark was in-
formed that the subsidy would be ended in May, although one
extra month’s payment would be made as a douceur.*> The
Swedish subsidy was also extinguished as soon as it could be done

 22. Herries Subsidy Account, AO 3/1088.
  23. Thornton paid the Danes £35,000 in bills drawn upon Rothschilds bank in
Amsterdam (Thornton to Castlereagh, May 10, 1814, FO 73/91). The balance due
(£86,917) was remitted to Denmark’s agents in London between May and September
1814 (Army Ledgers, PMG 2/113, 59, 60, and 76).


                                       B25
                                   1514-1815


without unduly offending Bernadotte. Monthly payments of
£100,000 would be continued through August, after which the
treaty would be considered as formally at an end. Britain’s other
obligation to Sweden proved more difficult to meet: the pledge
given in 1813 to transfer the island of Guadaloupe to Bernadotte
at the end of the war. Since the Bourbon government of France
pressed for a return of the island, Castlereagh had to cast about for
an equivalent. During the summer, Sweden made it known that a
British payment of £1,000,000 would be regarded as a satisfactory
substitute, and in August a treaty was concluded between the two
governments providing for such a payment.?>
  The Sicilian subsidy proved harder to end and, in fact, was
continued into 1815. Ever since the French drove King Ferdinand
from Naples, that monarch had yearned to return. It now
appeared, however, that the Kingdom of Naples, currently ruled
by Murat, might survive the deluge which had swept away the
other Napoleonic vassal states. The allies themselves were not of
one mind whether Ferdinand should be restored. Final settlement
of this question would have to wait until the Congress had
assembled at Vienna, and, consequently, the Cabinet decided to
retain its military force in Sicily. Although the subsidy would be
considered formally ended in August 1814, something would have
to be done to placate the Palermo regime; additional monthly
payments of half the usual amount would be made until the future
of Naples had been settled.”°
  Closing out the Portuguese and Spanish subsidies involved
especially difficult problems which were never satisfactorily
solved. The Portuguese and Spanish troops serving with Wellington
were sent back to their own countries following the surrender of
France, but London was ready to continue the subsidies for at
least a few more months. In August 1814 Castlereagh informed
the Lisbon Council of Regency that October would mark the
termination of the British aid program which had begun six years

  24. Bathurst to the Lords of the Treasury, October 3, 1814, FO 73/94.
  25. See William H. Robson, “New Light on Lord Castlereagh’s Diplomacy,” Journal of
Modern History, 3 (1931), 198-218. The payment of the £1,000,000 was conditional on
the union of Holland and Belgium and was therefore not made until 1815.
  26. Bathurst to A’Court, September 7, 1814, FO 70/65.
                               The Final Coalition


before.’ The accounts of the Portuguese subsidy were so confused
that it was impossible to determine whether British aid had
exceeded or fallen below what the council had a right to expect.
Every effort would be made to clarify this, although October 1814
would be the terminal date for the subsidy.22 Now began the
“battle of the bookkeepers,” which nearly led to an open break
between London and Lisbon. The two governments had kept
separate accounts of the British aid and there was ample room for
honest disagreement about the monetary value to be assigned to
shipments of supplies from England. British records were in such
disorder that it was not until 1822 that London had an account of
its payments which it believed reasonably correct. The Portuguese
Regency had long resented its ally’s highhanded methods and, in
the fall of 1814, it refused outright to accept a consignment of
grain sent by Britain as part payment of the aid due for that
year.” Anglo-Portuguese relations had steadily deteriorated during
the final years of the war and they were now to grow still worse.
   The Spanish subsidy proved troublesome to settle since Madrid
wished to use Britain’s desire for a commercial treaty as a lever to
obtain still more money. In February 1814 the Spanish govern-
ment announced that it was now ready to negotiate such a pact
with its ally. During the discussions which followed, Henry
Wellesley was frequently reminded of Madrid’s desperate need for
money. Perhaps Britain could continue the subsidy during the
remainder of the year even though the war had ended? Spain
would also be grateful if Downing Street supported her efforts to
borrow £10,000,000 in London.”" As proof of her good faith, she
was ready to conclude an immediate alliance and commercial
agreement which would go at least part way toward meeting
Britain’s wishes. The treaty, signed by Wellesley on July 5, did
indeed create an alliance between the two powers and extended a
few commercial privileges to Britain. Provision was made for the

  27. Writing to Thomas Sydenham at Lisbon on August 8, 1814, Castlereagh expressed
the hope that the Portuguese forces would be kept “in a state of competent
organization” (FO 63/174).
  28. Britain continued to make small remittances throughout 1814-1815.
  29. R. Lushington to W. Hamilton, Oct. 4, 1814, FO 63/180.
  30. H. Wellesley to Castlereagh, February 26, 1814 and June 17, 1814; FO 72/159, FO
72/160.



                                         BAS
                                   1814-1815


re-establishment of commercial relations between them on the
same basis which had existed in 1796. No significant concessions
were made to Britain’s desire for free trade with the Spanish
colonies, however. Presumably this would be arranged in a
supplementary convention at some future time.>!
  Castlereagh was tolerably satisfied with the Spanish treaty, but
he made clear to Henry Wellesley that Britain would never
guarantee a £10,000,000 loan for Madrid. ““Your Excellency well
knows,” he wrote, “that since the period of the Austrian loan, all
such Transactions are viewed in this Country in no other Light
than as a Subsidy granted under a less generous Name.” Originally,
the Cabinet planned to halt all payments at the end of July, but if
Spain undertook to abolish the slave trade within five years,
Britain would pay her £800,000 during the remainder of 1814. A
modest loan might also be arranged if the slave trade was stopped
immediately.*2 This offer appeared so puny to Madrid that it
brought forth a counterproposal:       the slave trade would be
abolished within five years in return for both the £800,000
subsidy balance and the promise of a loan. The Cabinet regarded
this proposition as outrageous and adhered to its original decision
to end the Spanish subsidy.°3 Castlereagh’s future negotiation with
Spain over the slave trade was therefore separated from the
problem of war subsidies.
  Although the end of the war freed Britain from monetary
obligations to the allies, she still suffered from a serious drain on
her manpower. The American war continued to drag on, and in
the summer of 1814 a large part of Wellington’s army was
transferred to North America. During that same summer, however,
the four great powers each agreed to maintain 75,000 men under
arms on the Continent while the Congress of Vienna was in
session.*4 In this way, Britain acquired an obligation which it
would be difficult for her to meet. Parliament was naturally
anxious to demobilize as quickly as possible, and by the end of

 31. Spain did agree that in the event her colonial markets ever were opened Britain
would enjoy a most-favored-nation status in them (Treaty with Spain, July 5, 1814, FO
93/99 [7B]).
  32. Castlereagh to H. Wellesley, July 30, 1814, FO 72/158.
  33. Bathurst to H. Wellesley, September 9, 1814, FO 72/158.
 34. The treaties of June 29, 1814, between Britain and Russia, FO 93/81 (19); Prussia,
FO 93/78 (10); and Austria, FO 93/11 (10).


                                         326
                                The Final Coalition


1814, 47,000 men had been eliminated from the army establish-
ment.*> There were still British garrisons in Belgium, Sicily, and
Genoa but their total fell considerably below the 75,000 men she
had promised to keep under arms. It was therefore decided to
retain the 15,000 subsidized Hanoverians who had served Britain
in the Low Countries.*® This decision was dictated by economy,
for the expense of the Hanoverian mercenaries was appreciably
less than the cost of maintaining a British force of the same size.
Even with the Hanoverians, Britain still required 22,000 more
troops to meet her quota. To make good this deficiency,
Castlereagh offered to pay Prussia to maintain as part of her own
army the additional number of troops Britain was treaty-bound to
supply. This was in accord with the spirit of the Chaumont
alliance, and, using the formula set forth in that convention,
Britain gave Prussia £355,333 for this purpose during the eight
months their bargain was in effect.>”
   Settling the subsidy accounts inevitably bred disagreement and
unpleasantness. When Austria learned that the value of British
arms sent her during 1813-1814 was to be deducted from the
subsidy due her by the Chaumont agreement, she heatedly
protested. After all, the subsidies being paid to Prussia and Russia
were not being similarly adjusted. Furthermore, a part of the war
supplies sent her were not received until the war had ended. Since
the amount at issue was small (less than £400,000) Castlereagh
yielded to the Hofburg’s demands as a matter of policy.*8 The
Russians made themselves most unpopular with British Treasury
agents, and their imperious demands for immediate payment of
the subsidies drove the commissary-in-chief nearly to despair.°?
Difficulties also developed with Prussia, who was being paid to

  35. Fortescue, British Army, X, 228.
  36. The British forces in Belgium during the summer of 1814 consisted of the
subsidized Hanoverians, the King’s German Legion, and the British expeditionary force
sent to Holland under Graham during the past winter. For reasons of expediency,
supreme command of this force was vested in the Prince of Orange. This provided
London with the opportunity to propose that half the cost of the Hanoverians be borne
by Holland, a suggestion the Dutch dutifully accepted (J. P. Moirer to G. Harrison,
September, 1814, FO 37/75).
  37. See Castlereagh’s letter to the Prussian charge d’affaires, Gruehm, of June 6, 1815,
FO 64/101.
  38. Merveldt to Bathurst, September    13, 1814, FO 7/113; Castlereagh to Metternich,
October 8, 1814, FO 7/113.
 39. Herries, Memoir, 1, 90.
                                 1814-1815

carry on her own military establishment a part of the 75,000 man
police force for which Britain was responsible. Prussia insisted that
those payments be increased on the grounds that British troops
garrisoned in the Mediterranean could not honestly be included in
the 75,000 quota Britain was bound to maintain “on the
Continent.’ This was too much for the foreign secretary, and he
rejected the Prussian demand even though the resulting ill-will
badly strained relations between London and Berlin.*°
   The British Treasury was obliged to provide £10,000,000 to
meet all the subsidy debts to the allies for 1814.4! Of this sum
about £3,000,000 represented aid to Portugal and Spain, almost all
of which was paid by the end of the summer. The £7,000,000 due
the other allies had still to be remitted by the time the war ended
in May. It had originally been intended to pay all subsidies in
London and this method had been specified in the Chaumont
treaties with the great powers. The Treasury soon had misgivings
about making payments in this manner. Once subsidies had been
paid in London, the allied governments would probably transfer
the money to their own accounts on the Continent. Such massive
conveyances might adversely affect the rate of exchange between
Britain and Europe. To prevent this, it was decided to make
payments both in London and on the Continent where credits
were now available to Britain. Since the war was over, a British
subsidy office was established in Paris from which payments to the
allies could be made as a supplement to those in London.*”
   Responsibility for managing the subsidy remittances fell to John
C. Herries, the commissary-in-chief, who left for Paris in April
1814 to supervise financial operations there. Payments made in
London and in Paris would have to be delicately balanced to avoid
unnecessary damage to Britain’s rate of exchange. Issuance of bills
of exchange required careful handling to prevent speculators
amassing them to the disadvantage of the Treasury. Precautions
would also have to be taken to discourage counterfeiters who were

 40. Hardenberg to Gruehm, May 13, 1815, FO 64/101; Castlereagh to Gruehm, June
6, 1815, FO 64/101.
 41. This includes ‘“‘federative paper” payments.
 42. Vansittart to Castlereagh, April 28, 1814, Correspondence   of Castlereagh,   IX,
520-522.
                                     The Final Coalition


already busy issuing spurious bills.47 The partnership formed
between Herries and Nathan Rothschild in 1811 took on special
significance now that Rothschild’s international banking connec-
tions were available for the use of the commissary-in-chief.
  In remitting money from Paris between 1814 and 1816, Herries
drew on credits available to him at nine financial centers in
Europe. So efficiently did he work that, by the close of 1814,
nearly all the subsidies due the allies had been paid.“ If anything,
Herries moved too quickly to suit Lord Castlereagh, who was
encountering difficulties with some of the powers at the Vienna
Congress. In January 1815 the foreign secretary urged Lord
Bathurst to have Herries slacken the pace of his remittances: ‘“‘I
beg you will not give any money at present to any of the
Continental Powers. The poorer they are kept, the better, to


  43. Jean    Baptiste Capefigue, Histoire des Grandes              Operations Financieres; Banques,
Bourses,     Emprunts ... (Paris,        1855-60),     Il],   2.   Herries’   management   of   subsidy
payments between 1811 and 1816 has still to receive the attention it deserves. Some hint
of the complexity of his task is revealed in his letter to George Harrison of February 28,
1822, which accompanied his final statement of subsidy payments (AO 3/1088): “It was
entrusted to me by their Lordships to effect the application of this very large Sum in the
discharge of foreign subsidies... by an arrangement entirely new which consisted
principally in providing the Specie required for these Services thro’ a single and
confidential agency, by means of which it was collected with greater certainty and more
economy; and much of the difficulty and embarrassment which had arisen in this branch
of the Public Service was removed. The details of this arrangment embraced every mode
by which foreign currencies could be obtained for British money or Credit; such as the
purchase of Specie in all the markets of the world; the conversion of Bullion into coin at
our own and at foreign mints; the coining of foreign money in England & the purchase
of bills of remittance in such manner as to conceal they were for a Public Account; the
negotiation of British Paper on the Continent at long date to avoid pressure upon the
Exchange, etc., etc.”
  44. Of the £42,500,000 paid out by Herries between 1811 and 1816, Rothschilds
bank handled at least half of it. See Count Egon Caesar Corti, The Rise of the House of
Rothschild, trans. B. and B. Lunn (New York, 1928), p. 169. Herries’ account (AO
3/1088) shows the following remittances during 1814 which paid off the subsidy debts
of 1813, as well as those of 1814:
       Austria                      fn     9395235
       Russia                            1,925,834
       Prussia                           1,037,268
       Hanover                             §25,000
       Sweden                              800,000
       Denmark                             121,917
       Sicily                              316,666
                              £5,666,208
Payments to Spain and Portugal do not appear in this account.




                                                     319)
                                         1814-1515

prevent them from quarrelling. Time enough to settle accounts,
when we know who deserves it.’4°
  At Vienna Castlereagh again tried to use British money as a tool
to persuade Spain and Portugal to end the slave trade. In the case
of Portugal, he discovered that her agreement could be bought. In
January 1815 Portugal promised to abolish the trade north of the
equator in return for an outright gift of £300,000 and Britain’s
promise to repay the £600,000 borrowed by the Regent in
London in 1809. Agreement with Spain was harder to win, and it
was not until 1817 that a bargain was struck with her which also
involved the payment of British money.*°
  The old problem of Russia’s debt came to the surface once more
on the eve of the Vienna Congress. Castlereagh was prepared to
assume at least a part of the £6,000,000 debt if the Tsar would
agree to the union of Belgium and Holland, but he was unable to
overcome the Cabinet’s determined opposition. Alexander now let
it be known that he might have to make the assumption of his
debts a sine qua non to the union of the Low Countries. Since this
was one of the cardinal features of Castlereagh’s plan for the
reconstruction of Europe, the foreign secretary knew that he must
come to terms with the Tsar. The great difficulty was the
Cabinet’s reluctance to endorse the plan. To make the assumption
acceptable to ministers, Castlereagh undertook to win an addi-
tional concession from Russia. For nearly two years he had vainly
urged the Tsar to liberalize his tariff policy to benefit British
commerce. In July 1814 he hinted to Nesselrode that Parlia-
mentary approval of the debt assumption would come easier if
“the commercial System of Russia towards Great Britain should
be previously placed upon a different and more friendly footing
than has latterly prevailed.” Although Russia did not respond,
Castlereagh was not discouraged. Even before the assembling of
the Vienna Congress, Britain had begun to press Holland to join
with her in underwriting repayment of half the Russian debt.*7
  Alexander’s plan for the reconstruction of Poland created a
serious crisis at Vienna and pushed the Russian debt issue into the

  4S. Castlereagh to Bathurst, January 30, 1815, Correspondence of Castlereagh, X, 248.
  46. There   were   two   treaties with Portugal,   signed on January   21 and 22, 1815; FO
93/77 (10), (11). Also see Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, Il, 459.
 47. Castlereagh to Nesselrode, July 11, 1814, FO 65/95; Robson, “New Light on Lord
Castlereagh’s Diplomacy,” pp. 213-214.

                                              330
                                The Final Coalition


background. Until the Tsar proved reasonable Castlereagh would
not give him a shilling. Liverpool was as hostile as ever to the
debt assumption and even Castlereagh conceded that it would be
folly to strengthen “tthe credit of a Calmuck Prince to overturn
Europe.”*® The foreign secretary still hoped that Alexander would
finally back down. In this spirit, he wrote to Vansittart, warning
the chancellor of the exchequer, “If his Imperial Majesty shall
change his tone, and make a reasonable arrangement of frontier on
the side of Poland, if he shall allow the other European
arrangements to be equitably settled, including those of Holland,
and alter his tariff besides, then, my dear Vansittart, I must come
upon you for my pound of flesh.’’4?
  The Polish crisis soon passed, and the Tsar proved as ready to
compromise on the other points as Castlereagh wished. By
mid-February      1815 an agreement had been reached between
Britain, Russia, and Holland regarding the Tsar’s debts. Britain and
Holland each undertook to repay one quarter of the Tsar’s debt,
which     portion,    with   accumulated      interest,  amounted    to
£2,272,727. The remaining half of the loan would continue to be
a charge on Russia. A dissolution of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands would free Britain and Holland from their debt
obligations, a proviso Castlereagh described to Liverpool as ‘‘a
most valuable guarantee on the part of Russia of those possessions
to the House of Orange.’”’ He was also able to inform the prime
minister that Alexander would soon carry through a major revision
in his tariff policy to the benefit of Britain’s merchants.°?
   the foreign secretary postponed the conversion of this agree-
ment into a treaty until May 1815, when agents of the three
powers signed the Russian-Dutch Loan Convention.              Although
the Cabinet disliked the whole business, it finally approved the
treaty at Castlereagh’s insistence.>! The financial obligation im-
  48. As late as November    2, 1814   Liverpool warned Castlereagh to steer clear of the
Russian debt problem and declared that for Britain to absorb a part of that debt “would
be in principle one of the most difficult questions to defend that ever was brought
forward in Parliament” (Yonge, Liverpool, II, 51; Castlereagh to Vansittart, November
11, 1814, Correspondence of Castlereagh, X, 200).
  49. Castlereagh to Vansittart, November 11, 1814,Correspondence of Castlereagh, X,
200.
  50. Castlereagh   to Liverpool, no. 69, February   13, 1815, FO     92/12; Nesselrode   to
Castlereagh, February 14, 1815, FO 92/12.
  51. The   Russian-Dutch    Loan   Convention,   May   19,   1815,   FO   93/81(22),(23).
Castlereagh’s delay was unfortunate. Napoleon had returned to power by the spring of
1815, and Russia accordingly demanded an important modification in the terms of the

                                           a3
                                      1814-1815


posed on Britain by the treaty was relatively light: repayment of
her share of the principal with interest computed at 5 percent per
year. Long-term amortization was provided by means Ofeaid
percent annual sinking fund, on the basis of which the total annual
charge to Britain amounted to £136,363.>
  Parliament’s reception of the Russian-Dutch Loan Convention
bore out Liverpool’s gloomy prophecy. When the text of the
agreement was presented to the Commons in June 1815, opposi-
tion leaders attacked it vociferously. Samuel Whitbread charged
that a large part of the debt had been incurred by Catherine the
Great to help finance her wars with Turkey. The British
government of the day had vainly tried to protect the Turks and,
as a consequence, had suffered the humiliation of Oczakoff. Now
Pitt’s disciples were asking the nation to pay for the mortification
which their leader had suffered at the Tsarina’s hands. Ministers
winced at the charge, especially since they were unable to deny
it.> Thanks to the fact that Napoleon was again loose in Europe
and that Britain and Russia were allies, Castlereagh won parlia-
mentary approval of the treaty. Opposition leaders rang the
changes of Oczakoff, but they mustered only nineteen votes in
Commons against the agreement.°4

  In February 1815 Castlereagh prepared to leave Vienna where,
for the past five months, he had wrestled with the problems of
European resettlement. All the major issues had now been settled,
and he could no longer ignore the Cabinet’s demand that he return
to London. What little business remained could be entrusted to
the Duke of Wellington, who had recently arrived to join the
British delegation. The Coalition of 1814 was by now almost


original agreement. If Belgium (or any part of it) were taken from the House of Orange,
Britain and Holland would continue to be liable for repayment of the debt, but the
extent of their obligation would be reduced in proportion to the loss of population to
the Netherlands which would result from the separation of Belgium.
  The Cabinet may have found it easier to approve the agreement because in 1814 the
Dutch bank of Hope and Co., which held the Russian loan, came under the control of
the English banking house of Baring (Jenks, Migration ofBritish Capital, p. 33).
  52. British and Foreign State Papers, ed. by the Librarian of the Foreign Office
(London, 1838-1841), II, 385.
 53. See Liverpool’s evasive answer    to this question   in the Lords on June 12, 1815,
Hansard, XXXI (1815), 718.
  54. Ibid., XXXI, 756.
                                  The Final Coalition


entirely dismantled. Nearly all subsidy treaties had been closed out
and payments to the allies were about completed. Britain had at
last ended her war with the United States and the arrival of the
New Year brought a promise of the first real peace which the
nation had known in a decade. In this spirit of optimism,
Parliament lost no time in cutting back the military establishment
and repealing the lucrative but unpopular Property Tax. Before
the arrival of spring, however, clouds of war once more darkened
the skies. On the first day of March, Napoleon landed on the south
coast of France, and within three weeks he re-established his
regime at Paris.
   Word of Napoleon’s escape from Elba had reached Vienna on
March 7, and the reports which followed during the next few days
confirmed Metternich’s prediction that he would make straight for
Paris. On March 12 mobilization orders were sent from Vienna to
the Russian, Prussian, and Austrian armies.*> Instinctively, the
foreign ministers turned to Wellington for advice and for a promise
of British money to help finance the contest which had already
begun. The British general insisted that the first step was to
determine how many men the allies could put into the field. Two
hundred thousand Russians were in winter quarters on the Niemen
river, and Alexander offered to create a second army of the same
size to hurl against Napoleon. Metternich had 300,000 Austrian
soldiers ready to serve in Italy and along the Rhine. One hundred
and fifty thousand Prussians together with 60,000 assorted British,
Dutch, and Hanoverian troops were already under arms. Thus, at
least 700,000 allied troops were available to oppose the military
machine Napoleon was constructing.>®
   Impressive as this force appeared on paper, its effectiveness
depended upon generous grants of British money. Wellington was
beset with demands for subsidies on a more lavish scale than in
1814. Lacking instructions, the Duke could make no promises,
although he felt reasonably certain what the Cabinet’s decision
would be. The three great powers could probably expect Britain to
provide them with the same aid specified in the Chaumont treaties
one year before; that is, £5,000,000. Predictably Nesselrode

  55. Wellington   to   Castlereagh,   March    12,    1815,   Dispatches   of Wellington,   XI,
266-268.
 56. Protocol of the allied Military Conference, March 17, 1815, FO 139/11.


                                               BJA)S
                                      1814-1515

pressed for special consideration since Russia’s needs were far
greater than those of the other powers. Would Britain grant an
extra subsidy if the Tsar mobilized a force in excess of the
200,000 men now on the Niemen? Wellington rejected the idea at
once knowing that Castlereagh had always aimed at an equal
division of subsidies among the three powers. Reporting this to
London, the Duke observed, “I conceived it would be quite
impossible for His Majesty’s Government to grant what was
required; and that it was best the subject should not now be
brought forward.” Nevertheless, Wellington sympathized with the
allies and urged the Cabinet to go as far as possible in meeting
their demands for money.°”
   The union of the four great powers against Napoleon was
accomplished in their alliance of March 25, binding each of them
to put at least 150,000 effective troops into motion at once. No
mention was made of British subsidies since Wellington had still
not heard from London. Doubtless, instructions would soon arrive
on the basis of which a supplementary agreement could be
concluded. The foreign ministers at Vienna were ready to rely on
Britain’s good faith, but they formally expressed the hope that she
would provide them with more than £5,000,000.°8
   Conclusion of the four-power alliance released Wellington from
his diplomatic duties and he was soon en route to Belgium in order
to assume command of Britain’s forces. During the three weeks
following Napoleon’s return, he had acquitted the responsibility
thrust upon him by that event. The Chaumont alliance was now
revived, and while Wellington had given the allies a general
guarantee of British aid he had made no promise which might
embarrass his government.
   In London Castlereagh was moving swiftly to resurrect the old
coalition which had been so carefully taken apart during the last
year. Wellington was to assure the allies that Britain would not fail
them in this crisis. ‘We can often do more than we can say,’’ he
explained to the Duke, ‘‘and I see no reason to fear, that the
Parliament or the Nation will shrink from supporting the
 57. Wellington   to Castlereagh,   March   18 (no. 14) and March   28, 1815, FO 92/14;
Wellington to Castlereagh, March 18, 1815, Dispatches of Wellington, XII, 271-273.
  58. Treaties of alliance with Russia, FO 93/81 (20); Prussia, FO 93/78 (11); and
Austria, FO 93/11 (13); and Protocol of March 25 signed by the Russian, Prussian, and
Austrian foreign ministers, FO 92/14.
                                The Final Coalition


Continental   Powers in whatever System of vigorous Policy they
may be prepared to adopt against Buonaparte.””>? A few days later,
he sent dispatches to Vienna containing the Cabinet’s decision
regarding subsidies: £5,000,000 to be equally shared by Russia,
Austria, and Prussia during the year.®? Wellington’s prediction was
thus fulfilled; the subsidy provisions of the Chaumont alliance
would be applied to the present war. It was unreasonable of the
allies to expect Britain to pay more. In addition to giving the
major powers £5,000,000 she would also have to hire troops to
complete her own        150,000 man quota. All this the foreign
secretary explained to Wellington’s successor at Vienna, Lord
Clancarty, and sourly concluded, “‘We shall not fail them [the
allies] in our due scale of Exertion, but the Powers of Europe
must not expect us to subsidize all the World, or to go beyond
certain limits in point of expence.’”®!
   Acting on these instructions, Clancarty concluded a subsidy
convention with the three great powers which supplemented their
alliance of March 25. Its terms exactly conformed to those of the
 1814 Chaumont agreement: £5,000,000 divided equally among
Russia, Prussia, and Austria and paid in monthly installments
during the year. Payments would be made through the month in
which a definitive treaty of peace was signed with France. At the
end of the war, the German powers were to receive an extra two
months’ subsidy as “return money,” while Russia would be
entitled to twice as much.®
  Britain’s refusal to give more than £5,000,000 greatly dis-
appointed the allies and they entered a plea for a supplementary
grant which, they argued, was essential to the success of their
operations. Castlereagh rejected this demand at once. Parliament
was soon to vote £9,000,000 for foreign aid which, together with
Britain’s own war expenses, would require the reintroduction of
the hated Property Tax. Surely, the continental powers did not

  59. Castlereagh to Wellington, March 14, 1815, FO 139/7. Compare this language with
that Castlereagh used in a letter to Thornton on November 29, 1812: “We can do much
in support of foreign states... , but we must do it our own way” (Webster, Foreign
Policy of Castlereagh, 1, 101).
  60. Castlereagh to Wellington, March 24,1815, FO 92/13.
  61. Castlereagh to Clancarty, April 12, 1815, FO 92/16.
  62. Treaties of April 30, 1815 with Russia, FO 93/81 (21); Prussia, FO 93/78 (12);
and Austria, FO 93/11 (14).
                                    1814-1815


think Britain was made of gold!® ‘“‘After the unexampled Efforts
of Great Britain in the two last years of the War,” the foreign
secretary explained to Wellington, “it is not surprizing that all
Europe should hope to derive aid from her resources, but the
extent to which those exertions were pushed is only an additional
reason why they can now only be called forth within certain
limits wees
  But was it true economy for Britain to withold from her allies
the additional funds they insisted they must have to deal with the
enemy? An extra million pounds spent now might be insurance
against having to spend ten times more the next year. Castlereagh
himself had warned Wellington against half-measures: “If we are to
undertake the job, we must leave nothing to chance. It must be
done upon the largest scale.”®> Under the pressure of this idea, the
foreign secretary gradually increased the original £5,000,000
subsidy limit for the great powers. Austria had an especially strong
claim on Britain for extra assistance. Her troops were already in
Italy to crush Murat and thus pave the way for a restoration of the
Neapolitan Bourbons. Since the success of this enterprise was
important to Britain, Castlereagh could not logically turn a deaf
ear to Vienna’s pleas. He therefore agreed to remit an additional
£280,000 to the Hofburg.6© The Tsar was ready to mobilize a
second army against France, if Britain would only supply the
means. When this offer was first made, Castlereagh had rejected it.
Now his anxieties led him to reconsider. Several months must pass
before a new Russian army could reach France, but its appearance
on the scene even then might make the difference between victory
and defeat. He therefore decided to give the Tsar an additional
£1,000,000 a year to add between 150,000 and 200,000 to his
forces.®/

  63. Castlereagh to Clancarty, April 24, 1815, FO 92/16. In May the Commons voted
£5,000,000 for subsidies to the three major powers and a month later an additional
£4,000,000 was provided in the budget for foreign aid (Hansard, XXXI    (1815), 798:
 64. Castlereagh to Wellington, April 13, 1815, FO 92/13.
petals           to Wellington,   March   26, 1815, Correspondence     of Castlereagh,   X,

  66. Castlereagh to Clancarty, April 24, 1815, FO 92/16. The foreign secretary
managed the extra grant to Austria without recourse to Parliament. See Castlereagh to
Wellington, March 12, 1815, Supplementary Despatches of Wellington, IX, 593.
  67. Castlereagh to Liverpool, October 5, 1815, FO 92/28.
                              The Final Coalition


  British efforts to resurrect the old war coalition encountered
difficulties only with some of the lesser powers. Bernadotte
refused to take part in the 1815 campaign. Professing ardent
support for the good cause, the Swedish Prince Royal explained
that he could not possibly put his army in motion before the end
of the summer.® Still more disappointing was Portugal’s refusal to
answer the call to arms. In April Wellington had urged the Cabinet
to send his old Portuguese units to Flanders. The suggestion was
immediately approved by London and Castlereagh invited Portugal
to supply between 12,000 and 14,000 troops for which Britain
would pay £11 a year per man.®? Considering Lisbon’s grudge
against Britain it is not surprising that the offer was declined. The
official reply explained that threat of a Spanish invasion made it
impossible for the Council of Regency to send any Portuguese
troops abroad. Dispatches from George Canning, currently serving
as British minister to Portugal, revealed that more than this was
involved. The Regency so bitterly resented the treatment it had
received at Britain’s hands that it would do nothing to help her.”
Spurned by Portugal, Castlereagh turned to Spain and offered to
hire 20,000 troops to cooperate with loyalists in the south of
France. Madrid promptly accepted the bid, but by then the
Hundred Days was over.’!
  Within three months of Napoleon’s return from Elba, the war
coalition of 1814 had been rebuilt almost in its entirety. Sweden
and Portugal chose to remain aloof, but in all other important
respects the alliance which now faced Napoleon was the same
which had overturned him one year before. At least £6,000,000 in
British subsidies had been pledged to Russia, Prussia, and Austria,
while Britain would have to spend nearly half that amount to
bring her continental army to the 150,000 mark established by her
alliance with the major powers. Since only about 50,000 British
and Hanoverian troops were currently in Flanders, an additional
100,000 would have to be recruited. To mobilize and maintain a

  68. Thornton to Castlereagh, April 6, 1815, FO 73/95.
  69. Wellington to Bathurst, April 12, 1815, Dispatches of Wellington, XI, 301-302;
and Castlereagh to Canning, April 17, 1815, FO 63/184.
  70. Canning to Castlereagh, April 10 and 28, 1815, FO 63/186.
  71. Castlereagh to H. Wellesley, June 22, 1815, FO 72/172; H. Wellesley to
Castlereagh, July 14, 1815, FO 72/175.




                                        S137)
                                    1814-1515

British soldier in Lurope for one year would cost the government
between £60 and £70.72 As a matter of pure economy the Cabinet
decided to fill its quota by renting troops from other states. Russia
and Prussia had already offered to supply them in exchange for
subsidies, but Castlereagh disliked the idea and recommended
instead that Britain apply to the states of Germany for assistance.
Subsidizing the German princes would at least help them “to fight
for what they are hereafter to defend.’”’”? The Cabinet agreed and
authorized Wellington to arrange with the German rulers for the
addition of 100,000 soldiers to his command. A fixed subsidy was
set for this purpose amounting to £11 2s. a year for each soldier
supplied.”4
   Even without this new responsibility, Wellington’s hands were
full with the business of converting the polyglot force under his
command into an army. Of the 47,000 men on the British muster
rolls, nearly half were Hanoverians or members of the King’s
German Legion. As commander of the Prince of Orange’s army,
Wellington also had 22,000 Dutch and Belgian troops at his
disposal.’> Soldiers from the German states, now marching toward
Flanders, could be relied on to bring his total force to nearly
200,000 men.
  In May Wellington turned to the negotiation of subsidy
agreements with the German emissaries who crowded in on him in
Brussels. The work was difficult since he had neither the time nor
patience to deal with the demands of individual princes for
preferential treatment.     By the time the Waterloo campaign
opened, however, five German states had agreed to supply a total
of 100,854 men in return for British financial aid.’°
  Britain had pledged her credit to the extent of £9,000,000 to
finance an allied army of nearly 1,000,000 men. Nothing had been
neglected which would contribute to the ultimate victory of the

 72. This was Castlereagh’s estimate. See Hansard, XX XI (1815), 459.
 73. Castlereagh to Wellington, no. 2, April 8, 1815, FO 92/13.
 74. Castlereagh to Wellington, April 13, 1815, FO 92/13.
  75. Fortescue, British Army, X, 430.
  76. Wellington was especially troubled by the Bavarian envoy, Colonel J. Washington,
who was probably a remote relative of the American president, George Washington. See
Wellington’s letter to J. Washington, May 20, 1815, Dispatches of Wellington, XII, 411.
  The five subsidy treaties were as follows: Baden, 16,000 troops; Bavaria, 60,000
troops; Nassau, 3,050 troops; Wurttemberg, 20,000 troops; Saxe Coburg, 1,804 troops.
Fortescue (British Army, X, 430) indicates that more than 7,000 Nassau troops were in
the field at Waterloo. It seems clear that Wellington was subsidizing only a part of each
German prince’s army.
                                          338
                                   The Final Coalition


coalition over Napoleon. The original strategy, developed by the
allies in the spring of 1815, called for the creation of an almost
unbroken line of troops stretching from Flanders along the Rhine,
and ending in northern Italy. The extreme right of this line was to
be held by Wellington, and by Bliicher’s 113,000 Prussians.
Russia’s army was to take position along the lower Rhine and
connect with the Austrians who were to hold the southern sector.
The Russians and Austrians moved so slowly that Wellington
despaired of seeing them on the Rhine until mid-June.””
   When Napoleon led his army into Belgium at first light on the
morning of June 15, only Wellington and Bliicher occupied the
positions assigned them in the allies’ plan. So it was that the full
fury of Waterloo fell on the Prussians and the conglomerate force
of British, Dutch, Belgian, and German units under Wellington’s
command. Of the total allied manpower, only about one fifth was
directly involved in the victory gained at Waterloo on June 18.
The Napoleonic menace crumbled so rapidly in the wake of that
engagement     that the larger part of the allied armies never
encountered the enemy in serious action. For Austria’s forces, the
high point of the war came a month before with their capture of
Naples. The Tsar’s 200,000 troops did not cross the Rhine until
after Waterloo had been fought, and their march on Paris was
hardly more than a mopping-up operation. /®
   The ease with which the resurrected Napoleonic Empire had
been blasted to pieces contrasted sharply with the huge expense
imposed on Britain to accomplish it. Nor did the expense end
when Napoleon was at last conveyed to the security of St. Helena.
Britain’s treaties bound her to continue monthly subsidy pay-
ments to the allies until the conclusion of a peace treaty with
France. Castlereagh reached Paris early in June, but the negotia-
tion proved so difficult that a formal convention was not signed
until the following November. The allies were thus entitled to
subsidies for each of the five months which followed the Battle of
Waterloo. Britain’s subsidy debt was therefore much larger than it
had   been       in     1814.    As     finally    settled,      it amounted          to nearly
£7,000,000 for a war which had lasted one hundred days.’?
 77. Wellington to H. Wellesley, June 2, 1815, Dispatches of Wellington, XII, 438.
 78. Lobanov-Rostovsky, Russia and Europe, pp. 352-353.
 79. Subsidies    due    the allies for 1815   were    as follows:   Austria, £1,668,889;   Russia,
£2,083,334;   Prussia,    £1,338,889;    Minor     Powers,   £1,723,727.    See   Herries   Subsidy
Account, AO 3/1088.
                                                 339
                                       1814-1515


  Liverpool and Vansittart watched with horror as the subsidy bill
steadily mounted throughout the summer and autumn of 1815.
Obviously nothing could be done about those subsidies which
would end only with the conclusion of a French peace treaty, but
certain other economies might be made. The 20,000 Spanish
soldiers hired by Henry Wellesley in July could certainly be
eliminated.8° Nor was there any need for the second Russian army
Castlereagh had hired; their march to the west should be halted at
once. Vansittart urged such steps on the foreign secretary early in
July adding the hope that the latter was ‘sufficiently aware of the
necessity of all practicable economy, and of reducing our expenses
within the narrowest limits which can be consistent with vigorous
and successful exertion.’®! Caught in the tangle of peace negotia-
tions at Paris, Castlereagh was annoyed by the chancellor’s lecture
on economy. Of course he would spare the Treasury useless
expense! The progress of the second Russian army had already
been halted and he had agreed to pay the Tsar £417,666 as a final
settlement for their services.8? So far as the Spanish subsidy was
concerned, Vansittart must surely know that nothing was due
Madrid since the war had ended before these troops reached the
French frontier.®3
   For reasons of policy Castlereagh strongly objected to the
Cabinet’s desire to escape its obligation to the German princes
with whom Wellington had concluded subsidy treaties. Five such
treaties had been signed prior to Waterloo, but many other
German states had their armies on the road to Flanders before that
battle had been fought and won. Were they not entitled to British
help, even though no formal treaties had been concluded with
them by that time? Wellington believed that they could not be
turned away empty-handed. To deny to some what others had
obtained only because they had arranged pacts with Britain before
June 18 would generate a vast amount of ill will. Furthermore, it
was not until some weeks after the battle that it became clear that

  80. Vansittart   to Castlereagh,   August   17, 1815, Correspondence   of Castlereagh,   X,
482.
  81. Vansittart to Castlereagh, July 7, 1815, ibid., X, 418.
  82. Provision for this was made in Castlereagh’s treaty with Russia, October 4, 1815,
FO 93/81 (25). See also Castlereagh’s letter to Liverpool, October 5, 1815, FO 92/28.
  83. Castlereagh to Vansittart, August 10, 1815, Correspondence of Castlereagh, X,
473-475.


                                              340
                               The Final Coalition


the war was in fact over. Relying on the support which the
Cabinet had always given him, the British field marshal continued
signing    treaties   with   the German        states during     the weeks      which
followed Waterloo. When pressed for an explanation of his
conduct, he replied by pointing out that as all the princes “have
performed the Stipulations of the Treaty of Accession to the
General Alliance, I conclude it is not the Intention of the
Government to deprive them of what others have got, and what
they have had reason to expect.’’®4 The form of all these treaties
was virtually the same: in return for a specified number of troops,
Britain would pay an annual subsidy (to begin with April 1815)
amounting to £11 2s for each man. Payments would be made
monthly with one extra month’s subsidy given as “return money”’
following the conclusion of peace with France.®°
  The Cabinet vigorously opposed this idea that Britain should
maintain an indiscriminate system of outdoor relief for the benefit
of German princes. Castlereagh immediately came to Wellington’s
defense, however. At Paris many of the German rulers were
already claiming bits and pieces of France as prizes of war.
Castlereagh would find it easier to divert them from such looting if
he could promise them subsidy money. For Britain to snap shut
her purse in the face of hungry German princelings might prove
bad policy. But there was a still more pressing reason why London
should indulge them in their passion for money, as the foreign
secretary explained to Liverpool: “If we were to cancel these
Arrangements, through the Effect of which alone we can establish
our own pretensions of being considered as a Power serving with
one hundred and fifty thousand men, we might possibly prejudice
our own Claims to serve as a great Power but, at all events, should
produce a great Clamour against us in Germany, which, altho’ in
the first instance confined to the smaller Powers, would soon drive
the greater to an intervention.’ The Cabinet might find it easier to
be generous since France had agreed to pay reparations to the
major allies. Castlereagh had all along insisted on Britain’s right to
share in such reparations, a demand which “‘has been acceded to in
consideration of our Subsidiary Efforts, and the effect will be that

  84. Wellington to Castlereagh, August 17, 1815, FO 92/15.
   85. The texts of twenty-five of these treaties concluded by Wellington are printed in
British Foreign and State Papers, Il, 484-516.


                                         341
                                         1814-1515


we shall take one fifth of whatever France pays.’ There were
times when considerations of economy must yield to those of
policy. The foreign secretary gently chided Vansittart on this
point: ““As I have no doubt... that you have not more money
than you know what to do with, you may rely upon my saving as
much for you as I possibly can, consistent with the military
attitude which the Confederacy must still assume, in order to
secure and consolidate the peace they have so successfully
conquered.”8’ These arguments finally prevailed, and Wellington
was allowed to continue signing subsidy agreements with the
German states which had put their armies into motion prior to
Waterloo. The last of such treaties, that with Holstein, was signed
on September 5, 1815. Britain’s generosity involved her in only a
modest expense. All these treaties expired in November 1815 with
the conclusion of the French peace treaty. The Treasury wasted
no time in settling accounts with the German states; by February
1816 they had received the £1,723,727 owed them.®8
  Management of subsidy remittances and British military ex-
penses was again entrusted to Commissary-in-Chief Herries, who
returned to the Continent within a month after Waterloo.
Following the practice of the previous year, he made payments to
the allies both in London and on the Continent where credit was
now   available for his use. Meanwhile, the Treasury had arranged to
finance the nation’s war effort by offering for sale £30,000,000 in 3
percent bonds. The entire loan was allocated to the British banks
of Baring Brothers and Smith, Payne and Smiths who, in turn, put
up a large part of the issue for sale in Hamburg, Amsterdam,
Vienna, Basel, Frankfort, and St. Petersburg. Herries was able to
draw on the proceeds of the sale at these six continental cities for
the payment of subsidies. So well did the arrangement work that
only £1,000,000 had to be sent him from England to close all
subsidy accounts with the allies.8? In April 1816 Herries made the

  86. Castlereagh to Liverpool, August 24, 1815, FO 92/24.
  87. Castlereagh to Vansittart, August 10, 1815, Correspondence            of Castlereagh,   X,
475.
  88. Statement of Sums paid on Account of Subsidies to Minor                  Powers,   under
Engagements made by the Duke of Wellington, ibid., XI, 172.
  89. Ralph   W.   Hidy,   The   House    of Baring   in American   Trade    and   Finance...
(Cambridge, Mass., 1949), p. 53; Jenks, British Capital, p. 33.
                                The Final Coalition


final remittance of subsidy money under the treaties of 1815.
Six years later he sent the Lords of the Treasury his official
statement of all payments made to the allies, thereby marking the
end of that long history of subsidization which began in 1793.
   Problems continued to arise relating to subsidies even after
Herries’ account had been sent the Treasury. In 1821 Lord
Liverpool’s government decided to insist that Austria repay her
two wartime loans. Pitt had persuaded Parliament to guarantee an
Austrian loan for £4,600,000 in 1795, and two years later a
similar endorsement was made to promote a new Hapsburg loan of
£1,620,000. Austria abandoned all responsibility for repayment of
these loans in 1797 and, thereafter, they became a charge on the
British Treasury. Pitt and his successors quietly accepted the fact
that they must patiently bear the expense, and the question of
Austria’s repayment appears never to have been raised between
London and Vienna during the last ten years of the war. Matters
would doubtless have remained this way had not opposition
leaders forced Liverpool to act in 1821. By that time, the original
Hapsburg loans of £6,220,000 had involved Britain in a debt of
£23,515,890, thanks to accumulated interest. The manner in
which Castlereagh, and later Canning, pressed Vienna for a
settlement of the debt did them little credit. Indeed, the game was
hardly worth the candle. The whole business was finally disposed
ofinNovember 1823, when Britain accepted an Austrian payment
of £2,500,000 in cash as a full and final settlement of the loans.
This represented a liquidation of the debt at a rate of about 10
percent.?!
  In 1831     the future of the Russian-Dutch Loan Convention,
signed by Castlereagh sixteen years before, was reopened. By that
treaty, Britain and Holland had promised to repay half of Russia’s
debt with Dutch bankers, but this obligation would be modified
to Russia’s disadvantage if Belgium were ever separated from
Holland. When the Belgian revolt occurred in 1830, a different

  90. Herries Account   (AO 3/1088) shows a final payment to Prussia of £9,022 in 1820.
Since no explanation is given, this presumably was to settle some claim arising out of the
past.
  91. The question has been examined by Irby C. Nichols, “Britain and the Austrian War
Debt, 1821-1823,” Historian, 20 (1958), 328-346. See also Helleiner, Imperial Loans,
pp. 147-179.



                                           343
                                   1814-1815

view of British interests prevailed. Lord Palmerston argued that it
was now to Britain’s advantage to promote an independent and
neutral Belgian state. To win Russia’s approval for this, the foreign
secretary proposed that Britain continue to meet her obligations
under the Loan Convention, regardless of the separation of
Belgium. A treaty embodying this agreement was concluded
between Russia and Britain in November           1831.72 Even the
outbreak of the Crimean War in 1854 did not interrupt the annual
British payments toward the reduction of her enemy’s debt.
Payments were made each year until 1891, by which time the
balance of Britain’s obligation had been reduced to £516,528. In
that year, an act of Parliament made arrangements for wiping out
that balance by 1906.7? Under the advancing shadow of the World
War, the British government finally closed the subsidy and loan
accounts of the Napoleonic period.

 92. Charles K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Palmerston (London, 1951), 1, 150-151.
 OBn S4yV ict. 26.




                                       344
                                     XV
                                CONCLUSION




Britain's payment     of subsidies to her war partners was a
time-honored practice long before the contest with Revolutionary
France broke out in 1793. The hiring of German mercenaries
began in the reign of Edward III and became so common that it
has been characterized as “‘perhaps, the most long-lived feature of
British foreign policy.”! Chatham’s subsidization of Frederick the
Great was still remembered in 1794 when his son used it as a
precedent to justify his own Prussian subsidy treaty. Between
 1793 and 1815 Britain poured out her treasure in an ever
increasing flow to aid her allies. By the end of the war, she had
given them £65,830,228. Almost half this amount was spent
during the last five years of the war, and in 1815 more than thirty
European powers, great and small, shared Britain’s bounty. Not
until the World War, almost exactly a century later, would Europe
again witness such an example of wartime aid.
   The memory of Britain’s massive financial contribution to
victory survived long after Napoleon ceased to menace Europe.
Looking back on that heroic period from the vantage point of the
late nineteenth century, English writers took a certain pride in the
fact that their country had financed Europe’s deliverance from the
Napoleonic yoke.” Almost inevitably, they applied to the entire
war period that characteristic of feverish British spending which
marked its final and most dramatic phase. Napoleon’s defenders
contributed to the growing legend by their frequent references to
‘*Pitt’s gold’ offered as a bribe to the continental powers to join
 1. Camb. Hist. Brit. For. Pol., 1, 3.
 2. See, for example, Sydney Buxton, Finance and Politics, |, 6-7.


                                         345
                           Guineas and Gunpowder

the coalitions. Even today, the myth of Pitt, the bountiful
paymaster of Europe, has been uncritically accepted by students
who refer to subsidy treaties which, in fact, never existed.? More
important than these errors, the legend of “Pitt’s gold” has created
a false image which conceals the evolutionary nature of Britain’s
subsidy policy. Far from meekly accepting the role of financier to
the coalitions, Pitt shunned          it for as long as he was able. But the
character of the war changed, forcing Britain’s subsidy policy to
change with it. By 1815 that policy was very different in character
and scope from what it had been twenty-two years before.
  Within a few weeks after the outbreak of hostilities in 1793,
Britain started to hire troops from the German princes in order to
enlarge her own army in the Low Countries. The practice was so
well established that even Pitt’s opponents raised no objection.
For nearly a year after the war began, the prime minister offered
no help to his country’s major allies. The contest with France was
not likely to last long and he was hardly inclined to be prodigal
with the nation’s wealth, which he had guarded so carefully as its
peacetime leader. In this mood, he rejected Russia’s demand for a
subsidy in 1793, even though he thereby provided Catherine the
Great with an excuse to remain out of the war.
  Austria and Prussia had struggled with France for nearly a year
before Britain joined them, and by the end of 1793 they were
showing unmistakable symptoms of financial exhaustion. Prussia
finally annnounced that the allies must subsidize her if they
wished her to remain in the coalition. Financial distress only
partly accounts for this resort to blackmail. Attracted by the
possibility of new territorial gains in Poland, she wanted to be paid
to continue what, so far, had been a profitless war with France.
For a time Pitt tried to persuade all the major allies to join in
helping Prussia, but in the end he was faced with a grim choice:
   3. A case in point is the volume of the Oxford History of England (published in 1960)
dealing with the eighteenth century (Watson, Reign of George III, p. 364) which has this
to say of the formation of the First Coalition: “Pitt still supposed nevertheless that his
r6le in Europe would be that of paymaster. In March 1793 a subsidy treaty was
negotiated with Russia. By the end of August Britain had agreed to finance Austria,
Prussia, Sardinia, Hesse-Cassel, Spain, and Naples, in war on France.” In fact, no subsidy
treaty was concluded with Russia until 1798, while only two of the other powers
(Sardinia and Hesse-Cassel) received British money during the period mentioned. The
same error appeared earlier in Rose, Pitt and the Great War, p. 123. See also the
treatment of Pitt’s subsidy policy in the popular textbook, W. E. Lunt, History of
England, 4th ed. (New York, 1957), p. 601.


                                          346
                             Conclusion


Britain herself must either pay Frederick William or allow him to
carry out his threat. There was no alternative but to yield to his
demands. The Prussian subsidy treaty of 1794 was not difficult for
Pitt to defend. Thanks to Britain’s advanced economy, her
population (twice that of Prussia) was vastly more productive than
those of her allies. The colonial campaigns, the war in Europe, and
the requirements of the navy were already drawing heavily on her
manpower supply. More than 200,000 of her people would serve
in the navy and with the army in Europe during the coming year.
Any greater diversion of her population into military service might
seriously diminish the nation’s ability to create wealth. Thus, as in
the case of hiring mercenaries, it was economically wiser for
Britain to subsidize 62,400 Prussians than to put that many of her
own people under arms. The weak point in this argument was its
failure to consider whether Prussia was as anxious to fight the
French as Britain was to have her do so. Even when given
subsidies, Prussia could not resist the lure of Polish lands and,
within a year, she abandoned the coalition to give her undivided
attention to the final partition of that unfortunate country. This
was not the last time that British leaders discovered that subsidies,
no matter how freely given, could not buy an ally’s dedication to
the cause.
   Britain, no less than her allies, had national interests to promote
in the war and they profoundly influenced her use of subsidies
during the first two coalitions. Pitt had been forced into war by
France’s attack on the Low Countries, and for the remainder of
his life the liberation of Holland was one of his most important
goals. Of the German allies, only Prussia had a similar interest in
the fate of the Low Countries. Geography, territorial ambition,
and dynastic connection with the House of Orange account for
this concern, whereas Austria had long wished to exchange
Belgium for Bavaria and thereby consolidate her holdings. One of
the most consistent features of Pitt’s war policy was his desire to
form a military combination with Prussia and Russia in order to
drive the French from Holland. By 1798 Paul I of Russia was
ready to support such a plan, provided Britain financed his
military operations. To bring Prussia to the same point, Pitt
launched five missions to Berlin between 1795 and 1805 with
attractive offers of money and territorial rewards in the west.

                                 347
                     Guineas and Gunpowder


Prussia rejected each of these offers because the chances of a
successful military intervention in the Low Countries were too
slim to justify her abandoning the profitable policy of neutrality
she had followed since the Peace of Basel.
  Pitt’s failure to give the early coalitions the northern focus he so
much wanted left him no choice but to fall back on _ his
partnership with Austria as the only means of carrying on the war.
By 1795, however, the Empire’s finances were so shaky that
Britain had either to provide support or allow her to follow
Prussia’s example and make peace with the enemy. Instead of
subsidizing    Austria,  the Cabinet      decided   to guarantee   the
£4,600,000 loan she was negotiating in England. Why a loan
guarantee rather than a subsidy? No positive answer can be given,
but several considerations probably account for Britain’s decision.
For more than a year, Austria had tried to borrow money in
London, but the affair languish2d. A British guarantee would bring
the business to a quick and successful conclusion. So far, Pitt’s
subsidization had been on a modest scale and he was in no
position to pay his ally the several million pounds she required. If
Vienna met the annual payments on the loan Britain had
guaranteed, the Treasury would not have to pay anything. Even if
she defaulted, as Pitt half expected, the annual charges which
Britain would thereafter be obliged to meet amounted to only
about £350,000. From the short-term view, and this was the view
which governed Pitt’s finance program during the first years of the
war, the annual expenditure of £350,000 was less troublesome
than the payment of £4,600,000 in subsidies at one time.
  The following year, when Austria again appealed to Britain for
help, the Cabinet advanced money to her which she was expected
to repay from a second loan. Even with this support Austria was
overwhelmed on the battlefield, and in 1797 she withdrew from
the war and reneged on all her financial obligations to Britain. She
not only refused to meet the annual payments on her original
loan, but stubbornly withheld ratification of her 1797 loan
convention with Britain. The quarrel which followed, ostensibly
financial in origin, went far beyond that issue. For years, Vienna
had resented London’s preferential treatment of Prussia, her
arch-rival. Instead of giving subsidies, such as those she had
provided for Prussia in 1794, Britain never did more for Vienna

                                348
                             Conclusion


than help her borrow money in London at what the Hofburg
regarded as an outrageously high interest rate. The British Cabinet,
for its part, was sorely distressed by Vienna’s indifference to the
fate of the Low Countries (a matter of prime importance to
Britain) and by her regrettable habit of engaging in separate
negotiations with the enemy. Austria’s peace treaty with France in
 1797 confirmed Pitt’s darkest suspicions: in return for sur-
rendering Belgium, Austria was to annex Venetia.
   Anglo-Austrian antagonism greatly weakened the Second Coali-
tion and led Britain to deny the Hofburg any financial aid, even
though both powers were at war with France. Pitt continued to
dream of a British-Prussian-Russian alliance, financed by subsidies,
which would liberate Holland. The Tsar’s abrupt withdrawal from
the war in 1799 destroyed that dream and forced Britain to come
to terms with Vienna in a last-minute effort to keep the coalition
alive. Once again Pitt proposed to advance money on still another
Imperial loan to be floated in London when the war ended. The
collapse of the Hapsburg war effort in the summer of 1800 put an
end to this plan as well as to the coalition. Henceforth, all British
aid to the major allies was given as an outright subsidy and the
Imperial loans of 1795 and 1797 were remembered as horrible
mistakes, never to be repeated.
   The year 1804 marked a major turning point in the development
of Britain’s subsidy policy. Before that time, Britain had used
subsidies as an emergency measure to keep the coalitions alive. Pitt
had made far more attractive offers to Prussia than to Austria in
keeping with his wish to create a northern league which would
release Holland from France’s grip. By 1804 France had made
good on her claim to supremacy in western Europe. If Britain
hoped to defeat the enemy, and that was now the all-important
goal, she must finance any nation ready to join her in the work.
The time had gone by for the selective subsidization she had
previously practiced.
   For these reasons, Pitt followed a very different subsidy policy
in the formation of the Third Coalition. The more realistic war
finance program he had introduced (the British national revenue
more than doubled between 1799 and 1804) now made it possible
for him to offer money with a free hand to any power ready to
take arms against Napoleon. Specifically, he was ready to pay

                                 349
                      Guineas and Gunpowder


£1,250,000 a year for each 100,000 soldiers Russia, Austria, and
Prussia sent into battle. This offer, the most generous Britain had
ever made, did nothing to create the war league Pitt so desperately
wanted. The interests of the great powers diverged wildly in 1805:
Britain was anxious to step up the war, Russia preferred a
negotiated settlement with France, while Austria and Prussia
wanted nothing more than to be left alone. Napoleon’s aggression
in Italy, not the promise of British subsidies, breathed life into the
Third Coalition. Pitt’s desire to bring Prussia into the league
inspired his final diplomatic venture: the sending of Harrowby to
Berlin with a glittering promise of money and land to attract
Frederick William and his ministers. Whatever basis exists in fact
for the legend of Pitt the tempter is to be found in his hot pursuit
of Prussia. In the end Prussia yielded her favor to France in
exchange for Hanover, a territorial bribe which Napoleon (unlike
Pitt) was able to deliver—and then take back.
  The collapse of the Third Coalition ended all chance of another
continental union for five years. Britain was too isolated to
support Prussia’s impulsive uprising in 1806 and that of Austria
three years later. In 1808, however, the Spanish and Portuguese
took arms against their oppressor and instinctively turned to
Britain for money, arms, and military help. Under Canning’s
leadership the government responded to these appeals in a heroic
manner. For the first time the French imperium was challenged
not by crowned heads but by a people driven on by a national
fervor as dynamic as anything seen in the early stages of the
French Revolution. A great flood of British specie and war
materials was let loose to support the Peninsular resistance
movement. Under relentless pressure from Downing Street the
Ordnance Department hastened its retooling in order to meet the
insurgents’ demand for arms. Muskets, carbines, pistols, cartridges,
flints, accoutrements, cannon, swords, drums, and medicines,
along with hundreds of other items, were sent in huge quantities
to outfit the armies which Spain and Portugal were creating. Never
before had British aid been given on such a scale in both money
and muskets. This was only the beginning. In the years to come,
Britian would have to send all her allies guns as well as gold since
both were desperately needed.
                            Conclusion


   The war in the Peninsula began with three allied armies in the
field, each directed by its own government. Britain had promised
to supply the Portuguese and Spanish forces and, at the same time,
send money to their governments. Almost at once it became clear
that the French could be defeated only if the three allied forces
were directed by a central authority. Wellington’s appointment as
generalissimo of the Portuguese and Spanish accomplished nothing
since the title was an empty one. By 1811 the British commander
was sure that centralized control over the armies was to be
obtained in only one way: the entire subsidy for Portugal and
Spain must be in his hands so that he might use it to feed, supply,
and pay the Iberian units under his direction. London approved
this plan, and by the time the war reached its climax in 1813,
almost the entire British subsidy was at Wellington’s disposal.
Thus, British aid to Portugal and Spain, amounting to about
£3,000,000 a year, bought Wellington the service ofa force larger
than that sent him by his own government. In effect the subsidy
became a direct military aid administered by Britain’s commander
in the Peninsula. For the first time since 1793, London could be
sure that all her subsidy money was going for strictly military
purposes.
  By 1812 Napoleon’s arrogant ambition was steadily forcing the
great powers into a war for survival which their economies were
hardly able to support. In the Peace of Tilsit (1807), the
conquering Emperor of the French had stripped Prussia of nearly
half her land and people, at the same time requiring that she pay
the expenses of his army of occupation. The failure of Austria’s
ill-timed War of Liberation in 1809 placed her too at Napoleon’s
mercy. To gain peace, the Hofburg was forced to part with some
of its most valuable possessions and submit to a crushing
indemnity. Russia alone was spared the blows which had beaten
Prussia and Austria to their knees, but in 1812 the French invasion
brought death and devastation to the richest part of the Tsar’s
domain. The French imperium nearly shattered the war-making
capacity of the great powers, but its terror strengthened their will
to survival.
  The help which Napoleon’s enemies so desperately needed in
1812-1814 could only come from the resources of Britain’s


                                Sil
                          Guineas and Gunpowder


expanding economy. Secure in her island and blessed with a
mighty navy which gave her access to the markets of the world,
Great Britain found increased strength in the years which brought
invasion and humiliation to the continental states. Despite
occasional setbacks, such as the financial crisis of 1810, the
progress of her economy was unmistakable. With the collapse of
the Continental System in 1812, Britain’s overseas trade leaped
forward and thereby enabled Castlereagh to help his country’s
allies at the time they most required it. The increasing productiv-
ity of the nation’s economy likewise furnished the British
government with a solid base for its war finance program; between
1806 and 1816 a population of less than fourteen million people
paid nearly £142,000,000 in income taxes alone.* Britain had
never been able to give her allies the will to fight France, but by
 1813 the great powers had found that essential ingredient within
themselves. What they now required of Britain was what she could
send them: the money and arms needed to transform that will into
victory over their common enemy.
   The certainty of receiving British aid encouraged the Rising of
the Nations, even though it did not inspire it. Thanks to the
increased efficiency of the Ordnance service, London was able to
ship almost unlimited quantities of arms to the Russians, Swedes,
Austrians, and Prussians during 1813-1814. So extreme were their
demands for guineas and gunpowder that, with all her wealth and
resources, Britain still had to strain every muscle to comply.
Nearly one million muskets and £7,500,000 in subsidies went to
the allies during 1813. Little wonder that Castlereagh and the
harassed chancellor of the exchequer, Vansittart, hoped that
““federative paper” might partly substitute for the cash Prussia and
Russia insisted they must have.
   Never before the summer of 1813 had Britain poured out such
lavish quantities of money and weapons to support the war against
France. She did so without attaching conditions to her gifts.
Castlereagh deplored the fact that the northern allies ignored their
benefactor’s interests in their sporadic peace talks with France,
but he never faltered in sending them the means to wage war.
 4. Arthur   Hope-Jones, Income   Tax in the Napoleonic   Wars (Cambridge,   1939), pp.
124-125.
                             Conclusion


Since the purpose of this aid was to overthrow Napoleon, Britain
did well to overlook the allies’ insensitivity to her wishes. The
refusal of Spain, Russia, and Austria to liberalize their tariff
policies irritated Downing Street, but not to the point of stopping
the subsidies. Only Bernadotte’s eccentric behavior drove Castle-
reagh past the point of endurance. Perhaps it was as well that his
threat to end the Swedish Prince’s subsidy was never carried out.
   Massive British subsidization had become such an accepted
policy that, by the time Castlereagh went to the Continent in
 1814, the only question remaining was how the £5,000,000 aid
for the year was to be apportioned among the allies. The foreign
secretary proposed an equal division among Russia, Austria, and
Prussia on the assumption that each of them would maintain at
least 150,000 effective troops under arms. This formula was
incorporated both in the Chaumont treaty (1814) and that
negotiated with the allies following Napoleon’s return from Elba
in 1815. By this device, Castlereagh may have hoped to end the
allies’ rivalry and, at the same time, respect his own theory of the
equality of the great powers, a theory fundamental to his whole
idea of a concert of Europe. The hard fact was that the military
strength of the great powers varied considerably. With the largest
army in the field, Russia naturally opposed the principle of
subsidy-equality and, in effect, argued for the strict application of
Pitt’s 1805 formula which apportioned subsidies in direct propor-
tion to the size of the allied armies. Castlereagh was finally obliged
to make “adjustments” so that Russia did indeed receive the
largest share of British aid during the closing years of the war.
   With the arrival of peace, Britain still found her money a useful
means     to attain diplomatic goals. Portugal and Spain were
persuaded to limit the slave trade in return for British gold.
Castlereagh also won trade concessions from Russia as well as her
consent to the creation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands by that
curious financial bargain known as the Russian-Dutch loan, a
bargain which imposed a small burden on British taxpayers until
1906.
   The liberalization of Britain’s subsidy policy naturally resulted
in a greatly increased outlay for foreign aid between 1793 and
1815. Pitt’s coalitions (1793-1807) never cost the British Treasury
                          Guineas and Gunpowder


more than £2,600,000 a year in subsidies.» Between the opening
of the Peninsular War in 1808 and the Rising of the Nations five
years later, British aid to the allies (chiefly Portugal and Spain)
fluctuated between £2,600,000 and £4,400,000 a year. Even this
increase was modest when compared to the final three years of the
contest culminating in Waterloo when annual British subsidy
payments never fell below £7,500,000. An all-time high was
reached in 1814 when more than £10,000,000 was spent in
subsidies to the allies. The climactic campaigns of 1814-1815,
involving less than ten months of actual combat, cost Britain
about £20,000,000 in subsidies alone. This equaled nearly one third
of the entire amount spent on subsidies and loans between 1793
and 1816.
   Impressive as these figures are, subsidies added proportionately
less to Britain’s total war costs than might be supposed.
Maintenance of the British army, navy, and ordnance between
 1793 and 1816 cost the government more than £830,000,000, yet
the total of all subsidies and loans for this period amounts to only
8 percent of the figure.© Most important, the government’s
increasing revenue returns kept pace with the expansion of the
subsidy program. In 1794 (the year of the Prussian subsidy)
payments to the allies amounted to about 14 percent of the
government’s revenue for the same year. In 1814 more than
£10,000,000 was paid in subsidies, but that still represented only
 14 percent of the government’s tax yield.
   Prior to the Peninsular War, the Cabinet relied heavily on
mercenaries and subsidized troops to meet its military commit-
ments on the Continent. Therefore it is hardly surprising to
discover that subsidy payments before 1808 generally exceed the
expenses of Britain’s national army in Europe. The sending of a
British force to the Peninsula dramatically reversed this condition.
Although foreign aid thereafter went soaring to new heights, it

  5. The Austrian Loan of £4,600,000, which Britain guaranteed in 1795 brought the
total of all foreign aid for that year to more than £5,000,000. Since this was a loan
guarantee, rather than a subsidy, it could be argued that the amount of the loan should
be excluded from the tabulation. Until 1797, that loan cost Britain nothing. The
liberalization of Pitt’s subsidy policy in 1804-1805 actually involved Britain in little
areas The Third Coalition did not last long enough to cost Britain much by way of
subsidies.
  6. Military costs determined on the basis of data in Pebrer, Taxation, p. 154.


                                        354
                            Conclusion


regularly fell below the amount Britain spent on her own military
operations.    Between   1808 and     1816 it cost Britain nearly
£80,000,000 (much of it in specie) to maintain Wellington’s army.
During this same period, all subsidy remittances amounted to only
about half that sum.
   Clearly, subsidies contributed less to Britain’s war burden
between 1793 and 1816 than their critics claimed. The British
taxpayer thoroughly detested paying foreign governments, a
prejudice which the antiwar party naturally exploited. How
important were subsidies in worsening the balance of payments
problem which troubled England during the final years of the war?
Unquestionably they made a bad situation worse. More to blame
than subsidies, however, was the very heavy expenditure of credit
and specie required to support the all-important campaigns which
Wellington carried on in the Peninsula.
   By means of subsidies, Britain hoped to enable her allies to carry
on a war program which was beyond their own strength. All the
early coalitions, however, lacked a community of interest among
the allies which kept victory out of reach. Britain’s own war goals
included the reduction of France’s power in Europe, the liberation
of Holland, and the acquisition of some of the enemy’s colonies—
what Pitt once called “‘a little mixture of indemnification.” Only
by defeating France on the battlefields of Europe could Britain
hope to achieve the first two of these goals. As an island power
with only half the population of her antagonist, she depended on
coalitions to overthrow the common enemy.
   But what of the interests of the continental powers on whom
Britain relied—powers whose lands lay exposed to enemy attack?
From the short-term view, Prussia’s withdrawal from the war in
 1795 was not entirely unjustified. Since taking up arms three years
before, the only territorial gains she had made were in the east,
and by 1795 even these were threatened by Russia and Austria.
The Treaty of Basel permitted Prussia to disentangle herself from
the French war and thereafter protect her interests and resources.
Britain could not really expect Austria to fight to the bitter end to
liberate the Low Countries when Vienna yearned for territorial
rewards in Italy and eastern Europe. Austria’s peace treaty with
France in 1797 left the enemy in a position of great strength, but
it was not entirely without honor and profit for the Hofburg. The

                                3.55
                     Guineas and Gunpowder


acquisition of Venetia (which Austria very much wanted) was
respectable compensation for her surrender of the Austrian
Netherlands (which she did not want). So far as Russia was
concerned, the mainspring of her military intervention between
1798 and 1805 was fear that French imperialism threatened her
interest in eastern Europe.
  France’s military prowess won her such a position of strength in
Europe by 1809 that Russia and Austria found it best to accept
peaceful coexistence with her. Prussia had already been reduced to
the condition of a French dependency in return for her challenge
to Napoleon’s power in 1806. Only in the Peninsula was there a
real show of resistance, and Britain showered that area with
money, arms, and troops in order to check the French. The money
was well spent for it enabled the Spanish and Portuguese
nationalists to accomplish what they burned to do: drive the
invader from their land. British foreign aid never yielded a better
return than that spent in the Peninsula.
   Napoleon’s reckless aggression toward the powers he once had
cowed resulted in a major change in the international scene by
1812. Russia had now to fight for her survival, and even
Bernadotte was ready to defy his former leader in the hope of
winning Norway as a reward for his daring. After a brief period of
indecision, Prussia declared for the new coalition and fought to
wipe out the shame of Jena.
   Generously supported though this union was with British money
and guns, it was actually weaker than it appeared. Such unity as it
had came not from British help, but from Napoleon‘s refusal to
accept any settlement of the issues at stake between France and
her enemies. The failure of the 1813 peace talks strengthened the
Russo-Prussian alliance and even brought Austria into the ranks of
the confederacy. As late as the winter of 1813-1814, Napoleon
still might have separated the continental powers from their
British paymaster. By the spring of 1814, however, it was too late.
At Chaumont, Castlereagh at last created that union of the great
powers which Pitt and Grenville had vainly tried to call into being.
Animated by a singleness of purpose and financed by Britain’s
great wealth, the coalition required only a month to drive
Napoleon from France. A year later, at Waterloo, it crushed all
efforts to resurrect that power which too long had disturbed the
peace of Europe.
                                 356
  APPENDIX



BIBLIOGRAPHY



   INDEX




      Sou
                           Appendix



       TABLE       OF   (EVENTS     IN      PRENCH   HISTORY
                               1789-1815



1789   July 14          Fall of the Bastille
1791   Sept. 3          Adoption of the new French
                        Constitution
Wee    Feb. 7           Austro-Prussian alliance against
                        France
       April 20         France declares war against Austria
       July 27          Brunswick Manifesto
       Sept. 20         Battle of Valmy
1793   Jan. 21          Louis XVI executed
       Feb. 1           France declares war against Britain
                        and Holland
       March            Revolt breaks out in the Vendée
       April 6          Formation of the Committee of Public
                        Safety
       June 2           Fall of the Girondins
       August           Levee-en-masse decreed
       Aug.-Dec.        Touion occupied by the allies
1794   July 27          Fall of Robespierre
       Dec. 27          French armies invade Holland
L795   April 5          Treaty of Basel with Prussia
       June-July        British-emigré invasion at Quiberon
       August 22        New Constitution adopted
       Ver              Belgium annexed to France
       Nov. 3           Directory installed
L796   March            Suppression of revolt in the Vendée and
                        Brittany
       Aug. 19          France allies with Spain
       Dec. 16          French invasion fleet sails for Ireland
                                   Bye) )
                           Appendix


Oi     eeClee       Mantua surrenders to Napoleon
         July 9     Cisalpine Republic formed
         Sept. 4    Coup d’état of 18 Fructidor
         Octe Ik/   Treaty of Campo Formio with Austria
         Dec. 16    Opening of the Congress of Rastadt
L7Ocer   eta s      Establishment of Roman Republic
         March      Formation of the Helvetic Republic
         May 19     Bonaparte sails from Toulon
         June 12    Malta surrenders to French
         Dec. 4     France declares war against Naples
1799     Nov. 9     Coup d’éetat of 18 Brumaire; overthrow
                    of Directory
        Dec. 24     Constitution of the Year VIII
1800    June 14     Battle of Marengo
1SO0 DS Feb. 9      Treaty of Lunéville
        July        Concordat with the Papacy
1802    March27     #Treaty of Amiens
        Aug. 2      Bonaparte becomes First Consul for life
        Aug.        Constitution of the Year X
1803.   May         Renewal of War with Britain
1804    March       French Civil Code
        March       Murder of the Duke of Enghien
        May 18      Formation of the French Empire
1805    May         Napoleon becomes King of Italy
        Octi21      Battle of Trafalgar
        DEcw2       Battle of Austerlitz
        Decl        Napoleon’s treaty with Prussia
1806    March       Joseph Bonaparte becomes King of Naples
        June        Louis Bonaparte becomes King of Holland
        July 12     Confederation of the Rhine organized
        Aug. 6      End of the Holy Roman Empire
        Nov. 21     Napoleon’s Berlin Decree
1807    July        Treaties of Tilsit with Russia and
                    Prussia
        Nov.        French armies occupy Portugal
        Dece 17     Napoleon’s Milan Decree
1808    May         Outbreak of revolt in Peninsula; Joseph
                    Bonaparte proclaimed King of Spain
        Oct.        Congress of Erfurt

                               360
                           Appendix


1809   May          Napoleon’s annexation of the Papal
                    States
       Oct. 14      Treaty of Schonbrunn with Austria
1810   April        Napoleon’s marriage to Marie Louise
       July 9       Holland annexed to French Empire
1812   June         Napoleon begins his invasion of Russia
       Sept. 7      Battle of Borodino
       Oct. 19      Retreat from Moscow
1813   Jan.         Concordat of Fontainebleau
       July-Aug.    Congress at Prague
       Aug. 12      Austria declares war against France
       Oct. 16-19   Battle of Leipzig
1814   Feb.-March   Congress at Chatillon
       April 11     Napoleon abdicates
       May 30       Treaty of Paris
       Sept.        Beginning of Congress of Vienna
1815   March 1      Napoleon lands at Cannes
       March 20     Napoleon enters Paris and restores
                    the Empire
       June 18      Battle of Waterloo
       June 22      Napoleon’s second abdication
       Oct.         Napoleon arrives at St. Helena
       Nov. 20      Second Treaty of Paris




                               361
            SUBSIDY         PAYMENTS             LO    THE      ALLIES
                                     1793-1816




Lists of subsidy payments for this period have already appeared in
a number of books.! With only one exception all of them
reproduce the data contained in a paper prepared by the Treasury
and presented to the House of Commons on May 6, 1822, entitled
“An Account of all Sums of Money paid or advanced by way of
Loan, Subsidy, or otherwise, to any Foreign State, from the Year
1792, up to the present time... ”? Notwithstanding the title’s
bold claim, the account is far from reliable. It contains errors and
in a number of cases is misleading. Payments are indicated for
years when Britain had no subsidy agreement with the power
receiving the money. Such remittances were to settle claims rising
out of past service.        For example,        £7,000 was paid Brunswick            in
1798 to satisfy her claims against Britain on the basis of their
treaty of four years before. Part of the money paid Hesse-Cassel in
1795 was the balance due her for supplying Britain with troops
during the American Revolution! The government would occa-
sionally pay subsidies without       first obtaining Parliamentary
approval, the money usually being drawn from the Secret Service
funds. The     1822 account discreetly neglects to note such
  1. For example, see the subsidy list given as Appendix A in Rosebery’s Pitt.
  2. This paper (Accounts and Papers, 1822, XX, Cmd. 293) was brought up to date and
reprinted in 1854. The only printed subsidy list I have encountered which differs from
the 1822 account is contained in Silberling, “Financial and Monetary Policy,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 38 (1923-1924), 227. Payments there are expressed in units of
£1,000,000 and they differ more from the 1822 account than those given in this
appendix.


                                          362
                             Appendix


payments. According to that paper the first Swedish subsidy began
in 1808, whereas, in fact, British money had been sent to Sweden
during each of the three previous years. Some omissions from the
1822 list are puzzling: in 1805 Austria received £1,000,000, of
which the official statement takes no notice.
  In compiling a list of subsidy payments for this appendix,
reliance has been placed on data derived from the following
sources:
  King’s Warrant Books (Ty. 52): This is particularly valuable for
subsidy payments made during the early years of the war.
   Declared Accounts in the Audit Office (AO 1): British officials
abroad (such as ministers) who made subsidy payments were
obliged to submit their accounts to the Audit Office.
   Minute Books of the Lords of the Treasury (Ty. 29): These
provide considerable information, especially relating to “‘federative
paper.”
   Army Ledgers of the Pay Master General’s Office (PMG 2): An
important source of information for a number of subsidies.
   Foreign Office Correspondence: Letters between the Foreign
Office and bankers handling subsidy money often provide data not
found elsewhere.
   John C. Herries Account (AO 3/1088): This superbly compiled
account is invaluable for the final years of the war. It fails,
however, to include payments made to the Peninsular powers.
   No claim for absolute accuracy is made for the list included in
this appendix. The confused manner in which subsidy accounts
were kept puts that degree of accuracy beyond the reach of even
the most devoted researcher with a lifetime to give to the work.
Furthermore, compiling a list of subsidy payments involves certain
problems which different students would solve in different ways.
For example, what year should be specified for a subsidy payment
authorized by the Treasury in December and remitted in January?
Payments in specie were always troublesome because the value
placed on the bullion by the Treasury was seldom that given it by
the recipient. Which valuation should be used? Should bankers’
commissions, together with freight costs and insurance on subsidy
bullion, be counted as part of the subsidy?
  Payments to Portugal and Spain between 1808 and 1815 are
especially difficult to deal with. British aid to those powers was

                                 363
                            Appendix


given in so many forms other than money that it is almost
impossible to express the total annual aid in pounds sterling. The
attempt would fail altogether were it not for the Audit Office
accounts dealing with those subsidies.
  The Spanish subsidy ledger, compiled in 1822, is entitled
‘Payments on Account of the Spanish Government” (AO 3/765)
and consists of forty-eight separate accounts each relating to some
aspect of the aid program. The expenditures of Wellington’s
commissary general, Sir Robert Kennedy, are given in eleven
separate accounts. Five accounts record payments made by the
British consul at Cadiz on the order of Sir Henry Wellesley.
Payments of British money to Generals Whittingham and Roche,
commanding units of the Spanish army, are itemized in nine
accounts. Many of these accounts represent payments made by
individuals over an extended period of time, and they must all be
coordinated year by year to determine the total annual payments
to Spain. The work involved was extensive and revealed some
problems which had to be solved. A few of the smaller accounts
simply show the sum of payments made over a period of years,
without specifying how much was paid each year. Since the
amount was small, I decided to omit it. On different grounds, I
also excluded Accounts No. 43 and 44 which set forth expendi-
tures by the Admiralty and the Victualling Department for the
benefit of Spain’s ships between 1808 and 1822. These payments
total £332,833 but had little to do with the war in the Peninsula.
  The Portuguese subsidy is easier to handle, thanks to the
existence of separate accounts for each year between 1808 and
1815. Unfortunately, this collection of ledgers (AO 3/746) lacks
that for the year 1811. Diligent search for the missing volume by
helpful staff members of the Public Record Office proved fruitless.
In this one case I have been obliged to rely on the data presented
in the 1822 account. I have done this with particular regret since
the subsidy figures given in that account for Spain and Portugal
during the Peninsular War are in almost every case simply
approximations or estimates.
   Subsidy figures given in the 1822 account appear below in a
parallel column for purposes of comparison.




                               364
                         SUBSIDY          PAYMENTS
                                    1793-1816



                                                       1822 Account

1793     Hanover                    £45255 51            £     492,650
         Hesse-Cassel                  190,622                 190,622
         Sardinia                      150,000                 150,000
1794     Baden                          20,196                  SISNET
         Brunswick                       17,659                none
         Hanover                       601,476                 Ss
         Hesse-Cassel                  418,132                 437,105
         Hesse-Darmstadt                Ol ae                  1025073
         Prussia                     1,200,000               1,226,495
         Sardinia                      200,000                 200,000
1795    Austrian Loan               4,600,000                4,600,000
        Baden                           6,794                     j
                                                                  Beriose
        Brunswick                      46,778                   LSieat
                                                                    Oa
        Hanover                       340,192                  478,347
        Hesse-Cassel                  317,492                  317,492
        Hesse-Darmstadt                85,224                   79,605
        Sardinia                       150,000                 150,000
1796    Brunswick                       53,645                  12,794
        Hanover                         S136                      none
        Hesse-Darmstadt                62,651                   20,075
1797    Austrian Loan               1,620,000                1,620,000
        Brunswick                        15.565                   qTeTK®)
        Hesse-Darmstadt                  19,249                 ayPOWs)
        Portugal”                        10,000                    none

 *Paid to agents in London for purchase of supplies.


                                         365
                                  Appendix


                                                       1822 Account


1798    Brunswick?                     7,000                     7,000
        Portugal”                    103,000                   120,013
1799     Hesse-Darmstadt               none                     4,812
        Portugal”                    S71,015                     none
        Russia                    1,386,070                   825,000
1800    Austria                     816,666                 1,066,666
        German Princes            1,066,667                   500,000
        Portugal”                    10,000                      none
        Russia                      S116                      545,494
1801    Austria                        none                   150,000
        German Princes              200,000                   200,000
        Hesse-Casselt                100,000                   100,000
        Portugal                     200,000                   200,113
1802    Hesse-Casselt                 33,451                    33,450
        Russiat                      200,000                   200,000
1803    Hanovert                     110.133                   117,628
        Russia?                       63,000                    63,000
        Portugal                        none                    31,647
1804    Hesse-Cassel!                 83,303                    83,303
1805    Austria                    1,000,000                      none
        Hanover                       26,190                    35,340
        Russia                       300,000                      none
        Sweden                       132,500                      none
1806    Austria‘                     500,000                   500,000
        Hanover                       76,865                    76,865
        Hesse-Cassel!                  18,982                    18,982
        Russiat                       50,000                      none
        Sweden                       311,400                      none
1807    Hanover                        19,899                   19,899
        Hesse-Cassel                  45,000                    45,000
        Prussia                      187,613                   180,000
         Russia!                     614,183                   614,182
         Sicily”                   1,094,002                      none
  1. £500,000 of this sum was due Russia from her 1805 treaty, while the balance was
the value of arms sent her in 1807.
  2. This is the total of all subsidies to Sicily between 1804 and 1807.
  *Paid to agents in London for purchase of supplies.
  +Payments for claims arising out of past service.


                                       366
                                     Appendix


                                                            1822 Account

         Sweden                          248,128                      none
1808     Portugal                        140,156                      none
         Sicily                          353,438                   300,000
         Spain                       i) 325,668                  1,497.873
         Sweden?                        094,023                  1,100,000
1809     Austria                        .187,500                   850,000
         Portugal                        3393569                      none
         Portuguese Loan                 600,000                   600,000
         Sicily                          343,636                   300,000
         Spain                          473,919                    5293039
         Sweden                          300,000                   300,000
1810     Portugal                    — 986,069                   Nees ieee!
         Sicily                          425,000                   425,000
         Spain                           Sey roy                   402,875
1811     Portugal                    —"832,168                   1,832,168
         Sicily                          275,000                   275,000
         Spain                           539,554                   220,689
1812     Portugal                    2,216,833                   2,167,831
         Sicily#                        628,532                    400,000
         Spain                       1,036,598                   1,000,000
         Sweden®                         500,000                   2485291
1813     Austria                        700,000                    500,000
         Prussia                        650,039                    650,039
         Portugal                    2,486,012                   1,644,062
         Russia®                     1,058,436                     657,500
         Sicily                         440,000                    600,000
         Spain                          877,200                  1,000,000
         Sweden                      [354,992                    1,320,000
1814     Austria                        pie eee)                 1,064,881
         Denmark                         IZ 817                    ay:
         Hanover                        525,000                    500,000
         Portugal                    1,345,082                   1,500,000


   3. Of this amount, £94,023 is the value of arms sent that year.
  4. Includes arms valued at £40,060.
  5. Includes arms and credit in London, totaling £300,000.
  6. Includes arms valued at £400,936.


                                          367
                                       Appendix


                                                                  1822 Account


         Prussia’                     1,438,643                        1,319:5128
         Russia®                      2,708,834                        2NGIIS2
         Sicily                         316,666                          316,666
         Spain                        1820932                            450,000
         Sweden                         800,000                          800,000
1815     Austria                      1,654,921                        15796,229
         Hanover                        270,940                          200,000
         Portugal                        54,915                          100,000
         Prussia?                     Prgiter els)                     2,294 222
         Russia!9                     2,000,033                        3,241,919
         Sicily                          359333                             none
         Spain                          147,295                          147,295
         Sweden                         608,048                          521,061
         Minor Powers 11              ee                               1,724,001
1816     Austria                        416,667                             none
         Russia                         OF2 222                        L,09G355
         Sicily                         117,748                          117,748
         Sweden                         422,766                          506,098

  7. Includes   approximately   £401,371   paid in ““federative   paper.”
  8. Includes   approximately   £783,000   paid in “federative    paper.”
  9. Includes   approximately   £469,728   paid in “federative    paper.”
 10. Includes   approximately   £888,922   paid in ““federative   paper.”
 11. These payments were completed in February 1816.




                                             368
 MILLIONS
OF POUNDS
                                                                                                                                                                                         =
      35

                                                                                                                                                                                         /
                                                                                                                                                                                     /
      30                                                              ae                                                                                                         ;
                                                               /                e     Ne                                 :    oN
                                                            th                                                                                        “

      25                                                                                                                                                  S              j
                                                        /                                                                                                       x!
                                                    /
          20                                    /
                                            /
                                                                                     ———————              Subsidy     payments
                                        /                                                                 Army      in Europe

          15                        /                                                —     »—      + —    Total     service costs



                               rf
                         "
          10




          2       1793          734         1795               1796          1797        i736      1799            soo              1801          1802               1803                1804




                   Comparison of Subsidy Payments, Cost of British Army in
                   Europe, and Total Costs of British Army, Navy, and
                   Ordnance, 1793-1803 and 1804-1816

~MILLIONS
OF POUNDS




     60                                                                                                                                        pe         aad                                   |
                              —_————_           —   — Subsidy      poyments

                                                        Army     in Europe                                                                 .                         \
                              —-        —   +—       Total       service   costs                                                     va


     50                                                                                                                  be                                                  \


                                                                              y ae                                                                                                   \
                                                                                     ”                       eh |



    40                                      cans            —sS                                                                                                                          \




     20




                        peace’
     fo}            —
                    —————-     ~                        =—-           —-             ——         —+———         r                ———                                                   r           4

                                                         1807          1808         1809        1810        1811             (8l2              1813           1814               1615           B16
           1804              1805       (806
                         BIBLIOGRAPHY




The British Foreign Office papers, deposited in the Public Record
Office, were the chief research source for this work. The bulk of
the collection consists of official correspondence between the
Foreign Office and British envoys. Students with little time to
spare are tempted to ignore the volumes of miscellaneous papers
which frequently interrupt the flow of this correspondence.
However, these volumes often contain valuable material along with
trivia. Nearly all treaties are in the Record Office; the protocol and
ratified forms are catalogued as FO 93 and FO 94 respectively. In
a few   cases,   the protocol   forms    escaped   classification   and   are
bound in with the regular Foreign Office correspondence. All
treaties cited were examined in both the protocol and ratified
forms, but in only one case was a difference discovered (Britain’s
treaty with Sweden of October 3, 1805).
  Information relating to subsidy payments is found in the
archives of the Treasury, the Audit Office, and the Pay Master
General’s Office. These sources are discussed in some detail in the
Appendix. Masters’ logs in the Admiralty papers reveal the
movement of naval vessels carrying specie abroad. The Foreign
Office dispatches provide information concerning the shipment of
war materials, but they should be supplemented by reference to
the War Office letters.
  Except for the Pitt papers (Chatham), private manuscript
collections yielded little more than was to be found in the Foreign
Office archives. Lord Cornwallis’ letters offer interesting sidelights
on his brief service with the allies’ military commission in
Germany in 1794. The collection of Lord Granville’s papers (the
Granville Leveson Gower of this period) contain some revealing
                                   S70
                            Bibliography


letters written during his service as British envoy at St. Petersburg.
   Unfortunately, the papers of John Charles Herries, Commissary-
in-Chief to the army in the last years of the war, (deposited in the
British Museum) were not available for examination in 1965S.
When students finally are able to use them, they will doubtless
yield a rich return. Herries deserves study, but for the moment we
must be content with his Memoir edited by Edward Herries.
   The correspondence of George III since 1783 is being edited for
publication by Professor Arthur Aspinall. Two volumes have
already appeared, bringing the work to the close of 1797. Until
the project is completed, American scholars will find it convenient
to use the twenty-two volumes of the King’s letters in typescript
deposited in the William L. Clements Library, the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.
   For the first two coalitions, the printed papers of Lord Grenville
are as important as the Foreign Office archives. This ten-volume
collection, published by the Historical Manuscripts Commission
under the confusing title, Report on the Manuscripts of J. B.
Fortescue, Esq., Preserved at Dropmore, is a rich storehouse for
students of the period. It should be supplemented by the Memoirs
of the Court and Cabinets of George the Third, which contain a
large number of private letters written by Lord Grenville and
Thomas Grenville. Fundamental for the concluding years of the
war is the more familiar collection of Lord Castlereagh’s corre-
spondence in twelve volumes edited by his half-brother. Many of
the printed memoirs of other British leaders of the period are
disappointing, although an exception must be noted in the case of
Lord Malmesbury’s Diaries and Correspondence.
  The collections of Austrian state papers edited by von Vivenot,
Huffer, and Pribram are all important. Fedor Martens, Recueil
des Traiteés et Conventions Conclus par la Russie... , includes
valuable source material taken from the Russian foreign archives.
It should be used in conjunction with the papers of the
Vorontzoff family published in the Arkhiv Kniazia Vorontsova.
Prince Hardenberg’s Denkwurdigkeiten, edited by von Ranke, has
some important material relative to Lord Harrowby’s unfortunate
mission to Berlin in 1805.
  Today’s student can still make good use of the multivolume
works of Alison, Sorel, von Sybel, and Thiers. Out-of-date though
they are in some ways, they nevertheless provide both dramatic
                                  37%
                            bibliography


sweep and an encyclopedic attention to detail. As guides through
the maze of diplomatic and military history of the period, nothing
takes the place of the appropriate volumes of the Cambridge
Modern History and the Cambridge History of British Foreign
Policy.
  After half a century, John Holland Rose’s biography of Pitt
remains the standard, and even Lord Stanhope’s older work
cannot be overlooked. Sir Charles Webster’s two-volume study of
Castlereagh’s foreign policy is a fundamental work, based as it is
on unassailable scholarship. Few British political leaders of the
period have found suitable biographers. Lord Grenville remains
unnoticed and the Earl of Liverpool still waits to be rescued from
the pages of Charles Yonge’s official biography. The brilliance of
Canning’s final years has obscured the fact that between 1807 and
1809 he served successfully as foreign secretary. Until a major
study of this early period of his life appears, we must be satisfied
with   Temperley’s   work   and   with   Dorothy   Marshall’s   Rise   of
George Canning.
  Sir John Fortescue’s History of the British Army remains
indispensable. Students of the Peninsular War will find Weller’s
Wellington in the Peninsula a handy guide through the subject
which is covered extensively by Fortescue, Napier, and Oman. All
but three of the twelve volumes of Wellington Dispatches deal
with the period 1808-1815 and my debt to this work is enormous.
The important changes which occurred in the ordnance supply
system and the organization of the British army at this time have
been skillfully examined by Richard Glover in his Peninsular
Preparation. Detailed accounts of naval operations are found in
the works of those rival historians, William James and Captain
Edward Brenton.
  Gayer et al., Growth and Fluctuation of the British Economy,
1790-1850 has been faulted by some because of its conclusions.
As a vade mecum through the maze of trade statistics I found it
most helpful. The economics of British subsidization is treated in
Norman J. Silberling’s ‘Financial and Monetary Policy of Great
Britain During the Napoleonic Wars,” (Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 38[1923-1924]), which deserves examination. Karl
Helleiner’s useful monograph, /mperial Loans, should be consulted
in connection with the Austrian Loans of 1795 and 1797. Sir

                                  372
                           Bibliography


Francis d’Ivernois, the author of the “‘federative paper” plan, has
been the subject of a biography and two articles by Otto Karmin.
Not to be overlooked is Francois Crouzet’s study of the effect of
the Continental System on Britain’s economy—a           work   which
largely supplants its predecessors in this field.

MANUSCRIPT      COLLECTIONS      AND PUBLIC RECORDS
Public Record Office, London
1. Foreign Office Papers
   FO     7 Austria
   FO 29     The Army in Germany
   FO 33     Hamburg and the Hanse Towns
   FO 37     Holland and the Netherlands
   FO 63 _ Portugal
   FO 64 _ Prussia
   FO 65     Russia
   FO 67.    Sardinia
   FO 70     Sicily and Naples
   FO 72     Spain
   FO 73     Sweden
   FO 74     Switzerland, Series I
   FO 83     Great Britain and General
   FO 92     Continent: Treaty Papers
   FO 93.    Protocols of Treaties
   FO 94 _ Ratifications of Treaties
   FO 97     Supplement to General Correspondence
   FO 120    Embassy and Consular Archives (Austria):
             Correspondence
   FO 139    Continent: Correspondence
2. Treasury Papers
   tee       Treasury Board Papers
  ay co      Minute Books
  yee        King’s Warrant Books

3. War Office Papers
  wo 1       In-Letters
  WO 2       Out-Letters


                                S)fle:
                                     Bibliography


4. Admiralty Papers
   Adm 52 Masters’ Logs

5. Audit Office Papers
   AO 1      Declared Accounts
   AO 3      Accounts, Various

6. Pay Master General’s Papers
   PMG 2     Ledgers

7. Collections of Private Papers
   Chatham Papers (including the papers
      of William Pitt the Younger)      (30/8)
   Cornwallis Papers                    (30/11)
   Granville Papers                     (30/29)

British Museum Additional Manuscripts
   Aberdeen Papers       (43073-43079)
   Grenville Papers      (41851-41859; 42058)
   Liverpool Papers      (38248-38261; 38325-38326)
   Vansittart Papers     (31230-3123:193:1236)
   Wellesley Papers      (37286-37288; 37292-37294;
                          37310; 37415)

William L. Clements Library, Ann Arbor, Michigan
  Typescripts of the unpublished correspondence of George III.

PUBLISHED MEMOIRS, PAPERS, AND DOCUMENTS
Adair, Robert. Historical Memoir ofa Mission to the Court of Vienna in 1806. London,
  1844
Arkhiv Kniazia   Vorontsova.   Edited by P. I. Bartenev. 40 vols. Moscow, 1870-1895.
Auckland, William Eden, first Baron. The Journal and Correspondence of William, Lord
  Auckland. 4 vols. London, 1861-1862.
Baring, Francis. Observations on the Establishment of the Bank of England, and on the
  Paper Circulation of the Country... 2d ed. London, 1797.
British and Foreign State Papers. The Librarian of the Foreign Office, ed. Vols. I-III.
   London, 1838-1841.
Calvert, Harry. The Journals & Correspondence of Gen'l Sir Harry Calvert... Harry
   Verney, ed. London, 1853.
Castlereagh, Viscount. See Londonderry, Robert Stewart, second Marquess of.
Cornwallis, Charles, first Marquis. Correspondence of Charles, First Marquis Cornwallis.
   Charles Ross, ed. 3 vols. London, 1859.
                                       Bibliography

Croker, John Wilson. The Croker Papers: The Correspondence and Diaries of the Late
  Right Honourable John Wilson Croker. Louis Jennings, ed. 2 vols. New York, 1884.
Czartoryski, Prince Adam. Mémoires du Prince Adam Czartoryski et Correspondance
  avec |’Empereur Alexandre 1°". 2 vols. Paris, 1887.
George III. The Later Correspondence of George III. Arthur Aspinall, ed. Vols. I-II.
  London, 1962- (in progress).
Granville, Granville Leveson Gower, first Earl of. See Leveson Gower, Granville.
Grenville, William Wyndham, first Baron. See Historical Manuscripts Commission,
  Report on the Manuscripts ofJ.B. Fortescue, Esq., Preserved at Dropmore.
Hansard’s Parliamentary Debates, from the Year 1803 to the Present Time, Published
  under the Superintendence of T. C. Hansard. First Series. 41 vols. London, 1803-1820.
Hardenberg, Karl August First von. Denkwiirdigkeiten des Staatskanzlers Fiirsten von
  Hardenberg. Leopold von Ranke, ed. 5 vols. Leipzig, 1877.
Herries, John Charles. Memoir of the Public Life of the Right Hon. John Charles
  Herries... Edward Herries, ed. 2 vols. London, 1880.
Historical Manuscripts Commission. Report on the Manuscripts of Earl Bathurst
  Preserved at Cirencester Park. London, 1923.
—— Report on the Manuscripts of J. B. Fortescue, Esq., Preserved at Dropmore. 10
  vols. London, 1892-1927.
Holland, Elizabeth Lady. The Journal of Elizabeth Lady Holland 1791-1801. Earl of
  Ilchester, ed. 2 vols. London, 1908.
Huffer, Hermann. Quellen zur Geschichte der Kriege von 1799 und 1800. 3 vols. Leipzig,
  1900-1907.
Jackson, George. The Diaries and Letters of Sir George Jackson, K.C.H., from the Peace
  of Amiens to the Battle of Talavera. Lady Jackson, ed. 2 vols. London, 1872.
Journal of the House of Commons. Vols. XLIX-LXX.
Leveson Gower, Granville, first Earl Granville. Lord Granville Leveson Gower... Private
  Correspondence 1781-1821. Castalia Countess Granville, ed. 2 vols. London, 1916.
Londonderry, Charles Stewart, third Marquess of. Narrative of the War in Germany and
  France, in 1813 and 1814. Philadelphia, 1831.
Londonderry, Robert Stewart, second Marquess of. Correspondence, Despatches, and
  Other Papers, of Viscount Castlereagh, Second Marquess of Londonderry. The 31d
  Marquess of Londonderry, ed. 12 vols. London, 1851-1853.
Malmesbury, James Harris, first Earl of. Diaries and Correspondence of James Harris,
  First Earl of Malmesbury...     2d ed. The 3rd Earl of Malmesbury, ed. 4 vols. London,
  1845.
___A      Series of Letters from the First Earl of Malmesbury,             His Family and Friends
  from 1745 to 1820. 2 vols. London, 1870.
Manuscripts of J.B. Fortescue, Esq. See Historical Manuscripts Commission.
Martens, Fedor F. Recueil des Traités et Conventions Conclus par la Russie avec les
  Puissances Etrangeres.   15 vols. St. Petersburg, 1874-1909.
Martens, George, and Martens, Charles. Recueil des Principaux Truités d’Alliance...
  Conclus par les Puissances de l'Europe... 2d ed. 8 vols. Gottingen, 1817-1835.
Memoirs of the Court and Cabinets of George the Third. The Duke of Buckingham and
  Chandos, ed. 4 vols. London, 1853-1855.
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Furst von. Memoirs of Prince Metternich 1773-1835.
  Prince Richard Metternich, ed. Mrs. Alexander Napier, tr. 5 vols. New York, 1881.
Minto, Gilbert   Elliot, first Earl of. Life and Letters of Sir Gilbert Elliot, First Earl of
 Minto, from 1751 to 1806...       The Countess of Minto, ed. 3 vols. London, 1874.
Nesselrode,   Karl   Robert,   Comte   de.   Lettres   et   Papiers   du    Chancelier   Comte   de
  Nesselrode, 1760-1850... 11 vols. Paris, 1904-1912.
Paget, Arthur. The Paget Papers: Diplomatic and Other Correspondence of the Right
  Hon. Sir Arthur Paget, G.C.B., 1794-1807. Sit Augustus Paget, ed. 2 vols. London,
  1896.
Parliamentary Debates. See Hansard’s Parliamentary Debates.
                                   Bibliography


Parliamentary History of England, from the Earliest Period to the Year 1803...    William
 Cobbett, ed. 36 vols. London,   1806-1820.
Pozzo di Borgo, Carlos Comte de. Correspondance Diplomatique du Comte Pozzo di
  Borgo... . 2 vols. Paris, 1890-1897.
Pribram, Alfred F. Oesterreichische Staatsvertrage. England. Vol. Il. Vienna, 1913.
Reports from Committees of the House of Commons. Vol. XI. London, 1803.
Rose, George. A Brief Examination into the Increase of the Revenue, Commerce, and
  Navigation of Great Britain during the Administration of the Rt. Hon. William Pitt.
  London, 1806.
      Diaries and Correspondence of the Right Hon. George Rose. L. V. Harcourt, ed. 2
  vols. London, 1860.
Sidmouth, Henry Addington, first Viscount. The Life and Correspondence of the Right
  Hon'ble Henry Addington, First Viscount Sidmouth. George Pellew, ed. 3 vols.
  London, 1847.
Smith, Adam. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
  Everyman edition. 2 vols. New York, 1910.
Vivenot, Alfred von. Quellen zur Geschichte der Deutschen Kaiserpolitik Oesterreichs
  wahrend der Franz0sischen Revolutionskriege,      1790-1801. 5 vols. Vienna, 1873-1890,
Vorontzoff, Simon. See Arkhiv Kniazia Vorontsova.
Webster, Charles K., ed., British Diplomacy, 1813-1815. London, 1921.
Wellesley, Richard, first Marquess. The Despatches and Correspondence of the Marquess
   Wellesley K.G. during His Lordship’s Mission to Spain...in 1809. M. Martin, ed.
  London, 1838.
_____ The Wellesley Papers. 2 vols. London, 1914.
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of. The Dispatches of Field Marshal the Duke of
   Wellington . . . Lieut.-Col. John Gurwood, ed. 12 vols. London, 1837-1838.
____ Supplementary Despatches and Memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur, Duke of
  Wellington, K.G. ... The 2d Duke of Wellington, ed. 15 vols. London,   1858-1872.
Wickham, William. The Correspondence of the Right Honourable       William Wickham from
  the Year   1794. William Wickham, ed. 2 vols. London,   1870.
Windham, William. The Windham Papers: The Life and Correspondence of the Rt. Hon.
  William Windham, 1750-1810. 2 vols. London, 1913.
Woodforde, James. The Diary of a Country Parson: The Reverend James Woodforde.
  John Beresford, ed. 5 vols. London,   1924-1931.


OTHER        SOURCES
Acton, Harold. The Bourbons of Naples 1734-1825. London, 1956.
Adams, Ephraim D. The Influence of Grenville on Pitt’s Foreign Policy,   1787-1798.
  Washington, D.C., 1904.
Albion, Robert G. “British Shipping and Latin America, 1806-1914,” Journal of
  Economic History, 11 (1951), 361-374.
 ——Forests and Sea Power: The Timber Problem of the English Navy, 1652-1862.
  Cambridge, Mass., 1926.
Alison, Archibald. History of Europe from the Commencement of the French
  Revolution to the Restoration of the Bourbons in MDCCCXV. 14 vols. Edinburgh and
  London, 1849-1850.
——Lives of Lord Castlereagh and Sir Charles Stewart... 3 vols. Edinburgh and
  London, 1861.
Andersson, Ingvar. A History of Sweden. Carolyn Hannay, tr. New York, 1957.
Andréadés, A., History of the Bank of England. C. Meredith, tr. New York, 1909.
Ashton, Thomas S. Jron and Steel in the Industrial Revolution. Manchester, Eng., 1951.
___Review of The Growth and Fluctuation of the British Economy, 1790-1850, by A.
  Gayer, W. W. Rostow, and A. J. Schwartz, in Economic History Review, 2d ser., 7
  (1955), 377-381.


                                           376
                                          Bibliography

Balfour, Lady Frances. The Life of George, Fourth Earl of Aberdeen K.G. 2 vols.
  ‘London, 1922.
Barnes, Donald G. George III and William Pitt, 1783-1806. Stanford, Calif., 1939.
Beamish, North Ludlow. History of the King’s German Legion. 2 vols. London,
   1832-1837.
Biro, Sydney S. The German Policy of Revolutionary France: A Study in French
  Ace     is during the War of the First Coalition, 1792-1797.           2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.,
     ay
Blease, W. L. Suvorof. London, 1920.
Bourgoing,    Francois   de.   Histoire   Diplomatique   de   l'Europe    pendant    la Révolution
  Francaise. 4 vols. Paris, 1865-1885.
Brenton, Edward P. The Naval History of Great Britain...          2 vols. London,     1837.
Brinton, Crane. A Decade of Revolution,    1789-1799. New York, 1934.
Browning, Oscar. ““Hugh Elliot at Naples,” English Historical Review, 4 (1889), 209-228.
Bryant, Arthur. The Years of Endurance. New York, 1942.
      The Years of Victory. London, 1944.
Buckland, C. S. B. Metternich and the British Government from 1809 to 1813. London,
  1932.
Burne, Alfred H. The Noble Duke of York: The Military Life of Frederick Duke of York
  and Albany. London, 1949.
Buxton, Sydney. Finance and Politics: An Historical Study, 1783-1885.               2 vols. London,
  1888.
Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1783-1919.A. W. Ward and G. P. Gooch,
  eds. Vol. I. Cambridge, 1922.
Cambridge Modern History. A. W. Ward, G. W. Prothero, and Stanley Leathes, eds. Vols.
  VIII and IX. Cambridge, 1934.
Capefigue, Jean Baptiste. Histoire des Grandes Opérations Financiéres; Banques, Bourses,
  Emprunts ... 4 vols. Paris, 1855-1860.
Carr, R. “Gustavus IV and the British          Government,     1804-1809,”     English Historical
  Review, 60 (1945), 36-66.
Clapham, John. The Bank of England:A History. 2 vols. New York, 1945.
     “Loans and Subsidies in Time of War, 1793-1914,” Economic Journal, 27 (1917),
  495-501.
C[okayne], G. E. Complete Peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the
   United Kingdom... 8 vols. London, 1887-1898.
Corti, Egon Caesar Count. The Rise of the House of Rothschild. B. and B. Lunn, trs.
  New York, 1928.
Court, W. H. B. A Concise Economic History of Britain, from 1750 to Recent Times.
  Cambridge, 1954.
Crawley, C. W. “French and English Influences in the Cortes of Cadiz, 1810-1814,”
  Cambridge Historical Journal, 6 (1938), 176-206.
Crouzet, Francois. “La Crise Monétaire Britannique et la Cinquiéme Coalition,” Bulletin
  de la Societe d'Histoire Moderne. 11th ser., no. 8 (Oct.-Dec. 1953), 14-19.
      L’Economie Britannique et le Blocus Continental, 1806-1813. 2 vols. Paris, 1958.
Cunningham, Audrey. British Credit in the Last Napoleonic War. Cambridge, 1910.
Daly, Robert. “Operations of the Russian Navy during the Reign of Napoleon I,”
 Mariner’s Mirror, 34 (1948), 169-183.
D’Auvergne,   Edmund.     Envoys Extraordinary:      The Romantic Careers of some Remark-
 able British Representatives Abroad.       London, 1937.
Davies, Godfrey. Wellington and His Army. Oxford, 1954.
Derry, John W. William Pitt. London, 1962.
Deutsch, Harold. The Genesis of Napoleonic Imperialism. Cambridge, Mass., 1938.
Elliot, D. C. “‘The Grenville Mission to Berlin, 1799,” Huntington Library Quarterly, 18
  (1954-1955), 129-146.
Falk, Minna R. “Stadion, adversaire de Napoléon (1806-1809),” Annales Historiques de
  la Révolution Francaise, 169 (1962), 288-305.


                                               Sia
                                          Bibliography

Festing, Gabrielle. Jonn Hookham Frere and His Friends. London, 1899.
Ford, Guy Stanton. Hanover and Prussia, 1795-1803: A Study in Neutrality...                       New
  York, 1903.
Fortescue, John W. British Statesmen of the Great War, 1793-1814. Oxford, 1911.
___A History of the British Army. 13 vols. London, 1899-1930.
Fremantle, A. F. England in the Nineteenth Century. 2 vols. New York, 1929-1930.
Fryer, W. R. Republic or Restoration in France, 1794-1797. Manchester, Eng., 1965.
Furber, Holden. Henry Dundas, First Viscount Melville, 1742-1811... London, 1931.
Gabory, E. L’ Angleterre et la Vendée. 2 vols. Paris, 1930-1931.
Galpin, W. F. The Grain Supply of England during the Napoleonic Period. New York,
  WGS)5)..
Gayer, Arthur, Rostow, W. W., and Schwartz, A. J. The Growth and Fluctuation of the
  British Economy, 1790-1850. 2 vols. Oxford, 1953.
Glover, Michael. Wellington’s Peninsular Victories. London,               1963.
Glover,    Richard.   “Arms    and the British Diplomat      in the French        Revolutionary   Era,”
  Journal of Modern History, 29 (1957), 199-212.
____ Peninsular Preparation: The Reform of the British Army, 1795-1809. Cambridge,
  1963.
Godechot, Jacques. La Grande Nation: l’Expansion Révolutionnaire de la France dans le
  Monde de 1789 a 1799. 2 vols. Paris, 1956.
Goebel, Dorothy B. “British Trade to the Spanish Colonies,                   1796-1823,”     American
  Historical Review, 43 (1937-1938), 288-320.
Gray, Denis. Spencer Perceval:        The Evangelical Prime Minister, 1 762-1812. Manchester,
  Eng., 1963.
Grunwald, Constantin de. Trois Siécles de Diplomatie Russe. Paris, 1945.
Halévy, Elie. A History of the English People in the Nineteenth Century. E. 1. Watkin
  and D. A. Barker, trs. Vol. 1. New York, 1945.
Hansing, Karl. Hardenberg und die Dritte Koalition. Berlin, 1899.
Hawtrey, Ralph G. Currency and Credit. 4th ed. London, 1950.
Hecksher, Eli. The Continental System: An Economic Interpretation.                    H. Westergaard,
  ed. Oxford, 1922.
Helleiner, Karl F. The Imperial Loans: A Study in Financial and Diplomatic History.
  Oxford, 1965.
Hidy, Ralph W. The House of Baring in American                Trade and Finance. . . Cambridge,
  Mass., 1949.
Hope-Jones, Arthur. Income Tax in the Napoleonic Wars. Cambridge, 1939.
Horn, D. B. The British Diplomatic Service,   1689-1789. Oxford, 1961.
Hovde, B. J. The Scandinavian Countries,    1720-1865. 2 vols. Boston, 1943.
Imlah, A. H. “Real Values in British Foreign Trade, 1798-1853,” Journal of Economic
  History, 7 (1948), 133-152.
James, William. The Naval History of Great Britain...              5 vols. London, 1822-1824.
Jenks,    Leland    H. The Migration of British Capital to 1875.           New     York and London,
  1927.
Karmin,    Otto.    “Autour    des Négociations      Financiéres    Anglo-Prusso-Russes      de 1813,”
  Revue Historique de la Révolution Frangaise et de l’Empire, 11 (January-June 1917),
  177-197; 12 (July-December 1917), 24-29, 216-252.
—__“‘Les Finances Russes en 1812 et la Mission de Sir Francis D’Ivernois a St.
  Pétersbourg,”’ Revue Historique de la Révolution Francaise et de l’Empire, 8 (1915),
  177-191; 9 (1916), 5-71.
     Sir Francis D’Ivernois 1757-1842. Geneva, 1920.
Kaufmann,       William   W.    British   Policy   and   the Independence         of Latin    America,
  1804-1828.       New Haven, Conn., 1951.
Kluchevsky, V. O. A History of Russia. C. J. Hogarth, tr. Vol. V. New York, 1960.
Kraehe, Enno       E. Metternich’s German Policy. Princeton, N.J., 1963.
Kukiel, Marian. Czartoryski and European Unity, 1770-1861. Princeton, N.J., 1955.
Lackland, H. M. “Lord William Bentinck in Sicily, 1811-1812,” English Historical


                                                   378
                                       Bibliography

  Review, 42 (1927), 371-396.
Lascelles, Edward C. P. The Life of Charles James Fox. Oxford, 1936.
Lewis, Michael. The History of the British Navy. London, 1959.
Lukacs, John A. “Russian Armies in Western Europe; 1799, 1814, 1917,” American
  Slavic and East European Review,      13 (1954), 319-337.
Lobanov-Rostovsky, Andrei A. Russia and Europe, 1789-1825. Durham, N.C., 1947.
Mackesy, Piers. The War in the Mediterranean, 1803-1810. Cambridge, Mass., 1957.
Manchester, Alan K. British Preeminence in Brazil: Its Rise and Decline. Chapel Hill,
  N.G., 1933:
Marcus, G. J. A Naval History of England. Vol. 1. London, 1961- (in progress).
Marriott, J. A. R. Castlereagh. London, 1936.
Marshall, Dorothy. The Rise of George Canning. London, 1938.
Matheson, Cyril. Life of Henry Dundas, First Viscount Melville, 1743-1811. London,
  1933.
Mitchell, Harvey. The Underground War against Revolutionary France: The Missions of
  William Wickham, 1794-1800. Oxford, 1965.
Moller, Herbert, ed. Population Movements in Modern European History. New York and
  London, 1964.
Napier, W. F. P. History of the War in the Peninsula. . . 6 vols. London, 1890.
Newmarch, William. “On the Loans Raised by Mr. Pitt during the First French War,
  1793-1801: with Some Statements in Defence of the Methods of Funding Employed,”
  Quarterly Journal of the Statistical Society, 18 (1855), 104-140, 242-284.
Nichols, Irby C. “Britain and the Austrian War Debt, 1821-1823,” Historian, 20 (1958),
  328-346.
Nicolle, André. “The Problem of Reparations          after    the Hundred   Days,” Journal of
  Modern History, 25 (1953), 343-354.
Oman, Carola. Sir John Moore. London, 1953.
Oman, Charles. A History of the Peninsular War. 7 vols. Oxford, 1902-1930.
Parkinson, C. N., ed. The Trade Winds: A Study of British Overseas Trade during the
  French Wars, 1793-1815. London, 1948.
Pebrer, Pablo. Taxation, Revenue, Expenditure, Power, Statistics, and Debt of the Whole
  British    Empire; their Origin, Progress, and Present State. London, 1833.
Piechowiak,    A. B. “The Anglo-Russian     Expedition to Holland in 1799,” Slavonic and
  East European Review, 41 (1962-1963), 182-195.
Pipes, Richard. Karamzin’s Memoir on Ancient and Modern Russia: A Translation and
  Analysis. Cambridge, Mass., 1959.
Puryear, Vernon J. Napoleon and the Dardenelles. Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1951.
Renier, G. J. Great Britain and the Establishment of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
  1813-1815. London, 1930.
Roberts, Michael. The Whig Party, 1807-1812. London, 1939.
Robson, William H. “New Light on Lord Castlereagh’s Diplomacy,” Journal of Modern
  History,3 (1931), 198-218.
Rose, John Holland. “Canning and the Spanish Patriots in 1808,” American Historical
  Review, 12 (1906-1907), 39-52.
——— Napoleonic Studies, 2d ed. London, 1906.
_____ Pitt and Napoleon: Essays and Letters. London, 1912.
___ William Pitt and the Great War. London, 1911.
____ William Pitt and National Revival. London, 1911.
Rosebery, Archibald, fifth Earl of. Pitt. London, 1915S.
Rosselli, John. Lord William Bentinck and the British Occupation of Sicily, 1811-1814.
  Cambridge, 1956.
Rostow, W. W. British Economy of the Nineteenth Century. Oxford, 1948.
Russell, Lord John. Memorials and Correspondence of Charles James Fox. 4 vols.
  London, 1853-1857.
Ruville, Albert von. William Pitt Earl of Chatham. H. J. Chaytor, tr. 3 vols. London,
  1907.
                                       Bibliography


Ryan, A. N. “The Defence of British           Trade    with   the   Baltic,   1808-1813,”       English
  Historical Review, 74 (1959), 443-466.
Rydjord,    John.   “British   Mediation   between    Spain   and   Her   Colonies,     1811-1813,”
 Hispanic American Historical Review, 21 (1941), 29-50.
Scott, Franklin D. Bernadotte and the Fall of Napoleon. Cambridge, Mass., 1935.
Shanahan, William O. Prussian Military Reforms, 1786-1813. New York, 1945.
Sherwig, John M. “Lord Grenville’s Plan for a Concert of Europe, 1797-1799,” Journal
  of Modern History, 34 (1962), 284-293.
Silberling, Norman J. ‘“‘Financial and Monetary Policy of Great Britain during the
  Napoleonic Wars,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,      38 (1923-1924), 214-233,
  397-439.
Sorel, Albert. L Europe et la Révolution Francaise. 8 vols. Paris, 1885-1904.
Spinney, J. D. “Some Vicissitudes of a ‘V.I.P., ” Blackwood’s Magazine, 265                     (1949),
 BMS I2s
Stanhope,    Philip, fifth Earl of. Life of the Right Honourable              William   Pitt.   4 vols.
 London, 1861-1862.
Stearns, Josephine B. The Role of Metternich in Undermining Napoleon. M\linois Studies
  in the Social Sciences, vol. XXIX, no. 4. Urbana, IIl., 1948.
Sybel, Heinrich von. History of the French Revolution. W. C. Perry, tr. 4 vols. London,
  1867-1869.
Temperley, H. W. V. Life of Canning. London, 1905.
Thiers, Louis A. History of the Consulate and Empire of France under Napoleon. D. F.
  Campbell and J. Stebbing, trs. 12 vols. Philadelphia, 1893-1894.
Tilley, John, and Gaselee, Stephen. The Foreign Office. London, 1933.
Tooke, Thomas. A History of Prices and of the State of Circulation from 1793 to
  1837... 6 vols. London, 1838-1857.
Treitschke, Heinrich von. History of Germany in the Nineteenth Century. E. and C. Paul,
  trs. 6 vols. New York, 1915-1919.
Turner, Eunice H. “The Russian Squadron              with Admiral    Duncan’s     North    Sea Fleet,
  1795-1800,” Mariner’s Mirror, 49 (1963), 212-222.
Vandal, Albert. Napoléon et Alexandre I® . . . 3 vols. Paris, 1891-1896.
Waliszewski, K. Paul the First of Russia, the Son of Catherine the Great. London, 1913.
Walpole, Spencer. The Life of the Rt. Hon. Spencer Perceval. 2 vols. London, 1874.
Ward, S. G. P. Wellington’s Headquarters.     Oxford, 1957.
Watson, J. Steven. The Reign of George III, 1760-1815. Oxford, 1960.
Webster, Charles K. The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh. 2 vols. London, 1947-1950.
      The Foreign Policy of Palmerston. Vol. 1. London, 1951.
Weil, M. H. Un Agent Inconnu de la Coalition, le Général de Stamford. Paris, 1923.
Weller, Jac. Wellington in the Peninsula, 1808-1814.      London, 1962.
Wheeler-Holohan, Vincent. The History of the King’s Messengers. New York, 1935.
Yonge, Charles Duke. The Life and Administration of Robert Banks, Second Earl of
  Liverpool. 3 vols. London, 1868.
Ziegler, Philip. Addington:      A   Life of Henry     Addington,     First   Viscount     Sidmouth.
  London, 1965.




                                              380
                                              Index




Abercrombie,      Maj.-Gen.     Sir Raiph,    121,       Almeida, 230, 235, 239
  142                                                    Amherst, William Amherst,      first Earl of,
Aberdeen,       George     Hamilton      Gordon,           265-266
  fourth Earl of, 305-307, 311, 313, 317                 Amiens, Treaty of (1802), 143
Abo, 279, 280                                            Amphion, H.M.S., 298, 300
A’Court, William, 271                                    Andalusia, 198, 222, 237
Active, H.M.S., 46-47                                    Antwerp, 213
Adair, Robert, 174, 176, 179n, 181, 189”                 Apodaca, Admiral, 200
Addington, Henry: prime minister (1801),                 Aranjuez, 200
  143; negotiates peace with France, 143;                Armies, allied: size in 1793, 11; in 1815,
  renews war with France, 144; tries to                    333
  organize coalition, 144-147; subsidizes                Army, British: condition in 1793, 14-15;
  Naples,    145-146,    162, 193; collapse of             growth (1793-1797), 19, 77, 94; cam-
 government (1804), 146, 147                               paign in Low Countries (1793-1795),
Alexander I, Tsar of Russia: accession,                    17, 50, 54, 61, 77; cost of (1793-1797),
  126; formation of Third Coalition, 144,                  87; in Portugal (1796-1801), 137-140;
  146; and Frederick William III, 149;                     expedition to Holland (1799), 121; in
  Novosiltzoff mission, 151-152, 154; sub-                 Egypt (1800-1801), 140, 142; in Italy
  sidy treaty with Britain (1805), 159,                    and Sicily, 162, 173; expedition to
  160, 161; and Sweden, 163, 181; War of                   north Germany (1805-1806), 168, 171,
  Third     Coalition,   166,   167,   170,   173,         173; expedition to Stralsund, 185, 188,
  179, 180; offers Hanover to Prussia,                     189; expedition to Walcheren, 213, 214;
  168,   169;  peace   negotiations   with                 and the Peninsular War, 197-265 passim;
  France, 175, 176; resentment of Britain,                 demobilization   (1814),   326-327,   333;
  181, 182; peace with Napoleon (1807),                    duty on Continent (1814), 327, 328;
  182, 189; war with Sweden (1808),                        and Hundred Days, 333, 337-338, 339
  205-206;    quarrel    with    Napoleon,               Army of Reserve Act (1804), Great Brit-
  274-275; relations with Bernadotte, 275,                 ain, 148
  279-280, 316; rapprochement with Brit-                 Aspern, Battle of (1809), 212
 ain, 276, 279-280, 282; D’Ivernois mis-                 Astrea, H.M.S., 189
 sion, 280-281; and Austria, 283; negotia-               Asturias, 196, 198, 228
 tions with Napoleon (1814), 316, 318;                   Auckland, William Eden, first Baron, 10
 and Castlereagh, 312, 319, 320-321,                     Austerlitz, Battle of (1805), 170, 171, 273
 330-331; occupies Paris (1814), 323;                    Austria
 Russian-Dutch    loan convention,    277,                before 1793: rivalry with Prussia, 5,
  320-321, 330-331; Hundred            Days, 333,         6, 7, 20, 24, 27; Belgium-Bavaria Ex-
  334, 336                                                change, 5, 20, 23; territorial ambitions,
Alkmaar, 121                                              5; economic weakness, 11; war with



                                                   381
                                                      Index


Austria,    cont.                                                   tariff policy and Britain, 305-306,
     France, 5, 6, 19-20, 29, 31; Second                            311; and the coalition of 1814, 313,
     Polish Partition, 6, 20, 23                                    315-318 passim; and the Chaumont
  First Coalition (1793-1797): territorial                          Treaty (1814), 318-321 passim; British
    ambitions, 23, 57-58; military opera-                           payments to under Chaumont Treaty,
    tions, 23n, 48-49, 56; alliance with                            323, 327-329 passim; and treaty to
     Britain (1793), 24; and Prussia’s re-                          maintain        army       during    Congress         of
    quest for financial help, 28, 30, 39;                           Vienna,      326;      renewal       of    war      with
    Third  Polish Partition, 52, 57-58,                             France (1815), 333; alliance and sub-
    72-73; seeks private loan in London                             sidy treaty with Britain, 334, 336;
    (1793-1794), 55-56; negotiation with                            British  payments    to,   336,  339,
    Britain for financial aid, 56-63, 65,                           342-343;   military operations,  333,
    67-69; mission of Lord Spencer and T.                           336, 339
    Grenville to, 57-61 passim; and Russia,                       1821-1823, 343
    57, 71, 72-73, 82; British financial                          See also     Cobenzl,        Metternich,       Stadion,
    advances to (1794-1795),            59, 60, 61,               Thugut
    68, 69; 1795 loan convention, 68, 69,
    93, 101; negotiation for second loan,                        Badajoz,.235, 239, 242, 250; 251,255
    80-81, 90; British financial advances to                     Badajoz, Treaty of (1801), 140-141
    (1796-1797),        81, 83-92 passim;           mis-         Baden, 18, 78n, 166
    sion of George Hammond to, 91, 93;                           Balance of payments, Great Britain, see
    separate peace with France (1797),                             Great Britain: Economy
    91-92, 94, 95; 1797 loan convention,                         Ballasteros, Gen. Francisco, 257
    Spr, 93)                                                     Bank Crisis (1797), 85-89, 138
  Second Coalition (1797-1801): and Con-                         Bank of England: and Prussian                       subsidy
    gress of Rastadt, 99, 103; rapproche-                          (1794),    41,    46,    48;    and        Bank     Crisis
    ment with Britain, 100-103; 1797 loan                          (1797),    78,    80,    86-87,       89;     and     war
    convention, 101-103 passim; 105-112                            finance, 134, 233, 256, 302
    passim, 127-130; and Russia, 106-107,                        Banks, Sir Joseph, 70
    PLO 24a           Sands rances lant:                         Barham, Charles Middleton, first Baron,
    attacked by France, 113-114; negotia-                          147n
    tion of third loan convention, 126-132                       Baring, Sir Francis, 88
    passim; territorial ambitions, 128, 130;                     Baring Brothers, bankers, 332n, 342
    asks Britain to recruit mercenary corps                      Basel, Treaty of (1795), 67, 73, 77, 141
    128-129, 130; British payments to, 132-                      Bathurst, Benjamin, 208, 213
    135;    military    defeat,    132-135     passim            Bathurst, Henry Bathurst, third                 Earl     of,
  Third Coalition       (1803-1806),        145; Brit-             2555029
    ish subsidies,       147,   150,         156-161,            Bavaria, 131, 166
    166-167,        175; and Russia, 149, 150;                   Baylen, Battle of (1808), 199
    military        operations, 166-167,  170;                   Belgium, revolt of (1830), 343-344
    makes     peace     with      France,    170;    re-         Belgium-Bavaria Exchange Plan, 5, 20, 23
    lations with Britain after war, 174,                         Bentinck, Lord William Cavendish, 266-271
    176, 181-182; effects of war, 190                            Beresford, William Carr:  named    Com-
  1808-1813: War of Liberation (1809),                             mander of Portuguese forces, 204; ser-
    207-208, 211, 212; attempts to obtain                         vice with Portuguese troops, 205, 217,
    subsidy treaty with Britain, 208-213                          230, 235, 240, 247
    passim; British payments to, 210-213                         Bernadotte, Jean-Baptiste: Prince Royal of
    passim;    effect of war on, 213, 273,                         Sweden, 274; acquisition of Norway,
    aoe         relations    with    Britain                       274-276 passim, 282, 284-285, 312,
    (1810-1813), 272, 283                                          316; break with Napoleon, 275; alliance
  Final Coalition (1813-1815): Plaswitz                            with    Russia,      275,      279;    and        Britain,
    armistice, 296, 300; British approach                         275-277 passim, 279, 280, 282-286 pas-
    to (1813), 298-300; British payments                          sim, 293; military operations, 285, 286,
    to (1813-1814), 299-300, 305, 310;                            292, 307-308, 312; and British subsidy,
    war with France, 300; British arms to,                        308, 323-324; war with Denmark, 312,
    305, 306-307; negotiation of subsidy                          316; refuses to fight Napoleon (1815),
    treaty with Britain (1813), 305-306;                          337

                                                           382
                                                      Index


Blucher,    Gebhard       Lebrecht       Prince     von,         Caracas, 228
  323, 339                                                       Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Viscount
Bonaparte, Joseph, 196, 256                                        early career: influence of Pitt, 2, 153,
Bonaparte, Napoleon, see Napoleon                                     154, 184,274; influence of Grenville,
Bordeaux, 322-323                                                    97; president of the Board of Control
Boulton, Matthew, 245                                                (1804-1806),   147-148; secretary of
Boyd, Walter, 55-57, 69, 138                                         war, 184, 185, 199; duel with Canning
Boyd, Benfield and Company, bankers,                                 (1809), 225
  55, 69, 81, 1037                                                 1812-1813:   foreign secretary (1812),
Brazil, 140-141, 191; British trade with,                            QL PAGE Spans, Low) 20552511 2085
   191-192, 201, 224                                                 and Sicily, 268, 270; and Sweden,
British Aid Office, 217-219, passim, 223,                            275-279   passim,  282-286    passim,
  224, 229, 242, 246                                                 2922295    S01, ol 2-35    3Oss and
British North America, timber trade, 207                             Russia, 276, 277, 280, 282, 289-298
Brittany, 76, 123-124                                                passim,     301-302,      313-314;          shipments
Brunswick, Charles William, Duke of, 54                              of arms and money to allies, 277, 279,
Brunswick, 54, 78, 78n                                               280, 287-288,   298, 306-307; and
Budberg, Russian minister, 189                                       Gneisenau, 283; and the Russian Ger-
Burgmann, Sir George, 303, 304                                       man Legion, 288; and Prussia, 289-298
Burgos, siege of (1812), 253, 256, 283                               passim,     301-302;      and Plaswitz armis-
Burke, Edmund, 2                                                     tice,     296,    297,    300;        and     Austria,
Busaco, Battle of (1810), 230                                        298-300, 305-307; plans for a grand
                                                                     alliance, 313-314; subsidy treaty with
                                                                     Hanover, 315
Cadiz, 222, 227, 228, 247,253                                      1814-1815:     mission             to         Continent
Calvert, Sir Harry, 67                                               (1814),          313-323;    and     Holland,
Camelford, Thomas Pitt, first Baron, 9                               315-316;          allies’ negotiation    with
Camperdown, Battle of (1797), 94                                     Napoleon,        316-318,    322; negotiation
Campo Formio, Treaty of (1797), 94, 100                              of Chaumont           Treaty,     317-322;        and
Canning, George                                                      Russian-Dutch    loan    convention,
  early career, 26; and Pitt, 182-183, 184                           320-322; 330-332; creation of King-
 Third       Coalition:        foreign     secretary                 dom of the Netherlands, 321, 330,
   (1807), 184; relations with Prussia,                              331; and peace           with France (1814),
   185-187, 189; and Russia, 187-188;                                323; settlement          of subsidy accounts,
   and    Austria, 188;   and  Sweden                                323-327, 329-330; suppression of slave
   (1807-1809),        188, 192-193,       206-207;                  trade, 326, 330; treaty with Austria,
   seizes    Danish    navy,     190;    and      Sicily             Prussia, and Russia to maintain armies
   (1807-1809), 193-196, 265, 266                                    during Congress          of Vienna, 326-328;
 Peninsular War (1807-1809): and Portu-                              and Congress of Vienna, 329-331, 332
   guese Regent, 191, 218; seeks trade                             Hundred      Days (1815): formation of
   benefits, -191, 200, 201, 215, 221,                               coalition,     334-336; Portugal and
   224; and revolts in Spain and Portugal                            Spain,     337;     hiring   of German           mer-
   (1808),   197;   aid to nationalists,                              cenaries, 338, 340-342; peace with
   198-199; aid program       for Spain,                              France (1815), 339; settlement of
   200-201,     219,      221; aid program          for               subsidy accounts with allies, 340-342;
   Portugal, 201-202, 204-205; disapoint-                             French reparations, 341-342
   ment in Peninsula, 203-204                                       1821-1822: settlement of Austrian loan,
 German War of Liberation (1809): sub-                                343
   sidy    negotiation    with  Austria,                           Efforts to win tariff concessions, 258,
   208-209, 210, 212; and Prussian lib-                               291, 305-306, 311-313 passim, 330-331
   eration movement, 209, 211; arms and                            Subsidy     and  war   policy,   283-284,
   money for Austria and Prussia, 211,                               287-288, 290-292, 309-314 passim,
   212-213; duel with Castlereagh and                                322, 334-336
   resignation as foreign secretary, 225                         Catalonia, 228, 247, 248, 268, 269
 later career (1809-1823), 234, 236, 251,                        Cathcart, William Schaw, first Earl of:
    309, 337, 343                                                 expedition to Stralsund, 188; mission to
 subsidy policy, 186-187, 189-190, 214                            Russia (1812), 277, 279-280, 282, 283,

                                                           383
                                                  Index


  290-292;      negotiation     of      Reichenbach       Corunna, Battle of (1809), 203, 205, 216,
  subsidy treaty (1813),          294-296, 298,             DA
  300-301; and Austria,           283, 299-300,           Council of Regency, Portugal, 201; and
  305, 306; and federative paper, 302-303;                Britain.2°20279204) 205e) 218592 31-2325
  seeks tariff concessions from Russia,                        239-247 passim,   337; and the war, 217,
  312; and Chatillon conference, 317                        2227229, 262
Catherine II, Tsarina of Russia: foreign                  Council of Regency, Spain, 227-228, 248,
  policy before 1793, 5-6; Polish Parti-                    249
  tions, 6, 51-52, 70, 72-73; alliance with               Craig, Gen. Sir James, 162
  Britain (1793), 20-23 passim; negotia-                  Craufurd, Col. Charles Gregan, 81, 91n
  tion of new alliance with Britain (1795),               Crimean War (1854-1856), 344
  54-55, 69-74; alliance with Austria, 57,                Cuesta, Gen. Don Gregorio Garcia de la, 221
  71; offers troops to Austria and de-                    Czartoryski, Prince Adam, 146-148 pas-
  mands British subsidy, 82, 90; death                         sim, 150-151, 155-159, 161, 167, 173
  (1796), 83
Cayley, Henry, 273                                        Dalrymple, Gen. Sir Hew, 198, 199
Charles, Archduke of Austria, 123                         Danzig, 185
Charles XIII, King of Sweden, 207                         De Luc, Jean André, 98
Chatham,      John Pitt, second Earl of, 186,             Denmark: arranges peace talks (1796), 82;
  L99R237                                                   and Britain, 190, 310, 316, 323; war
Chatham, William Pitt, first Earl of, 1877,                 with   Sweden,    192; union with Na-
  345                                                       poleon, 284; yields Norway, 312, 316
Chatillon conference          (1814),     317,   318,     De Souza e Coutinho, Jose, 231, 241, 242
  2AV), BO?                                               D’Ivernois, Sir Francis: mission to Russia
Chaumont,      Treaty   of   (1814),    154,                   (1812-1813), 277, 279, 280, 282; and
  S17-319- 321 3273205 533-959                                 federative paper scheme, 289-290, 294,
Chur, 123                                                      301
Cintra, Convention of (1808), 199                         Douglas, Alexander Hamilton,       Lord, 180,
Ciudad Rodrigo, 230, 235, 239, 242, 250                        181
Clancarty, Richard Trench, second Earl of,                Douro, Battle of the (1809), 218
  335                                                     Dresden, 294
Clausel, Gen. Bertrand, 253, 256                          Drummond, William, 194, 195, 267
Cobenzl, Count Louis, 106-107, 110-111,                   Duncan, Admiral Adam, 72, 94
   1345 1397150                                           Dundas, Henry,8, 14, 67, 109n, 124, 138,
Coburg, see Saxe-Coburg-Saalfield                           147
Collingwood, Vice-Admiral Lord, 14
Commissary General, British Army, opera-                  Eden, Sir Morton, 9-10; ministry to
  tion in Peninsular War: aid to Portugal,                  Vienna (1794-1799), 62, 67-69, 78, 93,
  217, 229, 244, 245-247, 254, 262-265;                      100-101, 105, 127
  organization    and methods,     223-224,               Edward III, King of England, 345
  232,    241; aid to Spanish        troops,              Egypt, 104, 140, 142, 143
  251-252, 254, 259-265                                   Elgin, Thomas Bruce, seventh Earl of,
Commissary General, Portuguese Army,                         17-18, 79, 80, 97, 103
  operation    in Peninsular    War:    229,              Elliot, Hugh, 193-194
  240-246 passim, 262, 264                                Emigre     troops, French, in British service,
Congress of Vienna, 326, 329-331, 332                          78n, 137-138, 140
Continental System:      creation of, 182;                Erebus, H.M.S., 315
  effect on British subsidy payments, 185,                    Espana, Don Carlos de, 252n
  214; effect on British trade, 190, 191,                 Experiment, British merchant vessel, 219
  192, 207, 224, 233; temporary             collapse
  (1809), 212; final collapse, 263, 311                   Fame, British merchant vessel, 219
Copenhagen, Battle of (1807), 142, 190                        Fanshawe, Capt. Henry, R.N., 273
Corfu, 146                                                    Federative   paper:   origin  of scheme,
Cornwallis,  Charles, first Marquis, 46-48,                     277-282 passim; treaty (1813), 289-296,
  59-60                                                         301-304
Cortes, Spain, 240, 247-250 passim, 252,                      Ferdinard IV, King of Naples and Sicily,
  253, 256-257;.and      Wellington, 259-262                    162, 193, 196, 267, 268, 324
                                                        384
                                               Index


Finland, 192, 205-206                               Francis I, Emperor of Austria, 56, 60, 68,
Fiume, 212, 306                                        92, 128,170
Fleurus, Battle of (1794), 49, 56                   Francis,    Hereditary      Prince of Naples and
Foreign Office, Great Britain, organization            Sicily, 267-269
  and operation, 9                                  Frankfort proposals, 315, 317
Fortescue, Sir John W., on Dundas as war            Frederick II (the Great), King of Prussia,
  leader, 14                                          Seis    Bek SRR   ee S)
Fox, Charles James, 19, 26, 120, 147,               Frederick William II, King of Prussia:
  172-176, 181; opposition .to Pitt, 26,              alliances with Britain 5-6, 24; and
  43-44, 62-63, 69, 84, 91, 160                        Poland, 6, 27-28, 45, 46, 53, 73; and
Fox, Gen. Henry, 194                                   British subsidy treaty (1794), 27-33
France                                                 passim, 35-36, 39, 48, 50; character,
  1789-1804: revolution and republic, 1-2;             34-35; dualism of policy, 53; withdraws
    campaign      in Low     Countries,   24, 31,      from Coalition, 63-65, 66; death, 94,
    35, 49, 50, 51; invasion of Nice and              97-98
    Savoy, 25, 76, 81; invasion of Holland,         Frederick      William     III, King     of Prussia:
    $4, 62; peace with Prussia (1795),                 accession, 98; and Russia,           103, 149; T.
    63-64, 67; allied invasion of, 69; cam-            Grenville    mission,    112, 113, 118, 119;
    paigns in Germany, 69, 76; peace with              and Hanover, 168, 169, 171; war with
    Spain   (1795),      76; revolt in Vendée,         Napoleon (1806-1807), 177, 178-179,
    76; establishment of Directory, 77;                190; and Prussian uprising (1809), 211;
    peace with Hesse-Cassel, 77-78; peace             occupation of Paris (1814), 323
    discussions with Britain (1796-1797),           Frere, John Hookham, 200, 201,                     202,
    79, 82-83, 94; neutrality treaty with              219, 248
    Prussia,   82; plans for invasion    of         Friedland, Battle of (1807), 189
    Britain (1797), 84, 86; reorganization
    of   monetary       system,    87; campaigns    Galicia, 196, 198, 203n, 228
   against Austria (1796), 89, 90-91;               Geneva, 103
   peace with Austria (1797), 92, 94;               Genoa, Republic of, 161
    Directory’s      foreign   policy               George     III, King of Great Britain, 7, 41,
    (1797-1798), 99, 100, 103; Rastadt                 Sa    Gl,   O77, 98,     142,°147,         2345s war
   Congress,      99;    seizure   of Malta   and     diplomacy, 66, 67, 70-71, 80, 82
    invasion of Egypt,       104; seeks alliance    George, Prince Regent of Great Britain
   with Prussia, 104; attacks Naples and              (afterwards George IV), 10, 234, 251,
   Austria, 112, 113-114; defeats in Italy,           308, 314
   116; the Consulate, 129; hostility to            German     princes:        and      British     subsidy
   Portugal, 136, 140-141; peace with                 treaties (1815), 338-342 passim
    Britain. (1801-1803), 143; renewal of           ‘Glorious First of June, Battle                 of the
    war with Britain, 144; aggression in               (1794), 14
    Switzerland     and Italy, 145; seizure of      Gneisenau,      Augustus         Neidhardt,     Count,
    Hanover, 145; aggression in Balkans,               209, 273, 283
     146, 174                                       Goltz, Count Von der, 63, 64
  the Empire, 1804-1815: establishment,             Goteborg, 180, 181, 192, 193
     147; plans for invasion of England,            Graham, Lt.-Gen. Sir Thomas, 15, 316
    148; alliance with Spain, 154; aggres-          Grasshopper, H.M.S., 273, 274
   sion in Italy, 160-161, 162; war with            Great Britain
   Third Coalition, 166, 170; and Prussia,            economy: growth of industry, 12, 214;
   166, 171, 172; negotiations with Brit-               war debt, 4, 12; war finance, 12, 95,
   ain (1806), 173, 175, 176; peace with                109-110, 149, 352, 354; grain imports,
   Prussia and Russia, 189; and Penin-                  12, 88, 185, 233; balance of pay-
   sular War, 196; war with Russia, 276,                ments, 78, 87-89 passim, 133-134,
   282; Peace of Paris (1814), 323; re-                 224, 355; financial crises, 85-89 pas-
   storation   of Empire,    333; second                sim, 233, 234, 352; specie shortage,
   Peace of Paris, 339; reparations to                   81, 85-89 passim, 200, 210, 214, 221,
    allies, 341-342                                      223-225      passim,         232-236       passim,
  See also Napoleon                                      255-256,  263-264; tariff problems,
Franche Comte, 119, 124                                  291, 305, 311-313 passim, 330-331,
                                                 Index


    353;   trade  with   Portuguese  and                Hamilton, Sir William, 9, 25n
    Spanish colonies, 136, 190-192 pas-                 Hammond, George, 82, 91, 93
    sim, 200-201, 221-222, 224, 227-228,                Hanover, 17, 77, 77n; and Third Coalition,
    257,     258,      325-326;    overseas   trade        167, 168, 169, 171; Prussian seizure,
    (general), 12-13, 224, 255, 311; effect               173, 177-178; subsidy treaty with Brit-
    of Continental     System   on_ trade,                ain (1813), 315; troops, 327, 338
    190-192 passim, 207, 224, 233, 352;                 Hardenberg, Charles Augustus, Prince von:
    trade with Gibraltar, Ionian Islands,                 Peace of Basel (1795), 64; and Lord
    and Sicily, 190; trade with Sweden                    Harrowby      (1805),    168,   170-171;
    and the Baltic, 190, 206, 207, 286,                   Reichenbach Treaty with Britain (1813),
    290-291, 298                                          294, 295, 296, 300; and Castlereagh,
  foreign      aid     program:      (1793-1806),         316, 37
    26-27,  95, 114-115, 164-165, 18i,                  Harman, Hoare and Harman, bankers, 46,
    345-350; (1807-1815), 214, 237, 283-                  47, 48, 50, 120, 127n
    284, 350-353; cost of (1793-1815),                  Harrowby, Dudley Ryder, first Earl of,
    345, 353-355                                          147, 148, 151, 168-172 passim
Grenville, George, 8                                    Haugwitz, Count C. A. H. Kurt von: and
Grenville, Thomas, 10, 57-61 passim, 109,                 subsidy treaty (1794), 40, 45, 46, 47-50
  110, 112-113, 117-119                                   passim,   52, 64; conduct of Prussian
Grenville, William Wyndham, first Baron,                  foreign policy (1795-1798),      80, 82,
  8-9, 10, 31-32, 177                                     98-100, 104; and T. Grenville’s mission
  First Coalition (1793-1797), 21-25 pas-                 (1799), 108, 112, 113, 117-119 passim
    sim; Prussian subsidy treaty (1794),                Havana, 228
     28-30, 32-33, 37, 39-40, 44; sub-                  Hawkesbury, Lord, see Liverpool, Robert
    sequent relations with Prussia, 49, 51,               Banks Jenkinson, second Earl of
    52, 54, 79-83 passim; Triple Alliance               Heligoland, 209, 211, 274n
    (1795), 55, 63, 66, 69, 71-74; loan                 Helvetic Republic, 103
    convention and alliance with Austria                Helvoetsluys, 264
    (1795), 59-63, 66-68; opposes Pitt,                     Hereditary Prince of Naples, 267-269
     65-67; relations with Russia, 69-74                    Herries, John Charles, 254-255, 263, 304,
   passim,      82,     90;    suspends   Sardinian            328-329, 342-343
    subsidy, 76n; second          loan convention           Herschel, Sir William, 70
    with Austria (1797), 78, 81, 83, 90,                    Hesse-Cassel, 17-18, 77-78, 78n
    92,93                                                   Hesse-Darmstadt, 18, 78, 166
  Second Coalition (1797-1801): plans for                   Hill, Lt.-Gen. Sir Rowland, 15, 252n
    a concert of Europe, 97-114 passim;                     Hohenlinden, Battle of (1800), 134-135
    and Prussia, 97-100, 103, 109-110,                      Holland, see United Provinces of the
     221 Se Lee       aniG eeecUssia OO:                     Netherlands and Kingdom of the Nether-
     105-112 passim, 114, 121, 123-126                        lands
    passim; and Austria, 101, 102-103,                      Hope, British merchant vessel, 219
     105-112 passim, 123, 127-135 passim;                   Hope, General Sir Alexander, 285-286
    hiring of mercenaries,         130-131; aid to          Hope and Company, bankers, 332n
    Portugal, 137-140                                       Horner, Francis, 233-234
  L8OU-1T8t4S    43%   ae   195599225;                      Howe, Richard, Earl, 14
    226-227,    308; as prime minister,                     Howick, Viscount, see Grey, Charles
    172-181                                                 Huskisson, William, 224, 234
Grey,       Charles,     19,       177-178,    180,         Hutchinson, John Hely-Hutchinson,      first
  181-182                                                     Baron, 178-179, 185-186
Guadalajara, British aid to (1810), 228
Guadaloupe, 285, 324                                        Income tax, Great Britain, 109-110, 333,
Guineas, British, export of, 134, 256                         B55oo2
Gustavus IV, Adolphus, King of Sweden,                      India, 94, 263
  150, 181, 197-198, 205; subsidy treaties                  Ionian Islands, 146, 190
  with Britain, 162-164, 188, 192, 206-207                  Ireland, 94, 103


Halevy, Elie, on British Navy, 13                           Jackson, Francis James, 145n

                                                      386
                                                     Index


Jacobi, Baron von: Grenville’s dislike of,                      Mainz, 24, 31, 48
  10, 31-32, 177; Prussian subsidy treaty                       Malmesbury,        James Harris, first Earl of, 5,
  (1794), 30-32 passim, 51, 52; negotiates                        32-41 passim, 45-52 passim, 64-67
 peace    with    Britain    (1806),       177,    178;         Malta, 104, 143, 144, 157-162 passim,
  subsequent career,        186, 187, 289, 298,                   164, 210
  301                                                           Mantua, 90, 116
Jena-Auerstadt, Battle of (1806), 178                           Marengo, Battle of (1800), 132, 133, 142
Joao, Don, Prince Regent of Portugal,                           Maria Carolina, Queen of Naples and
  136, 139-141 passim, 191, 218, 240,                             Sicily, 194-195, 265-268 passim, 270
  242                                                           Maritime Code, Great Britain, 152, 157-158
John, Archduke of Austria, 283                                  Massena, General        André: and the Second
John, Don, Prince Regent of Portugal, see                         Coalition, 123,       131; and the Peninsular
  Joao                                                            War, 2307235242355298.249
Jourdan, Gen. Jean-Baptiste, 62                                 Mayence,    British subsidy treaty                with
Junta de Viveres, see Commissary General,                       (1800), 131
  Portuguese Army                                               Mercenaries,       German,    in British     service:
                                                                  793-1797),     18;   19.   745) 77-78:
Kaiserslautern, 50                                                (1800-1801), 128-131 passim, 133, 135,
Kalisch, Treaty of (1813), 287                                    142; (1815), 338-342 passim; see also
Kennedy, Sir Robert, 254, 264                                     Baden, Hanover, Hesse-Cassel, Hesse-
Kinckel, Baron, 47                                                Darmstadt, Bavaria, Swabia, Brunswick
King, John Harcourt, 272, 283                                   Mercy D’Argenteau, Count, 58, 59
Kingdom of the Netherlands, creation of                         Mermaid, H.M.S., 48, 49, 50
  the, 321, 330, 331, 343                                       Merry, Anthony, 206-207
King’s   German     Legion,     the,    168n,     188n,         Metternich, Prince Klemens Wenzel von:
   327n, 338                                                      and Austrian War of Liberation (1809),
Kleist, Ludwig von, 209, 211                                      207;    and    Austrian  foreign  policy
Kloest, Baron von Jacobi,                see    Jacobi,           (TS8O09=31313) ee 23,8272,     oo    sand
  Baron von                                                       Plaswitz armistice (1813), 296; and Brit-
Knights of St. John, 143                                          ain    (1813),    298-300    passim,     305-306,
Kolberg, 283, 298                                                 313,    317; negotiations with Napoleon,
Konigsberg, 178, 179                                              313,    315; threatens to abandon coali-
Kronstadt, 72, 163, 164, 187, 189                                 tion, 318; and Hundred Days, 333
                                                                Milan, 132
Lehrbach, Count Ludwig, 27                                      “Military guineas,” 263
Leipzig, Battle of (1813), 307-308                              Minorca, 159-160
Leveson Gower, Granville: ministry   to                         Minto,   Gilbert Elliot,         first     Earl    of,
  Russia (1804-1806),  155-159 passim,                            127-135 passim
  161,  167,  172; second   ministry to                         Mollendorf, Field Marshal          Richard        von,
  Russia (1807), 187, 188, 189                                    47-51 passim, 53, 56, 64
Lieven, Count      Christoph,     282, 289, 298,                Moore, Lt.-Gen. Sir John:          and improve-
   301, 313, 314                                                  ment of British Army, 14-15; opinion of
Lille, Anglo-French peace              discussions   at           Maria Carolina, 194-195; expedition to
   (1797), 94, 97, 139                                            Sweden,   193, 197-198; campaign     in
Liverpool,       Robert       Banks       Jenkinson,              Spain (1808-1809),          199, 200, 202-203;
  second Earl of: foreign secretary under                         mentioned, 141, 208, 219, 221, 236
  Addington, 140-141, 144, 146-147, 191;                        Moreau, Gen. Jean-Victoire, 134-135
  as   secretary of war    (1809),   225,                       Morillo, Maj.-Gen. Pablo, 261
  226-227, 234n, 235; prime minister,                           Morpeth, George Howard, Viscount, 177-
  251, Russian-Dutch      loan, 321, 322,                         178
  331-332; settlement of 1815 subsidy                           Mulgrave, Henry Phipps, first Earl of, 151,
  account,    340,   341;    repayment of                         164, 166,171
  Austrian loans (1821), 343                                    Munich, 134
Lucchesini, Jér6me, Marquis de, 27-28                           Muotta, 123
Lunéville, Treaty of (1800), 135                                Murat, Gen. Joachim, 270, 324, 336

Madrid, 196, 253                                                Naples, Kingdom of: alliance with Britain
                                                          387
                                                 Index


 (1793),   24-25;      threatened     by    France             Coalition,       186;    Peninsular       War,        199,
 (1798-1799),    104-105,  112; France                         237; final coalition (1811-1815),                     273,
 abandons (1802), 143; British subsidies                       277, 287-288, 306, 310
 to, 145-146, 162, 193; French conquest                      Ostermann, Count Ivan, 22
 of   (1805),   162;    liberation    of    (1815),          Ottoman Empire,, 5, 143, 144, 174, 175
  339; see also Sicily
Napoleon I: campaigns   (1796-1800), 77,                     Paget, Arthur, 49-50, 52, 174
  81, 91, 104, 132; as First Consul, 129,                    Palmerston,  Henry John Temple,                        third
  140-141,    143; policy    (1802-1803),                      Viscount, 344
 143-145      passim;   and                  Prussia         Panin, Count Nikita, 108, 112
 (1803-1806), 145, 168, 169,               171; be-          Panixer Pass, 123
 comes Emperor, 147; and Italy (1805),                       Parish and Company, bankers, 47-50 passim
 160-161; and Balkans, 161-162, 174;                         Parliament, Great         Britain:    legislative       role,
 and War of the Third Coalition, 165-167                       8
 passim,   170,  178, 182, 273; peace                          1793-1797:        subsidy        treaties,     19,     26,
 negotiations   with    Britain   (1806),                           43-45;  Austrian   loans, 62-63,  69,
 173-176      passim;    and     Russia                             83-85, 91-92; other measures, 86, 138
 (1806-1807), 175, 176, 182, 189, 190;                         1797-1807:     120,  133    140, 148,
 and Continental System, 182; threatens                          154-155, 160
 Portugal (1807), 191; and Peninsular                          1808-1811:   195, 197; 2175 226-2275
 revolt,  196;   and  Prussian  uprising                         233-236 passim
 (1809),   211-212;  war   with  Russia,                       1812-18152   251. 292-2935) B09 sa26
 257-258, 274-275, 276, 282; seizure of                          333-335 passim
 Swedish Pomerania, 275; campaign of                           committees: on Bank Crisis (1797), 86,
 1813,   294; negotiation with   allies                          88-89; on   specie shortage (1810),
  (1813-1814), 300, 315-318 passim, 322;                            233-236 passim
  Hundred Days, 333-339 passim                               Paul     I, Tsar    of    Russia,     83,      94n;     and
Navy, British: in 1793, 3, 13-14; in the                       Grenville’s  concert     proposal, 100,
  Mediterranean, 81, 101, 102, 105, 136,                       103-108 passim,     110-111, 112, 114,
  161; defense of Cadiz, 228                                   115; and War of the Second Coalition,
Navy, Russian, 72, 289, 291, 296n, 321n                        116, 117; and Anglo-Russian expedition
Neerwinden, Battle of (1793), 23n                              to Holland, 117, 120, 121; quarrel with
Nelson, Vice-Admiral Lord, 14, 107, 169                        Austria,  119, 124, 125; negotiations
Nesselrode, Charles Robert Count von:                          with    Britain (1799-1800),   119-120,
  and Reichenbach subsidy treaty, 294,                         124-126
  295,    300;  and    Chaumont   Treaty,                    Pembroke, George Herbert, eleventh Earl
  317-318, 320, 321; and Russian-Dutch                         of, 188
  loan, 320, 321, 330; and Hundred Days,                     Peninsular War: general, 197-265 passim;
   333-334                                                     cost of British military operations in,
Nicolai, Baron, 276                                            222, 234n, 255
Nile, Battle of the (1798), 107, 142                         Perceval,     Spencer,      184,     225,       227;    war
Nootka Sound Affair, 25n                                       policy,     226-227,      235, 273; and Prince
Nore, Mutiny at the (1797), 90                                  Regent, 234, 251; and Bullion Com-
Norway,    Swedish       annexation        of,   see           mittee, 234, 235-236; assassination, 251
  Bernadotte                                                 Pichegru, Gen. Charles, 62
Novosiltzoff, Count Nicolai: mission to                      Picton, Lt.-Gen. Sir Thomas, 15
  Britain   (1804-1805),    151-152; sub-                    Piedmont, 160
  sequent career, 157, 159, 161                              Pierrepont, Henry, 163-164
Nugent, Lt.-Gen. Lavall, 299-300, 305                        Pitt, Anne, 8
                                                             Pitt, William, the Younger
Ocana, Battle of (1809), 222                                    before 1793: 1, 5-6
Oczakoff, 6, 332                                                1793-1797: war policy, 2, 36-37, 56-57,
Oporto, 218                                                       74-75, 77; management of war, 7-8,
Oporto, Bishop of, 198, 231, 241                                  12-14, 95, 109-110; and Second Polish
Oporto Wine Company, 240                                          Partition, 20; and Prussia, 28-29, 31,
Ordnance    Office,    Great    Britain:      Third                 37,   40,   41,    43,   45-46,         49,     51-53


                                                       388
                                                           Index


   passim,        61, 63-67 passim,          81-82, 89;                   324-325,       328;  slackens war effort,
   first Austrian loan convention, 55-63                                  262-263;       demobilization,  324; and
   passim, 65S; desire to liberate Holland,                               Hundred Days, 337
   64-65,         74;    peace       negotiations     with              See also Brazil, Council of Regency,
   France, 78-79, 82, 94; second Austrian                                 Portugal, and Commissary   General,
   loan convention, 80-81, 83-85, 89,                                     Portuguese Army
   91-93; on death       of Catherine the                           Posen, 27
   Great, 83; and Bank Crisis, 86                                   Pozzo di Borgo, Count, 313-314
 1797-1801:     relations   with   Austria,                         Prague, 305
   101-102, 107-108, 114; and Russia,                               Pressburg, Treaty of (1806), 172, 207
   105, 118-120, 124; plans to liberate                             Prince of Orange, 316, 320, 327n
   Holland,    114-116,     118-119;    and                         Property      Tax,     Great   Britain,   109-110,
   Prussia,       115, 118-119; spurns French                           303,555 9502
   peace      bid,       129;    third    Austrian    loan          Proserpine, H.M.S., 110
   convention, 133, 134; and Portugal,                              Prussia
   138; resignation, 142; views on peace                                before    1793: foreign policy, 5; rivalry
    with France, 143                                                      with:   Austrias 95.6, 7, 205 24.) 27;
  1804-1806:    forms  second    ministry,                                Second   Polish   Partition,   6,   20;
     147-148; Army Reserve Bill, 148; and                                 economic weakness, 11, 35
    Russia,       148-154 passim,           156-160 pas-                1793-1796: alliance with Britain (1793),
    sim,  169; and Austria,    148, 149,                                  24; anxiety about Poland, 27-28; anti-
    152-154 passim; Novosiltzoff mission,                                 war spirit, 28, 30, 45, 51; and British
    151-154;            plans      reconstruction           of            subsidies, 28-41 passim, 45-52 passim,
    Europe, 152-153; and Prussia, 152-154                                 88; withdraws from war, 51, 54;
    passim, 167-171; seeks subsidy grants,                                negotiates peace with France, 62-67
    154-155, 160; and Naples, 162, 193;                                   passim; considers reunion with Britain,
    and Sweden, 162-164; plans expedi-                                    63, 64; Third Polish Partition, 72-73;
    tion     to     north       Germany,      167,    168;                and neutrality of north Germany, 77;
    death, 171-172                                                        foreign policy after Peace of Basel, 79;
  subsidy         policy:        (1793-1797),        3,     4,            British bid to (1795), 79, 80, 82;
    26-27, 74-75, 95-96; (1797-1801),                                     treaty of neutrality with France, 82
    106,    118-120,    124; (1804-1806),                               1797-1812: Grenville’s concert proposal,
  . 148-150,    153-154,    164-165,  310;                                97-100, 104; neutrality policy, 104,
    general, 345-350, 353-354                                             113, 145; T. Grenville’s mission to,
Plaswitz     armistice          (1813),    296-300        pas-            108, 109, 110, 112-113, 117-119;     and
  sim                                                                     Hanover, 145, 168, 169, 171; and
Poland:     First       Partition,    5, Second      Parti-               Britain (1804-1806), 146, 167-171 pas-
  tion, 6, 20, 21-23 passim, 45, 70; Third                                sim; Harrowby mission to, 168-171;
  Partition, 51-53 passim, 72-73; and Con-                                war with Britain, 173, 174; war with
  gress of Vienna, 330-331                                                France, 176, 178-179, 182; British aid
Population, Great Britain, 44, 347, 355                                   to, 176-179, 186, 187, 189, 273-274;
Portland,     William           Cavendish      Bentinck,                  peace with France,      189, weakness
  third Duke of, 49, 184, 225                                             after 1807, 190, 273, 283, 351; re-
Portugal                                                                  sistance   movement      (1809),    209,
  1793-1807: 24-25, 136-141, 191                                          211-212
  1808-1815: British aid of rebellion, 198,                             1813-1815: war with France, 284, 287;
    199;     subsidy        program        (1809),    201,                British  aid and    subsidy,   287-288,
    204-205; army and military opera-                                     289-293      passim,    294-296,    298,
    tions, 217-218,    229-230,    234-235,                               300-304    passim, 326-328, 334-335;
    240, 250, 262-264 passim; loan con-                                   size of army, 295; Plaswitz armistice,
    vention,    218,   330;    British   aid                              296; revises tariff, 311; Chatillon con-
    (1809-1811), 218, 219, 226, 229-230,                                  ference, 317, 318; Chaumont Treaty,
    234-235, 237; and British commercial                                  318-321; debts with Dutch bankers,
    treaty, 240; suppression of slave trade,                              320; settlement of British subsidy
    240, 330; British subsidy account                                     account, 323, 327-329, 339, 342-343;
    with, 240-242, 244-247, 258, 264,                                     military operations, 333, 339


                                                                 Bip9
                                                 Index


Quebec, H.M.S., 180, 181                                       with     Austria,     150-151;      and    Sweden,
Quiberon, 69                                                   150, 162-164,    181; War of Third
                                                               Coalition, 166, 167, 170, 179, 182;
Rastadt, Congress of, 99, 100, 101, 103                        British subsidy payments to, 167,
Razumovsky, Count Andreas, 320                                 175-176, 180; and Prussia, 169; and
Regency Bill, Great Britain (1811), 234,                       Britain (1806-1807), 172-176 passim,
  251                                                          179-182       passim,          187-189          passim;
Rehbinder, Gen., 121n                                          peace talks with France             (1806),        175,
Reichenbach, Treaty of (1813), 295-296                         176; British aid to, 180-181, 186, 189;
Restriction Act, Great Britain (1797), 233                     peace with Napoleon, 189; declares
Ricardo, David, 233                                            war on Britain, 190; attacks Sweden,
Riga, 280n                                                     192, 205-207         passim; British arms to
Rimsky-Korsakoff, Gen. Alexander, 119,                         (1811), 273; rapprochement with Brit-
  IW W92By IAS. OX                                             ain, 276; war with France, 274-275,
Rio de Janeiro, 141, 191, 218, 240                             276;     D’Ivernois     mission    to
Robespierre, Maximilien, 77                                    (1812-1813),          277,     279-282          passim,
Roche, Sir Philip Keating, 248n                                289,   290;   and   Sweden    (1812),
Rolleston, Mr., 9                                              279-280; British arms to, 280; de-
Romana, Marquis de, 198”, 232                                  mands British subsidy, 282, 284, 289
Rome, 103                                                    final coalition, 1813-1815:           alliance with
Rose, George Henry, 49                                         Prussia    (1813),     287; British arms to,
Rosebery, Archibald Primrose, fifth Earl                       287-288;         Russian-German                 Legion
 of, 143                                                       treaty    with      Britain,     288;     federative
Rosicrucianism, 35                                             paper       treaty,          289-293            passim,
Rothschild, Nathan, 263-264, 304n, 329                         301-302; Reichenbach subsidy treaty,
Rothschilds Bank, 232n, 263, 323n                              294-296 passim; Plaswitz armistice,
Rugen, Island of, 162                                          296;      British      payments           to,      298,
Russia                                                         300-304          passim;         tariff       policy,
 before 1793: territorial ambitions and                        311-312;         supports       grand       alliance,
   foreign policy, 5, 6; Second Polish                         313-314; Chaumont              Treaty,     317-321;
   Partition, 6,      20,     51-52;      economic             Chatillon        conference,            317,       318;
   weakness, 11                                                economic weakness, 320; debts with
  1793-1801: negotiates alliance with Brit-                    Dutch bankers, 320-321; settlement of
    ain (1793), 20-21; demands British                          subsidy account, 323, 327-329; peace
    subsidy, 22-23; formation of Triple                         with France (1814), 323; and treaty to
    Alliance (1795), 54-55, 57, 69-74 pas-                      maintain armies during Congress of
   sim, 82; Third Polish Partition, 72-73;                      Vienna, 326; negotiation of Russian-
   offers British aid, 82-83, 90; neutrality                    Dutch    loan   convention,     320-322,
   policy,     83,   94;    Grenville’s     concert             330-332; army and military operations
   plan, 100, 103-108 passim; hostility                         (1815), 333, 336, 339; alliance and
   for France, 103, 104; 1798 subsidy                           subsidy treaty with Britain (1815),
   treaty with Britain, 104, 105, 110-112,                      334-335; additional British subsidy to,
   114, 115, 117; support of Austria,                           336, 340; settlement of British subsidy
    106-107, 112, 114, 116; British sub-                        account, 339, 340, 342-343; second
    sidy payments to, 119-121, 125-126;                         Russian-Dutch — loan        convention,
   quarrel   with    Austria,    119, 124, 125;                 343-344
   and 1799 subsidy treaty with Britain,                      See also Alexander I, Catherine II,
   119, 120; Anglo-Russian expedition to                        Nesselrode, Paul I
    Holland,    120-121;     and _ Britain                  Russian-Dutch Loan, 276, 277, 320-322
    (1799-1800), 123-126 passim; recalls                      passim, 330-332 passim, 343-344
    troops from the west, 126                               Russian-German Legion, 288, 289
  1802-1812: rejects British bid for joint
    action (1802-1803),    144, 145; and                    Sahagun, 202
    French aggression in Balkans, 146;                      Salamanca, 199-200, 202
    subsidy     treaty     with    Britain                  Salamanca, Battle of (1812), 253, 255
    (1804-1805), 148-161 passim; alliance                   Santander, 262


                                                      390
                                                        Index


Sardinia:  subsidy treaties with Britain,                    Spencer, George John, second Earl of,
  25-26, 76n, 322; withdraws from war,                         57-58, 60-61
  76, 81                                                     Spencer, Lord Henry, 64, 67
Savoy, House of, 119, 160                                    Spithead, Mutiny at (1797), 90
Saxe-Coburg-Saalfield, Prince Friedrich of,                  Stadion, Count Johann Philipp, 156, 158,
  56                                                           161, 207, 213, 299-300
Schaffhausen, 123                                            Stafford, George Granville Leveson Gow-
Schill, Maj. Ferdinand, 211-212                                er, second Marquess of, 155
Schwarzenberg,          Prince     Karl     Philip    von,   Starhemberg, Count Louis, 10, 24; Austri-
   323                                                         an loans, 55, 56, 59, 60, 90, 92, 93;
Secret Service Fund, Great Britain,                   sub-     quarrels with Britain, 101, 102, 103,
  sidy payments from, 163, 195                                 107, 129; subsequent career, 212
Seven Years War (1759-1763), 187                             Stein, Henry Frederick Baron vom, 282,
Seville, 222                                                   289, 294
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, 86                               Stewart, Gen. Sir Charles, 290-303 passim,
Sicily: and Bourbons,            162; relations with           S105 SHES, SHY
  Britain,    186m, 193-196, 265-271, 324;                   Storekeeper         General,     Great     Britain, 237,
  French      invasion of (1810), 265; and                     306
  Peninsular War, 269-270                                    Stralsund:     and Third Coalition, 162, 163,
Sieyés,     Comte      Emmanuel-Joseph,              Abbé,      164,     167,     192;    British     expedition     to
  104                                                           (1807),     185, 188, 189; and Schill up-
Slave trade, 326, 330                                           rising    (1809),        211-212;        arms     depot
Smith, Payne, and Smiths, bankers, 342                         (1813), 287-288; mentioned, 292
Soult, Marshal Nicolas-Jean-de-Dieu, 218,                    Strangford, Percy Smythe, sixth Viscount,
  222,256,261                                                  141,191
Souza e Coutinho, Jose de, 231, 241, 242                     Stroganoff, Count, 175-176
Spain                                                        Stuart, Gen. Sir Charles, 138, 141
  before     1808:    alliance with   Britain                Stuart, Charles, 198, 229, 231-232, 238,
    (1793),     24-25; peace with France                       241-245 passim
    (1795), 76; war with Britain (1796),                     Subsidy payments, Great Britain, see indi-
     76; threatens Portugal, 136, 140                          vidual countries and appendix
  1808-1815:         Joseph Bonaparte becomes                Surveillante, H.M.S., 216
   .king,     196;     revolts     (1808),     196-198;      Suvoroff, Count Alexander,                    114,    116,
    British aid to (1808-1810), 198-200                        17a        A23
    passim, 203, 219, 222-223, 227-228,                      Swabia, Circle of, 131
    237;     alliance       with    Britain     (1809),      Sweden:       and     Britain     (1799),     120n; and
    200-201,         219;   requests      money       from      Third     Coalition,         150,     161-164,     173,
    Britain, 200, 204, 221, 228, 250, 257,                      188,     192; subsidy treaties with Britain
    325; and trade with Britain, 200-201,                       (1804-1809),    162-164,    188,    192,
    221-222,227-228, 257, 258, 325-326;                         206-207; war with Russia, 192, 205-206,
    military   operations     (1809-1811),                      207;   British  aid   to   (1807-1808),
    221-222, 228, 232; British aid to                           192-193, 197-198; British trade with,
    (1811-1812),     247-250,     252-253,                      190, 206, 207, 286; deposition of Gus-
    257-259;        colonial     revolts,     247,    250;      tavus IV, 207; Bernadotte, 274; and
    and Wellington, 239-240, 258-265 pas-                       Britain (1811-1814), 274-279 passim,
    sim;   military    operations  (1812),                      282-286 passim, 292-293, 307-308, 312,
    256-257, 259-265 passim; settlement                         324; British) arms, 10; 27556277, 279:
    of British subsidy account, 325-326,                        287-288; alliance with Russia, 275, 279;
    328;   treaty   with   Britain (1814),                      failure of 1812 harvest, 285; Hope’s
    325-326; suppression of slave trade,                        mission to (1813), 285-286; subsidy
    326, 330; and Hundred Days, 337,                            treaties with Britain (1813), 285-286,
    340                                                         307-308; British payments to, 286, 289,
 See also Cortes, Peninsular War, Henry                         307n; and Spain, 286n; military opera-
    Wellesley, Wellington                                       tions (1813-1814), 292, 307, 312, 316;
Specie shortage, see Great Britain, Econo-                      tariff revision, 311; acquires Norway,
                                                                312, 316; settlement of British subsidy
  my
                                               Index


  account, 323-324; British payment in                    loan    conventions:    Austria,   68, 92,
  lieu of Guadaloupe, 324; refuses to join                   132-133; Portugal, 218, Russia, 331,
  in 1815 campaign, 337                                     344
  See also, Bernadotte, Gustavus IV, and                  subsidy treaties: Austria, 158-159, 161,
    Edward Thornton                                         306,     318-319,    335;    Baden,   18;
Swedish Pomerania, 150, 162-163, 164,                       Bavaria, 131; Brunswick, 54; German
  275                                                       princes, 338, 341; Hanover, 17, 315;
Switzerland, 99, 103, 105, 145                              HesseCassel, 17-18; Hesse-Darmstadt,
Syren, H.M.S., 46-47                                         18; Mayence, 131; Prussia, 40-41, 187,
                                                            295-296,     301-302,     318-319,   335;
Talavera,   Battle of (1809),    15, 213, 214,              Russia        2 ONS 8-159 59295-2962
  Doi                                                       301-302, 318-319, 335; Sardinia, 25,
Tarragona, 247                                              322; Sicily, 195-196, 269; Swabia,
Teplitz, treaties of, 306, 317                               131; Sweden, 163-164, 188, 192, 207,
Teschen, Treaty of (1779), 100                               285-286, 308; Wiirttemberg, 131
Thornton, Edward: and Austrian subsidy                    other treaties: Austria,      326; France,
  payments (1805), 166-167, 171, 175;                        143, 323, 339; Holland, 41; Portugal,
  ministries  to   Sweden,   192, 206n,                      191n, 330; Prussia, 326; Russia, 21,
  274-279 passim,    285, 286, 307-308,                     288, 326; Spain, 330; Sweden, 324
  312; negotiates treaty with Denmark,                  Triple Alliance (Britain, Holland, Prussia),
  B16y325                                                 5-6, 28-32 passim, 35, 37, 39, 41
Thornton, Samuel, 273                                   Triple Alliance (Britain, Austria, Russia),
Thornton and Smalley, bankers, 127n                          73-74
Thugut, Baron Johann: plans for terri-                  Turin, 116
  torial expansion, 23, 57-58, 119; refuses             Tyrol, Austrian, 283, 299-300
  to subsidize Prussia (1794), 39n; seeks
  financial help in London (1794), 55, 58;
  1795 alliance with Britain, 60-62 passim,
                                                        Ulm, Battle of (1805), 166, 168, 175
  65,   67-69;     new   help    from      Britain      United Provinces of the Netherlands, 5,
                                                          28, 29; and Prussian subsidy treaty
  (1795-1796), 78, 90; and Pitt, 89; loss
                                                          (1793-1794), 32-33, 39, 40, 41; French
  of Britain’s confidence in, 92-93, 106;
                                                          invasion (1795), 62; plans for liberation,
  1797 loan convention with Britain, 93,
                                                          98, 101, 114, 117-121 passim; Britain
  112, 128; terms of peace with France,
                                                          aids liberation (1813-1814),     316; see
  93-94,    100-101,   114;  and _Naples,
  104-105, 112; negotiations with France,
                                                             also    Kingdom    of the Netherlands and
                                                             Russian-Dutch Loan
  115, 133, 142; quarrel with Russia, 119,
  125: third Austrian loan with Britain                 United States, 233, 308, 326, 333
  (1800), 127-133 passim;         driven     from
  office (1800), 134                                    Valencia, 247
Tierney, George, 120                                    Vansittart, Nicholas:          and   Bullion   Com-
Tilsit, 182, 192                                             mittee,   236; as chancellor of the
Tilsit, Treaty of (1807), 189                                exchequer, 251, 293; and federative
Torres Vedras, Siege of (1810-1811), 230,                    paper,    282,    289,   290,   301;   Russian-
  231, 232, 234-235, 238                                      Dutch Loan, 322, 331; and settlement
Tortosa, 247                                                  of subsidy accounts (1815), 340, 342
Toulon, Siege of (1793), 19, 35-36                          Vendée, 76
Toulouse, 264, 323                                          Venetia, 95
Trafalgar, Battle of (1805), 14, 165, 169                   Venezuela, 228
Transport Office, Great Britain, 273                        Venus, H.M.S., 70
Treasury Office, Great Britain and Penin-                   Vera Cruz, 224
  sular War, 223-225 passim, 232, 255-256                   Verona, 116
Treaties, Great Britain (1793-1831)                         Villiers, John Charles, 201, 204, 229
  alliances: Austria, 24, 68, 211, 334;                     Vimiero, Battle of (1808), 199
    Naples, 24, 25n; Portugal, 24, 25n;                     Vittoria, Battle of (1813), 260, 300, 308
     Prussia, 24, 178, 334; Russia, 21, 71,                 Voltri, Battle of (1800), 131
     73-74, 276, 334; Spain, 24, 25n,                       Vorontzoff, Count Alexander, 22, 144,
     200-201, 325-326; Sweden, 276                            145, 146
                                                     39/2
                                                   Index


Vorontzoff,          Count  Simon,         10,  107,             230-232 passim,          234-238 passim; and
  108-109,         111, 146, 147,         175n; and              Portuguese      army,     217, 218, 237-238,
 alliance     with    Britain,     21,   22; Russian             244-247       passim,    254; and Portuguese
 subsidy treaty, 105; and Third Coalition,                       subsidy,      222,      223-224,     229;        specie
 148, 151-152, 159                                               shortage, 224, 232, 255-256, 263; and
                                                                 Portuguese Council of Regency, 231,
                                                                 239-244 passim, 262; and Spanish
Wagner, Lt. August, 208-209                                      subsidy, 239, 252-253, 258-262 pas-
Wagram, Battle of (1809), 212, 213                               sim;    and     Spanish     army,         240,    247,
Walcheren, Island of, British expedition to                       251-252, 256-257, 260-261
  (1809), 15, 213, 214, 215, 225                               Hundred       Days     (1815),       332,    333-335,
Wales, 86                                                         338-342
Wallmoden, Ludwig Von, 208-209, 211                           Wessenberg, Baron de, 298-299
Walpole, Lord, 320                                            Whitbread, Samuel, 332
War of 1812, 288, 308, 326, 333                               Whittingham, Sir Samuel Ford, 248n
War    of    the    Spanish      Succession   (1701-          Whitworth, Sir Charles, 10;and First Coali-
  1714), 25                                                     tion, 20-23, 70-73, 82, 83; promotes
Warren, Sir John Borlase, 144, 155                             Grenville’s     concert plan, 100, 103; and
Waterloo, Battle of (1815), 339                                subsidy           treaties    with    Russia
Watson, Brook, 47                                               (1798-1799), 105, 107, 110-111, 120;
Wellesley, Sir Arthur, see Wellington                           negotiations   with Tsar (1799-1800),
Wellesley,   Sir Henry:    and trade with                       124-126
  Spain, 227-228, 240, 258, 325-326; aid                      Wickham, William, 130-131, 133, 135
  to Spain, 227, 247,             248-251 passim,             William, Prince of Orange, 316, 320, 327n
  253, 258, 260; and              Wellington, 240,            Woodforde, The Reverend James, 1
  248, 252-253, 256, 259-260; treaty with                     World War I, 344, 345
  Spain (1814), 325-326; hires Spanish                        Wurttemberg, 18, 131, 166
  troops (1815), 340
Wellesley,  Richard Wellesley, the Mar-                       Yarmouth, Francis Seymour Conway, first
  quess: and Spain, 219, 228, 249, 250;                         Earl of, 18-19, 24, 27-28, 32
  foreign    secretary,   225-226,     238,                   York, Frederick Augustus, Duke of: gen-
  250-251, 272, 274; and Sicily, 266, 267;                     eral, 14, 15, 54; campaign in the Low
  and Russia, 272, 273; and Austria, 272;                      Countries (1793-1795), 31, 50, 77; and
  and Prussia, 273-274; and Sweden, 274                        Austrian army, 59, 60, 61, 68, 69;
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, first Duke of                    expedition   to Holland   (1799),  121,
  Peninsular War (1808-1814), 197, 199,                        124n
      205, 216; military operations, 214,
      218, 230-232 passim, 234-238 passim,                    Zealand, province of, 213
      239,     242,    250,       251-264     passim;         Zurich, 123




                                                        393
                          _—
                                                                               o         lea
        i                                    et
                                              baities                                     »-
    yy                            amg!                           i big                    een
é                         ¢                                                                     7



                                                                           _         Ue.




    + eng) ae Sa
                                         err                                              ee
                                                    -                      =
        we        bih4@                                  a-                    a           es

                  -               Ae


             Pe                                          eZ
        7                 ene                      _         +4    i
    ;                 Ee                           a]             "i           Wy
              Pie
                                                    _             o\
    maeYs ¢, 2                                               eo            _
                  ‘           ;              ‘ \        we             a            i.

             ee                      7             nl?

                                                                   ffs
                              (=                             _
                                               a)                  f
                      ‘                  :       as‘A!
tered by Napoleon’s military genius at Ulm
and Austerlitz.

When, in 1808, Spain and Portugal rose in
great national revolutions against French
domination, Britain was quick to take ad-
vantage of the turning of the tide. She sent
the Peninsular powers enormous quantities
of money and arms, as well as a military
force commanded by Sir Arthur Wellesley
(later the Duke of Wellington). Thanks in
great measure to the ever increasing flood of
British aid to the Peninsula, Wellington was
able to mobilize the fighting power of his
country’s allies and drive the French back
across the Pyrenees in 1813. At the same
time, Russia, Sweden,   Prussia, and Austria
rebelled against Napoleon, and looked to
Britain for the money and arms they lacked.
During 1813 alone, Britain sent her allies
nearly 1,000,000 muskets and pledged them
more than £11,000,000 in subsidies.    In
Waterloo Year, more than thirty European
powers, great and small, shared Britain’s
bounty.

Drawing on the British government archives,
the author traces the development of Bri-
tain’s subsidy policy through its successive
stages between 1793 and 1815 and casts
light on Britain’s little-noticed role as the
arsenal of the coalitions. From this study,
the war leadership of Pitt, Lord Grenville,
Canning, and Castlereagh emerges in a new
dimension.

The author, John M. Sherwig, is Professor
of British History at the State University of
New York, New Paltz.



    HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
       CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
