ill
NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE




TRENT UNIVERSITY
    LIBRARY

    PRESENTED BY

  PROP. CHRIS GREENE
/'
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
             in 2019 with funding from
              Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/ouvrardspeculatoOOOOwolf
Gabriel Julien Ouvrard. Lithograph by Villain. From Ouvrard’s Memoirs,
                 vol. Ill, 1827. (Otto JVolff Collection)
OUVRARD
   Speculator of Genius
           1770-1846



                 by
      OTTO WOLFF

            Translated by
   STEWART THOMSON
  With an Introduction and Notes by
      T. A. B. CORLEY




DAVID McKAY COMPANY, INC.
            NEW YORK
ENGLISH       TRANSLATION       ©     1962     BY
BARRIE & ROCKLIFF, 2 CLEMENT’S INN,
LONDON        WC2.    FROM    THE     ORIGINAL
GERMAN     “DIE      GESCHAFTE      DES    HERRN
OUVRARD”       BY    OTTO    WOLFF.    ©      i960
RHEINISCHE      VERLAGS-ANSTALT,          GMBH.,
                    WIESBADEN


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED,          INCLUDING THE
RIGHT    TO   REPRODUCE       THIS    BOOK,    OR
PARTS THEREOF, IN ANY FORM, EXCEPT
FOR THE INCLUSION OF BRIEF QUOTATIONS
                IN A REVIEW


  LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGUE
         CARD NUMBER 63-13474




        PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
                           Contents

INTRODUCTION BY T. A. B. CORLEY                               vii
NOTE                                                          xi V
author’s PREFACE                                              XV
One      A Controversial Figure                                i
Two      The First Deal                                        4
Three    A Fugitive from the Revolution                       12
Four     Paris: the Great Opportunity                         22
Five     The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte              52
Six      The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure   71
Seven    The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace
           Negotiations                                       109
Eight    The Banker of the Hundred Days                       125
Nine     The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation   133
Ten      Aristocratic Relations                               147
Eleven   Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain           151
Twelve   The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild            186
Thirteen The Last Quarter-Million                             198
Fourteen The Final Reckoning                                  204
epilogue                                                      208

APPENDIXES
       I Ouvrard’s Version of the Trading Contract with
           Charles IV                                       212
      II Supplementary Agreement Covering Trade with the
           Spanish Colonies                                 212
     III Royal Decree of Charles IV on the Expropriation of
           Religious Foundations                            214
     IV The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle                       215
      V Ouvrard’s Contract to supply Transport Vehicles for
           the French Army in Spain                         216
     VI Ouvrard on Imprisonment for Debt or Pending In¬
           vestigation                                      20

BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                  224
INDEX                                                         229
                      Illustrations

Gabriel Julien Ouvrard                                 frontispiece

Barras, Member of the Directory                   facing page   48
The merchant J. J. Vanlerberghe                                 48
Chateau Rainey in 1808                                          49
Madame Tallien                                                  49
Minister of the Treasury, Barbe-Marbois                         80
Fouche, Duke of Otranto                                         80
King Charles IV of Spain                                         81
Queen Marie-Louise of Spain                                      81
Prospectus of a loan-issue for Spain by the firm of Hope        96
Henry Hope                                                      97
P. C. Labouchere                                                97
Broker on the Paris Bourse                                      128
The Abbaye Prison                                               129
The prison tower at Vincennes                                   I29
Louis XVIII and Napoleon                                        144
Armand-Emmanuel, Due de Richelieu                               i45
Julien Ouvrard, Ouvrard’s son                                   M5
Title page of budget proposals by Ouvrard                       176
The Duke of Wellington                                          177
Attorney General Bellart                                        177
Evidence of the Commission of Enquiry, 1824                     192
The Conciergerie prison                                         192
Nathan Rothschild                                               193

  The Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris kindly granted access
  to its manuscript department and allowed manuscripts to be
                         photographed.
                           Introduction

                    by T. A. B. CORLEY


Otto Wolff (1881-1940) was a rarity among biographers, a
businessman who found the time, while presiding over the
fortunes of a vast industrial and commercial empire which he had
built up, to write the life of an earlier man of affairs. The fact that
the author’s life-work—unlike that of his subject—endured after
his death, in spite of war, defeat, inflation and reconstruction,
shows that he was well qualified to assess Ouvrard’s gifts and
limitations. He was familiar with the world of financial deals and
with the lore of the commodity and stock markets; similarly he
fully understood the subtle and often intricate relationship be¬
tween commerce, politics and diplomacy and the problems of
survival and success in an epoch of violent changes in the social
and political scene both at home and abroad.
  As he tells us in his Preface, Wolff was primarily interested in
probing the real relationship between economics and politics, a
subject that today still presents a challenge to historians and
economists alike. In particular, we still do not know nearly
enough about the economics of the period 1793-1815, that lies at
the centre of Ouvrard’s life; indeed, except for the nature and
immediate effects of the Continental System, the economic
aspects of this turbulent period of European history have not yet
been described in a coherent form to the English reader. This bio¬
graphy of a Frenchman, who was the leading army contractor and
financier of many of the campaigns that took place at that time,
therefore helps to fill a gap and to illuminate some hitherto
VUl                         Introduction

unsuspected connections between economic trends, problems of
logistics, and political, diplomatic and strategic events.
   Ouvrard’s enterprises and operations were on such a grand
scale, so abundantly was he endowed with imagination, resource¬
fulness and sheer animal spirits, so impressively did he combine
the lack of scruples of a financial soldier of fortune with out¬
standing powers of improvisation and innovation, that the con¬
temporary comparisons between him and Napoleon no longer
appear as entirely without substance. “I was born with a passion
for big business, which I find essential to the full activity of my
mind”, wrote Ouvrard in his Memoirs. “It gives me a kind of
gambler’s excitement which neither experience nor reason can
overcome.” Together with his genuine passion for gambling he
had the looks, bearing, spontaneous generosity and charm of
manner of the man of the world. These qualities and his unfailing
resilience made him capable time and again of rapid moral and
intellectual adjustment to the sudden transition from palace to
prison. And, as Wolff shows, he had his moments of greatness, of
constructive foresight and economic vision, which carried him at
times to the forefront of the stage of European history.
   The star of this great drama was of course Napoleon, who at
once hated Ouvrard and found him indispensable in times of
necessity. Not unexpectedly, there were close similarities in the
circumstances of the two men’s rise to fame. They were contem¬
poraries: Napoleon was born in 1769 and Ouvrard in 1770. Both
men courted official suspicion by their activities after 1789 and,
having come to Paris at the age of twenty-two in order to plead
their respective cases with the authorities, they became rapidly
drawn into the centre of affairs, partly through their remarkable
gifts and partly through getting to know the right people: the
Director Barras, Josephine de Beauharnais and Madame Tallien.
   While Ouvrard did not endear himself to the Directory or to
Napoleon by the sixty million francs he amassed between 1795
and 1799 as army contractor and naval victualler-in-chief, he did
nevertheless tender very sound advice to the Directors about the
folly of feeding inflation by continuing to print unbacked paper
money—the notorious assignats—and about the need to fund the
                            Introduction                         ix


national debt in an attempt to mobilize the country’s resources.
After the coup d’etat of the 18th Brumaire, Napoleon had to call
on him to supply the Marengo campaign of 1800 and to relieve
the severe famine of 1802. Yet Ouvrard could not expect any
favour of the First Consul, whom he later criticized in his
memoirs as “knowing no other sources of revenue but taxation
and conquest”. Napoleon, indeed, was constantly trying to
squeeze Ouvrard’s war profits out of him. Ouvrard chose not to
resist openly, but to bide his time and meanwhile to apply himself
to building up financial empires behind “men of straw” and to
salting away his wealth beyond the reach of the authorities.
   Wolff has rightly described his agreement of December 1804
with the King of Spain as “unparalleled in economic or political
history”. Its main object was to bring Spanish treasure worth
more than 260 million francs—nearly twice the combined
reserves of the Bank of France and the Bank of England at that
time—through the British blockade. It is amazing how nearly he
succeeded. The bold conception and the incisive analysis of a
given situation was, once more, sustained by his personal powers
of persuasion and charm of manner, which later captivated even
the crusty Duke of Wellington. Thus he managed to win over all
the men whose services were essential to his scheme, from
Napoleon and his ministers to the two foremost bankers in
Europe, Hope of Amsterdam and Baring of London. What almost
surpasses belief is that Baring, at Ouvrard’s behest, should have
persuaded Pitt to despatch four frigates of the Royal Navy in
order to bring back the first sixty millions. The Bank of England,
however, badly needed the bullion in order to fortify its reserves,
as British subsidies to Allied governments and other war expen¬
diture overseas totalled for 1805 and 1806 alone the equivalent
of seventy-five million francs. Once more Ouvrard’s grasp of
circumstances and opportunities shows the touch of a master.
   Pitt’s less sagacious successors refused to allow the other 200
millions to pass through the blockade as specie. In accordance
with Ouvrard’s alternative plan, therefore, this vast wealth
streamed across the Atlantic in the form of colonial goods, bought
in the United States with the Mexican piastres and carried to
X                           Introduction

Continental ports in neutral ships. Nelson’s old captains, still
maintaining their endless vigil offshore, shook their heads over
this apparent wide-open breach in the blockade. Yet although the
French benefited directly or indirectly from the use of these goods,
the British, living up to Napoleon’s contemptuous characteriza¬
tion as a “nation of shopkeepers”, were rapidly expanding their
exports of manufactured goods to the New World in order both
to acquire the piastres and to replace the markets now closed to
them on the Continent through Napoleon’s decrees.
    Wolff suggests that the whole gigantic operation collapsed as
a result of the Emperor’s high-handed interference. However,
later research has revealed that it continued until its completion
in the summer of 1808, interrupted only temporarily by Jefferson’s
Embargo Act of 1807 which forbade American ships to sail to
foreign ports. Yet it was regarded as important enough for the
United States Secretary of the Treasury specifically to exempt it.
The total proceeds did not come up to Ouvrard’s original expec¬
tations, but world trade benefited by the millions of francs’ worth
of bullion that had been drawn into international circulation, and
a number of the main parties did well enough out of the trans¬
action. Barings, Hopes and their American agents pocketed
twenty-two million francs, while Ouvrard’s own share was
allegedly a further twenty-four millions.
    Throughout the years of Napoleon’s ascendancy, Ouvrard’s
foremost allies were characteristically Talleyrand and Fouche,
These three great pragmatists and opportunists knew better than
anyone how to anticipate subtle shifts in social and political
power. Thus they formed a harmonious trio, as each member
could only profit from co-operation with the others—the wily
diplomatist, the astute and ever-alert police chief and the in¬
dispensable financier. That the two former were in the latter’s pay
most of the time was of equal benefit to all three: but that was
not the whole story, for irrespective of such simple monetary
considerations, their affinity of outlook, method of operation and
interest would surely have brought them together. In consequence
the three of them, by deliberate choice, or impelled by circum¬
stances beyond their control, were bound to part company with
                            Introduction                          xt

the Emperor, once he appeared to have embarked irrevocably on
his collision course against the rest of Europe and specifically
against Britain and Russia. As soon as it became clear that no
manoeuvre and no persuasion could have stopped Napoleon and
healed the fundamental rift in European power, all three—though
each in his different way—were waiting for the day of reckoning,
biding their time in readiness for a new regime to take over after
the collapse of the Empire, which now seemed to them un¬
avoidable.
  Although Napoleon was enlightened enough to establish the
Bank of France and lay the foundations of an equitable taxation
system, to the end he adhered to his outdated weapons of econo¬
mic warfare, namely indemnities and blockades. As Ouvrard
said in his Memoirs, “Napoleon, when he came to power, knew
no other means of replenishing his Treasury than those he had
employed as general to fill his military chest: war indemnities, the
spoliation of sovereigns and peoples, subsidies imposed on his
allies—who were often as ill-treated as his enemies—blockades,
ports closed to free commerce and opened by licences.... Credit
was to him an abstract idea, in which he saw merely the dreams of
ideologists and the empty notions of economists.” The Emperor
even smugly pointed to the Rothschilds’ shipments of bullion
across the Channel from 1811 onwards as evidence that his
blockade was driving Britain to her knees. He never grasped that
the network of international finance was, by means of bills and
smuggled letters of credit, simply transferring the money to
Wellington’s Peninsular Army, which would otherwise have
starved for lack of supplies. Ouvrard could have explained all
this, and on the eve of the Russian campaign of 1812 he did try
to impress on the Emperor, by letter, that in the end it is cheaper
to pay for supplies than to requisition them. As it was, he was
kept in more or less close confinement until 1814 when, as
Talleyrand’s protege, he accompanied the Bourbons on their
triumphal re-entry into Paris.
  This change of loyalties did not deter Napoleon from summon¬
ing him urgently to the Tuileries at the outset of the Hundred
Days, appointing him army contractor-in-chief and extracting
XU                          Introduction

from him a loan of fifty million francs, cash down. Ouvrard was
present on the field of Waterloo, but the Bourbons were not too
proud thereafter to make use of his talents or to follow the
Napoleonic practice of squeezing large sums out of him. Even if
the grand project of paying off the Allied reparations by borrow¬
ing the funds from the Allies themselves was not solely Ouvrard’s
intellectual property, he certainly played an important and
characteristically audacious part in its conception and execution.
This operation successfully mitigated the financial plight of the
Bourbons and in 1818 prematurely terminated the occupation of
France. Thus Ouvrard and his friends anticipated by a century
the similar solution to the German reparations problem after the
First World War. Incidentally, how well does the ingenuity—
and one may almost say, painless elegance—with which the
great bankers and statesmen of old Europe arranged matters
compare with the tortuous and dilatory methods of their succes¬
sors in the twenties of this century!
     The memory of this momentous operation had hardly begun
to fade before Ouvrard figured prominently and with un¬
diminished powers in the highly bizarre episode of the French
invasion of Spain in 1823. France had a quarrel with her neigh¬
bour; the army was massed on the Pyrenees. The Duke of
Angouleme arrived at Bayonne to take command, and found an
army virtually without provisions for man or beast. He therefore
did what all sensible men in those straits had done for the past
thirty years: he sent for Ouvrard. Ouvrard, having foreseen this
situation, had already cornered the market in those commodities
that the army most needed. He then put into practice his maxim
of paying handsomely for the necessary supplies in Spain, and
thus did precisely what Napoleon had so disastrously failed to do
during the Peninsular War a decade earlier. Now, fortified by
ample provisions, the royal Commander-in-Chief emulated the
grand old Duke of York by marching all the way to Cadiz via
Madrid—with Ouvrard energetically buying ahead even as far
afield as Morocco—and then marching back again in triumph to
Paris. French honour was amply satisfied; that is, until Ouvrard
presented the bill. The subsequent affaire Ouvrard raged for
                            Introduction                         xui

years in and out of the Chambers, the courts, commissions of
enquiry and the Press. The cause of it all, once more behind bars,
added to the sensation by writing his memoirs.
  After that episode, a slow decline in his fortunes set in. Ouvrard
was eventually released from prison and no doubt he was still
able to back his assessment of trends, which rarely failed him. He
was still able to play the market with a nimble but firm grip on
operations. That neither zest nor cunning had deserted him was
amply borne out by his large-scale bear operations against the
French rentes. He had convinced himself that the Bourbons were
on the way out and that the Rothschilds, by then the established
government bankers, were still backing the regime and thus the
wrong horse. But these were considerable though temporary
successes, brilliant coups which had no lasting impact on affairs,
on an historical scale. The Rothschilds and their competitors,
imitators and successors were by then “in” for keeps, and Ouvrard
was “out”. At the end Ouvrard, the one-time grand seigneur of
Rainey, died in 1846 in a small apartment in London, off Oxford
Street, of no account now, and entirely oblivious of the fever of
railway speculation that then raged in the country.
  In a sense Ouvrard was born before his time, as have been most
bold and imaginative innovators, not only in the field of finance
and commercial enterprise. Unlike the Comte de Saint-Simon—■
who had also grown rich and had lived in splendour under the
Directory—he gave little conscious thought to the future of
man and of society. Nevertheless, the promoters who impelled
France into her most rapid rate of growth in the nineteenth
century owed their economic ideas partly to Saint-Simon and
partly to Ouvrard. The watchword of the Pereire brothers,
founders of the Credit Mobilier, was almost identical with his
own phrase that “the present can be safeguarded only by mort¬
gaging the future”; like him, they eventually overreached them¬
selves and vanished into obscurity.
  Nor did his vision of exploiting the New World’s untold
wealth die with him. Whilst in prison, in 1826, he sketched out a
project for linking the Atlantic and Pacific oceans by means of a
canal through Nicaragua; exactly twenty years later a political
XIV                           Introduction

prisoner, who happened also to be Bonaparte’s nephew and heir,
wrote a pamphlet on the same topic. Louis Napoleon grasped the
boundless economic possibilities of Mexico and, when he had
become Emperor, launched his disastrous expedition against that
country.
    Ouvrard had another link with the Second Empire. As Wolff
tells us, he had hoped to found a financial dynasty similar to that
of the Barings, but his legitimate son rose no higher than county
councillor and deputy, serving without distinction on the
Chamber’s finance committee. It was left to the offspring of his
union with Madame Tallien to re-create in the society of the
Second Empire some of the elegance and dash that Ouvrard had
displayed in the First. Dr. Cabarrus was a good-looking man
of the world, whose wit, bedside manner and skill in treating
ailments of the larynx made him highly sought after, both pro¬
fessionally and socially, by the theatrical monde and their friends.
Oddly enough, Dr. Cabarrus married the sister of Ferdinand de
Lesseps, the man who realized the Saint-Simonian dream of
linking East and West by means of the Suez Canal. Mademoiselle
de Lesseps was also a cousin of Empress Eugenie. How the
subject of this fascinating biography would have relished the
irony of such a bond, however remote, between his family and
that of Napoleon.


                               NO TE

During most of Ouvrard’s lifetime the rate ofexchange was 2$ francs
to fl. In order to convert sums mentioned in this book to present-day
values, the New Franc being worth about is. 6d., it is necessary
to multiply those sums by four or five.
  In 1801, for instance, a franc (or 9\d.) would buy about 5 lb. of
white bread in the provinces, but prices were of course higher in Paris
and other big towns. The daily wage of an unskilled worker was
about l\ to 2 francs (say, is. to is. 6d.), but a highly skilled man, par¬
ticularly in the building industry in Paris, might earn up to 4 francs,
or 3s., a day. In England at this time the 4W. loaf cost about j\d., and
the wages of a skilled worker in the building trade were about 3s. a day.
                       Author s Preface


In the year 1818 the banker and military contractor, Ouvrard,
devised and executed an ingenious financial operation, which
resulted in the premature withdrawal of the Allied forces from
his native soil. In my search for historical parallels, which might
give me a better understanding of the problems of my own time,
I came upon Ouvrard and felt an urge to enquire more closely
into the fortunes of this extraordinary man. His contemporaries
were so passionately divergent in their judgements of him that
it is extremely difficult to paint an objective picture of his life
and his business career. So strong was the imprint of his per¬
sonality upon his own period that even today, a hundred years
later, writers continue to attack him as if he were still alive.
  Ouvrard lived at the turn of a century and of an epoch. He was
a child of the French Revolution. He developed as the age in
which he lived developed, with all its ups and downs. Although
at the outset he was concerned only with his own advancement,
the great economic problems of his day became an overriding
interest. The real relationship between economics and politics is
something we know little of, either from history or from tradition;
this book is an attempt to ascertain it.
  My thanks are due to Dr. Alfred Ludwig Schmitz, Berlin, for
his collaboration in this book.
                                                  OTTO WOLFF
                                 One



                    A Controversial Figure




 J- HE chief source for Ouvrard’s life is his own autobiography.
However, as a source autobiographies suffer from obvious faults,
since they often lack objectivity and do not always tell the reader
what he would like to know. Other sources are the comments of
contemporaries, but here the biographer of Ouvrard is over¬
whelmed by the diversity of their opinions.
  For example, Fouche wrote, “It is impossible to find a man
who is more skilful and, in his character, more obliging and
more captivating.” Marshal Marmont, Due de Ragusa, described
Ouvrard as “a clever man who is equal to any critical situation
and whose foresight and shrewdness never fail him”. Savary, Due
de Rovigo, Napoleon’s Minister of Police, said of him that he was
“the man who, by his powerful and highly skilful intervention in
the financial affairs of Spain, had at one time more weight and in¬
fluence in Spain than her leading politician, Godoy”. His agent
Nolte said Ouvrard was “indisputably the man who first revealed
to his own country the basic elements of the credit system and
used it himself in his audacious ventures at a time when Napoleon
barely understood, much less seriously grasped, the art of national
economy”. Villele publicly acknowledged the importance of
Ouvrard’s work in providing supplies for the Spanish campaign.
Lamartine, whose political experience lends weight to his views,
wrote   with   enthusiastic   admiration   of Ouvrard:   “Just   as
Archimedes discovered the lever, Newton the law of gravity,
Mirabeau public opinion, Frederick II and Napoleon the science
    b                             i
2                             Ouvrard.

of modern warfare, and Law credit, so Ouvrard discovered con¬
fidence and speculation, immeasurable and mysterious forces con¬
cealed in the depths of commercial life. They can, in one single
moment, increase a hundredfold the prodigious power of private
and public wealth for the wellbeing of the individual, of society
and of the State.”
  On the other hand, Thiers condemned him as “one of the most
successful and shrewdest speculators in any kind of business
transaction”. Sarran called him a sinister financier, unscrupulous
in commerce, shamelessly and incurably fraudulent, a notorious
purveyor with a dozen rogues at his beck and call. Beaurepaire
said that from the beginning he was an intriguer. Tourton, a
fellow financier, described him as a genius at duping those with
whom he did business. Contemporary pamphleteers called him a
trickster; a nobody, important only because of his money; almost
illiterate.
    Partisan strife has always been kindled by outstanding per¬
sonalities. But this remarkable conflict of opinions may also be
due to the nature of his career. For more than half a century, from
his arrival in Paris in 1793 to his death in 1846, there was not a
single government in France which did not benefit by his advice,
his help or his loans. Yet he spent several years in prison for debt.
At the age of twenty-one he had already made 300,000 francs and
at twenty-nine he possessed twenty-nine million francs. Five
years later, Napoleon’s refusal to honour debts incurred in his
service brought Ouvrard to the brink of ruin. Yet he immediately
embarked upon the vast Mexican Silver project which Nolte
described as “the most splendid edifice which commercial enter¬
prise had ever undertaken for the benefit of both monarchies”. In
the second decade of the nineteenth century he seemed a kind of
financial Vicar of Bray, for though he had served Napoleon, he
was asked to help the restored monarchy. He then financed
Napoleon during the Hundred Days and after Waterloo was
asked by Richelieu for his assistance and gave it. His greatest
achievement was the plan which became the basis of the Treaty of
Aix-la-Chapelle and helped to end both French insolvency and
the occupation.
                      A Controversial Figure                     3

   But after his rapid initial rise to fame complete success nearly
always eluded him. He founded no dynasty of financiers, and
died—as far as is known—relatively poor. What characteristic or
capacity was it that he lacked? It is to consider why he failed as
well as to tell the story of his remarkable career that this biog¬
raphy has been undertaken.
                                Two




                       The First Deal




(3   UVRARD was seventeen when he left the high school at
Clisson and went to the nearby town of Nantes. His character
was already completely formed and remained basically unaltered
until his death. In his memoirs, he says that he was born on nth
October 1770 at Clisson in the district of Poitou et Bretagne,
that he was one of eight children, and that his father owned a
paper-mill. That is all he has to say of his youth. He seems to have
decided from quite an early age that he was interested in com¬
merce, rather than in industry. His father’s factory provided—
and apparently provided amply—for a family of ten, but Ouvrard
had made his own observations on industry. Although the paper-
mills in the Department of Charente were important and there
were other major industries, such as the flourishing lace-manu¬
facture in the north, the silk-production of Lyons and the linen-
mills of Brittany, industrial production seemed to him to be too
risky. He may already have heard of industrial failures like that
which some years later befell his friend Marmont. When the
Marshal retired from the army to his chateau at Chatillon, he
built a large iron-foundry on the English pattern complete with
rolling-mill, puddling- and blast-furnaces, in which he could
produce thirty tons of iron in twenty-four hours. Before long this
expensive installation was at a complete standstill. Instead of using
French workers, who could produce only bad iron, skilled labour
had to be imported from England at great expense. Wood-firing,
which should have been cheaper and on which the whole enter-
                                  4
                           The First Deal                        5

prise was costed, proved impracticable, because the smaller
iron-foundries in the provinces forced up the timber prices to
prevent competition. After fresh estimates had been drawn up,
based on coal, the price of iron, which was high, came down.
Finally, when a cartel of small ironmasters brought the price
down still further, Marmont was forced out of business.
   Incidents of this kind were certainly not unfamiliar to Ouvrard.
But his decision to concentrate on commerce was also vindicated
when, a few years later, the industries of Brittany were destroyed
by the Revolutionary and Counter-Revolutionary armies and
 Ouvrard had to petition the Committee of Public Safety in Paris
for compensation for the loss of his father’s factory.
   The city of Nantes played a crucial part in Ouvrard’s youthful
dreams and commercial ambitions. When he arrived there in 1788,
towards the end of his eighteenth year, it had a population of
80,000 people. By the standards of that period it was a large city.
His first impression was one of real wealth. He had never realized
until then that so much money could be concentrated in so few
hands. He met merchants who thought nothing of placing an
order for fifty tons of tobacco. He learned that men like the
Thoinet brothers were in a position to advance the city a round
million francs to purchase grain supplies. In these circles, into
which Ouvrard as the son of a Clisson manufacturer gained
immediate entry, he soon acquired a self-confidence which re¬
mained one of his most striking characteristics and which stemmed
from the conviction that his profession was of vital importance.
The merchants and financiers of Nantes were democratic citizens
long before it even occurred to anyone in France to abolish the
King, the nobles and the clergy. The leading men of Nantes had
felt closer than ever to America since the Peace Treaty of 1783.
They were ship owners, merchants and bankers. Trade which
satisfies the most elementary human needs seemed to them to be
the cornerstone of the State. A new era was beginning, a new
“Kingdom of Commerce” was being established. Those citizens
who were engaged in commerce regarded themselves as better
informed than any other section of society about public affairs;
they alone could offer a guarantee of permanent prosperity. They
6                              Ouvrard

looked upon themselves as the true backbone of the nation. It
was hardly to be wondered at that Ouvrard adopted this self-
assured view of life with enthusiasm. It grew and blossomed in
his lively imagination. The final result was an almost messianic
awareness of the importance of his commercial mission.
    If such an attitude was particularly appropriate in Nantes, this
was because commerce there had quite a different character from
that of other French ports. It was not internal trade within
national boundaries; it was not even confined to the Continent;
the citizens of Nantes were world traders and it was thanks to
their commercial activities that France was able to buy the pro¬
ducts of many a remote foreign country. They imported goods
unobtainable in Europe: coffee-beans and tea, tobacco and cane-
sugar, a great variety of spices and a particularly fine brand of
wheat. They also, of course, had interests in “black ivory”, the ex¬
port of African negroes to America, and far from being troubled
by any moral scruples, they simply regarded such interests as
confirmation of their versatility. When their ships sailed up the
Loire they were laden with the riches of Cayenne and San
Domingo, of India and Africa.
    For young Ouvrard all this was an unforgettable spectacle. At
first he was filled with wonder, but he very soon realized what it
meant, that there were undreamt-of possibilities for anyone not
merely engaged in European trade but also conducting inter¬
national operations from bases overseas. At this early stage
Ouvrard acquired the limitless vision which was to shape his
subsequent career. His early experiences in Nantes ultimately
bore fruit in the most grandiose venture he ever embarked upon,
the scheme he devised some fifteen years later to recover the silver
treasure of Mexico.
    In Nantes, however, one could learn not merely how to make
money but also how to spend it. The orators of the French
Revolution condemned the “Asiatic luxury” of life in Nantes, but
this was an exaggeration. On the whole, the merchants lived
well but not luxuriously. In the household of the Hummels, for
instance, five thousand gold francs were spent on food in the
year 1793 and the family dressed expensively but with restrained
                           The First Deal                          7

elegance. Merchants took an interest in architecture. All the
splendid houses along the Loire from the Bourse to Salorges were
built during this period. The city acquired a new Chamber of
Commerce and a large theatre. Ouvrard, who was, as it were, a
country boy, acquired a completely new outlook on how the
individual should spend money. Everything the citizens of Nantes
undertook was the result of careful and sometimes even timid
planning; in Ouvrard’s bold imagination their schemes assumed
gigantic proportions and soon the pupil was to leave his teachers
far behind. Once he was installed in Paris his guests marvelled at
such princely luxury.
  Ouvrard came to know and understand the power of credit; he
realized “how it increases one’s financial resources and how, by
adding to one’s private fortune, one also increases the prosperity
of the nation”. A building contractor named Graslin became,
quite unknowingly, his teacher. When the Peace Treaty was
signed with America in 1783 a wave of prosperity broke over
Nantes, bringing with it a taste for a better, more comfortable
and more modern way of life. Graslin, the building contractor,
was the man to satisfy this taste. He had the courage to plan on a
large scale and to weigh up the public’s needs. He was not content,
as was customary at the time, to build single apartments or houses.
He planned in the more ambitious style of our own time, erecting
whole blocks of houses, whole streets, in fact a whole new
quarter of the city. The people of Nantes, for whom this was
something new and spectacular, expressed their approval by
naming the new quarter after Graslin. But in his boldness he
overreached himself. He had put a large proportion of his money
into the building sites, most of his building materials had to be
paid for on delivery, and a considerable time had to elapse before
the dwellings and shops were ready for occupation and yielded
any cash return. As Graslin could not see why a shortage of ready
cash should rob him of the certain success that awaited him, he
extended his financial backing artificially. Trusting in his reputa¬
tion, he issued a kind of token money in the form of pieces of
paper giving an assurance that they were covered by the building
sites, which had already been paid for, and by the houses under
8                           Ouvrard

construction. These were known as “Boris Graslin” or “building
papers”. Inevitably they went into circulation, because the
workers received no other form of wages. And, lo and behold,
the new currency was accepted everywhere without question,
although it was without cover.
   For Ouvrard, who had seen through this trick and followed it
with amused interest, the affair took a dramatic turn when the
basis of the whole credit operation, confidence in Graslin, began
to falter. His competitors spread the rumour that he was in
difficulties, and at once people came running with their “Bons
Graslin”. Anxious shopkeepers, into whose tills this private
currency had found its way, quoted the printed assurance on the
Ions that they could be converted into cash at any time. But
Graslin thought of a way out. The people, who rushed into his
office, gesticulating angrily, were assured that they would get
their money. But in copper coins! They must surely realize that
there was just not enough silver, which was already in short
supply, to cover sackfuls of paper! They would have to make do
with small change! But repayment in pennies and halfpennies was
naturally a slow business, and when it became known that
Graslin was, in fact, paying, day in, day out, slowly but surely,
confidence in him was gradually restored, the bons were no longer
presented and building was resumed.
   Ouvrard saw how successful Graslin had been and how he had
achieved it. He found it hard to believe that public confidence
could have such magical powers. He had learned a lesson which
he never forgot. “This incident showed me”, he wrote in his
memoirs, “how credit adds to one’s resources.” In these few
sober words the budding capitalist drew his own moral. Yet there
can be no doubt that this was the most important single ex¬
perience in Ouvrard’s life. Many years later he embodied the
same moral in a much more pretentious axiom: “Treasures of
gold and silver do not last for ever; the only treasure which is
never exhausted, which grows and multiplies, is credit.”
   Before long it was clear that everything Ouvrard had seen and
learned at Nantes assumed quite different dimensions and opened
up quite different commercial possibilities in his mind. When he
                            The First Deal                         9

arrived in Nantes in 1788 his first aim was to serve some kind of
apprenticeship. He joined the firm of Guertin, Loret & Co.,
wholesale grocers, but he did not stay there long. Not sur¬
prisingly, for what others took years to learn he picked up in a
flash. He could tell almost by the smell of a place if he was
wasting his time there. So Ouvrard left. It all happened very
quickly, because he derived no pleasure from watching others
making money. For the time being, however, he remained in the
trade. “Guertin et Ouvrard”, also dealing in wholesale groceries,
was his first business. But it was not his first venture in big
business. Ouvrard himself sensed that this was not the right
line for him. He twisted and turned on the high stool behind the
counter. It gave him no real pleasure to be chained to a desk and
to write reports on currants, sugar and liquorice. Sooner or later,
and probably later, it would bring in money and in Nantes it was
a highly respected occupation, but to him it seemed dull and
unappetizing. He was itching to embark on something more
ambitious, to take up commerce in a big way. So long as he
remained a wholesale grocer he would be one citizen among
many, a bourgeois among bourgeois. He had to get out. And the
very moment when he was ready to take the plunge coincided
with one of the great moments of history: on 14th July 1789 the
Revolution broke out in Paris.
   This was all Ouvrard needed to bring off his first major coup.
It was as simple as the story of Columbus and the egg. The
storming of the Bastille gave rise to a nation-wide debate on the
form of the new social order. Characteristically, Ouvrard kept
his own counsel. His head was quite unaffected by the new ideas,
his vision undimmed by the fog of emotional verbiage. He left
others to do the talking. Determined to move onwards and up¬
wards, his sure instinct told him which class of society would be
in the ascendant. He sensed that the bourgeoisie, not the pro¬
letariat, were preparing to take over from the old aristocrats. They
would do so anyway, and certainly without his help. His sole           \
preoccupation was to engineer for himself as favourable a position
as possible in this new society. There was no room for sentimen¬
tality.

          JT
10                              Ouvrard

     While Ouvrard was looking round for some way to exploit the
new situation, which would free him from an office desk and
enable him to enter the great world of unlimited wealth, he
suddenly found himself, to his surprise, back in his father’s firm.
Not physically but in a business context. When he had decided
a year before—and a mere twelve months had, in fact, elapsed—
to trade in groceries rather than produce paper, it had not
crossed his mind that he might ever again take an interest in
paper. When this did happen in 1789, however, it did not imply
any radical change in Ouvrard’s plans. He was not harking back
from trade to production but merely trading in paper. For the
knowledge he had acquired automatically in the family firm
made him realize at once that there was one market in particular
which must be the first to be affected by the Revolution.
     At this early stage the Revolution had produced few tangible
results. But one thing was clearly apparent: the freedom to speak,
the freedom to write, the freedom to print. The freedom of the
Press had been won. There was a positive deluge of placards:
speeches, manifestos and official declarations. Periodicals would
follow. Newspapers would soon appear: the Paris Revolution, the
Picardy Correspondent, the Free Press, the People’s Tribune and
many others. Ouvrard saw from the beginning the way things
were moving and he had enough expert knowledge of the trade
to realize that the French paper industry was too small to meet
such an increase in demand. Supply must inevitably lag behind
demand, which meant that the price of paper would rise steadily.
     The price would, of course, only rise if the freedom of the Press
remained. But would it remain? No one could answer that
question, because no one could possibly foresee what course
political events would take over the next two years. The Revo¬
lution, after all, did not lead to the immediate establishment of a
republic. The monarchy, which was to survive another three
years, might well have regained its former hold, in which case
public opinion would have been even more fettered than before.
Another possibility was that one man might come to power who
would declare, as Napoleon did later, that he could not hold out
three months with a free Press. Napoleon allowed only one news-
                           The First Deal                         ll

paper in each Department and reduced the number of papers in
France from seventy-three to thirteen. He introduced postal
and stage censorship. Louis XVIII after his restoration even
censored every book of less than twenty pages. Ouvrard, in short,
was taking a considerable risk when he set out to gain control
of the paper market. But throughout his career one of his out¬
standing qualities was courage, the intellectual courage which is
much subtler and rarer than its physical counterpart. He himself
had very little capital to invest, but he had learned from Graslin
that, for a time at least, one can pay with trust. The trust he
needed could be borrowed from his father, who was known and
respected in the trade.
  At the beginning of the Revolution Ouvrard travelled round
the paper-mills of Poitou and Angoumois. From the unsuspecting
manufacturers he bought up their entire production for the next
two years; at normal prices, of course; and on his own account.
The demand for paper began to increase, the prices rose and
printers were compelled to seek out Ouvrard.
  This, his first major business deal, was also his first masterpiece
and bore all the hall-marks of subsequent ventures. It was charac¬
teristic of him that he refused to become involved in questions of
detail. They no longer interested him. What excited and satisfied
him was the overall conception; it was enough for him to realize
an overall profit. The entire paper supply for two years, produced
and unproduced, was sold en bloc to a few firms in Tours and
Nantes. Ouvrard had made 300,000 francs. He was nineteen years
old.




            S>
           /
                                 Three




             A Fugitive from the Revolution




    O be nineteen years old and in possession of 300,000 francs
is unusual. The appetite of youth for enjoyment, for a life of
ease and elegance, can complicate matters and may even undo
much of what has been done. But where the money has been
earned, not inherited, this danger is greatly reduced. Ouvrard was
never mean and even at this early stage he did not count his
pennies. He lived up to his greatly improved circumstances but
nevertheless exercised the sort of moderation that comes from
respect for one’s own capital. Apparently calm and relaxed, he
was in fact waiting with feverish impatience for an opportunity
to repeat his first, brilliantly successful, coup. His fellow citizens
might be content with the modest and pious ambition to emulate
those gentlemen whose dignified gait, as they paced through the
streets of Nantes, was indicative of their millions, but Ouvrard
had other ideas.
  He could not go around indefinitely with the 300,000 francs in
his pocket. But it was no easy matter to know where else to put
them. A revolution had broken out and it was too early for any¬
one to foresee or even guess what effect it would have on trade.
In Nantes in 1789, on the other hand, there had so far been
relatively little change. Life went on much as before. The King
was still on the throne, the same city council was in office, and the
face of the city was unaltered. Had Ouvrard not possessed that
sixth sense, which no amount of rational thought can replace,
then he would undoubtedly have followed the example of all sea-
                                  12
                    A Fugitive from the Revolution                  13

loving people in Nantes and invested his capital in property over¬
seas. There was much to be said for it. Anyone who acquired a
sugar plantation in the French colonies could be sure of in¬
creasing his capital by io per cent each year. Cotton plantations
brought in between 12 and 15 per cent. Coffee plantations
yielded at least 20 per cent. These were sound investments, for
people have always remained loyal to their pleasures, especially
those of a more noxious variety. Ouvrard could see only one
drawback—and no one else seems to have realized this—that
there was no guarantee how long the slaves in the colonies would
remain slaves working for starvation wages. There was always
the danger that the growing unrest inside France would lead to
a breakdown of authority in overseas territories, that the natives
would rebel and that property and investments would disappear.
  Ouvrard was not prepared to expose his money and his future
prospects to such a risk. It was not the element of speculation
that he minded. Nothing was further from his mind than to look
for gilt-edged securities. Speculation was the breath of life to
him. But the future of overseas property was too unpredictable.
So, for the time being, he returned to the business he knew; he
bought, not colonial property, but colonial produce. Again he did
not act on his own. He had his reasons. Ouvrard’s associates on
this occasion were wholesale grocers in Nantes and the Brothers
Baour & Co. in Bordeaux. This deal was based on the same kind
of assumption as the paper transaction, namely that groceries, in
particular, must become scarcer and the prices must rise. The
precise outcome of this venture is not known. Ouvrard’s terse
comment was: “I did very well out of it.”
  At this point the historian loses track of Ouvrard until 1793.
He probably spent these years in similar, highly profitable, deals,
buying produce from the colonies wholesale and selling it by the
bag to shopkeepers. He seems to have returned voluntarily to
the routine of wholesale trading.
  Then    something    happened     that   changed   the   course   of
Ouvrard’s life yet again. As luck would have it, the Convention
in Paris chose to despatch to Nantes a particularly fanatical
revolutionary,   Jean-Baptiste   Carrier, as    Commissioner, and
          J’
14                            Ouvrard

Ouvrard was compelled, this time almost against his will, to
return to mid-stream. It was in the year 1793. A few months
earlier Nantes had sent Joseph Fouche, who was later to become
Napoleon’s Minister of Police, to Paris to represent it on the
Convention. Before his election Fouche had sworn by all that
was sacred that he would do everything possible to protect
trade and property. Apart from the fact that he had never been
foolish enough to regard any promise he made as binding, it
would have been virtually impossible for Fouche to fulfil his
promise. By the end of 1792 there was such a general shortage
that prices, especially of grain, sugar, coffee and wine, doubled
and trebled. At the same time there was also a shortage of money.
Monsieur Graslin would no longer have dared to build his
terraces of houses. The English were just outside the city gates.
It was impossible to sail out of the Loire into the open sea. Ships
rotted at the quaysides, transport stood idle, ships’ carpenters and
ropemakers, wheelwrights and caulkers were all out of work, and
the city council was finding it more difficult every week to provide
adequate supplies, even of flour, for a city which had always
received most of its provisions by sea. A general malaise spread
over the city like a dark cloud. Threatened from outside by the
Counter-Revolutionary Army, the city was also under increasing
strain internally as conditions deteriorated. It was the sort of
atmosphere which breeds bitterness. Fouche’s Amis de la Con¬
stitution, which was a fairly harmless club, was replaced by the
Club des Cordeliers, with a shopkeeper as president. Wigmakers,
weavers, coopers and umbrella-manufacturers and members of
other small trades dabbled in revolutionary jargon. For those
citizens who were still influential this was no laughing matter;
within a few months this faction was to launch a bloody reign of
terror.
     To begin with, however, this new activity took rather comic
forms. The shortage of supplies became increasingly acute. This
encouraged trade in small quantities and, while this was the kind
of trade in which the big businessman had little or no interest,
for that very reason it opened up new vistas for the little man.
Ouvrard and his colleagues found the situation more and more
                    A Fugitive from the Revolution                  15

difficult as the masses, not the money, assumed more and more
importance. The Societe Populaire Vincent-la-Montagne re¬
placed the Club des Cordeliers and took over control of the city.
A colder wind was now blowing. Food supplies were rationed.
Trade was strictly controlled. It was difficult for the big whole¬
saler to dispose quietly of a hundredweight, but a black market in
ounces and pounds was a simple matter for the small retailer.
Shoemakers took to selling oil, soap could be bought at a black¬
smith’s, and wigmakers traded in sugar and coffee. This was not,
of course, a situation that pleased Ouvrard. When little people
were making money and the big people could not do business,
the world was standing on its head. When a city was supplied
not by wholesalers but by bureaucrats, the divine order of things
was completely upset. Ouvrard was incapable of tolerating a
system in which the first became the last and the last the first.
  Ouvrard might have awaited the outcome of these develop¬
ments with the same philosophical calm as he was to show later
during five years in a debtors’ prison in Paris. But gradually he
found himself being too closely involved for his own comfort.
He and his colleagues were being pushed against the wall. Anyone
who did not loudly proclaim himself a Jacobin was suspect. The
Compagnie Marat, the Inquisition of the Societe Populaire
Vincent-la-Montagne, issued a manifesto demanding death for
the monarchists. (Ouvrard did not feel threatened.) Death to the
elegant fops. (This touched him rather more, for Ouvrard had
always been elegant in his dress.) Death to all moderates, “regard¬
less of the mask or colour behind which they may conceal them¬
selves”. (This formula was as meaningful and meaningless as a
blank cheque.) At all events, the situation in Nantes was growing
uncomfortable.
  It became even more uncomfortable when Jean-Baptiste
Carrier arrived from Paris with full powers as Commissioner.
He had only one aim and one passion: to “sansculotte” the
refractory citizens of Nantes. It was left entirely to him, a renegade
from Holy Orders, to decide exactly how he did it. Ouvrard
sized the man up, as soon as he set eyes on him: a fanatic, an
unfrocked priest, and not a man to be trifled with. This character

            I
i6                            Ouvrard

would keep the promise he had given to the Convention in Paris:
to teach the citizens of Nantes to dance the carmagnole and like it.
     Carrier was not so bloodthirsty and perverse as history makes
him out to be. His sullen expression, his harsh manner and, above
all, his dour silence had alienated even the Jacobin friends of this
forty-seven-year-old native of Auvergne. He was consumed by a
burning passion for the ideas and blessings of the new age. When
he made one of his tempestuous speeches in the People’s Assembly,
tossing his black mane of hair, no one could possibly doubt his
belief in humanity. Nor was it possible to believe that he would
ever compromise even in his own interest. While, on the one hand,
his devotion to his social mission was utterly disinterested—when
he died a year later, he was a poor man, although more than half
a million francs had passed uncontrolled through his hands—he
showed no mercy to those who tried to impede him in his life’s
work.
     Rather naturally, Ouvrard, like the other leading citizens of
Nantes, was not interested in understanding Carrier’s character.
It was a matter of complete indifference to him that this man
helped the poor, loved flowers and was kind to animals, that the
anti-revolutionary propaganda might be quite wrong in depicting
Carrier as an alcoholic who raped women prisoners, that Carrier,
who was both Commissioner of Nantes and the mainstay of the
French army in the west, worked twenty hours a day and con¬
trived somehow to keep the beleaguered city supplied with food.
Ouvrard was bound to treat him as an enemy, who threatened his
livelihood and even his life. In the fear-ridden minds of the people
of Nantes the number of arrests was multiplied a hundredfold.
(Yet this occurred before the unfortunate prisoners from the
Counter-Revolutionary army were drowned in their thousands
in the Loire by the leaders of the Revolutionary army in Nantes.)
But Ouvrard had no intention of joining the hundred or two
hundred or five hundred people who were to be sacrificed to the
Revolutionary cause. He had no intention of exposing his person,
which he held very dear, to Carrier’s dogma that the individual
is nothing, the Republic everything.
     Ouvrard had all the more reason to feel disturbed as he
                    A Fugitive from the Revolution              ly

belonged to a social group which in troubled times invariably
attracts unfriendly attention from the masses. His money was
not stowed away safely in a mattress or even invested in houses,
plantations, timber or State securities, but in large quantities of
edible goods, which would be one of the first targets for the mob.
It is sometimes a short step from a raid on a baker’s shop to a
campaign against a wholesaler’s.
  In Nantes any attempt to conceal stocks was severely punished
and profiteering was punishable by death. The Widow Mallet
was thrown into prison because she had been hoarding 70,000 lb.
of tobacco. The Brothers Thoinet fled the city when a night
search of their house revealed 3,000 cwt. of flour. There was
general consternation when some people who had laid in a stock
of turnips, and others who had tried to bribe sentries with a few
ducks, were shot out of hand. Carrier knew everything that was
going on, because he had turned the secret police, which he
originally set up in the Army of the West, on to the city fathers.
There were spies everywhere. People no longer dared to write,
they barely spoke and they almost stopped thinking. Carrier’s
secret police was omnipresent.
  Soon it was Ouvrard’s turn. Maybe his wealth was in itself
enough to make him suspect or maybe he really did something
that was not permissible in Nantes in 1793. At all events he was
denounced as a profiteer.
  It was difficult to defend oneself. So far, few had succeeded in
escaping from the city. There seemed to be even less future in
waiting calmly for a trial, which would be loaded with prejudice.
For a man with Ouvrard’s unerring instinct, however, there was
a third way of escape: he must place himself under the protection
of some influential person.
  Ouvrard did not hesitate. He knew he had no chance with the
Jacobins. Carrier could not be swayed by money, personal charm,
or the knowledge of a man’s position in society. That left only
the commanding General. It was not pure chance that Ouvrard
chose Boivin. Unless he was very much mistaken, the General
must know something about him. And indeed, when Ouvrard
sent in his card, General Boivin thought he remembered reading

            /'
18                             Ouvrard

the name somewhere before. In the course of conversation with
his elegant visitor, the General learned that Ouvrard was a
partner in the firm of Guertin et Ouvrard, whose invoices he had
frequently seen in the house of his father, a grocer in the Saint-
Sulpice quarter of Paris. This reminder was the best possible
reference; under the influence of nostalgic memories the General
proved accommodating. He appreciated that the situation in
Nantes condemned Ouvrard to idleness, that he hated nothing
more, and that it seemed only right to give him some occupation
in the framework of the New Order. He appointed Ouvrard his
adjutant.
  In his new function Ouvrard was not only rendered immune
from the civil authorities, he also felt more confidence than ever
in his own metier. For once again it was commerce that had
saved him; its solidarity had once more been demonstrated.
     For the time being, however, his sole concern was not to trade
but to serve. For someone as adaptable as Ouvrard, who in later
years had to make the best of quite different situations, it was not
too difficult to fit himself unobtrusively even into a military
machine with which he was quite unfamiliar. His position was
that of a private secretary rather than an officer. Moreover,
thanks to his exceptional talents, he succeeded before long in
making a niche for himself quite outside his official post. In
consequence he was soon able, if his own account is to be believed,
to act more or less independently. For example, the Revolutionary
Committee issued a decree, condemning a number of outstand¬
ing and wealthy citizens of Nantes to be shot:


       “We hereby order the Commandant of Nantes to muster
     three hundred soldiers. Half of them will march to the
     Boufflay prison, where they will remove the prisoners
     named in the attached list. They will be bound together by
     their hands in pairs. These people will be taken to
     Eperonniere. The second group of soldiers will conduct
     prisoners from Saintes-Claires, whose names are on the
     list, to the same place. The inmates of the prison at
     Eperonniere are also to be brought out, and all, without
                    A Fugitive from the Revolution                    19

  exception, are to be shot. The precise method of execution
  will be left to the Commandant.

     Nantes, 15 Frimaire of the year II of the Indivisible
   Republic [5th December 1793]
                                Sgnd. Gaulin, M. Grandmaison,
                                                     J-R. Minguet.”


  When the list of condemned men reached the adjutant’s office,
Ouvrard saw to his horror that it included a number of business
friends, whom he knew to be innocent. Within a few seconds the
fateful document had disappeared. When enquiries were made, it
was pointed out that the list had unfortunately gone astray. There
was acute embarrassment in the Revolutionary Committee, for no
copy had been made. The executions had to be postponed. But
clearly the real guardian angel of Nantes was the General himself,
for only his humanity and sense of justice made it possible for his
adjutant to take such liberties without risking his head. Never¬
theless, Nantes gradually became too hot for Ouvrard. Sus¬
picions were mounting, rumours gaining ground, and it was not
exactly reassuring to see one former class-mate after another
disappear behind prison bars. Ouvrard finally decided to make
his escape. He realized, however, that it would have to be done
quite openly. Any other way would be too dangerous.
  He escaped to the army. In modern times it has become cus¬
tomary for men who wish to avoid danger to claim exemption
from military duty; in those days one was more likely to succeed
by showing willingness to shed one’s blood for la patrie. A
soldier of the National Guard, who shouted on parade shortly
before the storming of the Tuileries: “We will fight for the
King to the death,” only escaped with his life at the hands of the
republicans by taking refuge in an Alpine Corps.
  Ouvrard did the same; he joined the Western Army. He went
with recommendations to General Kleber, who was stationed at
Remouille, and, as luck would have it, at headquarters he met
Merlin de Thionville, Commissioner of the Convention. Merlin
once saved the life of one of Ouvrard’s brothers, and, as a good
20                              Ouvrard

deed often proves more binding on the doer than on the recipient,
Ouvrard felt he could count on Merlin’s friendship.
     It is not easy to visualize Ouvrard, who, as Boivin’s adjutant,
had always been a civilian soldier, in the camp at Remouille. He
was now in the uncomfortable position of hearing the rattle of
musket-fire. Although he was spared an actual battle, he was
obliged to witness the skirmish at Torfou. He suddenly found
himself “commander of a detachment”, but this detachment is
not likely to have been large enough to require any decisive
action on his part. As it turned out, Kleber was wounded and his
troops defeated. Ouvrard, on the other hand, was unharmed and
far from beaten.
   It is a measure of his complete self-confidence that he agreed to
take part in an unintentional piece of comedy: the good soldier
Ouvrard was entrusted with the task of taking the captured enemy
colours to Paris! Standards captured from the foe have always
been greatly prized, more especially in France. In December 1797
when the Directory met in special session to greet the young
general who had conquered Italy, Napoleon found the courtyard
of the Palais du Luxembourg festooned with flags captured in the
revolutionary campaigns. Berthier wanted to set up on the banks
of the Seine the trophies which had been won on the banks of the
Nile. And when on one occasion Napoleon, as Consul, bowed
his head before the tattered, powder-blackened colours of French
regiments in the courtyard of the Tuileries, the crowd burst into
a mighty roar.
     Ouvrard’s colours were of a different, rather special kind. They
too were trophies, which had been wrested from the foe in battle
and which were doubtless stained with the blood of both the
assailant and the assailed, but they were, nevertheless, trophies of
defeat. The engagement was lost, the General wounded.
     There is, unfortunately, no record of how Ouvrard and his
unusual flags were received in the capital. The Convention in
Paris can hardly have felt any great urge to play out this comedy
with the civilian Gabriel Julien Ouvrard, wholesale grocer, and
his trophies of military prowess. The colours were probably
deposited together with other relics in an appropriate room.
                   A Fugitive from the Revolution            21

  No one could have been less put out than Ouvrard. If he was
entrusted with this rather delicate assignment, then it was un¬
doubtedly because he himself had asked for it. Ouvrard knew
what he was doing. He saw the army as merely a stepping-stone
to the conquest of the world. For him the world was Paris.
                              Four




               Paris: the Great Opportunity




w HEN Ouvrard arrived in Paris the atmosphere was one of
personal insecurity and complete political instability. The situa¬
tion was, in fact, every bit as critical as in Nantes. The cobbled
streets of the capital were slippery. Only a few weeks before, in
October 1793, Marie-Antoinette had laid her head under the
guillotine. Anyone who was someone or had something, or even
who had been someone or had had something, was in particular
danger. The banker Duruet was sent to the guillotine by the
Revolutionary Tribunal because he honoured a bill for 6,000
francs made out to him in London and thereby, it was held, had
conspired with a foreign power. A former banker, van den Niver,
suffered the same fate despite his advanced years. The ninety-
one-year-old citoyenne Prevost, who had a fortune of 100,000
francs, was accused of counter-revolutionary sympathies and was
punished for her affluence by imprisonment in the building which
still bears the name “Port libre”. So it went on, day in, day
out. It paid, if one wanted to remain both rich and free, to be as
shrewd as M. Recamier, who took his seat under the guillotine
every morning to show in public how interested he was in
the progress of the Revolution. But even this was not always
sufficient.
  Ouvrard was undoubtedly aware of all this before he decided
to go to Paris. He must have heard the grossly exaggerated reports
that circulated from house to house and from town to town.
                                22
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                23

According to counter-revolutionary sources, 32,000 people, in¬
cluding 15,000 children, were drowned in Nantes, whereas the
real figure was 4,074, of whom 3,793 were members of the
Counter-Revolutionary Army. Ouvrard must also have heard
figures from Paris which were just as astronomical. If he decided,
none the less, to walk into the lions’ den, then he clearly had his
own good reasons. It is not difficult to guess what they were.
Ouvrard had a feeling that the great opportunity of his life lay in
Paris. It was a dangerous city, in which the mere business of
staying alive was fraught with risks. But Ouvrard, as a merchant
of standing, knew that, where the risks were greatest, there also
were the greatest opportunities.
  He had studied the French character. Earlier than most others
he realized that in the not too distant future stirring words and
exalted ideas would lose their potency. The French were an
industrious people, as he well knew, and he could not believe that
they would let themselves be fooled indefinitely. He wanted to be
there when the reaction set in, so that he could have his share of
the power which must take over when the rule of ideas came to
an end: the power of money.
  Ouvrard was prudent enough, however, to plan only a short
visit to Paris to begin with. He made arrangements that, if life
in the capital was too uncomfortable, he could hand over his
trophies and, after a few days of “leave”, return to the safety of
the army. But, after studying the situation at first hand, he
decided that he could stay. The risks involved in doing business
so close to the epicentre of the Revolution seemed, after all, not
unreasonable. His completed mission was now followed by an
extended leave.
  The time had now come for Ouvrard to discard the petty
bourgeois guise he had worn in Nantes. Before long that city
meant little more to him than a name on the map. At most it
served to remind him of the distance he had travelled since he first
set out. In the first few months, however, there was still much
talk of Nantes. He could not easily forget the fate suffered by so
many of his fellow citizens at the hands of the incorruptible
Carrier, and, before he could launch out on fresh business
24                             Ouvrard

ventures, he became quite unexpectedly involved in an errand of
mercy, which was not without its dangers. In a Paris prison lay
132 citizens of Nantes, whom Carrier had despatched to the
Revolutionary Tribunal at five o’clock in the morning of 27th
November 1793. Chained together in pairs, they had been driven
out of the town without seeing their families to walk the long
road from Nantes to Paris in all kinds of weather. Dragged from
gaol to gaol, they finally ended up on the rotting palliasses of the
Conciergerie. “Prison sickness” took its toll, the bucket which
had to serve their most primitive needs polluted such air as there
was and their diseased bodies were weakened still further by the
inadequate and often uneatable food. Before the tribunal had
even seen them their number had been reduced from 132 to 84.
These citizens from the provinces, who had no contacts in Paris,
would have stood utterly defenceless before the Revolutionary
Tribunal had not Ouvrard intervened on their behalf as soon as
he had found his feet in Paris. Just as he never lacked moral
courage, so too he was always ready to help others, un¬
conditionally.
     However, the rescue of his fellow citizens was no easy matter.
In dealing with fanatics like Robespierre or Fouquier-Tinville,
the notorious Public Prosecutor, money was of no avail. There¬
fore he decided to appeal to Robespierre himself through the
family of Duplay, a cabinet-maker, with whom Robespierre
lived in the Rue St. Honore. The Duplay family exercised con¬
siderable influence over Robespierre, because they had been
amongst the first to give him unqualified support. “Father,
mother, sons, daughters, and cousins, both male and female—all
swore by Robespierre and by him alone”, wrote a contempo¬
rary observer contemptuously. “Mere Duplay was the Mother
Superior of Robespierre’s pious acolytes, and the daughters
became the overseers of this devout Community.” Ouvrard,
having sized up the situation with his usual shrewdness, addressed
himself to the daughters, confident that he would be able to make
a sufficiently strong impression. With all a young man’s elo¬
quence he described the appalling sufferings of the unfortunate
citizens of Nantes. The gamble—this time a purely psychological
                       Paris: the Great Opportunity                      25

one—came off: the girls promised to try to arrange an audience
with Robespierre.
   When Ouvrard was actually received two days later, in the
most informal atmosphere, he thought the game was already
won. There was something almost idyllic about that friendly yet
cautious conversation between a revolutionary dictator and a
wholesale merchant, who was at heart a counter-revolutionary,
with two carefree young girls dispensing morning coffee. The
outcome, however, was completely negative. Robespierre could
not trespass on the preserve of Fouquier-Tinville, the Prosecutor
of the Revolutionary Tribunal and executioner of Paris, and he
could only advise Ouvrard to approach Fouquier-Tinville or his
private secretary. Ouvrard, who was a past-master at making
contacts, knew how much influence was wielded by subordinates.
But he only succeeded in seeing the private secretary’s wife. On
the other hand, she gave him an excellent piece of advice: the only
way to achieve anything with Fouquier-Tinville was through a
beautiful woman.
   Ouvrard at once thought of the young and very beautiful
Mademoiselle de M., whose father was very ill in prison. She
actually gained an audience with Fouquier and, in a moving
display of indignation and despair, timidity and innocence,
begged him to have the citizens of Nantes moved to a hospital.
Fouquier seemed quite amenable but he made one condition:
the beautiful young woman must meet him alone the following
day at two in the afternoon, on the terrace of the Tuileries. With
such a preamble, one would be justified in assuming the worst.
But nothing untoward happened. The only hazard to which
Mile de M. was exposed was a strange dejeuner a deux, during
which scarcely a word was uttered. And it ended in complete
success: her plea was granted. The unfortunate prisoners were at
least transferred from the Conciergerie, the prison which was
usually the final stage before the guillotine.*
   The man to whom the Committee of Public Safety looked for
concrete evidence against the prisoners was Robert Lindet, the

   * Six months later it was Fouquier-Tinville’s turn to lay his head under
the guillotine.
26                              Ouvrard

financial expert of the Revolution and a man with a highly
developed sense of justice. He deliberately took so long to
provide any evidence at all that by the time the prisoners came
up for trial Robespierre had fallen and they were acquitted. It
is virtually certain that Ouvrard was partly responsible for the
fact that the evidence produced was favourable. Lindet also
supported Ouvrard in another plea which at that time was
fraught with danger.
   Ouvrard had not lost sight of his original purpose in coming to
Paris: to do business. He set about it in an unusual, original and
fearless way: he asked the Committee of Public Safety for sub¬
stantial compensation for the loss of his father’s paper-mill,
which had been burnt down during the fighting in the Vendee
between the Revolutionary and Counter-Revolutionary armies.
The prisons were full of citizens who were suspected, quite
wrongly, of having robbed the State or even a neighbour.
A certain citizen Fougeret had just been guillotined, because
he thought his private fortune had been much too highly
assessed, at 30,000 francs, and was rash enough to voice his objec¬
tions. Ouvrard clearly took the view that everything depended on
the individual and his approach. Success proved him right. On
the basis of a report by Robert Lindet, the Committee of Public
Safety, which was the official organ of the Terror, approved an
indemnity of 200,000 francs.
     Within a few months of his arrival in Paris, Ouvrard had, there¬
fore, scored a second major success. He managed to add a third
almost immediately. At the age of twenty-four he married the
daughter of one of the citizens of Nantes, for whose release he
had been largely responsible. As one can well imagine, she came
from no ordinary family. On such an important question Ouvrard
acted completely in character. This was not a pure love match.
Her father was Monsieur Tebaud, a man of excellent antecedents,
who belonged to the same class from which Ouvrard had acquired
a pride in his calling. And he was very rich. Jean Baptiste Tebaud
was one of the most competent and wealthiest merchants of
Nantes, a fact which undoubtedly influenced Ouvrard’s choice of
a wife. He lived in an age which was anything but emotional and
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                 27

still less sentimental. Whenever one of his generals discussed a
prospective wife with Napoleon their main concern was usually
with the dowry.
  Mademoiselle Tebaud was the first woman to play any part in
Ouvrard’s life. She was not the ideal partner for him. On the
contrary, her simplicity was in striking contrast to his brilliance,
and she is not likely to have shown much understanding of her
husband’s boundless energy and intellectual drive. Ouvrard
devoted to her only a few sentences of the thousand pages of his
memoirs. But he spoke well of her. The simple wedding cere¬
mony—in 1794 it could hardly be otherwise—would, even in
more congenial times, still have appealed to the bride. “The
quality of her mind and the nobility of her soul enabled her to
find in a life of retirement the sort of tranquil pleasures which a
worldly life could not have given her.” {Memoirs.) She found
natural fulfilment in bringing up her three children. Ouvrard
took the view that the main reason for his wife’s early death in
1818 was the unjust persecution to which he was subjected for
much of his life. There is no doubt that Mme Ouvrard was
deeply affected by her husband’s misfortunes, but a more im¬
mediate reason for her early death was probably the distress
caused her by his infidelity.
  But that still lay a few years ahead. Meanwhile, Ouvrard used
his own fortune and the large dowry his wife had brought to
build up the enormous financial power which made him banker
to three governments. All this was, of course, only possible
once he enjoyed complete freedom to negotiate, and this he
achieved with the fall of Robespierre and the end of the Terror—
on 9th Thermidor, or 27th July 1794. The face of Paris was
changed overnight. When the head of the dictator from the Rue
St. Honore dropped into the basket all opposition to unrestricted
private trading disappeared. But with it, for the time being at
least, went an incorruptible government. Money ascended the
empty throne of the Kings of France. Ouvrard, as one of its
most loyal and experienced servants, stood to gain more than
most by this new reign.
  Not that his sole concern was to amass riches for himself. He
          J’
28                             Ouvrard

was always ready, without receiving any immediate reward, to
help strengthen the financial foundations of the State, the supreme
importance of which he recognized more clearly than anyone else.
Even during the Terror he tried to help by impressing upon the
Committee of Public Safety the relationship between paper
money, the value of gold and credit. The government cut the
ground from under its own feet by flooding the country with
assignats, so that by the beginning of 1794 the real value of this
paper currency was only a third of its nominal value; a galloping
inflation had set in. In November 1795, when the Directory
needed twenty-four millions, this represented 3,000 millions in
paper. By the end of 1796 the louis d’or was worth between 23,000
and 25,000 paper francs. And yet the government persisted in up¬
holding what to any merchant was an absurd fiction, that a franc
was still a franc. In vain Ouvrard proposed that assignats should
be accepted in payment only at the current rate, thus ensuring that
taxes, not worthless scraps of paper, were collected. Those in
authority were too busy with personal quarrels and discussions,
political demonstrations and manifestos to give any thought to
vital problems of State. They failed to realize that, just as financial
collapse alone had made the Revolution possible, so their own
untenable financial position was paving the way for the counter¬
revolution. Ouvrard, whose approach to such problems was
quite elementary and in consequence correct, warned them in
vain. “Is it not remarkable,” he said in retrospect, “that among the
many talented people who influenced the Legislative Assembly,
and among the senior State officials, so few really knew anything
about finance!”
   As Ouvrard’s services were not required in public life, he was
able to concentrate on furthering his own plans. The complexion
of the firm very quickly changed. Wholesale groceries were no
longer the main line of business, for Ouvrard was now a banker
and the firm was a “Banking and Trading House”. The transition
to purely monetary transactions opened up undreamt-of pros¬
pects at a moment when the value of money was constantly
changing and when the timid and uninitiated had no inkling of
the direction in which things were moving. Ouvrard’s head-
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                 29

quarters was in the Rue d’Amboise, one of the narrow streets
which ran parallel to the Boulevard des Italiens, and in which
two carriages could barely pass. But in the overcrowded centre
of Paris this was a distinguished address, for the house had been
the head offices of Rougemont et Hottinguer, a firm of high
repute.
  Little is known of Ouvrard’s monetary transactions. He was
apparently reluctant to talk about the profits he made then. He
had, at all events, become the centre of attraction in the renascent
Bourse, where his big decisions and his bold gestures aroused
more and more admiration. Ouvrard only becomes talkative
again when his original line of business crops up: the grocery
trade. On this subject he is unashamedly vain. In one single
sentence he records—it must have been early in 1796—how,
together with a few other capitalists from Bordeaux, he bought
a consignment of groceries on which he alone made a profit of
half a million francs in three months. But he was careful not to
give precise details which would enable the reader to compare
the returns with the size of the order, to work out the ratio
between risk and profit!
  This is the only concrete transaction that has been recorded
between November 1793, when Ouvrard arrived in Paris with
the captured trophies of war, and the spring of 1796. It may be
that he simply felt no desire to give an account of each of the many
small transactions, which seemed to him insignificant trifles.
And, following his report of the 500,000 francs which he earned
in Bordeaux, no more is heard of profits running into thousands.
From then on Ouvrard dealt in millions.
  Profits of this magnitude were only feasible if he could extend
the scope and increase the tempo of his commercial transactions,
and there was only one way to achieve this, namely, by obtaining
government contracts. Since the fall of Robespierre and the end
of the Terror, it had become increasingly easy to establish good
relations with leading men. The period of the Directory, 1795-9,
was one of strong reaction against the ascetic Puritanism of the
Terror. Even in the first month or two after the 9th Thermidor,
though trade and industry were at a standstill, public amusement-
           J’
30                            Ouvrard

places shot up in the bloodstained streets of Paris in astonishing
numbers.
  In the first year of the Directory there were 644 dance-halls in
Paris. A ball, called the “Bal des Victimes”, was held and only
those who could show the death-certificate of a father, mother,
brother, sister or other relation liquidated by the Revolution, were
admitted. As in the period after the First World War, moral
ties were relaxed or broken. Relations between the sexes became
more uninhibited. Since divorce had been introduced in 1794,
marriages had been breaking up. The number of prostitutes was
rapidly increasing. The theatres were crowded. There were
famous hairdressers about whom the women raved. The gulf
between rich and poor grew wider every day. The communist,
Babeuf, displayed his nth Article on placards: “The Revolution
is not over. The rich still have the money. It is they who still
govern. And the poor, as before, are no more than slaves of
labour.” But it made no impression. Everyone, even the man in
the street, lived beyond his means. More and more food and
drink were consumed and gambling spread. There was a universal
craving for attractive or expensive clothes. Trading began again
in the street and on the Bourse, and never since the South Sea
Bubble had so many people been interested in speculating. En¬
joyment and easy earnings were the popular cry.
     The men who came to power in 1795 were not strong enough
to stem the current. Tallien had already been open to corruption
when, as Commissioner of the Convention in Bordeaux, he
controlled the guillotine.    Barras, the key figure, handsome,
pleasure-loving and a former officer from a noble family, had
also forgotten, when he ordered executions in Toulon and
Marseilles, that he was present at the storming of the Bastille.
When he became, at forty, a member of the Directory, he seemed
content merely to satisfy his taste for elegance. In his lace cravat,
knee-breeches and silk stockings he was a picturesque figure,
but he also created an impression of strength and determination.
In fact he was too susceptible to feminine charm and sensual
pleasures. Life was much more enjoyable in a beautiful old
chateau outside the gates of Paris, where splendid fetes could be
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                 31

held in an enormous park, than in the exhausting round of State
affairs. “Barras combined all the vices of the ancien regime and
the new era.” It took money to satisfy these vices, a great deal
more money than a member of the government could earn. “At
that time everything was for sale,” Napoleon said later to
Bourrienne. “Government posts, supplies, foodstuffs, uniforms,
military equipment; they sold everything and were even paid
seventy-five million in advance.”
  Ouvrard knew exactly how to handle a man like Barras. He
knew from experience that really big business with the govern¬
ment was not possible without personal outlay. He waited for a
convenient occasion. Since the autumn of 1795 he had met Barras
on several occasions in Madame Tallien’s salon, where the cream
of Parisian society forgathered. It may well be that Ouvrard had
been of service to the beautiful Madame Tallien and had thereby
gained the confidence of her intimate friend, Barras. It was about
the same period, in September 1795, that Napoleon, still a “little”
man, a mere brigade-commander in the artillery, obtained
material for a new uniform by virtue of a letter from Madame
Tallien to the Paymaster of the 17th Division.
  Ouvrard had certainly had plenty of opportunities to explain
to Barras his proposals for the restoration of a solvent paper
currency before February 1796, when the assignats were with¬
drawn from circulation and a new currency, the “mandat”, was
introduced. It is not known whether his advice was taken, although
he maintained that Barras was very impressed by his proposals.
Ouvrard would have had good reason not to advertise any con¬
tribution he made, for in quite a short time the mandats proved
just as valueless as the assignats had been. Moreover, Ouvrard’s
main concern at this point was not to help the government achieve
real financial stability, for he could see that, for the moment, the
right personalities were lacking.
   His primary objective was to make an impression on Barras
and win his support. No one could rival Ouvrard at this game. It
was very noticeable, on occasions when people were still eager to
play the market but were short of ready cash, that Ouvrard was
always in funds and had ample resources to draw on for further
32                             Ouvrard

investments. Credit facilities were, on the whole, hard to come
by. But, even when he was asked for credit, Ouvrard displayed
the same nonchalance as in any major business deal. His inex¬
haustible optimism carried conviction simply because his re¬
markable business acumen was so obvious. There was no dearth
of bankers and businessmen in Madame Tallien’s salon: Recamier,
the Brothers Michel, Perregaux, Hamelin, Tourton, Bazin and
many others, but, as soon as Ouvrard appeared, he stood out
unmistakably as a financial genius.
     Ouvrard, who was also an accomplished and elegant con¬
versationalist, can have found no difficulty in convincing Barras,
even without talking to him, that he stood head and shoulders
above the rest of the business community. It was not in his nature
to sit brooding over a desk, like a chess-player, laboriously
working out new ideas and fresh schemes. Always friendly and
cheerful, he seemed quite happy to decide on the impulse of the
moment what he should do or not do. It was as if he carried an
invisible divining-rod about with him. His magic formula re¬
mained a mystery, and mystery lent an even brighter halo to a
head which only a few months before had been completely un¬
known.
     Barras, the grand seigneur, also paid his tribute. He realized
that Ouvrard was a man with whom it would pay to co-operate
and who, however big the deal, would always remain solvent.
Soon it was the most natural thing in the world for Ouvrard to
suggest an informal meeting. Indeed, the day came when the
leading statesman in France called on Ouvrard at his country
residence at Vitry just outside Paris. What the two men discussed
between four walls was never disclosed. Barras makes no reference
to it in his memoirs; Ouvrard maintains a discreet silence in his.
But that the discussion was fruitful for both parties can be
deduced from Ouvrard s terse observation: “That day marked
the beginning of my business relations with the government. It
changed the whole course of my career.” {Memoirs.)
     This change involved Ouvrard in a return to his first field of
activity. His banking activities receded once more into the back¬
ground, and trading in foodstuffs was resumed. The scope,
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                 33

however, was enormously increased and the market was guaran¬
teed. To begin with, at least, Ouvrard did not have to worry
about selling his goods. For a year and a half, from May 1793
until the end of 1794, the people of Paris had been largely
dependent on the government for their food supplies, but that
ideal state of affairs was now over. On the other hand, the State’s
fighting troops were lamentably short of supplies, and Barras was
ultimately responsible for the army’s Commissariat.
  Naturally, Ouvrard found no reason to criticize such a situa¬
tion. What did irk him was that private capital was not allowed to
operate freely in the navy. Whereas the army had always received
its supplies direct from private concerns, the navy’s supplies were
controlled by the State. Ouvrard was undoubtedly right when
he said that in consequence “the administration of the navy was
just as inefficient as that of almost all other government depart¬
ments”. It was, therefore, with the public interest as well as his
own in mind that Ouvrard set about the formidable task in 1797
of completely reforming the navy’s victualling system. Ironically
enough, although it was no mere accident, when a government
commission was set up, he was called upon to give a report on
the merits and demerits of private enterprise. Naturally he put
forward the view, which, in the prevailing circumstances and
taking into account the people involved, was undoubtedly the
correct view, that the most efficient business is the one run by a
man with a financial stake in its success. He stressed the obvious
fact that since 1793 dishonest officials had been conducting a
regular black market in naval stores and that the quality of wood
and iron, of cordage and sails, had left a great deal to be desired.
It was well known that the Minister of Marine, Pleville-Peley,
had proved himself to be a rare bird in the administration by
returning to the Treasury 33,000 francs of the 40,000 set aside
for a particular mission.
   Ouvrard, on this occasion, certainly did not reveal all that was
in his mind, otherwise he would have been obliged to add that
the victualling of the navy would guarantee immense wealth to
the private individual entrusted with it, that the overall cost to
the State might be somewhat increased but that the result would
34                           Ouvrard

be an efficient organization. In his report Ouvrard showed a
marked concern that the government, which must be both the
controlling and executive    authority, should    be   relieved of
many small responsibilities and thereby spared much unnecessary
work.
  Ouvrard’s intervention was completely successful. Naturally
he was entrusted with the new administration. He was even given
a splendid title, General Victualling Master of the Navy, and a
budget of nearly sixty-four million francs. His annual profit from
that point onwards was not ascertainable. Even individual prices
could not be controlled. When the original listed price for wine
was raised from 494 francs per ton to 650 francs, thus yielding a
surplus of 775,000 francs on 5,000 tons of wine alone, this could
not fairly be regarded as pure profit without taking into account
the fluctuation in the wholesale purchase price and in the value of
money. But one thing can be said with certainty: in a transaction
of this magnitude the annual revenue ran into millions. And the
most important clause in the contract, which in a period of in¬
flation was also most unusual, required payments to be made in
silver dollars.
     It must have come as a great relief to Ouvrard when the
meticulous Pleville-Peley, who on resigning even left his entire
savings behind, had to give way to Rear-Admiral Bruix. The
new Minister of Marine was a sailor of considerable repute, with
whom the General Victualling Master was soon on the best of
terms. In the years to come Ouvrard had much to thank him for.
Nor was he forgetful of this when the Admiral died an early death
in 1805. With a generosity which was one of his many distinctive
traits, he immediately paid the widow of a man who could no
longer be of use to him the sum of 500 louis d’or—a substantial
amount in those days. He makes no mention of it in his memoirs.
     It may have been Bruix, and most probably it was, who
negotiated an extension of Ouvrard’s naval contract to cover the
ships of a friendly nation. The Minister also had under his com¬
mand twenty-five ships, which lay in Brest, the chief port of
Brittany. The Admiral succeeded in breaking through the
English blockade with his fleet and bringing back the ships of the
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                 35



Allied Spanish fleet. He sailed right round the Iberian Peninsula
to a point near Gibraltar, escorted the Spaniards out of the port
of Cadiz and brought them back safely to France. These ships,
cut off from their home base, had to be provisioned. The cost
was, of course, borne by the Spanish Government. Nothing
seemed more natural than that the Spanish Admiral Massaredo
should entrust the victualling of his ships to the same man whose
relations with the Minister and Admiral were so cordial and who,
moreover, had proved his ability to carry this heavy responsibility.
A formal contract was drawn up, which was signed by the Spanish
Premier Urtigo.
  From Ouvrard’s point of view this was a particularly profitable
arrangement. As the Spaniards were on a war footing and ready
to sail at a moment’s notice, supplies were commissioned on a
day-to-day basis, so that Ouvrard was able to demand the higher
prices which had been agreed for actual operations. At the same
time the English saw to it that the Spaniards were unable to
return to their home ports for some considerable time. As a result,
the victualling of the Spanish fleet went on for several years and
earned Ouvrard, on his own admission, a clear profit of four
million Mexican piastres, between fifteen and twenty million
francs, varying with the expenses Ouvrard incurred in realizing
the drafts on the Mexican treasury, which he received in lieu of
cash. This is the third sum mentioned proudly by Ouvrard. The
first was the 300,000 francs he cleared from the paper deal at the
outbreak of the Revolution in 1789, the second was the 500,000
francs he earned from the sale of groceries in Bordeaux, and
now, between 1798 and 1799, there was the 15—20 million from
the Spanish contract. This was the sort of rising scale of profits
which would make any merchant’s heart beat faster. Yet Ouvrard
would not have felt so elated had he been able to foresee that
this enormous access of wealth would almost ruin him ten years
later.
   For the moment, however, Ouvrard moved on from one
success to another. It is inherent in the sheer logic of economic
development and trading practice that increasing profits required
new ideas, further investments and fresh partnerships. He put
36                            Ouvrard

several millions into the firms Giradot & Co., Charles Rougemont
& Co., Charlemagne & Co. in Paris and three firms in Brest,
Bordeaux and Orleans. Before long these names were mere
covers for his own. They were part of the “concern”. His Paris
offices were steadily expanding and already looked like a Ministry.
They were run by Turpin, the former Director of the Treasury,
and Cambaceres, both remarkable men.
  In choosing Cambaceres as a collaborator, Ouvrard had
again shown that shrewd psychological insight to which he
owed so much of his success. Cambaceres had a rare, almost
paradoxical, capacity for forgetting insults quickly and yet never
forgetting services rendered to him. His friendship was of in¬
calculable value to Ouvrard for Cambaceres rose steadily from
one influential government post to another. President of the
Council of the Five Hundred, Minister of Justice under the
Directory, a Consul together with Napoleon, Deputy Head of the
Government, Arch-Chancellor under the Empire, editor of the
Code Napoleon, Duke of Parma: these were the various stages in
a brilliant career. In a magnificent house on the Place du Carrousel
he would receive the leading men of France, wearing, we are
told, a velvet suit embroidered with gold and an enormous
powdered wig.
     Yet he continued to help Ouvrard. It was almost certainly he
who sent a secret message from a session of the State Council to
warn Ouvrard that Napoleon had ordered his arrest. Bonaparte
himself certainly suspected as much, although Cambaceres stood
high in the Emperor’s favour. Some years later, on 25 th Decem¬
ber 1805, when Napoleon wrote from Austria to his brother
Joseph in Paris that he intended to imprison Ouvrard and his
associates, the Michel Brothers, because they were endangering the
State Treasury, he expressly forbade him to inform Cambaceres.
But even so Cambaceres managed to save the merchants, and
particularly Ouvrard, from imprisonment at Vincennes and to
arrange for the affair to be settled on a purely commercial basis.
     Cambaceres’ previous participation in Ouvrard’s firm was all
the more fruitful as the interruption of his political career cannot
have been a long one. It probably came at the same time as
                      Paris: the Great Opportunity                 37


Ouvrard, the private financier, was first approached by a French
government for a loan to tide it over a barren period. That was
in 1798. Defeat after defeat was being suffered in Italy while
Napoleon was in Egypt. The large sums of money which
Napoleon had been sending regularly from the conquered
territories to the Directory, had ceased. The government was not
even in a position to pay the fighting forces. The whole army was
poorly equipped and badly in need of uniforms, arms and
ammunition. The State coffers were empty; no further tax
revenue could be expected, although some of it had already been
spent in advance. So Ouvrard was asked for an advance of ten
million. This was not a large amount for him even in a time of
general stagnation. Again one of his basic principles had stood
him in good stead: always have a substantial amount of ready
money to hand.
    The momentary dependence of the government gave Ouvrard
an opportunity to indulge one of his pet ambitions: cleaning up
the State’s finances. For the past five years he had watched three
successive governments bungling through. His ten million francs
would only stem the flood for a few weeks. Ouvrard was not so
foolish as to believe that the individual would go unscathed, or
still less that trade could prosper for long, if the State went bank¬
rupt. But the persistence with which he returned to his financial
theories throughout the years (including much more stable
periods than that preceding the fall of the Directory) is a clear
indication that his interest in solving the problem was partly a
genuine and unselfish desire to master it for its own sake. And
added to this was the awareness, which he had acquired from the
patricians of Nantes, that he and the men of his profession could
make or mar the future, if not of the world, at least of those living
in it.
  Ouvrard had discussed the financial situation with leading
statesmen on several occasions. He had condemned the system
of assignats as unworkable. He had advised on the introduction
of the mandats. Now, in 1798, he felt convinced that his financial
theories would at last be taken seriously. He sat down to work
them out systematically, something he had never done before. It
 fj & ^aft'/uoP 0^"'‘

3$                            Ouvrard

was, in fact, the first time—though by no means the last—that
he had put his thoughts in writing. His main recommendation
was the establishment of a National Debt on the British pattern.
His thesis as a whole was a repetition of the familiar arguments
about the productive power of credit, which he had learned in
Nantes from Graslin, the building contractor.
     An essential feature of Ouvrard’s memorandum was a criticism
of the national budget procedure. Each year saw a new and
completely fictitious budget based on hypothetical economies,
which no government department had the slightest intention of
making. “The only result achieved by this economy race is that,
before the end of the financial year, the coffers are empty and the
Ministers are not in a position to meet real expenditure.” Par¬
ticularly unfortunate (for suppliers and therefore for Ouvrard)
was the fact that “in the last resort the State’s creditors have to
carry the deficit”. Ouvrard warned against groundless expecta¬
tions of unforeseen revenue, which could lead to a quite irre¬
sponsible acceptance of obligations. “The national economy must
be run on the same principles as private economy.”
     Once the State has acquired debts—unfortunately not a
National Debt—it must try to pay them. “Otherwise it falls into
the unhappy situation of a bad debtor, with whom one may
sympathize but with whom one can no longer do business.”
(Memoirs.) These debts could not be paid out of normal revenue;
a special sinking fund must be set up, which would draw its
income from a comprehensive National Debt Administration.
This debt would have to be consolidated on a long-term basis
and secured by adequate refunding operations. “Interest and
amortization must be limited to a third or a quarter of the
national revenue.” {Memoirs.)
     Even with her existing debts, France would benefit by a large
National Debt. It was the only way to stimulate the country’s
development; money would come pouring in from all over
Europe, if a shrewd government, which enjoyed international
confidence, could offer stocks with attractive prospects and a
good measure of security. France would then be able to spend this
money on generous, long-term projects. “Loans in the form of
                        Paris: the Great Opportunity                      jg

fixed-interest bonds (or rentes), which are secured by a sinking
fund, represent a public debt, which happily decreases steadily
and is finally liquidated, without imposing too heavy a burden
on the taxpayer and without in any way damaging the lenders.
The floating of such a debt mobilizes capital and must, in fact,
lead directly to an increase in the money and credit supply. It
serves, in short, as a stimulus to every form of business activity.
As a consequence, the taxpayers are prosperous, the tax revenue
itself must automatically increase, and a sense of utter confidence
prevails between the government and the people.”*
   Had there been a government in France at that time which
was filled with the desire to govern well, Ouvrard’s eloquence
would certainly have succeeded in pressing home such clear,
simple ideas. But in 1799, the last year of the Directory, as in
early 1794, the period of the Terror, no one had time to study
his financial system. It was easier to accept his credit than his
advice.
   Ouvrard understood the financial problems of his day because
he was a born financier. He had never had any doubt about his
vocation. From the moment when he first stood on his own feet
he had known only one ambition: the accumulation of money.
That is why he had remained unperturbed in 1796 and 1797,
when the Revolution in Paris was in its final throes and Babeuf,
the communist, tried to emancipate the people still further by
abolishing private capital. These two men, so unlike in every
respect, do not ever appear to have met. Babeuf, who had himself
adopted the name “Gracchus” amongst his disciples, the “Equals”,
had a passionate contempt for money; Ouvrard was its most
persistent and fortunate devotee. Babeuf went out of his way to
quarrel with anyone in a position of power who might have been
of use to him; Ouvrard knew how to get on with people, even
with the hard men of the Terror. The navvy’s son from Roye
paid with his life for his proclamation of the new gospel—the
gospel which promised universal happiness on the day that “mine”

  * At this time more than half the French national debt was a floating debt
and therefore in theory repayable at short notice. Interest on the public
debt accounted for about half of the annual budget.—T.A.B.C.
40                           Ouvrard

and “thine” disappeared from the language. The man from
Nantes was accused of having acted against the welfare of the
people in his financial transactions. In view of Babeuf’s poverty
and lack of influence, Ouvrard considered his arguments about
dress reform and town planning to be futile. One can well
imagine Ouvrard pausing before a hoarding at a street corner to
read with a contemptuous smile the communistic manifesto of
Gracchus Babeuf.
  For the ideas proclaimed by Babeuf fell on deaf ears in Paris,
his threats had no effect. Babeuf’s movement remained half¬
hearted, uncertain and ineffectual. Ouvrard, the realist, never
had occasion to give it serious thought. In his memoirs he makes
no mention of the last of the revolutionaries. Just how completely
unmoved he was by the gospel of equality can be seen from the
fact that he lived a life of luxury which at that time was almost
undreamt of. The faubourgs of Paris, particularly the working-
class quarter Faubourg St. Antoine, were still on the borders of
starvation between 1796 and 1799, when Ouvrard was openly
displaying his wealth. The number of dancing establishments in
1799 had, admittedly, almost doubled since 1795 to about 1,500,
but people were still dying of exhaustion in the streets. The
luxurious life of the upper classes in pre-Revolution France was
now so far beyond the reach of even a few that in 1800, when
Napoleon made his ceremonial change of residence from the
Luxembourg to the Tuileries, carriages had to be hired for the
State Councillors.
     Ouvrard was one of the few who, during this period of in¬
flation before 1800, had a very large income, and, while houses,
lands, estates and chateaux were still going cheap, he invested
extensively in property. He bought Preuilly with 18,000 acres of
forest. By acquiring Chateau Neuf, Saint Brice, Marly, Luciennes
and Vitry he secured his vast earnings against devaluation. Round
Cologne in Gers he purchased twenty-four farms, which brought
in 600,000 francs a year in rent. In Paris itself he bought the
Palais Montesson in the Rue du Mont Blanc, houses in the
Rue de Provence, on the Place Vendome and in many other
areas. More than one seller, who could not afford to keep his
                     Parts: the Great Opportunity

property, complained bitterly because Ouvrard, being a merchant,
would pay only in accordance with the law of supply and
demand.
  General Thiebault, in particular, protested furiously in his
memoirs because the Chateau of Saint Gratien de Villandry,
which his father-in-law himself offered to the General Victualling
Master, was bought by Ouvrard for 350,000 francs, although
Monsieur Chenais had originally paid 850,000 for it. The angry
heir swore that the owner of Villandry was bemused by Ouvrard’s
personal magnetism, by his luxurious house, by the Grand
seigneur’s fine manners and finally by a well-timed bottle of
champagne (“the most expensive that was ever drunk”), but this
story is hard to believe. Chenais had lost his entire fortune
through the revolution in San Domingo, thereby confirming
Ouvrard’s foresight in 1789, when he decided not to invest the
300,000 francs he had earned from the paper deal in colonial
plantations. There were few people who could afford 350,000
francs for a chateau, and if Chenais wanted to sell he had to be
content with less than half the original price. Ouvrard was not
exploiting an individual but the prevailing circumstances. Chenais,
in fact, was in precisely the same position as all other property
owners, the value of whose real estate had dropped following the
confiscation of emigre properties by the government. In the year
1799 alone the Directory tried to sell 125 million francs’ worth
of nationalized property, but, owing to a shortage of buyers, was
able to dispose of only a small percentage even at very reduced
prices.
   One of these nationalized estates was the Chateau of Rainey,
three to four miles outside Paris, which Ouvrard also bought. It
must have been about 1797. But Rainey was no ordinary chateau,
like the “residence with two weather-vanes” which was so much
sought after, or like Vitry, Villandry and Chateau Neuf. Rainey
was Ouvrard’s great extravagance, the symbol of his wealth, his
power, his social accomplishments and his scintillating personality.
It was an old Bourbon property which had been inhabited by the
Duke of Orleans until the Revolution. Rainey was so magnificent
that in 1808 Napoleon took it from General Junot merely on the
42                             Ouvrard

pretext that he must have a chateau near Paris. Recamier, who
had a country seat at Clichy-la-Charenne which formerly belonged
to a Due de Levis; even Barras, who had acquired the former
seat of Louis XVI’s brother at Grosbois; and later Talleyrand at
Neuilly—they all lived in a style befitting their station, but none
of them possessed Ouvrard’s consummate skill or had his truly
aristocratic feeling for things cultural.
     The chateau stands in the middle of a splendid park, which was
designed by Le Notre. The woods are full of deer, which today
gaze in anxious wonderment at the traffic streaming past from
Paris. Ouvrard always regarded hospitality as “the finest attri¬
bute of wealth”. After alterations had been made by the new
proprietor, no house could have been more suitable than Rainey.
In the splendid vestibule thirty-two Doric pillars, each one a
monolith, were surmounted by an enormous entablature. The
adjacent salon, octagonal in shape, was a delightful and unusually
exciting room. The features, mood and colour of the figures in
Lebrun’s large pictures kept changing with the reflection of a
thousand candles in the water of a huge basin, twenty feet in
diameter, in the centre of the room. At the top of the wide stair¬
case one entered the large Italian salon, along the entire length
of which—some eighty feet—were Ionic pillars right up to the
ceiling. Doors of mirror glass led to the master of the house’s
bedroom. But the real piece de resistance of this house was the half¬
moon-shaped bathroom with its floor of rare yellow marble. The
two enormous bathtubs, hewn out of blocks of grey-and-black
Vosges granite, were the talk of Paris. A stove of verde antico
gave out a comfortable warmth and when, after his bath, the
master of the house reclined on a velvet-covered sofa in an alcove,
he could feast his eyes on a rich fresco on the ceiling, which
represented Diana and her nymphs bathing.
     Twenty years later, in 1816, when the Bourbons were restored
and recovered their property, the Duke of Orleans declared on
seeing the bathroom at Rainey: “To create that needed a greater
man than I have ever been.” Here indeed Ouvrard had strained his
ambition to the uttermost. Only one thing was lacking: the note
of contrast struck by Fabre d’Eglantine, who also acquired his
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                 43

wealth fairly quickly, and who set aside one room in his palace
which contained souvenirs of his early poverty—a pallet bed, a
walnut table, two straw-bottomed chairs and a dilapidated
chamber-pot.
  Fetes at Rainey, which were organized by one of the leading
architects of Paris, Bertheaux, always provided an impressive
programme, and the guests who did not want to miss anything
had to leave Paris in the early afternoon. In front of the chateau
huntsmen blew their horns, the horses were led forward, hunting
carriages drove up and the pack strained impatiently at the leash.
The company moved off with Ouvrard at the head. When the
happy throng returned at dusk they were greeted with hundreds
of torches and coloured lanterns. The rigours of the hunt gave
added zest to the luxury that followed. The dining-room was
fringed by a long row of beautiful orange trees, their blossom
and fruit exuding the most delicious scent. In the marble basin
multi-coloured fish turned and twisted over a foundation of gold
dust. The choicest of dishes were served on silver plates and
golden salvers. Rare fruits from the Orient and the Occident
were heaped on priceless porcelain. The walls of the adjoining
coffee-room were covered with vines laden with bunches of
sweet grapes. In the four corners stood shell-shaped marble
basins with small gushing fountains of punch, orange-juice and
almond juice. Concealed behind banks of flowers an orchestra
played softly, until the time came for it to break into dance
music.
  But Ouvrard’s hospitality was not nearly so impersonal as this
glittering scene suggests. With uncommon generosity he used to
offer his house and his hospitality to his friends even when he
himself was not there or did not join the guests. It was also not un¬
usual for one of his acquaintances, such as Monsieur de Norvins-
Monbreton, to receive permission to spend a day with a score of
his friends in the park at Rainey and to live in the charming
Telegraph Pavilion. When they arrived with their picnic baskets,
they found to their surprise that an excellent lunch was waiting
for them, followed in due course by a no less excellent dinner.
When, towards nine o’clock, tea, ice-cream, sherbet and other
44                            Ouvrard

delicacies were served, there was still no sign of the master of the
house. He excused himself from each meal in a short note. “The
reception we were given was as rich, as distinguished as one could
possibly imagine, but the most distinguished touch of all was the
modesty and tact of our host, who had not considered his presence
fitting.”
    Ouvrard was certainly not exaggerating when he said later
that, if visitors’ books had been in vogue at that time, amongst the
recorded guests at Rainey would have been not only kings, princes
and lords but also the cream of the nobility, of literature and of
the arts. Charles James Fox spent a whole week there hunting.
Napoleon’s furious enquiry as to how long his Ministers had
held council at Madame Recamier’s might well have been
applied to Rainey after 18th Brumaire. All his leading generals,
Moreau, Junot and Marmont in particular, were constant visitors.
Napoleon himself went only once, to visit his War Minister when
he was staying there. A number of famous women could be seen
there. On one occasion Mesdames Recamier, Tallien and de
Stael, the beautiful Duchess of Courland, and the seductive
Visconti, the War Minister’s mistress, all took the floor at a
splendid ball. Another welcome guest at Rainey was Lucien
Bonaparte, who on one occasion at dinner took a sensational
revenge on Madame Recamier for rejecting his advances; when
he asked his fellow guests for their attention and proposed a
toast to the most beautiful woman present, all eyes turned to the
blushing Madame Recamier, but after a brief, dramatic pause,
Lucien toasted “La Paix“It is Peace we all long for.”
     Especially favoured guests had a pavilion in the park all to
themselves, so serving Ministers could enjoy free lodging on
Ouvrard’s estate for more or less indefinite periods. Chief among
these were Talleyrand and Berthier. Ouvrard knew what he was
doing, for here again his natural pleasure in social life had a firm
core of commercial calculation. Berthier, Napoleon’s right-hand
man, lived for a lengthy period in a hunting-lodge in the park
with the famous and beautiful Visconti. Rainey provided the
ideal seclusion for this passionate love-affair, which was almost
savage in its intensity.
                      Paris: the Great Opportunity                 45

   Ouvrard was seldom mistaken in his assessment of the politi¬
cians and soldiers with whom he collaborated. As early as 1794,
when General Bernadotte, later to become King of Sweden but
at that time entirely without private means, was anxious to get
married, Ouvrard advanced 50,000 francs, which was later repaid
by the firm of Bernadotte’s father-in-law. It may be, however,
that this friendly gesture had some influence on an army contract
which Ouvrard obtained under the name Boissonneau, when
Bernadotte was Minister of War (1798—99). In any case he was
flattered by the knowledge that he had been able to help the man,
who, having begun in 1780 as a private soldier, later became
Crown Prince and finally King of Sweden. Berthier became not
only Minister of War but eventually one of the few men whom the
suspicious Napoleon really trusted. It was Berthier who had to
recover Napoleon’s letters from Fouche after the dismissal of the
Chief of Police. It was Berthier who was delegated to ask for the
hand of the Austrian Emperor’s daughter on Napoleon’s behalf.
And it was Berthier who in January 1806, having returned from
Austerlitz to Paris a day before Napoleon, sent Ouvrard an
urgent message—before he even indulged his longing for a hot
bath—advising him to take “precautionary measures” against any
inroads Napoleon might make on his private fortune. This advice
was certainly not wasted. It is, indeed, quite likely that Ouvrard’s
friendly relations with Berthier, the Prince of Neufchatel and
Wagram, had already borne fruit earlier, for around 1800 Berthier
was removed from the War Ministry and made Army Com¬
mander, because he had not been severe enough in his business
negotiations. “He was too complaisant regarding payments due
and the conclusion of new contracts.” Bourrienne, who knew
everything that went on in the inner Cabinet, makes no reference
to Ouvrard’s benefiting more than anyone else from this com¬
plaisance. Nevertheless, he probably did.
  On the whole, however, Rainey was for Ouvrard anything but
a means to an end. This was the one place where his inner self
found its fullest satisfaction and expression, for at heart he was a
Grand seigneur with a natural talent for the grand and esoteric
gesture and for a wide range of social activities. Ouvrard regarded
46                            Ouvrard

patronage of the arts as “one of the greatest joys of a large for¬
tune”, but to it he brought his own individual touch. He not
only had his own collection of old masters but, in contrast to his
contemporaries, he also commissioned a number of pictures from
living artists. The whole ensemble, seen in the context of his
personality, was consistent. Only one thing was lacking to make
the picture complete: an intelligent and elegant wife of the same
stature as himself, who would appreciate and cultivate his tastes.
     Having come to Paris, a mere provincial merchant, Ouvrard
had become, within the incredibly short time of five years, one of
the most influential men in France. His wife could not keep pace
with him. She never dared do the honours in the brilliant society
at Rainey. But Ouvrard wanted to conduct the whole of his
life, including his relations with the other sex, in the grand style.
     So he turned to the woman who for the past five years had
been the toast of Paris, Madame Tallien. On many occasions
throughout the years he had seen her together with other elegant
women in her salon at the Chaumiere, the thatched house on the
Allee des Veuves. He watched her conjure out of the social chaos
of the Terror many of the former social graces of Versailles and,
by sheer personal charm, attract all the influential men in the
government, the army, the arts and high finance. In her salon she
combined seductive grace and an air of indulgence with a strong
sense of purpose; no one would ever say of her, as of Madame de
Stael, that she had an extraordinarily powerful mind and an
unusual command of words. But she was wholly feminine and
had a woman’s shrewdness. She had a full-bodied, voluptuous
beauty with perfectly proportioned limbs. She liked to display
her splendid white shoulders. Her pitch-black hair hung in
ringlets round her face, “like a frame of polished ebony”: her
skin was white, smooth and fresh, her eyes were large under
finely arched brows and her mouth was small with pearl-white
teeth. This was a description given not by some man she might
have bewitched but by a critical member of her own sex, the
Duchesse d Abrantes, who was fascinated by the beauty of those
features and the “transfiguration of this apparition” by the “re¬
flection of a gentle soul ’. The Duchesse felt unable to express in
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                47

words the almost supernatural perfection” and even speaks of
“an aura of divine beauty”.
  Madame Vigee-Lebrun confesses with the charming simplicity
of a rival that she “sought in vain for a defect in this beautiful
woman”. Most disarming, however, is the tribute paid by the
highly critical Madame de Stael, who in conversation described
Madame Tallien as “a new manifestation of all that is noble and
divine in the human intellect”. Lamartine was particularly im¬
pressed by her temperament. “She combined in her person the
fire of the South, the equanimity of the North and the grace of
France. Thus she was a living embodiment of the beauty of all
countries.” One can begin to understand contemporary reports
to the effect that people who saw Madame Tallien for the first time
involuntarily uttered a cry of delight.
  Ouvrard must have realized at a very early stage that he and
this woman, to whom everyone paid homage as to a queen, were
made for each other. He too was .tall, nearly six foot, and well
built. He had a well-shaped head, a thin mouth, a nose that was
rather too sharp, and eyes that were calm yet very alive. The over¬
all impression he gave was one of striking self-assurance, and
even his enemies could not help admitting that he had great
charm. He was an agreeable and highly accomplished conver¬
sationalist with a polished wit and most attractive manner. He had
no need to indulge, as did the banker Recamier, in original mis¬
quotations from Horace and Virgil, which were all too often
repeated.
  Ouvrard and Madame Tallien had, however, much more in
common than a marked similarity of personality and bearing.
Ouvrard, who with characteristic reticence devoted only a few
lines in his memoirs to the woman who was his close companion
for several years, gave no hint of their intimate relationship when
he said that “she combined courage and character with beauty
and intelligence”. Intellectual courage was something Ouvrard
himself had always possessed. It was almost second nature to
him to produce unorthodox ideas, even if others considered them
disturbing or alarming, and there is no doubt that he owed much
of his success to his unconventional methods. Madame Tallien’s
48                            Ouvrard

career had shown that she, for her part, took a much bolder and
more independent line than most other women in accepting the
new gospel of freedom.
  Born in 1773, Johanna Maria Ignatia Theresia de Cabarrus was
three years younger than Ouvrard. From the beginning, however,
she found it difficult to follow the examples set by her pious name¬
sakes. A more potent force was the influence of her mother, who
had allowed herself to be abducted by Monsieur de Cabarrus.
When Theresia was twelve a completely infatuated uncle made
a formal request for her hand in marriage. In 1788, at the age of
fifteen, she married a small, red-haired Senator, de Fontenay,
who lost no time in getting through her considerable fortune
while having numerous affairs with shopgirls. In this hard school
Theresia learned to stand on her own feet. In 1793 came her first
divorce. In Bordeaux a Commissioner of the Convention, Tallien,
whom she had met briefly in Paris, arranged her release from
prison. He was a forceful, powerful man and she became his
mistress. Once more in prison—this time in Paris—she sent a
note to Tallien, saying that she had been told she was to be
executed the next day. “Last night I dreamt that Robespierre
was dead and the prisons were open.... But thanks to your
cowardice there will soon be no one left in France capable of ful¬
filling such a dream.” Three days later Robespierre fell, and she
married Tallien in 1795. But the bourgeois way of life did not
suit her and Tallien did not live up to his earlier promise. A new
suitor appeared in Barras, a handsome, elegant ex-officer, who
was the son, not of a lackey like Tallien, but of an old and noble
family. Before long she was presiding openly at the table of the
new ruler of France in the Luxembourg. In 1799 she was divorced
but her relations with Barras remained as before.
     After Napoleon became Emperor, he is said to have remarked
contemptuously to Madame Tallien at a masked ball that she had
had two or three husbands, and children by God knows whom!
This left Ouvrard quite unmoved. As soon as he saw the possi¬
bility of winning this remarkable woman for himself, all that
interested him was the singleness of purpose which motivated all
her actions, the originality and consistency which were the hall-
(-Above) The merchant J. J. Vanlerberghe. Lithograph
     by Auguste Bry. {Paris, Biblioth'eque Nationale)
Chateau Rainey in 1808. Constantine Bourgeois (del.) de Saulx (sculp.)
                        (Otto JVolff Collection)




                   Madame Tallien. Miniature by Isabey
                     Paris: the Great Opportunity                49

marks of her character. At a time when both legality and legitimacy
had disappeared from all spheres of life, the only criterion that
mattered was vitality. And this woman possessed it to a much
higher degree than any others he knew.
  Like Ouvrard, who lent a helping hand to many, she was also
kind-hearted. In Bordeaux she succeeded in taming Lacombe, the
savage President of the Revolutionary Military Committee, and
on more than one occasion in Paris she left her bed in the middle
of the night to plead for prisoners. And if at times—though by
no means always—the help she gave was not entirely disinterested,
Ouvrard was both interested and amused to find a woman with
such a highly developed business instinct. His early visits to her
salon paved the wray to an agreement with Barras. The con¬
versation behind closed doors at Vitry bore considerable fruit,
particularly his appointment as General Victualling Master of the
Navy and subsequently the contract with the Spaniards. He did
business with Madame Tallien’s brothers in Bordeaux, and later
she presented him with a son, who himself developed a marked
talent for business and who was to lend him much-needed support
around 1830. But most significant perhaps was the connection
Ouvrard established with her father, Count Francois de Cabarrus,
who had founded the Bank of St. Charles in Madrid. So it was
through Madame Tallien that Ouvrard first became interested in
the country which was later to inspire the most ambitious financial
project not only of his whole life but of his century.
   Perhaps the strongest of all the bonds between Ouvrard and
Madame Tallien was their mutual interest in good living. They
had the same passion for luxury and society. He was delighted
when she added to her already considerable supply of blond,
black, rust-coloured and red wigs, each of which cost 150 to 200
gold francs, for each one seemed to present her beauty in a new
and charming light, or when she employed various expensive
Indian shawls to lend fresh colour to her beautiful head. Madame
Ouvrard had never learned the secret of encouraging and receiv¬
ing gifts, but Ouvrard took a special pleasure in giving with taste
and with discrimination. Madame Tallien responded to this; she
took pleasure in receiving and showed it. At one point during
50
                                  Ouvrard

their liaison Ouvrard chose a particularly charming way of
presenting her with a house in the Rue Babylone. He invited her
one day to go for a drive in his carriage. Suddenly they stopped
before a magnificent palais in the style of Louis XV. Ouvrard
took a small gold key, set with jewels, from his pocket and, when
they had inspected the rooms and the splendid gardens, handed it
to her with the words: “Adieu, Madame, this is your home.” And,
indeed, when she rang, the bell was immediately answered by
servants, whom Ouvrard had let into the secret.
     In the circumstances Madame Tallien did not find it difficult
to break with Barras and attach herself to Ouvrard. So in 1799
she ceased to be, as she was popularly known, “/a propriete du
gouvernement” and became, so to speak, Ouvrard’s left hand. One
of Barras’s enemies, the hunchback La Revelliere-Lepaux, who
later tried to found a special party of his own, started the in¬
credible rumour that Madame Tallien had been the object of a
disgusting business deal. Ouvrard, it was said, had acted the
lover very much against his will. He was a Grand seigneur who
was prepared to sell his manhood, a gallant who, rather than
forfeit profitable military supplies, agreed to relieve the head of
the government of a mistress he had grown tired of. There was,
of course, no truth in the story. Madame Tallien was the woman
Ouvrard had long been seeking, a born mistress for Rainey,
where she accepted the homage of Ouvrard’s guests like a queen.*
     It was at Grosbois, Barras’s estate, that Ouvrard finally made
his conquest. “Ouvrard and Madame Tallien”, writes a con¬
temporary, “were in adjoining rooms. The following morning,

  * Wolff is here perhaps taking an over-charitable view of a not very
edifying episode; elsewhere—see his dry comment on p. 107 on her “re¬
markable ability to sense crises in the affairs of her friends”—he recognizes
her calculating nature. Her spendthrift habits were notorious. Barras either
wearied of these or wearied of her and therefore passed her on to Ouvrard.
Wolff omits the most amusing part of La Revelliere-Lepaux’ account:
Barras celebrated her “hand-over” to Ouvrard by giving a ceremonial ban¬
quet in their honour, and derived much cynical amusement from Ouvrard’s
acute embarrassment at the figure he was cutting, for everybody knew that
the guest of honour was saddling himself with a very expensive mistress,
whose favours many of those present would continue to enjoy freely as they
had done hitherto.—T.A.B.C.
                   Paris: the Great Opportunity              51

when the hunting-horns sounded, Theresia rode one of Ouvrard’s
horses with Ouvrard at her side. Behind them rode two boys,
one in Tallien’s colours, the other in Ouvrard’s livery. The
couple became parted from the rest of the company. When they
came down late to dinner, it was generally accepted that Madame
Tallien had become the purveyor’s ‘friend’.”
  That day marked the culmination of Ouvrard’s life, for, after
only five years, he had virtually conquered Paris. At the age of
twenty-nine he was not merely a multi-millionaire but had also
won the heart of one of the most beautiful and most coveted
women in France.
                               Five




       The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte




TTHROUGHOUT those five years between 1794 and 1799,
when Ouvrard made his meteoric rise in Paris, there was not
a single hitch, not the slightest setback. Success followed on
success, both in his personal and in his business life. It was a
steep and rapid climb upwards.
   The picture changed when the current of events changed. So
far Ouvrard had only had to deal with people who were follow¬
ing a similar road to his own. Barras, the bon-vivant head of the
government, who constantly needed money, was the prototype
of this period.
   On 9th November 1799, the 18th of Brumaire, the change
came. At ten o’clock in the morning a new and quite different
type of man, Napoleon Bonaparte, who had returned from Egypt
on 16th October, marched along the boulevards of Paris followed
by a glittering escort of generals across the Place de la Concorde
to the Tuileries, where the Council of the Ancients, without
knowing what it was doing, issued a special decree giving the
leader of the coup (That supreme military power for the pro¬
tection of the apparently threatened Republic.
   One of the first to realize what had happened was Ouvrard. Yet
even he seems to have underrated the effect this fairly open
transfer of power would have on the country’s economic life, for
apparently he had no stake in the State rente, which rose in
value within a few days from seven to thirty francs. But on the
morning of the 18th Brumaire he was out early, very soon after
                                 52
                 The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte              55

  the unsuspecting Barras had removed his night-cap in die Palais
 du Luxembourg. As soon as Ouvrard drove up to the palais he
 realized that the situation of the man who had so often and so
 ably befriended him had radically changed. The Directory’s body¬
 guard had disappeared; the sentries had been replaced by
 Napoleon’s troops. The building itself was almost deserted.
 Breakfast was laid for thirty people* but the chairs were empty.
 Ouvrard alone had the strength of character and the courage to
 stay with Barras in his moment of downfall. He was there at
 nine o’clock in the morning when General Moreau rode into the
 courtyard of the Luxembourg to a roll of drums and occupied the
 palace with half a brigade. Soon Talleyrand and Admiral Bruix
 appeared and forced Barras, on Napoleon’s behalf, to hand in his
 resignation. Ouvrard’s all-powerful friend became a private
 citizen literally overnight and from then on the only authority
he wielded was on his estate at Grosbois, to which he retired.
    The man with whom Ouvrard now had to deal was no stranger
 to him. But Ouvrard, the merchant, must have realized that the
 General who had just taken over power was not likely to take the
same interest in business affairs as the former head of government
had shown. Ouvrard remembered with disquiet how he had first
met Napoleon at Madame Tallien’s in 1795, when the squat,
black-haired officer, then almost unknown, had come to beg for
a new uniform, while Ouvrard, who was the same age, strolled
round the salon a great man and a millionaire. Ouvrard had good
reason to assume that Napoleon had not forgotten his first feeling
of antipathy. And, in fact, from the moment he seized power,
Napoleon took every opportunity of cold-shouldering and
harming Ouvrard. But he had other reasons. Ouvrard’s success
had branded him as a symbol of the revolutionary period and this
was anathema to the leader of the counter-revolution, who was
destined to establish an imperial throne. Ouvrard was a prominent
associate of Barras, Napoleon’s enemy, whose downfall was one
of his most cherished ambitions.

  * Barras was accustomed to entertaining on a grand scale. On the 18th
Brumaire, however, only Ouvrard sat down to breakfast with him.—
T.A.B.C.
54                              Ouvrard.

     Ouvrard, the sharp-eyed habitue of the Tallien salon, knew
too much at first hand about the dubious past of Josephine de
Beauharnais, and Napoleon had no wish to be reminded of it.
Finally, Ouvrard was fabulously wealthy. Bonaparte had always
appreciated the real power of money, and for that very reason he
regarded people with a great deal of money with the utmost
suspicion. Of Ouvrard himself he said that a man who had thirty
millions and seemed comparatively carefree was dangerous. More¬
over, if he was to carry out his ambitious plans and satisfy his two
overriding passions, war and fame, he himself would need vast
sums of money in the public coffers. He believed that every franc
a merchant earned from the State acted as a brake on his own
progress.
   Ouvrard, as a merchant and purveyor, was faced on 18th
Brumaire with the task of maintaining his relations with a govern¬
ment whose new head was known to loathe the class of merchants
and purveyors. To quote his own words to Bourrienne, they
were “the scourge and the scum of nations”, and “no aristocracy
could be more intolerable”. They were “sponges” which must
be squeezed. “I have no love for merchants,” he said later in an
address to a trade delegation from Antwerp, “for a merchant
would gladly sell his country for a dollar.” And even in 1811,
when he assured a deputation of merchants and manufacturers,
who had exposed the ruinous effect of the Continental Blockade
on the economy, that trading was “an honourable profession”, he
added a stern warning that they must be satisfied with minimum
profits, a warning which showed that, at heart, he still regarded
trade as legalized robbery. Not surprisingly, therefore, he came
to be known abroad as the “arch-enemy of all trade”, to quote a
Dutch phrase, and even his closest advisers at home, such as the
Minister of the Treasury, Mollien, admitted that Napoleon “was
often unjustly prejudiced against the merchant class; and at the
same time he liked to find excuses for delaying payments”.
     It is only fair to say, however, that, to begin with, Napoleon’s
antipathy was not entirely unjustified. In his first Italian campaign
he had some shocking experiences with army purveyors. Although
money for the supplies had been paid to the purveyors, the troops
               The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte            55

were still badly equipped. English goods to the value of forty
million francs, which had been confiscated for the army in the
port ol Leghorn, soon found their way into the hands of army
purveyors, who had bought them cheaply from soldiers and
officers. In Milan in the late summer of 1796 Napoleon had a
number of supply scandals to deal with. Even his own generals
were making money. Two million francs disappeared from the
loan office in occupied Verona. His own wife even earned good
commission by acting as an intermediary in dubious business
deals, and Madame Talleyrand is also alleged to have received
400,000 francs from Genoese businessmen. Napoleon simply
generalized particular experiences of this kind to cover the whole
of the merchant community.
  The uneasiness Ouvrard felt about the future on the 18th
Brumaire was well founded. Napoleon was so completely biassed
against all merchants as “rogues” and “a pack of scoundrels”
that he was quite incapable of distinguishing the good from the
bad. And it was soon clear that he was also incapable of recogniz¬
ing that the selling price of supplies was frequently high because
of the government’s unrealistic methods of payment, the amount
of risk involved and the constant threat of heavy losses in interest.
Bourrienne, Napoleon’s Military Secretary, Marmont, his Marshal,
Count Mollien, his Minister of the Treasury, and Savary, Due de
Rovigo, his Minister of Police, state in their various memoirs how
difficult it was, by virtue of the number of departments involved,
to settle even a long-outstanding and perfectly legitimate account.
  The situation in France was not quite so bad as in Austria,
where the Archduke Karl, when he became War Minister in 1792,
found in the cellars sacks stuffed with 154,000 unpaid bills for
deliveries which had long since been carried out. But Napoleon
also clung to the general principle that, wherever possible, pay¬
ments should be deferred, either permanently or long enough to
force the supplier to bring down his price. His far-sighted and
devoted Minister of the Treasury, Mollien, tried in vain to achieve
the lowest price with the best quality by applying the principle
of prompt payment. In 1803 an impartial German observer, the
musician Reichardt, wrote in his Intimate Letters from Paris that
                                  Ouvrard
56

“if only one tenth is true of what one hears of the way the govern¬
ment is again .. . exploiting private suppliers, how harshly ... it
often deals with their most legitimate demands and how the
ruling family is once more using them for its own ends,—then
that protection must cost them dear”. Napoleon did not see the
connection. He noticed that though Josephine’s debts were not
paid for years and that though only half of the 1,200,000 francs
that she owed was ultimately paid, the              merchants of Paris
suffered no apparent ill-effects. This merely confirmed his low
opinion of commerce. And when, only a few years before Bona¬
parte’s downfall, the banker Laffitte, by a skilful verbal manoeuvre,
succeeded in telling the Emperor that “trade is by its very nature
a reasonable and far from aggressive occupation, which is of
necessity bound to maintain stability, on which it depends for
its very existence, and it only takes to opposition when it feels
threatened and insecure”—even then the whole idea was still
strange to Napoleon.
     Such then was the man and such were the preconceptions with
which Ouvrard was suddenly confronted. There were, however,
certain important traits in his character which were invaluable in
an emergency of this kind: his indefatigable optimism, the basic
principle that he must always be solvent, and, above all, his pro¬
found sense of mission as a member of the merchant class. In
1523 Charles V was called “Emperor by the Grace of Fugger”.
In 1525 Bartholomaus Welser kept him afloat with two and a
half millions. About the same period Sir Richard Gresham made
the English money market independent of the Dutch bankers.
His son, Thomas Gresham, restored the devalued coinage to its
full value and rehabilitated the country’s credit. The Papal
Nuncio kissed the hand of John Law’s daughter before an
assembled company and opened the ball with her.* Louis XV

   * John Law (1671—1729), a Scotsman by birth, was an adventurer and
financier who succeeded in convincing the French authorities that credit
creation was the only effective means of expanding their economy. He was
allowed to set up the first bank in France, under royal patronage and with
the power to issue its own notes; he was also granted a charter to establish
a trading company in order to put into effect the famous Mississippi scheme.
In 1720 he was made Controller General of the French Finances, but in the
                  The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte                   57

walked in shirt-sleeves in the park at Marly with a Jew, Samuel
Bernard, in order to arrange a loan. And Ouvrard may well
have thought that he was destined to finance the ambitious genius,
Bonaparte.
   If so, Ouvrard was mistaken. Even if he succeeded in suppress¬
ing his antipathy for the conqueror in the hope of achieving his
own aims, Napoleon made no such effort. True, he needed money.
The 500,000 francs, which his friend Collot had placed at his
disposal before the coup d’etat, lasted only a few days. The master
of France needed millions, about twelve to begin with. As early
as 18th Brumaire Ouvrard offered them in a letter to Admiral
Bruix, who was one of Napoleon’s leading advisers. “It occurred
to me that someone, who is already responsible for the major
victualling services in your command, could make such an offer
without indiscretion, and that you will regard this merely as
proof of my devotion to the national cause, which I shall always
feel in duty bound to serve.” But Ouvrard waited in vain for a
summons. Napoleon, it seems, was not impressed by such out¬
spoken patriotic sentiments an^ preferred to go on wrestling with
the finances of his movement |tbit longer, before he stretched out
his little finger to the merchant from Madame Tallien’s salon.
Ouvrard had to sit idly and angrily by, while the first Consul
summoned the leading financiers of Paris on 24th November and
deliberately ignored him. But at least he had the satisfaction of
knowing that Napoleon, who liked to dictate, had to resort to
persuasion and pleading to get an advance of twelve millions
from Messrs. Recamier, Perregaux, Fulchiron, Daviliers and
others, who, in the event, paid only three millions. So deep-rooted
same year both his enterprises were ruined when the speculative “bubble”,
similar to the contemporary South Sea Bubble in England, suddenly burst
and he was compelled to flee from France. During his brief period of in¬
fluence he had done some good to the French economy; however, his ill-
starred schemes served only to engrain even more deeply in the minds of
Frenchmen, their traditional mistrust of credit and their inclination to hoard
cash and buy real estate rather than employ their savings productively.
There was no State bank until Napoleon founded the Bank of France in 1800,
and these prejudices severely hampered both Ouvrard’s and (during the
Second Empire) the Pereires’ ambitious plans to develop the country.—
T.A.B.C.
^8                           Ouvrard

was Napoleon’s antipathy for Ouvrard that he even sent one of
his officers, Marmont, who later became Due de Ragusa, to
Holland with extraordinary terms for a loan. The “Regent”
diamond was to be deposited as security against supplies of
French timber to the value of the loan. The inhabitants of a
country “in which there was nothing but shrubs and bushes”
(Marmont) shook their heads over this strange offer, and besides
Marmont gained the impression, probably quite rightly, that the
citizens of Amsterdam would have had more confidence in him
if he had been acting on behalf of his father-in-law, Perregaux,
than of General Bonaparte.
   If Napoleon was prepared to go to such absurd lengths to
borrow money, then there is no sound reason why he should not
have accepted it from Ouvrard’s outstretched hand. A loan is not
a supply contract, and in the prevailing circumstances the risk
would have fallen on the creditor, not on the debtor. Napoleon
must have been swayed by purely personal considerations, and of
these probably none was so decisive as the woman whose whole
mental outlook and whose past had so attracted Napoleon in
Madame Tallien’s salon, that he felt confident he could win her
away from that milieu.
   Josephine, however, was the third woman who played some
part in Ouvrard’s life, “the good Josephine, against whom one
can make no reproaches, except perhaps that she was too femi¬
nine” (Bourrienne). Ouvrard, who has recorded that “Madame
de Beauharnais, by her gentle nature, her kind heart and her grace¬
ful bearing, was an ornament to Madame Tallien’s circle”, may
have been on even more intimate terms with her. While there is
no firm evidence to support this, she was “somewhat frivolous
and accommodating”, and, in a period when permanent bonds
were frowned upon, intimate relationships were easily entered
into and easily broken. In any case, she remained sufficiently
friendly with Ouvrard, even after her marriage, to turn to
him whenever she was short of money. When Napoleon was
in Egypt, Josephine was anxious to buy the small chateau at
 Malmaison. But she could not even scrape together a deposit
 of 37,000 francs, much less pay the purchase price of 160,000,
                The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte             59

  although she borrowed 15,000 from a servant. There seems little
  doubt that Ouvrard advanced the missing 22,000, thereby com¬
  mitting an unforgivable crime in the eyes of the jealous Napoleon,
 who doubtless got to hear of this and other financial transactions
 between Ouvrard and his wife, even before Ouvrard’s house was
  searched. Suspicious by nature, Napoleon must have concluded
 that Ouvrard s readiness to help betokened something deeper.
 And yet the bond between the two survived and it was Madame
 Bonaparte who one day warned her friend that the Consul was
 preparing to take certain measures against him.
     Ouvrard, who was no sentimentalist, could not see why the
 past should prevent him from doing business with the leaders of
 the counter-revolution. Nor was he prepared to be ignored by a
 government which was indebted to him. Part of the legacy
 Napoleon had taken over from the Directory was the loan of ten
 million francs which Ouvrard had made to the State in 1798.*
 In December 1799, shortly after the Paris bankers had been
 summoned to the Luxembourg, Ouvrard put in a claim for re¬
 payment of the loan. But Bonaparte was the last person to yield
 to such intimidation. His reaction showed that Ouvrard had at
 last met an adversary worthy of him. He curtly rejected Ouvrard’s
 claim for repayment in eight fixed instalments and decreed that he
 should receive instead letters of credit and national debt certi¬
 ficates (i.e. bills and government bonds). Ouvrard maintained
 that, as a result of this peculiar method of repayment, he even¬
 tually lost the money. He did not hesitate to describe it as robbery.
    At first he found himself wondering whether he should regard
this as one isolated act of vengeance or as the expression of a
“long-term plan of deceit”. He opted for the first, because he
simply could not bring himself to believe that the happy days of
the Directory were really over. As before, he came to the con¬
clusion that the government was incapable of working out a
proper financial policy and therefore needed his advice. So, after
having already submitted his credit plan to the Committee of
Public Safety and to the Directory, he went through it once again
and a few days later submitted it to the new, the third, government.
  * See above page 37.—T.A.B.C.
6o                             Ouvrard

  Of course, no more was heard of it, for Napoleon was so hostile
 to Ouvrard that it was not given serious consideration. Strangely
 enough, Ouvrard could not understand this. So obsessed was he
 with the thought of stabilizing the national finances by launching a
 permanent loan and setting up a sinking fund, that his normal
 vision was completely obscured. But Napoleon’s was no less dis¬
 torted. His personal feeling of antipathy deprived him of the co¬
 operation of a man whose mental calibre was equal to his own.
 Later, after the colossus had crashed, Ouvrard was able to point
 out with understandable satisfaction that Napoleon rejected a
 financial project in 1799, which the Due de Richelieu—again on
 Ouvrard’s advice—adopted in 1817 to France’s great benefit.
    Although it was a project which depended for its success on
public confidence and was, therefore, rather Utopian under the
Directory, it would have been perfectly feasible in the more stable
conditions of the Consulate. But Napoleon probably did not
even look up when Ouvrard’s memorandum was laid on his
desk. “He told me nothing out of the ordinary; he is an ideologist,
a banker. That type of person must of necessity have limited
views.” This was Napoleon’s opinion of Necker and it was a
standard cliche with which he condemned and brushed aside men
like Ouvrard.
    Napoleon was, however, not content merely to ignore Ouvrard.
He had not forgotten that he had had the temerity to stand up to
the new ruler and demand his money back at a highly incon¬
venient moment. So Ouvrard’s great adversary played a second
trump card. He ordered an enquiry into the victualling of the
navy. Forfait, the new Minister of Marine, was one of Napoleon’s
most trusted men. There could be no doubt what the General
wished the enquiry to reveal; faulty deliveries and illicit claims
were, in due course, reported. It is impossible today to judge
an investigation of this kind, for it was subject to no normal legal
control and did not even allow of an appeal. It was a method
that suited Napoleon admirably, for he had never shown any
inclination to subject his own judgement to that of a court of law.
On 27th January 1800—less than three months after Napoleon
came to power—he ordered Ouvrard’s arrest.
                The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte          6l

    The skill with which Ouvrard chose his friends was once more
  apparent. Josephine sent a message from Malmaison to warn
 him what her husband intended to do. For “the charming
  Madame Bonaparte had not forgotten a few small services which
 I had rendered her in the earlier stages of our social life”. Help
 even came from the fateful session of the State Council. One of
  Napoleon s Councillors—probably Cambaceres—who had tried
 in vain to save his friend from disaster, managed to send a
 pencil-written message with his coachman: “You are to be
 arrested; make for a safe place and issue any statements you
 have to give from there.” It was one o’clock in the morning when
 the note was handed to Ouvrard’s door-keeper with express
 instructions to give it to his master before he entered the house.
    It seems that Ouvrard had time to put his papers in order
 before the house was searched, but this respite was hardly
 necessary. Anything he had to conceal was not likely to be in
 black-and-white. In his memoirs he himself referred ironically to
 the informality of “business usages” under the Directory. So
 there was little for him to do. But he could not resist the tempta¬
 tion to take a slight revenge. Amongst his correspondence were
 several perfumed letters from a lady, with whose handwriting
 Napoleon was only too familiar. Ouvrard deliberately left them
 on his desk, with the result that Napoleon’s worst suspicions were
 confirmed—that Josephine, even after her marriage, had repeat¬
 edly received money from Ouvrard for Malmaison and for her
 personal expenses. Napoleon was furious. The blow to his vanity
 was all the greater because these documents had been seen by a
third party.
    Ouvrard gave himself a breathing-space of three days, then
surrendered to the police. It was characteristic of him that he
always faced up to his opponents, even when his position was
morally, legally or politically unfavourable. He never once tried
to run away, although on most occasions he could have escaped
arrest. In the last resort this policy always paid dividends. On
this occasion, in January 1800, when he paid his respects to the
Prefect of Police, he learned that he was merely to be subjected
to a kind of protective house-arrest. On his return home he found
62                              Ouvrard

that every article of furniture containing documents had been
sealed. To judge by Bourrienne’s account, Napoleon was far from
pleased by Ouvrard’s self-confidence. “The fool does not know
what is in store for him. He would have the public believe that his
hands are clean, but he is playing a dangerous game. He won’t
get the better of me. Let him talk as much as he likes! You can be
sure, Bourrienne, that, when such a man has money, he cannot
have acquired it honestly—besides, all such people with money
are dangerous. In a revolutionary age no man should have more
than three millions, and even that is too much.”
   Ouvrard’s arrest created a tremendous sensation in Paris. The
merchants of the capital were extremely alarmed by the high¬
handed way the new man had dealt with their most prominent
colleague. A deputation of twelve businessmen was sent to
Napoleon to impress upon him the disastrous effect such action
could have. Meantime for several days there was a steady stream of
visitors to Ouvrard’s palais, where more than five hundred people
called to sign their names in his visitors’ book as an expression
of sympathy. Ouvrard himself, encouraged by the widespread
indignation, wrote a courageous letter on 31st January:

     General,
        In defiance of the laws, which protect a citizen’s property
     and person, you are threatening my freedom. In time of war
     and in a general’s tent such an act might perhaps be tolerated,
     but in France and committed by the Head of State it must
     arouse the indignation of all decent people who are con¬
     scious of their rights.
        If you are of the opinion that I have behaved contrary to
     the law, then allow a court of justice to decide. Till this
     happens, I shall not cease to protest against your action.
     While I may not be able to prevent your despotism, I can
     at least warn my fellow citizens of the danger that threatens
     them.


  The remarkable thing is that Napoleon beat a partial retreat.
Ouvrard was actually set free, although he remained under
               The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte             63

police supervision. The financial dispute continued. Six State
Councillors spent several months studying his papers and finally
estimated the value of his property, money and securities at
twenty-nine million francs. The outcome of the investigation
was never recorded. But, after all that had been done, said and
written, Ouvrard made a surprising offer to the government: he
proposed to send the State Treasury the sum of 14,167,680 francs
(livres), until such time as a balance-sheet had been drawn up
of the income and expenditure of the former Chief Purveyor to
the Army. By a formal decision of the Consuls the offer was
accepted. Ouvrard carefully omits any mention of this in his
memoirs and nothing more was heard of the fourteen million
francs. There is no way of knowing whether this was a repayment
to an overdrawn account, a refund to cover overcharging, or
perhaps something quite different, a simple acceptance of power
politics. At all events, Ouvrard had to submit. He also had to
write off the ten millions lent to the Directory. Still worse, he was
relieved of his post as Victualler-in-Chief to the Navy. His
assurance that “he had always had the country’s welfare at heart”
did not help.
   One would be justified in assuming that Ouvrard, in disgrace,
was finished. Yet only a few weeks later, in March or April of the
same year, 1800, Ouvrard could be seen re-entering the War
Ministry. He had suddenly been summoned to play a decisive
part in preparing Napoleon’s biggest venture so far: a new Italian
war, the Marengo campaign. Ouvrard, whose self-confidence
played him many a trick, was convinced that Napoleon himself
had summoned him and had finally crossed the Alps on his
advice. After all that had gone before, this is unlikely. A much
more probable explanation is that Ouvrard’s personal contacts
had once again proved their worth. Berthier, the Minister of War,
was still living at Rainey, where he occupied one of the delightful
pavilions in the park with his mistress, Madame Visconti.
Berthier had full powers to plan and organize the whole campaign,
so he restored his friend to the position from which Napoleon,
who now had other things on his mind, had only recently re¬
moved him. On this occasion, however, Ouvrard had to share the
64                            Ouvrard

business with a grain merchant, Ignace-Josephe Vanlerberghe,
who was reputed to be a shrewd businessman and had acquired
the post of Head of General Supplies. But Ouvrard had only to
concede a third part of the contract and had no difficulty in
coming to an agreement on prices. From then on he had a
partner who understood him, who shared his optimism, who
admired his energy, and who did not quarrel with him when
things went badly. Nor did the government make any difficulties.
There was an atmosphere of reconciliation and rejoicing when
the Battle of Marengo brought Italy back into the French fold
on 14th June 1800.
   Although the Italian campaign came to an end without any
personal summons to Ouvrard from Napoleon, the great moment
arrived earlier than either of them had really expected. In the year
1802 a situation arose which was very similar to that of the 18th
Brumaire. Bonaparte was in a cleft stick. This time it was not so
much ready money as practical advice that he needed. Prices had
risen so steeply that in places there was a state of near-famine
and of anarchy. Grain stores had to be guarded by soldiers. In
Amiens and various other towns the granaries had already been
plundered. Napoleon was faced with the choice between making
himself unpopular by using force and losing authority by turning
a blind eye. He turned once more to the bankers. Eight of them
appeared, led by Perregaux, Recamier and Fulchiron. But they
merely shook their heads. This was not their line of country.
Supplies could be dealt with only by an expert. Napoleon now
had no option but to turn to Ouvrard. The great moment had
come. Bonaparte was forced to admit that the merchant whom
he had so contemptuously maltreated was now indispensable to
him.
  It was eleven o’clock at night when Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe
were summoned. That same night they arrived at Malmaison.
Napoleon explained that he did not want money but help in
organizing food supplies. In the special circumstances Ouvrard
and Vanlerberghe were willing to accept only 2 per cent com¬
mission. They set to work immediately. By means of express
couriers they bought up all the grain shipments which were
                 The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte                   65

either lying in Dutch and English ports, or which were due there.
The grain was transferred to Havre and Rouen and distributed
from there.* In quite a short time the operation was completed,
popular unrest died down, and order was restored.
   The whole transaction had cost the tidy sum of twenty-six
million francs. When the time came for the government to pay,
the trouble began. Napoleon “had literally rushed at our offer”,
Ouvrard reported. “He made no difficulties and raised no objec¬
tions, promised everything we asked for, accepted all our con¬
ditions, and all this with a joy and gratitude, which in that hour
of need were certainly sincere.” But when the hour of need had
passed, Napoleon had forgotten everything. He had suddenly lost
interest. In vain Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe presented the bills
for the twenty-six million francs when they fell due, bills which
had been made out to them personally. The government had no
money. It was prepared to pay only the commission, but, having
failed to get the partners to agree to halve their commission, it
refused to pay even this. Months went by and nothing happened.
Napoleon has recorded that he never forgot anything and never
changed his mind. “The State always calls upon me in an emer¬
gency,” said Ouvrard, “but once the emergency is over, my
services are rewarded with bankruptcy.”
   Nevertheless, in May 1803, when Napoleon proposed that he
should take over naval supplies again, Ouvrard did not refuse.
Bonaparte had certainly not forgotten that he had previously
cancelled Ouvrard’s contract in the most high-handed way, but
he had apparently learned not to allow his personal feelings to
interfere with the work in hand. In 1803 he was preparing to
make a landing in England. Ouvrard, for his part, simply could
not say “No”. In spite of all his previous experiences, he could
not resist the prospect of a major business transaction which
would continue for six years, but, quite apart from that, the
government owed him so much money that he could not afford
to reject the offer.

   * It was possible to buy grain in England as the two countries had been at
peace since the Treaty of Amiens, concluded two months before, in March
1802.—T.A.B.C.
66                            Ouvrard

    Once again Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe joined forces. Building
up a large landing-force, which was quite a new type of operation,
was incredibly expensive, and a year later, in April 1804, when
they worked out their first statement of costs, the govern¬
ment, according to Ouvrard, owed them 67,845,000 francs.
Napoleon acknowledged receipt of the statement with a satisfied
smile: “Soon Ouvrard will not even have any breath left.” And,
indeed, even Ouvrard, who appeared to have unlimited resources
to draw on, gradually found himself in serious difficulties. Ouvrard
and Vanlerberghe had to advance the State so much money, not
all of which could come from their own pockets, that, according
to Ouvrard, the overdraft finally reached the staggering figure of
46,296,000 francs. The government paid only a little and slowly.
Ouvrard alone was twenty millions out of pocket in April. He
and his partner had no alternative but to mobilize their private
property. Ouvrard lost, amongst other things, half of his twenty-
four estates round Cologne in Gers and with them an annual
income of some 300,000 francs. Vanlerberghe had a complete
mental breakdown.
   These frequent incidents are so striking that one finds it hard
to believe they could really have happened. But there is not the
slightest doubt they did. And other merchants fared no better
at Napoleon’s hands. Even his friend Collot, who contributed
500,000 francs free of interest and at considerable personal risk
to enable Napoleon to carry out his coup d'etat on 18th Brumaire,
was just as shabbily treated. Bonaparte behaved towards mer¬
chants—Bourrienne’s comparison was very apt—more or less
as he behaved towards the Beys in Egypt, whom he squeezed for
money. Even the faithful General Rapp, when he tried to find
excuses for Napoleon, merely succeeded in making matters worse:
“Whenever a creditor, whose rights were indisputable, had to be
paid, doubts were sown in his [Napoleon’s] mind about the just¬
ness of the demand (precisely because he was so anxious to have
doubts); he was encouraged to reduce the amount by half, to a
third, frequently even to nothing at all.” Ouvrard in his forth¬
right language called this a long-term system of swindling.
   In fact, Napoleon’s very pronounced concept of ownership
                  The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte                   67

  rested on two things. Napoleon displayed no contempt for money
  where he himself was concerned.* As Consul he began with a
  fixed annual salary of half a million francs. As Head of the Italian
  Republic he earned a further half-million a year. Half a million
  came from the Treasury to put the Tuileries in order for him.
 Alterations to Malmaison cost three million, to St. Cloud six.
  The imperial coronation (“/e pape sacre un fin demon,s) swallowed
 another 500,000 francs in direct expenditure alone. In 1802, the
 year in which Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe found it impossible to
 get the bills for the famine relief honoured, Napoleon spent
 thirteen million francs on household expenses. A year later they
 had increased to more than sixteen million. His wife’s personal
 allowance alone amounted to 600,000 francs. In the cellars of
 the Louvre he had treasures collected during his campaigns worth
  500 or 600 million francs, which none could touch except himself.
 Not uncharacteristic was the repayment of Josephine’s debts
 (600,000 francs) in 1800 from a fine of four and a half million paid
 by the State of Hamburg to Napoleon, naturally as the represen¬
 tative of France.
     There might be a hint of meanness in calling someone to account
 for his millions, when his unlimited power opened up unlimited
 financial possibilities, but Napoleon could hardly complain of
being judged by standards which he applied so arbitrarily to
 condemn others. Compared with Robespierre’s puritanical life or
even the modest style in which Pitt lived, he amassed enormous
wealth. And with a remarkable absence of logic he encouraged
luxury and riches in his officers and statesmen but branded it as
a vice in merchants, to whom it was, after all, a part of their
environment. He heaped expensive gifts on Talleyrand, although
they were paid for by the State. The principality of Benevento,
which he bestowed on him, brought an annual revenue of
1,200,000 francs. And the same Talleyrand, who managed to
combine the two professions of politics and business, was allowed
   * English readers are accustomed to regard Napoleon’s tastes in clothes,
food and personal needs as having been simple in the extreme; it therefore
comes as a surprise to learn of his profligacy. However, the recollections of
his valet Constant, quoted in Bourrienne’s Memoirs of Napoleon, make it
clear that this was so.—T.A.B.C.
68                           Ouvrard

to increase his private fortune unmolested from eighteen to
fifty million francs. As Foreign Minister, Talleyrand made an
estimated profit of ten million merely by his advance knowledge
of the terms of the Treaty of Luneville and the repartition of
Germany. Though on a lesser scale, Berthier had an annual
income of one million francs.
    Claims of that kind were promptly met, but merchants not
only went empty-handed, they even made advances that ran into
millions. When Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe finally realized this,
in March 1804, it seemed to be too late. Ouvrard had to dispose
not only of his estates round Cologne in Gers but also of the
Chateau Neuf, Saint Gratien de Villandry, Saint Brice, Marly,
Luciennes, a house on the Place Vendome and even his own town
house, the Palais Montesson in the Rue du Mont Blanc. Rainey,
over which Madame Tallien still presided, remained his for the
time being.
   During the past few years, however, the house in the Rue du
Mont Blanc had become almost more important than the chateau
outside Paris. If, in spite of Napoleon’s more or less official
hostility, in spite of the general change of climate, Ouvrard had
succeeded in remaining in the forefront, this was due as much to
the social talents he had developed, even in the new era, as to his
genius as a merchant and his indispensable professional knowledge.
Around 1800 the Rue du Mont Blanc was the “millionaires’ row”
of Paris. Necker had lived there. In the same house, which his
daughter Madame de Stael could not afford to keep, the beautiful
Madame de Recamier entertained everyone who was anyone in
Paris. The banker Perregaux also lived there. Nearby, at the
corner of the Rue de Provence and the Rue Cerrutti, the banker
Laffitte took over the Hotel de l’Empire. So, when Ouvrard
moved into the Palais Montesson around 1800 and enlarged it by
buying the house next door in the Rue de Provence, he chose a
brilliant setting. Ten years later the palais became the official
residence of the Austrian Ambassador, Prince von Schwarzenberg.
    Ouvrard had the good sense to allow the former owner,
Madame de Montesson, a charming old lady, to continue to occupy
her apartments, and carry on her social life as before. She was
               The Great Adversary: Napoleon Bonaparte           6g

the morganatic widow of the Due d’ Orleans and had the best
possible connections with any who had survived from the ancien
regime. (Moreover, Napoleon held her in very high esteem. By
one of those accidents of history, it was from her hands that he
had received a madiematics prize at the military academy of
Brienne in 1783.) He saw with pleasure how a new social group
was formed from past and present, drawn together in his house
by her magical charm and gaiety. So for the fourth time a woman
appeared at a critical moment to act as Ouvrard’s sponsor.
Madame de Montesson’s function was quite different from that of
Madame Ouvrard, Madame Tallien or of Josephine deBeauharnais,
 but it was none die less important. In the evenings when hundreds
 of candles blazed throughout the palais, when carriage after
 carriage drove up, when Napoleon’s friends entered in their
 brilliant uniforms, then not merely the material but also the moral
 and social foundations on which Ouvrard’s life stood were
 broadened and strengthened.
    His social status was still of enormous importance to him in
 this period from 1799 to 1804. This princely way of life had
 become a form of natural self-expression. He had an immense,
 spontaneous capacity for enjoying life, and even the frequent
 clashes with his great adversary merely served to underline his
 remarkable resilience. Moreover, in good or in bad times, he
 was always generous, particularly where the neglected arts were
 concerned. A characteristic example of this, and one which was
 known to only a few people, is shown by an incident which
 occurred at the beginning of the Consulate.
    He visited a musical “Studio” in the Hotel de Salm, where
 excerpts from an opera by an unknown composer, Nicolo Isouard,
 who later became fashionable, were performed before one of the
 most distinguished audiences in Paris. As Ouvrard left the house,
 he found bailiffs waiting in the courtyard with a writ for 3,000
 francs, the alternative being imprisonment in the debtors’ prison.
 To his astonishment Ouvrard learned that the unfortunate
 victim was none other than the composer whose music had so
 delighted him. Without a moment’s hesitation he paid the debt
 and the following day he wrote a charming letter to the composer,
            A
jO                            Ouvrard

 informing him that the debt had been settled and adding, almost
 apologetically, that he was enclosing a further sum of money.
 “As the finder of the writ takes a lively interest in your future
 and knows all too well how material obstacles may weigh like
 lead upon the most splendid ambitions and impede their progress,
 he begs you to accept the ten bank notes of 1,000 francs each,
 which you will find enclosed. Do not thank him, sir, for what is
 to him a trifle compared with the success the future will bring
you. All that he expects of you, however, is that you will continue
on the course you have chosen, that you may make ever-in¬
creasing efforts to deserve the fame which awaits you, and the
pleasure this must give him will surely far outweigh the small
service which he now asks you to accept.”
    One can easily imagine what it meant for a man, who was
accustomed to make such gestures, to find himself pushed to the
very brink of financial ruin in 1804 by the Napoleonic govern¬
ment’s methods of payment. When he was suddenly compelled
not merely to liquidate the greater part of his estates but also to
dispense with his town house, the lights went out in the palais
in the Rue du Mont Blanc. For the remaining two years of her
life, Madame de Montesson had to seek shelter elsewhere, and
Ouvrard had to make a supreme effort to maintain a reasonable
standard of living and ensure that his chances for the future
were not completely destroyed.
    This, then, was the situation at the end of Ouvrard’s second
five years in Paris. For the time being at least, his great adversary
was in full possession of the battlefield.
                                 Six



 The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure




O U VRARD’S fall, demonstrated by the sale of his palais in
the Rue du Mont Blanc in 1804, was so dramatic that one would
have expected to find him hobbling painfully on financial
crutches. All his commercial interests had been so severely
damaged that one would have at least assumed that he would
be forced on to the defensive. And his experiences with the
Napoleonic regime had been so disastrous that one would have
thought any further interest in doing business with the State
must have disappeared.
  On the contrary, Ouvrard remained an incurable optimist,
whose faith in his destiny was unshaken. He needed no crutches
as long as he could draw on the vast, almost inexhaustible, reserves
in his brain. He watched impatiently for an opportunity to launch
a fresh offensive. For him the contest with his great adversary
was by no means decided, and whenever an opportunity arose to
take his revenge on the government he seized it without a
moment’s hesitation.
  Even although the time had come when his whole future was
uncertain, Ouvrard felt no need to call on special reserves of
energy. He did not even have to look far for a new and ambitious
plan of action. For several years he had been brooding on a
commercial project of prodigious dimensions. Now more than
ever, when everything was at stake, he had one great expectation:
the silver treasure of Mexico. If he could succeed in releasing those
hundreds of millions that lay captive, his own personal gain
would be enormous.
                                  71
72                              Ouvrard

     The prospects were good, for         Ouvrard had established
excellent relations with Spain, the country to which Mexico and
the transatlantic treasure belonged. He had connections there
with such men as Monsieur de Cabarrus, Madame Tallien’s
father, who controlled the Bank of St. Charles in Madrid. Also
since 1797 Ouvrard had been in official contact with the Spanish
Government, which under a long-term agreement with the Spanish
Prime Minister had entrusted him with the victualling of the
Spanish fleet in French harbours. And Ouvrard arranged in the
most cunning way for this close link to be formally sealed: when
Napoleon gave Prince Louis of Bourbon-Parma the Kingdom of
Etruria in August 1801, the royal couple, though official guests
of the French Government, lived in Ouvrard’s house, the Palais
Montesson. For two months, while his guests moved to and fro
between his house and the Tuileries and were the talk of Paris.
Ouvrard had ample opportunity to make himself indispensable.
As usual, he spared no effort and no expense. He even had the
charming idea of commissioning the famous furniture maker,
Jacob, to produce a special ebony cradle for the fifteen-month-
old Crown Prince* Naturally the Spanish Ambassador, Chevalier
d’Azara, had sent detailed reports to Madrid, so the desired effect
was duly produced and Ouvrard received a flattering letter of
thanks from Charles IV.
     This cordial relationship proved of very real value. A year
later, in 1802, when Ouvrard sent his brother to America on a
reconnaissance tour, he was given the highest recommendations
from the Spanish Government to the Viceroy of Mexico. In
Mexico City itself Ouvrard had considerable interests, for Spain,
cut off from her overseas gold reserves, had to pay for her naval
supplies from 1797 to 1800 with letters of credit on her Mexican
treasure. The Treasurer of Mexico himself conducted Ouvrard’s
brother to the Treasure Chamber, in which, over the years,
seventy-one million piastres or about 350 million francs had been
amassed. The French merchant’s representative was shown four
million piastres—about twenty million francs—which had been

  * Napoleon later gave it to the Empress Marie-Louise in exchange for a
hundred-year-old state coach.
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure     73

set aside to cover Ouvrard’s letters of credit. The bags of coins
were actually labelled as Ouvrard’s personal property. Ouvrard,
the apostle of credit, felt almost intoxicated when he heard of this
vast supply of cash.
  Moreover, Ouvrard was naturally impressed by the scrupulously
correct business methods of the Spanish Government, for he had
become accustomed to receiving nothing but promises from
Napoleon and uncovered promissory notes from his Ministers.
He decided to do everything possible to extend his business
dealings with such a loyal government. The precise nature of
them was a foregone conclusion, for it was clear that Spain’s
only real source of capital was her colonies. Ouvrard’s plans
were also confirmed by the reports he received from his brother,
who spent a whole year studying the economic situation in each
of the various American countries, their products and their
sources of revenue.
  It is one of many remarkable coincidences in Ouvrard’s life
that the first opportunity to put his Spanish-Mexican plans into
operation, after years of careful preparation, finally came in 1804,
the same year in which Napoleon drove him to the brink of ruin.
Faced with the most desperate crisis of his career thus far, he
turned all his attention to what was the most ambitious project
of his whole life. The acute financial difficulties in which the
Napoleonic government again found itself gave him both his
incentive and his opportunity. In spite of his enormous military
expenditure, Napoleon still refused to accept credit of any kind
or to tolerate any other form of revenue except taxes and State
levies. But when, as in 1804, no war contributions could be im¬
posed, because the actual battles had not yet been fought, then
the government’s coffers were emptied in a matter of months. At
such times Napoleon was like a captain of industry who had more
imagination and intellectual capacity than financial skill. He acted
like a man who builds new factories, buys the most modern
machinery, installs new furnaces and opens up new branches
without bothering to find out if the finance department of his
firm has the necessary money.
   In the circumstances, it was not surprising that Napoleon’s
74                            Ouvrard

Minister of the Treasury, Monsieur Barbe-Marbois, treated
 Ouvrard as an unwelcome visitor when he called on him on 4th
April and reminded him of the twenty million francs still owing
to him for the preparations for the landing in England. Ouvrard,
who was usually better informed about what went on in the
various Ministries than the Ministers themselves, naturally fore¬
saw that he would not be given a very warm reception. The
reminder was only intended as a pretext for renewing business
dealings with the government. The plan he brought with him
was admirably designed to give him the revenge he was seeking.
Just as the government had not hesitated, when he had completed
his deliveries, to take full advantage of his defenceless position,
so he was determined to exploit the government’s acute shortage
of money. Barbe-Marbois confessed that he was in desperate and
immediate need of fifty millions and that the bankers had refused
to let him have it. Without batting an eyelid, Ouvrard, who had
just been compelled to sell many of his estates and even his town
house, offered to obtain that sum. The Minister was astounded,
moved and delighted. But it was now Ouvrard’s turn to lay down
conditions: the fifty million must include the twenty million
which the government owed him. In this way all the debts would
be paid at one and the same time, and, furthermore, the new loan,
which was a purely financial transaction, was something very
different from the commercial credit, which the government had
shrugged off with all kinds of moral excuses. Ouvrard was no
longer prepared to accept mere friendly assurances. The govern¬
ment must provide full security and the best at its disposal,
namely, general tax-collectors’ debentures.
   Dealings in these debentures, covered by taxes and customs
duties, which usually took fifteen to twenty months to reach the
Treasury, were subject to special legal restrictions. They were
equivalent to hard cash, could not be discounted and were designed
exclusively to cover Ministerial bonds. Ouvrard’s proposal was,
of course, simply that these debentures should be discounted
through him, and at no less than 9 per cent per annum in his
favour as against the 6 per cent discount of the Bank of France,
which, however, apparently had not thirty million to spare at
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure       75

 that moment. The government’s financial position must have been
 really critical at the beginning of April, for Napoleon, surprisingly
 enough, signed this contract without hesitation.
    This was a deal after Ouvrard’s heart. It was a great success,
 despite the fact that he must certainly have borrowed the thirty
 millions, which he had to pay on top of his own outstanding
 credit. But the success of this operation was by no means his
 sole interest. He regarded the whole affair as a prelude to his
 great Spanish-Mexican venture. Previously he had only supplied
 Napoleon with goods. Now he was his government’s banker, the
 financier who had saved it from bankruptcy. As such he found
 himself on quite a different footing which made it much easier
 for him to develop his foreign contacts.
    The decisive moment came two months later, when the Minis¬
 ter of the Treasury, faced with a further crisis in the nation’s
 finances, was forced to ask Ouvrard again for help, this time for
 150 million francs. It was hard to reconcile this kind of situation
 with Napoleon’s brave words in 1805, which were intended for
 foreign consumption, that “finances based on a healthy agricul¬
 ture cannot be undermined”. Yet on 8th June 1804 another,
highly unfavourable, agreement was signed by the government. It
had to surrender further tax-collectors’ debentures to the value of
 150 million francs, while receiving only 102 million: the remain¬
ing forty-eight million was to cover still more debts outstanding
from previous supply contracts between the War Ministry and
 Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe, who had joined forces with him.
A third person was involved in this latest gigantic deal, an
entrepreneur and engineer called Seguin. Twenty years later
Ouvrard was to spend several years in prison as a debtor to
Seguin. But for the moment the position seemed extremely
satisfactory. Ouvrard had become even more actively involved
in France’s financial administration, and it looked as if the country
could not survive without his helping hand. Now, at last—how
the situation had changed since 18th Brumaire!—he could be
sure of a fair hearing, if he came forward with suggestions for
sources of revenue.
    The sources which Ouvrard proposed to tap were, in fact, not
76                            Ouvrard

 new; all he had in mind was ways and means of collecting revenue
owing but not paid. He had a personal interest in this, for France’s
main debtor was none other than Spain. The Spanish Government
had agreed—somewhat reluctantly—to give Napoleon an annual
subsidy of seventy-two million francs, but, in spite of all the
Emperor’s pleas and threats, not even the first instalment of
thirty-two million had been sent. Napoleon’s mistake lay in
reckoning upon fixed sums, which Spain, in the circumstances,
simply could not pay. Nothing could have been more unrealistic
than his remark to Charles IV in January 1805, that there was no
reason why he should be short of money, for all he had to do was
to sell the treasures of the Knights of Malta and impose a patriotic
levy on clergy and religious orders. And a few years later, when
the tide had started to turn against Napoleon in the peninsula
itself, he still boasted that he would get 2,000 million francs
out of Spain. Ouvrard was much more realistic. He knew the
situation in the country from many economic reports and
realized that there was only one way to be sure of receiving the
Spanish subsidies of seventy-two million a year: the Continental
Blockade must somehow be broken, so that Spain could once
more draw on her transatlantic resources. The silver treasure of
350 million, on which Ouvrard’s brother had feasted his eyes in
the Mexico Treasury in 1802, must be mobilized.
   The blockade of Continental ports by the British fleet had been
so effective that such a plan seemed preposterous and no one
took it seriously. So Ouvrard contented himself with offering to
raise the first thirty-two million francs in Madrid itself, without
referring to the vast project he had in mind. In order to be sure
of clearing at least the first hurdle, he even acceded to Barbe-
Marbois s request—though not without difficulty—to advance
the money before he left. Where Ouvrard found a further thirty-
two million is a complete mystery, but he had become so ob¬
sessed by his dream, which now seemed about to come true, that
he threw caution to the winds. His scheme involved reconciling
the political and economic interests of Napoleon and France with
those of Charles IV and Spain, taking British interests into
account, and—last but not least—also expanding his own
            The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure       77

business interests. The aim in itself was a bold and ambitious
one, but its really decisive and original feature was the method
Ouvrard had chosen to realize it.
   At the end of September 1804 he left for Madrid. Barbe-
Marbois was reluctantly obliged to relax his grip on the coat¬
tails to which he had been clinging in his hour of need. Ouvrard
had not yet crossed the Spanish frontier, when a pathetic letter
from the Minister caught up with him: “... I can no longer doubt
that you are really on your way to Madrid. I... implore you
once again not to depart before you have settled the outstanding
business. ... I count upon your zeal and your shrewdness....”
   Letters such as this, official compliments of the most flattering
kind, the realization that he was indispensable, and the magnetic
attraction of a goal that was now in sight, all combined to give
Ouvrard an exhilarating sense of assurance, which made success
seem almost inevitable.
   But if Ouvrard, who had been given the rank of State Com¬
missioner, thought that he could start negotiations as soon as he
stepped out of his carriage, he was gravely mistaken. It was his
first visit to Spain, and he suddenly found himself in an atmo¬
sphere that was completely new and even alien to him. He had
come from an enlightened country, in which a revolution of
unprecedented violence had broken with a past which had long
since ceased to have any real meaning; he now found himself
suddenly in an ancient monarchy whose State ceremonies were
conducted with a centuries-old ritual. Accustomed to a modern
style of dress, he now met courtiers who might have stepped
straight out of pictures of Louis XIV’s battles. Every step he took
in Madrid brought fresh surprises:* the large number of monks
in the streets, the heavy carriages which looked exactly like the
coach in which Philip V had entered the city, the rigid etiquette,
the gothic traditions, the Spanish love of formality. Ouvrard, the
enlightened Frenchman, did not make the mistake of laughing at
all this. The spontaneous respect he felt for these traditions proved,

   * He committed his first faux pas when he politely declined a cigar
offered to him by the lady sitting—and smoking—next to him at his first
dinner party.
78                             Ouvrard

almost without his knowing it, to be an excellent psychological
introduction to the work he had to do.
   He was in urgent need of some such introduction, for, in the
last resort, he was a mere merchant. He was neither a Minister
nor a general, neither a diplomat nor a prince; he had no aris¬
tocratic connections, no centuries-old family tradition behind
him. He was, it is true, on a mission for the French Minister of the
Treasury, but his mission was not particularly welcome in Spain.
The Spanish Government had observed with understandable dis¬
quiet that France, the creditor, had sent her cleverest merchant
to collect money, countless millions which could be much better
spent in Spain itself.
     So when Ouvrard made his first overtures to the appropriate
government authorities he was told the same hard-luck story as
he had heard so often from Napoleon, that Spain wanted to pay
and would pay, as soon as she had the money, but that she had
none and was not likely to have any “until such time as it pleases
Providence to ease our present situation”. Ouvrard, in fact, had
to admit before long that the accounts of Spain’s critical financial
position were not exaggerated. The country’s basic needs were
not being satisfied, and even the Court—which really meant
something in Spain—had not been paid the 500,000 francs for the
annual visits to the various royal residences. But the most serious
problem was an acute food shortage, which only money could
overcome.
     Ouvrard was unique in that he was not prepared to leave it to
Providence to solve the Spanish problem, which also happened
to be France’s and his own. More to the point, perhaps, he had to
convince the Spanish Government that he, and he alone, had
been sent by Providence to solve it. And he must bring this con¬
viction home to the man who really counted in the Spanish
Government. This man was not hard to find. The government was
dependent on the King, the King was dominated by the Queen,
but the Queen was completely swayed by her lover, Godoy,
Prince of La Paz.
     Here Ouvrard’s business interests led him into an unusual
family idyll. The central figure was Godoy, who had arrived in
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure     79

Madrid in 1788 as a humble officer in the Royal Bodyguard.
Charles IV took a liking to the tall, volatile young officer, but he
appealed even more to Queen Marie-Louise. She was a little
voluptuous woman, who had no pretensions to beauty but was
starved of love and, according to Napoleon, her secret leanings
and her past were clearly written in her face. Godoy had developed
into a splendid specimen of manhood. (Though according to
Napoleon he looked like a bull.) He became the last word in
elegance and was an accomplished performer on the lute. He also
acquired consummate skill in political intrigue. Charles IV and
his wife showered favours on him, and soon Godoy, who knew
how to make the most of his opportunities, was—to quote a
tactful expression of the period—seeing the Queen at very close
quarters. Charles, however, remained unmoved. Secure in the
knowledge that he now had in the family, so to speak, a man who
could be trusted to carry the entire burden of State affairs, he was
able to devote all his time to the only two passions in his life,
hunting and the supervision thrice a day of several dozen clocks.
He was perfectly happy to be a mere figurehead and was not in the
least put out when Napoleon wrote to him in 1803 that the whole
of Europe was horrified by the scandal and expected him to dis¬
miss   Godoy and remount his throne. Far from following
Napoleon’s advice, he made his wife’s lover Prince of La Paz, and
gave formal recognition to a situation that had existed for some
time by officially appointing him Prime Minister of Spain. Godoy
was also made Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Grand
Admiral of the Fleet. The King heaped official and private presents
on this avaricious man, and he even sided with him in numerous
quarrels with his own son Ferdinand.
  Such was the man with whom Ouvrard had to come to terms,
if his political mission, the payment of the subsidies, was to be
successfully completed. The prospects of an agreement were not
inconsiderable, for Godoy, like Barras, was not uninterested in
feathering his own nest. Ouvrard mustered all his social talents to
conceal the carrot and the stick with which he was plying the
ruler of Spain. He assured Godoy that he was hewn from the
same wood from which Napoleon made his kings, but, at the
8o                             Ouvrard

same time, threatened him with the Emperor’s fearful wrath.
Undoubtedly he also offered him a financial incentive.
     Soon all that Godoy lacked was not the will to pay but the
opportunity. This came as no surprise to Ouvrard, who may even
have preferred such a deadlock, for it enabled him to unfold his
great plan. The scheme was doubly unusual in that it entailed
restoration of the finances of a whole nation by a foreign merchant.
     Ouvrard gradually explained to the Prince of La Paz, with
whom he usually took morning chocolate, a programme, which
can be summarized as follows:
     1. Internal stability is a prerequisite of any national economy
with international ramifications; for that reason the government
must solve the famine problem by finding supplies of grain.
     2. The agricultural productivity of the peninsula and with it
the national revenue must be increased; this could easily be
achieved by a land reform whereby property belonging largely
to the clergy or the nobility, which for the most part was lying
fallow, would be divided up and handed over to peasant farmers
for cultivation; the approval of Rome would be necessary,
and compensation for the mortmains would be paid in the
form of annuities, which would become part of the national
expenditure.
     3. The Spanish money lying in the Mexican State Treasury,
which had been rendered immobile by the British blockade, must
now be transferred, in spite of the renewal of hostilities. This was
not impracticable; all that was necessary was to entrust Ouvrard
with the task.
     4. Spain must pay France the promised subsidies without
waiting for this project to bear fruit, in order to avoid complica¬
tions and to fulfil her contract; this would require temporary
financial measures in the form of loans (for example in Holland),
which should be fully covered.
  5. The government must also set about paying off its internal
debts without delay.
     6. In order to carry out large-scale public development plans
to increase national productivity (the building of roads and
bridges and irrigation), a long term National Debt should be
King Charles IV of Spain. Anonymous contemporary en-       Queen Marie-Louise of Spain. Engraved by Esteve.
         graving. {Paris, Bibliothcque Nationale)      After the drawing by Bauzil. {Paris, Bibliothcque Nationals)
          The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure    8l

established, which would be backed by an independent and well-
endowed sinking fund.
   7. An essential prerequisite for the efficient implementation of
all these proposals was a sound banking system; the Bank of St.
Charles, founded by M. de Cabarrus, should be turned into a
kind of national “Bank of Spain”, and the establishment of
provincial banks was also essential.

   During those weeks, while Ouvrard was devoting all his
energies to working out his plans in Madrid, he received another
urgent letter from Barbe-Marbois: “See that all gold and silver
coins are despatched to Paris as soon as you receive them, so that
we do not have to wait too long—I count upon your zeal... .”
 One can imagine Ouvrard’s scornful smile as he consigned the
unsuspecting Minister’s letter to the archives.
   But even in Madrid the men he was dealing with were not much
wiser. His whole plan was so bold and many of its ingredients,
such as the land reform, were so far in advance of the times that
Ouvrard was forced time and again to employ all his powers of
persuasion. On one occasion the Prince of La Paz invited the
Finance Minister to morning chocolate to hear Ouvrard expound
his ideas. On another occasion the Queen came. Marie-Louise,
however, seemed more interested in displaying her affection for
the Prince and in showing how informally she could behave with
him than in listening attentively. Yet Ouvrard felt that her visit
had helped to further his cause.
   It was, on the other hand, not so much his ideas as his actions
that carried conviction. Not unnaturally his audience was only
prepared to take his miraculous powers seriously if he could
provide a few samples. Ouvrard did not hesitate to supply them.
To begin with, he provided the 500,000 francs which the Court
needed for its official journeys. Then he pointed out that, before
leaving Paris, he had himself arranged an advance payment of
thirty-two million on the Spanish subsidies, and he declared his
readiness to be a very forbearing creditor—in other words to
grant a sort of moratorium. The Spaniards were also very pleased
when Ouvrard, at Barbe-Marbois’s request, signed an agreement
82                           Ouvrard

on 24th October 1804 to pay a further instalment of the subsidies
direct to Napoleon and thereby replace France as creditor. His
major triumph, however, was the efficiency with which he dealt
with the famine in Spain. The situation was such that most of the
bakers in the country were unable to continue work as the price
of a fanega of flour (roughly a bushel) had risen fivefold to over
a hundred francs; infectious diseases were spreading and the
government appeared to be helpless.
   In November 1804 Ouvrard contracted to supply the Spanish
markets with 100,000 tons of grain. Two couriers were despatched,
one to London to ask for—and obtain—free passage for the grain-
ships through the blockade, the other to Paris to get Napoleon’s
permission to export the required quota of wheat, which France
could do without. The Emperor, businesslike as usual, imposed
only one condition: four francs per hundredweight or a net gain
of eight million would go to the French Government. Ouvrard
could afford to accept this, for he himself would still reap a
profit—though a gross profit—of eight million. Most of this,
however, was to disappear, for no sooner did the announcement
appear in the Spanish newspapers that Ouvrard would be
selling 100,000 tons of grain on the Madrid market at twenty-six
francs a hundredweight, than vast hoarded stocks of flour appeared
as if by magic. The announcement alone had been sufficient to
end the famine, and, before Ouvrard’s first grain ship had reached
Spain, the price of a fanega had dropped from 100 to 18 francs.
The government was suddenly placed in the very embarrassing
position of not knowing what to do with the 100,000 tons it had
guaranteed. Ouvrard had no alternative but to co-operate by
cancelling some of the shipments.
   This was, however, in his own interest, for he had not come to
Madrid to make a profit of a few millions but to gain access to the
wealth of the New World. And, indeed, his transatlantic plans
were now taken much more seriously in Madrid. On 26th Novem¬
ber and 4th December 1804 an agreement was signed, which is
unparalleled in economic or political history. The terms of the
main agreement and the collateral agreement, the texts of which
are given in the appendix, can be summarized as follows:
          The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure       83

  I. The contracting parties were Charles IV of Spain and
Gabriel Julien Ouvrard.
  II. They set up a company with monopoly powers.
  III. This company was given the official title of “Frangois
Ouvrard & Co.” (not, as it should have been, “Julien Ouvrard,
Charles IV & Co.”).
  IV. The contract was to remain valid as long as the war between
Spain and Britain lasted, which was likely to be many years.
  V. Sole managing director of the company was Ouvrard.
  VI. The firm was given exclusive rights in the following:
    (a) . The transfer of all gold and silver coins in Mexico
  belonging to Spain.
     (b) . The transportation of all goods imported by Spain from
  America into Europe or exported by Spain from Europe to
  America.
     (c) . The sale of all goods imported by the Spanish Govern¬
   ment from America to non-Spanish ports in Europe.
  VII. Ouvrard’s profit would accrue from the following
sources:
     (a) . Commission, i.e.
  \ per cent on the transfer of gold and silver coins,
  1 per cent of the Continental value of all goods exported to
     America or imported into Spain,
  2 per cent of the proceeds from the goods imported from
     America to non-Spanish ports in Europe;
     (b) . A personal trade concession, which gave Ouvrard the
  right to at least one third of the freight space on each ship;
     (c) . The direct costs, as well as the commission, were to be
  charged separately. Spain, for her part, undertook to cover a
  percentage of the basic transport costs, the local incidental
  expenses, the insurance, and the cost of obtaining the letters
  of safe conduct from England.

  One can imagine Ouvrard’s delight when Charles IV set his
name and seal under this long and detailed agreement: “Approved,
I the King.” Ouvrard had all the more reason to be pleased, as
the government immediately took steps to carry out its side of
84                            Ouvrard

the bargain. Ouvrard received 500 open trading concessions, in
which die destinations of the ships were left blank. By 18th
December 1804, only a fortnight after the conclusion of the
agreement, he had already been given 752 government bills of
exchange on the Treasury in Mexico and on the firm of Garochi
of Madrid. They totalled 52^ million piastres or 262^ million
French francs! In addition a second contract was signed which
gave Ouvrard two further important privileges: he was to raise a
loan for the royal consolidated fund and was empowered to
import silver dollars, which were rare in Paris, from Mexico into
France. Ouvrard was not exaggerating when he reported to
Barbe-Marbois that “no private firm had ever been entrusted
with more important and more useful business to transact”, and
he had every reason to feel confident that “this undertaking
should have the most positive effect upon both the French and
the Spanish national credit, trade, industry and all other factors,
which contribute to the prosperity of the State”.
     This was certainly the view held in Spanish Government
circles, and honours fell thick and fast on the merchant Ouvrard
from Paris, who, from the moment he had ended the famine, had
been looked upon with awe in Madrid as a worker of miracles.
He was the talk of the capital. The Prince of La Paz, who was not
in the habit of giving presents, sent him eight splendid horses.
The Finance Minister Soler invited him to stay at his house and
placed an apartment at his disposal. Soon, in fact, the only
honour which had not been accorded him was formal presentation
at Court. There was one obstacle: etiquette. Ouvrard had a some¬
what easier passage than Madame d’Abrantes, the wife of General
Junot, who in 1805 had to don a crinoline for the occasion and
made a laborious entry like an overloaded pack-mule, only to
fall flat on her face at the crucial moment. But Ouvrard wore his
hair cut short in the new French fashion, a Jacobin coiffure as the
Spaniards called it, which was quite unsuitable for a royal recep¬
tion. So he crammed an enormous powdered wig on his head and
the brilliant success of his visit to Madrid was crowned by formal
presentation at Court.
     Ouvrard had no difficulty in resisting the temptation to
          The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure    85

abandon himself to a round of social engagements. His one
absorbing interest in life was still his work. Moreover, no one
knew better than he how difficult it would be to carry through
the immense venture on which he had embarked. The first
problem was to acquire the English letters of safe conduct. To
begin with, free passage must be obtained for the ships carrying
the Mexican piastres. An agent was despatched to London by way
of Lisbon, but he found the English even less co-operative than
he had expected. Ouvrard had reckoned quite rightly with the
English merchants’ shortage of cash and had assumed that, if
he offered to get American silver to England, the British Govern¬
ment would put aside all political considerations. But war had
once again been declared on 12th December 1804. Pitt argued
that the English trading houses were bound to transfer the silver,
or at least its equivalent, to Spain, thereby lending aid to the
ally of his arch-enemy. On the other hand, there were several
individuals and companies in London which were actively
interested in the deal and gave Ouvrard their support. In par¬
ticular, the banking firm of the Baring Brothers and the East
India Company exerted all their influence to convince Pitt that
the benefit to England’s trade would be considerably greater than
to Spain and France. Pitt gave a certain amount of ground but
only to the extent of allowing four English frigates to pass
through with silver from the Mexican State Treasury. This would,
naturally, cover only a part of the money—although it trans¬
pired later that the ships transported some fourteen million
piastres, or about sixty million francs—and the affair suddenly
became extremely complicated. So it was more important than
ever that Ouvrard should find a large trading concern of world¬
wide connections to collaborate with him.
  Just such a concern existed in Amsterdam, at that time the
world’s leading trading centre, in which, as early as 1650, there
were no fewer than 500 certified brokers. The most important
firm in Amsterdam was the House of Hope, acknowledged
throughout the world to be the leading merchant-bankers of their
time. They had immense stocks of colonial produce in every port
on the Continent and considered themselves the equals of any
86                           Ouvrard

reigning sovereign in matters of finance. At the head of the firm
were two outstanding men, Henry Hope and P. C. Labouch^re.
Ouvrard called on them in Amsterdam in April 1805.
     His departure from Madrid was not merely triumphal, it was
a public occasion. Ministers and nobles paid him farewell visits;
cheering crowds lined the streets as his carriage passed. But with
the Hopes in Amsterdam Ouvrard found a much more sober
atmosphere. Ouvrard, proud of the spectacular agreement he
had reached with Charles IV, began by explaining his far-reaching
plans: gold shipments, Mexican silver dollars, exploitation of
American mines, transatlantic loans, import and export of goods
and foodstuffs, the virtual removal of the Continental Blockade,
all this echoed round the quiet room in disorderly abandon.
The first reaction of Ouvrard’s audience to this enthusiastic
outburst was one of mute astonishment: Hope and Labouchere
looked at one another, obviously wondering if this man was out
of his senses. They were accustomed to thinking and acting
daily on a continental and even transatlantic plane, but they
owed their phenomenal success to a profound sense of realism,
which forbade them to risk a single gulden on ingenious com¬
mercial propositions, which had nothing but their ingenuity to
recommend them. But gradually they were forced to admit that
Ouvrard was not just a visionary. He produced the contract with
its twenty-four clauses, bearing the joint signature of the mer¬
chant Ouvrard and King Charles IV and the royal seal of Spain.
Then he laid bills of exchange for 250 million francs on the
table, and they began to take him seriously.
     For Ouvrard a great deal, if not everything, depended upon
Hopes assuming the responsibility for carrying out his Spanish
contract. No other concern in the world had the means at its
disposal to carry through an essentially long-term transaction
of this magnitude. But most important of all was the fact that
Ouvrard could not have succeeded by himself. The painstaking,
systematic and essentially prosaic task of execution did not
appeal to Ouvrard. Out of his fertile mind and his restless blood
sprang a constant flow of ingenious plans, but once the plans
were completed he soon lost interest in them. He spent his
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure      87

millions lavishly, and it never occurred to him to save. He lacked
a sense of order and method; he had none of the ordinary
business man’s vigilance; being essentially far-sighted, his long-
range vision was astonishingly clear, but he neglected to take the
necessary precautions for more immediate situations. On the
other hand, Ouvrard was apparently aware of his own qualities
and shortcomings, for, as his first big operation, the paper deal
of 1789, showed, he confined himself to the overall planning of
business transactions, leaving any profit he might have made
from detailed execution of his plans to other merchants.
  In Hope’s office in Amsterdam he submitted to a minute
cross-examination. He was asked to give a detailed account of
all his contracts with the various Ministries in France and Spain,
a precise statement of his capital reserves, of his financial position
as a whole, and of the ready cash at his disposal at that time.
This cross-examination was conducted by hard-headed business¬
men who, unlike Ouvrard, were not in the habit of juggling
with millions, and he did not come out of it too well. Hope and
Labouchere were not able to gain the sort of clear picture that
they, as cautious financiers, would have liked. The solvency of
their new client, who appeared in some doubt as to how many of
his millions were owed to him and how many owed by him, was
not conclusively proven.
  For the first time in his life Ouvrard was up against men of his
own profession who were his equals, and even, in the last resort,
his superiors. It was characteristic of him that he immediately
bowed to their superiority and accepted unconditionally the
proposals which they, after a few days’ reflection, put before him.
One of the two parties had to show confidence; as Hopes knew
too little of Ouvrard and were generally recognized to be the
most stable and most reliable firm on the Continent, it was
clearly up to Ouvrard to show confidence. Ouvrard agreed
when he was told quite bluntly that, if he set any store by this
transaction, he must surrender all initiative, rely entirely upon
Hopes’ discretion, relinquish any right to interfere in the execu¬
tion of his plans, give his approval in advance to whatever the
outcome might be, accept in advance the balance-sheet drawn
88                           Ouvrard

up by Hopes and for this purpose sign twelve blank letters of
credit. Moreover, Hopes agreed to cover only a part of the
transaction, namely, to take up the trading concessions and to
negotiate the Spanish bills, the sale of which involved the enor¬
mous sum of 250 million francs and, in view of Pitt’s refusal
to let further silver shipments through the blockade, would
present problems enough. But Hopes were also prepared to issue
a loan in favour of the Spanish Government of thirty million
Dutch gulden (sixty million francs). The 500 trading concessions
were to be taken up in Ouvrard’s name against a commission of
5 per cent of the total turnover, but Hopes had to meet the cost
of the agencies. When the bills covering the Mexican piastres
were redeemed, Ouvrard was to be paid not at the theoretical
rate of five francs but at three francs seventy-five. Ouvrard
understood, agreed and signed. On 6th May 1805 this contract
was also completed.
     Whatever might happen, the spectacular agreements he had
concluded in Spain seemed now absolutely certain to reach
fulfilment. So Ouvrard had every reason to feel extremely pleased
with himself. And yet, although all he had to do was to sit and
wait till Hopes brought the Mexican pigeons home to roost, his
voracious appetite was far from satisfied. Before long he was back
in Madrid enjoying an extra titbit. Supplementary contracts were
signed giving him the concession for the lead and quicksilver
mines at the average price for the previous ten years and finally
making him sole supplier of the government’s tobacco monopoly.
     Ouvrard’s dream, to become owner or guardian of the silver
treasure of Mexico, was about to come true. Not surprisingly,
Ouvrard was a very happy man, and the Spanish Government, for
its part, was thankful for his help. On the other hand, Barbe-
Marbois in Paris was feeling anything but happy. His letters to
Ouvrard became more and more frequent, urging him to hurry
back home, where his presence was urgently needed, for the
Minister could no longer guarantee the continuance of the
national exchequer. The unfortunate man was quite unfitted for
such a difficult post.
     If Napoleon appointed Barbe-Marbois head of the newly
            The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure   89

created Ministry of the State Treasury in 1801, it was mainly be¬
cause he attached more importance to complete honesty than to
any other quality, including competence. Barbe’s uprightness was
certainly beyond dispute, and no one has ever spoken of him
without paying tribute to his sense of justice. Although he usually
gave a rather comic impression with his long, lean body dressed
in an inordinately long red velvet coat and white vest and with a
face that was invariably sombre and even sinister, yet he com¬
manded universal respect. Born in 1745, he had been a school¬
master, Minister of Marine, Consul General in North America,
Administrator of San Domingo, Counsellor in the Foreign
Office, Lord Mayor of Metz and Secretary of the Council of
Senators, before Napoleon gave him office. But, despite his varied
career, he had lost none of his mental sluggishness. This did not
particularly disturb Napoleon, as he preferred to do everything
himself and to have obedient servants around him. It must have
amused him to know that Barbe-Marbois had written a book
entitled    The best method of giving people a taste for virtue
and that his pen was active in the interest of the cultivation of
clover and esparto grass (1803). Napoleon’s sole reason for
calling him a blockhead was that “he imagines that one should
not lie”.
  Entrusting, of all things, the nation’s finances to such a man
was bound to place the country in peril when Napoleon was
absent for any length of time, as was the case in the summer and
winter of 1805, which he spent preparing and conducting the
Austro-German campaign. A Finance Minister, who was anxious
to create a popular taste for virtue, was not likely to be a match
for someone like Ouvrard, whose vast, long-term plans could
only be launched with substantial government support. Barbe-
Marbois realized too late that Ouvrard had not only transferred
no money from Spain to tide over the crisis in France but had
invested, though only temporarily of course, the reserves of the
Spanish National Treasury. Worse still, Ouvrard’s friends had
adopted special measures to lay their hands on the last of the
nation’s funds and had almost forced the Bank of France to close
down.
9o                           Ouvrard

     How this whole affair, which was eventually to ruin all
Ouvrard’s brilliant plans, came about remains something of a
mystery. On 4th April 1805 Ouvrard had offered the State fifty
million francs, less the twenty million owing to him. On 8th
June Barbe made a fresh appeal and received a further private
loan of 150 million, this time, however, against the equivalent in
bonds or debentures issued by national tax-collectors. Ouvrard,
who now enjoyed the complete confidence of the government,
came forward at this point with his plan to collect the outstanding
Spanish subsidies—seventy-two million a year—and, in order to
make his position absolutely inviolable, paid, at Barbe’s request,
the first thirty-two million of the Spanish money out of his own
pocket. Ouvrard did not hesitate to cover this advance, which
had been squeezed out of him, in a way that Barbe could not en¬
tirely control. As a businessman Ouvrard realized that an insol¬
vent creditor, like Spain, can only be expected to pay when he
has become solvent. But to make someone solvent costs money.
To make a country solvent costs millions, and, if the Treasury
is empty, these millions can only come from tax revenues, the
national reserve. This was the source from which Ouvrard met
the personal expenses of the Spanish Court and set up the Con¬
solidated Fund in Madrid, which issued its own notes. The
amount in question must have been at least thirty-six million but
was very probably as much as 36 -f- 24 =60 million.
     Ouvrard was able without great difficulty to use the bonds
as cover for the notes, because Barbe was completely at the mercy
of the bankers. When Ouvrard travelled to Spain as a State Com¬
missioner in September 1804, the Minister of the Treasury needed
someone who would be responsible for arranging payment of the
loan of 150 million francs pledged by Ouvrard and his friends,
Vanlerberghe, Seguin and Michel, against the delivery of bonds
on discount. Napoleon himself sought out this key figure: it was
Desprez. The banker Desprez was already a member of the
Board of Directors of the Bank of France, to which, so to speak,
not even a messenger could be appointed without Napoleon’s
personal approval. He had been for some time persona gratissima
with the Emperor’s entourage and had formerly spent ten years
          The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure      gi

as a Treasury official, where he was a colleague of Dufresne, the
Director to whom Napoleon paid eloquent tribute for his love of
order and matchless probity. So it is hardly to be wondered at
that everyone, and particularly Barbe-Marbois, placed almost un¬
limited confidence in Desprez. But Desprez was no longer a
government official, he was      a banker, who suddenly        found
himself leading an informal group of the most gifted business
men in France and who felt it incumbent on him to show what
he could do.
  He had no difficulty in arranging that Roger, the Secretary of
the Treasury and the Minister’s right-hand man, should be given
the authority to hand over to Desprez any bonds the latter
might demand in return for the equivalent in notes. And notes
were by no means confined to drafts issued by various govern¬
ment departments (which would have been in accordance with
Treasury regulations) but also included bills of exchange and
private promissory notes of all kinds. This meant, in fact, that the
Treasury was completely in the power of Ouvrard’s representa¬
tive and that Roger, the Secretary of the Treasury, had virtually
become an employee of the bankers. And very soon he confirmed
this by accepting the substantial sum of 1,200,000 francs.
  In these circumstances Ouvrard had naturally no difficulty
in obtaining from Desprez as many bonds from the Treasury as
he needed for the Madrid Consolidated Fund. In exchange the
equivalent in bills from the Spanish “mint” found their way to
the Treasury. Although for the moment they were virtually
worthless, they would acquire their full value when the Mexican
transaction was completed. Had matters been left like that,
Ouvrard would never have acquired the reputation of indulging
in dubious speculation. But Ouvrard and his friends could not
resist the temptation to exploit the fantastic situation, whereby
it was they who decided how much in the way of reserve bonds
should remain in the Treasury. Not only was Desprez responsible
for collecting and paying in the 150 million, not only was Ouvrard
responsible for making Spain solvent, but Ouvrard, Vanlerberghe
and their friends continued to hold the monopoly for supplies
to the army and the navy. This enormous expenditure, which
92                            Ouvrard

ran into many millions, had always been reimbursed in the past
by promissory notes payable by the Treasury, but, as Ouvrard
and Vanlerberghe knew from painful personal experience, most
of them had only been met, on Napoleon’s instructions, years
later and even then only partially. Now that Napoleon was away
at his headquarters, an opportunity presented itself of turning
the tables. They arranged immediate payment for all their de¬
liveries and—an unforgivable sin in Napoleon’s eyes—they even
took generous advances instead of advancing the money them¬
selves. All this was done with the aid of bonds, some of which
were privately discounted, while others—contrary to all agree¬
ments—were sold.
     Desprez did not have strong enough moral fibre to resist so
many temptations. He saw wonderful prospects opening up
before him, if only he had further means at his disposal. He took
advantage of his seat on the board of the Bank of France to talk
his fellow directors into honouring or discounting drafts bearing
the most dubious signatures. On one occasion Desprez lent the
firm of Grammont in Bordeaux fourteen million francs, although
this same firm, according to Ouvrard, was unable to obtain even
200,000 elsewhere. Napoleon, from his field headquarters, began
to criticize Barbe-Marbois, accusing him of being duped by
Desprez because, for example, he had drawn a bill for one million
on the paymaster of Arras, who could not pay. Bills of this mag¬
nitude were presented by Desprez, perhaps even bought up cheap
and fully honoured by the bank. At one point the Bank of France
had only one and a half million left in the till—and ninety-two
million in claims.
     The most remarkable feature of this situation was that for
every five million Desprez received he needed twenty-five. He
had managed to arrange for official instructions to be issued to
tax-collectors that the amounts due on their debentures should
be paid not to the Treasury but direct to the man who then
owned them, Desprez, and, for the time being, a simple receipt
was to be accepted. Desprez made the most of this by himself
issuing a circular letter in which he promised higher rates of
interest to tax-collectors who made abnormally prompt cash
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure    93

payments. But instead of returning these honoured bonds to
their drawers, he deposited them with the Bank of France and
—used them as security for further loans! This, of course, was
plain, unvarnished swindling.
  Meanwhile, Desprez’s financial juggling, in the course of
which he had drawn millions upon millions from the bank, had
been so successful that the Bank itself was no longer solvent.
It took the obvious course of presenting to the tax-collectors
what appeared to be its most valuable securities, namely, the
bonds which had long since been paid, only to get back in return
the receipts issued by Desprez. This was in November 1805.
The result was not only a major scandal but also a bank crash,
for Desprez had precious little of the money left, particularly as,
in an access of megalomania, he had set himself up as financial
backer of some highly dubious firms and had lent no less than
fifty million francs. By August the bank’s position was seriously
undermined, and in the second half of September—immediately
after Napoleon moved out into the field—the Bank of France
had to limit its payments. Anyone presenting paper money could
cash only a thousand-franc note. Night after night people queued
up in their hundreds in the Place des Victoires, hoping to be the
lucky ones the following morning. Then, in November, the
crisis reached its peak. Bank notes dropped as much as 12 per
cent in value. The police had their hands full, coping with a crowd
of 2,000 people in front of the bank. Barbe-Marbois proposed in
the Council of Ministers that the salaries of officials should be
reduced to a quarter. When the bank finally came to the end of
its resources, it chose a roundabout way of suspending payments:
a thousand-franc note could only be cashed if it was presented
with a certificate from the bearer’s local Town Council confirming
that he was in financial straits. Anyone fortunate enough to
advance thus far received a written summons and, as the bank
was playing for time, a bagful of hard cash was counted out,
coin by coin. All major transactions, however, came to a stand¬
still. Amongst these was the transfer of money to Madrid. As
Ouvrard’s Consolidated Fund was not yet self-supporting, it
collapsed with a bang that resounded throughout Spain.
94                           Ouvrard

     So Ouvrard, the State Commissioner, was brought down by
his own representative, Desprez, in his capacity as head of the
financial group. Robbed of his financial resources, Ouvrard could
no longer hope to make Spain solvent. And yet no sooner had he
returned to Paris than he made it clear that he still believed—
and with some justification—that the Mexican project was as
sound as ever. Once the Central American silver had reached
the Continent, then all the other problems, including the bill-
protests against the Consolidated Fund in Madrid, would solve
themselves.
     Ouvrard was not even shaken in his conviction by the be¬
haviour of Desprez and Vanlerberghe. Like many other concerns,
Vanlerberghe had been very hard hit by the bank crisis, and when
he too found it impossible to obtain any more money from the
government he suddenly announced that he would have to
declare himself bankrupt, if he did not receive an immediate
payment of twenty-six million francs for past deliveries. In the
Council of Ministers the War Minister voiced his dismay, pro¬
tested that, without the co-operation of the merchants, he could
not keep his department going nor could he find adequate
substitutes, and urged that the twenty-six million be paid. Then
came a sudden thunderbolt from Napoleon. Joseph Bonaparte,
Cambaceres and Barbe-Marbois received letters reprimanding
them for even considering such proposals. In the meantime,
following the Battle of Austerlitz on 2nd December 1805, the
economic situation in Paris had taken a turn for the better.
Ouvrard’s optimism was once again borne out by events, for,
without any change in the status of the Bank of France since the
suspension of payments, it suddenly became solvent again. The
thrill of victory revived so many hopes, that the run on the bank
stopped and no one thought any more of converting his paper
money.
     This could not, of course, bring back the millions which
Desprez by his sleight-of-hand had conjured out of the Treasury’s
coffers into his own pocket. Nor could the bills of the Con¬
solidated Fund in Madrid, which were lying in the Treasury
vaults and ran into tens of millions, be turned into hard cash
               The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure        95

overnight. But this was precisely what the victorious Napoleon
was concerned about, when he found time to look at the financial
reports from Paris. With mounting dismay, with indignation,
with the fury which always assailed him when he lost money but
which the sacrifice of thousands of human lives never aroused
in him, he saw through Desprez’              swindle, Barbe-Marbois’s
stupidity, and the illicit use of bonds to borrow money for Spain
instead of producing cash from it. He gave due warning in writing
of the frightful retribution to come.
   When it did come, following Napoleon’s return to Paris on
26th January 1806, it exceeded even the worst fears of all con¬
cerned. Although the Emperor did not carry out his threat to
return with all speed in order to clean up the financial mess—on
his way back from Vienna he remained almost three weeks in
Munich to marry off his stepson Eugene Beauharnais to a Bavarian
princess and, contrary to his normal practice, spent one to two
days in Augsburg, Stuttgart, Karlsruhe and Strasbourg—he had
no sooner reached Paris, at ten o’clock at night, than he ordered
the chief culprits to report at the Tuileries the following day.
When Barbe-Marbois entered the Imperial presence, he said,
with bowed head: “Your Majesty, I bring you my head.” To
which Napoleon gave the characteristically brusque reply: “Much
good that will do me, you stupid lout.” In a letter to Joseph
Bonaparte that same day, 27th January, the Emperor wrote: “I
arrived in Paris last night. I was indignant at the incompetent
manner in which M. Barbe-Marbois has conducted my finances.
I relieved him of his portfolio. I have appointed State Councillor
Mollien to succeed him.”
   The meeting, to which this brief account referred, was in fact
long and dramatic. It lasted from eight in the morning until five
in the afternoon, a nine hours’ ordeal for Barbe, Ouvrard,
Desprez, Vanlerberghe, Roger, Mollien and the Finance Minister,
Gaudin.* The first hour was the worst. Napoleon stormed and
raged, his eyes flashing fire. He threatened to lock up all the

  * The Minister of Finance was the Minister responsible for the collection
of revenue, while the Minister of the Treasury controlled expenditure.—
T.A.B.C.
 g6                               Ouvrard

merchants in the Tower of Vincennes and have them shot. Even
Ouvrard admitted that this first outburst of rage was terrifying.
Desprez broke down and wept, while the Secretary of the Trea¬
sury, Roger, tried to stammer out excuses. The only one who
remained apparently unmoved was Ouvrard. It was in crises of
this kind that he was at his most impressive. He sat there com¬
pletely motionless, silent, impassive, waiting patiently for the
storm to pass. When it finally subsided and one could hear one¬
self speak, it was Ouvrard who acted as spokesman.* Ouvrard
took advantage of the next eight hours to save what could still
be saved.
      The text of a decree was read out, making the financiers jointly
liable for the sum of eighty-seven million francs. “What security
can you give?” Ouvrard replied without hesitation: “Sire, the
Treasury will be paid, if you let us go free.” Napoleon was not
prepared for such an enormous commitment to be accepted so
promptly. He took Ouvrard aside to one of the windows, where
a more earnest exchange followed between the two great adver¬
saries.


napoleon:       Monsieur Ouvrard, you degrade the ruler by turning
                him into a trader.
ouvrard:        Sire, trade is the life’s blood of a State; it can manage
                very well without rulers, but not rulers without it.
napoleon:       Nonsense. Do you guarantee to make good the
                deficit?
ouvrard:        Yes, Sire.
napoleon:       Good. I rely upon you. I shall issue a new decree
                placing the piastres and other securities, which are
                with Hopes, at my disposal.
ouvrard:        But consider, Sire; England will not permit the ex¬
                port of these piastres, when she learns that they
                belong to Your Majesty, and, as for Spain, she will
                cancel our contracts.

     Napoleon s piesence did not have the same effect on him as on the witty
and much-f^ted Madame de Stael, who confessed that she became “as stupid
as a goose”.                                                             r
d'Une Negotiation de trf.nte millions florins Courant d’Hollandc, a 51
  pour Cent d'lnteret, pour Compte de Sa Majesty Catholique DON CstRLDS,
  Roi    de Castille &c. &c- &c. , fous la direction de Messieurs H 0 P K &
  Comp.,    fervant principalement, k la liquidation de tous les Capitaux ct Iu-
  tcrets echus dort fa dite Majesty est redevable a la Hollande, Conioimeaient
  aux principes d'equite et de regularity qu'elle a toujours manifeste.


(^.tte Negociation sera faitc pour quatorre armies Conlecutives a courir du i« Nomnbre 1806.
et le remboursement s’effcchiera en douze termes annuels d'un douzieme Chacun , & eomir.encer
le 1 e Novembre 1809.
  A chaque terrne Je remboursement outre le Capital, il ter* pay£ 5 pCt. de prime, de manrere
que chaque Obligation de f 1000 : — sera acquittde en f 1050 : —
  Sa Majesty Catholique prend a sa charge les droits de timbre pour PObligation priccipalc et
pour les Obligations particles ainsi que ceux qui pourront exister p»r la suite.
  Pour surety de ceite Negociation sa Majest^ Catholique a engage tous Ics reverus de son Roy.iu-
me, et il a dd remis a Messieurs HOPE &. Comp, comme surcruit de »urdtd l.s mandats >ui-
vanrs sur la Caisse Royale a Mexico les quels calculds a raison de 31' par Fus.rc Lai.a^Cviu re
montant de cette Negociation avec prime et intdrdts, savoir

                   N°.       1.   echeant le ]n Juillct 1807 de pf 1,031,:5a.
                             2.   -1808 — . 1,031,250.
                             3-   -1809 — , 0/71 875.
                             4-   -1810 - . r,5R5-937>
                             5        1811 — » 2,500,000.
                             6.                         1812 — » 2,414,063.
                             7-                         1813 — . 2,328,125.
                             8.                         1814 — r 2,242,187.
                             9-                         1815 — - 2,156,250.
                          10.                           1816 — • 2,0-0,313.
                         11.                            1817 — . 1,984,375.
                         12.                           1818 — » 1,898,437.
                         ,3-                           1819 — * 1,812,500.
                         J4*                           1820 — * 1.726,563.

                                                              Pf 28,453.125.
Avec leurs lectres d’avis , pour dtre en tout renips appliquds    au besoin, & 1’accomplbscment des
*ripularions de 1’empruDt , de telle     manicre que   Messieurs HOPE &. C 0 it p. jugcront le .plus
udle aux interests.
   Les dies mandats ainsi que leurs lertres tfavis et la cddule Royale, relative * cette Nego-
ciarion seront deposes, cbez le Nocaire Mr. G. van Homrich , avec facultd de les dclivrer
t Messieurs HOPE & Comp, a leur requisition, pour en faire i’usage neccssaire.
   Les Recepissds provisoires t foumir par Messieurs HOPE & Comp. poor les foumicsemens,
dirts cette Negotiation , seront retires et dchangu aussiefo que p>o*stbie, coo ere les Obligations
parodies , pourvus de leurs Coupons d’intdret.
            Amsterdam 25 Mai 1807


          Prospectus of a loan-issue for Spain by the firm of Hope. (Amsterdam,
                            in the possession of the firm oj Hope)
fc£
c :


a:
o.




^:
fcD:
C


bCc
c:
Wj
 qj
a*r
o:c
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure    97

napoleon:    Then I will march to Madrid myself; with five
             hundred thousand men one can do anything.
ouvrard:     Your Majesty can achieve anything with one clever
             man; with five hundred thousand you will not
             achieve much.

   When Ouvrard recorded this conversation in his memoirs
twenty years later he probably put down much of what he wished
he had said together with what actually passed between him and
the Emperor; not a few of the phrases he claims to have used
were much too bold for so critical a situation. But the fact remains
that in that conversation he paved the way for a businesslike and
strictly commercial solution of the crisis. At the same time,
Napoleon’s financial conditions were extremely harsh. The first
decree, which had been read aloud at the meeting and which
accused the financiers of having “embezzled” millions and
“employed them for private business deals”, was soon followed,
on 6th February 1806, by a second in which even harsher con¬
ditions were imposed on Ouvrard, Vanlerberghe, Michel and
Seguin for the honouring of all securities. And shortly afterwards,
following a report by Mollien, the total sum to be refunded was
increased from 87 to 141 million francs, again, of course, without
any process of law or independent administrative enquiry. Any
bills belonging to the financiers which could be found were im¬
mediately confiscated; their private fortunes disappeared, and
their warehouse stocks were requisitioned. Those like Desprez,
who could not pay, were flung into the debtors’ prison of Sainte-
Pelagie.
   Worst of all, Napoleon tried to lay his hands on the securities
Ouvrard had deposited with Hopes. His first attempt was so
arrogant and clumsy that it failed. To a letter, in which he made
the quite unnecessary accusation that the gentlemen in Amsterdam
had earned quite enough out of the Louisiana deal, he received
a cold and negative reply. When Napoleon followed this up by
sending Baron Louis to make a final settlement, Hopes answered:
“We are in no way obliged to inform you whether Monsieur
Ouvrard has money deposited with us or not. You yourself must
    h
98                           Ouvrard

surely realize that your demand is most unseemly.” But, as Spain
was in no position to stand up to the Emperor and as Ouvrard
was out of action, the Spanish-Mexican project, which Hopes
were on the point of putting into operation, went up in smoke.
“That marked the end,” said Ouvrard dejectedly, “of the biggest
commercial and political undertaking which was ever planned
and launched, an undertaking which, by virtue of the contract
between a crowned head and an ordinary private individual,
would have forged a closer and firmer link between the Old and
New Worlds and would have solved, at one stroke, the financial
problems of two States.”
  Napoleon behaved in a characteristic fashion. It did not occur to
him to draw any distinction between, on the one hand, Ouvrard’s
plans for making Spain solvent and for indirect collection of
outstanding subsidies and, on the other hand, the millions which,
according to Napoleon, were appropriated by Ouvrard for his
own personal ends—an accusation which Ouvrard hotly con¬
tested and which is no longer verifiable. Nor did the Emperor
pause for one moment to think that it might be better to leave
the Treasury bills which Ouvrard had invested in the Mexican
affair to work their passage home rather than to call them back
suddenly. He stared, as if hypnotized, at the deficit, which in¬
cidentally was no longer there, for he had brought back many
millions in forced contributions from Austria. As Ouvrard said,
credit for him was really “an abstract idea, the crazy conception
of political economists”. He thought of only two things: taxes
and conquests. The “compendium of the world”, as Goethe called
Napoleon, lacked any commercial sense; at         the same time,
Napoleon was completely blind to this defect and refused to
accept advice. “I do not want advice but news,” he told his
Minister of the Treasury, Mollien.
     He meddled in everything, however important, however in¬
significant. In 1800 he set up “the exchange office in Paris, which
bears the proud name of Bank of France”, as Ouvrard remarked
scornfully; side by side with the Finance Minister he appointed
 a Minister of the Treasury to enable him to divide and rule; the
First Consul changed the national holiday in celebration of the
            The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure   99

storming of the Bastille to a Sunday, in order not to lose a work¬
ing day, which did not prevent him, however, from turning an
increasing number of essential workers into soldiers. One of the
steps Napoleon took to combat British trade was to compel
Josephine very much against her will to wear Lyons silk instead
of the modern Indian muslin. In 1810 he supervised the transport
of 10,000 Spanish sheep to France, although the French army at
Saragossa alone consumed 200,000 sheep; one of the first things
he did on arriving in Elba was to go down into the iron quarries
like an inspector of mines and then conclude a trade agreement
with Leghorn.
  In tidying up the country’s finances, Napoleon certainly was
a great improvement on the Directory, but, as soon as he went
beyond the purely administrative into the commercial sphere, he
was out of his depth. He tried in vain, while Bourrienne was
Ambassador in Hamburg, to persuade the Hansa towns to accept
French protection against a payment of six million francs each;
he also failed in 1803 to buy from Louis XVIII his right to the
throne and, as the latter put it, his honour; he allowed himself to
be hopelessly entangled by the Rothschilds in 1811, when he
thought he had deprived the British of the hard cash they so
badly needed, whereas the Rothschilds used the bills drawn on
Madrid against this money to finance Wellington’s campaign in
Portugal.* Another of his plans which failed was the secret coun¬
terfeiting of large quantities of Russian and Austrian bank notes,
which the Councillor of State and Prefect of Police, Pasquier,
supplied and which were to be used in the 1812 campaign; Russian
merchants would only take them in very small quantities and they
finally had to be burnt. The Emperor was also over-optimistic
in his message from Russia to Paris that the salt-mines he had
seized would produce an extra revenue of eighty million francs.
Moreover, the relaxation of the Continental Blockade, which he
had imposed in 1806, with the introduction of expensive permits,
brought a marked but short-lived increase in customs revenue;
its long-term effects on the national finances were disastrous,
for the French economy was ruined by this impracticable and
  * See p. xi of Introduction.
100                          Ouvrard

ineffectual fiction. To take only one example, the price of sugar
rose to six francs a pound.
   Particularly disastrous in its consequences was Napoleon’s
refusal to take advice on pegging the market. At moments when
his devoted and experienced Minister of the Treasury, Mollien,
declared it was of no consequence whatsoever whether govern¬
ment stocks stood a few per cent higher or lower, he insisted on
face-saving measures, without having the necessary financial
backing; in 1803, the renewal of war cost him twelve million,
although the price of rentes still went down by 10 per cent. At
the outbreak of the Spanish War, Napoleon decreed, against
Mollien’s advice, that the 5 per cent stock must stand at 80 at
least; this cost him thirty million and was once again quite
ineffectual. Had the Emperor judged himself by the same
criterion as he judged Ouvrard and considered only the fact of
the deficit, not the circumstances which gave rise to it, he would
have been obliged to refund the millions, which had been
squandered through his stupidity and obstinacy, out       of his
own pocket or, alternatively, to condemn himself to the debtors’
prison of Sainte-Pelagie.
    The plan to make Spain solvent and the Mexican project were
on such a large and grandiose scale that even someone with as
little natural talent for commerce as Napoleon should have rea¬
lized their immense possibilities. His inability to see this was
perhaps partly due to the fact that his policy was essentially
European in character and that his whole attitude to commerce
was European. None of his own overseas ventures had turned
out well. The Egyptian campaign ended in complete military
and political defeat; Louisiana, France’s invaluable colonial
territory in America, had to be ceded for a mere eighty million
francs in 1803 under the growing threat of war with England;
San Domingo in Haiti could not be held, even with 50,000
men and an enormous amount of supplies and equipment, and
it was abandoned in 1803 without compensation; Napoleon’s
plan, to subdue his arch-enemy England by a cross-Channel
invasion, finally had to be dropped. In such circumstances
it was understandable that even someone like Napoleon, who
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure   101

had been so successful elsewhere, should suffer from hydro¬
phobia.
   Ouvrard’s efforts to make Spain and himself solvent foundered
on this aversion and finally on Napoleon’s outright refusal to
consider an enterprise which, in fact, had already reached a most
promising stage. “All the Emperor had to do was to open the
ports of France to immense treasures, which far exceeded all the
loot he had squeezed out of the conquered peoples with suffering,
brute-force and blood. Apparently gold held no attraction for
him, if it was acquired by the peaceful method of trade.” In
writing these words, Ouvrard overlooked the fact, of course, that,
had the agreement between him and Charles IV been carried out,
it would not have earned France more than the seventy-two
million francs a year which Spain owed her in subsidies. But,
with that qualification, what he said was true. For at the very
moment when Napoleon was clumsily tearing the whole finely
spun web to pieces, it became abundantly clear that Ouvrard’s
commercial transaction was perfectly practicable and utterly
different from Law’s dreams around 1716 of finding capital in the
mists of the Mississippi and the savannahs of Texas. Such of
Ouvrard’s Spanish bills of exchange as escaped Napoleon’s
clutches bore the promised fruit. Ouvrard’s first triumph came
when Hopes, in spite of the blockade, succeeded in getting four
frigates to England with Mexican silver piastres for the Spaniards,
which meant that fourteen million piastres were sold at 3-75 per
piastre on the Continent: from England to Hopes, from Hopes
to Ouvrard, from Ouvrard to Spain, from Spain to the French
Treasury. And even now, when Pitt was prepared to make
no further concessions, Ouvrard still had not played his last
card. His partnership with Hopes had been chosen with just such
an eventuality in mind. The second method, by which this firm
with its world-wide affiliations arranged for the remaining
Mexican silver to be released, was both costly and complex, but
it justified Ouvrard’s self-confidence, when he said later that,
as far as he was concerned, the blockade had never existed.
  This second method was to buy goods in America with the
Mexican piastres, transport them to Europe, sell them and hand
102                           Ouvrard

over the proceeds, after commission had been deducted, to
whoever was holding the bills of exchange, namely Ouvrard or
the Spanish Consolidated Fund. For a firm as experienced as
Hopes this presented no great difficulty, in spite of the enormous
sums involved, so long as England was prepared to wink an eye
at this camouflaged transfer of piastres. The deal was much too
big for Hopes to be able to pass off their shipments as neutral
freight. There remained only the much more complicated method
of making the shipments not apparently but really neutral. This
was only possible if American merchants could be won over, who
supplied direct to European firms in countries which were not
at war with England. But, as America was at an early stage of
development, it would obviously be very difficult to find reliable
North American firms big enough to take the risk.
  The plan of campaign, which was eventually worked out, was
as follows:
  Hopes, having received from Ouvrard the Spanish drafts on
Mexico, would send them with an agent from the Amsterdam
office, M. Lestapis, to Vera Cruz, where, to make matters easier,
he would carry Spanish papers in the name of Jose Gabriel de
Villaneuva.* Lestapis would then present the drafts in Mexico
and receive in return the silver dollars from the National Treasury.
These would be released gradually, as the opportunity arose to
transmit cash.
  The silver dollars would be loaded on ships specially built by
Hopes’ second agent, David Parish, stationed in Philadelphia,
the destination of the ships. These ships and their freight must be,
at least pro forma, American property, otherwise the British would
seize them. As no reputable firm would land itself in such
difficulties or incur such risks, everything depended on Parish’s
ingenuity.
  On arrival in Philadelphia, the silver dollars would be handed
over to carefully selected American commercial firms—as an
advance. In return they would be committed to buying goods—
cotton, tobacco, coffee, sugar and so on—and shipping them

  * A Spaniard, now dead, for whom A. P. Lestapis had worked some
years earlier.—T.A.B.C.
           The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure     103

to neutral countries in Europe. These European clients were to be
chosen by Hopes. The Americans would also be committed to
insuring these shipments in England, thus creating a more con¬
genial atmosphere for Hopes.
   The dollar advances would be secured by bills of exchange
from the American firms, to be handed to Hopes’ agent, Parish.
These bills would be paid by the European purchasers of the
goods, who, as soon as the shipments arrived, would make their
settlement with Hopes. Hopes, in turn, would settle up the
Spanish bills with Ouvrard, and the money, which the British
were so anxious to block, would finally begin flowing into the
coffers of France’s ally, Spain.
   In practice this American deal proved even more complicated
and risky, because in his contract with Charles IV Ouvrard had
succeeded in obtaining not merely permission to transport the
money but also a monopoly of trade with Mexico. The 500 trade
concessions, which Ouvrard was able to hand over in Amsterdam,
were extremely valuable, for it meant that the same number of
ships could be unloaded in the harbour of Vera Cruz. Hopes sent
these shipments (of German and English goods) not only from
European ports but also from Philadelphia, so that the freight-
space could be used on both the outward and the return journeys.
It was the responsibility of Hopes’ first agent, Lestapis, to see that
the goods which arrived in Mexico reached the buyers. But many
of the trading concessions could be sold at very high prices like
ordinary stocks: American firms paid up to a third of their net
profit as premium. The profits accruing from these sales had to
be shared out in accordance with the contract between Hopes and
Ouvrard and the contract between Ouvrard and Charles IV.
Both transactions, the transport of the money and the handling of
the trading concessions, were entrusted to a third agent, whom
Hopes sent to a point roughly midway between Vera Cruz and
Philadelphia—New Orleans. The name of this agent was Vincent
Nolte.
   Work on this vast edifice began in the summer of 1805, when
Hopes’ three agents moved to their respective stations in America.
In the spring of the following year, before they had even finished
104                           Ouvrard

laying the foundations, the entire project was ruined by Napo¬
leon’s intervention. Just how much was lost emerged from a
statement drawn up by Vincent Nolte for Parish at the end of
1808: the total turnover of this transaction, which had to be
prematurely abandoned, would have amounted to thirty-three
million Spanish dollars or 165 million French francs.
  The actual settlements with Ouvrard himself, the prime mover
of this vast undertaking, covered a mere fraction of the whole.
Even Hopes could not afford, in the long run,- not to work with
Napoleon’s government, which had taken over all Ouvrard’s
legal rights with his financial liquidation. Although the Hopes’
ledgers for the years 1804-13 do not show the enormous sum
involved, it is clear that the various enterprises he had launched
had greatly expanded. There is no mention of Ouvrard’s name
in the entries for 1804, as he first travelled to Spain in September
of that year. His 1805 account (“van Lerberghe & Ouvrard”)
showed 887,000 Dutch gulden. In 1806 there was a balance of
6,611,761 gulden, from which periodic deductions were made to
cover the advance on the loan, as Hopes disposed of their loan
issue. In the same year one million gulden were allowed to pass
again through a special account (“August Ouvrard”). At the end
of 1807 the account stood at 1,116,338 gulden, in 1808 at 1,709,049
gulden. In 1809 it shrank to 216,813, but rose *n 1810 to 223,692
gulden. In 1811 Ouvrard was 152,000 in debt, but in 1812 he
again had a balance of 160,721. In 1813 he disappeared from the
books of the firm of Hopes. As the account was balanced at the
end of each financial year, a total of twelve million gulden, some
twenty-four million    francs, had passed     through    Ouvrard’s
hands. So the prospects can hardly have been as bleak as Napoleon
made them out to be.
  The final irony, which must have given Ouvrard considerable
though belated satisfaction, came when Napoleon himself tried
to cash some of the Spanish-Mexican bills, which he had seized
from Ouvrard, directly, by-passing Hopes in Amsterdam with the
intention of evading the substantially lower European rate of
exchange (3-75 instead of 5 francs a piastre). The French Consul
General in Philadelphia, to whom the papers had been sent, was
            The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure            105

completely nonplussed when no one would touch the suspect
bills he was offering. The Consul had no alternative but to appeal
for help to Ouvrard’s business friend, David Parish of Hopes,
who was kind enough to obtain part of the money from Mexico.
But it was not the entire sum, which amounted to over two
million piastres.
   Whatever satisfaction Ouvrard may have felt, however, was
of little practical value to him. Together with Spain, with Vanler-
berghe, Michel and Seguin, he had been condemned to pay 141
million francs and, if he valued his freedom, he had to summon all
his resources to pay his share. It is a striking tribute to the financial
acumen of Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe that they were able to
reduce the total debt to eighty-five million by the end of 1806.
In March 1808, only fifteen months later, when the Minister of
the Treasury drew up a balance-sheet, only thirteen of the 141
million were still owing. But Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe had
already had enough of merely paying, particularly as the private
creditors were also growing restive. So they decided to have
recourse to the only legal expedient left to them, suspended
payments on 31st December 1807 and declared themselves
bankrupt.*
   It was, however, a rather unusual type of bankruptcy. The
two partners stressed the fact, with obvious relish, that their
liabilities did not exceed their assets but that they were simply
insolvent, because the government had quite unjustly confiscated
several millions which belonged to them and which it now owed
them. At the same time, Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe had appar¬
ently agreed to divide up their joint fortunes in such a way as
to make Napoleon’s decrees largely ineffective. They had no
intention, if they could help it, of paying out more than they had
invested in the Spanish-Mexican operation. This and that pro¬
perty must have been registered in another name, that of a friend
or relative, and in good time, probably before Napoleon returned
from the wars. Eighteen months later Ouvrard was in a position

  * They chose the 31st December because a new Commercial Code was
due to come into effect on the 1st January 1808, imposing stricter control on
commercial transactions and bankruptcies.—T.A.B.C.
io6                           Ouvrard

to pay a substantial sum in bail; in 1814 he was able to retire to an
estate near Orleans; as late as 1824 he was still considering the
possible industrial development of his estate at Preuilly (which
included the largest privately owned forest, some 18,000 acres,
in France), an estate of which Ouvrard himself said that he had
bought it “a long time ago” but, owing to pressure of business,
had never visited. This can only have been acquired during the
inflation period of the Directory.
   His ingenious method of handling his bankruptcy is illustrated
by the following incident:
   He still owed Monsieur Chenais 50,000 francs on the purchase
of Villandryand there was a mortgage outstanding. When frequent
demands for payment brought no response from Ouvrard, Chenais
sent his son-in-law, General Thiebault, to see him. Three days in
succession the General called early in the morning in the Fau¬
bourg du Roule but on each occasion Ouvrard was not at home.
When Thiebault finally forced his way in, he made his way
through a long series of empty rooms and eventually found the
master of the house just getting out of bed. Ouvrard pointed out
that, as he was bankrupt, he could pay off neither the cash debt
nor the mortgage. The General literally besieged him, threatening
to starve him out and only release him from his bedroom when
he had met his commitments. After two hours Ouvrard gave
way, wrote a cheque, and gave instructions for a mortgage to
be issued to Monsieur Chenais on a property which allegedly
belonged to his brother, August Ouvrard.
   This somewhat unorthodox form of bankruptcy was eventually
terminated as strangely as it had begun. Although Ouvrard
remained officially a bankrupt, he came to an agreement with his
private creditors on 26th October 1808 which gave him back
complete freedom of action. On the other hand, while Ouvrard
succeeded in resuming his full business activities and even built
up certain reserves, which would have seemed like considerable
wealth to the average businessman, for him, with his irrepressible
financial ambitions, the liquidation dictated by Napoleon was
nothing short of disastrous. A particularly striking symptom of it
 was the sale, which he could no longer postpone, of Rainey in
                The Great Expectation: the Mexican Silver Treasure           ioj

1806, and the loss of Madame Tallien, who, with her remarkable
ability to sense crises in the affairs of her friends, had rushed into
her third marriage with the Comte de Caraman in 1805.
   The announcement of Ouvrard’s bankruptcy brought his
reputation as a financier tumbling about his ears. People had come
to regard him as a sorcerer complete with magic wand and
divining-rod; now he stood exposed before the world, appar¬
ently as helpless as any ordinary mortal. Everyone knew that
Ouvrard had compelled the Emperor to turn to him in times of
need, but now that accounts had been settled it was clear that
Napoleon had emerged victorious, having won the contest
decisively and at a fearful price to his adversary.
   And yet, just how high the price had been was not to emerge
immediately, at the end of 1807, but some eighteen months
later. He spent this year and a half, when he must have missed the
company of Madame Tallien, “quietly with his family”, certainly
hoping in his heart that Napoleon would consider his bankruptcy
a thing of the past.* But on 21st June 1809, more than three years
after that dreadful day of reckoning in the Tuileries, Ouvrard’s
day-dreams were rudely shattered. He was made responsible for
the sum of a million and a half piastres (which, depending on the
rate of exchange, was between five-and-a-half and eight million

    * During 1809 he was mixed up in a number of schemes, political as well as
commercial. He was already in league with Talleyrand and Fouche, who
had agreed among themselves that if Napoleon should die in battle or
through assassination in Spain, his vain and pliable brother-in-law Murat
should succeed him. After Napoleon had learnt about this understanding
and had dismissed Talleyrand in a fury, Ouvrard coolly proceeded to make
arrangements with Murat, Fouche and Labouchere to ship a hundred cargoes
of goods from Malta to Murat’s kingdom of Naples against an equivalent
value of exports. This overt attempt to breach the blockade was frustrated
either by Ouvrard’s incarceration in June or by Napoleon’s authority being
strengthened as a result of his victory at Wagram a few weeks later. Never¬
theless, Murat did thereafter step up his exports to Britain of olive oil, grain
and silk. As in August 1805, so now Ouvrard’s schemes were helping to
shape future events. For the Tsar, who had reluctantly agreed at Tilsit in
1807 to participate in Napoleon’s Continental System, grew so discontented
at the news of these illegal grain exports that at the end of 1810 he resolved
to reopen his ports to neutral ships. Here then was one of the causes of
Napoleon’s invasion of Russia in 1812.—T.A.B.C.
           J'
108                             Ouvrard

francs) which Spain owed but had not yet paid. Ouvrard’s pro¬
tests were in vain. He sent a printed memorandum to the Emperor
which had no effect. He was treated like a defaulting debtor and,
as he did not pay, was locked up in the debtors’ prison. Deprived
of his freedom, Ouvrard lost what little remained to him of
pleasure in life and of his reputation. He would undoubtedly have
had to resign himself to an indefinite period of imprisonment in
Sainte-Pelagie if he had not managed to produce adequate bail
from his invisible reserves and thus saved himself from the worst
consequences of the Mexican affair.
   Only then, in this particular moment of crisis, was it clear
how far Ouvrard had fallen. And so once again, in 1809, another
five years of his life had ended with a hiatus, as if the ups and
downs of his career followed a regular time-pattern. Five years
earlier, in 1804, the government’s inability or refusal to pay had
forced him to dispose of much of his property, including his
town residence, the Palais Montesson. Ten years earlier, in
1799, his misfortunes had begun with the fall of his friend Barras
and Napoleon’s advent to power. Fifteen years earlier, in 1794,
he had started, as a soldier, on his meteoric career in Paris.
Twenty years earlier, in 1789, at the outbreak of the Revolution,
he had completed his first major deal with the purchase of paper
supplies. It had taken him altogether ten years, from 1789 to
1799, to reach his zenith and another ten years, from 1799 to
1809, to reach his nadir.
  If Ouvrard employed the days he spent in Sainte-Pelagie
wondering what the next decade would bring, it is unlikely,
despite all his setbacks, that he felt over-pessimistic. He still had
faith in his star. He realized that he still possessed capital resources
which were inalienable and irreplaceable: his great financial
talent. He could afford to feel reasonably confident about starting
afresh. After all, he was only thirty-nine.
                               Seven




                   The Great Disaster:
           the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations




In the final analysis, it was the combination of business and
politics that compelled Ouvrard to start once again from the
very beginning. He would not have fallen nearly so far and his
financial losses would not have been nearly so heavy, if he had
not felt obliged to dabble in politics in order to achieve greater
success in business. During the five years in Paris from 1794 to
1799, the period of the Directory and Barras, and in the first five
years of the Napoleonic era, he was content to interest politicians
in his plans and ventures. For a time this worked extremely well
and, even when it was less successful, at least his outstanding
achievements were never in danger. But when the Mexican
treasure became such an obsession that he agreed to go to Spain
as a State Commissioner and to become actively involved in
relations between France and Charles IV, between Spain and
England, between Spain and her colonies, then business and
politics combined proved too much for him.
  Strangely enough, Ouvrard, who in other respects was so far¬
sighted, did not even realize this, when Napoleon made him
responsible for the Spanish debt and deprived him of his freedom.
It still had not dawned on him that the Mexican dream was over.
Barely was he his own master again, than he was turning over
in his mind how he could change government policy to help him
in his business plans. He was convinced—and rightly so—that
everything would change for the better, if only the war with
                               109
110                              Ouvrard

England could be ended. Then the minted and the untapped
treasures of Central and South America would become freely and
openly accessible; even Napoleon’s opposition to Ouvrard’s
transatlantic plans would collapse; indeed, it would probably be
unnecessary even to ask for the Emperor’s approval.
   Having acquired this idee fixe, Ouvrard, with all his untiring
faith in any ideas he conceived, actually set to work to bring
about peace between France and England. It was a breath-taking
scheme, which called for at least the same degree of resourceful¬
ness as Ouvrard had employed in Spain. The two countries
had been at one another’s throats for more than fifteen years.
The time was long since past when, as during the Peace of
Amiens, the English came crowding over to Paris and could be
seen frequently in Madame Recamier’s salon. The main obstacle
to another peace treaty was, of course, Napoleon’s refusal to
compromise; he would not consider any treaty which did not
wring major concessions from the British. This was again made
abundantly clear when the peace overtures which Napoleon
himself authorized in February 1810 came to nothing because
the Emperor refused to budge from his position.* Ouvrard, who
knew that international negotiations were in progress and who
knew the English better than Napoleon, foresaw a fiasco and
tried his utmost to keep the negotiations going. The obvious
course was to attempt to win Napoleon over to a more reasonable
and more realistic view of the situation. But all his efforts to
obtain the “favour” of an audience were in vain. Again and again
his powerful friends Murat, Berthier, General Rapp and the
Councillor of State, Regnault, intervened with the Emperor on
his behalf, but without success.
  So Ouvrard’s direct approach had failed. But he had never
been one to abandon his plans lightly, and he immediately sought
another method of approach. He turned now for help to Joseph
Fouche, originally a Prefect in the Society of Oratorians, and

  * Already in January 1810 Fouche had anticipated his master’s intentions
by initiating his own unofficial peace talks in London through a certain
Francois Fagan. But although the talks were not unhopeful they produced
no results.—T.A.B.C.
         The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   Ill


subsequently one of the strange collection of renegade monks
and priests who played an important part in the Revolution;
men such as Carrier, who had started as a novice in a monastery
and then, as Commissioner of the Revolution, had taught the
citizens of Nantes to dance the carmagnole; the Abbe d’Espagnac,
who had amassed millions during the Revolution; Chabot, for¬
merly a Capuchin monk and later a Commissioner of the Con¬
vention; Sieyes, former Abbe and then a member of the Directory;
the priest, Robert-Thomas Lindet,* who voted for Louis XVI’s
execution and was the first member of the clergy to marry; Abbe
Louis, Louis XVI’s servant and the Emperor Napoleon’s financial
adviser; above all Talleyrand, who laid aside his bishop’s mitre
to devote himself to more worldly pleasures and pursuits. All
that distinguished Fouche from most of the others was that
he lasted longer. He had managed to shed the blood of counter¬
revolutionary citizens, to bring down the incorruptible Robe¬
spierre, to serve the Directory and Barras, to help the counter¬
revolutionary General Napoleon Bonaparte into the saddle and
at every deliberate change of course to steer clear of the rocks.
In fact, with each volte-face he had even become more powerful,
so that, when Ouvrard finally approached him, he was Napoleon’s
Minister of Police and the second most powerful man in France.
  If Ouvrard took his plan for an agreement with England to
Fouche, it was not merely because his own official standing had
been so undermined by the liquidation of the Spanish venture
that there was little or nothing he could do by himself. Fouche
was the ideal man because he had become a past master at intrigue
and because he had as little love for Napoleon as Ouvrard. So
the merchant, who had doubtless had frequent dealings with the
avaricious Minister, called on Fouche ostensibly, as he was still
under police supervision, to obtain a permit to travel to Amster¬
dam and settle his affairs with Hopes. The encounter was not un¬
like his first meeting with Barras at Ouvrard’s chateau at Vitry
in 1796. And, as on that occasion, little is known of what the two
men discussed in the Ministry of Police early in 1810. Later, after

  1 Brother of Robert Lindet, “the financial expert of the Revolution”
mentioned on pp. 25-6.—T.A.B.C.
112                          Ouvrard

the whole enterprise had failed miserably and Fouche was dead,
Ouvrard maintained that the whole idea of a rapprochement with
England had come from Fouche, who had brushed aside all
Ouvrard’s objections and used the request for a passport as a
means of forcing Ouvrard to sound out opinion in England
privately, without Napoleon’s knowledge. And historians have
so far assumed that the plan to open secret negotiations with the
British, unknown to Napoleon, did originate with Fouche, who
simply used Ouvrard as a means of adding to his own prestige
and perhaps even damaging Napoleon’s reputation. In fact the
state of Ouvrard’s affairs makes it likely that he had a share in
the initiation of this third attempt to reach a peace settlement.
Almost the only hope left to him of surmounting his bankruptcy
and resuming his former exalted position was a radical change
in the political situation, which would enable him, with or with¬
out Napoleon’s blessing, to pursue his American plans. But,
whoever may have started the ball rolling, when Ouvrard left
Fouche’s office it was as the Minister’s confidential ambassador.
His task was, while in Holland, to give the British the impression
that negotiations could be resumed and that, with the Emperor’s
if not official at least tacit approval, fresh proposals had been
worked out.
  Ouvrard arrived in Amsterdam in March 1810. Fouche sent
him a pass to England by courier. Ouvrard would certainly
have been happier if he could have travelled again, as he did to
Spain, in an official capacity, and if he did not move on to Eng¬
land at once it was because he was not at all sure what kind of
reception he would get. Labouchere, the man whom Napoleon
had entrusted in February with the task of putting out feelers in
England—although the initiative had to be made to appear to
come from Louis Bonaparte, King of Holland—had just returned
from London to Amsterdam. He was a partner and the effective
head of the firm of Hopes, and Ouvrard had collaborated with
him on the Mexican project; he was therefore the emissary Fouche
and Ouvrard were hoping to employ for their peace talks.
  A better mediator could hardly have been chosen. He was
French by birth, had married an Englishwoman and was resident
         The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   113

in a neutral country; he combined all the best qualities of a highly
respected businessman with the courtly manners of an aristocrat;
last, but by no means least, his wife was a daughter of Sir Francis
Baring, whose firm controlled the entire international money
market and who had excellent personal relations with members
of the British Government. This match alone, which became
known as the “Hope marriage”, had revealed Labouchere’s
extraordinary skill in achieving his ends. After a three years’
apprenticeship with Hopes he had asked, at the age of twenty-
two, for a partnership in the firm. Although his sterling qualities
were greatly appreciated, his request was, not surprisingly,
turned down. He then enquired whether, if he were Sir Francis
Baring’s son-in-law, he would be acceptable. The answer was in
the affirmative. When Labouchere asked Baring for his daughter’s
hand, he again received a negative reply, but, when he enquired
whether he would be acceptable if he were a partner in Hopes,
 the answer was again in the affirmative. Both marriage and
 partnership were now assured. This was a measure of the diplo¬
 matic skill which Fouche and Ouvrard were hoping to employ.
    However, the news Labouchere brought from London was
rather depressing. Although the British Cabinet had expressed
no interest in the fate of Holland, they did lay down one sub¬
 stantial condition, namely that the Bourbons—Charles IV and
his son Ferdinand—whom Napoleon had driven out of Spain by
 cunning and deceit, should be restored to the throne. This showed,
therefore, that the Emperor’s peace overtures had met with no
success whatever. Although Napoleon appeared to think seriously
for some weeks about resuming the talks, he finally realized that
these would be hopeless and quietly dropped the idea. In these
circumstances it was clearly impossible for Ouvrard to send
Labouchere back to London with fresh instructions. The memory
of the courteous but firm reception the envoy had received from
British politicians was still too fresh. Ouvrard therefore made
use of the delay to obtain some kind of legal backing for his own
plan. Having failed to gain an audience with Napoleon, he
decided to try an approach in writing. On 21st March he wrote a
letter to the Emperor from Amsterdam, in which he explained
114                          Ouvrard

how much was to be gained by making peace with England and
how, at the same time, the British could be outmanoeuvred: once
peace had been concluded, the Bourbons, exiled from Spain,
could be put on the throne in Central America, which, in any
case, belonged to them; this would give France a new political
base from which to operate, particularly as there would be the
possibility of arranging a marriage between the Spanish Crown
Prince, the Prince of Asturias, and a princess from the Bonaparte
family; Central America was an ideal centre from which to reach
other territories, particularly South America, where the British
were already expanding their interests; finally, “the Emperor of
America would give his daughter to the King of Mexico”,
England would thus be hemmed in and British trade would be
denied not merely Continental but also all American ports. “This
means the ruin of England”; to bring it about, all that was
needed was not a genuine but merely a patched-up peace, which
restored the freedom of the seas for about a year, so that any
concessions France might have to make need not be taken too
seriously.
  Needless to say, he waited in vain for an answer from Paris.
Napoleon was now preoccupied with preparations for his mar¬
riage to Marie-Louise and probably paid little attention to the
memorandum. Had he done so he would undoubtedly have
brought Ouvrard’s schemes to an abrupt end. However, Napoleon
did not even react a few weeks later when Ouvrard tried to renew
contact by a method he had already employed before, by making
a formal offer—although he was still an official bankrupt—of
ioo million francs in cash.
  So Ouvrard still had time to go on spinning his English web.
Through Francis Baring, Labouchere made another approach to
the Foreign Secretary, the Marquis Wellesley, and all three were
under the impression that the proposals they were discussing
stemmed from Napoleon. In fact the proposals, making several
concessions, came from Fouche. What Ouvrard was now sug¬
gesting as a basis for a peace settlement, in sharp contrast
to the ideas he had submitted to the Emperor, was nothing
more nor less than a partition of America between Britain
         The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   115

and France: Britain was to annex North America, and France
South America; Mexico in the middle (with her silver dollars
and mines!) was reserved for Ouvrard’s good friends the
Spaniards.
    This scheme was perhaps not so fantastic as it sounds. At any
 rate Wellesley and Canning (the previous Foreign Secretary, who
 advised Wellesley on foreign affairs) actually discussed at great
 length the proposals that Baring forwarded to them in April. On
 the 17th the proposals were accepted by the Cabinet as the basis
 for negotiations. When Baring reported this news from England,
 Ouvrard, his plans on the verge of success, set off for Paris to
 get further instructions from Fouche. The Minister of Police
 might well have been able to get official support for these plans.
 But unfortunately Napoleon decided to set out for Holland at the
 beginning of May to prepare it for formal annexation. His un¬
 suspecting brother, the King of Holland, told him all he knew
 of the second visit which Labouchere had paid to London at
 Ouvrard’s instigation. It was the first Napoleon had heard of a
 resumption of negotiations, without his approval and on an
entirely new basis, which was absolutely unacceptable to him.
Napoleon was beside himself with indignation. The earlier
talks had been authorized by himself while purporting to emanate
from the Dutch Government alone; the present series were en¬
tirely without his approval and yet were assumed to come from
himself. His grievance was not merely that the terms were
entirely unacceptable to himself, but also that Britain was a
country he hated more than any other because it was, in the last
resort, the British alone who stood between him and world
domination. They had not even recognized his imperial title;
in 1805, for example, he was informed that “His Majesty the King
[of England]” had received “the message of the Head of the
French Government”. Whereas the Press throughout the Con¬
tinent had to dance to his tune, in England it was free to caricature
and laugh at him!
   It was, therefore, not surprising that, when Napoleon returned
to Paris, a terrifying storm broke over Ouvrard’s head. When
it then emerged that Fouche was also implicated, Napoleon’s
ll6                          Ouvrard

rage knew no bounds. The session of the Council of State on
2nd June 1810, at which Napoleon sat in judgement on his
Minister of Police, was every bit as nerve-racking as the nine-
hour audience on 26th January 1806. The critical point came
when Fouche—with good reason—refused to arrest Ouvrard;
after all, Ouvrard had sent him regular reports from Amsterdam
in invisible ink by way of a Paris merchant. Fouche was immedi¬
ately dismissed and his successor, Savary, Due de Rovigo,
was told to arrest Ouvrard. So that there should be no warning
given, the order was to be carried out while the Council was still
in session. The police enticed Ouvrard to the house of Madame
Hamelin. He was taking tea there with Madame Hamelin and
Talleyrand, when a senior police officer arrived and asked to
speak to him alone; he was then taken to a waiting carriage, which
was escorted by eight officers of the gendarmerie.
  Ouvrard’s new, compulsory place of residence was, to begin
with, the Abbaye prison, then, a few days later, the Tower of
Vincennes. This was the prison for State criminals. Ouvrard
must have realized that the same prison had housed many dis¬
tinguished but also many ill-fated prisoners before him: Diderot
and Mirabeau, victims of the French Revolution, and a number of
priests and bishops, who had opted for the Pope and against
Napoleon. In one of the rooms in the Tower the Due d’Enghien
had spent the last hours of his life, before Napoleon committed a
travesty of justice and had him shot in the moat. And, as if to
make Ouvrard doubly conscious of his perilous position, the
prison governor objected, in his presence, to accepting the
prisoner under a false name and without a written order of com¬
mittal, on the grounds that, when the prisoner died, it would be
impossible to make out a proper death certificate.
  These gloomy prospects proved, however, to be without
foundation. On the other hand, Ouvrard’s position was unpleasant
enough, particularly as a warder was constantly with him in his
room, day and night. For someone with so many diverse interests
it was extraordinarily difficult to live without books and writing
material, and he kept his mind occupied by scattering a packet of
pins, the contents of which he had already counted, all over the
        The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   117

room and picking them up again. This sometimes took hours.
Fortunately, as the weeks passed, he saw signs that his position
was improving. The official investigation had revealed that he
did not go to London, contrary to what Napoleon had been led
to believe, that the peace proposals drawn up in Amsterdam on
21 st March had actually been reported to the Imperial Chan¬
cellery, and that Ouvrard had asked for the document to be
returned in the event of rejection, which had not been done.
Finally, after Madame Ouvrard had made a moving appeal for
clemency in a private audience with the Emperor, Ouvrard ceased
to be a prisoner of state.
  But Napoleon’s clemency took a peculiar form. No sooner
had Ouvrard been released than he was rearrested as a debtor
to the State. Napoleon was obviously reluctant to set such an
active and uncongenial character at liberty again. It was not for
nothing that he had written to Fouche’s successor at the Ministry
of Police to say that he had never encountered a worse example
of high treason and that this scoundrel had already cost him
two Ministers. So Ouvrard was confronted once more with the
decree of 21st July 1809, as a result of which he had already
been committed to prison, though only for a short time. He was
now held definitely responsible, as guarantor, for the millions of
francs owed by the Spaniards. On this occasion he was not able
to gain his freedom by merely giving bail; he was to spend more
than three years in the debtors’ prison of Sainte-Pelagie. As he
himself remarked, “in France it is always dangerous to be either
creditor or debtor to the government, quite regardless whether
it is a Republic, a Directory, a Consulate or an Empire—the
old traditions outlast every regime, and anyone who incurs the
enmity of a government is outside the law. For such wretches
there is no judiciary, no court of law and no justice—only
officials equipped with arbitrary powers.”
  The prison of Sainte-Pelagie to which Ouvrard was now trans¬
ferred from Vincennes, was at least convivial. Even in the criminal
section, the nephew of the Shah of Persia, Nadir Mirza Shah,
who was imprisoned there in 1802 for beating his coachman in a
public thoroughfare, had created complete chaos by organizing
118                          Ouvrard.

large parties at which the guests had to sit cross-legged and eat
with their fingers, and by laying on a constant supply of flowers,
women and wine. Such conditions were only permitted to foreign
guests in the criminal section but in the debtors’ prison these
facilities were available to any prisoner who could pay for them.
 Ouvrard, who always seemed to be able to produce money and
gold out of empty pockets like a magician pulling rabbits out of
a hat, soon made it clear that even in Sainte-Pelagie he could
afford to live up to his station. He furnished himself a room with
charming, expensive furniture, received many well-known people,
including Prince Laval who frequently lunched with him; there
were dinner-parties, small soirees with charades and whist; when
 Ouvrard received permission to hasten to the bedside of his
dying mother, a fast horse was waiting for him outside the prison
and he galloped off dressed in the most elegant riding habit.
   When Ouvrard ran out of visitors, he still had no reason to
be bored, for his old friends Vanlerberghe, Desprez and Seguin
were fellow inmates on the same charge; there must have been a
touching reunion when Ouvrard arrived from Vincennes. But
he did not enjoy their company for very long; either they did
not have his nerves of steel or perhaps they valued their freedom
more than their money; in short, they were not prepared to take
the risk of serving the maximum sentence of five years in Sainte-
Pelagie. They made their peace with the government. Ouvrard,
on the other hand, was not prepared to surrender his remaining
millions and refused to compromise. Not only did he turn the
situation to good account, he even made it a question of principle,
assuring all his guests that his sole reason for enduring imprison¬
ment was that at least one man must refuse to bend the knee to
force and despotism; if all victims of the government were to do
likewise, then it would find it much more difficult to abuse its
power; such a stand, he argued, was directed against enslavement
in general, in support of the community and against tyrants.
   If he was so determined to cling to his remaining millions,
even at the cost of five years in prison, it was perhaps because
the prospects of fresh conquests were slender indeed. His con¬
tracts with the Spaniards had been cancelled, the war between
         The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   119

Britain and France continued to have a ruinous effect on trade,
and he had even been relieved of the contract for supplying the
army. For all Napoleon’s fury in January 1806, he had still left
 Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe in charge of military and naval pro¬
visions, contrary to general expectations. With remarkable
shrewdness, which, in fact, was the first indication of a business¬
like approach by Napoleon, the Emperor made use of their
commitments to the armed forces to lay his hands on the 141
million francs he was demanding: they had to deliver the goods
 in full, as before, but received only a half or even a third of the
money due to them, the remainder being withheld to pay off
the debt. The new contract was drawn up for a period of six
years and should, therefore, have lasted until 1812, but in 1809
Napoleon cancelled the agreement unilaterally, brushing aside
 Ouvrard’s protests. He had suddenly decided that he would
have no more to do with these merchants, that he could now
 dispense with them.
    Whereas in 1797 Barras, at Ouvrard’s suggestion, had turned
over the provisioning of the navy from a government depart¬
ment to private hands, Napoleon, in order to free his own hands,
reversed the situation and placed the entire army administration
under State control. He set up a State organization, in which
employees of the commercial firms continued to work but which
was headed by State Counsellors. As long as the stocks taken over
by the new company lasted, all was well, but when they ran out
the trouble began. As soon as the young officials appeared in the
main corn-markets to buy up supplies, everyone, knowing their
lack of experience, did their best to cheat them. By the end of
the year the running costs of the new organization had already
gone up by a million francs compared with the cost under
Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe. So Ouvrard, sitting in prison, could
afford to gloat. In 1812, after he had spent exactly two years in
prison, he had even better cause to gloat, when, as a result of a
bad harvest in 1811, there was a serious shortage of grain. The
situation was much more critical than in 1802, when Napoleon,
who had hitherto refused to have any dealings with Ouvrard
and Vanlerberghe, had suddenly become very well disposed and
120                           Ouvrard

summoned them to Malmaison in the middle of the night. In the
spring of 1812 the price of grain was extremely high, and stocks
were   clearly being   hoarded. The shortage      was particularly
severe in the north; in Normandy crowds of hungry beggars
roamed through the fields; in Caen granaries were pillaged. In
such an emergency the Emperor had no choice but to turn once
more to the experts. On this occasion, however, he was not
prepared to leave the merchants to solve the problem by them¬
selves, although they had served him extremely well in 1802; he
thought it would be cheaper simply to take their advice, which
he did, free of charge, in early February, and then to set up a
“comite des subsistances”. But this experiment failed, because
action could only be taken by a majority decision and no one
individual was prepared to carry responsibility. Besides, the real
expert in famine, Ouvrard, was sitting behind bars.
  It was one of the most satisfying moments in Ouvrard’s life
when the government, after three months of fruitless delibera¬
tions, was finally compelled at the end of April to turn to him
for help, even although he was in prison. There was, however,
no suggestion of his release; he was merely asked for his advice,
free of charge. It was an unusual situation, yet Ouvrard behaved
with remarkable dignity. When the Prefect of the Paris Police,
Pasquier, appeared in person to explain the desperate straits in
which the government found itself, Ouvrard did not give him a
cool reception or even make conditions but, perhaps from
vanity, expressed his views on the situation unreservedly. The
following day, 30th April, in a memorandum, he once more gave
a detailed exposition of the whole supply system which he had
followed since the crisis of 1802. In 1802 the blockade had made
normal trade in grain impossible. Food supplies had therefore to
be treated as if they were public funds, which meant that the
demand could only be met in full if there was a reserve. There¬
fore, in this new emergency depots should be set up around Paris,
from which any unforeseen demand could be met by releasing
on to the Paris market specific quantities prescribed by the Prefect
of Police. The size of the reserve stocks would vary according
to the harvest: after a full harvest supplies for four months would
        The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   121

be stored, after a two-thirds harvest supplies for eight months,
after a half-harvest for twelve months. This was the pattern
Ouvrard had followed during his eight years’ contract; the
army Commissariat, on the other hand, had based its distribution
on a day-to-day basis. As a result, the crisis which had arisen
could only be overcome by importing supplies from abroad.
Ouvrard expressed his readiness to explain in greater detail how
the ban on imports could be surmounted. In giving this verbal
assurance, Ouvrard doubtless remembered how, in 1804, the
mere announcement that supplies were being imported had
magically changed the whole situation by bringing out hoarded
stocks on to the market at rapidly falling prices.
  Napoleon apparently decided not to take this last-minute
advice. A week later he cut the Gordian knot. Instead of tackling
the problem as one of supply and demand, he simply issued a
decree on 8th May fixing the price of grain at thirty-three francs
a hectolitre. If this was not enough, then police truncheons would
do the rest. In fact, at this particular time—the end of April and
beginning of May—Napoleon was much too busy with other
things. For it was 1812, the Emperor’s year of destiny. And
Napoleon himself, having decided to risk a Russian campaign,
was more than usually restless; he had a feeling that now was the
moment to stake everything on a single throw. The day after the
grain decree was issued, on 9th May 1812, Napoleon left Paris for
the Russian frontier.
  It is a striking testimony to Ouvrard’s foresight that, even
behind his prison bars, he should have sensed how dangerous
this Russian campaign was, and that he was one of the very
few, if not the only one, to lay his finger on the weakest point.
His first reaction was undoubtedly that of an impotent onlooker,
which for a man of his vitality and pride must have been tre¬
mendously frustrating. He simply could not understand why the
provisioning of an army of such unparalleled size should not
have been entrusted to him, for he alone was equal to it. And it
was beyond his comprehension that others should earn so many
millions while he had to stand idly by, his hands almost literally
tied behind his back. In spite of his strong personal interest,
122                          Ouvrard

however, for the fatally weak point in the Russian campaign
touched him professionally, the words of warning Ouvrard sent
to Napoleon had an almost prophetic ring about them. On 6th
August 1812, several weeks after Napoleon had begun his long
march, Ouvrard decided to point out not only the dangers to
which the Emperor was exposing himself but also ways and
means of avoiding them.
   “The English,” he said, “believe that the forces of nature and
local difficulties are the only weapons which can be used against
the Emperor. Therefore they want to lure him away from his
own lands, thus waging war without fighting battles. This new
system can be rendered ineffectual if all contingencies are pro¬
vided against. What are these hazards after all? The climate? Not
as long as the men are kept well clothed and well fed. Or dis¬
tances? Not as long as supply lines are maintained.”
   Ouvrard then worked out in detail the safeguards which he
thought were necessary and without which, as it turned out, the
whole gigantic enterprise was to collapse. The first was the pur¬
chase (not the requisitioning) of an enormous stock of grain;
for the divisions stationed west of Vilna silos would be set up,
especially in the Baltic area, for supplies would reach them
quickly and cheaply by the sea route; the troops on the march
would be supplied from special depots established at regular
intervals along the advance-route and adequately protected.
   Ouvrard sat in the Sainte-Pelagie prison waiting for an
answer, but none came. He never discovered if Napoleon, who
by this time had advanced beyond Posen, had even seen the
plans. But, if he did so, the Emperor probably decided that the
supply-depots in Warsaw, Modlin, Thorn, Bromberg, Marien-
burg, Marienwerder and Danzig were perfectly adequate, and
that the 300,000 cwt. of flour and two million packets of dry
biscuits in Danzig alone represented an enormous reserve. In
any case, even if he had recognized the value of Ouvrard’s
plans, it would have been too late. He could never have resigned
himself to further months of preparation; his sole thought was to
march and fight. But events showed that Ouvrard’s predictions
were completely accurate. The reserves of grain which Napoleon
        The Great Disaster: the Anglo-French Peace Negotiations   123

had built up were hopelessly inadequate for an army of more
than half a million men, and even the supplies available near the
bases could not be properly distributed because of lack of horses.
The Emperor, in fact, had once again adopted his old system of
supplying the army largely from the territories he conquered.
But on this occasion all such supplies were either removed or
destroyed. Very soon, surprisingly soon, a factor which Napoleon
had hitherto taken for granted became uppermost in his mind:
food. The hollow cry, “Food, food”, echoed across the vast,
frozen Russian steppes. Then came disaster. On 5 th December
1812 Napoleon began his flight home, abandoning his loyal but
defeated army. Behind him he left chaos and a quarter of a
million men dying the most horrible of deaths. Napoleon was
oppressed by the knowledge that ten out of sixteen million francs
in the Imperial Treasury had been lost in the retreat.
   Even if Ouvrard’s ideas had been adopted and carried out to
the last detail, defeat would probably not have been averted.
But the accuracy with which Ouvrard had predicted in his
memorandum that the dangers were the climate and the problem
of supply, showed yet again how foolish Napoleon had been to
refuse the advice of someone so far-sighted and so rich in ideas,
instead of making use of him.
   On 18th December 1812 the Emperor arrived back in Paris.
The circumstances of his return gave Ouvrard little satisfaction.
Napoleon was still so widely feared and, moreover, at that
moment his fate seemed so closely linked with that of France, that
his power did not seem to be in any serious danger. So Ouvrard
remained almost another year in Sainte-Pelagie; not until October
1813, after the Emperor’s authority had suffered a mortal blow
on the battlefield of Leipzig, did the gates of his prison open.
He was escorted to the Chief of Police, the Due de Rovigo, who
later referred to him in the most friendly terms in his memoirs.
On the pretext of a serious illness, which was described in the
official document as a digestive disorder, Ouvrard was released
prematurely and conducted by a police officer to his home.
  Ouvrard was, in a way, the victor. He had served only three
and a half years of his five years’ sentence in the debtors’ prison;
124                           Ouvrard

he had spent his period of imprisonment in the most agreeable
conditions, with comfortable quarters and plenty of diversion;
and he had not paid the government a single franc. Vanlerberghe,
Desprez and Seguin had paid for their weak-minded compromise
by losing all their money, while Ouvrard, the most remarkable
of all the bankrupts, had kept his hidden millions intact.
  For the time being he had to report regularly to the Chief of
Police and he was not allowed to leave the capital. But within
six months the hour of his great adversary had struck. At the
end of March 1814, when the Allies reached the outskirts of Paris,
Ouvrard was nowhere to be found. He had taken advantage of
the general confusion to pack his bags, and an hour before the
Cossacks rode down the Champs Elysees he had left for an
“unknown destination”.
   In fact he retired to an estate near Orleans, which was a symbol
of his victory over the Emperor, for it was one of several pro¬
perties which he had managed to keep out of Napoleon’s clutches.
                                 Eight




              The Banker of the Hundred Days




ON his estate near Orleans, Ouvrard had time enough to
reflect on the incredible turn events had taken. The colossus
had fallen. The man against whom he had fought so bitterly for
fifteen years, the unconquerable, who had forced him down step
by step from his former eminence, was now himself brought
low, deprived of all authority, and could count himself fortunate
merely to have been banished to Elba. Ouvrard, on the other
hand, had preserved his life, his freedom and the remains of his
fortune intact, and, although he had suffered a tremendous set¬
back in his profession, he was nevertheless free to try to regain
his old position.
   Ouvrard’s deep sense of satisfaction was increased when he
received a message from Talleyrand calling on him to return to
Paris. Early in April 1814 he was back in the capital. Here he
found an unexpected and unaccustomed task awaiting him: to
prepare for the return of the exiled Bourbons. Talleyrand in
person appealed to Ouvrard for his assistance.* By Ouvrard’s
own account he agreed with an alacrity which was matched only
by the shortage of time available.
   Ouvrard’s readiness to co-operate was undoubtedly sincere.
He had everything to hope for from the new regime: peace
abroad and stability at home. Peace would help trade and internal
stability would foster credit. The latter was especially important:

   * Talleyrand also made Ouvrard go to meet the Comte d’Artois—the
future Charles X—at Livry shortly before the ceremonial entry into Paris
on the 12th April.—T.A.B.C.
                                  125
126                            Ouvrard

“Treasures of gold and silver do not last for ever; the only-
treasure which is never exhausted is credit.” So Ouvrard had
good reason to welcome the restoration of the Bourbons, who,
in his view, would favour a peaceful, enduring and stable system
of government.
  Uppermost in Ouvrard’s mind was, of course, the determination
to play an active role in the new regime. The prospects were
good: Louis XVIII’s main problem, the state of the country’s
finances, was also close to Ouvrard’s heart. True, the Bourbons
found several hundred million francs in the National Treasury
alone, and tax revenue for 1814 was still to come, but the King
was heavily in debt and there were still many unpaid bills left by
Napoleon. Ouvrard adopted the same method of exploiting this
situation as he had adopted so often before. Without waiting to
be asked, and completely “a fonds perdu \ he had submitted a
finance plan to the Revolutionary Committee of Public Safety,
to the Directory, to the Consulate and to the Emperor Napoleon;
once more, in May 1814, he produced a memorandum which he
had printed and bound at his own expense.
  He began with a profound obeisance to the Royal Throne.
He addressed himself to the “good King”, who “has been recalled
by France to the throne of his fathers”, to the “enlightened
Prince” and “wise ruler”. The King, Ouvrard hoped, would
also lend an ear to what he had to say, for “all Frenchmen who,
by their experience, are in a position to inform the government”,
had a duty and a right to help fulfil the three main objects: to
secure peace externally, to set the internal administration in order,
and to restore financial stability and credit. The necessary supply
of money—and here Ouvrard began to display his wares—must
not be provided, as in the time of the Revolution and the Direc¬
tory, by an inflationary issue of assignats or mandats, by con¬
fiscation and public bankruptcy. He also condemned Napoleon’s
methods, which consisted of monopolies and excessive taxes at
home, with requisitioning and forced levies abroad. Now that a
new government had taken over, the monetary system could be
put in order in the only sensible way, namely, with the help of
credit. This meant, in plain terms, a loan which would be repaid
                   The Banker of the Hundred Days             127

over a specific period—eight to ten years—from the annual
State revenue. With this loan the State would gradually be able
to pay off its debts of between 800 and 1,000 million francs,
on which a moratorium would be declared. In consequence, the
entire loan would merely consist of entries in the State ledgers,
these entries to be offered, for the time being, to the nation’s
creditors in lieu of cash. In this way both the nation and its
creditors would be safeguarded. An essential condition was,
of course, that the budget, which Ouvrard went on to discuss in
detail, should also be put in order.
  Understandably enough, the King’s Finance Minister was not
greatly impressed by this memorandum. He had no intention of
allowing “unauthorized persons” to interfere in his department,
was annoyed by Ouvrard’s reference to a “miserable budget”,
and finally managed to shelve any official discussion of the new
proposals, although a parliamentary commission had been set
up to consider them. As things turned out, this represented a
considerable material loss to the State, for a few years later
Ouvrard’s proposals had to be revived. The loss to Ouvrard
himself was strictly immaterial, for a few months later, on 1st
September 1814, he found another, highly profitable, opening:
he went into partnership with Doumerc. In other words, the
entire State supplies of foodstuffs and fodder were once more
in his hands. It was a remarkable and difficult achievement.
Officially he was still a bankrupt and he did not have sufficient
liquid capital at his disposal for such a major operation. But he
was nothing if not resourceful. Once again he demonstrated the
truth of his basic principle that credit makes money. Hopes in
Amsterdam financed him and provided cover for his business
transactions abroad. In this case Ouvrard was more fortunate
than he was with the peculiar Russian deal of 1814. Talleyrand,
without informing the King, discussed with Ouvrard a plan to
keep—and supply—30,000 of the Russian occupation troops
in Paris for several years. The plan fell through as soon as the
King got wind of it for he realized that this was the surest way
for enemies to undermine his power.
  Before long, however, there was no need of a Russian occupa-
128                          Ouvrard

tion to undermine the position of the Bourbons. They themselves
saw to that. Since 1789 they had either learned nothing or for¬
gotten everything they had learned. The nation’s finances were
treated just as irresponsibly as before, although it should have
been clear by then that England, the real conqueror of Napoleon,
could not have carried on the struggle to the end, had she not
possessed an extremely sound monetary system. The unpopular
indirect taxes were retained, something that might have been
excusable if the Bourbons before the restoration had not promised
to remove them. The government could not make up its mind
to confirm ownership of properties which had been taken from
Royalists by the Revolution and sold. Orphanages were abolished
but colleges for the children of nobility were established. There
was a mass demobilization, as a result of which more than 22,000
officers were placed on the reserve list or sent home. In the
growing discontent, one man only was satisfied: Napoleon.
  On 26th February 1815, barely a year after he had been
deposed, Napoleon escaped from Elba. Everywhere he was
given an enthusiastic welcome. Four weeks later, on 20th March,
he re-entered the Tuileries without a shot having been fired.
Louis XVIII had fled the night before. Ouvrard, in common with
all the others who had assumed that the new House of Bourbon
would last and had made their peace with it, now had to decide
whether to remain or to flee with the “good King”. Characteristic¬
ally, he stayed behind. Once again he resolved to take the bull
by the horns. Not that he stood in any great danger. As he said,
he was no politician but a merchant, who must be permitted to do
business with whoever could make it worth his while. Indeed,
the only serious risk lay in flight, for if Napoleon were to
remain in power it would be extremely difficult for him to return
and resume business.
  So Ouvrard remained. Suppressing any personal sense of
animosity, which he never allowed to interfere with his work,
he immediately set about making himself indispensable to the
new ruler. He reckoned that, if he stood by the Emperor in this
hour of need, then he could surely count upon his lasting friend¬
ship thereafter. After all that had already passed between these
Broker on the Paris Bourse. Coloured woodcut by Guilbaut. (Otto IVolff
                              Collection)




      /■
The Abbaye Prison. Prieux (inv. et del.) Berthault (sculp.) Original title:
“Le Peuple delivrant des gardes francaises a Vabbaye St. Germain le jo Juin
                     1789’’ (Peter Haitan Collection)




The prison tower at Vincennes. Engraving by Berthanet. Original title:
    “ Affaire de Vincennes le 26 Fevrier 1791.” (Otto Wolff Collection)
                      The Banker of the Hundred Days                      129

two adversaries, after the way in which Napoleon, partly out of
vindictiveness, partly out of stupidity, had brought the whole of
Ouvrard’s lifework down about his ears, any such hope or
speculation on Ouvrard’s part may seem naive. But for the
moment Napoleon was really a different man. During his period
in Elba he had learned a number of lessons. Whereas before he
had always put the blame on others, at Grenoble, on his way to
Paris, he solemnly declared that he had been too addicted to war
and fame, that in future he would serve the cause of peace and
indeed of freedom, and that his ambition was to be the first
citizen rather than the sovereign of France. He would give the
people a liberal constitution. He now had need of people who
would give him advice and not just reports.
   Ouvrard lost no time in appearing at the Tuileries. In his
memoirs he said that Napoleon summoned him. At this first
encounter Ouvrard adopted an approach, which had not pro¬
duced the desired impression on Napoleon in the past but which
could not fail at such a critical time. He surprised Napoleon with
a question which had welcome implications: “Do you need
money?” There was nothing Napoleon needed more and an
agreement was immediately concluded for a loan of fifty million
francs in cash to be paid within twenty days. Ouvrard knew he
would have no difficulty in finding the money. He was in a
position to dictate terms, and the terms provided the money.
Firstly, the government was to pay immediately the fifteen
million francs which the State owed the firm of Doumerc, of
which Ouvrard was the real proprietor. Secondly, as security
in exchange for the 50 million, Ouvrard received five million of
consolidated rentes. Thirdly, the issue-price of the stocks was to
be fifty, regardless of the market rate.*
   * The French investor buys rentes as an annuity and therefore expresses
their value according to the interest they yield rather than by their face
value. His British counterpart, on the other hand, always refers to A100
nominal of two and a half per cent Consolidated Stock (for example) as
£100, never as the value of the interest (in this case £2 ioj.) to be obtained
from it. In the present deal, therefore, Ouvrard was getting an equivalent
in 5 per cent rentes to the fifty million francs of cash he was providing. At
the market price of fifty on which he insisted, he obtained 100 millions
nominal, which are here described as five millions.
    K
130                           Ouvrard

   The deal was satisfactory for both parties. The Emperor
received the money he so badly needed, while Ouvrard made a
substantial profit on the exchange. He maintained that the stocks
were quoted at no more than 53 on the market, but, according to
others, the rate varied between 63£ and 67I; it certainly seems
safe to assume that it was no lower than at the end of 1815 when
it stood at 57 or 58 francs. This was the first time Ouvrard had
dealt in government securities. Previously one had only general
reports of his stock exchange activities, which frequently in¬
volved him in appalling losses. But his first major deal in govern¬
ment securities was so promising that one understands why, from
then on, he always fell back on this form of investment, which pro¬
vided enough room for speculation but also an element of stability.
   From what one knows of Ouvrard—particularly the prepara¬
tions he made for the Spanish venture with Barbe-Marbois—
this loan, for all the handsome profit it yielded, was merely a
first step towards something quite different. Ouvrard wras too
well acquainted with Napoleon and the international situation
not to know that war was inevitable. The Allies, who had begun
to fall out with one another at the Congress of Vienna, had been
reunited by Napoleon’s return to the scene and were marching
in unison against him. On the French side the Purveyor General,
in other words the man responsible for all supplies on land and
water, was—Ouvrard. He had waited fifteen years for this
appointment, fifteen years to regain a position of which Napoleon
had deprived him in January 1800. The Emperor, on the other
hand, had certainly not decided to entrust him with supplies in
order that Ouvrard could carry out his latest plan of meeting
the cost of the war in enemy territory by general taxation instead
of the arbitrary and ruthless system of requisitioning. However
admirable Ouvrard’s plan may have been, those critical months
were no time for such experiments. Ouvrard was made respon¬
sible for supplies because there was no one else who could be
trusted to do the job efficiently.
  So, on 18th June 1815, Ouvrard was present on the fateful
battlefield of Waterloo. Even for him it was a painful experience,
for it brought the official status, for which he had fought so
                   The Banker of the Hundred Days                 131

skilfully, to an untimely end. Ouvrard’s dream had also lasted
a mere hundred days. But at least he tried to give it decent
burial. If Ouvrard is to be believed, Napoleon asked him to
give him several millions against guaranteed rentes and to take
custody of his personal valuables. Ouvrard refused, because he
might thereby have placed himself in a dangerous position. It is
not unlikely that Napoleon still had die one-and-a-half millions
in gold, which he had deposited before the Russian campaign on
the estate of his Minister of Postal Services, Count Lavalette.
But Ouvrard had no hesitation in hiding Napoleon’s brother
Jerome, the King of Westphalia, on his brother’s estate at
Domy (although he had not been particularly well treated by
any member of the family). He also allowed Colonel Labedoyere,
one of the first to join Napoleon after his escape from Elba, to hide
in his own house in Paris and gave him money to make what turned
out to be a tragically unsuccessful attempt to escape to America.
  Gestures of this kind, some of which became public knowledge,
were naturally not likely to recommend Ouvrard to the new
government. If he believed that he would at least be left in
peace, he was mistaken. The Reactionary movement spread
throughout the country. At times the royalists were as barbarous
as the Jacobins had been. Some supporters of Napoleon or of
the Republic were lynched. Marshal Ney and Colonel Labedoyere
were executed; the wife of Lavalette, the Minister, who had organ¬
ized her husband’s escape from the Conciergerie, was held so
long in prison that she lost her reason. And the Finance Minister
lost no time in demanding a refund of certain sums which Napo¬
leon had paid.
   This method was clearly designed to take revenge on such
people as Ouvrard. The Finance Minister had his own private
reasons for taking this step, for he was the Abbe Louis, Baron
by the grace of Napoleon. Abbe Louis had not forgotten the
reception he was given by Hopes in 1806, when Napoleon sent
him to Amsterdam to seize Ouvrard’s assets. Nor had he pre¬
sumably forgotten that Ouvrard, a year before, had described
his budget as “miserable”. Abbe Louis had coined the phrase
that there was no one in France powerful enough to receive
132                           Ouvrard

Ouvrard with impunity. He was, therefore, delighted to find
himself at last in a position to hit back at Ouvrard. He gave in¬
structions for the re-transfer of the five million francs in rentes,
which had been registered in Ouvrard’s name, the pretext being
that all the necessary formalities had not been observed in the
original transfer and that the profits from it had been too high.
It transpired, however, that the securities, in so far as they had
been paid out, had long since changed hands. The Finance
Minister, whose methods were somewhat unorthodox, tracked
down the new owners and, in order to force them to press
Ouvrard for compensation, imposed a general ban on the official
transfer of debt claims. This immediately created chaos on the
Bourse. The brokers rebelled against this preposterous ban and
the whole money market closed down. Ouvrard went in fury
to Talleyrand, the Prime Minister, who could not believe that his
Finance Minister had been guilty of such extraordinary behaviour.
Abbe Louis, with a sour face, withdrew his decree but he did
succeed in preventing Ouvrard from laying his hands on those
securities, originally worth 1,500,000 francs, which had not yet
been transferred. But, as Ouvrard had already sold them, although
they had not been formally handed over, he was now obliged
to compensate the purchaser at a higher exchange rate, and for
this purpose he had to find 2,500,000 francs.
  Thus the unfortunate Ouvrard had hardly succeeded in
settling all his differences with Napoleon when this financial
bureaucrat blocked his path. Abbe Louis’s talents were not much
above average and he had neither the breadth nor the keenness
of vision of Ouvrard, but he was the Minister and he was in
power. For the moment at least, Ouvrard could only bide his
time till the opportunity arose for him to take his revenge. And
the opportunity did arise.
  Throughout his period of office Abbe Louis was saddled with
a deficit, which he could not reduce, of 800 million francs. The
ultimate humiliation for the Finance Minister came when it was
eventually discovered that Ouvrard alone could devise a plan
whereby the government’s debts would be paid and the occupa¬
tion of the country brought to a premature end.
                               Nine




 The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation




 The second Treaty of Paris was signed in November 1815.
The main problems now facing France were financial prob¬
lems, and of these one was uppermost in the minds of the public:
how to remove the burden of reparations and pay the occupation
costs. In the first Treaty of Paris the Allies, with what then may
seem incredible magnanimity, had waived their claims to war
 damages. But Napoleon’s return had necessitated the elaborate
preparation of a second campaign against France, and the Allies
were no longer in the mood to write off the debt which amounted
to 700 million francs. In view of what had happened, it was
decided to leave an army of 150,000 men on French soil, till
“peace and order” had been restored. The maximum period of
occupation was fixed at five years, the minimum at three. France
was to be responsible for the maintenance of the occupying
army, which amounted—at three francs per head per day—to
some 150 million a year. At the same time, the various Allied
governments demanded reparations totalling about 500 million.
The Bourbons had to meet outstanding internal debts of 650
million left over from the Napoleonic period. This made a
grand total of some 2,000 million francs, which had to be
found, quite apart from the money needed to run the country.
Moreover, the value of the franc inside France was still very high
in 1815.
  Even with someone more ingenious than Abbe Louis in charge
of its finances, the French Government would have been faced
                               133
134                           Ouvrard

with an almost insoluble problem. Where the money was to
come from was a complete mystery, as the public coffers were
empty and the screw of taxation had already been turned too
far. The possibility of floating an internal loan by issuing govern¬
ment securities seemed, to say the least, unlikely, as no one would
subscribe to it and the insolvency of France and her government
would merely be confirmed. The sole result would be that the
previous issue, which in any case had lost 50 per cent of its value
on the Bourse, would become mere waste-paper. So what was
obviously needed was some expedient whereby repayment of
debts could be deferred, but no one could think of a formula.
Abbe Louis created havoc in the world of commerce by trying
to impose a forced loan on large private fortunes, but it was soon
clear that this economically unsound principle would produce a
mere 100 million francs, which was only enough to cover the
support costs of the occupation troops for eight months.
  In France the year 1815 ended in an atmosphere of acute
depression. Only one man in Paris was still as optimistic as
ever—Ouvrard. He had reason to be. At a time when all the
leading men in the country were in a state of despair, because
they could see no way out of what seemed a hopeless situation,
Ouvrard was quite confident that he knew the solution. He was
convinced that, if France followed his advice, she would not
only be able to pay off these debts but to do so within a very
short time.
  Ouvrard’s ideas, which subsequently turned out to be per¬
fectly practicable, would probably never have been realized if
Abbe Louis, his personal enemy, had remained Finance Minister.
For he would rather have declared the State bankrupt than accept
help from Ouvrard. But Baron Louis disappeared in September
1815 with the Talleyrand administration. During the Vienna
Congress, in other words before Napoleon’s return from Elba,
Talleyrand had been working for an alliance between Austria,
England and France against Russia. The indignation this had
aroused in Alexander hardly made Talleyrand the ideal man to
co-operate with the Allies in liquidating what was left of Napo¬
leon’s empire. His place was taken by the Due de Richelieu.
            The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation   135

Talleyrand remarked mockingly, and not without reason, that
it was an excellent choice, as there was no one in France who
knew more about the Crimea. For Richelieu was a complete
newcomer to politics and, indeed, a politician against his will.
Political activity of any kind had always been anathema to him.
Yet now, because his country called him, he was compelled “to
fling himself into this frightful abyss of passion, vice and cor¬
ruption”.
  It is, in fact, true to say that he could not ignore the call, for
he was the type of great leader who so often appears almost from
nowhere in a nation’s hour of need. Contemporary cartoonists
did him an injustice when they showed him walking on stilts in
an effort to correct his natural leanings. If the King chose to call
upon Richelieu, it was because he was extremely highly respected
abroad. He had spent twenty-five of his forty-eight years outside
France, fought with the Russian army against the Turks, and,
while serving as Governor of the Crimea, founded the modern
city of Odessa, where, on Alexander’s instructions, a bust of him
was erected with the words: “In honour of Richelieu from a
grateful Odessa.” There seemed reason to hope that this man
with the bluest of blood in his veins and a wide horizon acquired
from his travels would give outstanding service both at home
and abroad and that he was particularly well equipped to do
justice both to the Crown and to a liberal parliament. The more
so, as his excellent qualities were widely recognized: his tolerance
and   simplicity,   his   charitable   disposition and incorruptible
character, his nobility and his moderation were universally
acknowledged.
   Ouvrard naturally found no difficulty in gaining access to
someone with such an open mind and to his Finance Minister,
Count Corvetto. Richelieu’s profound sense of duty was in
itself a guarantee that even the ideas of a merchant without any
official status would be given a careful hearing. Ouvrard’s plans
certainly called for the utmost forbearance: in the context of 1815
they must have seemed fantastic. Ouvrard was riding his old
hobby-horse: “Taxes kill, debts stimulate.” His plan was essen¬
tially the same as the proposals he had submitted time and again
136                           Ouvrard

 to the Revolutionary Committee of Public Safety, the Directory
 and the government of Napoleon: the establishment of a very
 large National Debt, a very long-term loan, which would be
secured by an independent Sinking Fund. The present, said
 Ouvrard, could only be safeguarded by mortgaging the future.
These principles seemed, at first sight, particularly unrealistic,
because the government had already tried, without much success,
 to float a loan on the Paris market. But Ouvrard was given an
 opportunity to elaborate his plan at a Cabinet meeting.
 He argued that:
    A State which cannot raise credit cannot develop.
    A nation can raise credit only if it pays its debts.
    The war debts must, therefore, be paid and as soon as possible.
    As there was no ready money available and taxation to provide
       the required amount was not feasible, to borrow was the
      only alternative.
    Domestic loans were, for the time being, unobtainable; the
       foreign debts must, therefore, be paid with foreign money.
    Foreign money could be obtained by issuing French govern¬
      ment bonds, in other words, against loan certificates, but
      only if this National Debt was secured by a Sinking Fund.
    The Sinking Fund could draw on revenue from State forests
       and eventually on slightly increased taxation.
    This rapid liquidation of war debts, according to Ouvrard,
would immediately improve the State’s credit at home and so
automatically increase the exchange rate of the old government
bonds. At the same time, a run would begin in France on the new
issue as soon as foreign buying started. In this way France would
build up a “truly national public debt”, in which individual
citizens would actively participate.

   Ouvrard’s plan was received with the utmost bewilderment.
It seemed at that particular time highly paradoxical that money
should be found abroad to pay foreign debts. Furthermore, it was
hard to imagine what foreign buyers would be attracted by the
new issue, which would run into thousands of millions. Ouvrard’s
answer was that the Allies themselves were to buy the entire
           The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation        137

issue, and, in fact, without any reservations concerning changes
in the market price; moreover, the Allied governments would
recognize the issue of the bonds in itself as tantamount to pay¬
ment. This last condition made Ouvrard’s plan seem even more
astonishing. It was inconceivable that die Allies, who were short
of money themselves, would accept bonds issued by a State
which was nearly bankrupt and which could give no sort of
guarantee that the market price of the loan issue would remain
stable. So the Allies would have to carry the entire risk. Further¬
more, it was almost certain that, as soon as they offered a large
consignment of these bonds for sale, their value would drop well
below die market price.
   Ouvrard was not in the least put out by such objections,
which he had already foreseen. He had worked out four safe¬
guards, which would protect the Allies against all risks. Firstly,
the issue must be large enough to cover all the reparations, thus
freeing France of all outstanding obligations and gradually
reviving international confidence in her; her stock would then
rise, not fall. Secondly, the stability of the market quotation
could, to some extent, be guaranteed by the size of the inde¬
pendent sinking fund, because every buyer could then be certain
of receiving payment in full, when it was due. Thirdly, the Allies,
for their part, could stabilize the price by not immediately selling
any of the bonds. Fourthly, when they were eventually sold,
it would be not by the governments themselves but by a bank
experienced in international finance and able to place major
stocks skilfully on the market.
   So the success of Ouvrard’s plan depended, in the final
analysis, on finding a firm able and willing to carry a tremendous
responsibility of this kind, and which enjoyed the confidence of
the Allied governments. There was no doubt in Ouvrard’s mind
that the only possible candidate was the firm of Baring Brothers
of London, at that time the biggest financial concern in the
world. In 1816 its head was Alexander Baring,* son of Francis
Baring, who, before his death in 1810, had turned the family

   * Alexander Baring’s grandfather had emigrated from Bremen, where his
father was a Lutheran preacher.
138                          Ouvrard.

firm of cloth manufacturers into a banking-house. The pheno¬
menal expansion of Barings under Alexander was due largely to
the fact that, while studying in America, he ignored the only
two pieces of advice given him by his father: not to buy unculti¬
vated land and not to marry. He bought 100,000 dollars’ worth
of land in Pennsylvania and married a woman who not only
bore him nine children but eventually inherited almost a million
dollars from her father.
   Ouvrard had connections with Alexander Baring, for the
leading figure in Hopes, P. C. Labouchere, had married Alex¬
ander’s sister. The English firm had also been involved, together
with Hopes, in the Mexican deal, planned by Ouvrard. More¬
over, Alexander himself, who served part of his apprenticeship
with Hopes before going to America, must have had business
dealings with Ouvrard.
   So there was nothing fantastic about Ouvrard’s proposal to
make his whole scheme dependent on the participation of such a
powerful, far-sighted and respected figure. The English firm was
interested. But the time was not yet ripe; the French Finance
Minister, Count Corvetto, had not Richelieu’s courage, and the
Allies were not yet in the right frame of mind. They still believed
that they would get their money without lifting a finger them¬
selves and, when it did not materialize, blamed the French for
the wastefulness of their national budget.
   Only with the passage of time and under pressure of events
did they begin to see reason. For another year and more, how¬
ever, as it became more and more difficult to get the French to
pay, the Allies threatened to increase their occupation forces and
even to occupy whole provinces of France in lieu of reparations.
“The French,” it was said, “will never change.” The French,
for their part, continued to complain of the “excessive demands”
made by the other side, and there was growing “dissatisfaction
throughout the entire country over the enormous reparations
and forced levies, which imposed a much too heavy burden on
the nation”. (Memoirs.) Finally the point was reached where
the Treasury in Paris was completely empty and where there
seemed no possibility of even paying the current occupation
          The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation     139

costs. The leading French Ministers realized that this was bound
to produce tremendous political repercussions. To begin with,
they looked round once more for a stopgap. The bankers were
summoned but again gave a negative reply. Then Ouvrard was
asked for a loan of at least sixty million francs, but, while he was
quite prepared to make another deal with the government, he
had even fewer illusions about the facts of the situation than
the Ministers. His reply was couched in typically bold terms: “No
one can raise sixty million for the government’s present needs;
but it would be child’s play to raise a thousand million to enable
 the government to meet all the Allied demands.” Ouvrard was
 back on his old course.
    Meanwhile, the position of France had become so critical that
the government had no alternative but to adopt Ouvrard’s plan.
He was sent to London to discuss the situation with Barings.
Together with Labouchere he spent a weekend at Alexander
Baring’s estate outside London. The plan which Ouvrard put
forward was still essentially the same: the Allies would take over
the new issue of French bonds at a fixed rate, Barings and Hopes
would be jointly responsible for underwriting it and would
later sell against a fixed commission. Developments in 1816
had made it essential that the issue of bonds should also cover the
occupation costs, and Ouvrard suggested to his colleagues that
they should advance him 160 million a year for this purpose and
should agree to accept repayment in the new French bonds.
   Alexander Baring and Labouchere agreed in principle but
insisted that any final settlement must depend upon the attitude
of the Allies and on the details of the transaction being acceptable
to them. This was all that Ouvrard wanted. The agreement in
principle of two such powerful financial concerns provided
Ouvrard with a lever which he could apply to the Allies. More¬
over, when he returned to Paris, he was given the contract—
again in the name of Doumerc—to supply all the occupation
forces. But, while this was by no means unimportant to Ouvrard,
the overriding fact was that he was the man on whose skill and
acumen the success of a great national mission now depended.
The Prime Minister, Richelieu, gave full powers to Ouvrard to
 140                        Ouvrard

  conduct alone the preliminary negotiations with the Allies oil
  the payment of war debts. Once again, as in the splendid Madrid
 period, he had become a State Commissioner, and it seemed
 once more that the ideas he had formed during his years of
 apprenticeship in Nantes of the businessman playing a major
 part in world affairs were to be borne out in practice.
    At the beginning of December Ouvrard set out to meet the
 man who had more say in a settlement with France than all the
 Allied ambassadors in Paris put together—Wellington. The Duke
 of Wellington, who had reached the rank of major-general at
 the age of thirty-four, and who by his Spanish victories paved
 the way for the eventual overthrow of Napoleon, was universally
regarded not only as a man of rare distinction but also as possess¬
ing a cool, calculating brain, in fact as a very shrewd negotiator.
If he could be won over to Ouvrard’s plan, then it would not be
difficult to get the Allies to accept it. And there seemed, on the
face of it, no reason why Wellington should not agree, for he
knew better than most how powerful, prudent and responsible
the firm of Barings was.
    When Ouvrard met the Duke at the Hotel Bellevue in Brussels,
on 5 th December 1816, he found him highly mistrustful and full
of resentment over the difficulties of supplying the occupation
army under his command. He threatened to increase the number
of troops. Ouvrard, who always favoured the direct approach in
any such discussion, suggested that, on the contrary, the occupa¬
tion forces should be reduced by a fifth; this would make it all
the easier to supply the remainder, would cut down France’s
public expenditure, improve her credit, so raising the market
price of rentes and improving the prospects for a fresh loan—
which the Allies en bloc would take over in repayment of war
debts. Ouvrard then explained in detail the plan he had worked
out with Baring and Hope, underlined the fact that they had
agreed in principle, and within two days, thanks to his extra¬
ordinary powers of persuasion, had overcome Wellington’s
suspicions and convinced him that there was no other way by
which the Allies could receive their money.
    The plan was now set in motion. Wellington despatched a
            The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation           141

 courier to Castlereagh in London, suggesting that he confer
with Baring, Ouvrard had no sooner reported back to Paris
 than he was off to England again on a fresh mission. In London
he won the enthusiastic support of the French Ambassador, the
Marquis d’Osmond, who for a whole year had been fruitlessly
searching for a solution. Wellington himself returned home and
talked the Cabinet into giving the scheme its blessing. So one of
 Baring’s conditions was already in part fulfilled: that all the
Allied governments should give their unanimous approval.
Wellington travelled in person to Paris and stayed in Ouvrard’s
house in the Rue des Champs Elysees. On 8th January 1817 a
reparations conference opened in Ouvrard’s house, which was
attended by Wellington, Richelieu, the Finance Minister,
Corvetto and Ouvrard. The findings of this conference were
submitted to the Allied ambassadors, accepted by them and
immediately forwarded to the various Courts.
   In the meantime Ouvrard managed to entice Baring and
Labouchere to Paris, although they had told him that they were
not prepared to become involved in further negotiations till the
Allies and the French had reached a definite decision; he per¬
suaded the somewhat credulous Ambassador, d’Osmond, to
invite them to visit Richelieu, who was taken by surprise when
they arrived on 14th January. But Ouvrard’s stratagem worked,
for it was now possible to complete the final details and save a
considerable amount of time. The Allies were relieved to find
that there was at last a real prospect of being paid in full and they
gave their unreserved approval.* On 10th February the first
tranche of the loan was issued, a round nine million rentes
at an interest rate of 5 per cent and repayable at 100 francs a
   * Although Wolff does not specifically say so, the reminiscences of the
 Comtesse de Boigne (daughter of the French Ambassador in London,
d’Osmond) make it clear that Ouvrard employed the same kind of bluff
that he had used in the peace negotiations of 1810. He now speciously repre¬
sented to the other parties that Baring and Labouchere were prepared to
undertake the loan issues on terms acceptable to everyone when in fact the
bankers had not even discussed any such terms. When his bluff was even¬
tually called, it was Wellington and the Russian Ambassador Pozzo di
Borgo who threw all their efforts into bringing the negotiations to a satis¬
factory conclusion.—T.A.B.C.
 142                                 Ouvrard

piece. The Allies bought the whole issue at a take-over of 52^
francs.*
   The operation was staggeringly successful. Everything turned
out exactly as Ouvrard had predicted, and Alexander Baring’s
precautions proved for the most part to be unnecessary. For as
soon as it became known that the loan issue was being purchased
abroad, and indeed by the Allied governments themselves,
France’s credit was fully restored. No sooner did people realize
that, for the time being at least, the bonds were not for sale, than
they were anxious to buy them. As a result there was a slow but
steady improvement in the price. The clearest indication of
Ouvrard’s success was the fact that Barings and Hopes, who
until then had firmly declined to invest in the loan themselves,
suddenly expressed an interest in taking over the entire issue
instead of merely acting as brokers for the Allied governments.
The scene at the Bourse was reminiscent of the South Sea Bubble.
All the streets leading to it were blocked and people literally
came to blows in their eagerness to obtain some of the new
   * In order to help the reader, a list of the various loans (all at 5 per cent)
is set out here. All values are in millions of francs.
    Date        Proceeds Issue      Nominal     Interest          Participants
               to Govern¬ rate        value      value
                  ment
Feb. 1817         ioo-o      5 51     181 -8       9-1           Barings and Hopes
April             ioo-o      m        172-4        8-6           Barings and Hopes
                  115-2
                                                             f § Barings and Hopes
July                         64!      180-0        9-0     -j
                                                             (| French bankers
March 1818         s>   CO             40-0       2-0
                   vt                                            Barings and Hopes
May               197-9      66|      298-5      149             Issued on Bourse
                /165-0       67       246-3      12-3            Barings and Hopes
October
                b 100-0      74       132-3       6-6            Barings and Hopes

                  803-9


   t This rate includes       commission, which should be deducted from the
issue rate, and its value from the “Proceeds to Government”, in order to
arrive at the net figure.
   It will be noted that as the French Government’s credit steadily improved,
Barings and Hopes voluntarily shared some of the issue with such Paris
banks as Perr6gaux and Laffitte and also waived their 2£ per cent commission.
The issue of May 1818 was made entirely without the aid of bankers and
was over-subscribed more than ten times.—T.A.B.C.
           The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation          143

government annuities. The army had to be called in to restore
order.
   As further instalments were issued what had seemed the most
grotesque of Ouvrard’s prophecies came true, namely that as
the number of bonds increased, their value would go up. A
further eight million were issued in April at 55$ instead of 52J.
The July issue (nine million) rose to 6i\. By March 1818 the
issue price for two million had gone up to 64J, and when Barings
and Hopes issued the last twelve million, they started at 67. By
December 1818 they stood at 75.
   A complete transformation had been wrought in France’s
financial position. Whereas in 1816 the Treasury had only been
able to raise money on the domestic market at 15 to 20 per cent
per annum, in 1817 large funds were being offered voluntarily
at 4 to 5 per cent. As for the occupation forces, they had been
reduced by a fifth, bringing the support costs down by 20 per
cent.* The most remarkable achievement, however, was that
within an astonishingly short time most of the war debts had
been paid off, and France’s internal stability gave her a con¬
tractual right to demand the early departure of the occupation
forces.
   In September 1818 the Allied monarchs met in Aix-la-Chapelle
(or Aachen) to consider whether the occupation should be ended
after three instead of five years. As the King of Prussia, the
Emperor of Austria, the Tsar of Russia and finally the Due de
Richelieu arrived with full military pomp, the old imperial city
relived something of its glorious past, its thirty-six coronations
and its twenty-seven imperial assemblies. Yet to a casual visitor
the streets, which had been completely transformed, must have
suggested a trade fair rather than a political conference; there was
an impressive display of trinkets, china, jewellery, paintings,
tapestries and all kinds of other goods, while the centre of the
town was chock-a-block with Highnesses and Excellencies, with

  * Although the nominal rate of interest offered was 5 per cent, investors
who obtained 100 francs’ worth of stock for each payment of, say, 60 francs
(when the issue price was 60) would in fact be earning 5 francs per year on
each 60 francs invested =     per cent.—T.A.B.C.
144                             Ouvrard

Royal Prussian chamberlains and Imperial Russian generals and
Ministers. There was also a large camp-following of artists,
singers and painters, of English boxers and balloonists, all of
whom hoped to do good business. There were plenty of elegant
ladies like the beautiful Madame de Recamier, who went out
walking with Prince August of Prussia, and, as a contemporary
chronicler observed, the citizens of Aix-la-Chapelle “were sure
to catch a glimpse from time to time of the most illustrious
sovereigns, radiating geniality and charm, and to have an oppor¬
tunity of paying their due respects with childlike confidence”.
   Meanwhile, the Allied leaders had set to work behind closed
doors to try to clear up the last remaining problems. On 9th
October the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle was signed:* Allied troops
would leave French soil by the end of November; Allied claims
still outstanding were fixed at 265 million francs, 100 of which
were paid at once to the Allied governments, in French rentes,
the remainder in bills on Hopes and Barings.|
   Ouvrard’s great plan had thus been fully realized. He himself
had little more to do in Aix-la-Chapelle than take the air and
arrange dinner-parties. But the importance of his contribution to
these negotiations, which were so vital to France, was reflected
in the presence of his business friends, Barings and Hopes, at all
stages of the discussions. “Was not the settlement of France’s
financial problems,” he enquired of his friends in Aix-la-Chapelle,
“at a time when the country was in danger of collapsing under the
sheer weight of its obligations, one of the greatest miracles which
we have experienced in an age so rich in miraculous events?”
   Ouvrard, one would have thought, had earned the gratitude of
the French Government in particular. For months he had worked
with endless patience and skill, not, of course, merely out of
enthusiasm for his scheme or out of patriotism, but because, like
Hop es and Barings, as a financier he was interested in making

   * See Appendix IV.
   t 100 million of these were paid at once to the Allied governments at
75'575j which Barings and Hopes purchased at 74-074. The remaining 165
million were covered by nine monthly acceptances on Barings and Hopes.—
T.A.B.C.
Louis XVIII and Napoleon. Anonymous English caricature (1814-15).
Original title: A Pleasent Draught for Louis or the way to get rid of a
                Troublesom fellow. (Peter Haitan Collection)
Armand-Emmanuel, Due de Richelieu. Drawing by Laguiche after the    Julien   Ouvrard, Ouvrard’s son. Lithograph       by E.   David,
painting by Lawrence. Engraving by F. Lignon, dated 1824. {Paris,                   {Paris, Bibliotheque Nationals)
                       Bibliotheque Nationals)
          The Great Achievement: a Merchant Frees the Nation    145

money. But even before the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle set the
seal on his work, he had made the galling discovery that he stood
to gain nothing. All he had asked was that twelve million of the
government bonds should be sold to him—against cash—at the
Allies’ issue price, so that he would at least receive some benefit
 from the improvement in the rate, which he had predicted. The
 Finance Minister, Count Corvetto, who had played only a minor
 role in the whole operation, refused this concession on the
 grounds that he could no longer remember having given Ouvrard
any verbal assurance. So once again Ouvrard emerged empty-
handed, for he had been relying upon the good faith of the
 government and had not claimed any commission from Barings.
 On the other hand, Barings and Hopes, according to one of their
employees, made a profit of eight million francs. In the circum¬
stances it was understandable that Ouvrard should complain
bitterly that the Finance Ministry had given him the most solemn
assurances as long as it needed him but had dropped him as soon
as he had done what was required of him.
    Ouvrard had occasion before long to use the same words in
quite another context. Since the fall of Napoleon, he and Vanler-
berghe had been pressing an old claim for 13,200,000 francs,
which, in their view, was still outstanding from the sixty-seven
million which they had spent up to 1804 on supplies for the
planned invasion of England. When Napoleon arbitrarily liquid¬
ated the Mexican undertaking in 1806, he had declared the
remainder of the debt null and void. Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe,
who had never accepted Napoleon’s declaration, eventually
succeeded in having their claim included in the French budgets of
1814-19. But when in 1819, the year following the Congress of
Aix-la-Chapelle, payment was finally demanded, the Minister
of Marine vetoed it. The case was brought before an administra¬
tive tribunal, not a proper court of justice, and the Minister’s
veto was upheld. The Cabinet, which was no longer headed by
Richelieu, confirmed the verdict and threw out the merchants’
claim. Vanlerberghe was completely ruined. Two days later he
was dead.
  Ouvrard, however, was still very much alive. A year later, in
146                          Ouvrard

July 1820, he submitted to Richelieu, who had returned to
office as Prime Minister, a new plan which provided for a re¬
duction in the property tax by 100 million francs. Before another
year had passed, in June 1821, he came forward with a plan for
developing France’s network of waterways and so stimulating
agricultural production. But in both cases luck was still against
him, for work to implement these schemes had hardly been
started when for the second and last time Richelieu laid down
the burden of office which he had carried so reluctantly. He
resigned.
                                  Ten




                     Aristocratic Relations




D    ESPITE the fact that for twenty years, ever since 18th
Brumaire, Ouvrard’s grandiose schemes had ended unsatis¬
factorily, even sometimes disastrously, the tireless optimism
with which he always made a fresh start was deeply tinged with
realism. Such was his versatility and his innate ability that he
never failed to discover a new avenue, which, suddenly and
surprisingly, opened up yet another horizon full of promise. So,
although in 1818 and 1819 he was denied enormous profits to
which he believed he had a moral and material right, it did not
occur to him to accept defeat.
   He now embarked on the kind of venture which had not so
far figured in his very varied repertoire. At the outset of his career
he had confined himself to purely commercial transactions. Then
he took to politics in order to expand what seemed to him a too
narrow sphere of operations. Finally, in 1820-21, he decided that
the time had come to make an investment of his family. His
daughter Elizabeth was twenty-five and therefore ripe for mar¬
riage. Social convention assumed that she would marry not for
love but as a deliberate act of policy. So Ouvrard behaved quite
properly when he began looking round for a son-in-law who
would further his business interests. Naturally it must be some¬
one of noble birth. For all Ouvrard’s professional self-assurance
and individual way of life, he was not without the sense of in¬
feriority of a humble bourgeois towards the old aristocracy. It
had given him a unique feeling of pride to entertain such celeb¬
rities as Madame de Montesson, morganatic widow of the Due
                                 147
148                           Ouvrard

d’Orleans, the King of Etruria and the Duke of Wellington in
his house. Moreover, in seeking a distinguished match for his
daughter, Ouvrard was merely following a long-established
tradition, for it had become the accepted practice, even under
the old regime, for men of noble family to marry the daughters of
successful merchants. The Intendant General of Taxes, Crozat,
even succeeded in marrying his daughter to a Bourbon, the
Comte d’Evreux. The Intendant General of Taxes, de Pondre,
became the father-in-law of a La Rochefoucauld. The daughter
of the Court banker, de Laborde, became Comtesse Noailles. In
Ouvrard’s own lifetime such alliances between money and blood
were common occurrences; Napoleon had specialized in them.
When General Junot, later Due d’Abrantes, asked to be allowed
to marry a certain Mademoiselle Permon, who had not a penny
to her name, on the grounds that all the eligible heiresses were as
ugly as maggots, the Emperor, who had become deeply indebted
to the Permon family during his youth, advised Junot to think
again and marry a rich woman. In 1805 he himself suggested to
General Rapp that he should marry Mademoiselle Vanlerberghe,
daughter of Ouvrard’s business colleague. Marshal Marmont,
Due de Ragusa, married the daughter of the banker Perregaux.
Mademoiselle Laffitte became Princesse de la Moskowa. Not that
all these men found much happiness with their rich wives.
General Rapp observed with telling brevity in his memoirs:
“Unfortunately the marriage was not a happy one.” Marshal
Marmont’s wife soon grew tired of being left so much on her own,
and, when the Due de Ragusa returned from the wars for good, he
was virtually driven out of his own house by his wife’s friends.
  Little is known either of Elizabeth Ouvrard’s physical attri¬
butes or of her moral qualities. But in 1820 it was quite enough,
despite the setbacks her father had suffered, that he could offer a
prospective son-in-law a dowry of a million francs. There was
no lack of suitors. The Spanish General, Joseph Palafox de Melzi,
was one who tried and failed. A betrothal with Raoul de Mont¬
morency had to be broken off, when the bearer of this dis¬
tinguished name found that, with the death of an uncle, he could
marry his aunt. But Ouvrard soon had reason to be more than
                        Aristocratic Relations                    149

grateful for this apparent reverse, when the opportunity presented
itself of entering into a family relationship with the Prime
Minister himself, the Due de Richelieu. This opened up entirely
new prospects, for, if Richelieu had hitherto given the most sym¬
pathetic hearing to Ouvrard’s plans, family ties would doubtless
make him even better disposed.
  The son-in-law, whom Ouvrard welcomed so warmly, was
the Comte Louis Victor Leon de Rochechouart, a nephew of
Richelieu, who had been taken as an orphan into the childless
Richelieu house and had become like a son to the Duke. At
one time he had been Richelieu’s adjutant, then adjutant to the
Tsar Alexander of Russia; in 1821, at the age of thirty-three, he
was Chamberlain to Louis XVIII. Before long he was appointed
Commander of the Paris garrison and Richelieu himself presented
him with a not inconsiderable part of his private fortune as a
marriage-gift.
  Quite apart from any business plans or prospects, Ouvrard
had every reason to feel extremely gratified by the marriage, for
it linked his family with one of the most illustrious in France.
The Rochechouarts could trace their ancestors back to the year
965, among them Athenals de Rochechouart, Marquise de
Montespan, who had managed to hold the affections of Louis XIV
for twelve years and who had borne him seven children. The
motto of the Rochechouart family, which Ouvrard’s son-in-law
still carried on his coat-of-arms, was a typically French device:
                                  ,
“Avant qus la mer fut au monde Rochechouart portoit les ondes      ”
(“Before the sea was created, Rochechouart carried the waves”).
  On 5 th January 1822 in St. Roche de Paris, in the presence of
the Due de Richelieu, the Comte de Rochechouart married the
daughter of Ouvrard, the merchant. At the grand levee that
followed, the King himself signed the marriage contract. (Later,
in his   memoirs,   Rochechouart paid        the following   tribute:
“Mademoiselle Elizabeth Ouvrard was very agreeable, without
being particularly beautiful; she pleased me well.” It is hard to
reconcile this dispassionate remark with the statement that he
was the happiest of all men.) Then “two years later everything
collapsed”. That was in 1824, the year in which Ouvrard lost
150                           Ouvrard

both his fortune and his reputation in a gigantic public scandal.
But at least the son-in-law had one satisfaction: the dowry of a
million francs had been paid in full. The scoffers who maintained
that Rochechouart had received a wife but Ouvrard had kept
the dowry were mistaken. Nevertheless, it was disconcerting for
a Rochechouart to have a father-in-law who was a bankrupt and
in prison.
   Meanwhile Richelieu had been inconsiderate enough to retire
from political life in the period between the betrothal and the
marriage. His deep-seated aversion to politics had grown rather
than lessened since 1818. He was afraid to return to Paris from
Aix-la-Chapelle because, after such a resounding success, there
seemed no prospect that the King would release him. And if he
remained in office a little longer, it was not his appointment as
Chevalier du Saint Esprit which kept him, nor the handsome
gift of a portrait of Louis XVI, incorporating a strand of Hugh
Capet’s hair, but simply the King’s appeal to his sense of duty. In
February 1820, when the Due de Berry was assassinated, he was
reluctantly compelled once again to answer his sovereign’s call.
But at the end of December 1821 the situation in France was calm,
and to Ouvrard’s dismay, who had woven so many plans around
him, Richelieu finally retired into private life. In the following
year, 1822, he died.
   Count Rochechouart’s career also failed to come up to
Ouvrard’s expectations. Before the wedding year was up, he was
out of favour for no apparent reason, and was suddenly relieved
of his post in Paris; he was given twenty-four hours to move out
of his service quarters, although his wife had gone into confine¬
ment only four days before. Some time later, in 1830, he took part
in the Algerian expedition as commander of a reserve brigade, but
thereafter, from the age of forty-four onwards, he was obliged to
live as a private citizen. He spent most of his time at his chateau
at Jumilhac, which he had bought with his wife’s dowry.
  So, owing to events over which he had no control, another
of Ouvrard’s ventures had failed. Fortune, who had smiled on
his early rise to power, seemed to have abandoned him. He was
fifty-two years old.
                              Eleven




      Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain




With the resignation and subsequent death of his new
kinsman, the Due de Richelieu, in 1822, Ouvrard was forced
to abandon a number of ambitious plans, especially his hopes
of renewing the old ties between his business interests and
a settlement of the Franco-Spanish differences. At a time when
fresh political crises were looming up, Ouvrard regarded such
a settlement as supremely important. Although sixteen years had
passed since Napoleon made him responsible guarantor for the
Spanish Government’s debts and took the precaution of con¬
fiscating his millions, Ouvrard had never given up hope of
recovering the money which he had paid so reluctantly. On the
other hand, he had little if any legal claim. It seemed to him, as
a businessman, that the Spaniards would feel no inclination to
make such a belated payment, unless he managed to interest the
Spanish Government, which had since completely changed, in
his present affairs.
  The situation looked promising in the years 1820-22, when the
Spanish Crown issued more and more urgent appeals for foreign
support against its own subjects. Spain was in the throes of a
revolution. Ferdinand VII, son of Charles IV, who had been
restored to the throne in 1814, had returned no wiser than his
Bourbon cousins in France and continued to rule as an absolute
monarch. The King and his lackeys reimposed a tyranny as harsh
as any that had gone before, stirred up class-strife, pampered the
nobility and the clergy and allowed the common people to starve.
 152                           Ouvrard

But the army was also neglected, and the first to revolt were the
 officers of some regiments due to sail from Cadiz to Central
America. The cry “Long live the constitution” echoed throughout
the country. As had happened in France, this was hailed as “the
first year of the constitution for the well-being of the people”;
the upper classes were divided into factions called “servile”
and “liberale”. The members of the Spanish assembly, the Cortes,
were so carried away by the army’s success that they forgot how
in 1789 (that momentous year!) they had fallen on their knees
before the King, when he appeared in parliament in person to
send the members home. Ferdinand VII might well complain
that times had changed, for this same Cortes now proceeded to
clip his wings, despite his sudden decision to recognize the Con¬
stitution of Cadiz drawn up by the rebels. The Cortes, on the
other hand, had reason to mistrust him, for the King tried again
and again to arrange foreign armed intervention. The remarkably
long-suffering revolutionaries allowed this to go on until the
European Great Powers actually began to take the Spanish
problem seriously.
   A complex political situation of this kind had an obvious
appeal for a man like Ouvrard. As a connoisseur of Spanish affairs
and an addicted gambler, he immediately saw enormous possi¬
bilities. The French were bound to take some action. Since the
defeat of Napoleon, Europe had been dominated by men of
exceedingly reactionary temperament who saw the Spanish
Revolution as a serious threat to the peace of Europe and its
restored monarchies. They were now faced with the necessity
of leaving the rebels in power or undertaking armed intervention.
  The only man who had a different and better solution to offer
was Ouvrard. Thanks to his intimate knowledge of the country,
he was in a position to interpret the news from Spain with con¬
siderable accuracy. He realized that this revolution, which was
causing so much anxiety throughout Europe, was very super¬
ficial. It was confined to certain influential circles and to a small
section of the army. The common people had never taken much
interest in the constitutional issue. The clergy believed that their
destiny was inextricably bound up with that of the monarchy—
                  Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain           153

a belief that was fortified by the occasional plundering of monas¬
teries by the rebels—and had ample opportunity to voice the
battle-cry of the royalists: “Long live the King and the Holy
Inquisition”.
  It was on this internal split in Spain that Ouvrard based his
plan. A full two years before the European governments finally
reached a decision, Ouvrard had made up his mind. On 6th April
1821 he submitted a memorandum to the then Prime Minister,
Richelieu, in which he underlined the dangers inherent in military
intervention by the Allies. Either France would be entrusted with
the actual operation, in which case the military and the domestic
consequences were quite unpredictable, or a joint Austrian,
Prussian and Russian expedition would be organized, in which
case France, as military base, would once again be saddled with
foreign troops only a few years after she had rid herself of them.
All the risks and the expense involved could be avoided, Ouvrard
argued, because there was a much simpler way to restore Spain
to her monarchy, her religion and her ancient customs. The in¬
ternal split in the peninsula must be exploited to revitalize the
royalist party, which appeared to be the weaker, but, if one took
the attitude of the masses into account, was in fact the stronger.
Then the Bourbons would themselves be in a position to restore
order. The royalists lacked only one thing. They had political
leaders, officers, arms and ammunition; what they did not have
was the money to pay the army. If the royalists were given the
money, the clergy could be relied upon to muster an “army of
the   faithful”    which would       radically change     the   situation.
Seven or eight corps of loyalist Spaniards would march on
Madrid, force the Cortes to capitulate and free the King from its
control.
  Ouvrard’s proposal should, on the face of it, have had a dual
appeal for the Allied governments: it would reduce the risk of
war and it would save a great deal of money. For it was inherent
in Ouvrard’s plan that the millions supplied to the Spanish
royalists should be a loan against Spanish government bonds.
Unfortunately, Richelieu, who had shown himself receptive to
Ouvrard’s ideas, was replaced by Monsieur de Villele, a man by
154                               Ouvrard

nature averse to taking final decisions and basically opposed to
intervention. He had to contend, however, with a powerful
war faction headed by Chateaubriand.
   This was the position in October 1822, when Ouvrard hurried
off to the Congress of Verona where the Spanish question was to
be finally settled by the Great Powers. He arrived just in time,
for the Congress was on the verge of collapse. Ouvrard was
received by Metternich and, in the presence of Gentz, Metternich’s
chief political adviser, he again underlined the hazards of a
military intervention. It was agreed that his proposals should be
considered but no decision was reached.
   Ouvrard was not motivated by any passionate love of peace.
He had sound commercial reasons for advising against an armed
intervention. If his claims of 1806 were to be met, then he must
place the King of Spain under some obligation, and this could
only be achieved if the King owed his freedom not to the Euro¬
pean Powers but entirely to Ouvrard. This plan, grotesque as it
appeared to be, became a practical possibility provided aid to
Spain was made a purely French concern. From the beginning
it was Ouvrard’s intention to give the Spaniards their loan with¬
out any support from the French Government. All he asked of
Villele was that he should recognize another Spanish body as
legal representatives of the captive King, namely the three-man
“Regency” which had been set up in August 1822 in the moun¬
tain fortress of Urgel after its capture by the royalists. The
Regency consisted of a lawyer, a priest and a soldier. The Marquis
Mataflorida, who had worked his way up from a private law
practice to the Ministry of Justice, was a millionaire who had
committed   his    entire     fortune   to   the   counter-revolutionary
struggle; the Archbishop of Tarragona had the support of all
those who believed that the future of the Church was linked to
that of the monarchy; the Baron d’Eroles had displayed his
military talents   in   the    Spanish War of Fiberation against
Napoleon, which marked the beginning of the Emperor’s
downfall.
  When the Spanish Regency at Urgel sent a delegate to Paris
to obtain more money, French officials gave him plenty of
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain      155

comforting words, promises, good advice and reproaches, but
no money. “In an enlightened age,” remarked Ouvrard drily,
“the only ideas which arouse any enthusiasm are those which cost
nothing.” But in his heart he was naturally delighted that the
government had turned a deaf ear to this request, leaving the
Regency’s emissary with no alternative but to apply to him. The
request for two or three hundred thousand francs was turned
down flat. Ouvrard acted on the familiar principle that a small
credit was a waste of money, whereas an enormous loan was a
safe investment. So he told his astonished visitor that what the
Regency needed was not 300,000 francs but 400 million and that
he would obtain it. The draft contract which Ouvrard drew up
and duly handed over on 1st November 1822 provided for a loan
at 5 per cent interest, 2 per cent amortization, and—the sting in
the tail—the deduction from the loan of the money which, in
Ouvrard’s view, the Spanish Government had owed him for so
many years.
   It is more than doubtful if this method of collecting an old
debt, which Ouvrard had used with Napoleon several times with
success, would have worked in this case. The Regency of Urgel
would certainly have declared that any such commitment was
far beyond their powers. But neither party was called upon to
make a final decision, for Ouvrard had laid down one condition
which was not fulfilled, namely that the Regency should be
officially recognized as legal government of Spain either by the
Congress of Verona or at least by the French Government.
  But Ouvrard’s dreams were finally and irrevocably shattered
when the European Powers decided, largely under pressure from
Russia, to intervene in Spain. France, which only some thirty
years before had launched a world revolution, was now called
upon, “in the name of Europe”, to crush the Spanish Revolution.
The King’s speech from the throne on 20th January 1823 carried
a declaration of war on the Spanish Cortes.
  There was only one consolation for Ouvrard: if the war was
actually conducted by France, then this must provide an opening
for him. Admittedly, the head of the government, Monsieur de
Villele, had made no secret of his dislike for him. Villele was
156                          Ouvrard

simply opposed to anyone connected with his predecessor,
Richelieu. But Ouvrard had foisted his services on a bigger man
than he, Napoleon Bonaparte.
   In Paris, however, where the Minister of War, Monsieur de
Bellune, was in charge of all the preparations, Ouvrard did not
make much progress. Estimates had already been publicly invited
and supply-contracts given to a variety of firms. For the time
being at least, Ouvrard had to be content with the order placed
with the firm of Dubrac, in which he had a controlling interest.
But this was much too modest for Ouvrard’s liking. If he could
not get what he wanted by direct means, then he must try to
find some other way of upsetting the Minister’s arrangements.
So Ouvrard packed his bags and set out on a long coach
journey through southern France, arriving at Bayonne on 3rd
April.
  Bayonne was the focal point of the military preparations, the
Army Headquarters where the Intendant General, Sicard, was
stationed. In and around the town were massed all the troops,
equipment and supplies. The War Minister, the Due de Bellune,
had also gone down from Paris to inspect the army in person. Here
at Bayonne, where Napoleon had lured the Spanish Bourbons
into a trap in 1808 and forced them to abdicate in favour of
Joseph, Ouvrard played a similar trick on the horrified Minister.
While Bellune went round, beaming and blissfully confident that
he had done everything to ensure the success of the campaign,
the feeling grew amongst all those in responsible positions that
the supplies for the army and particularly the transport facilities
were completely inadequate. The Intendant General, Sicard,
was wringing his hands, because he could no longer feel sure
of guaranteeing the army’s food-rations in Spain. The Bourbon
Prince, the Due d’Angouleme, who was Commander-in-Chief,
had little or no idea what was going on and was merely waiting
with mounting impatience for the moment when the bugles
would sound and the war begin. Ouvrard, the expert, was given
a warm welcome and made a thorough investigation which con¬
firmed the Intendant’s worst fears. He reported that in Bayonne
there was just enough grain for ten days, enough biscuits for
               Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain      157

two to three days, and there were no mills; where there was flour,
there were no bolting-hutches;* where there were bolting-hutches,
there were no ovens or bakers; infantry posts had been supplied
with forage while cavalry posts had none; the number of baggage-
vehicles and horses was completely inadequate. This picture
was by no means borne out entirely by the facts, but even an
impartial observer like Marshal Marmont said of the Due de
 Bellune that his vague and often conflicting orders did not give
the impression that France had ever waged a war before. Ouvrard
doubtless did not fail to remind those in charge, the Chief of
 General Staff, Count Guilleminot, his assistant, General Borde-
soulle, and the Intendant, of the fate of Junot’s invading army in
 1807, when, because of lack of supplies, the Spanish roads were
soon crowded with stragglers and sick men.
   As soon as the leaders in Bayonne realized that the transport
available was quite inadequate to keep open the army’s supply
lines, Ouvrard’s offer to guarantee supplies in Spain for the
army seemed a godsend. And as, on the testimony of Marshal
Marmont, he was generally considered to be equal to any emer¬
gency, he was called into consultation on 4th and 5 th April in
Bayonne, with a view to changing all the arrangements and
placing them in private hands. The only one who knew nothing
of the new contracts which were being drawn up was the War
Minister, Bellune, who alone was, strictly speaking, authorized
to sign them. Instead, the sanction of the impatient Due d’Angou-
leme was obtained, so that there was little the Due de Bellune
could do. It was not until 8th April, when he was on the point
of returning to the King in Paris, that the War Minister learned
of the two contracts which “the distinguished son of France”
had signed, together with Ouvrard, on the 5 th. Completely taken
by surprise, he had no choice, for the time being at least, but to
give his approval. Complaining of his rheumatism and of the
miserable way his excellent administrative arrangements had
been carried out, he entered his carriage and set off for Paris.
And the man who had been Purveyor General to the Directory
and to Napoleon during his hundred days had now taken up the
  * Used for sifting the bran after milling.—T.A.B.C.
i58                             Ouvrard

same post with the Bourbon army, despite the fact that all
supplies had already been contracted out to other firms.
   The War Minister had ample time on his return journey to
consider what had really happened. He now had an opportunity
to study the thirty-seven clauses in the two contracts, which
had completely upset his own arrangements. A careful perusal
of the details was not designed to improve his temper. They were
substantially as follows:
  As long as French troops were on Spanish soil Ouvrard was
entirely responsible for their supplies.
  The prices were fixed: a 750 grammes ration of bread 30§ cen¬
times, 550 g. of biscuit 46 cts.,   \ litre wine 25 cts., fa litre cognac
      cts., etc. If food prices rose more than 10 per cent, Ouvrard
would be paid correspondingly more.
  All foodstuffs and army equipment already supplied or about
to be supplied would be placed at Ouvrard’s disposal at the
agreed prices, but he received a “handling fee”: 5 centimes per
ration of bread, 7! centimes per ration of forage.
  Any bread ordered by Ouvrard for troops on the march but
not consumed would be taken over by the army or sold in Spain
at the army’s risk.
  As prices were not available for forage, Ouvrard only agreed
to provide it against a commission of 2 per cent and a further
7I centimes per ration on distribution. Fuel supplies were also
to be provided at a commission of 2 per cent.
  Any losses suffered through act of God or by enemy action
would be borne by the State; full payment would be made for
any foodstuffs destroyed. The State would bear the cost of all
buildings for storage and distribution and of all depots.
  Purchasing and distribution would be carried out by Ouvrard’s
employees; in fact the administrative personnel of the army, who
would be paid by the State.
  Eleven-twelfths of all such payments would be made in
advance and within the first five days of each month. The State
was obliged to pay in cash. Any disputes between Ouvrard and
any government department arising from this contract would be
submitted to a court of arbitration.
             Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain       ljg

  “The registration fee for the foregoing contract is fixed at
one franc.”
   The War Minister must have winced as his eye fell on the
last signature: “Louis Antoine (de Bourbon, due d’Angouleme)”.
Then followed a second contract, in which there were twenty-
one clauses covering transport. Its main provisions were that:
   Ouvrard had to provide 600 rack-waggons and 6,000 mules,
saddled and harnessed. The State would hand over to him, against
payment, all the mules already available.
   The crews of the mule-brigades—one driver to every two
animals—would be paid, clothed, fed and quartered by the State,
which would also be responsible for feeding and stabling the
animals.
   Ouvrard would receive three francs a day for the hire of
each mule. For the hire of each waggon he would receive n\
francs per day per yoke; the normal waggon would have four
yokes.
   The State would be responsible for any losses incurred by
act of God, enemy action or plague and also for losses incurred
by a breakdown in food supplies, which Ouvrard had agreed
to provide on a commission basis. The indemnity rates were:
600 francs per waggon, 500-600 francs per draught animal.
   The State was obliged to buy from Ouvrard at these prices
any waggons and animals which had become superfluous by the
end of the first year. In the second year the State was required
to pay only a sixth of these prices.
   Any animals remaining in Ouvrard’s possession after hostilities
had ceased would be fed by the State for another three months
in order to guarantee the entrepreneur favourable selling con¬
ditions.
   An arbitration tribunal would also deal with any disputes
arising from this contract.

   By the time he had come to the end of these documents the
War Minister, Bellune, was also at the end of his tether. He had
spent two months making preparations, and now Ouvrard was
entitled by these contracts to make his first deliveries from the
i6o                           Ouvrard

stocks accumulated by Bellune himself along the Pyrenees. His
grain, his cognac and his draught-animals were simply to be
handed over to the Purveyor General; it was not Ouvrard who
was supplying the State but the State which was supplying
Ouvrard. And yet, as if to add insult to injury, it was he, Monsieur
de Bellune, who was being blamed in Paris for having made such
inefficient arrangements that this emergency contract had become
inevitable. And Ouvrard had not even money to offer! He was
not required, as was otherwise customary, to put down a sub¬
stantial deposit. On the contrary, he received almost the whole
of his money in advance at the beginning of the month. And
there was nothing to be done about it; the contract ran for the
duration of the war and Ouvrard had had the impertinence to
insert an arbitration clause, which invalidated the normal pro¬
cedure of revising contracts unilaterally by simple administrative
decree.
  While the Minister drove on towards Paris in a state of mount¬
ing rage and frustration, the army began to march, on 7th April
1823, from Bayonne. It was almost ten years since Napoleon’s
army, in June 1813, had been compelled to evacuate Spain so
ingloriously. Under the terms of the contract, the Purveyor
General was paid 1,000,000 francs in cash on 6th April, 2,000,000
francs on 7th April, 3,400,000 francs on nth April, a total of
6,400,000 for the month. He was able to draw on the War
Minister’s stocks for ten days and only made his first purchases,
1,500,000 rations, in the second half of the month.
  With his usual enthusiasm Ouvrard concentrated mainly on
the most difficult problem, transport. He sent out his agents
along the country roads to buy up every vehicle they could find
at any price. In spite of that, only a part of the ammunition and
half the artillery could be moved in the first month.
  It was very soon clear that Ouvrard had been right in his
assumption that supplies could not be sent forward from France
but must be obtained, but not under any circumstances requisi¬
tioned, in Spain itself. Requisitioning, which must have been a
part of the War Minister’s vague plans, could only serve to
drive the loyalists amongst the Spanish people into the arms of
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain        161

the constitutional party. In fact, Ouvrard gave a practical demon¬
stration of a principle which he had tried to impress upon Napo¬
leon, the principle of purchasing supplies inside enemy territory,
and in this case it saved the situation. After a few days’ march
the army found itself in the kind of mountainous, inaccessible
country where roads were few and far between. The first reaction
of the peasants, who still remembered the harrowing guerilla
war against Napoleon, was to keep out of the way and only sell
their produce—if at all—at very high prices. But Ouvrard’s
knowledge of human nature proved invaluable. His solution was
a very simple one: he looked for the chink in the peasants’
armour. He showed them plenty of hard cash, gold and silver,
let them feast their eyes on it, and said, in so many words: It is
all yours.
  At Tolosa, when the officers demanded to know where his
stores, his depots and his supplies were, Ouvrard gave orders for
tables to be set up in the market-place, spread out his money
on them, then summoned the local council, the clergy and the
merchants and asked them to get the peasants to deliver food and
supplies for cash: bread, vegetables, meat, oats, hay, horses and
waggons. Anything delivered before eight in the morning would
fetch ten times the normal price, before nine, nine times, before
ten, eight times, and so on. “Self-interest is a motive that never
fails” was one of Ouvrard’s mottoes. At Tolosa the peasants fell
over one another to prove how true it was. From the early hours
they could be seen hurrying across the hills in order to be amongst
the first. Very soon the law of supply and demand began to work
in Ouvrard’s favour, so that he had no further need to pay
abnormal prices. All the army’s needs were more than adequately
met; the Second Corps had enough supplies for ten days in
advance.
  To begin with, of course, Ouvrard had been obliged to pay
enormous prices, which no professional army officer would
have dared pay, but it was justified by events. From then on the
army enjoyed an excellent reputation, and Ouvrard managed to
feed the troops throughout the entire campaign without requisi¬
tioning and without building up any reserve stocks. Spanish
   M
162                           Ouvrard

traders became interested and soon Ouvrard was able to revert
to his old method of letting sub-contractors do the work.
  Everything would have turned out splendidly for Ouvrard,
had it not been for Monsieur de Bellune sitting in Paris and
wondering how he could get rid of a Purveyor General he had
never wanted. He tried in vain to vent his rage on the Intendant
General, Sicard, who had also put his signature to the contracts.
Sicard, it is true, had been relieved of his post, but the Military
Intendant of the Tenth Army, Bourdon, whom the War Minister
had appointed in his place, was not even allowed to enter Bayonne
and had to return immediately to Paris. In the meantime, at the
Prime Minister’s instigation, a Monsieur Regnault had been
despatched to the front with the rank of Royal Commissioner to
undertake an enquiry into the contracts. The War Minister gave
Regnault, who had a strong personal bias against Ouvrard,
strict orders to cancel the agreements and not to conclude any
further contract until the Minister had seen it. The final result of
this manoeuvre was that on 2nd May, a few days after Regnault
had seen Ouvrard, the Vittoria Agreement was drawn up—
without the Minister’s knowledge—which by and large confirmed
the agreements made at Bayonne. Certain changes were made in
the prices, but while some were reduced, others were even in¬
creased. The War Minister was beside himself when he heard
that, despite all his telegraphic instructions, his new Intendant
had not only renewed the Bayonne contracts but even extended
them. For at Vittoria Ouvrard was also given complete control
of the forage and fuel supplies, which he had hitherto provided
only on commission. And the 10th and nth Divisions, which
had been supplied by the government, were also included in
Ouvrard’s new contract.
  Naturally Monsieur de Bellune did not take this lying down;
the third Intendant General followed his predecessors into
obscurity, to be succeeded by the Baron de Joinville. By this time
it was the end of June and Ouvrard had reached Madrid with the
troops. Monsieur de Joinville immediately investigated prices
throughout the country, had discussions with the Prince, the
Chief of General Staff, the Assistant Intendant, and naturally
                  Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain      163

with Ouvrard, and came to the conclusion that, while the cam¬
paign was in progress, it was impossible to make any radical
change. On 26th July yet anodier contract was drawn up in
Madrid with Ouvrard, who again had to accept certain minor
modifications in his prices. The bread ration was now 29 centimes
instead of 30§, forage 2-67 instead of 3*15, cognac 8 instead of 8j.*
 But once more the Bayonne contracts were substantially con¬
firmed. A price-index clause was even added, which spoke only
of increases in the market prices and higher rates of reimburse¬
ment but not of any drop or further reduction. To start with,
the reimbursement for the meat ration was even increased by
8j centimes.
   This whole affair, which everyone took so seriously, suggests
 that neither the War Ministry in Paris nor the Army Headquarters
had anything more important to think about. And indeed this
was so, for though France was at war with Spain yet the troops
had no worries apart from sleeping, eating and drinking. They
encountered no resistance. The Due d’Angouleme rode at the
head of his army, as though he were leading a march past. The
rebel army of 130,000 men, which, early rumours had it, would
oppose his 100,000, did not materialize. The fearsome mountain
passes, scenes of countless ambushes in the Napoleonic war,
were now deserted. Only the occasional group of shepherds or
peasants gazed down curiously from the mountains—at the
strange host of armed men passing along the roads below. When
the French troops entered Madrid by the north gate, the troops
of the Spanish constitutionalists left it by the south gate.
  So the calculations Ouvrard had made at the time of the
Congress of Verona had been correct. The broad mass of the
people was loyal to the monarchy and the revolutionary move¬
ment’s fighting strength was negligible. But the wealthy intelli¬
gentzia was deeply committed to the cause of freedom and a
constitution and gave the French an unfriendly welcome. In one
house where officers were quartered the lady of the house
appeared at table with a napkin over her arm and said to one of
Ouvrard’s staff: “Now that the French are here, we must regard
  * See p. 158.
 164                           Ouvrard

 ourselves as slaves; I am starting my service.” In another house
 when Ouvrard paid compliments to the daughter and said she
 would be overwhelmed with suitors, she replied: “I would
 rather die a virgin than belong to a slave.” The different behaviour
 of the common people, though they had waged guerilla war
 against Napoleon, was explained by Ouvrard as follows: “In¬
 dependence is something people defend in blind fanaticism, out
 of national pride, whereas civil freedom can only be defended by
 those who understand it and appreciate its value. In the struggle
 for independence every man is a soldier and the whole people
 takes to arms; only fully fledged citizens will fight for their
 personal freedom, and they are in a minority in most countries,
 particularly in Spain.” Even in the capital the mass of the people
 were for the King, and the Due d’Angouleme had the greatest
 difficulty, after the Spanish troops had withdrawn, in protecting
 the remaining supporters of what was in fact a very moderate
 constitution from the fury of the population.
    The indignation of the people of Madrid was all the greater
as the rebel army had taken the King with it when it left Madrid
on 23rd May. Incredible as it may seem, the French Commander-
in-Chief made no attempt to rescue him, when he allowed the
Spanish troops to withdraw. The only one who could derive any
satisfaction from this was Ouvrard, for it meant that the war and
his contract were prolonged for another four months. The
French army was compelled to pursue the fleeing rebels through¬
out the length of Spain, first to Seville, then to Cadiz, where the
Trocadero, which was generally considered to be impregnable,
was taken by storm on 30th August. Four hundred French
soldiers were killed, the only casualties of the entire campaign.
But the siege of the town still continued, because the French
fleet which should have made a simultaneous attack on the town
had not arrived.
  As soon as the army was stationed for any length of time at
one spot, Ouvrard ran into difficulties. Before long, all food
supplies in the vicinity of Cadiz were exhausted, and Ouvrard
was compelled, not for the first time, to do something out of the
ordinary. Failing the treasure of Mexico, which was of no further
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain        ids

use to him, there was the Emperor of Morocco. Armed with
letters of recommendation from the Due d’Angouleme he set
off in the brig Zebra, but even on the short crossing to Tangiers
she was blown back time and again by contrary winds. But
his nephew, Victor Ouvrard, succeeded in reaching Gibraltar,
with the help of a robber chief, and crossed from there to the
African coast. Gifts to the Pasha of Tangiers and the Emperor
in Fez produced the desired effect: in November a trade agree¬
ment was signed, enabling Ouvrard to import 300,000 cwt. of
barley and 4,000 oxen.
   This agreement, however, was one of many somewhat un¬
orthodox transactions, the conclusion of which gave Ouvrard
so much satisfaction and aroused great expectations only to
lead to the most appalling complications and eventually end in
complete chaos. The conclusion of the agreement had, in the
nature of things, taken some time, and, before the negotiations
had been completed, Cadiz had fallen. The French fleet had
finally appeared and bombarded Cadiz at the end of September,
the army of the Cortes had capitulated, and by 1st October the
King was at liberty again and the French troops were marching
slowly northwards. The contract with the Emperor of Morocco
was transferred to an agent, Ducroc, who was to continue supply¬
ing Cadiz. Unfortunately, he went bankrupt, which led to bill
protests, the forfeiture of pledge guarantees and official re¬
criminations.
   The collapse of this venture was followed by premature ter¬
mination of his contract with the government. Ouvrard had
suffered so often from the bad faith of governments that he can
hardly have been surprised by this. His services were no longer
required—at least not so urgently. The Army Intendants had
got to know the country and had learned all they needed to know
of Ouvrard’s methods of obtaining supplies from the Spaniards,
while the Generals could now dismiss all possibility of enemy
action and the complications that might ensue. So the Due
d’Angouleme, nephew of the King of France, who had hitherto
been Ouvrard’s mainstay, at last gave way to the War Ministry in
Paris, where official feelings were still ruffled. He asked Ouvrard
i66                           Ouvrard

for premature cancellation of his contracts. Ouvrard made
certain counter-proposals and a fresh agreement was concluded.
“In order to give the Purveyor General proof of our satisfaction
and, at the same time, compensation for the premature termina¬
tion of his contract”, on 14th November the Due d’Angouleme
decreed that the price reductions introduced in the Madrid
contract as against the Bayonne contracts should be “declared
invalid once and for all”.
   So Ouvrard gradually dismantled his whole organization. He
now had time to study at close quarters the political consequences
of this strange crusade. One day, for example, he saw the Due
d’Angouleme leaving Ferdinand’s house, flushed with anger,
after the King had abruptly rejected the suggestion that he should
adopt a more liberal constitution and, above all, should show
leniency towards the rebels. In the words of the royal proclamation
of 1st October, the King had “been restored to the throne of the
saintly Ferdinand—by the wise and just hand of the Almighty”.
In Seville, where the Feast of the Holy Rosary was being cele¬
brated even more joyously than usual, the voice of the people
echoed the will of the ruler: “Long live the absolute King and
the Holy Inquisition.” And in Madrid the first grim example was
made when General Riego, who had sought the protection of the
French troops in vain, was held prisoner in a chapel for three
days and then, dressed in the white shirt of a condemned man,
was dragged behind a donkey through the streets of the city,
in a basket which was held just clear of the ground by monks;
then he was delivered to the gallows. A few days later the King
returned to his palace; the streets were crowded yet he received
a cold welcome; the open carriage moved at a swift trot
through the rain, while a lackey held an umbrella over the royal
pair.
   Having thus witnessed the end of the campaign, Ouvrard
lost no time in turning his wartime commitments into more
peaceful projects. He had not forgotten the plans which began
to take shape in his mind when he argued so passionately at
Verona for purely financial intervention in Spain. He was still
dreaming, in fact, of the treasures of Central America, and he
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain          i6j

could not believe that the good old times of 1804-5 were gone
for ever, when he “so to speak balanced the accounts of the
Spanish monarchy in both Continents and drew up a budget
for them”. Although the armed intervention had frustrated
Ouvrard’s plan to free the King for the Spanish legitimists by
means of a loan arranged entirely by himself, he had taken every
opportunity during the campaign to renew his acquaintance with
them. At Bayonne he had personally advanced money to several
penniless Spanish leaders, and he claimed to have made a loan of
two millions to the Regency temporarily set up by the Due
d’Angouleme at Vittoria in May. After the army entered Madrid,
he entered into negotiations for a very big loan, the interest and
eventually the capital to be paid out of the quicksilver mines, but
the government in Paris put a stop to this. Then in June 1823,
with the help of the bankers Wismann & Co. and an English
Consul, he managed to pass large sums of money to the King
in Seville to facilitate his release. The first coach and horses which
the King used in Cadiz after his escape belonged to Ouvrard,
who placed them at the ruler’s disposal, knowing that other
means of transport would be difficult to come by. In October
the King expressed his gratitude in an extremely friendly letter,
so Ouvrard had reason to hope that he would find an attentive
audience if he once more preached the gospel of the Promised
Land, America.
   But Ouvrard knew from his experience of 1804 how long it
took for decisions to be reached in Spain. He found himself a
suitable residence in Madrid and settled down to plan a mag¬
nificent social debut for himself. It was not difficult, for he had
only to copy the parties he had given at Rainey or the receptions
at the Palais Montesson. And it worked. As before, he chose a
house with historic associations, a palais in the most fashionable
part of Madrid, which the French Ambassador had decorated in
the best French style. The stables could accommodate 200 horses,
the coach-house sixty carriages. The great attraction was the
estate of 600 acres; formal gardens in the French style were divided
into great squares edged by box-hedges with flower-beds in the
middle; the park was full of splendid trees and the whole place
i68                              Ouvrard

 was watered by numerous small streams. A fine lawn, such as not
 even the British Embassy could boast, was laid with turf cut on
 the banks of the Manzanares.
    This was the sort of milieu in which Ouvrard could happily
renew his old contacts with the leading families of Spain. His
 son-in-law, the Count de Rochechouart, and his daughter did
the honours with much elegance and skill. At a ball held by
 Ouvrard, everyone who counted in society or in the army would
be among the five or six hundred guests. Those who remembered
the beautiful women at Ouvrard’s house in 1804 now met their
charming daughters. The entire diplomatic corps would be
there. One of the regular guests was Princess d’Ossuna, one of
the most distinguished ladies in Spain, whose life Ouvrard had
once saved at a reception for Barras in Paris, when her dress
caught fire and Ouvrard, with great presence of mind, wrapped
a carpet round her. Ouvrard gave a special dinner-party for
Pozzo di Borgo, the Russian Ambassador in Paris, who was sent
to Madrid to congratulate Ferdinand on his restoration.
    On one occasion, at a masked ball, the twenty-two-year-old
Abbe Meziere appeared disguised as an elegant Parisienne. The
following day he was sharply reprimanded by his superiors. A
more serious note was struck with a visit by Father Cirillo de la
Meda, the spiritual ruler of 15,000 Franciscans, whom Ouvrard had
known from the very beginning of the military campaign as one of
the most active supporters of the King. He was only thirty-six,
elegant and yet, unlike the heavily perfumed abbes of Louis XV,
possessing all the dignity of a Prince of the Church. This man was
of particular interest to Ouvrard, who could see how the enor¬
mous power he wielded was based on an excellent information
service supplied by all his monasteries throughout the peninsula.*
   Ouvrard now had ample time to enjoy life. He bought a pack
of hounds and went hunting. In the economic crisis following
the war, which compelled many people to sell their valuables,
he bought precious stones, pearls and old paintings. A court
    *When Ouvrard returned the visit, he found him with a large basket of
letters, from which he selected one from his monks at Bergara reporting the
capture of an officer of the constitutional party and asking for Christian
guidance on whether to let him escape or have him stoned.
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain        169

jeweller made two magnificent necklaces for his two daughters.
The younger of the two took painting lessons with Ribera.*
Ouvrard himself maintained that this splendid mode of living
was quite within his means. There was, indeed, only one dis¬
tinction which he coveted and could not himself acquire; his
great ambition was to be rewarded for his services to the war
effort with a hereditary title, “in order to perpetuate the memory
of his achievements in the family”. It is hard to believe, however,
that Ouvrard can have seriously expected such an ambition to
be fulfilled, for it was soon clear to everyone that the last thing
Paris had in mind was to do him honour.
  For all his splendid way of life, Ouvrard naturally did not
forget for one moment why he had remained in Madrid. When¬
ever an opportunity presented itself of engaging the appropriate
Spanish Minister in a serious conversation, he employed all his
considerable powers of persuasion on behalf of his new project,
his new American plans. Circumstances demanded—this was his
latest thesis—that America should be used to bolster up an
ageing Europe. One must, therefore, see to it that the Continent
did not continue to lose the vast sums which had been sadly
lacking since Joseph Bonaparte took Charles IV’s place in 1808
and trade with metropolitan Spain had almost entirely dis¬
appeared. Ouvrard believed that Europe could not afford to
lose Latin America. Indeed, he believed that the independent
South American States might develop into a direct threat to the
industry of Europe. The day must come when the new States of
America, once peace had been restored, would begin to copy
European methods of industrialization, to employ new inventions
and new machines, and to grow European agricultural products
themselves. Spain, and particularly France, would suffer the same
fate as England, whose production was, he believed, being almost
strangled. “Blinded by the economic boom, which brought with
it a rapid, day-to-day improvement in the means of production
but also put them out of date, so to speak, from one day to the
next, the English did not realize the problems they were creating

   * Ribera y Fernandez, Don Juan Antonio [1779-1860] became Court
Painter to Charles IV.
1 JO                         Ouvrard

for themselves; they lost sight of the fact that while capital and
running costs could only be covered by a steady increase in
production, there was no corresponding increase in consump¬
tion; in the end the manufacturers became so dependent on
their machines that they, not the manufacturers, became the
masters.” This, Ouvrard maintained in 1824, was the problem
with which France and Spain would also inevitably be confronted
but which would become even more acute if the prevailing
economic relations at least with Central America were not main¬
tained. “Unfortunately,” Ouvrard added pointedly, “no one
paid any attention to me when I suggested to the Prince of La
Paz in 1807 that the Spanish monarchy should transfer its official
residence to the new world of America”; there the monarchy
could so easily have found “support in the love and loyalty of
these primitive peoples, who look upon their kings as gods in
earthly form”.
   Ouvrard was naturally not prepared to revive this particular
plan. More than one and a half decades had passed, during which
time, he also felt, conditions beyond the seas had so completely
changed as to make the survival of the Spanish Crown much too
uncertain. In fact, all the South American colonies had broken
free from Europe; in the Argentine the independence movement
had begun as early as 1809, in Venezuela in 1811; since 1814
Paraguay had been ruled by a national dictator; Chile became
free in 1818; Bolivia and Peru only achieved full independence
in 1824. In Mexico itself the Creole immigrants had sided with
Spain against the native Indians and even defeated the 100,000-
strong army of independence, which the Spanish priest, Miguel
Hidalgo, had collected; but the Creoles suddenly changed sides
and, after several fruitless appeals to Spain between 1820 and
1822 to create an independent Mexican monarchy under a Spanish
prince (which would virtually have realized Ouvrard’s dream of
1810), the Creole officer Iturbide made himself Emperor of
Mexico. Within a year the Spaniards had to admit that even the
monarchical system could not survive, for by 1823, when Fer¬
dinand regained the Spanish throne, the independent States of
Central America had a federal republican constitution.
             Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain       171

  One might have assumed that in face of this ineluctable
process of history, Ouvrard would finally have abandoned his
dreams of the Mexican treasure. But he found it impossible to
give up the most cherished ambition of his life, which had been
the basis of his plans in 1804 and 1810 and which he now revived
for the third time. The apostle of credit was still so completely
under the spell of the mountain of gold which his brother had
seen in the Mexican State Treasury at the beginning of the cen¬
tury, that he was capable of tossing even the most sacred of his
principles overboard. He had suddenly forgotten the lesson he
had always tried to teach Napoleon, that there was more to be
achieved with one clever man than with 500,000 soldiers, and
persuaded himself that swords and firearms had their virtues.
The whole of his new American plan was based on armed inter¬
vention, on a military reconquest. What he had in mind was
something on the lines of the British East India Company with
its private army of 150,000 men and 20,000 sailors. In his many
conversations with Spanish Ministers Ouvrard pressed more
and more for the establishment of a “West Indies Company”,
which would first bring the overseas possessions of the King
“under the administrative control of the company, having sub¬
dued them by force”, and would then have an exclusive trading
monopoly with America.
  Ouvrard even drafted an agreement:


    1. A   “Compagnie   armee   espagnole au Nouveau Monde”
would be set up in the form of a joint-stock company.
   2. The total share capital would be 400 million reals or 100
million francs.
    3. The money accruing from the shares would be paid to the
National Exchequer.
   4. The company would be run by a Board headed by three
native Spaniards, each of whom must possess a nominal share-
capital of 100,000 francs.
    5. The Board would appoint all civil and military officials
and fix their emoluments.
   6. The initial military force would be 30,000 men strong. It
17 2                            Ouvrard

would consist of Spaniards and Swiss, and it would subsequently
be reinforced from the native population.
       7. The State would grant this company a monopoly of trade
with America for a period of thirty years.
       8. All State-owned installations in the Spanish colonies would
be ceded, together with all that they contain, to the company.
       9. The company will have the right not only to intervene
militarily but also to undertake political negotiations regarding
the status quo and the form of government in each individual
territory.
   10. Should the colonies at any time be granted political inde¬
pendence, they would have to pay an indemnity totalling 1,000
million francs or 4,000 million reals, for all the territories to¬
gether.
   11. This indemnity would be paid to the National Exchequer;
the company would receive 10 per cent as commission.
   12. The company would be obliged to issue a yearly balance
sheet and to publish it.


   One feature of this splendid plan was that Ouvrard had
apparently left himself out of account, for as a native Frenchman
he would be unable to play any leading part. By a remarkable
oversight, however, Ouvrard had managed to omit the stipula¬
tion that all the shares in the company should be registered shares
and that they should only be held by Spaniards.
  In view of the developments in the New World, Ouvrard’s
scheme must have seemed, at first glance, highly Utopian to his
contemporaries in 1824, particularly as not only the Central
American States with Mexico at their head but also the former
Spanish colonies in South America—Colombia, Peru and Chile
—were to be handed over to the New West Indies Company.
On the other hand, there is little doubt that Ouvrard’s plans
were politically practicable, given speedy and determined execu¬
tion. Independence had not put down such deep roots either
amongst the natives or amongst the Creoles that they would
not have bartered it against the sort of economic advantages
which the thirty-year trade agreement offered them. The next
                Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain               175

few decades were to show that most of these countries, including
Mexico, were only republics in name and were, in fact, ruled by
dictators. Moreover, the whole independence movement would
not have materialized, had it not been for the severance of all
links during the Spanish wars. Not one of these colonial territories
could muster a fighting force capable of standing up to a well-
trained European army of 30,000 men.
   If Madrid kept putting off a decision on Ouvrard’s plan and
finally let it die through sheer neglect, it was not because Ouvrard
had found it impossible to convince the Spanish statesmen that
his plan had at least economic advantages. While the discussions
were going on, there was a most unwelcome interruption. Great
Britain, which had been forced to swallow the independence of
her North American colonies, saw no reason why Spain should
fare any better in South or Central America. Most important of
all, Britain’s trade with the new autonomous States in the south,
which had developed so nicely, would be seriously affected and
possibly even killed altogether by a West Indies Company with
a trade monopoly. So the British Ambassador at the Spanish
Court, Sir William A’Court, employed every weapon of secret
diplomacy he could lay his hands on, in order to wreck Ouvrard’s
scheme.* He did not have much difficulty, for Spain was a highly
vulnerable country, which had just managed to find its feet again
with foreign help. So Ouvrard’s third American project suffered
the same sad fate as its predecessors.
   Yet Ouvrard’s spirit remained unbroken. His mind was brimful
of ideas. But, before he could produce a new one, events took a
turn which dashed once and for all the hopes which had brought
him to Spain. For steps were taken in Paris early in 1824 to wind
up the military expedition to Spain both politically and finan¬
cially. The Due d’Angouleme received a delirious welcome

   * The weapons of secret diplomacy whereby British representatives
abroad—particularly nineteenth-century ones such as Stratford de Redcliffe
—are popularly supposed to protect their country’s interests were in fact
not needed in the present instance. A’Court’s despatches to Canning suggest
that he did not take Ouvrard’s schemes very seriously; in any case, as Wolff
admits, Spain’s precarious internal condition gave little hope that such a
plan could ever become a reality.—T.A.B.C.
174                              Ouvrard

home. For four weeks he was hailed as the hero of “this glorious
and memorable war”, as a “noble scion of Saint Louis and
Henry IV”, as “a worthy descendant of the virtuous Louis XVI”,
as “the illustrious warrior” who, to quote the speech from the
throne, had led his troops “with courage as well as wisdom”.
To his dinner guests Louis XVIII compared his nephew with the
homeric Achilles, the thunder of whose voice put even the brave
Greeks to flight.*
  The wave of enthusiasm died away, however, a few months
later, on 5 th April 1824, when the French Prime Minister mounted
the rostrum in the Chamber to explain just how much this
glorious page in France’s history had cost. He was reluctantly
compelled to ask for a supplementary credit of no million
francs, as the war credits so far approved, exactly 100 million,
did not cover even half the cost. Immediately there was a gigantic
scandal. The deputies thought that this was going much too far
and that the victory, which had “restored the foundations of the
social system”, had nevertheless been won at too high a price.
Had the army left 10,000 dead, instead of a mere 400, in Spain,
the elected representatives of the people would have found no
difficulty in voting a few more war memorials, but 100 million
francs was not so easy to swallow. A scapegoat must be found.
  None of the politicians was, of course, prepared to take the
blame; neither the Prime Minister nor the Finance Minister, and
still less the War Minister, who had always said that the contracts
signed with Ouvrard were scandalous. Once the magic name of
Ouvrard had been uttered, it dominated the whole acrimonious
discussion for the next two years. It gave the French public a
focal point for all its grievances. Only fifty to sixty of the total
208 million francs had been spent on supplies, despite the fact that
the armed promenade had been conducted without any real
military expenditure. But this did not make any difference. There
was at least one man who could be thrown to the wolves; the
whole of Paris was in a turmoil. Ouvrard was accused of having
lined his own pockets with thirty-three million out of the fifty
or sixty million supply budget. Particularly well-informed people
  * In fact, Achilles’ voice threw the Trojans into chaos!—T.A.B.C.
             Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain        175

also claimed to know that, as soon as Ouvrard received his
monthly advance, he put three-quarters by and spent only a
quarter on supplies. The Prime Minister, Monsieur de Villele,
realized with dismay that his Cabinet was in danger. Then he
devised an apparently excellent scheme for bringing the whole
business to an end. He mounted the rostrum one day and declared
before God and the world that Ouvrard, and Ouvrard alone,
had been responsible for the smooth conduct of the campaign and
that, thanks to his experience and skill, the food supplies of the
army had been guaranteed throughout the campaign. Without
Ouvrard’s co-operation the war could not have been concluded in
six months. Ouvrard had saved the country money, because in¬
experienced administrators would have been much more costly.
  But even diese strong words produced no effect. The texts
of the contracts signed at Bayonne, which had made such dis¬
tressing reading for the War Minister on his return journey,
had now been made public. Such agreements, it was said, could
only have been concluded in one way: by bribing highly placed
officials. In the Chamber Ouvrard was openly accused of this
crime by Count Labourdonnaye, and the following day it was
printed in the Moniteur. The Chief of General Staff, Count
Guilleminot, and his deputy, General Bordesoulle, together with
the Intendant General, Sicard, were more or less openly accused
of having suffered from itching palms. Unfortunately, the Due
d’Angouleme had also signed the contracts, had indeed warmly
welcomed them and defended them throughout the campaign
against all the War Minister’s onslaughts. But the poor Prince,
the illustrious warrior, of whom it would have been almost
blasphemy to expect that sort of expertise, had simply been an
innocent victim of his unscrupulous advisers. The whole affair
was said to be “an attack on the loyalty and the good faith of a
generous prince”.
  Much to the regret of the Prime Minister a Committee of the
Chamber was set up to investigate. Their findings two and a half
months later completely vindicated Ouvrard: “The food rations
of the army on the eve of its departure for Spain were inadequate;
there was no forage. Worst of all, however, was the shortage of
176                            Ouvrard

transport. The Commission recognized the need for new measures
—the measures finally adopted were completely justified.” The
Chamber had no alternative but to approve the supplementary
credit of no million francs on 29th June 1824. The general
public, however, were still not satisfied. There were further
references in the Press to the “thieving hand of shameless and
unscrupulous swindlers”; one pamphlet even recalled the case
of M. de Marillac, Marshal of France in the reign of Louis XIII,
who was condemned to death for having received bribes and,
to the delight of the populace, was executed in the Place de
Greve. So Monsieur de Villele felt obliged to reverse his previous
judgement on Ouvrard’s contracts and to set up a second Com¬
mission of Enquiry. On 30th June 1824 a royal decree announced
the names of its members: a retired Field Marshal, an Admiral,
a former Imperial Intendant, two serving officials and Count
Daru, who, as Napoleon’s Military Intendant, was accused by
the Emperor in July 1809 of having allowed 18,000 prisoners on
the island of Lobau to die of starvation. These, then, were the
gentlemen who had to decide whether to vindicate the organiz¬
ing ability of their colleague, the Minister for War, Due de
Bellune, or the work done by the merchant Ouvrard. The choice
cannot have been difficult.
   Ouvrard himself was no longer in Madrid, witnessing these
developments in the Chamber and the Cabinet from a respectable
distance. Monsieur de Bellune and the government were not
content merely to bring the Spanish contract to a premature end,
they were also determined to put a stop to his quasi-political
activities at Ferdinand’s Court. Monsieur de Villele was not pre¬
pared to let a private individual, and still less a supporter of the
liberal   Richelieu,   represent France’s   interests   in   Spain.   So
Ouvrard was more or less smoked out of Madrid. On 17th May
an Order of the Day was issued which was clearly directed at
Ouvrard; it ordered all persons previously employed by the
army to leave Spain by        1st June. The quartermasters were
instructed to send any outstanding accounts not to Ouvrard but
to the Quartermaster General. The papers in Ouvrard’s office,
for which he had rented an entire house, were bundled together
            Juried ([Financed,
 *y£c/rcJdC' a a dfidoi ct a? /cl? ^sJommudtmv db /a

       C&/iamlre c/ed f2£^iu(cjf c/iarjjcG cfc feacamcn.

      (/((/ c/judpcf ^ytr^tcjd' ftar /cj ts/fmiJfrcJ

      /g *3 ty/cccm/res /f/S/


         &ar     ^j/. CWuttD f cni 8 1 C.


    OBSERVATIONS                    PRELIM IN AIRES



_A rssiTOT quo Jc Gouvcrnettieut Royal cut ete rendu a la
France, au mois d'avril 1814 1 je m’occupat de ia formation dun
plan de Finances qui pul embrasser , tout a la fois, la satisfaction
due aux car 01 n:ns de TFial, ie soulagemeul des coNrKiBUABLES
et ia restauration du ciu'iut public.
  Je ne connaissais pas encore lc projet du Ministre des Finances
                                                               1



  Title page of budget proposals by Ouvrard. Frontispiece: Ouvrard,
   Memoire sur les Finances . . . 1816. (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale)
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain        177

in two days, packed in old boxes and despatched in open hay-
waggons to Toulouse, where Monsieur de Bellune had decided
to make the final settlement. Ouvrard’s departure on 14th June,
when a French military escort was provided, was not without
incident. Ouvrard had never shown a passionate interest in paying
his debts at the best of times, but when the Army Paymaster,
obeying orders from Paris, had stopped any further payments to
Ouvrard on 2nd January, Ouvrard adopted the same attitude
towards his Spanish creditors, clearly hoping either to force the
French Government’s hand or place it in an embarrassing position.
But he also refused to accept accounts, even when they were per¬
fectly correct and countersigned by his employees, if the prices
were higher than those he himself received. So when he finally de¬
parted it was amidst a chorus of cat-calls from an organized street
mob. It was a very different scene from the one in spring 1805
when he left Madrid in triumph. Ouvrard ironically suggested that
it would have been more appropriate to be “taken in handcuffs to
Toulouse by the very people for whom I paved the way to Spain”.
  When he reached Paris the situation seemed more favourable
than he had dared hope. The Committee of the Chamber had
just announced, on 21st June, that it regarded the Bayonne
contract as inviolable. But then came a setback with the appoint¬
ment of an official Commission of Enquiry. Five long months
passed before this bunch of aristocrats had completed its inter¬
rogation, compared all the lists, collected all the documents and
seen all the reports. Only one man was not summoned to appear
before the Commission, the man whose whole livelihood and
reputation was at stake: Ouvrard. All the army quartermasters,
all the assistant quartermasters, all military officials and store
superintendents were interrogated about the supply position in
Spain; only the head of the Commisariat, Ouvrard, was not
questioned. So Ouvrard decided to give his evidence in the form
of a printed “Note du munitionnaire-general de VArmee d’Espagne”.
This was his contribution to the flood of pamphlets, which were
issued by all concerned in an attempt to sway the Commission.
  All of them were playing the popular game of pinning the
blame on someone else. The Chief of General Staff, Count
   N
178                          Ouvrard

Guilleminot, blamed the War Minister for a deficit of 3,500,000
rations at the start of the campaign; the War Minister was furious
with Count Andreossy, the officer in charge of the Commissariat,
for not carrying out his instructions; Andreossy held Andre
Marchand, the former Inspector General of the Commissariat,
responsible; Marchand complained that the time had been too
short and the circumstances unfavourable; as far as the Intendant
General, Sicard, was concerned, the sole culprit was the War
Minister, and the War Minister accused the Quartermaster
General, whom he himself had appointed, of abysmal ignorance.
So it went on, till every divisional quartermaster and store
superintendent had said his piece.
  Finally, on 30th November 1824, the Commission of Enquiry
produced a Rapport au Roi. ... Its length was phenomenal: it
ran to five volumes in large quarto size with more than 2,000
pages. It was touching to see how the resume endeavoured to
cast a mantle of Christian brotherly love over the shortcomings
of the civil servants and to conceal the fact that the report was a
shattering indictment of the War Minister and the whole military
bureaucracy under him. It was, indeed, possible, by juggling
with figures, by adding or subtracting millions of rations, to
show that the War Minister had really accumulated adequate
supplies of provisions at the Pyrenees frontier or arranged for
their delivery.   Given this kind of sweeping generalization,
Ouvrard’s assertion that no preparations had been made at
Bayonne was described as incorrect. There were, in fact, only
1,500,000 rations of forage for the 25,000 horses of the 100,000-
strong army, and even the Commission considered this too little.
There was virtually no dry biscuit, although it was important
as the only substitute the soldiers had for bread. This too the
Commission found inadequate. But a cautious reckoning showed
that at the beginning of April diere were sufficient stocks of
flour, rice, vegetables and cognac at the frontier to keep the army
well supplied for the first few weeks of the campaign. Unfortun¬
ately no one knew of their existence, neither the Due d’Angou-
leme nor the Chief of General Staff, nor, for that matter, the
Intendant General, Sicard, himself. Before       Ouvrard arrived
             Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain         179

at Bayonne it was generally assumed that the supplies were
completely inadequate.
  All this the report could not deny, so it moved on hastily
to deal with the vast reserve supplies which the far-seeing War
Minister had built up for the months after the start of the
campaign. For a period of six months, the Commission stated,
the army could have drawn on these reserve supplies, but it was
compelled to add, regretfully, that there were no means of trans¬
porting diem to the army. For the War Minister had omitted to
provide transport. It would have required 7,200 provision or
munition waggons, 34,900 horses with crews. The War Minister
had ordered only about 500 waggons and not all of these had
actually arrived. On the other hand, no plan had been drawn up
to tap the only possible alternative source of supply, Spain; the
money was there but no single individual who could have made
the necessary decision on the spot. So at the Bayonne headquarters,
the report continued, feeling was running high, when Ouvrard
suddenly appeared on the scene. The Commission could not
very well deny that everyone, and especially the Prince, gave a
sigh of relief when someone arrived who was known to be a
man of action and of experience.
  All the more reason for the members of the Commission to
move on rapidly to the price Ouvrard demanded to save the
campaign. It was shameful of him to ask for advance payments,
to require that his staff be paid by the government, to stipulate a
completely   unbureaucratic    system   of accounting,    and—the
height of impertinence—to demand that any disputes be sub¬
mitted to an arbitration tribunal. Naturally great prominence
was given to the unusual contract concerning vehicles and the
hire of horses, but the report actually admitted at a later stage
that Ouvrard, by applying his principle of living on the country,
was still using only 300 waggons two months after the campaign
had begun. The Commission expressed consternation at the
War Minister’s comparative figures, the source of which was
never divulged, showing the prices then current in Spain and
the prices fixed in Ouvrard’s contract. The War Minister was
confident that he had discovered a discrepancy of thirty million
180                           Ouvrard

francs on food and forage supplies alone. This did not emerge
very convincingly in the report, for it showed that, of the sixty-
five million claimed by Ouvrard, a total of fifty million was
approved. Actually the Commission’s report itself ruled out any
possibility of Ouvrard having made such net profits by pointing
out that Ouvrard had handed over the actual business transactions
to Spanish sub-contractors. In other words, as he had done in
1789 with the paper deal and later with the Mexican project, he
resorted to the same method of leaving the subsequent running
profits to others.
  Army quartermasters, who to their chagrin had found them¬
selves learning the tricks of their own trade from the civilian
Ouvrard and even taking orders from him, testified before the
Commission that the transfer of business to Spanish contractors
had not benefited the army. If the detailed evidence that filled
the entire fourth volume of the report was to be believed, then a
remarkable picture emerged. At the head of the marching columns
the military officials were busily collecting foodstuffs from the
local inhabitants against promises of money, while at the tail-end
the population were pestering the officers or Ouvrard’s staff for
money which was no longer there, because it had been paid to
Ouvrard in advance. Although, only a few sentences before,
Ouvrard had handed over all deliveries to sub-contractors, his
hirelings were bringing up the rear of each column, collecting
receipts in the villages and only paying cash at a substantial dis¬
count. There can be no doubt that Ouvrard stood to gain quite
considerably by the Bayonne contracts—he did, after all, per¬
form a major rescue operation—but to represent him as a failure
was to ignore the fact that, right up to the end of the campaign,
the Due d’Angouleme refused time and again to have him re¬
placed by die military bureaucrats. So it is only one of many
contradictions in the mass of documents published in 1824 when
the report concludes, with an obsequious bow to the Due
d’Angouleme: “If, even so, it was found possible to effect the
deliveries, this was due entirely to the general confidence in the
sterling qualities of the Prince, in his speedy decisions, in the
skill of his military operations, and—it must be said openly—
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain         181

in the honour which everyone derived from being privileged to
contribute to his success.”
  The tribute to the Prince was followed by a slap in the face for
Ouvrard: “The business transactions initiated by Ouvrard were
ruinous to the public interest.” The Commission did not think
it necessary to investigate other items of expenditure not con¬
cerned with supplies.
  While the government were still debating what action should
be taken following this adverse report on Ouvrard, he was
suddenly confronted by a new and, for the moment, much more
dangerous enemy: Armand Seguin. Seguin was well known in
Paris as a double-dyed scoundrel. By profession a chemist, he
had laid the foundations of his great fortune about the same time
as Ouvrard, in 1795. He had managed to convince the Conven¬
tion that he could reduce the normal period required for tanning
leather, from one to two years, to seven to eight days, and in the
case of calfskin even to twenty-four hours. The Convention gave
him two properties, a great deal of money and a contract for
the entire supply of army boots. Seguin supplied the leather and
the boots, but the soles were like cardboard. Yet together with this
commercial instinct he possessed exquisite taste. His palais in the
Rue d’Anjou contained a famous picture gallery and a delightful
music-room. (He had one peculiar mania: he took to pieces old
Italian violins from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in
an attempt to discover the secret of their beautiful tone.) Next to
his bedroom was a chemical laboratory, in which he also pro¬
duced an incredible number of pamphlets. So that no one could
see into his park, he surrounded it with a twenty-foot-high
embankment covered with shrubs. In his riding-stable he had
forty magnificent horses, which he seldom rode himself but
constantly admired. Although he also kept eight coach-horses,
when his wife went out she was given thirty sous to take a cab.
  This strange character had a lively sense of humour in every¬
thing except money. Ouvrard was made painfully aware of this
in December 1824. In February 1823, two months before Ouvrard
left for Bayonne, Seguin had fought a successful legal action
against him over the unhappy liquidation of the Mexican affair,
182                               Ouvrard

which Napoleon had so abruptly terminated. When Ouvrard went
to Spain in 1805, Seguin had taken over part of the payments on
the large loan which Ouvrard had made to the government *
Seguin earned a fixed commission, all the proceeds going to
Ouvrard and Vanlerberghe, who, however, guaranteed Seguin
against any losses he might suffer. When the scandal broke and
Napoleon held all those involved responsible, he demanded
1,600,000 francs, from Seguin. Ouvrard paid it to the State
Treasury. But it was immediately set off by the authorities
against Ouvrard’s debts and Seguin had to pay the same amount
himself. He quoted the indemnity clause. Ouvrard, incensed at the
idea of having to pay twice, refused. Seguin had to wait twenty
years before he saw an opportunity of getting his money back.
On 27th February 1823 the Court condemned Ouvrard to repay
Seguin’s debt with compound interest—a total of three million
francs. Ouvrard refused before the war and he continued to re¬
fuse after the war. He had spent three years in prison rather than
pay Napoleon and he proposed to treat Seguin in the same way.
The challenge was accepted. On Christmas Eve 1824, just as he
was leaving his office in the Rue du Brae for home, a heavy hand
fell on his shoulder. Ouvrard was escorted—for the third time—
to Sainte-Pelagie. It was the fifth time he had been arrested.
  This time Ouvrard apparently had reasons of his own for not
making his imprisonment quite so comfortable as before. He
acquired two rooms from other inmates, one for himself, the
other as an office, but he furnished them very modestly. The floor
was covered with a plain baize cloth; there was a plain stove, a
few chairs, a mirror costing forty francs, an alabaster clock and an
old iron camp-bed. For Ouvrard life in prison could not have been
simpler. But his hopes of being left in peace to enjoy these simple
surroundings were soon dashed, for within three weeks he had
started on a round tour of the prisons of Paris. On 12th February
1825 he was transferred to the criminal prison. Having sampled
Sainte-Pelagie, the Abbaye and Vincennes, he finally saw the
inside of the Conciergerie, in which so many State prisoners,
  * The rate of commission on Seguin’s loans was the excessively high one
of 18 per cent, for Ouvrard, liable as he was at any time to the depredations
of Napoleon, was a very bad risk.—T.A.B.C.
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain        lSj

amongst them Marie-Antoinette, had spent their last hours.
Following the Rapport au Roi, the Minister of Justice was in¬
structed “to proceed according to the laws of the Realm”, and
Ouvrard was accordingly accused of having bribed senior State
officials and generals ot the French army. It was rumoured that
Guilleminot had engineered a lucrative post for his brother-in-
law, and that General Bordesoulle had been in a position, on his
return home, to buy an estate worth 600,000 francs. The Baron
de Joinville was said to have received 400,000 francs for giving
his approval in Madrid to the Bayonne contracts.
  With Ouvrard’s incarceration in the Conciergerie the wheel
had come full circle. For in 1824 he entered the same prison from
which, thirty years before, he had rescued his fellow citizens
from Nantes, when they fell foul of the Revolutionary Tribunal.
Strangely enough, even in the Conciergerie he managed to
enjoy considerable freedom of movement. He was given per¬
mission to transfer his belongings from Sainte-Pelagie, two
clerks were allowed to work in the vestibule, and, when this
became too uncomfortable for Ouvrard, he was allowed to
break down the wall between the two rooms and turn them into
one. On Sundays he entertained his family, and a frequent visitor
was the famous actor, Talma, with his small son. Ouvrard was
even at liberty to attack the government, both verbally and in
print, a freedom unusual for the age.
  Ouvrard began his attacks on a purely commercial basis.
Monsieur de Villele, the latest of his great adversaries, tried to
reduce the State’s heavy interest payments by converting the 5
per cent loan to 3 per cent. There were indignant protests from
all those who held 5 per cent rentes. Ouvrard tried to whip up
this indignation by publishing letters in the Paris newspapers in
September 1825, in which he warned the public against the Prime
Minister’s intentions and offered to give details of another form
of conversion which would be quite safe, quite simple, less ruth¬
less and just as productive. Naturally this offer was not taken up.
  Ouvrard was soon to have an opportunity of giving an
account of himself. But for the time being he lapsed into silence
in order to obtain trial by the Court of Peers. In December 1825,
184                          Ouvrard

when he was brought before the Cour Royale, the Public Prosecu¬
tor, Bellart, complained of the obstinacy of the accused: “What¬
ever questions one puts to him—he never replies. If one asks him
to explain a very significant fact—he does not know what one is
talking about. If one shows him a letter—he does not know who
it came from. If one asks him to clarify a certain passage—he does
not know what the correspondent had in mind. If one enquires
how he came by such and such a paper—he does not remember.
If he is called upon to say whether a certain matter turned out
thus—he thinks: yes or he thinks: no. But he is unable either to
confirm or to deny it.”
  But Ouvrard’s tactics proved effective, for the Supreme Court
found the whole affair so embarrassing that it declared itself in¬
competent to deal with it: only the Chamber of Peers could
decide whether its    two   members,   Count    Guilleminot and
General Bordesoulle, had accepted bribes. Until this decision was
reached, judgement could not be passed on Ouvrard.
  The Court of Peers decided to take the matter up. In
February 1826 Ouvrard had to return to the Conciergerie. Two
months later the hour of freedom seemed to be at hand. On 22nd
May a Commission declared that it was convinced of the inno¬
cence of the accused generals. But on 10th June the Court of
Peers decided to make a fresh investigation of the Bayonne
contracts, regardless of the bribery charges. A second edition of
the five-volume report of the previous Commission was issued.
A fresh report by the Chairman was a shattering indictment not
merely of the War Minister but also of the first report. Such food
supplies as had been accumulated around Bayonne were not even
available for the troops when the advance began. All the War
Minister’s orders came too late. Forage: “There was neidier hay,
nor straw, nor oats.” Transportation: not even the 495 waggons
were there as stated. Administrative staff: hardly trustworthy and
undermanned; of 157 doctors only forty were present when the
troops marched off. The final conclusion: “The contract writh
Ouvrard may have been carelessly drawn up, but it was justified
by events.” So on 3rd August the Court of Peers acquitted all
the accused, including Ouvrard, of the charge of corruption.
              Comedy and Scandal: with the Army to Spain          185

None the less, the question of attempted corruption was referred
back to the ordinary courts. It was decided that Ouvrard should
remain in custody till this question was settled.
  Another three months elapsed before judgement was passed.
Then at last, on 9th November 1826, the final stage was reached.
“All lawsuits,” remarked Ouvrard, “have a natural tendency to
expand indefinitely; mine was unique in that it contracted more
and more.” And, in fact, this mammoth trial petered out miserably
in a common police court.
  Ouvrard was acquitted and released. Even the Public Prosecu¬
tor had withdrawn his charges. The general public had almost
entirely lost interest. “It is our greatest weakness in France,” said
one contemporary observer, “that we are immediately excited by
a major event. In a burst of enthusiasm we put pen to paper but
almost always we catch no more than a glimpse of the truth. We
do not give it time to make a proper impact on our minds. When
it eventually does, the matter has long since been settled and has
lost all interest.” Ouvrard would certainly have found little to
add to this summing-up. An innocent man, he had wasted two
years of his life in custody. He had been severely punished for
saving the army and the country from disgrace and perhaps from
disaster, against a War Minister’s will.
   Even now, however, Ouvrard was still not a free man. As the
government was not prepared to fulfil the Bayonne contracts or
to accept arbitration, but was prepared to go back on the solemn
word of the Due d’Angouleme as commander-in-chief, Ouvrard’s
disputed millions were simply not paid. In the circumstances, he
could not see his way to paying Seguin the three million francs, a
debt imposed on him by another quirk of fate. So he returned to
Sainte-Pelagie, where he remained a further three years. Not until
the end of 1829 was he finally set free. The moment of his release
was fortunate. For once again France was about to be faced with
crucial political decisions and, as before, there was everything to
be said for making certain long-term provisions. And—some¬
thing that meant a great deal to Ouvrard—he was soon to have
the opportunity for a final showdown with competitors who were
steadily growing in power, the Rothschilds of Paris and London.
                              Twelve




      The Slump of 1830j Battle with Rothschild




D   URING his five years of imprisonment Ouvrard had been
far from idle. Whereas in Vincennes in 1810 he found it necessary
to scatter and pick up pins in order to preserve his sanity, he
spent the period from 1824 to 1829, while he was waiting to be
released, in planning, discussing, corresponding and dictating. He
did not employ two clerks in prison merely to create an impres¬
sion. Apart from the documents he printed in his defence, he also
produced several pamphlets attacking his        former colleague
Tourton, who was suing him for part of the profits from the
Spanish campaign. MacGregor, one of the generals in the
Spanish War of Independence, enlisted his help to get property
acquired in Colombia legally recognized in Madrid. A large
number of people visited Ouvrard in the debtors’ prison in the
hope—it was a vain hope!—of interesting him in the sort of
wild speculation that was rife at the time. Ouvrard was primarily
interested in a plan, in which Lord Cochrane in London was
also involved, to restore the Order of the Knights of St. John of
the Cross in Malta and the independence of Greece by setting up
a Levant Company, which was simply the old idea of an armed
West Indies Company in a new form.
  In 1828 he even tried to revive his Mexican scheme in another
part of America, when he offered to help Colombia pay off debts,
amounting to 150 million francs, on condition that he was given
an “eternal” concession to exploit public lands, forests, lakes and
salt-mines. The offer was not accepted.
  Of vastly greater importance, however, was the writing of
                               186
               The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild           187

his memoirs, in which he set out not merely to answer the
accusations and suspicions directed against him but also to depict
his own career in the wider economic, historical and political
context of his time. For all their bias and the frequent signs of
revision, these memoirs make such impressive reading that one
might almost suspect they had been written not by a merchant
but by a professional writer of very high standing. Ouvrard’s
efforts did not go unrewarded: the three volumes comprising a
thousand pages had to be reprinted three times in one year.
  There was no lack of topicality. The then Prime Minister,
Monsieur de Villele, came in for frequent and bitter attacks. He
was described as a man “who in times of emergency displays so
little courage and, when the danger has passed, plays the despot”;
a man “of petty and unscrupulous vanity, of vulgar ambitions
and quite detestable envy”. Ouvrard referred to the government
“lies”. He said that the charge of corruption must be thrown back
at it, that the refusal to accept arbitration resulted in nothing more
nor less than “common robbery” and was “the hall-mark of a
predatory system”; that the Finance Minister was “dishonest
and malicious” and that the War Minister was guilty of “an
incredible dereliction of duty, for he endangered the army’s
supplies in the face of the enemy”.
  So Ouvrard did not mince matters in defending his contracts,
a defence which he was allowed to print with impunity. He lost
all sense of proportion, however, when he came to discuss the
government’s dealings with the Rothschild brothers. The expan¬
sion of this firm touched him on the raw. In France he alone had
been in a position, which no one had seriously challenged, to
devise the really big and complex schemes. “Now the houses of
Rothschild think they are destined to be the financiers of the
world’s States.” The time was long since past, however, when the
Rothschilds could be dismissed contemptuously as mere traders,
who dealt in tobacco and liquorice, walking-sticks and lanterns,
in short, anything and everything. Ouvrard had seen how, year
after year, slowly but surely, they had expanded.
  In 1800 Nathan went to England, in 1811 James appeared in
Paris, in 1820 Solomon settled in Vienna. In 1815, when Ouvrard
l88                          Ouvrard

was going round with his plan to finance France’s war-indemnity
through Baring and Hope, the Rothschild brothers tried to
squeeze in, but at that stage all they managed to achieve was the
transfer of a few millions, which France was still able to pay in
cash to the Allies. Ouvrard had also seen them prowling around
at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, by which time they
were being invited to lunch with Metternich but still had to leave
the lion’s share to Baring and Hope. He met them again in the
autumn of 1822 at the Congress of Verona, where he tried to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the Spanish problem, and at
that time he even watched them conducting margin deals on the
Paris Bourse by spreading rumours that the intervention which
Ouvrard was urging would not take place. It may be that Ouvrard
also learned to his chagrin that after the Congress of Aix-la-
Chapelle the influential Austrian Councillor of State, Gentz,
wrote to his friend Adam Muller (the great conservative econo¬
mist) that the most profound reasoning of Alexander Baring in¬
spired less confidence in him than a penetrating (off the cuff)
judgement by one of the more intelligent Rothschilds. At all
events, it must have upset Ouvrard to see heaped upon the three
brothers so many of the honours which, for all his efforts, had
completely passed him by. Solomon had been made a Prussian
Commercial Counsellor in i8i5,Nathan Austrian Consul General
in 1822, and eventually all three were raised to the nobility,
something that Ouvrard had always coveted. Solomon even
received the Order of Saint Vladimir in return for a loan of ten
million pounds to Russia.
  Ouvrard might perhaps have resigned himself to all this, had
the Rothschild brothers not become involved in the financial
affairs of the French Government, and this at a time when
Ouvrard was in no position to defend himself, except with his
pen. So he suddenly emerged as a custodian of the public con¬
science, an aggrieved patriot, an honest taxpayer. On its monetary
transactions for the government in the Spanish War of 1823, the
house of Rothschild, it seemed, had earned 3,300,000 francs;
this was completely unwarranted. In the same year Monsieur
de Villele had “wangled twenty-three million rentes” for this
               The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild         189

firm; before they were put on the market, which had to be
stimulated with secret offers, he had told James de Rothschild
privately what was the highest offer so far made, so that the latter
was able without risk to tender only slightly more. Most scandalous
of all, however, was the fact that the brothers did not even have to
pay for the rentes they had bought—they paid the Treasury
4 per cent for them and earned 6 per cent from them. Prior to the
Treasury audit, Rothschild paid in an uncovered cheque, and
after the audit it was returned to him. Finally, the conversion of
the rentes in 1824-5, that unjust and cruel exchange of a 5 per
cent for a 3 per cent loan which was to save the State thirty-four
million a year in interest, was concocted by the Rothschilds. For
Ouvrard, who was allowed to print all these accusations with
impunity, this was the last straw.
  He and he alone in France should be permitted to conduct this
sort of business transaction, which, incidentally, he claimed to
have suggested in his newspaper appeal, though, of course, with
much greater regard for public welfare. He now let himself go.
This whole conversion was “nothing but a clever manoeuvre”,
which would guarantee the Rothschild brothers a net annual
profit of 1,400,000 francs. He pulled out the patriotic stop: what
induced the Minister to be “so generous to the German banker”?
Ouvrard hinted at some kind of involuntary treason by Monsieur
de Villele: the whole affair was, after all, “suggested by bankers,
who were in very close contact with foreign Cabinets and acted
to some extent as their tools”. Then Ouvrard, sitting in the
debtors’ prison, appealed to the anti-Semitic instincts of the
populace: “these bonds, issued by royal decree and bearing the
Arms of France, do not gain in value by first passing through
Israelite hands”. There was an appeal to the man-in-the-street:
the Minister was “filling Rothschild’s coffers with the French
taxpayers’ money”. In this way Ouvrard “exposed the crooked
methods by which the Finance Minister extracted money from
the Treasury and transferred it to Rothschild’s pockets. Any
other Minister would have been found guilty of misappropriating
public funds. By rights Monsieur de Villele should be sitting in
my place in the Conciergerie.”
igo                           Ouvrard

  Neither Rothschild nor Villele answered this attack. These
diatribes appeared, unchallenged, in four successive editions.
Presumably neither party was anxious to have his affairs discussed
in public before the courts. The result could have been, to say the
least, embarrassing. So Ouvrard had to wait for another oppor¬
tunity to bring his enemy into the open. The opportunity even¬
tually came, as indeed it was bound to come, for Rothschild
speculated “a la hausse”, Ouvrard “a la baisse”, and both in the
same stocks, namely, French rentes. In the long run only one of
the two could be right; sooner or later one of them was bound to
take grist from the other’s mill.
  It is an interesting fact that Ouvrard, the incurable optimist,
felt very pessimistic about the future in the years 1825-6. The
wave of wild speculation, which broke over France after the
Spanish war, filled him with misgiving. Whereas at the time of
the 1817-18 war loan the issuing of rentes was still an event, the
markets were now flooded with new loans, especially for American
countries. The most insecure scrip was immediately bought up.
Everyone was dealing in export goods; factories were working
day and night. Mining shares soared, Paris was in a fever of
excitement, new consortiums and companies shot up overnight
like mushrooms. “People looked for profits,” Ouvrard reported,
“in the mists of Nicaragua and the savannahs of Texas, just as
they had looked for it in Law’s time in the mists of the Mississippi
and the salt trade of Honduras.”
   Ouvrard did not allow this to unsettle him, although the trans¬
atlantic commerce in which he was so deeply interested was very
much involved, and the building fever in Paris left him completely
unmoved. All available building-sites were being bought and
broken up into fresh lots. “Paris is like a town which has been
stormed by architects and bricklayers.” A man could go to bed
poor and wake up rich. He tells the story with obvious amuse¬
ment of a laundry in Neuilly covering six arpents (about six
acres); one day the owner was asked how much he wanted for it
and named what seemed to him the very high figure of 30,000
francs; to his astonishment the potential buyer said: “Thirty
thousand francs per arpent seems a bit much,” and then paid him
               The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild       igi

six times 30,000 francs. To Ouvrard this boom seemed utter
lunacy, for he could see no possibility of property rents rising
correspondingly.
   Ouvrard was proved right. In fact, his forecast of the conver¬
sion came true remarkably quickly. Instead of 150 million francs
only 30 million could be converted. Ouvrard had always main¬
tained that the 5 per cent rente was not high enough. Now the
new 3 per cent issue slowly collapsed: from 75 to 70, from 70 to
68, from 68 to 63, to 62. The Rothschilds came hurrying to
Paris from all points of the compass, till four brothers stood
together beside the grave of a beautiful dream.
   The year was 1825. There were no major crashes, the political
situation remained stable, Europe stood firm, and yet Ouvrard
was still filled with misgiving. The remarkably inept behaviour
of the Bourbons justified his pessimism. In 1814, when Louis
entered Paris, there were tremendous scenes of rejoicing. The
streets were so festooned that whole rows of houses were no
longer visible; more than 20,000 members of the National Guard
carried flowers on their muskets; the “Te Deum” in Notre-Dame
was immensely impressive and moving. “Only those who were
actually present,” said Rochechouart, “could have any idea of
the jubilation, the acclamation and the many signs of quite
insensate joy, which Paris displayed.” Napoleon’s dictatorship
was over, and in its place was a king who, since 4th June 1814,
had promised a constitution which would guarantee the rights of
the people. But Louis died ten years later and Charles X, Comte
d’Artois, was out of sympathy with the whole trend of events.
Although parliament had become completely reactionary under
de Villele’s leadership, its mere existence disturbed the King, who
felt that the aristocracy, which had long since resumed the habits
and privileges of the ancien regime, must nevertheless be given
an even stronger position; the position of the clergy was also
strengthened as never before, so that, for example, army chap¬
lains were promoted to higher rank than divisional commanders
and made regular reports on the conduct of individual officers,
which the War Minister frequently consulted before recom¬
mending promotion.
192                          Ouvrard

   The power of the Jesuits grew by leaps and bounds; a law was
passed which imposed the same penalty for sacrilege as for parri¬
cide. The freedom of the Press and scientific development were
increasingly restricted. The feeling of resentment in Paris grew
from year to year. In 1827, at the parade on the Champ de Mars,
the obsequious servants of the King were greeted with cries of
“Down with the Ministers”, “Down with Villele”, “Down with
the Jesuits” from the ranks of the National Guard. The response
was not long in coming: the National Guard, the citizens’
army of Paris, was disbanded. Before another two years had
passed, even Villele’s Cabinet of diehard royalists was no longer
good enough for the King. Ouvrard, who was still probably the
only bear speculator in Paris, was not at all displeased by the
growing tension. He certainly expressed his satisfaction when his
arch-enemy had to make way for Prince de Polignac, an Ultra of
the deepest dye, even although the change came six years too
late for Ouvrard.
   All Ouvrard’s misgivings throughout these years, vague as
they were, were now substantiated. In August 1829 Polignac
and his friends seized power; in May 1830 the unco-operative
Chamber was dissolved; in mid-July the election results were
declared, showing that at most 125 out of 428 deputies supported
the government. What followed could not have been foreseen
by even the shrewdest of bear speculators: the King and his
Ministers agreed on a coup d’etat. Behind locked doors they
decided to dissolve the Chamber before it reassembled, to change
the electoral law by royal decree, to fill the parliament with
King’s men, and to ban all newspapers and periodicals which did
not have a special licence.
   The King and his Ministers were agreed that, if this calculated
coup was to succeed, then the element of surprise was essential.
So all rumours of a coup, which no one seriously believed, were
ironically shrugged off by the government. Mid-July passed in
an atmosphere of general unrest, no one knowing what would
happen with the resumption of parliament. But few doubted
that it would resume.
   The only one who had doubts was Ouvrard. He had been at
  Five volumes of published evidence of the Commission of
  Enquiry into Ouvrard’s financial affairs during the Spanish
           campaign. Paris, 1824. (Otto IVolff Collection)




The Conciergerie prison. View at the time of the French Revolution
                    S«;vil   uinHclihtntH-ii   Milliom u (



Nathan Rothschild. \V(under) sculp., circa 1820. Coloured engraving.
                       (Otto WoIff Collection)

The German caption, translated as “We enfold you, many millions”, is
from Schiller’s Ode to Joy (and introduced by Beethoven into his Ninth
    Symphony) alluding to the brotherhood of man the world over
               The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild          193

liberty for six months and was once more extremely well in¬
formed, better informed than the Ministers’ closest friends. The
Public Prosecutor, Bellart, once said that Ouvrard knew more
about the Ministries than the Ministers themselves. This was no
exaggeration, although for the moment he knew no more than
the Ministers, but that was quite enough.
  It is said that the London Rothschild was present at the
battlefield of Waterloo. As soon as he saw that the tide had
turned against the French, he set out hotfoot for the Channel,
and, after a stormy crossing, arrived at the Stock Exchange in
London in time to make a handsome profit. (Ouvrard was also
present at Waterloo, as Purveyor General. “I was there,” he
related subsequently with obvious gusto, “and witnessed the
finest stage drama I have ever seen.”) Fifteen years later, in 1830,
Ouvrard made hotfoot for the Channel and arrived at the
London Stock Exchange in time to set the ball rolling.
  His moment of revenge had come at last, the moment when
either bull or bear, Rothschild or Ouvrard, must come out on top.
One fine day in July—it must have been about the 20th—when
Nathan Rothschild entered the London Stock Exchange at his
usual time and at his usual unhurried pace, he attracted even more
attention than normal. What would he do? There was Ouvrard, the
Paris financier, selling French rentes at steadily falling prices, a
transaction in those same State bonds in which the Rothschilds
held such a high stake. It was, after all, the Rothschild brothers
who, only a few months before, had underwritten the last French
Government loan, which was to pay for the Algerian campaign.
There   were   78,300,000    at   102   per   cent   and   Rothschild
had met with strong competition from other firms. Nathan
Rothschild was completely at a loss to understand what Ouvrard
was up to. His firm had an exclusive news service and, if there
were any grounds for alarm in Paris, his brother James would
certainly have informed him with all possible speed. It was only
a few days later, when Ouvrard still continued to sell million
after million on surrender, without himself possessing the scrip,
that Nathan became worried. Not that there was much he could
do now. If he was to prevent the exchange-rate of the rentes from
194                           Ouvrard

collapsing completely, then he had to buy what Ouvrard was
offering. Ever since 1824 Ouvrard had been waiting for just
such a “rare opportunity to find a solvent opponent on a bear
market”.
  Which of the two was correctly informed? Nathan or Ouvrard?
As James had still not sent any message, Nathan despatched an
express courier to Paris. James was no less bewildered than
Nathan. If Ouvrard was acting so confidently, then he must have
his reasons, but he himself knew of none. Although the 25 th
July was a Sunday, James leapt into his carriage and drove to the
Ministry of the Interior. He implored the Minister to tell him the
truth about the official decrees, of which there was so much talk,
and about the resumption of parliament, on which there was some
doubt. James reminded the Minister that as State banker he had
certain responsibilities and that he must be informed of any
political plans before anyone else. The Minister said that he could
not understand how such a shrewd man as Rothschild could
become so excited over baseless rumours.        The government
knew of nothing, was planning nothing and feared nothing.
Moreover, the Prince de Polignac himself had given the Russian
Ambassador, Pozzo di Borgo, on Saturday night his most solemn
assurance that no major development was contemplated.
  The following morning, Monday, 26th July 1830, the official
decrees were printed in the Moniteur. Only a few hours before
Rothschild saw the Minister of the Interior, Charles X, having
attended High Mass, had put his name to the suspension of the
constitution. The King and his Court took the precaution of
retiring to St. Cloud, outside the gates of Paris. “The citizens
of Paris,” Marshal Marmont once remarked, “always see them¬
selves as heroes in time of peace.” Marmont, commander of the
Paris garrison, learned to his cost in July 1830 how misplaced
his bon mot had been. On Tuesday the 27th Paris realized
that it either had to fight or lose its freedom and its civic
rights.
   The struggle began with clashes in the Rue St. Honore, the
street in which Robespierre had once lived. Gendarmes were
pelted with stones and opened fire. A state of siege was declared.
               The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild       195

Troops were brought in to occupy key-points in the capital: the
Boulevard des Capucines, the Place du Carrousel, the Pont Neuf,
the Place Vendome and the Place de la Bastille. The mob felled
trees in the boulevards and set up barricades. The soldiers were
bombarded with slates torn off the roofs. The white flags of the
Bourbons were trampled in the gutter. “Down with the Bour¬
bons.” A murderous hail of bullets poured down on the troops
from the windows. Whole columns were cut off and massacred.
The mob took a special delight in storming and plundering the
Archbishop’s Palace; a Jesuit monastery was the next target.
Such was the fury of the mob that 12,000 regular soldiers were
thrown back. Many isolated groups and three complete regiments
joined forces with the civilians. Marmont concentrated the
remainder around the Louvre and Tuileries, but they too had to
be abandoned. The Marshal withdrew his troops, leaving over
1,000 dead behind, more than twice as many in three days as
had been killed during the whole Spanish War of 1823.
  The Court, which remained as optimistic as ever, issued only
one order; namely, that the royal treasure should be taken to St.
Cloud. But on 30th July even Charles X saw the red light: he
rescinded the official decrees, but it was three days too late. On
2nd August he was forced to abdicate and flee to England. Prince
de Polignac was caught disguised as a servant and was condemned
to lifelong imprisonment. Louis Philippe, Due d’Orleans, a
liberal, ascended the throne. Soon all that the people of France
remembered of Charles X’s reign and of his Ministers was a
series of amusing and not very flattering caricatures.
  Marshal Marmont was not the only one who was impressed by
the energy and singlemindedness of the citizens of Paris in their
fight for freedom. Ouvrard, still in London, must also have been
surprised and delighted. The effect on the price of French State
bonds exceeded even his wildest hopes. On the first day the rente
dropped only 4 points in Paris; the Dauphin remarked confidently
at St. Cloud: “It will go up again.” But it dropped another 20,
then 30. The 3 per cent loan, which had stood at 75-80 before the
coup, now' stood at 50. By December it had pulled up to 58^,
but by February 1831 it was down to 48. In March it was still
196                          Ouvrard

only worth 53*20, in June it had risen to 60, but only ten years
after the Revolution did it return to normal at 73.
  The Rothschild brothers were beside themselves. Solomon
and James had remained in Paris throughout the troubles, not
merely their money but also their lives in jeopardy. As financial
advisers to the old regime, they were afraid of being lynched. But
no one molested them. Their financial losses had, on the other
hand, been very heavy; when the house of Rothschild in London,
Paris and Frankfurt worked out the extent of the damage, it
came to thirty-four million francs.
  A substantial part of this money went into Ouvrard’s pocket.
His great ambition, as he explained in 1824 to the London banker
Sir Isaac Goldsmid, had been “to divert Rothschild’s money
legally into our safe”. The bonds, which he had sold at short rates
before the Paris coup to Nathan Rothschild—who was compelled,
however reluctantly, to back them—he was now able to buy
cheaply in order to hand them over to their “rightful owner”.
  The duel was over and Ouvrard returned to Paris. It is im¬
possible to say how much he had gained. One of his firm’s bill-
brokers estimated his net profit at two million francs, but it
must have been considerably more. In any case, Ouvrard was
once more the man of the hour, the lion of the Bourse. The
Conciergerie was forgotten; his memories of Monsieur Seguin
and the debtors’ prison had faded. He rented a suite of rooms
behind the Bourse and furnished them, according to contemporary
reports, “with indescribable lavishness”. It became a sort of ante¬
chamber for agents de change and a host of acquaintances, who
came from near and far to see the great man in his sanctum in the
hope of picking up a useful tip.
   But Ouvrard, never the sedentary type, was soon back in
London. The Rothschilds followed his every movement with a
suspicion born of bitter experience. “The famous Ouvrard”,
Nathan wrote to Solomon on 5 th March 1831, “today bought a
great many stocks, so tomorrow will probably bring better
reports from Paris.” He clearly found it difficult to make this man
out, for he was now engaged in bull-buying at a time when
Austria’s armed intervention in Italy had led everyone else to sell.
                 The Slump of 1830: Battle with Rothschild             ip/



Yet nine days later, on 14th March, he was back in Paris, indulging
once more in bear operations. “Casarus,* Ouvrard’s illegitimate
son [by Madame Tallien], is selling rentes”, James wrote to
Solomon in Vienna. “This is frightening people from buying,
and any slight drop immediately has a damping effect on their
spirits.”
   Many other letters in the same vein passed from London to Paris,
from Paris to Vienna or Frankfurt, and reflected the anxiety which
the Rothschild brothers felt about Ouvrard’s activities. They were
afraid of him, because he had beaten them. They still bore the
marks of the lion’s claws. And yet there could be no doubt that
the centre of financial power in France was no longer Ouvrard
but Rothschild. The past ten years of Ouvrard’s life had taken too
heavy a toll; his five years in prison had drained his energy. He
would never again completely recover from the innumerable set¬
backs he had suffered. He would still try his hand at various
schemes; finding a husband for the Duchesse de Berry in 1833,!
raising a loan for Don Carlos in Spain in 1836—but these gestures
lacked the breathtaking grandeur which had characterized so
many of his transactions up to the July revolution. From now on
Ouvrard was more or less confined, and with varying degrees of
success, to gambling on the Stock Exchange.
   When Ouvrard reached this turning-point in his life he was
sixty years old.




   * He meant Cabarrus.—T.A.B.C.
   f This episode is an amusing example of Ouvrard’s resourcefulness. The
Duchesse, the widowed mother of the legitimist pretender, the Comte de
Chambord, was found to be pregnant. A hasty search had to be made for a
husband. Once again Ouvrard was sent for; he knew exactly where to look
for a princeling of suitably ancient lineage and—owing to heavy indebted¬
ness—suitably pliable, and he paved the way with a gift of 300,000 francs,—
T.A.B.C.
                              Thirteen




                 The Last Quarter-Million




FrOM the time Ouvrard abandoned politics, his tracks become
hard to follow. He was playing the market now here, now there;
at one moment in London, at another in Paris, depending upon
which of the two places offered the best prospects in any par¬
ticular deal. But finally Ouvrard appears to have overcome his
restlessness to the point of taking up permanent residence in
London.
  It was in London that a tragi-comedy of speculation began,
which showed that not only the Rothschilds had reason to curse
the French rente. In 1840 it was the turn of Ouvrard after his
resounding, much admired victory in 1830. The story, which is
of slight importance in itself, must be told because it revealed him
in an entirely different light from the generous and intelligent
man one has met so far. Ouvrard had worked out a new form of
margin-trading in rentes. It could only succeed, however, if he
himself remained in the background. Every move he made was
still being watched for market trends.
   It was by no means a simple operation. More than one middle¬
man was necessary to guarantee secrecy and all his reliable
nominees were well known. Finally Ouvrard thought he had hit
upon a solution. Looking back afterwards, he must often have
bitterly regretted his carelessness, for soon he was to meet in the
court room the very men whom he chose as his agents. Legal
records, still extant, enable us to reconstruct these events quite
accurately.
  Ouvrard began by transferring a considerable sum of money
                                198
                       The Last Quarter-Million                    jpp
from London to one of the lesser Paris banks. But not in his own
name. He used the name of an Englishman, Francis de Berkem,
who was a bill-broker on the London Exchange, and who, as a
safety measure, was to open the deal himself in Paris and there
to introduce the bankers, Louis d’Eichtal et Fils, to their new
customer. So Mr. de Berkem arrived in Paris in July 1840 and
started with a minor rente operation. He made use of a local
broker, a certain Textoris, whose security was the credit balance
with Eichtal et Fils. Berkem then departed and Ouvrard himself
set off from London via Brussels, carrying a letter from de Berkem
to Eichtal et Fils, authorizing the bearer to carry on where he had
left off. The current credit account was, of course, still in Berkem’s
name.
  The first thing Ouvrard did on reaching Paris on 18th August
was to fill in the blank space in the letter with the name Paul de la
Gironniere, a gentleman of private means. In what dark corner
he found this second man of straw with the beautiful name is not
known. He installed him in his own hotel in Paris where he
would be readily available and could not make any stupid mistakes,
for Ouvrard was clearly more concerned about his money than
about the personal comfort of his hireling. Monsieur de la
Gironniere did not, in fact, make any stupid mistakes but he got
up to some tricks which were not at all to Ouvrard’s liking.
  To begin with, however, it was the broker Textoris who gave
Ouvrard trouble. The returns for the month of August were
satisfactory to all concerned, but a new deal which started in the
beginning of September came to an abrupt and rather disreputable
end. Textoris was summoned to the Hotel de Paris, where de la
Gironniere gave him written instructions, signed by himself but
dictated by Ouvrard, to buy 120,000 francs’ worth of French
3 per cent rentes, nominal value four million francs, as soon as
the premium rate stood at fifty centimes. It was such a simple
operation that Ouvrard, who in any case did not want to be seen
at the Bourse, took a few days off and spent them with his son
Julien at his Chateau Gilly and with his daughter, the Comtesse
de Rochechouart, at Chatillon-sur-Seine.
  He thought it safer to take de la Gironniere with him. But he
200                          Ouvrard

was sadly mistaken in thinking that all was well, for at Chatillon
de la Gironniere received a letter from Textoris on ioth Sep¬
tember, in which he explained, with every appearance of inno¬
cence, the extraordinary way in which he had carried out his
instructions. He had bought 120,000 francs’ worth of rentes, at
rates of 77-50-78-25, although the closing price, “due to a panic,
the reason for which I could not ascertain”, was 73-50. The best
part of it was that Textoris ignored the strict instructions given
him to buy only at a premium of fifty centimes and paid a one-
franc premium.
   Ouvrard was beside himself. Not only was there no hope of
making a profit but there was a real danger of losing money.
He immediately returned to Paris and wrote to London to de
Berkem, through whose account the whole business was passing,
that he should refuse to recognize the deal as it was contrary to
instructions. Strangely enough, however, he apparently did not
tell de la Gironniere to lodge a protest with Textoris. He may
have thought that, by some fluke, he would still break even on
settlement of the September accounts and that, in any case, he
had Textoris well under control. Ouvrard certainly assumed that
he was covered. Textoris had exceeded his instructions and had
therefore acted without authority. Moreover, the whole opera¬
tion, in Ouvrard’s view, was a swindle, as Textoris had not, in
actual fact, bought at 77-50-78-25 but at the closing price of
73-50. He was hoping to use the difference to make good, at
Ouvrard’s expense, losses he had previously incurred. The truth
would come out, as soon as Textoris was made to present his
books and the proofs of purchase!
  Legally there is no doubt that Textoris had exceeded his in¬
structions and that the rente purchase was not binding on the
person who had issued the instructions. Unfortunately Ouvrard
had overlooked one small point; namely, that it was not he or
Francis de Berkem in London who had formally issued the in¬
structions but Paul de la Gironniere. And de la Gironniere now
started to be awkward. He suddenly decided to act on his own.
He could afford to do so. Textoris, it is true, had paid Ouvrard
100,000 francs, but that was before the dispute began, and the
                      The Last Quarter-Million                 201

money had been used for further speculation, again in Gironniere’s
name though on Ouvrard’s instructions and this time without
the help of Textoris.
  For a swindler it was a very happy situation and, when the
time came to settle the September accounts, Textoris had no
difficulty in persuading Gironniere to wind up the whole affair,
including the disastrous September speculation, in defiance of
Ouvrard, which meant recognizing the rente purchase at high
rates and with one-franc premiums, which had been directly
contrary to Ouvrard’s instructions. The sum involved was
227,220 francs. Ouvrard tried to get some kind of temporary
injunction but he was too late. An hour before he entered Tex-
toris’s office with the legal document in his hand, Gironniere
had received the balance of 22,324-75 francs from Textoris and
moved hurriedly out of the Hotel de Paris.
   Ouvrard was, to all intents and purposes, out on the street. He
had no control over de Berkem’s account with Eichtal et Fils,
in other words he could not draw on his own account. Nor did
he have any evidence of the 227,220 francs owed him by Textoris
and Gironniere, for the latter had absconded with it. Gironniere
had not even paid Ouvrard the first 100,000 francs, which Textoris
had refunded on 20th September in Ouvrard’s presence and
which Ouvrard had re-invested in Gironniere’s name.
   Ouvrard was compelled to start on a long and wearisome
journey through the courts. He brought a simultaneous action
against Textoris and Gironniere. As far as Textoris was con¬
cerned, he had known by the end of September at the latest that
de la Gironniere was only acting as Ouvrard’s man of straw and
consequently had no authority to settle with him. As for his
original purchase, that was to be declared null and void, because
Textoris had contravened instructions and had fraudulently
misrepresented the transaction, which was completely fictitious.
De la Gironniere should be condemned to make good all losses
incurred and to give a full account of the whole business, in
particular to refund the first 100,000 francs. He should be made
to repay immediately the balance of 22,324 francs which he had
misappropriated.
202                          Ouvrard

  To Ouvrard’s dismay, the court decided on 23rd July 1841
that the Gironniere-Textoris settlement was in order. Textoris
could not be expected to know that he was dealing with Ouvrard
and not with de la Gironniere, as the latter put his signature to
hundreds of thousands of francs and issued all instructions.
The rente purchase of 9th September, however, was held to be
genuine, as the books presented by Textoris provided document¬
ary evidence that the purchase had been made at the high rates
stated. There was no reason to suspect fraud. As far as exceeding
the instructions was concerned—buying at a premium of one
franc instead of fifty centimes—this could only be the subject
of legal dispute between the real contracting parties, Textoris
and Gironniere. Monsieur de la Gironniere had lodged no com¬
plaint. The judges were unable to form a sufficiently clear
picture of Gironniere’s obligations towards Ouvrard, and both
parties were advised to try to reach a settlement out of court with
the help of a third party nominated by the court. The judges
found that Ouvrard should pay all costs.
   Although he was now over seventy, Ouvrard was still as
tough as ever and refused to take the very explicit judgement of
the court lying down. In the appeal submitted by his lawyers
in April 1842, he once more went into the attack, all guns firing
and trained upon the whole of Paris: “Justice cannot be fobbed off
with words and pretexts. She must have facts, and she knows how
to assess them. She must have the truth. She seeks it with end¬
less care and persistence, and it is hard to evade her searching
enquiries.”
   This was the last court-case in which Ouvrard fought for
high stakes, with the help of French advocates, with all the cut
and thrust of legal dialectic and with prodigious pathos. Unfor¬
tunately it is not known whether Dame Truth displayed in the
court of appeal those features which Ouvrard would have liked
her to display. But, to whichever side the scales were finally
tipped, Ouvrard, having been forced to admit the validity of that
foolhardy purchase of rentes, doubtless considered himself
fortunate when he recovered the amount Paul de la Gironniere
had received from Textoris.
                       The Last Quarter-Million                  203

  Such, then, was the outcome of the ambitious, carefully planned
gamble, which       had brought Ouvrard hurrying across from
London to Paris and for which he had enlisted the services of
two “dummies” and a broker. His enemies, of whom he had
many right up to his death, must have rubbed their hands at what
they regarded as an act of poetic justice; that the old fox, who had
stolen so many grapes in his lifetime, should at last have fallen
into a trap. But, had Ouvrard written his memoirs in 1842 instead
of 1826, he would surely have maintained, with a profound and
genuine sense of grievance, that this trap had also shown how
almost all his carefully laid and honestly devised schemes had
come to grief on the baseness of his agents. The impartial observer,
on the other hand, can only express his astonishment that a specu¬
lator of such genius should have made his last bow in such a
pitiable fashion.
                            Fourteen




                    The Final Reckoning




SlX years after the abortive deal in rentes, Ouvrard settled his
final account. He died in London in October 1846. There is
no record of those last hours when he had to leave the life to
which he had been so attached.
  Ouvrard’s death passed unnoticed. His contemporaries were
unmoved and, in fact, uninterested. Sixteen years had passed
since he had fought his last major battle in July 1830, and during
those years he had grown old. He had outlived his time. Friends
and enemies had died before him. Madame de Montesson, the
charming old lady whose circle of acquaintances had proved
invaluable to him, died in 1806; Josephine, the second of the
women who had helped him, in 1814. Berthier, Napoleon’s
chief of staff, through whose friendship he had come by untold
wealth, threw himself out of a window in Bamberg in 1815. His
wife died in 1818. Vanlerberghe, who had been both friend and
ally, succumbed, a broken man, in 1819. Fouche followed him
in 1820. Napoleon, who was only a year older than Ouvrard,
died in 1821, and Richelieu in 1822. In 1824 it was the turn of
Cambaceres; in 1826 Ouvrard lost his youngest daughter. Barras
survived at the Chateau of Chaillot near Paris in bourgeois
splendour until 1829. Madame Tallien, Comtesse de Caraman,
Princesse de Chimay, passed away in Brussels in 1836 at the
age of sixty, followed the same year by Seguin. The same year
the news of Nathan Rothschild’s death sent a shock of disbelief
through the London Exchange. Barbe-Marbois hung on, as old
                                 204
                        The Final Reckoning                    205

as Methuselah, until 1837. Talleyrand, who had been French
Ambassador in London since 1830 and had led such a full life,
died, at the ripe age of eighty-four, in 1838. The Bourbon chief
of staff, Comte Guilleminot, was cultivating his garden until
1840, and in 1841 Ouvrard had the satisfaction of seeing the
War Minister, Bellune, carried to his last resting-place. Only
Alexander Baring survived Ouvrard by two years.
  So   Ouvrard outlived not only four different regimes—
Republic, Consulate, Empire and Bourbon Monarchy—but also
all the leading men of his day with whom he had had dealings.
It was little wonder that he soon became a spent force, that he
looked round in vain for familiar landmarks. When he died in
1846 Ouvrard had seventy-six phenomenally eventful years
behind him. What did he get out of them? His financial position
at the end remains something of a mystery. Three diarists, who
knew him personally, have spoken of the hardships of his closing
years. When Nolte met Ouvrard in 1835 in Rome, he described
him as neatly but shabbily dressed. Captain Gronow even claims
that the rente speculation of 1830, which began so well, finally
ruined Ouvrard, because he was reckoning that Louis Philippe
would soon go and that another slump would follow. The
Comtesse de Boigne states quite categorically that Ouvrard died
a poor man. Yet he can hardly have died a pauper in London. A
few years before he had visited his son at his chateau at Gilly,
which was almost certainly a present from his father. And if
his brother was able to live in another chateau at Douy, then it
was probably as Ouvrard’s nominee. His daughter, the Comtesse
de Rochechouart, also had her chateau at Chatillon-sur-Seine. In
1840 he could still gamble with a quarter of a million francs, so
that his private fortune must have been considerably larger.
Ouvrard does not appear to have fallen into the same desperate
straits as Law, who in his declining years had to pawn his diamond
ring and, when he died, left only a few pictures.
  One thing is certain: Ouvrard lost a great deal of money. Yet
the countless millions he lost always seemed to him merely a
step towards further gains. With his imperialist vision, he aimed
at heights of financial power, which he only achieved for brief
206                            Ouvrard

periods. Nothing came of the financial dynasty, which he dreamt
of establishing on the Baring model. His son, Dr. Cabarrus, who
had a great talent for commerce, did not bear his name but the
maiden name of his mother, Madame Tallien; as for his only
legitimate son, Julien Ouvrard, all that he could achieve, with
the help of his father’s money, was a seat in the chamber, which
led to some kind of administrative post on its Finance Committee.
Fate also denied Ouvrard many of the public honours which
were heaped upon other successful financiers such as the Roths¬
childs. And yet few of these men, who were given such pref¬
erential treatment, ennobled and covered with honours, could
stand serious comparison with him. They lacked his tremendous
vitality. They lacked his vision. Few of them possessed his mental
agility. He surpassed them all in charm and courtesy. Some made
even higher profits, but no one could compare with him for sheer
brilliance.
  At the same time, Ouvrard was sadly mistaken when he
ascribed the failure of his schemes to external circumstances alone,
to lack of ability in his partners or malice in his adversaries. He
himself was the final arbiter of success or failure. He trusted all
too much in his star, which had led him to such dizzy heights in
the ten short years from the beginning of the Revolution to the
end of the Directory. Like his great adversary, Napoleon, he
finally lost all sense of reality, of what was really possible. Specu¬
lation on a big scale gave him so much personal enjoyment that
the success he looked for was out of all proportion, whereas he
greatly underrated the difficulties. He became obsessed with
more and more astronomical figures and chose to ignore the
relatively confined space in which business had to be conducted.
And when he could no longer turn a blind eye to confines of
reality, he tried to employ political weapons, of which he had
no experience, in order to widen the field of commerce. His main
weakness, however, was that he lacked an interest in detail which
would have curbed his passion for expansion; that his tremendous
capacity for imaginative planning was not matched by an equal
ability to execute the practical details of his plans. So inevitably
the scales were weighted against Ouvrard as they had been
                        The Final Reckoning                     207

twenty-five years before against Napoleon Bonaparte. Both men
failed magnificently, but the result—from a commercial and a
social viewpoint—was a fiasco.
  Yet in 1846 Ouvrard could look back on a life that had been
remarkably full and successful, a life of frequent, outstanding
triumphs. He was also sufficient of a philosopher not to allow his
setbacks to blind him to the richness and variety of his life. Sit¬
ting at his English fireside in those closing months, he could
review many decades in which he had not only witnessed but
also helped to shape a momentous period of world history. And
the parting was not made any easier by the knowledge that one
final, splendid throw could still be made. For the time bad
almost come to make good any losses he may have suffered in
1830, when he is said to have miscalculated the length of Louis
Philippe’s reign. The year 1848, in which Louis Philippe actually
lost his throne, was already throwing out faint shadows, and
Ouvrard was certainly contemplating yet another major flutter
when death decided otherwise. But even if he had scored one
further resounding success, it would not have changed the overall
picture of his life. When death closed the account in October 1846
the final statement had already been drawn up.
                            Epilogue

     In the original {German) edition of this book., Wolff’s
     collaborator, Dr. Alfred L. Schmit{, of Berlin, outlined
     some of the sources for Ouvrard’s life. In order to make
     room for the additional material that is now available to
     historians, the original Epilogue has been abbreviated.
                                              —T.A.B.C.



It has been possible to tell the story of Ouvrard’s life as it is
told here, with its many dramatic episodes and frequent flashes
of comedy, largely because of the memoirs which Ouvrard wrote
in prison and published in 1826-7. This three-volume work,
running to close on a thousand pages, is often breathtaking and
at times almost incredible. It astonished contemporaries just as
it astonishes us; many of them, indeed, were highly embarrassed
at the candid revelations contained therein. However, the fact
that it ran to three editions in two years without evoking any
serious refutation from those involved in the events described
or mentioned by name who were still alive, suggests that the
memoirs are basically reliable.
  This hypothesis has been confirmed as a result of checking
Ouvrard’s account against the most trustworthy supporting
evidence, which falls into two categories: on the one hand, the
official archives and, on the other, the correspondence of eminent
men of repute.
  The archives show, for instance, that during the Terror he
did undoubtedly destroy the list of condemned men at Nantes;
an anonymous note to this effect has survived. They also amply
confirm the prominent role he played as supply agent to the
Directory’s armies and the vast sums that passed through his
hands as naval victualler-in-chief. Napoleon’s correspondence
                                  208
                              Epilogue                           209

similarly helps to chart the vicissitudes of the Emperor’s relation¬
ship with the financier whom he could never entirely do without.
Among the documents included are the demand for repayment
of fourteen million francs in 1800 when the supply contracts with
Ouvrard were renewed, a further claim by the Emperor for com¬
mission on the export of grain to relieve the Spanish famine of
1804, and a reference to Ouvrard’s memorandum of 1810 out¬
lining his peace proposals vis-a-vis Britain.
   Ouvrard’s account of the Mexican silver affair is supplemented
by the long reports from Vincent Nolte, Hope’s agent in New
Orleans, the accuracy of which Dr. Schmitz was able to verify
in 1931 from the Hope Archives in Amsterdam. The despatches
and letters of the agent in Philadelphia, David Parish, are also
of value; see P. G. and R. Walters: “The American Career of
David Parish”, Journal of Economic History (1943-4). The
various phases of the transaction are chronicled in R. W. Hidy:
The House of Baring in American Trade and Finance (1949).
The British Government’s attitude to the affair is still “little
known and obscure”, according to F. Crouzet in Heconomie
britannique et le blocus continental 1806—1813 (1958). He found
next to nothing of relevance in the British official archives after
an exhaustive search, apart from an interesting memorandum
from Baring to Pitt and Huskisson. M. Crouzet plans to devote
an article to the whole subject, but this does not seem to have
been published as yet.
   Another Frenchman who worked in both the British and
French government archives was P. Coquelle, the translation
of whose important work appeared in 1904 as Napoleon and
England 1803-1813, and who investigated fully the peace negotia¬
tions of 1810 with Britain. Talleyrand’s complicity in these
negotiations was accepted by G. Lacour-Gayet in volume II
of Talleyrand (1930). The memoirs of Pasquier and Savary, Due
de Rovigo, also provide supplementary evidence.
   Ouvrard’s services in bringing about the early evacuation
of France by Allied occupation forces, through arranging the
series of government loans, have been confirmed by letters
from Richelieu, the Prime Minister, and the memoirs of the
210                           Epilogue

Comte de Rochechouart and of the Comtesse de Boigne. The
latter was the daughter of the French Ambassador in London,
d’Osmond, and described Ouvrard as “the most capable if not
the most honest of financiers”. Hidy: House of Baring, gives
useful details of the various loans.
   There is a vast fund of contemporary material on the Bayonne
scandal of 1823 to set against Ouvrard’s account. Relevant
memoirs include those of Castellane, Pasquier and Villele. Some
interesting British diplomatic reports on Ouvrard’s proposals
that year for a “West Indies Company” are contained in C. K.
Webster’s Britain and the Independence of Latin America (1938).
The protracted legal wrangles between Ouvrard, Seguin and the
State have left in their trail many documents, particularly the
reports in the Gazette des tribunaux.
  Ouvrard died too obscurely for his death to be noted in The
Times, the Annual Register or the Gentlemans Magafme for
1846, nor was a will proved for him at Somerset House. An entry
for his son Dr. Cabarrus is included in the Dicdonnaire de bio-
graphie fran$aise (1956); this work has not yet progressed beyond
the letter C.
  An important annotated article, overlooked by Wolff, is
G. Weill’s “Le financier Ouvrard”, in the Revue Historique for
1918. J. Savant’s Tel fut Ouvrard (1954), although written in a
popular style, is on the whole reliable and is amply provided with
reference notes. He attributes Ouvrard’s failure, in spite of ex¬
ceptional gifts, to reach the summit of success—which is generally
put down to his unmethodical cast of mind—to a lack of vanity;
he also emphasizes the way in which Ouvrard shunned publicity
and the limelight in order to give the best possible chance to his
audacious schemes.
  A. Arthur-Levy’s Un grandprofiteur de guerre (1929—extracts
were published in the Revue de Paris, August and September
1929) was described by D. S. Landes in Bankers and Pashas (1958),
p. 44m, as “simply a frothy popularization”; it misleadingly depicts
Ouvrard as a greedy war profiteer whose memoirs are a tissue of
untruths and historically worthless. In contrast to that of Wolff,
neither   Savant’s   nor   Arthur-Levy’s   biography   makes    any
                              Epilogue                           211

attempt to assess Ouvrard’s role in relation to the domestic and
international events of his time. Landes’s own brief studies, in
Chapter 2 ol Bankers and Pashas, of the psychology of the
“prudent, thrifty, discreet” nineteenth-century merchant bankers
who firmly closed their ranks against a “maverick” such as
Ouvrard, and of Ouvrard himself doggedly “opposing their
wealth with his imagination, their influence with his energy and
persuasiveness, their self-righteous complacency with his mer¬
curial ambition” are well worth reading.
  Of general histories that mention Ouvrard, G. Lefebvre:
Napoleon (3rd edn. 1947), volume XIV in the Peuples et Civilisa¬
tions series, skilfully and concisely explores all aspects—including
the economic one—of Napoleon’s reign; there is no substitute
for this superb and lapidary work. L. Madelin’s Histoire du
Consulat et de VEmpire (1937—54), on the other hand, runs to
sixteen volumes and is seriously defective on the economic and
social sides. Volume IX, for instance, entitled La crise de VEmpire
1810-11, completely ignores the vitally important         industrial
crisis of those years; for other criticisms of the whole work see
the notes to Savant’s book.
  Volume IV of M. Marion: Histoire financiere de la France
depuis 1715 (1925), covers the years 1797-1818; his account of the
financial panic of 1805 is especially valuable. He quotes extracts
from Barbe-Marbois’s letters to Napoleon, including the one of
21st August 1805 which may have caused Napoleon to abandon
his attempt to invade England and attack Austria instead. The
industrial crisis of 1810-11 in the context of the Emperor’s
practical efforts to foster French industry is described by O.
Viennet in Napoleon et VIndustrie firanfaise (1947).
  Not surprisingly, Ouvrard’s colourful career has inspired two
novels: directly, E. J. Tobi’s Speculant onder Napoleon (Amster¬
dam 1950, apparently never translated into English), and in¬
directly Hervey Allen’s Anthony Adverse (New York, 1933;
London, 1956). The hero of the latter novel was portrayed as
Hope’s agent in New Orleans during the Mexican silver affair.
                              Appendixes



     OUVRARD’s VERSION OF THE TRADING CONTRACT WITH CHARLES IV
     OF 26TH NOVEMBER 1804 COVERING TRADE WITH THE SPANISH
            COLONIES. (OUVRARD’s MEMOIRS, VOL. I, PP. 95-6)



   1. Deed of partnership between H.M. Charles IV and the firm of Ouvrard
& Co. for the duration of the Anglo-Spanish war.
  2. The firm receives permission for the duration of the war to import all
goods and foodstuffs into all ports in the New World and, for the same
period, to export from these colonies all indigenous products and the total
output of gold and silver.
   3. H.M. C(harles IV) promises to grant the firm all the necessary con¬
cessions for the despatch of ships from Europe to America, on the basis of
demands made by myself as sole responsible director of the firm.
   4. The profits accruing from all the firm’s transactions will be divided
equally between H.M. C(harles IV) and M. Ouvrard.


                                   II

     TEXT   OF   SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT TO        CONTRACT    OF   26TH
     NOVEMBER 1804 COVERING TRADE WITH THE SPANISH COLONIES.
                 (OUVRARD’S MEMOIRS, VOL. II, PP. 338-42)



Article I. The firm Frangois Ouvrard is obliged to convey to Europe all
  goods and colonial products, which H.M. Charles desires to have exported
  from America. The agents of H.M. C(harles) will hold the goods ready for
  the firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co. in the ports of Santa-Cruz, Havana,
  Caracas and Montevideo and will deliver them to the representatives of
  the firm Frangois Ouvrard. The firm may claim at least a third of the
  cargoes it ships to Europe. The agents of H.M. are obliged to deliver the
  goods punctually on the dates fixed for sailing; should they not have
  sufficient goods ready by the date of sailing for a complete cargo, then the
  firm Frangois Ouvrard may complete the cargo on its own account.
Article II. The firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co. is further obliged to ship all
  foodstuffs and goods, which H.M.C. should wish to export from Europe
  to the ports of Vera-Cruz, Havana, Caracas and Montevideo. The goods
  in question will be conveyed by H.M.’s agents to the various European
  ports and delivered to the firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co. in good time, so
   that the loading and departure of the ships can be effected without delay.
                                     212
                                 Appendixes                               213

Article III. All goods and foodstuffs, which, in accordance with the two
  previous articles, are shipped from Europe to America and from America
  to Europe for H.M.’s account, must be insured against all risks. The firm
   Frangois Ouvrard & Co. will be entitled to recover the insurance costs.
Article IV. Likewise the firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co. will be reimbursed
   for the transport costs and local incidental expenses, which arise from the
   shipment of goods from Europe to America and vice-versa, in so far as
   they fall upon H.M.’s portion.
Article V. The firm Francois Ouvrard & Co. will sell for H.M.’s account,
   against a commission given below, all goods and foodstuffs which are
   transported from America to the various European ports, with the ex¬
   ception of direct shipments to Spanish ports. The sale must be effected
   immediately after the arrival of the ships at their port of destination,
   and the firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co. must render an account to H.M.
   within one month.
Article VI. In return for these services the firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co.
   receives a commission from H.M.C. which is made up as follows:
    1. One per cent of the total value of all goods shipped from Europe to
       America, which fall to H.M.’s portion. The value will be based on the
       price of the goods in Europe.
   2. One per cent of the total value of all goods and foodstuffs, which
        are shipped on H.M.C.’s account from America to Spain.
    3. Two per cent of the proceeds from the sale of goods or foodstuffs,
        which are transported from America to European ports, with the
        exception of Spanish ports.
Article VII. In Article 14 of the contract of 26th November 1804 the
   commission on shipments of gold and silver from America to Europe on
   H.M.C.’s account is fixed at one per cent of their value. This commission
    is herewith reduced to one half per cent.
Article VIII. Further to Article 18 of the contract of 26th November 1804
   concerning the import and export duties to be paid to H.M.C. by the
   firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co., it is reaffirmed that Ouvrard & Co. must
   pay these duties in full at the standard rates, in accordance with the law
   and with royal decrees. Only those exceptional conditions of payment
    quoted in the said article also remain in force.
Article IX. To facilitate a speedy and smooth fulfilment of the contract, the
   firm Frangois Ouvrard & Co. will take all the necessary steps and bear
   all the costs, to obtain letters of safe-conduct from England.
Article X. The costs incurred in obtaining these letters of safe-conduct,
   in so far as they concern H.M.C.’s share of the shipments, will be carried
   in full by him, the remainder to be met by the firm Frangois Ouvrard
    & Co.
                           Given at Madrid in duplicate
                              on 4th December 1804
                             Frangois Ouvrard & Co.
                              Manuel Sixto Espinosa.
Approved
I, the King.
                                     Ill

     ROYAL DECREE OF CHARLES IV IN 1804 ON THE EXPROPRIATION OF
     RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS. (ISSUED AS PART OF OUVRARD’s PLAN
     to clean up Spain’s national finances: ouvrard’s memoirs,
                     VOL. II, pp. 102-5 (unconfirmed))


    “We, by the Grace of God, King etc. On my royal command of 1st
December last year, my Council in the West Indies was sent a copy of the
ordinance of 28th November together with the relevant instructions for the
sale of the real estate owned by all religious foundations in my West Indian
Kingdom and the Philippines. The instructions are as follows:
    “In my royal decree of 19th September 1798 I commanded, for reasons
stated therein, that the real estate owned by all religious foundations should
be sold and the proceeds of their sale paid into the royal amortisation fund.
Interest of three per cent per annum will be charged on their sale value and
this interest will be covered by the revenue from certain customs duties. The
money which is paid into the royal treasury will be employed to settle the
national debts, in particular to redeem the rentes. The rights of the property
owners will be safeguarded both as regards their outstanding liabilities and
their other sources of revenue, on which interest of three per cent will also
be payable. It was not my original intention to make these regulations
applicable to my oversea possessions, but I decided to do so after they had
proved effective and beneficial in Spain both to the religious foundations
themselves, which, freed from all risk, can better fulfil the aims of their
founders, and to the monarchy and my subjects. For these reasons and out of
love for my American subjects, I wish to grant them the same benefits. I
command, therefore, that throughout all my realms overseas the real estate
property of any kind belonging to religious foundations should be sold
and that the proceeds from their sale be paid into my royal amortisation
fund. An appropriate amount of interest will be paid at local rates on the
funds of these foundations. The revenue from certain customs duties, which
were given in detail in my ordinance of 30th August, will serve as security
for these interest payments. This pledge and the solicitude of my Cabinet
are a guarantee that the obligations entered into will be scrupulously ful¬
filled. But in order to provide additional security, I have also pledged the
revenue from the tobacco monopoly and the turnover tax, as well as the
royal funds which are paid into the local treasuries, to indemnify dispossessed
landowners. I leave it to the owners to decide in what form they prefer the
indemnity to be paid. I hereby declare all sales and contracts arising from
the aforesaid ordinance to be exempt from turnover tax and all other taxes
and I call upon the reverend Archbishops, Bishops and Prelates to support
me in the execution of this decree in a manner which I expect of their devotion
and loyalty. This is my royal will, which is to be made known to all con-
                                       214
                                Appendixes                              215

cemed, principally to my West Indian Council, so that it can take all steps
necessary for its fulfilment.

                  Signed by H.M. the King’s own hand
                       on 28th November 1804. a.d.
                            Miguel Cayetano Soler.
Certified copy of the original signed by His Majesty, which is in my posses¬
sion.
                                                   Miguel Cayetano Soler.”


                                    IV

                THE TREATY OF AIX-LA-CHAPELLE OF 1818


Article I. The Troops composing the Army of Occupation shall be with¬
  drawn from the Territory of France by the 30th of November next, or
  sooner, if possible.
Article II. The Strongholds and Fortresses which the said Troops occupy
  shall be given up to Commissioners named for that purpose by His Most
  Christian Majesty, in the state in which they were at the time of their
  occupation, conformably to the IXth Article of the Convention concluded
  in execution of the Vth Article of the Treaty of 20th November, 1815.
Article III. The sum destined to provide for the pay, the equipment, and
  the clothing of the Troops of the Army of Occupation, shall be paid, in
  all cases, up to the 30th of November next, on the same footing on which
  it has existed since the 1st of December, 1817.
Article IV. All the accounts between France and the Allied Powers having
  been regulated and settled, the sum to be paid by France, to complete the
  execution of the IVth Article of the Treaty of 20th November, 1815, is
  definitively fixed at 265,000,000 of francs.
Article V. Of this sum the amount of 100,000,000 effective value, shall be
  paid by Inscriptions of Rentes on the great book of the Public Debt
  of France, bearing interest from the 22nd September, 1818. The said
  Inscriptions shall be received at the rate of the Funds of Monday the 5 th
  of October, 1818.
Article VI. The remaining 165,000,000 shall be paid by nine monthly instal¬
  ments, commencing on the 6th of January next, by Bills on the Houses
  of Hope and Co. and Baring, Brothers and Co., which, as well as the
  Inscriptions of Rentes, mentioned in the above Article, shall be delivered
  to Commissioners of the Courts of Austria, Great Britain, Prussia, and
  Russia, by the Royal Treasury of France, at the time of the complete and
  definitive evacuation of the French Territory.
Article VII. At the same period, the Commissioners of the said Courts shall
  deliver to the Royal Treasury of France, the six Bonds not yet discharged,
  which shall remain in their hands, of the fifteen Bonds delivered con¬
  formably to the Ilnd Article of the Convention concluded for the execu¬
  tion of the IVth Article of the Treaty of 20th November, 1815. The said
216                              Appendixes

  Commissioners shall, at the same time, deliver the Inscription of 7,000,000
  of Rentes, created in virtue of the Vlllth Article of the Said Convention.
Article VIII. The present Convention shall be ratified, and the Ratification
  thereof exchanged at Aix-la-Chapelle, the 9th Day of October, in the
  Year of our Lord 1818.

(L.S.) CASTLEREAGH
(L.S.) WELLINGTON
(L.S.) RICHELIEU

                                      V

      ouvrard’s contract to supply transport vehicles for the
      FRENCH ARMY IN SPAIN    (1823). (THE TRANSPORT CONTRACT WAS
      COMPLEMENTARY TO THE MAIN CONTRACT WHICH COVERED FOOD
           SUPPLIES.) OUVRARD’S MEMOIRS, VOL. II, PP.       354-63.


   Between the undersigned: M. Charles Sicard, Intendant General of the
French army in Spain, with the consent of H.R.H. the Due d’Angouleme,
Commander-in-Chief of the Army
and
M. Victor Ouvrard, landowner, resident in Paris, 27 Rue de Richelieu, at
present in Bayonne, his guarantor being M. Gabriel-Julien Ouvrard, resident
in Paris, 24 Place Vendome, at present in Bayonne, 34 Rue Bourg Neuf, the
following contract has been concluded:

Article I. Victor Ouvrard commits himself to hold at the permanent disposal
  of the army six hundred four-span rack-wagons and six thousand mules
  complete with saddles and harness.
Article II. Three quarters of the said number of wagons and mules will be
  held at the disposal of the Intendant General at Bayonne and one quarter
  at Perpignan.
     The draught animals must be five to six years old, must stand at least
  four feet six inches chest-high, and must be sound and strong; as it will be
  difficult, however, to muster so many mules of the same type, the con¬
  tractor may, in exceptional cases, take bigger animals.
Article III. The mules purchased in the provinces of Poitou and Limousin
  will be transported in troops of a hundred or more. They will receive the
  prescribed ration of forage and will remain until further notice with the
  tenth and eleventh divisions. The mules purchased in Velay will also
  proceed by easy stages to the tenth and eleventh divisions, after they have
  been handed over to an assistant-quartermaster and the usual experts.
  They will receive the same ration of forage.
Article IV. The harness of a pack animal consists of a pack-saddle, a trough,
  a snaffle, a halter, two straps, two saddle-bags and a blanket, or, failing a
  blanket, a curry-comb, a brush and a wire-brush. The horses and mules
  yoked in the wagons will have the same harness as horses in French or
  Spanish wagons.
                                  Appendixes                               217

Article V. Under no circumstances should a wagon be loaded with more
  than five hundred kilos gross weight per yoke and a mule with more than
  a hundred and twenty-five kilos.
      In view of the mountainous terrain and the bad roads in Spain this
  restriction is essential; in France it need not be so rigorously applied.
      The laden wagons and mules may not travel more than six miles per
   day.
Article VI. The pack- and draught-animals will be divided into formations.
   Each mule brigade consists of a hundred and twenty-five mules with one
   mule-driver for every two animals, as well as eight reserve drivers in¬
   cluding the trumpeter and the blacksmith. It also contains:
                              1 Brigade Commander
                              1 Adjutant
                             2 Quartermasters
                             4 Cavalry N.C.O.s.
Article VII. The brigades of wagons will be composed according to the
  instructions of the Intendant.
      The brigades will be at the disposal of the Intendants and their deputies
  but may not under any circumstances be employed for other than purely
  military purposes; the rates of pay of the crews will be determined by the
  Intendant General.
Article VIII. As employees must provide their own clothes and mounts,
   they will receive one extra month’s pay as service bonus.
Article IX. Clothing and arming wagon- and mule-drivers will be the
  responsibility of the State; if the contractor is made responsible, he will
  receive compensation in accordance with the clothing regulations. Should
  the war last so long that the point is reached, as foreseen in the clothing
  regulations, where a fresh issue of clothing is necessary, then the cost will
  be borne by the State.
Article X. Employees, drivers and mule-drivers will receive food, forage
  and quarters in accordance with their service-grades. Wagon-horses and
  mules will receive the same forage rations as artillery horses, pack-
  animals as light artillery, in accordance with the regulations. These
  rations will be issued both in camp and on the march.
Article XI. The contractor will receive eleven francs fifty centimes per day
  and per yoke for the running costs of the six hundred wagons, which
  must be kept in a constant state of readiness. From this he must maintain
  the wagons, harness, horseshoes etc., but the cost of forage and stabling
  will be covered by the State.
Article XII. The hire of each properly harnessed and equipped mule will
  amount to three francs per day.
Article XIII. The money to be spent on wagon-drivers, mule-drivers,
  horses and mules will be paid to the contractor on the first of each month
  by the Army Paymaster on presentation of a monthly account. The final
  settlement will be made at the end of each month. Payment will be in
  cash, either in French or Spanish currency at the daily rate or in Treasury
  bills at the daily rate.
     If no settlement has been made within thirty days of the date fixed and
218                              Appendixes

  the Commissary General has not been paid in full, the sum still due to
  him will carry interest at five per cent per annum, till it is paid in full.
Article XIV. Losses incurred through unforeseeable circumstances will be
  borne by the State. Amongst these are:
      1. Capture by the enemy.
     2. Abandonment of equipment to the enemy.
     3. Losses through pestilence.
     4. Losses caused by shortage or inferior quality of foodstuffs or by
         forced marches.
  Losses must be recorded by the assistant-quartermasters. As compensation
  for these losses the contractor will receive six hundred francs for each
  wagon, five hundred francs for each horse or draught animal, six hundred
  francs for each pack animal with harness. It is expressly agreed that the
  contractor will be indemnified monthly for these losses on presentation of
  a list, which is compiled from the assistant-quartermasters’ records, in
  accordance with the regulations in Article XIII.
Article XV. The contract is valid for the whole duration of the campaign
  or as long as French troops are stationed in Spain. Should the mule and
  wagon brigades be partially or entirely disbanded during this period, the
  contractor will receive compensation on the following terms: If the mule
  and wagon service is entirely or partially disbanded within a year after
  the present contract comes into force, then the contractor will be paid the
  full value of each wagon and mule at the rates determined in the previous
  article.
     If disbanding only takes place in the second year, then compensation
  will be reduced to a sixth of the value. In both cases the animals and the
  wagons become the property of the State.
Article XVI. On expiry of the present contract, mules and wagons remain
  the property of the contractor.
Article XVlI. In order to give the contractor a reasonable time to sell his
  wagons and mules, the State will feed the horses and mules for three
  months after expiry of the contract or pay the contractor a corresponding
  sum in compensation. The latter will be at the rate of two francs daily
  per horse and mule.
Article XVIII. Should the means of transport specified in the contract prove
  inadequate, so compelling the contractor to requisition further horse- or
  ox-wagons, he will receive for these vehicles the price laid down by the
  appropriate local authority. From this money he must pay compensation
  to the original owners. For the trouble he has taken he will also receive
  ten per cent of the total amount.
Article XIX. The contractor will take over all mules which the State has
  already acquired and will be held responsible for them. The value of
  these mules and their harness will be determined by experts.
Article XX. The present contract is binding upon both contracting parties
  until the end of the campaign.
Article XXI. Should divergences of opinion arise over the interpretation or
  execution of the present contract, either with the Intendant General of
  the Army or between members of the Intendant’s staff and the Com-
                                   Appendixes                                 219

  missary General’s employees, they are to be settled by an arbitration
  tribunal. Each party will nominate an arbitrator and, if they cannot agree,
  they will choose a third who will have a casting vote.
     If the two arbitrators cannot agree on the third, each of them will
  write down two names: lots will then be drawn to decide which of the
  four persons suggested is to give the casting vote.
Article XXII. The registration fee for the present contract will be one franc.
  In duplicate at Bayonne on 5 th April, 1823.
                                                      Signed V. Ouvrard.
As guarantor
                                                          Signed J. Ouvrard.

   Seen and approved by the Chief Intendant of the Army, subject to the
   agreement of the Generalissimo of the Army, H.R.H. the Due Louis
   Antoine d’Angouleme.
Bayonne, 5th April, 1823
                                                       Signed Sicard.
Approved                                               Signed Louis-Antoine.


                                       VI

      OUVRARD ON IMPRISONMENT FOR DEBT OR PENDING INVESTIGATION



                                                    Written in prison, 1826
                                                    Memoirs vol III pp. 103-21

                           1. Imprisonment for debt

   (The Paris prison) Sainte-Pelagie stands at the entrance to the Faubourg
Saint-Marceau next to the Jardin du Roi and is extremely uncomfortable
for inmates and visitors alike. Small rooms without fireplaces and long,
narrow, badly ventilated corridors, in which collect all the fumes from the
small cooking-stoves on which the prisoners must prepare their own meals,
make living-conditions almost unbearable. The courtyard is surrounded by
high walls and is so small that there is neither fresh air to breathe nor space to
move about.



. . . Sainte-Pelagie is also very uncomfortable for the prison staff, because its
structural shortcomings make it impossible to carry out the prison regula¬
tions. There can hardly be another prison in which such chaotic conditions
prevail. It was in vain that Baron Pasquier drew up reasonable prison regula¬
tions in the year 1811 and had them displayed on all the walls; even he could
not bring about any improvement in the situation, because it was essentially
a problem of accommodation. Baron Pasquier was more successful with the
second wing of the building, the department for convicts, which was organ-
220                              Appendixes

ized like a large factory, in which all prisoners, including children, were
employed on the manufacture of uniforms and other items of military
equipment, for which there was then a great demand. The atmosphere of
industry and comparative well-being in this department was in sad contrast
to the enforced idleness and the misery in the debtors’ prison. . . .
. . . The legislators of Germinal in the year VI were vastly mistaken, when
they assumed that imprisonment for debt was essential for trade! In my
view it harms trade just as much as the lotteries and gambling-halls, which
were reintroduced in the same period. By this I mean that moneylenders,
borrowers and gamblers were all equally ruined by these laws. The sole
beneficiary is the national exchequer.




   My personal experiences in Sainte-Pelagie will give a clearer picture of
conditions than any theoretical arguments.
   The number of people who are imprisoned for debt is about three hundred
a year, and this number rises—contrary to the general opinion—with an
increase in prosperity and in the circulation of money, and falls in times of
depression and shortage of money. In the last three years, which have wit¬
nessed an unprecedented commercial boom, the number of persons im¬
prisoned for debt has more than doubled.
   To give the reader a fair idea of the advantages which trade derives from
imprisonment for debt, I propose to consider the social status of the three
hundred prisoners as well as the nature and cause of their debts. Then I shall
deal with their creditors.
   Of the three hundred prisoners twenty or thirty are usually small traders,
who have borrowed from moneylenders. Ten to fifteen are bankrupt mer¬
chants who are held in custody until their affairs have been wound up. Not
surprisingly, they are always very small in number, because the appropriate
authorities have no interest in allowing matters to drag on too long, as there
is usually nothing to be gained by it and as trade in general is opposed to
imprisonment for debt. Its speculative transactions are based, after all, on
credit and not on the partners’ freedom. All the other prisoners, nearly three
hundred of them, are either young men of good family from all over France,
who have lost money, health, morals, inheritance and finally liberty in Paris,
or students, soldiers of all ranks, minor civil servants and pensioners,
foreigners and a few unfortunate workers, who had put their names to bills
in a moment of weakness. Almost all are victims of usury or revenge.
   A few examples may serve to prove this.
   If a prisoner is held for several months in Sainte-Pelagie, then it is no
longer because his creditors wish to force him to pay, for they already know
that he cannot pay, but out of revenge because the unfortunate culprits,
whose pleas to be set free pass unanswered, have been stung into using
insulting language.
   The French love freedom so much that no one remains five years in
Sainte-Pelagie because he will not pay but only because he cannot pay.
When he is set free at the end of five years, he is completely destitute.
                                    Appendixes                                  221

   The records of Sainte-Pelagie also have some very instructive things to
say about creditors, about the nature of their credit and the reasons behind
these cruel penalties. There are creditors or people who buy up outstanding
claims merely in order to land a hated opponent in prison.
   Women employ a third party to have their husbands imprisoned, formerly
to obtain a divorce, today with a view to obtaining a judicial separation or
to enjoying their extra-marital pleasures in greater freedom. Partners in a
business have a troublesome colleague locked up, thereby depriving him of
his rights in the business and of his share of the profits.
   Trustees or solicitors, who were described at one time as “cut-throats”,
employ stooges to have their former clients imprisoned for debt.
   The prison records of Sainte-Pelagie contain the names of countless
officers of the old and the new army, from Second-Lieutenants to Lieutenant-
Generals, who are on the retired list or on half-pay; of small rentiers and
officials on pension, all of them victims of moneylenders, whom they went
to for help and who now shamelessly exploit their desperate plight.
   Suppose, for example, that a man with a rente of a thousand francs wants
to borrow three thousand francs from a moneylender. He gets the money, if
he sui renders his rente or pension to the moneylender for five years and also
pays him a certain commission. As double security the moneylender demands
further that the borrower should sign ten promissory notes for five hundred
francs each, payable a few days before the end of the first half-year, but he
gives him a verbal assurance that he will make no use of these IOU’s. As the
borrower is seldom in a position to meet any of these, even when the first
falls due, he has to throw in his life insurance; if he refuses, then he is arrested,
 condemned and imprisoned.




   Charming ladies employ this method to get rid of lovers, whom they have
already ruined. Monsieur de Jouy, in his book Ermites en prison, quotes a
pretty poem to a woman, the creditor and mistress of a young man, for
whom, with the help of her dressmaker, she engineered a prison sentence.
   There is also an outstanding scholar in Sainte-Pelagie, who holds an
important post in the civil service and has never signed an IOU in his life. In
a moment of weakness he gave his wife full power of attorney, and, when she
lost heavily at gambling, she turned to a moneylender. She told her husband
nothing of this, and it was only when the bailiffs arrested him in the street
that he learned that he was heavily in debt.




   Imprisonment for debt, therefore, only benefits the moneylender, brings
ruin to a great many young people and misfortune to workers, small rentiers,
officials on pension, officers etc., etc., undermines public morals and en¬
courages crime.
222                               Appendixes

   When a prisoner, who has no family behind him, is released from Sainte-
Pelagie, he is liable to become all too often a burden on public or private
charity. Many find their way back to Sainte-Pelagie, after spending some
time in La Force and the Conciergerie! Those poor wretches, who are
released completely destitute from prison, where they have acquired more
vices than virtues, will probably be less scrupulous than before in earning a
livelihood. Must we not conclude from this that imprisonment for debt is
the basic cause of their misery, of their lack of scruples and of the consequent
lapses, which brought them into conflict with the law?




   The position of those in debtors’ prisons is even more desperate than is
generally supposed. Only someone who has himself witnessed it day after
day can form a true picture. If their creditors visit them at any time in prison,
they must be not only entirely devoid of humanity but also so obsessed by
hate as to be blind to their own interests, if they do not immediately arrange
for their debtors to be released. Each debtor is entitled to claim twenty
francs a month from his creditor, of which at least eight francs go towards
the compulsory charge for accommodation, leaving twelve francs, or forty
sous a day, for subsistence. In winter there is even less remaining for sub¬
sistence, for a stove must be rented and the heating paid for.
   I have suggested that imprisonment for debt should be confined to sums
over three thousand francs, for the simple reason that all debtors are made to
pay the same living-costs, which, therefore, fall particularly heavily on the
minor offenders.


                2. Imprisonment pending investigation

   I have given much thought to our penal system and would like to make a
few comments on it at this point.
   Before the introduction of the laws governing judicial inquiry, which we
owe to State Councillor Treilhard, there were three kinds of court order: an
order to appear before the police, an order to appear before the Court and an
order for arrest. The last of these could only be issued following an inquiry,
in order to safeguard the ordinary citizen against imprisonment on unjust
charges; furthermore, the arrest warrant must give the name, profession and
address of the arrested man, the reason for his arrest and the law under
which the arrest was being made; otherwise the prison authorities could not
take delivery of the accused without incurring a charge of false imprison¬
ment. The Court of Prosecution, a useful institution which was unfortun¬
ately abolished under the tyranny of the Empire, then pronounced judgment.
    The man who was intent upon gathering all power into his own hands
(Napoleon) was not content to abolish this time-honoured institution but
also introduced imprisonment pending investigation as a fresh penalty.
The warrant for arrest pending investigation need only give the name of the
accused, not die reason for his arrest. Whether the arrest is just or unjust,
                                  Appendixes                                223

 the prisoner can only be released after at least fifty to sixty days, for an
 investigation of even the simplest charge takes that amount of time.
    The new process of arrest pending investigation means, therefore, that a
 man can be put in prison in order to make it easier to try him, whereas
 formerly he could only be put in prison after he had been tried.
    By abolishing the preliminary investigation and the usual formalities,
 without which a warrant for arrest was once invalid, and by relieving the
 prison authorities of any responsibility, a three-fold assault was made, in my
 view, on the freedom of the individual. The facts prove better than all
 theoretical observations how much damage is done to society by these
 measures. In Paris 2,300 people a year are thrown into prison by this con¬
 venient and rapid expedient and only afterwards does a more or less pro¬
 tracted judicial inquiry begin. Only two thirds of the accused are handed
 over to the criminal police court or the assizes; a third, that is at least 800
 people, must be released, because, in spite of the most intensive inquiry,
 nothing incriminating can be laid against them. So, but for the introduction of
 the system of imprisonment pending investigation, eight hundred people
would not have been deprived of their freedom. Perhaps the unhappy
 consequences of this measure would be less severe if the judges entrusted
with the investigation were not, for the most part, young people or men
engaged on a temporary basis.
    At best I would grant the validity of such a summary process where
vagabonds are concerned, but, as the majority of the people arrested are
from the working-class and are permanently resident in Paris, I do not
understand why a judge should be given the dangerous and unpleasant
power to have these people imprisoned merely on suspicion, instead of
allowing them to remain with their families and at their work and simply
summoning them to appear before the Court.
    As a result of this misuse of prisons, the prison-accommodation, which is
in any case inadequate, is grossly overcrowded, a further burden for the
cost of forty to fifty thousand prison-days is placed upon the Exchequer,
the general public are demoralised and an irremediable injustice is done to
the victims as well as to their wives and children.
    Every patriotic and humane citizen must condemn the excessive severity
of our penal system, yet he must at the same time admit in all fairness that,
due to the deep sense of justice and humanity of our judges, their worst
effects have been considerably reduced. How often it happens that the judges
make a special effort to cut down the period of arrest and even pay com¬
pensation out of their own pockets to someone who has been wrongfully
arrested! The prison authorities, on the other hand, levy the same charge for
their “separate rooms” on the acquitted as on the condemned.
    How much injustice would be averted, how much misfortune remedied,
if the generous idea of compensation for wrongful arrest were made law!
I quote as an example the high-minded Minister of the unhappy Louis XVI,
whose humane efforts are in particularly blatant contrast to the tyranny
and severity of our present Ministers.
                              Bibliography
   Unless otherwise specified, the place of publication is London in the
case of works in English, and Paris in the case of French works.


                              i. ouvrard’s own writings


Memoire sur les finances, adresse au gouvernement, (1814).
Memoire sur les finances, adresse au Roi et a la Commission de la Chambre
  des Deputes, chargee de I’examen du Budget propose par les Ministres le
  23 Decembre 1813, (1816).
Observations sur la motion faite, le 14 mars 1816, a la chambre des deputes,
  par M. Blosseville, (1817).
Observations sur les finances de la France en 1818 et proposition d’un cautionne-
  ment de go Millions a exiger de la Banque de France, (1818).
Memoire sur le credit administratif, (1819).
Note du Munitionnaire-general de Varmee d’Espagne, sur ses marches et ses
  services, (1824).
Sur l’administration, (1824).
Memoire du sieur Victor Ouvrard ex-munitionnaire-general de Varmee
  d’Espagne, et du sieur Julien Ouvrard, sa caution, contre le sieur Tourton,
  (i825).
Memoires a consulter pour M. Gabr.-Tul. Ouvrard contre le sieur Tourton,
  (1825).
Proces de MM. Ouvrard, contre M. Louis Tourton, (1826).
Memoires de . . . sur sa vie et ses diverses operations financieres, (1826—7).



               II. CONTEMPORARY MEMOIRS AND DOCUMENTS


d’Abrantes, Duchesse: His wire des salons de Paris, (1893), III, p. 137 ff-,
  339 ff.; IV, p. 178; VI p. 269-74.
Archives nationales: A.F. IV, 12; A.F. IV, 151; A.F. IV, 1283; A.F. 1674;
  F-7, 6554.
Arret du 27 Fevrier 1823 . . . de la cour royale de Paris, qui condamne Ouvrard
  et Vmlerberghe ... a payer au sieur Seguin la somme de 1,630,484 Fr.
  40 c. avec interets a 6 pour 100 depuis le 20 mai 1812, (1823).
Arret du 12 Mai 1823. Rendu par le Cour royale de Paris, qui decide que le
  concordat intervenu en 1808 entre Ouvrard et Vanlerberghe et leurs creanciers
  nest point opponable au sieur Seguin, auquel les conventions de 1810 ont eu
  pour objet d’assurer le solde integral de sa creance, non obstant les conditions
  imposees a tous les autres creanciers par le concordat, (1823).
                                       224
                                 Bibliography                                225

Arret du Jp Mars 1838 ... de la Cour royale de Paris, qui . . . confirme le
 jugement du 13 mai, 1837, lequel attribue aux heritiers Seguin le prix des
  immeubles de Corbeil, (1838).
Berryer et Naudot: Precis pour MM. Ouvrard, appelant d’un jugement rendu
  en la lire Chambre du Tribunal civil de la Seine, le 23 juillet, 1841, Francis
  de Berkhem (Agent de Change pres la Bourse de Londres, Intervenant)
  contre MM. Textoris, Agent de change pres la Bourse de Paris, Paul de
  la Gironniere, Rentier, Intimes, (1842).
de Boigne, Comtesse: Memoirs, (1907).
Bonaparte, Joseph: Memoires et correspondance politique et militaire, (1853),
  I) PP- 2.73-360.
Bonaparte, Lucien: Memoires, (Th. Jung; Bonaparte et son temps, (1881),
  m, P. 226 et seq.).
de Bourrienne, F.: Memoirs of Napoleon, (1836), IV, Chap. 9; VII, Chap. 6.
Constant: Memoires sur la vie privee de Napoleon, (1830), pp. 60—80.
Dispositif du Jugement du 13 Mai 1837 rendu par le Tribunal de premiere
  instance de la Seine, lequel enonce Vattribution au profit des heritiers Seguin
  du prix d’immeubles, sis a Corbeil, dependant de I’actif d’lgnace-Joseph
   Vanlerberghe, (1837).
Fouche, Joseph: Memoires, (1824), Chap. 10, Chap. 11.
de la Garde, A.: Gemalde des IViener Kongresses. Herausgeg. v. G. Gugit{,
  Munich, (1914), I, Chap. 17, Chap. 25 pp. 437-41; II, p. 274 ff.
Gay, Sophie: Salons celebres, p. 313.
Gronow, Captain R. H.: Reminiscences and recollections, (1892).
Jugement du 11 Janvier 1833 du Tribunal civil de Premiere Instance de Corbeil,
   lequel declare nulle pour cause de fraude la vente simulee par Madame
    Vanlerberghe a son frere, des immeubles actualises a Corbeil, que le meme
  jugement decide avoir ete acquis frauduleusement par V epoux Vanlerberghe,
   sous le nom de la dame Vanlerberghe, confirme par arret de la Cour royale
   de Paris, du 17 janvier 1834, (1834).
Jugement du 27 Decembre 1838 rendu par le Tribunal de Premiere Instance de
  la Seine, qui attribue aux heritiers Seguin le prix des moulins de Corbeil,
  dependant de I’actif d’lgnace-Joseph Vanlerberghe, (1839).
La Revelliere-Lepaux: Memoires,publies par son fils, II, p. 247 et seq.
de Lamartine, A.: History of the Restoration of the Monarchy in France,
   (1851-3).
Marmont, Le marechal: Memoires, (1857), VII, Chap. 22.
Miot de Melito: Memoires, (1858), II, Chap. 21.
Mollien, Comte: Memoires d’un ministre du tre'sor public 1780 a 1813. Edition
   Gomel-Guillaumin, (1898), I, p. 12 et seq.
Napoleon Ier: Correspondence de . . . (1838—70), VI, VII, VIII, X, XI, XII,
   XIV, XV, XXVIII.
Nolte, Vincent: Fifty years in both Hemispheres, (1854).
de Norvins, J. M.: Memorial, (1896), II, p. 299 et seq.
Pasquier, E. D.: Histoire de mon temps. Memoires. Publ. par d’Audiffret-
   Pasquier, (1893), I.
Rochechouart, Louis-Victor-Leon, Comte de: Souvenirs sur la revolution,
  l’ empire et la restauration,publids par son fils, (1889), p. 484, pp. 494-8.
      Q
226                              Bibliography

Rovigo, Due de: Memoires, (1829), II, Chap. 18; IV, Chap. 23.
Sarrut, G.: Ouvrard {Gabriel-Julien). Des hommes du jour, (1842), pp.
  296-316.
Thiebault, General: Memoires, (1894), III, pp. 293-5, 533-5.


      III. SPECIAL SOURCES FOR THE SPANISH EXPEDITION OF               1823

Affaire administrative de la Campagne de 1823. Examen de la defense de
  M. Vintendant Sicard, appelant a son appui MM. les generaux comte
  Guilleminot et comte Bordesoulle.
Andreossy, Comte de: De la direction des subsistances militaires sous le
  ministere de M. le marechal due de Bellune, (1824).
  Memoire de M. le comte A. sur ce qui concerne les marches Ouvrard, (1826).
d’Aulnois, Augustin: Revue impartiale des operations administrates de la
  campagne de 1823, (1826).
(de Beaurepaire): Des operations devoilees du sieur Ouvrard, munitionnaire-
  general a Varmee d’ Espagne, suivant les marches passes a Bayonne . . .
  desquels marches s’en est suivi le crime de dilapidation de la fortune publique.
  Deuxieme partie, (1826).
Beaurepaire, pere: Le munitionnaire de Varmee d’Espagne et ses marches,
   (1825).
Bellart: Requisitoire du procureur gineral B. dans Vaffaire Ouvrard, (1826).
(de Bellune): Memoire pour M. le marechal Due de Bellune sur les marches
   Ouvrard, (1826).
(de Clermont-Tonnere, M. le marquis): Rapport fait au Roi par le Ministre
  de la Guerre, sur la liquidation definitive des depenses de la guerre d'Espagne,
  (1826).
(Cour des Pairs): Pieces fondamentales de Varret rendu par la cour des Pairs
  sur les marches de Bayonne, (1826).
de Guilleminot, Comte: Expose sommaire des mesures administratives
  adoptees pour Vexecution de la campagne de 1823, a Varmee d’Espagne.
Marchand, Andre: Des Marches-Ouvrard, des Soumissions et les traites
  passes par ordre de M. le Marechal, due de Bellune ... du rapport fait contre
  les soumissions et ces traites par M. le comte Andreossy. Refutation de ce
  rapport, (1825).
de Martignac, Vicomte: Essai historique sur la revolution d’Espagne et sur
  Vintervention de 1823, (1832).
Mauguin, Avocat: Memoire pour G. J. Ouvrard sur les affaires d’Espagne,
  (1826).
M. E. M.: Encore un mot sur VEspagne, (1825).
Moniteur Universel: Issues of 22nd, 29th, 30th June, and 1st July, 1824.
(Poisson): Petition presentee aux Chambres sur un acte arbitraire commis par
   le General Guilleminot, en Espagne; et notice sur Vadministration de Varmee
  franfaise en Espagne, (1824).
Rapport de la Commission creee par Vordonnance royale du 30 juin 1824 pour
  receuillir des documents sur les depenses de la Guerre d’Espagne, (1824),
  I, p. 630; II, p. 240; III, I, p. 590; III, 2, p. 369; IV, p. 315.
                                Bibliography                              227

Rollac, James: (Offener Brief iiber das Vertragsangebot Ouvrards an Rollac-
   V2ter.) La Quotidienne, 3rd July, 1824.
   Memoire de M. Rollac (Ex-entrepreneur des transports generaux pour
   l’armee d’Espagne en 1823) contre MM. Ouvrard et Tourton, (1827).
de Salvandy, P.: La verite sur les marches Ouvrard, (1825).
Sarran: Des marches Ouvrard et de l'esprit politique et financier de M. de
    Villele, (1824).
Sicard: Administration militaire de I’armee des Pyrenees, du 28 janvier au
   21 avril 1823, (1825).
(Tourton): Affaire Tour ton-0 uvrard: Tribunal de Commerce. Audience du
   8 Mars. Extrait de la Gazette des Tribunaux des 10 et 11 Mars, (1826).
  Affaire entre MM. Tourton et Ouvrard: Tribunal de Commerce. Audience
  du ier avril. Extrait de la Gazette des Tribunaux, (1826).
d’Yaniz, Miguel: L’agonie des soustraitants espagnols qui ont fait les fourni-
  tures, etc. (Petition to the Chamber of Peers), (1826).




                              IV. LATER WORKS


Alison, A.: History of Europe, (1848), IX, pp. 77-8.
Arthur-Levy, A.: Un grand profiteur de guerre sous la Revolution, VEmpire
  et la Restauration: C. J. Ouvrard, (1929).
Balia, J.: The Romance of the Rothschilds, (1913).
Berdrow, Wilh.: Gabriel Julien Ouvrard, der Finanqkdnig der napoleonischen
   Zeit = Buch beriihmter Kaufleute, Leipzig, (1909), pp. 151-78.
Coquelle, P.: Napoleon and England, 1803—13, (1904), Chap. 27—31.
Corti, E. C.: The Rise of the House of Rothschild, (1928).
   The Reign of the House of Rothschild, (1928).
Fisquet, H.: Ouvrard = Nouv. Biographie gener., (1862), XXXVIII, pp.
   986-8.
Friedegg, Ernst: Der Schatqmeister Napoleons = Millionen und Millionaire.
   Berlin, (1914), pp. 70-80.
Houssaye, A.: Notre Dame de Thermidor, (1866), pp. 417, 449, 451.
de Janze, La Vtesse Alix: Les Financiers d’autrefois, Fermiers generaux,
   (1886), pp. 333-41.
Kircheisen, Friedrich M.: Napoleon /., sein Leben und seine Zeit, Munich
   (1911 ff.), I, pp. 421, 426, 464; V, p. 15; VII, pp. 4-7; VIII, pp. 321-6.
Liesse, Andre: Ouvrard = Portraits des Financiers, (1908), pp. 1—67.
Martin, Gaston: Carrier et sa Mission a Nantes, (1924).
Ouvrard = Biographie universelle, (Michaud), n.d., XXXI, pp. 520—4.
Ouvrard = Grand Dictionnaire universel du XIXe siecle, (1874), XI, pp.
  1593-4-
Renoacl, J.-C.: Graslin et le quartier de Nantes, Nantes, (i860).
Schumann, O. B.: Gabriel Julien Ouvrard, ein Finanqmann des 1. Napo¬
  leonischen Kaiserreichs (1770-1846) = Franq Otto, Der Kaufmann qu
  alien Zeiten. 2. Sammlung des Buches beriihmter Kaufleute, Leipzig, n.d.,
  pp. 511-32.
228                             Bibliography

S(agne), L(eon): Ouvrard = La Grande Encyclopedic, (1899), XXV, pp.
   714-15.
Scott, W.: Life of Napoleon, (1827), VIII, pp. 66—7.
Strobl and Ravelsberg, F.: Metternich und seine Zeit, Vienna, (1906-7), II.
Thiers, Adolphe: History of the Consulate and the Empire, (1893—4).
Turquan: La citoyenne Tallien, (1898).
           Madame Recamier, (1903).




                     V. SUPPLEMENTARY BIBLIOGRAPHY


Castellane: Journal du Marechal de Castellane 1804-62, (1895—7).
Caulaincourt, A. de: Memoirs, (1935-8).
Cooper, A. Duff: Talleyrand, (1932).
Crouzet, F.: L’economic britannique et le blocus continental, 1806—13, (195 8).
Deutsch, H. C.: “Napoleonic Policy and the Project of a Descent upon Eng¬
  land.” Journal of Modern History, (1930).
Hidy, R.: The House of Baring in American Trade and Finance, 1763—1861.
   (Harvard University Press, 1949).
Labouchere, G.: “Un financier diplomate au siecle dernier: P. C. Labou-
   chere.” Revue d’Histoire Diplomatique, 1913.
Lacour-Gayet, G.: Talleyrand, 1734-1838, (1928-31).
Lecestre, L.: Lettres inedites de Napoleon I, (1897).
Lefebvre, G.: Napoleon, (Vol. XIV of Peuples et Civilisations, 3rd edn. 1947).
Madelin, L.: Histoire du Consulat et du VEmpire, (1937—54).
   Fouche, (1901).
Redlich, F.: “Payments between Nations in the Eighteenth and Early
   Nineteenth Centuries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1936.
Rydjord, J.: “Napoleon and Mexican Silver.” The South Western Social
   Science Quarterly, XIX.
Savant, J.: Telfut Ouvrard, (1954).
Silberling, N. J.: “Financial and Monetary Policy of Great Britain during
   the Napoleonic Wars.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1924.
Villele, Comte de: Memoires, (1890-1904).
Walters, P. G. and R.: “The American Career of David Parish.” Journal of
   Economic History, 1943—4.
Webster, C. K.: Britain and the Independence of Latin America, (1938).
Weill, G.: “Le financier Ouvrard.” Revue Historique, 1918.
Index
Abba ye prison, 116, ill. f 129
Abrantes, Due d’, see Junot, General
Abrantes, Duchesse d’, 46, 84
A’Court, Sir William, 173
Aix-la-Chapelle: Allies’ meeting at, 143-4, 188; Treaty of, 2, 144-5, D0, 215-16
Alexander, Tsar of Russia, 134-5, 143, 149
Amiens, Treaty of, 65 n., no
Amis de la Constitution, 14
Amsterdam, 58, 85-7, 116—17, 131
Andreossy, Count, 178
Angouleme, Louis Antoine de Bourbon, Due d’, 156-7, 159, 163-7, 173-5,
  178—81, 185, 216
Artois, Comte d’, later Charles X, q.v.
August, Prince of Prussia, 144
Austerlitz, Battle of, 45, 94
Azara, Chevalier d’, 72



Babeuf, Frangois Emile (“Gracchus”), 30, 39-40
Bal des Victimes, 30
Bank of France, 57 n., 74—5, 89, 90, 92-4, 98
Baour & Co. of Bordeaux, 13
Barbe-Marbois, Marquis Frangois de, 74, 76—7, 81, 84, 88-94, 130, 204, 211,
  ill. f 80
Baring, Alexander, 137-42, 188, 205, 209
Baring, Sir Francis, 113—15, 137
Baring Brothers, firm of, 85, 113, 137-45, 188
Barras, Vicomte Paul Frangois de, 30—3, 42, 48, 49, 50, 52, 79, 108, 109, in,
  119, 168, 204; resignation of, 53
Bastille: storming of, 9, 30, 99
Bayonne: Ouvrard at, 156—60, 162, 167, 175, 178—81, 184
Bazin (financier), 32
Beauharnais, Eugene, 95
Beauharnais, Josephine de, 54, 55, 56, 58—9, 61, 67, 69, 99, 204
Beaurepaire, 2
Bellart, Attorney—General, 184, ill. f. 177
Bellune, Claude Victor Perrin, Due de, 156—60, 162, 176-9, 187, 205
Benevento, principality of, 67
                                      231
232                                    Index

Bernadotte, General Jean-Baptiste Jules (later King of Sweden), 45
Bernard, Samuel, 57
Berry, Charles Ferdinand de Bourbon, Due de, 150
Berry, Duchesse de, 197
Bertheaux (architect), 43
Berthier, Marshal Louis Alexandre, Prince de Neuchatel and Wagram, 20,44-5,
  63, 68, no, 204
Boigne, Comtesse de, 141 n., 205, 210
Boivin, General, 17-20
Bonaparte, Jerome, King of Westphalia, 131
Bonaparte, Joseph, 36, 94, 95, 156, 169
Bonaparte, Josephine, see Beauharnais, Josephine de
Bonaparte, Louis, King of Holland, 112, 115
Bonaparte, Lucien, 44
Bonaparte, Napoleon, see Napoleon I
Bordeaux, 13, 29, 30, 36, 48, 49, 92
Bordesoulle, General, 157, 175, 183-4
Borgo, Pozzo di, 141 n., 168, 194
Bourbon-Parma, Prince Louis of (later King of Etruria), 72, 148
Bourdon (Military Intendant), 162
Bourrienne, F. de, 31, 45, 54, 55, 62, 66, 67 n., 99
Brest, 34, 36
British East India Co., 85, 171
Brittany: industries of, 4-5
Bruix, Rear-Admiral, 34, 53, 57



Cabarrus, Count Frangois de, 48, 49, 72, 81
Cabarrus, Dr. (son of Ouvrard), 197, n., 206, 210
Cabarrus, Theresia de, see Tallien, Madame
Cadiz: besieged by French, 164-5; Constitution of, 152
Cambaceres, Jean Jacques Regis, Due de, 36, 61, 94, 204
Canning, George, 115, 173 n.
Caraman, Comte de, 107
Carrier, Jean-Baptiste, 13-17, 23-4, m
Castellane: memoirs, 210
Chabot, Frangois, 111
Chambord, Comte de, 197 n.
Charlemagne & Co., 36
Charles IV, King of Spain, 72, 76, 78-9, 83-4, 86, 101, 103, 113, 151, 169,
  ill. f. 81; Ouvrard’s trading contract with (1804), 82-3, 212-13; Royal Decree
  on Expropriation of Religious Foundations, 214-15
Charles V, Emperor, 56
Charles X, King of France (Comte d’Artois), 125 n., 191-2, 194-5; abdication
  of, 195
Chateaubriand, Vicomte Frangois Rene de, 154
Chenais, M., 41, 106
Clisson, 4, 5
                                      Index                          233

Club des Cordeliers, 14-15
Cochrane, Lord, 186
Collot, 57, 66
Colombia, 172, 186
Conciergerie prison, 24-5, 182-4, 189, 196, ill. f 192
Constant (valet to Napoleon), 67 n.
Corvetto, Count, 135, 138, 141, 145
Courland, Duchess of, 44
Crozat (Intendant General of Taxes), 148



Daru, Count, 176
Daviliers (financier), 57
Desprez (financier), 90-7, 118, 124
Diderot, 116
Directory period (1795-9), n, 28-53, 59, 60, 61, 63
Doumerc, firm of, 127, 129, 139
Dubrac, firm of, 156
Dufresne (Treasury Director), 91
Duplay family of Paris, 24
Duruet (banker), 22



Eglantine, Fabre d’, 42
Egypt, 37, 52, 58, 66, 100
Eichtal et Fils, 199, 201
Elba, 99, 125, 128, 131, 134
Enghien, Louis Antoine de Bourbon-Conde, Due d’, 116
Eroles, Baron d’, 154
Espagnac, Abbe o’, 111
Etruria, King of, see Bourbon-Parma, Prince of
Evreux, Comte d’, 148



Fagan, Francois, no n.
Ferdinand VII, King of Spain, 79, 113, 151-3, 164-70
Fontenay, Marquis J. J. de, 48
Forfait (Minister of Marine), 60
Fouche, Joseph, 1, 14, 45, 107 n., 110-11, 114-16, 204, ill. f. 80
Fouquier-Tinville, Antoine Quentin, 24-5
Fox, Charles James, 44
French loans, list of, 142 n.
French Revolution, outbreak of, 9-11
Fulchiron (financier), 57, 64



Garochi, firm of, 84
Gaudin, Martin Michel Charles, Due de Gaete, 95
234                                   Index

Gentz, Friedrich von, 154, 188
Giradot & Co., 36
Gironniere, Paul de la, 199-202
Godoy, Manuel de, Prince of La Paz, 1, 78-9, 81, 84, 170
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 98
Goldsmid, Sir Isaac, 196
Graslin (building contractor), 7-8, 11, 14, 38
Greece, 186
Gresham, Sir Richard, 56
Gresham, Thomas, 56
Gronow, Capt. R. H., 205
Grosbois: Barras’s estate at, 30, 53
Guerin, Loret & Co., 9
Guertin et Ouvrard, 9, 18
Guilleminot, Comte, 157, 175, 178, 183-4, 205



Hamburg, 67
Hamelin (banker), 32
Hamelin, Mme, 116
Hidalgo, Miguel, 170
Honduras: salt trade, 190
Hope, Henry, 86, ill. f. 97
Hope, House of (Amsterdam), 85-8, 96—8, 101-3, hi—13, I27> 131, 138—45,
  188, 209; Prospectus of loan-issue for Spain by, ill. f 97
Hummel family, 6
Hundred Days, 2, 125-33



Isouaed, Nicolo, 69
Iturbide, Emperor of Mexico, 170



Joinville, Baron de, 162, 183
Junot, General Andoche (later Due d’Abrantes), 41, 44, 84, 148, 157



Kleber, General Jean-Baptiste, 19—20
Knights of St. John of the Cross, 186



Labedoyere, Colonel Charles, Comte de, 131
Laborde, de (banker), 148
Labouchere, P. C., 86, 107 n., 112-15, 138, 139, ill. f. 97
Labourdonnaye, Count, 175
Lacombe (President of Military Committee), 49
Laffitte, Jacques, 56, 68, 142 n., 148
Lamartine, A. de., 47
                                       Index                                 235

La Paz, Prince of, see Godoy
La Revelliere-Lepaux, 50
La Rochefoucauld, Due de, 148
Laval, Prince, 118
Lavalette, Antoine Marie Chamans, Comte de, 131
Law, John, 56, 101, 190, 205
Lebrun, Charles, 42
Leipzig, Battle of, 123
Le Notre, Andre, 42
Lestapis, A. P., 102, 103
Levant Company, proposed, 186
Lindet, Robert, 25—6, in n.
Lindet, Robert-Thomas, m
London Stock Exchange, 193, 196, 197, 204
Louis, Abbe Baron, 97, in, 131—4
Louis XIV, 149
Louis XV, 56—7, 168
Louis XVI, in, 150
Louis XVIII, n, 99, 126-8, 149-50, 155, 174, 191, ill. f 144
Louis Philippe, Due d’Orleans, 195, 205, 207
Louisiana: ceded by Napoleon, 100
Luneville, Treaty of, 68
Luxembourg, Palais du, 40, 53, 59



MacGregor, General, 186
Madrid: Bank of St Charles, 49, 72, 81; Consolidated Fund in, 90-5, 102; Ouvrard
    in, 76—86, 90, 162^77
Mallet, Widow, 17
Malmaison, Chateau de, 58, 61, 64, 67
Marchand, Andre, 178
Marengo, Battle of, 63-4
Marie-Antoinette, Queen, 22, 183
Marie-Louise, Empress, 72 n., 114
Marie-Louise, Queen of Spain, 78—9, 81, ill. f 81
Marillac, Marshal de, 176
Marmont, Marshal, Due de Ragusa, 1, 4-5, 44, 55, 58, 148, 157, 194-5
Marseilles, 30
Massaredo, Admiral, 35
Mataflorida, Marquis, 154
Meda, Cirillo de la, 168
Melzi, General Joseph Palafox de, 148
Merlin de Thionville, 19-20
Mettemich, Prince, 154, 188
Mexico: changing events in, 170-3; Ouvrard’s silver project, 2, 6, 71-108, 138,
  145, 171, 181, 186, 209; collapse of project, 98
Meziere, Abbe, 168
Michel Brothers, 32, 36, 90, 97, 105
236                                     Index

Mirabeau, Comte de, 116
Mississippi scheme, 56 n., 101, 190
Mollien, Comte Frangois Nicolas, 54, 55, 95, 97? 9^? 100
Montespan, Marquise de, 149
Montesson, Mme de, 68-70, 147, 204
Montmorency, Raoul de, 148
Moreau, General Jean Victor, 44, 53
Morocco, Emperor of, 165
Moskowa, Princesse de la, 148
Muller, Adam, 188
Murat, Joachim, King of Naples, 107 n., no



Nadir Mirza Shah, 117
Nantes, 4-16, 22-6, 37-8, hi, 140, 183, 208
Napoleon I: pre-imperial period, 1, 2, 11, 20, 27, 31, 36-7, 40, 98-9; coup d’etat
  (1799), 52-7, 66; antagonism to Ouvrard, 36, 53-70; profligacy of, 67; as
  Emperor, 73, 75-6, 79-80, 82, 89-94, 126, 145, 148, 151-2, 154-6? 160-1,
  164, 176, 182, 204, 206-7; financial collapse (1806), 95-9, 107; ruins Mexican
  plan, 104; refuses to compromise with British, no, 113; Russian campaign,
  121—3; during the Hundred Days, 128—31
Necker, Jacques, 60, 68
Newspapers during Revolution, 10-n
Ney, Marshal Michel, Due d’Elchingen, 131
Noailles, Comtesse, 148
Nolte, Vincent, 1, 2, 103—4, 205, 209
Norvins-Monbreton, 43



Odessa, 135
Orleans, 36
Orleans, Duke of, 41-2, 69
Osmond, Marquis d’, 141, 210
Ossuna, Princesse d’, 168
Ouvrard, August, 106, 205
Ouvrard, Elizabeth (later Comtesse de Rochechouart), 147, 148—50, 199, 205
Ouvrard, Gabriel Julien: contemporary opinions of, 1-2; early years in Nantes,
  3—19; his views on “credit”, 8, 126, 127, 136; paper-trade venture, 10—n; in
  danger during Revolution, 16—21; in Paris, 20—51; character and appearance,
  24, 32, 42—7, 56, 69, 206; marriage, 26—7; during Directory period, 29—51,
  109; as Victualling Master of the Navy, 34, 49, 60, 63, 65-6, 91, 119; supplies
  Spanish fleet, 34-5, 72; three financial coups, 35; proposals for reform of
  national finance, 37-40, 59-60; chateaux and estates, 40-2, 66, 68, 106;
  hospitality at Rainey, 43-4; liaison with Mme Tallien, 46—51; changes under
  Napoleon 52-70; arrest of (1800), 61—3; appealed to by Napoleon, 64-5;
  generosityto the arts, 69-70; works on Mexican project, 71-108; finances French
  government (1804), 74-5; goes to Spain as State Commissioner, 77-86, 88,
  109; visits Amsterdam, 86-8, 112-15; censured by Napoleon, 95-8; bank-
                                      Index                                   237

  ruptcy of, 105-8; 114, 127; in debtors’ prison, 108, 117-24; role in Anglo-
  French peace negotiations, 109-24; imprisonment at Vincennes, 116-17;
  during the Hundred Days, 125-32; negotiates payment of France’s war debts,
  i33_4<5> supplies occupation forces, 139; meets Duke of Wellington, 140-1;
  plan for restoring order in Spain, 153-5; goes with French army to Spain
  C1823), 160-6, 216-19; third American project, 171-3; in prison again, 182-5;
  battle with Rothschilds, 187-97; writing of Memoirs, 187, 203, 208; settles
  in London, 198; last gamble, 198-203; death of, 204, 207
Ouvrard, Mme Gabriel (wife of above), 27, 46, 49, 69, 117, 204
Ouvrard, Julien (son of above), 199, 205, 206, ill. f 145
Ouvrard, Victor, 165, 216
Ouvrard & Co., Frangois, 212—13



Paris, 5, 7, 9, 13-16, 20-1, 125, 154, 157, 160, 162-3, 165, 167, 169, 174, 177,

  190-2, 199-203; Ouvrard’s first five years in, 22-51; after the Reign of Terror,

  29—30, 33) 40;  Napoleon’s coup d’etat in, 52; Ouvrard’s second five years in,
  52-70;   Rue du Mont Blanc and Palais Montesson, 40, 68-72, 108, 167; bank
  crash and recovery (1805), 93—5; grain depots for, 120-1; First and Second
  Treaties of, 133; rejoicing in (1814), 191; July Revolution (1830), 194-6
Parish, David, 102-5, 2°9
Pasquier, E. D., 99, 120, 209, 210
Pereire, firm of (bankers), 57 n.
Permon family, 148
Perregaux (financier), 32, 57, 58, 64, 68, 142 n., 148
Pitt, William, the Younger, 67, 85, 88, 101, 209
Pleville-Peley (Minister of Marine), 33, 34
Polignac, Prince de, 192, 194
Pondre, de, 148
Prevost, Citoyenne, 22



Ragusa, Due de, see Marmont
Rainey, Chateau de, 41—6, 50, 63, 68, 167, ill. f. 49; sale of, 106—7
Rapp, General Jean, Comte, 66, no, 148
Recamier, Jacques, 22, 32, 42, 47, 57, 64
Recamier, Mme Jeanne, 44, 68, no, 144
Redcliffe, Stratford de, 173 n.
Regnault, Councillor, no, 162
Reichardt, Johann Friedrich, 55-6
Remouille, 19—20
Richelieu, Armand Emmanuel, Due de, 2, 60, 134-5, 138, 139, 141, J43, I45_^»
  149-51, 153, 156, 176, 204, 209, ill.f 145
Riego y Nunez, General Rafael del, 166
Robespierre, Maximilien Frangois de, 24-7, 48, 67, in, 194
Rochechouart, Comte Louis Victor Leon de, 149—50, 168, 210
Rochechouart, Comtesse de, see Ouvrard, Elizabeth
Roger (Secretary of Treasury), 91, 95-6
238                                 Index

Rome, 205
Rothschild, House of, 99, 185, 187-97, 206
Rothschild, James de, 187, 189-90, 193-4, 196
Rothschild, Nathan, 187-8, 193-4, 196, 204, ill. f 193
Rothschild, Solomon, 187-8, 196
Rougemont, Charles, & Co., 36
Rougemont et Hottinguer, 29
Rovigo, Savary, Due de, 1, 55, 116, 123, 209
Russia, 99, 107 n.; Napoleon’s campaign in, 121-3; plan to keep troops in
  Paris, 127; Talleyrand’s proposed alliance against, 134; intervention in
  Spain, 153, 155; honours Rothschild, 188



St. Cloud, Chateau de, 67, 194-3
Sainte-Pelagie prison, 97, 100, 108, 122, 182—3, 185, 219—22
San Domingo: revolution in, 41, 100
Saragossa, 99
Sarran, 2
Savary, see Rovigo, Due de
Schwarzenberg, Prince von, 68
Seguin, Armand, 75, 90, 97, 105, 118, 124, 181-2, 185, 196, 204, 210
Sicard, General, 156, 162, 175, 178, 216
Sieyes, Abbe, 111
Societe Populaire Vincent-la-Montagne, 15
Soler (Spanish Finance Minister), 84
Spain: Ouvrard’s connections with, 1, 34-5, 49, 72—91, 151—85; subsidy to
   France, 76, 80, 90, 101; Ouvrard’s financial programme for, 80—1, 90; end of
   famine in, 82, 84; trading contract with Ouvrard (1804), 82—3, 98, 101, 103
Stael, Mme de, 44, 46, 47, 68, 96 n.



Talleyrand-Perigord, Charles Maurice de, 42, 53, 67-8, 107 n., 111, 116,125,
      127, 132, 134-5, 205, 209
Talleyrand-Perigord, Mme, 55
Tallien, Jean Lambert, 30, 48
Tallien, Mme Jeanne Theresia, 31-2, 44, 46-51, 53-4, 57, 58, 68, 69, 107, 197,
  204, 206, ill. f. 49
Talma, Frangois Joseph, 183
Tarragona, Archbishop of, 154
Tax-collector’s debentures, 74-5, 90, 92-3
Tebaud, Jean-Baptiste, 26
Tebaud, Mile, see Ouvrard, Mme
Textoris (broker), 199-202
Thiebault, General, 41, 106
Thiers, Louis Adolphe, 2
Thoinet Brothers, 5, 17
Toulon, 30
Toulouse, 177
                                      Index                              239
Tourton (financier), 2, 32, 186
Tuileries, n, 52, 67, 72, 95, 107, 128, 129, 19;
Turpin (Director of Treasury), 36



Urgel: Spanish Regency at, 154-5
Urtigo (Spanish Premier), 35



Van den Niver (banker), 22
Vanlerberghe, Ignace-Josephe, 64-7, 75, 90-2, 94, 95, 97, 105, 118, 119, 124,
   145, 148, 182, 204, ill.f 48
Vera Cruz, 102, 103
Verona, Congress of, 154, 155, 163, 166, 188
Vienna, Congress of, 130, 134
Vigee-Lebrun, Mme Marie Anne Elisabeth, 47
Villandry, Chateau de, 41, 106
Villaneuva, Jose Gabriel de, 102
Villele, Comte Jean Baptiste de, 153-4, 155-6, 175-6, 183, 187-92, 210
Vincennes prison, 116, 118, 186, ill.f 129
Visconti, Mme, 44, 63
Vitry: Ouvrard’s residence at, 32, 40, 49, hi
Vittoria Agreement, 162, 167



Wagram, Battle of, 107 n.
Waterloo, Batde of, 2, 130, 193
Wellesley, Richard Colley, Marquis, 114-15
Wellington, Arthur, Duke of, 99, 140-1, 148, ill.f. 177
Welser, Bartholomaus, 56
West Indies Company, plan for, 171-3, 186, 210
Wismann & Co., 167
  DATE DUE / DATE DE RETOUR




CARR MCLEAN              38-297
