 SythtGeli
        Ro     em
      Barings, 1762-1929
                      ~
           ™~   oor   ae
      bt




Ree
Pes
                           r

                               EGLER
Baring Brothers is the oldest merchant
bank in the City of London, and one of the
most pre-eminent British financial
institutions. Beginning as traders and
manufacturers in Exeter, the Baring
family established a merchant house in
1762, and — over two hundred years later —
the founder’s direct descendants are still
deeply involved in its management. Its
history is also the history of merchant
banking in Britain, for Barings blazed the
trail along which so many have since
followed. But it must also first and
foremost bea history of members of the
family themselves. What enabled them to
survive through so many vicissitudes and
changing circumstances?
In less than a century Barings had soared
through trading in commodities and
accepting bills to financial heights from
which the operations of ordinary
commercial life looked small and distant.
They specialized in the issue of loans for
overseas governments, and the house’s
influence was such that in 1818 Barings
could be described by the Duc de
Richelieu as the sixth power in Europe
after Britain, France, Austria, Prussia and
Russia. They owned country houses and
huge estates, their picture collections
would have merited a sizeable gallery, and
between them they acquired four peerages
before 1900. Beyond and behind all this
lay a position and a reputation such as no
other British merchant bank has ever
achieved.
So widely were they recognized as a
national institution that when at last they
overreached themselves and tottered on
the verge of ruin, the whole world of



                         (Continued on back flap)
S
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
              In 2022 with funding from
               Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/sixthgreatpowerb0000zieg
THE   SIXTH   GREAT   POWER
 By the same author

THE DUCHESS OF DINO
       ADDINGTON
 THE BLACK DEATH
  KING WILLIAM Iv
    MELBOURNE
  DIANA COOPER
  MOUNTBATTEN
   ~
The Sixth Great Power
     BARINGS
        1762-1929

    lees
      WA al coral EnGEAANS




              COLLINS
      8 Grafton Street, London W1
                   1988
              William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd
          London - Glasgow - Sydney - Auckland
                 Toronto - Johannesburg




BRITISH    LIBRARY CATALOGUING   IN PUBLICATION   DATA

                     Ziegler, Philip
     The sixth great power: Barings, 1762-1929.
              1. Barings (Firm)—History
                         I. Title
               332.66'0941    HG2998.B/
                  ISBN 0-00-217508-8

                First published 1988
      Copyright © Baring Brothers & Co. Ltd
         & P.S. & M.C. Ziegler & Co. 1988

             Photoset in Digitek Janson by
      Ace Filmsetting Ltd, Frome, Somerset
      Printed and bound in Great Britain by
    Butler & Tanner Ltd, Frome and London
                         CONTENTS

  List ofIllustrations                                        7
  Acknowledgements                                            8
  Preface                                                  11

 1 The Birth ofBarings: 1483-1776                          13
2 Laying the Foundations: 1776- 1793                       23
 3 The French Wars: 1793-1815                              43
4 ‘The Highest Fame for Respectability’:
    The United States, 1783-1828                           61
5 ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828         78
6 ‘Magnificentin Promise’: Latin America to 1848          100
7 Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                             2
 8 The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                    pars
9 ‘American Resources and Wealth’
     North America, 1828-1848                             143
10 ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873   158
11 Riding fora Fall: 1873-1890                            186
12 An ‘Immense Connection’ in America
     North America, 1848-1890                             207

13 Overcommitted
     Latin America, 1849-1890                             229

14 The Baring Crisis: 1890                                244
15 The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                        267
16 High Finance: 1890-1914                                291
17 Barings at War: 1914-1918                              320
18 ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929       333
   Epilogue: 1929-1987                                    emIe
                              Contents

APPENDICES
| Family Trees                                            365
II Partners and Managing Directors ofBaring Brothers      371
III Capital, Profits and Losses, and Commission Income,
        1762-1890                                         373
IV Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Figures, 1890-1930   377
V Analysis ofGross Profits, 1890-1930                     379
VI The Pound Sterling, 1750-1980                          381

Bibliographic Notes                                       382
Notes                                                     385
Index                                                     421
            LIST      OF      ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                            between pages
John Baring by William Hoare                                    80-81
Elizabeth Baring by Thomas Gainsborough
Sir Francis Baring by Benjamin West
Sir Francis Baring, John Baring and Charles Wall by Thomas Lawrence
Alexander Baring by Thomas Lawrence

Joshua Bates, by an unknown artist                               160-161
Thomas Baring by George Richmond
Edward Baring by Rudolf Lehmann                                  192-193
Cartoon from Punch referring to the Baring Crisis of 1890

Norman Shaw facade to the Bishopsgate office                 Zi 22          Om
John Baring, Cecil Baring, Gaspard Farrer and Alfred Mildmay by
  Ambrose McEvoy
Cartoons of four distinguished Barings

John Baring byAmbrose McEvoy                                     336-337
Partners’ room at 8 Bishopsgate
Thomas (‘Tom’) Baring by Sidney Kent
Sir Edward Peacock by James Gunn
Windham Baring
Hugo Baring
              ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


 My first acknowledgement must be to Nicholas Baring, who almost
 ten years ago suggested that I might write this book, and to those
  partners of Baring Brothers who have helped and encouraged me in
 my work. I have been given every facility and total freedom to
 express the truth as I saw it.
     Mr T. L. Ingram, archivist of Barings between 1959 and 1978, was
 largely responsible for the formidable task of putting this enormous
 quantity of records into order. Without his efforts I would have
 found it impossible to write this book.
     He was succeeded by DrJohn Orbell. Dr Orbell not only possesses
 an encyclopaedic knowledge of the affairs of Barings and a wide
understanding of economic and financial history, but also wisdom
and - for me most important of all - endless patience. He and his
staff have made my work not merely feasible, but enjoyable as well,
and he has saved me from innumerable blunders and omissions.
    Professor Christopher Platt of St Antony’s College, Oxford,
worked for several years on Barings’ archives and related papers. I
have been fortunate enough to see many of the fruits of his labours,
both published and unpublished. They have been of inestimable
value to me. His mastery of international finance and the history of
Latin America give his work unique authority. I only wish I knew
half as much on either subject.
    I owe much to the assistance of Mr Christopher Cooper, Keeper of
Manuscripts at Guildhall Library; Mr Henry Gillett of the Bank of
England; Mrs Hodge and Miss Mace of the Rothschild
                                                     Archive
(London); Mr Thomas Dunnings, Curator of Manuscripts
                                                       of the
New York Historical Society; Ms Anne-Marie Schaaf of the Histori
                                                                 -
cal Society of Pennsylvania; Mr John Cushing of the Massachusett
                                                                 s
Historical Society; Mr Albert Gordon of Kidder Peabody; MrJames
Hutson of the Manuscript Division of the Library of
                                                    Congress; Ms
Anita Burdett and Miss Kennedy of the Public Archives of
                                                           Canada;
                                  8
                          Acknowledgements                           9
Mr R. H. Harcourt Williams, Librarian and Archivist of the
Marquess of Salisbury; Mme Brot, Conservateur aux Archives
Nationales; Mlle Marie-Aimée Carli of the Européenne de Banque.
   Anyone who ventures for the first time into a world as complex as
that of the merchant bank must owe a great debt to all those who
have gone before or who are currently working in the field. I am par-
ticularly grateful for help and advice to Dr Stanley Chapman, author
of the invaluable The Rise ofMerchant Banking; Professor H. S. Ferns,
leading authority on the history of Britain and Argentina;
Professor Vincent Carosso, historian of Kidder Peabody and of
Morgans; Dr Samuel Amaral of the Instituto Torcuato di Tella in
Buenos Aires; Dr Kathleen Burk and Dr Richard Roberts, respec-
tively historians of Morgan Grenfell and Schroders.
   Apart from those Barings and their colleagues who are active in
the house I have been given much help and treated with great gener-
osity by the Earl of Cromer, Lords Ashburton and Northbrook, Sir
Mark Baring, The Hon. Mrs Mildmay-White, Miss Anne-Cecilia
Baring and the late Mrs Daphne Pollen. The Marquess of North-
ampton kindly allowed me to see Baring papers in his possession.
Among former members of the house or those closely associated
with it, I have especially valued the opportunity of talking with Sir
Andrew Carnwath, Mr John Phillimore and Mr Duncan Surling.
   So many people have helped me along the way that I hesitate to
mention any for fear of the inevitable omissions, but I could not pass
over Mr Ismael Benavides, Mr Leslie Bethell, The Hon. Raymond
Bonham Carter, Mr Robert Cross, Mr Benjamin Davis, the late Mr
Geoffrey and Mrs Gibson, Mrs Cecily Glazzard, Mr R. C. Haskell,
Mr and Mrs Philip Jebb, Mr and Mrs David McCosh, Dr Miguel
Mancera, Mr George Nissen, Mr Archie Norman, Mr Henry Rob-
erts, Mr and Mrs John Shakespeare, Mr John Shepherd, Lord
Sudeley, Dr Claudio Veliz, and Mrs S. D. Wyles.
   My agent, Mrs Diana Baring, has managed with characteristic
grace the difficult task of having a husband in one camp and a client
in the other. Happily the two have never come to blows.
   Finally my wife and children have once again endured with equa-
nimity the inconveniences and irritations of having an author in the
family. My wife’s support has been, as always, the one element
wholly indispensable to my work.
‘There are six great powers in Europe: England, France,
Prussia, Austria, Russia and Baring Brothers.’
                                    Duc de Richelieu, 1818
                            PREFACE


Francis Baring established his house in London in 1762; 225 years
later it is still managed and controlled by his direct descendants. It
was the longevity ofthis dynasty which first intrigued me. What was
there about the family which had enabled it to survive through so
many vicissitudes and changing circumstances? The history of Bar-
ing Brothers must first and foremost be a history of the Barings
themselves.
   It is also to an extent a history of British merchant banking, for
Barings blazed the trail along which so many have since followed. At
first I thought that it would be the sociopolitical aspects of the story
that would most interest me, but it did not take me long to discover
the extraordinary fascination, and indeed excitement, inherent in
this kind of banking. The expert will perhaps find my treatment of
the financial issues too superficial for his taste, the general reader
may wish that he was told less about issues and acceptances, but I
hope that some at least will feel that I have hit a proper balance
between the work of the banker and the personalities involved.
   When to stop was an almost insoluble problem. No banker in his
senses is going to tell inquisitive historians everything about the
transactions in which he is currently engaged or in which living
clients were involved. If I had continued the book beyond 1945, it
would have taken on a different nature. By ending it at an earlier date
I made it possible to claim that nothing had been concealed from me
and nothing censored.
   The possible points at which to cut off the history seemed to be
1918, 1929 and 1939. 1918 would have been too early, and involved
the sacrifice of a lot of interesting material. At first glance 1939 was
the obvious date. Yet 1929 was the year of the 2nd Lord Revelstoke’s
death. With his departure the bank took a fundamentally different
course - or, perhaps more accurately, his existence had masked a
change that was already happening. The process was exaggerated
                                   11
12                            Preface
and speeded up by the slump and the decline of sterling. Interna-
tional issuing withered, corporate financing throve. The decade
between 1929 and the Second World War looks forward to the
postwar world rather than back to 1918 and the years before it. Any
cut-off date would have been arbitrary and unsatisfactory, but I felt
that 1929 was less so than any other. I have added a short and non-
critical epilogue, to give some indication of what has happened
between then and the present day.
                                   l
                                pm Sa




               The Birth of Barings
                     1483-1776


The Barings were not Jews. So bald a statement may seem unduly
negative as an introduction to the history of a dynasty. It may even
inspire disquiet among those who consider that to betray an interest
in whether or not an individual is Jewish is evidence, if not proof, of
anti-Semitism. That the Barings were gentile, however, is by far the
most important fact to emerge from a study of their eminently
respectable but undramatic genealogy. It shaped the growth of their
banking business throughout the nineteenth and into the twentieth
century; dictated with which houses they should cooperate and with —
whom they should do battle; led them to involve themselves in cer-
tain countries and to eschew others. If the Barings had been Jews, the
history of British merchant banking would have been different.
  They were, in fact, low churchmen from North Germany. Some
nineteenth-century historian, no doubt owing them money, once
linked their name with that of the hero of the Baring Saga, a Norse
translation of an old German romance which featured a young
knight who travelled from tournament to tournament, defeating all
his adversaries with monotonous ease, and became first King of Sax-
ony and then Emperor of Byzantium.! Another antiquarian claimed
to have had access to the ‘most indisputable documents’ establishing
the family’s Saxon origins. Their ancestor, S. Beeringe, had been
accepted as a proper attendant on a Norman baron because of his
‘absolute Saxon worthiness and knightly birth’.? Reality was some-
what less romantic.
   The first Baring about whom there is any accurate information 1s
Peter, who was born in about 1483 in the free city of Groningen in
West Friesland. His younger son, Franz, became a Carmelite friar
                                  13
 14                           The Sixth Great Power

but fell under the influence of Martin Luther and ended his life as
pastor ofaparish near Hamburg. Franz’s son was also Franz, and also
a pastor.* His son Johann, a senior civil servant, married a pastor's
daughter and settled in Bremen, and his son, Franz again, became a
Professor of Theology. This tradition of diligent service to God or
the state was now broken. The latest Franz married Rebecca Vogds,
the daughter ofone of Bremen’s leading wool merchants. Franz died
in 1697, aged only forty, and his son Johann was born a fortnight
later. The Vogds found themselves charged with bringing up the
fatherless boy.’
   They elected to direct him towards their own rather than his
father’s interests. North Germany imported much wool and serge
from Britain and exported large quantities of linen in return. A high
proportion of the wool came from the West Country and this was
almost all collected at Exeter for dyeing, finishing and shipment
abroad. In the early eighteenth century Exeter was a boom town,
with some 12,000 inhabitants and four out of five earners deriving
their income in one form or another from the wool trade. The Vogds
family firm imported most of its coloured serge from the largest Exe-
ter merchant, Edmund Cock, and it was probably to this house that
Johann, or John as he soon became, was apprenticed when he was
sent to England in 1717.4
   Though John Baring brought with him a handsome £500+ as his
share of his father’s estate it seems unlikely that he expected when he
first arrived to spend more than a year or two in Exeter learning
about the trade from the English end and making contacts that
would be useful to his mother’s family. He liked the place, however,
and soon felt thoroughly at home. His first task was to dispose of
consignments of linen from the Vogds in Germany, which he sold
on commission; doing so with such success that other merchants
from Bremen invited him to handle their goods as well. From this he
expanded into the wool trade, found it more profitable and gradu-
* The Barings were always parsimonious over Christian names. Among thirty Baring
or near Baring partners in the house since 1762 there were five Thomases, four Johns,
four Charleses and three Francises. This does not make life easy for the historian
                                                                                    (or
the reader).
+ Attempts to translate the currency of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries into
a contemporary equivalent are wayward and inaccurate. A guide of a sort is
                                                                                  con-
tained in appendix VI.
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                  15
ally let his interest in linen dwindle. By 1723 he had become so
well established that he decided to become a British citizen. In this
he set something of a fashion. He was the first foreign merchant
to settle in Exeter, but John Duntze, also from Bremen, followed a
few years later, with the Passavants from Frankfurt, the Mandrots
from Amsterdam      and other traders from the continent not long
behind.’
   He completed the process of assimilation by taking an English
wife. He chose judiciously, marrying Elizabeth Vowler, daughter of a
merchant who was then styled a ‘grocer’, but was in fact a substantial
wholesaler of tea, coffee, sugar, dried fruits and other such
commodities. John’s father-in-law had already retired by the me
his daughter married but was able to give her a handsome dowry
which, at his death, was made up to some £20,000; in the first half of
the eighteenth century a very considerable sum indeed. That Baring
secured such a prize proves that he must have won a respected posi-
tion in Exeter society, but also says something about his personality.
Elizabeth Vowler was a most resolute young lady, who would not
have allowed herself to be fobbed off with a German immigrant
however well established, unless she had loved him. John was, wrote
his son, ‘a man of exceeding good parts, of a most pleasant, excellent
disposition’. He had ‘an admirable head and an excellent heart’.
Without the first he would not have made such a success of business;
without the second he would never have won the esteem of his fel-
low citizens or the hand of Miss Vowler.
   What he lacked was good health. He was never robust and he grew
worse; the last part of his life, wrote his son, ‘passed away very
uncomfortably’. This did not prevent him having five children: the
eldest, also John, was born in 1730, Thomas three years later, Francis
in 1740, Charles in 1742 and a daughter, Elizabeth, in 1744. Nor did
it stop him expanding his business and adding to his already consid-
erable fortune. By the time Francis was born the family had moved
from the centre of town and had settled in the substantial but unpre-
tentious Larkbear House, standing in thirty-seven acres on the
fringes of Exeter. When John died, probably of consumption, at the
age of fifty-one, he was a landowner on a considerable scale and one
of the richest merchants in the West Country. He, the bishop and the
recorder were the only people in Exeter to keep their own carriages.’
16                       The Sixth Great Power

   Impressive though these achievements were, they did not suffice
to bridge the gap between trade and the landed gentry. Referring to
those who belonged to county society, Anthony Trollope wrote: ‘It is
very rarely indeed, that money alone will bestow this acknowledged
rank; and in Exeter, which by the stringency and excellence of its well
defined rules on such matters, may perhaps be said to take the lead
of all English provincial towns, money alone has never availed.’® He
was writing of Exeter a century later, but the pattern was unchanged.
To move to a spacious house outside the town availed nothing.
Trollope’s Miss Stanbury, a stalwart of cathedral society, pro-
nounced that ‘there was doubtless a respectable neighbourhood on
the Heavitree side of the town, but for the new streets, and especially
for the suburban villas, she had no endurance’.? Larkbear House, one
fears, would have been categorized by Miss Stanbury as a suburban
villa. To break through the social barrier required measures more
extreme than John had ever contemplated adopting; he had laid the
foundation, however, and the next generation was to build on it
most handsomely.


In 1748, with John dead and his eldest son only eighteen, prospects
for such promotion must have seemed, at the best, uncertain. There
was no shortage of money. John had left some £40,000; of which his
widow received £17,000, his eldest son £15,000, and the other four
children £2000 apiece. Mrs Baring could have lived comfortably on
her inheritance and let the business go. She had, however, no inten-
tion of doing anything of the sort. While her husband had been
dying she had already played an active part in managing the wool
factory; now she took over the business altogether and did so to such
good effect that the family property had grown to £70,000 by the
time she died in 1766.
   There were setbacks. In 1763 a fire destroyed the new press house
and finishing room and at one time seemed likely to consume the
rest of the factory buildings as well. Goods worth £8000 had to be
carried into the grounds and exposed to the torrential rain, which
helped put out the fire but did no good to the woollen products.
Worst of all, the new buildings were uninsured. ‘Tis a bad beginning
for the two younger ones [Francis and Charles],’ she told a friend,
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                   17
‘but otherwise the year must have proved a very advantageous one,
this I hope will not carry off all the profit!”
   She had found it hard to surrender control and her easy-going
elder son John did not press her unduly. Technically he and Thomas
were in charge of the business after John’s return from a period on
the continent in 1755, but she continued to interfere and, in particu-
lar, to direct the lives of her younger sons. Charles, the youngest,
complained ruefully that it had been his lot to grow up ‘under the
Eye of a Mother, excellent in many respects, but very severe’. Francis
and Charles were sent off to London to be apprenticed to suitably
distinguished merchants, but when their brother Thomas died sud-
denly in 1758 Charles, aged only fifteen, was recalled to Exeter to
take his place. It was a misfortune both for him and for the family; in
London he would have continued to learn the job in subordinate
positions, in Exeter he was given too much responsibility too fast
and made a lamentable mess of it.
    Francis, the most talented of the children, indeed one of the most
remarkable men of his generation, remained in London. He had
already been educated there - at Mr Fargue’s French school at
Hoxton and at Mr Fuller’s Academy in Lothbury'! - and had shown
an aptitude for algebra and mental arithmetic which was then and
remained throughout his life phenomenal. More significantly, he
proved capable of dedicated hard work and a degree of concentra-
tion on the matter in hand which raised him far above his fellow
scholars. As a New Year’s gift in 1743 his maternal grandfather, John
Vowler, had given him an anthology of improving verses for chil-
dren, recommended by the Rev. Dr Doddridge, a distinguished
hymnologist.!? The Rules for Youth included:
          Shun Idleness, the cursed Root of Vice
          Whence Shame, Disgrace and Poverty do nse;
          Yet worse than these, deplorable you'll find
          Is Ignorance, and Poverty of Mind.

          Save what you can. Contrive with prudent Care
          Costly superfluous Trifles to forbear.
           Imploy your Head and Hands, stick not at Pain,
          Plenteous Supplies by Industry you'll Gain!
18                       The Sixth Great Power

  Even Francis Baring would not have made much of these exem-
plary precepts when he was only two, yet he could hardly have taken
them more to heart. He was never idle, never ostentatious, stuck not
at Pain, and did indeed by his Industry gain Plenteous Supplies. He
also abhorred Poverty of Mind; his range of interests was wide, his
curiosity insatiable, he never had much tume for reading but liked
having books around him and possessed that precious knack of
establishing what lay inside them without actually reading the con-
tents. He was serious but not solemn, from a very early age he com-
manded respect and people listened to what he had to say confident
that it would be worth hearing. His thoughts were clear and their
exposition invariably lucid. Small, sharp-featured, even when young
a little deaf, he was not immediately impressive to meet but soon
asserted himself in any society. Though a tough businessman, he
was tolerant and generous in private life. When two unknown and
very distant cousins from Hanover wrote to say that they were
imprisoned for debt in Lymington, Francis Baring sent them £60
without demur, ‘and they need not trouble themselves about the
reimbursement’.!3 Similar acts of benevolence abound; he could
well afford them but not all rich men see this as a reason for help-
ing others.
   For seven years from 1755 Francis was apprenticed to Samuel
Touchet, one of the leading Manchester and West Indian mer-
chants. By the me his apprenticeship was over he considered that
he had learned enough; what is more, he had considerable and, as it
turned out, well-justified reservations about the way Touchet ran his
business. He had no wish to return to Exeter, where Charles was
firmly installed and opportunity limited. London was where he saw
his future. Yet his capital was limited and he would have been hard
put to start up in business on his own. A solution was offered by
Nathaniel Paice, who for many years had been a close friend of the
Baring family and their agent in London. He had for some time been
contemplating retirement; now he proposed that Francis take over
the business and develop it as a branch of the house in London.
Barings would become, in effect, a partnership with two seats of
business, in Exeter and London, and two sets of managers.!* On a
domestic scale, it was the same system as the Rothschilds were to
practise internationally a quarter of a century later. For its success it
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                  19
depended on harmony between the different branches. It soon
became clear that this would not be forthcoming.
   John Baring, the eldest son, was the link between the two wings
ofthe partnership, senior partner of John and Francis Baring and Co.
in London, and of John and Charles Baring and Co. in Exeter, and in
theory supervising the work of his younger brothers in both cities. In
fact he rarely visited London and left Francis to his own devices. Nor
did he occupy himself much more conscientiously with the business
in Exeter. A gregarious, easy-going character, he found it more
satisfying to cut a dash in West Country society and nurse political
ambitions. In 1755, for 2000 guineas, he bought the Mount Radford
estate with a fine, three-storeyed Georgian house fit for a country
gentleman. This part he now proceeded to play with vigour and
considerable success. it did not leave much time for matters of
commerce.
   Francis Baring’s original and for some years main role was to be
the agent for the Exeter business, buying the raw materials needed
for its factory and seeking new markets for its products. He did the
same for other Exeter manufacturers, but his brothers’ company was
much his most considerable customer. The financial services which
he rendered these houses were equally important, collecting money
due to them and arranging to honour their bills when presented to
the new house.
   But even if Francis Baring had been content to stick to this
homespun fare, he would have found it difficult not to get drawn
progressively into more ambitious enterprises. The eighteenth cen-
tury witnessed a phenomenal growth in international trade, fuelled
by increasing European penetration of the Indian subcontinent,
South-East Asia and the Far East and by the expansion of the market
in North America. The demand was there, the goods were there, the
ships and entrepreneurs were there, but the financial machinery for
making the process work evolved more slowly. Wools, dyes and
cloths were the commodities with which Francis Baring felt mostat
home, but there were bigger profits to be made in other spheres. He
began to take afinancial interest in shipments of such things as coch-
ineal, copper, diamonds, cream of tartar, sometimes merely handl-
ing the property of others on commission but increasingly buying
cargoes on his own account, or more often joint account with other
20                        The Sixth Great Power

merchants, as a fully fledged merchant adventurer. Generally he
kept his investment in any transaction to a level he could afford, but
risks were high and one disastrous speculation in soda ash in 1774, in
which his share of the loss was over £2000, must have come close to
putting him out of business.'*
   The greatest need in international trade in the eighteenth century
was for someone to fill the gap between buyer and seller. Smith had
2000 Ibs of best tea lying in his warehouse in Calcutta, Jones knew
that he could profitably dispose of it in Mincing Lane, there was no
dispute over price or quantity, but Smith did not wish to dispatch his
tea without being certain that he would be paid for it, and Jones did
not wish to pay until the tea had arrived and was in his possession.
The essential was a middleman who had confidence in and who had
gained the confidence of both parties, who would accept the bills of
exchange issued by one party and guarantee to pay that amount to
the other. Francis Baring did not invent the business of acceptances,
but he came into it when it was still relatively undeveloped and is
associated as much as any other individual with its growing sophisti-
cation. Five years after John and Francis Baring and Co. was set up,
its liabilities on acceptances stood at some £12,000. By 1776 they
were more than three times as great.
   Elizabeth Baring was somewhat alarmed at her son’s growing
independence and adventurousness. Business was booming in Exe-
ter and there was no need to branch out. She wrote tartly to him in
March 1766:
     As it was so long since I heard from you I imagined you had
     forgot you had a Mother. I am glad your business bears so
     promising an Aspect. I see you have begun in the Exchange
     way, as you Say tis nota lucrative thing, advise you to be care-
     ful you do not run out of your depth. I am satisfied tis
     attended with risk and many houses called considerable
     abroad have often disappointed and sometimes absolutely
     ruined those who have placed Confidence in them, am sen-
     sible you may be drawn in to be answerable for large Sums
     before you are aware of it, and let Mr Touchet’s example of
     grasping at too much and not being contented with a very
     handsome profit which he might have had without running
                   The Birth of Barings: 1483-1776                  21
   such enormous risks, be a warning to you. Consider the
   whole Family are embarked in one Bottom, our trade here is
   surprizingly great, in short we cannot get goods to supply the
   orders, nor money to pay for what we do buy, nor hands to
   finish them, a great deal we do, and more we might if we
   could procure the 3 very necessary ingredients, our people
   work from 5 in the morn to 9 at night and there is yet no
   prospect of coming to the end of it.'¢
   She was right in believing that her son was embarking on danger-
ous and largely uncharted waters. The secret of successful merchant
banking is above all good intelligence; to be well informed - and to
be the first to be informed - about the resources, the policies and the
capacities of all the companies with whom one deals, and about
political and economic developments which will affect the course of
their business. A merchant banker must not only be a mathematician
buta historian and a geographer as well; he must know about church
and state, not to mention the possibility of a revolution or a coup
d’état; he must be agronomist, mineralogist and weather forecaster;
a psychologist able to detect the hidden strengths and weaknesses of
those with whom he works; a futurologist qualified to predict the
vagaries of diet and fashion. Since he can hardly hope to unite so
many parts in one mind, the essential is that he should havea great
many informants and be skilled at collating and interpreting their
information. Francis Baring was quick to see this, and to learn his
trade, but networks of informants are not built up overnight and he
made expensive misjudgements, both of people and of circum-
stances.
   In the fourteen years in which the partnership with Exeter existed,
Francis Baring lost money in eight of them. Profits were above £3000
in one of the remaining years but otherwise were far lower. When
the joint partnership had been set up the personal property of the
family, amounting to some £50,000, had been allocated £20,000 to
                                                                at
London and £30,000 to Exeter, but in practice Francis had £4200
his disposal when he opened his office off Cheapside in 1763. He
inherited £5000 from his mother in 1766 and drew £2000 from his
original inheritance in 1769. John Baring put in £7810 in 1766,
£1500 in 1767 and £3000 in 1769. Yet by January 1777 Francis
22                      The Sixth Great Power

Baring’s personal capital in London was only £2,457.3.6d. He told
Lord de Dunstanville that he had begun with a fortune of £10,000
and had spent all but a few hundred before ‘he acquired anything
but a knowledge of trade and commerce’.!” It cannot be called a
gloriously successful start to a career in business, and there can have
been few who would have foreseen what immense rewards that
‘knowledge of trade and commerce’ were soon to earn.
   Francis Baring himself admitted that inexperience and lack of
caution were at the root of his problems, but he also blamed the asso-
ciation with the house in Exeter. His brother Charles, he claimed,
was ‘not calculated for the management of the house, an establish-
ment which depended on steady order and attention, ill suited to his
disposition of catching at every new project that offered’. Charles
had travelled in Spain and Portugal; journeys which had proved
expensive both in ttme and money and had involved John and
Charles Baring and Co. in a number of unprofitable connections:
‘This is not stated as a reflection on his intention, but solely to
impeach the want of commercial knowledge and judgment, which
he has manifested through life.’ Nor was it merely in Spain and Por-
tugal that Charles had blundered; not only had he ‘interfered too
much with the house in London, but by degrees he formed partner-
ships, connexions and speculations, of a wild, strange, incoherent
description; and what is particularly unfortunate, not one of them
has proved successfull’.'8
  John Baring was even stronger in his condemnation of his brother.
‘The weakness, the capriciousness, the greediness, the shabbiness of
Charles are so abominable it is hoped no occasion will arise again to
mention him,’ he wrote in his sketch of a family history.19 In fairness
to Charles one must wonder why, if his shortcomings were really so
glaring, his elder brother and senior partner did so little to check
them. Charles for his part complained that John had been guilty of
undue severity and of never giving him a fair chance.2° To this
Francis retorted that the accusation reminded him of their mother,
who had once been told that she sang out of tune. ‘She said it was
impossible for she could not sing out of tune if she would, and this
may be correctly applied to my Brother, who could not be severe if
he would.’2!
  It is possible to sympathize with Charles, who had been promoted
                   The Birth of Barings:   1483-1776                 23
too young and given authority which he was not fit to wield, but
even with the most loving supervision it seems unlikely that he
would ever have made a competent businessman; his judgement
was too uncertain and his impetuosity too unbridled. Add to this
vanity, and the arrogance of a weak man determined to prove him-
self strong, and all the ingredients were there for a disaster. It never
quite came, but near enough; in June 1774 matters were so bad that
the three brothers signed a memorandum agreeing that, if one of
them died, £2000 should be deducted from his capital as his share of
the likely total loss.??
   For Francis Baring the most vexatious aspect of Charles’s enter-
prises was that constant demands were made on the capital of the
London house, thus preventing him using it for more profitable and
enduring enterprises. ‘Your unceasing projects, by absorbing so large
a part of the family and of the Bank, hung as a dead weight and
impeded my progress for many years.?3 Whether, at that period, the
money would have been used more gainfully by Francis is open to
question, but he had no doubt himself that Charles was squandering
the vital resources of the house. His brother compounded the
offence by maintaining that it was he who was making a success of
the business and Francis who was bungling, telling all and sundry
that in his opinion Francis’s family must in the end come to the
 parish.2# Mrs Baring had said, ‘the whole Family are embarked in one
 Bottom’; Francis regretted the truth of the statement and was more
than ready to leave the ship and venture forth on his own.
    The opportunity came in the autumn of 1776. Charles arrived in
 London accompanied, said Francis, by ‘three low persons, projec-
tors, who had offered a plan for spinning Wool by Machinery’.?®
Francis was ill at the time, and under considerable financial pressure,
which he attributed entirely to Charles’s thoughtlessness and mis-
management. He met Charles and his cronies with a notable lack of
enthusiasm, an attitude which became more marked when he heard
of his brother's plans to build woollen mills in Devonshire. The party
departed for Lancashire with Francis still urging extreme caution; he
was therefore not unnaturally disturbed when Charles returned tri-
umphant announcing that ‘he had found everything so satisfactory,
that he had signed an agreement for a partnership with those per-
sons, wherein he had stipulated to advance a Capital of £20,000’.?6
24                       The Sixth Great Power

   Francis had no intention of being dragged into this morass, a view
of the affair justified by the fact that two of Charles’s three putative
partners were shortly made bankrupt. He suggested that the partner-
ship should continue on its present basis but that Charles should
accept sole responsibility for and take all the benefit from this latest
enterprise. Charles treated this proposal with contempt, and
accepted with alacrity when Francis said that in that case the only
thing to do was to dissolve the partnership. Without the support of
the Exeter house, Charles believed, John and Francis Baring and Co.
would quickly founder; and he advised John ‘to consider well the
hazard he ran by continuing the partnership’.?” In the end John Bar-
ing decided to continue as a partner in both houses; perhaps still
hoping that in time the family might be reunited. Bad debts were
written off on each side and Charles Baring contributed £1000
towards a ‘desperate debt of about £5500’ which was outstanding 1n
London. The ending of the partnership was deemed to take effect at
the end of 1776 and the articles of dissolution were finally signed by
the three brothers on 29 March 1777.
                                     Z
                                ew       nate




           Laying the Foundations
                   1776-1793


Britain in 1776 was economically, and probably politically and
socially as well, the most advanced country on earth. It was still dom-
inated by a few hundred aristocratic families who monopolized a
grotesque proportion of the nation’s wealth, but though this caste
jealously guarded its status and its privileges it was by no means
immutable. The rule of primogeniture ensured that its poorer mem-
bers were constantly dropping off to join the professional classes or
landed gentry, while new blood could buy its way in if the price
offered were high enough. Nor did its members disdain the delights
of money-making; they usually ensured that their estates were run
efficiently and that the coal, tin or other such resources found on
their estates were mined to best advantage. They contributed to the
nation’s wealth.
   If the aristocrats still largely ran the country, it was the 12,000-
13,000 families of the country gentry that made it work. They ranged
from baronets with a seat in parliament, whose large estates and
grand houses made them the equal of most of the continental and
some of the indigenous nobility, to impoverished squires who
worked their own land and were barely to be distinguished from the
yeoman farmers who were their neighbours.
   The more they looked like farmers, however, the more they were
aware of their gentility. They sometimes disliked but always
respected the aristocracy; they always disliked and usually despised
                                                                      to
the industrialists and merchants who were bringing the country
undreamt-of prosperity. It was not until the nineteenth century that
                                                                    was
the phrase ‘in trade’ gained wide currency as a label for all that
mean and socially inferior, but the eighteenth-century squire knew
well what the description signified.
                                     25
 26                      The Sixth Great Power
    Few of the country gentlemen realized that their importance in
 the social order was about to be overshadowed by this new breed of
 men. The nouveaux riches made their money in ways barely contem-
 plated a century before. Wool was still Britain’s leading export, em-
 ploying one way or another some three quarters of a million people,
 but the metal trades were in violent upsurge and exports ofiron and
 steel manufactures were doubled, redoubled and doubled again ina
 mere 75 years. The coal required to fuel these industries brought vast
 wealth to those lucky enough to own the mines, and also gave
 employment, brutish.and ill-paid perhaps yet still acceptable, to
 many thousands more. The Industrial Revolution was rolling, towns
 such as Birmingham and Sheffield took on a new significance, and
 though London was still by far the largest city of the realm, its rela-
 tive importance dwindled.
    In one field, however, it remained not merely pre-eminent but
 unique. Birmingham and Sheffield might be generating the money,
 Liverpool and Bristol might be the entrepéts for a flourishing com-
 merce, but London was the financial centre of Britain. Francis Baring
 could not have achieved, could not have attempted to achieve, what
 he did in any other city. London was also, of course, the seat of gov-
 ernment; indeed, if it had not been the seat of government it could
 never have been the financial centre of the country, for, as Baring was
 soon to find out, the two were inextricably meshed together.
_ When the first Baring partnership began to operate in January
 1763 George III had been a little over two years on the throne. It was
 to be another seven years before he was able to settle his pliant
 instrument, Lord North, in the office of prime minister. Increasing
 ill feeling between the Baring brothers in Exeter and London was
 matched on an international scale by the growing acrimony between
 North’s government and the settlers in America. The United States’
 declaration of independence of 4 July 1776 preceded by six months
 Francis Baring’s escape from the shackles of Exeter. It did not seem a
 wholly propitious prelude.
    The American War of Independence not only tarnished Britain’s
 military reputation but also gravely damaged her economy. Exports,
 which had grown steadily for a quarter of a century or more, fell by
almost 20 per cent. To the North American market, much the most
important to Britain outside Europe, they were halved. There was
                Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                    27
unemployment in the industrial towns and consternation in the City
of London. It was hardly the ideal moment for Francis Baring to
escape from the family bottom and paddle his own canoe.


He was not entirely alone. His brother John was still with him and
could be counted on for encouragement at least, and probably a
measure of financial assistance. Nor was he without other support.
In 1767 he had married Harriet Herring, who being both an heiress
and a cousin to a former Archbishop of Canterbury, neatly united
God and mammon in the service of the new house. In the long run
she was to bring a fortune of £12,000; not much of this was available
on marriage but Baring immediately benefited by a share in the
proceeds of the Prerogative Office (predecessor of the Court of Pro-
bate), which produced an average £156.11.4%4d per annum.’ He
needed this increment; the year after his marriage he spent £180 on
his wine cellar, £160 on silver plate and £350 on furniture, but
Harriet Baring proved a good and frugal manager, running a com-
fortable and well-conducted household ata cost of £800 a year. ‘I can
now   assert,’ wrote   her husband    after her death, ‘that if those
expenses had amounted to £1200 a year for the same period, it must
have ruined me for ever.”
   Given a chance Harriet would have been convivial as well as cap-
able. A description of her written in 1805 reported that she had a
sociable nature and never missed a party if she could help it. Her
own receptions were ‘among the most brilliant in town’ though her
husband was seldom among those present, preferring ‘the more
tranquil enjoyment of a domestic circle to those gay but promiscu-
ous assemblies’.3 John Mallet, married to Francis Baring’s niece,
went further and described Harriet as a ‘vain, worldly, fine woman,
whose life was devoted to fashionable society’.* This may have been
true of her in later life but certainly it was not the case in the years
after her marriage, when she was not only short of money but had to
bear twelve children and bring up ten, for the most part above the
offices of Barings 1n Mincing Lane, in the City of London.
                                                                  ,
  Francis Baring was a loving and conscientious father. Mallet
                                                                 ng
indeed, describes him as being ‘the mamma of the family’, orderi
                                                            of their
shoes and frocks for the children, fussing over the details
28                        The Sixth Great Power

nursery life and organizing schools for his sons.’ The author was
probably more intent on blackening Harriet’s reputation than on
giving an objective portrait of her husband. Francis Baring never
seems to have felt that he was unreasonably put upon. If he did
behave in a way so uncharacteristic of the late eighteenth century, it
was because he wanted to. He never ceased to concern himself with
his children’s welfare and to applaud or rebuke them as seemed
appropriate, always with patently sincere affection.


Mincing Lane was to be Francis Baring’s office until 1793. At first he
ran affairs with the help only of a handful of clerks, no doubt dis-
couraged from taking on partners by the thought that he had a pleth-
ora of sons to support him in due course. He took the first £500 of
any annual profit and split what was left with his brother John. By
1781, however, the burden had become impossible to bear alone. A
young man called Charles Wall was admitted as a partner and the
senior clerk, James Mesturas, promoted at the same time. They were
given a generous salary of £900 a year (three times what Mesturas
and more than ten times what Wall had been earning previously)
and one seventh of the profit each. The fact that Francis Baring could
afford to offer these lavish rewards showed how the business was
prospering. In 1777, the year after the new partnership had been in1-
tiated, a profit of £3400 was recorded; in 1779 1t was £4400. By 1781,
when the new partners were appointed, it had risen to £10,300, and
by 1788, admittedly an exceptional year, the profit reached a spec-
tacular £12,000.
     It was, in fact, a period of steady growth, with the occasional vio-
lent leap forward and less dramatic moments of recession. Most of
the business, though not necessarily the most profitable element,
was an extension of what the partnership had done in the past. There
was a marked change in emphasis, however. Little by little the old
connections with the West Country withered and were replaced by a
network of international relationships. By 1780 the evolution was
already clearly marked. Of the seven accounts that turned over more
than £10,000 a year, only one was in Exeter and one in London. Two
of the others were in Amsterdam, and one each in Cartagena, Leg-
horn and St Petersburg. This list excludes the substantial business
                Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                    29
done with John and Charles Baring and Co., still by far the largest
single item on the books, but that too was in decline. By 1790 the
West Country clients had almost disappeared, while business with
the United States grew steadily more important. Trade across the
Atlantic was back to the levels ruling before the revolution and
Francis Baring was pre-eminent among British merchants who fos-
tered this swelling commerce.®
   Successful merchant banking depends on confidence, most of all
in the world of acceptances where the banker is playing the honest
broker between two other parties. It is essential that a house should
be known to be rich, secure and well-informed, but its reputation,
particularly in the eighteenth and nineteenth centunis, could be no
better than that of its senior partners. John and Francis Baring and
Co., in the 1780s, was Francis Baring, and it was in him that were first
clearly marked those characteristics which subsequent generations
have come to expect in members of the family. Lord D’Abernon
summed it up as successfully as anyone in 1931 when he described
the Barings as: ‘Strong, sensible, self-reliant men, with a profound
belief in themselves, in their family and in their country - eminently
just and fair; no trace of hypocrisy or cant; not only solid and square
but giving the impression both of solidity and squareness . . . not
subtle or mentally agile, but endowed with that curious combination
of character which lends authority even to doubtful decisions, and
makes those who possess it respected in counsel and obeyed as
rulers.” The Barings were above all reliable, on that everyone agreed;
as also on the fact that their attitude towards the rest of humanity
was detached and cool, at its best manifested in a balanced objec-
tivity, at its worst disdainful and indifferent. Lord Welby in the mid-
nineteenth century described Lord Northbrook’s ‘essentially Baring
character’ as being ‘rather unsympathetic outwardly, certainly very
undemonstrative, with a tendency to strong prepossessions, some
would say prejudices’, but always ‘just and anxious to do justice’.
Barings were not expected to be warm, at any rate to the outside
world. Fifty years later Christopher Sandeman found Maurice Bar-
ing ‘tenuous and even ghostlike. Distinction certainly, in a high
                                                                      so
degree, but possibly the family coldness, which Strachey detested
in Evelyn Baring’s replies to Gordon’s frenzied telegrams.’? Nor were
                                                                   Lady
they supposed to be brilliant. ‘We had a dull dinner at
30                         The Sixth Great Power

Ashburton’s,’   recorded    Thackeray gloomily, ‘A party of Barings
chiefly.’!° But they were sound.
   Francis Baring was not in all ways typical of the dynasty which he
founded. He would never have been so successful had he not pos-
sessed a strain of adventurousness, sometimes even of recklessness,
which was not often to be found in those who built on his founda-
tions. But in most respects he would have been instantly recogniz-
able to Lord D’Abernon or Lord Welby.
    ‘His manner was cold and his disposition reserved, wrote Sir
Denis le Marchant, ‘so that he had few friends or even political fol-
lowers, but no man was more respected and trusted by those who
had to deal with him.’!! By no means everyone would have agreed
about the coldness of his manner - he seems often to have been posi-
tively jovial for a Baring - but on the respect and trust that he
inspired there was no dispute.
    It was this that contributed above all to the great growth of Bar-
ings’ business in acceptances between 1776 and the French wars. The
total of their liabilities rose from £42,000 at the end of 1777 to
£121,000 in 1793, but the quality of the business they did was more
important than the quantity. Like Othello, Francis Baring would
have cried that he who stole his purse stole not trash perhaps, but
certainly something of secondary importance, but ‘he that filches
from me my good name robs me of that which not enriches him, and
makes me poor indeed’. At any time Baring would have sacrificed
the whole of his house’s profits to preserve his reputation, because
he knew that without reputation his house would be worth nothing.
His reward was that during this period Barings became one of the
most respected houses in the City. The fact that their name was on a
bill, that they had guaranteed it, gave it credibility and ensured that if
itcame to be sold or discounted before it fell due, it would be done at
the most favourable rates.
   Acceptances trebled in the seventeen years after Francis Baring
broke with his brother Charles. In the same period commission
income - the fees Barings levied on the issuing of acceptances, han-
dling consignments of merchandise, and a wide variety of banking
transactions - more than doubled, from £4000 or so per annum to
£10,000. It was an important element in the house’s affairs, but less
so than previously. It was made the more profitable by the fact that
                Laying the Foundations:    1776-1793                31
Baring was always ready to act, in effect, as an insurance broker;
sometimes carrying the risk of a cargo himself, more often passing it
on to others. In 1771 he had been appointed a director of the Royal
Exchange Assurance, an association which must have helped con-
siderably in building up this useful though never substantial line of
business.
   But the association which contributed more than any other to the
growth of Barings’ business and reputation was with the Amsterdam
house of Hope and Co., probably at the time the richest and most
powerful in Europe, and therefore in the world. Francis Baring
always had a partiality for the Dutch. In 1787 he told Pitt’s Treasurer
of the Navy, Henry Dundas, that a commercial treaty with Holland
would be ‘preferable to one with any other nation as she can pro-
mote the sale of our Indian products and manufactures in a superior
degree; and at the same time contribute very important political
assistance. The two Countries have one great original object in view
and which do not clash in the smallest degree. That of Great Britain
is to maintain and preserve the Empire which she has acquired, in
comparison of which, Trade is a subordinate, or collateral considera-
tion. The great object of Holland is in the first instance to secure to
herself the monopoly of the Spice Islands, and secondly to extend
her general trade.’!
   What was true for Britain was equally true for Barings. The Dutch
mercantile houses had many interests in common with their British
counterparts and were rarely in direct competition. But Hopes
bulked far larger on the European scene. They were in origin a Scot-
tish family, tenuously connected with the Earls of Hopetoun, who
had settled in Holland in the sixteenth century and established
themselves as the first bankers of the land. Henry Hope, head of the
family and of the bank, lived in seigneurial style at Welgelen, near
Haarlem, a palace modelled loosely on the Villa Borghese, but most
of the day-to-day dealings with such houses as Barings were done by
Robert - ‘Little Bob’ - Voate, the son of a Huguenot emigré who had
settled in Amsterdam."3 To bring his house into intimate association
with such a concern was one of Francis Baring’s more remarkable
achievements, and one which owed far more to his character and
personal ability than to the resources at his disposal.
  According to one report, the relationship between Hopes and
22                        The Sixth Great Power
Barings began when the Dutch bankers decided to try out the fledg-
ling house by passing them a few trifling bills for sale. Francis Baring
executed this task so promptly and secured so favourable a rate of
exchange that Hopes at once sent him £15,000 in bills with the same
instructions. Baring had never dealt with anything like so large an
order before, but undeterred he went to his bankers, Martin and
Stone, and possibly assisted by the fact that Richard Stone was about
to become his brother-in-law, had the bills discounted and imme-
diately remitted the exchange to Amsterdam. The transaction dem-
onstrated what Baring already suspected to be the case, that friends
or relations in the right place could be at least as useful as money in
the bank. “The Hopes were exceedingly struck with the transaction
which bespoke not only great zeal and activity, but what was still
more important in the eyes of the mercantile men, either good credit
or great resources in their correspondent. From that day Baring
became one of their principal “friends”.”!*
     They became friends, as well as ‘friends’ in the business sense.
By 1790 William Hope was apologizing that pressure of work had
prevented him writing before, but that he considered ‘my communi-
cations with you, my dear Sir, as a family correspondence, and in fact
it is so on the footing you have been good enough to admit me’.!5
When the Hopes visited London they stayed with the Barings and
were passed on to grand friends, like Lord Lansdowne at Bowood.!¢
‘It was a notable characteristic of the Baring House,’ wrote the Cana-
dian historian, Adam Shortt, ‘that, once an intimate connection was
established between it and the chief personages in any house, the
world around, that connection was maintained, not only for the lives
of the original heads, but for the lives of their successors to the sec-
ond and even third generation.”!7 In the case of Hopes it was still
more long-lived, lasting from 1766 when the two houses first corre-
sponded, to far into the twentieth century when Hopes ceased to
exist as an independent entity, or, indeed, until the present day, with
the successor firm of Bank Mees and Hope and its parent company,
the Algemene Bank Nederland.
   The relationship was not always beneficial. In 1787 and 1788
Voate involved Barings in an ill-judged scheme to corner the market
for cochineal. Secret purchase orders were sent out to correspon-
dents all over Europe but stocks proved more substantial than had
                Laying the Foundations:   1776-1793              33
been expected and extravagantly large prices had to be paid for the
final deposits. Even when almost all the cochineal in Europe had
been procured the price was obstinately slow in rising, and the dis-
comfiture was complete when the new crop arrived from Mexico
months earlier than expected. Barings only bore a quarter of the cost
of this escapade but they still had to find some 500,000 guilders.18
Such incidents were exceptional, however. On the whole Barings
benefited immeasurably from their association with Hope and Co.,
both in directly financial terms, and from the prestige which their
intimacy with so great a house earned them among competitors and
potential clients.


In 1786 Francis Baring told Lord Lansdowne:
    My time and attention is chiefly employed by three great
    objects, my Commercial concerns, the public, and the East
    India Company. The first is the sole object to which I look
    for a pecuniary provision for my family; at present I am well
    supported, the business is in a very flourishing situation,
    totally divested of moonshine, and the attention which |
    bestow is fully sufficient, but if that support should fail, I
    should not hesitate a moment about renouncing every other
    consideration to my duty to my family. The public requires
    time and I am fully possessed with a hope of doing some
    good, but the time which is employed is not embarrassing to
    my mind. I have men of sense and conversant with business
    to work with and am under no apprehension about discharg-
    ing my duty satisfactorily.'?
  The references to ‘the public’ - by which he meant above all the
world of politics - showed how far Baring had advanced from being
the mere agent of a West Country wool firm. The fact that the letter
                                                                 e
was written to the Marquis of Lansdowne, former Earl of Shelburn
                                                    ,  marked  the
and one of the most notable grandees in the kingdom
move still more clearly. It was a move which took him away from his
occupation as a merchant and to that extent was detrimental to his
financial wellbeing. Yet, eighteenth-century Britain being what it
was, the mové also opened up new possibilities that would never
34                       The Sixth Great Power

have existed for him if he had stuck to his counting house. The time
that Francis Baring devoted to ‘the public’ was as valuable to John
and Francis Baring and Co. as any spent poring over manifests or cal-
culating the profit margin on consignments of cochineal.
   Baring’s introduction to politics came through John Dunning,
nine years his senior, the son of a successful attorney from Devon
who had made himselfa fortune at the bar and was said by Burke to
be ‘the first of all his profession . . . there is not a man in any situa-
tion, of a more erect and independent spirit, of a more proud hon-
our, or more manly mind, or more firm, determined integrity’.?°
Gainsborough credited him with sober sense and great acuteness; ‘I
begin to think that there is something in the air of Devon that grows
clever fellows’.2! Dunning became Solicitor General and later Chan-
cellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, was created Lord Ashburton in
1782, and two years earlier married Elizabeth, the sister of that other
clever fellow from Devon, Francis Baring. He was a close friend of
Colonel Isaac Barré, who in 1782 was to become Pitt’s Paymaster
General and thus a man of almost limitless patronage. Dunning,
Barré and Baring became a formidable triumvirate; so much so that
in 1787 Baring commissioned Joshua Reynolds to paint a group
portrait of the first two and Lord Lansdowne, their great
patron. Lansdowne, while still Shelburne, had served briefly as
Prime Minister with Pitt as his Chancellor of the Exchequer. While
Prime Minister, and presumably on Dunning’s recommendation,
Shelburne wrote to Baring, to say he needed ‘to have recourse from
time to time to Mercantile advice’, and that he hoped Baring would
supply the need. The recipient proudly annotated the letter
‘received and answered the same day, 31 July 1782. N.B. the first let-
ter or message I ever received from His Lordship.’2? It was far from
being the last. In the Baring archives lie copies of a plethora of letters
in which Baring proffered his advice on one. subject or another.
Shelburne asked how important Senegal was to the French slave
trade. ‘Senegal is not of the smallest importance to France with
regard to negroes but solely with regard to gum,’ Baring answered
firmly. ‘The Slave trade from Senegal is trifling as the Natives are a
flimsy enervated race, unfit for labor.’23
  In his dealings with Shelburne - or indeed any other politician -
Baring never missed a chance to speak up for the mercantile interest.
                 Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                 35
In June 1783, for example, he argued that taxation fell more heavily
on merchants and small shopkeepers than on country gentlemen.
‘Commercial and personal property has very seldom been fairly rep-
resented in the House of Commons. . . When the tax on wheels was
proposed there was a general clamor, and for which very few gentle-
men can pay above £5 or £10 a year, whereas a tallow-chandler, gro-
cer, or an obscure tradesman must under the stamps upon receipts
pay £30, £40 or £50 per annum and some a good deal more.’?+
Shelburne for his part played Baring the compliment of being frank
to the point of bluntness in his letters. When Baring complained that
one of his greenhouses had burnt down, Lansdowne, as he had by
then become, replied with some brutality that it was not much loss:
‘It was   not handsome    of its kind or, I think, particularly well
placed.’25
   William Cobbett, in the splenetic vein which ran particularly rich
when financiers of foreign origin were in question, referred to
Francis Baring as being a merchant’s clerk who owed his rise to ‘hav-
ing become a handy city-man to the father of the present Marquis of
Lansdowne’.*¢ In fact Baring seems to have done little in the way of
promoting Lansdowne’s personal finances, which presumably was
what Cobbett had in mind. But he felt considerable loyalty to his
patron, and since Lansdowne remained in opposition, he never grew
close to the Prime Minister, William Pitt. This did not stop Pitt
appealing to him for advice on a wide variety of subjects: on Turkey;
on Gibraltar - only of value if Britain possessed a superior fleet;
on Customs House reform - ‘To obtain admission to the
Commissioners is almost impossible; to obtain information from
them is equally so.”27 Baring was never slow to produce such replies,
always decisive and to the point. But he was more hesitant when he
was asked by Pitt to become one of the Commissioners enquiring
into the fees and perquisites of certain public offices. He accepted in
the end, but only on condition that he got no remuneration for his
work and after first securing Lansdowne’s blessing.”
   In April 1786 Baring was accused in the press of having used his
connection with the East India Company to make a profit out of
sales of tea. The sales had in fact been made by Robert Voate on
behalf of Hopes and other companies. Hopes and the other houses
involved signéd a declaration stating that, though they would have
36                       The Sixth Great Power
been delighted to include Baring in their number if he had wished,
no such request had been made. Vodte went further and said that he
had repeatedly pressed Baring to take an interest in the transaction,
but his friend ‘constantly and firmly refused ’.2? In spite of this it took
Baring nearly three years to clear his name. He felt particularly bitter,
because he had only become involved in the business some two
years earlier at the direct request of Pitt, when large stocks of tea were
bought up in an attempt to defeat the widespread smuggling that
was going on.30 He had been impressed by Pitt at the time, telling
Shelburne in some surprise that the Prime Minister was ‘not only
fully informed but appears equally well to comprehend the whole
extent’ of the Commutation Bill,}! but approval turned to rancour
when Pitt and Dundas not merely failed to come to his defence but
seemed positively to egg on his accusers: “The attack was rather
encouraged than otherwise, my temper would not permit me to
bring forward what would have justified me in a moment, namely,
the papers and authorities under which I acted from Mr Pitt from
whence it appeared that I had exceeded, and very considerably sur-
passed those expectations which I had held out and which Mr Pitt
had entertained.’32 Baring continued to work with and for Pitt, but
he never wholly forgave him. After Pitt died he wrote to The Times to
deny that he had contributed to the settlement of the Prime Minis-
ter’s debts. “With the highest respect for the talents, the integrity, and
intentions of Mr Pitt,’ he wrote, ‘I have not been able to concur with
him on any great political question for above 20 years, our political
opinions and principles being different.’33
   Lansdowne was constantly urging Baring to ‘put his views before
the Publick’. In terms that were presumably well intentioned but
strike the contemporary reader as a little tactless, he told Baring that
he should seek to ‘lay the Foundation of solid Reputation and Char-
acter. It’s the highest Injustice to consider every Merchant as a Jew,
as if he was incapable of looking forward to anything but a Fraudu-
lent Contract or a Line of Stockjobbing - the consequence of which
is that their talents are left to prey upon the Publick instead of serv-
ing it... Dirtiness of character will occur in all Professions . . .’34
When he urged Baring to ‘put his views before the Publick’, he meant
that the banker should seek election to the House of Commons. By
entering the House he would transcend the status of a mere mer-
                 Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                     wll
chant, enter as of right into the empyrean of the ruling classes, and
not merely lay but build upon ‘the Foundation of solid Reputation’.
It was not a new idea to Baring, indeed it was one that had occurred
already to both his brothers.
   Charles, characteristically, was the first to chance his arm and,
equally characteristically, failed. He stood for Tiverton, offering not
merely to live in the town but, more extravagantly, to buy all their
wool products into the bargain. In spite of this he was rejected,
probably because he insisted that, if elected, he must also take over
the lucrative post of Receiver of the Land Tax. The Tivertonians
preferred another Exeter merchant, John Duntze, also a first-genera-
tion emigré, who was somewhat less exigent in his demands.?5
   John tried next, for Honiton in 1774. He too was defeated, in spite
of the support of the Courtenays, and resolved never to stand again,
but was provoked to change his mind when the son-in-law of John
Duntze, John Cholwich (or sometimes Cholwych), contested Exeter
in 1776. The Duntzes and Barings were the Montagus and Capulets
of Exeter and a plank in Cholwich’s platform was that the Baring
influence in the city should be reduced. The challenge could not be
refused. John stood against him, spent £6000 on the election and
won the day.3¢ Presumably he thought the money well spent, for he
remained MP for Exeter until 1802. ‘My supporters were fond of me
as a candidate free with my money, he wrote a little ruefully, and he
calculated that the seat cost him in all more than £25 ,000.37 By far the
most expensive election was 1790, Baring spending some £10,000.
His rival, Sir Charles Bampfylde, told the Prince of Wales that Baring
was almost certain to be unseated as the result of a petition alleging
bribery, corruption and undue influence: ‘I have every reason to
assure myself he would not venture a second contest.’ Bampfylde
might well have been right, but had no chance to find out, since the
House of Commons decided Baring had been properly elected.?*
   Francis Baring prudently waited until his London business was
well established before following his brothers into a pursuit that was
certain to be both costly and time-consuming. He first came in for
the rotten borough of Grampound in Devon at the cost of £3000,
and then in 1790 decided to switch to IIchester, agreeing to pay
Samuel Smith £1500 for his interest in the borough. *. . .1n case Mr
Baring is not seated the sum of Two Hundred Fifty Pounds is to be
 38                      The Sixth Great Power
returned to him by Mr Smith. This agreement to remain secret.’3?
Smith proved unable to supply what he had promised and Baring
lost the election. Not long after Lansdowne offered him one of his
boroughs, and from 1794 to 1806 he sat either for Calne or for
Chipping Norton.
   He was not a natural orator, nor did he ever feel at home in the
House of Commons. He wrote to Lansdowne to deny having said
something attributed to him by the press: ‘My voice is so very un-
equal to the House of Commons, and I am consequently very much
misrepresented in the papers.’*° The True Briton, admittedly well-
disposed to his politics, thought better of his efforts. In his speeches,
it said, he was ‘neat, flowing and perspicuous, aiming more by solid-
 ity of argument to arrest and convince his hearers, than by beautiful
 figures and impassioned eloquence to mislead the minds of men’.*!
 He was, in short, a humdrum but competent performer who com-
 manded the respect of the House not by fine words but by his com-
 mand of his subject and obvious sincerity. The views that he
 expounded were much as might have been expected from a promi-
 nent merchant, and on the lines every Baring in Parliament was to
 follow for the next one hundred and fifty years. He advocated /aissez-
faire, in its most sweeping form. ‘Every regulation’, he said, ‘is a
 restriction, and as such contrary to that freedom which I have held to
 be the first principle of the wellbeing of commerce.’#? Trade must
 follow its own course, any interference with it could only stunt its
 growth and distort its proper pattern. He was consistent in his'views,
 even when it was possible that their application would in the short
 term at least work to his disadvantage. In a memorandum that he
 prepared for Lansdowne he argued vigorously that there should be
 free trade with the United States and no limitations imposed on the
 use of American shipping.*3
    This condemnation of monopolies as much as any other artificial
 restraint on trade was qualified in the case of India. Baring had
 begun to invest in the East India Company in 1776, though never on
 a large scale, and in 1779 he became a Director. The Company more
 or less monopolized imports and exports from and to India; a breach
of his principles which Baring tolerated with apparent equanimity.
 He fiercely opposed Charles James Fox’s attempt to capture this rich
fount of patronage for his section of the Whig party. ‘It is such a Sys-
                 Laying the Foundations: 1776-1793                  39
tem ofinfluence and corruption as amazes me. . .’ he told Shelburne
of Fox’s India bill. ‘It will for ever remain as a monument of the
boldest and most artful effort ever attempted by any subject since
the restoration.’# But he did not deny that government had a right to
influence the doings of the Company; on the contrary, he cham-
pioned the right of ministers to make their opinions heard and, gen-
erally, heard with respect.
  By 1783 Baring was accepted as the leader of the City interest on
the Court of Directors of the East India Company, and he worked
closely with a colleague and old friend, Robert Atkinson, in support
of Pitt. Wraxall said of Atkinson that he ‘possessed a long mathemat-
ical head, sustained by vast facility and rapidity in calculations of a
pecuniary nature: qualities held in high esteem by Pitt’,45 and the
same was a fortiori true of Baring. Atkinson, however, was dying of
consumption, and when Laurence Sullivan also died in 1786, Baring
was left as by far the most able and experienced member of the
Court. He continued to work closely with Pitt and Dundas when he
became Chairman in 1792-3, refusing to bring forward any nomina-
tions for senior posts without Dundas’s previous agreement. But he
was nota docile servant of ministers, opposing Dundas in 1791 when
the minister wanted to abolish the Secret Committee, the inner
Council of the Company, and to reduce the number of Directors.*6
When   Dundas resolved to reform the structure of the Company,
Baring was chief negotiator for the Directors. Dundas believed they
could work together successfully and urged Pitt to take Baring fully
into his confidence: ‘If you do give him one of the papers, let him
knowitis done in concert with me, and that. . . we shall from time to
time expect a return of unreserved communication from him.” On
the whole the partnership worked smoothly. It was in recognition of
Baring’s work as Chairman of the East India Company that in 1793
he was created a baronet.*8 ‘I don’t congratulate you on your Title,
wrote Lansdowne loftily, ‘because I think in these times you do it
more honour than it does you.’*?                                .
   Though Baring dominated the Council, he       never really enjoyed
his time on it. ‘The more I work,’ he complained to Lansdowne, ‘the
greater degree of jealousy and difficulty I have to encounter amongst
the Directors, who are in general composed of either Fools or
Knaves.’5° The main reason for staying on was that he wished to
40                      The Sixth Great Power
provide for two of his sons in the East; an end which he duly
achieved in 1790 when Tom was packed off to Bengal, and Henry to
China. Nor was this the only benefit gained from membership of the
Council. The East India Company continued to buy woollen goods
from the West Country for export to India long after it became clear
that they would inevitably be sold at a loss. The records do not give
reasons for the decision, but it is hard to believe that Baring’s long
association with Exeter was not in part responsible.*!
   Baring’s close involvement with ministers and the confidence that
they placed in him, won him important benefits when government
contracts came to be placed. One such was for supplying British
forces in the field at the tail end of the American War of Independ-
ence and related conflicts. Isaac Barré said of contractors as a class
that they were ‘animals of a greedy nature, always craving and never
satisfied, their appetites for dishonest lucre and foul gain were as
insatiable as their consciences were easily satisfied’.5? Baring
calculated that the profit made by his predecessors on government
contracts in 1781-2 was 13.4 per cent, and that it had been even
higher in previous years. He offered to do the same job fora commis-
sion of | per cent, and when Shelburne gave him responsibility for
victualling the armed services in 1783, he did so ata total cost of Sda
head instead of the previous 5'/2d - thus saving the public some
£70,000 and earning his own house over the same period a modest
but satisfactory £11,000.53 By March 1783 the end of hostilities
meant that the operation had to be run down and much surplus dis-
posed of. This too Baring handled successfully. About a third of the
overstock had to be sold ata loss, but this was never more than 20 per
cent; a result significantly better than that achieved by the
Victualling Board when in a similar situation some twenty years
before.5+
   In its minute recording the decision to award the contract, the
Navy Board stated: ‘Mr Francis Baring being represented to My
Lords as a merchant of great character and responsibility, every way
equal to the Trust, and the due execution of so important a Service;
he 1s called in and asked at what rate he will execute the Business,
which he offers to do for a Commission of £1 per cent.’55 The fact
that the recommendation came from Shelburne was all-important,
yet no one doubted that Baring was indeed ‘a merchant of great
                 Laying the Foundations:    1776-1793                 41
character and responsibility’. The same was true in another new field
for the expansion of John and Francis Baring and Co. in the 1780s -
that of public loans. Baring’s connections with the mighty ensured
him an inside track in the negotiations, but he would not have main-
tained himself there if he had not showed himself fully competent.
   When in the early 1780s the Government wished to raise money
to finance the American War it selected a banking house which
would accept responsibility for the entire amount and raise it from
its own resources, its clients or outside investors. Provided ministers
got the money they needed, they were not too concerned about the
amount the chosen banker charged the public. If he got his figures
right, therefore, the banker had the chance to make a fat profit; if he
got it wrong, however - put too high a price on the stock, misjudged
the public mood, or was unlucky in his timing - then he could find
himself with a lot ofunsaleable paper on his hands and in a very dif-
ficult position. It was a high- profit, high-risk business. No one got it
right all the time; the most successful banker was the one whose
information and acumen enabled him to get it right more often than
the others. Between 1780 and 1784 Baring made a profit of £19,000
out of raising money for the British Government; not a sensational
figure but eminently satisfactory and a harbinger of the far bigger
business to be done in the French wars.
   Baring’s forays into public life reaped rich dividends for his busi-
ness house, but it would be wrong to deduce from this that financial
profit was his only, or even primary, consideration. Baring did not
court Pitt or Lansdowne because he foresaw pickings for John and
Francis Baring in so doing. He did so because he was flattered to
receive advances from such magnificos, because he relished the
power and consequence earned by such associations, and because he
sincerely wished to serve his country. But in the eighteenth century -
as in the twentieth - those in power liked to deal with those they
knew and trusted. Ministers knew and trusted Baring, they liked him
and respected his ability, they felt they owed him something. What
more likely then that they would push in his direction whatever
plums were theirs for the giving?
   With the ending of the war, the number of plums diminished.
Merchant banking is often a matter of swings and roundabouts. The
                                                                  War
profit made from raising money to finance the American
42                      The Sixth Great Power

compensated for the loss in trade that that war had involved; the
revival of international trade after the war filled the gap left by the
disappearance of public loans. The years between 1777 and 1793,
despite occasional vicissitudes, were ones of almost uninterrupted
growth for John and Francis Baring and Co. Capital grew from
£20,071   to £66,177.   Profits   inevitably fluctuated,   but reached
£13,268 in 1792. Commission income and acceptances rose from
year to year. By the outbreak of the French wars in 1793, Barings
were among the best known and strongest houses in the City. The
foundation had been well laid for the extraordinary expansion that
was to come.
                                        3
                                    ope Swede




                    The French Wars
                                1793-1815


The always inconspicuous part that John Baring had played in the
affairs of John and Francis Baring and Co. dwindled almost to noth-
ing in the years after 1793. He remained a partner until the end of
1800 but his share of the profits was reduced to a quarter after 1796.
‘Our ancient Firm will henceforward cease;’ it was announced some-
what grandiloquently on 1 April 1800, ‘but the remaining Partners
will continue the Business under that of Francis Baring and Co.’ The
new partners were given as Francis, his elder son Thomas - twenty-
eight years old* - and Charles Wall, the son of an attorney who had
married Sir Francis’s daughter Harriet in 1790.! Farington described
Wall in 1806 as ‘the principal manager of the business’, and it was
certainly he who did most of the day-to-day labour while Francis was
relaxing his hold on affairs.
   John retired a prosperous and contented man butin old age things
went wrong. Two daughters died and then his second son commit-
ted suicide. He retreated into melancholic solitude. He ‘has the fam-
ily characteristic’, the Rev. Mr Patch told Farington. ‘He never shows
distress, but suppresses His feelings so far as not to make them
apparent. He looked up to his brother [Francis] as being a very
superior man.’ When Patch complimented him on his firmness of
mind John Baring replied: ‘Look to my Brother. He is the firm man.”
   Francis’s firmness, indeed hardness, was shown in his relationship
with his brother Charles. In 1801 he was called in to unscramble the
affairs of John and Charles Baring and with bad grace made Charles
a loan to help him through his difficulties.* He never expected to get

* Most sources give 1804 as being the date Thomas became a full partner.
                                       43
44                       The Sixth Great Power

the money back and made his opinion contemptuously clear. “You
are exalted with every success, I am of late oppressed with many
troubles,’ wrote Charles pathetically. “Your letter is a cruel one. |
have never deserved from you such expressions.’’ Francis’s riposte
was crueller still. ‘You never did understand your own Character and
your own situation,’ he told his brother. ‘We have had a very long test
of your conduct in the almost monstrous management of the origi-
nal and chief dependence of the Baring family and you are disposed
to impute your want of success to the want of luck . . . In this I
cannot agree with you as there is not a single instance which has
come to my knowledge in which ultimate miscarriage was not to be
discovered in the outset.’
   Though the performance of his brothers did not inspire him with
great confidence, Francis Baring felt strongly that he was building for
future generations and that his children and children’s children
should carry on where he had left off. Yet the problems that would
beset any such dynasty were very obvious to him. Writing to his son
Alexander’s father-in-law in 1803 he admitted he was worried:
     Unremitting attention and exertion through a long life have
     placed objects within my reach, the value of which are
     acknowledged by all, but the difficulty to acquire them, and
     the facility with which they are lost, appear to me to be
     appreciated by none. . . Money or Fortune derive no secu-
     rity from the magnitude or amount, as it cannot be expected
     that the next in succession will possess equal prudence with
     the person who acquired . .. A man is considered as mean
     who does not spend his income; and although there are
     instances of young misers, they are very rare, and the impu-
     tation of meanness is so insupportable to a young man, that
     they never fail to plunge into the opposite extreme. It is for
     this reason that families founded on the acquirements of an
     individual do not last above sixty years one with another:
     families which are founded on the success of public Service
     continue longer, because the Children and Grandchildren of
     the founder are generally inclined to pursue the same line of
     Service: but the posterity of a Merchant, Banker etc., particu-
     larly when they are young, abandon the pursuit of their pre-
                     The French Wars:    1793-1815                   45

    decessor as beneath them, or they follow it by agents without
    interfering themselves, which is only a more rapid road to
    ruin.”
   That the Barings avoided this risk is attributable above all to the
fact that they were philoprogenitive and tenacious in retaining fam-
ily links. At any given moment, therefore, there was likely to be a
plentiful supply of cousins acquainted with each other and eager for
a job in the bank. Elder sons might drop out, deeming the work ‘as
beneath them’, but there were plenty of hungry younger sons who
needed to make their fortune. Those at the head of the bank were
also ruthless when it came to disposing of the second rate; to carry
the name of Baring was not enough, if one could not do the job suc-
cessfully one was quickly banished to an outpost or consigned to
some less exacting line of business. If the nght Baring was not there,
then somebody was brought in; in ten or twenty years a Baring
would no doubt be available to take on the task, but in the meantime
it was better that it should be well done by an outsider than bungled
by a member of the family.
    In 1803 Francis Baring doubted whether the nght Barings were
there. Thomas, the elder son and future baronet, had served the East
India Company until 1801. He showed neither aptitude for nor
interest in banking and made it clear that when his father died he
expected to tend his estates, collect pictures, sit in the House of
Commons, and generally behave in a gentlemanly way. He was tech-
nically a partner in the house but retired even before his father’s
death. The future seemed to lie with his younger brothers, Alexander
and Henry; and Francis Baring did not look to them with great
expectations. ‘It would afford me some comfort if I could perceive
anything that was rational or manly in their pursuits, he wrote
despairingly. ‘I can make allowance fora considerable degree of friv-
olous dissipation on the outset of life, but when it carries the appear-
ance of degenerating into system, I must withdraw that indulgence
for it merits none.’®
    So far as Alexander was concerned, these strictures are extrava-
gant. He was an eminently, even depressingly, assiduous young
man. He started his career at Hope and Co. in Amsterdam, where
he showed himself ‘very sensible for his age’ but at the same time
46                     The Sixth Great Power

  headstrong and impatient: ‘His character was not yet modifyed in
  such a manner, as to act constantly with such an application as
  would be more agreeable to Mr Hope.’? When Hopes were chased
  from Holland by the invading French, Alexander was sent to the
  United States. He won good opinions there. General Cobb found
  him ‘a Dutchman in negotiation’ - by which he seems to have meant
 that Baring was tough, shrewd, but never unreasonable - yet with ‘no
 art or cunning about him’ and ‘a good heart’.!° Another American
 businessman described him as ‘an extraordinary young man, of great
 mercantile talents and possessed of much information. Though a
 young man of about twenty-five [in fact he was twenty-three] he is
 respected by all the old characters who know him.”!! The mistake
 over his age was typical; Alexander was born middle-aged and never
 failed to impress by the gravitas which throughout the generations
 has been the hallmark of his clan. In business this inspired confi-
 dence; in the more frivolous reaches of London society the enthusi-
 asm was less marked. Miss Berry sat next to him at dinner and found
 him ‘rather a heavy-looking young man, with a hesitating manner,
 but seems very clear in his ideas’.!2
    Francis Baring was unimpressed by reports from America of his
 son’s good sense and maturity. The ‘superior tone of mind’ that
Alexander had taken with him to America had been ‘visibly
impaired’; he had acquired ‘enervating habits’; a trip to Paris that
Alexander undertook with his new wife and American father-in-law
was responsible for the rebuke that ‘frivolous dissipation’ was
‘degenerating into system’.'3 The real cause of offence seems to have
been that on his return from America he had refused to take upa
partnership in Hopes, thus thwarting his father’s dream of a grand
Anglo-Dutch consortium that would rule the commercial world.'4
Not unreasonably Alexander felt that he should be allowed to spend
some time at home again, but to Francis Baring it seemed that this
wilful opposition to his views arose only because ‘the pleasures of
the present moment must not be sacrificed to the most brilliant
prospects’. 15
   Alexander’s brother Henry was more deserving of criticism. A
shadowy figure, he seems to have been both more brilliantand more
wayward than his brother. A passionate gambler, he was also a suc-
cessful one, several times breaking the bank at the L’Entreprise
                    The French Wars: 1793-1815                       47

Générale des Jeux in Paris. Such a hobby was, however, deemed
inappropriate to his role in the City.'¢ For this, or for other reasons,
he was never encouraged to play a prominent role in the house,
though he remained technically a partner until 1823. He and
Alexander married sisters, but Henry divorced his wife Marie in
1824. Alexander deplored this step; Marie had undoubtedly com-
mitted adultery, but to divorce her would be to ‘throw her absolutely
on the Dunghill’. Anyway, Henry’s own ‘anti-domestic life is of great
notoriety and must tell heavily against him’. He might well fail to
secure a divorce and ‘both parties will come out of court covered
with dirt’.!7 Henry paid no attention, got his divorce and in due
course married a second time, to Cecilia Windham. Like Banquo, he
got kings though he was none; inconsiderable in the bank himself,
his son and grandson were to dominate it for well over fifty years.
The mud of the divorce court did not stick to Henry; he became a
popular figure, prominent in the London clubs and asked to all the
best shoots - ‘Mr H. Baring’s shooting quite wonderful,’ recorded an
awe-struck Henry Fox.!8
   The two youngest brothers, William and George, were both
dispatched to the East. William showed promise - ‘he will at no dis-
tant period be fully capable of conducting his own private Business
without Assistance,’ a Baring correspondent reported from Canton’?
- but he frequently fell ill. ‘My hopes of enjoying very robust health
are frail and I must be contented in being free from violent irritabil-
ity,2° he wrote wistfully in 1806, and it was judged by the doctors
that banking and irritability too often went hand in hand. He died in
 1820. George was a raffish figure. He married against his family’s
will, lost a lot of money speculating in opium, then left the East India
Company to join the Church. However, wailed his brother Henry,
‘the quiet and useful life of a respectable Country Clergyman was
much too tame and unobtrusive for him’ and he became ‘the ranting
preacher of a wild Sect’?! He combined this activity with an extrava-
gant style of living that drove him to bankruptcy in 1827. Thomas
Baring was for letting him stew in his own juice but Alexander
insisted that ‘we must extricate him. I say we because it is quite clear
that his family must come to the aid of this unfortunate member of it
and that you as our head must proceed to make the necessary
arrangements.22George was packed off to live in a villa in Florence
48                      The Sixth Great Power

where Henry Fox found him in 1828 puffing cigar smoke at Lady
Dudley and decidedly the worse for drink, surrounded by his daugh-
ters, ‘tall, raw-boned, vulgar misses, very underbred and unladylike
in their conversation and manners’.23 William and George both had
sons, but though one of William’s descendants found his way back
into the bank, it was the progeny of Thomas, Alexander and Henry
who were to ensure the future of the house of Baring.
  It was these three brothers who took formal control of the house
when Francis Baring retired. He gave up his share in the profit and
loss of the house from mid-1803, leaving as much of his capital
behind as his sons cared to use and charging only a generous 4 per
cent interest. Unlike most people who have built up their own
businesses, he was delighted to pass over power to his successors,
would indeed have done so earlier if he had felt his sons were ready.
By early 1803 his doubts about their capacity had long been put at
rest. He told John William Hope that his sons were anxious to show
that they could stand alone and he quite as anxious to give them the
chance, ‘for the Success of which I do not entertain the slightest
apprehension . . . They all possess abilities and although differing
from each other in qualifications yet each has something which the
other wants and. . . there can be no doubt that they will act with the
most perfect cordiality in support of acommon Cause.’2+ By October
1807 he was able, no doubt with some satisfaction, to refuse a loan to
the Duke of Kent on the grounds that he was retired and his property
‘disposed of and dispersed’. ‘Although I have appeared as Contrac-
tor for loans’, he wrote, ‘yet I have not for three years had the least
concern, nor gained or lost myself a single penny; but I have
appeared because it was thought my name would be useful in the
opinion of the publick, and at the desire of my successors.’25 His
retirement was shortly followed in 1805 or 1806 by the move of the
business from Devonshire Square, where it had been since 1793, toa
much larger building at 8 Bishopsgate. This solid Georgian house,
with garden at the back, was approached from the street through an
archway and open courtyard with stables on one side. Its site was to
accommodate Barings’ headquarters until the present day.26
   Francis Baring had begun the transition from banker to gentleman
of leisure in 1796 when at an auction at Garraway’s Coffee House he
had acquired a reversionary interest in 623 acres and the manor
                        The French Wars: 1793-1815                     49
house of Lee, near Lewisham. Lee had a distinguished pedigree; a
continuous line of lords of the manor descending from Aluuin, the
last recorded Saxon thane, by way of Lord Montifichet, one of the
barons at Runnymede, and the Marquis of Dorset whose daughter
married Edward      IV, to Baring’s friend Joseph Plaice.2” Baring
bought the reversion for £20,000 with a Mrs Angerstein in residence
who had a life interest. When she died unexpectedly four years later,
putting Baring into possession far earlier than he had expected, he
insisted on paying his friend an additional £7000, saying it was ‘abso-
lutely necessary for my peace of mind’ and that the money should
not be returned, even in Plaice’s will.28 By then he had already
acquired a further 583 acres from Lord Sondes, and he settled
contentedly into the ‘Capital Uniform Modern Brick and Stone
Mansion House’, which had probably been built by Richard Jupp,
architect of the East India Company’s building in Leadenhall
Street.?? To run his establishment, a modest staff fora medium-sized
country   house,   he    had   a butler,   under-butler,   two   footmen,
housekeeper, cook, laundry maid, two housemaids, two kitchen-
maids, a coachman, and a second coachman.
  But this was only a sighting shot for finer things. In 1801 Francis
Baring laid out £150,000 on the purchase of an estate from the Duke
of Bedford near Micheldever in Hampshire. George Dance was
commissioned to refashion the house, which he adorned with a mas-
sive portico of Doric columns. This was much admired in the neigh-
bourhood and inspired the banker Henry Drummond to add a still
mightier portico to his neighbouring house, the Grange. Dance’s
work cost £25,000 or so, extravagant enough but trifling compared
with the £400,000 Beckford squandered on Fonthill.*° Baring spent
another £40,000 planting the grounds and never missed a chance to
snap up an adjoining property. ‘Sir Francis Baring is extending his
purchases so largely in Hampshire that he soon expects to be able to
inclose the county within his own park paling, wrote some contem-
porary satirist.?!
   By mid-1801 Farington was describing the alterations as ‘nearly
finished’, but it does not seem that the house was fully habitable tll a
couple of years later.32 It was about that time that Count
Stahremberg, the Austrian minister, wrote to thank Baring for ‘your
kind reception in your Kingdom of Stratton’.33 Lawrence went there
50                      The Sixth Great Power

in September 1806 ‘to paint three portraits in one picture, viz: Sir
Francis Baring, His Brother John and Mr Wall, his Partner’.** In the
picture Wall and John Baring are posed over an open volume while
Sir Francis looks away from them with his hand raised to his ear. This
caused some ribaldry. ‘Sir George [Beaumont] remarked on Sir
Francis turning his head from those He was listening to as if to hear
Thunder; Beechey sd He turned his head from Mr Wall as if the lat-
ter on looking on the Book before him announced a deficit of
£100,000.’35 James Ward engraved the portrait for three hundred
guineas, but when it was proposed to publish the print the project
was vetoed by Sir Francis’s sons - ‘because they do not like to have
their Father exhibited with a Ledger before him, surmised
Farington.?¢
   Stratton was furnished with a fine collection of paintings, notably
Dutch. Like many collectors, Baring repented in old age the enthusi-
asms of his youth and by 1804 was telling his son-in-law that he had
‘done with all except the very superior’ and of those it was only
‘Rembrandt, Rubens or Van Dyck that tempt me, and the first must
not be too dark, nor the second indecent’.3”7 He had a good opinion
of his purchases, noting, on the catalogue of an exhibition in Paris in
1802, of Cuyp, ‘229 and 230 the best but none equal to mine’; of
Ostade, ‘some fine specimens but not equal to mine’; of Adrian Van
der Velde ‘not equal to mine’; of Rembrandt ‘none fine or equal to
mine’; of Wouvermans ‘many pretty, none v. fine. I prefer my own’.38
His farm was probably as close to his heart as any of his pictures. He
kepta farm of 600 acres in hand, tended it lovingly, and took particu-
lar pride in his ‘famous flock of sheep’.3
   That he bought pictures because he liked them and reared sheep
because he enjoyed doing so, is incontestable, but equally the acqui-
sition of estates and a stately home was an essential step in the pro-
cess of social consolidation. It was commonly believed that Baring
was angling for a seat in the House of Lords. When in May 1806 he
was one of only four Directors to support Lauderdale’s nomination
as Governor General, Colonel Toone told Hastings that this was
because he wanted a peerage.*? When the Duke of York’s alleged
corruption was debated by the House of Commons in 1809, it was
whispered that Baring and Sir Robert Peel had both paid Mrs Clarke
£5000 for a peerage.*! That he would have been delighted to receive
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       pl
one is undoubtedly true, that he would have bribed Mrs Clarke to
that end would have been wholly out of character. Nor can he
seriously have expected such an honour. As F. M. L. Thompson has
convincingly shown, Disraeli’s claim that Pitt ‘created a plebeian
aristocracy and blended it with the patrician oligarchy. . . He caught
them in the alleys of Lombard Street and clutched them from the
counting-houses of Cornhill’ is picturesque nonsense.*? The only
peer created by Pitt from a similar background to Baring was Robert
Smith, Lord Carrington, and Smith had severed his connection with
banking long before his elevation. The best that Baring could real-
istically hope for was that he might procure aristocratic marriages
for his children and that his descendants might one day achieve
nobility.
   By 1810, when Francis Baring died, there was no house 1n which a
Baring would have been socially unacceptable. But this did not mean
that they were wholly integrated with the aristocracy. If one of his
daughters married a lord, it was taken for granted that a fat dowry
would garnish the mésalliance. When Alexander Baring was admitted
to that elite Whig dining club, the King of Clubs, Sydney Smith told
Lady Holland that this was ‘upon the express promise that he lends
£50 to any member ofthe Club when applied to’.## Smith was joking,
of course, but there was a half truth concealed in the jest. The Barings
had gone astonishingly far in a short time, but there was still some
way to go.
   When he died Francis Baring left £625,000. Four hundred thou-
sand pounds was in land, £27,000 in pictures, furniture and jewels.
His capital in Barings, Baring Brothers as the house had been called
since 1807, was £68,507; an enormous sum, but notas large as that of
Charles Wall, who was credited with £86,126, and only a little more
than his eldest son, Thomas, with £67,448. It is a testimony to the
skill with which the house had been built up that his death caused it
hardly a tremor. ‘At his death,’ wrote Lord Erskine, ‘he was unques-
tionably the first merchant in Europe; first in knowledge and talents,
and first in character and opulence.’## To him, almost alone, Baring
Brothers owed the stability of its foundations; it was largely his
doing that it had so far sailed successfully through the perilous
waters of the war with France.
                            *       *       +
a2                      The Sixth Great Power

Bankers do not like war. There are already too many imponderables
in their lives without the extra financial, military and political haz-
ards that accompany hostilities. What they hope for is steadily
expanding trade in a predictable economic climate and with a mini-
mum of political interference. But though war carries alarming risks,
it can also yield amazing profits. Traditional fields of business may
wither, but there are always opportunities for something new, and
the banker who is resourceful, bold and resolute; who possesses a
cool head and a long purse; above all, perhaps, who knows the right
people, and who enjoys the priceless gift of being 1n the ght place at
the right time, will make a great deal of money. Barings had all these
advantages and they made the money.
   Francis Baring approached the war in a spirit of detached prag-
matism. He disliked the Bourbons but found the revolutionaries
even more alarming. He thought the émigrés and their pretensions
absurd and believed that what France needed was a constitutional
king, but since Britain was committed to the unconditional restora-
tion of the Bourbons he accepted resignedly that the war was likely
to continue for many years.*’ In the meantime, he sagely observed:
‘People will eat, drink and be cloathed in defiance of their rulers.’4¢
He agreed with his son Alexander that it was certainly futile and
probably mischievous for a government to attempt to interfere with
the course of trade. In a memorandum of 1805 Alexander argued
that the blockade of the continent had done more harm to the Brit-
ish than the French. “The most desirable system for the trade of this
country is to abstain from all restrictions, to leave it as free and
uncircumscribed as possible, and to desist from, or mitigate all Naval
blockades as much as other more important considerations will per-
mit.’47 To this view he remained consistent.
   The question of whether there was a conflict of interest between
the mercantile community and the nation as a whole, or whether
official policy corresponded with the real national interest, did not
cause the Barings many sleepless nights. They went on trading wher-
ever it was possible, avoiding the overtly illegal but not too
preoccupied with the spirit of the law. In 1802 Cobbett wrote to Wil-
liam Windham to complain: ‘The French fleet and army in St
Domingo continue to be supplied with provisions and other
necessaries by Willings and Co. of Philadelphia who draw on Barings
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       53
and Co. for payment.’#8 At that moment the war was in temporary
abeyance but Cobbett would probably have had as much andas little
justification for his accusation two years before or two years later.
Certainly he could not have proved his case. Through Willing and
Francis, who were Barings’ closest correspondents in the United
States, and many other American merchants, Barings were involved
in much trade with continental Europe conducted under the cloak
of ‘neutrality’. Barings’ money in part at least must have financed
many cargoes that were smuggled illicitly under the noses of the
Royal Navy and the French authorities. Barings themselves were not
and did not need to be involved in smuggling. They cannot possibly
have been ignorant of what was going on, but did not wish to have
any formal knowledge of it. In this they differed little from those in
authority. Though the official policy of the British government was
that the trade should be stopped, it is doubtful whether the breaches
of that policy caused much greater real concern in Whitehall than in
Bishopsgate.
   Of course there was much international trade that was in no way
questionable. A typical adventure in July 1801 concerned the Can-
ton, a vessel valued at $50,000 with a cargo worth four times as much:
nankeens and silks, porcelain, sugar and Bohem, Souchong and
Hyson tea. The ship arrived in mid-September and Barings wrote to
reassure the American merchants who shared the profit or loss on
joint account: ‘The cargo is very valuable and will find a ready sale at
good prices, as our Market is again bare of Indian goods.’*” The voy-
age was made during the short-lived peace after the Treaty of
Amiens, but even if it had not been, it would have been entirely legal.
Yet the markets of Europe were still more bare of Indian goods than
those of London and in wartime the prices paid there might be twice
as high. It would be surprising if none of that silk and tea ended up
across the Channel.
   There were periods during which trade was severely curtailed. In
the autumn of 1805 Francis Baring described his business as having
‘sunk to nothing’.°° Yet this was the exception. In the first five years
of the war commission income grew by more than 150 per cent, and
it only dropped     below £20,000     once   between   then and    1815.
Liabilities on acceptance rose even more dramatically from £89,458
in 1793 to £454,807 in 1797, and remained over £200,000 for the rest
54                       The Sixth Great Power

of the war, again with the exception of one year. The United States
was responsible for the greater part of the growth; in the last five
years of the war nearly 80 per cent of commisssion income was
attributable to ‘American and Colonial’ trade. British exports
remained remarkably stable throughout the wars, and the propor-
tion of the world’s trade carried in British ships and financed by Brit-
ish money grew considerably as the merchant fleets of the continent
were driven from the seas. But Barings prospered more greatly than
the national norm. There were not many houses that could match
their resources, expertise and worldwide connections.
   Their resources had been greatly strengthened in 1795 by an
inrush of funds from Hope and Co. ‘I am so completely in the habit
of considering Holland and England as the same Country that I can
very easily find myself as much at home in the one as in the other,
Henry Hope wrote to Francis Baring in January 1794.5! Within a
year he was forced to put his words to the test. As the French revolu-
tionary troops advanced into Holland, the Hopes fled to London.
The Royal Navy sent a frigate to escort their ship - not so much to
protect the Hopes themselves as the gold and other forms of wealth
they brought with them. Alexander Baring and the youngest
and most capable of Hopes’ partners, Peter César Labouchére,
stayed at their posts until the last minute and then escaped across
the ice-packed estuaries just as the French troops entered
Amsterdam.*?
   Labouchére was one of the most talented bankers of his genera-
tion. Itis said that, aged only twenty-two, he asked Hopes if he might
be made a partner. He was refused. ‘Would itbe different if I were Sir
Francis Baring’s son-in-law?’ he asked. ‘Yes,’ he was told. ‘Well,     lam
going to be.’ He then rushed to Francis Baring and asked for the
hand of his daughter, Dorothy. Baring refused. ‘Would it be different
if | were a partner in Hope.and Co.?’ he asked. ‘Yes,’ he was told.
‘Well, lam going to be.’ He brought off a left and right, winning both
partnership and wife.53 In fact, he does not seem to have become a
partner of Hopes for several years, but the spirit of the story at least is
true. Dorothy may have felt that she was the only loser by the trans-
action. Labouchére was an ungainly figure; short on wit and educa-
tion; generous, honourable and exceedingly astute but with a touch-
ing determination to ape the manners of a pre-war French aristocrat.
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       55
He spoke his native French with an English accent and English with
a French.54
   When the Treaty of Amiens brought fleeting peace to Europe in
1801, Hopes planned to return to Amsterdam, but it was November
1802 before they finally reopened in Holland and even then much of
their capital remained effectively at the disposal of Barings. It was at
this point that Alexander caused such offence to his father by refus-
ing to take up a partnership in the Dutch house.5> He was proved
right when the French returned and Hopes’ fortunes waned.
Labouchére was briefly prominent in 1810 when he acted as mouth-
piece for a group of French dissidents - Fouché and Ouvrard among
them - who were trying to negotiate peace with England. Francis
Baring put him in touch with Wellesley, the Foreign Secretary, but
Napoleon discovered what was going on and quickly put a stop to
it.%6 By 1813 Hopes was an empty shell. Alexander Baring took it
over at a cost of £250,521 and at first intended to strip its assets and
close it down. On second thoughts, however, he decided it was worth
preserving, if only to provide a berth for his brother Thomas’s sons.*7
Hope and Co. resumed life and was to be an active trading partner of
Baring Brothers for more than another century.
   Their virtual integration with Hopes was as much as anything
responsible for Barings’ increasing involvement in a new field; they
had long financed international trade; now they began to concern
themselves with the affairs of foreign governments. The negotia-
tions with Portugal illustrate well the hazards and tribulations of
such work. In March 1797 the Prince of Brazil sought to raise £1.2
million in London. He was prepared to pledge diamonds and the
revenue   from   the snuff contract    as security, or if these were
unsatisfactory, ‘the rich Kingdom and Islands of Mozambique’.
Francis Baring was tempted but referred the matter to Pitt,** who
expressed extreme distaste for the proposed colonial quid pro quo,
and said that, in the ‘particular distressed situation of this country’,
he was unenthusiastic about the loan in principle. If Barings wanted
to make it privately, then he would not oppose it, but there would be
no official backing. In view of his attitude Baring concluded that
negotiations should be continued but ‘the terms must be onerous
and the conditions rendered very flattering to the publick’.*” The
terms were too onerous and the matter was allowed to drop.
56                      The Sixth Great Power

   In 1801, when the Portuguese had to raise a large sum to pay off
their war debts, the question of a loan was revived. This time, with
Pitt out of office, Francis Baring decided to go it alone: ‘Just at the
crucial period,’ he told Labouchére, ‘it may be desirable not to have
the subject to discuss with our own Ministers, as you know very well
how ignorant they are of foreign finance.’6° Labouchére and George
Baring were sent on a taxing midwinter journey by mule across the
Pyrenées to Lisbon. The negotiations proved almost as exhausting as
the journey, Labouchére complaining that the Portuguese ‘con-
stantly alter the text, and I have to puzzle my brain to find out in a
language which I do not understand the nght from the wrong’.é
Urgency was lent to the affair when, in March 1802, Baring reported
‘a competition in the persons of some Jews, which is formidable
from the powers they possess as they have money, but there is noth-
ing more to fear as they cannot afford to pay so high a price as our-
selves. A competitor however is always dangerous and must be
attended to.’6? It was attended to, and the Portuguese Diamond
Loan of 1802 ensued, initially for 6.5 million guilders but eventually
for 13 million. The loan was not a total success; Hopes took the
larger part but Barings were responsible for 5 million guilders, and
by the end of 1802 had placed only a little over 1.5 million on the
British market.
   The conclusion drawn from this début was that international
loans were potentially profitable but needed to be handled with cau-
tion. In 1800 Francis Baring was urging the claims of his house to
handle the Austrian account in London, but when it was a question
of a small loan of £150,000 to be transmitted immediately to Vienna
he was more reticent. It was not the amount, which was guaranteed
by the British government, but the impossibility of ensuring that it
would reach its destination; ‘they could as soon undertake, that the
Enemy shall not cross the Danube’.6+ Canning, the Foreign Secre-
tary, gloomily accepted that Barings must do their best nevertheless.
If they failed, then future subsidies to Austria would have to be sus-
pended, ‘For I think you will agree with me that there could be no
great use in sending money to the Continent to subsidize Buona-
parte’.65
   Sometimes an immense profit seemed possible but had to be
rejected on grounds of principle. In 1799 Barings had the opportu-
                     The French Wars: 1793-1815                       df
nity to collect silver in Spanish America and pay dollars to the
Spanish government, making a profit of some 80 per cent on
the transaction. The risks would be high, wrote Francis Baring, ‘But
the second objection decided us - namely that it was conveying the
treasure from America to Spain for the use of the Government and
of course the King’s enemies. It is possible we might have obtained a
licence as nothing can exceed the ignorance of our Ministers. . . But
to have obtained that licence we must have presented a memorial so
equivocal and in truth so unfounded that it would not suit us and
therefore was abandoned.’ The distinction between financing
trade of which the British government officially disapproved and
giving direct aid to the enemies of Britain might sometimes appear a
fine one, but it was very clear to Baring.
   In business like the loan to Austria, Barings were in effect acting as
the agent of the British government. This was not the first ume that
they had been approached this way by ministers. In 1803 Vansittart,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer, asked Barings whether they could
hire ships, clothing and provisions for an expeditionary force under
Home Popham of 2000 infantry with supporting cavalry and artil-
lery to capture Buenos Aires. Barings expressed their willingness, but
the matter was never followed up. Francis Baring wrote the minister
a slightly injured letter: ‘I never solicited, nor ever invited, to be
employed by Government for the sake of emolument. I can there-
fore assure you very sincerely that it is a disappointment to me that
the service should be performed by another.’” In fact the service was
not performed by another until Home Popham’s expedition to the
River Plate finally took place three years later under another govern-
ment. To add insult to injury, ministers used Baring’s supposed
                                                                       of
reluctance to cooperate as a reason for inaction - ‘New evidence
                                                   avail themselves,   to
what little, miserable Schemes these people
                                                               wrote the
delay doing what all the world says they ought to do,’
                                                            the question
American chargé d’affaires.°® Ten years later, when
                                                     troops  in Holland,
arose of supplying money for the use of Allied
                                                            offered their
Vansittart made amends. ‘Many houses have already
                                                             me on every
services to me,’ he reported, ‘but Barings. . . appears to
score the most proper channel for our many transactions.’°?
                                                             that Barings
   It was in loans raised by the British government itself
                                                         the confidence
made the greatest profits and benefited most from
 58                      The Sixth Great Power
reposed in them by ministers. Between 1793 and 1815 the govern-
ment borrowed some £770 million at varying rates ofinterest. Until
1799 the market was dominated by William Boyd, but after he ran
into difficulties early that year Barings took the lead. In twelve out of
the next fifteen years they headed the list of successful contractors
for public loans.”° Even before his father retired, Alexander Baring
made this line of business his particular responsibility. Profits on the
loans were usually high: £21,000 in 1799 and a spectacular £77,000
from two loans in 1813 yielding a total net profit of £190,000 over
the next seventeen years. But it was not easy money. The public had
to be persuaded to subscribe and this meant that their confidence
both in the government and in Barings must remain unshaken.
When confidence failed, an expensive catastrophe could follow. In
 1810 a combination of the death of Sir Francis Baring and the
activities of the Bullion Committee of the House of Commons - a
Whig-dominated body, on which Alexander Baring was prominent,
which urged a substantial reduction of paper money and the
resumption of payments in gold by the Bank of England - caused a
panic in financial circles. The £22.3 million loan, for which Barings
and Abraham Goldsmid were jointly responsible, fell to an 8 percent
discount.7! Goldsmid committed suicide and the year ended with a
heavy loss - in the short term at least costing Barings more than
£43,000. When Goldsmid and Baring were described in The Times as
‘the pillars of the city’,7? Cobbett exploded with indignation. ‘A
couple of dealers in funds and paper,’ he described them. ‘I look
upon the life of Sir Francis Baring or that of Goldsmid as being of no
more, if so much, value to England, as that of any one of your
apprentices or plough boys.’73


Francis Baring’s association with the East India Company had dwin-
dled as he grew older. In 1792 he was vigorously defending the new
Governor of Bengal, Sir John Shore, against Burke, who claimed that
Shore was too closely involved with Warren Hastings. However that
might be, said Baring, he was ‘one of the ablest and most upright Ser-
vants of the Company in India’.’”4 In 1798 he got the credit for find-
ing the indigent Charles Lamb a place as clerk in the India Office, but
his contribution seems in fact to have been small.75 When the Court
                    The French Wars: 1793-1815                     59
of the East India Company debated what reward Nelson should
receive for destroying Napoleon’s fleet at Aboukir Bay, and thus
frustrating his designs on India, Baring pointed to the statues of
Clive, Lawrence and other worthies and proposed they should ‘place
the Hero of the Nile by the side of the Heroes of the Ganges’. The
Court instead voted Nelson £10,000; a reward which the Hero of the
Nile would have felt decidedly more appropriate.’6
   But Baring never supported the expansion of Bnitain’s role in
India. When Dundas, speaking of private trade with India, wrote
that the Company’s monopoly did not ‘rest on principles of colonial
exclusion’, Baring noted in the margin: ‘India is not a Colony and
God forbid that it ever should be one.’’? He opposed the majority of
the Directors when they wanted to impose severe curbs on American
trade with India, arguing that American prosperity would increase
the market for British products and that, anyway, India needed the
trade.’8 Progressively, he grew more disenchanted with his fellow
Directors, and more spasmodic in his attendance. In 1808 he argued
that the Christian missions were responsible for the recent mutiny.
He was voted down. His colleague Sweny Tone commented: ‘Sir
Francis has lost much of that consequence with the Court which his
superior knowledge, experience and abilities entitle him to, by rarely
appearing among them.’”?
   In the House of Commons, too, increasing deafness and disincli-
nation to put himself out led to his playing an ever smaller role. He
was still canvassing support with some enthusiasm in 1802 - ‘I must
devote the remainder of this week to expressing my gratitude to my
constituents through the solid medium of roast beef, plumb pud-
ding and suet,’ he told his American friend Rufus King? - but it did
not go much further than that. His sons Thomas and Alexander were
left to carry the family fortunes in the House. Alexander sat for
Taunton from 1806. He was always listened to with respect on finan-
cial questions but his painstaking fairness of mind did not equip him
                                                                  as ‘a
to be an ideal party politician. Daniel Webster described him
                                                     two sides toa
good man to deal with, who could see that there were
                                                                vigor-
question’.8! The trouble was that he expounded one side as
                                        speech one  way  and  his vote
ously as the other: ‘He always gave his
                                                              and told
another.’2 His brother Henry wrote of his ‘hesitating Spirit’
                                                           one side of
Peel that when he was a boy a phrenologist had said that
60                      The Sixth Great Power

 his head was at war with the other; ‘his eyes go one road and his legs
another ’.83 It was fortunate for Baring Brothers that Alexander's dif-
fidence was more marked in the House of Commons than in the
counting house; in business he was shrewd, and though generally
prudent he was capable of striking boldness.
    By the end of the Napoleonic wars Barings had by far outdis-
tanced their rivals. The merchant bankers had established them-
selves as an indispensable instrument by which government could
finance its operations and manage them overseas.8* A crop of new
houses had sprung up: N. M. Rothschild and Sons and J. Henry
Schroder in 1804; Wm Brandt and Sons in 1805; Antony Gibbs in
1808; Brown, Shipley and Co. in 1810.85 Of these, Rothschilds at
least were providing formidable opposition. Barings were still
supreme. Yet the future was uncertain. With the end of the waritwas
reasonable to suppose that government borrowing would dwindle if
not cease and that the merchant banks would be thrust back upon
their traditional means of making money. For Barings there could
be no doubt that such means were to be found above all in the
United States.
                                  4
                               ope
                                 © eee




            ‘The Highest Fame for
                Respectability’
             The United States, 1783-1828




Barings’ involvement with America was older than the United
States. One of the best markets for the British cloth industry was
North America. American exports had to be fostered if they were to
be able to pay for what they bought, and in both these traffics
Barings were busily engaged. The War of Independence put an end
to that and it was not until 1783 that Robert Morris of Philadelphia,
one of the new republic’s most prominent and successful financiers,
wrote on behalf of a group of Philadelphia’s leading merchants to
urge Barings to enter into correspondence with them.! A few months
later, Senator William Bingham, a millionaire from Philadelphia
whose family as well as financial future were to become entwined
with those of Francis Baring, extolled the excellent prospects for
commerce with England and offered to settle there as resident Min-
ister. He wrote from London and was already a regular visitor at Bar-
ing’s house.?
    Barings welcomed such overtures with enthusiasm. But they were
not content with a profitable trading role. The next step in their
march to pre-eminence among the ‘American’ houses - a phrase
loosely used to describe houses either American in origin or special-
izing in American trade - came in 1795. The American Minister in
Lisbon, David Humphreys, was negotiating with the Barbary powers
of North Africa over the free movement of shipping in the Mediter-
                                                                    .
ranean and needed funds with which to satisfy their demands
                                              stock from  the United
Francis Baring was sent $800,000 of 6 percent
                                                         Lisbon: ina
States and told to remit the proceeds to Humphreys in
                                 61
62                       The Sixth Great Power
 way characteristic of treasury officials, the American authorities
 both stressed the extreme urgency of the transaction and enjoined
 Baring to sell the stock ‘without causing a depression in the prices
 and thus injuring the credit of American funds’? Various things
 went wrong - there were difficulties in procuring the necessary silver
 bullion and still more in delivering it in the night place - and Barings
 in several cases ran a considerable risk by taking what they believed
 to be essential action without waiting for authority from Washing-
 ton. The Treaty could not have been carried into effect, Francis Bar-
 ing told the American Minister in London, ‘if I had not acted with a
 degree of zeal, perhaps imprudence, in going beyond the letters of
 my orders’.* The stocks sold slowly, and Barings mildly complained:
 ‘Our respect for the United States and zeal for their interest will not
permit us to proceed to an instant sale if you shall think it desirable
to wait for a reasonable time,’ but they were still making consider-
able sacrifices ‘in being deprived of a beneficial arrangement of our
funds for many months’.’ Yet only a month later they put up a fur-
ther $200,000 to meet Humphreys’s urgent needs. Francis Baring
could reasonably feel he had served the Americans well, and King
wrote to congratulate him on ‘the liberal and skilfull manner in
which you have assisted Col. Humphreys in a very critical operation.
I have written to the Secretary of the Treasury on this Subject and
shall communicate to him the assurance that I have given to you of
my conviction that the United States will entertain a proper sense of
your Services in this Business.’7
  At much the same time Barings were scouring the market for mus-
kets and cannon to equip the United States for what seemed an
imminent war with France. It proved a frustrating commission. One
thousand five hundred muskets were shipped on the Woodrop Sims
and captured by the French; another 2000 were put aboard the
Washington, which also fell in with a French privateer and had to put
back into Lisbon for repairs.’ In the end some £45,000 was spentand
nearly 10,000 muskets and 330 cannon reached America.? By the end
of the eighteenth century Barings, though not yet appointed agents
of the US Government, were established as the British bank to
whom the Americans turned when they wanted something done in
Europe.
                          *        *       *
                    The United States:   1783-1828                   63
In 1793 William Bingham headed a syndicate which bought three
million acres of Maine lands ata little over 10 cents an acre. The area
- about the size of Yorkshire - was a remote and rugged wasteland.
Bingham was pledged to establish 2500 settlers on the land by 1803,
and would be fined $30 per settler if he failed. It did not take him
long to realize that a large part of this bleak empire would have to be
disposed of at a profit if financial disaster were to be avoided. A Vir-
ginian gentleman, Major William Jackson, was sent to Europe to try
to find a market.!°
   Jackson was the very pattern of an estate agent; plausible, enthusi-
astic and not over-preoccupied with the need for rigorous accuracy.
When he compared description with reality, Alexander Baring wrote
from New York: ‘All Americans that go to Europe to sell lands make
up their speeches and character with hypocritical art, and from a
general deficiency which certainly exists throughout this country of
that nice honour which is not merely contented with being exactly
within the pale of the law.’!! Francis Baring was not wholly taken in
by Jackson but he was interested in principle in investment in unde-
veloped lands in America. It was a curious choice for one who, like
every merchant banker, hated to lock up his precious capital in long-
term enterprises that would prevent him using it more profitably
elsewhere. He must certainly have been strongly encouraged by
Hopes, who were anxious to invest as rapidly as possible some part
of the money they had brought with them from Holland. Hopes
were partners in the enterprise from the start, agreeing to put up
three-quarters of whatever was invested.
   By April 1795 Jackson had concluded that Barings were the best, if
not the only serious prospect among possible purchasers in Britain.
He reduced the asking price to 44 cents an acre and urged instant
acceptance of the unrepeatable offer, ‘the most certain and the most
profitable that ever was offered to the public’.!2 Alexander Baring
was under-employed, having recently returned from Amsterdam,
and his father decided that it would be to everyone’s benefit if he
                                                              the
now visited America, to look at the Maine lands and to assess
market generally. Nolte - a close associate of Barings over many
                                                                      of
years - in his memoirs claims that Alexander was given two bits
                                                ated lands which ‘can be
advice by his father: not to invest in uncultiv
                                                                      an
more readily bought than sold again’; and not to bring home
64                       The Sixth Great Power

American wife, ‘a wife is best suited to the home in which she was
raised, and cannot be formed or trained a second time’.!3 The first
piece of advice was obviously never given; and the second, if given,
was to be ignored.
   By the tme Alexander arrived Bingham was growing desperate. If
Barings did not buy, he told his partner General Knox, he would be
‘in a most cruel and embarrassed situation’.!* Another partner, Gen-
eral Cobb, was sent to meet Baring ‘accidentally’ at Boston, and other
local worthies were briefed to speak warmly to him of the prospects
for Maine. Baring was sufficiently deluded to report that he found
the Maine lands ‘well thought of, collectively considered’, but he was
in no hurry to commit himself. He made a point of speaking, and
being seen speaking, to people with land to sell in other parts of the
United States. In fact he had already made up his mind that the
Maine lands would be an excellent investment, that the population
would inevitably increase, that the demand for cultivated lands
would grow proportionately, and that these factors would put ‘the
real solid value of the article beyond the reach of almost any
events’.!5 Bingham, however, was thoroughly alarmed and reduced
his price still further. In the end Baring settled to buy a million acres
at 33 cents an acre ~ he later proudly claimed that he had been ready
to pay considerably more.!* The total cost to Hopes and Barings was
£106,875. ‘Itis, Gentlemen,’ he wrote on 26 February 1796, ‘with the
greatest pleasure I inform you that every circumstance weighed and
every object worth attention in this Country considered I have after
much discussion and treating closed this important bargain with the
most perfect confidence of its being a most lucrative and secure
investment.’!7 In fact it proved to be reasonably secure but far from
lucrative; when the partners finally extricated themselves from the
property fifty years later they got little more than they had originally
paid for it.8
   Alexander liked America. “This is not a country to afford great
Luxuries as enjoyments for a young man, he wrote with some
pomposity to Henry Hope, ‘but I am sure he will very shortly
perceive that though the curiosities of Rome are not to be found in it
nor the refinements of London and Paris, it offers a curiosity
                                                               of a
larger and more gratifying import, of a rising country, a spectacle the
most grateful to a liberal mind and the most instructive, whether
                   The United States: 1783-1828                     65
considered with the eye of the Philosopher, the Politician or the
Merchant." In June 1797 he proposed to his father that he should
stay in America to manage the Maine lands. Later Francis Baring
endorsed the letter: ‘His object must then have been a marriage with
Miss Bingham.’2°
  During the negotiations Alexander had been a regular visitor to
William Bingham’s home and duly fell in love with the Senator's
seventeen-year-old daughter Anne. The Times was uncivilly to
suggest that this was little more than a business arrangement,?! but
there is no reason to believe the charge. Anne, though by 1844 she
was severe and solid,?? was pretty enough as a girl. Some people in
later life found her cold and snobbish, but Alexander’s nephew H. B.
Mildmay voiced the general opinion when he described her as ‘a
kind and good woman, thoroughly subordinate to her husband’.?3
However, though the match may not have been made for money, it
was financially advantageous. Bingham gave his daughter a marriage
settlement of £500 a year and the elegant Powel House on Third
Street in Philadelphia.?* At his death it was said - though probably
with some picturesque exaggeration - that his daughter inherited
$900,000.75
   Alexander was not given the management of the Maine lands - a
task for which he would have been singularly ill-equipped - but he
did remain for a while in America. The purchase of the land was only
part of his brief, and from the moment of his arrival he had been on
the lookout for new business. His impressions were not entirely
favourable. He found the Boston merchants well established and
respectable, but unfortunately ‘people in general have all some
peculiar tye to some house in England’.?6 Connections could be built
up, but it would take time. Outside Boston things were still less
hopeful:

    The Merchants in this Country are generally speaking a low
    Class of Man, having all raised themselves from Nothing, the
    best at this place [Philadelphia] and New York are travelling
    Clerks to English manufacturing houses .. . The Northern
    States are always some degrees above their Neighbours in
    everything and the scale sinks lower as you go South . . . to
    the south of Baltimore I understand there is nobody worth
 66                        The Sixth Great Power
      trusting. The proper mode of doing business with this Coun-
      try to most advantage is certainly to give a large Credit to very
      few, selecting only one or two houses you can depend on in
      each place, and then to give the others liberal assistance in
      their houses on proper Security which will attract as much as
      any one Establishment can wish. The Rage for Speculation 1s
      so great and the ups and downs in fortunes so sudden that it
      is necessary to keep up a constant Communication with your
      confidential Correspondent.??

    Despite the hauteur with which he spoke of American merchants,
 Baring in fact soon built up excellent relationships with several of the
 most important. The Codmans in Boston; Willing and Francis in
 Philadelphia; Robert Gilmor and Co. and Robert Oliver and Broth-
ers in Baltimore were all felt worthy of large uncovered credits.
Credit of a year or more was by no means unusual, but the money
was usually safe and the return substantial. Alexander told Charles
Wall that one of Barings’ correspondents in Philadelphia was ‘the
most barefaced liar and dirty equivocator’ he had met in his life,28
but he eventually concluded that such scoundrels were few and far
between. By 1798 Alexander Baring’s business in America was bring-
ing in a profit of £10,000 a year.
   He visited Canada in 1797. Upper Canada, he reported, was
‘beyond the reach of any export market and must like Switzerland
subsist from its own resources’. Both it and Lower Canada were ‘a
perfect deadweight to Great Britain’. The settlers were without any
kind of patriotism and as soon as self-interest dictated a change of
policy, ‘the same scene will be played which we witnessed in these
States [he wrote from Philadelphia] with the only difference that the
Contest will be much shorter’. The only reason for occupying the
Canadas had been to secure the northern frontier of what was now
the United States, ‘but since the loss of the latter they are of no serv-
ice but to the empty vanity of large territorial possessions and to
increase Ministerial patronage at the expense of the Nation’.?9
   He had no such doubts about the future of the United States. ‘The
accession of MrJefferson may have excited apprehensions,’ he wrote
early in 1801, ‘but you may depend on it that they are unfounded.’
Jetferson might be personally disposed to favour France if the Euro-
                    The United States:   1783-1828                   67
pean war was renewed but the country as a whole did not share this
predilection. “The consequences of a war with England would be
fatal to every description of people throughout America... . You
may rely on it that there is no danger from this side at present unless
goaded by increasing aggression of the British ministers.’3°
   One of the reasons for his journey had been to investigate the mer-
its of American stocks. Alexander soon concluded that these were
eminently suitable for investment, giving a high yield and offering as
much security as anything in Europe. The problem would be to con-
vince the British capitalist that this was the case. The French Revolu-
tion, Alexander believed, had persuaded the monied classes that
republicanism was synonymous with Jacobinism,; to express any
sympathy for the United States was to lay oneself open to a charge of
condoning violent revolution if not regicide. In fact the British were
by no means so hostile to their former colonists as Alexander imag-
ined, but it was not until he saw the names of the Duke of Northum-
berland and some European princelings on a list of those who held
large quantities of American stock that he accepted this might be
Sut?
   Cause and effect is as difficult to establish in banking as in any
other branch of history. American stocks would undoubtedly have
become acceptable in London even though Barings had never sup-
ported them. The fact, however, that so powerful and generally
respected a house was known to be investing in the United States,
both for its friends and on its own account, must have been an
important factor in shaping the opinion of the public. Once the first
steps had been taken there was no looking back. At the very end of
the eighteenth and in the early nineteenth century British invest-
ment in US stocks rose rapidly; by 1803 almost half the total $32
million of stock held by foreigners was domiciled in Britain. And
Barings were at the heart of the business; from 1799 indeed they
                                                                    on
acted in conjunction with London merchants, Cazenove and Co.,
                                                                 on  all
behalf of the Bank of the United States in paying dividends
American stock in Britain.
                                                                 a new
   In 1799, too, Alexander Baring was closely associated with
                                                              him the
$5 million loan. He was dismayed by what seemed to
                                                           of America
naivety of the Treasury in Washington. ‘Our Financiers
                                                        to  his father,
as well as our Politicians are quite Novices,’ he wrote
68                      The Sixth Great Power

 ‘they know nothing ofwhat Mr Burke called the small ware of either
 Diplomaticks or finance.’ The Secretary of the Treasury borrowed
 his wants by ‘fixing his interest and opening a Great Book for sub-
 scriptions without ascertaining by receiving offers the Minimum of
 interest it could be obtained for’.3? Francis Baring agreed with his
son’s strictures, quoting with approval Talleyrand’s dictum that
Americans ‘sont des ostrogothes qui ne se connatssent pas en affaires’?
The Secretary, Oliver Wolcott, compounded his folly in Alexander’s
eyes by his reluctance to entrust the London end ofthe loan entirely
to Barings. ‘I positively declined taking any share in such a scramble
unless I could be put on higher ground than my competitors,3+
wrote Baring, with an arrogance that would have been only too easily
recognizable by anyone who had dealings with successive genera-
tions of the family. His father was wise enough to realize that
Wolcott would have to take endless pains to avoid giving the impres-
sion of favouring anyone, least of all a foreign banker.
   Thomas Willing of the Bank of the United States had been one of
Francis Baring’s staunchest allies since the early 1790s. Cazenoves
had previously been the closest associate of the Bank and were not at
all pleased to see their cosy relationship disturbed. In July 1793 Bar-
ing wrote to thank Willing for trying to steer all the Bank’s business
in his direction. ‘I flattered myself, however, that our rivals would
have been contented with a fair participation to which they solicited
us strongly, and as we conceived that their interest would have
induced them to conciliate on all occasions with us, we so far yielded
as to write to the bank that we should readily concur with them in a
joint operation, whenever circumstances would permit.’ Cazenoves’
response had been to pocket the entire commission on a loan that
had been raised in Holland. ‘Although we think ourselves equal to
any degree of fair competition, yet we know from experience that we
have no chance against Men of an intriguing disposition, that I beg
to mention to you in perfect confidence the determination of my
house not to act in concert with them on any occasion whatsoever,’35
   Such dire threats are usually soon forgotten, and Barings were
associated with Cazenoves only two years later in a new $600,000
issue of certificates.36 In February 1803, however, Willing, with some
help from Rufus King in London, secured Barings the prize they had
long coveted - the agency of the government of the United States in
                   The United States:   1783-1828                   69
London. When Barings took over the payment of dividends on US
governmentstock, Alexander had argued that in this way they would
‘secure a species of monopoly in the direction of American Stocks in
Europe and become more obvious for individual operations of
Commerce’.3? The government agency was the logical next step.
After the failure of the previous agents Bird, Savage and Bird, Rufus
King told Barings, the American government had decided to employ
‘an English house of the first Reputation and Solidity’ to make the
‘large Remittances to the Continent’ which were periodically neces-
sary and to keep in funds various US diplomatic missions.3 The
work was often troublesome and the recompense in commission
income insignificant, but the prestige was all important. From 1803
no one could doubt that Barings were the leading ‘American’ house
in London.


‘I have been so often disappointed about Alex’s return,’ Francis Bar-
ing wrote to Bingham in November 1800. ‘His presence is so indis-
pensable to a Man of my Age, infirmities and numerous family, that
I must request of you to bind him hand and foot, and put him on
board some Ship bound to England.’3? Baring could only regain his
son at the price of Bingham losing his daughter, so it is perhaps not
surprising that Alexander was not pressed too vigorously to move. At
one time it seems that he contemplated settling permanently in Phil-
adelphia but ‘it is by no means a desirable country to live in and will
never be so in my days,’ he concluded.*° By mid-1802 it seemed that
he was at last on the move, Willing reporting that he was in Philadel-
phia ‘perhaps for the last time’,*! but it was not until February 1804
that he wrote from New York to Albert Gallatin at the Treasury in
Washington to thank him for his kindness and assistance. ‘Like an
itinerant peddler,’ he told Gallatin, ‘I have been opening my shop.’
He had left Washington charged with the placing of the latest loan,
had sold $200,000 worth in Baltimore at about par, the same amount
                                                         many
in Philadelphia and $100,000 in New York, ‘and I find in
instances the first purchasers have resold with a profit’. If he had
                                                     not much
stayed longer he might have sold more, but there was
point in doing so if the stock would be at once put back on the mar-
ket, perhapsinEurope where he hoped to place the rest of the loan
 70                       The Sixth Great Power

himself.4? Besides, his father-in-law and wife were already in Europe,
and the thought of a holiday in Paris was most appealing.
      Some time before, Bingham had written from London: “None of
my friends have as yet informed me, what Impression the Cession of
Louisiana to France had made on the United States.’#3 The omission
is surprising, because little else was being talked of in America at the
time. Louisiana had been a French colony until 1763, then was ceded
 to Spain, only to be restored to its original owner in 1800 by the
 treaty of Saint-Ildefonse. The Americans disliked having the Span-
 iards there, but at least could rely on them to remain inert. The
 thought of a French army installed to their south appalled them.
 The British obligingly offered to conquer the area and hand it over to
 the United States after the war. This alarmed the Americans even
 more. Instead Jefferson sent an emissary to Paris to see if Napoleon
 might be prepared to sell part of the area. To his surprise he found
 that the Emperor was happy to dispose of the entire territory. Napo-
 leon needed the money and had no real interest in Louisiana, indeed
 his main reason for demanding it back from Spain had been to frus-
 trate any similar move from Britain: ‘Pour affranchir les peoples de la
tyrannie commerciale de l’Angleterre, ilfaut la contrepoiser par une puis-
sance maritime qui devienne un jour sa rivale: ce sont les Etats-Unis.’+4
    The United States in 1803 were thus offered the chance of doubl-
ing their land space and acquiring the entire Mississippi valley at a
single throw. It was an opportunity that could not be missed. ‘A little
more or less money cannot be an object with a Country circum-
stanced like ours,’ wrote Rufus King, ‘especially when it is applied to
secure advantages so important.’#5 In fact the price was a bargain -
$15 million from which $3.75 million were to be deducted for Amer-
ican claims against France - but the negotiators were still stupefied
by the immensity of their undertaking. Someone announced that a
pile of 15 million dollar pieces would be three miles high, a calcula-
tion of dubious relevance but symptomatic of the disquiet felt in
many circles.*° Where was the money to be found?
   The answer was to hand. Alexander Baring had been in Paris
throughout the negotiations in an unobtrusive role and, according to
his father, was largely responsible for reducing the French demands
to so low a figure.*” Barings and Hopes, it was understood, would
underwrite the purchase. Francis Baring, normally imperturbable,
                    The United States: 1783-1828                        71

was almost overwhelmed by the responsibility his son was incurring.
‘] must request that no calculation may be made,’ he wrote to
Labouchére, ‘those sent to Alexander Baring should be burnt, and
even this letter after extracting such notes as you may think useful.
My nerves are equal to the operation, but not to the imprudences
which I see committed to paper. We all tremble about the magni-
tude of the American account.’ At the very most Barings might con-
tract for 60 per cent of the whole.*8 But though the risks were great,
the potential rewards were still greater. ‘I am satisfied if we can man
age this business well,’ he told his son, ‘we shall have frequent occur-
rence to us in circumstances or events that must arise and keep the
Ball at our feet for many years to come.’#? The final agreement was
that Barings and Hopes would acquire $11.25 million of 6 per cent
American bonds against payment to the French of 52 million francs.
The bonds would be handed over in three tranches, and similariy
payments to the French would be spread over two years; 6 million
francs payable in the first month and 2 million a month thereafter.
What in fact happened was that the two banks bought Louisiana
from France and resold it to America.
   A curious feature of this operation was that, while Britain was still
at peace with France, it seemed certain that war would soon be re-
sumed. The money Napoleon obtained through the sale of Louisi-
ana could be used to launch an attack on Britain. Rather belatedly,
Francis Baring in June 1803 told the Prime Minister, Henry
Addington, what had been done. ‘I asked distinctly if he approved
the treaty and our conduct. He said that he thoughtitwould have
been wise for this country to pay a million sterling for the transfer of
Louisiana from France to America, that he saw nothing in our con-
duct but to approve.’%° With this ministerial blessing Alexander
                                                                        the
Baring set off for Washington to settle the last details with
Americans.*!
                                                                          It
   By June 1803 the war with France had already been renewed.
                                                                     could
was not long before Addington began to wonder whether he
                                                         remitt ing  2 mil-
really justify a situation in which a British bank was
                                                                at war. In
lion francs a month to a country with which Britain was
                                                to cease   paying   remit-
December he formally requested Barings
                                                           the  contin ent
tances to France. If there were sums of money on
                                                                  have the
which were due to France on this account, ‘and you should
 72                     The Sixth Great Power

 Means of withdrawing them, or of diverting them into other Chan-
nels, I fully rely on your doing so’.5? Barings dutifully passed this on
to Hopes, in a letter that was cautiously phrased, ‘from a persuasion
that our correspondence is watched’.53 Hopes’ reply was blunt: ‘We
have no objection to the discontinuance of your Remittances as we
shall not want them. But we cannot comply with the rest of your
 request. 54 It is hard to believe that this somewhat formal exchange is
 all that passed between the two houses. Barings must have known
 that Hopes would continue to pay remittances to the French, and
 Hopes must have known that Barings would make only a token pro-
 test: if the British government expected anything else then they were
 deluding themselves.
    Albert Gallatin estimated the profit which Hopes and Barings
 made from this business at $3 million.’ No precise figures exist, but
 though Gallatin’s figure must be too high, there were undoubtedly
 rich pickings. There was some rancour between the two partners
 over the division of the spoils. Labouchére claimed that he had origi-
 nated the operation and that a sixth of the profit was due to Henry
 Hope in London. Barings denied the claim. ‘To put an end to such
discussions, which can answer no good purpose,’ Francis Baring
wrote finally, ‘we are compelled to state to you that we claim as “a
Right” one moiety of the profits as proposed to you by Alexander
Baring. We do not ask this as a favor, for we should think meanly of
ourselves if we received a single penny as a concession or favor, but
we claim it as a strict indisputable right.’ He dismissed the argument
that Hopes deserved more because of the political risks to which
they had been exposed. His own political situation had been far
worse; ‘what I suffered can never be described and it completely
overpowered my nerves for the first and I hope the last time’.%6
    The fact that Barings were the foreign bankers most trusted by the
American government did not mean that they were treated as sacro-
sanct or given the benefit of every doubt. In 1806 the former Vice-
President, Aaron Burr, was accused of plotting to dismember the
Union and was widely believed to have British backing. Vincent
Nolte found himself looked on with suspicion by the commanding
general in New Orleans, ‘since he had ascertained that the house of
Baring, at London, had placed itself in readiness to furnish the funds
necessary to secure the success of Burr's conspiracy; and I was well
                    The United States: 1783-1828                       wi,
known to be the agent for that firm’.5? Such rumours were fantastical
and easily disproved - nothing would have suited Barings less than
the disintegration of the United States - but they illustrated the
alarm with which Americans viewed British intentions and also the
mounting hostility between the two nations.
   Barings were constantly preoccupied by the bad relations between
Britain and the United States. The problem was personal - with both
Alexander and Henry married to daughters of Senator Bingham,
they could hardly contemplate the threat of war without distress -
but it was also, and more immediately, a business one. ‘American
stocks have fallen here in consequence of the alarm generally
prevalent of War with this Country,’ wrote Alexander to a friend in
Philadelphia in October 1807.58 For a house that dealt so largely in
American stocks, that was bad news. In 1807 the risk receded. The
following year Alexander argued cogently that the Orders in Coun-
cil, which sought to curb American trade, should be rescinded. He
inveighed against the ‘injustice as well as impolicy of ruining one
trade to support another’, and urged the need to increase trade with
the United States by every means. What Britain most needed, he
claimed, was an American nation ‘politically independent, but
commercially as dependent on us as habits and interest can make
them’. France had largely succeeded in excluding British trade trom
Europe, ‘but with prudence and skill we might move our island,
commercially speaking, out of Europe’.*?
   Baring indignantly denied that he was actuated by anything
except the most disinterested and patriotic motives: ‘It can hardly be
supposed that merchants, naturally more interested in preserving
than in acquiring, should be occupied with collecting a few paltry
                                                                   ’©° His
profits from their trade, at the expense of their dearest interest.
protestations did not convince everyone. In the House of Commons
J. Marryat complained that he too had commercial interests and
                                                            bim to
family connections in America but ‘these should not induce
                                                     ’? Wnung of
forget his great and paramount duty to his country          was an
                                                   alleged that he
Francis Baring later in the same year The Times
                                              are fixed on that
American merchant ‘whose heart and affections           jibe was
                                                is’.62 The
 country where the fountainhead of his treasure
                                                        had no doubt
largely unjustified; in the last resort the Barings
                                               lay, but they would do
where both their loyalties and their interests
74                       The Sixth Great Power

everything they could to prevent that last resort being reached. They
were not optimistic. Francis Baring wrote to Rufus King in May 1809
to thank him for the assurance that the Americans did not want war:
‘You may entertain the same confidence on our side with regard to
the sober-sided part of the nation, and even those of the high ranks
in ostensible situation, but the farceurs and intrigants have always
too much to say, and in truth generally rule.’6
  War came 1n 1812. Barings took the line that, as British citizens,
they would do nothing of which their government would disap-
 prove; but that the war was a temporary aberration and they would
never cease to plan beyond its ending. Alexander Baring said frankly
that it was his object to help maintain the credit of the United States,
and it is an interesting comment on the attitude towards war in the
early nineteenth century that ministers felt this to be not merely
reasonable but actually desirable. Barings continued to pay interest
to holders of American bonds, even though the funds were not
available from the United States, and to perform other routine
transactions like the liquidation of outstanding converted 6 per cent
bonds, but they refused to sell new Federal issues.6+ Their main
preoccupation was to support any initiative that might lead to peace.
‘A senseless war,’ Alexander described it to Gallatin. ‘That we wish
fora restoration of peace with you need not be argued. Our situation
... makes it impossible that we should be otherwise than heartily
desirous of putting an end to a contest from which we suffer
considerably . . . and from which no good can result.’65
  In July 1813 Gallatin came to Europe as one of a commission
nominated to negotiate for peace. The commission went first to St
Petersburg, in the mistaken belief that the British would welcome, or
at least accept, Russian mediation. Alexander Baring found himself
acting as middleman between Gallatin and the Foreign Secretary,
Castlereagh. He had to tell his American friend that the British
would never accept a Russian role in ‘a sort of family quarrel, where
foreign interference can only do harm’.* Gallatin finally reached
London in March 1814. ‘I find London very dull in comparison to
Paris and St Petersburg,’ complained his son James. ‘Our position is
not a very pleasant one; we have many invitations, and I think all
mean to be civil and kind, but there is always a feeling of constraint.
... The only house where we seem to be really welcome is Mr Bar-
                     The United States: 1783-1828                   75
ing’s.’°7 A year later, when Gallatin finally left, James had evidently
had a change of heart. ‘All the Barings were so kind. The dinner was
delightful and we parted with them with deep regret. I will be glad to
get home; after all it is my home and I love it. But I want to come
back.’¢8 Alexander Baring, said James Gallatin, ‘had done more than
any other man in England, or perhaps, with one exception, even in
America, to hasten the peace, and had, with the knowledge and con-
sent of his own government, rendered very important financial
assistance even while the war was going on’.°?


With so much goodwill working in their favour, immense financial
resources and unrivalled connections, Barings should have contin-
ued to dominate Anglo-American trade in the decades after the
Napoleonic wars. Certainly no one house can be said to have
displaced them, but their prominence was not so absolute as at first
seemed probable. This was due more to a lack of interest and energy
on the part of Barings than to any machinations of their rivals.
Things began well. In 1817 John Sergeant came to London on behalf
of the Bank of the United States to select as agent for the Bank the
house that would ‘be of the greatest solidity and integrity and pos-
sess, in the highest degree, the confidence of the public’.’”? To no
one’s surprise, the choice fell on Barings. The distnction may have
seemed of questionable value when mismanagementin the Bank led
to its being $1.76 million in debt to Barings and other European
houses by the middle of 1818 but the problems proved transitory.”!
By the time its greatest, if most erratic President, Nicholas Biddle,
took over in 1823, affairs seemed soundly based. The Montagu
Norman of his days, he believed that his task was to fuel the growth
                                                                    his
of the American economy. He scorned the cautious attitude of
predecessor and embarked on a bold, and at times alarmingly    expan-
                                                                   fact
sjonist course. Some dismissed him as a playboy but he was in
                                                       when he wrote:
supremely professional. He was not belying himself
               I prefer my last letter from Barings or Hope
               To the finest epistles of Pliny and Pope.’
                                                his mark strongly
   Ambitious, autocratic and impetuous, he left
                                                         itself.
upon American banking and, indeed, upon America
 76                     The Sixth Great Power
    His recklessness must have been one factor in Barings’ noticeable
 caution in American affairs. It was anyway a period of transition so
 far as loans were concerned. Capital was no longer so hard to come
 by across the Atlantic and the Bank of the United States tended more
 and more to take responsibility for Federal indebtedness. The
 amount of British capital invested in American funds, according to
 S. C. Holland, fell from some £5.7 million in 1805 to £1.3 million in
 1818.73 It was only slowly that the individual states began to emerge
as serious borrowers in their own right. When they did so Barings
regarded them with marked caution.
   New York, whether for banks or State loans, was held to be in a
class of its own. In 1823 Barings placed £200,000 Bank of New York
stock and found little trouble in doing so. The ‘old States north of the
Chesapeake’ were felt to be almost as sound. But more far-flung
regions were a different matter. ‘The credit of Virginia is not good,
we hardly know why,’ Barings wrote in 1825 to Le Roy Bayard of
New York, ‘and we find with difficulty buyers for some of it which
we hold.’ They saw no reason for believing that the Stock of Ohio, ‘a
State the name of which is hardly known in Europe’, would appeal
any more to the British investor.’* They were not wholly consistent
in their position. Their interest in the cotton trade made them more
sympathetic to Louisiana than they would otherwise have been, and
in 1829, to finance the Planters’ Bank, Barings made a public issue of
Louisiana securities, the first to be made payable in London ata fixed
rate of exchange.’ But their attitude was more often that which was
shown   to one of the most eminent of Philadelphians, General
Cadwalader, when in 1824 he tried to involve them in an operation
in bank shares: ‘In other times,’ Barings apologized, ‘it might have
suited us... to have entered into your views, but at the moment,
being engaged in large financial operations in France, we do not feel
disposed to divest ourselves of our own Capital, by placing it at a
distance from us. Indeed, our object always is to have our Capital
within reach that we may command it as necessary.’7¢
   In the event they relented far enough to buy 4000 US Bank shares
on joint account with the General at £25. Their initial caution
seemed justified when the economic crisis of 1825-6 sent prices
tumbling. By the end of 1825 the theoretical price of the shares was
£22. 10s., ‘but we doubt whether any buyer would now be found
                      The United States: 1783-1828                     es
even at a considerable reduction’.??7 Three months later £21 was
quoted, again with no takers.78 It was not until the middle of 1827
that Barings finally extricated themselves, and even then ata loss of
8 shillings a share.”°
  In ordinary trading transactions also, Barings did not expand as
vigorously as in 1815 had seemed likely. It was not that the
opportunities were not there. Between 1820 and 1830, 36 percent of
American exports went to and 43 per cent of their imports came
from Britain; 80 per cent of Lancashire cotton came from the
Southern States.8° Yet Barings did not maintain their market share.
In part this reflected increased competition, from the United States
 as well as Europe; in partit reflected the personalities of the partners.
Alexander Baring was bored by the bread-and-butter business of
American trade; he concerned himself mainly with the more
 glamorous European loans or was often absent from his house.
 Swinton Holland, who was charged mainly with the routine side of
the business,    knew a lot about American        trade but was     ultra-
conservative, cautious, restrictive in granting credit and singularly
graceless in refusing it. He made many enemies in the United States
and lost the house much business.
   An example was John Jacob Astor. Astor had regularly used
Barings to draw on and treated them with considerable confidence,
in 1814 sending them $200,000 of government stock to sell or hold
as security for bills drawn on them, as they should prefer.®! It was
often convenient to him to leave a large debit in his current account
                                                            no one
at the end of the year, and since his credit was undoubted,
had objected. Holland, however, who was by nature inflexible and
saw no reason to treat one American house differently from another,
                    to   protest,   in terms   ‘couched   in very   sharp
wrote    to Astor
                                                                    his
 language’.8? Astor was not surprisingly displeased, and though
 name continued to appear in Barings’ American         and   Colonial
                                                                   last
 Ledgers until 1829, the account dwindled markedly in the
 decade.                                                      .
                                                          Barin gs still
    By 1828, a particularly shrewd observer commented,
                                                            ’ in the
 enjoyed the ‘highest fame for respectability and wealth
                                                         high’.83 The
 United States but ‘for business it did not stand very
                                                        was   urgently
 potential for renewed growth was there, but someone
 needed to take the task in hand.
                                   .
                                pte
                                  @ ate




           ‘Accidental Chances’ and
                        ‘Lucky Hits’
                            1815-1828


 In the eighteenth century France was the richest country in Europe.
The Revolution and twenty-five years or so of almost unbroken war
had left its wealth essentially unscathed. Francis Baring had told
Voate in 1801 that France was ‘the pivot on which the Commerce of
Europe depends’,! and his son would have seen no reason to revise
that opinion in 1815. But there has always been a striking distinction
between the prosperity of the French people and their government.
The French investor was dubious about lending money to his lead-
ers, never more so than when he surveyed the uncertain future of the
restored Bourbons in a country garrisoned by allied troops. When
the Duc de Richelieu, Louis XVIII’s Prime Minister, found it neces-
sary to raise money to pay the indemnities owing to the victorious
allies, he realized that he would have to look abroad. It was not
impossible for a French government to obtain money from its own
people. The Parisian haute banque - the private banks of important
standing who operated in rivalry with each other and yet with a com-
mon purpose ~ had raised a substantial sum early in 1816.2 But
something vastly greater was now in question. Few believed that
Richelieu would be notably more successful in London or Amster-
dam than he would have been in Paris. The country’s most eminent
financier, Jacques Laffitte, predicted boldly, ‘La France ne trouverait
pas un petit écu a emprunter sur aucune place de |‘Europe.’
  It seems to have been Gabriel-Julien Ouvrard who first ap-
proached Barings. Ouvrard had been Napoleon’s financial adviser
                                                                .
‘A clever good-for-nothing man,’ the future Lord Northbrook
                                   78
           Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828              79
described him in 1826, who nevertheless would make ‘a very decent
figure in history.’* In this he underestimated that ingenious Artful
Dodger, who enjoyed the resourcefulness and the indestructibility
of a Talleyrand ora Fouché. Ouvrard’s original idea had been to float
a vast issue, large enough to pay off the allies for once and for all,
and persuade the allied powers themselves to take over the issue in
settlement of their debts. This failed to inspire enthusiasm in Lon-
don, Berlin or St Petersburg.’ When the Duke of Wellington, then
British Ambassador to France, was staying with him in Paris towards
the end of 1816, Ouvrard raised the possibility of persuading Hopes
and Barings to find the money. Wellington cautiously approved and
Richelieu agreed that it was worth a try. Hastening to London,
Ouvrard persuaded Alexander Baring and Labouchére to say that
they might be prepared to undertake the operation if the British gov-
ernment approved it. With the French Ambassador he then tackled
Castlereagh, who said that he would not merely approve but would
strongly support the proposal - ‘en se chargeant de cette transaction,
qu’ils rendraient un service éminente a |’Europe entiere’.” The report of
the conversation comes from the French Ambassador; it suggests a
change of heart on the part of Castlereagh, who the previous year
had been disposed to veto any attempt by France to borrow her way
out of her difficulties with British money.®
    Ouvrard almost over-reached himself. He told Baring that
 Richelieu and the Minister of Finance, Corvetto, had specifically
 instructed him to negotiate with the Anglo-Dutch consortium for a
 loan,? and told the French minister that Baring and Labouchére were
 committed to the deal. Neither statement was wholly true, as quickly
 transpired when Baring called on Richelieu, but Ouvrard cheerfully
 admitted that he had strained the truth in the interests of getting
 negotiations started. Fortunately for him all the principal parties
were sufficiently keen on doing business to treat his misrepresenta-
 tions as established fact. Baring, as it turned out, was keener than
 Labouchére. At the Tuileries the two were cornered by men who
 wished to see the negotiations fail and regaled with accounts of
 France’s economic weakness. Labouchére stayed and listened; Bar-
 ing shrugged his shoulders and moved on. Next day, when negotia-
 tions resumed, Labouchére began to go back on what had previously
 been agreed but ‘Ja franche loyauté de Baring s'y opposa, et il combattatt
80                       The Sixth Great Power

lui-méme les arguments de son associé’ 1° Talleyrand, who had his own
 private fish to fry, was one of those who would have liked to see the
 talks break down. Louis XVIII told Baring that France was happy to
 have him in Paris. ‘Placer la bonheur de France chez un banquter anglats
n'est pas bien noble de la part du souverain du pays,’ wrote Talleyrand
bitterly. ‘Mats on fait comme cela a present.’'!
    In December 1816 things had advanced far enough for Welling-
ton in Paris to write formally to Castlereagh. The sum initially in
question, he said, was 300 million francs (about £12 million). Of this,
£2 million would probably have to be found in London. Baring had
originally hoped to get a guarantee from the allied governments, but
had quickly been convinced that this was out of the question. There
was no law to prevent him going ahead nevertheless, but he had
made it clear he would not proceed without at least the tacit blessing
of the British government. Wellington felt strongly that this should
be forthcoming: ‘It is my opinion that unless some arrangement of
the description proposed is adopted, France will be aground this
year, and our settlement of last year will be entirely destroyed.’!2
Back in London, Baring was confronted by Liverpool, the Prime
Minister, as well as Castlereagh and the Chancellor, Vansittart. ‘He
distinctly intimated that his share and Mr Hope’sin the business was
to be that of an agency to realise the scrip . . . upon a moderate com-
mission; but they were not to be contractors, or to take the profit or
loss of the French stock upon themselves.’!3 He was told that the
British government had no objection to his proposals.
  In fact Barings were very definitely acting as contractors, and the
size of their profit would depend on the price they paid for the stock
and the price they got for it. This was shown in February when they
tried to force the price of the loan down from the proposed 55 to
522. Richelieu consulted Wellington and said he would agree if
advised by the Ambassador that it was necessary. This Wellington
refused to do, ‘first, because it is not true; secondly, it would have
brought on me and the British government all the odium of this bad
financial bargain’.!* He urged Richelieu to stick out for 55, and it was
at this price that the deal was done.
   In all Barings raised 315 million francs for the French government
in 1817, in three tranches of 100 million, 100 million and 115
                                                               mil-
lion. The issues were an unqualified success; so much so that the
John Baring (1697-1748) by                      Elizabeth Baring (1702-1766) by
William Hoare.                                  Thomas Gainsborough.

              Sir Francis Baring (1740-1810) by Benjamin West.
Sir Francis Baring, John Baring (1730-1816) and Charle
                                                      s Wall, the three
partners at the end of the eighteenth centur
                                             y, y Thomas Lawrence.
The ledger is open at the account of Hope
                                             and Co. of Amsterdam.
  lexander Baring (1774-1848), first Lord Ashburton of the second
creation, by Thomas Lawrence.
           Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828             81
 third tranche was brought out at the higher price of 6112 and the
 French bankers took half the amount instead of the quarter which
 they had put up for the first two tranches. If there is one thing
 for which Barings deserved the gratitude of the French government
 and people, it is that they re-established public credit and restored
 the morale of the French bankers. Even the stock which was offered
 for sale in London and Amsterdam largely ended up in Paris; it
 was French money that paid off the indemnities, but without the cat-
 alyst provided by Hopes and Barings it would not have been forth-
 coming.!5
    Despite his success, Alexander Baring at the end of 1817 was ina
 cautious mood. ‘Too much stock has been emitted and credit
 thereby overstretched, he complained to Wellington. The last 115
 million had been too much. ‘Our sales move very heavily, or rather
 for a long time we have sold nothing, and | should calculate that
 there must be in our hands, or in those of other speculators, at least
  80 million unliquidated.’ British demand seemed to have been sati-
  ated. What the French government now called for was one last mas-
  sive operation to pay off all the foreign claims, but he had no wish to
  handle the business himself: ‘I should much wish to withdraw if I
  could do so decently ... but at the same time, after the liberal
  manner in which I have been treated, and the very profitable opera-
  tion I have made, I cannot with propriety withdraw as long as I can
  really be of service.’!6 His disenchantment may have been fanned
  by the hostility that his operations aroused in some quarters in
  England: the Commercial Chronicle attacked ‘the base and wretched
_ avidity of the Monied Interest, which at the prospect of gain, 1s ready
  to forget all the claims of patriotism’, while The Times complained
  thata moment when industry and agriculture were so depressed was
  not appropriate for transferring funds to Britain’s most dangerous
  rival.!7
    Wellington did not take Baring’s protestations too seriously. “The
                                                                    the
 fact is,’ he told Liverpool a few weeks later, ‘that Baring having
                                                      in fashion in
 French finances in his hands, and French loans being
                                                                   market
 England, has to a certain degree the command of the money
                                                              task to suc-
 of the world. He feels his power, and it is not a very easy
                                                           least going to
 ceed in counteracting him.’!® The Rothschilds were at
                                                      as well as London,
 try. With powerful branches in Vienna and Paris
 82                           The Sixth Great Power
 they considered it monstrous that they had not been involved in the
 business from the outset. ‘You are writing that I should not worry,
 because these people [Hopes and Barings] cannot take all the world,’
James from Paris had written to his cousin Salomon in London at
the beginning of March 1817. ‘However, you don’t know how clever
they are.’19* A few days later James met Labouchére: ‘A nice and
intelligent man. I never saw like him. And I assure you they are
expert merchants, clever ones, and they do merit the business they
get. Unfortunately, they are getting so big that others therefore are
dwarfed.’ James offered, somewhat optimistically, to take over the
whole Barings-Hopes interest, on the grounds that if Barings tried to
handle it alone, ‘the business world would become frightened and
the quotations would fall’. Labouchére replied that some £600,000
was the maximum needed; of this Rothschilds could have £50,000.
So far as the 1817 loans were concerned, that was that.?°
   Relations became more embittered when negotiations began for
the 1818 loan. In October 1817 rumours began to circulate about a
new loan to pay off all the remaining reparations so that the foreign
occupation forces could be withdrawn. Baring was alleged to have
told Lord Liverpool that the money would be raised exclusively by
French bankers. If he made any such statement it was inaccurate.
Salomon Rothschild told Nathan from Paris that Barings and Hopes
in fact had a 50 per cent interest. ‘He is quite a crook, this Baring... .
We must certainly watch our step as far as he is concerned. The Bar-
ing lot is and was well versed in the way of using influence, as we are.
There is not a single man of importance among the authorities here
who would not work with Baring hand-in-glove . . . Baring and the
French Minister of Finance are sharing the profit. The Minister is
reported to be one of the most corrupt of all.’2! Barings’ leading ally
in Paris was Jacques Laffitte of the bank Perregaux-Laffitte. In a
postscript to Salomon’s letter, James Rothschild reported that he
had just called on Laffitte. ‘He gave me his word of honour that we
are not going to be left out in the next loan. . .. However, I don’t
believe a single word of what the Frenchman says. The following
* Quotations from Rothschild correspondence at this period
                                                              are usually translations
from the Jiidendeutsch made by immigrants whose comma
                                                             nd of English was less
cae perfect. Hence the fact that, though the sense is clear,
                                                             the phraseology is often
clumsy.
          Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828             83
month Alexander Baring called on Rothschilds and tentatively sug-
gested a deal by which Rothschilds would take a share equal in size
to that of Hopes and Barings.?? This offer was still supposedly the
basis for negotiations at the end of the year, but Baring was now
expressing doubts about Labouchére’s attitude. ‘Baring again and
again uses the expression “If my partner agrees .. .” However,
Labouchére, who thinks himself greater than the Messiah himself,
wants to rule alone.’?3
   It may have been a case of Dickens’s celebrated couple, Spenlow
and Jorkins, with Labouchére playing the role of the invisible but
allegedly intractable partner, but if conflict really existed, it was
Jorkins/Labouchére who won. As late as 9 February the Duke of
Wellington was giving ‘his word of honour that Baring had not yet
got any further in this matter’,?+ yet within a few days came a scream
of rage from Paris. ‘In Frankfurt one got used to confront anti-
semitism, so one is not astonished,’ wrote James Rothschild, ‘but
here the case is the contrary, and if something of the kind happens
here one is more amazed.’ Baring had assured Laffitte that he had no
objection to working with Rothschilds; now he had changed his
position and said that his associates would not allow him to do busi-
ness with any Jew. ‘It all originates in Labouchére’s pride and in
Sillem’s envy and greed; as these two are Hopes, they think that their
honour would suffer if they would have to get in line with a Frank-
furt Jew.’ Rothschild   poured out his woes to David Parish, the
Anglo-German banker from Hamburg, who told him that it was not
Hopes alone who were recalcitrant. Baring had told him: “Those gen-
tlemen are working like Jews. How could we co-operate if their prin-
ciples are different? They are working on 20 transactions at the same
time. . . with the only aim to do business. It is like stock-jobbers.2
   The Rothschilds meditated organizing a party in opposition to the
                                                                groups
Barings-Hope coalition, but thought better of it. ‘Opposition
                                                                  make
are an abomination,’ wrote Salomon. They did not want to
                                                        nment  gives us
themselves too unpopular in London. ‘This Gover
                                                 this Government
our bread and butter, further, our accounts with
                                                                     said:
are still open.’ There could be unpleasant repercussions if it was
                                                  fell through, the
 ‘The Rothschilds organized a diversion, the loan
                                                        make too
troops can’t be withdrawn.’ Besides, he did not want to
                                            Membe r of Parlia ment
pronounced an enemy of Baring, who was a
 84                      The Sixth Great Power
and as such could make trouble when the accounts came to be
debated.?6                                                   val
   No papers survive to give the Baring point of view on this imbro-
glio. Where the letters are to be found in both archives it is usually
the case that Rothschild complaints about the duplicity and arro-
gance of the Barings are matched by equally vehement Baring
denunciations of the skulduggery and malevolence of the Roths-
childs. Both points of view were sincerely held and no doubt had
some justice in them. Whatever the rights and wrongs in 1818, how-
ever, the Rothschilds were bitterly aggrieved and the Barings had
made dangerous enemies. The Rothschilds did not wreak revenge
on this occasion, but they almost had the last laugh.
   On 30 May 1818 Barings and Hopes contracted for a loan of 265
million francs. They offered 20 million to Laffitte and only 10 mil-
lion to Rothschild, to share with David Parish. Laffitte wrote later,
‘M. de Rothschild, qui n’était pas encore un si grand personnage, trouva le
procédé abominable.’?’ But he had to accept or get nothing. He was
soon to rejoice at his ill-treatment. In view of the success of the pre-
vious loans, and no doubtalso in consideration of being given exclu-
sive control of this one, Barings, who had originally agreed to take it
at 66, with payments in twelve instalments,?8 under pressure raised
the price to an optimistic 76. They thus set themselves a formidable
task of salesmanship. Simultaneously Lord Liverpool removed any
 possibility that they might escape from the consequences of their
rashness by insisting that the contractors would have to take full
responsibility for the payments, if the allied troops were withdrawn
before the full amount had been received: ‘We could not look with
such an object to mere French contractors; . . . the intervention of
Baring, Hope etc. is absolutely necessary to give credit to the transac-
tion.’?? This was no doubt very flattering to Baring, Hope etc., but it
was a compliment they could well have done without.
   All would have gone well if the public response to the loan had
been the same as in 1817. Instead purchases were sluggish and by 8
September the stock was at a discount. The English investors pan-
icked and threw their holdings on to the market. Soon the quoted
price was 71 with few takers. Baring appealed to Wellington. To con-
tinue to make the scheduled payments to the allies would be ruin-
ous: ‘As far as we are concerned we are amply prepared and could. . .
           ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828                       85
make all our payments withouta single further sale, but in collecting
our own funds we should produce the same distress as if we were to
sell stock.’ The Foreign Secretaries of the allied powers were at that
moment in Congress at Aix and fortunately for Baring the principals
among them - Metternich, Nesselrode and Hardenberg - had all
participated personally in the loan and would have lost heavily if the
terms had not been amended. It was agreed that the second half of
the loan should be cancelled and payment of the rest deferred to
 1819.
    The Duke of Wellington, who had been instrumental in bringing
about this - for Hopes and Barings anyway - happy result, was
widely accused of having taken a bribe. The charge caused him little
unease. He told Lord Colchester ten years later that he and
Castlereagh had saved Barings from absolute ruin, but, he main-
tained, ‘neither Castlereagh or I ever thought that we had done more
upon that occasion than our Duty towards our own Country and the
World at large’.3! Certainly the consequences would have been dire
for France and Europe if Barings had been forced to default at this
crucial moment.
   All was well that ended well. The allies got their money, France
was relieved of the burden of the occupation, and Barings had no
cause to feel themselves inadequately rewarded. ‘Mr Baring
returned from Paris a few days before me and we shortly afterwards
settled the affairs relating to the French loan,’ wrote one of the part-
ners in Barings, ‘which produced to the House the enormous and
unheard of profit of about £720,000 . . . forming as I conceive the
most profitable undertaking in which any mercantile House ever
engaged.’32 Nor was their reward only financial. Their reputation
                                                                      six
stood higher than that ef any other banking house. “There are
great powers in Europe, said the Duc de Richelieu:            ‘England,
                                                                     They could be
France, Prussia, Austria, Russia and Baring Brothers.”*
                                                                before a
forgiven for feeling pride; but pride went, if not in this case
fall, then at least before a slow decline.



                                                       a very convincing attribution.
* This aphorism is frequently quoted but never with
                                           is in Lady Doroth y Nevill’s My Own Times
The earliest printed citation I have found                           been.
                                              said, it should have
(London, 1912, p. 24). But even if it was not
86                       The Sixth Great Power
The problem lay with the men in charge of the house, particularly
with the main partner. Alexander Baring had never taken any very
 keen interest in the bread-and-butter business of commissions and
acceptances, and the negotiations for the French loan - during which
he had hobnobbed daily with men like Wellington and Richelieu
and savoured the delights of being at the centre of the stage - had not
disposed him to buckle down to it in future. From 1818 onwards he
largely withdrew from the day-to-day management of the bank,
devoting his time to travels on the continent, political activities and
the demanding grind of establishing himself as a country gentleman
on the largest scale.
   In 1816 or 1817 Baring bought for £136,620 from his fellow-
banker Henry Drummond an estate adjoining his brother's property
at Stratton. The house, the Grange, had been entirely remodelled by
William Wilkins, architect of the National Gallery, and completed
only seven years before. A passable sighting shot for the Parthenon,
its relevance to the Hampshire countryside was not immediately
apparent: the sun never filtered through its vast Doric portico; the
damp and cold, on the other hand, were omnipresent. It had cost
Drummond some £30,000 to build and Baring spent as much again
trying to make it habitable. The result was never comfortable, still
less cosy, but it was indubitably imposing. ‘The place is like, not one,
but a conglomeration of Greek temples,’ wrote Jane Carlyle some
years later, ‘set down in a magnificent wooded park some five miles
in length. The inside is magnificent to death - the ceilings all painted
in fresco - some dozen public rooms on the ground floor all hung
with magnificent paintings and fitted up like rooms in an Arabian
night’s entertainment - but the finest part of it is the entrance hall
and staircases, which presents a view of columns, frescoes and carved
wood and Turkey carpet that one might guess a quarter of a mile
long!’ Alexander Baring himself stated it more modestly. ‘Our air is
healthy,’ he told Rufus King in 1825, ‘and you may rely on a warm
and comfortable room.’33
  The ‘magnificent paintings’ admired by Mrs Carlyle followed the
fashion of the time in being predominantly Dutch. Baring seems to
have had a sound if not particularly sensitive taste; his collection
included good examples of work by Rembrandt, Hals and Cuyp. In
1826 he bought Lord Radstock’s pictures, including an
                                                      undoubted
          Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828               87
Titan of Herod’s daughter for 1800 guineas and a somewhat less
certainly attributed Giorgione - ‘the latter a charming picture’ - for
700.34 He was well known as being ready to pay high prices for what
he wanted. Sheridan, short of money as usual, planned to sell his pic-
tures, which contained two Gainsboroughs and two by the then
much-sought-after Morland. ‘The Good you can do me,’ he told
Samuel Whitbread, ‘is to speak to some fair men like Baring or
Angerstein etc. etc. who will deal liberally that I may not be forced to
take half their value for them.’35
   It was not until the next generation that the Grange became a cen-
tre for the haut ton of the intelligentsia, but Alexander Baring enter-
tained lavishly. The results were not always applauded. Emily Eden
confessed that she found ‘the Barings rather failures - I mean as to
agreeableness. It will be some time before Mr Baring fails in the
moneyed sense of the word: but I see you, in fact, think of the
Grange just as I do - charming place and family, but a dull visit.’
But others were less censorious or perhaps less sophisticated: the
Gallatins ‘had a delightful Christmas with the Barings, who are hos-
pitality itself. There are Barings of all shapes and colours, all sizes -
tall ones, short ones, lean ones, fat ones, but all are so nice and cheer-
ful; they seem indeed a united family. We played all sorts of silly
games and became children again.’>”
   Nothing was spared to make the estate the non-pareil of stately
residences. Colonel Peter Hawker, who devoted his life almost
exclusively to the destruction of miscellaneous fauna, grumbled in
1826: ‘The whole county was, and 1s now for ever likely to be, ruined
by the presence of Mr Alexander Baring, of the Grange Park, who
feeds and monopolizes, merely to ornament his water and tickle his
fancy, half the fowl in Hampshire. I drove there expressly to see his
collection, and I am confident I saw not less than 8000 fowl on the
water before his house.’3* But it was in the acquisition of land that
Baring’s presence was most felt. He was resolved to match if not sur-
pass the territorial conquests of his brother. In 1818 he bought
                                                                 to swell
Abbotstone and Itchen Stoke from Lord Bolton for £64,200
                                                                follies  in
the Grange estate. This would be, he wrote, ‘the last of my
                                                              propertyis
the way of land purchases. . . . I pay very fully, but the
                                                            purchaser.    39
very essential to me, and I am therefore a very willing
                                                            acquired    the
Far from being the last, 1t was a mere apéritif. In 1824 he
 88                       The Sixth Great Power

 Brown and Chilton Candover estates from Sir Thomas Freeman
 Heathcote for £85,000; in 1835 the Itchen Abbas estate was added.
 And these were just the more conspicuous transactions. ‘The Barings
 are now the great men in Hampshire,’ wrote Cobbett in 1822. “The
 small gentry are all gone, nearly to a man, and the small farmers along
 with them. The Barings alone have, I should think, swallowed up
 thirty or forty of these small gentry without perceiving it. They,
 indeed, swallow up the biggest race of all, but innumerable small fry
 slip down unperceived, like caplins down the throats of the sharks,
 while these latter fee/ only the codfish.’4° Mallet noted in 1825: ‘Alex-
 ander Baring has invested nearly a million sterling in land; probably
 the largest purchase ever made by any one individual.’*! Mallet exag-
 gerated, but Baring paid high prices for the land he bought and at his
 death his estates were estimated to be worth about £800,000. Even as
 late as 1843 he was acquiring a property of 160 acres belonging to a
Mr Brittingham on the grounds that ‘it is the only speck of alien
 property in five adjoining parishes’.42
    Cobbett accused him of being a notably inefficient landlord, far
worse than his brother Thomas. His trees were covered with moss
and dying at the top. ‘Everything that has been done here is to the
injury of the estate, and discovers a most shocking want of taste in
the proprietor.’#3 Certainly he did not devote as much attention to
his estates as did Sir Thomas Baring. When in England he was more
often to be found in London. In 1821 he rebuilt the Pulteneys’ old
Bath House at 82 Piccadilly in the most sumptuous style: ‘the
Palazzo di Piccadilly’, Swinton Holland called it, and Cobbett more
unkindly ‘Scrip Castle’. Even before that his parties were among the
best in London. ‘Think of the pineapples and strawberries and ices
and temporary rooms and magnificent hangings and beautiful flow-
ers at Mrs Baring’s,’ wrote Emily Eden enviously. ‘I wish I was a rich
old banker, but then I would not have, or own, so many fellow crea-
tures as the Barings do.’4+ He loved to do everything in the grandest
possible style, with generosity as well as flamboyance. He could
sometimes be impulsive, but there was usually calculation
                                                          some-
where behind it. He was apt to say that there were two things he par-
ticularly disliked, ‘an abolitionist and a saint’, yet he did
                                                                not allow
these prejudices to deter him when young Henry Thornton, who
was both, appealed for a loan so that he could start a business.
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828           89
Instead ‘he very carelessly offered him £200,000 to begin with’.45 It
was a splendid gesture - but he knew that Thornton had plenty of
money behind him and a shrewd business head as well.
   Of the 31 millionaire merchant bankers who died between 1809
and 1939, 24 were Jewish and only 4 were Anglicans.*¢ As a gentile
and a member of the Church of England, Baring was therefore in a
minority, a fact which could generally be turned to his advantage but
sometimes led to his being excluded from business in which he
could profitably have taken a share. As a gentile, too, a range of dis-
tractions was open to him from which his Jewish rivals were exclu-
ded. In the eyes of the Rothschilds the fact that several Barings were
members of the House of Commons was an unfair advantage which
gave them the chance to pull strings, secure confidential information
and pervert policy to their own ends. To some extent - though less
than the Rothschilds supposed - it was all those things, but it was
also an unconscionable distraction. If Alexander Baring had passed
in the counting house the time he spent in the House of Commons,
or gossiping about politics in the clubs, then Baring Brothers would
have benefited greatly by his increased attention. Whether they
would have gained more than they lost is an open question; given
Baring’s personality, probably not, but the balance was by no means
so heavily tipped in his favour as the Rothschilds imagined.
   For most of his political career Baring remained a Whig, suffi-
ciently prominent to be numbered among the grandees of the party
who met at Brooks’s in February 1821 to discuss the possibility of
making some financial provision for the beleaguered Queen.*?
Though not an orator, his obvious honesty, independence of mind
and determination to seek the truth won the respect of the House. In
1826 a Mr Alexander Robertson claimed to find something sinister
in the fact that the grant by the President of the Board of Trade of a
licence to incorporate a silk company in which Baring had invested
                                                                   the
£200 was shortly followed by Baring proposing an increase in
President's salary. Robert Peel replied that if Robertson was suggest-
                                                                might
ing that Baring ‘on account of the miserable profits which he
                                                              propose
realize from a venture of £200 was induced deliberately to
                                                                    look
an increase of the salary of his right hon. friend, he would only
                                                                   sat
for the answer   to so unfounded an imputation, in the smile which
                                                             if the sum
upon every face from the moment it was uttered’.48 Even
 90                      The Sixth Great Power

 had been £20,000 the feeling of the House would have been the
 same.
    On his chosen subjects he could be an effective debater, specializ-
 ing in a line of bloodcurdling gloom. “You have no conception with
 what attention Baring was heard in a full house last night,’ Fremantle
 told Buckingham, ‘when for an hour or so he described the commer-
 cial state of England in the most lamentable terms.’4? In partnership
 with Brougham he was instrumental in organizing the unexpected
 defeat of the Government over the income tax. He was particularly
 disturbed by the ‘inquisitorial’ nature of the tax: ‘He would much
 rather be summoned before the bench of bishops to be questioned
 about his beliefinthe doctrinal points of religion than appear before
the commissioners under the property tax.’5° His belief in the right
of a businessman to do what he wanted with his own money made
him an impenitent opponent of any legislative interference with the
slave trade. In a debate in 1828 he argued that the misfortunes of the
slaves were much exaggerated by ill-informed meddlers; they were
in reality well fed and housed and generally treated with justice and
kindness, living in conditions ‘in many respects superior to that of
most of the peasantry of Europe’. He appealed for moderation, caus-
ing the abolitionist Fowell Buxton to protest that his speech was ‘the
most immoderate, intemperate, violent and exasperating that ever I
heard in my life’.*! Though a Whig, Baring could never have been
called liberal. “He pretends to be a great Whig, but he is just as bad as
any of the Tories,’ wrote Cobbett indignantly.52
  Alexander Baring’s eldest son, William Bingham, did not follow
his father into the House of Commons. Shy and maladroit, he did
not do justice to his in fact considerable intellectual powers and
interests, ‘Giving an impression of mental weakness and even moral
inferiority,’ wrote Lord Houghton.’3 There was never any question
of his going into the bank; not for want of aptitude, but because it
was considered no place for an elder son. The same was true in most
banking houses. ‘It will not be necessary that my Grandson, who is
likely to be Heir to the Estate, should be brought up to the Banking
Concern,’ wrote Sir Richard Glyn to his son. ‘His Fortune will I trust
be ample and sufficient to give him consequence in life and in
                                                                   the
Country.’ Possible professions for such a favourite of fortune were
deemed to be ‘the Guards or the Law and Parliament’.5+ No
                                                              Baring
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828            91
was ashamed of his association with the counting house, but equally
it was not something of which he talked too much in polite society.
When William married Lady Harriet Montagu, daughter of the Earl
of Sandwich, he was left in no doubt that he was being done a singu-
lar honour. His father made a settlement of £25,000 and a jointure
for the bride of £3000 a year, while his mother - an American as well
as a banker’s wife - was treated with much disdain: ‘I am told that at
her son’s marriage she was not invited to the déjeuner,’ wrote one
generally reliable observer. ‘Certainly Lady Harriet, who was the
most perfect example of insolent ill-breeding I ever saw, treated the
poor old lady in her own home with great coolness if not imperti-
nence.’55 Lady Holland described Mrs Baring dining with the Sand-
wiches and looking ‘quite mortified and wretched’ while Lady
Harriet brushed aside her future husband’s views on travel: ‘He is
but a boy just out of College. What can he know or what can he like?”
Lady Harriet was just seventeen.*®
  It was Alexander’s second son, Francis, who was destined in his
father’s eyes to take over Baring Brothers. He seemed eminently well
equipped for the role. ‘Bountiful nature,’ wrote Nolte, ‘had endowed
this man. . . with so lavish a hand, that it might almost be termed
spendthrift profusion.’ He was intelligent, quick, perceptive, with a
phenomenal memory and ‘iron strength of will’.57 It was not until he
took off on his own and involved the House in some disastrous spec-
ulations in Spanish America that his volatility and lack of judgement
became evident. He was an attractive figure, and always his father’s
favourite, but he never played an important role in the Bank again.
   Only after Francis’s career foundered was Alexander forced to
consider the possibility of taking his brother's sons into the business.
                                                              son in
Like Alexander, Sir Thomas felt no wish to involve his eldest
                                                   and John,  were a
commerce, but his second and third sons, Thomas
different matter. Whether from doubts about their capacity ora wish
                                                                   reluc-
to keep the plums for his own children, Alexander was at first
                                                   dispatc hed  to  Hope
tant to fall in with his brother's plans. John was
                                                                  assidu-
and Co., where Labouchere described him as being ‘steady,
                                           would continu e to encoura  ge
ous and of an obliging disposition’. He
                                                    advice will render it
him, ‘and the docility with which he follows our
                                                        sensible and
an easy and grateful task’.** He sounds a dull dog. ‘As
                                                          Alexander
as sedate a young man as I have ever known at his age,’
 92                      The Sixth Great Power

  Baring described his nephew when he visited the United States in
  1825. Francis had been there a short while before. ‘The last visitor of
  our name was perhaps rather more shewy, but I think this one will
  please better in your country where the steady and sedate is more
  praised than the volatile.’5?
     In 1817 Sir Thomas suggested that Thomas should join Baring
  Brothers. Alexander was still cautious. He would like to help ‘if it can
 be done in a manner consistent with the interests and safety of the
 establishment’. Tom too had better learn the job at Hopes. After he
 had been there for some years, the time might be ripe for considering
 his future in Barings. ‘When the time for decision arrives it will be
 made with a strict reference to merits. If I had a boy of my own to
 hand his case would be exactly the same and so far I can assure you
 that my anxiety for yours will be quite as great.’ The essential thing
 was that the partnership should work asa team: ‘Ill-assorted partner-
 ships can produce no good results, and not only all the essential
 qualities of character and temper are requisite, but every partner
 must be able to contribute to the general stock of execution and use-
 fulness.’6°
    Alexander seems to have been playing for time, hoping that if the
 matter was postponed for long enough his nephew would become
inextricably involved elsewhere. He was disappointed. In 1825 Sir
Thomas returned to the attack. Tom was now a partner in Hopes but
the future for that House looked gloomy, while John had no imme-
diate prospects. Sir Thomas proposed that John at least should now
join Baring Brothers. He was rebuffed. He wrote to his sons in dis-
may about ‘the unexpected determination of your Uncle to exclude
him [John] from the London House, of which I shall say no more
than that it was a great disappointment to my expectations’. Partly,
one suspects, to induce his brother to change his mind, he now pro-
posed advancing £40,000 with which his sons could start a ‘House of
Trade’ in London. ‘It might be in some respects objectionable to
your Uncle that another House of the same name should be formed
in England, yet I am well persuaded that his opinion of you and his
affection for me will induce him to take an interest in your welfare
and probably to assist you.’6! If he really entertained so sanguine a
hope, he was soon disillusioned; Alexander made it clear he would
neither help this new enterprise nor take his nephews into the Bank.
         ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’:   1815-1828            93
Sir Thomas told his sons ‘it was the wish at the Grange to fix Tom
permanently at Amsterdam and to find an opening for John at Ham-
burg or some other place upon the continent, and thus to exile you
both from your Country and family’.62 Tom soldiered on at Hopes,
John went to the United States where in 1826 he set up in business
with a Boston merchant called Joshua Bates. But for the blighting of
ta rosy prospects, they might well have stayed there all their
 ives.
    Pending Alexander's change of heart, Baring Brothers drifted on
with the somewhat shoddy personnel that was left to man it. In 1824
Alexander had given a partnership to Humphrey Mildmay, husband
of his eldest daughter Anne. Mildmay had been a Captain in the
Coldstream Guards. He was prudent, diligent, and considered fit to
be a Director of the Bank of England, but he had no experience of
mercantile matters and never overcame his extreme timidity in mak-
ing decisions involving large sums of money. He was quite unfit to
run the Bank. Most of the work was done by Swinton Holland. Hol-
land was a Liverpool merchant who had done business in many parts
of the world and established a reputation for diligence and rocklike
probity. In December 1814 he noted in his diary, a document rich in
sanctimonious prosing: ‘This day is a remarkable event in my life as
promising an increased degree of prosperity . . . Mr Baring of the
house of Baring Brothers and Co. of London, perhaps at this day the
first mercantile house in the world, made me a proposition to
become a general partner in their concern: giving me one sixth share
of the whole business after the next 30 June. . .Omnipotent Ruler of
the Universe, may I be grateful to thee, for this mark of thy goodness
in elevating my situation in Life.’
                                                      served
   Holland brought £30,000 with him, and on the whole
Barings well. If Alexander had been there to temper his pettifogging
                                                                       ted
inflexibility and inject a little imagination and vision, his undoub
                                                         applica tion   and
skills might have been properly used. ‘Industry,
                                                                I have any
commonplace talents I can promise. . . but I do not feel
                                                                  work. He
extraordinary talents,’ Holland wrote on taking up his new
                                                                  e he was
was right. He was no leader and the house suffered becaus
                                                                and a new
forced to act as one. In June 1823 Henry Baring retired
                                                     g  a  half  share and
partnership was formed, with Alexander holdin
                                                                 uction of
Holland and Francis Baring a quarter each. The introd
 94                      The Sixth Great Power

 Mildmay did something to relieve the pressure on Holland, but by
 1826, with Alexander out of touch and Francis in disgrace, it was
 clear reinforcements were urgently needed.


It was not only the personnel of Barings which was weak; the house
was starved of capital as well. Holland, like Alexander Baring,
fancied himself as a landowner, acquiring an estate from Lord
Somers for £80,000% and another eighteen months later for £66,000.
Both Alexander and he could afford the purchases, but they still
needed to withdraw large sums of money from the business, which
otherwise would have been available for profitable investment. The
capital of the house, which amounted to £622,000 in 1821, fell to lit-
tle more than a third of that in 1823, and though it recovered, it was
never at this period at the proper level to support the international
loans on which Alexander Baring wished to concentrate. Roths-
childs, with their greater resources and branches all over Europe,
were better placed to secure new business abroad, while the British
government largely stopped borrowing once the war was over.
   It was a sign of the times that it was James de Rothschild who in
 1824 called together his London cousins, Barings and Laffitte, when
the French Prime Minister, Villéle, put forward a scheme for con-
verting the French debt. Public response was unpredictable and the
preliminary negotiations were conducted in great secrecy. Old
animosities were forgotten, or at least temporarily buried. James de
Rothschild urged Alexander Baring to come to stay in his house on
the outskirts of Paris for discussions with the minister,> while Bar-
ing assured Villéle: ‘Jai la conviction que je pourrai toujours agir avec
M. de Rothschild de Londres dans une parfaite intelligence.’ Rothschild
and Laffitte had perhaps something less than perfect confidence in
Barings’ intentions, in that they put a clause in the contract stipulat-
ing that they would manage the affair themselves if Barings dropped
out. In the event the project foundered when it was not ratified by
the Senate, but it was an alarming affair while it lasted.
                                                           At one
moment Barings found themselves in advance to Rothschilds by
some £625,000. ‘I must candidly confess that I have not nerve for
                                                                  his
operations,’ Holland told Baring. ‘They are generally well planned,
great cleverness and adroitness in execution — but he isin money
                                                                 and
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’:   1815-1828           95
funds what Bonaparte was in war, and if any sudden shake comes, he
will fall to the ground like the other. I really wish we were out of his
clutches.’7
   Collaboration, even abortive, was the exception rather than the
rule. In 1818 Barings, in collaboration with Hopes and Bethmanns,
raised some £3 million for the Austrian government. Rothschilds
were offered financial participation but no share in the management
of the loan. ‘These people behave with incredible pride, complained
James de Rothschild. ‘I was yesterday speaking to Bethmann at the
Minister of Police’s when Labouchére came and took him from my
side without even a “good evening”. Baring is giving a big ball tomor-
row and Laffitte asked me whether we could talk over the French
loan on this occasion. Well, Baring didn’t even invite me.’¢8 From
Berlin, Carl was more philosophic. ‘Pro primo, we are Jews; pro
secundo, we are not born millionaires; pro tertio, we are fighting Bar-
ing. Why should he be so great a friend?”6?
  Russia was another battleground. Traditionally Hopes and
Barings had enjoyed a monopoly of Russian bonds, with the Dutch
house taking the larger share. The loans of 1817 and 1818 were
organized on this basis, with less than a quarter of the bonds sold in
London. Yet in 1822 a loan for £6.5 million was brought out by
Rothschilds - only, believed Sillem of Hopes, because they had sub-
orned the Russian Ambassador in London, Prince Lieven.7° To
Barings’ gratification, the issue was a failure with much stock left
unsold.
   Foreign loans were risky work, and though the rewards could be
great, they were at the best erratic. Swinton Holland stated his view
of the problem when reviewing the excellent results for 1820/21:
                                                              rather
    These profits do not arise from any merit of mine, but
                                                             as well
    from accidental chances, lucky hits in Stocks foreign
                                                  of  all count ries
    as domestic. The Stocks for Public securities
                                                            who do
    _. are a dangerous commodity to deal in, by those
                                                           deceived
    not understand them, and the wisest . . . are often
                                                      they  depend
    with regard to them: probably in ordinary times
                                                    in the market,
    more on the scarcity or abundance of money
                                                 ng  around Lon-
    than on-any other circumstance. . . . Looki
                                                          erous are
    don in the present day we find that the most prosp
 96                       The Sixth Great Power

      those who had to do with Loans and Stocks of different
      Countries. This is the advantage of dealing in Stocks, to all
      other commodities, if you purchase what you have money to
      pay for and they afterwards fall, by holding on, if the security
      is good, you are always receiving some capital, in lieu of your
      invested capital.7!

   Francis Baring for one would not have found much consolation in
this last consideration. He believed that nothing was more unfortu-
nate fora merchant banker than to see his capital indefinitely locked
up, and few lock-ups were so intractable as an unsaleable foreign
 stock. Nor was Holland’s certainty that at least there would always
 bea regular income coming in borne out by events; it was to be onlya
few years before the apparition of countries defaulting on their
foreign debts arose to haunt the sleep of the less wary merchant
banker.
    By 1825 Rothschilds, when it came to international loans, were
unequivocally the most powerful house in Europe. At this period the
capital of the London house alone was £1.14 million, against
£490,000 for Barings;?? the capital of all the branches of the
Rothschild empire put together was probably over £5 million. In
part at least because of the default of Alexander Baring, Nathan
Rothschild had become the leading figure - ‘maintemant sans conteste
le commercant le plus entreprenant d'ici,’ the Prussian Ambassador,
Humboldt,     described him. ‘C’est aussi un homme str, avec qui le
gouvernement anglais traite beaucoup daffaires.73 It was indeed to
Rothschild that the British government was becoming accustomed
to turn in need; ‘L’intérét du ministre anglais pour M. Rothschild est
bien vif, reported the French Ambassador.
   Nor was Barings even wholly secure in second place. In 1818
Byron asked:

        Who holds the balance of the world? Who reign
          O’er congress, whether royalist or liberal?
        Who rouse the shirtless patriots of Spain
          (That make old Europe’s journals squeak and gibber all)?
        Who keep the world both old and new, in pain
          Or pleasure? Who make politics run glibber all?
            ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’:            1815-1828               97
         The shade of Buonaparte’s double daring?
         Jew Rothschild and his fellow, Christian Baring.’* *
   If Byron had written Don Juan a few years later and had known his
facts, he would have had to consider substituting Brown, Shipley for
Barings (though for reasons of rhyme and scansion if no other he
would certainly not have done so). Barings were still ahead on most
counts but Brown, Shipley, blood brothers to the Baltimore, New
York and Boston firm of Brown Brothers, were uncomfortably close
behind. Their capital was already £350,000 and growing at a faster
rate than Barings’.”5
   In fact an unadventurous approach to foreign lending was no bad
thing in the 1820s. In 1819 Alexander Baring had declared that never
before had so much money been withdrawn from enterprise at
home to invest in foreign funds: ‘There was a general sauve qui peut
among monied men.”¢ The speculation mania of the next few years
was by no means confined to foreign funds. Over 200 new joint-
stock companies were approved by parliament, ranging from highly
respectable railways to a Cemetery Company which promised ‘to
combine the beauties of the celebrated Cimetiére du Pére Lachaise
with perfect security for the dead’.’” But it was the foreign loans that
the investor found most alluring; Latin America in particular, with
loans to among others Chile, Colombia, Brazil, Buenos Aires, Mex-
ico and, especially bizarre, a little loan of £200,000 to the republic of
Poyais, which was supposed to exist somewhere in Honduras but
appeared in the works of no cartographer.’* Peacock’s Sir Flimsy
Kite extolled the beauties of his bank’s holdings:
                      Good bills a monstrous lot, sir;
                      And Spanish bonds a store, sir;
                      And Mining Shares still more, sir;
                      Columbian scrip and Chilian;
                      And Poyais half a million:
                      And what will make you sleek, sir,
                       Fine pickings from the Greek, sir.’?
                                                                   only make sense if one
* The usual reading is ‘fellow-Christian Baring’. This would
                            t (1) the Barings were  Jews   and   (2) the Rothschilds tried
assumed that Byron though                                                   absurd. Surely
                                                           y,  the  second
to pass themselves off as Christians. The first is unlikel                 (and, no doubt,
                                            s  were  equall  y  powerf ul
Byron meant that, Jew or Christian, banker
equally odious)?
98                       The Sixth Great Power

   The cautious Barings eschewed such exotic delights and had cause
to congratulate themselves when the financial crisis of 1825 crippled
international trade and caused almost every borrower in Latin
America to default on his payments of interest. To quote Peacock
again, the British people belatedly discovered “That paper is not
metal, and promises of payment are neither food nor raiment’.8° In
December 1825 it was even feared that the Bank of England might
fail. One Saturday night it closed with only a few thousand pounds
of gold left in its vaults and applied to the Government for an Order
in Council to suspend cash payments. An emergency meeting of Liv-
erpool, the Chancellor Huskisson, the Governor of the Bank and
Alexander Baring agreed to postpone this disastrous measure and
the Bank was saved; chiefly, Baring told Greville, ‘by the accidental
discovery of a box of one-pound Bank of England notes, to the
amount of a million and a half, which had never been issued, and
which the public were content to receive’.®!
   Barings did not emerge unscathed. In October 1825 Alexander
reported to Francis: “There is considerable distress and difficulty
about money... . An extensive Cotton Speculation failing has upset
Liverpool, Manchester, and by a contre coup the United States. The
bubble has also burst of all joint stock companies and loans... . All
houses lose because all houses have their joint capital in something
and everything has fallen in value. We are caught with Consols and
French 3 per cents and must lose considerably. Nolte is completely
wrecked, fortunately we are likely to be paid and lose nothing by
him. This however is the only piece of good luck and this year cannot
fail to be largely a losing one.’82           |
   It was. In July 1825 Barings had divided profit of £120,000; a year
later it was a loss of £56,000. In fact things were less disastrous; sub-
stantial sums were transferred from Profit and Loss to meet esti-
mated losses on French stock which turned out to be smaller than
expected. It was a bad business, though, and exposed brutally how
dependent Barings had become on their profit from foreign loans.
The economic stagnation that followed the Napoleonic wars had
been gradually relieved, but Barings had not taken their proportion-
ate share of the reviving trade. In 1824 Holland surveyed the scale of
their business with some satisfaction but observed ‘its profits are
derived more from loans to foreign Governments [and] the rise in
          ‘Accidental Chances’ and ‘Lucky Hits’: 1815-1828        99
English Stock, than from mercantile operations’.83 Between 1813
and 1817 accepting and commission income had averaged a little
over £50,000 a year, between 1818 and 1822 it fell to £35,000 and
between 1823 and 1827 to £26,000. In 1827/28 the figure was a piti-
ful £20,672 and capital was only £310,000, of which much was
locked up in more-or-less worthless stock. Barings’ reputation in the
world still stood high: the Comte de Bertrand, secluded in Elba with
the Emperor Napoleon, gave them carte blanche to do whatever they
thought best with his property;8* they found themselves responsible
for procuring four small enamelled gold watches from Mr Pybus of
Old Compton Street at a price of £220 for the Emperor of China.*5
But serious business was in short supply. Something needed to be
done, and when, on 17 December 1827, Swinton Holland died at his
desk, it was clear that it would have to be done immediately. Before
describing what came next, however, it is necessary to go back in
time and consider what was going on in a part of the world which
was to bulk large in the history of Barings - Latin America and, in
particular, Argentina.
                                   6
                                ope
                                  @ onde




           ‘Magnificent in Promise’
                    Latin America to 1848




Barings had been interested in a small way in Latin America since
almost the time that they involved themselves in international trad-
ing, but any idea that they should play a more prominent role in this
remote and alien continent was far from their minds before the end
of the Napoleonic wars. In 1807 the Southern Star, first English-lan-
guage paper on the River Plate, announced that there would shortly
arrive ‘an accredited Agent from the House of Baring and Co.. . . It
will be a great accommodation to the inhabitants of this country,
through the medium of this house, to place their money in safety in
Spain, Portugal, China, the East Indies, or indeed in any part of the
world, without any possible risk."! The news was premature, the
inhabitants would have to wait some time yet for such a facility.
  The recession that afflicted Europe after 1815 and the end of the
Spanish and Portuguese empires kindled a new interest in Latin
America. By 1817 Brougham was declaring in the House of Com-
mons: ‘There can be no field of enterprise so magnificent in promise,
so well calculated to raise sanguine hopes, so congenial to the most
generous sympathies, so consistent with the best and the highest
interests of England, as the vast continent of South America.” Pro-
fessor Platt has ably demonstrated how very limited that magnifi-
cent promise in fact was.} Barings were intrigued enough to commis-
sion a report on the trade of the River Plate from the British firm of
John Parish Robertson,* but they remained cautious about the pros-
pects of the area as a whole. For this they earned the abuse of
Disraeli, who had himself put money he could ill afford into Mexi-
can mining shares and was most upset when Alexander Baring
decried the investment, supporting his criticism of the security
                                 100
                         Latin America to 1848                        101

offered, said Disraeli, ‘by statements which are so utterly unfounded
that they might make mendacity blush and so awfully ridiculous
that they might make folly grave’.5
  But Barings were not averse in principle to investment in Latin
America. In 1820 they offered to subscribe £10,000 to a Chilean loan,
only to see the project disavowed by the Senate in Santiago. The fol-
lowing year they almost contracted for a small loan to Colombia, but
backed out when their agent was discovered to be both a gunrunner
and dead. The Colombian government negotiated a second loan
elsewhere.” They saw no reason to lament the loss of these two pieces
of business, yet they had an uneasy suspicion that they were missing
the bus. They felt this particularly about the River Plate, to which
area the British exported more than £1 million worth of goods in
1824 alone. If the right opportunity offered, Barings would grasp it.
   An opportunity soon offered. In 1822 Congress authorized the
raising ofaloan of £1 million to builda port at Buenos Aires, provide
running water for the capital and finance frontier settlements. The
loan was to pay interest of 6 per cent and the minimum price was 70
- that is to say £100 worth of stock would be offered to the public for
£70, plus whatever commission was taken by the middleman. The
government would receive £700,000 against a debt of £1 million and
would in effect be paying 8.7 per cent interest on the money. The
authorities in Buenos Aires might not seem to have made a particu-
larly good bargain, and even at the time there was criticism of the
terms, but if they had tried to raise the money at home they would
have had to pay considerably more, perhaps even twice as much.
    By the time William Parish Robertson and various Argentine asso-
ciates finally contracted to take the loan early in 1824 the purposes to
which the money was to be applied had been modified but the terms
remained the same. The Minister of Finance in Buenos Aires had
urged them to involve Barings in the transaction if they possibly
 could, since nothing would help more to establish the country’s
 credit. Robertson spared no pains to bring this about. He assured
                                                                     Gov-
 Barings that the business was absolutely safe: ‘In resources, in
                                                                         t
ernment stability, in every regard Buenos Ayres holds a differen
                                                            potenti ally  a
 rank from the other Independent States.’ For him it was
                                                           at 70, they
most lucrative deal. The consortium took the loan
                                                  at 90; the  £200,000
believed they could sell it to the British public
 102                      The Sixth Great Power

difference less expenses and whatever they had to allow to Barings
would be theirs to pocket. Barings for their part could hope to do
well, though not so well, taking a fee of £30,000 to cover expenses,
and a 1 per cent commission on the stock they sold.?
   Hopes were disappointed. Barings dismissed the idea of floating
the loan at 90 as absurd, but against their better judgement offered
the bonds at 85. This would have given the investor a 7.05 per cent
return on a stock emanating from a country about which he knew lit-
tle or nothing. Speculators briefly kept the price at a premium but
they soon cut their losses and threw their stock on the market.
 Barings bought much of it back in an effort to keep up the price, but
their exertions meant that they had an uncomfortably large amount
of capital locked up in virtually unsaleable bonds. By October
Robertson was regretting ‘that you are under the necessity of consid-
ering the Buenos Ayres Loan as a failure’. The government and the
contractors, he assured Holland, ‘feel themselves under peculiar
 obligation to your House for the decided and most liberal support of
 the Loan’.!° On the whole Argentine historians have supported his
 view. ‘The name of Alexander Baring,’ concluded the first serious
 study of the loan from the Argentine point of view, ‘. . . is worthy to
 figure among the loyal servants of our country.’!!
    Not everyone has been so kind. Revisionist historians have pre-
 sented Barings as unscrupulous adventurers who took an unfair
advantage of the inexperienced Argentines and made monstrous
profits at their expense. The 1824 loan, according to this thesis, was
just the first of a long series of misfeasances, by which Argentine
industry was crippled to serve the needs of British exporters, and its
workers exploited to enrich British capitalists.12 A second line of
attack, somewhat more moderate, while not acquitting Barings
altogether of sharp practice, suggested that the main blame must
be borne by Argentine politicians who were certainly inept and
probably corrupt as well.!3 The assumptions common to both sets
of historians are that Barings made a fat profit out of the loan and
that the Argentine government received only a small part of what
it was entitled to expect.
   Neither contention is correct. The decision to buy in the bonds
when they went to a discount may be attributed to self-interest or
chivalry according to taste, but it certainly ensured that Barings
                                                                    lost
                        Latin America to 1848                         103

money on the deal. If anyone made money it was the original con-
tractors. As for the amount received by the Argentine government,
they contracted for £700,000 and that is what was paid to them. The
Argentine dictator Juan Manuel Rosas contended that the money
had not been needed and had been squandered shamefully, but he
never denied that it had been received.!* Seven hundred thousand
pounds was perhaps not an over-generous amount to receive against
a debt of £1 million, but the reception the loan received in the British
market showed that it was a realistic approximation to what people
were prepared to pay.
   The investors’ scepticism was soon proved justified. Things went
merrily for two or three years, Robertson reporting from Buenos
Aires in 1825: ‘Nothing can be more satisfying than to observe the
rapid strides which the Country makes in every branch of publicand
domestic economy.’!§ But war with Brazil changed all that, draining
the National Bank and making the currency almost worthless. Bue-
nos Aires ‘has been gradually sinking into a state of Poverty and
Disorganization, from which it will require many years for her to
emerge,’ Robertson wrote gloomily at the end of 1827." The hero of
the Liberation, San Martin himself, provided an ironic commentary
on the prospects for his continent. He came to London with money
to invest and called at Bishopsgate to seek advice. Barings offered
him a tempting range of Latin American stocks, including the 1824
Argentine loan, which was now at so much of a discount as to be
yielding a return of nearly 9 per cent. He rejected them all in favour
of British 3 per cent Consols.'7 He was proved right in January 1828
when the Argentine government defaulted on its interest payments.
For Barings this was the most painful of the many shocks they had
suffered in the previous two years.


They had already had a nasty fright in Mexico. Apart from Brazil,
                                                                       was
Mexico, with its long-established and profitable export of silver,
                                                                    s were
economically the strongest country in Latin America. Baring
                                                     and   perhap   s even
interested in the possibilities of increased trade
                                                             second son,
some investment. In 1825 Francis Baring, Alexander's
was sent out on a fact-finding mission.
                                                                 ,’ he told
   His first reactions were of dismay. ‘This country is a desert
104                     The Sixth Great Power
 Humphrey Mildmay. He urgently requested six boxes of Seidlitz
 powders and ‘a stoutish hunting crop with bronze handle, the dogs
 are wolves, and one’s legs are always in danger’. The country could
 be prosperous if properly run, but ‘I do not see any material in this
 country out of which they could form a good set of ministers, and
 even were such treasures to be found, there is not public spirit or
 intelligence sufficient to support them in their measures’. Mexico
 would go on borrowing so long as England would lend, ‘and they
 will end up by a complete break up or bankruptcy’.!8
    What happened next is hard to establish with any exactness, but it
effectively ended his career in banking. He found the climate
oppressive, took to drink, and was still further borne down by a
shooting accident, in which he contrived to kill an English friend,
Augustus Waldegrave.!* Then he fell among thieves, in particular
one Robert Staples who had previously been British Consul in Mex-
ico City. Egged on by these new acquaintances, he concluded that
Mexico was the country of the future - ‘When I was in Mexico,’ he
wrote long afterwards, ‘I believed - God help me! in Mexican stabil-
ity.’0 He began to invest largely in mining shares and miscellaneous
bonds. His crowning folly came when he bought for 800,000 pesos
(about £160,000) 9 million acres of the Parral estate in northern
Mexico from the creditors of the Marqués de San Miguel de
Aguallo.?! ‘I mention for the information of the gentlemen of your
house,’ he wrote proudly to Le Roy Bayard in New York, “. . . that I
have lately made an extensive purchase of land here in conjunction
with Mr Staples’s house, and that I have great confidence in the
soundness of the operation.’22
   His confidence was not shared by his partners in London. He had
committed Baring Brothers to pay 25 per cent of the purchase price
immediately and this obligation was duly honoured, but enough was
enough. Alexander Baring wrote in outrage to his errant son:
     Our position with respect to your operation is the most per-
    plexing possible. After repeated readings of your letter I can-
    not make out what you have been doing. . . . If you have
    been buying a large tract of land, with herds of oxen, sheep
    and all the appendages of farming, I have only to say that
    however the world may consider your bargain, I have no
                        Latin America to 1848                        105
   doubt that it would prove ruinous to you if for your own
   account, and that for ws it is totally unsuited. We are a house
   of trade, and have no business with any adventure of the
   kind, to say nothing ofone out of all proportion to the extent
   of our capital... . You may conceive the surprise and uneasi-
   ness which your letters and projects have created, and being
   quite unable to reconcile them to my opinion of your con-
   duct and judgment, I live in hope that I have not properly
   understood you, and that on further reflection you will have
   been able to back out, and remit your money home in safe
   bills before you leave Mexico... .
      Mr Holland and I have work’d hard for our fortunes and
   do not wish to risk them. Humphrey, just beginning to get
   on his legs, cannot afford such risk, and I know pretty well
   what your position requires. . . . One of your bad qualities,
    my dear Francis, and I do not attribute many to you, 1s that
   you are a bad taker of advice, but if, on this occasion, I
    administer mine rather harshly, it is because I have no time
    for circumlocution and because you are entitled to have
    from me my unequivocal sentiments. At all events, what I
    must insist on is, that if you have made any landed or mining
    adventure for us to the extent of £40 or 50,000, you do not
    leave the country until you have placed it in good hands and
    that you in any case come straight to me.”?
  There was no escape for Barings from the portfolio of dubious
                                                          the
investments with which Francis had endowed them, but from
contract to buy the Parral estate at least they were able to extricate
themselves with no more than the loss of their original £40,000.
Nationalist sentiment in Mexico had always been hostile to the own-
                                                                        g
ership of land by foreigners, and it did not take more than lobbyin
                                                bribes to contriv e  that
and a few small but judiciously apportioned
                                                                     ing
the Chamber of Deputies passed a bill retrospectively forbidd
                                                              s in Lon-
foreigners to buy country property. How far Baring Brother
                                                              in Mexico
don were aware of the activities of their agents and friends
                                                               question.
City in bringing about this happy conclusion is an open
                                                   and Co.  broug    htan
Formally they were acquitted. In 1844 Staples
                                                            been   acting
action against them, claiming that Barings’ agents had
 106                     The Sixth Great Power

 on the instructions of their principals in London and that Staples
 and others of Barings’ partners in Mexico had been grievously
 injured as a result of these machinations. Lord Denman summed up
 in favour of Barings and the jury acquitted them.?#
    Not everyone was convinced, however. ‘Did you see that cause of
 Lord Ashburton’s [as Alexander Baring had by then become] where
he was indicted for a conspiracy to bribe the Mexican Government?”
asked Sydney Smith. ‘The letters directing his agents to do so, and
mentioning what each man was worth were read in open Court, and
the fact was not denied. The Jury found him not guilty, but it was
a narrow escape, for the Jury were out of court for an hour and a
half.’25 Baring’s partner, Joshua Bates, not surprisingly saw things
a little differently. The only reason the verdict took so long to reach
was because ‘one ignorant man’ was put in to fill the place of one of
the Special Jury. ‘It was the most abominable suit that ever was
undertaken, and that by a man whose bills the old House held for
£160,000 for which they never could get sixpence. It sickens one of
human nature.’26 On the whole the evidence suggests that the part-
ners in London were ignorant of the skulduggery being practised by
their associates in Mexico; that they would tacitly have condoned it
seems probable at least; that tactics quite as questionable were prac-
used by the other parties to the dispute is likeliest of all.
   This was an unhappy start to Barings’ relationship with Mexico,
but it did not alter their opinion that the country had much to offer.
In 1826 the agents of the Mexican government in London, Barclay,
 Herring Richardson and Co., were one of the many firms that
foundered in the crisis. Barings took on the agency, servicing the
country’s external debt and accepting responsibility for payments to
the Mexican legations in Europe. It proved an expensive and time-
consuming business. Time and again Barings found themselves
having to make payments before they had received funds from Mex-
ico City, and sometimes the delays were embarrassingly protracted.
The sums involved were not enormous, but the uncertainty, with the
consequent need to tie up funds unprofitably, was a constant irri-
tant. ‘We are sorry that your caution not to trust the Government
came rather too late,’ they wrote in 1832 to their correspondents
                                                                    in
Mexico City, ‘for we had unfortunately by advancing the deficien
                                                                   cy
for the Dividends and the monthly payments to the
                                                            Legation,
                         Latin America to 1848                          107

already allowed it to become our debtor to a very large amount.’
They would make no further payments to the legations until matters
had been put in order.27                           |
   A few years later they had had enough. The Mexican economy was
in total disarray and it was clear that the government would only
with the greatest difficulty be able to maintain the interest payments
on its external debt. When Lizardi and Co., a Mexican house which
had recently opened up in London, offered to take on the agency,
Barings did nothing to defend their position. They had by this time
disposed of part of the government stock which Francis had so
improvidently secured but quite enough remained to provide an
unappealing souvenir of their involvement with Mexico. Even with-
out the long-drawn-out unpleasantness over the Parral estate,
Barings had little reason to view their association with Argentina and
Mexico with satisfaction. Not until they took on the agency for the
Chilean government in 1844 did they again play an important part in
the part of the world with which they were thenceforward to be so
 intimately concerned.


By then some progress was at last being made in Argentina. From the
time of the Argentine default in 1828 Barings had been preoccupied
by the need to secure a settlement which would give partial satisfac-
tion at least to the people who had invested on their recommenda-
tion. Though Barings had originally retained part of the 1824 loan
for its own account, and had bought back more to protect the price,
                                                                          the
the bulk was still owned by private investors in Britain and on
                                                                           to
continent. So far, so good, but no merchant banker who wished
                                                                       of the
survive as a leading house could afford to ignore the woes
                                                     If a  loan  backed    by
bondholders who had bought stock from them.
                                                               their  judge-
Barings ended in such abject failure, who would trust
                                          as a sense of   honour    dictated
ment in the future? Self-interest as well
                                                             resumpt  ion of
that they should do all they could to ensure a speedy
                                                                during the
payments and compensation for the loss of interest
period of default.
                                                           sh government.
   Not much help was to be expected from the Briti
                                                        investment over-
Canning had defined the official position towards
                                                 defau lted    in 1823. He
seas when the Colombian government had
 108                     The Sixth Great Power

 refused to make a resumption of payments a precondition for diplo-
 matic recognition. Not only would he not send a gunboat to mani-
 fest British displeasure, he declined to allow British diplomats and
 consular agents to bring pressure on the defaulters. If British invest-
 ors chose to risk their money overseas, then it was their own funeral
 if they lost it.28 Lord Aberdeen was somewhat less austere in his
 approach, but though he would allow his diplomats to give such
help as they could and to make sympathetic noises, there was still no
question of official intervention. Not until 1847 did Palmerston sug-
gest in the House of Commons that in certain circumstances it
would be permissible for Britain to take action in defence of its
holders of foreign bonds.??
   Barings were on their own. Their strongest card was that the
Argentine government wanted a settlement, since until one was
reached there would be no hope of returning to the European
money markets. But good intentions alone availed little, and
Argentine politics were in such turmoil that successive Ministers of
Finance were quite unable to do anything in practice. It was not until
the end of 1829, when Juan Manuel Rosas was elected Governorand
Captain General of the Province of Buenos Aires, that some hope of
stability returned. Woodbine Parish, the British chargé d'affaires,
praised Rosas’s ‘modesty and moderation’, and predicted that his
regime would last.3° On the second point he was right - Rosas’s rule
continued for 21 years; but neither modesty nor moderation was
ever a conspicuous attribute of the dictator.
   Rosas was more concerned with paying his army and domestic
creditors than with satisfying foreign investors, but he was enough of
a realist to stress in his first message to the Assembly that it was ‘nec-
essary to recover our credit jeopardized abroad’. It was some time,
however, before he could do much about it, since virtual civil
                                                                war
continued in parts of the country and drought aggravated his already
crippling problems.3! In 1828 the Minister of Finance had tenta-
tively suggested that an easy way to settle the debt would be for them
to hand over a couple of unwanted frigates in final settlement.32
Barings had dismissed the idea out of hand, but when Rosas took
power he cast around for something else which might satisfy
                                                                    the
British investor without involving a drain on Argentina’s currency.
                                                                      It
took him eighteen months to concentrate on the matter but at
                                                                    the
                        Latin America to 1848                       109
end of 1831 his Finance Minister, Manuel Garcia, approached Par-
ish with the proposal that repayment should be made in the form of
land in Patagonia. “The fine and healthy Climate of these Countries
is known in Europe to everyone of ordinary information,’ he told
Parish.33 The notorious fact that no Argentine citizen was prepared
to brave the rigours of that bleak, southern outpost did not dispose
Barings to look kindly at what would anyway have been a far-fetched
expedient. ‘The holders of Buenos Ayres securities,’ wrote Francis
Baring coldly, ‘are principally among a class of persons little inclined
by habits or experience to adventures of this kind.’34 Barings contin-
ued to deplore the duplicity and incompetence of the Argentine gov-
ernment: ‘We are unable to meet the charge against the good faith of
 Buenos Ayres with any defence which would appear to justify it in
the eyes of its creditors,’ they complained to their new representa-
tives, Zimmerman, Frazier and Co. ‘If the Buenos Ayres government
wishes to be put by the sides of those other civilized countries, she
 must lose no time in removing the blot which has for so long tar-
 nished her credit.’35
    For a decade or so little was heard except the grumbling of the
 British bondholders. Not everyone despaired. In 1832 a Miss E.
 Caton wrote eagerly: ‘I have an inspiration about Buenos Ayres
 bonds and must have some, even though I have to part with some of
 my Spanish bonds.’ Barings do not seem to have tried to dissuade
                                                            she was
her, but the inspiration soon faded. Some three years later
                                                                      I
writing: ‘If I can get out of the Buenos Ayres bonds without loss
                                                    consider able dis-
should like to do it36 She at least had bought at a
                                                      the chances of
count; for those who had taken up the original offer,
                                                                      did
getting their money back seemed slim indeed. Their indignation
                                                            ders    were
not diminish with time. At the end of 1842 the bondhol
                                                              hard that,
planning a protest meeting: ‘They naturally think it very
                                            their public  debt   and sev-
while Chile and Mexico have provided for
                                                         do  so,  Buenos
eral other South American states are making efforts to
Ayres should do nothing.’*”
                                                               modestly
   The increasing turbulence of the bondholders and
                                                           gs that they
encouraging signals from Buenos Aires convinced Barin
                                                         an intelligent,
mustat least appear to be taking action. In April |842
                                                               to reopen
young Spanish speaker, Francis Falconnet, was dispatched
                                                    too much to hope
negotiations. No miracles were expected. It was
 110                     The Sixth Great Power

  that the government would at once resume full payment of interest.
  ‘The first thing you must do 1s to make up your mind by all the infor-
 mation you can get, how much they can pay annually and then make
 your arrangements accordingly.’38
     Falconnet’s initial report was gloomy and his second gloomier
 still. There was a war in progress over Uruguay and the condition of
 the country’s economy was as chaotic as ever: ‘It is almost impossible
 to give you an idea of the wretched state in which matters stand here,
 both in a moral and physical point of view.3? He was modestly
 encouraged by an interview with Rosas. The dictator said bluntly
 that he thought the loan had been useless and expensive but that he
 was nevertheless anxious to satisfy the bondholders as soon as pos-
 sible.#° But the method that he proposed early in 1843 was quite as
 unpromising as any that had been advanced before. The Argentine
Minister in London, Rosas told Falconnet, had ‘been authorized to
propose the absolute cession of the Malvina Islands to the English
Government on condition it should take charge of the Loan’.
Falconnet expressed ‘surprise and disappointment’ but asked that
the proposal should be put into writing, and this was duly done a few
days later.*!
   Barings were no less surprised and disappointed than their repre-
sentative. The Falkland Islands seemed no more appropriate in set-
tlement of the debt than two frigates or part of Patagonia. Besides, as
the British government was quick to point out, there was nothing to
cede; Argentina had no claim to the Falkland Islands, which were
 British territory. This contention Rosas, not surprisingly, did not
accept; he ‘expected a just compensation from the English Govern-
 ment for the entire cession of their rights of Sovereignty, upon which
they partly relied to enable them to settle the claims of the
Bondholders’. It is interesting to speculate how different the his-
tory of the last few years might have been if the British government
had taken over the loan as Rosas asked and thereby gained title to the
Falkland Islands unquestioned even by the Argentines.
   This was not Rosas’s last word, however. Under a Convention of
1840 the Argentine government was bound to set aside 5000 silver
dollars a month in settlement of certain French claims. These claims
would be metin full by April 1844. Falconnet suggested that the
                                                                    pay-
ments should then be transferred to the bondholders. Rather
                                                                  to his
                         Latin America to 1848                       it

surprise, Rosas agreed. Falconnet was jubilant. The payments would
only amount to some £12,000 a year, as opposed to the £60,000
which was properly owing, but they were still a start and they reaf-
firmed the existence of the debt and the acceptance of responsibility
by the Argentine government. ‘However limited is this first step
towards a final arrangement,’ wrote Falconnet, ‘I have the con-
science that nothing else could be obtained for the present. . . and
great credit must be given to the Governor for what he has done.’
   Even this first step proved precarious. After the payments had
been continuing for little over a year, an Anglo-French fleet, for reas-
ons which were presumably clear to Lord Aberdeen at the time but
now seem singularly obscure, blockaded Buenos Aires.*# One imme-
diate result was that the bondholders once more lost any interest on
the loan. Like most British businessmen, Joshua Bates of Barings was
outraged by this intervention. ‘The Buenos Aires affair is one of the
most infamous interference and the most stupid in my opinion,’ he
wrote to T. W. Ward, the house’s agent in Boston. ‘It 1s much the
same as if the United States had sent a fleet to Vera Cruz and had
seized all the Mexican ships and said, “You shall make peace with
Texas. Commerce suffers by your contest. . . therefore we will stop
all Commerce.” "45 Barings protested to the Foreign Office and in the
end the British element in the fleet was withdrawn and the blockade
broke up, having achieved little. It was not until January 1859 that
payments were resumed. This time it was for good, however. It was
the beginning of a new and vastly important chapter in the history of
Barings’ involvement with Argentina and the rest of Latin America.
                                     r
                                 pt
                                  @ ee




                    Baring and Bates
                         1827-1847


With Holland dead at the end of 1827, Alexander Baring taking ever
less interest in the bank and Francis discredited, it was clear that Bar-
ing Brothers needed reinforcement, not only at the top but in the
 middle echelons as well.
   Alexander was still in charge, but he was disenchanted with rou-
tine and resentful of the fact that Holland’s death forced him to
spend more time than he liked in the partners’ room. He was rich
enough to live in style on his estates without bothering about his
income from the bank and his main interest was now in the world of
public affairs. In 1830 he retired. T. W. Ward wrote in alarm: ‘I do
not think it would be advisable for Mr Baring to leave at a time when
the eyes of the World are on the House as the sheet anchor of mer-
cantile safety and confidence.’ In the United States everyone would
be asking how much money had been withdrawn and whether the
house could now meet its commitments.! Joshua Bates, one of the
two new men broughtin to take over Baring Brothers, scoffed at such
fears: ‘For my part, I cannot say I regret it, he said of his senior part-
ner’s retirement. There was plenty of talent left, and capital too.
‘Besides, it is ridiculous to have a partner who has long since given up
all connexions with mercantile men. The Americans who come over
~ some of them - expect that Mr Alexander Baring will shew them
some attention, and they go back dissatisfied if he does not.. . . If in
losing Mr Baring we lose the advantage of his individual respectabil-
ity and great wealth as a security for the funds placed in our hands,
we are called on to use double diligence and endeavour to acquire
that fame for ourselves that he has so justly attained.’? Six months
later Bates concluded that time had proved him right: ‘As the wheel
                                   112
                    Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                    113

moves round this seems to be now forgotten; and as your House is
not a common House, it is not to be measured by common rules -
and | have no doubt that the judgment, character and talent which
conducts its operations will give it a standing even higher than it has
yet attained.3
   It was freely surmised that Baring’s retirement from banking was
the step on the road to the peerage he sought so earnestly. ‘He has
money and lands and Parliamentary influence enough to procure
anything he may desire,’ Bates told Ward.* Only his everyday assoct-
ation with commerce seemed a bar.
                 Bob Smith lives here,
                 Billy Pitt made him a peer,
                And he took the pen from behind his ear,

ran the jingle when Pitt ennobled Robert Smith as Lord Carrington
in 1797.5 Now Baring’s pen had been taken from behind his ear as
well. For him to become a peer would still have been something
freakish. He would only have been the second banking creation, and
no industrialist or heir to an industrial fortune was to become a lord
for twenty years.¢ But the possibility, even the probability, existed.
   That Baring wanted a peerage seems evident. He had already mar-
ried his son into the aristocracy, and in 1830 engineered a match for
his daughter Harriet with Lord Henry Thynne, future Marquess of
Bath. It cost him £50,000, as against the £10,000 his son-in-law put
into the marriage pool, but he felt the money well spent.” ‘As the
Barings want connection and he wants money, it was a natural mar-
riage for all the world to insist upon, commented Emily Eden. Yet if
a title was indeed his primary objective, he behaved with remarkable
independence of mind. All his political life he had been a Whig; then
when the Whigs were at last in office, and he might hope to reap the
rewards of loyalty, he defected to the Tories.
   His waning enthusiasm for the Whig cause had long been appar-
                                                                    his
ent. His conservatism was notorious. In July 1830 he had done
best to restrain his colleagues from an all-out onslaught on the wilt-
                                                                   mob
ing Tories? and he inveighed publicly against the perils of
                                                                   wit-
rule.!° ‘Such a finished blockhead as the great Baring 1s, | never
                                                       offended when
nessed,’ complained O’Connell.!! He was somewhat
                                                              more put
offered no job by Grey in the Whig administration and still
114                      The Sixth Great Power

out when he asked that his son should be made a Lord of the Treas-
ury and instead saw the job given to his nephew Francis, Sir Thomas
Baring’s eldest son. ‘I suspect he would have lost no time acting like
Lord Carnarvon,’ wrote Brougham’s secretary, Denis le Marchant,
referring to a recent Whig renegade, ‘had not the hopes of a coronet
kept him with his party.’!?
   But not even the certainty of acoronet could have stifled his grow-
ing doubts about the Whig Reform Bill. The measure, he told the
House of Commons, amounted ‘as much to a new Constitution as if
it had been drawn from the pigeon holes of Abbé Sieyés’. He
objected to the Bill’s ‘democratic tendency’. The Commons were
made all-powerful, the influence of the aristocracy swept away. ‘He
should be as sorry as any man to see the lower classes, even the
lowest classes, of this country, without considerable influence in that
House,’ but enough was enough. What he wanted was ‘liberty for
alli’
   The Duke of Wellington believed that Alexander’s change of heart
~ ‘See-saw Baring’ he was nicknamed henceforth - would herald the
move of the rest of the clan to the Tory ranks. In this he was over-
optimistic. The new minister, Francis Baring; his father, Sir Thomas;
Henry Labouchére; Charles Baring-Wall (the only son of Charles
Wall by Sir Francis’s daughter, Harriet); and even Alexander’s elder
son, William Bingham Baring: all voted for the Reform Bill - ‘as I
believe will in truth my uncle,’ wrote Francis Baring, ‘and conse-
quently Francis [Alexander’s second son, and the villain of Mex-
ico]’.!* He was mistaken; Alexander remained loyal in his disloyalty,
but for the moment at least the other Barings stayed in the Whig
ranks. Alexander was said to have been indignant with his two sons
for not following his example and to have tried to turn them out of
their seats, but if displeasure there was it can only have been fleeting.
Alexander’s relationship with his sons remained amicable and Wil-
liam, anyway, soon rallied to Peel. There can be no doubt that Alex-
ander’s defection was made on principle and against his personal
interests. Nevertheless, there were to be times in the next decades
when it was advantageous to the Barings to have afoot in both politi-
cal camps.
   It was anyway far from certain that Alexander would have gained
his longed-for peerage even though he had stayed with the Whigs.
                    Baring and Bates:   1827-1847                  115

Grey was notoriously fastidious about opening the delights of the
House of Lords to those who had sprung from outside the ranks of
the aristocracy, or, at the worst, the country gentry. According to
Creevey he at one time seriously considered offering a peerage to Sir
Thomas Baring as a reward for his loyalty and ‘as an additional mor-
tification’ to his brother.!’ The rumour was heard by Disraeli, who
had high hopes ofinheriting Sir Thomas's seat at Wycombe.!¢ When
it came to the point, however, Grey was deterred by the fact that
Thomas had sons. To turn a banker into a lord might - just - be
acceptable if the title died with him, but to create a dynasty was
another matter. As it turned out, Alexander’s change of loyalty was in
the long run to serve him well. For the moment, however, his only
reward was to have his windows smashed by the mob, which at least
put him in the distinguished company of the Duke of Wellington.
   The association was not confined to broken windows. In May
1832 Baring was a key figure in the Duke’s misguided effort to form a
Tory administration which would pass a measure of reform. He at
first refused to serve as Chancellor of the Exchequer, ‘on account of
the state of his health’, according to Bates,!7 but in fact because he
felt the Duke was opposed in principle to even the modest measure
of reform which he himself felt desirable.!8 Soon he changed his
mind, agreeing to serve if the Speaker, Manners-Sutton, would take
the lead. His decision was felt by some to be of crucial importance -
‘The Whigs    say we   are landed    if we   get Baring,’ wrote   Lord
Ellenborough hopefully!’ - but in fact this belated effort by the
Tories to take over and themselves pass a Reform Bill was greeted
with fury by a rampant House of Commons. Baring spoke four times
in the debate and in the end was personally responsible for propos-
ing that the Whig ministers should resume office.2° ‘I would face a
thousand devils rather than such a House of Commons, he told the
Duke.?!
   He remained on reasonable terms with his former colleagues, if
only because so many of them were his relations. ‘I have a favour to
ask,’ Sydney Smith wrote to Alexander's wife in July 1834 when the
death of Lord Althorp’s father meant that a new Chancellor had to
be found from the House of Commons. ‘Could you lend our side
such a thing as a Chancellor of the Exchequer? . . . We will take great
care of him, and return him so improved you will hardly know
116                     The Sixth Great Power

him.’2? In fact Althorp’s resignation led to the downfall of the Whigs
and Robert Peel’s brief Tory administration. Baring agreed to serve
as President of the Board of Trade and was alarmed when he found
that he was also being referred to as Treasurer of the Navy - “This
Treasurership is of all inflictions that which I should most lament.??
Disraeli states Baring took the job on the promise that he would be
given a peerage:*4 it is unlikely that the bargain was struck in so many
words, but when Peel resigned after only a few months Baring got his
reward in the dissolution honours. He called himself Lord
Ashburton, reviving the now defunct title of his uncle by marriage,
John Dunning. He got his title, commented         The Times unkindly,
 ‘since no human being can assign a valid reason why he should not
 have been made a lord’.?5
    In the House of Lords, Ashburton discarded the last shackles of
 his former liberalism and spoke invariably as champion of capital-
ism incarnate. When Lord Ashley tried to introduce a bill limiting
working hours, Ashburton commented that he had no idea whether
a ten-, eleven- or twelve-hour working day was most desirable, ‘but I
should be sorry to incur the responsibility of any restrictions at all.
. . The most mischievous men of our day are our conceited political
economists and our ultra-humanitarians, good men some of them,
but theirs is a description of cant just suited to the capacities of the
majority of our electoral body.’?6 One of his speeches stung Lord
Clarendon to almost hysterical rage: ‘There was no exploded fallacy,
no stupid prejudice, no reference to selfish interests, which this
faithful representative of his own breeches pocket did not hash up
together in language mainly characterized by spite against those
whom he supposed to be meddling with his interests.’ He com-
pounded his offence in Clarendon’s eyes when he referred to ‘the
bloated mass of commercial prosperity’ which existed in Britain.
‘He! Lord Ashburton! whose £40,000 a year was made by commerce
- whose connexions are all in trade.’27
    In 1839, and again in 1841, Ashburton forestalled any plan Peel
might have had for offering him another place in government by
insisting in advance that he did not want one. ‘The truth is that my
work is done and my lease of life too near its natural close to under-
take efficient occupation.’28 He did, however, hold out for a job for
his son William Bingham; ‘The Vice Presidency of the Board of
                    Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                     Hh?

Trade would suit and satisfy him.’ This vacancy was booked for
Gladstone, wrote Peel apologetically, but the Board of Control (of
Indian affairs) was ‘of equal importance’.2® The Board of Control it
was.
   At the end of 1841 Lord Aberdeen persuaded Ashburton that his
work was not done and despatched him on a special mission to solve
the boundary disputes still outstanding between Britain and the
United States. He was, Aberdeen told Queen Victoria, one of the few
eminent Englishmen who would be acceptable to the Americans.3°
Some thought he was too acceptable. ‘There is much of popular
objection to him from his American connections and his supposed
strong American interests, wrote Lord Melbourne. ‘He is supposed
to possess much funded property in that country, and to have almost
as strong an interest in its welfare as in that of Great Britain.’3! The
settlement he brought back certainly gave away more than ardent
British patriots thought proper, but Melbourne spoke for the more
moderate opposition when he concluded that nothing of real impor-
tance was lost and ‘any settlement is better than none’.}? Ashburton
himself felt the government did not do enough to show that they
approved the terms he had secured. He told Peel he should be made
an earl. Peel countered with the offer of a viscountcy and the Order
of the Bath. ‘Probably many would prefer the more flashy distinction
of a Star and Ribbon,’ wrote Ashburton, ‘but I feel so strongly that
this does not suit me, and that the decoration would attach a certain
degree of ridicule to me, that I hope Ishall lose nothing of your good
opinion of me if I adhere to my first impression of the case.’33 Peel
maintained that an earldom for Ashburton would suggest ‘undue
exultation on the part of this country,’ and lead the Americans to
question the justice of the settlement.** It was an ingenious argu-
                                                                  ended
ment, butit did not convince his correspondent; the exchange
with Ashburton embittered and still a baron.
  The men were reconciled at the end of 1844 when Ashburton
                                                               1846
played with the idea of rejoining the Cabinet, but fell out in
                                                agreed, he told
over Peel’s commitment to Free Trade. Ashburton
                                                                 entre
Peel, with all previous relaxation of protection, ‘but to the
                                                   I have an  insupe r-
removal of all protection from domestic industry
                                                       agree - ‘he ais
able objection’.35 His son, William Bingham, did not
                                                           hing called
devoted disciple of the School of Doctrinaires, and everyt
118                      The Sixth Great Power

 Free Trade has with him irresistible attraction’ - but he felt he should
nevertheless resign in solidarity with his father.36 Peel replied that
 Bingham’s resignation would be absurd; as to the point at issue
Ashburton was ‘the practical founder of the School of Free Trade.
The Doctrinaires could have done nothing without your help and
the help of men in your position. It was your hand that shook the
fabric of Prohibition and of Protection.’3? There was no shortage of
unkind critics who saw a link between Ashburton’s conversion to
protection and his acquisition of vast agricultural estates.
   Bingham did not resign but his political career never prospered.
He retired with some relief after his father’s death and devoted him-
self to more congenial pursuits, such as being a Trustee of the
National Gallery and President of the Royal Asiatic Society. His
nearest approach to fame came in 1830 when he confronted a group
of riotous rustics, who were apparently bent on burning down the
Grange. One of them, a ploughboy aged nineteen called Henry
Cook, hit him on the head with a hammer and was later hanged for
his pains. ‘It was worse than treason to knock off the hat of a Baring,’
commented Cobbett bitterly,38 but in fairness to British justice an
eyewitness recorded that Cook had knocked his victim down and
was on the point of finishing him off when bystanders intervened.39
There was much agricultural disorder in 1830 and the Baring lands
were in the thick of it. At neighbouring Stratton, Francis Baring
found his father Sir Thomas policing the neighbourhood ‘at the
head of tag, rag and bobtail, looking all very gallant with laurel leaves
in their hats - many of them the very fellows who had broken his
machinery ~ so laid hold of one to my father’s utter astonishment’.4°
   After his uncle Alexander’s defection, Francis Baring became the
family’s most prominent representative among the Whigs. ‘A
morose and rigid millionaire,’ Greville described him;*! ‘very rigid
and severe in his principles’ was Sir James Graham’s verdict,#2 and
though many disliked him, no one questioned his total reliability. ‘A
thoroughly honest man, and an able public servant, Melbourne
called him to Queen Victoria.4? His cautious attitude towards
reform - ‘I consider all organic change an evil,’ he told a constitu-
ent*# - would certainly have commended him to Lord Melbourne,
and in 1839 he was offered the Exchequer. ‘I told him that I did not
wish it,’ Francis Baring told his father, but Sir Thomas
                                                         persuaded
                     Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                      119
him to take a more robust view, and in the end he accepted.*5
   He did not have an easy time. ‘We have everything excepting a
revenue and a majority,’ he wrote gloomily in his journal.*6 There is
nothing in his papers, or in those of Baring Brothers, to suggest that
while he was Chancellor he had any close dealings with his uncle,
brothers or cousins at the bank. Equally, they must often have been
in each other’s company, both in London and in the country. They
had no need to put anything on paper. Matters must from time to
time have been discussed which bore on the affairs of the house, and
it would be surprising if Baring Brothers never gleaned information
of interest and value from such conversations. So, no doubt, did the
Exchequer. What does seem supremely unlikely, given the awesome
rectitude of Francis Baring, was that any disclosures were improp-
erly made or any unfair advantage given to his kinsmen. The
Rothschilds would never have believed it, and their scepticism 1s
wholly pardonable, but though Francis and Thomas Baring were
affectionate brothers, the Chancellor and the banker treated each
other with cautious restraint.
   Francis Baring never considered that his own son Thomas, heir to
a great fortune and a baronetcy at least, should go into the bank.
‘Your position is fixed,’ he told him, ‘that of an English country gen-
tleman, and it will be your business “to do your duty in that station
of life to which it has pleased God to call you”.’ Ideally, he felt, that
duty should take his son into public life, but ‘a quieter life’ could also
be useful. Banking might be good enough for his cousins, or his
uncles Thomas and John, but not for an elder son.*”
  Of the older generation, Alexander's son Francis remained as a
partner after 1830; technically, indeed, the senior partner. The dis-
                                                               es to trust
tinction meant little; his record hardly induced his associat
him very far. His career in politics was as undistinguished as in bank-
                                               Zealand in the
ing; once, when he introduced a bill about New
                                                            not
House of Commons, he lost his audience so rapidly that soon
                                                       daughter of
even a quorum was left.48 In 1833 he married Hortense,
                                                                    springs
the Duke of Bassano, and henceforth spent the winters and
                                                                position in
at his house in the Place Vend6me in Paris. He treated his
                                                               letter: ‘The
the bank with some levity, once replying to an urgent
                                                                   ly races
senior partner in the first house in the first city was at Chantil
                                                             I can assume
when your letter arrived . . . it will be clear to you that
 120                     The Sixth Great Power

no responsibility in the matter.’#? But he took offence if he thought
he was being slighted. In 1845 he discovered that Barings had given
their closest associates in Paris, Hottinguers, power to sign for them.
‘| do not understand upon what principle this is done when I am on
the spot,’ he wrote indignantly, ‘and I cannot for one moment allow
any business to be carried on in a manner which I consideras a reflec-
tion upon myself.’5° His cousin John Baring good-naturedly apolo-
gized - ‘If there has been any error or irregularity. . . itis Iwho must
cry peccavi'>! — but they had done the same thing in the past and were
to do so again.
   Thomas Nixson, clerk promoted partner, had retired in mid-1828,
so that Humphrey Mildmay was the only other partner surviving
after Holland’s death. His new partners treated him with affection-
ate contempt. ‘He is a most estimable man and his punctuality and
attention to business deserve great praise,’ wrote Joshua Bates, but
he ‘suffers from weak nerves, and having had but little experience his
natural timidity is thereby heightened.’s? On one occasion he pan-
icked, decided the house would need at least £400,000 within the
next few weeks and wrote letters appealing for help to Hope and Co.,
Hottinguers and other close friends. Bates went into the matter and
found Barings had funds perfectly adequate to meet any conceivable
need - ‘Some arrangement must be made by which I can avoid this
annoyance of Mr Mildmay’s weak nerves.’%3
  Sir Thomas’s third son, John, was one of the new partners who
began work in July 1828. A curiously elusive figure, his main signifi-
cance to the house was that he had gone into business with Joshua
Bates and now brought his partner back to join Barings in London.
‘Able but indolent,’ was how Ward described him, and all the - not
very plenuful - traces of his tenure in London suggest a man who
was affable, easy-going and somewhat diffident. ‘The truth was I was
very tired of the thing,’ he told Bates, when he retired in 1837. If he
had been senior partner it might have been different, ‘but being
junior I could not give myself airs, particularly as my seniors are
workers, and as really it requires pretty close working and watching
to keep the house at its present pitch’.5+ After ten years in the busi-
ness he retired with £180,000; ‘probably the largest fortune gained
by any one individual in business in which there is very little specula-
tion,’ commented Bates.55 He flourished in retirement for fifty years,
                     Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                     121

living alone and modestly and giving the surplus of his income to the
poor. ‘He 1s one of the best and most pure-minded of men,’ wrote
Bates.*¢
   His brother Thomas was altogether more formidable. Tactful,
witty, affable, yet with the Baring aptitude for ensuring that he was
taken seriously, he was as ready as his brother to relax when the occa-
sion offered, but far more ready to work when the need was there. ‘I
feel a want of the desk, and a yearning after the dear Bankers’ book
and the insinuating book of acceptances,’ he wrote when on holiday
in Paris.57 But in fact the book of acceptances was far from being his
favourite reading. He hankered after the more glamorous side of
banking and like Alexander before him preferred the world of high
finance and international loans to the more humdrum business of
the counting house. He not merely enjoyed such work, but he was
outstandingly good at it. ‘Tom Baring writes you about stocks,’ Bates
told Ward. ‘He does that sort of correspondence to admiration - so
 much better than I can that I have made him take charge of that
 department.’*8
    In 1835 he joined the family contingent in the House of Com-
 mons; a conservative like his uncle, and thus at odds with his father
 and brother. In 1843 he fought a particularly spirited by-election in
 the City of London. ‘You must read Tom’s speeches,’ Bates told
 Ward. ‘He has astounded everybody by his readiness and even elo-
 quence, his manner and fluency are quite remarkable.’5? Unfortu-
 nately he was opposed by the Anti-corn Law League, who had been
 stirred up by the great financier, Lord Overstone. Overstone, a pas-
 sionate free-trader, denounced Baring as being at the best lukewarm
 on the theme. ‘I see by the papers that you have given me a very hard
 hit, which falls the heavier on me as it had not been expected,’
 Thomas Baring wrote to his fellow banker. ‘I hope you do not
 approve of the coarse manner in which Mr Pattison speaks of Lord
 Ashburton and my family’ - a reference to the claim of his opponent
 that Baring was standing only to satisfy the ambitions of his uncle
 and had quarrelled with his own family in consequence.°°
                                                                      lost
    Baring spent £5485.6.3d. on the City of London election but
                                                        r, he  enjoye d  a
 by 6367 votes to 6532. The following year, howeve
                                                                  and  we
 walkover at Huntingdon. ‘Our business is in good order now
                                                            wrote Bates.
 can spare one or two partners a portion of the time,’
 122                     The Sixth Great Power

 ‘Tom will do us credit. He should be Chancellor of the Exchr.’*! Peel
 did in fact seek to push him forward, asked him to second the
 address in February 1845 and proposed that he become President of
 the Board of Trade a few months later. Baring refused - ‘the
 Bishopsgate House has too many temptations yet,’ wrote Bates, but
 it was felt by most people that he would become a minister within a
few years.
    He never did. The following year he joined his uncle in opposing
 Peel’s policy on Free Trade. Disraeli much admired his performance:
‘The member for Huntingdon brought the great name of Baring, and
all the authority of his pre-eminent position in the commercial
world, to support the principle of regulated competition. His mas-
tery of the subject would under any circumstances have commanded
attention. The house liked to receive the latest and most authentic
information as to the state of the markets from the greatest merchant
in the country.’ Nor was this praise exceptional; in 1848 Disraeli
was extolling Baring for ‘one of the best speeches ever made in the
House of Commons. Few more combine mastery of the case with
parliamentary point than this gentleman.’6+
    In time Disraeli was to press him to join his government, but for
the moment Baring was more than satisfied with the back benches.
Not that his freedom from ministerial office meant that he was
under-employed. ‘The fact is,’ said Bates, ‘he is the best worker I ever
saw. This, combined with his ability, makes him sought after as
Chairman and on Committees, Irish relief, etc.’65 He tried to do too
much, and as a result was often in bad health. His frequent absences
also imposed an additional burden on the third of the new partners
introduced by Alexander Baring in 1828. Fortunately it was a burden
Joshua Bates was well able to bear.
   Bates was the most imaginative of Alexander Baring’s appoint-
ments: not a member of the family, not an Englishman, not even
with a particularly brilliant career behind him. Massachusetts born
and bred, he had spent much of his career in the counting house of a
Boston merchant specializing in trade with Russia and Calcutta. He
had worked in Europe and had an unrivalled knowledge of Ameri-
can business and businessmen. His association with John Baring had
been soundly if not sensationally prosperous, and it must have been
the fact that both his partner and Peter Labouchére confidently
                    Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                      123
recommended him that Jed Alexander to make the experiment.
Clearly he had the experience and skills to be a useful partner;
whether he had the temperament took longer to establish.
   Bates was pawky, dour, charmless; with little imagination and less
humour. ‘His tone was dry, his words tew, wrote Samuel Ward,
whose father T. W. Ward was an ardent admirer and protégé of his
fellow countryman.® He could be touchingly naive. He noted in his
diary that he was charmed by Boswell’s Johnson: ‘perhaps this partly
owing to the fact that I find Johnson’s opinion on many subjects
coincide with my own, and as I have never derived any great advan-
tage from Books, never having read much, this is greatly in favour of
my intellect’.67 A man of grinding conscientiousness, his joy was
work; ‘You are the most uniformly laborious man I know,’ wrote
T. W. Ward.¢8 Bates sometimes tried to persuade himself that there
were other pleasures in life than those of the counting house. ‘I
would rather make a quarter of the money I do and free myself from
the necessity of that day and night attention to business which
becomes irksome to me,’ he told Ward.°? No doubt he believed it at
 the time, but if ever he tried to put it into practice he quickly found
 himself pining for the delights of trading. ‘The man was illiterate and
 ignorant but possessed a strong mind and much business ability,’
was the verdict of one of the many Americans who visited him in
 London, and it does not seem unfair.7°
    Bates displayed in his private life the same rectitude and
 meticulousness as in the office. ‘From this date Mrs Bates to be
allowed £150 per year for her dress, thread, tapes, needles, pins and
for charitable purposes; Tolls, expenses in carriage, ices at Gunter’s,
he noted in his diary.7! It was not ungenerous, but woe betide Mrs
Bates if she exceeded her allowance. Bates was a hard man. ‘My
gardener seems to be much in debt, he noted. ‘He has too many chil-
dren, which is the great difficulty with all labouring men. | must dis-
charge him.’7? Another time two of his house servants fell in love and
conceived a child. They were ready to marry but Bates dismissed
                                                                      ser-
them. It was ‘more important to set a good example to the other
                                                                 realistic
yants than redeem these servants’. But he could be as coolly
                                                             gh   Review
about himself as about others. In 1833 the Edinbur
                                                                ‘unques-
described him as ‘the first Merchant of the country’ and
                                                   y  style me  the  most
tionably the ablest’. ‘The Quarterly will probabl
 124                       The Sixth Great Power

 insignificant,’ commented Bates. “These periodicals cut one up or
 praise one just to suit their own purpose.’73                   |
    He ‘has a trial in his wife as great as almost any person living’,
 wrote Ward.74 Another American described her as an ‘audaciously
 vulgar old woman’. She had been complaining that her daughter had
 nowhere fit to live, in spite of the fact that she had huge houses in
both London and the country: ‘This kind of whining comes from a
woman who was born in a four roomed log house in Massachusetts
and never saw a carpet until she was a woman grown.’75 Mrs Bates
must have been one of the factors that made it hard for Bates to win
the place he felt he deserved in British society.In theory he despised
the fripperies of fashion, in fact he hankered after them. One of his
few weaknesses, Ward felt, was undue deference to wealth and
 rank.”6 Bates believed he got the balance just right. He told Ward
 that a certain new American arrival in London was too voluble and
 noisy, ‘but that will wear off. A residence of one year in London
 would make a perfect gentleman of him ... In London no
 extravagance of word or gesture is allowed in good society and since
 I have got a little into it I am charmed with that which I at first
 thought objectionable.’7”
    He wrote thus confidently as early as 1831, but his progress into
high society was in fact slow and arduous. It was from the Barings
themselves that he received the most painful rebuffs. Lord
Ashburton’s return from the United States in 1844 ‘renewed the
mortification and pain I have always felt in consequence of my social
position. On joining the house of Baring Brothers and Co. when
Lord Ashburton was a partner, I found that he and Mr Mildmay did
not consider that by forming a co-partnership with me they had
incurred the so-called necessity for any intercourse with me and my
family.’78 He was almost never invited to the Grange and only to din-
ner in London when there were American visitors - and even then
Mrs Bates was not included. ‘This must not continue,’ wrote Bates
angrily, but it did.?? When Bates asked if Lady Ashburton would pre-
sent his wife and daughter at Court, Ashburton found some polite
excuse. ‘This is the first favor I have asked of this family and it will
                                                                          be
the last.’8°
   Fortunately Thomas Baring, more easy going and good-natur
                                                                         ed
than his uncle, and witha far clearer appreciation of Bates’s
                                                                qualities,
                     Baring and Bates: 1827-1847                     125
showed no such arrogance in his attitude to his partner. Indeed, he
treated Bates to all intents and purposes as the senior partner.
Though Baring made the running where international loans were in
question, Bates ruled supreme over all the routine trading business
and the administration of the office. In particular, he took responsi-
bility for the rapidly increasing American business. He was a first
port of call for all important American visitors to London and
regarded by most of them as the ultimate fount of wisdom on British
and international affairs. ‘Have you letters for Mr Bates?’ Charles
Summer asked his brother. ‘You will find him a person of sterling
honesty and sense.’8! Louis McLane advised his successor at the
American Legation to use Schultz as his tailor and Adams as his hos-
tler. ‘Lady Wellesley . . . will instruct you in the mysteries of fashion
and Mr Bates, your Banker - whom you will find the kindest man in
the world - will instruct and aid you essentially in all matters of busi-
ness and housekeeping.®?
  Thomas Baring and Joshua Bates liked and respected each other,
and admirably complemented each other's abilities. On them
depended the future of Baring Brothers. When Alexander Baring
retired in 1830 he left five partners: his brother Francis, his son-in-
law Humphrey Mildmay, his nephews Thomas and John, and
Joshua Bates. In theory three partners had to endorse any decision of
importance, but with Francis often in Paris and generally ignored
and John withdrawing in 1837 and anyway disposed to follow his
brother’s lead, the practice became that the three managing partners
did all the business and only invoked the other two in case of dis-
                                                               a con-
agreement.®} At the end of 1835 there had been something of
                                                        free capital
frontation, when Mildmay had tried to limit the house’s
                                                                    to
at any one time to £100,000 and had recruited Lord Ashburton
                                                             essential
support him. Bates argued that £5 00,000 was the minimum
                                                  business that might
fora reserve sufficient to embrace any profitable
                                                    with him, and
come along, established that John and Thomas agreed
                                                       reduce the
convinced Ashburton that Mildmay’s course ‘would
                                                as not  to make it
profits of the House in a short time so much so
                                             He won the day, but
worth anyone's attention to the business’.**
                                                                  in his
remained dissatisfied. ‘Too much falls on me,’ he complained
                                                       plans for opera-
diary. ‘To talk to everybody, sell the goods, draw the
                                           and hard thinking too;
tions which require a vast deal of thought
126                      The Sixth Great Power

  then I have all the disadvantage of not being supported by my part-
  ners. No one lends a helping hand to render myself or my family
  more respectable, and they never take the least notice of my country-
  men unless I request it. Then the timidity of Mildmay will spoil any
  business.’85
     The timidity of Mildmay was a constant cause for complaint. In
  1837 he unusually succeeded in winning the support of John and
 Francis and blocking some new business which Bates and Thomas
 Baring - the two activists - wished to introduce. ‘Someone else
 should therefore take the lead, complained Bates, but he had no
 intention of letting anyone do so,’ and as Mildmay became more
 preoccupied with his parliamentary life, his power to irritate van-
 ished. By 1844, with Thomas Baring also active in parliament, Bates
 was taking 7/24 of the profits, against ¢/24 to Thomas, §/24 to Mildmay
 and */24 to Francis. The remaining 2/24 went to Charles Baring Young,
 a grandson of Charles Baring of Exeter, who had come to
 Bishopsgate in 1843 to take some of the load off Bates. Young was
assiduous and able but had only one leg and was in poor health;
there was never any possibility that he would play a more responsi-
ble role.87
    Mildmay considered retirement as early as 1841 but stayed on to
build up a larger fortune for his sons. By 1847, however, it was evi-
dent even to Francis Baring that he was increasingly a liability to the
house: ‘The man is to be pitied for his mind is in a morbid state. . . .’88
Finally he agreed to retire at the end of the year. The retirement of a
partner who owned as large a proportion of the capital as did
Mildmay was bound in some measure to reduce the resources of the
house, but this was greatly mitigated by the fact that the partnership
contract stipulated that capital should only be withdrawn in stages
over a period of years. ‘If we have our ordinary luck,’ Bates assured
Ward, ‘his retirement will produce no diminution of the Capital of
the House.’ In every other way it was an unmixed blessing. Thomas
Baring and Joshua Bates were now in undisputed control.
                                      8
                                  >    ent




          The Trade in Bishopsgate
                   1830-1848


The house as reorganized by Joshua Bates was altogether more
orderly than it had been under his predecessors. Alexander Baring
understood the need for system. “You should well impress on your
mind the importance in a counting house of many clerks is the
necessity of minute punctuality, he told his nephew Thomas. ‘It
is not generally a Baring virtue and therefore requires some self-
command. This is more important in the management of business
than genius or higher talent, and you may rely upon it that your
business will move unsatisfactorily and in some degree unsafely
unless you attach importance to the apparent trifling circumstance
of minute discipline.’! But he himself had rarely found ume or incli-
nation to practise what he preached, and though Holland kept the
clerks to their office hours, he had little idea of more sophisticated
measures to improve the running of the office.
   With Bates’s arrival a new system is apparent in the records of Bar-
ing Brothers. Correspondence was properly entered and copies of
the replies retained; reporting on economic and commercial matters
from all corners of the earth was vastly increased and rationalized,
annual trial balances were henceforth struck. Barings in 1830 were
one of the largest houses, employing some 30 clerks in their
Bishopsgate office against 40 to 50 at Rothschilds and 10 to 15 at
most of the other important houses.? They were well paid, earning
                                                                        £40
between £250 and £500 a year for an experienced clerk down to
                                               that their  number     could
for a beginner. Bates started with the view
                                                                   fast that
be reduced, but by early 1831 found that business grew so
                                                                            a
even more were called for. ‘It is extremely difficult to arrange
                                                   go on  as it should   go,’
counting house so as to have so much business
                                      Izy,
 128                      The Sixth Great Power

 he complained to Ward. ‘As soon as I get proper clerks and the bust-
 ness goes easy, it is found that the increase of work requires addi-
 tional hands.’3 Four years later, with the total now over 40, he was
looking for yet more staff.+
   But though he did not succeed in reducing numbers, and actually
raised the basic salaries, he cut down on the commissions, unofficial
but tacitly condoned, which the clerks had grown used to taking. He
made himself exceedingly unpopular as a result.’ His advice to him-
self in his diary on how to run the office is typical both of the man
and his regime. ‘Having been generally successful in business we
have become too free and open in our conduct and have incurred
risks that it will not be wise to repeat. A system of secrecy should be
encouraged and. . .none but clever persons admitted into the office.
A rigid economy should also be enforced as much as in less prosper-
ous times. Avoid all pride, ostentation and unnecessary show.”6
   The regulations laid down for the clerks suggest that their life was
austere but not over-taxing. Juniors arrived at 9.30 a.m., seniors at 10
a.m., there was an hour for lunch, and all left at 5 p.m. except when
the international mail was departing. Anyone under the age of sixty
had to sign a book on arrival; after one’s sixtieth birthday it was pre-
sumably hoped the habit of punctuality would have been finally
inculcated. “Unnecessary conversation in the Office, one with
another, was deplored, as were visits by friends or disappearances
from the office on personal affairs. ‘When it is considered that these
Regulations, on ordinary days, only require attendance for the
Superior Clerks about Six Hours per day, and the Junior Six and a
half Hours, and Two Hours additional on Post and Packet Days, it
cannot be thought severe,’ concluded the notice somewhat defen-
sively. ‘It is therefore insisted on that the short time be devoted ear-
nestly to the duties of the office.’7
  William Rathbone, who joined Barings in 1840, would not have
felt this unreasonable. He found his life ‘full of very hard and varied
work, but of perfect health and freedom from anxiety or disturbance
or worry of any kind’. Bates was an exacting but not unreasonable
taskmaster, he ‘had the knack of seeing everything without appear-
ing to take any trouble to do so’.8 Humphrey Mildmay’s son Henry
Bingham was taken on in 1845, initially to copy letters. His hand-
writing was not considered to come up to the required commer
                                                                  cial
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                      129
standards and he was sent to take lessons from an expert in the
Gray's Inn Road. His only complaint was that he had to work on Sat-
urday afternoons.?
   In 1828 Labouchére took a young American, Russell Sturgis, to
Bishopsgate. Sturgis was amazed by the volume of business trans-
acted. The postage on the letters each day amounted to £25. Sturgis
remarked that the partners must have an easy time of it since all they
had to do was sign their names, and was told that on that one day
they would have 3000 cheques to sign for French dividends and 500
for American.!° (The same was still true in 1912, when Patrick Shaw-
 Stewart, confronted by 500 dividend warrants, cursed the day he had
 opted to sign with his full name rather than as P. Stewart.)!! The rit-
 ual was that all the letters, often 200 a day, were looked at by Bates,
inspected more meticulously by Mildmay and then distributed
around the office. An immense part of the burden was borne by
 Bates, who personally handled almost all the correspondence with
 the United States as well as making regular visits to Exchange to buy
 and sell bills, draw and remit. ‘This requires promptness and deci-
 sion, and a degree of experience,’ wrote T. W. Ward, who visited
 Bishopsgate when the new partnership was forming. He noticed
 how conscientious Bates was in his attendance compared to his col-
 leagues or those from other houses: “This is an advantage Bates has -
 he is devoted to business and willing to labor.’
    [t was almost certainly Bates who propounded the golden rule on
 which Baring Brothers based its operations: °. . . by being too liberal
 we lose our money and not being sufficiently liberal we lose our
 business. Therefore the middle course is the one it should be our aim
 to follow.13 Admirably rational though it was, the precept still
                                                                              d
 comes into the category of ‘easier said than done’. Barings operate
                                                        safegua  rded     them
 under certain self-imposed restrictions, which
                                                                          They
 from much loss but at the price of missing many opportunities.
                                                                         it had
 would rarely enter into business with a house abroad unless
 been introduced by one of their own trusted corresp         ondents  .   They
                                                                            the
 never parted with bills of exchange endorsed by themselves until
 bills fell due: ‘It is a source of pride and  satisfac tion  to  me,’   wrote
                                                                              of
 Bates of the 1837 financial crisis, ‘that by foresight on the part
                                                                         never
 myself and partners our House has never discounted a bill and
                                                           grantin  g   credits
 had aid from the Bank in any way’.'* They disliked
 130                      The Sixth Great Power

 unless assured that the correspondent kept his account solely with
 Barings.                                                    )
    In applying such rules they were deemed ultra-conservative by
 many of their most successful rivals. Rothschilds habitually bor-
 rowed large sums from the Bank of England and discounted many
 bills with Overend, Gurney, the leading discount house. Brown,
 Shipley were more adventurous over accepting clients who took
 credit elsewhere, and won much good business from Barings by their
 policy. Their record hardly proves them wrong. Yet as Barings suc-
cessfully rode out the successive economic crises of the 1830s and
 1840s, their prudence did not seem misplaced. They missed
opportunities for profit but they slept more securely in their beds,
and in the circumstances of the time that was a comforting reflection
for their correspondents as well as for themselves.
   Sometimes profit was not a consideration. In November 1845 the
failure of the Irish potato crop led to the government ordering
£100,000 to be spent on buying maize in the United States. The
problem was that as soon as the buyer was known prices would soar.
Sir Randolph Routh, head of the Commissariat Department of the
British Army, suggested his brother-in-law in Quebec should do the
job, but the Chancellor of the Exchequer politely replied that, while
this gentleman was ‘doubtless respectable’, he was ‘hardly likely to
 be a first-class merchant’. He preferred Baring Brothers.!5 Thomas
 Baring offered to put their agent, T. W. Ward, at the disposal of the
government and in December they undertook to procure £100,000
worth of ‘Indian Corn and Meal’ to ship to Cork.16 The business was
done with extreme discretion; no one in the United States had any
idea what was going on and the maize was bought at rock-bottom
prices. C. E. Trevelyan was so impressed by Barings’ performance
that he tried to use them ona similar job in Britain a year later.!7 This
Barings declined, but they did not take a penny in commission for
their trouble in the Irish business.
   The Liverpool office was the brainchild of Joshua Bates, set up
                                                                        to
foster the American trade which was his special pride and which
demands attention in a separate chapter. He had envisaged a Liver-
pool house as early as 1830, but hesitated to establish it in case ‘we
may be thought too grasping and people will be set against
                                                                    us’.18
Mildmay was characteristically reluctant to endorse so bold
                                                                   a step
and it was not until 1832 that the office was opened, under
                                                                 Charles
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                 131
Baring Young and SF. S. Gair. ‘It is a grand move,’ wrote Thomas Bar-
ing from Paris, ‘which has been wanting for the last three years but
nots I hope, too late.’ It was not. By 1833 twenty clerks were
employed and Bates could report proudly that ‘We are No. 5 in the
list of receivers of cotton, and may be no. 2 before the year is out.. . .
I foresee that this Liverpool House will one day rival ours in London,
and I am quite enamoured of it.’!9
   The business in Liverpool, with its concentration on cotton, admi-
rably exemplified the sort of general trade in which Barings excelled.
Thomas Baring relished the major deal which might take years to set
up but could yield a fortune if it came off; Bates favoured a multi-
plicity of minor bargains, each one producing a small but sure return.
Unlike Rothschilds, who specialized in bullion, mercury or dia-
monds, Barings were interested in any commodity that was widely in
demand, which could be bought and sold or on which advances
could be made or shipping and insurance organized: tea, sugar, cof-
fee, indigo, copper, grain, rice, tobacco... . But Bates was a prudent
man and he was always quick to retreat from a field if he felt that the
future was uncertain. He withdrew almost entirely from advances to
the European wool growers, and cut off credit to Calcutta in 1832
and 1833 when the tea planters failed to produce enough to cover
their bills. He was criticized at the time, but saved Barings a great
deal of money.?°
   Very occasionally Bates could be adventurous, however, as in
1830 and 1831 when political disturbances on the continent meant
that the amount of capital deposited with them had become almost
embarrassingly large. The knowledge that many cattle in Russia
had died of distemper made him think that the price of tallow was
bound to rise, and Barings bought large amounts for their own
account. Then he decided that they would do well to control the
                                                           Baron
market, so in collaboration with the St Petersburg banker,
                                                                    By
Alexander Stieglitz, he set out to corner all the existing stocks.
                                                                   was
mid-December Barings had bought 44,000 casks and the price
                                             had invested  more   than
beginning to rise, and a month later they
£120,000 and could claim ‘to have under our control all the yellow
                                                             order not
Candle Tallow in the market. . . but for distant delivery in
                                                      gain £70,000   by
to affect the market. Now the chance is that we shall
it and Stieglitz as much more.?!
                                                             manufac-
   But a storm arose. Furious protests from importers and
132                      The Sixth Great Power

turers led to questions being asked in the House of Commons, and
the radical member ‘Orator’ Hunt inveighed against monopolies.??
Nor did Barings have it all their own way in the market. Stieglitz was
told about ‘the violent opposition of the Jews, who have made use of
every stratagem in their power to depress prices and deter buyers
from coming forward ’.2} There were rumours that the duty on can-
dles was about to be taken off. Barings sold most of their holdings at
a respectable price but were left with an uncomfortably large quan-
tity which they had to dispose ofata loss. At the end ofthe year Bates
claimed that none of the operations he had championed had been
misguided; ‘the tallow spec 1s proved to have been night, we wanted
courage to hold’.*# Overall Barings probably lost money on the oper-
ation, but it was not a disaster and, as Thomas Baring told his part-
ner: ‘You needed some such contest to put you fairly on your legs in
London!’ Bates drew a different moral from the affair. ‘I never wish
to grapple with a whole community again.25
  There is nothing to indicate what havoc the tallow speculation
wreaked on the frail nerves of Humphrey Mildmay. He had, how-
ever, little reason to be disturbed by any other feature of Bates’s trad-
ing activities. He may have felt that some advances to tea planters in
Ceylon were made injudiciously, so that after the crisis of 1847
Barings found themselves unwilling proprietors of three planta-
tions, but though this locked up capital that could have been better
employed, in the short and middle term it did not prove a bad invest-
ment. Bates’s most important contribution was to build up Barings’
representation abroad, by picking the right men and offering them
financial backing. T. W. Ward, with the American agency in Boston,
was immeasurably the most important but by no means unique. In
1833, for instance, Bates was considering strengthening the house of
Gisborne and Co. by putting in a partner and ‘furnishing him with
capital sufficient to enable them to assume an importance in Cal-
cutta worthy of our patronage’. Shortly afterwards John Richards
joined Gisbornes with a £20,000 advance from Barings by way of a
dowry. After the disasters that had afflicted Calcutta in the previous
years, felt Bates, ‘we cannot fail to become receivers of a large pro-
portion of the goods from that country’.26
   It was only a short step from financing international trade and
organizing transport and insurance, to taking an interest in
                                                             the
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                 133

vessels themselves. In October 1833 the newspapers reported that
Barings were building a ship that would be manned exclusively by
seamen who had taken the pledge not to drink alcohol or to indulge
in blasphemy; the reports were true, wrote Bates, ‘and may do some
good by calling public attention to the subject, which is one of deep
interest’.2”7 The ship was the Alexander Baring of 550 tons, built
mainly for the East India and China trades. In February 1835, carry-
ing freight worth £150,000, she reached Canton after a rapid 103
days’ transit. By that time Barings also owned the Antoinette of 350
tons, General Palmer of 531 tons and Diana of 487 tons.
    Usually, however, they chartered ships for each operation. A typi-
cal venture of 1839 involved sending an American ship, the Wasb-
ington, to Canton. It was anticipated that the Bocca Tigris would
 shortly be blockaded by British naval units, so the captain, Francis
 Booth Wells, was told, ‘you will do well to avoid speaking to any
 British ship, particularly ships of war. . . . Of course you will be igno-
 rant of any Blockade and are justified in proceeding until you are
 notified of itand warned off by competent authority.’ In Canton the
 Washington was to discharge her cargo of woollen and cotton goods
 and iron and stock up with tea and raw silk. ‘Be as quick as practic-
 able as it is probable a Blockade will be declared.’ The ship should
 then continue to Singapore and Macao to ‘transfer your cargo to a
 good English boat, ideally the Alexander Baring if it can be found’.
 The Washington itself should try to get a freighting job between Sin-
 gapore and Manila; at Manila or Batavia 1t should load up with sugar
 and continue to Cowes. Various alternative instructions covered the
 action the captain should take if Canton was blockaded before the
 Washington arrived.

     In conducting your business you will always find a great
     advantage in keeping it all to yourself. Communicate noth-
     ing beyond what is absolutely necessary to anyone. To the
     young man who is a passenger, who by the by is a talented
                                                               g of
     youth, we would advise you to communicate nothin
                                                            you  are
     your own business as he 1s going to join a House that
     not likely to deal with.
                                                                  of
       Wher you get out or before you arrive on the coast
                                                              apers
     China you will do well to have all the letters and newsp
134                      The Sixth Great Power

      in the ship collected in a bag. Have it sealed and take it into
      your own possession for you cannot tell until you reach Can-
      ton what advantage it may be to your operation that other
      people be kept in ignorance.
         You must never think that these advices comprise every-
      thing you have to think of and decide about. Various
      changes may take place in the position of things before you
      leave Canton or afterwards, which may render a different
      course preferable and you should always be prepared for any
      emergency and act promptly, having always in view the per-
      fect safety of your investment.
         Wishing you a prosperous voyage we are
              Dear Sir
                   Very truly yours,
                        Baring Brothers?8
   Bates’s success can be measured by the acceptances outstanding at
the end of each twelve-month period. In 1828 these were a mere
£295,000; after one year of Bates’s stewardship the figure had risen
to £604,000. By 1831 it was £1.4 million and in 1833 £2.3 million. In
1837, in line with world trade, it dropped back to just under a mil-
lion, but it quickly rose again and averaged £1.26 million throughout
the 1840s. Commission income rose similarly. It had been allowed to
fall away to £25,000 or soa year in the 1820s, now it doubled in five
years, doubled again, and remained at about £80,000 a year during
the 1840s.
   There were plenty of fanciful speculations in which Bates could
have risked these solid profits. In 1835 ‘Sir Anthony Carlisle writes
me that his machine for flying is nearly bro’t to perfection and he
only wants a clever person to bring it out. It seems impossible but he
says It 1s quite an affair of science, floatage being all that is
required.” In 1846 the failure of some merchants in Smyrna made
Barings the surprised owners of 1000 chests of opium.3° In 1832 an
invention for making wrought iron nails was under consideration.
Since iron cost £7 a ton, producing the nails including the inventor's
royalty would cost £5 a ton, nails were selling at £24 a ton and it was
expected that 70,000 tons a year would be sold, the annual profit
should be £480,000 a year - ‘enormous and must be fallacious
                                                                ,’ com-
mented Bates pessimistically.3!
                 The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                   135

— ~But it was iron that introduced Bates to one of his few ventures
into British industry. Since the early fifteenth century when the
Bishop of Durham began to produce at his own forge, Weardale had
been a cradle of the English iron industry.3? In 1844 Mr Chas.
Attwood, who had secured leases of mineral deposits in the Wear
Valley, tried to interest Barings in a new process for manufacturing
 pig iron. The present price was £5.10/- and Attwood calculated he
 could produce it at 16/-, giving a potential annual profit of £350,000.
 ‘This may well seem incredible, wrote Bates. ‘In about one month
 we shall know about it and decide.’33 It was nails all over again, but
 this time the outcome was different. By May 1845 the only question
 was whether Weardale ironstone and coal would together make
 good iron: ‘] entertain no doubt.’34 He took his partners along with
 him. Thomas Baring found it hard to believe so good a thing had
 been so long undiscovered, but was prepared to let Bates have his
 head; Francis Baring and Charles Baring Young had no objections.
 Even Mildmay was ready to support the enterprise on the grounds
 that he had some friends who had done well out of iron. Usually he
 would have opposed it, he said, as not being the right sort of
employment ‘for the capital of a House of business’, but he was
prepared to make an exception because of the ‘unusually tempting
circumstances ’.35                                         |
  Thomas Baring remained mildly sceptical. He had been in Paris
pursuing a loan. ‘Now that our French much ado about nothing 1s all
over and ended in smoke,’ he wrote, ‘you can only look to your
Weardale project for a fortune. I hope that will end in smoke and
something else.’ By late 1846 Barings had paid Attwood £14,000
                                                              d £100,000
 for half his leases of ironstone and coal and had advance
to the Weardale Iron Co. ‘Secret, Bates told Ward. ‘We are making
                                                                it in reply,
Iron very fast and ata very cheap rate, but don’t mention
                                                        us  of being   con-
for it so happens that no one appears to suspect
                                                           but every   me
cerned in Iron making.’37 A triumph seemed at hand,
                                             technic al   hitch  occurred.
that production began to build up, some
                                                             dreame   d of,’
‘There are more difficulties in Iron making than I ever
                                                           on the edge of
Bates wrote in his diary.38 The dream was to teeter
                                                         course.
nightmare before the saga of Weardale had run its
                                                         by Barings, how-
   No house doing business of the kind undertaken
                                                        vagaries of world
ever astutely run, could flourish irrespective of the
 136                     The Sixth Great Power
 trade. In 1831 all seemed set fair. Alexander Baring’s retirement had
 done good, declared Bates. ‘Each man in the House now sees the
 necessity of taking a stand for himself; the consequence is an aggre-
 gate mass of influence which will in a short time carry the House
 above what it ever was as a commercial establishment.’3? Rothschilds
 had been caught with huge holdings of French stocks after the 1830
 revolution and their credit had suffered. ‘It is really unpleasant,’
 wrote Bates with transparent insincerity, ‘to see Mr R. drawing at 25
 1212 on Paris while we find eager takers at 25 21/2. I cannot under-
 stand it, for altho’ he has lost by the turn of events he must be a man
 of great wealth; to be sure, he draws on his Brothers, while we draw
on Hottinguers, Baguenault and Hope.’#°
   The euphoria did not abate in the following years. Profit for 1832
was £98,000 and the following year £119,000 ‘Between ourselves,’
Bates boasted to Ward, “BB and Co. are as much beyond what they
ever were as a Commercial House as Prime is beyond Shipman or
any other small concern.’ The problem was how to escape being
overwhelmed by the flood of business.+! The economic crisis in the
United States in 1837 involved them in severe losses at the time but
in the end strengthened their position by removing some of their
more dangerous rivals from the field.*
   In 1839 it was a British crisis, brought about by an outflow of ster-
ling to pay for wheat imports from the continent and the unre-
stricted growth of joint stock banks, all merrily issuing Notes in spite
of their inadequate capital.42 The Bank of England, drained of its
gold reserves, was close to having to stop payments. The Comte
d’Argout, Governor of the Bank of France, was in London             and
offered to help. The Bank of France could not lend itself, but would
advance £2 million on bills payable in Paris. Barings were asked to
help in the operation and at once put together a syndicate of Paris
bankers, led by Hottinguers; ‘the operation of which this forms part
is intended to set at rest the agitations of our money market and pre-
vent any further export of gold,’ they explained to J. B. Gossler and
Co. of Hamburg.* Barings, who took a 1 per cent commission on
                                                                   the
transaction, sent Thomas Baring to Paris to supervise it. Rothschilds
refused to join the syndicate, though they belatedly tried to getinon

* See pp. 148-9 below.
                 The Trade in Bishopsgate: 1830-1848                137
the act. Why not approach the Bank of England and offer to sell
them franc bills at a cheap rate? suggested Baron James to his Lon-
don nephews. ‘Lam sure that the Bank encounters difficulties when
buying through Barings, because as soon as Baring shows up every-
body knows that it is for the Bank and people start to speculate.
Transactions through the House of Rothschild would be a relief to
all concerned.’+
   The 1840s were at first marked by the recovery of the world econ-
omy and proved extravagantly fat years for Barings. ‘Our business is
too good and too extensive for us to keep it many years. . . . As we
now stand the permanent means of the House would enable us to
buy all our competitors out and have half a million to spare,’ wrote
Bates vaingloriously in 1846.45 But at the same time Barings were
battening down the hatches against the storm they believed Robert
Peel’s free trade legislation of 1845 was certain to conjure up. Huge
imports of corn from the continent and the outflow of sterling to
finance the new European railways once again put the Bank of Eng-
land under pressure. “There seems to be a dreadful crumbling to
pieces around you,’ wrote Thomas Baring to Bates from Aix, ‘and it
shows your good management that we are notas yet hit harder than
we are and that according to prospects we seem tolerably safe.’*¢
Once again Bates could legitimately congratulate himself on having
saved his house from great loss: ‘We do not hold on our own account
£20,000 worth of goods, and our consignments, which are also mod-
erate, will sell for enough to cover our advances.'#7
   Bates put the blame for the crisis on the folly of the British govern-
ment and British merchants - ‘The developments that are daily tak-
ing place surpass anything American. Inevitably the crisis spread
                                                                    that
to the continent and was fomented by the wave of revolutions
                                              keep  credits  to  a mini-
swept Europe in 1848. Bates’s answer was to
                                                                 variant
mum and treat commodities as if he was playing a mercantile
                                                                y, even
of pass-the-parcel, shifting them on with the utmost rapidit
                                                 Thoma  s   Baring   dis-
though the profit was minimal or non- existent.
                                                               probably
liked the policy but generously accepted that his partner
                                                             my confi-
knew best: ‘I have no doubt that you are right - indeed
                                                            to  shut up
dence in your judgment is so implicit that if you were
                                                         doing so, and
shop I should be sure that you had the best reasons for
                                              showed    too  rapid and
if I thought that one or two of your moves
 138                    The Sixth Great Power

shorta tack for that character of steadiness which gives us a superior-
ity over the Jews and makes people prefer doing business with us, it
was because I was not on the spot and could not understand all the
circumstances of the case.’4? At the height of the crisis Ashburton
told John Baring that the house was ‘very snug and comfortable’.*°
Not many houses could have said the same.


In 1831, when Ward had urged Bates in future to concentrate exclu-
sively on commission and acceptance business, Bates replied: ‘What-
ever may have been the character of our House formerly, it is no
longer a House concerned in foreign loans. At the same time, with a
constantly accumulating capital [in 1831, £326,424], it is not worth
while to say that it will not suit us to enter into any monied opera-
tions that we deem safe. Indeed, our capital is too large unless we
were to take an interest sometimes in operations that require money
in large sums.’5!
   Though the first part of Bates’s statement may have been true at
the time it was made, it did not remain so for long. What is certainly
the case, however, is that it was not a house concerned in domestic
loans. If the British government was in the market Barings were pre-
pared to participate, but even then not very enthusiastically. When
the Chancellor raised £8 million in 3 per cent Consols in 1847
Barings did a deal with Rothschilds. Each made a tender for the
whole loan at the same price and then divided it. Since they were the
only competitors, they not surprisingly secured the loan: ‘Our bid
was, we have reason to believe, close to the minister’s minimum, if
indeed it was not exactly the same.’s? The views of the Chancellor on
what he might reasonably have felt to be a somewhat unsporting car-
tel, are not recorded. So far as British industry was concerned, with
the freakish exception of Weardale, where they set up their own
company, Barings felt they had nothing to contribute. Nor, indeed,
were they asked to; the merchant banks were not seen as a source of
funds for industrialists in Britain in the mid-nineteenth century. The
exception for some banks, but not for Barings, was railways.
   In the 1840s the railway boom in Britain absorbed the best part of
£60 million a year.5? In Endymion Disraeli marvelled at the reluc-
tance of British bankers to take part in this orgy: ‘The mighty loan-
                 The Trade in Bishopsgate:    1830-1848                £39
mongers, on whose fiat the fate of kings and empires sometimes
depended, seemed like men who, witnessing some eccentricity of
nature, watch it with mixed feelings of curiosity and alarm. . . 1t was
only by the irresisuble pressure of circumstances that a banking firm
   - was ultimately forced to take the leading part that was
required.’** The reluctant leader was Glyn, Hallifax, Mills; though
few if any loan-mongers were mightier than Barings they viewed
such operations with distaste. “There seems to be an increasing
mania for railroads, Bates wrote in his diary in 1836, *... which
must lead to confusion and embarrassment before a year.’ He com-
forted himself with the thought that, since the money would be
spent at home, it would at least ‘have been scattered to do good in
the country’.**
   The same could not be said of the European loans in which they
were engaged. When Bates said that Barings was no longer a house
concerned in foreign loans, he tacitly conceded that the pre-
eminence Rothschilds had established in this field was theirs to
keep. Thomas Baring was less ready to yield the day. He did not
find it easy to reassert himself. In Vienna, indeed, Barings suffered a
further reverse when Hopes were replaced as agent of the Austrian
government - ‘It is probably that the Jews have been paying for the
                                                                       In
agency ... as they usually do, commented Barings darkly.*¢
                                                                       in
 Portugal Barings provided a small short-term loan of £140,000
 1846, but against the better judgement      of several of the partners.
                                                                   of the
 ‘Portuguese credit has been so tainted by the mismanagement
                                                       not be a very
Jews and Jobbers,’ wrote Mildmay, that *. . . it would
                                                                  with the
desirable connexion for any House wishing to stand well
                                                               they    were
Public.’57 The Mildmay view prevailed when in 1847
                                                                    govern-
invited to take on the financial agency of the Portuguese
                                                     unflatterin g  alacrity
ment; Barings refused the poisoned chalice with
and left the field to their competitors.
                                                                   put up a
   Spain was another Rothschild preserve but here Barings
                                                                 reason   to
stouter fight. They steered clear of a loan in 1834 and had
                                                             ked and the
congratulate themselves when the Stock Exchange panic
                                                    from  exper ience and
price fell heavily: ‘I hope they will take a lesson
                                                           smugly.** But
never carry their operations so far again,’ wrote Bates
                                                         an essential ele-
there was money to be made in Spain. Mercury was
                                                            source of the
ment in the refining of silver, and Spain controlled the
140                      The Sixth Great Power

best and cheapest mercury. Every so often the Spanish government
would contract for the disposal of the mercury production over the
next few years. In 1835, 1838 and 1843 Rothschilds secured the con-
tract and Barings held off; then in 1847 Francis Falconnet was
dispatched to Madrid, among other things to look into the
possibilities of intervention in the mercury market. Through the first
half of 1848 desultory negotiations dragged on. “Thank God that
Barings do not intend interfering in the quicksilver business,’ wrote
Anthony de Rothschild in June, but his relief was premature.5?
Barings were far from having withdrawn, yet were ready to accept
that Rothschilds could not be wholly driven from the field. The pos-
sibility of some sort of joint operation was taking shape by the time
the 1848 revolutions put a brake on the pace of business all over
Europe.
   In Paris the ascendancy of Rothschilds was still more evident; they
were indeed so strongly entrenched there that at any time they were
ready to pay above the odds to keep rivals at bay. From time to time
Hottinguer tried to put together a gentile syndicate to disturb their
hegemony but rarely with success. In 1841, when a huge loan was in
prospect, Hottinguer had to accepta quarter share from Rothschilds
and Barings ended up with only 54,000 francs of rentes. In 1844
Hottinguers insisted on taking half and, when this was refused, went
into opposition. Thomas Baring visited Paris to join the battle.
‘Hottinguer is decidedly of opinion that my arrival had better not be
known,’ he told Bates, °. . . because if it did not bring Rothschild to
terms it would induce him to raise his bid... . 1am to be shut up tll
after Monday, which seems rather absurd but I obey orders.’6°
Whether or not he knew of Baring’s presence, Rothschild outbid
Hottinguer handsomely: Baring comforted himself with the reflec-
tion that it was of the greatest importance for ‘our rival to be success-
ful, while. . . itis of little consequence to us’.6! By the time another
loan came up in 1847 Rothschild was alone in the field. It was a
costly victory, for the growing economic and political problems of
1847 and 1848 made it almost impossible to dispose of the stock.
‘The Jew took the loan out of vanity,’ wrote Francis Baring, who reg-
ularly showed himself the most vigorously anti-Semitic of the part-
ners, ‘not chusing that any great arrangement should be made with-
out him.’6
                  The Trade in Bishopsgate:     1830-1848                141

_ It was a different matter when it came to the French railways,
in which some £40 million was invested in the 1840s.° In 1843
Barings joined a consortium to oppose Rothschilds in their bid for
the railway concession from Paris to the Belgian frontier. ‘Barings
have joined the rival company,’ reported Anselm de Rothschild; and
two days later, ‘The rival company intrigues like the devil against
us.’6¢ In the end neither group obtained the concession. But there
were plentiful pickings for everyone and a formula was generally
worked out by which the profits were spread around the interested
 parties. Barings never took the lead in the negotiations but did quite
 nicely all the same. When the shares in the Northern Railroad were
 distributed in August 1845, Bates reported that they had taken them
 at £12 and sold at £20: ‘I hope it is not wicked to make money so fast.
 I settle the account with my conscience in the belief that a share 1s
 really worth £40.'¢
     Though Francis and Thomas Baring were both made directors of
 the Northern Railroad, the part played by Barings in the financing of
 the French railways was not considerable. Except for a brief flurry
 around 1845 the British investor's interest was cautious and limited.
 The significance of Barings and other British banks, as Professor
  Platt has put it, was that they ‘stimulated the haute banque and
  opened the floodgates for domestic speculation and investment             .*°
                                                 with  even  this  seconda ry
  By 1846 they were decidedly disenchanted
                                                                     . .. they
  role. ‘There is now a very general gloom and depression .
  told Hottinguers. ‘All foreign rail are a deadletter. . . .'°”
                                                                         s or
     If in France Barings played second fiddle to Hottinguer
                                                               Tradit ionall y
  Rothschilds, in Russia it was Hopes who took the lead.
                                                              The few rela-
  Amsterdam was the main centre for Russian stocks.
                                                      1830s  and   1840s met
  tively small loans that were brought out in the
                                                            was   repell ed by
  with a poor response in London, where the public
                                            ment of his neighbour,
 the Tsar’s autocratic rule and harsh treat
                                                     moderation which
 Poland. ‘If the Emperor continues the system of
                                                          t a new Rus-
 he is following in Poland. . . then the prejudice agains
                                                 told Hopes in 1831,%%
 sian loan here will entirely subside,’ Barings
                                                placed 500,000 roubles
 but though on this occasion they successfully
                                                 seemed incompatible
 of stock in London, sustained moderation
                                                   other hazards too. In
 with the nature of the Russian state. There were
                                                   been observed that
 November 1832 Barings reported: ‘It has
 142                    The Sixth Great Power

Rothschild paid yesterday a long visit at the Russian Embassy where
he has not been seen for the last 3 years.’? Ten years later the threat
became reality when Rothschilds in Berlin and Frankfurt handled
the larger part of a new 4 per cent loan raised to finance a railroad
from St Petersburg to Moscow.7°
   In spite of this setback Barings still hoped to secure the agency for
the Russian government in London; not that it was likely to prove
lucrative but because, as Mildmay modestly admitted, ‘there is a cer-
tain credit even to such a House as Baring Brothers and Co. in being
appointed to such an Agency’?! From retirement Lord Ashburton
urged his nephew on, but he was sceptical about the chances. ‘I am
 afraid your competitor will prove too strong for you,’ he wrote. ‘He
 has winning ways which you cannot imitate. . . . You will gain noth-
 ing by stooping too low and though the Agency is very desirable it
would not even be worth having with engagements which would
leave the Court masters of your Capital at all time.’72 When the nego-
tiations went sour, Barings consoled themselves with the thought
that they were well rid of what could have been an embarrassing
encumbrance. The grapes were, perhaps, genuinely sour, but in Rus-
sia as in almost every country in Europe the power of Rothschilds
had proved superior.
   Looking at Europe alone, Bates’s contention that Barings were no
longer a house interested in foreign loans, though not the whole
truth, was at least a large part of it. Such loans contributed only a
small element to the total turnover and were generally more trouble
than they were worth. But Europe was not the whole story. There
was a world elsewhere; and it was across the Atlantic that Barings’
business, in loans as well as in the more traditional trading, pros-
pered most mightily.
                                    9
                                >   ex

      ;
 American Resources and Wealth’
                North America, 1828-1848




Given the experience and predilections of Joshua Bates it would
have been amazing if North America had not witnessed Barings’
most dramatic growth in the 1830s and 1840s. But it was not Bates
alone who was responsible. When the firm of Bates and Baring had
been taken into Baring Brothers in 1828 it brought with it business
worth some £14,000 a year, and though no one doubted that Bates
had been the most active partner, the name of John Baring was
remembered and well liked in business circles throughout New Eng-
land. Thomas Baring was also well known in the United States. He
was introduced to the former President, James Madison, as being
one of those ‘whose interests, as well as their feelings, are interwoven
with the prosperity of this country". The house of Baring had been
less conspicuous over the last decade than directly after the Napole-
onic wars, but there was still a solid basis of reputation and good will
on which to build.
   In London it was Bates who made himself responsible for the
American visitors to London, a stream which became a torrent after
the steamboat service was established in 1838. Even in 1833 some
100 or 150 Americans might be in town at the same time with intro-
ductions to Barings. ‘I doubt if anyone goes away under the idea that
                                                                        he
his business is neglected but he may have an idea that personally
has received but little attention,’ wrote Bates. What was    to be done?
Even if he were able to ask them all to his house it would be at the risk
                                                                       the
of ‘offending the higher by mixing them with the lower, and
                                                                     feel-
Americans display none of that equality or want of aristocratic
ing, which they are so famed for at home’.
                                                                         in
   It was, however, Thomas Baring who went to the United States
                                    143
144                      The Sixth Great Power

 1829 to consider how best Barings’ business should be built up. The
obvious course was to appoint an agent, but Bates had doubts about
this. ‘.. . an Agent, unless he is a very clever man and stands high,
does an injury to any House,’ he had written while he was still work-
ing in Boston. ‘People are perfectly sick of the name of Agent, both
here and in New York.’3 Baring was quite ready to echo this opinion
- ‘In general agents don’t succeed here,’ he concluded while in New
York* - but by the tme he reached Boston he found Bates had
changed his mind. “This relieves me from the decision of a question
of which I can be in no way a competent judge, he wrote with some
relief.5 The favoured candidate was T. W. Ward, who had
unfortunately just blown off his left hand in a gun accident and was
in peril from lockjaw; but once this hazard was overcome, Baring
thought well of him.
   Thomas Ward was an old colleague of Bates; slow, somewhat
unprepossessing, brusque and graceless in manner:        ‘What would
you think of a man,’ asked Bates, ‘so forgetful of himself and every-
one else as to come into your room while your family was at break-
fast, put his hat, gloves and spectacles down on the breakfast tray,
take a sausage with his fingers out of the dish and, holding it by its
two ends, bite off the middle and put the two ends back into the dish
without a word being said?’ But Ward was honest, meticulous, and
with an encyclopaedic knowledge of American business and busi-
nessmen. Trading on his own account he would never have made a
fortune, as Barings’ agent his value was immense. On 1 January 1830
he took up his duties at a basic salary of £2000 ayear. Bates told him
later that he had the entire confidence of the house and that they had
permitted him to enjoy power which no one partner would have
been allowed to exercise in London.’ In fact he was constantly being
enjoined to do this and eschew the other, but he was still given wide
discretion. He took his duties with becoming seriousness. His new
role, he wrote in his diary, ‘makes it important I should rise early and
do up my business in the morning, that I should keep a memoran-
dum or diary of occurrences. . . If lam to succeed as an agent I must
be more attentive to the minor modes of pleasing others, and mix
more with the busy world. The great object, however, is to do what I
think right on all occasions, and to be deliberate in my decisions.’8
   His main task was to select the individuals and houses with which
                      North America: 1828-1848                       145

Barings should do business, to assess their credit-worthiness, probe
their weaknesses, gauge their honesty, secure information on their
bank balances. His instinct was to expect the worst: ‘My own conft-
dence in our mercantile community as a whole was never great, and
is now lessened by what I see. We have bad habits, and not easily
cured.’? His assessments of the people concerned were brisk and to
the point: in a typical list, one was ‘poor and miserable’; one ‘doing
nothing, safe’; one ‘snug, has some property’; one ‘capable, an only
son and his father is rich’.!° Barings meanwhile responded with
information about their clients in England: one was ‘very safe and
very respectable’; another was a ‘3rd or 4th rate cotton broker. Habits
not the best.’ But it was not just people about whom Ward kept
Barings informed: political trends, projected railroads, prospects for
crops, all were relevant; even the level of the Mobile River was of
interest, since this affected the shipping of cotton and might give
Barings a chance to dispose of stocks in Liverpool.'!
   The branch of Barings at Liverpool was one of the most important
factors in the development of their American business, putting them
into direct competition with one of their most formidable rivals,
W. andJ.Brown and Co. in the United States, Brown, Shipley in Brit-
ain. It did a healthy export and import trade in many commodities,
but cotton was its speciality and the huge resources Barings could
deploy quickly made it one of the largest importers. The business
was conducted on the lines Bates had laid down in London - dispose
of a consignment quickly and accept a smaller profit rather than
hold and risk a loss. For this they were criticized, sometimes with
reason, but it stood them in good stead in times of crisis.'?
   ‘I feel quite satisfied with the position of the House in the United
                                                                       ss
States,’ wrote Ward in 1831. ‘The foundation is good, the busine
increasing. . . You can hardly do justice to the great increas e of trade
                                                                   fail to
in this country. There is much competition, but you cannot
                                                       and gain from
take the lead and the best business. . . We lose none,
                                                                 fiercest
others and take the best of the new ones.’ Traditionally the
                                                                 “Ameri-
opposition came from ‘the three Ws’, the long-established
                                                           and  Co.  and
can houses’ of George Wildes and Co., Thomas Wilson
                                                                growing
Timothy Wiggin and Co., but W. and J. Brown and Co. was
                                                               this fam-
fast - ‘This house,’ admitted Barings in June 1831, ‘or rather
                                             in the US.’3
 ily of houses, commands an immense business
146                     The Sixth Great Power

   Rothschilds were inconsiderable in the commercial field, but after
their setbacks in 1830 in France they began to look with interest at
the United States. In 1834 this brought them into direct conflict with
Barings. The new administration under President Andrew Jackson
was known to be violently opposed to Nicholas Biddle’s Bank of the
United States, with which Barings were closely allied, and Barings
had also been somewhat less than sympathetic when the Secretary of
the Treasury carelessly drew a bill without first appropriating the
necessary funds. It seemed possible the United States government
might wish to change its agent. Rothschilds evidently volunteered
for the role, for in July 1834 the Treasury Department wrote to thank
them: “The high standing and character of your house 1s well under-
stood in the United States, and I take pleasure in saying that the
Government of this country will probably avail itself of yr offer.’
   The first Barings heard of it was a brusque note from the Secretary
of the Treasury telling them that the account would be transferred in
just over two months.!5 The news was received, wrote the historian
of Rothschilds, with ‘un mélange dorgueil froissé et d'amertume’.'6
Certainly the identity of their replacement caused them more dis-
tress than the loss of the account, which in financial terms was more
trouble than it was worth. “They might have written us a more civil
letter,’ was their temperate comment.!” They comforted themselves
with the reflection that they had kept the far more profitable US
Navy account, and that since the change had been a political one,
‘and as parties are rapidly changing, it is probable that we shall have
it back in two or three years’.18
   In this they were proved right. In 1843 Tyler became President,
with Barings’ staunch friend, Daniel Webster, as Secretary of State.
At once the account was restored to Barings. Webster then resigned.
Rothschilds’ man in America, August Belmont, saw a chance to
regain the prize. ‘It would be an easy matter to get the account back,’
he wrote, ‘provided, however, the place 1s not filled by a creature of
Webster's, who for weighty reasons is very attached to Barings.”!9
Some months later, he was pointing out to all and sundry the merits
of transferring the account to Rothschilds in Paris, arguing ‘how
impolitic it is on the part of the United States Government to keep
her accounts for the disbursement of her diplomatic agents and
a great portion of her foreign fleet not only in England, the only
                      North America:    1828-1848                     147

country with which ever a collision is likely to occur, but moreover in
the hands of a banking house whose close connection with a mem-
ber of the House of Lords puts the accounts of this Government
almost under the immediate eye of the British Cabinet’.2° Ingenious
though his arguments were they availed him nothing, and the
Rothschilds in London did little to urge him on. It was more than
twenty years before Barings finally lost the agency, and then only to
an American bank.


Ward felt that Barings did not use their pre-eminence in Anglo-
American trade to full advantage, and that they underestimated the
potential of the New World: ‘You have altogether too low ideas of
American resources and wealth, intelligence, efficiency of labour,
extent of production, ease of subsistence.’?!Bates had said scoffingly
that there were 3000 houses in England as powerful as the largest in
the United States and that the capital of Barings was almost equal to
that of Boston. ‘We have 15 millions of people active, intelligent,
industrious, full of eager competition and free of taxes,’ retorted
Ward. ‘We have a fertility of soil unexampled . . . So far as wealth
consists in commodities, good land, houses, people, power, roads,
canals, it would seem that we have both wealth and the means of
increasing it.22 When things were going badly Barings were too
quick to apply restrictions: ‘By acting with freedom I have done you
great good .. . Is it not desirable that your commercial correspon-
dents should feel that in times of security . . . they can have some
advantage from the resources of so great a House in delay or accom-
modation? Is it not very important to keep up the impression that
there is nothing like Barings, and is there no danger that the charm
may be broken?’3 When things went better they were too slow to
relax: ‘Two years ago, Ward wrote in 1835, ‘we seemed to be monop-
                                                                     com-
olizing the business of this country, but. . . various causes have
bined to lessen the proportion you have of the American business.
Your prudence has been a leading cause.’
                                                              1832, the
   He scored the occasional debating point. When, in
                                                 consi derab le   loss to
Hamburg firm of Sillem and Co. closed with
                                                                satisfac-
Barings among others Ward wrote with barely concealed
                                                         you, and that
tion: ‘I must say Iam surprised at such an event so near
148                      The Sixth Great Power

you should not have kept clear - not that the amount is anything of
importance, but I have valued your watchfulness and sagacity.’ How
much better things were ordered in the United States.’ But Barings
changed their policy not one whit. Constantly they were calling
Ward to order and reminding him of the rules of the house: ‘It is a
bad way to get into to allow people to postpone remittances and we
wish your particular attention to this point now’; ‘As it is probable busi-
ness will become unprofitable it will be absolutely necessary to limit
the issue of credit . . .’26 By the end of 1836, when the economic
storm had already broken over the United States, what had been pre-
viously pettifogging conservatism suddenly seemed the acme of wis-
dom. ‘It is now easy to perceive how wise Messrs Barings have been
in that restricted course which they have lately pursued, in conse-
quence of which they are now so snug and easy, wrote a friend in
London to Thomas Ward. ‘The other American acceptors, tho’ they
will get safely through, will have an anxious and painful time of 1t.’27
The writer thought the storm was almost over, in fact the worst was
still to come.
   The long period of American expansion, with an inflow of foreign
goods and capital paid for by the issue of more and yet more stocks,
was halted abruptly when the European investor lost interest and
confidence in these securities. In the crisis that followed, American
merchants found themselves unable to remit the huge sums owing
to their European creditors, and brought down not only their own
houses but the houses of their creditors as well. Barings, who had
been systematically running down their American commitments for
a year or more, and anyway had far larger capital reserves than their
rivals, were seriously inconvenienced, recording a loss of £168,000 in
1837 and writing off bad debts of some £118,000 the following year.
For the other ‘American’ houses it was disaster. The Bank of England
gave help to tide the weaker houses over the worst of their
difficulties and give time for remittances to resume. The Committee
of Treasury concerned itself in the matter. ‘Barings stood up to the
Committee as equals,’ recorded the historian of the Bank of Eng-
land, ‘gave them much and rather patronizing advice through their
American specialist,   Mr Joshua Bates, and were never in danger’, but
by mid-1837 Wiggins had £384,000 acceptances with the Bank and
Wilson and Wildes some £250,000.28 The ‘three Ws’ were effectively
                    North America: 1828-1848                     149
driven out of business; W. and J. Brown survived, but only with
much and prolonged aid from the Bank and a rescue operation by
other houses.
   Rumours abounded that Barings too were heavily over-com-
mitted, that they had outstanding acceptances of£1.5 million. ‘Even
the House of Baring are in a frightful dilemma, reported a letter to
Thomas Raikes in April 1837. ‘Lord Ashburton has been obliged to
support them with £800,000 and the Bank is called upon by them for
fresh advances.’2? When the dust settled and they were seen to be
hardly impaired, their stature was immeasurably increased. ‘There is
very great reliance on your House,’ wrote Ward in May 1837, ‘and it
will be the sheet anchor of the commercial world, and command the
deposits of the shipping interest of the United States and any other
business which may be desirable to you.3°This for a time was liter-
ally the case; at the end of 1837 there was no rival in sight.
   It could not last long, of course. As the American economy slowly
recovered, other houses returned to the scene. To the chagrin of
Ward, Barings had no inclination to relax the prudence that they had
showed before the crisis or to go out hungrily for new business.
Lizardi and Co. and Huth and Co. began to reassert themselves.
W. and J. Brown and Co. were particularly active in taking on small
accounts and had none of Barings’ reticence when it came to offering
credit to houses which did not deal exclusively with them. Barings’
power remained massive, but as the 1840s wore on their attention
was more and more focused upon the public borrowing on which
the future of the United States seemed so much to depend.


By and large the American investor looked after the needs of the
                                                                    to
Federal government; it was the individual States that turned
                                                                 and
Europe for development capital. With high interest rates
                                                 richer  and  longer
security believed to be complete at least in the
                                                                    In
established States, it seemed a promising field for investment.
                                                            for Mas-
1828 Alexander Baring urged his partners to take up a loan
                                                         sober  state
sachusetts: ‘I should think the engagements of this old
                                                                  y.’
the very best security in which any man could invest his propert
                                             was  always  necessa ry:
New York was another favourite. But caution
                                                      a good judge
‘You may find the public not so discriminating as
150                      The Sixth Great Power

would be between the credit of Massachusetts and Louisiana.3!
Barings saw their role as being, if not to educate the public, then at
 least to protect it by offering only stocks in which they had confi-
 dence and which they would be happy to hold on their own account.
    Curiously, Louisiana was one of the first States in which Barings
became deeply involved. Before the first Massachusetts loan had
been floated, Thomas Baring’s friend Edmond Forstall had talked
him into taking 1250 of the $1000 bonds raised to finance the bank
which the Planters of Louisiana were intent on establishing. Two
years later he again involved Barings in the setting up of the Union
Bank in New Orleans.3? In 1832 a Louisiana Loan was introduced
and Barings secured it. ‘We shall all make money, and pretty easily
too,’ Bates wrote with satisfaction. ‘At one time. . . Rothschild gave
out that he should take the loan. When he found out we had got it he
said he hoped we would give him a part of it. We told him we would
gladly do so at the same price that we gave it to the public, which he
declined.’33 Rothschild had the last laugh, however. In July 1833
Bates was ruefully admitting: ‘It was probably a mistake bringing the
Louisiana Loan out in the market, altho’ at the time it was thought it
would go off. . . the takers bring it to market for a /2% or 1% profit
and if you do not support the market by buying at 1% premium one
gets the reputation of not supporting one’s loan.’34
   Barings were far from being the only house dealing in American
securities, and Rothschilds became more interested as the scale
expanded. Their motives seem to have been as much to spite Barings
as to make money. Urging his nephews in London to buy American
State bonds, James de Rothschild wrote, ‘I do this, so that Barings
should not be in the position to say: “I forced Rothschild out of the
way.” Therefore, even if there is nota penny profit, so long as there is
no loss - I shall carry on with the business.’35 When Barings’ closest
New York associates, Prime, Ward and King, made a joint offer with
Rothschilds for a Maryland loan and offered Barings a share, Barings
remonstrated with their friend in tones more of injury than anger:
‘Such an interest as you contemplated giving would not have been as
satisfactory to us as what you do for us usually is.’36 But though the
Opposition was real, it was erratic, and there were not many contracts
which Barings could not obtain if they set their heart on it. They
remained as clearly the leading house in American loans as
Rothschilds were in Spain or Austria.
                       North America: 1828-1848                       151

   Barings continued to be discriminating about the States whose
loans they would handle. Mississippi they espoused with caution,
and were confirmed in their doubts when they failed to persuade
Hopes to join them. In general ‘old’ States were felt desirable, ‘new’
were to be eschewed. ‘The Public here do not like the Securities of
the new States, wrote Bates. ‘I do not think they offer the same secu-
rity as the old States, for the population of all the new States is neces-
sarily rude and not much used to the possession of Money.’ Barings
would not touch Indiana but Ohio was very popular ‘owing to its
being an old State, the oldest of the Western States, and was peopled
from New England’.3”
   As directly relevant as any State loan to the development of North
America was the close relationship that grew up between Barings
and the Bank of the United States under its ambitious, headstrong
and sometimes maverick President, Nicholas Biddle. Biddle was an
economic nationalist, who felt that the Bank should be used to free
the United States from the shackles of European capitalism.38 Up to
a point Barings supported him in the enterprise, and even the cau-
tious Mildmay was in 1829 prepared to increase the Bank's credit
from £100,000 to £250,000: ‘We will not deny that the mortification
would be great were we to see the Institution in correspondence with
any other House in London as their Agents.’*? With Biddle at the
helm, things rarely ran altogether smoothly ~ in 1831 Barings seri-
ously considered giving up the agency*? - but a more or less amicable
relationship was maintained until the crisis of 1836 and 1837.
   In April 1836 Samuel Jaudon arrived in London on behalf of the
Bank, demanding an extended credit of £1 million. It was a moment
at which Barings were cutting back on their American commitments
                                                                         in
and though the credit was not refused outright it was granted only
                                                                      been
part and grudgingly. When it was discovered Jaudon had also
                                                         Bates    lecture d
in touch with the Governor of the Bank of England,
                                                                       else
him on the impropriety of opening negotiations with anyone
                                                was affront ed.   The  fol-
while Barings were still in the field.*! Biddle
                                                              to   replace
lowing year Jaudon returned to London, with orders
                                                                 d exclu-
Barings as agent and thus provide a representative ‘devote
                                                 Jaudon  did   as  well as
sively to American concerns.” But though
                                               the Bank of the
 could have -been hoped for in London, Biddle,
                                                     were drifting
 United States and the American economy generally
                                                   Americ a and a
 into ever stormier waters. Crop failures in North
152                      The Sixth Great Power

recession in Europe combined to make it almost impossible to sell
American stocks in London. With a million pounds of notes matur-
ing in the autumn of 1839, Jaudon’s position became impossible.*
   Biddle saw no recourse but to swallow his pride and ask Barings to
resume the agency. Nor surprisingly, Barings did not make it pleas-
ant for him. ‘We do not consider ourselves in any way pledged to
resume the agency of the Bank,’ they wrote loftily in August 1839,
‘which if hereafter desirable must be open to fresh negotiations.’##
They insisted that the Bank should forthwith cease borrowing on its
bonds, a condition Jaudon had to accept. That done, they contrib-
uted £100,000 to a subscription of £740,000 designed to assist the
Bank through its worst problems, and in November helped raise
another £300,000 - ‘Jaudon was with me on Saturday, wrote the
great financier, Lord Overstone. ‘He wants another lift. . . Bates also
came up on the same errand. I gave a positive refusal to have any-
thing to do with the business - stating distinctly that I was disgusted
with the whole concern.’#5
   Ward, who loathed Biddle, regretted that Barings had come to the
rescue. ‘I think the Bank should never be allowed to rise again into
power, he wrote, ‘.. . and were I not in your service I should con-
sider it a high public duty to use my influence to put it down for
ever.'#6 He was particularly incensed when the New York Courier and
Enquirer accused Barings of double-crossing Jaudon and working to
destroy the Bank.*” Jaudon was enlisted to deny the story in the
Morning Chronicle** and an injured rebuttal of the charges was sent
to all Barings’ favoured correspondents.*?
   By the middle of 1840 it was clear that Barings had done no more
than buy a breathing space for the Bank, and they did all they could
to dissociate themselves from its death throes. It was finally sus-
pended in February 1841. ‘What a set of swindlers the Directors
must be,’ wrote Bates to Ward. ‘I think you will stand very high in the
opinion of the people for your judgement in this matter.’5° He
thought that this was the last act in a protracted tragedy; he soon
found that it was only a curtain raiser. In F ebruary 1841 Ward
warned Barings that it was unlikely that several of the Western States
would be able to pay the next dividends on their loans, and that even
Pennsylvania was in trouble.5! ‘I feel ashamed of my country,’ wrote
Bates. Maryland caused him the greatest concern. Barings had
                        North America: 1828-1848                         153

recently sold £700,000 worth of this State’s securities and were the
agents for paying the dividends. ‘If we can keep Maryland night |
shall be very happy,’ he wrote. ‘It is the only one which our fame
would suffer by in case of default, therefore pray look to it without
delay.’® 2 Ward was not surprisingly baffled by this somewhat exigent
instruction. ‘I cannot comprehend your thinking I should be able to
do anything with Maryland,’ he protested. The State government
continued to claim that it intended to pay but his guess was that both
itand Pennsylvania would soon default, joining Florida, Mississippi,
Indiana, Illinois, Arkansas and Michigan.*?
    European bankers and investors were outraged. American resi-
dents in London encountered a hostility they had never experienced
when the two countries were at war - cut in the streets and black-
balled in the clubs. ‘The State of Pennsylvania cheats me this year
 out of £50,’ complained Sydney Smith. ‘There is nothing in the
 Crime of Kings worse than this Villainy of Democracy. The mob
 positively refuse all taxation for the payment of State debts.’5+ Bates
 bemoaned the fact that his homeland was disgraced; finding a little
 comfort in the fact that Massachusetts at least was sound but still
 concluding, ‘the damning proofs against the moral honesty of the
 States and individuals are so numerous. . . that all efforts are useless
 and Americans abroad are doomed to that sort of sorrow that I can
 conceive a brother to feel for a loved sister who had deviated from
 the paths of virtue’.*
    Though the federal government was in no way legally responsible
 for the plight of the States, its credit was inevitably tarnished by what
 had happened. In 1842 agents of the US Treasury came to London to
                                                                        and
 try to raise a new loan. ‘The United States are wealthy, thrifty,
 rapidly increasing in wealth, and as         a govern ment   out of  debt,
                                                                      Euro-
 pleaded Ward.*¢ Such arguments made no impression on the
                                                                           de
 pean investor. "You may tell your government, said James
                                                   seen  the man  who   1s  at
 Rothschild grandiloquently, ‘that you have
                                                                  that they
 the head of the finances of Europe, and that he has told you
                                                                 enjoyed
cannot borrow a dollar, not a dollar.’*7 Barings would have
                                                       for   the   British
proving him wrong, but they knew that he spoke
                                                              to interest
investor as much as the French. They tentatively tried
                                              of Texas  but   found the
Hopes in a loan to the fledgling Republic
                                                          ‘It  strikes us
Dutchmen disinclined to anything so adventurous:
154                      The Sixth Great Power

that the fate of the new South American Republics 1s as yet so
uncertain, that notwithstanding the great differences in the Origin,
habits and pursuits of the Texan population, there 1s no saying what
will ultimately grow out of the sort of anarchy which prevails in
Mexico.’58
   Even if they had not been agents for the American government,
Barings could not possibly have washed their hands of the defaulting
States. They had too much at stake. Thomas Baring, perhaps because
he felt less personally involved than Bates, was the more optimistic
of the two. ‘It seems that all goes on le mieux du monde dans ce meilleur
des mondes except that dark spot America, he wrote to Bates in
August 1842, ‘but I cannot help believing that we shall see a clear up
there.’5? Though several of the States seemed particularly loath to
resume payments, even if the money could somehow be raised, only
Mississippi had gone so far as formally to repudiate its debts. There
was still hope. The most practical step that Barings could take to
restore American credit was to persuade the more respectable of the
defaulting States to resume payment; with luck the rest would then
come into line. Pennsylvania, Maryland and Louisiana were the
three States with whom they felt a particular involvement, and it was
on these that they instructed their agent, Ward, to concentrate.
  Ward's campaign in Pennsylvania was a model of lobbying and
media-manipulation. Politicians were persuaded that self-interest
demanded a rapid resumption of payments; the press was fed with
letters and articles arguing that the economic development of the
State would be crippled unless access to foreign funds was restored;
appeals were made to pride and a sense of propriety; the clergy was
enlisted to preach that credit-worthiness was next to godliness,
‘every Christian man and woman. . . will feel this obligation when it
is presented to their attention’.6° He laid out about £1500 on the
operation and thought that every penny had been well spent when
Pennsylvania resumed payments early in 1845. He did not hesitate
to use occasional small but well-placed bribes or promises of favours
to come. His activities filled Bates with fastidious horror. ‘What you
say and what I see of many people in the United States makes me
think that you and I on the whole are very respectable Gentlemen. I
have asort of instinctive horror of doing one thing to effect another,
or using any sort of subterfuge or reserve. It never was practised...
                     North America: 1828-1848                       155

by any of the Barings. My whole life has been a stranger to any such
doings.”¢!
   Bates’s chief preoccupation was that Barings should not expose
themselves to any charge that they were interfering in American pol-
itics. ‘Your payment to Mr Webster would not appear well if it
should get out, he wrote anxiously to Ward. ‘Itis very important that
we should not in any way interfere in the Elections. . . The claims of
the creditors of the States rest on a firmer basis than that which 1s
influenced by party politics and we must not damage our case by
doing that which we are bound not to do.’¢? Daniel Webster was one
of the most talented and influential figures in American public life, a
man whose oratorical powers and lucid, powerful mind were
matched by his greed and unscrupulous pursuit of self-interest.
Ward had given him $500 in 1839 to subsidize a visit to London and
 Barings had looked after him while he was there.* It had proved a
good investment, but Webster was an instrument that had to be used
with care. ‘I do not give him my confidence,’ wrote Ward in 1843.
‘That he is desirous of sustaining his reputation as a great statesman
_. I do not doubt; but he wants and must have money, and will in
what he does or omits look very much to its results to himself.’¢* On
the issue of State debts he proved a redoubtable champion, and did
as much as anyone to ensure that one by one the sinners returned to
the fold.
   By the mid-1840s Barings were beginning tentatively to reintro-
duce the better American securities to the European market. There
were obstacles beyond those caused by the defaulting States. For one
thing, railroad fever was consuming most of the capital Europe had
to offer.6° For another, the possibility of war over the north-west
                                                                remote.
frontier between the United States and Canada was real if
                                                            e   regions
 ‘Go to war about the snow peaks and desolat
                                                                      ‘A
of Oregon!’ protested a friend from Illinois to Thomas Baring.
                                                               who like
country thought of as a residence only by restless pioneers
                                                                 French
the buffalo fly before civilization, or perhaps by Canadian
                                                                as soon
who find a copper-coloured wife in every wigwam! I should
                                                   of the Arctic  Sea.’*
think of getting into contest about the navigation
                                                was one more factor to
 But wars had begun for odder reasons, and it
disquiet the market.
                                                   defaults that
   It was nevertheless the rancour inspired by the
156                      The Sixth Great Power

caused the greatest problem. There was genuine distrust of Ameri-
can securities on the part of the British investor, and plenty of
bystanders who for one reason or another wanted to keep these
doubts alive. The Times was one of the more conspicuous of these.
Joshua Bates professed to dismiss its operations as insignificant. ‘The
Times has always had a spite against B.B. and Co. on account of polit-
ical differences, he told Ward 1n 1845. “They have usually attacked
every American loan or anything else that they could trump up a
story about, but the result of these attacks has, I believe, almost
always operated in favour of the project or operation attacked. Pub-
lic attention was drawn to them and the attacks only served as an
advertisement. Newspapers in this country do not represent public
opinion.’6? But in this case at least The Times was articulating the
fears of its readers rather than creating them. It was not until Europe
slipped into political chaos in 1848 that the British investor began to
think that there might be something to be said for the New World
after all.


One part of North America was not directly affected by the problems
of the defaulting States; but Canada had more than enough of its
own problems. Alexander Baring had visited the colony in 1797 and
reported that it was economically beyond hope: barren, bleak, cut off
from access to any seaport, it was ‘a perfect deadweight to Great Brit-
ain, serving only to feed the empty vanity of large territorial posses-
sions and to increase Ministerial patronage at the expense of the
nation’.¢8 Early approaches for loans from the government of Upper
Canada were dismissed by Barings as offering flimsy security and
inadequate interest. To geographical remoteness and inhospitable
terrain, the region now added extreme political instability; the
French population had been by no means successfully assimilated
and the growing power of the United States posed a constant threat
from the south.
   It was not until 1835, when money was particularly plentiful, that
Barings could be prevailed on to tender for a small £400,000 loan to
Upper Canada, and even then they did so without marked enthusi-
asm. They were glad to split the loan with the rival bidders, Thomas
Wilson and Co. Even this they had cause to regret, the financial crisis
                       North America: 1828-1848                     157

of 1836 and 1837 soon spread to Canada and by 1838 Wilsons were
bankrupt and Barings still had £60,000 worth of stock on their
hands. It was an unpromising start to what was to be a long and close
association.
   Why Barings did not cut their losses and have done with Canada ts
hard to see. Probably it was that combination of obstinacy and hon-
our which so often led them to continue to fight for causes which, if
not losing, at least promised to be unprofitable in the short and
medium term. Having backed Canada once, they would continue to
do so. In 1837, in place of the tottering Wilsons, they took over as
 financial agents in partnership with Glyn, Hallifax, Mills.6? Ward
strongly approved ofthis new interest. “They appear to be thriving in
Canada, he told Bates in 1841, ‘and to be a prudent, frugal and good
 sort of people. . .7° The following year, fortified by a guarantee from
 the British government, Barings and Glyns raised £1.5 million for
 public works in Lower and Upper Canada.
    They were still, however, something less than whole-hearted in
 their support. At the end of 1848, the Canadian government sug-
 gested that Barings should now take over the sole agency. Barings
 refused; out of friendship to Glyns, they declared. If the Canadians
 insisted ona sole agency, then Glyns were ‘fully as able and willing as
 ourselves to promote the interests of the Colony’.’! No doubt they
 were sincere in their protestations of affection for Glyns, but itis not
 over-cynical to detect also some uncertainty about the future for
 Canada’s economic development. It is also fair to say that, at the end
 of 1848, the partners in Baring Brothers had other, more pressing
 considerations on their mind.
                                  10
                                opm
                                  @ =t4-




       ‘A House Which We Intend
                    to be Perpetual’
                            1848-1873




The year 1848 saw the end of the second generation of the Barings
of London: Sir Thomas; Alexander, Lord Ashburton; and Henry
Baring all dying within a few months of each other. The head of the
family was now Sir Thomas’s eldest son Francis, who served in Lord
John Russell’s Whig administration from 1849 to 1852 asa modestly
innovative First Lord of the Admiralty. According to Francis Baring’s
journal he tooka day to consider John Russell’s offer: ‘In the evening
more talk and I accepted. Alas!’! Greville, however, suggests he
grasped the offer with almost unbecoming alacrity.2 He never took
office again but soldiered on as a reliable and influential member of
parliament, representing Portsmouth until he was created Lord
Northbrook in January 1865. The honour bore heavily upon him; he
died eight months later.
   That other Baring peer, the 2nd Lord Ashburton, was equally
remote from the bank. Thomas Carlyle thought he found little pleas-
ure in his new glory. ‘He is immensely rich, but having no children,
and for himself no silly vanity, I believe does not in the least rejoice
at such a lot. Poor fellow! He looked miserably ill the day I called on
him . . . One could not but ask oneself, thinking of £60,000 a year,
“Alas, what is the use of it?” ’3 His gloom was possibly induced by his
wife Harriet, who knew only too well what was the use of £60,000 a
year. Greville called her ‘perhaps the most conspicuous woman in
the society of the present day’,+ she was intelligent, quick-witted,
with just enough education to pass for a bluestocking and enough
vivacity to pass for a wit. She was anxious to shine in the high aes-
                                 158
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         159

thetic line, and turned the Grange into a menagerie where literary
lions like Carlyle and Thackeray grazed among politicians and
assorted grandees. Her main defects were arrogance and a propen-
sity for conversational bullying so marked as to verge on sadism. ‘I
don’t mind being knocked down,’ complained one victim, ‘but I
can’t stand being danced upon afterwards.’’ Anything to do with the
bank seemed to her tedious and common: when the wife of a new
Baring partner, Mrs Russell Sturgis, asked to be introduced to her at
a party, she replied ‘in a dawdling tone that she must decline as she
had already been introduced to two ladies of that firm’.6 But she
 made sure that her guests enjoyed the best: what impressed an
American visitor, Mrs Laurence, when she visited the Grange was
not so much the resident physician; the groom of the chambers, but-
ler and under-butler; the spectacular silver and the turkey stuffed
with truffles; but the fact that at breakfast the boiled eggs were
marked with the day of the month on which they were laid.’
  When the 2nd Lord Ashburton died without a son in 1864, the
title went to his brother Francis. Until then Francis had gone on liv-
ing mainly in Paris, paying little attention to the bank of which he
was technically senior partner, but complaining querulously if neg-
lected: ‘I have not had a line from Mildmay or anyone since Ileft,’ he
wrote to Thomas Baring, ‘but I suppose I am not thought of suffi-
cient consequence to be written to.’* He retired from even nominal
partnership when he inherited the title.
   Joshua Bates and Thomas Baring were thus very much in charge;
at first in that order, then, as Bates aged and the bank became more
involved in international loans, with the balance of power shifting to
the younger man. Bates by 1848 was an extremely rich man, living in
great grandeur. He bought a mansion standing in 24,000 square feet
on the site of what is now the Ritz on Piccadilly and Green Park.
T. W. Ward was overawed by its splendour: ‘Most magnificent,
adequate for Royalty itself; the ceilings some 20 or 25 feet high in the
                                                           damask,
drawing rooms; the walls of the rooms all lined with satin
and the painting white and gold.” The guests were as imposing as
the drawing rooms; at dinner on 24 March 1858 were the Duchess of
Cambridge and Princess Mary, the Duke and Duchess of Manches-
                                                      and, among
ter, the Duchess of Inverness, Earl and Countess Grey
many others, the Bishop of Oxford.
 160                      The Sixth Great Power

   Bates owed his breakthrough into high society largely to his
daughter, who married Jean Sylvain Van de Weyer, the Belgian min-
ister in London. The Van de Weyers were befriended by Queen Vic-
toria and their children invited to play in the royal nurseries. ‘I
started at Weymouth with $5 in my pocket and have increased it to
$4 million,’ wrote Bates in wonder. ‘I am on friendly terms with King
Leopold and the French Emperor, my Grand Children play with
Princes and Princesses. The world, as old Rothschild used to say, has
been very kind to me.’!° Perhaps the most notable victory was that he
and Mrs Bates were now received at the Grange. ‘Hada very pleasant
time,’ he noted with satisfaction in 1850.1! What Harriet Ashburton
said of him once his back was turned is another matter.
   Bates still ate, drank and breathed his work but a suggestion of
mellowing was apparent. He paid several visits to the Great Exhibi-
tion, for which he had put up £500 and offered a further £10,000.12
‘Great curiosity to see the Nepalese Ambassador and the Hippopot-
amus,’ he wrote in June 1850, demonstrating a finely eclectic
approach to sightseeing. '} But he remained touchy and preoccupied
with his dignity. In 1855, when Louis Napoleon visited Windsor,
Bates was only belatedly invited to join a party of City dignitaries
who presented an address to the Emperor. ‘I declined to go - not
knowing what position I might be placed in. . . I feel that I should
not expose myself to the chance of mortification. This is always the
case with the British merchants, as they are called, they are so push-
ing for notoriety that a Modest Man is always neglected.’1+
 _ Bates’s invitation to go to Windsor on this occasion arose because
Thomas Baring, who had been asked to read the address, had better
things to do. When Ward dined with him he noted, ‘Mr Baring’s
house is very simple compared with Mr Bates’s.’'5 But though Baring
may have been more unassuming than his partner, he possessed in
full the gravitas which marked his family through the generations.
He was a perfect choice for all those semi-public posts that call for
men of patent integrity, stature and sound judgement: chairman
                                                                   of
Lloyds, deputy-chairman of the Royal West India Mail Steam
Packet Co., chairman of the Savings Bank, trustee
                                                  of Merton Col-
lege. “He will damage his health if he is not careful,’ wrote
                                                                Bates, ‘but
he is a most generous, talented and agreeable man
                                                  and well calcu-
lated to lead in anything.’16
Joshua Bates, by an unknown artist.
‘Thomas Bar ing (1799- 1873) by George Richmond
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:     1848-1873      161

  With more enthusiasm on his part Baring could certainly have
played a leading part in politics. Disraeli’s admiration for his ability
was undiminished; he possessed, wrote the Tory leader, ‘a talent for
the exercise of which he is responsible to his sovereign and his coun-
try’.!7 Baring did not accept the responsibility. In June 1851, discour-
aged by some minor setbacks, Disraeli urged him to take over as
leader of the party in the House of Commons. Baring professed to
find the suggestion a joke, but Disraeli renewed it.' Baring was
unmoved; he had too many other commitments, he said, even if he
was up to the task. Derby spoke bitterly about the reluctance of cer-
tain Tories to take office; ‘the one whose private affairs prevented
him,’ wrote Greville, ‘was Tom Baring.’!? Derby had no more luck
the following year. ‘It is supposed Lord Derby may be sent for to
form a ministry,’ wrote Bates. ‘If so they will want my partner Tho.
Baring for the Exchequer but I doubt if they will get him.?° The invi-
tation duly came, and Bates was right.?!
   But though he eschewed office, Thomas Baring could not avoid
being one of the most influential of the Tories - ‘the most sensible
and respectable of the Derbyites, Greville described him.?? His
instincts were conservative: ‘In dealing with great commercial ques-
tions and with great interests,’ he declared in the House of
Commons, ‘sudden revolutions are the worst and most dangerous
experiments.’? But unlike some members of his family, he was in
social terms never illiberal. He was the only leading Conservative of
the main stream to give Disraeli full and effective backing in his
battle for Jewish emancipation, aligning himself on this and similar
issues with Peel and Gladstone rather than his usual allies.”
   He had many interests to distract him from both politics and busi-
ness. He was already a very rich man when, in 1853, his cousin,
                                                               at
Charles Baring-Wall, left him his house and fortune, estimated
between £350 and £450,000. Norman Court was a pleasant if
undistinguished house set in 7000 acres near Stockbridge in Hamp-
shire. The house was not large for the park, noted Mrs Reeve, ‘but
pictures and china are renowned; so is the cooking; and with such
wealth as is at our host’s comman4, all the details are in perfection’.?°
                                                                       his
It was the pictures that Baring particularly cherished. In 1838
                                                  of Rome    by  Samuel
younger brother John gave him a drawing
                                                                than the
Palmer; a replica, but one which the artist thought better
 162                    The Sixth Great Power

 original: ‘I offered to make him a duplicate for twenty or thirty
 guineas according to the time spent upon it and ifIdid my very best
 for forty. He at once commissioned me to make a duplicate for forty
 guineas.’6 From then on Baring collected avidly. In 1846 he com-
 bined with Humphrey Mildmay and Lord Overstone to buy the cel-
 ebrated Dutch pictures of Baron Verstolk van Soelen. They acquired
 the collection en bloc and then held a private auction, splitting the
 profit or loss between them.2’ By the time he died his collection of
 Dutch and Flemish pictures was spectacular, including works by
 Lucas Cranach the Elder, Jan Gossaert, Jan Van Eyck, Mabuse, Bol,
 Dou, Peter de Hooch, Metsu, a doubtful Rembrandt and a splendid
Hals. He paid more money for Murillo’s portrait of Don Andres de
Andrade - £1020 - than for any other single picture; his Mantegna
from Cardinal Fesch’s collection cost him £420, his Titian portrait of
Charles V £204.15/- and his small Zurbaran of St Francis in Medita-
tion a mere £12.78 The total value of his collection was put at about
£100,000.?9
   An American railway tycoon in London in 1853 remarked how
curious it was that in the greatest city in the world, ‘there should be
only one man to look to and consult, and to guide action in impor-
tant financial matters. . . Ask about anything and the reply is, “What
does Mr Thomas Baring say, or think?” ’30 With all these extra-
curricular activities, it is amazing that he managed to devote as much
time as he did to the affairs of Baring Brothers. These remained his
prime concern, however, and he was painfully aware that he and
Bates were a two-man band, with no one clearly destined to succeed
them. This was not at all what he wanted: ‘Half my pleasure,’ he
declared in 1849, ‘is to work for a house which we intend to be
perpetual; /e Roi est mort, vive le Roi.3!
  Where to look for the next king was the problem that exercised
Bates and Baring. Young, wrote Bates dismissively, ‘is a useful part-
ner, discreet and gentlemanly but he has no head for business’. The
only member of the family who seemed likely ever to come into the
house was the child of Henry Baring’s second marriage, Edward, and
he was only twenty. He had stayed with Bates in 1845 and had been
found to be ‘evidently fond of business and only wants good advice
and opportunity to make himself master of it, but it would bea long
tuume before he would be ready to be made a partner, let
                                                           alone to run
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873          163

the house. ‘I can’t wait for him. . . What is to become of the House
after a few years I know not, but I am quite sure that it will never be
organized as efficiently as now.’??
   Bates was now sixty and very conscious of it. It was to take death to
release his tenacious grip on the affairs of the counting house, but
business from 1848 onwards was increasingly conducted against a
background rumble of threats to resign and complaints at the unfair
burden put upon him. In 1849 a step was taken to relieve the strain
by the appointment of a new partner, an American, Russell Sturgis.
Sturgis was a lawyer by training who had then worked in the family
mercantile house, mainly in the East. ‘Query: is he the man for us?’
Bates asked himself.33 He was taken on for an initial three years at a
salary of £2000 a year and within a month had won golden opinions.
‘I judge he is just the man for us,’ concluded Bates. ‘Good manners,
agreeable temper, industrious and attentive to his business, knows
how to receive Strangers and will by and by relieve me very much.’34
A note of caution crept in towards the end of 1850 - ‘Mr Sturgis is a
little too vain and jumps to a conclusion without sufficient thought’
— but the faults were felt to be trivial and easily corrected.?*> He was
admitted into partnership in 1851, taking ¥¢ of the profits.
   Then the snags began to appear. He was industrious enough when
in the office, but left his work behind him when he went outside,
conduct unaccountable to the dedicated Bates. He was extravagant,
too; spending his income on good living instead of ploughing it back
to build up the house’s capital. He was ostentatious and inclined to
frivolity; when his father died, ‘he puts on no mourning and has gay
company at his Country House which looks very odd. It is some-
thing more than eccentricity.’*6 His vanity was not so easily cured as
Bates had hoped and he began to put on airs, professing himself the
equal of Bates in matters of American trade and his superior in other
fields. Crowning offence to the staunch Bostonian Bates, he took the
side of the South in the American Civil War and treated Barings’
trading partners from the North with scant courtesy - ‘He is now
anti-American in everything,’ commented Bates sadly.*”
   But he was there; and Baring had a better opinion of him than
                                                                  con-
Bates. In 1853, indeed, when Baring was becoming increasingly
                                                        other matter s,
cerned about the amount of time he was devoting to
                                                                      in
including long stints on his doctor's orders taking the waters
 164                    The Sixth Great Power

Germany, Sturgis’s share of the profits was doubled to “iz. At the
same time two young men were brought into the counting house ata
salary of £1000 a year: Humphrey Mildmay’s son Henry Bingham
and the young Edward Baring who had so impressed Bates a few
years before. Mildmay was brought in as a sop to his father, who was
still offended at having been eased out of the house in 1847 - ‘a very
good young man, but can never become a manager of the House,’
judged Bates.38 Ned Baring was a different matter. ‘His morals are
bad, but he is clever, felt Bates. The extent of his immorality, to
judge from other entries in Bates’s diary, was that he was fond of
society, slovenly in his accounts, expensive in his habits, apt to hurry
his business and not stay late in the office, and ‘desirous of playing
the first fiddle’ — hardly the pinnacle of viciousness but black enough
in the eyes of Bates.3? ‘I doubt his judgement’ was Bates’s summing
up - which was in time to be proved perceptive indeed.#9 ‘My
impression is that neither of them will make a good merchant,’ he
concluded gloomily. If he and Thomas Baring were to retire, with
more than £1 million of capital between them, there would be little
left in the way of capital or talent. ‘I suppose I must continue two
years longer during which T. Baring will do very little.’*!
   In spite of these misgivings, Mildmay and Ned Baring were
admitted partners at the beginning of 1856: of the 24 shares, Francis
Baring, still the senior partner, retained 3; Joshua Bates 6; Thomas
Baring 5; Charles Baring Young and Russell Sturgis 3 each and
Mildmay and Ned Baring 1 each. The remaining 2 were kept in
reserve against possible needs. The business they had joined could
hardly have seemed more prosperous. In 1858, Bates noted proudly,
Baring Brothers were agents for the governments of Russia, Norway,
Austria, the United States, Chile, Buenos Aires, New Grenada, Can-
ada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Australia; they had 1200
                                                               cor-
respondents in different parts of the world; they held the personal
accounts of the Emperor of the French, Count Chambord,
                                                       King
Leopold of Belgium: ‘No House ever had such a business and were |
20 years younger I should delight to conduct it.’#2 Neither the gov-
ernmental nor the private accounts were necessarily a source
                                                                    of
profit - in 1863 Barings found themselves suddenly having to come
to the rescue of the Prince of Orange, who had lost his entire allow-
ance and £2000 besides on the Derby*} - but they gave the
                                                               house
prestige of inestimable value.
        ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:     1848-1873      165
    But Bates was not twenty years younger, and as he edged into his
‘seventies he became more and more doubtful whether the house
 had any future after the departure of himself and Thomas Baring.
 Sturgis was spending £11,000 a year and the amount was increasing
 even faster than his income. He had only £20,000 in the business and
 showed no signs of increasing his stake appreciably. Edward Baring
 lived at the rate of £8400 a year and was far too fond of hunting.
 Bates remonstrated with them both. After some grumbling Sturgis
 agreed to give up his house in town, but the economy achieved was
 trifling and he made such a fuss about it that the word went around
 that Barings were in financial difficulties. Ned Baring promised to
 reduce his expenditure to £3000 a year, but signally failed to do so.
 Bates’s preferred solution was to dismiss them both, replacing them
 by a senior clerk, George White, and his own grandson, Victor Van
 de Weyer. Whether he put this proposal to Thomas Baring is not
 clear; if he did he must have been persuaded that it was unduly dras-
 tic. The same partners were in charge in 1864; the two managing
 partners still agreeing that they would have the gravest doubts about
 leaving the business in the hands of their juniors, but doing nothing
 very much to put the matter nght.#
     By then Bates’s health was clearly failing. Several times in the pre-
 vious years he had proposed that Barings should go into voluntary
 liquidation rather than face inevitable decline. When he died in Sep-
 tember 1864 it seemed that his suggestion might have to be adopted.
 Francis Baring ceased to be a partner almost immediately afterwards
 and the joint effect of these two departures was that the house's capi-
 tal fell from £1.41 million in 1862 to £0.63 million in 1865, while the
 Reserve Account was reduced from £0.67 million to £0.13 million.
 Barings had either to reduce its commitments, rapidly build up its
 resources, or give up the struggle. It was Thomas Baring who had to
 find the solution, virtually single-handed.


 The firm over which he presided had come a long way since the trau-
 mas of 1848. Barings in particular, and the British economy in gen-
 eral, had benefited by the flow of capital from the continent - France
 and Spain above all - as European capitalists tried to find a safe
                                                                      to
 home for their resources. But to amass these funds was one thing,
 deploy them profitably another. The late 1840s and early 1850s were
 166                      The Sixth Great Power

 nervous years. There were plenty of openings on the continent - in
 the last few weeks of 1848 Barings were approached about possible
 loans for Sardinia, Austria, Tuscany, Denmark and the City of Paris*5
 - but none of them seemed possible in the political climate of the
 day. ‘John Bull is in a sort of maze what to do with his money, Bates
 told Thomas Baring. *. . The American stocks are likely to attract his
 attention.'*6 But here too confidence took time to rebuild and it was
 to be some years before sales of American securities could be
 undertaken in London without extreme prudence. Yet somehow
 business continued buoyant; distributed profit for 1849 was
£168,000 and only a little less in 1850. ‘What enormous gains,’ won-
dered Bates, and made with little risk, but he characteristically found
grounds for despondency about the future: ‘There seems abroad a
growing indifference and unbelief in regard to Religion which more
than anything indicates the decline of nations.’47
   Barings putat least part of their profit into bricks and mortar. The
business had now wholly outgrown the Georgian buildings at 8
Bishopsgate into which they had moved some fifty years before, and
early in 1853 Lewis Cubitt, brother of William Cubitt, the architect
of Belgravia, and himself responsible for the Great Northern Rail-
way terminus at King’s Cross, was called in to remodel the premises.
Amazingly, he had completed his work, which included building
over the old courtyard and installing gas lighting, within seven
months and the imposing new office block was in full operation by
the end of the year. ‘I hear that you are making yourself very smart
and comfortable in Bishopsgate Street,’ wrote Charles Labouchére.48
 Bates simply wondered how they had ever managed to make do with
the old premises.*? In accordance with the rules of business proce-
dure throughout the ages, it was a matter of months rather than years
before there were discontented murmurs that more space was
required.
   In January 1854 Baring Brothers gave a dinner at the London Tav-
ern to their forty clerks. ‘I hope we are setting a good example,’ wrote
Bates rather dubiously in his diary. ‘They are certainly very excelle
                                                                       nt
clerks.’*° Ward told his son that they were ‘so able in their respec
                                                                     tive
places’ that everything ran smoothly. ‘Mr Bates says that they
                                                                     have
several who are equal to everything required, and know
                                                             just what to
do whatever comes up, and that when anything is wanted
                                                                   of the
       A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:     1848-1873      167
partners, the matter is placed clearly before them by the Clerk in
whose care it is in a few words together with his reasoning on it. The
principals only have to assent to the conclusion arrived at, as they do
usually, or decide what else shall be done.’s! One of these super-
clerks was presumably the George White whom Bates had wanted to
make a partner in place of Russell Sturgis, and who was in time to
play an important role in Argentina.
   Barings were good employers. Recognizing that the road to the
partners’ room was all but impassable to those who did not belong to
the family, they were always ready to help an ambitious youngster
get on elsewhere. Charles Dickens's son Charley, who had been
strongly recommended to them, was first put into a broker’s and
then offered a place in Bishopsgate at £50 a year. ‘I suspect the
 Brokers to have been a device and trial altogether, wrote his father ‘-
to get a telescopic view of a youth with a double suspicion on him
arising out of being an author's son and an Eton boy.’s? Charley
 Dickens did well, and a few years later was sent off to set up his own
 business in Hong Kong with Barings’ blessing and financial support.
When George Knapp fell ill in 1860 Barings tolerated his frequent
 absences for almost eighteen months and only then retired him on a
 pension of £150 a year. His pension was continued to his widow
 when he died in 1865 and a cash payment was made to his two
 daughters when she followed her husband.**
    The Liverpool house never expanded to the extent Bates had once
hoped, but it continued to make a useful contribution to profits,
usually between £20,000 and £30,000 a year. For twenty years from
1848 it was run by James Price, who became a partner in the London
house in 1867. Price was a bachelor, a fact which proved profitable
to his second-in-command, Mathias Purton, who found himself
responsible for the house’s entertainment of American and other vis-
itors. ‘I should wish to do the thing in proper style,’ he wrote, ‘and
this I have no doubt you also would expect.’** Presumably they did;
anyway, they raised no objection when he increased his expenditure
by £800 a year and bought a new house for £2850. Price was a pru-
dent man and objected when Bates played with the idea of taking an
interest in a line of packet boats to the United States. Cunard had
more than enough screw boats to cope with any foreseeable demand
and would be formidable competitors. ‘The management of steam-
168                       The Sixth Great Power

 ers is a business ofitself and with which the less such Houses as ours
 have to do, the better.’55 His words were heeded, Barings’ direct
 involvement in transport by sea was not revived for a decade or
 more.
    Screw boats were one factor that transformed the business of mer-
 chant banking, the telegraph was another. ‘All news is now made by
 the electric telegraph common property,’ Barings told Hottinguers
 in 1853, in mingled gratification and alarm.** The new development
 had its influence in every field, but above all in the world of inter-
national finance which Thomas Baring had made his own, and
which occupied more and more of the house’s energies as Joshua
Bates lost his grip on the day-to-day business of acceptances and
credits. The day of hurried missions and face-to-face negotiations
was by no means over, but it became increasingly possible for
bankers to appoint representatives abroad and control them closely.
   So far as Europe was concerned, Thomas Baring’s main preoccu-
pation in the years after 1848 was to practise the art of refusing grace-
fully. In 1849 Count Tojal, the Portuguese Minister of Finance,
asked for a small loan of £45,000 for the repair of roads. Barings
replied:
      Nothing would be more agreeable and flattering to us than
      to be able to co-operate efficiently with advantage to the
      Government of Portugal . . . That desire on our part has, we
      can assure Your Excellency, not been diminished when we
      find that the department of the Finances has been confided
      toa minister of such acknowledged talents and experience as
      yourself. . . We have not the slightest distrust of the honour
      or good faith of the Government of Portugal or of its full
      determination to keep strictly to its engagements, but we
      unfortunately had during the last operation a proof that
      inevitable events may baffle the best intentions, and that
      perfect reliance cannot be placed on the exact payments at
      times fixed, and Your Excellency is aware how important
      such punctuality is in the business of merchants.57
In a case like this, Barings concluded, the best solution was
                                                                to let the
local population pay.
   Even where the prospects did seem more enticing Barings
                                                           were
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         169
hesitant. Towards the end of 1848 they advanced £170,000 to the
Spanish governmentagainst the delivery of mercury, a safe and prof-
itable business even if it involved tying up capital for a period longer
than they really liked. But when the proposal was renewed they
proved reluctant. Their correspondent in Madrid, Henry O'Shea,
was told that Barings, ‘as a matter of delicacy and good feeling’, were
anxious to avoid ‘direct and repeated competition’ with their neigh-
bours, Rothschilds.’ This was the first manifestation of a trend
which was to become more and more apparent as the nineteenth
century wore on; Rothschilds and Barings no longer seeking to cut
each other’s throats in every corner of the world, but tacitly accept-
ing that each had a sphere of influence in which they were pre-
dominant. Partly this stemmed from recognition of the fact that in a
conflict of this kind there could be no winner, only greater or lesser
losers; partly it was a banding together of the two oldest and
grandest houses against the threat of the joint stock banks and the
emergence of new competitors on both sides of the Atlanuc.
    The new spirit of conciliation wore pretty thin in Spain, however,
when the two houses found themselves vying for the 1849/50 mer-
cury contract. The problem for Barings was that the Spanish govern-
 ment was too deeply committed to Rothschilds to shuffle them off
altogether, yet wanted to have a rival conspicuously in the offing to
ensure that its regular bankers did not exploit it unmercifully.
 Barings were cast in this dispiriting role. Weisweiller, the Roths-
 childs’ representative, at one point suggested that the two houses
should tender for the mercury on joint account, conduct the sales
jointly and split the profit fifty-fifty.*° Thomas Baring, who had gone
out to Spain for the auction, was cautiously interested, but negotia-
tions foundered when the Spanish government set a price for the
mercury far higher than Barings were prepared to pay, and
Rothschilds took the contract for the next two years. From London
Joshua Bates complained that Barings’ agents, O’Shea and Co., had
time and again been outmanoeuvred by Weisweiller and the
Rothschilds. Baring defended them: ‘They have certainly not the
shrewd cunning nor the active talent for intrigue of Weisweiller, but
in these qualities Jews beat Christians all over the world. They are,
                                                         Roths-
however, honest, straightforward and zealous.’6° Whether
childs would in fact have gone through with the compromise is an
 170                      The Sixth Great Power

open question; Thomas Baring believed they would only have done
so if they had been in sole charge of the negotiations.6! What is
certain is that Rothschilds had no intention of being driven from the
field. Baron Lionel told Weisweiller ‘to offer $60 in case he has good
reason for believing that Baring intends opposing us and making an
offer, but if not, he is to offer 53 and to try to get it at 55.’62
   The Spanish government continued to make overtures to Barings
over the next decade but the only time that anything came near a
conclusion was in 1853 when Barings were ready to sponsor a £9.5
million loan. Hopes flatly refused to cooperate - ‘We have had such
repeated proofs of the little faith that can be placed in the assurances
of the Spanish Government that we should not wish to place our-
selves again in their power’ - and were proved right when a politi-
cal storm in Madrid led to the government reneging on the deal. It
was not until 1867 that Barings again undertook any operation on
behalf of Madrid, and then it was on a limited scale and rendered
nugatory by a revolution the following year.


Spain was Rothschild territory into which Barings rarely and timidly
ventured; the reverse was true in Russia which was to be for seventy
years or more the European country with which Barings were most
intimately involved. When Baron Stieglitz, the Berlin-born financier
who enjoyed a semi-official status in St Petersburg, wished to raise a
large loan for the Russian government in 1849, he this time went
directly to Barings rather than first approaching Hopes. Barings were
sceptical; they wanted Hopes to take the lead and, anyway, felt that
with the war in Hungary undecided and doubtful, and all European
policy uncertain, the chance of profit at 95 does not seem to us at
present to compensate for the risk of loss’.6+ Russia at the time was in
one of its phases of full-blooded self-assertion, its armies rampantin
Poland and Hungary. Barings’ calculations were coloured by the fact
that Richard Cobden, the influential economist and politician, was
being vociferous even by his own high standards in denouncing Rus-
sian aggression, and at a well-attended meeting at the London Tay-
ern only a few days before had inveighed against any possible loan.
‘We do not attribute much importance to the circumstance,’
                                                                Barings
told Stieglitz,$> but they did.
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         171
   By the end of the year, however, the war in Hungary was to all
intents and purposes over and the loan which the Russian govern-
ment was seeking was presented as being for the completion of the
Moscow-St Petersburg railway and not for any military purpose.
Cobden duly denounced it as an ‘unholy and infamous transac-
tion,66but the average British investor was more concerned with the
prospects of profit. Bates was uneasy - £5.5 million seemed to him
too large an amount and 93 too high a price - but he allowed himself
to be over-persuaded.*” His doubts were quickly appeased, the issue
was six times oversubscribed and opened at a 2 per cent premium.
An anonymous letter received at Bishopsgate which threatened dire
consequences to all concerned did nothing to damp the euphoria.**
The commission earned by Barings, apart from any profits made by
dealings in the bonds, was £105,000.°° Bates’s only complaint was
that by August 1850 Barings still held £150,000 worth of Russian
stock on their own account and Thomas Baring was reluctant to sell
it off. It was the old difference of attitude between the two men; in
Bates’s view, ‘the object should be to close an operation and secure
the profits - if it can be done without injuring the general impression
in regard to the well conducting of the Loan, and as there have been
eager buyers I cannot account for the disposition to hold’.”° But this
was a minor blemish; reflecting on the loan Bates concluded: ‘I don’t
know that B. B. and Co. can stand any higher, they are undoubtedly
the first Commercial firm in the world which is a great achievement
when it is considered that there is no stain on their fame of any kind.
We are always liberal to all, honest as a matter of course. We work
hard, perhaps too hard.’7!
   Two years after the loan had passed off so successfully, a credit
was opened at Barings in favour of the Imperial Court. In effect
Barings were now the official agents of the Russian government. It
was unfortunate that this happened at a moment when Britain and
Russia seemed on the brink of war over Turkish territorial problems.
One of Barings’ first tasks was to remove the Russian deposit of
about£1 million from the Bank of England, retain a third of it for the
payment of dividends and ship the rest to Holland in Gold Impert-
als. ‘This will make a sensation when it becomes known,’ com-
mented Bates, and a few days later: ‘This move is either a political
manoeuvre or there must be fear of war on the part of Russia.’7?
 172                     The Sixth Great Power

    The fears were justified. In March 1854 Britain and France
 declared war on Russia. Barings’ well-known association with the
 Russian government did not make things easy for them. In the
 House of Commons Palmerston described Thomas Baring as being
 the private agent of the Emperor of Russia.7* The relationship
 between international finance and foreign policy, or to particularize,
between Barings and the Foreign Office, is always hard to define
with any precision.’* Thomas Baring constantly met members of the
government in the House of Commons, private houses and the
clubs. Often his relations were among them. He was considered by
them to be a member of the establishment, whose discretion could
be relied on and whose opinion on many issues was well worth elicit-
ing. He, for his part, made it his business to know the main lines of
British policy. It is hard to conceive any circumstances in which he
would deliberately have taken action likely to frustrate it, and impos-
sible to believe that he would ever have ignored a direct instruction,
or even request from the British government - self-interest as well as
patriotism would have precluded any such behaviour.
   But it did not follow from this that Barings were a docile tool of
British policy. On the contrary, they could often take an indepen-
dent line. Thomas Baring liked to know what the government was
about, but he retained the discretion not to know if it suited his book.
There was in fact nothing ministers could have done to block the
transfer of the Russian deposits out of the country, but if there had
been and Baring had thought it possible that there might be opposi-
tion, he would have been capable of making the transfer first and
telling the government later. As for the Crimean War, he never
viewed it as anything but a calamity, and an unnecessary one at that.
‘Decidedly and foolishly war-like,’ was how Barings described the
public mood to Hottinguers in February 1854.75 Of John Russell’s
peace mission in 1855, Barings feared that ‘public opinion may be so
goaded by the press and so irritated by the failure of immediate and
complete success in the war as had been absurdly anticipated,
                                                              that
national vanity may be a hindrance to a reasonable peace’.76
   Nor did Barings pretend, even in wartime, that their relations with
their commercial contacts in Russia were ever less than cordial. In
June 1854 Baron Stieglitz rather bizarrely offered Barings participa-
tion ina 50 million rouble war loan. He made it clear he did not anti-
       ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’:    1848-1873       173
cipate acceptance and Barings duly refused the offer, but ‘we are not
the less obliged to you for this evidence of a friendship which we
always value’.?7 When peace came in 1856, Barings were quick to
assure Stieglitz that ‘one of the most awful results of the war has been
the interruption of our full and confidential correspondence. We
trust that such a disastrous state of events may not again occur.’
   During the war Barings continued to market enough Russian
bonds through Hopes to meet the interest due to British investors on
earlier issues. This activity caused some confusion. ‘Only think of the
Russian loan being levied here!’ wrote the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, Lord Clarendon, indignantly to his wife. ‘In the
ordinary way of business, too, so I don’t see how it can be inter-
fered with! £200,000 left London yesterday . . .7° It sounds as if
Clarendon was equating payment of interest on the 1850 loan with a
new loan. A surprising number of people, though few of them as
well-informed as Clarendon should have been, imagined Barings
were in some way associated with Stieglitz’s 50 million rouble war
 loan. Legally this would have been impermissible, economically
 injudicious, and politically and socially inconceivable.*
    As soon as the war was over Barings plunged back into the fray.
 The insatiable appetite of the Russian railways for fresh financing
 led to negotiations in April 1856 for a huge loan to cover the con-
 struction of a network of 2500 miles at an eventual cost of some £40
 million. The Grande Société des Chemins de Fer Russes, as the enterprise
was called, was to build a line from St Petersburg to Warsaw and
other links, mainly radiating from Moscow. Stimulated in part at
least by the knowledge that Rothschilds were showing interest,
Barings played an unwontedly aggressive role, and in October
Thomas Baring led a group of French and English bankers to St
Petersburg. Bates was initially suspicious; “Unless they make a very
favourable contract they will, I trust, make no engagement. For my
part I rather wish to have nothing to do with it.’8! Once the contract
                                                                     ‘If it
was signed, however, excitement overcame his habitual caution:
does not prove a brilliant affair I shall be much disappointed.’*?
Barings agreed to place in London 140,000 shares of £20 each.
  An extraordinary outcry greeted the announcement of this agree-
ment, based partly on the argument that British capital was needed
                                                                   y of
urgently in Britain, partly on the impropriety of helping a countr
 174                    The Sixth Great Power

 autocratic tendencies which had so recently been an enemy, and
 partly on the alleged riskiness of the investment. In Birmingham
 Peel made a speech warning the public not to hazard their money in
 such a field, but his words were dulcet compared with those of the
 press. Under the headline ‘Patriotism and Five Per Cent’ the I/lus-
 trated London News speculated whether Barings could be considered
 good patriots - ‘naturally no direct answer can be given to such a
 ticklish question’.83 Punch broke into verse:
            Can anybody of the British nation
            Attempt a railway loan’s negotiation
               His countrymen in Russian toils ensnaring?
            No firm in England, sure, could be so base,
            Let us then hope that such is not the case,
              Although reported of the House of Baring.84
   But it was The Times that produced the most sustained and
rebarbative abuse, causing particular offence to Bates by a piece that
accused Barings of rigging the market. The newspaper adduced a
 pair of apparently respectable clergymen who had been put forward
as would-be buyers of the stock but in fact were pawns of the unscru-
pulous promoter. ‘False, wicked and malicious,’ Bates described it:
‘It is inconceivable that malice can invent such falsehoods.’85 Small
wonder that Bates had been outraged when assured in Paris that
Barings were proprietors of The Times: ‘Of course I denied it and
informed that it was hostile to the Barings and had abused them
from the late Lord Ashburton down to the present Generation.’86
   The hostility of the press, a shortage of money, the low interest
offered by the Russian government, and reasonable doubts about
the viability of the project, combined to make the issue a disaster.
Under 19,000 shares were applied for, and though others were grad-
ually disposed of in Amsterdam or St Petersburg, Barings were left
holding more than 100,000 shares at the end of 1 857. They
                                                             remained
obstinately optimistic, however; Thomas Baring told Stieglitz that
he was certain the shares would soon win the approval of the British
investor while Hottinguers were confidently assured: ‘The more
                                                                 we
hear and learn of the Grand Russian Railway the better we think of
                                                                   it
... We hope the opening 100 miles towards Warsaw may
                                                             make a
sensation that the London press will have to notice.’87
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873          7/3
   Unfortunately their optimism proved ill founded. Within a few
months they were grumbling about the extravagance of the enter-
prise and the refusal of the Russians to employ a British engineer.’*
Costs were consistently exceeded, schedules not held to, those lines
that were operating were run inefficiently. Thomas Baring tried to
withdraw from the Board of the Grande Société on the grounds that
there were few British shareholders and he had no useful role to
play.8? The foreigners on the council were invariably ignored and ‘I
do not wish to expose myself to such complete neglect,’ he com-
plained in 1868. ‘I suppose that the foreign members are considered
ornamental but they are evidently of no weight.’ For Barings the
Grande Société meant a lock-up of much-needed capital and much
worry and frustration.
   Nor did their support for Russian railways guarantee their posi-
tion when other loans were in question. At the end of 1858, when the
 Russian government wanted to raise £11 million, it disconcerted
 Barings by announcing that it proposed to offer the contract to sev-
eral tenderers. ‘We cannot forbear from expressing the painful regret
that we experience in observing that the Russian government, in
applying to others, should seem to manifest a distrust of the ability
and zeal of those who have in past times been entrusted with similar
negotiations,’ wrote Thomas Baring reproachfully to Baron Stieglitz.
‘| cannot help fearing when not an open but private competition 1s
involved . . . that we may be defeated by arts which we could not
employ.’#! The arts he had in mind were of course those of
Rothschilds, but when the bids were put in it was found that by far
the best came from the respectable but relatively minor firm of
Thomson Bonar.
   The loan was not a success and Thomson Bonar proved them-
selves incapable of sustaining the credit of the Russian government.
For several years Barings and Rothschilds then boxed and coxed in
                                                                      in
the favour of St Petersburg; Barings having an expensive time of it
                                                                     ng
1860 repairing the damage done by Bonars, Rothschilds managi
                                                       fortuna tely  for
no better in 1862. Then in 1864 the tide turned;
                                                                   1866
Barings on a loan which they and Hopes controlled. The year
                                                a vast subscri ption  of
proved still better, with Barings harvesting
                                                             had  to  be
£18.6 million against a total loan of £6 million which
                                                                 ahead.
shared with Hopes. It seemed that a prosperous future lay
 176                    The Sixth Great Power

But the fickle British public soon concluded that there was a limit to
the quantity of Russian stock it was prepared to stomach. The Dutch
market too showed signs of being sated. A succession of railway
loans proved that the money was more easily raised in Paris, Berlin
or Frankfurt, and inevitably the Russians began to look in that direc-
tion. Between 1870 and 1886 three fifths of foreign investment in
Russia came from Germany.®? It was a development that left little
room for Barings.


 While Russia was hungry for foreign capital, France was very capable
 of looking after its own requirements; indeed French capitalists were
 more and more in competition with the British in the European
 money markets. Bates told Lord Shaftesbury that ‘he had more
 hopeful views of French finance than of any other country on
earth,’? and though the country’s wealth was more latent than
apparent in the years that immediately followed the revolution of
 1848, Louis Napoleon’s coup d’état at the end of 1851 restored the
confidence of the monied classes.
    Barings flattered themselves that they enjoyed a special relation-
ship with the future Emperor. In 1885 they were to write to the Edin-
burgh Review, complaining of a story that in 1866 Louis Napoleon
had deposited nearly £1 million with them as a hedge against pos-
sible future trouble: ‘This statement is entirely erroneous. In 1866
we had neither money nor securities belonging to the Emperor of
the French. . . Neither then, nor at any other time during his reign,
did the Emperor remit to us any large amount either of money or
securities.°*The statement was carefully phrased and somewhat
disingenuous. Louis Napoleon during his exile in Britain had been a
frequent visitor to Joshua Bates’s home and during his time as
Emperor from time to time deposited a few thousand pounds with
Barings, notably after a visit Bates paid to St Cloud in November
1860.°> Nothing remotely approaching £1 million was involved, but
Louis Napoleon was still aware that Barings were his trusted friends.
   It must have been in part at least this familiarity which led him in
September 1855 to write directly to Joshua Bates with a most singu-
lar proposal. There had been a bad harvest in France. If the French
government were known to be in the market, prices would
                                                               soar.
      A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         177
Would Barings procure 3 million hectolitres of corn in the United
States? This would be sold in France at the current price: if Barings
gained on the deal, it would be their good luck, if they lost, the
French government would make up the deficit. It was Ireland and
1845 over again; no one could be better qualified for the task than
Barings, Bates assured the Emperor, ‘having executed a similar com-
mission for the late Sir Robert Peel’.°7 They would prefer not to
make a profit on the deal, but would charge 2 per cent commission
on the purchases and 5 per cent on any money they had to advance
for the purpose.*8 Louis Napoleon was so far satisfied with this offer
that he broke off negotiations with the French houses with whom he -
had also been treating and entrusted the business to Barings.
    The operation could hardly have been better carried out. A poor
 harvest in Germany and the devastation of the Russian crops
 by drought and locusts drove prices upward, but in Boston Ward
 handled the purchases with skill and discretion. ‘We repeat our anx1-
 ety that this order be executed in the best manner possible,’ read
 Ward’s instructions. ‘As great confidence has been placed in us by
 His Majesty the Emperor we should be very sorry that he should in
 any way be disappointed,’ - exemplary sentiments, though rendered
 a little less inspiring by the fact that the letter was copied to Louis
 Napoleon.9? By mid-February, 1856, corn to the total value of
£1,864,940.6s.3d. had arrived in France - ‘There was a heavy loss on
 the operation,’ reported Barings, ‘which however was a gain to the
 people of France by the influence which our sales had on the general
 prices.’!0° The only snag was that Barings had to wait a long time for
 their money. Francis Baring in Paris was responsible for pressing for
 payment. He found it an ungrateful task. ‘This is the shabbiest Gov-
 ernment going,’ he grumbled. ‘After going from one Minister to
 another I have only half done my job.’!°! The trouble was that if he
 pressed too hard he gave the impression that Barings were in urgent
need of their money and thus not so affluent as generally believed.
To be deprived of the money was indeed more inconvenient than
they liked to admit; in February 1856 they had to draw on Hopes for
£100,000 to tide things over.'°
  Apart from this unusual enterprise, Louis Napoleon’s favour did
Barings little good in France. When the French government wanted
to raise 500 million francs as a loan in 1855, to help pay for the
 178                     The Sixth Great Power

  Crimean War, Barings were the only foreign house to be asked to
  join the Parisian banks, but the demand in Paris was so great that
 their list of subscribers was returned to them unused.!° According
 to the French financier, Baron d’Eichthal, they suffered more than
 disappointment. When the French Minister of Finance, Achille
 Fould, first approached Barings, Thomas Baring apparently argued
 that, as banker for the Russian government, he could not undertake
 the issue. He was over-persuaded, and the Russians, attributing the
 loan’s great success to Barings’ participation, took their revenge in St
 Petersburg when their latest loan was put out to tender in 1858.1
 The story seems unlikely; Barings’ role in the French loan was in fact
 insignificant and, if the Russians had felt vengeful, it would presum-
 ably have been in 1856 that their displeasure would have been most
 evident. It is possible, though, that while they accepted that Barings
would have actively to support the British government in the
Crimean War, they felt it unfriendly to extend that aid to France, and
that the memory of this made them more ready to abandon Barings
when Thomson Bonar or Rothschild were in contention for a loan.
    What small contribution Barings did make to French financing lay
in the development of the railways, and here too the French could
provide all their own needs and more. Whatever share Barings were
willing to take, they found themselves cut down to a tithe or less.
They were reduced to arguing that they should at least be placed ona
parity with the London Rothschilds, ‘that there should be no superi-
ority granted to them, and no power or privilege granted to them
which we do not enjoy. That is requisite for our position here.’ 105
    Under Louis Napoleon, indeed for the rest of the nineteenth
century, foreign capital had little place in France. After the Franco-
Prussian war, with French morale shattered and a need to raise
                                                               an
£80 million indemnity loan within a few months, it seemed that out-
side help would once more be essential.19% Barings and Rothschilds
jointly issued the prospectus and Barings offered to guarantee £2
million for themselves and £2.7 million for ‘our friends under our
responsibility’.°7 But even this modest contribution proved un-
necessary; Paris alone subscribed more than was needed
                                                       to cover the
indemnity, and the French provinces half as much again.

                          *        *        *
      A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873            179
Except for Russia, therefore, Barings’ role in international finance
after 1848 was concentrated heavily on North and Latin America.
They made occasional forays elsewhere. In 1857, for instance, young
Hugh Childers was sent out to Australia to act as Barings’ confiden-
tial representative to negotiate a £7 million loan needed by the Colo-
nial Treasurer of Victoria - ‘All is settled with the Barings. They offer
very liberally, wrote Mrs Childers appreciatively. Childers went,
negotiated, and returned to report. ‘Met Mr [Thomas] Baring and his
cousin Mr Edward Baring,’ he recorded. ‘Norman Courta fine place.
Full of curiosities. Edward Baring a capital fellow.’ The trip had
proved abortive, however. While he was en route to Australia the gov-
ernment had changed and the new ministers preferred to deal with
the local banks. 1°
   Barings were not beyond investing in stocks for which they had no
personal responsibility. Thomas Baring rejected as sancumonious
humbug a sentence in a draft letter which stated Barings never spec-
ulated in this way. ‘Our books would show that we have speculated
for our own and for joint account in English, French, Russian,
Austrian, American stocks which we did not ourselves bring out,
lately in Panama Bonds and Australian Railroad shares. And I pre-
sume we should do it again if there was a good prospect of profit.'°?
It was notable that members of the family were decidedly more
robust than outsiders like Bates or Sturgis when it came to balancing
profit against prestige. Writing about a Mexican loan Francis Baring
commented: ‘... the question of dignity remains for the house,
which I am less solicitous about if the thing goes down. | don’t
believe in dignity in our days. See how the Jew gets on!'4!°
   Perhaps not surprisingly for a house that every year was concen-
trating more on the international field, Barings’ one large investment
at home continued to give trouble. ‘1858 has certainly been a won-
derful year for profits, Thomas Baring wrote to Bates. ‘Luckily it has
                                                  Weardale, or
been an expensive one and we have Grand Trunk and
we should become too fat and saucy.’!!! Grand Trunk was the North
                                                             to his
American railroad which was Thomas Baring’s contribution
                                                         £10,00 0 a
house’s losses; the Weardale ironworks, losing a regular
                                                             y. In
year, was the cross that Bates had made and now bore manfull
                                                          retrieved. Iron
 1848 he was still hopeful that the situation could be
                                                                    rably
was being produced at a little over £2 a ton, which if conside
 180                     The Sixth Great Power

 more than the 16/- predicted by Attwood, was still a competitive
 price.!!2 But to produce iron consistently at a price and quantity
which could compete in a glutted market proved beyond Attwood’s
powers. By 1859 Thomas Baring had largely lost hope. ‘I thoroughly
deserve my name Thomas for I am incredulous of the existence of
miracles. . . 1confess that Iam notin love with the present system of
management and do not think that I disparage the great talents and
knowledge of yourself and Mr Attwood when I say that I have not
implicit confidence in either as an experienced and _ practical
ironmaster.’!!3 The annual loss was a trifling matter, the lock-up of
funds far more serious, but there seemed nothing to be done but jog
on as we best can together’. The moral was that merchant bankers
should stick to doing what they knew how to do; something which
neither Baring nor Bates would have disputed in principle but some-
times found harder to follow in practice.


What they still did best in practice, though the emphasis was shift-
ing, was the nuts-and-bolts work of international trading. Accept-
ances were at £1.57 million in 1848, rose above £2 million in 1851,
soared to £4.2 million in 1855, fell back in the troubles that followed,
but quickly recovered and averaged over £7 million a year towards
the end of the 1860s. In 1850 their acceptances were almost four
times as large as Rothschilds’, figures which contrast strikingly with
those for foreign and colonial issues, where the Rothschilds’ total
was five times that of Barings;!!+ Profits mounted proportionately:
£11,209 in 1848; £217,863 by 1862; and £480,011 in 1868. There
were setbacks, exceptional losses, lean years when        international
trade withered because of some crisis - but the trend was ever
upward.
   One such setback came in 1857, with a banking crisis in the
United States spreading to Europe, in particular Hamburg and other
northern cities. Given their strong American connections it was
                                                                  not
surprising that people looked to Barings to see how they were weath-
ering the storm. For some reason, persistent gossip maintained
                                                                 that
they were in trouble, so much so that Brown Brothe
                                                   rs in New York
removed them from the list of houses on which Brown,
                                                          Shipley
might safely take bills. Brown, Shipley protested: Baring
                                                          s were
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873           181
‘among the undoubted English Houses; notwithstanding all the
rumours [we] cannot bring ourselves to believe in the possibility of
their being in any difficulty’.1!5 When George Peabody and Co.
came near default, the rumours about Barings redoubled and Brown,
Shipley began to trim their sails - ‘You need not attach more weight
to our confidence in them than our assertions warrant, and an addi-
tional good name never hurts a Bill.’!!6 First thoughts were best,
Barings came through almost unscathed, losing only £15,000-
£20,000, ‘but it will be prudent to leave a considerable sum in Profit
and Loss to meet any loss that may happen,’ wrote Bates."?’ With a
profit of £175,000 in 1857 they could well afford to; Peabody and
Co. needed a loan of £800,000 from the Bank of England to carry on.
Barings were ready to act as one of the guarantors but previously
they had pressed hard for the immediate settlement of outstanding
bills and caused the other firm considerable embarrassment. Ran-
cour remained. ‘Mr Peabody was so averse to have assistance from
Barings . . . that he requested the withdrawal of their names. '!!8
   The revolution of 1848 had switched investment from Europe to
the United States, now the threat of civil war in the United States
moved it back again. The war caused schism in Barings - Joshua
Bates sturdily supporting the North, Sturgis the South - but more
immediately it bit deeply into the cotton trade of the Liverpool
house, whose commission        income fell from £32,000 in 1861 to
£14,000 in 1862.
                                                                 y banks,
   Fresh turmoil was caused by the joint-stock limited liabilit
                                                                        of
whose intervention in matters outside their traditional field
domestic banking threatened the hegem      ony  of the traditi onal  mer-
                                                                  willing
chant houses. Drawing their capital as they did from any
                                                               the giants
investor, these new banks swiftly became larger even than
                                                   er  in Paris  was the
like Barings and Rothschilds. The Crédit Mobili
                                                                potential
first great exemplar; Barings gave ita cautious welcome as a
                                                                  should
counterweight to Rothschilds and agreed that Francis Baring
                                                   reach  London     until
become a director.!19 The movement did not
                                                            Many theof
1863 in the shape of the International Financial Society.
                                                                 Herman
great names of the City - Junius Morgan of Peabody's,
                                                    among the directors,
 Stern of Stern Brothers, Frederick Huth - were
                                                       were inveter-
 but Barings and Rothschilds stayed aloof. Rothschilds
                                                     attitude.
 ate in opposition, Barings more ambiguous in their
 182                      The Sixth Great Power

    ‘You see, Mr Mallet,’ Bates said to the envoy of the Crédit
 Mobilier, ‘we consider ourselves a sort of Crédit Mobilier, ourselves,
 alone.’!?° The argumentis not unlike that of the headmaster of Eton
 contending that his school is really a glorified comprehensive - the
 same tone of patronizing broad-mindedness is apparent. Bates felt
 that a joint-stock bank was no more than ‘large capital, collected for
 purposes of speculation’.!21 The idea of limited liability was
 ungentlemanly, a true Englishman (or American for that matter)
 should stick by his commitments to the last penny. They were also
 inefficient; sooner or later, Thomas     Baring predicted, the public
 would appreciate ‘that business can be conducted with greater econ-
 omy, activity and attention by private establishments where every
  partner has a direct interest, than by boards playing with the money
  of others’.!?? But in the meantime they were there and notably pow-
 erful: ‘It appears to me that these sort of Banks will get all the Public
  Loans and that B.B. and Co. must content themselves with the Com-
 mission and Banking business,’ wrote Bates gloomily in 1863.123
    Three years later the bubble was, if not burst, at least partially
 deflated. Feverish speculation against a background of ancestral
 voices prophesying war had been the order of the day for more than
 twelve months, and the more prudent houses like Barings had with-
 drawn their money from the discount houses and battened down the
 hatches. Then on 9 May 1866, Overend Gurney suspended pay-
 ments. This great Quaker house had been by far the largest of the dis-
 count brokers, but it had lost heavily for several years and in 1865
 had tried to redeem the position by turning itself into a limited liabil-
ity company. The Bank of England appointed George Glyn, R. C. L.
Bevan of Barclays Bevan Tritton and Co. and Kirkman Hodgson,
who was soon to join Barings, to judge whether a rescue operation
could be mounted. Their conclusion was that things had gone
                                                                       too
far. Overend Gurney failed, and in their failing dragged down
                                                                    a host
of lesser businesses. The result was temporarily to discredit
                                                                  the lim-
ited liability company and to lead to the return to Barings of
                                                                 much of
the commercial credit business that they had lost over the
                                                                 previous
years.


Joshua Bates was not there to weep crocodile tears
                                                         over his rivals’
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873          183
misfortunes. With his death in 1864 Thomas Baring depended
largely on Russell Sturgis for the running of the business. The
thought gave him little satisfaction. His colleague, he felt, was intent
on taking profit from the firm and uninterested in the need to build
up its depleted capital. Sturgis thought himself quite as capable of
managing the concern as ever Bates had been. “That arises from a
constitutional self-esteem which nothing shakes. Of course Ameri-
cans look more and more to him as the great authority . . . There
would be no harm in this if I could always feel perfect reliance on his
sound judgement, but he seems to me to be disposed to form too
rapid decisions and to act before due reflection, and then never
thinks himself wrong.’!?4
    Sturgis saw no reason why the house should be reinforced, either
 in management or in capital, and felt himself fully capable of carry-
 ing on if Thomas Baring were to follow Bates. The younger partners,
 Bingham Mildmay and Ned Baring, agreed. Thomas Baring, sup-
 ported by Young, thought otherwise. He played with the idea of
 bringing in another American but was dissuaded by Ward - ‘Two
 Americans would in all probability quarrel or combine. Equally bad!’
 What was needed was ‘an Englishman of ability and large capital
 with whom you had a perfect understanding’.!75 By 1867 Baring
 decided he had found such a man. Ignoring the opposition of his
 partners - ‘It was difficult to oppose Thomas Baring when he had
made up his mind,’ wrote Mildmay’s son Alfred!26 - he forced
through an amalgamation of Baring Brothers with the house of
 Finlay Hodgson     and Co. It was, indeed, more like an amicable
takeover than a merger: the name of Baring Brothers was retained,
and though the result of the new combination was that the capital
                                                         incoming
 recovered from £760,000 to £1,390,000, none of the four
 partners received more than '¥44 of the profits, as against Thomas
 Baring and Russell Sturgis who took 24444 each. From Thomas
                                                                    was
 Baring’s point of view the most attractive element of the merger
                                                                Kirkman
 the arrival in the house of Finlay Hodgson’s senior partner,
                                                              long-time
 Hodgson, a former Governor of the Bank of England and
                                                         of  Canada.
 colleague on the board of the Grand Trunk Railroad
                                                                 empha-
    The predominance of the Barings in the new house was
                                                           Charles, son
 sized the same year when Thomas's nephew Thomas
                                                     the  firm.  He had
 of Charles Baring, the Bishop of Durham, joined
 184                     The Sixth Great Power

 been working in the United States for the previous decade and not
 much was known about him, except that he had been a distinguished
 classical scholar and was devoted to his old college, Hertford.
 Thomas was dubious about his nephew's potential, and inclined to
 wonder whether he was not filling a place that would be more use-
 fully occupied by someone of greater efficiency, ‘But there is room
 enough,’ he comforted himself.
    The first few years of the new partnership were comfortably suc-
 cessful. Profits rose from £297,000 in 1866 to £446,828 in 1869, but
 thereafter fell away. By the end of 1871 the capital had swollen to
 £2.4 million, with acceptances totalling £7.4 million. But it was still,
if nota one-man band, then at least a house in which one partner was
very evidently predominant. Thomas Baring’s share of the capital
was £609,000, almost as much as the next two put together - Sturgis
and Mildmay with £320,000 apiece. Kirkman Hodgson had
£261,000 against his brother J.S. with £251,000. Ned Baring came
next with £222,000 while the newest recruit, Thomas Charles, had a
mere £71,000.!?7 In reputation and influence as well as fortune,
Thomas Baring took the lead. There were many who speculated on
the future of the house after he had departed.
   Not least among these was Thomas Baring himself. From 1870
onwards he had been receding from the direction of the firm. It
arose, he wrote, ‘in part from age and natural indulgence. . . butalso
perhaps from the difficulty that may occur in free communications
between as many as eight partners’. To the outside world he was still
in charge, within the house more and more decisions were being
taken without reference to him: ‘I do not altogether like when I have
been put on the top of the tree, to be regarded as a dead branch,’
                                                                      he
complained.!?8 Unlike Bates, he had many things to do outside the
world of banking and no wish to cling on where he was not welcome.
But his readiness to withdraw did not prove thar he was entirely
happy with what he left behind. About a year before he died, Lady
Northbrook asked him whether she should encourage her
                                                                  son
Francis to enter the bank. He advised her not to. ‘I suspect,’
                                                                wrote
Lady Northbrook, ‘from what I picked up that the Halcyon
                                                              days of
the Baring House are past and that there is no talent in the
                                                               young
men that have entered that are of My Boy’s standing, and
                                                            probably
Tom Baring with his quiet discernment saw that the
                                                      House would
      ‘A House Which We Intend to be Perpetual’: 1848-1873         185
not keep up its reputation very many more years.    !?9
   The testing time was about to come. In the spring of 1873 Thomas
Baring was convalescing in Torquay and finding it on the whole ben-
eficial; in the autumn he moved to Bournemouth and, for that or
other reasons, lost ground rapidly.'3° On 19 November Bertram
Currie of Glyn’s wrote to his father, ‘Poor old Thomas Baring went
off at4 p.m. yesterday. . . He was certainly a proof, if any were want-
ing, that a merchant may be as good a gentleman as an acred lord or
squire and he was wisely content with and proud of his trade. I don’t
think he has left his equal behind.’!3! On this point Ned Baring at
least was resolved to prove Currie wrong.
                                  11
                                >> en,




                   Riding for a Fall
                       1873-1890


For the next fifty years of Baring Brothers’ history, the house was
dominated by a father and son, Edward and John Baring, Ist and
2nd Barons Revelstoke. The two men were in many ways similar.
Both were intelligent and cultivated, self-confident to the point
of arrogance. They were dignified in manner and imposing in
appearance, men accustomed to and demanding the deference of
their inferiors, and putting into this category the generality of man-
kind. They were generous and public-spirited, not over-endowed
with a sense of humour but felt by most people to be good company.
The indolence that the family were apt to claim as their leading
weakness was even less apparent in them than in most of their
relations; they had immense application and zest for work. They
differed most markedly in that John had the better judgement, more
discretion, and a larger share of that most valuable of commodities,
luck.
   Ned Revelstoke was a man of deeper and more varied intellectual
interests than his eldest son. His mother, Cecilia Wyndham, spoke
fluent French, German and Italian, loved poetry and had a fine con-
tralto voice which had been trained by Rossini.! Her passion for
music was transmitted to her son and grandson. Ned was weaker in
Italian but spoke excellent Spanish. He greatly enjoyed the theatre
and held strong views about it: watching Irving play Romeo
                                                                    he
punctuated the performance with indignant snorts of ‘Remove
                                                                  that
man from the stage’? In this he was no more intemperate than
                                                                    in
every other field: sitting next to him ata banquet at Plymouth
                                                                 Lady
Monkswell observed with some amusement that when he
                                                             thought
the speeches were going on too long he began to swear to
                                                          himself ina
                                 186
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                       187
far from inaudible undertone - ‘one really did not know what he
would say next’.
    His generosity was as unbridled as every other aspect of his char-
acter. He used to collect Bréguet watches; not to keep but to give
away to people whom he thought would appreciate them. One day,
walking in the garden of his Devonshire home with his son Maurice,
he announced: ‘This is your path; I give it to you and the gate at the
end.’ It was the inclusion of the little iron gate at the end, recalled
Maurice Baring, ‘which made that present poignantly perfect’. He
had a contempt for half-measures and liked both himself and others
 to do things on the grandest possible scale. ‘So and so,’ he used to say,
 ‘has behaved well’; by which he meant ‘big and free handed, and
 above small and mean considerations’. He liked the best.* ‘C’était
 magnifique,’ some financial Bosquet might have remarked, ‘mats ce
 n était pas la haute finance.’
    Nor was his recklessness an attribute generally to be recom-
 mended in a banker. His father, Henry, had been a celebrated gam-
bler and was said to have won his house, 11 Berkeley Square, at cards
from Lord Orford. Ned Baring was no card player but he hada gam-
bler’s instinct which caused frequent distress to his more prudent
partners. For a long time the gambles came off. Baring’s reputation
became ever more established and his renown spread as the first
banker of London, and hence the world. In 1885 he was offered a
peerage in Gladstone’s dissolution honours. His companion in en-
noblement was Nathan Rothschild - ‘It was thought desirable at this
                                                                        of
moment to give an addition of commercial strength to the House
Lords,’ noted Edward Hamilton, Gladstone’s private           secretar y.®
                                                                     arly
Neither the reason nor the company could have been particul
                                           was not to be  looked   in  the
appealing to Baring, but such a gift horse
                                                             and distin-
mouth. Thanking Gladstone for this ‘entrely unexpected
                                                                      was
guished honour’, he assured his patron that the pleasure
                                                       as  yourself ,  for
enhanced by its coming ‘from one so distinguished
                                                           Lord   Revel-
whom | entertain a sincere admiration and respect.’
                                              first active banker to
 stoke, as he now called himself, was not the
                                                             George Glyn,
 become a peer - Lord Overstone had been the firstand
                                                    it was still a rarity and
 Lord Wolverton, had followed soon after - but
                                                            his admira-
 he could justly take pride in his achievement. But though
                                                      sincere, they did
 tion and respect for Gladstone were undoubtedly
 188                     The Sixth Great Power

 not stop him accompanying the main weight of the City interest in
 its drift towards the Tories. When in May 1886 there was a meeting
 at the Westminster Palace Hotel of dissident Liberals intent on pre-
 serving the Union with Ireland, the Lords Rothschild and Revel-
 stoke were among those appointed to the General Committee.®
    It was shortly after he received his peerage that Revelstoke began
the lavish refurbishment of his house in Charles Street, Mayfair. No.
37, an already substantial mid-eighteenth-century terrace house of
grey brick which he had bought fifteen years before, was united with
No. 38 and £55,000 spent gutting the interiors and creating a rich
French-style ensemble with sweeping marble staircase, riotous
rococo ornamentation and decorative panelling looted from the
houses of France. Into this opulent showcase Revelstoke poured his
outstanding collection of French furniture and objets d’art - an item
typical of his taste was described, in auctioneer’s English, as ‘Pair of
Louis XVI or-molu candelabra, each with an undraped female figure
bearing a cornucopia, supporting poppy branches for three lights
each, on plinths chased with oak branches, foliage and acorns, by
 Goulliére - on circular pedestals of red and white marble, decorated
with festoons of vine foliage and flowers of chased or-molu’.? The
 pictures were less distinguished than the other furnishings: there
was a fine Cuyp in one of the two downstairs drawing rooms but a
vast Birket Foster view of Venice on the landing outside was more
illustrative of the owner’s taste.!° Within this cadre Revelstoke enter-
tained in a style as lavish as the furnishing. It was always a home,
however: a visitor remembered seeing its splendours tarnished by
three small sons of the house lined up on the great staircase, seeing
who could pee furthest towards the hall.1!
   As befitted a public figure of his grandeur, Revelstoke became a
landowner. The Baring estates were concentrated in Hampshire
where they had now accumulated 89,000 acres, There they lived in
princely style; in 1887 4076 partridges were shot on Lord Ashbur
                                                                       -
ton’s land in four days, beating the previous record of 3392
                                                                       at
Holkham in 1885. Revelstoke decided not to compete with his
                                                                     sol-
idly established cousins. He had married Louise-Emily Bulteel, from
an old Devonshire family, and it was to the county that had first
received the Barings in 1717 that he now returned. He bought the
estate of Membland, twelve miles from Plymouth, near
                                                     the Bulteels
                      Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                      189
of Pamflete and the Mildmays of Flete. There he remodelled the old
manor house, converting it into a large, square mansion of Jacobean
style built of white brick, with green shutters, ivy and a tower.
Houses on the estate were all painted in a distinctive shade some-
what pretentiously described as ‘Revelstoke blue’; the ‘Bull and Bear
Gate’, set with figures of appropriate design, commemorated his alli-
ance with the Bulteels; the church at the neighbouring village of
Noss Mayo was demolished and rebuilt; Revelstoke’s 150-ton yacht,
the Waterwitch, was berthed in the Yealm river thereby: everything
was done in the most lavish style.
    Ned Baring had not started rich. In 1873, when Thomas Baring
died, the total capital of Baring Brothers was about £2.2 million, of
which Thomas Baring owned a quarter. Much of this went to his
 nephew, T. C. Baring, and thus stayed in the firm; but by 1874 the
 capital had still dropped to just under £2 million. Of this Edward
 Baring’s share was £222,000, which compared favourably with the
 pittance with which he had begun but was significantly smaller than
 the holdings of Sturgis, Bingham Mildmay and J. S. Hodgson. Four
 years later, so ambitious was his spending, his share of the capital
 had slipped to a mere £78,000, the smallest of all the partners. It did
 not even begin to build up substantially until the mid-1880s, and
 even by 1890 the two Hodgsons, Mildmay and Francis Baring had
 far larger holdings. But this in no way indicated his importance and
 activity within the firm, which related more closely to the share he
 took of the profits. In 1873 this had been "14s, against Russell
 Sturgis’s 24/144; by 1887, with Sturgis departed, he took ?%20, H. B.
 Mildmay being the only other partner to receive as much.
    Even this did not reflect the extent of his real authority. It was his
 young brother Evelyn, later Lord Cromer, who earned the nickname
 ‘Over-Baring’, but it could as well have been applied to Ned. With
                                                                     to con-
 the death of Thomas Baring he became increasingly difficult
                                                                        tion
 trol and determined to control others. The only effective opposi
                                                 partner , Russell  Sturgis ,
 from within the house came from the senior
                                                               that  Sturgis
 and the workings of the partnership made it certain
                                                                   not even
 would never be more than primus inter pares and sometimes
                                                   C. Baring’ s  comme  nts
 that. When he retired in 1882, the tone of T.
                                                            strong  as  ever,
 was almost contemptuous: Sturgis was physically as
                                                        have grown weaker
 he told T. W. Ward’s son, Samuel, but ‘his nerves
 190                     The Sixth Great Power

 of late and he shrinks from the risks that must be met in a business
 like ours... . . But we shall lose a genial, kindly and popular partner,
 who used to work very hard.’!?
     Sturgis’s departure was preceded by one of the few serious rows
 between the partners in the whole of Barings’ history. Sturgis
 insisted that his son Harry should become a partner. His colleagues
 refused to agree. Harry could be made a partner in the Liverpool
 office but that was all they would concede. When Sturgis persisted,
 Ned Baring drew up a grand remonstrance. ‘We think itis hardly fair
 that he should ask us on purely personal grounds to satisfy the
 expectations of his family to do what has never been done before for
 anyone and what we all consider is detrimental to the future inter-
 ests of the House.’ If he and Bingham Mildmay had been inclined to
 behave in the same way they would have sought to reserve the place
 for their own sons. As it was, his brother Tom had a prior right to a
 partnership and ‘it would be unfair to overlook the claim that the
 Hodgson interest has to be represented in the House’. Bob Hodgson
was at least as strong a candidate as Harry Sturgis. ‘I am the last to
underrate Mr Sturgis’s constant and valuable services to the firm,’
Ned Baring concluded his memorandum, ‘but supposed that (like
the rest of us) he found a fair compensation in an annual accumula-
tion of fortune as well as in the consideration which he enjoys as the
head of Baring Brothers and Co.’ At the bottom, undera laconic ‘We
fully agree’, were the signatures of J. S. Hodgson, Charles Norman,
T. C. Baring and Henry Bingham Mildmay.'3 Robert Hodgson and,
eventually, Tom Baring, became partners or directors of Baring
Brothers; Harry Sturgis was a managing partner in Liverpool from
1880 but never entered the partners’ room in Bishopsgate.
    Sturgis’s demands on behalf of his son had been inspired by the
fact that Francis Henry Baring, son of the Ist Lord Northbrook by his
second wife, had recently been granted procuration, a step on
                                                              the
road towards full membership. Francis Baring had dithered for some
time before joining the house at all. In March 1874 T. C. Baring
reported that he was ‘hesitating between a desk here with a large for-
tune in prospect and a private secretaryship with a view to a life
purely political’.!* Francis did not abandon his political ambitions
but concluded: ‘Business will, I suppose, lead pretty safely to
                                                                   the
House of Commons in good time and is not a bad training for
                                                                 poli-
                    Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                    191
tics or official work if it should come.’ He had no anxiety to be very
rich, he told his father, ‘but it does seem a useful work in the World
to keep up a house of high business character’. Besides, if he did not
go in, within twenty years there would be little connection between
Baring Brothers and the Baring family, and ‘this is a prospect that
Ned and Charles both seem to dislike very much’.!5 Given the pleth-
ora of Baring sons, nephews and cousins available to fill any and
every vacancy, this last concern is hard to take too seriously, but the
problem of the succession always preoccupied the senior Barings in
the house, and anyone who was both able and bore the sacred name
would be made to feel welcome.
    Francis Baring was exceptionally able. His political career never
came to anything and could not have been expected to; his health
 was poor, his oratorical powers conspicuously lacking and his shy
 and reserved nature wholly unsuited to the hurly-burly ofthe hus-
 tings or convivial caballing in the clubs or the House of Commons.
 But he was a classical scholar and a mathematician of real distinc-
 tion, with a lucid mind and a rare capacity for seeing the essential
 facts in any situation and holding to them tenaciously. His value to
 the firm was obvious from the start and was to become more so in
 the times of crisis that lay ahead.
    Ned Baring’s brother Tom, whose pretensions had been defended
 against those of Harry Sturgis, had begun his career in Liverpool,
 and continued it in the New York firm of Kidder Peabody. His twin
 passions were classical literature and various types of sporting activ-
 ity. The latter was the more apparent of the two. A large, red-faced
man of blimpish manner, he had been Captain of the Boats at Eton,
hunted vigorously when in England, had fished many Canadian riv-
ers and spent his holidays pursuing grizzly bears, moose and wild
goats around the Rocky Mountains. When stirred, he could be active
                                                          brother,
and efficient, but the Baring indolence, so absent in his
often possessed him. He enjoyed his life in New York but was
vaguely disgruntled that he had never been offered a niche in
Bishopsgate and regularly awaited a call that was a long time in
coming.
  Another Baring recruit to the house was Revelstoke’s son, John.
                                                            y feat
An oarsmanlike his Uncle Tom, he achieved the extraordinar
                                                                At
of coxing the Eton eight one year and rowing stroke the next.'¢
 192                     The Sixth Great Power

Cambridge he was master of the University Drag, ‘always splendidly
mounted,’ noted a contemporary, ‘and did justice to his horses too,
being a fine horseman whose seat in the saddle was akin to perfec-
tion’.!7 But at the age of twenty he left university to join Barings,
spent two years going through the mill in the counting house, then
did an extensive tour of North and South America and finally
became a partner early in 1890. To those who studied the fortunes of
the house it seemed that he was the most likely of the younger gener-
ation to steer it into the twentieth century.
   Whether it was - as their father suspected - to keep the line of suc-
cession open for John Baring, or because he had doubts about their
capacity, Lord Revelstoke flatly refused to take any of Lord
Ashburton’s sons into the bank, even on a trial basis.'8 Certainly the
field was left clear as a result. Charles Norman, one of the old Finlay
Hodgson partners, died in 1889 with £600,000 of Barings’ capital to
his name, to be replaced by his son Archie; but Archie Norman,
though well liked and no fool, was not a contender for the leader-
ship. By 1890 he and John Baring were the only two partners who
could reasonably expect to survive when Lord Revelstoke and
Francis Baring finally departed.
   In the meantime T. C. Baring played the part of Revelstoke’s right-
hand man. Thomas Charles was one of those conscientiously
grumpy characters who are always assumed to have a heart of gold
but gives few grounds to support such an assumption. His irritability
and cantankerousness can be excused by his sufferings from gout,
but did not make him appealing in society; indeed, he cultivated
few acquaintances, ignoring his neighbours in Roehampton and
throughout the year driving the few hundred yards to church in a
closed carriage with his children, even on the hottest day, dressed in
scarlet comforters and goloshes. When his sons went to Harrow the
family moved to the area so that the children could live near by ‘and
be spared the contamination of other boys’.19 Two of them were
sacked.                               |
   Anecdotes abound of T. C. Baring getting the better of other peo-
ple, and usually jumping on them afterwards. At night when he was
being driven back to his house on the outskirts of London he would
sleep soundly in his carriage. Suspecting, however, that his coach-
man was giving an illicit lift to a friend, he one night changed places
                                                   by Rudolf   Lehmann.
Edward Baring (1828-1897) _ first Lord Revelstoke,
              Wk
               hy




                                   “SAME          OLD   GAME!”
) Lavy or TurgapNerpee   Srerer.   ‘YOU ’VE GOT YOURSELVES INTO A NICE   MESS   WITH   YOUR   PRECIO!
         “SPECULATION!?            WELL—I "LL HELP YOU OUT OF IT FOR
                                                                         THIS   ONCE!!”

            A cartoon from Punch, 8 November 1890, referring
                                                             to the Baring Crisis
            of that year,
                    Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                    193
with him and donned the cloak and hat. Someone duly signalled to
the carriage to stop and prefaced his thanks by saying that he sup-
posed the old so-and-so was safely fuddled inside as usual. Baring
threw off his passenger, drove home at full speed and fired the
coachman. Another time a clerk made a foolish error in a letter to
Hopes. Baring discovered the man responsible and dictated to hima
letter to Hopes beginning: ‘Owing to the gross carelessness of a
member of our staff who has since been dismissed. . . .. To be fair to
Baring, this was the last the wretched clerk heard of the incident.?°
  T.C. Baring retired at the end of 1888, aged only fifty-seven. When
disaster overtook the firm two years later many people assumed that
he had foreseen it and had resigned since he could not change what
he regarded as Revelstoke’s misguided policies. There is no evidence
to suggest this was true and it was denied by other members of the
family.?! Certainly there is nothing in his farewell letter to indicate
he was unhappy about the running of the firm. ‘I have at least the
satisfaction of knowing that I leave the conduct of the firm . . . in
exceptionally able hands,’ he told Lord Revelstoke, ‘and I have great
confidence in its new future, as John has shown what Iconsider great
fitness for City life.’ Increasing age and failing health were the only
reasons he gave for his premature disappearance; ‘I have had warn-
ings enough that my powers will not bear the double strain of steady
Parliamentary and City work.’ Between the two he would have put
business before politics, but having only recently been elected for
the City of London, he felt that to throw up the seat so soon would
not ‘have reflected much credit on the firm’.”?
   T. C. Baring was a Member of Parliament, with one brief interrup-
tion, from 1874 until his death in 1891. His style was as truculent in
the political field as in any other. Standing as a Tory against the Lib-
eral brewer, Edward North Buxton, he took as his slogan ‘Barings’
brains are best’ as a riposte to his opponent's celebrated ‘Buxtons’
beers are best’. ‘Thank God I’m a churchman,’ declared Buxton.
‘Thank God I’m a Christian!’ retorted Baring.?? He was neither
offered office nor would have accepted it. He was the last Baring
prominent in the bank to combine the task with a parliamentary
                                                         The fact
career, while Ned Revelstoke was the first not to do so.
marked a change in the attitude of the partners towards their work.
 Francis, Alexander,   Thomas    Baring had all been hard-working
 194                     The Sixth Great Power

professional bankers but they did not see themselves as being mer-
chants first and foremost. The first and second Lords Revelstoke
accepted many responsibilities not directly related to their work at
Bishopsgate, but they never doubted that Baring Brothers was by far
their most important occupation. Banking after the 1880s did not
allow of any parallel career.
   There were still Barings, however, prominent in public life outside
the City. The 2nd Baron Northbrook was appointed Viceroy ofIndia
in 1872, became an Earl, was given the Admiralty under Gladstone
in 1880 and was as responsible as anyone for sending Gordon to
Khartoum. His cousin, Evelyn Baring, younger brother of Ned
Revelstoke, was one of the most remarkable public servants of the
period, benevolent dictator of Egypt from 1883 to 1907 and created
Baron then Viscount, finally Earl of Cromer - fourth of the five
extant Baring peerages. In India, where he served before going to
Egypt, he was called ‘the Vice-Viceroy’; in Cairo he became ‘Over-
Baring’; after he became a peer he was known simply as ‘The Lord’.
All three nicknames indicate the strength of character and autocratic
disposition which marked his public as much as his private life.
   Neither Northbrook nor Cromer was associated directly with the
bank, but it did not follow that they took no interest in its concerns.
Both were on the short list of ‘friends of the house’ who could expect
a share if some issue was to be floated on advantageous terms, and
both felt it entirely natural to brief their relations on events in the
public sphere which could bear upon financial developments. This
suggests impropriety; none existed. Both Northbrook and Cromer
were honourable men, who would never have contemplated
                                                       taking
advantage of their position to feather their own nest or do a good
turn for their relations. By the standard of the time their behaviour
was wholly proper; even in these more censorious days little would
have been found to criticize.
  In 1889, for instance, Lord Revelstoke heard that
                                                    the Egyptian
government might soon be seeking to appoint a new agent for
                                                                   the
payment of the interest on the loans they had raised in Londo
                                                               n and
Paris. They would like the job, Revelstoke told Evelyn Baring
                                                              , ‘and I
think we may say that their interests would be honourably
                                                            and care-
fully looked after. If under the circumstances it would
                                                        not be agree-
able to you that our name should be brought forward,
                                                         we are quite
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                    195
willing to leave the matter entirely alone, but if otherwise, the busi-
ness is a valuable one and quite in our line, so that it is worth while
making an effort to get it. The Jew has no doubt already applied, but
perhaps the Government may not be sorry to avoid being entirely in
his clutches.’2+ Evelyn Baring replied that he saw no objection to
Barings offering themselves for the task. It was nota matter in which
he would expect to be consulted, but, ‘in order to avoid any possibil-
ity of misrepresentation, I will ask the various authorities concerned
to settle it in any manner they may think most conducive to the
interests of Egypt and without communication with me in any form
whatsoever’.25 There is every reason to suppose that he was as good
 as his word; Barings did not secure the agency.
    Not everyone was ready to assume that the Barings were automat-
 ically public-spirited and high-principled. In 1884 Northbrook was
 despatched to Cairo on a mission to enquire into the state of Egypt's
finances. Evelyn Baring, already ensconced in Cairo, was appointed
 his expert adviser. Randolph Churchill protested in the House of
Commons. Traditionally, he said, the public service of the country
 had been free from any connection with commercial or financial
 enterprises. This appointment was flagrantly contrary to such a prin-
 ciple. ‘Two members of the great house of Baring are to be entrusted
 with the sole disposal and almost unlimited control of England’s
 political and financial interests in Egypt... . There literally would be
 no difference whatever in sending out two members of the House of
 Rothschild. The two are almost equal in greatness and in their great
 pecuniary interest in the East.’ Hugh Childers, the minister respon-
sible, argued that Northbrook had no link with Baring Brothers. His
father had been Chancellor of the Exchequer. Would Churchill have
objected to that appointment? ‘Certainly!’ interjected Lord Ran-
dolph. As usual he spoilt his case by overstatement, yet there were
some members of the House of Commons who felt he had a point.
But Northbrook was certainly depicting the truth as it was at the
time when he told Childers positively: ‘I have, of course, nothing to
do with Baring Brothers’ affairs, and I don’t believe they have any
concern with Egypt.’¢
 196                      The Sixth Great Power

 Commenting ona Treasury Bill in 1877, Bagehot discussed the need
 for a new kind of security that the Treasury might offer similar to a
 bill of exchange, which would be ‘the finest security in the world’.
 Racking his brain for a phrase that would sum up the splendour of
this new device, he concluded: ‘Such a bill would rank before a bill of
 Barings’.’27 Bagehot was far from being typical of the general public
 but his words reflected the opinion of the informed man-in-the-
street. As a brand image Barings was unsurpassed: not as glamorous
as Rothschilds, not as thrusting or adventurous as one or two of the
younger Anglo-American houses, but supreme for reliability, stabil-
ity, honest worth. The Bankers’ Magazine, referring to that ‘unim-
peachable virtue known as first class credit’, cited Barings as being
the house which ‘have never known, during the present century,
anything but first class credit, into which enters the elements of dig-
nity - moral, personal and commercial alike’.28 Yet its reputation
concealed certain weaknesses. Now more than ever its prosperity
was built on the shifting sands of international financing, and in this
world of high risks and vast rewards the discretion and good judge-
ment of the man who made the decisions was of paramount impor-
tance. In Barings the decisions were increasingly made by Edward
Revelstoke, and the doubts about his judgement first raised by
Joshua Bates had never been totally removed.
   In the last thirty or so years of the twentieth century, British
investment in foreign securities rose from about £775 million to
£4500 million. The greater part of this vast increase was organized
through the agency of a handful of merchant banks, based predomi-
nantly in London. Among these Rothschilds still had the largest
share but Barings were catching up. So much business was done in
conjunction with other houses that precise comparisons are impos-
sible, but a rough indication is provided by the fact that between
 1860 and 1890 Barings contracted for 62 public issues worth a total
of £560 million; Rothschilds for 43 worth £896 million.2? Increas-
ingly Hambros and Morgans were featuring as prominent rivals, but
the big two still prevailed. In an article at the end of 1888 The Statist
named Barings as being the house most responsible for the drain of
gold resulting from foreign issues. They had raised £95 million in
                                                                      six
years, complained The Statist, all for foreign countries except for
                                                                     two
breweries and the Manchester Ship Canal (three pretty substantia
                                                                       l
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                   197
exceptions, as will be seen). ‘It will be noticed, too, that Messrs Bar-
ing have been growing bolder and bolder in their invitations to the
public’; in 1884 they had sought to raise £6.5 million, in 1886 over
£18.25 million, in 1888 with a month still to go, £28 million.3°
   This overseas investment was heavily concentrated on the Ameri-
cas, particularly Argentina and Uruguay, but the traditional Euro-
pean clients were not wholly neglected. The efforts to meet the
financial needs of Russia illustrate well Barings’ struggle to remain in
this field and their comparative lack of success. The opposition was
strong and formidably well entrenched, the London market disin-
clined to participate substantially in Russian investments. In 1877
Hopes approached Barings to ask whether they would be prepared
to put up some part of the money needed to tide the Russian govern-
ment over until a large new loan could be issued. The trouble was
that the operation was being set up by Mendelssohn and Co. of Ber-
lin, and the role of the Dutch and English houses would be subsid-
iary. ‘This, it seems to us, as we believe it will to yourselves, wrote
Hopes, ‘would be an entirely new mode of coming in contact with
the Russian Government.’3! It was not a mode that appealed to
Barings: they excused themselves politely on the grounds that Euro-
pean politics were at the moment too uncertain to permit of any
important new commitment being taken on.’
   The new loan, when it came, was also handled by Mendelssohns,
and when in 1884 Barings approached Baron Stieglitz to say that the
time had at last arrived when ‘the issue of a large Foreign Loan for
Russia might be made with every chance of success,#?the answer
was unenthusiastic. It was not until 1888 that Barings participated in
a government loan, this time in conjunction with Hambros, and they
then discovered that the British public were so unenthusiastic about
Russian securities that they took up only £0.55 million out of a total
international loan of nearly £20 million. Even in the financing of rail-
road building Barings found that continental competition and the
indifference of the British investor ensured that they could secure
only a small part of the market. In mid-1880 a large loan was raised
                                                                     for
for the Grand Company, to build a new line. Hopes took it
                                                               to their
granted that they and Barings would get first refusal, but
                                           any  warning   being  given
dismay the- stock was sold, without
                                                            ubiquitou s
them, to the Banque Russe et Frangaise of Paris, and the
 198                     The Sixth Great Power

 Mendelssohns. Hopes and Barings protested jointly to the President
 of the Grand Company, but got little for their pains. They were not
always excluded; several times Barings and Hopes participated in
 railway loans over this period, but the results were not much to
crow over. In 1890, for instance, when a loan of £2.5 million was
contracted for, the total subscription in London amounted to a
miserable £25,000 - “We can only regret that we have had so little
success, Barings wrote apologetically to Hopes.3+ Three months
later Hopes still had £423,000 worth ofunplaced stock, and only the
intervention of a French syndicate saved Barings from a lock-up of
funds at a particularly awkward time.
   Not many people realized how insignificant a role Barings - or for
that matter any other British house - were playing in continental
financing. In 1871 and 1872 huge loans were floated by the French
government to finance the indemnities owing after the Franco-
Prussian war. Barings and Rothschilds jointly handled the London
end. The loans went conspicuously well. Joseph Laurence wrote to
congratulate Barings on ‘the marvellous success of the colossal
French loan, in great measure due to the influence of your name’.
How splendid it was, rhapsodized Mr Laurence, ‘in these days of
 competition’ to see ‘the house in Bishopsgate maintain its undis-
 puted place as the first Commercial House in the World’.35 Yet in
 fact its name was just about all that Barings did contribute. Only
 about 10 per cent of the £200 million which was raised came from
 London, and of this modest amount by far the larger part was sub-
scribed by Rothschilds.
    For the rest Barings’ role was as often as not confined to variations
on the theme of saying no. An application for £1 million for the
drainage and water supply of Lisbon was rejected on the grounds
that the bonds would be issued in Portuguese currency and would
therefore not be saleable in London.36 For Norway in 1876 there was
not even that excuse - ‘For years past no time has been so
unfavourable as the present for introducing new schemes of any
kind to the English public.’37 Six years later, when it was the Span-
1ards who wanted a loan, things had evidently not improved. In ordi-
nary times Barings would be delighted to employ their money in this
way but times were far from ordinary, ‘and we, like everybody else,
prefer keeping ourselves as strong as we can’. Of course if Barings
                      Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                       199

were official bankers to the Spanish government it would be a differ-
ent matter. ‘I confess I don’t quite see why they should not apply to
their friends in New Court with whom I believe they have a large
account, wrote T. C. Baring.38 It would be going too far to say that
Barings opted out of Europe in the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, but promising opportunities were limited and such as did
exist were not pursued with any zest.
    This perhaps over-cautious inertia was counterbalanced, how-
ever, by a dramatic new departure at home. In 1886 Sir Edward
 Guinness, whose family had been brewing their dark brown liquid
 since the mid-eighteenth century, decided to float the business as a
 public company. According to Lord Rothschild, the business was
 first offered to his house and turned down. ‘When | agree to any pro-
 posal, I am immediately filled with anxiety,’ he told Frank Harris.
 ‘To say “Yes” is like putting your finger in a machine - the whirring
 wheels may drag your whole body in after the finger.*? Revelstoke
 was the last man to suffer from such exaggerated timidity. He at once
 told Guinness that Barings would be happy to undertake the flota-
 tion. ‘I think Guinness ought surely to yield profit to Baring Brothers
 and Co.,’ wrote Thomas Baring from New York. He agreed it would
 be absurd to place any of the shares on the American market; Lon-
 don could easily find the money.                                  .
     Six million pounds’ worth of preference and ordinar     y  shares    and
  debenture stock were to be issued, of which the Guinness family
 elected to keep £800,000. That left £5.2 million, to satisfy what it was
 clear was going to be a very substanual public demand. Applications
 were invited for Saturday morning 23 October and extra policemen
 were brought in to be on hand in case the traffic proved unusually
  heavy. Nothing prepared Barings for the frenzied tumult that in fact
                                                                        Daily
  ensued. ‘Barings’ place was literally besieged,’ reported the
                                                         crowd    of   clerks,
  News. ‘Special policemen kept back the pushing
                                                                  have one
  agents, messengers and City men, and pains were taken to
                                                                        clerks
  of the swing doors only partly open, so that none but spectral
                                                             squeeze     in.’4°
  and Stock Exchange men of the Cassius cut could
                                                            wrapped their
  Frank Harris wrote that some resourceful applicants
                                                     the  windows    .*! The
  forms around stones and flung them through
                                                        total  somewh     ere
  Times reported that applications were said to
                                                         good reason for
  between £60 million and £130 million: ‘We have
 200                      The Sixth Great Power

 believing that the latter figure is the more nearly correct of the two.’#?
 They were well informed: the actual figure was £114 million. By
 Monday morning the £10 ordinary shares were changing hands at
 £16 10/-, the preference shares at £13 10/-.
    With people wanting twenty times as many shares as were avail-
 able, it was obvious Barings would have to apply some kind of
 rationing. ‘Itis doubtful whether Messrs Baring have any discretion-
 ary powers atall... , ‘Q’ wrote to The Times. ‘Once they allow that
 they have such power, then they may, if they like, allot the whole of
 the shares to themselves. I imagine their duty is to divide the shares
pro rata to the applicants. . . Ithas been too much the custom to con-
 sider that shares may be given away at the sweet will of the issuer.’#3
‘Q' must already have suspected what was indeed the truth, that the
sweet will of Barings had been paramount in the allotment of the
shares. Of the £4.5 million ordinary and preference shares, where the
largest profit was to be found, Barings kept something over £800,000
for themselves. The individual partners took a further slice: £70,000
for T. C. Baring, £20,000 for Thomas Baring. There was an allocation
for family and friends outside the house: Lord and Lady Ashburton
got £35,000 between them, Lt-Gen. Baring £10,000, Colonel Baring
£2000,   Lord   Rosebery £40,000.     Favoured    merchant    banks   and
stockbrokers got handsome helpings: Glyn Mills took £250,000;
Hambros    £105,000; Morgans £100,000;         Rothschilds £350,000      -
according to the Morning Advertiser, in exchange for a large share ina
new Chilean loan. Little over a quarter of the shares was available to
the general public.
   There was nothing illegal in what Barings did. By the standards of
the day their behaviour can hardly even be described as immoral.
Lord Rothschild - more in admiration than disapproval - said that
they had made £1 million profit on the affair.4+ This figure is too
high, but the total benefit to the house and individual partners was
enormous, probably in excess of £500,000. Their defence
                                                              would
have been that flotations were risky businesses; that when
                                                           they went
badly they accepted their responsibility to maintain the price
                                                                     by
holding stock and, if necessary, buying it back when it came on to
                                                                    the
market; and it was therefore only fair that they should get a share
                                                                     of
the takings if things went well. The defence was not unreasonable,
the Financial News was doing them less than justice when it
                                                                wrote
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                   201
that it was convinced ‘that if the floating of this company had been
no great success the general public would have been favoured with a
full allotment and thus have been obliged to hold the baby for all
time to come’.*5 The question was, how big a profit was reasonable
compensation for the risk? That Barings felt somewhat ashamed of
their performance on this occasion was indicated by their reluctance
to release the original list of subscribers. Instead, they published the
names of those who held shares on 1 March 1887, and the original
allocations were released only after they had appeared 1n consider-
able detail in the press.
    The newspapers and public had no doubt that Barings had been
guilty of something approaching sharp practice. Money accused
them of ‘a career of shabby evasion and (in the moral if not in the
 legal sense) concealment’.*¢ Mr R. Cecil, who had applied for Guin-
ness shares and been refused, wrote        from the Carlton Club to
denounce ‘one of the most disgraceful Frauds on the Public that in
my experience has ever been concocted’.*?7 Mr Charles Hodgson
returned a prospectus for an issue of mortgage bonds in the
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad, saying he was so outraged
by the way his Guinness application had been treated that ‘I have
resolved if I can possibly help it to have no further dealings with your
firm of any kind’. Those who knew rather more about the current
practices of the market would not have criticized Barings so harshly,
but even among insiders who had benefited from the operation
there was afeeling that things had gone a bit too far. Even within the
partners’ room at Bishopsgate there was some disquiet; if a flotation
of a similar nature had come up in 1887 it would have been handled
                                                             was
differently. In fact, when a smaller brewery, Combe and Co.,
floated in 1888, they were given no chance to repeat their conduct.
Charles Combe wrote pointedly: ‘For fear of misunderstanding we
think it better to remind you that our customers are to have a preter-
ential allotment, even though their applications come in after the
close of the subscription list.’#8 Two directors were appointed by the
company to sit in Barings when the allotments were decided.
   Evidence that Barings had some reason when they argued that flo-
                                                                      in
tations were a matter of swings and roundabouts was forthcoming
                                                                      s
1887 when an issue of shares and debentures was made by Baring
                                                     Canal, a waterw ay
and Rothschilds to finance the Manchester Ship
 202                     The Sixth Great Power

intended to run from the Mersey near Liverpool deep into industrial
Lancashire. It was an ambitious and most desirable project but it
failed to appeal to the investor. ‘Barings’ beer is more successful than
Rothschilds’ water’ was a saying of the times, but it was unfair to
Rothschilds, for the first £4 million in preference shares were issued
at par on joint account between the two houses. Only 18 per cent
were subscribed by the public, almost entirely in Manchester and its
vicinity. A syndicate had been set up, including Cazenove and
Akroyds, Morgans and Hambros, which took a large proportion of
the remainder, but Barings were still left with 39,881 shares. By
March the following year this total had risen to 42,738 as more
shares were acquired on the market to stop the price going to a dis-
count. Only Rothschilds, with 45,317 shares, held more.*? The issue
had been a failure, and locked up capital at a time when it was badly
 needed.
    The routine trading business of the house meanwhile carried on,
 not in spite of the partners, but without any sustained energy being
shown by them. Revelstoke was apt to argue that there was no differ-
ence in principle between accepting bills on commission and issuing
loans on commission; the bills were private while the loans were
public and usually of longer duration, but both called for the same
calculations and involved the same risks.5° No doubt this reflected
his views, but he found the loans altogether more glamorous and sat-
istying and concentrated his attention largely on this side of the busi-
ness. The strength of Barings and its reputation, and the efficient
organization of the house, is shown by the steady growth of its
acceptance income during this period in spite of Revelstoke’s indif-
ference. Liabilities on acceptances had been £6.7 million at the end
of 1870; by the beginning of 1890 they were £15 million. The next
largest issuer was Kleinworts, with £4.9 million; Rothschilds had a
mere £1.4 million.
   The days in which Barings would trade in goods on their own
account were almost over. The collapse of Russell Sturgis’s family
firm in 1875 gravely damaged Barings’ traditional network of agents
around Asia and nobody was particularly concerned to renew it. The
Liverpool office made fitful efforts to get into new lines, rubber and
guano among them, but the field was already crowded with special-
ist firms better qualified to undertake such trade. It was safer and
                     Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                  203

more profitable to provide the money that enabled others to do the
work. Not that the task of granting credits was necessarily less oner-
ous or risky than the trading which it subsidized. It used to be rela-
tively easy for private bankers to know to whom it was safe to lend
money, mused Bagehot, but now ‘the world has become so large and
complicated that it is not easy to tell who is rich and who poor’.*!
There seemed no end to the proliferation of new companies or indi-
viduals clamouring for money to finance their favoured projects.
Barings took refuge in their habitual caution. ‘We have hitherto not
even heard the name of the Company mentioned in your letter and
therefore can give no advice worth giving as to its merits or demerits,
they typically told Hopes in December 1884. ‘But there can be no
 question that the three noblemen, whose names appear in connex-
 ion with it, are utterly wanting in business knowledge and commer-
cial standing, and none of them 1s rich.’5?
    One line of business which had been discontinued was now
 renewed. Finlay, Hodgson had owned two sailing vessels, the Chaa
Sze and the Black Prince. The Chaa Sze was soon disposed of, but
rather than abandon ship management a second time Barings com-
missioned from a Glasgow yard the Norman Court, called after
Thomas Baring’s country house, a clipper ship designed to ply
between Britain and Australia or the Far East. The two ships
remained in operation throughout the 1870s but the competition of
steam proved too strong. The Black Prince was finally sold in 1880,
the Norman Court the following year.
   The tradition that Barings, as a merchant house, would deal in
anything that might show a profit, was never abandoned. Ventures
into strange territory could be risky unless great care was taken. In
1874 the Chinese had urgent need of an ironclad frigate. Barings
were asked to purchase one from the Danish government and pro-
                                                                     a
cured it for £200,000, paying £20,000 of their own money as
deposit. By an aberration which suggests some carelessness     on the
part of the negotiator, they had agreed to a contract which gave the
Danes the right to deliver the ship where and when they wanted.
                                                                    in
This was unacceptable to the Chinese, who insisted on delivery
                                                                    in
China. The Danes argued that the war which was currently raging
                                                     involved  by this
the Far East-made this impracticable. The delay
toing-and-froing proved disastrous, since the Chinese maintained
 204                    The Sixth Great Power

 that there was now no time to get a crew to Copenhagen and to take
 delivery ofthe vessel there.53 They refused to complete the purchase.
 Barings asked for the return of the deposit from the Danes but were
 met with a counter-claim for the rest of the purchase price. The Chi-
 nese showed no interest in paying anything. All they had accom-
 plished, Barings told their correspondents in Shanghai, was to fall
out with the Danish government and risk losing a lot of money.%4
 Barings never got back their £20,000, though in the end they were
absolved from any other liabilities under the contract. To avoid ‘the
scandal of a lawsuit with a foreign Government’, they cut their losses
and called it a day.°5
   The increase of business led to demands for extra staff. The num-
ber of clerks continued to grow and the first woman joined the house
in 1873. Within a decade there were ten of them, who had of course
to be provided with a separate entrance and their own amenities so
as to protect them from lascivious male colleagues. Cubitt’s work of
less than thirty years before had already been found inadequate.
Richard Norman Shaw, the architect who was associated above all
with the revolt against fashionable Victorian design and a return to
the eighteenth-century tradition, was     commissioned     in 1880 to
retain Cubitt’s old banking hall but create a new facade in Queen
Anne style and expand behind it. His heavy red brick doorway with
broad, open pediment and slit-like windows gave the building some-
thing of the air of a fortress. ‘For myself, I have no objection to its
high narrow windows and stony front, wrote a correspondent of the
Daily News, ‘for that means the safety of valuable property; nor can
you cavil at the low, arched doorway, with its two swinging doors,
through whose glass panes you look up the long passage into the
serene and mystic interior, where gentlemanly clerks deal with heaps
of gold as children deal with a handful of hazelnuts.’56
   Though ‘heaps of gold’ can hardly have been a common feature of
the counting house, the ‘serenity’ was real. J. Walter Wood joined
Barings in the autumn of 1888. The general office was a large room
without windows, illumination coming from sky-lights or the single
candlestick fixed to every desk.
   The silence was impressive, and the great banking room,
   with its mellowed features seen through the soft light, was
   very dignified.
                    Riding for a Fall: 1873-1890                      205
      No one seemed in a hurry. Business did not really begin till
   about 11 o’clock and was usually over by 4 o'clock. For those
   clerks who remained at work till 5 o'clock, tea with thin slices
   of buttered bread was served by the liveried ‘walkers’ [bank
   messengers]. The partners’ room adjoined the general office,
   and was more like a gentleman’s library, with a cheerful open
   fire in a marble mantelpiece at the end of the room, and a
   soft red and blue rug. The mahogany desks were massive,
   and the chairs deeply upholstered in dark leather. In the cen-
   ter of the room was a large table with a limited number of
   necessary reference books, and from the walls deceased part-
   ners of the House looked down from mellowed gilt frames.
   In spite of the upheaval caused by the building of Norman Shaw's
new offices, changes to the procedural rituals were accepted only
after due and sometimes agonizing deliberation. After an important
draft had been lost for several hours, Wood suggested the introduc-
tion of what were, in effect, In and Out trays. His senior colleague, to
whom he put forward the idea, ‘after mature reflection admitted
advantages but said that such a thing “had never been done” ’. The
matter was one for the Head Clerk. The Head Clerk listened care-
fully, added his meed of mature       reflection, and said the matter
would have to be referred to a partner. A partner eventually
appeared and the proposal was expounded fora third time. Whether
a partners’ meeting was summoned to discuss the issue is uncertain,
but the upshot was that the trays were installed and proved notably
successful.*7
   As the 1880s wore on, it must have seemed to the outside world
                                                                 as the
that the partners of Barings had every right to be as cheerful
                                                                capital
fire that burnt beneath their marble mantelpiece. Their
                                                                profits
appeared to be large enough for any likely contingency, their
                                                      as ever. Perhap s
were more than satisfactory, their reputation as high
                                                              by the lim-
most remarkable, they had survived the challenge posed
                                                                  the pri-
ited liability joint-stock banks. As The Statist argued in 1885,
                                                              becaus e he
vate banker would always score over the joint-stock bank
                                                             ver, he has
could act with greater promptitude and decision. ‘Moreo
                                                     dge, and 1s pos-
a skill and training, has accumulated special knowle
                                                       to an extent the
sessed of the traditions of the business, in a way and
                                                     while in addition
directors of a joint-stock bank cannot pretend to;
206                      The Sixth Great Power

he is a specialist no more liable to abuse the secrets of his customer
than their doctor or solicitor, whereas the joint-stock director may be
a competitor in their own trade.’ As to the superior resources of the
joint-stock bank, The Statist dismissed them as unimportant; because
his liability was   unlimited   the private banker, provided he was
wealthy, offered security greater than that provided by any but the
largest of the joint-stock banks.*8
  That was all true, as far as it went, but it took no account of the pos-
sibility that the private banker, because of that very freedom of
action which was put forward as being his advantage, might involve
himself in commitments greater than his assets. Though almost
everyone in the City would have laughed at the idea until the very
end, this in fact was what Lord Revelstoke was bringing upon his
house by his policy in North and, still more, Latin America.
                                    12
                                >   eae




        An ‘Immense Connection’
               in America
                North America, 1848-1890




‘| have pretty well made up my mind,’ wrote Joshua Bates in Sep-
tember 1848, ‘that the interests of the House will be best consulted
by wasting none     of our resources      on European    business but
turn{ing] our greatest attention to the United States and to the
East.’! The following year he visited the United States and was
enraptured by all he saw. Business was booming, confidence high,
the network of roads and railways spreading with astonishing speed,
the States were resolved never to get deep into debt again. “There
never was a country so prosperous. The progress of everything in 8
years is almost incredible.’? Though he was better informed than
most of them, Bates was doing no more than reflect the views of Brit-
ish investors. The revolutions in Europe had convinced them that
their money would not be safe the other side of the Channel; the
efforts of the American States to extricate themselves from their
difficulties and the ardent championship of Barings had won back
confidence in London; money was plentiful and opportunities for
investment scarce; the time was ripe for the United States to become
once more the fashion.
   Bates’s visit stirred up speculation in financial circles in America.
Belmont, Rothschild’s representative, was well informed: Bates’s
                                                                       s
principal object, he wrote, was to find a new general agent, ‘Thoma
                                                        s of retir-
Ward, having made a considerable fortune, being desirou
ing. He is said to have made $600,000, having had a considerable
                                                             on the
salary and a-share in the business.’? Belmont’s figures were
                                                               ers
generous side, being no doubt intended to impress his employ
                                    207
208                     The Sixth Great Power

with his own comparative ill treatment, but the story was night in
essentials. Ward had been talking about retiring since 1845 and was
now anxious to go: ‘I am growing old, and cannot do what Is neces-
sary for Messrs Barings’ interest and my own satisfaction.’ |
   Bates was undismayed by the prospect. He was apt to claim that
the vast increase in American business had come in spite of and not
because of Ward: ‘The liberality and high character of the House
drew the business and not T.W.W.’s influence, which was rather a
drag.’’ After talking to Ward in Boston he complained that he was so
slow and prolix that it took twenty-four hours to establish his views
about the future. It was high time he went.* But when it came to
deciding on a replacement, the problem grew more difficult. The
most obvious course was to follow the move of big business to New
York and establish a new agency there, but though Bates accepted
this, he was a loyal Bostonian and found himself reluctant to take the
step.’ T. W. Ward’s son Samuel was put forward as a possible
replacement for his father. Bates was at first unimpressed. ‘Sam has
no energy and the whole agency would be a rickety concern,’ he told
Thomas Baring.’ Sam was an unprepossessing figure; small, with a
nasal twang and mustachios curling up to his eyeballs. But he was
there. Bates’s attitude towards him softened. The two men had a
long talk and Bates decided Sam was ‘not wanting in ability and
seems to have the right view of things’. Perhaps T. W. Ward should
be persuaded to stay on for a few years longer in partnership with his
son. “The great prosperity of this Country, assisted as it will be by
immigration and Californian gold, will lead to hazard, and Ward is
just the man to hold people back and keep them safe.’?
   From London Thomas Baring was sceptical. He declined to give
advice - “How can we at this distance give an opinion as to people we
have never seen?’ - but wondered whether the retention of Ward
would achieve the main objective, that of setting up an agency that
would last for many years.'° Bates persisted, however, and the
agency in fact lasted another thirty years. When T. W. Ward finally
retired in 1852 Sam Ward was appointed sole agent. It proved an
unexpectedly successful solution. Sam Ward was as much astick-in-
the-mud as his father and lacked the latter’s knowledge of American
business, but he was shrewd, conscientious and much the more
                                                             aff-
able and approachable of the two. His contacts were excellent and he
                     North America: 1848-1890                      209

did much to maintain, if not enhance, the standing of Barings in
American trading.
   Writing from Havana in 1859 Baron Alphonse de Rothschild told
his cousins in London that Barings were the chief among a handful
of houses making all the profit from commission, credits and
consignation - ‘Barings has immense connection everywhere in
America and I have no doubt, my dear Cousins, should you enter
business in this country with some confidence, you will find enough
to extend greatly the already existing sphere of operations in Amer-
ica.’!! Rothschilds were never to challenge Barings’ supreme posi-
tion in the field of credit. Others did better, notably Brown Brothers.
Browns were the more aggressive and picked up much business
which Barings either scorned or let slip by. Yet in 1855 Brown,
Shipley, Browns’ English associates, were still complaining that ‘we
aim, and with perfect right, at a rank and position equal to Barings,
but were still far from achieving it.!? Barings’ credits on American
account rose from £1.3 million at the end of 1848 to £2.6 million in
 1852, £3.2 million in 1857 and £3.6 million in 1860. The totals were
impressive enough, what was still more remarkable was the quality
of the accounts involved. Throughout this period Barings could pick
their clients almost as they chose. In 1867, Brown, Shipley reported,
Kidder Peabody were beginning to issue credits for use in the East
and South America; ‘They rely on Barings being able to do less than
formerly, which .    . would be a reasonable expectation from Mr
Ward’s limited powers and not acceptable manner.’? Yet, reason-
able or not, the following year they were bewailing the fact that they
had just lost another customer to Barings.'* Viewed in terms of the
expansion of the American economy and the growth of its rivals,
Barings’ position was slipping; but the change was self-willed, at any
moment they had the ability to take on whatever business they felt
judicious. ‘The great house of B Band Co [is] now decidedly the first
in the world in the estimation of the Americans,’ announced Bates
smugly in 1849.15 ‘The Administration is entirely in the hands of
Barings’ friends,’ Belmont told Rothschilds in despair.!6 They had
their setbacks, and the Administration in particular did not always
remain so securely in their hands, but the authority of Barings
remained virtually unshaken until the great crash of 1890.
   The possibilities for involvement in the flood of new American
210                       The Sixth Great Power

 securities that reached London in the early 1850s were similarly
 unlimited. Barings had done more than any other house, British or
American, to reestablish the credit of the United States in Britain and
 Europe and they could have participated in virtually any venture
 that appealed to them. They chose to follow a policy of extreme
 restraint. In 1852 Thomas Baring visited America on a fact-finding
 mission. He found a country bursting with optimism, convinced
 that ‘the prosperity would last and encrease’.!7 Ward assured him
 that all was indeed for the best in the best of possible worlds, that
 there was wealth enough to take up all that was on offer, ‘no
 overstrained use of credit, no kite-flying, no large circulation of
 Banknotes, no inability to meet a sudden call for the settlement of
 pending engagements’. Baring was sceptical. There were too many
 railway projects and too much speculation, a crash must come, but
while Californian gold continued to be produced and England
bought cotton and took American bonds, there would be rich pick-
ings for the investor. ‘Our policy it seems to me is to take only what is
really good and which even if sales are stopped we can hold with per-
fect security.’!8
   The American railway system was by far the most rapacious con-
sumer of capital and the sector in which fortunes could most easily
be lost or made. Increasingly the United States itself found the
money needed for such enterprises, but periodic injections of for-
eign capital were still necessary, if only to give an air of respectability
to what might otherwise have seemed an insecure adventure. No
name offered greater respectability than that of Barings, yet there
were few houses less eager to lend their name, let alone their money.
‘I cannot help thinking that there are too many railroads on foot in
the U. States. . . and this country is lending too fast,’ remarked Bates
in 1852.19 To Ward he criticized those ‘go-ahead’ people who
derided Barings for not promoting the sale of railway bonds. Some
of these bonds were undoubtedly sound but ‘if we bring forward the
good we shall be promoting the bad, and I have great doubts if we
should touch them’.2
   In fact Barings had already touched American railway shares as
early as 1839, choosing the Baltimore and Ohio as the favoure
                                                              d
exception, in a complicated arrangement which involved exchang-
ing state bonds for iron rails. They believed this to be the safest rail-
                      North America: 1848-1890                      Zi

road investment in North America and as such fit to be associated
with the name of Barings: ‘Before bringing forward this new kind of
Bond here,’ they told Ward, ‘it is indispensably necessary that the
character of the security should be such as we can offer with credit to
to ourselves and with safety to the public.’?! Limited investment in
the choicest securities was to be their rule, and in 1853 even this pru-
dent policy was deemed too adventurous. ‘We begin to fear that the
Country has already got nearly as many railway Bonds and shares
from foreign Countries as she can hold,’ Barings told Ward. ‘At any
rate we must see a little clearer into the future before we load our-
selves with any more.2? But there could be exceptions, especially
when Weardale benefited. In 1855 a transaction involved the West-
ern Railroad Company. Barings took the bonds at a price that
included a 5 to 6 per cent commission and would yield 7 per cent
interest. The rails would come from Weardale, ‘the quality being
superior owing to the great strength and toughness of the iron’. The
high commission was justified by the fact that ‘we shall not be able to
sell the bonds without our guarantee’.?3 Whether the eventual buyer
was told of the hidden benefit to Barings through the sale of iron
from Weardale, and whether the prospects of such a sale to any
extent affected Barings’ judgement of the merits of the Western Rail-
road, must remain uncertain. In fairness, however, it must be said
that the investors were never given cause to regret their purchase,
and Barings ensured that the interest was paid when the line was in
temporary difficulties.
   It was not only over railroads that Barings showed caution. In
October 1850 ‘a Mr Vanderbilt and MrJ.H. White’ were in London
trying to raise money for a canal to link the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans through the Lake of Nicaragua. The estimated cost was $4
million, Bates believed £10 million would be nearer the mark but felt
it was ‘a great work and should be accomplished if possible’.2# To put
up money for it was another matter, though; Barings agreed with
Rothschilds that a feasibility study by British engineers was an essen-
tial first step.2* By September 1852 the idea had been dismissed as
impracticable and an alternative canal through Panama to cost £14
million was being considered. ‘My impression, wrote Bates in one of
his less prescient moments, ‘is that none of these canals will ever be
constructed for the simple reason that they will not pay.¢
242                     The Sixth Great Power

   Thirty years later another equally futuristic opportunity occurred,
when in 1881 the United States Electric-Light Co., controlled largely
by Grace and Co., and The Edison Company belonging to Drexel
Morgan, more or less simultaneously solved the problem of using
electric light to replace gas for all purposes. A merger was mooted
and Barings were asked to assume the management for England, ‘so
that you would have a commission on the future use of the inven-
tion, in return for the Service it would be to them to have their inter-
ests in the best and most influential hands’. It was all very indefinite,
Ward apologized, but ‘if we wait tll the thing is a success it would be
too late to take hold of 1t’.27
   They waited and it was. Perhaps in this case a fortune was lost, but
in general Barings’ prudence was amply justified by the crisis of
1857. They had seen it coming for some time and Ward had been
busily reducing acceptances and pressing for early remittances. Bates
had little sympathy for those less prudent. ‘Mr Wildes of Henry
Wildes asked if we could assist their House in case they should
require it. Their Bankers should assist them,’ he noted severely in his
diary. ‘It is impossible to foresee what inconvenience we ourselves
may experience, therefore we cannot promise aid to others.’28 In fact
their practice in the United States was considerably more liberal
than this might suggest; they came to the help of several of their
long-standing correspondents, one at least of whom would have had
to close but for Barings’ assistance.2? They had some uncomfortable
moments, but the result of the crisis in the long run was to weaken
others and thus to strengthen them. By the beginning of 1858 Bates
could claim with justified pride that ‘the losses to my house by bad
debts arising out of the crisis are not much and will be more than
compensated by increased business’3°
  Any disposition Barings might have had to playa larger part in the
financing of America’s development was curbed by the increasing
likelihood of war between North and South. By December 1860,
when South Carolina set the ball rolling by seceding from the Union,
Barings had reduced their holdings of American securities to a
handful of railroad bonds and had ceased to trade in new issues.
Thomas Baring pleaded with the Foreign Secretary, John Russell, to
mediate between the two parties, but Russell politely declined the
invitation.*! For the next few months Bates continued to hope that
                      North America: 1848-1890                       213

the worst might be avoided,}2 but by May it was plain thata long and
bloody war was beginning. ‘During its continuance trade must be
comparatively at a standstill, Barings warned Ward. “Those who
considered themselves rich may find themselves poor from the great
depreciation of property of all kinds. This will increase the risk of Bill
operations.’ Ward was advised to ‘lessen your operations until it can
be seen how things are going, confining your remittances to bills
drawn on first class firms’ - a counsel which he might reasonably
have felt superfluous, since it had been pressed on him repeatedly
even in times of peace.??
    Barings as a house unequivocally supported the North and
deplored the British government’s policy of non-intervention. So
much might have been expected of a staunch New Englander like
Joshua Bates, but Thomas Baring was little less enthusiastic. ‘People
in this country look upon you as a friend of the country, Samuel
Ward assured him. ‘. . . Iwas applied to lately for your autograph to
go in an album containing autographs of “our friends in Europe”.’
 Benjamin Moran, at the American Legation, noted with approval a
speech that Baring made in the House of Commons in May 1864:
‘The man is a gentleman. . . . It is mortifying to me that while he is
loyal to us, the only citizen of the United States belonging to his firm,
Mr Russell Sturgis, is a rebel sympathizer.’3+ Sturgis was indeed a
considerable embarrassment to his colleagues. While Samuel Ward
 deplored the fact that he ‘did not take the view of American affairs
 natural for a Northern man,’ he thought Sturgis’s ‘personal friendli-
 ness and efficiency’ would make up for this.3> The American govern-
 ment took the matter more seriously. ‘The man’s disloyalty has
 caused the Government to think seriously of transferring its busi-
ness to some other House,’ recorded Moran. The Minister, Charles
Adams, formally called on Sturgis to express his displeasure.*¢
   Barings sometimes tempered their zeal for the North with finan-
cial prudence. In 1875 the New York Tribune complained that, in
the early 1860s, Barings had sought to embarrass the American
government by demanding immediate payment of a small debt of
$50,000.37 The matter was hurriedly cleared up; it was true that the
diplomatic account had been overdrawn by that amount but Barings
                                                        who, with-
had not been in the least concerned. It was Samuel Ward
out London knowing, had called on the State Department to draw
 214                      The Sixth Great Power

 their attention to the matter. The explanation was accepted, yet on 9
 May 1861 Moran had recorded in his journal that Bates had spoken
 of Barings’ doubts ‘about letting our Government have more money
 on account of Diplomatic salaries, as they might not get paid. This is
 the confidence of Barings after being our bankers for nearly 70
 years!’38
   On the whole, though, Barings proved loyal friends of the Federal
 government. William Aspinwall visited London to buy ironclads for
 the Northern government and paid a rousing tribute to Barings’ role
 in the transaction. “These gentlemen unhesitatingly authorized us to
 draw on them, at sight, fora very large amount - some millions - and
 on terms at once liberal and most considerate as to the time of reim-
 bursement by our Government, thus showing a most exceptional
 degree of confidence and sympathy ata period when the public feel-
 ing in London was almost universally in favour of the South. . . .
 From motives of delicacy, no public mention has been made of this
honourable act, which certainly no other house in Europe could
have or would have done.’? In August 1861 Barings advanced
 $500,000 so that George Schuyler could purchase arms for the
 American government even though the documents he produced did
 not authorize any such activity. By the time the proper authorization
 was received in October the amount had risen to $634,000.40
    With so creditable a record Barings had reason to feel a little
 aggrieved when they lost the agency of the United States govern-
 ment in 1871. It was by no means the first time such a setback had
 seemed possible since they had recaptured it from Rothschilds in
 1843. Rothschilds, Peabody, Rothschilds again, and Brown Brothers
 each in turn thought that the prize was theirs.*! Yet as late as 1869 the
 Secretary to the Navy had gratuitously assured Barings that ‘we have
 every reason to be satisfied with the transactions that have taken
 place between yourselves and the Government, and hope the feeling
 may long continue’.42
   It did not. Pressure to transfer the account to an American house
was becoming irresistible. That resourceful and well-connected
financier Jay Cooke was particularly eager to secure the naval
agency, which would ‘aid in the cultivation of a very large and
                                                                    profit-
able business which Barings have monopolized for years, namely
                                                                        the
accounts of American merchantmen’. Cooke’s desire to rob
                                                                  Barings
of the agency was no doubt fomented by the story that,
                                                           when Barings
                     North America: 1848-1890                        215

were asked for an opinion ofhis house, they loftily replied that they
had hardly heard ofit, nor any ofits directors. In the summer of 1871
he prevailed, and the account was removed from what Cooke
described as the ‘Anglo-Russian-Chinese’ house of Baring to his own
London house.*} At the same time Clews, Habicht and Co. were
given the diplomatic and consular account. Who was responsible for
the change is unclear; Hamilton Fish, the Secretary of State at the
time, was recorded as saying that it was none of his doing and he
deplored the decision.*#
   In less than two years Barings had the satisfaction of seeing their
rivals in the bankruptcy court. Many people, who felt that they had
been hardly used, now clamoured for their recall, and Fish cabled the
President to ask that no appointment should be made until he had
had a chance of arguing the case for Barings.**
   ‘Though we should of course be proud to be once more the agents
of the United States Government, Barings told Ward, ‘we can quite
understand the difficulty which the existing cabinet would have in
appointing us.’#6 They were right, and not only for the existing cabi-
net. Morton, Rose and Co. were appointed. The days were past when
a British bank could represent the American governmentin London.


 Recovery after the Civil War was a slow and painful business. T. C.
 Baring toured the South early in 1866 and was dismayed by what he
                                                              in part
 saw. He found a population in part hankering after the past,
 dreaming of the future, and in both cases disinclined to face the
 problems of the present. The old aristocracy, who had lost almost
                                                               late Con-
 everything, ‘sit listlessly in their houses and mourn for the
                                                                         or
 federacy. You would hardly believe that I did not see in Richmond
                                                                        the
 Petersburg one gentleman’s house with the shutters open.’ As for
                                                 ed   off the  face  of the
 negroes, they were ‘gradually being improv
                                                                      about
 earth like the red man’. A few worked ‘but the lazy ones hang
                                                                 they have
 the bureau for a scanty support. Unfortunately for them
                                                        ment   is sooner or
 become possessed by the idea that the U.S. Govern
                                                              former mas-
 later going to distribute among them the funds of their
                                                                 coming.*”
 ters and they live, or rather die, in hopes of the good time
                                                            tion    gone to
 America emerged from the war with its cotton produc
                                                                maimed or
 ruin, its countryside devastated, the cream of its youth
 dead and a national debt swollen to £555.6 million.
 216                    The Sixth Great Power

   Nevertheless, the corner was turned by 1870. The loss of the gov-
 ernment agency coincided with the start of an astonishing boom in
 American securities in which Barings vigorously participated, under-
 taking twenty-two new issues in the 1870s and 1880s. The days in
 which they could operate on important government issues single-
 handed, however, were over. For Grant's first refunding loan of
  1871, five houses were named, including Morgans and Rothschilds
 as well as Barings. ‘Of course these arrangements are not what would
 be most agreeable to us,’ Barings told Hopes, ‘nor what we should
 have recommended as the best mode of bringing the loan under the
 favourable consideration of the public, but we do not think that it
 would be becoming to refuse to act. We none of us shall make for-
 tunes out of the agency. . . .’48
   When the process was repeated in 1873, Barings, Hopes and Mor-
ton, Rose were pitted against Rothschilds and Jay Cooke, and the
American government asked the two groups to unite in a single syn-
dicate. Belmont, on holiday in Nice, urged Rothschilds to agree. ‘]
think most favourably of the combination of the five houses,’ he told
Nathan Rothschild, ‘and I am only sorry it was not effected before
the two separate offers were handed in, because you would have had,
then, the game in your hands, and could have forced the Secretary to
better conditions, as no other houses here or in America would have
 ventured to bid against you.#?Barings were by now well accustomed
 to working 1n conjunction with Rothschilds and accepted the forced
 union with equanimity. Hopes were less amenable and protested
 strongly when they found that the acceptance of subscriptions in
Amsterdam was to be made under the instructions of Rothschilds.
 ‘We cannot but regret that we were not aware of the real state of the
case, they declared,%° though they did not push their dislike of
Rothschilds to the point of turning down the business.
    Fourteen of the twenty-two issues were for railway compa
                                                                nies.
Between 1865 and 1890, Barings were responsible for 28.7
                                                             per cent
of the North American railroad stocks issued through Londo
                                                              n mer-
chant banks, worth £34.68 million. Morgans were next with
                                                              21.6 per
cent or £26.09 million. No other competitor took as much
                                                            as 10 per
cent; Rothschilds’ share was a mere £800,000.5! And yet,
                                                            like Eng-
land’s Indian empire, it happened largely by mistake. The
                                                           year 1874
found Barings surveying with some dismay the pletho
                                                       ra of railway
                     North America: 1848-1890                        217

shares for which they had been responsible and those for which
financing was now being invited. ‘We cannot disguise from our-
selves that American Rail Roads in general have lost favour,’ they
told Ward.5? They blamed the trouble largely on the lack of discrimi-
nation of the British investor, who could not see the difference
 between good and bad, but the following year they found them-
 selves guilty of the same offence when their much- favoured Louis-
 ville and Nashville Railway ran into trouble. ‘Not only have we lost a
 large interest in the Bonds,’ they told Ward, ‘but, which touches us
 more nearly, is the fear of loans introduced by us proving other than
first class.’53 When the railroad defaulted the following month
 Barings found the money to pay the balance of the interest. “You will
 have understood . . . how deeply we feel the unfortunate collapse of
a security we have recommended with so much confidence,’ they
told Ward.**
   Not surprisingly this disagreeable experience led them to look
sceptically on future railroad offers. They quite agreed with Lee,
Higginson in 1876 that the Chicago, Burlington Railroad was secure
but declined to participate on the grounds of ‘the very unsettled
state of European politics’ - hardly an argument they would have
advanced in 1849.55 They refused to have anything to do with the
New York and New England Railroad the following year: “There is a
feeling of distrust of American Railroads growing out of the condi-
tion of several of them.’*¢ When Ward, in 1885, pressed them to join
a consortium to buy railway land for the North Pacific Railroad Co.,
they replied bluntly that it ‘would not suit’.4”7 Ward was indefatigable
in his efforts to persuade them that they were missing excellent
opportunities. In 1883 he suggested that George Morrison, an
authority on railroads, should be recruited as a partner. ‘The taking
of a new partner is almost as serious a matter as a second marriage,
replied T. C. Baring, ‘and the fact that the person is a stranger renders
the advantage of the act certainly not less problematical.’ They did
not want an expert on railways in the partners’ room. ‘As we have
more than once pretty clearly stated, our experience in the business
of railway loans in the US, though profitable in the main, has not
always been of so satisfactory and smooth a character as to make us
very passionately enamoured of it.’**
   One major issue which slipped through in the early 1880s was the
 218                    The Sixth Great Power

Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad; strongly championed by
Barings’ closest ally, Kidder Peabody, and endorsed by Sam Ward as
being ‘unexceptionable, the road finished and earning 12 per cent on
its stock, and rapidly developing and without complications’.5? In
 1883 Tom Baring was to be found ‘shaking and rattling’ along the
line and forming an excellent opinion of it. More money would be
needed, but it would be found in America.®° It was, to disastrous
effect. Within three years the company’s debts had tripled and it was
weighed down by interest payments, as well as beset by strikes and
involved in a ferocious rate-cutting war with the neighbouring Mis-
souri Pacific Railroad.*! The quarterly dividend was slashed and the
price of the stock tumbled. Things then appeared to mend a little. By
early 1889 Tom Baring reported: ‘I think we have seen the worst of
Atchison.’6? Once again he was too sanguine. Within a couple of
months it was clear that a serious cash shortage lay only a few
months ahead. After that horror was piled upon horror: the directors
had lied about the floating debt, they had falsified the figures for the
payment for cars and locomotives: ‘The swindling, extravagance,
incapacity, nepotism - as Ward used to say, general wickedness - of
 the past two years exceeds belief.’6
    Barings and Kidder Peabody mounted a coup d’état. The old
 board was forced out of power and a new finance committee set up
in New York under the chairmanship of Kidder’s expert on corpor-
ate reorganization, George Magoun, and with Tom Baring reluc-
tantly recruited as a director. Barings authorized further advances
not to exceed $1.5 million and by the autumn of 1889 all seemed to
be running relatively smoothly. The two banks congratulated them-
selves that they had made the best of a bad job and that, though their
clients whom they had put into the railroad had certainly suffered,
they could have done a great deal worse. Not all the clients agreed.
From Stockholm the Duc d’Otrante wrote indignantly to complain
about his reduced dividends. Revelstoke’s reply was a fine piece of
measured disdain. ‘I do not wish to avoid any responsibility I may
have incurred in recommending the investment to you,’ he wrote,
‘and you will today receive a letter from my firm crediting you with
the sum you paid for the Bonds. As however you think proper to
                                                                   say
you think the whole thing isa “swindle” I should prefer that our
                                                                  bus-
iness relations should cease and I have to request that you
                                                               will as
                     North America: 1848-1890                       219

soon as possible inform my firm to whom they can transfer the
Stocks and money they hold for your account.’
   Railways seemed constantly to be demanding exertions outside
the normal scope of merchant banking. Barings, on the urgent
encouragement of Sam Ward, had invested largely in the St Louis
and Iron Mountain Railway. Gross mismanagement had reduced
the line to chaos and the only recourse was a radical reorganization
and the expulsion of the directors. At first it seemed as if the board
would go quietly, then the President, Thomas Allen, telegraphed: ‘I
can before answering only ask you if it means unconditional sur-
render. If it does, count me out.’’ It plainly did, and a protracted
proxy battle ensued, with Thomas and Francis Baring on a visit to the
United States urging on Sam Ward to fresh efforts. Then the battle
was transferred to the courts, with the directors trying to rally patri-
otic sentiment on their side by claiming ‘a London party’ was aiming
to secure control of the line for its own - no doubt nefarious -
purposes.® Francis Baring became almost as obsessed with the issue
as Ward himself: ‘It is a scandal to civilization,’ he wrote, ‘that a
good road should not be run to best advantage.’ Allen was wholly
incompetent, ‘stupid, short-sighted and pigheaded’.*” In the end a
compromise was reached, by which the board was remodelled but
the stupid, short-sighted and pigheaded Allen allowed to remain
President. The result was not notably satisfactory and it took the
intervention of Jay Gould, as part of his titanic battle to impose
order on the American railways, to allow Barings to escape with
credit. ‘No railroad can reckon without Jay Gould,’ Sam Ward con-
cluded philosophically.*8 ‘The man’s power is uncomfortably great,
whether for good or evil,’ wrote Thomas Baring some years later, ‘but
we must take him as we find him now and thank heaven he is on the
side of law and order.’
   The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé was far from being the only
railroad in which Kidder Peabody involved Barings, and the other
ventures proved happier. Kidder Peabody were a powerful and
                                                           in
ambitious house based in New York and Boston, who believed
playing a more active role in running the enterprises in which they
took an interest than was usual in British merchant banking. In par-
ticular they specialized in rescuing and reorganizing railways which
were in financial trouble, no rarity in America at that period. Barings
 220                     The Sixth Great Power

 had been closely associated with them since 1878. Ward’s sub-agent
 in Boston (the headquarters of the agency had now been transferred
 to New York), perhaps saw a threat to his own position in the con-
 nection - at any rate, he deplored it, ‘they were not the sort of people
 you have heretofore corresponded with, over-sharp, standing low in
 public esteem, ‘the arrangement would create great surprise in Bos-
 ton’.’° Barings paid no attention. Even Ward, who had shared his
 sub-agent’s doubts about the future of the house, was impressed by
 their profits, capital and leadership. ‘Mr Kidder is in good health and
 attends actively to business. He is 59 years old. Peabody, 10 years
 younger, [is] the genius of the concern; his health suffers from over-
 work and [he] absents himself agood deal in winter. Magoun. . . is
 entirely devoted to business yet seems to take it easy and I believe
 that your experience shows that he does it well.’7!
    On the whole Sam Ward had served Barings well. Extolling his
 own achievements when it was proposed to cut his pension, he
claimed that the credit business had doubled in value during his
time as agent. He had maintained a virtual monopoly of the East
 India business so long as that business existed, sorted out the prob-
lems of the Eastern Railroad, carried on the great battle over Iron
Mountain: ‘What House in the American business can show such a
record during all that time?’?? He had a good case, but by 1884 the
days of glory were far behind him. He was a sick man, whose ability
to transact business efficiently depended on his taking long and fre-
quent holidays. His brother George suffered from ‘softening of the
brain’ and what Sam described as ‘self- interest and mental sluggish-
ness’.’3 His son Tom was very deaf. Tom Baring started with a poor
view of his namesake but gradually thought better of him; Magoun,
however, described him as ‘quite infantile, absolutely incapable
                                                                 of
understanding business matters’.74 Old clients were being lost and
new not gained. It was only too plain that if Barings’ business in
                                                                   the
United States was to survive, rapid changes were essential.
   Ward’s proposed solution was to bring in the newly appointed
sub-agent in New Orleans as reinforcement. To Revelstoke
                                                            - signing
himself thus for the first time - this seemed wholly inadeq
                                                              uate.75
Tom Baring agreed and had no doubt that the future should
                                                               lie in a
closer association with Kidder Peabody - they could not
                                                         possibly be
in safer hands, he commented; a generous verdict, seeing
                                                          that in the
                     North America: 1848-1890                        221

same letter he complained about Kidders’ recruitment of a Mr H. L.
Griggs, sharp and active enough, to be sure, but ‘a disagreeable
hog’.76 Revelstoke was dubious. The sort of arrangement his brother
had in mind would entail Barings giving up all their New York and
Boston business to another house and abandoning their own indi-
viduality. For Kidders to take in Tom Ward as a partner would avail
nothing. The only way the new arrangement could be acceptable
would be to have ‘a partner in New York who would really represent
 us and safeguard our interests’. Would Tom Baring be that man?7’
 With some reluctance Baring agreed he might.
   The proposal was duly broached to Mr Kidder, who was
disconcertingly unappreciative of the honour being done him. ‘He
appears altogether to ignore the value of our offer,’ wrote T. C. Bar-
ing indignantly. ‘Perhaps what we should bring to his firm would at
the outset not be very much, but it involves the potentiality of the
best and largest American credit business, not only in New York but
throughout the United States and Canada. His firm would no doubt
have to work for this, but it would be owr standing that would make
it attainable.’78 Kidder flatly refused to accept Tom Ward as a part-
ner - ‘he thinks him absolutely useless, even as a clerk’ - and did not
even seem very gratified by the thought of Tom Baring joining the
firm; ‘he is afraid of taking ina partner who might very shortly be the
chief and controlling influence in the firm,’ was Baring’s somewhat
complacent explanation.’?
    Possibly Kidder wanted not to appear too anxious to grasp at what
was, in truth, an enticing proposition. Negotiations were quickly
under way and virtually completed by October 1885. Now it was
Tom Baring who was anxious not to seem too eager. ‘| wish it to be
                                                        New York,’ he
most clearly understood that I do not ask to be sent to
reminded Revelstoke. ‘On the contrary I should much prefer to stay
                                                         the firm desires
here [Liverpool] and I only go to New York because
                                                               away I do
me to. Therefore I hope I may assume that by thus going
                                                              of 15 years
not forfeit or lose any claims or rights that my partnership
                                                                    assur-
may have given me.’8° Presumably he received a satisfactory
                                                      taking 20  per  cent
ance. He joined Kidder Peabody as a full partner
                                                            a year). Tom
of the profits (which had recently totalled some £36,000
                                       but  was taken  into the office at
Ward did not get his partnership
$7500 a year.®!
 222                     The Sixth Great Power

    The association proved on the whole fruitful and harmonious.
 Tom Baring’s own role in the enlarged business is more question-
 able. Peabody was apt to refer to his ‘apprehension and uneasiness’.
 He complained that good business was lost because of Baring’s lack
 of confidence in his partners’ ‘conservatism and judgment’.8? To
 Tom’s loyal nephew Cecil, however, the advantage he bestowed on
 Kidders was of inestimable value. “There is no doubt that his pres-
 ence here makes a very great difference to the tone as well as to the
 volume of the business. . . . Itis the one thing you want here, a man
 who is to begin with a gentleman, and who has strength of will
 enough to have his own way. Of course the ways of doing business
 are odious and must be distasteful to him, and he frets at not being
 “boss” of the whole place as he was at Liverpool, but I am perfectly
certain that every day he is here makes a difference to the business.’
One of his chief contributions was establishing a better relationship
between Kidder Peabody and such rivals as Browns or Drexels. ‘They
used to snarl at each other, but now the partners of both houses have
all been in here, and we have dined with them and what not...
Belmont also, Rothschild’s agent - a dog Jew - has been v. civil and
appeals to Uncle Tom’s stomach - which is more than one can say
for any of the others.’
   Cecil Baring was much more likeable than this letter might
suggest. He was Ned Revelstoke’s second surviving son and was
academically as formidable as any of his relations, having won the
Newcastle Scholarship at Eton and gota first in Greats under Jowett
of Balliol. He claimed to base his outlook on life on Aristotle’s
                                                                    Ethics,
 but he by no means confined himself to the classics, studied the
works of Darwin and Huxley, and took a passionate interest in the
flora and fauna wherever he might be. He contrived to be in a lot of
far-flung places.8+ He first went to America in the vacations from
Oxford, travelling with his Uncle Tom: ‘Cecil is a real good fellow
and a most pleasant companion, especially for me. We read
                                                                    the
Antigone through on the steamer and are about to begin
                                                                on the
Acharnians. On the 11th we proceed West to Garrison (Monta
                                                                   na)
and then to Melrose in Idaho. There the guides and horses
                                                                will be
ready and we disappear into the Bitter Root Mountains
                                                               and Big
Hole Basin.’*s In the course of this visit Cecil found himself
                                                               inspect-
ing the Niagara Falls with Lord Frederic Hamilton.
                                                           They saw a
                      North America: 1848-1890                        223

plaque commemorating Lord Desborough’s feat in swimming the
river at that point. ‘I looked at Baring, Baring looked at me. “I don’t
see why we shouldn’t do it too,” ’ he observed. When the two young
men emerged naked on the Canadian bank they were confronted by
a reporter who tried to interview them but, hearing they had not
done it for a bet, said ‘Hell!’ and walked off.8¢
   Cecil Baring drifted into banking for want of an alternative and
never really gave his heart to it. He joined his uncle in Kidder Pea-
body in 1887 - ‘Cecil has plunged headlong into work and is doing it
all as well as possible,’8? Tom Baring wrote appreciatively - and was
still there when the dual Boston and New York house was dissolved
three years later. Two firms took its place: Kidder Peabody in Boston
and Baring, Magoun, a partnership of Thomas Baring and George
Magoun, the specialist in railways, in New York. Both houses acted
as Barings’ agents, and in New York Baring, Magoun continued to
 operate a joint account, with a capital of£1 million or a little more.
 Cecil Baring went with his uncle, with the promise of a partnership
 in Bishopsgate in 1891 if all went well.88 By the time that moment
 came, the situation of Barings was very different and the future of
 Tom or Cecil in London looked, to say the least, precarious.


In economic terms Canada was far behind the United States, its
industry primitive and kept in that state by the dumping of cheap
exports from the south, its agriculture hamstrung by inadequate
communications. Politically it was still frail; even in 1848 many
people believed it must in the end throw in its lot with the States. It
had the same hunger for capital as its neighbour but far less capacity
to develop it for itself. If it was not to keep up with the United States,
for that was far beyond its powers, but to advance at all, then it
urgently required money from abroad. The only source of capital for
Canada was London, and all that came was raised by the efforts of
Barings and Glyns.
   It might be going unnecessarily far to accuse Barings of a crime so
heinous as altruism, but their policy towards Canada was consis-
tently generous and liberal. When in 1849 the Inspector General of
Public Accounts, Francis Hincks, tried to explain various temporary
problems which led to a pressing need for funds, Barings brushed his
 224                    The Sixth Great Power

words aside; the explanations ‘were in no wise required by us to con-
firm our opinion of the honour and resources of the Government or
People of Canada’.®? Barings and Glyns found themselves regularly
in advance by £100,000 or more, sometimes as much as £450,000,
and charging a rate of interest noticeably lower than they could have
got in London. ‘We do not wish and we feel we ought not to enforce
our full right on such a valued and valuable connection as that with
the Province, wrote Thomas Baring, but the value, whatever it was,
was certainly not monetary.
   The greatest problem was to persuade the British investor to take
an interest in the affairs of this remote and precarious colony. In the
late 1850s £400,000 was urgently needed to meet a deficit on current
account. Barings and Glyns were in despair. They wrote jointly to
assure the Canadian government that debentures could only be sold
at a price so lowas to alarm every holder of Canadian bonds. ‘We are
most desirous not only to prevent such an occurrence but to aid to
the utmost of our power in the advancement of every work likely to
promote the prosperity of the Province. . . . We see no other mode,
therefore, than to purchase a portion ourselves and by that means to
try to give confidence to others, as well as to meet your immediate
wants, and though not anxious to buy a security for which we as yet
see no chance of a re-sale, we consent . . . to buy debentures to the
extent of £100,000 nominal capital.’ At the end of 1858 a powerful
delegation came to London to discuss the political and economic
future of the provinces. Joshua Bates acted as a kind of unofficial
Canadian ambassador, advising the delegates on the people they
would be meeting and accompanying them when they called on the
Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer.” As one result of
the visit Barings and Glyns brought out a £2.8 million loan at the
beginning of 1860. They were not particularly optimistic about the
prospects - ‘our people will not take much interest in it,’ they told
Hopes gloomily® - but in the event it proved a triumphant success.
The loan was going ‘like hot rolls’, Bates noted in his diary, and the
issue was ten times oversubscribed.94
   As in the United States, it was the development of the railway sys-
tem that needed most capital. Between 1850 and 1870 expansion
was particularly feverish, and nearly £30 million was called for to
finance the new lines, a demand which the Canadian econo
                                                             my could
                     North America: 1848-1890                        225

not begin to meet. The Grand Trunk Railway was the most ambi-
tious of the various undertakings, and from the point of view of
Barings at least, the most disastrous. Weardale Iron and the Grand
Trunk were Barings’ two great blunders of the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury; the first was primarily the responsibility of Joshua Bates, the
second of Thomas Baring.
   The Grand Trunk was a noble concept: 1112 miles driving west
and opening up the heartlands around Lake Huron. It offered ‘the
certainty of a great traffic’, observed no less an authority than Robert
Stephenson; Lord Elgin, the Governor General, eulogized it; it
promised a dividend of 11 percent. Barings supported the idea from
the start, but baulked at naming one of their partners to serve on the
London board - it was not the sort of thing they did. When the pros-
 pectus arrived, however, both Thomas Baring and George Glyn were
 named among the directors; they protested but gave way on the urg-
 ing of John Ross, the President of the railway, who pointed out that
 they would be keeping company with the entire cabinet of Northern
 Canada.*5
    ‘The Grand Trunk business will go right, I think,’ Bates reassured
 Baring. His cautious qualitication proved all too necessary; within
 a few years it was going badly wrong. By the end of 1857 funds were
 exhausted, traffic failed to grow as had been anticipated, the public
 lost confidence in the securities. Glyns and Barings urged the Cana-
 dian government to come to the rescue, otherwise the concern
 would collapse.?7 The Finance Minister, A. T. Galt, was hardly
 encouraging; he ruled out any idea of the government taking over
 the line or providing direct aid; the only long-term solution lay in
 increased traffic.%8 The line had become an embarrassingly live polit-
 ical issue, and no government was likely to risk the explosion of pop-
 ular indignation which would have followed intervention. In any
 case the finances of the Canadian government were almost as preca-
 rious as those of the railway. In July 1860 the company made a final
 appeal. The Grand Trunk ‘had scrupulously completed a line of rail-
 way of undoubted excellence’; it had bestowed on the province
 4ncalculable advantages from its expenditure and works’; it had
 crowned its labours by ‘erecting at enormous cost the Victoria Bridge
                                                                    yet it
 which must always be considered as an honor to Canada’; and
 was now about to ‘sink under the pressing load of present debt’.
  226                     The Sixth Great Power

 Galt’s reply was sympathetic but noncommittal. ‘Unfortunately the
 visit of the Prince of Wales absorbs a large share of our time and
 attention at this moment.’! Since the main purpose of the Prince’s
 visit was to open the Victoria Bridge, Galt could have found a
 happier excuse.
    Bates continued to keep a commendably stiff upper lip. When
 asked whether to sell or keep Grand Trunk shares, he replied, ‘Keep
 to be sure. It will be good property for the grandchildren. Lock up
 the shares. There is nothing more to pay on them.’!°! To Young, in
 November 1860, he maintained that the railway was bound to suc-
 ceed some time or other ‘and those who buy at the low price will
 make money’.!° But Baring, who felt himself personally responsible
 and, as Chairman of the London board, was the all-too-visible mani-
festation of the company in London, took the matter more tragically.
Certainly it was hard to find a bright side. By the end of 1860 the
Grand Trunk was unable even to cover its running costs, let alone
pay interest on its shares. For Barings the consequences were
extremely serious. After the first issue they found themselves left
with £361,000 worth on their hands and debts from the company
amounting to more than £125,000.1%          In 1860, after the second,
almost entirely unsuccessful issue, they had more than £800,000 of
unsaleable stock and were owed well over £400,000. When
                                                                Bates was
totting up his personal wealth in 1863, he found that his Grand
Trunk stock was valued at £219,000, while when Thomas
                                                           Baring
died in 1873 his holding was worth a theoretical £600,000.
   _ By then the railway, though still a drain on Barings’ resources,
                                                                       was
 no longer a total disaster. At the end of 1860 Barings and Glyns
                                                                      took
 joint action to distrain on the company’s property. Their
                                                                  move at
 last forced the Canadian government to intervene to preven
                                                                  t a dis-
astrous breakdown of communications. A commission
                                                               was set up
and recommended that certain parts of the revenue
                                                            should be set
aside for the payment of creditors; it also propo
                                                          sed important
economies in the running of the railroad of a kind which
                                                              the London
board had been urging for years but had wholly
                                                     failed to impose on
their headstrong Canadian colleagues. The Grand
                                                          Trunk Railway
was   never to bea favourite of the British invest
                                                   or, nor spoken of with
affection inside the partners’ room at
                                            Barings, but the worst was
over.
                     North America: 1848-1890                       227

   ‘Our unpopularity is awful, wrote Thomas Baring in March 1861
when they were launching their legal action against the railway. ‘I
hope that we may not be the cause of the stoppage of the Road. We
should be as much abused in England as in Canada.’!°* One of
Baring’s stauncher allies in his battle to involve the Canadian gov-
ernment in the affairs of the Grand Trunk had been the Governor
General, Sir Edmund Head. ‘I believe that the future prosperity of
Canada is intimately connected with the speedy and successful con-
clusion of this great work,’ he told Baring.1°5 His intervention
became well known and the more ardent nationalists deplored what
they saw as his subservience to British interests. When, in August
 1858, Head somewhat controversially refused a dissolution, the
opposition press abused him. Under the headline ‘Sir E. Head’s
Closet Councillors’, The Globe accused him of taking orders from
Barings. Why not, it suggested, do away with all pretence and ask
Barings to nominate the Inspector General and the merchants of
 London, Manchester and Glasgow the two Attorney Generals?10%
Not the least disagreeable feature for Barings of the Grand Trunk
affair was that it drew them into Canadian politics and associated
them in the public eye with the government as against the opposi-
tion.
    It was some time before Barings made any other important sorties
 into the world of Canadian railway finance, but in 1884 George Ste-
phen - later Lord Mount Stephen - reckoned that they should by
now be ready to supporta yet more grandiose project, the Canadian
Pacific Railroad, a line to link east and west and unite the nation.
Alexander Baring, a distant cousin who was working for the Cana-
dian Pacific’s agents in New York, was dispatched to take the tem-
perature of his kinsmen. He was reasonably well received but
reported that at that moment all transatlantic enterprises were
viewed suspiciously in London.'° The following year the Canadian
                                                                 of
government authorized the Canadian Pacific to raise $35 million,
which they would put up $20 million and the directors must find the
                                                                       to
rest. This time George Stephen himself took the proposition
                                                                    Lord
Barings. Before he had even completed his exposition
Revelstoke interrupted: ‘We have been looking into        this question
                                                                      the
carefully, and if agreeable to you, we are prepared to take over
whole issue of £3 million of stock at 92%4.’ It was a characteris tically
 228                      The Sixth Great Power

flamboyant gesture and Stephen exultantly cabled Canada. His fel-
low directors were anxiously awaiting the news: ‘In the tumult of our
feelings we began capering about like schoolboys, even bestowing
sundry kicks on the furniture of the board room.’!98
   The story almost missed its happy ending. The London Stock
Exchange did not take kindly to the first issue and Barings were left
with a great deal of stock on their hands.1°? ‘Between ourselves, |
doubt if much over half have actually been sold to investors,’ wrote
Stephen. ‘There was a dead set against the bonds by Grand Trunk
Railroad folks, and there is not another House in London could have
 done what Barings have accomplished.’ Little by little the bonds
 became established and on 5 November Stephen cabled: ‘Railway
 now out of danger’.!!0 The Americans proved more resistant. From
 New York Cecil Baring reported the Canadian Pacific was little
 bought, ‘and most of the people here abuse it like the devil’. Even if it
did well with the eastbound freight, ‘all their cars will have to run
back empty to the West again without the remotest chance of any
compensating traffic’.!"1 Undiscomfited, Barings pushed on with
fresh issues. A loan for something over £4 million was floated in
 1886. They farmed out shares to Glyns, Hambros, Morton Rose and
other allies, but once again the market proved sluggish and at one
point they had to buy £325,000 worth themselves to support it. The
final profit was almost £60,000. A further issue of £3 million in 1888
was still more successful. Over £26 million was applied for and
Barings’ total profit on expenses and account amounted to nearly
£130,000. It was a welcome success after the troubles of the
                                                             Grand
Trunk and provided a moment of satisfaction before the storm
broke in Argentina several thousand miles to the south.
                                   ie
                                 eon




                    Overcommitted
                  Latin America, 1849-1890




Barings’ commitments in Latin America between 1850 and 1890
were so heavily concentrated in Argentina and Uruguay that it is
easy to ignore their activities in other countries of the region. These
did not, in fact, add up to very much. In Mexico their chief function
was that of agent for the disgruntled British bondholders who had
lost years of interest on their investment as the result of defaults by
the Mexican government. The bondholders fondly hoped that tri-
partite intervention by British, French and Spanish forces would
secure them their money, but when an expedition was finally
mounted, its object was to benefit only foreign merchants who had
claims against the Mexican government.                          ,
    A French army eventually fought its way to Mexico      City    in 1863
and it was in an effort to defray the cost of its operations that the
French Minister of Finance approached Hottinguers and Roths-
childs about a possible loan. Barings were involved from the start,
through their close alliance with Hottinguers, but the reluctance of
the French government to guarantee the loan ensured that their any-
way tepid interest quickly chilled into extinction. Not even a direct
appeal to Thomas Baring from ‘the great Baron James’ had any
                                                                  ready in
 effect, though Baring told Hottinguers he was perfectly
                                                                     of the
 principle to act with Rothschilds; ‘since the establishment
                                                 did, however,
Crédit Mobilier here we must look about us’.! He
                                                      by the
promise to discuss with Rothschilds any approach made
                                                     avec M. Baring,
French government to either house: ‘Cette entente
                                               non seulemen t a cause de
Rothschild told Fould, ‘nous a paru opportune,
                                                               & cause des
la position difficile ou se trouve le Mexique, mais aussi
                                                         intermédaire.? In
emprunts antérieurs dont cette maison a été le principal
                                   229
  230                     The Sixth Great Power

 the end Glyns and that threatening new apparition, the Crédit
 Mobilier, handled the loan.
    Barings retained the financial agency for the Chilean government
 until the 1870s. It was a costly distinction. In November 1858 the
 house issued a £1.5 million government loan. Thomas Baring, who
 was abroad at the time, had been pouring cold water on the enter-
 prise, to the chagrin of Joshua Bates. ‘I am very sorry that the absence
 of Francis and myself and our letters should prevent you from con-
 cluding what you think right about the Chile loan,’ wrote Baring. ‘I
always consider that the principle of our house is that the partners on
the spot, especially when you are one of those, should decide all mat-
ters of business as they alone can judge oftime and circumstances.”3
Unfortunately a combination of political disorder in Chile and what
Baring called ‘the uncertainty and languor of the money market’
proved damaging. Some half of the loan went the first day but little
of this was for permanent investment. ‘So small a loan a few years
ago would have been taken in a few hours,’ Bates wrote in his diary.*
One million pounds had been allotted a few days later but Barings
had already had to buy back £200,000 so as to keep the stock at a pre-
mium. Early in 1859 still only half the original amount had been
taken, and in 1867 Barings were com plaining bitterly that fresh loans
 issued through Morgans were undermining the value of the earlier
issue.
   Nor was their experience in Venezuela any happier. In 1862
Barings floated a £1 million loan secured against customs duties, but
within two years the government took over all the income from
                                                                    the
customs and suspended payments. Barings plagued successive
                                                                  Brit-
ish Foreign Ministers to protest, and in 1867 Thomas Baring headed
a deputation that urged Lord Stanley ‘to take active and energe
                                                                   tic
measures’. Stanley had no intention of getting into the same
                                                               sort of
mess as the French had contrived for themselves in Mexico
                                                              . ‘Her
Majesty’s Government,’ he replied, ‘do not feel justifi
                                                        ed in seeking
the sanction of Parliament to adopt coercive measures
                                                           which might
involve this country in a war with the Republic of Venezu
                                                             ela.’5 The
bondholders had to wait a long time for their money.
   Brazil was Rothschild country and the fact that Barin
                                                            gs opened a
small credit for the Bank of Brazil in 1879 did notal
                                                      ter the situation.¢
Nor did a £1 million short-term loan for the gove
                                                     rnment of Peru in
                      Latin America: 1849-1890                       231

1874 establish a pattern for the future.” Barings’ serious efforts were
directed towards Argentina, and the resumption of payments on the
1824 loan in 1859 opened the way for a new and more vigorous
expansion of activities. In view of what was to come, it was not with-
out significance that young Ned Baring chose the same year for a
first tour of the Americas. ‘Edward Baring’s . . . news is interesting,
reported Thomas Baring. ‘I have a few very sensible lines from him.
_.. The youngster promises well.’ He was not enamoured by what
he found in the various countries he visited. In Mexico he concluded
that the real reason for the failure to satisfy the bondholders was ‘the
antipathy of the majority of the Congress to see so large a sum of
money as $412 million go to pay their just debts to foreigners, thus
 precluding the possibility of any of it going into their pockets’.? In
 Peru he commented, ‘an infusion of Anglo Saxon blood into this
 country would no doubt be of the greatest service; but the intoler-
 ance with respect to religion is still so great that it presents a great
 barrier to any project for immigration’.!° When he finally reached
 Argentina he was still further dismayed: ‘There is certainly a marked
 difference between the Argentine Confederation and any other part
 ofS.America as this so called Republic is possibly under a more des-
 potic rule than any other country on the face of the earth.’!!
   Baring found himself seeing a lot of this despot, Juan Rosas, over
                                                                  had
the next few months. The British Minister, Henry Southern,
been sent out with instructions to get on good terms with Rosas and
he performed this task manfully. Southern had a close relationship
with Barings, and though Thomas Baring was at pains never to treat
him as a supernumerary employee, he larded his letters to the
                                                                    or
diplomat with casual references to what he had said to Palmerston
                                                       at dinner   the
Palmerston had said to him when they had met
                                                                   the
previous night. Baring was equally close to Lord Eddisbury,
                                                who  advised   him  to
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
                                                             disliked;
avoid writing to Rosas on blue paper, which he much
                                                            to extend
svhilst on the other hand if your letter were to be made
                                                       together with a bit
 beyond one sheet, and if the sheets were to be tied
                                                       a ridiculous
 of Red Ribbon, Rosas would be more gratified by such
                                   make him a large Loan’.!? What-
 bit of homage than if you were to
                                               however, it did not
 ever the colour of the paper and ribbon used,
                                                         Buenos Aires, all
 alter the fact that by the time Ned Baring arrived in
MSy)                     The Sixth Great Power

 Rosas had offered was ‘promises and a Guano contract, with both of
which,’ Thomas Baring told Southern, ‘I fear that a meeting of bond
 holders would not be at all pleased’."
    Southern and Ned Baring cooperated closely in their efforts to
 make Rosas improve his offer. Together they regularly visited his
country house, where they paid court to the dictator and his formi-
dable, Eva Peron prototype, daughter Manuelita. Baring was not
wholly seduced by Rosas, whom he found ‘from his vanity and habit
of doing just as he pleases’ a difficult man to deal with,'* but he con-
cluded he genuinely wanted a settlement of the debts and would put
forward a reasonable proposition as soon as circumstances allowed.
Rosas never got a chance to prove his good will. Within two years of
Baring’s visit the dictator and his daughter were deposed and had
fled the country. The news of his downfall arrived in London only a
few days before Major Ferdinand White was dispatched to Buenos
Aires as Barings’ new agent and negotiator for the bondholders.
   White was a curious choice. He listed his qualifications as being
‘Integrity, Secrecy, Tact, and a knowledge of Spanish’,!5 but the last
at least was exiguous. He was offered £1000 and expenses for his
trouble, and demonstrated his integrity by keeping a low profile and
his expenses to a minimum, living in humble lodgings, distributing
no bribes and doing no entertaining. He brought out with him a
handsome rifle and pair of pistols, purchased originally as a gift for
Rosas and subsequently intended for whoever seemed to be in
power, but rapidly concluded that all the ‘dignitaries and officials I
have had to deal with are learned Doctors of Law and peaceful Civil-
ians. The era of the caudillos has passed away: thank God.’!¢ He sold
the rifle for rather less than had been paid for it to an officer in the
Royal Navy and brought the pistols back to England. In this he dem-
onstrated his inadequacy; the new and ferocious military dictator,
General Urquiza, would have relished the present, but White never
aimed so high. Not that it would have helped much if he had.
Urquiza was soon ejected from Buenos Aires and the country lapsed
into chaos in which no negotiations over debt settlements could pos-
sibly be expected. White sadly left for home: ‘I am sorry to say the
aspect of affairs is more gloomy than ever.’ A protracted civil war
seemed inevitable.!7
   It was 1856 before things had mended sufficiently for hopes of a
                      Latin America: 1849-1890                        233

final settlement of the debts to be revived.'® Zimmerman, Frazier
and Co. had become Barings’ correspondents in Buenos Aires after
the departure of Ferdinand White, and in April Charles Cabot of that
firm wrote to report that the situation was now more tranquil, reve-
nues were growing and ‘I therefore cannot but think that the Gov-
ernment will be enabled before long to do something more for the
English Bond holders’.!9 Ferdinand White’s former deputy, con-
fusingly called George White, was sent out to try at last to put a stop
to this unhappy saga. He was speeded on his way by a blast of indig-
 nation from the bondholders. They considered Barings had been
weak and dilatory and nothing would satisfy them but terms sub-
 stantially better than any so far offered: “The Committee 1s so angry
 that they will throw the whole blame upon Barings.?°
    Fortunately the improvement was forthcoming. By the time
 White arrived, indeed, the only point at issue was the rate of interest
 to be paid on the bonds in lieu ofthe thirty years or so oflost interest.
The bondholders wanted 3 per cent; Roberto Norberto de la Riestra,
the Minister of Finance, offered only 1 per cent. Riestra was ‘very
stiff on the subject,’ reported White.! In the end he relented, and a
sliding scale of interest was agreed which gave the bondholders their
3 per cent from 1871.2? The settlement meant that the bondholders
got only £7000 less than they demanded. ‘I have therefore thought it
best to close at once,’ White told the British Minister, ‘and I trust the
affair may now be considered as virtually settled.’”°
   After this chastening experience it not surprisingly took some
time before Barings were disposed to lend more money to Argentina.
The surprising thing, indeed, is that within a few years they were at it
again. The fact was that Argentina enjoyed immense natural wealth,
and that though incompetence, corruption and political instability
might from time to time put foreign investors at risk, in the long run
their profit was likely to be secure. The very fact that the risks were
                                                                        in
there meant that the profits would be greater than those secured
                                                                         a
 more stable areas. Up to 18 per cent interest could be secured on
well-secured short-term loan. Handled with       discreti on, investm ent
                                                                  Barings
 in Argentina could be an eminently satisfactory enterprise.
                                                                        to
 lost a great deal of money there, but that should not be allowed
                                                    They   were in a posi-
 obscure the fact that they made a great deal too.
                                                                      t of
 tion of peculiar responsibility. The British investor was ignoran
234                     The Sixth Great Power

almost everything to do with Latin America, confusing Argentina
with Chile and Mexico and wholly unable to follow the intricacies of
Argentine internal politics.24 They depended on the judgement of
Barings as to whether or not the money would be safe. On the whole
their confidence was justified.
   Not that the public blindly followed the bankers’ bidding. Barings
re-entered the market early in 1866 with a small loan of £1.25 million
to help the Argentine government finance a war the latter and Brazil
were jointly waging against Paraguay. Argentina’s ‘progress in mate-
rial resources was rapid and satisfactory, Barings told Baron
Stieglitz; the security was good, the timing seemed right, yet less
than half the subscription was taken up. Throughout 1866, a year
disastrously marked by the failure of Overend Gurney, Barings kept
up the price of the loan by buying shares as they came on to the mar-
ket, but the war dragged on, money in London grew no easier, and
1867 found them holding an embarrassingly large amount ofunsale-
able stock as well as having advanced over £300,000 to meet the
immediate needs of the Argentine government. There was no hope
of issuing the further loan which Argentina now desperately needed.
It was not until June 1868 that a further £1.95 million was offered to
the British investor, and not until the following year, by which time
the war was clearly won, that the full amount was subscribed.
  Two years later, with the war against Paraguay over, and the
Franco-Prussian war causing European investors to look farther
afield, it seemed the tide of public opinion must turn. Yet it obsti-
nately failed to do so. In 1873 Barings brought out a small loan for
the province of Buenos Aires. The subscription went well and the
following year the Argentines came back for more. But the British
investor still would not accept that Argentina was a proper resting
place for his money. The 1873 loan was soon ata discount and there
were no buyers to be found. ‘It would be impossible to offer a new
loan except at a much lower figure than the last, which would be
derogatory to the dignity of the Government, Barings told the
Argentine Minister of Finance. ‘We may add for your private infor-
mation that, in order to secure the success of the loan of 1873, we
were obliged to take a considerable amount ourselves, and of this the
principal part remains, still unsold, in our possession.’26
   Barings did not lose their faith in the long-term future of
                     Latin America: 1849-1890                       235

Argentina but they had to defend its reputation against ferocious
attacks by Stock Exchange speculators and certain financial journal-
ists, particularly from The Times. Barings believed that this was a
systematic campaign intended to drive down the price of Argentine
securities, and it succeeded in lowering the price of the 1873 loan
from its original 89.5 to a mere 63.27 Letters from Barings to the
editors of The Times, the Morning Post and other newspapers to some
extent checked the rot, but prices still drifted down. ‘We have the
strongest interest in seeing the credit of the Republic maintained,’
Barings told a new Minister of Finance in August 1876, ‘and we have
seen with the greatest pain the serious and continued depreciation in
Argentine securities . . . We have made large purchases of Argentine
 Bonds on our own account to endeavour to arrest the fall, but with-
 out success.’?8
    Three months later Barings took a step that seemed relatively
 unimportant at the time but was to have the most direful conse-
 quences. It dispatched to act as its agent in Buenos Aires, for an ini-
 tial three years, Nicholas Bouwer, a clerk of Dutch extraction who
 had been employed by Barings for some thirteen years. His terms of
 reference were to urge retrenchment on the Argentine government,
 but also to look out for suitable mercantile operations, and to pay
 particular attention to the Buenos Aires Drainage and Waterworks,
 which had been the beneficiary of the 1873 loan.?? “Buenos Ayres on
 the whole is nota bad place to live, the climate doing much to recon-
 cile a foreigner to the country,’ Bouwer told Ned Baring. ‘The popu-
 lation however leaves much to desire; the foreign element, generally
speaking, is not of the best, and as regards the natives, though
exceedingly polite, they invariably betray their descent from the
Spaniards.’3° It was almost the only deprecating phrase about the
country that he was to utter; after his first meeting with the Finance
Minister he reported: ‘It cannot be gainsaid that all the Argentine
Republic requires to recover itself from its financial embarrassment
is peace and prosperity. The latter appears to be returning and as to
the former, I think, from all I hear, that it is decidedly secured.’3!
   It was Bouwer who introduced Barings to the affairs of the well-
                                                          Co. Hales,
 established Buenos Aires trading house of S. B. Hale and
                                                                   r-
 Bouwer reported, had lost a lot of money recently but were ‘honou
                                                                    ,
 ably run and basically sound’. The principal partner, Mr Pearson
236                     The Sixth Great Power

was ‘a little too easy in business’, but the man who provided most of
the management ‘I consider to be very active and intelligent’.
 Bouwer recommended that the house should be given a credit of
£40,000 to £50,000. Barings turned down the proposal, but Bouwer
later returned to the charge. ‘I can assure you from the intimate
knowledge I now have of the firm, that your relations with it will be
both satisfactory and remunerative, and that you may grant it
facilities with perfect confidence.’32 On the basis of this resounding
recommendation Barings granted a credit of £15,000. The intumacy
of Bouwer’s knowledge is attested to by the fact that he soon after-
wards became engaged to Mr Pearson’s daughter; its accuracy can be
judged by the fact that he was reporting by mid-1879 ‘with very great
regret’ that Hales were in serious difficulties and would have to be
rescued if they were not to collapse, probably taking the provincial
government with them.}3 Against their better judgement Barings
agreed to accept the proffered security and enlarge their credit, find-
ing themselves by 1880 inextricably engaged with the affairs of this
volatile company, and the somewhat perplexed owners of a country
house, two ranches and a large quantity of cattle.34
   It was no time for volatility. After so many years in the doldrums,
the Argentine economy found itself on the high seas with a strong
wind behind it. The country was as hungry as ever for fresh capital
and suddenly the British investor was eager to supply it. ‘The Com-
mercial crisis which has so long weighed upon your country may be
said to have disappeared,’ wrote Barings exultantly to the new Presi-
dent of the Banco de la Provincia in Buenos Aires, ‘and she appears
to be entering once more upon a career of prosperity.’35 When Gen-
eral Roca became President of the Republic in October 1880 and
Buenos Aires was forcibly and finally integrated with the rest of the
country, British investment in joint-stock enterprises in Argentina
was worth about £25 million, by 1885 it was £45 million, by 1890
nearly £150 million. In 1889 Argentina absorbed 40-50 per cent of
all British funds invested outside the United Kingdom.3¢
   By no means all this vast inflow came through Barings but a strik-
ingly large proportion did. In the first five years there was some
restraint but in the four years beginning in 1886 loans were raised of
£4 million, £4.3 million, £3.9 million and £5.3 million, the first two
jointly with Morgans. Barings enjoyed a special relationship, even at
                      Latin America: 1849-1890                        237

those times at which they were unpopular for having refused to do
all the government asked ofthem. They supplied the Finance Minis-
ter with a complimentary copy of the Economist and in 1882 were
talked into selecting and sending outa racehorse for the Governor of
Buenos Aires. They at first refused this potentially hazardous
request and were reproached by Bouwer. The Governor, he told
them, was ‘very sorely disappointed, as he had hoped that you would
have consented to render the country the service of securing a good
stallion. He reckoned that some of you being good judges of horses,
there would be no objection on your part to undertake the commis-
 sion, the more as it was intended to leave you entirely free in your
 choice.’37 Barings eventually took on the task. The stallion turned
 out to be ten years older than its proclaimed age, it had bandy legs
 and the first two foals which it sired were both stillborn.
     Barings’ close relationship with the government did not assure
 them a monopoly. In 1881 they refused to accept that the time was
 yet ripe to launch a new loan in London, whereupon a French syndi-
 cate moved in and seized the contract. It seemed as if the French had
 established themselves so firmly that they would take over the chief
  role of raising money abroad for the Argentine government, but the
 Argentines were delighted to play one banker off against the other.
  Early in 1884 Roca sent for Bouwer and asked whether Barings
 would take charge of a new $30 million loan to be raised for certain
  public works. Bouwer pointed out that the French were on the point
  of raising a $12 million loan in London. Roca said there was no
                                                                         the
  immediate hurry for the larger loan. ‘From the manner in which
                                           is heartily tired of  the way  in
  President spoke I am convinced that he
                                                                very  much
  which the French houses have treated him, and that he
                                                                 the affairs
  regrets ever having allowed himself to be induced to place
                                                          There    was evi-
  of the Government in other hands than yours.’
                                                                 of waiting
  dently more hurry than Bouwer thought; Roca got tired
                                                               of Morgans
  and negotiated the loan with a powerful combination
                                                        this rebuff   which
  and the Crédit Industriel in Paris. It was possibly
                                                              all events, in
  determined Barings to be more aggressive in future: at
                                                          million govern-
   1886 they combined with Morgans to take the £4
                                                         for Buenos Aires
   ment loan and added a loan for almost £2 million
   on their own account.
                                                              gs’ policies.
      There was still evidence of some restraint in Barin
238                       The Sixth Great Power

When the National Bank in 1886 wanted a credit of £200,000,
Barings told Bouwer tartly: ‘It is impossible for us to grant all the
credits and advances sought for by the Governments, Institutions
and individuals in the Republic. The applications we receive are
especially numerous just now, while we, from our own point of view,
are of opinion that we have already quite as much interest there as
we care to have.’3? Yet the pickings were often sumptuous. In 1887,
when they closed the books on two loans of £400,000 for the West-
ern Railway of Santa Fé, the profit that remained from commission
and dealings on their own account was £182,334 4s.9d. With
fortunes like that to be made, it was hard to blame the partners for
yielding to the temptation always to add one more commitment to
their existing list.
   Meanwhile neighbouring Uruguay was making heavy demands
on the resources of the house. At the end of 1887 Bouwer reported
that the government in Montevideo wanted Barings to issue a new
$20 million loan on their behalf: ‘It is willing to leave the time and
price of issue to you, and further to bind itself that all future financial
operations shall pass through your hands.’4° The list opened and
closed on 5 April 1888 with applications for nearly £30 million. After
so heady a success it took some self-discipline to turn down a
Montevideo City loan. ‘The number of loans and schemes of all
kinds connected with the Argentine Republic and Uruguay which
are likely to be offered here in the next few months,’ Barings told
Hales, ‘is so great that it seems almost impossible that the European
market can absorb them satisfactorily.’#1 The letter ended with a
mention of the fact that Hales’ director, C. H. Sanford, was expected
to call at Bishopsgate after lunch. Barings’s self-discipline was about
to run out.


There was no prejudice in favour of Sanford within the partners’
room at Bishopsgate. He was by origin an American and had come to
Argentina as representative of a firm selling ‘Florida Water’, a propri-
etary medicine of questionable efficacy made from the flower of the
elder tree.42 Somehow he became a director of Hale and Co.
                                                           and,
almost by default, rose to be its manager. When Hales were heavily
in debt to Barings in 1882, it was Sanford who was held particularly
                       Latin America: 1849-1890                          239

to blame in London. ‘It is difficult to believe that his two senior part-
ners are unable to control Mr Sanford sufficiently to force him to act
honestly,’ they wrote indignantly to Bouwer.*? When Ward asked for
a report on Hales some three years later Barings told him that the
house had recently been doing well through government loans and
that Mr Hale was an old man of whom nobody spoke ill. ‘Besides this
there is a Mr Pearson, whose daughter our agent married and whom
we do not know. The controlling partner is Mr Sanford, in whom we
 have no confidence.’*+ And yet this man, who could not be induced
 to act honestly and in whom Barings had no confidence, was not
 merely received by Lord Revelstoke, but listened to with respect and
 treated as a sound authority on the Argentine economy.
    He seems, indeed, to have been an uncommonly plausible trick-
 ster; not, perhaps, consciously a rogue, but carried away by his
 enthusiasm and with an alarming capacity to carry others away as
 well. He had greatly impressed the President of Argentina by his
 business acumen and it was this connection which had secured for
  Hales the concession to take over and extend the waterworks and
  drainage system of Buenos Aires. They purchased this concession for
  $21 million, payable in three annual instalments, and in exchange
  for this and the construction of the works were to receive £10 million
  shares and debentures in the newly formed Buenos Aires Water Sup-
  ply and Drainage Company for sale to the public. If all went well, the
  construction work proceeded to schedule and to budget, and the
                                                         alacrity,
 public bought the shares and debentures with reasonable
 then an immense profit would be made. If things did not go well,
 then the loss would be correspondingly calamitous.
    Revelstoke saw only the possibilities of profit. He agreed to enter
                                                                          that
 into the business on joint account with Hales, though knowing
                                                           help   in  case   of
 that house lacked the substance to give any effective
                                                                          pay-
 trouble, and thus committed Barings to a series of enormous
                                             money   was   to  come      from.
 ments with no certainty as to where the
                                                                        ion of
 The first tranche of shares offered to the public gave an indicat
                                                                     to offer
 the problems that lay ahead. Writing on 16 November
                                                  £25,00 0,   Baring   s told
 Messrs Ephraim and Co. a participation of
                                                                  to  various
 them that the issue ‘was brought out yesterday and owing
                                           ably  receive d  by   the   Public,
 circumstances has not been very favour
                                                       sed    us.  We     have
 which we are bound to say has not much surpri
240                      The Sixth Great Power

however every confidence in the future of the undertaking.’** Some
of Barings’ rivals were equally unsurprised but not so confident.
Writing in early October about the news that Barings were to issue
‘yet another Argentine loan,’ Alphonse de Rothschild commented
sceptically that ‘the Argentine Republic had to grow rapidly very rich
indeed, also with a growth of producing, thus enabling her the lux-
ury of these numerous successive big loans’.4¢ When the subscrip-
tion was complete, more than half the preference shares were still
held by the syndicate of nine banks and brokers which Barings had
set up to handle the issue. Prospects for the second and third
tranches seemed increasingly precarious. And yet more or less at the
same time Barings and Hales found themselves having to take up
£300,000 stock for the Western Railways of Santa Fé and Barings
advanced more than £500,000 for the Curamalan Land Company, a
vast estate of 600,000 acres in the south of Buenos Aires province.
   With reasonable luck things could still have turned out well, but
the luck was running out. General Roca’s successor as President, Dr
Miguel Celman, was a weak man who allowed the railway building
mania to get out of hand and ran up debts out of all proportion to the
immediately realizable assets of the country. ‘The Confederation is
piling up liabilities after much too wholesale a fashion, and great as
are 1ts resources, 1t cannot stand such a strain as this threatens to be,’
wrote the Bankers Magazine at the end of 1888.47 A year later even
Revelstoke was showing alarm. “The accounts we get from B. Ayres
are not very satisfactory, he told Sanford. ‘It seems to us that a crisis
is almost inevitable and the consequences may be very serious. Our
money market is getting tighter daily, and with the great expansion
of trade and continuous outflow of Gold, there will probably be a
considerable pinch for money towards the end of the year. Argentine
securities of all kinds are depressed and practically unsaleable in any
quantity and are likely to remain so for the present.’ He ended his
letter by saying that his son John was coming out to view things on
the spot.48 John might as well have stayed at home, the damage was
already done.
   John Baring arrived in Buenos Aires at the very end of 1889. Like
so many visitors he found himself divided between wonder at the
vast potential of Argentina and dismay at the mess the inhabitants
were making of it. ‘A glorious country’ he considered it - ‘I mean
                       Latin America: 1849-1890                          241

exclusively from a financial point of view, aesthetically it is hideous.’
If only its rulers would behave decently then the value of its stock
would soar sky high. “There really is no limit to the riches of the
republic.’ But decency was the last thing to be expected. “The bribery
and corruption 1s really quite awful,’ he told his father. ‘After glean-
ing the principles of business in the moral atmosphere of No. 8
Bishopsgate, I assure you I am perfectly aghast at what goes on.’#?
Yet in spite of the worst that humanity could do, he still felt reason-
ably confident about the future of the country. ‘Of a “crash” I think
there is no chance whatever. Business is at an absolute standstill as tar
as brokers etc. are concerned. But I think each day amejoras the posi-
tion of the country. Of their defaulting on their Bonds I do not
believe there to be the least chance.’5°
    His initial reaction to the great waterworks project was to be
 impressed by its efficiency but dismayed by its size. ‘I confess I was
 surprised to see what a big thing this waterwork business is,’ he wrote
 after his first inspection. ‘You have no idea, I am sure, of the scale it is
on.’ Rather in the same way as the Grand Trunk Railroad in Canada,
the enterprise had been identified with the government and was
therefore abused by the opposition; the company being daily
denounced in the press as a monstrous creation designed to benefit a
few corrupt Argentine politicians and foreign capitalists at the
expense of the inhabitants of Buenos Aires. ‘I’m bound to say, the
works do not conduce to the comfort of the town,’ admitted Baring,
‘as they have rooted up most of the streets and excavate huge pits in
them. The other day the President was gaily tooling along in a vic-
toria, when his horse disappeared into an abyss and broke its neck.
This was rather unfortunate.*!
   Soon he ceased even to be impressed by the efficiency of the man-
agement. Work was almost at a standstill for want of drawings and
shortage of materials, labour was extravagantly deployed, money
was being squandered. To ensure a safe income for the company tt
had been provided that the users of its services should pay not in
paper pesos, which were swiftly devalued, but at the rate of six gold
dollars per house. The householders met this demand either by
refusing to avail themselves of the services offered them or by using
the water and then failing to pay for it. By the end of October 1890
customers owed the company arrears of $1.65 million.*? Yet at the
242                    The Sixth Great Power

same time the company still had to pay interest to the shareholders
and the next slice of the purchase price to the government. ‘The only
chance,’ John Baring concluded, as he surveyed the dismal future for
Barings in Argentina, ‘is to absolutely refuse any new business and to
trust to events taking a more favourable turn in the near future.’**
   Unfortunately there was more than enough old business on hand
already. Barings were committed to go on issuing debentures to
finance the instalment payments due to the Argentine government,
yet did not dare to offer them to the public. Of the £2 million ordi-
nary shares theoretically allotted, only about £150,000 were in fact
placed with the public. The greater part remained as a gigantic mill-
stone round the necks of Hales and Barings - which in effect meant
the neck of Barings alone. In an article in November 1890 the Econo-
mist complained about the unscrupulous efforts made by Barings to
promote the sale of these securities; ‘the market devices that were
employed to attract investors’ were deliberately calculated to mis-
lead.5+ Sir John Clapham, historian of the Bank of England, agrees
that Barings’ issuing and underwriting methods were indefensible, ‘a
great and wealthy house should not have stooped to them’.* If
Barings were really employing every market device to persuade the
investor to take the stock of the Waterworks Company, they were
singularly unsuccessful. The impression one gains a hundred years
or so later is of a doomed passivity, the resignation of men who see
an avalanche about to descend upon them but can do nothing to
save themselves.
   The disaster was now compounded bya political crisis in Argen-
tina. The grossly inflationary policies of President Celman so
alarmed his Minister of Finance that the latter issued an ulumatum -
either he would resign or the President of the National Bank must be
dismissed. Celman accepted his resignation. The gold premium
jumped from 118 to 165 ina single day and Barings were warned that
the quarterly dividends on the bonds of the Republic could not be
paid.5¢ Revolution broke out and the Navy backed the insurgents.
Celman fled, and the Vice-President, Carlos Pellegrini, took over.
‘The nomination of Dr Pellegrini has had a good effect,’ wrote
Alphonse de Rothschild, ‘and doubtless should restore some calm in
the minds of . . . Messrs Barings.’7 It was too late for any such reas-
surance. The chaos in Argentina made it more than ever certain that
                     Latin America: 1849-1890                      243
no British investor would hurry to risk his money in such a land.
Whether Pellegrini would manage to restore financial order in a year
or two was, for Barings, of academic interest.
   ‘Financial affairs critical,’ cabled Hales on 20 November 1890.
‘Minister of Finance requests us inform you it of the utmost impor-
tance loan should be arranged without delay in order to avoid bank-
ruptcy. If conditions are not such as Argentine Government can
honourably accept, Minister of Finance and Cabinet will resign. This
would be fatal as will probably result in anarchy.’’8 If anyone in the
partners’ room at Bishopsgate was still capable of raising a wry smile,
then surely this cable would have provoked it. They knew by then
that not merely could they not provide a new loan, but they could
not even find the money to pay the next instalment due under the
waterworks agreement. The Argentine ministers were not the only
people to be facing bankruptcy.
                                    14
                               >>    e+.




                The Baring Crisis
                       1890


Until the middle of October 1890 there were not halfadozen people
in London who suspected that Barings were under serious pressure.
Plenty of people were uneasy about what was going on. Within the
house T. C. Baring had been predicting disaster in Argentina for sev-
eral years.! Tom Baring was said to have ‘spoken very strongly’ to
Revelstoke some months before.? The Statist had been particularly
prescient. As early as the middle of 1889 it had deplored the huge
proportion of the issues made on behalf of Uruguay and Argentina
which had had to be taken up by the houses involved; only a few
weeks later it stated bluntly: “The truth is that even the most san-
guine can no longer shut their eyes to the fact that a crash is inevit-
able.’? Yet nobody really believed that Baring Brothers could be in
danger. Even Revelstoke, who should have known the situation if
anyone did, deluded himself that all would be well: ‘He of course
knew the engagements were very heavy but he had always been con-
fident that money would come in and carry them through as it had
on other occasions.’
   By 13 October, however, he at least accepted that temporary help
was needed. Through the agency of a broker, MrS. Brunton, Bertram
Currie of Glyn, Mills was told that Barings needed a large sum of
money immediately and did not wish to cause alarm by appearing in
the market as borrowers. On enquiry Brunton established that the
gap between Barings’ acceptances and the bills in its portfolio
amounted to about £1 million: Glyns thereupon made an advance of
£500,000 on the security of some of the Guinness stock still held by
the house or its partners and subsequently put up a further £250,000.
Martins also helped to the tune of £500,000. At the end of the month
                                    244
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      245
Currie was given a statement of Barings’ position which showed
liabilities of £20.96 million against a shaky list of assets which
included £4.16 million for Argentine securities held jointly with
Hales, a similar amount for ‘Baring Brothers’ own securities’, and
‘Partners’ houses, lands, contents etc.’ valued at £1 million. Currie at
least was left in no doubt that the situation was desperate.
   The secret was well kept. When Brown, Shipley cabled Brown
Brothers with the news on 12 November, Browns professed their
astonishment. ‘House referred to much talked about lately,’ they
replied. ‘General impression nothing could be wrong.’s The impres-
sion that nothing could be wrong with Barings was so general and
 deeply held that it was to take much disturbing. On Friday 7 Novem-
ber Everard Hambro of C. J. Hambro and Son, a house which was
also deeply involved in the affairs of Hales, called on Revelstoke to
discuss what was to be done. At 8 a.m. the following day he was with
Lord Rothschild in St Swithin’s Lane - the first indication for some
people that a crisis was afoot was said to be the apparition of so
senior a figure in the City on a Saturday morning at so intemperate
an hour.’ Rothschild was inclined to wash his hands of the whole
affair; nothing could now be done to save Barings. Undiscomfited,
Hambro moved on to visit the Governor of the Bank of England,
William Lidderdale. Lidderdale immediately undertook to meet
 Revelstoke and Francis Baring in Hambro’s office that afternoon.
   The story Revelstoke had to unfold was darker even than had been
expected. Argentina was not Barings’ only worry. At the end of June
the Russian government had recalled £2 million of the immense
 deposits they had lavished on Barings the year before.® This followed
withdrawals of another £3 million in the previous ten months.
 Barings were already anticipating the blow that was to fall on 11
                                                          £2.4 mil-
 November, a demand for a further £1.5 million out of the
                                                            of the
lion that remained.’ ‘Many people think they see the finger
Jew in the large Russian withdrawals of cash which were one of the
                                                         in it,’ wrote
 causes of the downfall. | think that there is something
                                                                    peo-
 Revelstoke’s brother, Colonel Robert Baring.!° Who the ‘many
                                                           is singular ly
 ple’ were and what grounds they had for their belief
                                                                  Minis-
 obscure. Only a few days after this letter the Russian Finance
                                                   Baring undoubt  edly
 ter was writing to Rothschilds - whom Robert
                                                          had   made   ‘to
 had in mind - to thank them for the contribution they
246                     The Sixth Great Power

assure the safety ofahouse, in which the Imperial Treasury still had
immense interests involved. If anything could add to the renown of
the great name you bear as a financier, this would be the assistance
which you have just accorded to rivals of yesteryear. This deal will
occupy, as I am sure, a place of honour in the annals of the world of
finance.”!! In fact Rothschilds were neither as chivalrous as the Rus-
sians claimed nor as base as Colonel Baring believed. Certainly they
had played no part in the withdrawal of Russian funds, any more
than they could claim credit for a subsequent change of heart in St
Petersburg, as a result of which the outstanding £2.4 million was left
in entirety with Barings.!2 This decision, probably made at the
request of the Bank of England, was to be the first break in the clouds
that now enveloped the house of Barings.
   Revelstoke’s meeting with Lidderdale must have been disagree-
able. The Governor took no trouble to hide his indignation at the
conduct of affairs. He believed that even without the Argentine
imbroglio Barings would have run into trouble sooner or later, and
probably sooner, ‘because the business was entirely managed by
Revelstoke and he did not seem the least to know how he stood; it
was haphazard management, certain to bring any firm to grief’.43 But
fume though he might, he could not afford to stand aside; there was
too much at stake. As soon as Revelstoke had gone he sent off a mes-
sage to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Goschen - himself
a former partner in the financial house of Fruhling and Goschen -
asking him to stand by for an urgent meeting on Monday morning.
‘Mysterious letter from Governor of the Bank, hoping I should be in
town early tomorrow - very alarming,’ wrote Goschen in his diary;
and then the following day: ‘Found him in a dreadful state of anxi-
ety. Barings in such danger that unless aid is given, they must stop.’!4
Lidderdale insisted that the government must come to the rescue. If
they would put up £1 million, the Bank would do the same and the
City could find the rest. Unless something like this was done, banks
would be closing all over London and house after house would have
to stop. Goschen expressed good will but insisted that the City must
find its own solution, there was nothing the government could do to
help. When W. H. Smith, the Leader of the House of Commons and
First Lord of the Treasury, was brought into the picture he took the
same line. There could be no question of government credit, the City
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      247

magnates must provide the necessary guarantees themselves. “But
do you realize, Mr Smith, asked Lidderdale, ‘what the amount 1s
which has to be guaranteed?’ ‘Perfectly,’ replied Smith, ‘and though |
have nothing to do with the firm or the interests involved, you can
put my name down for £100,000.’'5
   Gallant gesture though this was, it did not go far to solve the prob-
lem of Barings’ indebtedness. Goschen now involved the Prime
Minister, writing in terms of cautious optimism. Smith and he, he
told Lord Salisbury, had agreed ‘that any direct intervention on the
part of the Government would be impossible under any circum-
 stances. . . Tremendous pressure may be brought on us to help, but
 think that it will be necessary for “Ja haute finance” to find its own
 solution. The Rothschilds are sure to put the screws on, but it won't
 do . . 16 Salisbury, who knew Lord Rothschild well, now sent for
 him. He found that the great financier was sceptical about the
 chances of cobbling together a syndicate of City magnates to save
 Barings. Part of the liabilities was £15 million of bills scattered over
 the commercial world; any attempt to raise money by a syndicate
 would reveal the fact that these bills were jeopardized and lead to a
 general sawve qui peut. The government must assist, either directly or
 through the Bank of England.
    As to Barings, Rothschild’s tone was frankly vengeful. ‘He spoke
 with the utmost certainty that the house must disappear. On the
 most favourable hypothesis they would only save £2 million of their
 capital. No one would trust them with large operations again: they
 could not make more than 5 per cent on the £2 million: and as there
 were ten partners [in fact there were seven] that would mean an
 income of £10,000 a year each. He thought they would prefer to cut
 up their remaining capital and retire into the country on 4 percent or
 £8000 a year each.’ Rothschild was ambiguous about the effect the
 disaster would have on his own affairs; he insisted ‘that he was quite
                                                                       the
 indifferent - that he had no liabilities’, but went on to admit that
                                                   the year, would
 accounts of his house, when made up at the end of
                                                                   more
 not be pleasant reading: and that he should have to live
                                                           catastro phe
 quietly. ‘I thought him very anxious. He said that if the
                                                               habit of
 came, he thought it would put an end to the commercial
                                              bills on London.’ !”
 transacting all the business of the world by
                                                                 ns as a
   Rothschildfollowed up what he described to his Paris cousi
248                       The Sixth Great Power

‘satisfactory interview’ by helping Lidderdale build up the reserves
of the Bank of England to support any possible rescue operation. ‘I
called on the Governor of the Bank of France and had the satisfac-
tion of sending you a telegram announcing the Bank’s readiness to
make a further advance of £1 million to the Bank of England,
reported Alphonse de Rothschild.!8 This advance was only part of a
larger operation, in which the Bank of England borrowed £3 million
in gold from Paris and purchased a further £1.5 million from St
Petersburg to shore up its inadequate reserves. The fact that the
money was known to be there made it unlikely that it would be
needed; if there had been any suspicion that the Bank of England
was unable to cope with the crisis then the sauve qui peut that
Rothschild had predicted would indeed have started. Fortunately
things were calm at the moment in Paris and, as Hottinguers told
Barings, there was a determination to do all that could be done to
avert disaster.19
  Indeed, the solidarity shown by the financial world was impres-
sive. In London, though Barings were regularly condemned, the feel-
ing was that the City was all in it together. ‘What a season of disaster!’
recorded Reginald Brett, future Lord Esher, in his diary. ‘Had
Barings been allowed to collapse, Natty [Rothschild] says most of
the great London houses would have fallen with them.’?° From Paris
Alphonse de Rothschild urged his London cousins to make ‘the
greatest effort to forestall a catastrophe’! ‘It is frightful to think
what might have been the consequences if Barings had not been
carried through,’ wrote Brown Brothers. ‘It is sad enough and bad
enough as itis, and with you we are quite ready to make the best of it,
hard as it is to be discredited as every private banker will be because
of their actions.’2? The New York Times proclaimed that this was like
no other banking catastrophe; Barings were ‘the greatest banking
house of all the world’ whose ‘signature has stood always and every-
where for an absolute guarantee’.?? Only Edward Wagg, the senior
partner of Helbert, Wagg, greeted the disaster with British phlegm.
He was on holiday in Scotland and received a telegram from his part-
ners, ‘Barings in difficulties. Return at once.’ He replied, ‘If by
returning can save Barings will come: otherwise propose finishing
holiday.’ He stayed.?+
   But on 11 November the prospects of saving Barings still seemed
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      249
slight. Rothschilds were opposed to the setting up of a syndicate
from within the City unless the government would join in, and the
stature of Rothschilds was such that if they abstained the operation
would never get off the ground. Yet the government was in principle
still opposed to lending assistance. To a nineteenth-century Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer, the idea that he might intervene in a matter
of private business was anathema. The government had no money at
its disposal, Salisbury told Rothschild; even if it was minded to help,
the mechanism did not exist to enable it to do so. The only recourse
would be by putting the matter to the House of Commons, which
would inevitably provoke acrimonious debate of a kind certain to
 precipitate rather than avert disaster. ‘How defend a supplemental
estimate for a loss of half a million?’ Goschen asked himself in his
 diary. ‘And would not immediate application put the whole fat in
 the fire?’25
    Only one man was ina position to bridge the gap between govern-
 ment and City, and that was Lidderdale at the Bank of England. He
 was ready, indeed anxious to try, but had first to be sure of his
 ground. As a preliminary step, he asked Bertram Currie to investi-
 gate the exact state of Barings’ finances and to report whether the
 house was solvent - not solvent in the short term, which it was pain-
 fully clear they were not, but with assets sufficient to meet their
 liabilities if they were given time to realize them. At first it was sug-
 gested that a partner in Brown, Shipley should share the labour, but
 Currie objected that then both investigators would be closely
 involved with the affairs of Barings. Benjamin Buck Greene, another
 director of the Bank of England, eighty-three years old but singularly
 sharp and tenacious, was appointed instead.26 The two men worked
 with exemplary speed and reported back within three days. Their
 finding was that Barings’ assets exceeded their liabilities, but that
  many of the securities which formed part of those assets were
  ‘though valuable, virtually unsaleable in any quantity’. If they were
                                                                     then
to be able to meet all their obligations over the next few weeks,
                                                                    to
something over £8 million to £9 million was going to be needed
top up the liquid portion of their assets. Their conclusion, assented
                                                                     it
to with some reluctance by Greene because he knew that without
                                                     was that: ‘On
the Governor would be unable to take further action,
                                                                     time
consideration of the whole question we believe that if sufficient
250                      The Sixth Great Power

be given for realizing the assets, the Firm will be left with a substan-
tial surplus after discharging their liabilities.*7
   Even three days was dangerously long. John Daniell, senior part-
ner of the government brokers Mullens and Co., came into the Bank
of England crying: ‘Can’t you do something, or say something to
relieve people’s minds? They have made up their minds that some-
thing awful is up, and they are talking of the very highest names, the
very highest.’ Lidderdale vividly remembered the words he spoke and
‘the way he lifted up his arms when speaking’.”8 As the word spread
that Barings were in trouble, so their paper began to be presented
and anyone who had advances outstanding began to call them in.
The situation cannot have been made any easier by the attitude of
houses like Martin and Co. who, when the crisis was still far from
resolved, asked for the immediate repayment of £150,000 of their
total advance of £500,000, and then demanded the rest the following
day: ‘We are under no anxiety as to any of our accounts, but we are
anxious to strengthen our cash as much as possible.’29
   For the partners of Barings there must have been some consola-
tion in the loyalty shown by family and friends. T. C. Baring was the
first and most conspicuous example. ‘When C. T. Baring [sic] heard
of his late firm’s disaster he offered them all his fortune to the last
farthing, reported Reginald Brett. ‘This was generous, as he left the
firm two years ago upon differences with Lord Revelstoke in connec-
tion with their Argentine speculations. He took the old-fashioned
view.3°This story that T. C. Baring had left the house because he dis-
approved of the house’s commitments in Argentina was revived a
year or so later in what Revelstoke’s wife described to her son
Everard as an ‘odious paragraph’ in the Pall Mall Gazette; ‘Whereas
the truth is he [T. C. Baring] had a cute for Papa and wrote a letter on
retiring (solely on account of bad health) to Papa, quite the nicest and
most touching letter you can conceive from a man as undemonstra-
tive. . .also asa fact the fresh engagements in Argentina and Buenos
Ayres Waterworks were entered into while he was still a partner -
and not objected to by him.’3! Lady Revelstoke’s comment was fair
enough: though T. C. Baring told Francis Baring that for years he had
been ‘shy of S. America’ and had thought the house was getting too
deeply involved, the fact remains that he made little effort to check
Revelstoke’s madcap course. He must accept some part of the blame.
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                           251

   But legally he was now free ofthe house and its commitments. He
had no obligation to come to its support and most people would
have felt he had done his bit if he had merely left in Barings what
money he had which was still there. Instead he told Francis: ‘Of
course what I have is at your disposal to pledge or sell. You have my
full power of attorney and may use it.’3? Legend has it that he went to
the Bank of England and withdrew all his cash and securities. Then
he proceeded to Bishopsgate with several bulging Gladstone bags,
only marring this dramatic gesture by allowing one of the bags to
burst open and spill over the road while he was arguing with the cab
driver over an alleged overcharge of sixpence.}? So picturesque a ges-
ture would not have been beyond him. Not merely did he pledge his
entire fortune, at the end of November he circulated a memoran-
dum to his future partners:
    As I retired at the end of the year before last I am still rich, as
    folk count riches. You have been, are not, but, I think, will be
    again.
       Can this inequality be partially remedied in the mean-
    time? I think so. Iam prepared from | January next to place
    annually at the disposal of members of the old firm .. . the
    sum of £23,000 as follows: £5000 a year each to the 3 senior
    members, £2500 a year each to the 3 junior members, £500 a
     year to the only bachelor.
        The conditions are:
        (1) That nothing shall be said about this to anyone, espec-
     ially to me. Any speaking about it might strain relations,
     which are naturally a little strange, and which I should like
     restored to those of 1888.
        (2) That this offer ceases in case of my death. .. .
        There must be no hesitation on the part of all or any of you
     in this matter on the ground of delicacy. I don’t make this
     offer as a gift, but as a loan.*#
   Tom Baring in New York was more bitterly critical of Revelstoke’s
behaviour. He had no responsibility for the disastrous decisions that
had been taken and was shocked by the unexpected news. As late as 6
                                                                     out
November he was writing: ‘I feel in my bones that they will come
all right.’35 When they came out all wrong, he bewailed his brother's
252                      The Sixth Great Power

recklessness and folly. ‘The name and the glory and the position and
everything is gone,’ he told Evelyn Baring. ‘Ned would have it all —
glory and wealth. He might at least have guarded our good name.
But it has all gone, offered up to his insatiate vanity and extravagance
... I never thought I should have to write such a letter as this. Verily
“A great Nemesis overtook Croesus.” The line has never been out of
my head since the Guinness success.’36 But his rancour did not pre-
vent him cabling his total support for whatever phoenix might rise
from the ashes of the old house. Indeed, he hastened home, confi-
dent that he would be begged to play an important role in the work
of reconstruction, only to find that ‘I am asked to take a back seat: to
stay as long as I will in New York or take Liverpool! where there is
nothing to manage. However, I won't cut up nasty.’37
   Members of the family who had no direct connection with the
bank had still less reason to put themselves out to save it, but did so
nevertheless. Lord Ashburton was so far out of touch with events at
Bishopsgate that when Lord Northbrook arrived at the Grange for a
day’s shooting and took his host aside to announce with an ashen
face that the house was in trouble, Ashburton’s mind flew to what he
knew to be a regular problem at Stratton Park and he replied: ‘Ah,
that damned roof leaking again!’38 But when the time came to put up
money as a guarantee of Baring Brothers’ liabilities, Northbrook
came forward with £250,000 and Ashburton with £50,000. Nor was
it just the family who rallied in this way. Markby, Stewart had long
been solicitors to Baring Brothers. On 17 November Henry Markby
and Charles Stewart wrote to say that their firm had areserve against
contingencies of £10,000. ‘We do not know anything . . . beyond
what we read in the newspapers. It is possible that we may be totally
misapprehending the facts. But we trust that we are not committing
any impertinence in saying that we shall feel honoured if you will
allow us to place these securities, of comparatively trifling amount
though they may be, at your firm’s disposal.’3
   Generous though the gesture was, £10,000 was indeed trifling
compared with the sort of sum Lidderdale was looking for. Armed
with the imprimatur of Currie and Greene, he on Friday renewed
his assault on the government. The Bank, he said, could not alone
bear the risk of what might happen if Barings were to founderwhilea
rescue operation was being mounted: ‘Unless the Government
                       The Baring Crisis:   1890                      253
could relieve us of some of the possible loss,’ he said, ‘I should return
at once and throw out all further Acceptances of the Firm.’*° In the
face of this ultimatum, ministers made a grudging but all-important
concession. They agreed to bear half any loss that might result from
Barings’ bills taken in between 2 p.m. on Friday 14 November and
the same time on the 15th. Lidderdale, in fact, had twenty-four
hours in which to save Barings.*!
   Imprecise though the promise was, it gave the Governor grounds
to act. He summoned a meeting of the Court of Directors of the
Bank of England and announced that he was setting up a Guarantee
Fund to cover any possible long-term deficit in Barings’ finances.
Once it was known that the City was backing Barings and that
nobody risked loss, then the pressure would be off. The Bank of Eng-
land, he said, would put up £1 million provided at least £3 million
was guaranteed by others. Currie then took over and said that, hav-
ing investigated the affairs of Barings with Mr Greene, he was pre-
pared to offer £500,000 on behalf of Glyn Mills, provided that
Rothschilds would do the same. Lord Rothschild had just arrived.
‘When informed of the circumstances of the case and the conditions
I had made, he hesitated and desired to consult his brothers,’ rec-
orded Currie, ‘but was finally and after some pressure persuaded to
put down his firm for £500,000.’#2 Word of the hesitation was seized
on by those who wished to portray Rothschilds as a half-hearted or
even unwilling rescuer. ‘I was told that Rothschild had behaved well
but I believe that this is not the case,’ Tom Baring told his brother.
‘He guaranteed £500,000, but only because Bertram Currie shamed
him into doing so.’#3 Though Lord Rothschild may not much have
relished his role it is hard to believe that he seriously doubted it was
inevitable. As Baron Alphonse wrote to him from Paris: “By saving
Barings from this catastrophe [the English house] are serving their
own interests, for at this moment the House of Baring 1s the keystone
of English commercial credit and its collapse would provoke terrible
consequences for English trade in all parts of the world. You must
feel very proud about the contribution you have made, by your per-
sonal efforts, towards avoiding the worst misfortune.'*
   Once it was certain that Glyn, Mills and Rothschilds had joined
the Bank of England in arescue operation, all doubts were put aside.
Within half an hour Lidderdale had promises of £3.25 million, with
254                       The Sixth Great Power

substantial contributions from Brown, Shipley, Antony Gibbs, Mor-
gans, Hambros and all the rest of Barings’ former rivals. Not every-
one gave gladly. ‘The Bank people think there will be no loss, we are
not so sanguine,’ Raphaels, who contributed £250,000, told their
New York agents. They had joined in, they admitted, not from love
of Barings but to protect their own interests.*5 But their names were
on the list. The following day the joint-stock banks joined in, with
£750,000 each from the London and Westminster, London and
County, and National Provincial. To be mentioned in the Guarantee
 Fund became fashionable, though those who had hoped to secure
 some easy advertisement by appearing 1n such distinguished com-
 pany were disappointed when it was decided not to publish the list.
 By the end of the Governor's twenty-four-hour deadline £10 million
had been pledged; the final figure was more than £17 million.
   Lidderdale was the hero of the hour. With a less courageous or less
energetic Governor, Barings would certainly have collapsed. ‘I don’t
know what to say or how to thank you but we will do our best not to
be unworthy of what has been done,’ Revelstoke wrote to him.*¢
Goschen recommended him to Salisbury fora GCB - ‘He is not rich
enough for a baronetcy.’#7 It is pleasant to know that in due course
Barings were to return the compliment. In 1897 Lidderdale found
himself in financial difficulties, urgently needing £35,000. The secu-
rity he could offer was inadequate and for £10,000 ‘my request is for
an advance on my bare word that I will repay it if I can’. The money
was instantly forthcoming.*8
   Barings were saved, but at a calamitous cost. When Rothschild
had told Salisbury that nobody would trust them with large opera-
tions again*? he spoke too soon, but there were few people in the
City who would have contradicted him at the time. Sanford, who
had done more than anyone except Lord Revelstoke to lead the
house to its doom, had the effrontery to remark to a City acquaint-
ance after the crash: ‘I madea mistake going to Barings. Had I known
that they were such a weak firm, I would have let them alone.’5°
Coming from him the comment was outrageous, but even if Barings
could survive they would have to prove that they were not ‘a weak
firm’. At first even its survival was in doubt. In the eyes of the general
public it was written off. When Alice James early in 1891 gave
Barings as a reference to a house agent, ‘he knew them not;
                                                                       this
                         The Baring Crisis: 1890                      255

  winter, when the world has rung with their downfall, makes the
  cessation of his business consciousness just without their radius
  the more remarkable’.5!
     Clearly the old partnership must be liquidated. Lidderdale had
  made ita condition ofhis support that Revelstoke would resign from
  its management, and this he did on 22 November. ‘He is about
  broken hearted, I think, but now less worried than he was ten days
  ago, wrote his son John. ‘We have had a ghastly time here. The
  question now is whether we cannot do something to carry on the
~ business. New capital is necessary, as the liquidation of the old firm
   must take 2 or 3 years.’5? Lady Revelstoke bewailed her husband’s
  fate: ‘No longer young, to have as it were to begin again.. . . To have
   to endure this and to cut down every expense is very hard for him -
   coupled with the thought be by one mistake has done this.’*? The
   saddest thought must have been that for him there would be no
  beginning again. Discredited as he was, the association of his name
  with any new firm would have been a guarantee of failure. Henry
  Mildmay was displaced as well. Some thought that he had been
  unfairly victimized for a blunder that was not of his creation. He
  himself contested this. He told his son ‘that he had never for a
  moment doubted the prudence of the firm’s policy and that it was
  humiliating to him that his responsibility as a senior partner should
  be minimized or that it should be suggested either that he condoned
  imprudence or that he did not realize what was going on.’5# Even if
  he had been wholly innocent, he was the old guard and he would
  have to go.
     Some people frankly rejoiced at Barings’ downfall. They had for so
  long assumed the role of leaders, had wrapped around themselves
  the imperial mantle, had shown such condescension towards their
  lesser rivals, that even the most benevolent extracted some satisfac-
  tion from the situation. ‘Fancy the Barings being brought so low,’
                                                                    ride
  wrote Randolph Churchill. ‘Lord Revelstoke will not be able to
  the high horse as much as he used to.’** But though their judgement
                                                                   and
  had been faulty, their probity was undoubted, and the courage
                                                               disaster
  resolution with which they accepted responsibility for the
                                                     their sourest crit-
  and set about retrieving it, won the admiration of
                                                                       r of
  ics. Evelyn Baring wrote to his friend C. Moberly Bell, manage
                                               dishono urable’ . Bell wrote
  The Times, about the affair being ‘tricky or
256                      The Sixth Great Power

to reproach him. “The burthen of every comment on all sides was the
extreme loyalty and uprightness with which the firm behaved... .1
am not exaggerating when I say that over and over again I have got
up from a dinner with a sort of wish that I should like my name to
have been Baring so as to have heard such praise of1t.’56 ‘One thing 1s
beyond question,’ wrote the future Lord Mount Stephen, ‘that is
their honor and honesty. . . . Their character stands as high today as
it ever did and this ofitself will prove as good to them as an extra mil-
lion of capital.’57 It was this sympathy that was John Baring’s greatest
asset when he came to establish the new house.
    On 25 November a circular letter announced that Baring Brothers
and Company had transferred their business to a new company with
limited liability to be called Baring Brothers and Co., Limited. The
directors were to be T. C. Baring, Francis Baring, R. K. Hodgson and
John Baring. The paid-up capital was said to be £1 million. ‘It has
been arranged that the whole of Mr T. C. Baring’s property shall be
liable for the Company’s engagements, ’** read an announcement of
the period. T. C. Baring was inevitably the titular senior director. ‘I
can see that the general feeling here, among people that know me
ever so little even, is that Jshould be conducting the new Co.,’ wrote
Thomas Baring, ‘but of course with Charley [1.e. T. C. Baring] here
that is impossible. But it is a physical impossibility for his personal
management to go on for long.’’? John Baring would have agreed
with the second but not the first part of his uncle Tom’s pronounce-
ment. T. C. Baring had to be the leader because of his great financial
contribution and the staunch loyalty he had shown the house, but
the appointment was nota wholly happy one. He was elderly, ill and
curmudgeonly: ‘I fear he will drive away what little business there is
left,’ wrote John Baring gloomily.® But it did not follow that because
T. C. Baring was to be viewed as no more than a temporary stopgap,
Tom Baring should be the heir apparent. To John Baring it was clear
that the effective work in the limited company would be done by the
new generation and that they - or, to be more precise, he - should
lead it.
   Of the £1 million capital, T. C. Baring put up by far the largest
share, £210,000. Tom Baring produced £25,000, John and Francis
Baring and Robert Hodgson, who had been partners in the old
house, would have no funds available until it had been liquidated
                       The Baring Crisis: 1890                        257

and perhaps not then, but Evelyn Baring contributed £10,000.
Hopes and Hottinguers added £50,000 and £40,000 respectively.
George Stephen offered £50,000 and said that he could easily raise
another £200,000: ‘You never in your life saw anything like the effect
of this prompt response upon their spirits. It seemed to lift a cloud
off their minds and since then all has gone on most swimmingly.’
Stephen recommended John Macdonald, Canada’s first Prime Min-
ister, to come over personally to consider the question of Barings’
replacement as Canada’s financial agent, since he feared this might
be secured by some second-rate firm; then cabled in relief to report
that Barings had set up a new house which would be ‘strong beyond
question’. There was no need for a change.*!
    Things have turned out more satisfactorily than we dared
    hope...’ John Baring told his uncle Evelyn at the end of
    January 1891. ‘My own feeling is that we ought to finish the
    crying and all buckle to and make a fight for it, so as to cir-
    cumvent if possible the machinations of these blasted Jews. I
    would like to see them all crucified upside down, but in the
    meantime they are reaping a huge advantage from what the
    newspapers delight in calling the ‘Baring smash’. The ‘new
    firm’ is fairly started. There is lots of business left. The glory
    of the past and the prestige of the name have I fear disap-
    peared for ever. But still a great many people will not go
    away. I have no doubt that as far as a financial investment
    goes, the Company will show a very good return on its capt-
    tal.6?
While Baring Brothers and Co. Ltd began to find its feet, the painful
task started of liquidating the old house. This work was made more
laborious by the degree to which it was involved with recovery, or
lack of recovery in the Argentine economy. Before Barings could
                                                          liabilities,
 realize their assets and thus free themselves from their
                                                                     d
their enormous holdings of Argentine securities had to be dispose
of; yet the news of Barings’ troubles had  provok ed  a  catastr ophic
                                                                   the
drop in this market. ‘The widespread nature of the disaster and
                                                              brought
importance of those who attempted to prevent a panic,
                                                 had    never   before
Argentine matters into a prominence they
                                                           ofthe River
occupied in the world’s estimation,’ reported the Review
258                      The Sixth Great Power

Plate.©3 Prominence proved the last thing that was wanted. Argentine
government bonds and railway stock worth an average 100 in March
1889 fell to 60 per cent of that value by March 1891 and 40 per cent
by July 1891.%# If the Argentine government defaulted on its debts
for any lengthy period, then the loss would be even worse. All hope
of meeting Barings’ liabilities would have to be abandoned.
   Fortunately the Argentines had no intention of letting this hap-
pen. The committee of bankers under the chairmanship of Lord
Rothschild which was set up to negotiate a settlement with the
Argentine government was met with a request for a new loan to tide
them over the next six months and a sensible plan for staggered pay-
ments and a gradual resumption of full interest. The committee
quickly reached agreement, subject to the proviso: “This scheme will
only be recommended. . . on the understanding that the agreement
of the Government with the Buenos Ayres Water Supply and Drain-
age Company be duly satisfied.’** Only when this incubus had been
erased from the balance sheet of Baring Brothers would the
liquidators be able to see their way towards a final settlement.
   In May 1891 provisional agreement had been reached that the
waterworks would be sold to the government for £6.325 million in 5
per cent bonds.** The works had to be completed and accepted as
satisfactory before the agreement would become effective. Unfor-
tunately progress was imperilled by the ineffable Sanford, who made
extravagant claims on behalf of Hales. ‘Mr Sanford has relapsed into
almost open hostility,’ Barings told their new agent in Buenos Aires,
Essex Reade, ‘and his last move is a threat to impede the completion
of the Waterworks contract unless we agree to certain conditions.
These included the provisos that £50,000 worth of shares should be
transferred to him and that he should be paid £5000 immediately
and £100 a week for the next three years. It seems to us an outrageous
proposal, and we have no intention of yielding.’? In the end Sanford
got £16,000 in cash and East Argentine railway stock with a face
value of £54,000 but in fact worth about half of that.68
   Unfortunately the government kept finding fault with the build-
ing when it was done. Some at least of the criticism was justified, but
Barings were in no position to supervise the contractor or speed up
the work. Meanwhile the final settlement was held up. The
Rothschild committee appealed to the Foreign Secretary, Lord
                       The Baring Crisis: 1890                     259

Rosebery, who in turn cabled the British Minister, instructing him to
press for ‘equitable and considerate treatment’ of Barings and the
contractors by the government. ‘The matter involves large interests,
and on it depends in great measure the issue of the Baring liquida-
tion. A want of good faith on the part of the Argentine government
will have the worst possible effect.’
   It was as well for Barings that negotiations on the waterworks
contract and on a general settlement of Argentina’s debts, though
theoretically distinct, were in fact intimately connected. At the end
of 1892 the Argentine Minister of Finance, Dr Romero, underlined
this fact when he put a proposal for further negotiations not to the
Rothschild committee but to Barings. Barings suggested politely
that it would be better if the minister sent somebody to London,
since so many other interests were involved. Romero declined with
equal politeness. He wanted to negotiate with someone who could
speak Spanish, knew the country and would see for himself how
things stood. A representative of Barings, after all, had negotiated
the settlement of the 1824 debt. ‘I rely, Romero ended, ‘on the recol-
lection of the old link of friendship which has always existed
between Messrs Barings and the Argentine Republic.’7°
   It is a measure of the rehabilitation of Barings that John Baring
went out to Buenos Aires as de facto representative of the Rothschild
committee. The offer that he passed to London asa result of his visit
was hardly generous, yet gave a promise of a final solution. Argen-
tina would pay the Bank of England a lump sum of £1.5 million for
distribution to creditors over the next five years. Full payment of
interest would resume in 1898. Rothschild quibbled over details but
in effect accepted the proposal, subject only to his insistence that the
waterworks question should at last be settled. The government must
take over the works as they stood. The Argentine government, who
hadas little reason to spin things out as the Rothschild committee, in
their turn accepted without demur, only retaining £500,000 in bonds
until the claims against the contractors had been settled. The deal
was done and heralded a spectacular improvement in the Argentine
economy; payment of full interest in fact began a year before the
scheduled date. The last serious obstacle in the path of the
liquidators had been removed.
            =               *       *       *
260                     The Sixth Great Power

Meanwhile the liquidated had been going through what Revelstoke
described as ‘the Agonies of the Damned’.”! As partners they were
personally responsible for all the debts of Baring Brothers. No one
was going to reduce them to a point where they had no roof over
their heads or food to eat - T. C. Baring’s generosity alone was
enough to make sure of that - but the life they had enjoyed in the
past was over. ‘In reference to the kindness and assistance granted to
my firm by the Bank of England,’ Revelstoke wrote to the Governor,
‘I beg to assure you on my own behalf and that of my partners that
we shall hold all our property of every kind at your disposal and be
guided in every way by your advice and guidance.’7? Lidderdale’s
advice, in a sentence, was that everything had to go: lands, houses,
pictures, horses, anything that could make a sensible contribution to
liquidating the debts of the partnership.
  Revelstoke, who had been the highest, had the furthest to fall. His
entitlement to the largest share of the profits now made him respon-
sible for a similar proportion of the losses. To the pain of stripping
himself of beloved possessions and the humiliation of feeling him-
self degraded in the eyes of the world, was added the shame of hav-
ing almost single-handed brought ruin upon himself, his family and
his partners. He was not the most likeable of men, his arrogance and
complacency had alienated many who would otherwise have sym-
pathized fully with him, yet it is impossible to contemplate his suf-
ferings at this tme without feeling acute pity. There was no question
that Membland and the house in Charles Street would have to go,
with all the furniture and pictures. Membland, with 4500 acres, was
valued at £150,000, with a further £10,000 for the contents; 37
Charles Street at £75,000, with £50,000 for Revelstoke’s splendid
French furniture, pictures and olyets d'art. The work of stripping the
houses of their rich contents began at once. ‘When we went back to
Membland at Christmas everything was different,’ remembered
Revelstoke’s son Maurice. “There was no Christmas party and the
household was going through a process of gradual dissolution.
Chérie [the French governess] was leaving us, the stables were
empty, and the old glory of Membland had gone for ever.’73
    Revelstoke at first retreated into apathetic misery, then erupted
into fresh activity. ‘Such a Metamorphosis in the space of one month
it is impossible to conceive,’ Lady Revelstoke told Everard. ‘Tearing
                        The Baring Crisis:   1890                    261
spirits - and at the sight of the sideboard with nothing on it, exclaim-
ing “By heaven, I cannot be starved! Let’s have enough to eat!” So
things must be better,7* His wife and children not merely refrained
from reproaches but defended him fiercely against all criticism. Nor
was the more extended family less loyal. Two of Lord Cork’s daugh-
ters had married into the house - one to a Baring, one to a Hodgson -
to the considerable satisfaction of Lady Cork, who thought they
would be most handsomely set up. ‘They knew what their mother
would feel, and went off to break the news to her with cheerfulness
and never to this day have said a word of grumbling.’”5 Revelstoke’s
children, brought up to take it for granted that they would be rich,
found themselves abruptly impoverished. ‘My darling child, the
House is spared at the expense of our being ruined for the moment,’
Lady Revelstoke wrote to her youngest daughter Susan. ‘Papa will
not rest until all is paid, and there will be little left. The one of our
children we feel for is you, my darling; however you must make eyes
at a good rich man! for our gendre.’76 Susan Baring was twenty at the
time; nine years later she married James Reid, Queen Victoria’s doc-
tor, an alliance which was hardly considered glorious at the time and
would have been felt wholly undesirable by Lord Revelstoke before
the crash. Susan had been a Maid of Honour at court. The Queen
sulked for three days when the engagement was announced, ‘but
finally laughed when Sir James promised never to do it again’.’7
   Henry Mildmay let his country house, Norman Shaw's majestic
fastness at Flete, and in London sacked the under-butler, the two
footmen and the schoolroom footman. The governess voluntarily
halved her salary. The butler stayed on for a year but then left as
there were no guests to give tips and no prospects of a pension. The
fine collection of pictures and china was dispersed. Mildmay initi-
ally bore the disaster with greater sang-froid than Lord Revelstoke,
but in the autumn of 1891 the problems with the Argentine govern-
ment over the waterworks and a further sharp fall in the value of all
South American securities, finally broke his nerve and thence-
forward he lived in constant dread of insolvency; a fear rational
enough at first but as time wore on less and less close to reality.
  Stewart Hodgson, least responsible of the partners of the old
house, was nevertheless ‘plunged from his riches and beautiful
houses at Lythe Hill and in South Audley Street into poverty. His
262                       The Sixth Great Power

daughter, Ruth, nearly died of a broken heart at having to leave her
home and in consequence of the great anxiety they passed
through.’78 In April 1893 he disposed of the last of his pictures to
Agnews for £25,000, making the total value of the sale £43,000.7°
Even as far away as Boston Sam Ward suffered in the disaster. For a
time Barings kept his and other pensions going but the slow rate of
improvement finally forced them to suspend all those where no
acute hardship was involved. Ward acquiesced but protested when
he saw references to what appeared to be a surplus in Barings’
accounts. It was a paper surplus, Francis Baring explained, and pro-
duced nothing for the firm. ‘To tell the truth my conscience has been
a good deal strained the last 4 years by continuing any pensions at all
and if things had gone hopelessly wrong there would have been a
very unpleasant discussion with the guarantors. . . . After all, you
must be a richer man at present than any of us and the old arrange-
ments would seem almost absurd.’8°
   The death of T. C. Baring in April 1891 may have eased John
Baring’s efforts to establish the new house but seriously complicated
the liquidation of the old. “You know he behaved so nobly all
through /a crise,’ wrote Lady Revelstoke to Everard Baring, °. . . that it
is just possible to wind up the Fairy Tale by his leaving his million to
Papa on condition he becomes chairman of the Reconstruction!!!
but I fear not even could such a thing figure in an Arabian Nights story
or Monte Cristo... . Financially I believe it makes no difference as he
executed a deed making the whole of his personal estate responsible
for the liabilities of the New House for 5 years.’§! Revelstoke did not
get his second chance, nor were the financial consequences as Lady
Revelstoke had hoped. When T. C. Baring died he still had £113,000
at Barings, the last part of his capital which had not been due for
withdrawal until the end of 1890 and which he therefore considered
to be liable to the risks of the business and not to be included among
the house’s liabilities. His executors, however, were told that the
money was as much due to his estate as if he had been an ordinary
depositor.8? They felt themselves ‘bound to take the most strenuous
steps’ to recover the £113,000 plus interest, even if it meant forcing
an immediate bankruptcy. Eventually they were persuaded to accept
50 percentin full discharge; ‘and though we feel that the payment of
even this amount is quite contrary to T.C.B.’s intentions,’ John Bar-
                       The Baring Crisis: 1890                    263

ing told Lidderdale, ‘we have no alternative. . . but to recommend it
to the Board.’8
    Early in 1893, with the guarantee due to run out in November, the
Bank of England began to press for faster action in disposing of the
various assets of the old house: ‘We shall be glad to hear from you
what you are doing with a view to accomplish this, what sales of
securities you can shortly effect, and what arrangements have been
made for disposing of the partners’ private property, which latter we
feel must now be dealt with.’8* Argentine securities were not the only
assets which proved difficult to dispose of. Revelstoke’s house in
Charles Street was put on the market but found nota single bidder.
 In the previous three years, said the agents, only two houses of com-
 parable size in London had been sold, Mr Brassey's Bath House in
 Piccadilly (oddly enough, itself once the property of Lord Ash-
 burton) and Count de Santurce’s palace in Carlton House Terrace.
 Both had been sold at a considerable sacrifice and to foreigners. ‘We
 consider your house quite unique in its way, being freehold in the
 first place and having been almost rebuilt and then arranged and
 decorated in a style that is not equalled in any London mansion and
 having all the modern appliances such as Electric Lighting from its
 own Dynamos, Hydraulic Lifts etc. There are absolutely no buyers
 for this sort of House at the present time.’8’ The house was still
 unsold when Lord Revelstoke died four years later. Nor was it always
 easy to pick the right moment to sell pictures. A sale of pictures at
 Christies had to be postponed because a particularly important col-
 lection of French pictures came on the market. In the end sales
 through Christies yielded £215,000 - £50,000 from 37 Charles
 Street, £40,000 from the Mildmays’ house at 46 Berkeley Square,
£30,000 from the Hodgsons’ at 50 Grosvenor Street, £50,000 from
Flete and £10,000 from Membland.*¢
   By April 1893 it was clear that more time was going to be needed.
The Bank of England recommended extension of the guarantee bya
year to November 1894, with the option to renew for a second and
final year. On the record of this debate Lidderdale minuted: ‘We had
a hard fight to get the extension of time - several Banks and the
Rothschilds standing out fora long time.’87 Since the guarantee only
needed to be for a quarter of the original amount and it was almost
certain that two extra years would be more than enough to meet
264                      The Sixth Great Power

what was left of the liabilities, the reluctance of certain of the guaran-
tors seems decidedly unchivalrous. A year later more than £2 million
Argentine waterworks remained unsold; £204,000 Manchester Ship
Canal, £165,000 City of Montevideo, £517,000 Anglo-Argentine
Trams, £529,000 Curamalan       Land, £537,000 Uruguay 32 per cent
bonds, and a bunch of smaller holdings. The Bank of England con-
tinued to press for as swift a sale as possible: ‘There are still a good
many small amounts of Securities, not of the South American Class,
which could probably be sold at a slight reduction on the quoted
prices, and, bad as the market is, we should be very glad to hear that
progress is being made in the direction indicated.’** When the guar-
antee was renewed for its final year Barings’ liability to the Bank had
shrunk to less than £2 million.8?
   The Bank nevertheless continued to insist that Barings should
wind the matter up. Even as the second renewal was effected
Lidderdale told Francis Baring that they would have to reach an end
within six months. It was in their own interests to do so: “The sooner
the thing is taken seriously in hand the more likely you will be to
escape from being squeezed in the end.’ Barings had no doubt that
this was true and had already made their own plans. In November
1894 a new public company, the Baring Estate Company, was set up.
All the capital was owned by Barings. Its raison détre was to issue £1.5
million of debentures, the proceeds of which would be used to take
over the assets of the old partnership of Baring Brothers and Co.
lion of quoted securities, for the most part Argentine, and substan-
tial unquoted assets, mainly what was left of the partners’ personal
property. Other assets, including the Uruguay bonds, remained tem-
porarily with the Bank against the balance of the debt, but were to be
taken over within a month or two.?!
   There was no shortage of investors ready to take up these deben-
tures ~ ‘a raging demand’, Cecil Baring described it. Finding directors
proved a little more troublesome: ‘We want a friendly man, accept-
able to the Bank - who will mot interfere.’ Francis Baring proved
exceptionally adroit in ironing out any legal problems while Lord
Revelstoke    was ‘now in a good temper and does what he is asked’.
Hopes and Hottinguers were prodigal in offers of any help that was
needed. ‘Lord Rothschild has been very humane,’ reported Cecil
Baring. Only Lord Ashburton disgraced himself, he ‘behaved like a
                        The Baring Crisis: 1890                      265
dog and positively refused to see Ned at all!’?2 The Company did not
take long in organizing its own demise. The Argentine shares were
swiftly disposed of at a good price as soon as the Argentine govern-
ment announced its resumption of full interest payments in 1897,
and the first issue of debentures was redeemed. In December of the
same year the final settlement of the waterworks dispute enabled the
Company to take up what was left of the debentures. Having done
its work the Baring Estate Company formally expired. It was, in the
words of the Daily News, ‘one of the most important and skilfully
managed financial operations on record’.% The credit for its success,
indeed for the whole operation of winding up the old partnership
and constructing the new company, belongs to Francis Baring more
than to any other individual. His skills, never completely relevant to
the career of amerchant banker, were peculiarly adapted to this task.
He laid the foundations on which John Baring was to build.
   For the Bank of England the operation had concluded in 1895
when the Estate Company took over Barings’ remaining assets. ‘I
congratulate the Sinbad of Threadneedle Street that he is delivered
from the Old Man of the Sea,’ wrote the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, William Harcourt. ‘The Baring Guarantee was a bold and
probably a necessary stroke. It has ended well. May it never be
repeated. Such turns of luck do not often occur in the nature of
things.’* The word ‘probably’ strikes a rather grudging note but
illustrates well with what distaste politicians of this period looked on
such excursions into the private sector. Viewed from the 1980s the
bold stroke seems not merely necessary but essential. Disaster was
averted and at the end of the day the only victims were the partners
in Barings.
   For them a nightmare was over. The way ahead was by no means
comfortable, but at least they now knew where they were going and
could tackle the journey without distractions. ‘We should be doing a
great injustice to our own feelings,’ they wrote to Lidderdale, ‘if we
allowed the present moment to pass by without expressing to you
and to our friend Mr Greene the deep sense of the obligation we feel
we are under to you both for your cordial help and advice during the
trying years we have gone through - without this continuous and
hearty cooperation it would have been most difficult, if not impos-
sible for us to arrive, as we have done, at a satisfactory liquidation of
266                     The Sixth Great Power

our Debt to the Bank.’ Under pressure, the establishment had
closed ranks and saved its own. It remained for Barings to prove that
they were fit to resume their former place.
                                 15
                               rend




            The Road to Recovery
                   1890-1914


With the death of T. C. Baring in 1891, formal recognition was made
of what was already a reality; a new generation took over Baring
Brothers. The Mildmay family hoped that Henry Mildmay might be
rehabilitated and put in charge, but even if this could have been
done without involving the return of the rest of the old gang,
Mildmay was too close to nervous collapse to make the idea practi-
cable.! Francis Baring inherited as titular head of the new company.
Even if his abilities and temperament had inclined him to become an
autocrat in the style of Lord Revelstoke, his frail health would have
curbed his ambitions. He remained leader until 1901, but never
sought to exercise his authority.
   The second of the surviving partners from the old house, Robert
Hodgson, was a worthy but curiously dim figure. His role was des-
tined to bea minor one, though it lasted until his retirement in 1908.
That left John Baring undisputed master. His only possible rival was
his uncle Tom, much richer and with more experience of financial
matters, but remote from City affairs and without his nephew's cun-
ning and determination. After his somewhat cool reception in Lon-
don, Tom Baring returned to New York with moderate good grace
and did fine work looking after Barings’ interests there. In 1892 he
at last joined the partners’ room at Bishopsgate. (It could equally,
perhaps, have been called the directors’ room, since with the crea-
tion of the limited liability company the term ‘partnership’ was more
properly applied to the old house. In practice, however, the two
terms were used interchangeably and the ‘partners’ room’ was
always so called; more justifiably after 1896 when a new partnership,
Baring Bros and Co., was set up to control the limited company.)
                                 267
268                     The Sixth Great Power

  In maturity and old age Tom’s mild eccentricity hardened into an
almost unbreachable mould. ‘A large, red-faced, shrewd, irascible
but lovable man, his great-niece Daphne described him, ‘[who] con-
cealed considerable erudition and love of literature behind an
improbably Blimpish facade.’? Helena Gleichen was one of the sev-
eral attractive young women with whom he enjoyed a platonic
friendship. He taught her about birds and birdsong - on which sub-
ject his knowledge was imposing - and they used to visit the ‘anu-
quity dealers’ shops’ together. ‘His presents were an unending joy.
An early Ming dynasty bronze horse, a lovely cane with an old
Dresden china top, a large comfy sofa for my cottage, and a salmon
rod, were among the treasures he gave me. 3The friendship perished
when he startled everyone by getting married at the age of sixty-two.
He proposed to Constance Barron at his home in Norfolk. Halfway
through his passionate declaration he noticed that she was resting
her foot on a precious glass fire screen and broke off to snap, ‘For
goodness sake, take your foot off my screen!’ At the end of his
speech, without even waiting for the formality of an acceptance, he
pulled five magnificent rings from his pocket. ‘Choose one,’ he said.
The girl hesitated, so he went on impatiently: “You'd better take
them all.’ In spite of this somewhat brusque wooing, she took him,
bore him two sons, buried him when he was eighty-four and out-
lived him by a quarter of a century.*
   Tom Baring was not the man to compete seriously with his ambi-
tious and dynamic nephew. In short bursts he could be formidable.
When things went badly wrong in New York in 1904, a new director,
Gaspard Farrer, wrote to John Baring: ‘Your Uncle Tom has been
quite splendid through all the trouble. I had no conception he was
such a man and so capable. If only he could be roused, as he has been
during the last few days, there is nothing he would not be able to do
in the way of business.’’ But he could rarely be roused, while his
nephew could hardly be induced to rest. John Baring, or Lord
Revelstoke as he became after the death of the first baron in 1897,
was as autocratic as his father and in time almostas vain, but enjoyed
better judgement and a capacity for calculation. If there had been no
Baring crisis he might have inherited his father’s recklessness as well,
but he had learned prudence the hard way and was never to forget it.
He hated being in debt or liable for more money than he had imme-
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                   269
diately available; ‘keep down the overheads and know where your
own money 1s, were the words of wisdom which he imparted to new
recruits to the house.¢ In its obituary The Times recalled that many
years after the crash he was still refusing to take an important role in
a certain enterprise. His firm was not yet sufficiently recovered, he
said. ‘I am going to take no risks.”
   He was as much at home in Paris as in London and spoke excellent
Spanish and passable German and Italian as well: ‘I fancy the Latin
mind is one which appeals particularly to your brother, Gaspard
Farrer told Hugo Baring.® He was celebrated as a conversationalist,
but with a tendency to the pontifical, good sense and wide know-
ledge more evident than wit ora sense of fun. ‘I had a solid regard for
John Revelstoke, wrote W. B. Maxwell, ‘because I knew him to be
remarkably kind, considerate to his friends, and never wearying in
the service ofunfortunate people.’ But though the benevolence was
real it seemed to some that his charity was bestowed in a manner that
was intolerably patronizing. The natural hauteur that had been
curbed by disaster reasserted itself as prosperity was regained: Jews,
the middle classes, almost all Americans, were viewed if not with
contempt, then at least in the sublime awareness that they were part
of a lower breed. ‘I always deprecate the suggestion that any relation
of my friends should go on the Stock Exchange,’ he told Sir Edward
Hamilton; ‘. . . the whole profession is so very much over-run that I
consider it a dangerous and rather demoralizing vocation to suggest
fora young man.’!° He would have been outraged if he had heard the
verdict on him of Billy Grenfell - marginally less odious than his
brother Julian but still a horror by any standard: ‘Dear God, what a
man! He has the mind of a haberdasher who reads the social column
in the Daily Mail every morning before retailing second-hand
trowsers and “Modern Society” and Browning on Sunday after-
noons.’!!
   Curiously enough this letter was written by the son of Lady
Desborough, John Revelstoke’s first great love, to Nancy Astor, who
was his second. ‘Love’ is perhaps the wrong word. Revelstoke liked
to be seen with attractive and distinguished women. ‘Lord Revel-
stoke is in Paris at the moment, enjoying the Champs Elysées and
the boulevards in the company of Mr Arthur Balfour and a large
number of beautiful ladies, wrote Natty Rothschild, his derision
270                     The Sixth Great Power

perhaps touched with jealousy." Itis hard to believe there was much
more than parade and mutual convenience in his relationship with
Ettie   Desborough,   that prodigy   of synthetic   passion.   In   1915
Asquith wrote that Revelstoke had been ‘more or less’ in love with
Lady Desborough for twenty years; “The years have rattled by, and
every kind of water has passed under the bridge, but plus ¢a change,
plus c’est la meme chose."'3 Nicholas Mosley suggests that the relation-
ship between the two was ‘almost certainly sexual’.’* It would be
impossible to prove him wrong, but what sex there was must have
been suffused by snobbery and etiolated almost beyond recognition.
    In his love for Nancy Langhorne it is possible to detect more real
feeling, though she found it hard enough to recognize. At first she
thought him an Apollo but later ‘I came to my senses and discovered
that he was an appalling snob’. She was dismayed when she discov-
ered that his affair with Lady Desborough was still in progress and
infuriated when he asked her: ‘Do you really think that you could fill
the position that would be required of my wife? You would have to
 meet kings and queens and entertain ambassadors. Do you think
you could do it?’ She accused him of putting his social and business
 interests before his love for her and was not appeased by his denials:
 ‘Nancy doesn’t come after Russian loans, or 8 Bish (Within) or Aix!
 How can you pretend to think so?’ His remark about kings and
 queens, he explained, had mainly been a warning of the tedium she
 might encounter. He probably meant what he said; he formally pro-
 posed to her in February 1906, but by that time Waldorf Astor was
on the scene. Revelstoke bowed out in style and possibly with some
relief; his wedding present to them was a diamond bow modelled on
a piece in the crown jewels of Louis XV.15
   Nancy Langhorne would indeed have had to mix with frequent
ambassadors and the occasional king or queen in Lord Revelstoke’s
salons. After a decade of comparative austerity, he indulged himself
by living in the grandest manner. By 1905, within a few weeks, he was
ordering twelve dozen Margaux, a Bechstein grand, a red enamel cig-
arette case and yellow flacon from M. Fabergé of St Petersburg and
two jade dogs from Cartier in Paris. He was hunting regularly with
the Pytchley and the Fernie and keeping a house in Market
Harborough for the purpose. The following year he applied for a
licence to drive an Electric Carriage in Hyde Park, and he bought a
                   The Road to Recovery:   1890-1914                 ee |

series of ever more powerful and luxurious motorcars. Three times
within a week a wheel fell off his 60- horsepower, six-cylinder Napier.
After the second occasion a mechanic announced it was impossible
for the mishap to recur. Revelstoke changed both garage and car.
   He leased a splendid house in Carlton House Terrace, furnished it
sumptuously and employed the best cook in London, the celebrated
Rosa Lewis, who was to go on to still nobler things in the Cavendish
Hotel and the pages of Evelyn Waugh. He was, said Edward VII, the
‘Prince of Bon Viveurs’. The food and wine were superb but the dis-
cipline was also strict; women were only allowed one glass of wine
since Revelstoke disliked seeing them with flushed faces. Lady Airlie
went to the house for the first time as escort to the Princess of Wales,
who was curious to see the objets dart. After dinner more guests
arrived and a concert was given: “The artists were always world-
famous - usually brought over from the Continent for fabulous fees.
I believe Sarah Bernhardt was the only one who ever refused to
appear.’'¢ On another occasion he decided to organize a theatrical
entertainment in French for the Queen and the Prince and Princess
of Wales. The company was to come over from Paris. Rostand’s
‘Pierrot qui pleure et Pierrot qui rit’ was proposed. This would do,
Revelstoke decided, provided it was followed by something light
and amusing, ‘not too proper, not too improper’.!7 The royal visitors
were charmed.
   This was not just empty show. Barings had a reputation to regain;
the affluence of their senior partner and his acceptance by the
greatest in the land was a significant element in their rehabilitation.
It would have availed nothing if John Revelstoke had not also been
uncommonly good at his job. A somewhat chilly remoteness was not
the only Baring characteristic which he had inherited; he enjoyed in
large measure the self-evident reliability, the dignity, the gravitas of
his ancestors. To a friend who was enquiring about a career in the
City for his son, Revelstoke observed: ‘It is almost a platitude to say
that I consider that character and power of application count for
more in the City - or indeed in most careers - than brains or brilliant
abilities.’!8
   Revelstoke himself had good brains but little brilliance; character
and power of application were his hallmarks. They carried him
through. ‘John ... is daily gaining power and influence both in
pak                      The Sixth Great Power

London and in continental financial centres,’ wrote Gaspard Farrer.
‘If his health remains good then really there seems to be no reason
why this house should not come right to the front again, at least as far
as English commerce and finance are concerned; but it will need
patience and control and a willingness to give up present profits for
the sake of the future.’!% Patience and control were also among
Revelstoke’s most marked qualities and his influence grew, as Farrer
had predicted. It is typical that Sir Edward Hamilton, that most stal-
wart pillar of the establishment, in 1903 named Revelstoke, Lord
Rothschild and Sir Ernest Cassel as his ‘first counsellors’, the ‘repre-
sentative men’ whom he felt it essential to introduce to incoming
Chancellors of the Exchequer.?° It was no mean tribute to a man
who, a little over a decade before, had seen his father disgraced and
his family firm brought to the verge of bankruptcy.
   Gaspard Farrer had been imported into Barings by John Baring
from the small merchant banking house of H. S. Lefevre and Co.,
where he had acquired a reputation as an expert on transport matters
in general and American railroads in particular, and in which he
remained a partner - a confusing doubling of roles which could have
aroused concern if he had not been so patently honourable. He was a
man of extraordinary kindness, common sense and humour; tainted
by the fashionable anti-Semitism of his time but in most respects
humane and liberal: ‘he was essentially Aristocratic, socially and eco-
nomically, concluded his protégé, Duncan Stirling.2! Farrer was a
genius with figures, who derived delight from the work of reshaping
balance sheets and company reports, but he knew that human
beings, not statistics, made a business work and he valued friendship
highly. ‘I am afraid I may be prejudiced in the matter of individuals,’
he told Hugo Baring; ‘if I like a person I will go far with him, even
unreasonably far. . . and equally I am perhaps unreasonably timid
where I take a dislike to an individual.’22 He loved his work and
made it his main interest in life, but he would never have allowed its
needs to overrule his loyalties. In 1914, though only fifty-four, he
decided that he was blocking the promotion prospects of the
younger men and should retire; the war disturbed his plans but the
fact that he intended such a sacrifice illustrates well the scale of val-
ues which shaped his character and career.?3
  Such a man could not, nor would have wished to be a rival to John
Wy




                      Fig
            sei ill halt




Wi yyri HiMy ithiy ie
                    ie
             | hill Hy
                                                                                feiba                    HANA




                                                                                                     -
                                                                                               inna ee
                                                                                        tom!




                                                                                                 1
                                                                                         |) SEM ( .
                                                                                        As
                                                                                 ‘}




                                                                                                                a =:
                                                                                                           ir a
                                                                                                             ==
                                                                                tly




                                                                                                         Uae
             it
                                                                                 TH



                                                                                 NR




                                                                                               je aL




                            The Norman Shaw facade to the Bishopsgate office, built in 1880 and
                            sketchéd by Geoffrey Fletcher shortly before its demolition.
mae   Lpreaticwe Bo
The senior partners in 1926
(from left to right): John
Baring (1863-1929), second
Lord Revelstoke; Cecil
Baring (1864-1934), later third
Lord Revelstoke; Gaspard
Farrer and Alfred Mildmay,
by Ambrose McEvoy.
The first Earl of Northbrook by Spy               The first Lord Revelstoke by Lib
                       Cartoons of four distinguished Barings
The second Lord Revelstoke by Spy                  The first Earl of Cromer by Spy
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                   273
Revelstoke. There was, indeed, no one within the house who could
come near to challenging his authority. William Bingham Baring, a
remote cousin but of the same generation, had been one of the few
members of the family to oppose setting up the Estate Company. He
had been ‘recalcitrant and peevish,’ wrote Cecil Baring contemptu-
ously. ‘He is indeed a poor thing.’* His punishment was to be
packed off to Liverpool at £500 a year. Henry Mildmay’s son Alfred
became a director in 1897 and remained one for forty-three years,
but he was not the sort of man to rule, or wish to do so. Apart from
Gaspard Farrer, John Revelstoke’s most effective support came from
his own siblings. Of these the eldest, the most remarkable, and the
eventual heir to the title was his brother Cecil.
   Cecil Baring was one of the most attractively eccentric members of
a family in which unconventionality was no rarity. Long after the
fashion had changed he continued to dress in square bowler hat and
‘coachman’s’ topcoat, not from conservatism or any wish to attract
attention but because he could not be bothered to adjust his style.
A dedicated classicist, he was found at his desk when a financial crisis
was raging, peacefully reading Homer. The advice he gave on this
occasion was felt to be particularly prescient.’ His ruling passions,
however, were those of the naturalist: he would always walk straight
into a rock pool to inspect the contents, without waiting to remove
his brogues or to dry them out afterwards. Once he was in Madrid
negotiating a loan of particular importance. His partners were wait-
ing anxiously when at last a telegram arrived. It read: ‘Have my
blackcaps arrived??? He found the routine of the office always
tedious and often repulsive; he could rarely bring himself to con-
form to its shibboleths. Totally unpretentious, while his brother
John was conveyed to work top-hatted in an electric brougham, he
went ina bowler hat by tube. Yet once at Bishopsgate his mind was as
shrewd and his judgement as sound as anybody’s.
  He had lived and worked in New York, first in Kidder Peabody,
then in Baring, Magoun, and had acquired a considerable reputation
there. At one point he had been about to marry the future Mrs
Cornelius Vanderbilt Junior, but the engagement was broken off -
allegedly because he had lost all his money in the Baring crash.?8
Then he eloped with Maude Tailer, née Lorillard, wife of one of his
partners in Baring, Magoun. This did not improve his prospects in
274                      The Sixth Great Power

New York and he returned to London, where he spent the next dec-
ade in semi-retirement, contentedly creating a home on the island of
Lambay off Dublin, with a castle extended and remodelled by
Lutyens, and gardens planned by Gertrude Jekyll. There he con-
ducted a survey ofthe wild life: five Lambay species - three worms, a
mite, and a bristletail - were new to science; twelve others were addi-
tions to the British fauna. He introduced mountain sheep from
Corsica, a chamois (which worried the sheep), a kinkajou (which
teased the chamois), rheas, bustards, peacocks and, in fine defiance
of St Patrick, grass snakes. In 1906 Farrer found him ‘entirely blissful
and content... . He amused us by ordering a thousand new shillings
to take back with him, presumably for currency in his own island;
though we believe the inhabitants are confined to his family, the
nurse and the bootboy.? Though he was used for odd missions by
the house, the scandal of his divorce and his own lack of enthusiasm
for along time kept him from playing a full role, and it was not until
 1911 that he became a partner.
    His younger brother, Hugo, worked with him in New York,
mainly because there was no room for him in London.}° ‘He is very
young, but it seems to me that he has the makings of a man of affairs,’
reported Robert Winsor from Kidder Peabody in 1903.3! Hugo was
twenty-seven, young enough, but at the same age his brother had
been grappling with the Baring crisis. His impetuosity and uncertain
judgement alarmed his colleagues and were in the end to spell disas-
ter. Everard, the third son, always known in family circles as ‘The
Imp’, had been a soldier and made a reputation for himself as
Curzon’s Military Secretary. John Revelstoke brought him into the
house in 1905: ‘He is a person of character and Capacity, wrote
Farrer, ‘and I think will be useful to us here if not in direct money-
making, at least in important negotiations where dealing with fellow
creatures plays a more important part than knowledge of markets or
businesses.’32
   Maurice Baring came between Everard and Hugo in the roll call of
John Revelstoke’s brothers. He had a small but genuine literary tal-
ent, a genius for languages, vast exuberance and a wild imagination
veering erratically between fantasy and whimsy. He was one of those
people of whom it is difficult to see the point unless one actually
knows them. He was loved and despaired of by his brother, who was
                   The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                   275
perpetually paying his bills, and trying to impose some order on him.
‘I can hardly think that it is necessary for you to patronize so expen-
sive a tailor as Davies?’ Revelstoke pleaded with him. ‘And Bain’s bill
of £64 for books could be avoided, could it not? Now that, by your
brains, you have acquired a position in the literary and journalistic
world, you should be able to make both ends meet.’33 Once, in St
Petersburg and under the supervision of the local Barings’ represent-
ative, he was allowed to take part in some financial negotiations over
a tramways loan. ‘You will find him eager and anxious to second
your efforts, wrote Mildmay, ‘but he is entirely without business
knowledge and we therefore look to you alone to see that our
requirements have been satisfied.’3+ The story on which Maurice
Baring dined out for many years was that he committed his desired
terms to paper, locked himself away and ‘sat like the Mikado in the
hotel and refused to see a soul, whereby he got the reputation of
being an inflexible Lord of Finance,’ and prevailed on every point.35
The truth is not quite so picturesque; Barings’ representative con-
ducted the negotiations and had to make several important conces-
sions.36 Certainly Maurice Baring developed no taste for business
and this was his only foray into international finance.
    Yet two more members of the family were prominentin the bank’s
affairs at this period. Windham Baring, Lord Cromer’s second son,
joined the house in 1903 fresh from university. Like every recruit, of
the blood royal or not, he served his time in the galleys before earn-
ing promotion. John Revelstoke told Windham’s father he had
found him late one evening ‘engaged in copying one of the yearly
statements of account sent to clients. This consists, as you know, in
transcribing entries from a ledger to a sheet of paper. He confided to
me that he considered it “devilish tricky work”.’37 He made a good
impression and three years later was despatched to Buenos Aires; the
idea being, Farrer explained, that he would spend ten years at least
there; ‘It is plain that there will be no room for him here for the pres-
ent, and his best chance of attaining to the private room 1s by making
himself useful where Baring Brothers and Co. require representa-
tion.’38
   His elder brother, Rowland, had become Viscount Errington
when his father Evelyn was created an earl in 1901. Evelyn Baring
had taken thé first step in the peerage in 1892 when he became Baron
276                      The Sixth Great Power

Cromer halfway through his time in Egypt. Sir Edward Hamilton
deplored the creation: ‘I do not think a peerage to a Baring 1s the
most appropriate of honours. To begin with there is hardly any
precedent this reign for ennobling two brothers: the Baring family
has already peerages in it; and just now to single out a Baring for a
hereditary distinction when the name is in such odium among so
many people, is rather a gaucherie.’3? It seemed that no one else in
authority agreed; Cromer continued to progress, becoming a vis-
count and finally making the Baring family’s tally two earls -
Northbrook and Cromer - and two barons - Ashburton and
Revelstoke. His son, Rowland Errington, spent ten years as a diplo-
mat; was stationed in St Petersburg where he impressed Lord
Revelstoke;*° moved to the bank in 1911; became a director two
years later; left for the war in 1914 and thence entered the service of
the royal family.
   Lord Cromer himself continued his somewhat wary relationship
with the family firm. In 1905 he consulted Barings about the sale of
some Egyptian bonds. When the time came to sell them, however, he
refused to make use of Barings’ services, even though he knew ‘you
would do the business for us much better than anyone else’, and ‘it is
equally clear that I should not gain a farthing by it’. The trouble was,
he explained, he was constantly assailed by ‘a very vigilant, very hos-
tile and utterly unscrupulous opposition’. If he employed Barings on
this business it would give his enemies the opportunity they were
seeking. So instead he would use Sir Ernest Cassel. ‘Of course, if
Cassel likes to associate Baring Brothers and Co. or anyone else in
the business, I don’t mind. That is his affair. . . .’41 Since Cassel, as
Cromer well knew, was Revelstoke’s closest ally, and the two men
had already cooperated on Egyptian affairs, Cromer could reason-
ably congratulate himself on having had his cake and eaten it too. To
No one’s surprise, Barings participated in the business.
   There was one more, and surprising, appointment to the board of
Barings before 1914. Patrick Shaw-Stewart had been the most bril-
liant scholar in an outstanding generation at Oxford, winning the
Craven, Ireland and Hertford Scholarships followed by a first in
Greats. His contemporaries admired his intelligence, but distrusted
his self-interest and aggressive ambition: ‘like the electric eel at the
zoo, said Julian Grenfell; ‘not quite long enough in the bottle’ was
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                ar
Raymond Asquith’s astringent verdict.#? Ettie Desborough adored
him, preached his virtues to Lord Revelstoke, and won the day:
‘Bishopsgate is yours if you want it,’ she wrote in triumph, ‘over
Edom shall you cast your shoe.’#3 Shaw-Stewart did want it. ‘On
Tuesday morning, he told Ronald Knox, ‘I put on my little round
black coat, my paper cuffs, and take the tube at Chancery Lane at
about 9.15 a.m.’ It pleased him, he said, to be in a place ‘where you
referred to eight thousands of pounds simply as “eight” ’.#4# Gaspard
Farrer reported that the partners had found him ‘charming, very
modest and gentle, anxious to learn and, needless to say, extraordi-
narily intelligent’*#5 - a judgement which suggests that Shaw-Stewart
was quite as able to advance his own interests as his friends sup-
posed. Early in 1913 he was made a director, a promotion which
delighted him though the honour of signing for the firm had its
drawbacks: ‘My virgin document was a cheque for £100,000, which
gave me an exquisite sensation, but since then I have had to sign 500
dividend warrants in 20 minutes, and wished I had taken one of the
partners’ advice and used “P. Stewart”.’#6 The only fault the firm
could find in him was that night after night he would stay up tll
4 a.m. at fashionable dances, ‘which is not a good beginning for a
day’s work at No. 8’.47 They tried to cure this weakness by despatch-
ing him to New York, a remedy which the war cut short before its
efficacy could be proven.
   Nobody in the bank played any active part in politics. Lord
Ashburton’s brother Guy was MP for Winchester and Alfred
Mildmay’s brother Francis for Totnes; the partners applauded
politely and Alfred Mildmay went to canvass for his brother, but,
even if they had aspired to a more active role, the demands of their
profession would have made it difficult. This did not mean, how-
ever, that they had no concern for politics. The City interest had on
the whole moved right with the Liberal Unionists and now sup-
ported the Conservative party. Revelstoke, in particular, was tem-
peramentally akin to Tory ministers and especially close to Arthur
Balfour. Cromer found this useful when he wished to get his ideas
across to the government without committing himself officially. In
1900 it was rumoured that Kitchener might be appointed to the War
Office. Cromer wrote that he personally saw a lot in favour of the
idea, and then proceeded to say the opposite to devastating effect.
278                       The Sixth Great Power

Kitchener had already produced a mutiny in the army and if he had
stayed in the Sudan ‘would have stifled trade and have produced a
civil upset by over-taxation, and general incapacity to understand
that there is a great deal of human nature in men. The only thing
which appears really to have interested him was the building (with
forced military labour) of a ridiculous huge palace wherewith to
 entertain the Duchess of Portland, Lady Cranborne etc.’ Kitchener
was ‘the most arbitrary and unjust man I have ever met’. If there was
a pleasant and unpleasant way to do something he would unfailingly
choose the latter. ‘He is devoured by personal ambition and, I
should say, wholly unscrupulous. . . . Truthfulness and loyalty are
not his strong points.’ He had no powers of persuasion, no tact, no
sense of proportion. In every other way he would do a splendid job
at the War Office.*8
   Revelstoke had already had a ‘quiet conversation’ with Balfour in
which he had reported Cromer’s limited enthusiasm for Kitchener.*?
Armed with this diatribe he hastened back. Cause and effect are
always difficult to establish in politics: all that is certain is that, while
on 12 February Balfour had been ready to ‘acquiesce with some
equanimity’ in Kitchener's translation to the War Office, once the
South African war was over it was in India and not Whitehall that the
newly created viscount found himself installed.
   But though Revelstoke was closer to Balfour than any other politi-
cian, he considered himself in particular and bankers in general to be
above the political conflict. On 20 July 1905 he gave a large dinner
party at his house in Carlton House Terrace and invited more people
in later to dance to a Viennese band. At | a.m. Lord Spencer burst in
to announce that the government had fallen. ‘He was shortly fol-
lowed by a jubilant Asquith and by several other citizens, who evi-
dently think they are going to be members of the next Ministry.
Margot appeared, as usual very lightly clad, and talked wildly about
her approaching occupation of 10 Downing Street.’5° When the Lib-
erals swept in at the election of 1906 Farrer pronounced that it was
inevitable, ‘and right as well for the good of the country that there
should be a change’! Revelstoke gave a large dinner to introduce
Asquith to the senior officials of the Bank of England, and financial
heavyweights such as Lord Rothschild, Lord Mount Stephen and
Edgar Speyer.®2
                   The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                    279
   Asquith might be acceptable but Lloyd George went a little far
even for the most open-minded banker. Alfred Mildmay noted scep-
tically that the new Chancellor had said he did not intend to bring in
‘any measures of a socialist nature’; the speech was all night as far as it
went, ‘but it did not seem to me to contain much more than
platitudes’.53 Revelstoke referred gloomily to ‘the eccentricities of
our Radical Government’.s+ When Lloyd George introduced his
controversial budget in 1909, Revelstoke was one of the more well-
informed ofthe peers to oppose it. In his speech, the first after twelve
years as a member of the House of Lords, he spoke as ‘one brought
up in the midst of financial and commercial operations, in the con-
duct and consideration of which I have endeavoured to follow the
traditions and to be guided by the experience of many generations of
financiers in my own family’. The Finance Bill penalized capital and
destroyed credit. What was being sacrificed was confidence: ‘Confi-
dence in financial prudence, confidence in ability to pay, confidence
in financial equity, confidence in the sanctity of property.’** His
speech deserved the highest praise, judged Almeric Fitzroy, ‘as it was
a maiden effort, and by universal consent an extremely effective con-
tribution to the debate’.5* But when the issue turned to one of Lords
against Commons and the call went out for all moderates to rally to
the government, Revelstoke knew where his loyalties lay. He even
volunteered to return specially from his beloved Aix to go into the
government lobby, ‘it being understood, of course, that in that case
 an opportunity should be given me of registering my protest against
 the measure in question’.*”
    Though their views on foreign policy might differ from ume to
 time, on one thing all the partners of Barings were united: that if war
broke out between two major European powers, then, irrespective of
who won or lost, ‘as far as banking and commercial circles are con-
cerned, the result would be disastrous’.** Gaspard Farrer confessed
to an ‘old craze of mine of fear of the German and all his works’,5? but
he was still convinced that no sane man could contemplate war and
ready to deride the various scares which from time to time swept
Britain in the early twentieth century. ‘If you can come,’ he wrote to
an American friend in 1906, ‘you will find Englishmen who can still
sleep soundly in their beds without fear of waking to the boom of
German guns and the news of German warships in the Thames. Can
280                     The Sixth Great Power

anything be more ridiculous than the fuss our newspapers have been
making?’ But the time came when the fuss was no longer so
ridiculous. Revelstoke, at least, was more prescient than the general
public, or than many politicians. The ill-feeling which prevailed in
Europe, he told Patrick Shaw-Stewart in March 1914, had causes
much deeper than any particular squabble in the Balkans: ‘This aug-
mentation of European armaments, both by sea and land, is indeed a
terrifying thing, and I am more than ever convinced of the want of
wisdom in taking on any risks which entail an engagement ofalong
period.’6! Less than five months later Britain was at war.


The new limited company that had been set up at the end of 1890
never had many shareholders and members of the Baring family
held about 20 per cent of the equity. It had been provided that the
Baring partners could buy out the other shareholders by exchanging
the voting shares for new preference non-voting shares. At the time
this had been a remote contingency. It was not that the sums of
money involved were very large but because in 1890 it seemed
unlikely that the firm would be able to maintain itself without the
overt support of the financial establishment. To the mild chagrin of
some of the equity holders, however, who had hoped for a perma-
nent stake in the new house, within five years they had all been
bought out by the new partnership.® In ttle as well as reality the
Barings were once more in control of their own house. In 1895 the
share capital was increased to £1.025 million, a level at which it
remained for more than twenty years.
  The old house, meanwhile, coexisted with the new; not engaged in
active trading but administering its remaining investments. In 1898
the partners were once more able to withdraw capital as all the debts
were paid off, and it remained a source of profit until its final demise
in 1920. Its relationship with the limited company was close but not
invariably harmonious. In 1904 Windham Baring suggested the new
firm should take over the country house near Buenos Aires which
had been acquired from Hale and Co. Nothing would make the old
house more reluctant to sell than the knowledge that the new house
was interested, said Gaspard Farrer drily. ‘There seems no good
reason if it is good business for B.B. and Co. Ltd to buy why the old
firm should sell.’6
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                    281
   If the recovery of Barings can best be measured by their gross
profits - the profits obtained before the deduction of any expenses,
writing off bad debts, transfers to reserves etc. - the’ figures show
quiet and on the whole sustained growth from £141,000 in 1891 to
£206,000 in 1897; a leap to £315,000 in 1904 and £522,000 in 1905
accounted for by particularly large investment income; a sharp and
temporary setback in 1906 and 1907; followed by profits averaging
about £450,000 in the years between then and the war. Commission
income was far steadier: £98,000 in 1891, it only fell below £100,000
five times between 1892 and 1914, yet only four times exceeded
£125,000 and then often only by a few hundreds. Barings’ liabilities
on acceptances at year end, which had risen to £15 million before the
crash, dropped to £3 million, and though they were pushed up again
to £6.2 million by 1904 and £7.5 million by 1910 this only repre-
sented 5 per cent of the total London figure. Leadership of the mar-
ket was never recaptured, both Schroders and Kleinworts enjoyed
almost twice as large a business and Brown Shipley ran Barings close
for third place. Barings tried to see the silver lining in this demotion.
‘Personally I am glad to think that Barings’ credits are not to be gotas
easily as Kleinworts’ or Schroders’, wrote Cecil Baring, ‘because I am
vain enough to think that the goodwill represented by our name isin
a different class from that represented by the above named and their
like.’64
   The main growth in acceptances came through the joint accounts
with Kidder Peabody in Boston and Baring, Magoun or its succes-
sors in New York. In 1910, out of a grand total of about £15.5 million,
£8.6 million emanated from North America. Three hundred and
fifty commercial credits were issued in New York in 1906; among the
transactions Barings helped finance were the import of shellac from
India, hides from Hamburg, lemons from Italy, slippers from Tur-
key, skins from Russia, cocoa from Portugal, coffee from Brazil, tin
from the Straits and silk from Japan. The house was more ready to
seek business than in the old days. “The old practice here was to sit
and wait for applicants,’ said Farrer to Hugo Baring in 1905, ‘and it is
needless to tell you that the result was that the business has fallen to
a very low ebb. Of recent years we have reached out to encourage old
                                                             satisfac-
friends and get new ones, and the results so far seem highly
tory.’    ;
  But the risks were still there and caution was never thrown
282                     The Sixth Great Power

overboard. In 1911 a plausible young man called on the Commercial
Credits Department and asked for £10,000 to finance the shipment
of Manchester goods to the East. The capital, all owned by him, was
said to be £15,000 and was shortly to be raised to £30,000. It took
careful enquiry to establish that only £3207 capital was actually paid
up and that no confidence was to be placed in the young man or his
firm. ‘We naturally declined to have anything to do with the busi-
ness. It was discovered that he was seeking credit all over London,
and he failed shortly afterwards.’ Precise information was as essen-
tial as ever. In the same year Barings lost a substantial sum through
the unexpected failure of Messrs Leontieff in St Petersburg. ‘It is
apparently difficult, if not impossible, to obtain reliable information
about firms in Russia, complained the Credit Department. ‘Personal
knowledge of members of firms with whom one does business, and
frequent personal intercourse is very desirable.’*”
   Any inclination to indulge in more ambitious adventures was
sternly curbed. In 1900 Cecil Baring reported from New York that it
was said on the Metal Exchange that Barings were at the head of a
speculative movement in tin and that they actually controlled three-
quarters of the visible supply. The days were long past when Baring
Brothers could set out to corner tin, indigo, or any other commodity.
Cecil Baring told everyone that the story was a lie, ‘and that you and
we were only interested in tin from time to time, just as we are in
other sorts of merchandise, as Bankers’.*8
   Barings had always done well for themselves as well as for their
clients by managing the affairs of the affluent and well connected. In
1891 clients’ accounts totalled £2 million; by the end of 1914 the
figure was £9.5 million. Sometimes there was a family connection
and the motive was to oblige rather than to make a profit. In 1913
Lord Revelstoke found himself called upon to sort out the financial
problems of his brother-in-law, Lord Spencer. The difficulty was one
of cash flow rather than anything more fundamental. ‘I dislike the
idea of fine works of art being sold to liquidate deficiencies of
income,’ Revelstoke told Gaspard Farrer’s solicitor brother Henry.
‘You are well aware how many beautiful things are at Althorp and in
Spencer House, and of all these I believe my brother-in-law has the
free disposal without any entail.’? Such duties could be trouble-
some, but at least where no relationship was involved the honour
                   The Road to Recovery:   1890-1914                 283
could be declined. When Lady Cunard suggested Barings should
look after her affairs, Revelstoke commented: ‘She is an extremely
tiresome woman, and is mixed up with speculative people, so that, as
far as | am concerned, I should consistently refuse to have anything
to do with her affairs.’7° In 1913 Barings took over the small firm of
Mormis, Prevost, an old, well-established but sleepy house which
specialized in looking after bonds and other securities held by for-
eign customers, collecting interests and dividends and doing any
other business that had to be done. Barings’ list of foreign clients was
thereby embellished by a rich selection of the noblesse of France: the
Duc d’Abrantes, the Duc de Broglie, the Comte de Fitzjames and
many others.
   Providing credits for foreign travellers was also an increasing if
minor line of business. The most eminent of such clients was
undoubtedly   Jules Verne’s Phineas Fogg, who was entitled to draw
on Barings to ‘an extent unlimited’ in the course of his journey
around the world in eighty days. The majority of foreign travellers
came from the United States; in 1902 Cecil Baring was reporting
from New York that some of his richer clients would like to have
‘check books on your esteemed firm bound in a rather more expen-
sive way than the regular paper cover’. Samples of various luxurious
forms of binding were asked for.7! It was the dawn of the traveller's
cheque. In 1905 Kidder Peabody reported that the American
Express Company was selling a great many such cheques, but for
small amounts and at greater cost than those issued by the merchant
banks: ‘The business which they take from us is the most trouble-
some and least profitable part of the travelling Credit business.”
Barings were not so sure. Gaspard Farrer supposed that, in self-
defence, they would have to go in for ‘travellers’ Circular Notes’. A
visiting American lady had just been extolling their delights; ‘the
womenfolk prefer something that can be easily cashed - and easily
stolen - to the necessary formalities which a letter of credit entails’.’?


By the turn of the century it could fairly be said that Barings had
recovered. The feat was impressive but needs to be viewed in propor-
tion. Between 1890 and 1914 the City of London was losing its lead
as financial céntre of the world, the merchant banks were losing
284                      The Sixth Great Power

ground to the giant joint-stock banks, and Barings were slipping
behind certain of the other merchant banks. They were still a big fish,
but in a smaller pond and with more and even bigger fish around
them.
   The competition from Paris was ever more formidable. ‘The
Crédit Lyonnais,’ wrote Farrer, ‘is the most powerful institution in
the world with investors; we should not care to propose to them a
business involving less than $50 million, and they would probably
prefer $100 million. ... The Crédit Lyonnais’ yearly power of
placement is at least £30 million, and practically every client follows
the institution’s advice blindly.’* But the German banks were
equally aggressive. In the United States the opposition became ever
more powerful. It is notable that in 1900 Barings employed seventy
clerks; the comparable figure for Morgans in New York was twice as
great. Within Britain the merchant banks were still powerful but
they had shown themselves conservative in the development of new
business, had left the financing of the railways largely to contractors,
the handling of new industrial issues to company promoters. Their
resources were small compared with those of the joint-stock banks,
who lured away many of their employees and made incursions into
their historic business.75
   The gulf was wide between the old and traditionally minded
merchant   banks, among which       Barings, Rothschilds,   Schroders,
Hambros and Gibbs were pre-eminent, and the newer, more aggres-
sive houses, mainly of German origin, Kleinworts, Speyer Bros,
Brandts, the French-American Lazards. The partners in the former
group sent their sons to public schools, married into the English
gentry, spent time on their country estates - a typical August
found Revelstoke at Aix, Tom Baring shooting grouse in Scotland
and Cecil Baring collecting bugs in the wilds of Mexico. The direc-
tors of Kleinworts and Speyers took continental brides and rarely
had a country house. They sent their children to learn their job in the
German banks, where the clerks worked from sixty to seventy hours
a week; in the purely British houses the working day was usually
from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., with one half day a week.76 A Russian corre-
spondent told Farrer that he only took on young men able to read,
write and speak in four languages. ‘I told him that in this country we
might search from Land’s End to Cape Wrath without finding a
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                285

young man with such qualifications; it is hard enough to find one
who can write a decent letter in English.” Rothschilds were no
longer Barings’ most formidable rival; instead they were an ally,
deploring the vulgarity and unscrupulousness of the new wave. Nor
did Barings find them particularly effective even in this role. ‘New
Court is so unreasonable and so lazy that it is difficult to ensure a
business being properly carried through under their direction, com-
plained Revelstoke. “They refuse to look into new things . . . and
their intelligence and capacity is not of a high order.’78
   Barings in the early twentieth century, then, were a powerful and
thriving house, but no longer the innovative force they had been in
their youth, nor enjoying the undisputed mastery that had belonged
to them in their prime. Their expansion, however, was marked by
developments in the offices at 8 Bishopsgate. The first operation
of any significance came in 1906 with an attempt to improve the
ventilation in what Farrer described as ‘our abominable partners’
room’. ‘It is difficult to please them all, complained Farrer, and in
fact it seemed almost impossible to please any of them. ‘Yesterday
when every inlet and outlet was hermetically sealed half of them
complained of draughts; today when the hot air is on and the fans
going Bob [Hodgson] talks of training for another and presumably
worse world, while John shivers and suggests that trips to Brighton
are no longer necessary.’7? In 1912 more drastic schemes were afoot.
The watchmaker’s shop and public house next door had been
acquired, the upper part of the house demolished, the general office
boarded up, and fierce redevelopment begun. ‘We are promised five
to seven months of knocking and hammering, wrote Mildmay
gloomily.®°
   But in spite of the knocking and hammering, and in spite - or per-
haps because - of the comparatively relaxed atmosphere of the part-
ners’ room, Barings remained a good place to work. Whatever the
blandishments of the joint-stock banks, most of the staff remained
loyal. Mr John Warry was hardly typical, but his attitude was that of
many others. ‘On 15th May next,’ Barings wrote to him, ‘you will
have completed sixty years service with the Firm and we understand
that, now being in your eighty-fifth year, you would be glad to be
relieved of your duties... . Such a desire is but natural,’ admitted
Barings handsomely. He was to retire in June, receive full pay until
286                     The Sixth Great Power

the end of the year, and then get a pension of £250 a year.*! One
hopes he enjoyed it for a decade at least.
   Two hundred and fifty pounds was quite generous. In 1914 a
junior clerk was taken on probation at £1 a week. A year or so later, if
accepted for the regular staff, this would rise to £70 a year. ‘A hard-
working clerk who gives general satisfaction without possessing
exceptional abilities’ would expect to work up in the end to about
£400 a year. A thorough knowledge of French, Spanish or German
was very desirable (though if Farrer is to be believed a considerable
rarity) - ‘A slight knowledge of a Foreign language is useless.’ No
social or educational qualifications were necessary, but ‘our experi-
ence leads us to the conclusion that the training afforded by the Eng-
lish Public School has the effect of cultivating a wider field of view,
and a greater spirit of self-reliance, than any other type of school at
the present time’.82 Women were now taken for granted at any
except the highest and lowest levels. They were mostly employed in
the Travellers’ Letters Department (which at the peak period in
August might handle as many as 1500 letters in a single day) or the
Coupon Department. The former were in a special category ‘in that
they have to pass frequently through the public parts of the office;
we have therefore decided that in future black dresses must be worn.
There is no objection to white collars and cuffs, but the Directors
desire that no coloured trimming or fancy blouses be worn during
business hours.’83


The British merchant banks were often criticized for failing to play a
large part in the financing of British industry. Certainly Revelstoke
regarded the business with some caution. In 1911 he disclaimed any
interest in a concern for making use of coal products: ‘I confess that
personally I have a horror of all industrial companies, and that |
should not think of placing my hard-earned gains into such a ven-
ture.’§* His attitude may have been coloured by a brush which
Barings is supposed to have had some years earlier with Ernest Terah
Hooley, the most notoriously crooked of the company promoters of
the age. Barings had unwisely been drawn into helping him float his
Trafford Park Estates, and though they had contrived to disentangle
themselves with no more than a nasty scare, the unpleasant memory
                   The Road to Recovery:   1890-1914                 287
lingered on.85 But though it was rarely indeed that the house partici-
pated in any fully-fledged industrial enterprise, their role in what
might be called the infrastructure of British industry was by no
means inconsiderable.
   In 1900 and 1901 came their first association with public transport
in London, two issues of £316,000 and £840,000 respectively for
London United Tramways. Revelstoke told James Stillman of the
National City Bank in New York that, though a small beginning, the
first issue was likely to lead to something big. ‘Electric traction and
surface roads have not reached the same popularity in England as
they have in the States ... the conservatism of my countrymen
would seem to render them content with a means of locomotion
which would appear quite antiquated to the average American.’ This
was the first proposition to finance ‘electrification for surface roads’
in London. ‘I am quite convinced that the thing 1s only in its infancy
as far as this metropolis is concerned, and that when the English
public is educated to take an interest in such schemes, we shall see a
huge development on the lines which have been so successful in
your country.’ The English public were not the only people who
needed education. The Astronomer Royal and the other Observa-
tory authorities from Greenwich waged a vociferous campaign to
stop the development of the system and it took a long me to con-
vince them that ‘the disturbances created by the electric currents’
were not so damaging as they feared.87
    From trams to the underground railway was a natural progress.
 Barings never themselves made an issue for the Central London
 Railway but they took stock for their own and their clients’ account,
and Farrer, in particular, had a keen interest in it. He was worried
about the increasing competition from the electrified Metropolitan
and District Railways and anxious to reduce costs in every way. ‘The
 snipping of tickets at the barriers’ he believed to be ‘perfectly useless
and a great expense’. The occasional fraud would cost little com-
 pared to the wages of the staff, and inspectors on the trains would be
 just as effective. He also thought a rise in fares would be justified: ‘I
do not believe people travel by Tube unless they are obliged. Itis not
like a surface tram where the sight of the passing car and a very low
fare may tempt a man to ride a few hundred yards when he would
otherwise walk.’88
288                     The Sixth Great Power

   If neither Revelstoke nor Farrer was personally enthusiastic about
an enterprise it did not stand much chance in Barings. British rail-
ways came in this category. In 1901 Cecil Baring wrote in high excite-
ment from New York to report that E. H. Harriman was ready to
spend $500 million to consolidate and modernize the British system.
J. P. Morgan too was interested. ‘I am sure this is well worth your
thinking about, because we are in an ideal position in the matter, as
Harriman would like to be associated with us, and have the whole
Jew element behind him without being too conspicuous, while Mor-
gan would come in on such a scheme, and if it ever got as large as it
seems to me it might, we could be the leaders with all interests
behind us.’8? Revelstoke was unimpressed by this rosy vision. Clearly
there were possibilities, but ‘in this small country there are limita-
tions as to the fares and as to the carrying capabilities, impediments
created by the Board of Trade, difficulties caused by the Trades
unions’. The whole subject was a tricky one and had better be
eschewed. Eighteen months later Farrer was ready to concede that
the situation seemed more hopeful but he still did not see it as a
profitable field for investment. ‘We shall be agreeably surprised if in
the long run the increase of capital account, and the increase of rates
and taxes and labour bills, do not compensate for any increased earn-
ings which more intelligent operation may effect.’#!
   It was different where the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board was
concerned. The Board wanted to raise £3.5 million at 32 per cent.
Barings insisted that the price to them could not exceed 9412. It was
vital that the first issue should be a success: ‘We are proud of our
long connection with Liverpool . . . and would strain every nerve to
prove our loyalty to you and justify your Board’s to us.’92 This emo-
tional appeal prevailed, and the stock was issued at 9612, the 2 per
cent difference being Barings’ profit after all expenses including
underwriting were deducted. The issue was a success, though not
sensationally so, and the house’s direct gain on the operation was
some £23,000. More important, however, was the fact that Baring
Brothers applied for £7 50,000 worth of stock on its own account and
allotted itself £740,000 (in no way an echo of the Guinness affair,
since in this case the issue was undersubscribed and Barings’ large
holding was needed to maintain the price). The investment eventu-
ally proved a good one: at the end of 1903 a little over £30,000 was
                  The Road to Recovery: 1890-1914                  289
transferred to the Investment Account as profit from the trans-
action. In January 1906 Barings felt able to contract for a further
£500,000 ‘on terms which give us a reasonable profit and at the same
time are very fair to the Dock Board’.?} By June all the old stock had
been sold, almost half the new, and it was expected that what
remained would be gone within a few weeks.**
  There were a few cases in which Barings became involved with
those industrial companies which Revelstoke deplored. Usually
these rose from his close friendship, or perhaps alliance would be a
better word, with the German Jewish financier Sir Ernest Cassel,
who by 1900 was a naturalized Briton, one of the dominant forces in
the City of London and personal adviser to the Prince of Wales. It
was on joint account with Cassel that at the end of 1902 Barings
undertook to raise £1 million for the great armaments firm, Vickers
Sons and Maxim, though their name was not mentioned in the pros-
pectus. The relationship with Cassel was conducted on the most
gentlemanly lines. Cassel wrote to say that he felt he should give the
stockbroker Akroyd an interest of £20,000: ‘You will understand that
as this is in recognition of services rendered in connection with the
issue before you had anything to do with it, the cession will fall on
my shoulders only.’* Revelstoke protested: ‘We should very much
prefer, if you will allow us to do so, to bear our share of the cession
made to him. We should thus be consistent with the idea of a joint
account with you, which has been one of the pleasantest features of
this particular business.’%6 Another pleasant feature was that every-
one concerned made a handsome though not indecent profit; by
February all the stock had been taken and Arthur Balfour had
received a cheque for £4277.14.9d for the first £4000 of the £10,000
participation which Barings had reserved him.
   William Beardmore was another industrial company in which
Barings became involved, and the Cunard Steamship Company a
third. For Cunards they provided a series of short-term financial
credits, totalling about £1.2 million, to finance the building of their
                                                       a, which
new liners of 19,500 tons, the Caronia and the Carmani
joined the Cunard fleet in 1905. It was something, but it was not
much. Barings’ attitude was more often that which they adopted
                                                                   .
when the German firm of Siemens considered a flotation in London
They might bé interested, said Barings cautiously, ‘though it is only
290                      The Sixth Great Power

fair to say that it is only in very rare cases that we ourselves issue
industrial Stocks’.97 They saw themselves as they had always been,
an international merchant banking house. International trade was
their bread and butter; international loans their jam; the financing of
British industry was fare for the servants’ hall or, worse still, fit only
for the dogs.
                                  16
                                pe
                                 @ te




                     High Finance
                        1890-1914


By the end of the nineteenth century Barings was once more a force
to be taken seriously in the world of national or international financ-
ing. The test came in 1900 when the British government, in need of
money to finance the war in South Africa and aware of the Bank of
England’s dangerously depleted gold reserves, turned to the United
States for a loan. If the crisis had come five years before, Barings
might well have been by-passed and negotiations have taken place by
way of J. S. Morgan in London and J. P. Morgan in New York, prob-
ably with the participation of Rothschilds and Ernest Cassel. As it
was, Revelstoke was from the start consulted by the Chancellor and
the Governor of the Bank of England; and when J. P. Morgan in July
1900 showed himself less eager than the Chancellor thought proper
to raise the £5 million or so which the government wanted from the
United States, it was Barings who were invoked to share the burden.
Morgans were most put out - the Chancellor, Hicks-Beach, was
‘notoriously stupid and most unbusinesslike,’ wrote Morgan’s part-
ner in London, Sir Clinton Dawkins - but they had either to swallow
the condition or lose the business, and chose the former.'
   It was some years before this that they had begun to venture back
into international financing. From 1895 onwards, somewhat timidly
at first, they had begun to handle the London end of minor Ameri-
can issues: $500,000 for the Minneapolis Western Railway, $4.5
million for the Park Steel Company of Pittsburgh. It was the start of
greater things; between 1890 and 1914 the house handled twenty
United States issues and had a finger in the pie of many more.
   It was a battle to become re-established. No British banker com-
manded the deference in New York that he would have enjoyed
                                  291
292                      The Sixth Great Power

twenty years before. Farrer remarked in 1904 that he had seen for a
long time ‘that it cannot be very long before New York becomes the
financial centre of the world; but I fear for our sakes it is coming too
quickly’? Barings were doubly devalued. Even after they had reha-
bilitated themselves in London, they were considered small fry
across the Atlantic. In 1901 Dawkins observed that: ‘In London, the
resuscitated Barings are the only people nearly in the same rank with
us. In the US they are nowhere now, a mere cipher, and the US 1s
going to dominate in most ways. The Barings have nobody but
Revelstoke [Farrer was recruited a few months later], a man com-
monly reported to be strong, but a strange mixture of occasional
strength and sheer timidity. He has no nerve to fall back on.. . . He
has greatly irritated the Morgans once or twice by want of tact and by
talking loosely (after they helped Barings largely in 1891) and it cost
me a good deal of difficulty this summer to patch up the old alliance
between the two houses.”
   Even in 1901 Barings were deemed more considerable in New
York than this account suggests, but Farrer at least had no illusions
about the power they wielded. When Revelstoke returned from the
United States in April 1902 enthusing about the warm reception he
had encountered, Farrer commented that he wished there ‘had been
a little more business and a little less civility, but I have no doubt the
trip will have done some good’.* It did do some good, and every suc-
ceeding trip did more, as the position was laboriously retrieved.
Barings would not have been Barings if they had not occasionally
made the work unnecessarily hard. Only a few months after
Revelstoke had returned in such satisfactionan important American
client called Charles Alexander visited London. After a few weeks he
wrote in indignation to Tom Baring in New York: ‘I doubt very
much whether Baring Brothers and Company will care to be both-
ered with my presence at their banking house. I don’t believe they
very much appreciate me there... . While the Union Bank people all
called upon my arrival in London. . . and while also Mr Morgan did
all that was polite, I have yet to receive a card from anyone con-
nected with your correspondent. . . . My time is very valuable and I
don’t intend to waste it in trotting down to Bishopsgate unless I have
some evidence that they want to have me.’s
   The issues that put Barings back into the first division in the
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                        293

United States were those of American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
(ATTC) and its subsidiary, the New York Telephone Co. (NYTC).
The story began gloomily in 1904, when Kidder Peabody and
Barings were unable to secure a slice of the business: “La maison
Speyer devient de plus en plus difficile a combattre, noted the Banque de
Paris et des Pays Bas.® Early the following year, however, Morgans
and Kidder Peabody were back in the battle, this me successfully,
and it was Speyers, Kuhn, Loeb and Rothschilds who were excluded.
Barings were invited to take over the European end of the issue,
making themselves responsible for $25 million on joint account with
Kidder Peabody. Initially Barings were hesitant, especially since
Morgans’ London house would have somehow to be accommo-
dated. ‘An American bond of this nature would be such a novelty
here and on the Continent that the placing would be a matter of
work and education. ... We do not want to educate the old man
[J. P. Morgan] to imagine that we are willing to make public issues in
conjunction with his present London house, especially as we know
that 90 per cent of the work would have to be done in our office.”
Courage prevailed, Hopes took $1 million, and the issue was made
in early March. The response was cautious - ‘We suspect that the
voice of your Stock Exchange was influenced by some of your
Hebrew friends,’ wrote Kidder Peabody, ‘as they made a strong sub
rosa effort, on this side, to discredit the issue’’ - but soon caught on,
and by the end of the month the issue was oversubscribed, with
applications ‘almost entirely made up of genuine investors.
   The following year, when another ATTC loan was offered, Barings
were again hesitant. It was only fifteen years since they had met dis-
aster and they were understandably reluctant to involve themselves
in any potentially precarious commitment. Initially they declined to
take the lead in Europe on the grounds that money was scarce and
investors likely to be backward. The idea of a combination with
Speyers and the French Rothschilds was mooted. Yet at the same
time they were doubtful about their doubts. Perhaps they were ‘actu-
ated by excessive caution’, mused Farrer.!° In the end the robust
encouragement of Morgans, and their own fear of losing the position
which they had just begun to recapture, prevailed over their midity.
 Barings and Morgans’ London house took on the $15 million
offered in London.
294                   The Sixth Great Power

   The following year a further $40 million was thrown on to the
market. This time it seemed that Barings’ scepticism was justified.
Everyone agreed that the stock was an excellent long-term invest
ment, that no political hurricane could seriously shake the stability
of the American investor, yet ‘the response made by the public was
practically nothing’.!! Barings had never wanted to make this further
issue, explained Mildmay, and had only done so out of loyalty to
their friends in the syndicate. Yet though they suffered fleeting
embarrassment they were never in real danger. They were not
exposed as they had been in Argentina. The ATTC stock continued
to sell quietly, and Barings’ resolution in sticking by their syndicate
was amply rewarded in 1909 when the ATTC subsidiary, the New
York Telephone Company, went to the markets for a total of £5 mil-
lion, of which £2 million was raised by Barings in London. ‘There is
only one City of New York,’ wrote Gaspard Farrer triumphantly;
‘only one Telephone Company operating in it, and these bonds are
secured on the only First Mortgage which it can issue. In our opinion
it is as good as a telephone security can be.’!? This time the public
agreed and there was a hectic struggle for shares. Barings as always
protected the interests of their favoured clients: Gordon Cunard,
Evan Charteris, the Lords Lansdowne, Allendale, Cromer and
Mount Stephen, Robert and Hugo Baring, Revelstoke’s favourite,
Lady Desborough, were all on the ‘red list’, as it was called, among
the fortunate recipients of allocations of the stock. It was ‘one of the
best pieces of business we have put through of recent years,’
announced Farrer,!3 and psychologically it provided a spectacular
boost, announcing to any remaining doubters that Barings were still
the house to turn to for a successful American issue.
   Not that such reaffirmation was really needed by 1909. The pre-
vious year Jacob Schiff of Kuhn, Loeb had offered them a large issue
for the Pennsylvania Railroad. Revelstoke called'in Rothschilds and
Cassel, to such effect that he felt able to dispense with underwriting
and thus swell an already comfortable profit. The loan ‘has exceeded
our wildest expectations,’ Revelstoke told Windham Baring. The
‘ordinary applicant’ was getting little more than 3 per cent of what
he asked for.!* The ‘ordinary applicants’ did not include Lord
Lansdowne, Lord Allendale and the rest.
  The fact that Kuhn, Loeb put this business in the way of Barings
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       295
shows both how the latter's standing had been restored and how far
the traditional alliances between British and American houses had
fluctuated with the years. For the first decade after the crash, such
American business as Barings did was conducted through its old ally,
Kidder Peabody, in Boston and the partnership of Tom and Cecil
Baring and George Magoun in New York. Baring, Magoun was never
a total success. Their relationship with their cousin house in Boston
veered between the suspicious and the hostile and they were rarely
treated as a major contender by their other rivals in New York. Out-
side the - highly important - work of commercial credits, their inde-
pendent activities were almost entirely confined to operations with
the railroads. Their main value to Barings was as a sort of superior
posting house and intelligence agency, reporting on new issues and
from time to time negotiating on behalf of the parent house.
   When Hugo replaced Cecil in 1902, things got worse. Hugo
Baring was a man of outstanding decency who seta high value on his
own intelligence and acumen, a judgement that was not entirely
shared by the partners in London. Conrad Russell, a young
employee, found him kind and generous but ‘unattractive and with-
out charm’, and marvelled at the lack of discipline within the office -
‘very different from the atmosphere of Schroders’.'* Baring often
took a view of business matters radically different from that held in
Bishopsgate. In 1903 he was enthusiastic about the prospects of the
Wabash Railroad and wanted to make them a $4 million advance for
the purchase of equipment. Barings responded coolly: ‘Regret Com-
 pany’s past record here makes business unadvisable for us.’ ‘Regret
Wabash decision, cabled Hugo Baring. ‘Would you object our nego-
tiating with Robert Fleming, who seemed interested in such things
while here?’ If this was a bluff to bring his brother into line it failed
signally: ‘None whatever, came the reply. ‘Wish you every success.’
That Hugo’s self-confidence masked doubts about his real stature is
indicated by his readiness to take offence. Revelstoke often had to
 soothe the injured dignity of his younger brother. ‘You must | think
 be affected - even you - by the New York climate, if you are inclined
to suggest that we intended any slight to your firm. You know how
 long-standing a jealousy there has been between the firms in New
York and Boston; and we also look to your beneficent and indepen-
dent influence minimizing this as much as possible, so you must
 296                    The Sixth Great Power

realize how much we have in heart your credit and prosperity.'17
Constantly he urged Hugo to work more closely with Kidder Pea-
body. ‘Looking to the much greater wealth of our competitors,’       he
wrote early in 1904, ‘the only chance for yourselves, Kidder Peabody
and ourselves is to work loyally together whenever we can.’!8
   Wealthiest and most powerful of those competitors were Mor-
gans. The received wisdom in London was that New York bankers
were devious and unscrupulous. Hugo Baring loved to tell the story
of the young man who asked whether he would be able to make an
honest living in New York. He was told the chances were excellent,
there would be no competition at all. To this Morgans were - some-
what grudgingly - admitted to be an exception. They were the lead-
ing Protestant house and prided themselves on it. Talking to
Revelstoke in 1904,J. P.Morgan urged him to playa more active part
in New York. ‘He inveighed bitterly against the growing power of the
Jews and of the Rockefeller crowd, and said more than once that our
firm and his were the only two composed of white men in New
York.’!9 Revelstoke for his part admired J. P. Morgan and wrote of
him that he was ‘a great, big, large-hearted generous man... witha
character which is remarkable for straight dealing’.2° But the real
sympathy between the two houses did not alter the fact that they
were frequently in conflict. “We have no wish to act in any way inimi-
cal to him,’ Revelstoke told Cecil Baring, “but it is obvious that our
interests are such as to render our position one of constant and active
competition.’2! In the past it had usually been Barings who pre-
vailed, now it was more often Morgans, and the older house did not
find it easy to stomach this change in their position. To their mind
they were constantly going out of their way to conciliate Morgans
and not to trespass on their preserves, and met with scant courtesy
and a minimum of consideration in return. To Morgans it seemed
that Barings were jealously clinging on to a role that they were no
longer qualified to play and seeking to exclude others from delights
they could no longer experience themselves.
  The fiercest clashes between the two houses came in Argentina,*
but tension mounted from the beginning of the twentieth century,
when J. P. Morgan began to build up his house in London and to

* See pp. 307-10.
                           High Finance: 1890-1914                                  297

bribe up-and-coming City men with promises of partnerships and
lavish salaries. It was his intention, said Cecil Baring, ‘without regard
to expenditure of money, to make the position of said firm un-
rivalled for the next generation’.2? Revelstoke protested that his
house were excellent friends with the London Morgans, ‘but we real
ize their attitude is one of active competition with us, and while we
do not suppose that they would act in any manner calculated to take
from us any business which is already ours, we feel strongly that a
real community of interests with them is impossible’.
   Morgans were not the only pebble, or perhaps boulder, on the
beach. Revelstoke’s remarks were made in response to a query from
James Stillman, President of the National City Bank of New York, as
to whether Barings would cooperate with him on the British govern-
ment’s issue business, or whether their existing commitments would
prevent such an arrangement. Revelstoke hardly knew what to reply.
His instinct was to cooperate whenever possible with the City Bank
and to risk the breach with Morgans that might follow, but his
brother Cecil was strongly opposed to any such behaviour: ‘In any
Government loan matter we take it absolutely for granted that we
are committed to them [Morgans]. . . . Of course on any really big
loan, the City Bank ought to be included on the ground floor, and
whenever the time comes J.P.M. will be the man to offer Sullman the
business.’ The relationship with Morgans was all important, ‘in culti-
vating harmony with them lies our best chance of success’.’*
   Cecil Baring’s hurried departure from New York with his former
partner’s wife precipitated the need for some long-term decision.
Tom Baring declared that, with only juniors running the office at
Baring, Magoun, he had no intention of leaving his money there for
more than a few months. Almost at the same tme J. P. Morgan pro-
posed a grandiose merger, with Barings closing Baring, Magoun in
New York and acting as sole correspondent for the new combination
in London.* This would involve sacrificing the London subsidiary,
J. S. Morgan and Co., but that did not appear to worryJ.P. Morgan,
who said cheerfully that J. S. Morgan ‘ought to be liquidated and
                                                                          initiative came
* In his history of Morgans, Vincent Carosso suggests the original
                                    the concept   emerge d in convers ation  between the
from Lord Revelstoke. No doubt
             ls, each being convinc ed  that the other was the more  eager  (The Morgans
two principa     A

[Boston, 1987], pp. 446-7).
298                      The Sixth Great Power

could not exist without him as a partner’.25 Revelstoke had been
playing with the idea of persuading Kidder Peabody to open in New
York, but the partners in Boston were reluctant and he anyway
found this new grand design most alluring.
  Then J. P. Morgan began to back pedal. He was worried by the
future of his protégé, Sir Clinton Dawkins, who would be broken-
hearted if any radical change were made to his position. “There is a
berth vacant and likely soon to be filled under the Indian Govern-
ment, for which he is eminently qualified,’ cabled Farrer hopefully,
but Dawkins proved most unreasonably reluctant to remove himself
to the Orient. J. P.Morgan came to London, but was evasive: ‘He has
been entirely occupied through the last month with the Archbishop
of Canterbury,’ reported Bob Winsor of Kidder Peabody, ‘and appar-
ently has nothing else on his mind.’?* Dawkins made up for his
obduracy over India by having a heart attack and retiring, but still
J. P. Morgan would not move. The real stumbling block, Revelstoke
later decided, had been the position ofJ.P.’s son Jack, who was now
spending six months of the year in Britain. ‘I expect there is little
sympathy and less confidence between father and son... . The Lon-
don lot, as at present constituted, are so entirely useless and so out of
touch with anything which is of value in English financial and com-
mercial life that Morgan’s people will find their power constantly
decreasing on this side.’27
   In October 1904 Barings decided the matter could no longer be
left to drift. Revelstoke wrote Morgan a letter, ‘which will necessitate
his answering and deciding one way or the other’.?8 J. P. Morgan was
assured that Barings would welcome a situation in which they
looked after all Morgans’ interests in London and Morgans all theirs
in New York. The letter was carefully phrased so that it would not do
too much damage if shown to Jack Morgan in London, but the
implication was clear - there was no room for Baring, Magoun orJ.S.
Morgan. ‘It would be particularly agreeable to me to be able to look
forward to opportunities of being brought into closer contact with
yourself; |have remembered that you have more than once told me
that you considered that your firm and mine should be as intimate as
possible in view of the growing power and aggression of our compet-
itors.? But by now J. P. Morgan was committed to the view that
while he could to good effect take on the work of Baring, Magoun in
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       299
New York, J. S. Morgan should continue to coexist with Barings in
London. Early in 1905 he arrived in Europe, resolved to convert
Revelstoke to his point of view. “The old man will have to talk to
Doomsday before he convinces John,’ said Farrer.3° He talked until
July, or at least desultory negotiations went on until then, but
neither man had any real hopes of success. ‘We have made up our
minds that nothing will come of this alliance, though from no fault
of ours, concluded Farrer regretfully. “We must therefore look else-
where.3!
   Where to look was more difficult to decide. Baring, Magoun must
either be reinforced with a new American partner and new capital,
reduced to the level of a mere agency as Wards had been, or dis-
solved altogether and the business handed to some third party. At
one moment Lazards were tentatively considered. What reputation
did they have in New York? asked Farrer. ‘We know the London
partner, Kindersley, whom they took in about two years ago, and like
him particularly. Are his New York colleagues of the usual repulsive
Jewish type, or are they men with whom it would be possible for you
or us to work?’32 James Stillman and the City Bank were canvassed
more seriously, and George Baker and the First National Bank were
also in contention. In the end, however, and somewhat against their
better judgement, Barings set up Hugo Baring with a capital of $1
million in a new firm to be called Baring and Co. He began work to a
chorus of anxious voices advising him not to allow his capital to be
locked up in speculations. ‘Enterprises such as Coal properties or
Mexican land thrill us with horror, wrote Farrer. It was quite
unnecessary for Bishopsgate to thrill with horror, replied Hugo
Baring rather crossly, he had no intention of risking all his capital in
any enterprise.33 He had, of course. The doings of Hugo Baring in
New York and the reactions of his colleagues in London demon-
strate vividly the limitations on the role that Barings played in the
world after 1890. It was Gaspard Farrer who saw most clearly
what could and could not be achieved. ‘We are not capitalists,’ he
emphasized, ‘cannot undertake the business of a capitalist, and are
only prepared to act as intermediaries between the borrower and the
public... . We cannot compete with the big capitalists and it ts silly
and dangerous to pretend we can. Still less will you be able to in New
York... 3+ THere was nothing in this with which Revelstoke would
300                       The Sixth Great Power

have dissented, indeed he said much the same thing on several occa-
sions, yet a part of him craved for madder music and stronger wine.
Farrer was aware and concerned about the difference between them.
Writing abouta possible new partner for Barings, he remarked: ‘I am
not like John - I neither want to have the earth nor to rule - and
should be far better content to have a bit ofadrudge of high charac-
ter than the most brilliant financier liable to take chances in morality
or business risks.’35 Hugo Baring was no drudge, and saw himselfas a
brilliant financier. John Revelstoke had enough of his father in him
to sympathize with his younger brother’s aspirations. If he had fully
supported Farrer’s efforts to curb Hugo Baring’s exuberance, Baring
and Co. might have had a very different history. In 1904 Gaspard
Farrer had written Hugo Baring a letter of most prescient advice
which he would have done well to heed; if it had come from Lord
Revelstoke he might well have heeded it, but it was not a letter
Revelstoke could have written:
      I hope you will bear in mind, and bear in mind continuously,
      that our credit is the only asset which the firm of Baring
      Brothers and Company possesses, that and character which
      is part and parcel of credit. We cannot hope to vie with these
      nimble Jews in point of brains and sharpness, and are not in
      it for weight of metal in comparison with the rich men of this
      country and the multi-millionaires of the United States. I
      have always told John that for his lifetime and mine we must
      be content to work slowly and build up the business to its
      former pre-eminence; and if I am content to do that, I am
      sure anyone of your name should be willing to follow the
      example. I think only one who has been brought up outside
      the business like myself can realize how fatal a single mistake
      would be. Through the efforts of those who have been work-
      ing here since 1890, mainly through those of John and
      Francis, a great advance has been made and everywhere
      people are disposed to be friendly, but I know that the least
      lapse into speculative finance, even if successful, would
      immediately raise a storm of criticism.36
  Speculative finance was just what Hugo Baring now indulged in.
Within a few months of the new business opening, Farrer was writ-
                     High Finance: 1890-1914                       301
ing anxiously to friends in New York of his fears that his young
colleague was lending too rashly: ‘If you can do anything to keep
Hugo straight in this matter I shall be eternally obliged, but for
Heaven's sake do not give me away.3” By early the following year
alarm became vociferous dismay. Baring was speculating on his own
and on the firm’s account in Great Northern Ores, to the extent of
£100,000 or more    and was showing a heavy paper loss.38 Then
Baring’s partner, George Hallock, casually reported the firm had
taken an interest of $250,000 in the Union Pacific Syndicate.3? In
June 1907, when Hugo Baring was in London, the full truth was
revealed. Not merely were there heavy losses on stock purchases for
Baring and Co. but large advances had been taken from the firm to
finance private speculation. A halt was called. E. W. Theobald was
sent out from the Liverpool office to take charge of the firm: Hugo
Baring was allowed to return to New York but only for a few months
and with no effective power - ‘our object being, of course, to keep
secret the unfortunate occurrences . . . and to avoid the publicity
which might injure our name and credit’.*°
   Hugo Baring had extremely bad luck. He was put into a job for
which he lacked the necessary experience, was given inadequate sup-
port from Bishopsgate, and was then unfortunate in his ming. Like
his father before him he had chosen to gamble at a moment when
extreme prudence was called for; 1907 was a year of sharp economic
crisis in the United States. His colleagues in New York pleaded for
him touchingly: ‘Let us beg of you that any change that you may
effect will be accomplished in a way that will . . . make sure that his
power and loyalty and affection for and his desire to exalt the name
of Baring, shall not be destroyed.’*! No one doubted that his conduct
had been honourable and his intentions excellent. But he was in
some disgrace. The Governorship of New South Wales not being
immediately available, he was found a directorship of Parr’s Bank
and subsequently served a long and successful stint as Resident
Director in Paris of the Westminster Foreign Bank. His relationship
with his brothers remained affectionate and he was high on the list of
Barings’ favoured clients. But he never served again in Bishopsgate,
nor was it contemplated for a moment that he might.
   Once again the question of Barings’ representation in New York
was for discussion. The idea of handing over all their business to the
302                      The Sixth Great Power

City Bank was revived. Then Kidder Peabody decided that, after all,
it was not out of the question that they should open an office in New
York. Obstacles melted away, and in November 1907 Baring Broth-
ers had the pleasure ofinforming their correspondents ‘that our old
and valued friends Messrs Kidder Peabody and Co. of Boston have
decided to reopen their house in New York on 1 January 1908, and
will represent us there from that date; the firm of Baring and Co.
ceasing to exist’.4?
   For what it was worth, Kidder Peabody also concerned themselves
with Barings’ business in Canada. This was but a shadow of its for-
mer glories, however. At the end of 1892 the financial agency of the
Canadian government had been removed from Barings and given to
the Bank of Montreal. Barings were aggrieved, as they had just
offered what they felt to be generous terms for continuing the
agency for a further decade and had been ready to puta credit of £1
million at the disposal of the government. Probably the Canadian
government's decision represented no more than a desire to employ
a national bank, but to Barings, coming so soon after their disaster, it
seemed unnecessarily harsh. ‘It is a matter of satisfaction to us, they
concluded with some dignity, ‘that during the long period of 50
years for which we have acted as Agents for the Dominion of Canada
in London, we can recall no occasion upon which we have not been
willing to place our services at the disposal of the Government,
either by way of temporary advances or by giving very substantial
support to the loans which have been issued by us from time to
time.’#3
   Barings were not to undertake any more Canadian issues and,
though from time to time they took an interest in Canadian financ-
ing, the subject provoked a note of rancour in Bishopsgate. In 1908
Farrer was grumbling about Canada’s spendthrift ways and deplor-
ing the scale of her debts,*# and three years later he called her ‘the
most importunate of beggars: £7 million one day for the Canadian
Northern, £5 million the next for the Canadian Pacific, besides innu-
merable other issues of similar dimensions. It will be a miracle if
there is not trouble there before long.’45 The wish, one feels, was
father to that thought.
                     High Finance: 1890-1914                       303
Given the disaster of 1890 it would not have been surprising if
Barings had chosen wholly to eschew Latin America in future inter-
national financing. The contrary was true. By the early twentieth
century they were once more engaged in Argentine loans, and
involved to a lesser extent in other countries of the region. But their
policies were shaped by an almost exaggerated respect for the
susceptibilities and interests of their rivals. In 1902, for instance,
when an alliance with the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas was being
forged, Revelstoke stressed that ‘it is understood, of course, that the
preserves of Brazil and Chile will be respected as belonging to our
noble friends in New Court [Rothschilds]’.4¢ When the American
firm of Grace Brothers wanted them to join in a bid for the construc-
tion of a railway in Chile, Barings were happy to undertake it pro-
vided that, if a government loan was involved, it should first be
offered to Rothschilds: ‘This stipulation we made so as to maintain
our friendly understanding with them, that we would not interfere
with Chile so long as they did not with Argentina.’#” Unfortunately
these elaborate courtesies sometimes meant that the business was
snapped up by less gentlemanly rivals. In this case there was a gov-
ernment loan, Rothschilds did bid for it, but the business ended up
with Deutsche Bank. The noble friends in New Court, Mildmay
complained, were ‘hardly sufficiently active in their business meth-
ods to be even with a German firm’.*8
   In some countries syndicates were set up on the understanding
that any business acquired would be shared among the participants;
in Peru Barings, Morgans, Grace Brothers and the London Bank of
Mexico united and agreed with a French group including the
Banque de Paris that each would give the other 25 per cent of any-
thing that came out of Lima.*? Morgans were Barings’ most usual
American partners, and Revelstoke was even more anxious not to
offend them than he was Rothschilds. In 1902 he declined to join the
 Banque de Paris in a Mexican loan unless Morgans were first invited
to participate: ‘We should take care not to make ourselves disagree-
able to them by endeavouring to take away business to which they
might conceive they had a prior claim.’*°
  This genteel and unaggressive approach was very marked when a
Cuban loan was mooted late in 1903. Revelstoke refused even to
contemplateitunless the operation was placed under the auspices of
304                      The Sixth Great Power

a powerful American group.5! Kuhn, Loeb and the National City
Bank were powerful enough to satisfy anyone and by February 1904
Barings were telling Hottinguers that ‘unless any very untoward
circumstances arise we shall find ourselves in the position ofcontrol-
ling the European side of the business’.s? The untoward circum-
stance proved to be Edgar Speyer, descendant of a Frankfurt banking
family that had once been more eminent than the Rothschilds.
Speyer had settled in London but maintained a close relationship
with the Deutsche Bank in Berlin. Together these two now put in a
bid for the Cuban loan and suggested to Barings that the groups join
forces. ‘It was obvious that they had only come in at the last moment,
and were anxious to gather the fruits of our labours,’ wrote
Revelstoke crossly.53 Barings were grudgingly prepared to give
Speyer some share, but only if they retained the leadership and
issued the prospectus; Speyer insisted on equal participation; the
Deutsche Bank suggested that everyone’s honour would be satisfied
if the firms were both mentioned on the prospectus, but in alphabet-
ical order.5+ Then the Russo-Japanese war broke out and gave
Barings a reason - or perhaps an excuse - to quit the field. Speyer
persisted, secured the loan, and compounded his offence by making
a success of it. ‘I can’t help feeling, quite between us two, that we will
appear perhaps a little too conservative in the eyes of our American
friends,’ suggested Noetzlin of the Banque de Paris.°5 Speyer cer-
tainly felt so, though he was effusive when he shortly afterwards met
Hugo Baring in New York. ‘He said that nothing would please him
more than to do business with us and that he wished very much that
when I wrote to you I would tell you this!!! Dirty little beast!’5¢
   Only in Argentina were Barings prepared to maintain their posi-
tion with tenacity. Speyers at one point challenged their authority
but were bought off after three years of more or less open hostility.
The two houses did a deal, ‘the basis being,’ reported Farrer, ‘that
they should leave our clients alone and we leave theirs, they keeping
out of Argentine government and certain other specified business in
that country, and we out of Mexico and Cuba’.57 Morgans were the
only other international house which played a significant role in
Argentina. They proved formidable rivals but it was not until 1907
that they achieved parity with the long-established Barings.
   Until 1905 Barings’ affairs in Argentina were managed by Essex
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       305
Reade: ‘a charming man, agreat reader, rather aesthetic and dainty in
his manner of living, wrote one of the most distinguished of the
Anglo-Argentine settlers, Herbert Gibson.5* Reade was at first much
preoccupied with unscrambling the affairs of the old partnership but
gradually the possibility of doing new business arose, and by 1898, in
collaboration with the Buenos Aires house of Ernesto Tornquist,
he was busily negotiating a short-term loan of £300,000. It was not
until the Boer War was raging, with the demand it generated for
hides, beef, horses, mutton, wheat and wool, that the Argentine
economy really expanded, but already the political stability at the
end of the nineteenth century was allowing its huge potential to
develop.*?
   The only flaw was the incipient war with Chile, which in both
countries diverted capital badly needed for other purposes into a
wasteful arms race. Anyone who believed that merchant bankers
took pleasure in fomenting conflicts for the sake of the pickings to be
derived from them would be confounded by Barings’ reactions to
the possibility of war in Latin America. Like seconds anxious to pre-
vent a duel, Barings and Rothschilds fussed around their respective
champions, urging restraint, suggesting compromises, surrept-
tiously removing the bullets and substituting blanks. “The views of
Messrs   Barings and Messrs Rothschilds are in complete accord,’
Reade told Tornquist. ‘They are both imbued with the friendliest
feelings to the respective countries with which they are related in
business, but they have naturally no wish to help to keep up the pres-
ent wasteful competition in expenditure. Of course all they can do is
refuse to assist itand to discountenance it in every way they can. This
is a very repugnant course to have to take, but it is less repugnant
than assisting both countries to cripple themselves to the verge of
bankruptcy.’
   In this pacifist policy they were consistent. Three years later Chile
ordered two ironclads from Maxim and Armstrong. Argentina
promptly began to negotiate a similar purchase. ‘If these purchases
will be effected, it will be financial ruin to both countries,’ cabled
Tornquist. Could not the British government intervene in the dis-
pute?®! With Barings already involved with Vickers Sons and Maxim
it was a tricky request to make, but Revelstoke faced it manfully. He
called on Lansdowne and extracted a promise from the Foreign
306                     The Sixth Great Power

Secretary that, if the two governments were to make a formal
request, he would do all he could to mediate. But Chile was not the
only country to pose athreat to Argentina. In 1906 Brazil entered the
field with an expenditure of £10 million on two new battleships.
Once again Argentina felt bound to match them and once again
Revelstoke was called upon to check the lunatic arms race, perhaps
by persuading Rothschilds and the British government to cut off
credit to Brazil.62 He failed, and in 1908 a partner ofthe shipbuilders,
John Brown, called to ask whether Barings would assist if the
Argentine government ordered new warships. ‘We told him frankly
that we should do all in our power to advise the Government against
embarking upon warships, but that, if we found building was inevi-
table, we should . . . be willing to render the Company some finan-
cial assistance.$? The result was that by 1914 Argentina was saddled
with three battleships. Barings hoped they might be allowed to sell
them on commission elsewhere, but they did not rate the chances
very high. ‘Argentina will be difficult to deal with in a matter of this
kind,’ wrote Farrer, ‘and even a very large cash insult [would be]
probably insufficient to prevail against her sense of dignity. I only
wish we could find some way of relieving the country of these useless
luxuries... . Argentina has no need for a navy, no men to man it, no
docks in which to repair it, and no harbour in which it can lie.’
   The first important loan to Argentina in the twentieth century
came in 1902 with an advance of £1.5 million. The opposition press
had a field day over what they called the ‘scandalous and ruinous’
conditions attached to the loan, but though the 6 per cent interest
was unusually high, everything else seemed normal.*s Certainly it
did no harm to Barings’ relations with the Argentine authorities:
between 1902 and 1914 they were directly responsible for thirteen
issues for the country or for Buenos Aires, worth in total a little
under £27 million. Any doubts that Barings might have had about
this market were now dispelled. ‘Have you got anything that you
specially recommend?’ asked A. J. Balfour. ‘Are Argentine Rails
desirable?’6 They were, and another favoured client, Admiral of the
Fleet the Earl of Clanwilliam, was urged not to put his money into
Uruguay: “The Governments there are anything but trustworthy and
the country a very poor place compared with neighbouring Argen-
tina.’67
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                        307
   Nearly all the issues were successful, some remarkably so. One of
the few exceptions came in 1907, when Barings were pressed to issue
£2.58 million of a larger international loan. It was a difficult year and
they put the loan on the market with trepidation. This was more
than justified; the public were unenthusiastic and the underwriters
left with three-quarters of the stock on their hands.®® It was on this
issue thatJ.S. Morgan and Co. first appeared with Barings as joint
leaders on the prospectus. Revelstoke had initially opposed the pro-
posal but Jack Morgan was obdurate: “The whole matter most trying
and very sorry it has come up now, he telegraphed to his colleague,
E. C. Grenfell, ‘but see no reason why we should submit to being
squeezed out without saying anything or why all friction should be
on our side.’¢?
   Barings and Morgans had battled for supremacy in Argentina
since the last years of the nineteenth century, but the struggle now
reached its climax.7° Barings were handicapped by the fact that
Argentina wanted direct access to the New York market, and that the
combination of J. P. and J. S. Morgan could guarantee this in a way
impossible for the English house. When in September 1908 the
Argentine government opened negotiations with J. P. Morgan and
Co. for a new £10 million loan, Morgans insisted that J. S. Morgan
should handle the London end ofthe loan on joint account and deal
with Barings on that basis. The Argentines retorted that they pro-
posed to ask Barings for a separate bid and for a ume it seemed as if
rival syndicates would contest the contract - to the benefit, no
doubt, of the would-be borrowers but at the expense of both Mor-
gans and Barings. ‘I don’t care how we fight him [Lord Revelstoke],’
wrote Jack Morgan defiantly, ‘but am quite ready to fight him when
we need to.7! Sanity prevailed, and the two houses did a deal which
concededJ.S. Morgan’s parity on this and future loans. Barings were
relieved but disgruntled. Ina   letter to G. A. Schwenke of Tornquists,
Windham Baring made the best of a bad job. Barings, he insisted,
wished ‘to do what is absolutely fair, being well convinced that the
only way to retain the confidence of successive Argentine Govern-
ments is to do their business to better advantage than any other firm.
At the same time I wish. . . for you quite clearly to understand the
feeling here, which is that we are not running after the business, and
we are only too desirous of helping the Minister if he treats us with
308                      The Sixth Great Power

due respect and consideration, but if not we are quite content to take
off our hats and say goodbye and leave him strictly to himself.’7?
  Windham Baring, author of this somewhat disingenuous compo-
sition, had gone out to Buenos Aires at the end of 1905. He worked
in the office of Ernesto Tornquist; a difficult role, since though he
found Tornquist not merely well disposed but also ‘one of the most
powerful and capable men in the country, having the advantage of
knowing everybody, being a deputy, being rich,’ there was no disput-
ing the fact that his first loyalties were to certain German houses.
Farrer had advised Baring to keep his eyes and ears open and his
mouth shut, and this he did to good effect, but he felt inhibited from
seeking business outside since it would seem to be going behind
Tornquist’s back.73 Baring was an activist who itched to better the
position ofhis house as rapidly as possible. He suggested advertising
in the local press: ‘I know it is a practice thatim England would not be
regarded favourably, especially by my Uncle Tom, but however here
I don’t see why it could do any harm and it would show that we are
alive and always ready to take on good business.’”* Farrer found the
concept quite as distasteful as would Uncle Tom and was sceptical
about the benefits; ‘I am in hopes, he concluded gently, ‘that
through your presence in Buenos Aires the idea will get abroad that
we are alive and able to undertake any sound business.’75 The nearest
thing to advertising Barings could contemplate was a dinner for
General Roca when he visited London. There was a three-line whip
to all senior members of the family, Revelstoke made an excellent
speech, and the only setbacks occurred when the toastmaster
insisted on calling the guest of honour General Roco, and when the
band, called on to play the Argentine national anthem, produced
some tune recognized by neither the British nor the Argentine din-
ers. When Revelstoke expostulated the bandmaster made his men
pack up their instruments and stalked out of the hall in dudgeon.76
Banquets for Argentine dignitaries were rather a speciality of
Barings. Ata dinner for the Argentine Ambassador in 1910 they infu-
riated the partners of J. S. Morgan by excluding them from the
planning of the occasion and only inviting them to attend in a very
off-hand way.?77
   After Ernesto Tornquist died in 1908 Barings played with the idea
of acquiring a stake in the company but were not prepared to tie up
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       309

the necessary capital when there was so much to be done with it at
home.’8 Gradually the interests of the two houses diverged and in
1912 Barings transferred their business to Leng, Roberts, a small
house of limited capital, but staffed by ‘men of high character’, who
were English and could be relied on to put Barings’ interests first.7?
Everard Meynell, a young man who had been working at Bishops-
gate, was sent to join Lengs at a salary paid by Barings of £800 a year.
On 1 January 1913 he became a partner of Lengs. Barings offered to
put £20,000 into the house on his behalf, but he declined gratefully.
The association lasted until the present day, the business being now
known as the Banco Roberts.
    The break with Tornquists followed abortive negotiations in 1911
for one of the few major loans in which Barings took no interest.
They felt that a new loan for £14 million was both more than the
market would stand and - at 412 per cent - insufficiently tempting to
attract whatever money there was. ‘We know exactly what margin is
required to ensure a successful issue, declared Mildmay with
uncharacteristic arrogance, ‘and, were we to depart from the lines
which experience has taught us are the limit of safe business, we
should not only damage ourselves but deprive ourselves of influenc-
ing people to invest in future Argentine Government loans.’*°
 Instead, the loan was taken by a consortium of French andBelgian
bankers, with Schroders, who had previously protested that they
were most unwilling to compete with Barings, somewhat shame-
facedly taking a share on the grounds that they could not offend
their close associate Bembergs. ‘If they were a little bigger people,’
wrote Revelstoke loftily, ‘they might have told Bemberg to go to
 blazes and come round here to say they had done so, but the semitic
 blood which runs so freely through their veins does not seem to per-
 mit them to take the course which would have been obvious to a
good Englishman.’*! This comment would have been particularly
 offensive to Schroders, who with reason felt themselves quite as gen-
 tile and almost as English as Barings.
   Barings regretted the break in their relationship with the
Argentine government and felt it ‘a great bore losing the commission
on the service of the loan, which would have rolled in regularly for
the next thirty years,’ but they did not doubt that they had made the
right decision.*? Their view was reinforced by the relative failure of
310                      The Sixth Great Power

the issue.8? Barings in fact contributed to this happy result. They
brought considerable pressure on their friends among the French
banks not to help place the loan and made sure that none of the tra-
ditional British investors in Argentine stock came forward on this
occasion. Something of the sort had to be done, wrote Windham
Baring, so as to prove to the Argentine authorities ‘the necessity of
dealing with first class banking houses’. Otherwise, he concluded,
‘our power for any future business will vanish’.4 It did not vanish:
1912 and 1913 found them involved with substantial loans for
Buenos Aires and in March 1914 Farrer was able to announce trium-
phantly, ‘we have apparently collared the Government business fora
year to come to the exclusion of our neighbours’.*5


Barings’ inhibitions about trespassing on their neighbours’ territory
in Latin America were felt still more strongly in Europe. In 1897 they
refused to bring outa Spanish loan, since they did not think it would
go well in London: ‘We should besides be disinclined to incur the
hostility of the Jewish Houses, who look on the Spaniard as their
exclusive property.’8¢ In Portugal they were so anxious not to steal
business from the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas that they gave
Speyer and Hambros the chance to slip in and secure a share of the
action.’7 They were equally reluctant to break new ground. They
rejected a pressing invitation from the Foreign Office to issue a loan
for the Turkish government in 1908,88 brought outa £1 million loan
for the City of Constantinople in 1910, but were cool again six years
later: "We are none of us very keen on. Turkish things,’ said
Revelstoke when the Banque de Paris offered him a share of a new
loan, though in view of his relationship with the French bank he felt
bound to take a token Frs 2.5 million.8° He resisted even stronger
efforts to induce him to raise a loan of £2 million to £3 million for the
Romanian railways and in the end sold the idea to Schroders, who
took it on with alacrity.%° Barings did good business in Europe from
time to time, notably in Belgium, for which two loans of £6 million
each were heavily oversubscribed, but even here they insisted that ‘it
would be politic and expedient to invite the London Rothschilds to
figure in the London issue’.?! With the exception of Russia; they did
not feel that Europe fell properly within their sphere of influence.
                     High Finance: 1890-1914                        311
   Russia was an important exception. Though the French banks
provided the bulk of Russia’s capital needs, Barings’ heavy
involvement in Russian railways and long enduring relationship
with its government ensured that they would always feel some sort
of obligation to help it if help were needed. A complicating factor
was Barings’ newer but still most friendly relationship with Japan.
Barings had discovered Japan in 1898 when they were considering a
loan of £1 million to Nippon Tetsudo Kaisha Ltd of Yokohama. ‘It
has been gratifying to us to have the opportunity of learning the
details of such a well-managed business, they wrote admiringly.
‘The accounts seem to us to be kept in a manner which merits warm
praise.’°? They never lost this belief in Japanese efficiency and in
 1902 joined with the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank to bring out a
750 million yen (£5.1 million) loan in London to finance the build-
ing of railways. It proved a great success, applications pouring in
from members of the public who were remote from the City but for
some reason warmed to the idea of Japan. The issue was four times
oversubscribed.%
   It was a propitious start to what Barings hoped would be a long
and close relationship. The imperialist ambitions of Russia and
Japan were, however, on collision course in Manchuria and Korea.
At first this did not seem to Barings an impediment to their business,
indeed they conceived a splendid scheme by which they would serve
the interests of two of their clients and get a handsome commission
for their trouble by organizing the sale of the Argentine battleships
to Japan. Unfortunately, by the time the proposal was made, war
with Russia was so nearly imminent that any such purchase would
have come too late.?* Convinced that they would win an easy victory
and thus rally a dissident nation behind them, the Russian govern-
ment refused to contemplate any compromise. The Japanese struck
without the preliminary formality of a declaration of war and Pearl
Harbored the Russian fleet in Port Arthur. What seemed likely to be
a prolonged war had begun.
   Early in 1904 the Japanese came back for a further loan. Barings
                                                                    and,
were in, not two, but at least three minds. Business was business
as they told the Banque de Paris, this was likely to be ‘business of an
attractive nature’.95 On the other hand, they had served the Russian
government for many years and were reluctant now to succour its
oe                       The Sixth Great Power

enemies. On a third hand, their sympathies were privately with
Japan and they had been more closely associated with the Japanese
in recent years. Lord Lansdowne consulted the Prime Minister and
reported that the British government had no objection to the loan
being made.%° The Banque de Paris regretted that, ‘juicy and safe
enough’ though the business would be, their relationship with Rus-
sia forbade their proceeding.?” The Jewish houses, delighted that
anyone should be at war with Russia, which had pursued a rabidly
anti-Semitic line for so many years, were more than ready to take on
the loan. Revelstoke wavered, and finally concluded that Barings
could not take part in a public issue. “The fact is,’ he told Hugo
Baring, ‘that there is a feeling here amongst the highest people that it
would be well to preserve a more or less neutral attitude.’%8
   He then proceeded to give a masterly demonstration of how to
have one’s cake and eat it too. Formally Barings had no connection
with the loan, their name did not appear on the prospectus; so far as
the Russian government knew they disapproved of it. Yet they per-
suaded Schiff of Kuhn, Loeb to take up a £5 million loan and
charged '/2 per cent commission for the introduction (£25,000), and
they underwrote £300,000 of the loan (£6007). When an additional
£30 million was called for at the end of the year Barings again
declined to appear on the prospectus - ‘for various internal reasons,
among them that we have valuable Russian Government Accounts’
as Farrer cheerfully admitted’? - but undertook the negotiations
with   Kuhn,   Loeb, Warburgs     in Berlin   and      Rothschilds.   They
emerged with a profit of £110,000, having earned the gratitude of the
Japanese and left untroubled their relationship with the Russians.
‘John seems to have managed the whole matter with great skill,’
commented Farrer.!°° The compliment does not seem extravagant.
   By mid-1905 the Russian fleet had been destroyed and their defeat
was certain. It was now the turn of Russia to be inneed of money and
their thoughts turned naturally to their tried and trusted friends at
Bishopsgate. Barings were at first doubtful whether the British pub-
lic would look kindly on such an issue,!®! but Lord Hardinge, the
British Ambassador in St Petersburg, urged them to do their best,
                                                                  if
only in the interest of improving the difficult relations between the
two countries.!°2   In October   Revelstoke      was   in St Petersburg,
escorted by his brother Everard. He found a situation of almost
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                        313
laughable complexity: the German bankers not talking to the
French; the Russians at loggerheads with the latter; the Dutch -
Hopes - sulking because they had been asked to share their market
with another house; the Americans - Morgans - declining to attend a
meeting at the Ministry of Finance and, as Revelstoke complained,
‘talking, rather “through their hats” if I may say so, of an indepen-
dent attitude etc. etc.’!°3 It was above all due to Revelstoke’s efforts,
after what he described as ‘days of the hardest and most complicated
work I’ve ever experienced’,!° that the broad outlines of an agree-
ment were reached for a loan of £50 million at 4 per cent, of which
the British and American share would be £8 million. Public discon-
tent, fanned by the débacle in the Far East, then exploded. Rail travel
was suspended, there was widespread noting and talk of a general
strike. ‘If things get worse we shall have something uncommonly like
a revolution, reported Revelstoke, ‘in which case it will obviously
not be the moment to embark on a public issue.’!°5 Things did get
worse. The international financiers fled the city. John Revelstoke
found a tiny steamer called the Stave going to Stettin and paid the
captain £100 for the use of his cabin. Morgan did a little better. A
passenger liner bound for Stockholm arrived unexpectedly and he
took the entire accommodation.!% It was a sad end to laborious
negotiations but Farrer derived some comfort from the thought that
the interruption would only be temporary: ‘Their visit to Russia,’ he
told Hugo Baring, ‘will be productive of great good to the firm here,
and neither of them will have an excuse to regret the work and incon-
venience.    1°
   He proved right. The revolution was quickly quashed and by
March 1906 the question of the loan was once more under discus-
sion. Revelstoke canvassed his friends in the government and got
assurances from Asquith and Grey that they were still in favour -
‘Speaking for myself and between ourselves,’ wrote Asquith cau-
tiously, ‘we shall give all the good will we can.’1°* One complicating
factor was that the German bankers were ordered to abstain, partly
because the Emperor was displeased with the Russian attitude at the
Algeciras conference, partly because the money was needed at home.
It did not take too much bargaining to divide up their commitment
among the other participants; London’s share rose to just over £13
million, the total loan being a massive £89 million.
314                     The Sixth Great Power

   ‘I quite agree with you that those that have undertaken to fund the
Russian Government this enormous sum of money, are undertaking
a huge responsibility, wrote Lord Rothschild to his French cousins.
‘No doubt they are well paid for their trouble and their risk, but |
must confess that, anxious as I am for business, quite apart from the
Jewish question, I should not care much for the responsibility.’1°
The Jewish banks greeted the loan with dismay, as also did the liberal
members of the Duma, who feared that it would reinforce the auto-
cratic tendencies of the Tsar and his ministers. The regrets of
Rothschilds turned to rage when the press suggested that they
had covertly taken a share of the loan. They indignantly denied the
story and the Jewish Chronicle, picked up by The Times,!'° suggested
that the imperial government was responsible for spreading it.
Routkowsky, of the Imperial Russian Financial Agency in London,
demanded that Rothschild deny ‘this astonishing, unwarranted,
obviously unfounded and ill-intentioned statement. Rothschild
blandly if evasively replied that Routkowsky’s short residence in
Britain obviously disqualified him from understanding the workings
of free institutions. Routkowsky hastened to Revelstoke to ask for
help in drafting a reply. Nothing could have pleased Revelstoke less
than to be drawn into a quarrel of this sort. He suggested a temperate
response, but Routkowsky elected to pepper the final version with
references to lies and dishonour. It is unlikely Rothschild knew that
Revelstoke had had any hand in the letter - if he had, the relation-
ship between Bishopsgate and New Court would have grown even
more sour than the Russian loan rendered it.1!1
   In spite of the ill-timed intervention of the San Francisco earth-
quake, which induced extreme caution on the part of any investor
concerned in the world of insurance, the subscription went well. ‘We
have a splendid list,’ reported Revelstoke. *. . . The Russian govern-
ment should be pleased to realize that this issue has really appealed
to the genuine British investing public.’!12 Most of the Jewish houses
refused to participate even in the underwriting, but some took the
line that ‘the more money they could mulct the Government of the
better pleased they would be’.!!3 Rothschilds were not among them.
   Though they would undoubtedly have prevented it if they could,
Barings made an uncommonly good thing out of the Russo-
Japanese war. They even derived a little extra benefit from Russia’s
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                     315
defeat by financing the ships that brought the troops back to Europe.
It had been a troublesome business to get started, wrote Farrer, but it
promised to be very profitable and with little risk.!!4 By the autumn
of 1906 Barings’ reputation should have been sky high. Yet in fact
rumours abounded that huge amounts of Russian stock had been
left unsold and that Barings were in trouble. The Argentine papers
trumpeted the story that 1890 was here again.!!5 It was a disconcert-
ing but no doubt salutary experience for the partners in Bishopsgate
to find that they had not yet exorcized this bogey. ‘Our position 1s
that of intermediaries between the public and the borrower,’ expos-
tulated Mildmay. ‘Our resources are not nearly large enough to en-
able us to retain any considerable portion of any loan we may
happen to bring out.’!'6 Farrer, hearing the stories in Canada, wrote
that he had no idea what Barings’ holdings of Russian stocks might
be but that ‘ifwe lost every penny of our holdings it would not hurt
us’.117 Nor would it have, but the man in the street thought he knew
better, and the man in the Stock Exchange was almost as ready to
believe the worst.
    In 1909 came another substantial Russian loan, the British share
this time being £6 million and most of the work being done by the
French. Once again Barings secured underwriters for the whole
issue. ‘The underwriting has been a great success here,’ Lord
 Rothschild told his Paris cousins with some regret, but - more hope-
fully - ‘opinions are absolutely divided whether the public will want
it or not.’ Revelstoke, said Rothschild, was ‘very highly pleased, and
naturally enough’.1!8 He was still more pleased when the public
responded hungrily and the lists had to be closed at 4 p.m. on the
first day.!!9 All applications were scaled down: the larger ones by 50
per cent or more, those under £1000 to an automatic £100.
Revelstoke apologized to the Russian Minister of Finance for what
he recognized must seem an inexplicable attempt to disadvantage
the small investor, but ‘the art of “stag-ing” as it is called here, or
applying so as to sell instantly ata premium, has been carried to such
perfection by the small applicant, that even people who are well off
send in countless applications for £100 apiece, without any sense of
shame, in the hope of securing a larger proportionate allotment.’!?°
   This was the last Russian loan to be brought out before the war. If
                                                                      ’
only because of the dividends they had to pay, however, Barings
316                         The Sixth Great Power

links with St Petersburg remained close. One trivial manifestation of
their interest in the country arose in 1914 when Commissioner
Mapp of the Salvation Army called on Barings’ agent armed with a
letter in which ‘I was requested to show him every civility and to
assist him in every way possible. Messrs Baring Brothers further
informed me that their house was in close relationship with the
Salvation Army.’!2! War and the Revolution sadly put an end to
what might have been an interesting experiment.


Russia also was involved, though in a very different role, in abortive
negotiations over railways in the Middle East; two episodes which
illustrated vividly both Barings’ close links with the British govern-
ment and the frustrations often inherent in any such relationship.
First came the Baghdad railway, a project to link the Persian Gulf to
the Mediterranean by way of Baghdad. Lord Lansdowne set the ball
rolling in February 1903 when he obligingly showed Revelstoke the
draft of a letter which the Foreign Office might send to Barings on
the subject.* His Majesty’s Government, said the draft, attached
considerable importance to this enterprise and might even grant a
subsidy for the carriage of mails to India and help provide a terminus
near Kuwait. ‘I am directed by His Lordship to inform you that it
would give great satisfaction to His Majesty’s Government if the
management of the British participation in the scheme were to be
placed in your house.’!?? Revelstoke not surprisingly approved this
amiable letter with only trivial amendments, and a consortium was
quickly set up with Britain, France and Germany all taking 25 per
cent of the interest, other countries a total of 15 per cent, and the
Anatolian Railway Company - the holders of the previous conces-
sion — 10 per cent.!?3
   Then things began to go wrong. The first hint of trouble came
when Lord Rothschild announced that he had consulted his cousin
Alphonse in Paris and that the French house did not ‘take a favour-

* Given the close relationship between Lord Lansdowne and Barings and the con-
siderable correspondence between them it is interesting to note Lansdowne stating
in the House of Lords on 5 May 1903 that it was a ‘rare occurrence’ for H.M. Govern-
ment to be in confidential communication with the City - ‘probably much rarer in
this country than in any other country in the world’,
                      High Finance: 1890-1914                       st7

able view of the operation’.!2+ Almost simultaneously the Spectator
and the National Review violently attacked the project on the
grounds that it was tailored to favour German rather than British
interests, and a debate in the House of Commons gave rise to similar
accusations. Joseph Chamberlain was said to be making mischief
within the Cabinet. Revelstoke told Cromer that he had no intention
of proceeding with the affair unless Downing Street backed him
wholeheartedly: ‘I have no wish to be gibbeted as promoting a Tur-
kish Railroad for mere motives of cash gain.’!?5 To Lansdowne he
said that the press reactions must cause everyone to think again: ‘I
hoped he would not allow any feelings of loyalty he might have for
us to lead him to havea tussle with other members of the Cabinet.’ !?6
Lansdowne acted accordingly and the Cabinet concluded that it
could not actively support the scheme or provide any sort of subsidy.
‘The decision of the Government not to countenance the Bagdad
Railway is wise . . .,. concluded Almeric Fitzroy. “The scheme was as
much financial as political, though no doubt the two elements were
inextricably interwoven.  ’!27 Barings can hardly be blamed for taking
a different view. Revelstoke complained that he had been made to
‘look small’.!28 He would have echoed his uncle’s lapidary judge-
ment: ‘I have been serving the British Governmentall my life,’ wrote
Cromer, ‘but I never yet knewa British Minister    who had a policy.’1?°
   Much the same thing happened seven years later, when Russia
mooted the construction of a railway running 1600 miles across
Persia to link Russia with India. The old guard of the India lobby
maintained that such a railway would pave the way for a Russian
attack on India, but Hardinge, former Ambassador in St Petersburg
and now Viceroy of India, dismissed such fears as chimeras. Both the
Russians and the French were ready to give the lead to the British,
and wanted Barings to look after their interests. The first step would
be to set up a Société d’Etudes to consider the possibilities. At the
end of 1910 Revelstoke extracted from the Permanent Under-Secre-
tary at the Foreign Office, Sir Arthur Nicolson, a cautious blessing
for the enterprise and the Société was set up, Barings contributing 40
per cent of the £30,000 initially subscribed. The British representa-
tives in the Société kept closely in touch with Whitehall; one of
them, Colonel H. D. Napier, was in and out of the Intelligence
Department of the War Office, whose attitude was predictably
318                      The Sixth Great Power

Janus-faced. They disliked the idea of the railway but, if it had to be,
considered it essential that the British should participate and as far
as possible control it.13°
   By mid-1912 a point had been reached where the scheme either
had to press ahead or die of inanition. In the House of Commons
Edward Grey indicated that the government looked with a benevo-
lent eye on the enterprise, but in the Lords the powerful voice of
Curzon besought ministers ‘to think not once or twice, or even
twenty times, but a hundred times, before committing themselves to
a project fraught with such grave danger to India’.13! The reply of
ministers, complained Revelstoke, was ‘emasculate and unsatis-
factory ’;!32 Lord Morley timidly suggesting that the government was
‘in no way committed not to oppose the construction of the railway
when the time came’.!33
   Not unreasonably fearful that he was about to be left in the lurch
again, Revelstoke tackled the Foreign Office, insisting that the time
had come when Barings must know finally ‘whether His Mayesty’s
Government view with favour or disfavour the prospect of direct
railway communication between India and Europe via Russia’.134
Favourable in principle, was the reply, but so hedged about with
qualifications as to route and timing as to be almost meaningless. !35
From Paris André Benac of the Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas
offered sympathy: ‘Je comprends que c'est surtout l'attitude de votre
gouvernement qui vous cause des ingquiétudes. ... Nous connaissons,
bélas! cette situation.’ Patience and diplomacy, he insisted, would see
things come right.136 But Barings felt the time for patience was past.
In June 1913 Lord Errington, their representative on the Société,
bluntly told Louis Mallet of the Foreign Office that he was going to
Paris to announce Barings’ withdrawal from the consortium. Mallet
‘expressed great surprise and evinced much annoyance’, but though
Errington’s ultimatum produced some movement, the British goy-
ernment could not bring itself to agree to the last link of the railway
from Isfahan to Karachi. The most they would contemplate was a
temporary line to Bunder Abbas on the Persian Gulf, with the possi-
bility of an extension to India in due course. Long before the course
was due, other more pressing considerations supervened. ‘Cette ques-
tion de concession ayant dormi depuis 1912, wrote Errington wearily in
November 1914 to the President of the Société d'Etudes, ‘il serait
                        High Finance: 1890-1914                         312
peut étre possible de la laisser sommeiller jusqu’a la fin de la guerre.’137
Like so much other unfinished business, the Trans-Persian Railway
went into the pending tray until 1918 and the birth of a very different
world.
                                  1,
                                >>
                                 @ a+




                    Barings at War
                        1914-1918


‘Austria-Servia grave but not hopeless, Barings telegraphed their
representative in Buenos Aires on 28 July 1914, ‘although such war
would endanger Russo-German relations. Paris banking situation
black. We fear banking troubles inevitable.”! It was hardly surprising
that a banking house should view the mounting crisis mainly in the
light of the financial problem, but at the end ofJuly there were few
even in government who foresaw the greater dangers. Even if Russia
and Germany went to war, it was by no means certain that France
and Britain would be drawn in; if they were it would all be over by
Christmas. The day after this telegram was sent, Revelstoke was still
debating whether to postpone his annual holiday at Aix. The fact
that he contemplated the possibility shows what alarm the situation
inspired; the fact it was still a matter for debate shows how little the
magnitude of the incipient disaster was appreciated. Yet within
forty-eight hours messages were pouring in from the continent
reporting that no remittances were available to meet the outstanding
debts, brokers were flooded with selling orders, the Stock Exchange
closed its doors. With general war more and more certain, it became
patent that the machinery of international credit had broken down.
‘I do not see how it is possible to guard against.such a general cata-
clysm as we have had,’ wrote Farrer, ‘but itis none the less mortifying
in the extreme to find how instantaneously the credit edifice which
we have been building for generations could tumble to pieces in a
night.’
   Monday 3 August was a bank holiday. Early that morning the
leading bankers met at the Bank of England and decided that
the holiday must be extended by three days to bring some order into
                                  320
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                     321
the growing chaos. On Tuesday, reported The Times, the only house
with its doors actually open was Baring Brothers, though there was
plenty going on inside the others. It was not difficult to establish
that those banks which relied heavily on remittances from the con-
tinent, from Germany and Austria in particular, were going to be ina
disastrous plight if nothing was done to help them. If they failed,
then the rest of the City would be in an almost equally desperate
state. No one doubted that the government would in some way have
to shoulder responsibility for the German debts, but how and when
were exacting problems: ‘If you saw the length of the faces of those
who know, wrote Shaw-Stewart excitedly, ‘you would realize this is
one of the most terrific things London has been up against since
finance existed.”
   The bank holiday could hardly be prolonged indefinitely, so as an
interim measure a moratorium was declared, permitting the renewal
for one month of all acceptances granted before the declaration of
war on 4 August. For those whose business was mainly with the con-
tinent this provision was essential for survival; even for those like
Barings whose acceptances mainly related to other parts of the world
it was most desirable, since the outbreak of war briefly interrupted
remittances from North and South America as well as the Far East.
As much by good luck as by good management, however, Barings
were in an extraordinarily strong position. They had just received
£200,000 in gold from Kidder Peabody and another £600,000
arrived on 8 August, the proceeds of North Western Telephone
Notes and of Austrian Treasury Bills, which had been paid off on 1
July.s Though acceptances totalled £5.35 million, only £700,000 of
these were at risk and less than half that amountat serious risk. Debts
from German firms amounted only to £144,000, just over half of
which was an unsecured debt from D. H. Watjen of Bremen.® With
payments from the United States being quickly resumed, Barings
only availed themselves of the moratorium for two days and then
resumed paying in full. They were the only accepting house in Lon-
don which could afford to behave in such a way. ‘We particularly do
not wish to herald that we are doing any more than our neighbours
or are any better than they,’ wrote Farrer. ‘The catastrophe that has
                                                            and
overtaken the financial world could not have been foreseen,
even if foreseen no effective preparations could have been made
322                      The Sixth Great Power

against it, so that no one can be fairly criticized for the trials all are
undergoing.”
   Within Barings the most obvious result of the war was an imme-
diate exodus of staff to join the services. First of the partners to go
was Patrick Shaw-Stewart, who started as an interpreter, served in
Gallipoli and was finally killed in France at the end of 1917.
Windham Baring stayed on with the firm until the outstanding
problems with Argentina had been cleared up, during which time he
spent every other night on top of some high building manning a
searchlight; then in mid-1915 he joined the Navy and saw out the
war in the Mediterranean and North Sea. Errington rejoined the
Grenadier Guards and went out to India; at the end of 1916 he was
lost to Barings for ever when he became Assistant Private Secretary
to the King. By 7 October thirty-one of the staff at Bishopsgate had
enlisted; none had yet been killed, though Gaspard Farrer had five
cousins at the front at the beginning of September and only one left
alive a month later. By mid-1915 more than half the male staff had
gone and there were more women than men in the office: ‘We are
now reduced to a very elderly party, wrote Farrer ruefully, ‘old
crocks who ought by this time to have been on the shelf.’8
   So far as the greatly diminished day-to-day banking operations
were concerned, a skeleton staff of old crocks could manage very
well. But Barings were London bankers for the Russian, Italian and
Portuguese governments, and the first of these in particular caused a
vast amount of work. The result was that the office as a whole got
busier as the war progressed: 5850 letters had been written in Jan-
uary 1914, in 1916 the figure was 7450. Sixty-seven women were
employed against forty-three in 1914; sixty men against seventy-five
- of whom eighteen were of military age and eight under eighteen.
The introduction of conscription early in 1916 alarmed Revelstoke,
lest he should lose some of the key men handling the Russian
accounts. After a certain amount of prompting, the Russian Ambas-
sador wrote to Revelstoke, hoping that ‘the correspondence of a par-
ticularly confidential nature should continue to be dealt with by
those of your staff by whom it has been conducted since the out-
break of hostilities’? Revelstoke made good use of this letter before
the City of London Tribunal, and successfully protected the most
cherished members of the staff. The threat was not renewed until
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                        323
almost the end of the war when a new Manpower Bill was intro-
duced. ‘It looks as if every clerk of capacity here will be swept off into
the service, as well as Alfred Mildmay. . . , wrote Farrer gloomily. ‘I
expect before long John and I will have to take it in turns to sweep
the office out.’!®
   It was not only his staff that Revelstoke sought to protect. Late in
1917 the military proposed to requisition his house in Carlton
House Terrace. ‘I should have the very strongest objection,’ wrote
Revelstoke. ‘My business duties, which are of an important charac-
ter, Mecessitate my constant presence for at least eleven months in
any year... . | trust therefore that the War Department will not find
it necessary to inflict upon me what I really believe would be an
extreme hardship.’!! His domestic staff, after three years of war, con-
sisted of housekeeper, three housemaids, one kitchenmaid, one
scullerymaid, two parlourmaids, one valet and one odd man. But it
was not only his own interests which he sought to defend. An old
crony, the Marquise de Villa-Urrutia, was most disturbed because
her son at Oxford could not get as much meat as he was used to.
Would you please, Revelstoke instructed his doctor, ‘send the boy a
certificate to the effect that he is suffering from diabetes and there-
fore entitled to a more generous allowance of meat’.!?
   Conditions at Bishopsgate were not easy, especially when air raids
on the City extended from the night to daylight hours. There was a
large basement, and a system was introduced which would allow the
staff and the more essential records to be evacuated there in three or
four minutes from a warning being given - ‘I have not yet been told
where my own funk hole is,’ wrote Farrer, ‘but I intend to get there at
the double when the time arrives.’3 The only trouble was that the
warning was scarcely ever given: one bomb fell within fifteen and
one within thirty yards of the office without any previous indication
that a raid was in progress. Neither did damage except to the nerves
of the staff. The British guns provided a more serious threat; the
head of a shell came through the skylight and would have put paid to
anyone who had happened to be below.
   The work that was done at Bishopsgate differed largely from that
of peacetime. At first it looked as if acceptances would survive more
or less unscathed, as the immense demands of the Allied forces for
food and material replaced the traditional lines of trade. The second
324                      The Sixth Great Power

half of 1914 was not surprisingly poor, bringing total UK accept-
ances for the year down to £5.5 million. By the end of 1915, though
Mildmay complained that ‘business is very quiet and will probably
become quieter’* and only twenty-five new credits were opened
against seventy-eight closed, acceptances were at £6.3 million. They
did not maintain this improvement, but in the last few years settled
down at an average ofa little over £4.5 million; by no means a negli-
gible figure, though well below that to which Barings had grown
accustomed.
   The issuing business, on the other hand, was almost entirely at an
end. One loan for the Argentine government in 1915 was unavoid-
able, otherwise the government vetoed any transaction that might
draw money from the country. As a result, a lot of good and tradi-
tional business was lost. In January 1915 Barings got so far as to offer
Kidder Peabody participation in an issue for Toronto Terminals,
only to be told at the last minute that the business was contrary to
public policy. ‘I do not think we have ever told you how Treasury-
ridden we are these days,’ grumbled Farrer. ‘No fresh loan can be
made, and not even a renewal of an old loan carried out, without per-
mission for the issue of fresh loans. .. . No doubt in principle the
Government are right, that we must not place ourselves under fresh
obligations while there are so many calls upon our gold.’!5 Only the
chivalry of Kidder Peabody saved Barings from being totally
excluded. In 1916 they offered Barings participation in a new issue
for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. Barings were
compelled to decline the invitation, whereupon Kidder Peabody
insisted that the operation had nevertheless been conducted on joint
account and credited Barings with a profit of $32,599.60.16 ‘What a
triumph your Telephone issue was, and how utterly quixotic the
behaviour of your firm to us, wrote Farrer. ‘I do not know what to
say to you about it, but you know we feel a good deal.’!7
   The 1915 Argentine loan was nota success; the passenger liner the
Lusitania has been sunk a fortnight before and, according to
Windham Baring, ‘investors in the City were in far too infuriated a
mood with this terrible crime of the Germans to think of paying any
attention to an Argentine issue’.!® Though the stock was gradually
placed, 88 per cent was initially left with the underwriters. It was the
more disappointing because Barings knew that it was likely to be the
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                    325

last loan in which they would be able to participate for several years
at least. Instead they had to sit back in chagrin and watch the Ameri-
cans, notably the National City Bank, take over the business. To be
forced to quit the field of Argentine finance, which they had for so
long dominated, was particularly hard for them to endure. ‘For a
century past Argentina has honoured us with its confidence,’ wrote
Farrer in elegiac mood, ‘and as a result of intimate association
through several generations it has become a proud tradition of our
house to sympathize with the country’s aspirations, to respect its
susceptibilities and to do our best to uphold its credit; and nothing
will give us greater pleasure than to see the country regain complete
financial independence. But there is only one way to attain this end:
Argentina must make up her mind to go slow for some years to
come.'!?
   But Argentina did not wish to go slow, and the American banks
proved distressingly ready to gratify its ambitions. The National City
Bank caused great offence to Barings’ agent, H. H. Leng, by sending
to Buenos Aires as their representative a certain John H. Allen who
was ‘not a gentleman, simply a common North American bounder-
bully, entirely unscrupulous’. Allen said that the day of Barings was
over, the United States would in future provide all the capital Argen-
tina needed. Barings took the news philosophically. Allen was quite
as much disliked by the Argentines as by the British; “We must there-
fore pray for long life to Mr Allen and for similar successors on his
departure.’2° For better or worse, the immediate future was with the
Americans; the best the British could hope was that they could keep
the door open for an eventual return. For this reason Barings were
relieved when Leng Roberts agreed to work with the National City
Bank, Morgans and Kuhn, Loeb in organizing Argentine credit:
‘When the London market is once more open to fresh operations on
foreign account, it will be of great advantage that you should not
meanwhile have been deprived. . . of the close touch with Argentine
Government finance and financiers which can only be maintained
by active business.’?!
   ‘We have been doing quite a big business in some ways, wrote
Farrer early in 1915, ‘genuine commercial business on a large scale
and certain banking business connected with allied countries, which
has been profitable; otherwise we are idle, did not expect much
326                     The Sixth Great Power

general business and really do not want it; conditions are so abso-
lutely artificial here that we are scared to death to let any money out
of our sight.’2? But though the bank as such may from time to tme
have been under-employed, the partners never were. Links between
the government and the City, always strong, became doubly so in
times of war. Revelstoke told the King’s private secretary, Lord
Stamfordham, that ministers were closely in touch with City opin-
ion, had set up capable committees to consider all the urgent eco-
nomic problems of the day, and were giving ‘intelligent and expert
attention . . . to responsibilities, the magnitude of which were quite
unheard of two years ago’.23 There were no City men more in
demand for these capable committees than Revelstoke, Farrer and
Mildmay, and the close relationship between Barings and the British
government ensured that they were asked to undertake certain odd
jobs that could not conveniently be done by any official agency.
Indeed, to a great extent Barings between 1914 and 1918 operated as
a wing of government.
   Both Revelstoke and Farrer had a high respect for Arthur Balfour -
‘head and shoulders above any of our statesmen on either side in pol-
itics’ was Farrer’s verdict?* — and they got on well with Asquith. By
1916, however, like most of the country, they had lost confidence in
the Prime Minister’s leadership, and they accepted his extinction
with equanimity. ‘City people dislike a crisis of any kind, wrote
Mildmay, ‘but I think that they like the idea of being governed by Mr
Lloyd George, who has almost qualified for the post of idol of the
Tory party.?5 With resignation, indeed almost with relish, Farrer
announced that he was anticipating a level.of super-tax practically
amounting to confiscation, and to a great increase in death duties. In
terms that would have outraged some of his wealthier clients he
admitted that to him ‘the very big individual incomes have always
seemed a danger in the community and a very moderate blessing to
the possessor, and the inheritance of big fortunes an unmixed evil for
the inheritors’.2¢
   Barings worked with the Bank of England in taking over American
securities held by the British to help finance the war - a measure
which would have reduced Revelstoke to apoplexy in other times.
Observing that most of the partners of Morgans were in London,
Farrer announced that he was proposing ‘embargoing them and
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                       327
offering them as collateral for the next loan’.2” Barings contributed
to the compilation of a black list of German banks working in South
America, particularly Argentina.?8 Cecil Baring was recruited by the
government to assemble information about ‘the character, standing
and capacity of suppliers and manufacturers in. . . North and South
America’.?? Barings were insistent that they intended to keep out of
the direct negotiation of government contracts, a field in which they
felt themselves notably inexpert, but they still hoped that Cecil
Baring’s activities would generate a little business for the house:
‘There is no reason why we should not undertake all the banking end
of contracts, so long as the end is safe and profitable.’3°
   In fact, with Kidder Peabody, they became more deeply involved
with government orders from United States manufacturers than
they had intended. Insofar as the British government could have
 been said to have an agent formally charged with the purchase of war
materials in the United States, it was J. P. Morgan and Co.,3! but
there was still a lot of business which, particularly in the early stages
of the war, was handled otherwise. In December 1914, for instance,
Kidder Peabody, on Barings’ instructions, contracted for the pur-
chase from the American Woollen Company of 250,000 yards of
cloth for jackets, 475,000 for trousers and 750,000 for overcoats.
Other contracts were for telephone cable, hematite ore, picric acid,
oleum, trinitrotoluol, gun cotton and fishing boats. Gradually the
government set up its own purchasing agencies, but there were some
unpleasant contretemps in the meanume. In July 1915 the Director
of Army Contracts complained that Kidder Peabody were claiming
for certain administrative expenses that should properly be to their
own charge. Cecil Baring hotly defended his American colleagues
but could get nowhere. ‘I am ashamed,’ he told Bob Winsor of
Kidder Peabody, ‘that proposals of such incredible meanness should
be made, by a responsible officer of the British Government, to
people who have rendered them such signal service.’32 Winsor was
unperturbed; American officials were just as bad, he said. Anyway,
the disputed $45,000 was fortunately in their possession and, egged
on by Barings, they refused to part with it.’?
   Kidder Peabody were not the only victims of governmental mean-
ness or chicanery. The Munitions Department contracted to buy one
million Mauser rifles, and put in a clause saying that the supplier
328                      The Sixth Great Power

would forfeit his deposit of £10,000 if the rifles were not available for
previous inspection. In fact some of the rifles were already in their
possession, and so they must have known that they could not be pro-
duced for inspection. ‘The war is setting many new standards, and
apparently a new standard of morality,’ commented Farrer. “Let us
hope it will be confined to the Munitions Department.*4
   ‘| suppose we ought to be making a mint of money, wrote Farrer,
‘but we have determined we will have nothing to do with any of the
Government contracts beyond the purely banking and after a con-
tract has been obtained.’35 Barings sometimes portrayed themselves
as having almost been put out of business, the time of the directors
largely taken up with unpaid labours for their country. ‘We shut the
office now at 4.0 and might almost shut it at 3.0, Farrer told Winsor.
‘I suppose if one took the trouble one could launch in new direc-
tions, but we none of us have any desire to make money out of the
war.36By 1918, when this was written, it was more nearly true than it
had been previously, but inspection of the accounts of Baring Broth-
ers for the period of the war suggests that, if the partners were really
reluctant to make money, they had to put up with a good deal. In
1913, the last complete year of business before the war, the gross
profit had been £438,000. In 1914 this fell to £282,000. The compar-
able figure for 1915 was £1.189 million. In 1916 it was £853,000, in
1917 £683,000, and even in 1918 the gross profit was £502,000,
higher than in any of the four years before the war. The explanation,
in a few words, is the ‘banking business connected with allied
countries’, to which Farrer had referred early in 1915.37 In that year,
‘Certain Russian Accounts’ showed a profit of £718,000, the follow-
ing year the figure was £5 18,000, and in 1917, the year of the Russian
Revolution, the item still contributed £136,000 to the balance sheet.
   One of the first indications that war was imminent had come to
Barings in July 1914 when M- Routkowsky, Chief of the Imperial
Russian Financial Agency in London, asked Barings to withdraw 20
million marks from Mendelssohn and Co. in Berlin. But 20 million
marks were not going to last the Russian government long in time of
war. It was clear from the start that the Russians would have to bor-
row vast amounts of money if they were to sustain their armies in the
field. Fora source of such money they would look first to London. As
the official bankers of the Russian government, Barings could not
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                      rae,
fail to be intimately involved. The first transaction yielded them no
profit at all. The British Treasury had agreed to the discount at the
Bank of England of £12 million Russian Treasury bills if £8 million
in gold was sent over from St Petersburg, against which a further
credit of £8 million would be provided. The Russian Treasury con-
tracted to place the bills at Barings, and Barings undertook to have
them discounted at the Bank of England, taking no commission or
brokerage.
   Then the real business began. To meet urgent payments, Barings
made a short-term loan of £2 million to the Russian government,
borrowed from the Bank of England at4 per cent and lent to the Rus-
sians at 5 per cent with | per cent commission. They deposited the
Russian gold in the Bank of England, the Bank paid 2 per cent inter-
est, Barings passed on 11/2 per cent and retained a modest 1/2 per cent.
When the first big loan of £20 million was negotiated in February
 1915, Barings’ commission was       per cent. In June 1915, to bridge a
gap, they provided a short-term loan of £2.5 million at 5 per cent
interest with 1 per cent commission. This was later increased to £4.5
 million. A £25 million loan was contracted for in July 1915; Barings’
commission was ¥% per cent; modest again, yet worth £62,500.
Another £25 million followed. Later in 1915, with Routkowsky ill,
Revelstoke found himself negotiating with the British government
on behalf of the Russians. He secured a further £30 million, although
only £5 million was in fact made available, this being required to set-
tle another temporary advance made by Barings, this time at 6 per
cent with 1 per cent commission. All these commitments were
dwarfed when in September 1915 the British Treasury agreed to
advance a total of £300 million over a twelve-month period. The
agreement was negotiated without Barings’ intervention, but the
Russian government pleaded that things would go more smoothly if
their bankers were involved and Barings charged a commission of "6
per cent. It was smaller than before, but it still brought in £187,500.
   It may sound as if the British or Russian governments were being
exploited. That is not the case. The charges, as a proportion of the
                                                         ed. Any
whole, were reasonable, even modest. Nothing was conceal
other bank would have taken as much and probably more. Barings
gave good value for their money. It was only because of the immen-
sity of the sums involved that Barings’ recompense was high. Yet for
330                      The Sixth Great Power

a virtually risk-free transaction involving not much in the way of
work, the profit was substantial. Itis not surprising that some oftheir
rivals felt jealous, and that Gaspard Farrer’s protestations about his
house’s reluctance to make money out of the war might have been
somewhat cynically received by Barings’ rivals.
   Early in 1917 Revelstoke was given the honorary title of Minister
Plenipotentiary and dispatched with Lord Milner to St Petersburg.
The Russians were demanding economic and military aid on an
impossible scale - a further £400 million was their starting point -
and the mission was supposed to establish how much was really
essential and by what dates it was needed. Revelstoke was dismayed
by the sense of incipient chaos that hung over the city. Rasputin had
been murdered only a short time before, authority was crumbling
from the centre, the mission had grave doubts about the capacity of
the imperial government to survive: yet all plans had to be made on
the basis that the Russians would continue the war against Germany.
The report was completed in a matter of weeks rather than the
months that were desirable. ‘It is hurried, therefore incomplete, and
by no means a good document, wrote Revelstoke. “During all the
years I have been at Bishopsgate, I have never once allowed so hastily
composed a paper to leave the office.’38
   By the time the mission left St Petersburg the first phase of the
Russian Revolution was already under way. Revelstoke had con-
ducted most of his negotiations with M. Bark at the Ministry of
Finance; now Bark had gone and his place had been taken by
M. Michel Terestchenko, who at once cabled Barings to ask for con-
firmation that the firm would continue to put their services at the
disposal of the provisional Russian government and that all the
existing agreements would remain in force. Revelstoke’s immediate
response was to welcome Kerensky’s government. The new minis-
ters, he wrote, ‘are said to be honest and upright, and I trust therefore
that the risk of disorganization and disorder, which would be the
consequence of the direction of affairs by extremists, may be
avoided’.3? He recommended to the Foreign Office that Barings
should continue to make payments on the basis of instructions from
St Petersburg just as they had done before the Revolution, and got
the ea that anything else would be bound to have damaging
results.*°
                     Barings at War: 1914-1918                        331

   The Treasury was more sceptical than the Foreign Office; or per-
haps more concerned about its balances. By April 1917 most credits
were being refused. Cecil Baring called on Sir Robert Chalmers at the
Treasury on behalf of Kerensky’s provisional government, and got a
cool reception. Chalmers was extremely sceptical about the future of
the regime and disinclined to pour good money after bad: ‘The more
roubles you buy, the more orders will be placed here. ... It is a
morass that we have no intention of paving.’*! Revelstoke would
sometimes speculate whether a more generous attitude towards the
provisional government might not have helped it to establish itself;
it seems unlikely that anything could have checked the march of the
better organized and more ruthless Bolsheviks, but Kerensky had
grounds for complaint that he was shabbily treated by his allies.
   In October 1917 the Bolsheviks struck, Lenin and Trotsky seized
power and began to negotiate a separate peace with Germany. Farrer
comforted himself with the thought that the regime could not last,
but saw much pain for the Russian people in the meantime: ‘Starva-
tion and great distress of every kind is inevitable this winter, espec-
ially in the big centres, and it is better that this should occur under an
anarchical so-called government than under a strong despotic head.
The time for the latter has not yet come.’#? But even as he wrote the
despots were establishing themselves. The moment could not long
be postponed when Barings would have to decide what to do with
the Russian funds in their possession. At the end of 1917 they had
nearly £1 million in the Comte Spécial set up in October 1915 for
arms purchases in Britain, and well over £1.5 million in other
Russian accounts. On 14 December M. Ermolaieff, speaking as a
representative of the Treasury of Russia’s last and only legal govern-
ment, told Barings that they should accept no instructions from ‘the
persons who have temporarily seized the power in Petrograd’.#3
Barings agreed that they would not; but though they did not say so to
M. Ermolaieff, the question of whose instructions they should accept
was more difficult to resolve.
   Early in 1918 a firm of solicitors acting for the Bolshevik govern-
ment notified Barings that Maxim Litvinoff would shortly be arriv-
ing as Chargé d’Affaires. All official Russian funds should for the
moment be frozen. Barings gave an equivocal reply, but equivoca-
tion was no longer possible when a telegram arrived from Petrograd,
332                        The Sixth Great Power

purporting to come from the Chancellery of Credit and signed
Axelrod, which instructed them to make a dollar payment to the
Guaranty Trust of New York. Barings appealed to the Treasury, who
on | February 1918 formally ordered them to hold all transactions
on the Russian accounts in abeyance until the situation had evolved.
The British government would indemnify them fully against any
consequences. Fortified by this, Barings ignored Axelrod’s telegram,
and the stream of subsequent instructions that arrived from
Petrograd.
   But though Barings were ready to freeze the Russian funds, they
were more reluctant to countenance their confiscation. In March
 1918, after the Russians had left the war, the possibility was raised
that their funds should be distrained and in some way applied to the
war effort. Farrer wrote in dismay to the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer: ‘I am convinced such a seizure would be considered as a
blot on the past record of this country as the safest centre for banking
funds.’ If it had to be done, then let it at least be done by all the allies
acting in unison. ‘It would be grievous if this country were placed ata
disadvantage with our competitive neighbours.’4+ For this or for
other reasons the idea was dropped. Peace came with Barings still in
possession of approximately £3.5 million of Russian money and no
very clear idea what to do with it.
                                 18
                                pe   oat




            ‘The Concern Remains
                a Family Affair’
                            1918-1929




Barings at the end of 1918 was dominated by Lord Revelstoke even
more than had been the case before the war. He had been on the
Court of the Bank of England since 1898 and a Privy Councillor
since 1903. He had become Receiver-General of the Duchy of Corn-
wall in 1908, was George V’s closest financial adviser as well as being
a personal friend, and became Lord Lieutenant of Middlesex in
1926. He was the indispensable man of British financial life; indis-
pensable, that is to say, until he died, when - like all indispensable
men - he was rapidly dispensed with. “The Chancellor of the
Exchequer is overwhelmed, Thomas Jones told Hankey in 1919.
‘One feels he is fighting a losing battle. Ought he not to have at his
elbow someone of the calibre of Reading or Revelstoke?’! His rule at
Barings was autocratic; though he never ignored his partners as his
father had done, he generally considered that he knew best and was
reluctant to accept the contrary.
   On his normal working day he would come in to lunch at Barings,
and be served a sole. He would open it and peer suspiciously at the
backbone. If it seemed to him darker than it should be, he would
push it to one side and march off to the Bank of England in search of
better pickings.? His life in Carlton House Terrace was as grand as
his demands in the office were simple. The new ‘concealed electric
lighting’ in the reception rooms illuminated gatherings even more
magnificent than those before the war, royalty was still more often
present, the artists who performed after dinner yet more distin-
guished. People rarely felt at home with Revelstoke, not many even
                                     333
334                      The Sixth Great Power

felt at ease — his niece Daphne Pollen recalled the ‘chill atmosphere’
of the great rooms, with their ‘well-varnished and discreetly lit
Canalettos and polished parquet floor - but in his own style he did it
very well. In 1922 he was thinking seriously of adding a country
house to his other possessions, sending inter alia for the particulars
of Mereworth, a Palladian villa in Kent, but the impulse passed
before he had indulged it.
   One day in Bishopsgate he wanted to speak to the book-keepers
and got the postal department by mistake. He asked the boy who
replied to let him know the balance of Princess Troubetskoy’s
account. There was a baffled silence. Revelstoke repeated the ques-
tion. ‘Who are you?’ asked the boy cautiously. ‘Lord Revelstoke!’
‘Lord who?’ Revelstoke in his turn now asked, ‘And who are you?’ ‘I
am Barings,’ replied the boy with some magniloquence. ‘So am I!’
retorted Revelstoke. So, in the eyes of the outside world, and indeed
in the eyes of his partners, he was.
  The only one among them who could hold his own was Gaspard
Farrer, and he reserved his fire for occasions that he felt of real
importance. But Farrer was almost sixty at the end of the war, and it
was five years since he had first announced his intention to retire. At
the beginning of 1924 he handed over virtually all his interests in
Barings to the younger generation, and though he did not formally
cease to be a partner until the end of the following year, his attend-
ance in the partners’ room became more erratic and he devoted him-
self to his work with his first love, H.S. Lefevre and Co. Alfred
Mildmay soldiered on, did not retire as a director until 1940, and was
indeed technically a partner when he died aged seventy-three in
1944. His influence on Revelstoke had never been great, however,
and did not increase with the years. When asked what Mildmay did
all day, an unkind colleague remarked that he used to spend his time
adding up his money on a piece of blotting paper, but had had to
renounce this pursuit when the blotting paper became too small.3
Cecil Baring too remained from the older generation, but he re-
garded his elder brother with a certain amount of awe and rarely
took a different line to him.
   Of those others who had been partners or near-partners before the
war, Shaw-Stewart was dead, Errington - now Lord Cromer - was at
court, and Everard Baring had gone back to the army and ended up
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929           335
as Chairman of the Southern Railway. Windham Baring was the
only partner to return. He was one of the first to be demobilized,
having had the good fortune to be serving ona ship that was paid off
in November 1918. He was in the office before Christmas: ‘It seemed
rather strange coming back to this life again, he told Leng in Buenos
Aires, ‘but nevertheless I can assure you I am very glad to return.’* He
took responsibility for Latin American affairs again, and also for the
office in Liverpool, where Alan Tod was put in charge the following
year. In due course he would probably have become senior partner.
Then, at the end of 1922, he was convalescing after an operation for
appendicitis. A blood clot reached his heart and he died suddenly,
aged forty-one. ‘We were devoted to him and he to us and we shall
miss him sadly,’ Farrer told Leng. ‘He was too young to die... . . His
great interest in life was his business here and most particularly its
connexion with Argentina.’
   Even before he died it was obvious that new blood was needed.
‘We shall have to bestir ourselves and try to make arrangements for
the Future here,’ wrote Farrer in 1919, ‘as we are all getting old and
past work, and I at least am certainly not fit to cope with the new con-
ditions in business which we shall all have to face. We badly need
men here of sound sense and strength, who are not afraid to tell
unpleasant truths, but sympathetic enough to command attention.’¢
Arthur Villiers was sympathetic enough, though perhaps not too
eager to tell unpleasant truths. He had joined Barings before the war
but had been lured away to help George Schuster set up an invest-
ment company and excelled in this arcane science. Two wounds and
a DSO later he returned to Barings. He professed dislike of Jews and
foreigners, particularly Germans, but went to France to be best man
at Antony de Rothschild’s wedding and did more than anyone else
to strengthen his house’s relationship with Rothschilds and
Schroders.” Villiers was thirty-six when he rejoined Barings in 1919;
ten years older than Evelyn Bingham Baring, a descendant of Sir
Francis’s fourth son, William, who became a director in 1923. Evelyn
Baring - ‘little Evelyn’, not to be confused with Lord Cromer’s third
son, Evelyn, who served briefly in the bank but made his name in the
public service and ended as Lord Howick - was said by Cecil Baring
to be ‘gifted with ability and insight’.8 He went with Windham Bar-
ing to Argentina in 1921 and was described as ‘getting on first class
336                      The Sixth Great Power
and is a great help to me, talks Spanish whenever he gets an opportu-
nity and makes friends wherever he goes’.? He never seems to have
made any marked impression, however, and did not stand outas the
natural leader who would take Barings into the 1930s and 1940s.
   Still younger blood was introduced in the next decade. Edward
Reid was the son of John Revelstoke’s sister Susan. He became a
director in 1926, one year before his cousin Alexander, who was to
succeed as 6th Lord Ashburton and remain with Barings till 1969.
‘Both shew great capacity for work,’ wrote Cecil Baring, ‘and one
feels sure that when it comes to their turn to exercise judgment, there
need be no lack of confidence as to the outcome.'!°
   All of these except Villiers were members of the family, and all of
them were out of the same intellectual and social mould. Revelstoke
could not see among his junior partners any who were suitable to
take on the leadership when he died or retired: some were too old,
some too young, and those that were neither were too deeply
imbued with the values and shibboleths of establishment merchant
banking to grapple with the problems that lay ahead. Barings needed
a new Joshua Bates, and like Alexander Baring before him
Revelstoke looked for him from the New World.
   Edward Peacock was the son of a poor Presbyterian minister in
Ontario. He worked his way through college, had a few months as
motorman on a streetcar, taught English for five years, and in 1902
joined Dominion Securities, a Toronto financial company, which
sent him to manage its affairs in London." His already considerable
reputation was enhanced when Dr Pearson, the international finan-
cier, was drowned in the Lusitania and Peacock was putin charge of a
motley collection of ill-managed and under-funded enterprises and
‘brought them through in a marvellous way’.!? Revelstoke was much
struck by him and was instrumental in securing his election to the
Court of the Bank of England in 1921: ‘I shall look forward to the
certainty of having gained a most esteemed new colleague,’ he wrote
in congratulation.!3 He then proceeded to get his protégé out of the
Court again by persuading him to join Barings - tradition dictating
that two partners from the same house should not serve with the
Bank simultaneously. Peacock made up his mind at the end of 1923:
‘He is another man since the decision was made,’ wrote Farrer,
‘comes in here fairly often and in the highest spirits.’!4
John Baring (1863-1929),   , by Ambrose
McEvoy.
                                                                ;



                                                                    onrsennsststh




                                                              AAI
                                                              lsSA
                                                              i|
                                                              auaerlecicnnansesmasnmionenin..o
                                                               NNR




                          Ra




                                                                                                 SQL




The partners’ room at 8 Bishopsgate, designed by Lewis Cubitt in 1853,
as 1t appeared shortly before its demolition in the early t
Thomas (“Tom”) Baring (1839-1923) by   Sir Edward Peacock by James Gunn.
Sidney Kent.

Windham Baring (1880-1922)
photographed in naval uniform during
the First   World War.                 Hugo Baring (1876-1949).
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929          337
   He joined Barings on the implicit understanding that, whoever
the senior partner might be in title, he would effectively run the
house after Revelstoke’s departure. Whether some of the partners
felt chagrin at this appointment is unknown. Cecil Baring certainly
welcomed it from the start. ‘Peacock is a man of strong character and
wide experience,’ he told the King’s secretary, Lord Stamfordham,
after Revelstoke’s death. ‘The principal driving force in our manage-
ment now resides in him and it is inevitable that a large share of the
work and responsibility will devolve upon his shoulders.’!5 An out-
standingly clear mind, integrity, determination and a readiness to
suffer fools, if not gladly, at least with a measure of patience, were
Peacock’s most marked characteristics. Taciturn and largely indiffer-
ent to the delights of London society, he did not fit readily into Lord
Revelstoke’s gilded soirées, but his good looks and natural dignity
carried him through such occasions as he felt it is duty to attend.
   The house which he joined was still a gentlemanly affair. In his
diary in March 1929 Lord Revelstoke wrote with some wistfulness of
Barings’ closest allies in France, the house of Hottinguer. ‘Their life
seems to be one happy unity. They are extremely rich, they have
beautiful houses with fine works of art, and have such a solid posi-
tion in the banking world that they seem to be content to manage
their fortunes and those of their many rich (Protestant) clients with-
out any nervous desire to compete with more modern conditions, or
to be tainted by the “get-rich-quick” feeling which is so prevalent
nowadays.’!6 He recognized that Barings could not survive on such a
basis, yet part of him hankered for it. He introduced an internal tele-
phone system into Bishopsgate, but could rarely make it work and
preferred to stump around the building seeing people for himself.
Statements of account were still sent out in longhand. “They also
impressed me by the simple grandeur of their notepaper, wrote one
young correspondent. ‘Thick, cream, of beautiful quality, it carried
as the sole heading, die-stamped in square, black letters: “8
 Bishopsgate Within. London E C”. Doubtless it reflected the convic-
tion that the letter was a private communication from one gentle-
man to another.’!”
   With such a disposition it would have been surprising if
Revelstoke and the other partners had not been conservative in poli-
tics. So, indeéd, they were, but their approach was pragmatic and
338                     The Sixth Great Power

they were remarkably ready to contemplate working with a Labour
government if need arose. In the election of 1918 Mildmay admitted
to a lack of enthusiasm for the Conservative/Liberal coalition but
concluded that ‘the Labour party, which includes many patriotic and
disinterested men, is clearly too inexperienced to take over the gov-
ernment of the country at the moment’.!8 In 1922 Farrer rejoiced at
the setback experienced by Lloyd George and said of the greatly
increased Labour vote: ‘I for one do not regret their large representa-
tion in Parliament. If, as is probable, some day they will be in actual
control, itis better that they should have this preliminary training in
opposition.!?Even Revelstoke, as close to being a diehard as was to
be found in the partners’ room, noted with some amusement that
Ramsay MacDonald, so recently the bugbear of the capitalists, had
only been Prime Minister for a few weeks when he found himself
‘the hero of the hour’.2° He seemed, said Mildmay, ‘a cautious man,
very well-intentioned and of a rather sympathetic personality’?!
   Open-mindedness did not extend to taking the side of the unions
in the General Strike. Barings hired hotel rooms to accommodate
those of their staff who lived out of London, and motorcars to fetch
in those in the suburbs. ‘We have also been able to encourage some
of our young men to take up emergency work, as of course the vol-
ume of business has very much diminished.’ One of the not-so-
young men was Evelyn Bingham Baring, who paraded the streets of
Bow and Hounslowin the guise of a special constable.? In Liverpool
Alan Tod was busily distributing posters and copies of Churchill’s
brainchild, the British Gazette: ‘There are very few “dismal Jimmies”
and good spirits showing everywhere,’ he wrote proudly.?3


The ‘new conditions in business’ which Gaspard Farrer had said
would need new men to cope with, were most notably the decline of
Britain’s economic standing in the world and the readiness of the
government to interfere in matters that had traditionally been dealt
with entirely in the private sector. It was a matter for conjecture
whether the merchant banks would be able to thrive, or even survive,
in these new circumstances. Farrer confided his thoughts and
worries to C. E. ter Meulen of Hopes, Barings’ ally for nearly 150
years.
        ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:     1918-1929         339
   My own feeling is that the private firms are on their trial; if
   they have not gone back during the war, they have at least
   not made the progress of the Joint Stock Banks. . . . Never-
   theless, Iam convinced that there is still room for the private
   firms, but they must be sure of themselves, and I think such
   as yours and ourselves must not only set their own houses in
   order but make fast their alliances with houses similarly situ-
   ated in other countries. Houses such as Hottinguers, Kidder
   Peabody, Morgans or whoever they may be. You will notice
   that I include ourselves among the private houses, for such
   we still consider ourselves; though we think that our consti-
   tution gives us a great advantage, not only from the fact of
   publishing our accounts yearly, but from the nature of our
   constitution, which provides for a continuing capital which
   remains irrespective of death... . . At the same time the con-
   trol of the firm is absolutely in the directors’ hands. You
   would perhaps be amused to hear that during my sixteen
   years here, we have only once had a shareholder at our
   Annual Meeting, and he came at our special request.”
   The interference of government was mainly confined to those
transactions which involved the export of British capital - particu-
larly in the financing of international issues. What money there was,
was needed at home. Barings admitted a patriotic duty to abide by
the spirit as well as the letter of the law. When Maurice Jenks wanted
Barings’ help in transferring £150,000 of Hong Kong money to New
York and undertaking its management there, the business was
refused. ‘Even if the operation were not found to be contrary to exist-
ing regulations, we should not wish to facilitate the removal of so
large a sum from London to the United States.’?° Control of trade
was another matter, and Barings deplored any restraint put upon the
free market forces. Not surprisingly it was acceptances that were the
first part of Barings’ peacetime business to recover. In 1918, by far
the worst war year, the annual total granted had fallen away to £14
million, of which only £3.9 million related to British trade; in 1919,
aided by the boom as European industry rebuilt its depleted stocks,
the British figure rose to £7.7 million; while in 1920, the London
acceptance figure rose to £12.1 million and the grand total including
Boston and New York to £30 million. There was a sharp drop when
340                     The Sixth Great Power

the postwar boom ended, a gradual recovery, another sharp relapse
in 1926 caused by lower prices for wool, cotton and rubber and the
increasing ability of German banks to finance their own national
trade, then a resurgence in 1928 to £22.6 million in Britain alone - a
figure which would not be surpassed for many years as the Wall
Street Crash of 1929 led to the world’s most calamitous slump.
   It was the growth in continental credits - ‘insatiable’, Farrer
described the demand in 192526 - which contributed most to the
excellent figures for the 1920s; American acceptances fell away as
more and more of their trade was financed through dollar credits.
Barings viewed the trend without too much regret: ‘We have
watched the falling-off with some equanimity,’ wrote Farrer, ‘In view
of the rates of commission at which US credit business is now being
generally done.’27 They valued the connection with Kidder Peabody
more than the credit business they did on joint account. ‘Our Joint
Account operations have not only been eminently remunerative,
declared Revelstoke, ‘but have been conducted in a manner which
has made the business a pleasure for us all.’28 It was this, more than
any possible profit, which led Barings to increase their existing stake
of $2.5 million, when Kidder Peabody developed a more or less dere-
lict concern, called first the New England Yarn Company and then
the New England Investment Company, into the Kidder Peabody
Acceptance Corporation. For a time it did remarkably well and by
1929 its outstanding acceptances had risen to $40 million, making it
the second largest specialized acceptance house in the United
States.2? Then the business was overwhelmed in the disasters of 1929
and 1930, Kidder Peabody retreated from the field of acceptances,
and the joint account was wound up. Barings at least were able to
repay some of the support Kidder Peabody had offered during the
war by contributing $600,000 to the operation that Morgans organ-
ized to rescue its old friend and rival.           ;
   Barings were as conservative as ever when it came to advancing
money to industrial concerns or trading houses. They had an almost
inviolable rule against advancing cash against shares, and would
only do so against goods in store if the margin was satisfactory and
the facility requested by a first-class firm. In general, they felt that
they could not compete with the joint stock banks and did not
intend to try. When they offered to advance up to £500,000 against
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:   1918-1929      341
cotton they emphasized that this was an exception, undertaken only
‘to keep up our connection with our cotton friends in Liverpool’3°
They were restrictive of credit even to an international company as
well established as Lever Brothers. ‘I cannot believe that sensible
business people such as the Directors of Messrs Lever would take
umbrage ata refusal which is based on our unwillingness to increase
our acceptances, wrote Farrer in what one assumes was feigned sur-
prise.3! Levers had indeed taken umbrage and their indignation was
redoubled when Barings not only refused to double their existing
£200,000 credit, but withdrew even this on the ground that Levers
were drawing bills ‘upon nearly every institution in London’.3?
Barings knew that they were taking a different line to many of their
rivals - Kleinworts, in particular, were conspicuously more liberal
in their grants of credit - but, wrote Farrer, ‘I do not think
that any action of our neighbours should influence us in our
policy’.33 Barings always had been prudent in such matters and
they were not going to start changing their attitude after more than
150 years.
  In other respects Barings could be curiously gullible, or perhaps
more accurately, had a weakness for a particular type of flamboyant
adventurer. The first Lord Revelstoke had had his Sanford, the sec-
ond his Albert Loewenstein. Loewenstein was a Belgian stockbroker
who had made a fortune in dealing in various Latin American shares
and was habitually referred to in the popular press as “The Belgian
Croesus’ or ‘The Mystery Millionaire’. In May 1926 he fell on his
head from a horse, became prone to mystical experiences, and began
to behave with marked eccentricity. He acquired a large number of
shares in the Brazilian Traction Co.,a concern in which Barings were
interested, and then began to plan a gigantic merger without any
prior consultation with the boards concerned.** ‘He is adopting his
usual peculiar, theatrical methods which are very unpleasant to me
and harmful to the business,’ complained Revelstoke. “Nevertheless,
from what I can learn, I should think he has a reasonably good
chance of putting the business through and if he succeeds in doing
so, the new Company will be a strong one.’*
   It was a marked misjudgement. Barings put £300,000 into the
group which backed Loewenstein, but soon regretted it. By early
1927 Peacock was trying to set up a syndicate to take over
342                      The Sixth Great Power

Loewenstein’s vast and ramshackle shareholdings and thus save a
market collapse: Loewenstein, or people acting on his behalf, was
meanwhile busily manipulating the market, forcing up the price of
one share and undermining another to suit his own advantage. ‘No
doubt we shall come through in the end,’ wrote Peacock philosophi-
cally, ‘but we are having a new experience meanwhile which is far
from pleasant. It involves also having L or his accountant in our
office day by day, all day, and as he is ina state almost of collapse and
the accountant much the same, and as his accounts are of the
strangest order, we are making the slowest kind of progress.’36 The
omelette was still largely unscrambled when Loewenstein, theatrical
to the last, disappeared from his personal Fokker aircraft over the
Channel. His body was eventually picked up off Cap Gris-Nez. He
must have jumped, but whether to commit suicide or as the result of
another mystical experience has never been established.


The government's embargo on foreign issues impelled Barings to
take more interest than they had done previously in British industry.
Early in 1919 they were struck by the fact that both Kuhn, Loeb and
the City Bank were prowling around London looking for profitable
enterprises in which to invest. ‘It looks as if some business should be
possible,’ wrote Farrer, ‘and we for our part will assuredly keep our
eyes open.’37
   They did, but not always to good effect. The most protracted and
painful saga was that of Armstrong Whitworth, the engineering and
armaments firm. A central figure was Montagu Norman, Governor
of the Bank of England, who saw himself as the man who would res-
cue British industry from its decline.38 It was Norman who early in
1924 introduced Armstrongs to Barings, originally with the proposal
that a joint company should be formed to set up and develop prom-
ising enterprises. Barings declined this honour but were happy to act
as financial advisers.39 Armstrongs were short of capital, mainly
because they owned an exceedingly costly paper company in New-
foundland, which they believed would eventually yield handsome
profits but currently produced nothing but headaches and a crippl-
ing loss. Barings raised £2 million for Armstrongs, and at the end of
1924 a further £3 million - ‘The fact is,’ commented F arrer, ‘they
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929          343
require a very stout Godmother that can hold babies till they are well
grown... . and this takes time and money.’#°
   By 1925 the situation had deteriorated so far that Barings felt
bound to intervene. At Peacock’s instigation, the Bank of England
imported and placed on the board a tough Aberdonian called Frater
Taylor, so cautious that his most enthusiastic recorded reaction was
‘I’m not against it’, and so cheeseparing that, when the chairman of
Armstrongs was eventually forced from office, Taylor refused him
the use of a company car to travel home after the decisive meeting.*!
Sir Glyn West, the chairman in question, accepted Taylor’s original
arrival with apparent equanimity, but the Aberdonian met with stiff
resistance when he tried to pry too deeply into the company’s
accounts. It was in February 1926, with Armstrongs more than £5
million in debt to the Bank of England, that a balance sheet was
finally approved. ‘The story is going to be a very unpleasant one and
must result in drastic action, commented Peacock grimly.* First
drastic action was to evict the chairman; the second might have been
to put the company into receivership but this would have resulted in
the loss of all its government contracts and destroyed any chance of
its rehabilitation. Instead, the Bank of England was persuaded to put
 up yet another £500,000 and to allow a further twelve months’
breathing space. ‘The time has come when we should establish the
relations between Armstrong and Barings on a more business-like
basis,’ wrote Peacock. Hitherto Barings had received nota penny for
all their trouble, in future they would work on commission.*3
   They certainly gave service for their money. Throughout 1926 and
 1927 Revelstoke and Peacock tried to secure Armstrongs contracts in
a variety of countries and enterprises: a floating dock for the St Law-
rence, locomotives for Argentina, Rhodesia and the Great Western
Railway, destroyers and frigates for the Royal Navy, liners for
Cunard, steamers for the Canadian lakes, a tanker for the British
Molasses Company, steel sleepers for Rhodesia. A merger of
shipbuilding interests was arranged with Vickers, and the joint
Board had its first meeting in January 1928. The search for a chair-
man proved particularly taxing. Lords Southborough and Verulam
came and went. ‘I have heard from an intimate friend of Sir John
Reith, Managing Director of the British Broadcasting Company, that
he would like additional work and has plenty of time to look after
344                      The Sixth Great Power

another job,’ reported Peacock. ‘I have been told that he is very able
and has many of the qualities of a good chief.’#* Possibly the BBC
proved more time-consuming than Reith had expected; anyway, the
job in the end went to General Dawnay.
   Early in 1929 a drastic reorganization was put in hand. Fourteen
million pounds in accumulated losses were written off; the New-
foundland paper mill was at last disposed of. If the scheme goes
through, declared the Economist, it will be ‘the greatest achievement
of financial salvage ever recorded’.*5 It did go through, though there
were angry shouts at the shareholders’ meeting and Mr W. J. Smith
complained that the proposals ‘simply weren't cricket’.*¢ It would be
pleasant to record that recovery followed rapidly, but in mid-1931
Peacock was admitting that: ‘Vickers Armstrong has been a great
disappointment. . . . The whole difficulty, of course, is based upon
very much wider considerations than those affecting Armstrongs
directly. The deterioration in the industrial position of England. . .
has been even greater than that of Armstrong and is mainly respon-
sible for the whole of the difficulties.’4” It was 1936 before the Bank
of England recovered the greater part of its losses.
   Compared with this the Underground Electric Railway was a
model enterprise. In 1926 Lord Ashfield asked Barings to raise the
capital for and tender advice on the expansion and reconstruction of
the underground railway. Peacock went on to the board and took a
keen interest in the railway’s running, complaining that the curved
platform at the Bank Station meant that an unacceptably large gap
was left between carriage and terra firma. There were solutions,
replied the manager, but they were all extremely expensive. ‘I had a
look at it again this morning,’ retorted Peacock, ‘and quite expect to
break my leg there some day.’48 He had still not done so when he
died in 1962. An issue of £4 million was made in May 1928 in con-
junction with Rothschilds, Schroders and Speyers. Barings kept all
the underwriting to themselves on the grounds that ‘our profit on
the issue is so small that we have perforce had to eke it out by making
what we could out of the underwriting ourselves’.#? Fortunately for
them the issue was subscribed ten times over, though Lord
Revelstoke still managed to reserve £50,000 for Lady Desborough
and suitable amounts for other cronies.
   ‘Compared with foreign Government loans, an issue such as this
        ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929          345
seems to involve a great deal more work at a great deal less profit,’
complained Evelyn Bingham Baring.5° He could hardly have said
the same of the flotation of the brewing company, Taylor Walker.
Early in 1927 Barings agreed to place £600,000 ordinary shares and
£414,000 debentures. For these Taylor Walker would receive
£912,000, the £102,000 difference covering Barings’ costs and profit.
Lady Desborough for some reason was not among those allotted
ordinary shares but Princess Troubetzkoy, Lord Lansdowne, Lord
Allendale and other close friends of Barings or Lord Revelstoke were
given a slice of what promised to be an appetizing cake. The only
condition made was that the shares should not be resold within six
months, but Revelstoke in fact sold Lansdowne’s after only two -
making a profit of £4300 on an investment of £10,000: ‘It was my
opinion that the shares were a good investment at 20/-, but the
present quotation would seem to discount to a marked degree the
prospects of prosperity which the Company undoubtedly has.’s! A
few weeks later Barings financed Taylor Walker's takeover of a
smaller brewery, Smith Garrett and Co., for a little over £900,000.
Barings’ commission on this transaction was £37,500, and their
profit on the sale of shares £82,000.
   These were by no means the only excursions made by Barings into
the field of British industry, though they were cautious about enter-
prises on which they felt themselves inadequately informed.
Yardleys, the scent and soap manufacturers, approached them in
1927 about a projected financial reorganization. ‘It is only in very
exceptional cases that Baring Brothers undertake the responsibility
of sponsoring an industrial concern, wrote Arthur Villiers, ‘but in
view of the high standing and excellent record of your company we
should be very happy to look further into the matter.’ Evidently the
further look was displeasing, the approach was not followed up. The
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., the American firm that was the
world’s biggest tyre manufacturer, got a better hearing when they
asked Barings to raise money to pay for a British subsidiary. Farrer
was sceptical - ‘Such a business is good so long as tyres are required
and can be made and sold ata profit and almost valueless unless'*? -
but the other partners took a rosier view of the prospects for the
motorcar and Barings agreed to place £800,000 of 6'2 per cent
debentures provided Goodyear would take up the same number of
346                      The Sixth Great Power

ordinary shares at par. The public subscribed £955,000, and the
enterprise flourished. Mild alarm was experienced when Firestone
opened its sumptuous new Art Deco factory on the Great West Road
but the managing director of Goodyear reassured the partners that,
though the site had great advertising value, the costs of the final
product would certainly be too high.*#
   Barings were cautious when Mr Ullner of the Deutsche Erdoel
Aktiengesellschaft approached Arthur Villiers about stopping a
price-cutting campaign which was damaging the coal industries of
both Britain and Germany. Ullner wanted Barings to set up a new
Anglo-German company which would, inter alia, investigate the
potential of producing oil from coal. He was convinced that this
was the way of the future. ‘It was calculated that existing supplies of
oil in the USA, Persia and elsewhere would not last much longer
than 12 years, and that when they were exhausted the only
method of obtaining oil would be to extract it from lignite and
coal.’55 Villiers was sufficiently interested in the possibility to try to
set up a meeting between Ullner and a colliery owner, but not to
pursue it further when the British coal producers proved con-
spicuously unenthusiastic.


It was in the field of international financing that Barings felt most
markedly the changed world conditions. Determined to protect a
weakened sterling and to prepare the way for a return to the gold
standard, the Treasury in 1918 imposed an almost complete
embargo on the issuing of foreign loans. When loans did again
become permissible it was only under licence, and they were
directed above all to the monetary reconstruction of Europe.
   A radical change in the direction of Barings’ business inevitably
resulted. The United States was now a creditor nation on a majestic
scale, able to finance its own needs and much else besides. To a lesser
extent the same was true of Canada, which anyway looked more and
more to its southern neighbour for finance. Schroders were anxious
to involve Barings in the development of Ontario, arguing that the
potential of the province was so enormous that it would not matter if
the underwriters were landed with the stock for a year or two.
Revelstoke demurred and Peacock, for all his Canadian loyalties,
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929       347
fully supported him: ‘This is undoubtedly a very rich and progres-
sive province but it has been adding to its debt rather rapidly and its
bonds sell upon a basis which would make it very difficult to offer
them in London.’’¢ A loan to Canada was, indeed, one of the few
issues for a country outside Europe that the Bank of England would
have tolerated before the end of 1925. Montague Norman ‘says he
cannot possibly bar a Colonial issue on this market,’ reported
Revelstoke.*” Australia would have been equally favoured, but there
was little likelihood of Barings chancing their arm in that direction.
Farrer had an especial dislike of the Antipodes. Denouncing the
‘spendthrift democracies’ who would go on borrowing till nobody
was left to lend, he concluded, ‘I have always thought our Australian
cousins a particularly vicious example and do not believe for a
moment that they would continue to pay even their interest if we
were unable or unwilling to continue to lend’.*8
   Despite his caution over Ontario, Peacock’s membership of
Barings did lead in the end to an increased interest in Canada. In
 1927 a small company was set up, with a capital of $1 million - half
British, half Canadian - to take advantage of any promising invest-
ment opportunities that might develop in Canada. Of the British
 $500,000, Revelstoke put up $200,000, Cecil Baring, Mildmay and
Peacock $50,000 each and Robert Fleming, of the eponymous bank-
ing house, $100,000.59 The hope was that the capital would build up
substantially out of profits, and with holdings in enterprises like the
Ford Motor Co., Massey-Harris and the Canada Cement Co. it
would certainly have done so swiftly if the recession after 1929 had
not set back investment prospects in Canada, and indeed the world.
   Of Barings’ other traditional clients, loans to Russia ended with
the Bolshevik Revolution and the prospect of recovering money
already lent seemed remote. Barings had no inclination to plunge
deeper into this morass and early in 1919 refused to advance money
on the security of vineyards in the Crimea. ‘I confess that the idea of
discharging the debts of the Grand Dukes leaves me absolutely cold,’
                                                         were
Revelstoke told Stamfordham.® Their sympathies, however,
with the White Russian government in Omsk, and when this govern-
ment proposed to export £10 million in gold to Hong Kong as secu-
rity against a loan to finance the forces of the Omsk government and
General Denikin in South Russia, Barings were ready to help. Alfred
348                      The Sixth Great Power
Holt and Co. provided steamers to pick up the gold but were uneasy
about their strongrooms - eventually it was decided to put the bul-
lion in the deep tank and then to pour in water; ‘this treatment
would in their opinion entirely eliminate the risk of theft’.6' The
Omsk government refused to sell the gold and Barings made them-
selves responsible for placing £3 million of the loan at 7 per cent per
annum for eighteen months. The largest shares went to the joint-
stock banks, though Revelstoke personally took £300,000 and Farrer
£100,000. It was a silly way for the White Russians to do business.
‘The expense . . . to our friends seems to me a crime, commented
Farrer. ‘At the end of the period they will have disbursed some £1.2
million in interest and expenses without any advantage that I can
foresee which they would not have obtained by selling their gold
now.62
   By early 1920 it was clear that the Omsk government was in dis-
array. The Foreign Office declined to say whether it was still in
existence or not and for some months no instructions of any kind
were received, but finally it became clear that Denikin was de facto in
control of whatever White Russian government was left and his
representative authorized the selling of the gold. Barings offered it to
the Treasury but Norman would pay only a very low rate of exchange
between sterling and the dollar on the amount due to be remitted to
New York. Farrer indignantly refused: ‘I told him we could never
justify such a transaction to our clients, and that it was most
unreasonable of the Treasury to hold us up because we wished to
behave like white men.’*? Norman increased his price, but not
enough, and Farrer threatened to sell the gold elsewhere. ‘Don’t do
that,’ said Norman. ‘[The Treasury] would be dreadfully upset, so
would I, and so I believe would you.’ Reluctantly Farrer accepted the
Bank’s offer. ‘It is not as good a settlement as I had hoped to make
nor as good as | think we had a right to make, but we concluded it
would be unwise to go our own way and leave Norman and the
Treasury with sore heads.’6* It was May before Denikin’s successor,
General Wrangel, retrospectively authorized the sale, and it was not
long afterwards that he and what was left of his army were driven
back to the Crimea and fled to Constantinople.
   So far as the Bolshevik government was concerned, Barings con-
sidered that until they would acknowledge and put forward some
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929       349
scheme for repaying the imperial debts, then there could be no fur-
ther dealings with them. They remained convinced that in the end
economic forces would make a settlement inevitable: ‘It is as certain
as night follows day, wrote Farrer in 1923, ‘that before long the
people of that country will of themselves acknowledge the necessity
of recognizing the debt.’¢ It was a long time before Farrer’s logic was
accepted in Moscow. Meanwhile Barings retained the £3.5 million-
odd of Russian funds that had been in their possession at the end of
the war, paid the interest regularly and wondered when they would
be relieved of the responsibility. It was not until 1986, by which
time the total had risen to some £48 million, that a settlement
was reached with the Soviet government and Barings’ stewardship
was over. The imperial treasure which it was so often alleged was
mouldering in the cellars at Bishopsgate existed only in the popular
imagination: the Russian royal family had no account with Barings
and deposited no assets there.
   There could be no equally abrupt severance with Argentina; too
much unfinished business needed to be done. From 1918, however,
Barings were fighting a rearguard action against the superior power
of the American banking houses. At first they could not even get into
the fight. Late in 1919 a gloomy Windham Baring reported that
Buenos Aires was making overtures to New York bankers, including
Barings’ traditional allies Morgans and the City Bank. “There is no
getting away from the fact that the Americans will have the field to
themselves as far as Argentine finance is concerned, as it will cer-
tainly be some time before our Government allows us to take part in
any Argentine finance on a large scale.’** When he visited Buenos
Aires in 1921, however, he found that the name of Barings stull
enjoyed a prestige in Argentina which he feared would long have
been lost.67 The Americans seemed chivalrously reluctant to take
advantage of Barings’ temporary disablement - “Morgans. . . have
been particularly civil and anxious to defer to us, reported Farrer.®®
It seemed that one day Barings might after all be able to reclaim their
former fief.
   The prospects seemed even brighter when in 1923 Barings, in con-
                                                               ,
junction with Morgan Grenfell (as J. S. Morgan had now become)
were exceptionally allowed by the Treasury to issue £2.5 million 5
per cent bonds for the development of the Port of Buenos Aires. The
350                     The Sixth Great Power

issue was heavily oversubscribed and went immediately to a pre-
mium of 12 per cent. For Barings this happy result was doubly gall-
ing. In Argentina it gave rise to bitter complaints that the price was
too low and Barings had made extravagantly large profits - the pre-
mium was, indeed, striking, admitted Mildmay, ‘but the margin
between success and failure is very small. That is to say, either people
throng to apply fora loan or people do not apply at all.’°? In London
it showed how much money there was waiting to be invested in
issues ofthis kind. Yet Barings were not allowed to bring the horse to
the water. In 1925, when the Argentine government offered Mor-
gans and Barings the chance to bring out a $40 million loan on most
generous terms, Barings had to refuse: “The embargo on foreign
issues is stronger than ever.’7° ‘Barings must of course cooperate with
those who have the good of our country at heart,’ commented
Mildmay sanctimoniously, but doing so left a sour taste in the
mouth.7!
   It was not until the end of 1925, with a return to the gold standard,
that the merchant banks were once more free to raise money for any
part of the world that took their fancy. Lord Beaverbrook character-
istically marked the occasion by sending a messenger to Barings with
a bill for which he demanded payment in gold. “His action was only
taken, of course, to embarrass us,’ wrote Revelstoke, ‘and he must
have been disappointed to have had his £25 paid to him in gold with-
out demur. But it is a vicious move on his part, and shows an
unnecessarily unreasonable, vindictive spirit.’72
_ What the Treasury gave with one hand, it took away with the
other. The unkindest cut came in 1926, when another $25 million of
Argentine bills had to be placed. This time the British Treasury for-
mally placed no obstacle, but the stamp duty which they levied
forced Barings to tender at a price 1'/2 per cent worse than that avail-
able in New York, a difference which the Argentines could hardly be
expected to ignore. In 1927 Barings for the same reason had to refuse
to participate in a number of issues where they knew they could not
compete with the American price. Still the Argentines remained
remarkably loyal to their old friends. In 1929 a request was made for
an immediate advance of £5 million. Mildmay for the first time
talked to Everard Meynell in Buenos Aires by telephone. The result
was not wholly satisfactory; Mildmay knew that it was Meynell by
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:     1918-1929        351
the tone of his voice but: ‘What you said was indistinguishable; it
sounded as if you were trying to shout with pebbles in your
mouth.’73 The attitude of the Argentine President, on the other
hand, could not have been bettered. He had, reported Evelyn
Bingham Baring, who was visiting Buenos Aires, ‘an insane desire to
deal with London and Baring Brothers and Co. Ltd at all costs’. He
had turned down a multiplicity of offers from New York. ‘Cannot we
and Great Britain profit by this unique opportunity?’7* This time all
went well; after a frantic flurry of telegrams, terms were agreed by
the end of the year. It did not represent a real turn of the tide, but it
was comforting to find that after more than a hundred years so much
good will persisted.
   This falling away of Barings’ traditional issuing business was in
part compensated for by the great increase in loans raised for
Europe. It was not until after 1926 that this really gained its
full momentum - between 1926 and 1928 Barings made twelve
issues in London for continental governments, Hambros thirteen
and Morgan Grenfell six’5 - but a new pattern had long before been
established. ‘I am sure that if private firms are to survive amidst the
constantly increasing competition of companies, the more friendly
terms on which they are with each other, the better it will be for their
wellbeing,’ Farrer told J. S. Morgan.’¢ Barings acted on this precept
by forging the closest possible alliance with two other veterans of
merchant banking, Rothschilds and Schroders. Forgotten - or at any
rate concealed - was the animosity of the nineteenth century;
together these three banks established a powerful cartel which com-
peted for business as a unit, one bank taking the lead in each country
and dividing up the liabilities and the profits between them. So close
was the relationship that Barings practically refused to join a syndi-
cate raising a French loan in 1927 unless Schroders were also
included. Lazards, another participant, pleaded that Schroders were
a German house, with no standing in this business, but Barings were
obdurate. Only the fact that Lionel Rothschild told Arthur Villiers
that his house had agreed to Schroders’ exclusion induced Barings
reluctantly to give way.’’
   Czechoslovakia was a country in which Barings took the lead and
controlled the negotiations, and since it was also the first country in
Central Europe to receive a loan, the case deserves a little study.
352                     The Sixth Great Power

Barings first heard of the possibility in November 1921 from
Michael Spencer-Smith, a former colleague of Farrer’s and a
Director of the Bank of England, who had promised the premier,
Dr Befies, that he would try to help him raise money in London.
Spencer-Smith did not pretend that it would be easy, and Farrer was
also without illusions. Czechoslovakia seemed more likely to prove
solvent than any other of the Central European states but the politi-
cal risks would make the public chary of investing in such an area.’8
Anyway, the country had only recently been conjured from the old
Austro-Hungarian empire and the man in the street hardly knew
what or where it was. The man in the bank was not much better
informed; as late as April 1922 Barings were having to instruct
Kidder Peabody that Czechoslovakia should be written as one word
and with a small ‘s’.
   In February 1922, while Barings were still hesitating, Dr Befies
arrived in London. ‘A nice little man,’ Farrer judged him, ‘bright,
quick on the uptake, very human, and so far as we can see entirely
simple and straightforward.’7? Serious negotiations then began,
made more troublesome by the fact that the Czech negotiator, Dr
Vilem Pospisil, spoke no English and very little French; considering
this, said Farrer handsomely, ‘it is creditable to him to have got
through at all’.8° The Czech team needed as much education as the
British public. Seeing that would-be underwriters were quick to
come forward, they assumed the loan could be for as much as they
wished. ‘It is hard to get them to realize that selling loans to
underwriters is a very different matter from placing a loan with the
permanent investor. At the first breath of an adverse wind, every
underwriter 1s a seller and the credit of a country may be damaged
for months or years to come.’$!
   In the event Barings apportioned the first tranche of what was
eventually to be a £10 million loan so that $14 million was issued by
Kidder Peabody in the United States, £2.8 million in conjunction
with Schroders and Rothschilds in London and £500,000 by Hopes
in Amsterdam. The issue got away to an excellent start and was soon
at a premium of 2 per cent. Masaryk, the President of Czechoslo-
vakia, called personally on the British Minister in Prague, Sir George
Clerk, to express his pleasure. The success had been almost too great,
Clerk told Revelstoke, ‘for besides increasing an already sufficiently
         ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929        353
developed conceit [in the Czechs], it has led some people to think
that the terms might have been less stringent’. With a bluntness that
was something less than diplomatic Clerk pointed out that Czecho-
slovakia had to pay ‘for being a fraction of Central Europe - not an
encouraging field for the British investor - and for its comic opera
name, and so on’.82
   The advice was ineffective. Within a few weeks Helbert, Wagg
were back in the market with a £1.5 million loan for the City of
Prague. The State of Czechoslovakia stock promptly went to a dis-
count, and though Barings propped it up fora while they were not at
all dissatisfied by the chagrin which this setback caused the Ministry
of Finance in Prague. Farrer read Dr Pospisil a stern lesson when it
was rumoured at the end of the year that enquiries were being made
about a further national loan. ‘Even in London millions do not grow
like cherries on a cherry tree. . . , he wrote. ‘We and our associates
would not fora moment pretend to claim the monopoly of Czecho-
slovak business, but we do think it was due to us, if such an operation
was contemplated, that we should have been first consulted in the
matter.’83 Pospisil denied that any such move was in the air, and it
was not until mid-1923 that Barings were asked to bring out the
second tranche of the loan.
   Politics then intervened. The British Foreign Office had been
instrumental in urging Barings to take up the loan in the first place,
now they were displeased with the attitude of the Czechs on the
Reparations Committee. The government ‘would not go so far as to
veto our raising further money for the Czechs,’ Farrer told ter
Meulen of Hopes, but ‘it would no doubt be sorry to see us doing
it’.84 Barings urged the Czechs to discuss the matter direct with the
Foreign Office, and only when this had been sorted out did they feel
free to proceed with the second tranche. It went even better than the
first. Barings paid 91 and offered the bonds to the public at 96%,
yielding interest of 8.3 per cent. Of the £1.85 million issued in Lon-
don, Rothschilds were allotted £337,000 and received applications
for £1.7 million and Schroders £236,000 against £1.4 million.
‘Messrs Barings have undertaken all the negotiations and arrange-
ments for the loan, including the underwriting,’ Lionel Rothschild
told his cousins in Paris.8* Though they had exacted a substantial
payment for the trouble and the risk, they had given value for money
354                     The Sixth Great Power

and established the credit of the fledgling republic in a way few other
houses could have matched.
   Of the other loans raised in London for the continental countries,
those for Hungary were managed by Rothschilds: “We value very
highly your unfailing friendship and much of the success of the loan
was due to your wise and able guidance,’ Lionel Rothschild assured
Revelstoke.8¢ With a £3.5 million loan for the City of Berlin it was
Schroders who led. But they were not the only London houses with
whom Barings worked. Morgan Grenfell and the Westminster Bank
were the partners when a loan for Belgium was mooted in 1926.
Here, as so often in this period, Barings found themselves expected
to act in part as an arm of British foreign policy. The British govern-
ment were preoccupied by the risk that Belgium might slip into
chaos and, perhaps, then into communism, and felt a loan might
save the day. Peacock saw the force of this, ‘but I cannot help think-
ing a good deal also of the danger to Barings and our colleagues if we
should issue something that is not sound that might come to grief in
the very near future’.8? In the end a £7.25 million loan was issued and
heavily oversubscribed: the profits from underwriting alone netted
Lord Revelstoke’s various accounts (including the assets he man-
aged for other people) £15,000, Lord Lansdowne £300, and Sir
Edwin Lutyens £37.10/-.
   The fact that Barings were almost always working in partnership
with at least one other house did not diminish the conviction of the
partners that there was something very special about their status. In
1928 a loan to the Portuguese was in question but was being viewed
with some suspicion in London because of the doubtful constitu-
tional standing of their government. ‘We must remember,’ wrote
Mildmay, ‘that in American as well as British opinion, the Baring
Brothers and Co. trade-mark will be regarded as sufficient evidence
of legality, as good or better than the League of Nations.’88
   Outside Europe it was Brazil that provided the most business.
This was traditional Rothschild territory and Barings were scrupu-
lous about taking no initiative which might suggest they were any-
thing but junior partners. Such an attitude might have caused
embarrassment when the Permanent Under-Secretary at the For-
eign Office in 1926 tried to use his friendship with Peacock to stop
the issue of a loan to Brazil. The British government were annoyed
          ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’: 1918-1929           355
with the Brazilians for blocking German entry to the League of
Nations. ‘It is obvious we can do nothing except to restrain, for the
moment only I hope, any intempestive enthusiasm on the part of
Messrs N.M.R. and Co.,’ Revelstoke commented. ‘It would be well to
keep in close touch with the F.O.’8? The enthusiasm was duly
restrained and the business lost to the United States, but Barings
were still involved in seven Brazilian issues between 1921 and 1930.
A £25 million Japanese loan to repair the damage done by the earth-
quake of 1923 was also a formidable success. For this Morgan
Grenfell and other banks were added to the more usual triumvirate
of Barings, Schroders and Rothschilds: the result was ‘quite satisfac-
tory to us from a pecuniary point of view,’ said Farrer; a modest rep-
resentation of what had been an extremely profitable operation.®°
   In the Middle East the Société d’Etudes for the Trans-Persian rail-
way lingered on as loth to die. After characteristic shilly-shallying the
Foreign Office in 1919 finally committed itself to a blunt: ‘Present
circumstances certainly render desirable the dissolution of the
Société in question.’%! Inexplicably, the following year Revelstoke
assured Routkowsky: ‘I have had no indication that the British Gov-
ernment has expressed a desire to see the Société d’Etudes wound
up.’%2 Possibly there had been a change of heart in Whitehall. Cer-
tainly Barings could not have been playing some deep game on their
own behalf, since they had no interest in the Société’s preservation
and welcomed the death of its chairman in 1932 as a reason for giv-
ing the enterprise its final quietus. This did not imply a lack of inter-
est in Persia. In mid-1925 Villiers wrote to Sir Percy Lorraine, the
British Minister in Teheran, to deplore the fact that ‘the Americans
are endeavouring to retain the Persian business for themselves to the
exclusion of British interests,’ and that the restrictions on foreign
issues imposed in London made their task lamentably easy. Could
not some help be given under cover of development by the Anglo-
Persian Oil Company?% Lorraine cautiously replied that the worst
thing for Persia would be cut-throat Anglo-American competition.
Barings persisted, and armed the local representatives of Anglo-
Persian with a letter stating that in principle Barings and Schroders
were disposed to help develop the national transport system. ‘T can-
not give you a very encouraging account of conditions over here,’
Villiers told Lorraine. ‘We are lending abroad more than would
356                      The Sixth Great Power

appear to be justified by the amount of goods which we export, and
our home trade has hardly fulfilled expectations.’ But things were
looking up; ‘every year since the war we have made distinct progress
towards sounder and more settled conditions’.**


Unfortunately the sounder conditions were never established, in
part because of the speculative fever in the United States and the
scale of their foreign lending. Revelstoke wrote in alarm of a situa-
tion in which, even in the more remote hamlets of the West, the
‘ticker’ buzzed busily all day as the speculators gambled on perpetual
growth,5 while Farrer remarked that they were ‘aghast at the size
and number of their foreign loans. . .. How can these borrowers
fulfil such obligations? or is London judging from her past experi-
ences as complete a back number as I feel and know I am myself?’%
   It was against this background of incipient disaster that Revel-
stoke, at the end of 1928, accepted Winston Churchill’s invitation to
join Sir Josiah Stamp as British delegate at the forthcoming con-
ference on German reparations in Paris. Revelstoke was by then
sixty-six, and had been carrying the brunt of the responsibilities at
Barings for almost forty years. He must from time to time have con-
templated retirement, but he showed no signs of any such intention
when he wrote to Peacock from Paris urging his partner to accept the
task of Chairman of the Channel Tunnel Committee. The confer-
ence could not last much longer, he wrote: ‘I hope and think that at
any rate by the end of April I ought to be free, and in that case I can
assure you that it will be with particular pleasure that I shall return to
my Penates at Bishopsgate.’97
   The work in Paris was gruelling. Moreau, the head of the French
delegation, refused to modify the existing reparation terms by one
iota ~ ‘he shuts his mouth like a steel trap when Schacht pleads pov-
erty and inability to pay’.°8 Schacht, the German delegate, was
equally intransigent: ‘with his hatchet, Teuton face and burly neck
and badly fitting collar ... ,’ wrote Revelstoke in his diary, ‘he
reminds me of a sealion at the Zoo, which is half out of the water on a
rock, and is waiting to catch a fish thrown to him by his keeper’.9
The Italians felt it their duty to be as difficult as the French. J. P.
Morgan, for the Americans, was ‘like a wild bison in a shop that sells
          ‘The Concern Remains a Family Affair’:    1918-1929      357
Dresden china’. Revelstoke, in atrabilious mood, deplored the power
of the United States and the unhappy lot of the British who, ‘in spite
of their loss of blood and treasure since 1914, find themselves
ground under the iron heel of the insolent wealth of aTrans-Atlantic
people who must be considered the greatest profiteers that the
World has ever seen’.!°° Finally the representatives of the British
Treasury drove Revelstoke to despair, with their ‘supercilious man-
ner and sneering attitude for the whole of the rest of mankind’ and
their ‘impossibly inelastic preconceptions’.!°!
   Most of these disobliging observations, it is only fair to say, were
written when Revelstoke had fallen prey to the virulent flu epidemic
that was ravaging Europe. He was ill and tired but the demands of
the conference did not allow him to relax. Sometimes the leaders of
the delegation would convene at his bedside to argue acrimoniously
over his ailing body. By mid-April a complete breakdown of negotia-
tions was imminent. On 18 April the committee sat until 6.45 p.m.
and the Germans walked out in high anger: ‘Schacht was quite
impossible today, Revelstoke wrote in his diary in a shaky hand. It
was his final entry. He suffered a major heart attack in the early
hours of 19 April and was dead when his servant came to call him in
the morning. His body was brought back to England and buried at
Membland. A special trainload of family and friends travelled to
Devon for the funeral. ‘It seemed to be a matter of course,’ wrote his
niece Daphne, ‘that Lady Desborough and her daughter Imogen
should take their places as chief mourners.’1°
  Lord Revelstoke left unsettled estate of £2,492,000, of which
£1,087,000 was paid in duty. To the National Gallery he left his
Guardi, his Van de Capelle and the ‘well-varnished Canalettos’; the
National Portrait Gallery got his pictures by Hone and Chandler. He
left £100,000 to King Edward’s Hospital, whose Treasurer he had
been for many     years; £50,000   to Guy's; £25,000 to St Mary’s,
Paddington, Medical Schools and £5 to a Baring godchild. Though
his death inevitably diminished the money immediately available to
the house for day-to-day operations, it did not affect the capital or
reserves. Besides the £2 million or so which figured in the published
balance sheet there was, Cecil Baring told Lord Stamfordham, ‘at
least as much more money in the business which might, if the need
for strict accounting arose, be set down as “surplus or undivided
358                     The Sixth Great Power

profits” ’.1°3 The growth of Barings over the previous decade had not
been spectacular, especially when compared with certain of their
rivals, but the business was sound and prosperous. Alfred Mildmay
was now the senior partner, but everyone accepted that it was to Pea-
cock that the house looked for its future direction.
  ‘You will see, Cecil Baring, now Lord Revelstoke, wrote to
Stamfordham, ‘that the concern remains, as a whole, a family affair,
although it has always been laid down here, and we of the family
constantly recognize, that there can be no place for one of our
members unless he shews the requisite character and brains. It is a
team that I feel sure will pull together, and to which the term “happy
family” can unhesitatingly be applied. In spite of the loss which we
have suffered, which cannot in its entirety be made good, we are
going to do our best to meet the responsibilities which are entrusted
to us, and to conduct our business with the same impersonal ends
which have guided our predecessors.’!°4
   Stamfordham in his reply spoke for George V, who had profited
so signally from Lord Revelstoke’s advice throughout his life. The
King was confident, he wrote, that ‘with the varied personnel of the
Baring family, strengthened by the addition of Mr Peacock, the
Board of Directors will not only be “family” in character, and a
united “happy family”, but remain a powerful national institution,
animated by the great traditions of which John was so justly
proud’.!°5 Those traditions, established   towards   the end of the
eighteenth century, had been carried through for almost one hun-
dred and fifty years with astonishing consistency. The language was
different, the sums of money vastly greater, but the spirit of Francis
Baring’s partners’ room still ruled in Bishopsgate. Intelligence was
desirable, clubability no defect, but integrity was indispensable.
Lord Revelstoke had done as much as anyone to ensure that this
scale of values had survived. He had good reason to be proud of his
accomplishment.
                          Epilogue
                           1929-1987


It is now nearly sixty years since the death of Lord Revelstoke, some-
thing over a quarter of Barings’ total life span to date. The period
between 1929 and 1939 was marked by a radical reshaping of the
house’s activities in the field of issues. The slump between 1929 ana
1934 shook still further the strength of sterling and disrupted the
world’s monetary order. New issues for overseas borrowers were less
than half what they had been in the previous decade, while issues for
British borrowers were three times as numerous. Peacock made a
speciality of corporate finance, and under his direction Barings
played an important part in financing and reorganizing British busi-
ness. The formation of the Lancashire Cotton Corporation, the
reconstruction of the Royal Mail Group, the electrification of the
Southern Railway and the extension of the Piccadilly Line to
Finsbury Park in the north and Hammersmith           in the west, the
takeover by Charringtons of Hoare’s Brewery, were only some of the
larger enterprises in which Barings were involved.
   During the Second World War, as between 1914 and 1918, tradi-
tional merchant banking was almost impossible to practise. Issuing
stopped altogether, the credit business collapsed, and with all the
partners involved in some kind of war work, the house was con-
cerned mainly with routine banking business such as the payment of
dividends and the management of client accounts. Though Bishops-
gate never closed, most of the remaining staff moved down to Lord
Northbrook’s old family home, Stratton Park - acquired from the
school which by then occupied it - where they stayed for the dura-
tion of the war.
   After 1945 Peacock continued to lead the house. He was assisted
                                 359
360                     The Sixth Great Power

by Howard Millis, a solicitor formerly with the City firm of
Slaughter and May, who specialized in corporate finance. Invest-
ment expertise was supplied by Arthur Villiers and Evelyn Baring.
Sir Edward Reid looked after the banking business and Lord
Ashburton played an important general role with responsibility fora
number of orporate relationships. Lord Errington and John Philli-
more respectively represented the younger element of the family
and brought Argentine experience. Errington, who succeeded his
father as Lord Cromer in 1953, was to take leave of absence from the
firm in 1959 to become Minister at the Embassy in Washington and
without returning to the firm went on to become Governor of the
Bank of England at the age of forty-three. When Millis retired in the
1950s, his place was taken by Andrew Carnwath who with A. W.
Giles led the house team in many important mergers and takeovers
during the 1960s. It was Giles who was above all responsible for
keeping alive Barings’ connection in South-East Asia - particularly
with Jardine Matheson, a significant holding in which was acquired
in the late 1950s.
   When Peacock retired in 1954 his role as senior partner was taken
over by Evelyn Baring. He in turn was succeeded in 1963 by Sir
Edward Reid, followed in 1967 by Lord Cromer, at the end of the
latter’s five-year term of office as Governor of the Bank of England.
In 1971 Cromer was appointed British Ambassador in Washington.
His place as senior partner was filled for brief periods, first byJohn
Phillimore and then by Sir Andrew Carnwath. John Baring, the
eldest son of Lord Ashburton, was appointed Chairman of the Ex-
ecutive Committee on Lord Cromer’s departure and on Sir
Andrew’s retirement in 1974 was named the first Chairman of
Baring Brothers.
   The change in the traditional business of Barings became still
more accentuated after 1945. With sterling far weaker even than
before the war, issues for overseas borrowers became a rarity in the
1950s, 1960s and 1970s. The sterling market was opened to overseas
borrowers, however, on a number of occasions during this period.
Barings led sterling debt issues for the World Bank on two occasions
in the 1950s and again in 1972, for the Inter American Development
Bank in 1964 and for the Government of Japan in 1963. It was a par-
ticular feather in the firm’s cap to be selected as lead manager for the
                         Epilogue: 1929-1987                         361
two international agencies; in the case of the World Bank, Barings
were unanimously put forward as lead manager by the group of six
banks (Barings, Hambros, Lazards, Morgan Grenfell, Rothschilds
and Schroders) whom the World Bank had selected.
   While the sterling market was only opened to foreign borrowers as
an exception between 1945 and 1979, Barings remained active as a
manager of new issues of equity and debt securities for UK issuers
during this period - though the market for new issues of debt saw
little marked activity in the 1970s. The firm also featured among
those London houses who took part in the development of the
Eurobond market, and kept its relationship with foreign clients alive
in that way. It was not until 1979 that exchange controls were aban-
doned and Barings availed themselves of the possibility of issuing
long- or medium-term sterling debt for countries like Finland and
Sweden. The house has since emerged as a leader in new issues of
sterling debt securities.
    Acceptances, the other pillar on which the prosperity of Barings
 traditionally rested, have remained a feature, though far less signifi-
 cant than in the past as a measure of business activity, since they are
 today just one of a number of facilities offered to clients. Liabilities
 on acceptances at the end of 1987 stood at over £350 million. In 1981
 Barings, with Rothschilds and Samuel Montagu, were responsible
 for setting up a syndicate of more than fifty banks to finance an
acceptance credit of £365 million for Petroleos Mexicanos, at that
time the largest acceptance credit ever arranged in London.
   Corporate finance has played an increasingly significant part in
the bank’s activities. Most of the acquisitions and mergers which
Barings have organized have taken place with relatively little bother,
but from time to time contested bids have commanded the head-
lines for weeks or even months ata time. A particularly conspicuous
example was the great battle in the early 1960s, when Barings
advised Courtaulds in their fierce and finally successful resistance to
a takeover bid from ICI. Breweries, textiles and overseas trading
companies were the industrial sectors in which Barings were particu-
larly active. They were involved in takeover transactions for Watneys
                                                                     of
and Whitbreads, and played an important part in the building up
                                                          was the
Allied Breweries, now Allied-Lyons. Another cause célébre
                                                           an
takeover of AEI by GEC in which Barings managed to achieve
362                      The Sixth Great Power

increase in the value of the offer, though AE] lostits independence at
the end of a hard-fought battle.
   The corporate finance business has never been more active than it
is now. The roll of clients for whom the firm has recently acted, or
whom it has advised, includes national and international names
such as Royal Insurance, Pirelli, Blue Circle Industmes, Cathay
Pacific Airways, Allied-Lyons, Ferranu, Philips, W.H. Smith, Bank of
England, H.M. Government, Royal Bank of Scotland, Union Bank
of Switzerland, The World Bank, and this is but a selection of some
of the better-known names.
   Investment managements a part of the business in which growth
had been outstanding. Before 1939 this was done on an informal
basis for frends and clients; by the mid-1950s the securttes man-
aged on a discretionary basis for clients were valued at some £15
million. The growing complexity of the securities market, together
with an immense upsurge in the amount of money available for
investment, especially in pension funds, has led to a wide range of
charities, trusts and funds, as well as private clients, concluding that
their affairs would be better looked after by professionals. At the end
of 1987 Barings managed about £10.7 billion for a wide range of cli-
ents through companies in London, Boston, Tokyo and Hong Kong.
   Compared with the Bntsh clearing banks, Barings is a minnow
among whales. In comparison with the other merchant banks, it can
hold up its head, but is notamong the largest. Yet in 1987 its balance
sheet stood at some £2.7 billion, having grown from £276 million in
a little over a decade. The old offices in Bishopsgate have vanished,
replaced by a twenty-storey tower block. The worldwide staff of the
Barings Group is not far short of two thousand and growing.
   In the mid-1960s existing inheritance tax laws and the possibility
of a wealth tax being introduced by the ruling Labour Government
were seen to pose a threat to the continuity of Barings in its then
form. Partly in order to meet this threat it was decided in 1969 to
transfer a majority stake in the equity of the business to a newly-
formed charity called The Baring Foundation. In 1985 a major capi-
tal reorganization took place with a new top company, Barings ple,
being set up and the balance of the equity being transferred to the
Foundation. Baring Brothers remains the merchant banking subsid-
iary, with the investment management business being grouped in a
                        Epilogue: 1929-1987                        363
parallel operating company. Control of the policy of the Barings
Group rests with the directors of Barings ple while the economic
interest in its equity is owned by the Foundation, which applies the
flow of dividends to charitable purposes. In 1987 it made grants
totalling £2.6 million to a wide range of national and other charities
with particular emphasis on social welfare.
   Two hundred and twenty-five years after Francis Baring opened
his agency in London, his four-times great-grandson, John, is
Chairman of the house, and his three-times great-grandson,
Nicholas, is Deputy Chairman. Nicholas’s brother Peter is group
finance director and another Baring is a director of Baring Brothers &
Co. Limited, while three more are working in the house. Of the eight
men and women who sit on the board of The Baring Foundation,
five are members of the family. Sixty years ago Cecil Baring told Lord
Stamfordham, “The concern remains, as a whole, a family affair.’
Immense though the growth has been in the business and in the
number of individuals involved, there is still strong family represen-
tation at the top level today working in partnership, as has so often
been the pattern in the past, with non-family colleagues of great
ability. There is nothing in the constitution of Barings or of the
Foundation which requires family involvement, and its conunua-
tion depends on a flow of suitable individuals. However, there is no
lack of up-and-coming Barings in the wings, and this, together with
the interest of other members of the group in seeing the traditional
spirit of the house maintained, gives good reason to hope that the
business will continue to have a distinctive feeling for some time yet.
                                                                                                                           Ww       i




>
                                                                                             ~               :                  ‘
                                                                                                                            o4


                                                 Pie                                             «7                   Lak)


                                                                    |                                                     rn
     ’   ,            ‘       b                                *        ~      :C4                                        tu 4




             '    5               :          ;         Poti    GP’ 4)         TH4s     tia       peligro                                J
        ten. wt te   yikes                                    C2  aa <a rap ar!Einhae eS
    ttt         SESH   Sb                                       ek ol le, RGSS vale
    SSS Th es     Tees)                (ee         we +) phe Ot)            seltpaniciga eastoepaeasell
(CHG!             cher siesta                                               oe ee     intecy! eer Sele                    eee
    Feat eed its Aie, Gigs) Sh ata                                                    D6                   SS
    a0           they encoun mb                                             ot aL
                                                                               piaeas <a
eee:vpanemendgian                                                           aaa                       oF         ry

                                        if
                                                       =           rtd                Amp PE                          6
                          a

                                                       ah           ei               esta                  ae :
phan                  denna                                    A               PED               ¢ oe
     6S!                              eeset              he et ee
                APPENDIX I


     Abridged Baring Family Trees


Fig. 1 Family of John Baring of Larkbear, Exeter
Fig. 2 Northbrook Family
Fig. 3 Ashburton Family
Fig. 4 Cromer/Howick Families
Fig. 5 Revelstoke Family
DO
                                                            uyof     Suueg
                                                                        jo                ‘Ieaqysey]
                                                                                                  Ja1axq
                                                                                       (8bZ1-Z691)
                                                                       Wi        6cZ[
                                                                             YIIgGkZI/qJ3JMOA
                                                                       'P)           (99Z1

            uyof                    |       sewoy                  (41S)
                                                                     J        sioued Suleg                         sapey)                             yioqeziyy
                (9I81-O€Z1)                   (8SZI-€€Z1)                    1-ObZ1)
                                                                                  (O18                           1-7rZ1)
                                                                                                                      (678                              (608I-FbZ1)
     wi      Z£Sz{                  wi     SSL]                        UW          LOL]                    Ws         LOL                      “WwW   O82
      suUy Joyleg                        yioqezi|q
                                                 Jayied                  Le SULUD}                             jasesiepy
                                                                                                                       p[noy               uyof   Suruung
                                                                                                                                                       Jaje])
    'P)    (S9LI                                                       'P) (F081                           'P)    (Z181                     Pd         JOC
       |                                                                                                      (a                             ISI}   (UONBIID
    7    suos                                                                                                  SUIAR]anssi                      |
  $         siaqysnep                                                                                                                         | uOs

 (JIS)
    |       sewioy                Jopuexo[y        Aiud}                               WITTIMA                              231095        ¢                 slaqysnep
            (8¢81-ZZZ1)            (8b81-bZZ1)        (8b81-9ZL1)                        (0781-6221)                          (pS8I-18Z1)
  99s ‘BI
        Z                 das ‘BIJ
                                ¢              908 $B                        Ww        Og]                        “WwW|     908
                                                                     saouR1y |
                                                                             -NapnegWoy
                                                                                     —-uosd                  iouepyy
                                                                                                                  pep Ao]            Aa]hQ,q
                                                                             'P)       (L281                      P)         (€€81
                                                                                 |                                     |
                                                                             |       uUOS                         $         SUOS
                                                                       |                    Jaiysnep         g                 slaiysnep
                                                              slaiysnep ¢
                                                                 UOS|
                                                                    |
                                                         Suruurp] PUIMOY
                                                                1s6, wi                                                       onssi OU                      onssi Ou
                                                        YOOLGGUON WOLD G16                                                            |                         |
                                                                                                                                                                        -S161)
                                                                                                                                                                       (P)
                                                                                                                                                                         F681
                                                                                                                                                                       'P)9661
                                       ansst ou               uyof siouely                                              AquiojdJaqgy 29ual0]4 ~-Uosplaeq epy
                                            |                       |                                                        6681 pug wi         68] 3s] Wi
                                       (9261 P)                 (6161 P)                                                         YOOIGqUoNfo avy pug
                                 UYJD souRIsuoy — sa}TeYD UA}PAg                                           (0L-¥581)                      (6761-0581)
 anssi Ou         anssi OU          Ib6] pug “wi         $16] 3s] Ww                     Jaysnep]            inyuy                        38109‘) sIduRIY
      |                |                   YOOLGGLION UOLDG Yip
(p6-1681)    (9S61-$881)                          (Lb61-7881)
 uodny           uyof                             inyuy sours                                                                                       (L981 'P)
                                                                                                                                                ums yioqezi|q
                                                                                                                                                   Shs Ww
                                                              (S$€61 P)                                                                    YOoLgqUon fo Avy IS] 12k]
                                                        3408 =o S Ra                                              siiyanep ¢                      (6061-9781)
                                                            S281 Wi                                            (JUBJUI UP “p) UOS |                 sewoy]
                                                          (SI61-OS81)
                                                                        sIouely
    siaiysnep Z              Jaiysnep |
       uos |                   suos 7                              ee
           |                      |                                                                                          (p881 P)        (8€81 P)
      (S881 'P)               (O81 'P)               (981 'P)                                                          paemoy eyoqery Ape] = Aaa aur
  dwiay surjore)             Ajeas Are;           Jayo1og eljawy                                                           tS] pug "wi          S78] IS] WH
   9p81 puc Ww               O¢8] Is] Ww              78] “Wi               powiewun                                          YOOLQqUoN UoAv IS] 1218]
                             (62-2081)              (88-1081)               (€£81-6621)                                                   (9981-9621)
    ssanysnep ¢               sapeyy                   uyof                   sewoy |,                                                [[!yusoy] sours y                ‘
                                                                                          JIS(8p81-ZZZ1)


                                                                        (9b81 ‘P) Ajeas Arew
                                                                                       W
                                                                                       $6L]
                                                                    Suueg      sewoyy]
                                                                                                                                                                       ¢ Old
                                                                                                                                                                                         -1£€61
                                                                                                                                                                                         (eS8C
                                                                                                                                                                ulqoy           uyof
                                                                                                                                                                         —
                                                                                                                                                              uUnodeHY SIOg $76 | ‘Wi
                                                                                                                                                               uoLinggsy uUoLvg 419
                                                                                                                                                                      ( -8681)
                                               Jaiysnep |                                                                            anssiou — suaqysnep $           Jopuex2[V
                              Jaiysnep |          SUOS ¢                                      Joiysnep |                                 |            |                    |
                                 os |                |                                              |                                (6S61 'P)                     |
                                    |           (F961 “P)                                      (1S61 'P)                        Ajjauuog saoursy        (061 ‘P) POOH [2qew
                              ueuty May        YUWS SATO                                    uosqoH Piney]                          9061 puc Wi               688] IS] “WwW
                 7sinysnep

                                £06] “Ww         £06] “Ww        pewewmun                      068] Ww                                         UOLUNGGSY UOlvg G16
                             (9S61-O881)       (9I16I-€Z81)     (8461-6981)                  (1961-2981)                                           (8£61-9981)
                                 |Aley              Ant)         Jopuexa[y                    yoUapa1y                                                SIDURIY
            be                    -                     ae            |                           }___]
                                                                                                                    (O£61
                                                                                                                    P)
                                                                                              Aqsiq e1ou0sT]
                                                                                                          Wi
                                                                                                          98]
                                                                                            uOLiNggsy UoLvg Gp
                                                                 (99-L£€8T)                      (68-S€81)
                                               Jaqysnep |          [Izuaq                       Japuexaly                           $88] ‘uoldweyuoN
                                                    |                 |                                                             jo ssanbiey- yg “Ww
                                                                                                                                                                                     (Z061
                                                                                                                                                                                     P)
                                                                                                                                                                                     (O€-8781)
                                                              slaysnep 7                                                                   Arey;                        Japuexa[Vy
                                                                  UOS |                     (7881 P)                                           |                             |
                                                                     |                  ourssegJO 94nd                                    (€061 P)                     (ZS81 P)
                                                                (+881 'P)            joiaysnep ‘asusu0p{                             dIZUIYIVPy BSINOT          n3evluoy) lawiep Apey
                                                           uolysy BoLWapaly                 Ze] Ww                                         puz w                         4s] “Ul
                                                                 1¢g] wi              uoLINGYsY Wow pig                                            uoLINgYSY UoLDg pug
                             (8€-8181)     (Z£-O181)          (89-9081)                    (89-0081)                                                   (6981-6621)
                               Inyuy        Japuexary          yoUapaly                      sIourly                                                     WII
s1aYysnep        ¢
            L                    |              |             So |                            +                                                             |
                                                                                    (8b81 ‘P)
                                                                                                      (8h81-bZZ1)



                                                                                 weysulg suuy
                                                                                            86L] Ww
                                                                                Japurxayy
                                                           UONBIID        WOLINGYSY
                                                                             JO  PUZ              UL                 191k]IS]
                                                                                                                                                                                        SS
+ Old

                                                                   (8b81-9ZZ1)
                                                            [WH JowolD jo suueg Arua}
                                                         pw pas cO8                   uw     pug sce
                                                         euey    weysulg                   PIII     WeYPUIAA
   \                                                        #1
       Away]         “A WITT          sawef     siaysnepz
  (69-4081)        (€061-ZZ81)       (1061'P)
        |               |
siaysnepZ
       suOS
       |¢UOS        Jaysnep]

               "M
            WITT                prempy          waqoy         paeyory       sewoy                      uA]aAq                    JOVEM |        Jaiysnep
              (92-9781)           (46-8781)       (ST6I-€E€8T) (€8-€E8T)       (€761-6E81)                  (L161-1+81)             ($161-+b81)
        WI 798]        193k]Js]     uodpg        powewun       pawewunwi 106]               191°]IS] [ADFJO      LIULOL)       |
          l                      ayossjaaay                              |               “WH ys]             ‘wi puz         | uOS
        ou anssi        Ww 19g]                                        7   SuOS              Pwd          Ape]         suuayiey    jaysnep]
                          BsINoT] [aeq[Ng                                                        uous |,          auudy
                        P)       (7681                                                 'P)     (8681        P)     (€£61
                             |                                                                  |                 |
                       By
                       §as
                                                                           purjmMoy                   WeYPUlAA                  uA]aAq
                                                                            (€S61-LZ81)                (7761-0881)                (€Z-€061)
                                                                  pug avyfo    Adon’)   Wi          €16]           1218]IS]     UOADY YIINOP]
                                                                      WwW 806]              Ape]       yiouaMmy          Ww   Sco,
        :
                                                                    Ape] Aqny rorya                   cates             Ape] Arey; Aairy

                                                                                            ¢       SUOS
                                                                281095)     Genep¢ efor                                       ‘sapiey)   7      slo1ysnep
                                                           12
                                                     PSE FUR        e
                                                                   wien      3                                    pug    Uowg yImop]
                                                                                                                          =L261)
                                                                                                                            (
                                                       ( -8161)
                                                                                                       suos Z
                                                                                                               ayoqsjaaay
                                                                                                       be6[ Wi
            Jaiysnep      Jaq |    S¥]OYDIN                                                    UOLDG     Git
            {____}           _]
                       ]]PUUOGo~; asoy Ape] “wi                                  siaaysnep Z    -1161)
                                                                                                  (    wodny
                                       (Ob-6061)
                           Auoyluy sours]                           sianysnep ¢
                                  |                                        |              (2261 'P)
                                                                                                          'P)
                                                                                                          (1€6I
                                                                                                          pae|[UOT
                                                                                                          (S€61'P)
                                                                                                          apne;
                                                                                                          —
                           Jadooy-AaTysy                             aquioounq             Z06| ‘Wi                powiewun
                            udjaaq Ape]                              Bot] Q Apey          ayossaaay                 ayOISJIAIY
¢saiysnep

                               $06] WwW             poluewun           $06] W            uodvg ple                 uolvg pug
              (8281)        (6¢61-9281)            (Sh6I-bZ81)      (7£61-S$981)        (b£61-+981)               (6761-£981)      (7981)
              uodny             osny                souney]            pleloAq             pag                              uyof   Inywy
                                                                  P)
                                                                  (7681
                                                                     esinoTy
                                                                     jeaqng
                                                                 Ww
                                                                 198]
                                                                           IYOIJIAIY
                                                                           UOAVY
                                                                           IS]
                                                                           131e]
                                                                  (L6-8781)
                                                        hoes
                                                                                                                                   Se JIC!
                           APPENDIX            II


  Partners of Baring Brothers & Co., 1762-1890
           and Managing Directors of
     Baring Brothers & Co. Limited, 1890-1929

  PARTNERS

  Charles Baring                                    1762-1776
  John Baring                                       1762-1800
  Francis Baring (later Sir Francis, Ist Bt)        1762-1804
  James Mesturas                                    LD dD)
  Charles Wall                                      1781-1809
  Thomas Baring (later Sir Thomas, 2nd Bt)          1804-1809
  Henry Baring                                      1804-1823
  Alexander Baring (later 1st Baron Ashburton)      1804-1830
  John Deacon                                       1809-1823
  Thomas Nixson                                     1809-1828
  Swinton Holland                                   1815-1827
  The Hon. Francis Baring (later 3rd Baron
    Ashburton)                                      1823-1864
  Humphrey Mildmay                                  1824-1847
 John Baring                                        1828-1837
 Joshua Bates                                       1828-1864
  Thomas Baring                                     1828-1873
  Charles Baring Young                              1843-1867
- Russell Sturgis                                   1851-182
  Edward Baring (later 1st Baron Revelstoke)        from 1856*
  Henry Mildmay                                     from 1856*
  Thomas C. Baring                                  1867-1888
 James Price                                        1867-1870
 William Moir                                       1867-c.1872
  Kirkman Hodgson                                   1867-1878
  Charles Norman                                    1867-1889
                                    371
S72                      The Sixth Great Power

James Hodgson                                     from 1867*
The Hon. Francis Baring                           from 1882*
Robert Hodgson                                    from 1882*
Archibald Norman                                  from 1890*
The Hon. John Baring (later 2nd Baron Revelstoke) from 1890*


MANAGING       DIRECTORS

Thomas C. Baring                                          1890-1891
The Hon. Francis Baring                                   1890-1901
Robert Hodgson                                            1890-1908
The Hon. John Baring (later 2nd Baron Revelstoke) 1890-1929
Thomas (Tom) Baring                                       1892-1912
Walter Gair                                               1897-1920
Alfred Mildmay                                            1897-1940
Gaspard Farrer                                            1902-1925
Sydney Ward                                               1904-1933
The Hon. Windham Baring                                   1910-1922
The Hon. Cecil Baring (later 3rd Baron Revelstoke)        1911-1934
Patrick Shaw-Stewart                                      1913-19 t7
Viscount Errington (later 2nd Earl of Cromer)             1913-1916
The Hon. Arthur Villiers                                  1919-1954
Evelyn B. Baring                                          1923-1966
Edward Peacock (later Sir Edward, GCVO)                   1924-1954
Sir Edward Reid (2nd baronet)                             1926-1966
The Hon. Alexander Baring (later 6th Baron
   Ashburton)                                             1927-1969
* Continued beyond 1890 as partners of Baring Brothers & Co. but were not
necessarily directors of Baring Brothers & Co. Limited.
                         APPENDIX               III


                 Baring Brothers & Co.
  Capital, Profits and Losses, Commission
Income and Total of Trial Balance, 1762-1890


Year   Capital       Distributed       Profit and          Total of          Accepting
                        profit             loss         trial balance        and other
                                                                            commission

1762          4200               —                  —                   —                as
1763          4765             423              429            13,879                49
1764          4368             553               353           11,421               258
1765          4500             601              601            23,564               414
1766          8237          —3091           = oy |             26,878               584
1767        11,302               “a             264            31,748               554
1768        13,075             900              900            47,947               849
1769        17,200               =                 =           56,661               892
1770        17,016               =                 a           81,402              es
1771        19,687            3000             3000            87,289              1517
1772        17,849          —1500                  —           93,241              1654
1773        19,323               =                ioe          86,708              1906
1774        19,296               —                 a           TVS AT              2315
1775        19,718             600             1100            (2) 06              3002
1776        19,452               —               500          134,873              3105
1777       20,071             3000             3363           173,412              4248
1778       20,595             2400             1037           159,151              4563
1779       23,321            4000             4426            113,205              4484
1780       28,091             8000             7574           132,646              5021
1781       34,171           10,000           10,297           162,757              6289
1782       41,261           10,000          11,506            129,296              5894
1783       43,951             5000             7354/7         132,434              4645
1784       43,318             3000               ppPs         185,835              5945
1785       46,477             5000           10,258           191,463              6839
1786       53,726             7000            8,374           205,276              a7 32
1787       59,797             8000             6153           333,149              5580
1788       74,923           16,160          11,854            277,161              3633
1789       71,997              600            4092            286,018              6236

                                      373
374                  The Sixth Great Power
ren
Wied Capital Distributed Profit and    Total of            Accepting
                profit       loss   trial balance          and other
                                                          commission

1790        (peers        6300         3730     384,089          8237
1791        74,940        8400         9170     378,104          8043
1792        75,891      14,000       13,268     412,000          9868
Wee:        66,177        3500         8537     365,821        10,448
Ie          76,317      16,100       13,696     407,852        12,573
1795:       oo SF)     28,000       32,383      765,063        19,913
1796       130,156     40,000       37,746    1,875,167        20,732
1797       117,920     42,000       40,729    1,660,534        27,918
1798       138,223     40,000       40,833    1,845,699        20,485
1799       183,675     44,000       45,115    1,136,973        21,119
1800      220,445      66,018       66,753    1,690,966        16,781
1801      225,337      80,034       55,419    1,716,201        28,353
1802      413,576     210,352      211,166    2,260,930        28,237
1803      428,594      80,400       91,465    ZL BJU Ss        48,453
1804      399,168      20,000       18,352    L9Z3,101         20,969
1805      378,413      32,000       38,743    1,749,441        24,296
1806      449,899      50,000       51,874    1,795,895        29,204
1807      428,053      40,000       46,077    1,799,415        32,242
1808      274,843      40,000       36,115    2,585,934        25,078
1809      350,701      44,000       25,744    3,182,378        317359
1810      413,606      26,000       39,718    3,421,615        37,373
1811      366,054            =         9811   ZILIEaAS         27,193
1812      288,540            —         1006   2,810,508        30,894
1813      302,151            se     61,447    3,173,930        42,599
1814      322,192      80,000       53,968    3,284,573        50,958
1815      374,365      60,000      100,276    3,876,853        54,409
1816      355,823         9000      26,784    3,891,109        55,345
1817      416,060      45,000       87,875    3,633,173        48,351
1818      429,318      84,000       67,404    4,631,614        44,456
1819      484,022      20,000       39,175    3,777,842        AS,152
1820      578,193      36,000       —6664     2,851,330        32,910
1821      621,943      72,000      133,107    3,127,263        28,507
1822      502,412      36,000       36,438    2,666,968        25,496
1823      226,146      46,200       36,456    2,004,815        17,783
1824      286,342      50,000      103,142    2,842,246        25,788
1825      452,654     120,000      135,374    2,424,997        31,414
1826      4455126    —65,000      — 56,087    2,110,983        27,666
1827      384,429      20,000       35,378    1,846,278        29,666
1828      309,803            eo     47,106    2,254,518        20,672
                                   Appendices                                 375

 Year   Capital      Distributed       Profit and       Total of       Accepting
                        profit             loss      trial balance     and other
                                                                      commission

 1829     392,459          68,996          25,655        2,195,373         26,294
 1830     292,390          60,000          64,913        3,370,693         47,644
 1831      326,424         48,000          53,612        S795 92)          47,611
 1832     405,818          96,000          97,651        4,236,557         80,701
 1833      525,542        132,000         118,766        4,592,313        110,800
 1834     605,608          84,000          91,160        4,591,385         64,933
 1835     674,018          84,000         129,220        4,886,608         85,261
 1836     776,650         126,000         164,312        6,102,441        1133535
 1837      776,798         18,000        —167,976        3,927,226         76,579
 1838     637,746          72,000          64,413        3,666,675         71,549
 1839      691,489        108,000          71,548        4.492.319         97,243
 1840      756,201        162,000         121,085        3,685,164        103,423
 1841      620,212      — 100,000         118,111        3,770,390         69,178
 1842      546,835       — 36,000             9375       2,992,120         64,033
 1843     497,767               —       -—112,669        3,100,216         56,772
(1844      501,944         36,000          50,294        3,050,421         62,649
 1845      529,082        192,000         181,098        3,333,904         73,210
 1846      589,908        108,000          30,812        3,756,499         78,073
 1847     469,588               =.         98,573        3,308,388        106,456
 1848      477,055        114,000           11,209       3,238,857         88,128
 1849      499,024        168,000         230,102        3,648,392       103,489
 1850      589,613        144,000         159,441        4,546,428        115,989
 1851      624,306        108,000         134,256        4,792,239        104,259
 1852      865,235        192,000         286,486        6,106,027        127,395
 1853      928,727        120,000         140,925        6,661,165        129,504
 1854    1,007,142        120,000         180,811        6,424,494        156,692
 1855    1,099,122        168,000         190,204        7,926,698        144,408
 1856    1,182,535         96,000         210,456        6,957,396        1915732
 1857    1,233,684        120,000         175,343        8,149,021        163,169
 1858    1,349,550        192,000         181,609        7,754,924        168,799
 1859    1,409,365        120,000         123,378        7,718,404        166,102
 1860    1,266,451        145,043         125777.        9,385,914        148,714
 1861    1,268,769        144,000         194,962        9,860,331        1525335
 1862    1,409,061        216,000         217,863        9,234,183        139,503
 1863      772,344         96,000             4944        9,228,457       138,297
 1864      682,195        185,759         204,052       10,525,571        165,450
 1865      627,597        240,000         299,096       11,477,768        161,341
 1866      759,245        336,000         297,233       10,630,337        210,860
 1867    1,388,379        360,000         438,572       12,186,022        269,994
376                       The Sixth Great Power

Year   Capital        Distributed     Profit and       Total of      Accepting
                         profit           loss      trial balance    and other
                                                                    commission

1868    1,824,234          504,000       480,011      17,565,415        315,471
1869    2,072,413          360,000       446,828          n.a.          262,929
1870    2,098,772          144,000       293,749          n.a.          265,960
1871    2,403,129          504,000       334,153          n.a.                ae
1872    2,498,130          266,000       376,716          n.a.          244,229
1873    2,193,845          388,500       242,352          n.a.          212,854
1874    orb Byte oe        140,000       237,958          n.a.          218,022
1875    1,628,765               --+       141,757         n.a.          203,943
1876    1,724,293          210,000        102,553         n.a.          187,877
1877    1,725,362          280,000        149,573         n.a.          218,926
1878    1,811,082          280,000       278,630          n.a.          158,466
1879    1,904,063          350,000       264,440          n.a.          215,059
1880    1,855,269          175,000       223,642          n.a.          209,691
1881    2,222,495          210,000       218,728          n.a.          198,953
1882    2,159,904          240,000       237,410          n.a.          204,930
1883    1,981,200          120,000        1737 79         n.a.          206,179
1884    1,898,745           90,000        124,970         n.a.          199,826
1885    2,157,368          300,000       218,556          n.a.          224,403
1886    2,463,719          480,000       515,445          n.a.          294,261
1887    2,620,292          360,000       319, 142         n.a.          171,571
1888    3,102,368          600,000       643,165          n.a.          219,458
1889    2,452,438          362,000       442,915      27,987,327        282,756
1890    2,954,025                —       368,135      24,095,982        302,185
                                  APPENDIX                IV


       Baring Brothers & Co. Limited, 1890-1930
   Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Figures (1)


Year     Share         Client        Bills      Gross      Expenses    Net      Balance
       capital at   accounts at   accepted at   profits        (3)    profits    sheet
       year end      yearend       year end       (2)                   (4)       total


1891   1,000,000      2,129,970    3,455,927   140,643  15,181  125,462          6,712,205
1892   1,000,000      2,251,041    3,876,582  221,684   42,626   179,058         iota 0+
1893   1,000,000      2,161,173    3,037,728   169,884  63,188  106,697          6,462,160
1894   1,000,000      2,901,571    3,608,382   150,366 41,351    109,015         7,750,963
1895   1,025,000      2,409,231    4,893,919   175,213  61,627   113,586         8,617,340
1896   1,025,000      2,551,920    4,515,542   192,400 45,172    147,228         8,459,742
1897   1,025,000      2,823,071    4,678,974  206,450   46,775   159,676         8,998,909
1898   1,025,000      3,201,575    3,557,178  220,677 45,814     174,863         8,296,458
1899   1,025,000      3,514,189    3,900,266  241,127   46,340   194,787         9,260,488
1900   1,025,000      3,382,858    4,532,186   205,408  50,320   155,088         9.50) 39
1901   1,025,000      3,770,478    4,490,105   200,433  51,343   149,090         waeeS
1902   1,025,000      5,201,506    4,714,587   202,212  55,024   147,188        11,634,016
1903   1,025,000      4,627,592    3,833,856   164,439 62,585    101,854         9,882,503
1904   1,025,000      4,835,183    6,201,543   315,322  $7,341   257,981        12,593,064
1905   1,025,000      7,114,411    7,422,989   521,849  65,310  456,539         16,450,734
1906   1,025,000     11,415,022    7,373,608   257,357  65,608   191,748        20,810,151
1907   1,025,000      4,425,168    5,391,293   256,121  74,507   181,614        11,982,917
1908   1,025,000      4,863,246    6,938,568   607,254 68,573    538,682        14,328,409
       1,025,000      5,404,440    7,771,615   658,673  62,046   596,628        16,099,090
1909
1910   1,025,000      7,526,339    7,498,544   448,571  70,592   377,980        17,813,790
1911   1,025,000      6,412,558    6,263,429   Z19,412  74,869   244,543
       1,025,000      5,840,123    6,810,846   289,718 79,117    210,602        15,518,288
1912
                      6,011,766    6,636,588   437,870 78,197    359,673        15,815,001
1913   1,025,000
                      9,481,297    3,723,682   282,200 103,387   178,813        16,238,785
1914   1,025,000
                     12,483,038    6,781,991 1,188,773  94,337 1,094,436        23,193,245
1915   1,025,000
                     14,484,896    4,613,591   852,667   88,475  764,192        23,395,910
1916   1,025,000
                     17,517,268    5,939,554   683,214  93,302   589,913        28,011,822
1917   1,025,000
                     15,728,333     3,077,331  502,048   89,039  413,008        23,469,826
1918   1,025,000.

                                          S17
   378                                 The Sixth Great Power

 Wear        Share         Client          Bills       Gross      Expenses    Net       Balance
           capital at   accounts at    accepted at     profits       (3)     profits     sheet
           year end      yearend         yearend         (2)                   (4)       total


1919       1,025,000     23,240,711     11,257,865     441,592    183,550    258,042   38,701,625
1920       1,025,000     15,532,070      4,157,670     895,477    133,407    762,070   24,271,031
[921       1,025,000     16,977,543      8,283,430     697,889    133,067    564,822   29,765,651
1922       1,025,000     15,113,012      6,785,757     920,826    141,794    779,032   26,936,797
1973       1,025,000     13,469,571      5,512,430     823,650    133,786    689,863   23,727,350
1924       1,025,000     17,003,047      9,004,163     894,586    137,236    757,351   31,174,516
1925       1,025,000     23,044,315     10,205,631     767,164    142,122    625,042   38,477,181
1926       1,025,000     19,125,898      7,868,871     738,504    232,000    506,504   32,214,916
1927       1,025,000     18,897,751      7,780,572     809,841    233490     576,344   32,142,596
1928       1,025,000     18,411,419      9,411,511     720,438    251,283    469,155   33,392,229
1929       1,025,000     16,366,036      6,780,601     646,724    240,761    405,963   28,807,904


NOTES

(1) The figures are extracted from the private balance sheets, and not the published balance
        sheets, but the two are broadly similar.
(2) Total gross profit is profit prior to deduction of counting houses expenses (salaries, office
       costs, etc.), bad debts written off, and transfers to reserves.
(3) These include counting house expenses, certain bad debts written off and Liverpool office
        losses but not transfers to reserves.
(4) Net profits are gross profits less expenses.
                                  APPENDIX                V


              Baring Brothers & Co. Limited
           Analysis of Gross Profits, 1890-1930

Year      Total gross   Invest-   Commis-     Interest+        Russian Barings’    Other
             profit     ments       sion      discount        accounts Liverpool
               (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)             (5)    office
                                                                           (6)

1890-91     140,643     3255    98,061  38,431                   a    Uy         704
1892       221,684 47,800 136,102       35,128                   — _ 1154      1500
1893        169,8e¢     4277 118.01? 44,093.                      —   146      3251
1894        103 hor) 49,0192 77.320 25,109,                      =      =      2318
1895        biel      20912 128.313     20393                           =      6193
1896        192,400 40,443 103,770 39390                         —      =      8797
1897       206,450 45,558 111,838 44,613                         —      —      4441
1898       220,677 43,076 116,506 56516                          —      =      4579
1899       2415127 ~ $7,032°105,5932:67,180                   0 e—      oe mL1   B22
1900       205,408 47,504 92,170 56,933                          —      —   -. 8801
1901        200/45 37 35,251 106,051    55,679.                  —      —        24
                                                                               chy
1902        202,212     8055 114417     67,820                   —      —    11,920
1903        164,439        —    93,506 61,855                    —      =      9078
1904        315,322 148,232 110,558 49,700                       —      —      6832
1905        521,849 334,099 122,679 54,774                       —      —    10,297
1906        257,357     ~4203/124,341   67,/00                   —      —    61,113 (7)
1907        256,121   84,887 85,766 69,892                       —      —    15,576
1908        607,235. 253,411    83,970. 97,307...                —      —   172,547 (8)
1909        658,673 413,109    125,858  87,119                   —      —    32,587 (9)
1910        448,570 220,785 120,027     96407                    —      —    11,351
1911        319,412 88,814 109,753 112,909                       —      —       7936
1912        289,828 40,074 112,797 128,928                       —     110      7919
            438,098 160,000 117,410 149,357,                     —    228    ~=:111,103
1913
            282,200 18,026 126,651 130,799                      =—      cr      6724
1914
          1,188,772 153,061 149,043 142,253                   718,089   —    26,326
1915
            852,666     6433 160,818 148,045                  517,992   —    19,378
1916
            683,214     6326 172,563 366,987                  135,555 =—        1783
1917
                                            379
   380                              The Sixth Great Power

Year         Total gross Invest-      Commis-     Interest+    Russian Barings’        Other
                profit   ments          sion      discount    accounts Liverpool
                 (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)    office
                                                                           (6)

1918           502,048    13,881 109,008 284,251    =      —                         94,908 (10)
L919.          ama ews         — 1715) 0192665045          a                           3497
1920           895, 495449 1,0360303,111E503 450 ee        —                          35,918(11)
192)           697,889 62,184 173;501° 455,451      =    811                           IP42
be             920,826 475,706 160,128 262,809      —  1836                            5947
1923           823,650 249,739. 165,380,324,929     =  ATG                           3G 2)
1924,          894,586..345,799 198.911 299 568 ~ —*.  7022")                        437286113)
192)           767,164 106,108 276462 367,525.      —  3039                          14.030
1926           738,504 94,016 218,513 419,174        —   937                           5864
127            809,841 233,105 203,451 364,571      PANY                               7464
1928           720,438, 117,310 215,099 371,534—    —  1937,                         14,558
1929           646,724        = 195 U6. 39. OLL     —  1180                          56,025 (14)
1930           675,877 200,000 170,540 296,239      —  1182                            7918


NOTES
 (1)   Total gross profit is profit prior to the deduction of counting houses expenses (salaries,
       office costs, etc.), bad debts and transfers to reserves.
 (2)   Investment income was derived from the issue, placing and dealing in securities. As from
       1922 the account was known as British Government securities when commission arising
       out of issuing etc. was included as commission income.
 (3)   Commissions result from accepting, work as paying agents, purchase and sale ofsecurities
       for clients, charges on client accounts, trusteeship work, provision of guarantees and bail
       bonds, etc.
 (4) Interest and discount represents interest received on loans made less interest credited to
       client accounts, and monies received as a result of discounting bills of exchange.
 (5)   Commissions were regularly received for business undertaken for the Russian Govern-
       ment. These commissions were so large during the war years, they are shown separately.
 (6)   Barings’ Liverpool office represents profits made by the Liverpool office and transferred to
       the profit and loss account.
 (7)   Inclusive of £43,000 transferred from Russian loan 1906 Account.
 (8)   Inclusive of £160,831 transferred from Russian loan 1906 Account.
 (9)   Inclusive of £19,784 recovered as a result of the liquidation of Baring & Co.
(10)   Inclusive of £90,857 transferred from the Italira Reserve Account.
(11)   Inclusive of £31,386 transferred from the Omsk Government Loan Account.
(12)   Inclusive of £43,352 commission on coffee sales re Brazil loan and £35,583
                                                                                  reGovernment
       of Brazil advance.
(13)   Inclusive of £27,649 and £6833 re above respectively.
(14)   Inclusive of £50,000 transferred from Income Tax Account.
                            APPENDIX           VI


    Purchasing Power of the Pound Sterling,
                  1750-1980

In order to obtain an impression of the current value of sterling
figures provided in the text, the following price index of con-
sumer goods and services may be helpful. It should be used with
caution and provides no more than the roughest of guides.

  Jan. 1974=100

                 Year       Index               Year       Index

               1750           6.6              1870         123
                1760          fed              1880         11.6
               1770           8.0              1890          a
                1780          8.2              1900          Dd,
                1790          9.8              1910         10.7
                1800         17.6              1920         2yEe
                1810         18.8              1930         17.6
                1820         2                 1940          —
                1830         12:9              1950         35.6
                1840         14.5              1960        49.6
                1850         10.9              1970        7331
                1860         121               1980       263.7

                                                                                    ;
SOURCES
1750-1849: ‘Seven Centuries of Price Consumables’, Economica (Nov., 1956),
                                                                               1,
p. 311; 1850-1913: Layton & Crowther, The Study of Prices, appendix E, table
p. 265; 1914-198  0:  Long-ter m Index of Prices of Consumer Goods and Services,
Central Statistical Office.




                                      381
             BIBLIOGRAPHIC                    NOTES

The archives of Baring Brothers must surely be the most complete
and extensive of any merchant bank in the British Isles. The first
component, including many of the most important papers from the
first fifty years of the bank’s history, are not in fact properly part of
the Baring archives at all. These are the papers deposited in
Bishopsgate by Lord Northbrook, described in the reference notes as
Northbrook papers. Most of the other Baring papers dating from
before 1870 are at the time of writing to be found in the Guildhall
and are described as Baring Mss (G). Subsequent papers are still at
Bishopsgate (Baring Mss (B)) and also at Bishopsgate are various col-
lections, some earlier than 1870, some later, some most extensive
and some consisting of only one or two documents, catalogued
under Baring Mss (B) DEP. At one stage in the 1920s the archive was
pillaged by a Canadian professor who removed several thousand
pages, mainly papers of Canadian interest but some relating to the
United States or Latin America. These are nowin the Public Archives
in Ottawa (Baring Mss (O)). A further small but important batch of
Baring papers is in the possession of the Marquess of Northampton
at Compton Wynyates (Northampton papers), while the Bank of Eng-
land holds a number of papers concerning the Baring Crisis of 1890
(Bank of England papers on Baring Crisis). A copy of the diary of Mr
Joshua Bates, one of Barings’ most durable partners, is to be found in
Baring Mss (B) DEP.
   Outside the Baring archives the most relevant papers are
undoubtedly those of Messrs Rothschilds. The papers of the Lon-
don House are at the bank’s headquarters at New Court in St
Swithin’s Lane (RAL). Though they have been sadly emasculated,
the papers of the French house are also of limited use. They now
form part of the Archives Nationales in the Cité des Archives
contemporaines at Fontainbleau (RAF). Other manuscript collec-
tions of more than fleeting relevance are those of Lord Milner in the
                                  382
                         Bibhograpbical Notes                      383
Bodleian Library at Oxford; the Peel, Gladstone and Liverpool
papers and the Hamilton diaries in the British Library; the papers
of the 3rd Marquess of Salisbury at Hatfield House; the Gallatin
collection in the Library of Congress; the Simon Gratz, Cadwalader
and Bingham Collections in the Historical Society of Pennsylvania;
the Rufus King and Brown Brothers papers in the New York Histori-
cal Society; and the Thomas W. Ward papers in the Massachusetts
Historical Society.
   Among published works John Orbell’s Baring Brothers and Co.
Limited. A History to 1939 (privately printed, 1985) provides a lucid
and reliable introduction to the history of the house. Ralph Hidy’s
The House ofBaring in American Trade and Finance (New York, 1949)
is the somewhat indigestible fruit of a heroic trawl through the docu-
ments relating to this aspect of Barings’ affairs. Professor Platt’s
Foreign Finance in Continental Europe and the USA 1815-1870 (Lon-
don, 1984) makes excellent use of Barings’ archives for this period.
Professor Fern’s Britain and Argentina in the Nineteenth Century
(Oxford, 1960) deals extensively with the affairs of Barings and in
particular has a chapter on the 1890 Crisis which he is now develop-
ing into a book - some of which he has most generously allowed
me to see in typescript. On a more personal level, Daphne Pollen’s
I Remember, I Remember (privately printed, 1983) and Bernard
Mallet’s Thomas George, Earl of Northbrook (London, 1906) both add
useful information about the banking members of the family.
   It would be a work of supererogation to list all the books which are
referred to in the notes. Among the general studies which I found of
particular value are Stanley Chapman’s The Rise ofMerchant Banking
(London, 1984), P. L. Cottrell’s British Overseas Investment in the
Nineteenth Century (London, 1975), Leland Jenks’s The Migration of
British Capital to 1975 (London, 1927) and D. C. M. Platt’s Finance,
Trade, and Politics in British Foreign Policy 1815-1914 (Oxford, 1968).
Sir John Clapham’s The Bank ofEngland (Cambridge, 1944) and R.S.
Sayers’s The Bank of England 1891-1944 (Cambridge, 1976) were
both highly relevant. Among the studies of other banks I would
mention Aytoun Ellis’s Heir ofAdventure. The Story ofBrown, Shipley
and Co. (privately printed, 1960); E. H. Allman’s William Deacon's
(Manchester, 1971); Roger Fulford’s Glyn’s (London, 195 3) - most
pleasantly written of all such books; Bo Bramsen and Kathleen
384                    The Sixth Great Power

Wain’s The Hambros (London, 1979); Martin Buist’s At Spes non
Fracta. Hope and Co. (Amsterdam, 1974), Vincent Carosso’s More
Than a Century of Investment Banking. The Kidder, Peabody and Co.
Story (New York, 1979) and The Morgans (Boston, 1986); Frederick
Allan’s The Great Pierpont Morgan; Bertrand Gille’s Histoire de la
Maison Rothschild (Geneva, 1965) - much the most considerable of
the innumerable studies of this bank, and Richard Davis’s The Eng-
lish Rothschilds (London, 1982) - most interesting but concentrating
heavily on the family’s political and social role.
                                       NOTES



CHAPTER1 (pp. 13-24)                              Greig (London, 1926), vol. VI, p.
                                                   ews
 if Northbrook papers. D.                        . Memorandum by Francis Baring.
 2 Public Characters of 1805 (London,              Northbrook papers. D1.
      1805), p. 30.                              . Northbrook papers. G3.
 Ee The early history of the Baring              . Charles to Francis Baring, 22
    family has been painstakingly                  March 1800. Northbrook papers.
    assembled by Miss Anne-Cecilia                 D8.
    Baring.                                    Zi: Francis to Charles Baring, 14
  . Charles Wilson, Anglo-Dutch                   April 1800. Northbrook papers.
      Commerce and Finance in the                  D8.
      Eighteenth Century (Cambridge,           22s Northbrook papers. A14.
      1941), p. 40. See also W. G.             23 Francis to Charles Baring, 14
      Hoskins, Industry, Trade and                 April 1800. Northbrook papers.
      People in Exeter (Manchester,                D8.
      1935).                                   24. Francis to Charles Baring, 14
wn. Hoskins, op. cit., p. 42.                      April 1800. Northbrook papers.
  . Northbrook papers. G3.                         D8.
  . Robert Dymond, History of the              25: Memorandum by Francis Baring.
    Suburban Parish of St Leonard,                 Northbrook papers. D1.
    Exeter (Exeter, 1873), p. 19.              26. Memorandum by Francis Baring.
  . He Knew He Was Right (London,                  Northbrook papers. D1.
      1868; World’s Classic Edition,           27. Francis to Charles Baring, 14
      1948), p. 58.                                April 1800. Northbrook papers. D8.
 . He Knew He Was Right (London,
      1868; World’s Classic Edition),
      p. 65.                                   CHAPTER 2 (pp. 25-42)
  . Elizabeth Baring to Nath. Paice,
    13 Dec. 1763. Northbrook papers.            te Francis Baring’s Account Book.
      Gll.                                         Baring Mss (B) HC1. 204. 31.
 . Public Characters of 1809 (London,           2. Northbrook papers. G3.
                                                2. Public Characters of 1805 (London,
                                                +
    1809), pp. 590-1.
 . Northbrook papers. G1. 1.                       1805), p. 38.
 . Northbrook papers. G6. 1.                    4. John Lewis Mallet, unpublished
 . Northbrook papers. G3.                           ‘Autobiographical Retrospect’.
  . Francis Baring’s Account Book.                  Baring Mss (B), p. 3.
       Baring Mss (B) HC1. 204. 31.               . John Lewis Mallet, unpublished
     . Elizabeth to Francis Baring, 31             ‘Autobiographical Retrospect’.
       March 1766. Northbrook papers.              Baring Mss (B), pp. 4-5.
      G11.            <                          . See chapter 4 below. Ralph W.
     . The Farington Diary, ed. James              Hidy, The House of Baring in
                                         385
386                             The Sixth Great Power

    American Trade and Finance (New           20s 13 Dec. 1784. Northbrook papers.
    York, 1949) provides the fullest              N4. 3. 231.
    picture of this development.              26. Cobbett’s Weekly Register (17 July
  _ Viscount D’Abernon, Portraits                 1824), p. 132.
      and Appreciations (London, 1931),       Die Memorandum of May 1783.
      ppoi4-l3:                                   Northbrook papers. A 23.
  _ Bernard Mallet, Thomas George,            28. Francis Baring to Shelburne, 4
      Earl of Northbrook (London,                 Dec. 1784. Northbrook papers.
      1908), p. 291.                              N4. 4. 224.
  . Christopher Sandeman, No Music              . Northbrook papers. N4. 4. 346.
    in Particular (London, 1943), p- 82.        . John Ehrman, The Younger Pitt.
  . The Letters and Private Papers of             Vol. I (London, 1969), pp. 242-5.
    William Makepeace Thackeray, Vol            . 4 Aug. 1784. Bowood Mss.
    II, ed. Gordon Ray (London,                 . Francis Baring to Dundas, 7 April
    1945), p. 647.                                1793. Northbrook papers. N4. 5.
  . Mallet, Northbrook, op. cit., p. 15.          LL3:
  . 4 Nov. 1787. Northbrook papers.             . 6 Feb. 1806.
      N45. 17.                                  . Lansdowne to Francis Baring, 11
  . Martin G. Buist, At Spes Non                  Nov. 1785. Northbrook papers.
  . Fracta. Hope and Co. 1770-1815                N4. 4. 318.
    (Amsterdam, 1974), pp. 33-4.                . Hoskins, Industry, Trade and
14. John Mallet, ‘Autobiographical                People in Exeter, op. cit., p. 44.
      Retrospect’, op. cit., pp. 3-4.           . Northbrook papers. G3. cf.
   . William Hope to Francis Baring,              Baring Mss (B) DEP 17.
     26 Jan. 1790. Northbrook papers.           . Baring Mss (B) DEP 17.
     sl:                                        . The Correspondence of George,
  . Lansdowne to Francis Baring, 5                Prince of Wales, ed. A. Aspinall
      Aug. 1786. Northbrook papers.               (London, 1964), vol. II, p. 112.
      N4. 4.                                    . Baring Mss (B) HC1. 204. 3a.
  . Adam Shortt, ‘The Barings’,                 . 7 May 1785. Northbrook papers.
      unpublished thesis. National                N45 42953
      Archives, Ottawa. MG 30. D101.            . Daily Advertiser, Oracle and True
     Vol. 60, p. 58.                              Briton (12 Oct. 1805).
  . Buist, At Spes Non Fracta, op. cit.,        . Public Characters of 1805 (London,
     pp. 33-4.                                    1805), p. 34.
   . Jan. 1786. Northbrook papers.            43. ‘Notes on a Commercial Treaty
      IN4.4:.3.37.                                with the United States’.
  . Lord Brougham, Historical                   . 20 Nov. 1783. Northbrook
    Sketches of Statesmen who flourished          papers. N4. 4. 127.
    in the Time of George III. Vol. II        45. Sir N. W. Wraxall, Posthumous
      (London, 1856), pp. 325-34.                 Memoirs of His Own Time. Vol. 1
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. III,          (London, 1836), p. 118.
      p25):                                     . C.H. Philips, The East India
  . Northbrook papers. B1.                        Company 1784-1834
  . Shelburne to Francis Baring, 16               (Manchester, 1961), pp. 25-63.
    Sept. 1782 and Baring to                    . Dundas to Pitt, 18 Oct. 1792.
    Shelburne, 24 Sept. 1782.                     PRO 30/8/157.
    Northbrook papers. N4. 3.                 48. Ehrman, The Younger Pitt, op. cit.,
24. Francis Baring to Shelburne, June             vol. I, pp. 458-66.
    1783. Northbrook papers. N4. 3.           49. May 1793. Northbroook papers.
                                           Notes                                       387
    N4. 4. 293.                                        Lady Theresa Lewis (London,
50. ? Jan. 1786. Northbrook papers.                    1905), vol. II, p. 344.
    N4. 4. 337.                                      . Francis Baring to William
DU Hidy, The House of Baring, op.                      Bingham, 6 Jan. 1803.
    cit., pp. 20-1.                                    Northbrook papers. B3. I.
D2 cit., Norman Baker, Government                    . Alexander to Francis Baring, 13
   and Contractors (London, 1971),                     Oct. 1801. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.
    p. 242.                                            Oe
Pee Northbrook papers. N4. 4. 255.                   . Francis Baring to William
54. Baker, Government and                              Bingham, 6 Jan. 1803.
    Contractors, op. cit., pp. 146-7.                  Northbrook papers. B3. I.
538 Baker, Government and                            . The Memoirs of Vincent Nolte,
    Contractors, p. 140.                               translated from the German
                                                       (New York, 1931), p. 158.
                                                     . Alexander to Thomas Baring,
                                                       April 1824. Northbrook papers.
CHAPTER 3 (pp. 43-60)                                  E/.¢:
                                                     . The Journal of the Hon. Henry
 ule Copy of memorandum in                             Edward Fox, ed. Earl of Ichester
    Bingham Collection. Historical                     (London, 1946), p. 131.
    Society of Pennsylvania. f64.                    . David Lance to Francis Baring, 3
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. III,               Nov. 1803. Northbrook papers.
    p. 261.                                            B3. IV.
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. VI,              . William to Francis Baring, 3 Jan.
    pp. 187-9.                                         1806. Northbrook papers. B3 i.
  . Charles to John Baring, 3 March                  . Henry to Thomas Baring, 28
    1801. Northbrook papers. D7.                       Sept. 1815. Northbrook papers.
   . Charles to Francis Baring, 4                      B3. VIII.
     March 1801. Northbrook papers.                  . Alexander to Thomas Baring, 10
     D7.                                               June 1827. Northbrook papers.
  . Francis to Charles Baring, 7                       E7 d.
     March 1801. Northbrook papers.                  . The Journal of the Hon. Henry
     D7.                                               Edward Fox, op. cit., p. 318.
  . Francis Baring to William                        . 14 Jan. 1806. Baring Mss (B) DEP
     Bingham, 6 Jan. 1803.                             35 bartwlle
      Northbrook papers. B3. I.                      . Francis Baring to Count Louis
    . Francis Baring to William                        Stahremberg, 8 Oct. 1807.
      Bingham, 6 Jan. 1803.                            Northbrook papers. A21.
      Northbrook papers. B3. I.                      . Baring Mss (B) DEP 22. VII.
   . Voate to Francis Baring, 4 June                 . Edwyn and Josephine
      1793. Northbrook papers. A I.                    Birchenough, The Manor House,
10. General David Cobb to Bingham,                     Lee, and its Associations
      cit. Robert C. Alberts, The Golden               (Lewisham, 1971). cf. A. W.
      Voyage. The Life and Times of                    Wood, ‘Lee and the Northbrook
      William Bingham (Boston, 1969),                  family’. Copy in Baring Mss (B)
      pp. 270-1.                                       DEP 22. VII.
Lh Robert Gilmor, The Golden                       28. H. R. Fox-Bourne, English
      Voyage, op. cit., p. 311.                        Merchants. Vol. II (London, 1866),
12: Extracts of the Journals and                       p. 240.
      Correspondence ofMiss Berry, ed.             29. A. W. Wood, ‘Lee and the
388                             The Sixth Great Power

      Northbrook family’, op. cit.            52: Henry Hope to Francis Baring,
30. F. M. L. Thompson, English                    10 Jan. 1794. Northbrook papers.
    Landed Society in the Nineteenth              Al. cf. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta,
      Century (London, 1963), p. 89.              op. cit., pp. 48-50.
  . John Francis, Chronicles and              De Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 112.
      Characters of the Stock Exchange        54: Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 50. cf.
    (Boston, 1850), p. 75.                        Algar Thorold, The Life ofHenry
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. III,          Labouchére (London, 1913),
      p. 261.                                     pp. 11-12.
  . Northbrook papers. A21.                   55. See p. 46.
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. III,      56. Otto Wolff, Ouvrard: Speculator of
      p. 303.                                     Genius (London, 1962), pp. 112-
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. IV,           13. cf. Thorold, Labouchére op.
      p. 134.                                     cit., pp. 6-11.
  . Farington Diary, op. cit., vol. V,        57. Alexander to Sir Thomas Baring,
      p. 114.                                     4 Jan. 1817. Northbrook papers.
  . Francis Baring to Pierre César                E7act:
    Labouchéere, 9 Oct. 1804.                 58. 9 March 1797. Northbrook
    Northbrook papers. A4. 3.                     papers. Al9.
  . Northbrook papers. A9.                    oe Francis Baring to William
  . Francis Baring to Rufus King, 4               Stephens, 14 March 1797.
    Jan. 1808. Rufus King papers.                 Northbrook papers. A19.
    New York Historical Society. Box          60. Francis Baring to William
      1805-8.                                     Stephens, 12 Dec. 1801.
  . Philips, The East India Company,              Northbrook papers. A19.
    op. cit., p. 148.                         61. Labouchéere to Francis Baring, 17
  . Philips, The East India Company,              Feb. 1802. Northbrook papers.
      op. cit., p. 9.                             Al9.
  . Thompson, English Landed                  62. Francis Baring to Labouchére, 12
    Society, op. cit., p. 51.                     March 1802. Northbrook papers.
  . 1 Oct. 1809. The Letters of Sydney            ieWibss
      Smith, ed. Nowell C. Smith              63. Francis Baring to Stahremberg,
      (Oxford, 1953), p. 153.                     13 Feb. 1800. Northbrook papers.
  . Gentleman’s Magazine (1810),                  A21.
      D:.293.                                 64. Francis Baring to Stahremberg,
  . Francis Baring to William                     21 June 1809. Northbrook
      Bingham, 17 Sept. 1799.                     papers. A21.
      Northampton papers.                     65. Canning to Stahremberg, 23 June
  . Undated memorandum.                           1809. Northbrook papers. A21.
    Northbrook papers. B.                     66. Francis to Alexander Baring, 20
  . Northbrook papers. A23.                       May 1799. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.
  . 23 Oct. 1802. The Life and Letters            III.
    of William Cobbett, ed. Lewis             67. 29 Oct. 1803. Northbrook papers.
    Melville (London, 1913), vol. I,              A20.
      Dp, E7Z.                                68. C. Gore to Rufus King, 16 Nov.
   . Barings to William Bingham, 11               1803. Rufus King papers, op. cit.
     Sept. 1801. Northampton papers.              Box 1803-1804.
50. Francis to John Baring, 13 Nov.          69. J. C. Herries to A. Rosenhagen,
     1805. Northbrook papers. D4.                25 Nov. 1813. RAL X1/T37/4.
ae 10 Jan. 1794. Northbrook papers.          70. I am indebted to Professor Platt
      Al.                                         for these statistics, who derived
                                          Notes                                       389

    them from P. K. O’Brien’s                         Pennsylvania. Case 1. Box 3.
    unpublished D.Phil. thesis,                    . Barings to Rufus King, 28 Aug.
    ‘Government Revenue, 1793-                        1796. Rufus King papers, op. cit.
    1813’ (Oxford, 1967).                             Vol. 39, f5.
A   A. F. Fremantle, England in the                 . Barings to Rufus King, 28 Dec.
    Nineteenth Century (London,                      1796. Rufus King papers, vol. 39,
    1930), pp. 316-18. cf. Denis Gray,               12:
    Spencer Perceval (Manchester,                  . Barings to Rufus King, 6 June
    1963), pp. 370-5.                                1797. Rufus King papers, vol. 39,
G2. 29 Sept. 1810.                                   fF
73. Weekly Political Register, vol.                 . Barings to Rufus King, 20 July
    XVIII, no. 16 (3 Oct. 1810).                      1797. Rufus King papers, vol. 39,
74. Francis Baring to Burke, 17 Oct.                 Ly.
    1792. BM Add Mss 29172. £458.                   . Rufus King to Barings and Co., 6
(sy William Foster, The East India                     Oct. 1798. Rufus King papers,
    House (London, 1924), p. 176.                      vol. 51, 461.
76. William Foster, The East India                   . Barings to Rufus King, 22 Dec.
    House (London, 1924), pp. 137-8.                  1799. Rufus King papers, vol. 39,
Th 2 April 1800. Northbrook papers.                   £62.
    N4. 5.                                          . Hidy, The House of Baring, op.
78. Philips, The East India Company,                 ci, pis 2:
    op. cit., p. 157.                               . Baring Mss (B) DEP 3. cf. Alberts,
79. Philips, The East India Company,                 The Golden Voyage, op. cit.,
    op. cit., p. 164.                                pp. 229-50.
80. 12 June 1802. Rufus King papers,                . Alexander Baring to Barings, 12
    op. cit. Box 1798-1802.                          Dec. 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.
81. Journals and Correspondence of                    Il.
    FT. Baring, ed. Lord Northbrook                 . Alberts, The Golden Voyage, op.
    (London, 1905), p. 10.                           Cit, P25     2.
82. Illustrated London News (21 Oct.                _ Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 159.
    1843).                                          . Alberts. The Golden Voyage, op.
83. Henry Baring to Robert Peel, 4                   cit., p. 265.
    Feb. 1846. Peel papers. BM Add                  . Alexander Baring to John
    Mss 40584. £26.                                   Williams Hope, 30 April 1798.
84. See Leland Jenks, The Migration                   Baring Mss (B) DEP 3. II.
    of British Capital to 1875 (London,             . Alberts, The Golden Voyage, op.
    1927), p. 18.                                     cit., p. 276.
85. Richard Kellett, The Merchant                   . Alexander Baring to Hopes.
    Banking Arena (London, 1967),                     Baring Mss (B) DEP 3. I.
    p. 10.                                          . Memorandum by Lord
                                                      Ashburton of Nov. 1846.
                                                      Northbrook papers. G8. 1.
                                                    . 29 Nov. 1796. Baring Mss (B)
CHAPTER 4 (pp. 61-77)                                 DEP 3. II. 40.
 1. Robert Morris to John and                       _ 1 June 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP
    Francis Baring, 17 April 1783.                   3. II. 40.
    Baring Mss (O) MG 30. D101.                   ra Obituary of Lord Ashburton (15
 2; Bingham to Thos. FitzSimons, 29                   May 1848).
    Nov. 1783. Gratz Collection.                  22. J. A. Froude, Thomas Carlyle. Vol.
    Historical Society of                             1 (London, 1884), p. 348.
390                            The Sixth Great Power

23 . ‘Notes and Recollections’. Baring        42 . 4 Feb. 1804. Gallatin Collection.
     Mss (B) DEP 135.                             Library of Congress. Reel 9.
  . Alberts, The Golden Voyage, op.           43. Bingham to Willing, 22 May
    cit., p. 346.                                 1802. Gratz Collection, op. cit.
  . Spectator (30 April 1864).                    Case 13. Box 20.
  . Alexander Baring to John                    . L’Annexion de la Louisiante. Revue
    Williams Hope, 8 Dec. 1795.                   d'Histoire Diplomatique (1916) vol.
    Baring Mss (B) DEP 3. III.                    XXX.
Paik Alexander Baring to Henry Hope,            . King to Robert Livingston, 16
      9 Jan. 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP             May 1803. Rufus King papers, op.
    Bi Ws).                                       cit. Box 1803-1804.
28. 20 Jan. 1799. Baring Mss (B) DEP          46. J. E. Winston, ‘How the
    sy IONE.                                      Louisiana Purchase was
ay Alexander Baring to Hopes, 31                  Financed’, The Louisiana
      Dec. 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.            Historical Quarterly (April, 1929),
      ie                                          vol. 12, no. 2.
30. Alexander to Francis Baring, 29           ail Francis Baring to Henry
      March 1801. Baring Mss (B) DEP              Addington, 12 Nov. 1803.
     Sle                                          Northbrook papers. A4.
Dil. Alexander Baring to Hopes, 10            48. 15 Feb. 1803. Northbrook papers.
     Jan. 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.             A4/1.
     II.                                      ao 21 April 1803. Northbrook
SpA. Alexander to Francis Baring, 20              papers. A4.
    Jan. 1799. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.          50. Note by Francis Baring, 19 June
    00k                                           1803. Northbrook papers. A4.
33% Francis to Alexander Baring, 9            ole Francis Baring to Robert Gilmor,
    March 1799. Baring Mss (B) DEP                15 Aug. 1803. Northbrook papers.
      sh, IU.                                     A4.
34. Alexander to Francis Baring, 20           Dee Henry Addington to Francis
      Jan. 1799. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.            Baring, 16 Dec. 1803. Northbrook
      If.                                 ;       papers. A4.
ID, Francis Baring to Thomas                    . 23 Dec. 1803. Northbrook papers.
      Willing, 3 July 1793. Gratz                 A4.
      Collection, op. cit. Case 13. Box         . 26 Dec. 1803. Northbrook papers.
    20/3.                                         A4.
36. Francis Baring to Thomas                     . Alberts, The Golden Voyage, op.
    Willing, 13 Aug. 1795. Gratz                   cit., p. 434.
    Collection, op. cit. Case 13. Box           . 21 July 1804. Northbrook papers.
    20/3.                                         A4.
3/e Alexander to Francis Baring, |               . Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 92.
    Feb. 1799. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.             . Alexander Baring to C. W. Hare,
      Ill.                                         21 Oct. 1807. Cadwalader papers.
  . 17 Feb. 1803. Rufus King papers,               Historical Society of
    op. cit. Vol. 55. ff378-9.                     Pennsylvania. Box 2.
  . 12 Nov. 1800. Northampton                 ony Alexander Baring, An Inquiry into
    papers.                                        the Causes and Consequences of the
  . Alexander to Francis Baring, 19                Orders in Council and An
      Nov. 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.             Examination of the Conduct of
   ie                                              Great Britain towards the Neutral
41 Willing to Bingham, 22 June                     Commerce ofAmerica (London,
      1802. Northampton papers.                   1808), pp. 4, 21 and 177.
                                           Notes                                           39]
  . Baring, An Inquiry into the Causes                 Op. Cit., p. 67.
    Sg, OPC, De 1:                                 81. Kenneth Porter, John Jacob Astor.
  . 10 March 1808, Hansard, vol. X.                      Vol. I (New York, 1966), p. 310.
   1058-62. cf. Gray, Spencer                      82. Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 286.
   Perceval, op. cit., p. 173.                     83. Joshua Bates to T. W. Ward, 7
  . 6 August 1808.                                       Nov. 1830. T. W. Ward papers.
  . 2 May 1809. Rufus King papers,                       Massachusetts Historical Society.
    op. cit. Box 1809-13.
  . Hidy, House of Baring, op. cit.,
    pp. 51-2.                                      CHAPTER S (pp. 78-99)
  . 22 July 1813. A Great Peace
    Maker. The Diary ofJames                        —   . 4 Aug. 1801. Northbrook papers.
    Gallatin, ed. Count Gallatin                         A9
    (London, 1914), pp. 281-3.                          . D.C.M. Platt, Foreign Finance in
  . Henry Adams, The Life of Albert                      Continental Europe and the USA
    Gallatin (New York, 1943),                           1815-1870 (London, 1984), p. 6.
    pp. 496-9.                                      wa  . Mémoires de la Comtesse de Boigne.
  . 11 April 1814. A Great Peace                         Vol. II (Paris, 1907), p. 246.
   Maker, op. cit., p. 14.                               Francis Baring to J. L. Mallet, 14
  . 3 July 1815. A Great Peace Maker,                    Sept. 1826, cit. Journals and
    op. cit., p. 14.                                     Correspondence of Francis Thornhill
  . Adams, Gallatin, op. cit., p. 552.                   Baring, Lord Northbrook, ed.
  . Instructions of 19 June 1817.                        Thomas, Earl of Northbrook
    Cadwalader papers, op. cit. Box 2.                   (London, 1905), vol. I, p. 49.
    1                                                   . Otto Wolff, Ouvrard, op. cit.,
  . Hidy, House of Baring, op. cit.,                      pu las.
    poti                                             . Paul Emden, Money Powers of
  . Thomas Payne Govan, Nicholas                       Europe in the 19th and 20th
    Biddle (Chicago, 1959), p. 81.                     Centuries (London, 1937), p. 9.
  . Hidy, House of Baring, op. cit.,                 . Mémoires de la Comtesse de Boigne,
    p. 69.                                             op. cit., p. 247.
  . Gratz Collection, op. cit. ‘Baring               . J. E. Cookson, Lord Liverpool's
    Brothers’.                                         Administration (Edinburgh, 1975),
  . Jenks, Migration of British Capital,                 p. 27.
    op. cit. p. 75.                                  . Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 265.
  . Baring Brothers to Gen. T.                       . Mémoires de la Comtesse de Boigne,
    Cadwalader, 25 June 1824.                          op. cit., p. 254.
    Cadwalader papers, op. cit. Box                  . Talleyrand to the Duchesse de
     ifey                                                Courlande, 30 Jan. 1817, cit.
rite Baring Brothers to Gen. T.                          Lacour-Gayet, Talleyrand. Vol. III
    Cadwalader, 14 Dec. 1825.                          (Paris, 1947), p. 72.
    Cadwalader papers, op. cit. Box                  . 6 Dec. 1816. Supplementary
    iS                                                 Despatches of the Duke of
78. Baring Brothers to Gen. T.
                                                       Wellington. Vol. XI (London,
    Cadwalader, 18 Feb. 1826.                            1864), pp. 562-5.
    Cadwalader papers, op. cit. Box                13) Castlereagh to Wellington, 17
    IX                                                 Jan. 1817. Supplementary
                                                       Despatches .. ., Vol. XI, pp. 600-1.
a9. Baring Brothers to Gen. T.
    Cadwalader, 14 May 1827.                       14. Wellington to Castlereagh, 3 Feb.
                                                        1817. Supplementary Despatches
    Cadwalader papers, op. cit. Box 15.
80. Jenks, Migration of British Capital,               .. 4 Vol. XI, p. 619.
392                                The Sixth Great Power

15. See, in particular, Professor                    Russell (London, 1854), vol. V,
    Platt’s lucid exposition in Foreign              p. 66.
      Finance in Continental Europe, op.         352 6 Nov. 1814. The Letters of Richard
      cit. pp. 7-11.                                Brinsley Sheridan, ed. Cecil Price
  . Baring to Wellington, 4 Dec.                     (Oxford, 1966), vol. III, p. 203.
    1817. Supplementary Despatches               36. Emily Eden to Miss Villiers, July
      _.., Vol. XII (London, 1865),                  1827. Miss Eden’s Letters, ed.
    plztk                                            Violet Dickinson (London, 1919),
  . 16 Jan. 1817 and 17 Dec. 1816                    p. 128.
    respectively, cit. Jenks, Migration          Be 28 Dec. 1826. A Great Peace
    of British Capital, op. cit., p. 36.            Maker, op. cit., p. 624.
  . 4 Feb. 1818. Supplementary                     . 18 Jan. 1826. The Diary of Colonel
    Despatches .. ., Vol. XII, pp. 247-9.           Peter Hawker. Vol. 1 (London,
  . 1 March 1817. RAL T27/212.                       1893),
                                                         p.290.
  . James to Salomon Rothschild, 3                 . Thompson, English Landed
      March 1817. RAL T27/213.                       Society, op. cit., pp. 36-8.
  . 9 Aug. 1817. RAL 127/292.                      _ William Cobbett, Rural Rides, ed.
  . James to Nathan Rothschild, 11                   Pitt Cobbett (London, 1885), vol.
      Oct. 1817. RAL T27/297.                        I, pp. 251 and 396.
  . James to Nathan Rothschild, 17                 . Mallet, Northbrook, op. cit., p. 10.
    Dec. 1817. RAL T63 46/1.                       . Thompson, English Landed
oe James to Nathan Rothschild, 9                     Society, op. cit., p. 38.
      Feb. 1818. RAL T64/174.                      . Rural Rides, op. cit., vol. I,
  . James to Nathan Rothschild, 14                   pp. 129-30.
    Feb. 1818. RAL T64/174.                        . Emily Eden to Miss Villiers, 4
  . Salomon Rothschild to London                    June 1819. Miss Eden’s Letters, op.
    Cousins, 24 Feb. 1818. RAL                      Cit. pe 35:
    T64/158/2.                                     . Marianne Thornton to Hannah
27. Bertrand Gille, Histoire de la                   Moore, 29 Dec. 1825. William
    Maison Rothschild (Geneva, 1965),                Deacon’s 1771-1970, ed. A. H.
    p. 64.                                           Allman (Manchester, 1971), p. 81.
28. Baring to Wellington, 27 May                   . W. D. Rubinstein, Men of Property
     1818. Supplementary Despatches                  (London, 1981), p. 92.
    .. 4 Vol. XII, op. cit., pp. 526-8.            . The Creevey Papers, ed. Herbert
29. Liverpool to Wellington, 9 June                  Maxwell, vol. II (London, 1904),
     1818. Supplementary Despatches                  p. 14.
      .. 4 Vol. XII, pp. 539-40.                   . 6 April 1826, Hansard NS.15.
30. Baring to Wellington, 30 Oct.                    100-3.
      1818. Supplementary Despatches               . Cookson, Lord Liverpool's
      vistey VOLOXTT, sp. 7 89.                      Administration, op. cit., p. 21.
31. Elizabeth Longford, Wellington,                . Chester New, Life of Henry
    Pillar of State (London, 1972),                  Brougham (Oxford, 1961),
    Diy.                                             pp. 163-6.
52 16 July 1819. Ms                                . 6 March 1828, Hansard NS. 18.
      Autobiographical Memoirs of                    1033-40.
      Swinton Holland. Baring Mss (B)            os cit. Stanley Chapman, The Rise of
      DEP 225XV.                                     Merchant Banking (London,
5}. 13 Nov. 1825. Rufus King papers,                 1984),
                                                         p.30.
    op. cit. Box 1825-26.                        Ds Lord Houghton, Monographs
34. Thomas Moore, Memoirs, Journal                   Personal and Social (London,
   ‘and Correspondence, ed. Lord John                1873),
                                                         p.234.
                                          Notes                                          393
54: Roger Fulford, Glyn’s (London,                   Banking, op. cit., p. 40.
   1953), p. 69.                                    . Hansard NS 41. 906.
ee Alberts, The Golden Voyage, op.                  . Emden, Money Powers of Europe,
   cit., p. 437.                                      op. cit., p. 38.
56. 12 May 1823. Elizabeth Lady                     . Sir John Clapham, The Bank of
    Holland to ber Son, ed. The Earl of               England. Vol. II (Cambridge,
    Ilchester (London, 1946), p. 23.                  1944), pp. 93-4.
Si. Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit.,                     12: Thomas Love Peacock, ‘Paper
    pp. 281-2.                                        Money Lyrics’, Collected Works.
58. Labouchére to Thomas Baring.                      Vol. III (London, 1875), p. 226.
    Undated. Northbrook papers.                   80. Thomas Love Peacock, ‘Paper
    Al3.                                              Money Lyrics’, Collected Works.
59) Alexander Baring to T.                            Vol. LIT, p. 222.
    Cadwalader, 11 Oct. 1823.                     81. The Greville Memoirs, ed. Lytton
    Cadwalader papers, op. cit. Box 2.                Strachey and Roger Fulford
60. Alexander to Thomas Baring, 4                     (London, 1938), vol. I, pp. 154-5.
    Jan. 1817. Northbrook papers                  82. 18 Oct. 1825. Baring Mss (B)
    E7. 1.                                            HGi204        3
61. Thomas to Tom and John Baring,                83. Autobiographical Memortr, op.
    3 Oct. 1825. Baring Mss (B) DEP                   cit.
    193. 39.                                      84. Comte de Bertrand to Barings, 8
62. Thomas to Tom and John Baring,                    June 1818. BM Mss 20122 £465.
    probably Nov. 1825. Baring Mss                85. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC1.
    (B) DEP 193. 39.                                  82.
  . Autobiographical Memoir. Baring
    Mss (B) DEP 22 XV.                            CHAPTER 6 (pp. 100-11)
  . Cobbett, Rural Rides, op. cit.,
    vol. II, p. 151.                               1 30 May 1807. Copy in Baring
  . James de Rothschild to                            Mss (B) DEP 193. 75. 3. 47.
    Alexander Baring, 13 March 1824.               2. 13 March 1817. Hansard NS 35.
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC7.                     1026.
    EA                                             3: D.C. M. Platt, Latin America and
  . Gille, Maison Rothschild, op. cit.,               British Trade 1806-1914 (London,
    pp. 136-9.                                        1972), pp. 4-10.
  . May 1824. Baring Mss (G) MS                      . Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC4.
    18321. HC2. 576.                                  ese AS
  . James to Nathaniel Rothschild, 9                 . Monypenny and Buckle, The Life
    April 1818. RAL 164/338/3.                         of Benjamin Disraeli. Vol. I.
  . Carl to James Rothschild, 13                       (London, 1910), p. 59. cf. Robert
    April 1818. RAL T64/202/3.                         Blake, Disraeli (London, 1966),
  _ H. Sillem to Alexander Baring, 25                 p. 26.
    June 1822. Baring Mss (G) Ms                     _ Claudio Veliz, ‘The Irisarri Loan’.
    18321. HC8. 3.                                    Boletin de Estudios
  . Autobiographical Memoir, op.                      Latinoamericanos y del Caribe, no.
    cit., 18 July 1821.                               23 (December, 1977).
  . Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                         _ Reinhard Liehr, ‘La Deuda
    Banking, op. cit., p. 40.                          exterior de la Gran Colombia
  . Gille, Maison Rothschild, op. cit.,                frente a Gran Bretafia. 1820-
    p. 67.                                             1860’. Instituto Ibero-Americano
   . Don Juan, Canto XII, verse V.                    y Universidad Libre de Berlin,
   . Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                          pp. 12-14.
394                               The Sixth Great Power

8. H. S. Ferns, Britain and Argentina              Americano y Universidad Libre
    in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford,             de Berlin.
    1960), p. 132.                             7 27 Aug. 1825. Simon Gratz
  . Vera Blinn Raber, British                      Collection, op. cit. ‘Francis
    Mercantile Houses in Buenos Aires              Baring’.
      1810-1880 (Harvard, 1979),               25s 18 Oct. 1825. Baring Mss (B)
      p. 116.                                     HC1. 204. 3f.
  . 24 Oct. 1824. Baring Mss (G) MS            2, Annual Register, 1844. p. 348.
      18321 2HC4 12/3. 1B.                     2a Sydney Smith to Lady Grey, 17
  . ‘El Primer Empréstito Argentino ,              July 1844. Letters of Sydney Smith,
    Revista de Economia Argentina.                 op. cit., p. 841.
      Tome XIII. Nos 75-76 (Sept.-             26. Bates to T. W. Ward, 3 July 1844.
      Oct. 1924).                                  Ward papers. Massachusetts
Ve. e.g., R. Scalabrini Ortiz, Polttica            Historical Society.
    Briténica en el Rio de la Plata            Lie Barings to Manning and
    (Buenos Aires, 1965) or Eduardo                Marshall, 22 Oct. 1832. Baring
      Duhalde, Baring Brothers y la                Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol. III.
      Historia Polttica Argentina              28. 15 June 1824. Hansard. NS2. Vol.
      (Buenos Aires, 1968).                        174. 1404.
  . e.g., Juan Carlos Vedoya, La               29) 6 July 1847. Hansard. NS3. XCIII.
    verdad sobre el Empréstito Baring              1298-1306.
      Brothers (Buenos Aires, 1971) and        30. Ferns, Britain and Argentina, op.
      Arnando Chiapella, E/ Destino del            cit., p. 209.
      Empréstito Baring Brothers. 1824-        31. Ferns, Britain and Argentina,
    26 (Buenos Aires, 1975).                       pp. 220-2.
14. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC4.              32: ‘El Primer Empréstito Argentino’,
      1. 13. 18. cf. Ernesto J. Fitte,             op. cit. p. 14.
      Historia de un Empréstito: La            33: Garcfa to Parish, 31 Dec. 1831.
      Emision de Baring Brothers en                Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC4.
    1824 (Buenos Aires, 1962).                     1.6.
  . Robertson to Holland, 5 May                34. 30 June 1832. Baring Mss (G) MS
    1825. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.                 18322. Vol. III.
    HC4. 3. 6.                                 38 6 Feb. 1833. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Robertson to Holland, 14 Dec.                  18322. Vol. III.
    1827. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.             36. 1832 and 1835, undated. Baring
    HC4. 3.6.                                      Mss (G) MS 18321. HCI. 11.
We I am indebted to Dr Samuel                  STP Barings to Francis Falconnet, 5
    Amaral of the Instituto Torcuato               Oct. 1842. Baring Mss (G) MS
    di Tella for drawing my attention               18322. Vol. III.
    to this fact.                               38. Instructions of 30 March 1842.
18. 23 April 1825. Baring Mss (B)                    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC4.
      DEP 93 74. 23                 ;                Mevlizsae:
119). Henry Ward to Canning, 30 Oct.            30. Falconnet to Barings, 15 June and
      1825. PRO. FO. 50/15.                          12 July 1842. Baring Mss (G) MS
20. Francis to Thomas Baring, 22                     18321. HC4. 1. 14.
      July 1817. Baring Mss (G) MS                 . Falconnet to Barings, 24 Oct.
   18321. HC 20. 5/1.                                1842. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
Ze Reinhard Liehr, ‘La Deuda exterior              HC4. 1214:
      de México en la primera mitad del        41. Falconnet to Barings, 20 Feb.
      siglo XIX y los merchant bankers             1843. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
      briténicos’, Instituto Ibero-                HGAy iS 4:
                                          Notes                                             ao)
42. Falconnet to Barings, 20 March                    12 Nov. 1830. Northbrook.
    1843. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.                   Journals and Correspondence, op.
    HC4.   1. 14.                                    cit., p. 70.
a 3 Falconnet to Barings, 20 March                  . John Gore, Creevey (London,
    1843. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.                    1948), p. 339.
    HC4.   1. 14.                                   . Monypenny and Buckle,
  . For a lucid exposition of this                   Disraeli, op. cit., vol. I, p. 204.
    imbroglio see Ferns, Britain and                . Bates to Colonel Thomas Perkins,
    Argentina, op. cit., pp. 122-4.                   14 May 1832. Baring Mss (G) MS
45: 29 Oct. 1845. Ward papers, op.                    18321. HC8. 1. 1OB.
    cit.                                            . Michael Brock, The Great Reform
                                                     Act (London, 1973), p. 294.
                                                    . 13 May 1832. Three Early
                                                      Nineteenth Century Diaries, op.
CHAPTER 7 (pp. 112-26)
                                                      cit poze
 ile Ward to Bates, 4 Jan. 1831. Ward               . The Taylor Papers, ed. Ernest
     Papers, op. cit.                                 Taylor (London, 1913), p. 344.
 23 Bates to Ward, 7 Nov. 1830.                     . Greville Memoirs, op. cit., vol. II,
    Ward papers, op. cit.                             p. 299.
  . Bates to Ward, 5 April 1831.                    . Letters of Sydney Smith, op. cit.,
    Ward papers, op. cit.                             p. 590
   . Bates to Ward, 24 Nov. 1830.                   . Alexander Baring to Peel, 15 Dec.
     Ward papers. cf. Nolte, Memozrs,                 1834. BM Add Mss 40405 221.
     op. cit., p. 287.                              . Disraeli to Sarah Disraeli, 15 Nov.
   . Roger Fulford, Glyn’s, op. cit.,                 1834. Monypenny and Buckle,
    p 199.                                            Disraeli, op. cit., vol. I, p. 265.
   . Edward Strutt, Ist Baron Belper.               . Obituary of 15 May 1848.
     Ralph E. Pumphrey, “The                        . Ashburton to Croker, 7 April
     Introduction of Industrialists into              1844. The Correspondence and
     the British Peerage’, American                   Diaries ofJohn Wilson Croker, ed.
    Hist. Rev. LXV (1959), pp. 1-16.                  Louis Jennings (London, 1844),
   . F.M.L. Thompson, English                         vol. III, pp. 17-18.
     Landed Society, op. cit., p. 100.            Die 15 March 1843. Life and Letters of
   . 19 Oct. 1829. Miss Eden’s Letters,               the Fourth Earl of Clarendon, ed.
     op. cit. p. 185.                                 Sir Herbert Maxwell (London,
   . The Journal ofMrs Arbuthnot, ed.                 1913), vol. I, p. 241.
     Francis Bamford and the Duke of              28. Ashburton to Peel, 9 May 1839.
     Wellington (London, 1950), vol.                  BM Add Mss 40426 £262; and 29
    II, p. 369.                                       Aug. 1841. BM Add Mss 40486
 10. Gentleman’s Magazine. New                        £209.
     Series, vol. XXX, p. 89.                     pay Peel to Ashburton, 3 Sept. 1841.
 11. 9 Feb. 1830. The Correspondence of               BM Add Mss 40487 £150.
     Daniel O’Connell, ed. Maurice                30. 24 Dec. 1841. The Letters of Queen
     O'Connell (Dublin, 1971), vol. IV,                Victoria. 1837-1861, ed. Arthur
    p. 124.                                            Benson and Viscount Esher
 2: Feb. 1831. Three Early Nineteenth                  (London, 1907), vol. I, p. 462.
    Century Diaries, ed. A. Aspinall                 . 12 Feb. 1843. Letters of Queen
    (London, 1952), p. 9.                              Victoria, vol. I, p. 579.
13. 13 March 1831. Hansard. Third                 EPs Melbourne to John Russell, 7
                                                       Oct. 1842. Lord Melbourne's
    Series. Vol.II. 1305-17; and 14
    July 1831. Ibid. Vol. IV. 1286-8.
                                                       Papers, ed. Lloyd Sanders
396                            The Sixth Great Power

    (London, 1889), p. 515.                     Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC 1.
338 Ashburton to Peel, 18 Oct. 1842.            20/3
      BM Add Mss 40492 £250.                   . Bates’s diary, 1 Jan. 1838, op. cit.
  . Peel to Ashburton, 16 and 22               . Bates’s diary, 1 Nov. 1838, op. cit.
      Oct. 1842. BM Add Mss 40517              . Thomas Baring to Barings, 17
    ff5 and 9.                                  Aug. 1832. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Peel to Ashburton, 4 Nov. 1844.             183212 HE 1920-441
      BM Add Mss 40553 £244 and                . Bates to Ward, 31 Jan. 1843.
      Ashburton to Peel, 6 Nov. 1844.            Ward papers, op. cit.
      BM Add Mss 40576 £41.                    . Bates to Ward, 18 Oct. 1843.
  . Ashburton to Peel, 30 Jan. 1846.             Ward papers, op. cit.
      BM Add Mss 40584 £18.                    . The Correspondence of Lord
  . Peel to Ashburton, 30 Jan. 1846.            Overstone, ed. D. P. O’Brien
      BM Add Mss 405
                   84 £20.                      (Cambridge, 1971), vol. I, pp.
  . G.D.H. Cole, The Life of William            338-40.
      Cobbett (London, 1924), p. 367.         . Bates to Ward, 2 May 1844.
  . George Harding to Lady                      Ward papers, op. cit.
      Ashburton, 23 Nov. 1864. Baring         . Bates to Ward, 3 Feb. 1845 and
    Mss (B) DEP 37.                             T. W. Ward’s diary, 31 Aug. 1845.
  . Francis Baring to his wife, 23              Ward papers, op. cit.
    Nov. 1830. Northbrook Journals,           . B. Disraeli, Lord George Bentinck.
    op. cit., p. 75.                            A Political Biography (London,
  . Greville Memoirs, op. cit., vol. III,       1852), pp. 87-8.
      pued3:                                  . B. Disraeli, Lord George Bentinck.
  . Greville Memoirs, vol. VI, p. 62.           A Political Biography, op. cit.,
  . 2 Sept. 1841. Letters of Queen              p. 526.
    Victoria, op. cit., p. 395.               . Bates to Ward, 19 April 1847.
  . 2 Aug. 1841. Northbrook Journals,           Ward papers, op. cit.
      oprcit; prl79:                          . Samuel to T. W. Ward, 21 Sept.
  . 8 Aug. 1839. Northbrook Journals,           1846. Ward papers, op. cit.
    op. cit., p. 142.                         . Bates’s diary, 3 Jan. 1836, op. cit.
  . 8 Aug. 1839. Northbrook Journals,         . Ward to Bates, 25 July 1853.
      op. cit. p. 147.                          Baring Mss (B) DEP 193. 26. 1.
  . Francis to Thomas Baring, 21              . Bates to Ward, 4 Jan. 1832. Ward
      Oct. 1843. Northbrook Journals,           Papers, op. cit.
    op. cit., pp. 192-3.                      . 26 Sept. 1864. The Journal of
  . Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., 287-8.            Benjamin Moran, ed. Sarah
  . Francis Baring to Barings, 21 May           Wallace and Frances Gillespie
    1845. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.              (Chicago, 1948), vol. II, p. 1331.
    Ike 7, Wh                                 _ 25 April 1831.
50. Francis Baring to Barings, 28             . Bates’s diary, 16 May 1853, op.
      Nov. 1845. Baring Mss (G) MS              Cit.
      183212HCMs20, Sat                       . Bates’s diary, 14 Oct. 1833, op.
51. John to Francis Baring, 1 Dec.              cit.
     1845. Baring Mss (G) MS 18322.             T. W. Ward's diary, 30 Aug. 1841,
     Vol. 15.                                   Op. cit.
a2: Bates to Ward, 10 July 1833.              . 6 May 1858. The Journal of
     Ward papers, op. cit.                      Benjamin Moran, op. cit., vol. II,
ey Joshua Bates’s diary, 2 Oct. 1835.           p. 308.
     Copy in Baring Mss (B) DEP 74.           . Ward's diary, 30 Aug. 1841, op.
a4 . John Baring to Bates, Dec. 1837.           Git
                                            Notes                                         397
ale Bates to Ward, 21 Dec. 1831.                      . From the Books and Papers of
   Ward papers, op. cit.                                Russell Sturgis, ed. Julian Sturgis
78. Bates’s diary, 24 June 1844, op.                    (Privately printed, Oxford),
    cit.                                               p. 108.
  . Bates’s diary, 30 April 1836, op.                 . Ronald Knox, Patrick Shaw-
    cit.                                                Stewart (London, 1920), p. 81.
  . Bates’s diary, 17 Feb. 1838, op.                  . Ward’s diary, August 1828, op.
    cit.                                               cit.
  . Charles to George Sumner, 30                      . April 1838. Cit. Hidy, The House
    April 1842. Memoirs and Letters of                  of Baring, op. cit., p. 138.
    Charles Sumner, ed. Edward La                     . Bates’s diary, 4 March 1837, op.
    Pierce (London, 1878), vol. II,                     cit.
    p. 207.                                           . Cecil Woodham-Smith, The Great
  . John A. Munroe, Louis McLane                        Hunger (London, 1962), pp. 54-7.
    (New Jersey, 1973), pp. 281-2.                    . Minute of Board of Treasury of 9
  . Nolte, Memoirs, op. cit., p. 287.                   Dec. 1845. Copy in Baring Mss
  . Bates’s diary, 1 Nov. 1835, op. cit.               (B) DEP 193. 74. 9.
  . Bates’s diary, 27 Dec. 1835, op.                  . C.E. Trevelyan to Barings, 26
    cit.                                                Aug. 1846. Baring Mss (B) DEP
  . Bates’s diary, 3 Sept. 1837, op. cit.               19357
  . Ward’s diary, 30 Aug. 1845, op.                   . Bates to Ward, 7 Nov. 1830.
    cit.                                               Ward papers, op. cit.
  . Francis Baring to Barings, 10 Aug.                . Bates to Ward, 20 April 1833.
    1847. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.                      Ward papers, op. cit.
    HG T5205):                                        . Chapman, Rise of Merchant
  . Bates to Ward, 3 Nov. 1847.                         Banking, op. cit., pp. 25-6.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                             . Bates to Ward, 13 Jan. 1831.
                                                        Ward papers. Bates’s diary, 6 Dec.
                                                        1830, 15 Dec. 1830, 9 Jan. 1831,
CHAPTER 8 (pp. 127-42)                                  op. cit.
 1. 24 Jan. 1830. Baring Mss (B) DEP                  . Bates’s diary, 5 Feb. 1831, op. cit.
    193. 13.                                          . Barings to Sueglitz, 18 Feb. 1831.
 2. Chapman, Rise of Merchant                           Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol. I.
    Banking, op. cit., p. 13.                         . Bates’s diary, 30 Nov. 1831, op.
 33 13 Jan. 1831. Ward papers, op.                      cit.
     cit.                                             . Bates to Ward, 30 Jan. 1832.
   . Bates’s diary, 24 May 1834, op.                    Ward papers, op. cit.
    cit.                                              . Bates’s diary, 8 Sept. 1833, op. cit.
   . Charles Blake to Thomas Baring,                  . Bates’s diary, 14 Oct. 1833, op.
     11 Nov. 1848. Baring Mss (G) MS                    eit
     1Ss2 WHC 1. 14.3218.                             _ Instructions to Francis Booth
   . 31 Dee. 1832.                                      Wells of 12 Dec. 1839. Baring
   . Regulations of 1 June 1845.                        Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol. 124.
     Baring Mss (B) PF 323. Staff                     . Bates’s diary, 28 Feb. 1835, op.
     Memoranda.                                         Cit
   . Eleanor F. Rathbone, William                     . Hidy, The House of Baring, op.
     Rathbone. A Memoir (London,                        cit., p. 359.
     1905), p. 94.                                  ope Bates’s diary, 30 July 1832, op.
                                                         cit.
   . Alfred Mildmay, ‘Notes and
                                                    aye. Thomas Ashton, Iron and Steel in
     Recollections’. Baring Mss (B)
                                                         the Industrial Revolution
    DEP 135.
 398                                 The Sixth Great Power

       (Manchester, 1924), pp. 2-3.                    Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.
   . Bates’s diary, 25 April 1845, op.                 12:
       cit.                                       57. Mildmay to Bates, 13 Dec. 1846.
   . Bates’s diary, 6 May 1845, op. cit.              Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC 1.
   . Mildmay to Thomas Baring, 16                     ZLOwZ
     Nov. 1845. Baring Mss (G) MS                 58. Bates’s diary, 31 May 1835, op.
       LSS 21S Ei Gs leZ0n2   els:                    cit.
   . Thomas Baring to Bates, 11 Dec.              59. 26 June 1848. RAL T8/83.
       1844. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.             60. 7 Dec. 1844. Baring Mss (G) MS
     HC 1. 20. 4.                                      18321. HC 1. 20. 4.
   . 3 Aug. 1846, Ward papers, op. cite           61. 7 Dec. 1844. Baring Mss (G) MS
   . 4 Oct. 1846, op. cit.                             [33212       GAs 2024:
   . Bates to Ward, 6 Feb. 1831. Ward             62. Francis Baring to Barings, 8
     papers, op. cit.                                 March 1847. Baring Mss (G) MS
   . Bates to Ward, 6 Feb. 1831. Ward                  US320bLG e205 Sethe
     papers, op. cit.                             63. See, in particular, Platt, Foreign
   . Bates to Ward, 21 June 1832 and                  Finance in Continental Europe, op.
     6 July 1833. Ward papers.                        cit., pp. 18-24.
42. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC 3.                64. Anselm de Rothschild to London
     52. 1B. cf. Emden Money Powers                   Cousins, 6 May and 8 May 1843.
     of Europe, op. cit., p. 73.                      RAL 118/128 and 129.
43. 23 July 1839. Baring Mss (G) MS               65. Bates to Ward, 29 Oct. 1845.
    18322. Vol. 9. cf. Clapham, The                   Ward papers, op. cit.
    Bank of England, op. cit., pp. 168-           66. Platt, Foreign Finance, op. cit.,
    70; Gille, Maison Rothschild, op.                 p. 20.
     cit., vol. I, p. 292.                        67. 25 March 1846. Baring Mss (G)
   . 2 Dec. 1839. RAL T35/85.                         MS 18322. Vol. 16.
   . Bates to Ward, 5 April 1846.                 68. 11 Oct. 1831. Baring Mss (G) MS
    Ward papers, op. cit.                             18322. Vol. 2.
   . 13 Sept. 1847. Baring Mss (G)                69. Barings to Hopes, 30 Nov. 1832.
     MS 18321. HC 1. 20. 4. 2.                        Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol. 3.
   . Bates to Ward, 3 Nov. 1847.                  70. Hopes to Barings, 5 Feb. 1842.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                             Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC 8.
  . Bates to Ward, 3 Nov. 1847.                       1. 4.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                         71. Mildmay to Thomas Baring, 1
  . 21 Aug. 1848. Baring Mss (G) MS                   Dec. 1846. Baring Mss (G) MS
    18321. HGS 2097:                                  18321. HC 1. 20. 2. 26.
  . John Baring to Bates, 30 Dec.                72. Ashburton to Thomas Baring, 30
    1847. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.                   Nov. 1846. Baring Mss (G) MS
    ELGeiee2   ON                                    L83218FiG@ 1720. 169)
  . Bates to Ward, 13 Jan. 1831.
    Ward papers, op. cit.
  . Barings to Hottinguer and Co., |
                                                  CHAPTER 9 (pp. 143-57)
    March 1847. Baring Mss (G) MS
    18322. Vol. 17.                                1. J. N. Vaughan to James Madison,
   . Jenks, Migration of British Capital,            21 Oct. 1829. Baring Mss (B) DEP
     op. cit., pp. 127-30.                            36.
   . Disraeli, Endymion (London,                  2. Bates to Ward, 30 Oct. 1833.
     1881 edition), p. 356.                          Ward papers, op. cit.
Se 24 Jan. 1836, op. cit.                         3. Bates to Thomson, Bonar and
56. Barings to Hopes, 28 Oct. 1842.                  Co., 2 Feb. 1828. Baring Mss (O)
                                          Notes                                       399
   MG?4. D21. Vol. 3.                             24. Ward to Bates, 4 April 1835.
 . Thomas Baring to Barings, 30                       Baring Mss (O) MG 24. D21. Vol.
   June 1829. Baring Mss (G) MS                       29,
   18321. HC 1. 20. 4.                            25) Ward to Bates, 29 May 1832.
 . Thomas Baring to Barings, 21                       Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC S.
    Sept. 1829. Baring Mss (G) MS                     1:
    18321. HC 1. 20. 4.                           26. Barings to Ward, 30 Jan. and 14
  . Bates to C. B. Young and Thomas                   Feb. 1833. Baring Mss (G) MS
    Baring, 18 May 1849. Baring Mss                   18322. Vol. 3.
    (G) MS 18321. HC 1. 20. 8.                    Zi: P. Perit to Ward, 16 Dec. 1836.
  . T. W. Ward diary, 30 Aug. 1841,                   Ward papers, op. cit.
   Op. Cit.                                       28. Clapham, Bank of England, op.
  . T. W. Ward diary, 19 Oct. 1829,                   cit., vol. II, pp. 151-4.
    op. cit.                                      22) Journal of Thomas Raikes. Vol. III
  . Ward to Bates, 12 Aug. 1829.                      (London, 1857), p. 157.
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC S.                30. Ward to Barings, 21 May 1837.
    eZ                                                Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.
  . Memorandum for 1833. Baring                       De
   Mss (G) MS 18321. HC 5.1. 5.                   St. Alexander Baring to Barings, 27
  . Ward to Barings, 11 Feb. 1840.                    Nov. 1828. Baring Mss (G) MS
    Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.                    18321. HC1. 20. 1.
   Ale                                            ope Irene D. Nev, ‘Edmond J.
  . Hidy, The House of Baring, op.                    Forstall. Banker of New Orleans.’
    cit., pp. 185, 285-8.                             Copy in Baring Mss (B) DEP 22
  . Barings to Ward, 18 June 1831.                    (ii)e.
    Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.                  . Bates to Ward, 21 June 1832.
    if                                                Ward papers, op. cit.
14. Levi Woodbury to Rothschilds, 2                 . Bates to Ward, 10 July 1833.
    July 1834. RAL T49/6.                             Ward papers, op. cit.
  . Bates’s diary, 26 Sept. 1834, op.               _ 24 Nov. 1839. RAL T35/81.
   cit.                                             . 14 June 1838. Baring Mss (O)
  . Gille, Maison Rothschild, op. cit.,               MG?4. D21. Vol. 122.
    vol. I, p. 405.                                 . Bates to Stockmar, | Sept. 1838.
  . Barings to Ward, 29 Sept. 1834.                   Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.
    Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.                    122
    9
                                                    . Jenks, Migration of British Capital,
                                                      op. cit., pp. 88-90.
  _ Bates’s diary, 26 Sept. 1834, op.
    cit.                                          ek Mildmay to Thomas Baring, 22
  . Belmont to Rothschilds, 25 June                   July 1829. Baring Mss (G) MS
    1843. RAL T54/173.                                18321. HC1. 20. 4.
  . Belmont to Rothschilds, 29 Nov.               40. Bates’s diary, 8 May 1831, op. cit.
    1843. RAL T54/190.                                Ward to Barings, 17 Oct. 1831.
  . Ward to Bates, 8 Dec. 1835.                       Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HCS.
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC 5.                    1¥3:
       Fae                                           . Bates’s diary, 24 April 1836, op.
  . Ward to Bates, 20 Nov. 1835.                      cit.
                                                    . Thomas Payne Govan, Nicholas
     Baring Mss (O) MG 24. D21. Vol.
     26.                                               Biddle (Chicago, 1959), p. 318.
ub). Ward to Bates, 7 June 1833.                     . Jenks, Migration of British Capital,
                                                       op. cit., pp. 95-6.
     Baring Mss (O) MG 24. D21. Vol.
   24.                                               . Barings to Jaudon, 23 Aug. 1839.
400                               The Sixth Great Power

      Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.               28 Jan. 1846. Baring Mss (B) DEP
      P22.                                         193510:
45. Overstone to G. W. Norman, 11              67. 16 May 1845. Ward papers, op.
      Nov. 1839. Correspondence of Lord            cit.
      Overstone, op. cit., vol. I, p. 245.     68. Alexander Baring to Hopes, 31
  . Ward to Barings, 5 Nov. 1839.                  Dec. 1797. Baring Mss (B) DEP 3.
      Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.               pe
    2ie                                        69. Fulford, Glyn’s, op. cit., pp. 144-8.
  . 19 and 20 Dec. 1839.                       AO: 31 Aug. 1841. Baring Mss (O)
  . 13 Jan. 1840.                                  MG?4. D21. Vol. 32.
  . E.g., Barings to Prime Ward and            ile Thomas Baring to Francis
      King, Hopes, and Hottinguers, 6              Hincks, 12 Jan. 1849. Baring Mss
      Jan. 1840. Baring Mss (O) MG24.              (G) MS 18321. HC1. 20.
      D21. Vol. 124.
  . 9 Feb. 1841. Ward papers, op. cit.
  . 15 Feb. 1841. Baring Mss (O)               CHAPTER 10 (pp. 158-85)
    MG?4. D21. Vol. 32.
  . Bates to Ward, 3 Nov. 1841.                 if Northbrook, Journals and
    Ward papers, op. cit.                          Correspondence, op. cit., p. 244.
  . Ward to Bates, 13 Nov. 1841.                ah Greville Memoirs, op. cit., vol. VI,
    Ward papers, op. cit.                          p. 147.
  . Smith to Lady Grey, 19 Sept.                3. Froude, Carlyle, op. cit., vol. I,
    1842. Letters of Sydney Smith, op.               . 444.
      Cit D7 08.                                4. Greville Memoirs, op. cit., vol.
  . Bates to Ward., 26 April 1843.                 VII, pp. 286-7.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                        . Houghton, Monographs, op. cit.,
  . Ward to Barings, 31 May 1841.                  p. 231.
      Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.             . The Journal of Benjamin Moran,
      5.                                           ed. Sarah Wallace and Frances
  . Cit. Jenks, Migration of British               Gillespie (Chicago, 1948), vol. I,
    Capital, op. cit., p. 105.                     p. 632.
  . Hopes to Barings, 5 Jan. 1841.               . Mrs T. B. Laurence to her
    Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.                 mother. Baring Mss (B) DEP
      3                                            187.
  _ 10 Aug. 1842. Baring Mss (G) MS              . 1 Jan. 1858. Baring Mss (G) MS
      18321. HC1. 20. 4.                            ESS 2G      205 5ee2s
  . Hidy, House of Baring, op. cit.,             . T. W. to Samuel Ward, 30 June
      pp. 313-20.                                  1853. Ward papers, op. cit.
  . Bates to Ward, 26 April 1844.                . Bates to Ward, 3 April 1857.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                          Ward papers, op. cit.
  . Bates to Ward, 4 Nov. 1844.                  . Bates’s diary, 13 Jan. 1850, op.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                          cit.
  . Ward to Barings, 4 May 1839.                 . Bates’s diary, 7 Aug. 1851.
    Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21. Vol.               . Bates’s diary, 16 June 1850.
      Dif                                        . Bates’s diary, 15 April 1853.
  . Ward to Barings, 15 Sept. 1843.              . T. W. to Samuel Ward, 4 July
    Baring Mss (B) DEP 193. 10.                      1853. Ward papers, op. cit.
  . Prime Ward and King to Barings,               . Bates to Ward, 13 May 1852.
    30 June 1895. Baring Mss (B)                     Ward papers, op. cit.
    DEP 193. 10.                                   . Monypenny and Buckle,
  . John Davis to Thomas Baring,                     Disraeli, op. cit., vol. II, p. 94.
                                           Notes                                       401
 . Monypenny and Buckle,                                1860; 13 April 1862; 17 Oct.
   Disraeli, op. cit., vol. II,                         1863.
   pp. 307-8.                                      ae) Barings to Hopes, 5 Jan. 1849.
 . Greville Memoirs, op. cit., vol. VI,                 Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.
   p. 276.                                              19
 . Bates’s diary, 22 Feb. 1852, op.                   . 26 Dec. 1849. Baring Mss (G)
   cit.                                                MS 18321. HC1. 20. 4. 3.
  . Baring Mss (B) DEP 185.                          . Bates’s diary, 10 March 1850,
  . Greville Memoirs, op. cit., vol. VI,               op. cit.
    p. 403.                                          . J. Charles Labouchére to Bates,
  . 30 April 1852, Hansard. Third                      20 Sept. 1853. Baring Mss (G)
    Series. Vol. CXXI, pp. 47-8.                       MS 183212 HGI: 22:
  . Monypenny and Buckle,                            . Bates’s diary, 20 Nov. 1853, op.
    Disraeli, op. cit., vol. III, p. 78.               cit.
  . Memoirs of Henry Reeve, ed. John               50. Bates’s diary, | Jan. 1854.
    Laughton (London, 1898), vol.                  oy T. W. Ward to S. G. Ward, 15
    II, p. 154.                                        Aug. 1853. Ward papers, op. cit.
26. 25 March 1838. The Letters of                    . Edgar Johnson, Charles Dickens.
    Samuel Palmer, ed. Raymond                         Vol. II (New York, 1952), p. 848.
    Lister (Oxford, 1974), vol. 1,                   . Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.
    p. 181.                                            34 and MS 18321. HCL. 14. 3.
Zhe Alfred Mildmay, ‘Notes and                         49.
    Recollections’, op. cit., p. 165.                _ M. Purton to Bates, 7 Dec. 1850.
28. A Descriptive Catalogue of the                     Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC3.
    Collection of Pictures belonging to                25 aG:
    the Earl of Northbrook (London,                  . J. Price to Bates, 10 Feb. 1859.
    1899).                                             Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC3.
  _ T. W. Ward to Samuel Ward, 14                       3522:
    July 1853. Ward papers, op. cit.                 . 2 July 1853. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Cit. Hidy, House of Baring, op.                    18322. Vol. 25.
    cit., p. 420.                                    . 30 Oct. 1849. Baring Mss (G)
  . Thomas Baring to Bates, 10                         MS 18322. Vol. 20.
    Nov. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS                     . Barings to O’Shea, 18 Dec. 1848
    18321. HC1. 20. 4.                                 and O’Shea to Barings, 28 Dec.
  . Bates to Ward, 9 Jan. 1849.                        1848. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
    Ward papers, op. cit.                              HC4. 8. 6.
  . Bates’s diary, 27 July 1849, op.               hy Thomas Baring to Barings, 21
    cit.
                                                       Nov. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Bates’s diary, 10 Sept. 1849.                      18321. HCI. 20. 4. 2.
  . Bates’s diary, 22 Dec. 1850.                   60. Thomas Baring to Barings, 23
  . Bates’s diary, 21 Oct. 1856.                       Dec. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Bates’s diary, 4 Oct. 1863.                        19321, HCh.20. 4.2.
  . Bates’s diary, 5 Nov. 1853.                    61. Thomas Baring to Barings, 16
  . Bates’s diary, 8 June 1853.                        Nov. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Bates’s diary, 5 Nov. 1853 and 1                   183213 HC1,.20/4:2,
    Jan. 1856.                                     62. Baron Lionel to Mayer
  . Bates’s diary, 12 Dec. 1853.                       Rothschild, 26 Nov. 1849. RAL
  . Bates’s diary, 1 April 1858.                       T8/188.
  . Bates’s diary, 24 May 1863.                    63. Hopes to Barings, 28 March
  . Bates’s diary, 5 Oct. 1858; 11                     1852. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
                                                       HC8. 1. 7.
    Dec. 1859; 4 Feb. 1860; 3 June
402                              The Sixth Great Power

64. Barings to Hopes, 8 Jan. and 22               1857). Bates’s diary, 22 April
    Jan. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS                  1857, op. cit.
     18322. Vol. 19.                          86. Bates to C. B. Young, 16 Aug.
65. Barings to Stieglitz. 24 July                 1855. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
      1849. Baring Mss (G) MS 18322.              HC1. 20. 8.
      Vol. 19.                                87. Thomas Baring to Stieglitz, 19
  . The Times (16 Jan. 1850).                     May 1857; Barings to
  . Bates’s diary, 13 Jan. 1850, op.              Hottinguers, 5 Sept. 1857.
    cit                                           Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.
  . Bates’s diary, 17 Jan. 1850.                  29)
  . Bates’s diary, 23 Jan. 1850.              88. Thomas Baring to Hottinguers,
  . Bates’s diary, 18 Aug. 1850.                  4 Jan. 1858. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . Bates’s diary 30 Jan. 1850.                   18322. Vol. 30.
  . Bates’s diary, 18 and 24 Nov.             89. Thomas Baring to Hottinguers,
      1853.                                       22 Oct. 1859. Baring Mss (G)
  . 2 Aug. 1854, Hansard. NS3.                    MS 18322. Vol. 31.
      iio                                     90. Thomas Baring to S. Gwyer, 14
  . For an interesting discussion of              Jan. 1868. Baring Mss (G) MS
      the relationship between                   18322. Vol. 40.
      government and bankers see              le Thomas Baring to Stieglitz, 13
      Platt, Finance, Trade and Politics,         Dec. 1858. Baring Mss (G) MS
      op. cit., pp. 10-12.                       18322. Vol. 30.
  . 1 Feb. 1854. Baring Mss (G) MS            De Platt, Foreign Finance in
    18322. Vol. 26.                               Continental Europe, op. cit.,
  . Baring to Hottinguers, 20 Feb.                pp. 65-7.
    1855. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.            235 Edwin Hodder, The Life and
    Vol. 27.                                      Work of the Seventh Earl of
  . Barings to Stieglitz, 20 June                 Shaftesbury. Vol. II (London,
      1854. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.               1886), p. 384.
    Vol. 26.                                  94. Barings to the Edinburgh Review
78. Barings to Stieglitz, 1 April                 (16 March 1885). Baring Mss (B)
      1856. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.              Letter Books.
      Vol. 28.                                ERE Bates’s diary, 9 Nov. 1860 and
TD) Lord to Lady Clarendon, 19                    25 March 1861, op. cit.
    Dec. 1855. Cit. Herbert                   96. Louis Napoleon to Bates, 2 Sept.
    Maxwell, Life and Letters of the              1855. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.
    Fourth Earl of Clarendon. Vol. II             ri:
    (London, 1913), p. 107.                   97: Bates to Louis Napoleon, 3 Sept.
80. Clive Anderson, “The Russian                   1855. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.
      Loan of 1855’, Economia (Nov.               ifile
      1960), pp. 368-71 and Frank             98. Bates to Louis Napoleon, 4 Sept.
      Whitson, ‘The Russian Loan of                1855. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.
      1855: a Postscript’, Economia               IDE
      (Nov. 1961), pp. 421-6.                 99. Barings to Samuel Ward, 21
  . Bates’s diary, 19 Sept. 1856, op.              Sept. 1855. Baring Mss (B) DEP
      Cit                                          193.11.
  . Bates’s diary, 28 Dec. 1856, op.          100. Barings to Louis Napoleon, 27
      Cit.                                         Dec. 1856. Baring Mss (B) DEP
  . 29 Nov. 1856.                                  193311;
  . 2 May 1857.                               101. Francis Baring to Barings, 11
  . The Times (21 and 22 April                     Nov. 1856. Baring Mss (G) MS
                                          Notes                                         403
     18321. HEE: 1; 2025.                              Jan. 1855. Baring Mss (G) MS
102. Barings to Hopes, 12 Feb. 1856.                   18322. Vol. 27.
     Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.                120. Chapman, Rise ofMerchant
     28.                                               Banking, op. cit., p. 29.
103. Platt, Foreign Finance in                    121. Bates to Thomas Baring, 16
     Continental Europe, op. cit.,                     Aug. 1855. Baring Mss (G) MS
     p. 16.                                            L321) G12 20),3;
104. E. d’Eichthal to Barings, 5 April            122. Thomas Baring to Henri
     1891. Baring Mss (B) HC7. 67.                     Hottinguer, 2 April 1864. Baring
105. Barings to Hottinguers, 24 Dec.                   Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol. 36.
     1851. Baring Mss (G) MS 18322.               123: Bates’s diary, 5 May 1863, op.
     Vol. 22.                                          cit.
106. Platt, Foreign Finance in                    124. Thomas Baring to Ward, | July
     Continental Europe, op. cit.,                     1865. Baring Mss (B) HC1. 204.
     pp. 16-17.                                        28.
107. Barings to Rothschilds fréres, 24            125: Ward to Thomas Baring, 6 Nov.
     June 1871. Baring Mss (B)                         1864 and 9 June 1865. Baring
     Letter Books.                                     Mss (B) HCl. 204. 28.
108. The Life and Correspondence of the           126. ‘Notes and Recollections’, op.
     Right Hon. Hugh C. E. Childers,                   cit., p. 60.
     ed. Lt Colonel Spencer Childers              127. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193. 39.
     (London, 1901), pp. 81-5.                    128. 1 Oct. 1870. Baring Mss (B)
109. Thomas Baring to Barings, 11                      HC1. 204. 3k.
     July 1853. Baring Mss (G) MS                 129: Arabella, Lady Northbrook to
     183212 HCl: 20,4233                                Lord Northbrook, 27 Nov. 1873.
110. Francis to Thomas Baring, 21                       Northbrook papers, vol. III.
     March 1864. Baring Mss (G) MS                130. Barings to Ward, 1 March and 8
     18321. HCl. 20. 5.                                 Nov. 1873. Baring Mss (B)
Pit 30 Jan. 1859. Baring Mss (G)                        Letter Books.            :
     MS 18321. HC1. 20. 4. 4.                     13ile Roger Fulford, Glyn’s, op. cit.,
rie. Bates’s diary, 8 June 1848, op.                    p. 208.
     cit.
PIS. 2 Sept. 1859. Baring Mss (G)                 CHAPTER       11 (pp. 186-206)
     MS 18321. HC1. 20. 4. 4.
114. Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                      ile The Marquess of Zetland, Lord
     Banking, op. cit., p. 17.                        Cromer (London, 1932), pp. 20-1.
115, Brown, Shipley to Brown Bros, |               2 Maurice Baring, The Puppet Show
     Dec. 1857. Brown Brothers                        ofMemory (London, 1922), p. 31.
     papers. New York Historical                    . A Victorian Diarist. Extracts from
     Society.                                         the Journals ofMary, Lady
116. Brown, Shipley to Brown Bros, 5                  Monkswell (London, 1944), p. 152.
     Dec. 1857. Brown Brothers                      . Baring, Puppet Show ofMemory,
     papers, op. cit. cf. Vincent                     op. cit. p. 72.
     Carosso, The Morgans (Boston,                  . Zetland, Cromer, op. cit., p. 20.
     1987), p. 65.                                  . The Diary of Sir Edward Walter
1i7. Bates’s diary, 13 Feb. 1858, op.                 Hamilton, ed. Dudley Bellman
     cit.                                             (Oxford, 1972), p. 880.
118. Brown, Shipley to Brown Bros, 5                . 25 June 1885. Gladstone papers.
     Dec. 1857. Brown Brothers                        BM Add Mss 44491 £163.
     papers, op. cit.                               _ Arthur D. Eliot, Goschen. Vol. IT
1}3: Thomas to Francis Baring, 27                    (London, 1911), appendix 1.
404                              The Sixth Great Power

9. Memorandum by Susan Beattie                    HGsr iexval:
      of the Historic Buildings Division        . Barings to Hopes, 26 April 1877.
      of the GLC.                                 Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.
  . Baring, Puppet Show ofMemory,               . T.C. Baring to Sueglitz, 24
      op. cit., p. 20.                            March 1884. Baring Mss (B)
  . Daphne Pollen, J Remember, I                  Letter Books.
      Remember (privately printed,            34. Barings to Hopes, 12 July 1890.
      1983), p. 31.                               Baring Mss (B) HC8. 1. Vol.
  . 14 Dec. 1882. Baring Mss (B)                  XVIII.
    Letter Books.                             a58 Joseph Laurence to Thomas
  . 5 Nov. 1878. Baring Mss (B)                   Baring, 17 Aug. 1872. Baring Mss
      HC     20431.                               (B) HC1. 168.
  . T. C. Baring to Lord Northbrook,          36. Barings to Torlades and Co., 16
    5 March 1874. Northbrook                      March 1876. Baring Mss (B)
      papers, 8. 1.                               Letter Books.
  . Francis Baring to Lord                    373 Barings to Joachim Ebbell, 25
    Northbrook, 15 and 22 Jan. 1874.              May 1876. Baring Mss (B) Letter
      Northbrook papers, 8. 2.                    Books.
  . Sydney James, Seventy Years               38. T. C. Baring to Mr Buck, 11 Feb.
    (London, 1926), p. 49.                        1882. Baring Mss (B) Letter
  . Ralph Nevill, Unconventional                  Books.
    Memories (London, 1923),                  5) Frank Harris. His Life and
      pp. 84-5.                                   Adventures (London, 1947),
  . Oral information from Lord                    pp. 336-7.
    Ashburton.                                   . 27 Oct. 1886.
  . Unpublished memoirs of Mrs                   . Frank Harris. Life, op. cit.,
    Constance Hugh Smith. In the                   pp. 336-7.
      possession of Mrs Fortune                  . 25 Oct. 1886.
     Stanley. Vol. III, p. 84.                   . 26 Oct. 1886.
   . Baring Mss (B) DEP 22 (XX).                 . Frank Harris. Life, op. cit.,
  . E.g., Alfred Mildmay, ‘Notes and              pp. 336-7.
     Recollections’, op. cit., pp. 148-9.        . 28 Oct. 1886.
  . Undated. Dec. 1888. Baring Mss               _ 19 Jan. 1887.
    (B) HCI. 204. 33.                            . 19 Jan. 1887. Baring Mss (B)
     . Baring Mss (B) DEP 22 (XX).                FiG3mi168.0;
     . 12 March 1889. Baring Mss (B)             . Charles Combe to Barings, 27
      Letter Books.                                June 1888. Baring Mss (B) HC3.
     . 23 March 1889. Baring Mss (B)               15,9)
      HEIp 182:                                  . Baring Mss (B) HC3. 135 and
    . The Life and Correspondence of the           1453)
      Right Hon. Hugh C. E. Childers,            . e.g., Bankers’ Magazine of 1888,
      op. cit., pp. 207-11.                       No. XLVIII, pp. 607-8.
Jefe The Collected Works of Walter                . Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street: a
      Bagebot, ed. Norman St John                   Description of the Money Market
      Stevas (London, 1978), vol. XI,               (London, 1874).
      p. 407.                                     . Baring Brothers to Hopes, 29
28. No. XVIII (1888), p. 609.                       Dec. 1884. Baring Mss (B) Letter
29) Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                        Books.
      Banking, op,cit., p. 17.                 53. 5 Sept. 1874. Baring Mss (B)
30. 1 Dec. 1888.                                    Letter Books.
Mt    25 April 1877. Baring Mss (B)            54. Barings to Messrs Russell and
                                                                              405
    Co., 30 Oct. 1874. Baring Mss (B)      Belmont to N. M. Rothschild,
    Letter Books.                          27 Nov. 1849. RAL 154/310.
  . 12 March 1875. Baring Mss (B)          Thomas Baring to Bates, 14
    Letter Books.                          Sept. 1852. Baring Mss (G) MS
  . 27 Oct. 1886.                           18321. HC1. 20. 4/3.
  . Baring Mss (B) DEP 115.               . Thomas Baring to Bates, 2 Nov.
  _17 Jan. 1885.                            1852. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
                                            HCl. 20. 4/3.
                                          . Bates to Thomas Baring. 7 Sept.
CHAPTER 12 (pp. 207-28)                     1852. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.
                                            39:
  it Bates to Young, 23 Sept. 1848.       . Bates to T. W. Ward, 13 May
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC1.           1852. Ward papers, op. cit.
    20. 8.                                . Hidy, House of Baring, op. cit.,
   . Bates to Hottinguer, 7 Sept.           p. 412.
    1849. Baring Mss (G) MS 18322.        . 14 Jan. 1853. Baring Mss (G)
    Vol. 19.                                MS 18322. Vol. 25.
   . Belmont to N. M. Rothschild,         . Barings to S. Ward, 23 March
     15 May 1849. RAL T54/290.              and 13 April 1855. Baring Mss
   . T. W. Ward diary, 22 June 1848,        (O) MG24. D21. Vol. 154.
    op. cit.                              . Bates’s diary, 6 Oct. 1850, op.
   . Bates to Thomas Baring, 20 Jan.        cit.
     1862. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.        . Bates’s diary, 15 Oct. 1850, op.
     39)                                    cit.
   . Bates to Thomas Baring, 8 Ma 4       . Bates to Thomas Baring, 7 Sept.
     1849. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.         and 10 Sept. 1852. Baring Mss
     HIGI> 20: 8.                           (B) DEP 193. 39.
   . Bates to Thomas Baring, 15 May       . Ward to Barings, 20 April 1881.
     1849. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.         Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2.30.
    HCl. 20. 8.                           . Bates’s diary, 25 Oct. 1857, op.
   . 15 May 1849. Baring Mss (G)            cit.
    MS 18321. HC1. 20. 8.                 . Hidy, House of Baring, op. cit.,
   . Bates to Thomas Baring, 2 June         pp. 463-4.
     1849. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.       . Bates’s diary, 10 Jan. 1858, op.
    HE1. 2048.                              cit.
   . Thomas Baring to Bates, 1 June        . Russell Sturgis to Thomas
     1849. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.          Baring, 31 Dec. 1860. Cit. Hidy,
     HCI. 20. 8.                             House of Baring, op. cit., p. 474.
   . 14 Jan. 1849. RAL T8/125.            . 22 April 1861. Baring Mss (G)
   . Brown, Shipley to Brown                MS 18322. Vol. 33.
     Brothers, 9 Feb. 1855. Brown         . Barings to Ward, 25 May 1861.
     Brothers papers, op. cit.              Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.
   . Brown, Shipley to Brown                 33;
     Brothers, 2 Aug. 1867. Brown          . Journal of Benjamin Moran, op.
     Brothers papers, op. cit.               cit., vol. II, p. 1297.
   . Brown, Shipley to Brown               . Ward to Thomas Baring, 2 Jan.
     Brothers, 2 Nov. 1868. Brown             1865. Baring Mss (B) HC1. 204.
     Brothers papers, op. cit.               28.
 ie Bates to Young, 4 June 1849.        36. Journal of Benjamin Moran, op.
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC1.           cit., vol. II, pp. 1401-2.
    20. 8.       f                      Bhs 15 Oct. 1875.
406                             The Sixth Great Power

  . Journal of Benjamin Moran, op.               1883. Baring Mss (B) Letter
    cit. vol. II, p. 807.                        Books.
  _ New York Tribune (15 Oct. 1875).         oR Ward to Barings, 14 Dec. 1880.
  . Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol.                Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2. 30.
      Boe                                    60. Tom Baring to Revelstoke, 18
  . T. W. Ward to Bates, 26 Jan.                 April 1886. Baring Mss (B) HCS.
      1851. Ward papers, op. cit. Bates          LeZ/:
      to Ward, 14 Feb. 1851. Ward            61. Vincent P. Carosso, More Than a
      papers, op. cit. Brown, Shipley            Century of Investment Banking.
      to Brown Brothers, 22 Sept,                The Kidder Peabody and Co. Story
      1860. Brown Brothers papers,               (New York, 1979), p. 22.
      op. cit. Brown, Shipley to Brown       62. Tom Baring to Revelstoke, 1
      Brothers, 17 May 1865. Brown               Feb. 1889. Baring Mss (B) HCS.
      Brothers papers, op. cit.                  rap
42. 18 March 1869. Baring Mss (O)            63. Tom Baring to Revelstoke, 6
      MG/?24. D21. Vol. 23.                      Oct. 1889. Baring Mss (B) HCS.
43. Ellis Oberholtzer, Jay Cooke.                127:
      Financier of the Civil War, Vol. 2     64. 20 Nov. 1889. Baring Mss (B)
      (Philadelphia, 1907), pp. 209-             Letter Books.
      10.                                    65. 1 Feb. 1877. Baring Mss (B)
  . The Herald (9 Oct. 1875).                    Isk@s, 2. 5i0)
  . Ward to Barings, 26 Sept. 1873.          66. Thomas Baring to Barings, 13
    Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2. 30.                   Feb. 1877. Baring Mss (B) HCS.
  . Barings to Ward, 11 Oct. 1873.               2a 0:
    Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.             67. Francis Baring to Barings, 8
  . T.C. Baring to Thomas Baring,                Sept. 1877. Baring Mss (B) HCS.
      2 Feb. 1866. Baring Mss (O)                Das O%
      MG?4.   D21. Vol. 23.                  68. Ward to Barings, 14 Dec. 1880.
  . Barings to Hopes, 27 Feb. 1871.              Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2. 30.
    Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.             69. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke,
  . Belmont to N. M. Rothschild,                 12 Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B)
    23 Jan. 1873. RAL T5 8/134.                  FiGia230!
  . Hopes to Barings, 1 Feb. 1873.           70. Ward to Barings, 24 Aug. 1878.
      Baring Mss (B) HC8. 1: XV.                 Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2. 30.
  . Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                 70 Ward to Barings, 28 Feb. 1882.
     Banking, op. cit., p. 97.                   Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2. 30.
  . Barings to Ward, 6 June 1874.            12) Ward to Barings, 19 Feb. 1891.
     Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2. 30.
  . Barings to Ward, 17 Aug. 1875.           73% Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 4
     Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                Aug. 1885 and Sam Ward to
  . Barings to Ward, 23 Dec. 1875.               Revelstoke, 18 June 1885.
     Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                Baring Mss (B) HC1. 145 and
  . Barings to Lee, Higginson and                FiGoe2es0!
     Co., 13 Oct. 1876. Baring Mss           74. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 4
     (B) Letter Books.                           and 6 Aug. 1885. Baring Mss (B)
   . Russell Sturgis to Mr Roosevelt,            HCl. 145.
     22 Feb. 1877. Baring Mss (B)            US. Revelstoke to Ward, 9 July 1885.
     Letter Books.                               Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.
   . Barings to Ward, Nov. 1882.             76. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 3
     Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.               June 1886. Baring Mss (B) HCS.
   . T.C. Baring to Ward, 2 Aug.                 12274
                                         Notes                                         407
12: Revelstoke to Thomas Baring,                      MG24. D21. Vol. 19.
    25 Aug. 1885. Baring Mss (B)                 96. 27 Aug. 1853. Baring Mss (B).
    Letter Books.                                     DEP 193-39,
78. T. C. Baring to Thomas Baring,               Wife George Glyn to A. T. Galt, Nov.
    29 Aug. 1885. Baring Mss (B)                      1857. Cit. Fulford, Glyn’s, op.
    Letter Books.                                     cit., p. 154.
qo: Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 9                98. Galt to Thomas Baring, 26 June
    Aug. 1885. Baring Mss (B) HCl.                    1859. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
    145.                                              HS mlie24:
80. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 8                tbe 14 July 1860. Baring Mss (G)
    Oct. 1885. Baring Mss (B) HC1.                    MS 1832). HGS s15.224.
    145.                                         100. Galt to Thomas Baring, 3 Aug.
81. Barings to Kidder Peabody, 15                     1860. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
    Oct. 1885. Baring Mss (B) Letter                  HC5.15. 24.
    Books.                                       101. Bates to Thomas Baring, 30 July
82. Carosso, Kidder Peabody Story,                     1858. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
    op. cit., p. 20.                                  HC1. 20. 8.
83. Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 26               102. Bates to Young, 2 Nov. 1860.
    Jan. 1886. Baring Mss (B) HCS.                    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HCl.
    27:                                               20. 8.
84. An admirable portrait of Cecil               103. Bates to Young, 25 Aug. 1858.
    Baring is to be found in Daphne                   Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HCl.
    Pollen’s I Remember, I                            20. 8.
    Remember, op. cit.                           104. Thomas Baring to Bates, 26
85. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 9                    March 1861. Baring Mss (G) MS
    Aug. 1885. Baring Mss (B) Letter                  183215 ICR 2028:
    Books.                                       105. D. G. G. Kerr, Sir Edmund Head.
86. Lord Frederic Hamilton, The                       A Scholarly Governor (Toronto,
    Days Before Yesterday (London,                    1954), p. 214.
    1920), p. 251.                               106. D. G. G. Kerr, Sir Edmund Head.
87. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 5                     A Scholarly Governor, op. cit., Pp.
    April 1888. Baring Mss (B) HCS.                    190.
    18272                                        107. Heather Gilbert, Awakening
88. Thomas Baring to Revelstoke, 7                     Continent. The Life of Lord Mount
    Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) HCS.                     Stephen. Vol. I (Aberdeen, 1965),
    127.                                               pp. 160-1.
89. Barings to Hincks, 12 Jan. 1849.                 . Beckles Wilson, The Life of Lord
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18322. Vol. 19.                  Strathcona and Mount Royal. Vol
90. Thomas Baring to W. Cayley, 8                      II (Boston, 1915), p. 120.
    Jan. 1858. Baring Mss (O)                        . Hopes to Barings, 24 July 1885.
    MG?4. D21. Vol. 24.                                Baring Mss (B) HC8. 1. XVII.
91, Fulford, Glyn’s, op. cit., p. 152.               . Gilbert, Awakening Continent,
og. Bates’s diary, 10 Nov. 1858, op.                   op. cit., p. 179.
    cit.                                         Ith. Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 26
93. Barings to Hopes, 3 Jan. 1860.                     Jan. 1886. Baring Mss (B) HCl.
    Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC8.                      M27,
    Ey
94. Bates’s diary, 5 and 18 Jan. 1860,           CHAPTER 13 (pp. 229-43)
    op. cit.
95. Thomas Baring to John Ross, 8                 1. Thomas Baring to Hottinguers,
    April 1853. Baring Mss (O)                       24 June 1863. Baring Mss (G) MS
408                                    The Sixth Great Power

      18322. Vol. 35.                               ee Cabot to Barings, 30 April 1856.
  . Gille, Maison Rothschild, op. cit.,                 Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC4.
      pp. 414-17.                                       NEPA?
  . Thomas Baring to Bates, 14 Nov.                 20. David Robertson to George
      1858. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.                   White, 7 April 1857. Baring Mss
      HC1. 20. 4/4.                                    (G) MS 18321. HC4. 1. 3. 4.
  . 26 Nov. 1858, op. cit.                          2A White to Barings, 3 April 1857.
  . Jenks, Migration of British Capital,                Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HC4.
    op. cit., pp. 287-8.                                1, 3:4.
  . Barings to Luiz Alves de Silva                  Zen David Robertson to White, 1 Oct.
    Porto, 7 May 1879. Baring Mss                       1857. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321.
    (B) Letter Books.                                   HC4. 1. 3. 4.
  . Hopes to Barings, 30 April 1874.                25a White to W. D. Christie, 27 Sept.
    Baring Mss (B) HC8. 1. XVI.                        1857. Cit. Ferns, Britain and
  . Thomas Baring to Barings, 28                       Argentina, op. cit., p. 320.
      Nov. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS                  24. Ferns, Britain and Argentina, op.
      18321. HC1. 20. 4/2.                              cit., p. 330.
  . Edward Baring to Barings, 13                    2D. 11 Jan. 1866. Baring Mss (G) MS
    Aug. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS                        18322. Vol. 38.
      332    Ge?         Oat   Saale                26. Barings to Dr Huergo, 17 Sept.
  . Edward Baring to Barings, 12                          1874. Baring Mss (B) Letter
    Dec. 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS                          Books.
      svat VeKat, 740) WBE Ue                       Zi Barings to Sr Eduardo Madero, 2
  . Edward Baring to Thomas                               Sept. 1875. Baring Mss (B) Letter
    Baring, 15 May 1850. Baring Mss                       Books.
    (G) MS 18321. HC1. 20. 13. 1.                   28. Barings to Don Roberto de la
  . Lord Eddisbury to Thomas                              Bicestra, 8 Aug. 1876. Baring Mss
    Baring, 14 April 1849. Baring Mss                     (B) Letter Books.
      (G) MS 18321. HC4. 1. 18.                     pan). Barings to Bouwer, | Nov. 1876.
  . 4 May 1849. Baring Mss (G) MS                       Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65. I. and
      18322. Vol. 19.                                   Letter Books.
  . Edward to Thomas Baring, 28                     30. Bouwer to Edward Baring, 19
    June 1850. Baring Mss (G) MS                        Oct. 1877. Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1.
    18321. HC4. 20.13. 1.                               6541
ASS ‘Journal of Major White’s                       318 Bouwer to Barings, 26 Dec. 1876.
      Mission to Buenos Ayres, 1852-                    Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65. I.
      53’. Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21.                32 Bouwer to Barings, 19 Jan. 1878.
      Vol. 193, p. 20.                                  Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65. 1.
16. ‘Journal of Major White’s                       B38 Bouwer to Barings, 23 June 1879.
      Mission to Buenos Ayres, 185 2-                   Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65. I.
      53’. Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21.                oo: Bouwer to Barings, 17 Oct. 1879.
      Vol. 193, p. 182.                                 Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65. I.
  . ‘Journal of Major White’s                       oy Barings to Dr Lopez, 3 May 1879.
      Mission to Buenos Ayres, 1852-                    Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65. I.
    53’. Baring Mss (O) MG24. D21.                  36. Ferns, Britain and Argentina, op.
    Vol. 193, p. 240.                                   Cit, pu397.
18. By far the best account of British              if Bouwer to Barings, 18 Oct. 1882.
    involvement in Argentine history                    Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65.
    is to be found in H. S. Ferns,                  38. Bouwer to Barings, 14 Feb. 1884.
    Britain and Argentina in the                        Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 65.
    Nineteenth Century (Oxford, 1960).              SW). Barings to Bouwer, 18 June 1886.
                                          Notes                                           409
    Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                    . XXIV (1889), p. 100 and XXV
  . Bouwer to Barings, 31 Dec. 1887.                 (1890), p. 257.
    Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 71.                      . B. W. Currie’s account of the
  . Barings to Hales, 18 Sept. 1888.                 Crisis. Fulford, Glyn’s, op. cit.,
    Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                     pp. 209-12.
  . H. Osborne O'Hagan, Leaves from                 . 12 Nov. 1890. Brown Brothers
    My Life. Vol. I (London, 1929),                   papers, op. cit.
    p. 377.                                         . Bo Bramsen and Kathleen Wain,
  . Barings to Bouwer, 17 Jan. 1882.                 The Hambros (London, 1979),
    Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                      pes:
  . Barings to Ward, 20 Aug. 1885.                  . Clapham, Bank of England, op.
    Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                     cit., vol. II, p. 328.
  . Baring Mss (B) Letter Books.                    . Revelstoke to Tom Baring, 23
  . Alphonse de Rothschild to                         April 1890. Baring Mss (B) Letter
    London Cousins, 12 Oct. 1888.                      Books.
    RAL 114/39.                                     . Francis Baring to T. C. Baring, 11
  . Vol. XLVIII. 1888. p. 382.                        Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP
  . 25 Oct. 1889. Baring Mss (B)                      193.975, 15134.
    Letter Books.                                 10. Colonel Robert to Evelyn Baring,
   . John Baring to Revelstoke, 20                    25 Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B)
      Jan. 1890. Baring Mss (B)                       DEP 84.
      Uncatalogued.                                 . Wischnegradny to Rothschilds,
   . John Baring to Revelstoke, 7 Feb.                28 Nov. 1890. Copy in Baring
       1890. Uncatalogued.                           Mss (B) DEP 150.
    . John Baring to Revelstoke, 4 Jan.           We Clapham, Bank of England, op.
       1890. Uncatalogued.                            cit. vol. II, p. 334.
2. ‘The Baring Crisis in Anglo-                   13: Cit. L. S. Pressnell, ‘Gold
      Argentine History’. Chapter from                Reserves, Banking Reserves and
      an as yet unpublished book by                   the Baring Crisis of 1890’, in
       Professor H. S. Ferns, pp. 23-4.               Essays in Money and Banking in
53. John Baring to Revelstoke, 14                     honour of R. S. Sayers, ed. G. R.
      Jan. 1890. Baring Mss (B)                       Whittlesey and J. S. G. Wilson
      Uncatalogued.                                   (Oxford, 1968), p. 195. My
54. 22 Nov. 1890.                                     attention was drawn to this, as to
5) Clapham, Bank of England, op.                      much else in this chapter, by
    cit. vol. II, p. 327.                             Ferns, ‘The Baring Crisis’, op. cit.
56. Ferns, Britain and Argentina, op.                 Eliot, Goschen, op. cit., p. 170.
    cit., p. 453.                                   . Lord George Hamilton,
Sf. Alphonse de Rothschild to                         Parliamentary Reminiscences and
    London Cousins, 7 Aug. 1890.                      Reflections (London, 1916), p. 79.
    RAL 115/37.                                     _ 11 Nov. 1890. Hatfield House
58. Baring Mss (B) HC4. 1. 71.                        papers. 3M/E. Goschen.
                                                    . Salisbury to Smith, 12 Nov. 1890.
                                                      Hatfield House papers. 3M/DXV.
CHAPTER 14 (pp. 244-66)                             . 13 Nov. 1890. RAL T15/43.
 1. Francis to T. C. Baring, 11 Nov.                . Rodolphe Hottinguer to
    1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.                     Revelstoke. 11 Nov. 1890. Baring
    PShel Fas                                        Mss (B) HC7. 1. 16. 14.
 2 Philip Currie to Evelyn Baring, 21               . Journals and Letters of Viscount
    Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP                    Esber, ed. Maurice Brill (London,
    84.          f                                    1934), vol. 1, p. 145.
410                                The Sixth Great Power

aie 12 Nov. 1890. RAL. X1. 101/21/                   Baring Crisis. G15/189/12.
     37.                                         47. 9 May 1891. Hatfield House
Mie, Brown Brothers to Brown,                        papers. 3M/E Goschen.
      Shipley, 21 Nov. 1890. Brown               48. Baring Mss (G) MS 18321. HCl.
      Brothers papers, op. cit.                      29. cf. Baring Mss (B) Letter
IB), 16 Nov. 1890. Cit. Carosso, The                 Books. 3 Dec. 1897.
      Morgans, op. cit., p. 299.                 49. See p. 247.
2A L. E. Jones, Georgian Afternoon               50. O'Hagan, Leaves From My Life,
      (London, 1958), pp. 71-2.                      op. cit., vol. I, p. 381.
78), Eliot, Goschen, op. cit., p. 172.           Sul The Diary of Alice James, ed. Leon
26. Fulford, Glyn’s, op. cit., pp. 209-              Edel (London, 1965), p. 205.
     12                                          52. John to Evelyn Baring, 21 Nov.
IN Bank of England papers on                         1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP 84.
    Baring Crisis. G15/189/2.                    5S: Lady Revelstoke to Everard
28. Clapham, Bank of England, op.                    Baring, 30 Nov. 1890. Baring Mss
      cit., vol. II, pp. 330-1.                      (B) DEP 47.
29: 17 Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (G)                 54: Alfred Mildmay, ‘Notes and
    MSH S32 ISEIG3a3 8:                              Recollections’. Baring Mss (B)
30. Esher, Journals and Letters, op. cit.,           DEP 135:
      p. 145.                                      . Lord Randolph Churchill to
SiN 9 April 1891. Baring Mss (B) DEP                 Alfred de Rothschild, 17 Nov.
    47.                                              1890. RAL T15/58.
  . 9 April 1891. Baring Mss (B) DEP               . 28 Jan. 1891. Baring Mss (B) DEP
    47,                                              84.
  . Baring Mss (B) DEP 22 (XX).                    . Stephen to John Macdonald, 22
  . Baring Mss (B) DEP 193. 74. 13.                  Nov. 1890. Gilbert, Mount
  . Thomas to Evelyn Baring, 6 Nov.                  Stephen, op. cit., vol. II, p. 256.
      1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP 84.                 . Baring Mss (B) DEP 193. 26. 2.
  . Thomas to Evelyn Baring, 14                    . Thomas to Evelyn Baring, 17
      Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP                  Dec. 1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP
      84.                                            84.
  . Thomas to Evelyn Baring, 4 Dec.                . John to Evelyn Baring, 21 Nov.
    1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP 84.                     1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP 84.
  . Oral information from Lord                     . Gilbert, Mount Stephen, op. cit.,
    Ashburton.                                       vol. II, pp. 255-6.
  . Baring Mss (B) HC3. 103.                       . 30 Jan. 1891. Baring Mss (B) DEP
  . Minutes of the Court of the                      84.
    Governor of the Bank of                        . 16 Jan. 1892. P. 3.
    England, 26 Nov. 1890.                         . Platt, Latin America and British
  . Clapham, Bank of England, op.                    Trade, op. cit., p. 284.
      cit., vol. II, p. 332.                       . Economist (6 Dec. 1890).
  . Bank of England papers on                      . Barings to Governor of Buenos
    Baring Crisis. G15/192.                           Aires, 3 Oct. 1892. Baring Mss (B)
  . Thomas to Evelyn Baring, 21                       Letter Books.
      Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP                 . 17 Oct. 1891. Baring Mss (B)
     84.                                              Letter Books.
   . 15 Nov. 1890. RAL 101/21/                   68. Barings to Lidderdale, 5 Jan.
     40                                               1892. Baring Mss (B) Letter
  . Cit. Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                     Books.
     Banking, op. cit., p. 79.                   69. 27 Jan. 1893. Cit. Ferns, Britain
  . Bank of England papers on                        and Argentina, op. cit., p. 475.
                                          Notes                                         411
70. Luis Dominguez to Barings, 28                    HC1. 204. 38.
    Dec. 1892. Baring Mss (B) HC4.                90. 6 Nov. 1894. Baring Mss (B)
    iS:                                               HGs5s224 0!
71. Revelstoke to Tom Baring, 15                  Os Barings to A. G. Sandeman, 4
    Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) DEP                    Dec. 1894. Bank of England
    84.                                              papers on Baring Crisis. G15/192/
aD. Revelstoke to Lidderdale, 15                      iDbe
    Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B) Letter              92: Cecil Baring to Lord Cromer, 23
      Books.                                          Nov. 1894. Baring Mss (B) DEP
73: Maurice Baring, Puppet Show of                    193. 42.
    Memory, op. cit., p. 147.                     93 14 Dec. 1897.
74. 26 March 1891. Baring Mss (B)                 o*. 11 Jan. 1895. Bank of England
    DEP 47.                                           papers on Baring Crisis. G15/192/
(ey Unpublished autobiography of                      167.
      Mrs Constance Hugh Smith, op.               95% 11 Jan. 1895. Baring Mss (B)
      cit., vol. III, p. 118.                         HG1. 204538:
76. 15 Nov. 1890. Baring Mss (B)
    DERM 2st         22 239:
Me Life with Queen Victoria. Marie                CHAPTER 15 (pp. 267-90)
    Mallet’s Letters from Court, ed.
      Victor Mallet (London, 1968),                i Mildmay, ‘Notes and
      p. XXI.                                        Recollections’, op. cit. p. 159.
78. Constance Hugh Smith, op. cit.,                2: Daphne Pollen, J Remember, I
      vol. III, p. 118.                              Remember, op. cit., p. 37.
79. Bank of England papers on                      3. Helena Gleichen, Contacts and
      Baring Crisis. G15/191/65.                     Contrasts (London, 1940), p. 36.
80. 12 Dec. 1894. Baring Mss (B)                   4. Baroness de Stoeckl, My Dear
      Letter Books.                                   Marquis (London, 1952), p. 86.
81. 9 April 1891. Baring Mss (B) DEP                . 6 April 1904. Baring Mss (B).
    47:                                               Lord Revelstoke’s Private Letters.
82. Barings to Lidderdale, 5 Jan.                   _ ‘R.F.S.K.’ ‘Arthur Villiers. A
    1892. Baring Mss (B) Letter                       private memoir’, p. 82. Baring
    Books.                                            Mss (B). DEP 22 (XXXV)
83. 2 Feb. 1893. Baring Mss (B)                     . 20 April 1929.
    Letter Books.                                   . 4 May 1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 6.
84. 12 Jan. 1893. Bank of England                   . Time Gathered (London, 1937),
    papers on Baring Crisis. G15/191/                p. 256.
      1                                             . 19 April 1906. Private Letters, op.
85. 9 March 1893. Bank of England                    cit.
      papers on Baring Crisis. G15/191/             . W. Grenfell to Nancy Astor, cit.
      49.                                             Christopher Sykes. Nancy, The
86. Barings to D. Powell, 3 Feb. and                  Life ofLady Astor (London, 1972),
    11 July 1893. Baring Mss (B)                         LOS:
    Letter Books.                                 12, a Rothschild to French
87. Bank of England papers on                           Cousins, 5 June 1906. RAL XI/
    Baring Crisis. G15/192/178 and                      130A/0.
    179:                                          ths). 11 May 1915. H. H. Asquith.
88. Powell to Barings, 26 July 1894.                  Letters to Venetia Stanley, ed. M.
      Bank of England papers on                       and E. Brock (Oxford, 1982).
      Baring Crisis. G15/192/71A.                   . Julian Grenfell (London, 1976),
89.   25 Oct. 1894. Baring Mss (B)                    p.42;
412                          The Sixth Great Power

 . Sykes, Nancy Astor, op. cit.,          38. Farrer to Mildmay, 25 Aug. 1906.
  pp. 71-87.                                  Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/9.
 . Mabel Countess of Airlie               39) 26 May 1892. Hamilton diaries,
   Thatched with Gold (London,                op. cit.
   1962), pp. 103-4.                      40. Revelstoke to Cromer, 7 Nov.
 . Revelstoke to Gaston Meyer, 9              1903. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 1.
   March 1910. Private Letters, op.           i
   cit.                                   41. Cromer to Revelstoke, 15 Nov.
 . Revelstoke to Arthur Lawley, 25            1905. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 1.
  May 1909. Private Letters, op. cit.         1.
 . Farrer to John Sterling, 14 April      42. Philip Ziegler, Diana Cooper
   1905. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/9.             (London, 1981), p. 18.
 . Hamilton diaries, 16 Nov. 1903.        435 Mosley, Julian Grenfell, op. cit.,
   BM Add Mss 48658.                          pois:                       :
 . Oral information from Mr               44. Knox, Shaw-Stewart, op. cit.,
   Duncan Stirling.                           pp. 71-3.
 . 22 Aug. 1905. Baring Mss (B) PF        45. Farrer to Robert Winsor, 21 Jan.
   6                                          1914. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/15.
 . Farrer to John Sterling, 1 Jan.        46. Knox, Shaw-Stewart, op. cit.,
   1914. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/15.            p. 81.
 . Cecil to Evelyn Cromer, 23 Nov.        aah Farrer to J. W. Sterling, 21 Jan.
  1894. Baring Mss (B) DEP 193.               1914. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/15.
  42.                                     48. Cromer to Revelstoke, 22 Feb.
 . Daphne Pollen, J Remember, I               1900. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 1.
  Remember, op. cit., pp. 49-50.              J.
 . Obituary by Maurice Baring in          au Revelstoke to Cromer, 12 Feb.
   The Times (27 Jan. 1934).                  1900. Baring Mss (B) COF OS. 1.
 . Daphne Pollen, J Remember, I               1
   Remember, op. cit., p. 47.             50. Revelstoke to Thomas Baring, 21
 . Cornelius Vanderbilt, The                  July 1905. Baring Mss (B) Private
   Vanderbilt Feud (London, 1957),            Letters, op. cit.
  pPpy2s—e                                VE Farrer to Windham Baring, 16
 . Farrer to Windham Baring, 25              Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF 181.
   Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF 181.      2: Farrer to Windham Baring, 7 Feb.
 . Farrer to Hugo Baring, 7 June              1906. Baring Mss (B) PF 181.
   1905. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/9.         D3: Mildmay to Windham Baring, 26
 . Winsor to Farrer, 2 Sept. 1903.            June 1907. Baring Mss (B)
   Baring Mss (B) PF 2.                       Windham Baring Correspondence.
 . Farrer to Sterling, 16 March 1906.     a4: Revelstoke to Hugh O’Beirne, 10
  Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/10.                   July 1907. Baring Mss (B) PF
 . 23 May 1907. Baring Mss (B).              A.
   Private Letters, op. cit.              Sk 22 Nov. 1909, Hansard (Lords). 9
 . Alfred Mildmay to James                    Edward VII. Vol. IV, 794-9.
   Whishaw, 24 Feb. 1908. Baring          56. Memortrs of Sir Almeric Fitzroy,
   Mss (B) PF 220.                            Vol. I (London, 1925), p. 388.
 . Ethel Smyth, Maurice Baring            da Revelstoke to Lord Hindlip,
   (London, 1938), p. 40.                     undated. Baring Mss (B). Private
 . Whishaw to Mildmay, 12 March               Letters, op. cit.
   1908. Baring Mss (B) PF 220.           58. Farrer to Howard Elliott, 17 Feb.
 . Revelstoke to Cromer, 3 Nov.               1912. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/12.
  1903. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 1. 1.         . Farrer to Adolf Boissevain, 20
                                          Notes                                       413
   June 1902. Baring Mss (B) DEP                     Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF 181.
   33/6.                                            . Mildmay to Everard Meynell, 26
60. Farrer to Arthur Gwinner, 13                     Sept. 1912. Baring Mss (B) PF
    Feb. 1906. Baring Mss (B) DEP                     189.
    33/10.                                        81. Barings to John Warry, 22 Feb.
61. 18 March 1914. Baring Mss (B).                    1896. Baring Mss (B) Letter
    Private Letters, op. cit.                         Books.
62. Kellett, Merchant Banking Arena,              82. Barings to the Educational
    op. cit., pp. 113-14.                             Officer, 22 July 1914. Baring Mss
63. Farrer to Windham Baring, 20                      (B) PF 323.
    Feb. 1904. Baring Mss (B).                    83. Undated directive. Baring Mss
    Windham Baring Correspondence.                    (B) PF 323.
64. Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 3                 84. Revelstoke to Gordon Cunard, 11
    Nov. 1900. Baring Mss (B) PF 3.                   Dec. 1911. Baring Mss (B) Private
65. 12 July 1905. Baring Mss (B) PF                   Letters, op. cit.
    6                                             85. E. T. Hooley, Hooley’s Confesstons
66. Baring Mss (B) Credit                             (London, 1925), pp. 26-31.
    Department CRD. 22.7. 1911.                   86. 31 Oct. 1900. Baring Mss (B)
67. Baring Mss (B) Credit                             Letter Books.
    Department CRD. 22. 7. General                87. Revelstoke to George White, 27
    Remarks.                                          Dec. 1900. Baring Mss (B) Letter
68. Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 5 Oct.                Books.
    1900. Baring Mss (B) PF 3.                    88. Farrer to James Ross, 16 Jan.
69. 1 September 1913, Baring Mss                      1904 and to Robert Fleming. 11
    (B) Private Letters, op. cit.                     March 1909. Baring Mss (B) DEP
70. Revelstoke to Hugo Baring, 23                     33/7.
    Oct. 1906. Baring Mss (B)                     89. Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 5 Oct.
    Correspondence with Baring,                       1901. Baring Mss (B) PF 4.
    Magoun.                                       90. Revelstoke to T. S. Tailer, 17 Oct.
7G Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 25                     1901. Baring Mss (B) Private
   Jan. 1902. Baring Mss (B) HCS. 2.                  Letters, op. cit.
   39.                                            NIE Farrer to J. H. Thors, 17 Feb.
10 Kidder Peabody to Baring,                          1903. Baring Mss (B) Banque de
   Magoun, 9 Sept. 1905. Baring                       Paris et des Pays Bas.
   Mss (B) PF 6.                                      Uncatalogued.
EK Farrer to Hugo Baring, 6 Dec.                  92. W. B. Gair to H. R. Robertson, 14
    1905. Baring Mss (B).                             Jan. 1905. Baring Mss (B) Mersey
    Correspondence with Baring,                       Docks and Harbour Board.
    Magoun.                                       93. Farrer to Windham Baring, 16
74. Farrer to J. J. Hill, 15 Dec. 1905.               Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
    Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 2. 5.                      180.
rey Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                      94. Mildmay to Windham Baring, 8
    Banking, op. cit., pp. 173-7.                     June 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
76. Chapman, Rise ofMerchant                          181.
    Banking, op. cit., pp. 170-1.                 OX: Cassel to Revelstoke, 6 Feb. 1903.
ode Farrer to Windham Baring, 30                      Baring Mss (B) PF 157.
    Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF 181.             96. Revelstoke to Cassel, 10 Feb.
78. Revelstoke to Cromer, 3 April                     1903. Baring Mss (B) PF 157.
     1903. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 1.              oT: Barings to Deutsche Bank, Berlin,
    1.                                                26 Jan. 1899. Baring Mss (B)
ae. Farrer to Windham Baring, 19                      Letter Books.
414                                The Sixth Great Power

CHAPTER 16 (pp. 291-319)                        20. 14 Feb. 1929, Revelstoke diary.
                                                    Baring Mss (B) DPP 2. 4. 4.
  1. Kathleen Burk, Morgan Grenfell,            IAN 23 Nov. 1900. Baring Mss (B).
     1838-1988 (Oxford, 1988). |am                  Letter Books.
      most grateful to Dr Burk for              Zee Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 28
      allowing me to see this book in               Dec. 1900. Baring Mss (B) PF 3.
      typescript. Cf. Carosso, The              2S: Revelstoke to Cecil Baring, 23
      Morgans, op. cit., p. 511.                    Nov. 1900. Baring Mss (B).
  . Farrer to Sterling, 31 Dec. 1904.               Letter Books.
    Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/8.                    24. Cecil Baring to Revelstoke, 27
  . 22 March 1901. Milner papers.                   Nov. 1900. Baring Mss (B) PF 3.
      Bodleian Library. 214/42. 41.             Ty. Winsor to Farrer, 10 Sept. 1904.
  . Farrer to Sterling, 26 April 1902.              Baring Mss (B) COF 05/2/2.
    Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/6.                    26. Winsor to Revelstoke, 10 Oct.
  . Copy sent to Revelstoke by T. S.                1904. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 2.
    Tailer, 4 Aug. 1902. Baring Mss                 Ze
    (B) PF 1.                                   Ze Revelstoke to Hugo Baring, 8
  . Banque de Paris to Barings, 13                  Aug. 1905. Baring Mss (B) COF
      April 1904. Baring Mss (B).                   05/2/2.
      Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas.          28. Farrer to Winsor, 18 Oct. 1904.
      Uncatalogued.                                 Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/8.
  . Revelstoke to Winsor, 10 Feb.               Zo, Revelstoke to J. P. Morgan, 18
    1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 19.                     Oct. 1904. Baring Mss (B) COF
  . Kidder Peabody to Barings, 3                    05/2/2.
    March 1905. Baring Mss (B) PF               30. Farrer to Winsor, 12 Jan. 1905.
      19.
                                                    Baring Mss (B) COF 05/2/2.
  . Barings to A. Spitzer, 22 March             31. Farrer to Winsor, 29 July 1905.
    1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 19.
                                                    Baring Mss (B) COF 05/2/2.
  . Farrer to Winsor, 6 Feb. 1906.              SZ: Farrer to Hugo Baring, 12 Feb.
    Baring Mss (B) PF 20.
                                                    1907. Baring Mss (B).
  . Mildmay to Windham Baring, 8
                                                    Correspondence with Baring,
      Feb. 1907. Baring Mss (B) PF
                                                    Magoun.
      182.
                                                333 Hugo Baring to Farrer, 1 May
  . Farrer to Oliver Baring, Oct.
                                                    1906. Baring Mss (B).
    1909. Baring Mss (B) PF 25.
                                                    Correspondence with Baring,
  . Farrer to Winsor, 30 Oct. 1909.
                                                    Magoun.
      Baring Mss (B) PF 25.
                                                34. Farrer to Hugo Baring, 11 Jan.
  . 30 April 1908, Baring Mss (B)
                                                    1906. Baring Mss (B).
    PF 184.
  . Letters of Conrad Russell, ed.                  Correspondence with Baring,
                                                    Magoun.
    Georgiana Blakiston (London,
                                                by, Farrer to John Sterling, 20 Oct.
    1987), pp. 31-2.
  . 23, 28 and 29 Dec. 1903. Baring                 1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 5.
                                                36. Farrer to Hugo Baring, 11 Oct.
    Mss (B) HGS. 2. 39.
  . Revelstoke to Hugo Baring, 2                    1904. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/8.
                                                hs Farrer to John Sterling, 30 April
    Feb. 1904. Baring Mss (B) PF 5.
  . Revelstoke to Hugo Baring, 5                    1906. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/
                                                    10.
    Feb. 1904, Baring Mss (B) PF 5.
                                                38. Farrer to Hugo Baring, 12 Feb.
  . Revelstoke to Farrer, 19 April
    1904. Baring Mss (B). Private                   1907. Baring Mss (B).
      Letters.                                      Correspondence with Baring,
                                                    Magoun.
                                        Notes                                       115
32. Farrer to Hugo Baring, 28 May                   1905. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/9.
    1907. Baring Mss (B).                       58. Herbert Gibson to Madelaine
    Correspondence with Baring,                     Place, 5 March 1895. Gibson
    Magoun.                                         papers. Estancia Tres Cerros.
  . Baring Brothers to Baring and                   Argentina.
    Co., 17 June 1907. Baring Mss               59. Ferns, Britain and Argentine, op.
    (B) COF 05/6/3.                                 cit., pp. 483-4.
41. Baring and Co. to Baring                    60. 30 June 1898. Baring Mss (B).
    Brothers, 2 July 1907. Baring                   Letter Books.
    Mss (B) COF 05/6/3.                         61. Tornquist to Barings, 24 March
42. Circular of 19 Nov. 1907. Baring                1902. Baring Mss (B). Private
    Mss (B). Correspondence with                    Letters.
    Baring, Magoun.                             62. Windham Baring to Revelstoke,
  . Barings to Hon. George Firton,                  12 Oct. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
    21 Nov. 1892. Baring Mss (B).                   181.
    Letter Books.                               63. Farrer to Windham Baring, 20
  . Farrer to R. Meighan, 3 Nov.                    Aug. 1908. Baring Mss (B) PF
     1908. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/7.                 184.
  . Farrer to J. W. Sterling, 14 Dec.             . Farrer to R. Winsor, 17 March
     1911. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/7.                 1914. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/
   . Revelstoke to Mildmay, 9 Oct.                  (Se
     1902. Baring Mss (B). Private                . Reade to Barings, 11 Sept. 1902.
    Letters.                                        Baring Mss (B). Private Letters.
   . Farrer to Windham Baring, 6                  . Balfour to Revelstoke, 22 Feb.
     Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF                   1902. Baring Mss (B) DEP 201.
      180.                                          2
   . Mildmay to Windham Baring,                   ; oye to Clanwilliam, 6 Feb.
     22 March 1906. Baring Mss (B)                  1904. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/7.
    PF 180.                                       . Farrer to Hugo Baring, 26
49. 30 March 1909. Baring Mss (B)                   March 1907. Baring Mss (B).
    COF05 5.114                                     Correspondence with Baring,
50. Revelstoke to Noetzlin, 27 Oct.                 Magoun.
     1902. Baring Mss (B). Banque de              . Burk, Morgan Grenfell, op. cit.
     Paris et des Pays Bas.                       . Carosso, The Morgans, op. cit.,
     Uncatalogued.                                  pp. 408-11.
aA. Revelstoke to Thors., 27 Nov.                 _ Cit. John Douglas Forbes. J. P.
    1903. Baring Mss (B). Banque de                 Morgan Jr (Charlottesville,
    Paris et des Pays Bas.                          1981), p. 64.
    Uncatalogued.                               UPr Windham Baring to G. A.
S23 Revelstoke to Hottinguer, | Feb.                Schwenke, 29 Jan. 1909. Baring
    1904. Baring Mss (B) PF 281.                     Mss (B) PF 185.
3. Revelstoke to Hugo Baring, 17                Mes: Windham Baring to Farrer, 1
    Feb. 1904. Baring Mss (B) PF 5.                 Dec. 1905 and 4 July 1906.
54. Deutsche Bank to Barings, 4                     Baring Mss (B) PF 180.
    Feb. 1904. Baring Mss (B) PF                74. Windham Baring to Farrer, 4
    281.                                            Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
33. Noetzlin to Revelstoke, 16 Feb.                 180.
    1904. Baring Mss (B) PF 281.                ree Farrer to Windham Baring, 30
56. Hugo Baring to Revelstoke, 30                   Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
    Sept. 1904. Baring Mss (B) PF 5.                180.
Sh: Farrer to J. W. Sterling, 5 Oct.            76. Mildmay to Windham Baring,
416                             The Sixth Great Power

      20 July 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF         94. Baring Mss (B) Japanese Papers.
      181.                                        COEF 05-123.
Lid Carosso, The Morgans, op. cit., p.        D5: Revelstoke to Noetzlin, 19 Feb.
      844.                                        1904. Baring Mss (B). Banque de
78. Mildmay to Windham Baring,                    Paris et Pays Bas. Uncatalogued.
      17 June 1908. Baring Mss (B) PF         96. Lansdowne to Revelstoke, 22
      184.                                        Feb. 1904. Baring Mss (B) PF
pee Farrer to William Benedict, 23                303.
    Jan 1913. Baring Mss (B).                 of: Noetzlin to Revelstoke, 20 Feb.
      Correspondence with Baring,                 1904. Baring Mss (B) PF 303.
      Magoun.                                 98. 8 March 1904. Baring Mss (B)
80. Mildmay to Windham Baring, 8                  PF 303.
    June 1911. Baring Mss (B) PF              29: Farrer to J. Sterling, 2 Nov.
      187.                                        1904. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/8.
81. Revelstoke to Farrer, 20 June                . Farrer to R. Winsor, 17 May
    1911. Baring Mss (B). Private                  1904. Baring Mss (B). Private
    Letters.                                       Letters.
82. Mildmay to Windham Baring,                   . Farrer to Revelstoke, 1 Sept.
      16 June 1911. Baring Mss (B) PF             1905. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/9.
      187.                                       . Hardinge to Revelstoke, 10 Oct.
83. Evening Times (4 Sept. 1911).                 1905. Baring Mss (B) HC10. 66.
84. Windham Baring to Mildmay,                   . Revelstoke to Barings, 21 Oct.
      18 June 1911. Baring Mss (B) PF              1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 206.
      187.                                       . Revelstoke to Farrer, 25 Oct.
85. Farrer to Shaw-Stewart, 26                     1905. Baring Mss (B) HC10. 66.
      March 1914. Baring Mss (B)                 . Revelstoke to Barings, 25 Oct.
      DEP 33/15.                                   1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 206.
86. Barings to Hottinguers, 12 April             . Memoirs of James Whishaw, ed.
      1897. Baring Mss (B). Letter                 Maxwell S. Leigh (London,
    Books.                                        1935), p. 126.
87. Revelstoke to Cassel, 21 Feb.                . 7 Nov. 1905. Baring Mss (B) PF 6.
      and 7 March 1905. Baring Mss               . Asquith to Revelstoke, 7 April
      (B). Lord Revelstoke’s Private              1906. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 1.
      Letters.                                    7
88. Platt, Finance, Trade and British            _ 18 April 1906. RAL. XI. 130A/0.
    Foreign Policy, op. cit., p. 193.            . 20.Nov. 1906.
89. Revelstoke to Farrer, 7 April                 Correspondence in Baring Mss
    1914. Baring Mss (B) PF 255.                   (B) PF 207.
90. Revelstoke to W. Koch, | and 29              . Revelstoke to A. Fischel, 28
    Sept. 1913. Baring Mss (B) COF                April 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
    0S. 7. 4.                                     207.
ol Record of conversation between                . Mildmay to Windham Baring,
    Revelstoke and S. S. Kahn, 4                   19 April 1906. Baring Mss (B)
    Dec. 1913. Baring Mss (B) PF 224.              PF 180.
D2: Barings to Messrs Walsh Hall,             114. Farrer to Windham Baring, 19
    14 July 1898. Baring Mss (B).                  Jan. 1906. Baring Mss (B).
    Letter Books.                                  Windham Baring
93: Barings to Banque de Paris, 9                  Correspondence.
      Oct. 1902. Baring Mss (B).              MGs. Windham Baring to Mildmay,
      Banque de Paris et Pays Bas.                 27 July 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF
      Uncatalogued.                                181.
                                         Notes                                         417
116. Mildmay to Windham Baring, 5                     1913. Baring Mss (B) PF 163.
      Sept. 1906. Baring Mss (B) PF              137. Errington to Raindre, 25 Nov.
    181.                                                1914. Baring Mss (B) PF 164.
11s Farrer to Winsor, 21 July 1906.
      Baring Mss (B) DEF 33/10.
118. 15 Jan. 1909. RAL. XI. 130A/3.              CHAPTER 17 (pp. 320-32)
Lio: Revelstoke to A. Turrettini, 18               ¥. Barings to E. B. Lockhart, 28 July
     Jan. 1909. Baring Mss (B).                         1914. Baring Mss (B) PF 804.
     Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas.              Z Farrer to Winsor. 7 Aug. 1914.
     Uncatalogued.                                   Baring Mss (B) PF 804.
120. Revelstoke to L. Davidoff, 1                  of   5 Aug. 1914.
     Feb. 1909. Baring Mss (B) PF                   . Shaw-Stewart to Ronald Knox, 21
    209.                                              Aug. 1914. Knox, Shaw-Stewart,
PAE Memoirs ofJames Whishaw, op.                      op. cit., p. 101.
      cit., p. 161.                                 . Mildmay to Lockhart, 7 Aug.
122. Lansdowne to Revelstoke, 21                      1914. Baring Mss (B) COF 0S. 6.
      Feb. 1903. Baring Mss (B) PF                      3
      272:                                          ; Public Trustee Office.
123: Dr Gwinner (Deutsche Bank) to                      Registration Order G. Return of
     Revelstoke, 18 March 1903.                         17 Oct. 1916. Farrer to Sterling, |
     Baring Mss (B) PF 272.                             Sept. 1914. Baring Mss (B) DEP
124. Rothschild to Revelstoke, 7                        33/16.
     April 1903. Baring Mss (B) PF                  . Farrer to Sterling, 7 Oct. 1914.
     22,                                              Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/16.
125: Revelstoke to Cromer, 9 April                  . Farrer to Windham Baring, 11
      1903. Baring Mss (B) PF 272.                      June 1915. Baring Mss (B) DEP
126. Revelstoke to Cromer, 1 May                      33/16.
     1903. Baring Mss (B) PF 272.                   . Benckendorff to Revelstoke, 10
12K. Memoirs of Sir Almeric Fitzroy,                    March 1916. Baring Mss (B) COF
     op. cit., vol. I, p. 128.                          OSaD RS:
128. Hamilton Diary, 21 April 1903.               10. Farrer to Sterling, 3 April 1918.
      BM Add Mss 48680.                                 Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/19.
129. Cromer to Revelstoke, 7 May                  Is Revelstoke to Lt Col. Cooper, 25
      1903. Baring Mss (B) PF 272.                      Sept. 1917. Baring Mss (B).
130. Napier to Barings, 7 June 1912.                  Private Letters.
      Baring Mss (B) PF 161.                        . Revelstoke to Dr Beauchamp, 25
NEI   16 July 1912, Hansard                             April 1918. Baring Mss (B).
      (Commons). 61. 190; and 15                        Private Letters.
      July 1912, Hansard (Lords). 12.               . Farrer to Winsor, 11 July 1917.
     454-71.                                          Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/18.
132: Revelstoke to Turrettini, 24 July              . Mildmay to Leng, 15 Jan. 1916.
      1912. Baring Mss (B) PF 162.                    Baring Mss (B) PF 201.
133. 15 July 1912, Hansard (Lords).                 . Farrer to Sterling, Feb. 1916.
     L247 19.                                         Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.
134. Revelstoke to Foreign Office, 9                . Barings to Hopes, 10 Feb. 1916.
     Dec. 1912. Baring Mss (B) PF                     Baring Mss (B) PF 24.
     162.                                           . Farrer to Winsor, 13 Jan. 1917.
35: Foreign Office to Revelstoke, 4                     Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/17.
     Feb. 1913. Baring Mss (B) PF                   . Windham Baring to Leng, 12
     162.                                             May 1915. Baring Mss (B) PF
136. Benac to Errington, 15 June                      199:
418                            The Sixth Great Power

19. Farrer to Leng, 12 May 1915.           42. Farrer to Sterling, 16 Nov. 1917.
      Baring Mss (B) PF 199.                   Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/18.
20. Farrer to Leng, 25 May LOLS:           43. Baring Mss (B). Russian Accounts
      Baring Mss (B) PF 196.                    1914-35. f72.
2, Mildmay to Leng, 13 June 1916.           44. Farrer to Austen Chamberlain, 14
      Baring Mss (B) PF 201.                    March 1918. Baring Mss (B) DEP
22, Farrer to Sterling, 6 Jan. 1915.            33/19.
      Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/16.
23: Revelstoke to Stamfordham, 29
    July 1916. Baring Mss (B). Private
                                           CHAPTER 18 (pp.333-58)
    Letters.                                 if. Thomas Jones, Whitehall Diary,
24: Farrer to Sterling, 27 April 1917.           ed. Keith Middlemass (London,
    Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/17.                    1969), vol. I, p. 90.
25, Mildmay to Leng, 7 Dec. 1916.             . Oral information from Lord
      Baring Mss (B) PF 201.                    Ashburton.
26. Farrer to Winsor, 17 Nov. 1917.           . Oral information from Sir Mark
      Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.                   Baring.
27. Farrer to Edward Tuck, 19 Oct.            . Windham Baring to Leng, 18
    1916. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/17.             Dec. 1918. Baring Mss (B) PF
28. Baring Mss (B). Foreign Trade               204.
    and Finance. Return of March              . Farrer to Leng, 29 Dec. 1922.
      1916.                                     Baring Mss (B) PF 355A.
dy). Barings to Kidder Peabody, 22            . Farrer to J. N. Hill, 26 April
     Oct. 1914. Baring Mss (B) PF 172.          1919. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.
30. Farrer to Winsor, 23 Oct. 1914.           . ‘RE.S.K. Arthur Villiers. A
      Baring Mss (B) PF 172.                    private memoir, op. cit.
3h Burk, Morgan Grenfell, op. cit.            . Cecil Baring (3rd Lord
Se: Cecil Baring to Winsor, 2 July              Revelstoke) to Lord
      1915. Baring Mss (B) PF 172.              Stamfordham, 21 May 1929.
33, Barings to Kidder Peabody, 19               Baring Mss (B). Uncatalogued.
      Nov. 1915. Baring Mss (B) PF            . Windham Baring to Mildmay, 4
      WD.                                       March 1921. Baring Mss (B)
34,   Farrer to Cecil Coward, 18 Feb.          COE OSS 10st0;
      1916. Baring Mss (B) COF 05. 7.         . Cecil Baring to Stamfordham,
      9:                                        21 May 1929, op. cit.
35. Farrer to Sterling, 22 Oct. 1914.         . Obituary in The Times (20 Nov.
      Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/16.                 1962).
36. Farrer to Winsor, 4 July 1918 and         . Farrer to Winsor, 23 May 1922.
      to Sterling, 15 June 1918. DEP            Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.
      33.                                     . Revelstoke to Peacock, 3 March
ae 2 25),                                       1921. Baring Mss (B).
38, 19 Feb. 1917. Baring Mss (B)                Uncatalogued.
      DPR)                                    . Farrer to Mildmay, 8 Nov. 1923.
39. Revelstoke to Louis Dorizon, 20             Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/22.
      March 1917. Baring Mss (B).             . Cecil Baring to Stamfordham,
     Private Letters.                           21 May 1929, op. cit.
40. 22 March 1917, Baring Mss (B).          16. 5 March 1929. Baring Mss (B)
     Russian Accounts 1914-35 £63.              DPP 2:4. 4.
Gall 24 April 1917. Baring Mss (B).         17. Frank Ledwith, Ships that Go
     Russian Accounts 1914-35                   Bump in the Night (London,
     ff67-8.                                    1974), p. 63.
                                       Notes                                       419
. Mildmay to Leng, 11 Dec. 1918.                    Baring Mss (B) PF 38.
  Baring Mss (B) PF 204.                          . W. J. Reader, Bowater. A History
. Farrer to Winsor, 17 Nov. 1922.
                                                   (Cambridge, 1981), p. 52.
  Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/21.                       . Peacock to Farrer, 16 Feb. 1926.
. Revelstoke to Charles Addis, 1                    Baring Mss (B) PF 43.
  Feb. 1924. Baring Mss (B).                      . Peacock to Taylor, 10 June
  Private Letters.                                  1926. Baring Mss (B) PF 46.
. Mildmay to Leng, 23 Jan. 1924.                  . Peacock to Taylor, 10 June
  Baring Mss (B) PF 376.                            1926. Baring Mss (B) PF 406.
. Mildmay to Meynell, 15 May                      . 16 Feb. 1929.
  1926. Baring Mss (B) PF 385.                    . Evening News (19 Feb. 1929).
. Tod to Villiers, 11 June 1926.                  . Memorandum of 3 July 1931.
  Baring Mss (B) PF 265.                            Baring Mss (B) PF 430.
. Farrer to ter Meulen, 10 Oct.                   . Peacock to F. Pick, 3 March
  1918. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.                      1927. Baring Mss (B) PF 309.
. 7 Dec. 1918. Baring Mss (B)                     . E. B. Baring to Tod, 30 May
  COF 05.)12..4.                                    1928. Baring Mss (B) PF 309.
. Farrer to Winsor, 4 Aug. 1925.                  . E. B. Baring to Meynell, 30 May
  Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/23.                         1928. Baring Mss (B) PF 425.
. Farrer to Winsor, 22 July 1924.                 . Revelstoke to Lansdowne, 13
  Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/22.                        May 1927. Baring Mss (B) PF
. Revelstoke to Winsor, 19 Nov.                    ERIE
  1920. Baring Mss (B) PF 338 Pt                 . Villiers to A. M. Hesse, 17 June
  I                                                1927. Baring Mss (B) COF 05.
. Vincent Carosso, The Kidder                      eye
  Peabody Story, op. cit., pp. 58-9.             . Farrer to Peacock, 14 June 1927.
. Windham Baring to Tod, 7 Oct.                    Baring Mss (B) PF 422.
  1919. Baring Mss (B) PF 260.                   . 8 Aug. 1928. Baring Mss (B) PF
. Farrer to Tod, 13 Feb. 1920.                     534.
  Baring Mss (B) PF 260.                         . Aug. 1927. Baring Mss (B) COF
. Windham Baring to Tod, 27 Jan.                   OSS     az:
  1921. Baring Mss (B) PF 262.                   . Peacock to Revelstoke, 11 May
. Farrer to Tod, 6 April 1920.                     1925. Baring Mss (B) PF 39.
  Baring Mss (B) PF 261.                         . Revelstoke to Peacock, 28 April
. Meredith G. Glassco, ‘An                         1925. Baring Mss (B). Private
  Unedited Manuscript of the                       Letters.
  History of Brascan Ltd’. Copy in               . Farrer to Lord Eversley, 28 June
  Baring Mss (B) DEP 70. Chapter                   1921. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.
 X.                                              . Memo of 14 Dec. 1927. Baring
. Revelstoke to Peacock, 3 Sept.                   Mss (B) PF 366.
  1926. Baring Mss (B) PF 278.                   . 16 Jan. 1919. Baring Mss (B).
. Peacock to E. R. Wood, 28 Jan.                   Private Letters.
  1927. Baring Mss (B) PF 278.                   . John Swire and Sons to Barings,
. Farrer to Winsor, 28 Jan. 1919.                  24 June 1919. Baring Mss (B) PF
   Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.                          aA,
 . R.S. Sayers, The Bank of England               . Farrer to ter Meulen, 5 Aug.
   1891-1944 (Cambridge, 1976),                     1919. Baring Mss (B) PF 241.
   pp. 316-17.                                 63. Farrer to Revelstoke, 7 April
 . Norman to Glyn West, 31 Jan.                    1920. Baring Mss (B) PF 241.
   1924. Baring Mss (B) PF 38.                 64. Farrer to Revelstoke, 8 April
. Farrer to Péacock, 24 Aug. 1924.                 1920. Baring Mss (B) PF 244.
420                             The Sixth Great Power

65. Farrer to ter Meulen, 15 Oct.             86. 2 July 1924. Baring Mss (B) PF
    1923. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.                  2 oie
66. Windham Baring to Meynell, 17             87. Peacock to Revelstoke, 20 Feb.
      Sept. 1919. Baring Mss (B) PF               1926. Baring Mss (B) PF 226. Pt
    358A.                                         I
67. Farrer to Leng, 6 May 1921.               88. Mildmay to E. B. Baring, 28
      Baring Mss (B) PF 356A.                      Aug. 1928. Baring Mss (B) PF
68. Farrer to Revelstoke, 26 Aug.                  336.
      1921. Baring Mss (B) DEP                 89. Revelstoke to Peacock, 31
    33/20                                          March 1926. Baring Mss (B) PF
69. Mildmay to Leng, 22 June 1923.                By.
    Baring Mss (B) PF 375. Pt I.              90. Farrer to Cecil Baring, 20 Feb.
70. E. B. Baring to Meynell, 4 May                1924. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.
    1925. Baring Mss (B) PF 384.              ok F.O. to Barings, 31 May 1919.
i Mildmay to Leng, 24 Oct. 1924.                   Baring Mss (B) PF 452.
    Baring Mss (B) PF 386.                     oz. Revelstoke to Routkowsky, 19
ee Revelstoke to Peacock, 27 April                  Oct. 1920. Baring Mss (B) PF
    1925. Baring Mss (B). Private                   452.
    Letters.                                   O35. Villiers to Lorraine, 30 June
73. Mildmay to Meynell, 7 Nov.                     1925. Baring Mss (B) COF 05.
      1929. Baring Mss (B) PF 426.                14. 2.
74. E. B. Baring to Barings, 12 Dec.           a. Villiers to Lorraine, 15 April
   1929. Baring Mss (B) PF 426.                    1926. Baring Mss (B) COF 05.
fo Whittlesey and Wilson, Essays in                14. 2.
      Money and Banking, op. cit.,             95% Revelstoke to Hugo Baring, 10
    pot                                            May 1928. Baring Mss (B).
76. Farrer to J. S. Morgan, 18 Nov.                Private Letters.
      1923. Baring Mss (B) DEP                 96. Farrer to Winsor, 1 Dec. 1927.
      33/22.                                       Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/23.
Vile Feb-March 1927. Baring Mss                Din Revelstoke to Peacock, 16
      (B) COF 05. 15. 6.                           March 1929. Baring Mss (B)
78. Farrer to Winsor, 15 Dec. 1921.                DPPr2E4ts4:
      Baring Mss (B) PF 229.                   98. Revelstoke diary, 15 Feb. 1929.
Ue. Farrer to Winsor, 21 Feb. 1922.                Baring Mss (B) DPP 2. 4. 4.
      Baring Mss (B) PF 230.                   99: Revelstoke diary, 22 Feb. 1929.
80. Farrer to Winsor, 4 April 1922.                Baring Mss (B) DPP 2. 4. 4.
      Baring Mss (B) DEP 33/21.               100. Revelstoke diary, 14 Feb. 1929.
81. Farrer to Spencer-Smith, 9                     Baring Mss (B) DPP 2. 4. 4.
      March 1922. Baring Mss (B) PF           101. Revelstoke diary, 25 Feb. 1929.
    230.                                           Baring Mss (B) DPP 2. 4. 4.
82. Clerk to Revelstoke, 9 April              102. Pollen, J Remember,I Remember,
      1922. Baring Mss (B) PF 231.                 op. cit., p. 220.
83. Farrer to Pospisil, 22 Dec. 1922.         103. 21 May 1929. Baring Mss (B).
      Baring Mss (B) PF 232.                       Uncatalogued.
84. Farrer to ter Meulen, 15 June             104. 21 May 1929. Baring Mss (B).
      1923. Baring Mss (B) DEP 33.                 Uncatalogued.
85. 15 May 1924. RAF. 132. AQ.                105. 22 May 1929. Baring Mss (B).
      5621.                                        Uncatalogued.
                                         INDEX


  A comma rather than a semi-colon between entries denotes that both entries
                  are covered by the previous sub-heading.

Aberdeen, George Gordon, 4th Earl of, 108;             124; retires 125; 127; 136; 138; 142; 149;
  111; 117                                             156; dies 158; 174; 193; 336
Acceptances, early days of 20; growth of 30,         Ashburton, Alexander Francis Baring, 6th
   42; in French Wars 53-4; growth under               Baron (1898-       ), 336; 360
   Bates 134; 180; by 1890 202; in United            Ashburton, Alexander Hugh Baring, 4th
   States 209; 281; in First World War 323-            Baron (1835-1889), 192; 200
   4; post-war 339-40; 361                           Ashburton, Anne, Lady (née Bingham), 46;
Adams, Charles, 213                                    65; 91; 115
Addington, Henry (later Ist Viscount                 Ashburton, Elizabeth, Lady (née Baring), 15;
   Sidmouth), 71                                       54.
Airlie, Mabel, Countess of, 271                      Ashburton, Francis Baring, 3rd Baron (1800-
Aix, Congress at, 85; 279, 284; 320                    1868), 91; 93-4; 98; in Mexico 103-5, 107;
Allen, Thomas, 219                                     109; 112; 114; career in politics 119; in
Allied Breweries, 361                                  Paris 119-20, 125-6; 135; 141; succeeds to
Althorp, Charles, Lord (later 3rd Earl                 title 159; 164; 177; 179; 181
   Spencer), 115                                     Ashburton, Francis Denzil Edward Baring,
American Express Co., 283                              5th Baron (1866-1938), 252; 264
American Telephone and Telegraph Co.                 Ashburton, Harriet, Lady (née Lady Harriet
  (ATTC), 293-4; 324                                   Montagu), 30; 91; 124; 158-60
Amsterdam, 28; 31-2; 45; occupied by                 Ashburton, Hortense, Lady (née Marat), 119
  French 54-5; 63; 81; centre for Russian            Ashburton, John Dunning, Ist Baron (Ist
  stocks 141; 174; 216                                 Creation), 34; 116
Argentina, 99; 1824 loan 101-2, defaulted            Ashburton, William Bingham, 2nd Baron
  on 103, negotiations over 107-11; 167;               (1799-1864), 90-1; 114; 116-18; 158
   increased investment in 197; 228-9;               Ashfield, Albert Stanley, Ist Baron, 344
   Barings’ heavy investment in 231-43; and          Ashley, Anthony Ashley Cooper, Lord (later
   the Baring Crisis 244-5, 250, 257-9, 265;            7th Earl of Shaftesbury), 116; 176
   296; Barings return to 303-10; in First           Aspinwall, William, 214
  World War 322, 324-5; 335; 343; 349-51             Asquith, Herbert (later Ist Earl of Oxford
Argout, Comte d’, 136                                  and Asquith), 270; 278-9; 313; 326
Armstrong Whitworth and Co., 342-3                   Asquith, Margot (later Countess of Oxford
Ashburton, Alexander Baring, Ist Baron                 and Asquith), 278
   (1774-1848), 44-5; in United States 46-7;         Asquith, Raymond, 277
   51; and French Wars 52, 54-5, 58; in              Associated Electrical Industries (AEI), 361
   House of Commons 59-60; sent to                   Astor, John Jacob, 77
   United States 63-4; marries 65; purchases         Astor, Nancy, Viscountess, 269-70
   Maine lands 65; in Canada 66; and                 Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad,
  American loans 67-9; and Louisiana                   200; 217-19
   purchase 70-2; and American War 73-5;             Atkinson, Robert, 39
   77; and French indemnities 79-85;                 Attwood, Charles, 135; 179-80
   acquisition of estates 86-8; and pictures         Australia, 164; 179; 203; 347
   86-7; public life of 89; family 90-1;             Austria, 56; 95; 139; 164; 166; in First World
   opposition to nephews joining Barings               War 320-1
   91-3; 96-8; and Latin America 100, 102-
  6; political activities 1 12-16; becomes
                                                     Bagehot, Walter, 196; 203
  Lord Ashburton 116; on boundary                    Baghdad Railway, 316-17
  mission 117; 118-19; 122-3; snubs Bates            Baker, George, 299

                                               421
422                                            Index
Balfour, Arthur, 269; 277-8; 289; 306; 326             Baring, Francis Denzil Edward, see Sth Baron
Baltimore, 66; 69; 97                                     Ashburton
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, 210                       Baring, Francis Henry (1850-1915), 184;
Banco Roberts, 309                                        granted procuration 190; character 191;
Bank of England, 58; 93; close to failure 98;             219; and Baring Crisis 245, 250, 256, 262,
  in 1839 crisis 136-7; 148-9; 151; 171; 181;             264-5; titular head of Barings 267; 300
  and Baring Crisis 245-54, 259-60, 263-6;             Baring, Francis Thornhill, see Northbrook
  278; in First World War 320, 326, 329;               Baring, Franz I, 13-14
  BIeVOR Sein Big    Boas, onl                         Baring, Franz II, 14
Bank of France, 136; 248                               Baring, Franz III, 14
Bank of New York, 76                                   Baring, George (1781-1854), 47-8; 56
Bank of the United States, 67-8; appoints              Baring, Guy Victor (1873-1916), 277
  Barings as agent 75-6; 146; troubles of              Baring, Harriet (née Herring), 27-8
  15 =2                                                Baring, Harriet, see Wall
Bankers’ Magazine, the, 196; 240                       Baring, Lady Harriet, see Ashburton
Banque de Paris et des Pays Bas, 303-4;                Baring, Henry (1776-1848), 40; 45-8; 59-60;
  S012 ais                                                71359353 158; 1621 87
Banque Russe et Francaise, 197                         Baring, Hugo (1876-1949), 269; 272; joins
Baring, Alexander, 227                                    Kidder Peabody 274; 281; 294; in New
Baring, Alexander, see 1st Baron Ashburton               York 295-6, 299-301; subsequent career
Baring, Alexander Francis, see 6th Baron                 301; 304; 312-13
   Ashburton                                           Baring, Johann, 14
Baring, Anne, see Mildmay                              Baring, Johann (later John) (1697-1748), 14-
Baring, Cecil, see Revelstoke                             16
Baring, Cecilia (née Windham), 47; 186                 Baring, John (1730-1816), 15-17; 19-24, 27;
Baring, Charles (1742-1829), 15-19; 22-4;                29; 34; enters parliament 37; 41-2; retires
   30; fails to enter parliament 37; 43-4;               43; 50
  126                                                  Baring, John (1801-1888), wishes to join
Baring, Constance (née Barron), 268                       Barings 91-3; joins Barings 120-2; 125-6;
Baring, Dorothy, see Labouchére                          138; 143; 161
Baring, Edward Charles, see Revelstoke                 Baring, John, see Revelstoke
Baring, Elizabeth, see Ashburton                       Baring, John Francis Harcourt (1928-       _),
Baring, Elizabeth (née Vowler), 15-17; 20-3              360; 362
Baring, Evelyn, see Cromer                             Baring, Marie (née Bingham), 47
Baring, Evelyn (later 1st Baron Howick)                Baring, Maurice (1874-1945), 29; 187; 260;
  (1903-1973), 335                                       HG =e)
Baring, Evelyn Bingham (1893-1966), 335;               Baring, Nicholas Hugo (1934         _), 362
  84 5h. 00)                                           Baring, Peter, 13
Baring, Everard (1865-1932), 250; 260; 262;            Baring, Colonel Robert (1833-1915), 245-6;
   joins Barings 274; 312; 334-5; 338                     294
Baring, Sir Francis (1740-1810), birth 15;             Baring, Susan (later Lady Reid), 261; 336
   education 16-18; character 18, 30;                  Baring, Thomas (1733-1757), 15; 17
   partnership with Exeter house 19-24;                Baring, Sir Thomas (1772-1848), 40;
   disputes with Charles 22-4; marriage 27-              becomes partner 43; reluctance to be
   8; opens own house 28-33; relationship                 banker 45; 47; 51; 55; in House of
  with Hopes 31-3; public life of 33-6,                   Commons 59; 88; wishes sons to join
  enters parliament 37-8; and East India                  Barings 91-3; 114-15; 118; dies 158
  Co. 38-40, 58-9; created a baronet 39;               Baring, Thomas (1799-1873), wishes to join
  and American War of Independence 40-                    Barings 92-3; becomes partner 121; in
  2; sets up Francis Baring and Co. 43-4;                 politics 121-2; 125-6; 131-2; 135-7; and
  views on future of Barings 45; retires 48;              European loans 139-42; popularity in
  purchases of property 48-50; collection of              USA 143-4; 150; 155; 159; in public life
  pictures 50; dies 51; and French Wars 52-               160-1; collection of pictures 162; 163-6;
  8; and United States 61-6, 69; and                      in international finance 168-75, 178-9;
  Louisiana purchase 70-2; and American                  and Russia 172-5; and Weardale 180; on
  War 73-5; 78; 96; 114; 193; 335; 358; 362              joint stock banks 182; merges with Finlay
Baring, Francis, see 3rd Baron Ashburton                 Hodgson 183-4; dies 185; 189; 193; 203.
                                             Index                                            423
  and United States 208, 210, 212-13, 219;           Bertrand, Comte de, 99
   and Grand Trunk Railway 225-7; 229-32             Bethmanns and Co., 95
Baring, Thomas, ‘Tom’ (1839-1923), 190;              Biddle, Nicholas, 75; 146; 151-2
   character 191; 199-200; 218; joins Kidder         Bingham, William, 44; 61; 63-5; 69-70; 73
   Peabody 220-2; forms Baring, Magoun               Bishopsgate, No. 8, purchased 48; 103;
   223; and Baring Crisis 244, 251-3, 256;              organisation of office at 127-9; rebuilt
   becomes partner 267-8; 284; 292; 295;               (1853) 166, and in 1880 204-5;
  297; 308                                             redeveloped 285; organisation of office at
Baring, Thomas Charles (1831-1891), joins              285-6; in First World War 322-3; John
   Barings 183-4;189-90; character of 192-3;           Revelstoke in 334, 337; redeveloped 362
   199-200; in United States 215; 217; 221;          Boer War, 291; 305
   and Baring Crisis 244, 250-1, 256; dies           Boston, 64-6; 93; 97; 111; 132; Barings’
  262; 267                                             agency opened in 144; 147; 177; 208;
Baring, Thomas George, see Northbrook                   Barings’ agency moved from 219-20;
Baring, William (1779-1820), 47-8; 335                 Kidder Peabody in 223; 263; 281; 295
Baring, William Bingham (1799-1864), see             Bouwer, Nicholas, 235-9
   Ashburton                                         Boyd, William, 58
Baring, William Bingham (1859-1916), 273             Brandt, William, Sons and Co., 60; 284
Baring, Windham (1880-1922), joins Barings           Brazil, 97; 103; 230; 234; 281; 306; 354-5
  275; 280; 294; in Argentina 307, 310; in           Brazilian Traction Co., 341
   First World War 322, 324; dies 335; 349           Bremen, 14-15; 321
Baring and Co. (New York), 299-301                   Brett, Reginald (later 2nd Viscount Esher),
Baring Estate Co., 264-5                               248; 250
Baring Foundation, 362-3                             Brooks’s Club, 89
Baring, John and Charles, and Co., 18-19;            Brougham, Henry (later Ist Baron), 90; 100;
  22-4529;43                                           114
Baring, John and Francis, and Co., 18-24;            Brown Brothers and Co. (W. and J. Brown
  21= 327 41-35                                        and Co.), 97; 145; 149; 180-1; 209; 214;
Baring, Magoun and Co., 223; 273; 281;                 and Baring Crisis 245, 248
   295-9                                             Brown, Shipley and Co., 60; 97; 130; 145;
Barings, characteristics of, 29-30; 32; 45; 191        180-1; 209; and Baring Crisis 245, 249,
Barings, genealogy of, 13-14                           254; 281
Baring- Wall, Charles, 114; 161                      Buenos Aires, 57; 97; 1824 loan 101-2,
Barré, Colonel Isaac, 34                               defaulted on 103, negotiations over 107-
Bates, Joshua, 93; 106; 111-13; 115; 120-1;            11; 164; Edward Baring in 231-2; 1873
   joins Barings 122; character 122-4; 125-6;          loan for 234; 235-7; integrated with
   reorganises Bishopsgate 127-30; opens               Argentina 236; 239-41; during Baring
   Liverpool office 130-1; speculates in               Crisis 258-9; Windham Baring in 275;
   tallow 131-2; 133-4, interest in iron 135;          280; 306; 308; 310; in First World War
   136-42; involvement in American trade               320, 325; 335; 349-51
   143-5, 147-8, 150-7; grand life-style of          Buenos Aires Water Supply and Drainage
   159-60; concerned about succession 162-             Co., 239-42; 258-9; 264
   4; dies 165; 166-7; 169; and Russian loan         Burke, Edmund, 34; 58; 68
  171, 174; 176; 179; 181-4; 196; and                Burr, Aaron, 72
   United States 207-14; and Canada 224-6;           Buxton, Edward North, 193
   230; 336                                          Buxton, Fowell, 90
Bates, Lucretia, 123-4                               Byron, George Gordon, 6th Baron, 96-7
Bayard, Le Roy, 76; 104
Beardmore, William, and Co., 289                     Cadwalader, General T., 76
Beaverbrook, Max Aitken, Ist Baron, 350              Calcutta, 20; 122; 131-2
Belgium, 310; 354                                    Canada, 66; possibility of war with USA
Bell, C. Moberly, 255                                   155; Barings’ first loan to 156-7; 164; 221;
Belmont, August, 146-7; 207; 209; 216; 222             Barings’ involvement in 1849-1890 223-8;
Benax, André, 318                                      257; agency lost 302; 315; 346-7
Befies, Dr Eduard, 352                               Canadian Pacific Railroad, 227-8; 302
Berlin, 79; 95; 142; as source of Russian            Canning, George, 56; 107
  loans 176, 197; 328; 354                           Canton, 47; 133-4
424                                           Index

Carlyle, Jane, 86                                       Barings 276-8; 294; 317
Carlyle, Thomas, 158-9                                Cromer, 2nd Earl of, see Errington
Carnwath, Andrew, 360                                 Cromer, George Rowland Baring, 3rd Earl of
Carosso, Professor Vincent, 296                         (1918-      ), 360
Carrington, Robert Smith, Ist Baron, 51; 113          Courtaulds and Co., 361
Cassel, Sir Ernest, 272; 276; association with        Cuba, 303-4
  Barings 289; 291; 294                               Cubitt, Lewis, 166; 204
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Viscount, 79-            Cunard, Maud (Emerald), Lady, 283
  80; 85                                              Cunard Steamship Co., 167; 289; 343
Cazenove and Co. (Cazenove and Akroyds),              Curamalan Land Co., 240
  67-8; 202                                           Currie, Bertram, 185; 244-5; 249; 252-3
Celman, Dr Miguel, 240, 242                           Curzon, George Nathaniel, 1st Marquis,
Ceylon, 132                                             274, 318
Chalmers, Sir Robert, 331                             Czechoslovakia, 351-4
Chamberlain, Joseph, 317
Charringtons’ Brewery, 359                            D’Abernon, Edgar Vincent, Ist Viscount, 29
Childers, Hugh, 179; 195                              Daily Mail, the 269
Chile, 97; 101; 107; 109; 164; 200; 230; 234;         Daily News, the, 199; 204; 265
  303; threat of war with Argentina 305-6             Dance, George, 49
China, 40; 100; 203-4                                 Daniell, John, 250
Churchill, Lord Randolph, 195; 255                    Dawkins, Clinton, 291-2; 298
Churchill, Winston, 338; 356                          Dawnay, General, 344
Clanwilliam, Admiral of the Fleet the Earl            Denikin, General Anton, 347-8
   of, 306                                            Denman, Thomas, Ist Baron, 106
Clapham, John, 242                                    Denmark, 166; 203-4
Clarendon, George Villiers, 4th Earl of, 116;         Derby, Edward Stanley, 14th Earl of, 161
  173                                                 Desborough, Ethel (Ettie), Lady, 269-70;
Clarke, Mary Anne, 50-1                                  277; 294; 344-5; 357
Clerk, George, 352-3                                  Deutsche Bank, 303-4
Clews, Habicht and Co., 215                           Dickens, Charles, 83; 167
Coal, 25-6                                            Disraeli, Benjamin (later Ist Earl of
Cobbett, William, 35; 52; 58; 88; 90; 118                Beaconsfield), 51; 100-1; 116; 122; 138-9;
Cobden, Richard, 170-1                                  161
Cochineal, 19; 32-3                                   Drummond, Henry, 49; 86
Cock, Edmund, 14                                      Dundas, Henry (later 1st Viscount Melville),
Coffee, 131                                             31; 36; 39; 59
Colombia, 97; 101; 107-8                              Dunning, John, see Ashburton
Combe, Charles, 201                                   Dunstanville, Francis Basset, Ist Baron, 22
Combe and Co., 201                                    Duntze, John, 15; 37
Commercial Chronicle, the, 81
Commissions, 30-1; 42; in French Wars 53-             East India Company, 33; 35; 45; 49; 58-9
  4; 99; growth under Bates’s rule 134; 281           Economist, the, 237; 242; 344
Cooke, Jay, 214-16                                    Eddisbury, Edward Stanley, 1st Baron, 231
Copper, 19; 131                                       Eden, Emily, 87; 88; 113
Corn, Anti-Corn Law League 121; purchases             Edinburgh Review, the, 123; 176
   for Ireland 130; 131; 137; purchases for           Edward VII, King, 271; 289
   France 176-7                                       Egypt, 194-5; 276
Corvetto, Count, 79                                   Eichthal, Baron d’, 178
Cotton, 76; 98; 131; and American Civil War           Elgin, James Bruce, 8th Earl of, 225
   181, 215; 341; 359                                 Ellenborough, Edward Law, Ist Earl of, 115
Crédit Lyonnais, 284                                  Ephraim and Co., 239
Crédit Mobilier, 181-2; 229-30                        Errington, Rowland Thomas Baring,
Creevey, Thomas, 115                                     Viscount (later 2nd Earl of Cromer)
Crimean War, 171-3; 177-8                               (1877-1953), 275-6; 318-19; 322; 334
Cromer, Evelyn Baring, Ist Earl of (1841-             Erskine, Thomas, Ist Baron, 51
   1917), 29; 189; 194-5; and Baring Crisis           Eurobonds, 361
  252, 255, 257; 275; relationship with               Exeter, 14-24; 26; 28; 37; 40
                                               Index                                            425

Falconnet, Francis, 109-11; 140                          Canada 1848-1890 223-6, 228; 230; and
Falkland Islands, 110                                    the Baring Crisis 244, 253
Farington, Joseph, 43; 49                              Goldsmid, Abraham, 58
Farrer, Gaspard, 268-9; joins Barings 272-3,           Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., 345-6
   274-5; 277-8; and international finance             Goschen, George, 246; 249; 254
   292-4; 298-9; views on Barings’ future              Gossler, J. B., and Co., 136
  300; 301-2; 304; 306; 308; 310; 312-13;              Gould, Jay, 219
  315; in First World War 320-6, 328, 330-             Grace Brothers and Co., 212; 303
  2; retires 334; 335; 338-42; 345; 347; and           Graham, Sir James, 118
  Russian gold 348-9; 351; 355                         Grand Trunk Railroad (Canada), 179; 225-
Farrer, Henry, 282                                       8; 241                   7
Financial News, the, 200                               Grande Société des Chemins de Fer Russes, 173-
Finlay, Hodgson and Co., 183; 203                        6; 197-8
First National, Bank, 299                              Grange, The, 49; 86; 93; 118; 124; 159-60; 252
Fish, Hamilton, 215                                    Grant, Ulysses S., 216
Fitzroy, Almeric, 279; 317                             Greene, Benjamin Buck, 249; 252-3; 265
Fleming, Robert, 295; 347                              Grenfell, Edward C., 307
Flete, 261; 263                                        Grenfell, Julian, 269; 277
Fogg, Phineas, 283                                     Grenfell, William, 269
Forstall, Edmond, 150                                  Greville, Charles, 98; 118; 158; 161
Fouché, Joseph, 55; 79                                 Grey, Charles, 2nd Earl, 113; 115
Fould, Achille, 178; 229                               Grey, Edward (later Ist Viscount), 313; 318
Fox, Charles James, 38-9                               Guinness, Edward, 199
Fox, Henry, 47-8                                       Guinness Son and Co., Arthur, 199-201;
France, 34; wars with Britain 52-60; 62; 66;             244, 288
   and Louisiana purchase 70-1; 73; 76;
   richness of 78; indemnities 1815-1819               Hale, S. B., and Co., 235-6; 238-40; 242-3;
   78-85; 165; Crimean War 171; supplies                 245; 280
   own capital needs 176, 178; Franco-                 Hallock, George, 301
   Prussian War, 198; 316; in First World              Hambro, C. J., and Son, 196-7; 200; 202;
  War 320                                                228; and Baring Crisis 245; 254; 284; 310;
Franco-Prussian War, 178; 198; 234                        351; 360
Free Trade, 117-18; 122; 137                           Hambro, Everard, 245
                                                       Hamburg, 83; 93; 147; 180; 281
Gair, Samuel S., 131                                   Hamilton, Edward, 187; 269; 272
Gallatin, Albert, 69; 72; 74-5; 87                     Hamilton, Lord Frederic, 222
Gallatin, James, 74-5; 87                              Harcourt, William, 265
Galt, A. T., 225                                       Hardinge, Charles, Ist Baron, 312; 317
Garcia, Manuel, 109                                    Harriman, E. H., 288
General Strike, the, 338                               Harris, Frank, 199
George V, King, 333; 358                               Hastings, Warren, 50; 58
Germany, as source of Russian loans 176;               Hawker, Colonel Peter, 87
  313; 316; in First World War 320-1, 327,             Head, Edmund, 227
   SILT IIS                                            Helbert, Wagg and Co., 248; 353
Gibbs, Antony, and Sons, 60; 254; 284                  Hicks-Beach, Michael (later Earl St Aldwyn),
Gibson, Herbert, 305                                      291
Giles, William, 360                                    Hincks, Francis, 223
Gisborne and Co., 132                                  Hodgson, J. Kirkman, 182; joins Barings
Gladstone, William Ewart, 117; 161; 187;                 183-4
                                                       Hodgson, J. S., 184; 189-90
   194
Gleichen, Helena, 268                                  Hodgson, Robert, 190; 256; 267; 285
Globe, the, 227                                        Hodgson, Stewart, 261
                                                       Holland, Elizabeth, Lady, 51; 91
Glyn, George (later 1st Baron Wolverton),
   182; 187; 225                                       Holland, Swinton Colthurst, 76-7; 88; 93-6;
                                                          103; 105; 112; 120
Glyn, Richard, 90
Glyn, Hallifax, Mills and Co. (later Glyn,             Holland, 31; 46; overrun by French 54-5;
                                                          68; 171
  Mills, Currie), 139; 157; 185; 200; in
426                                           Index

Holt, Alfred, and Co., 347-8                          King, Rufus, 59; 62; 68-70; 74; 86
Hooley, Ernest Terah, 286                             Kitchener, Horatio, Ist Earl, 277-8
Hope, Henry, 31; 54; 64; 72                           Kleinwort Sons and Co., 202; 281; 284; 341
Hope, John William, 48                                Knox, Ronald, 277
Hope, William, 32                                     Kuhn, Loeb and Co., 293-4; 304; 312; 325;
Hope and Co., first association with Barings            342
   31-3; 35; 45-6; flee to London 54-5; 64;
  and Louisiana purchase 70-2; and French             Labouchére, Charles, 166
   indemnities 82-5; 91-2; 95; in Russia 141;         Labouchére, Dorothy (née Baring), 54
  151; 153-4; by-passed by Russian                    Labouchére, Henry, 114
  government 171; 173; 175; 177; 193; and             Labouchere, Peter César, marries Dorothy
  Russian loans 197-8; 203; 216; 224; and               Baring 54-5; 56; and Louisiana purchase
  Baring Crisis 257, 264; 293; 313; 338;                 71-2; and French indemnities 79, 82-3;
  352-3                                                  D195   122129
Hottinguer and Co., 120; 136; 141; 168; 172;          Laffitte, Jacques, 78; 82-4; 94-5
  174; 229; and Baring Crisis 248, 257, 264;          Lamb, Charles, 58
   304; 337; 339                                      Lambay, 274
Houghton, Richard Monckton Milnes, Ist                Lancashire Cotton Corporation, 359
   Baron, 90                                          Lansdowne, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th
Humboldt, Karl Wilhelm von, 96                          Marquis of, 294; 305-6; 312; and
Humphreys, Colonel David, 61-2                          Baghdad railway 316-17; 345; 354
Hungary, 170; 354                                     Lansdowne, William Petty, Ist Marquis of,
Hunt, Henry ‘Orator’, 132                                32-6;35—41
Huskisson, William, 98                                Larkbear House, 15-16
Huth and Co., 149                                     Lawrence, Thomas, 49-50
                                                      Lazard Bros. and Co., 284; 299; 351; 360
Illustrated London News, 174                          Lee House, 49
Income tax, 90                                        Lefevre, H. S., and Co., 272; 334
India, 19; 40; 53; 59; 194; 278; 281                  Le Marchant, Denis, 30; 114
Indiana, 151; 153                                     Leng ite Hg 255335
Indigo, 131                                           Leng, Roberts and Co., 309; 325
Inter American Development Bank, 360                  Leopold, King, of Belgium, 160; 164
Ireland, 130                                          Lever Brothers, 341
Iron, 26; 133; Barings’ involvement in                Lewis, Rosa, 271
  manufacture of 134-5, 138, 179-80, 211              Lidderdale, William, 245-50; 252-5; 263-5
                                                      Lieven, Prince, 95
Jackson, Andrew, 146                                  Linen, 14-15
Jackson, Major William, 63                            Lisbon, 56; 60; 198
James, Alice, 254-5                                   Litvinoff, Maxim, 331
Japan, 281; 311-12; 355; 360                          Liverpool, Robert Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of,
Jaudon, Samuel, 151-2                                    80-1; 84
Jefferson, Thomas, 66; 70                             Liverpool, 26; 93; 98; Barings’ office in 130-
Jekyll, Gertrude, 274                                    1, 145, 167-8, 190-1; 202; 221; 252; 273,
Jewish Chronicle, the, 314                               288; office post-1918 335; 338; 341
Jones, Thomas, 333                                    Lizardi and Co., 107; 149
Jupp, Richard, 49                                     Lloyd George, David, later 1st Earl of
                                                        Dwyfor, 279; 326; 338
Kent, Edward, Duke of, 48                             Loewenstein, Albert, 341-2
Kerensky, Alexander, 330-1                            London United Tramways, 287
Kidder Peabody and Co., 191; 209; and US              Lorraine, Sir Percival, 355
  railroads 218-19; association with Barings          Louis XVIII, King, of France, 78; 80
  220-3, 273-4, 281; 283; 293; 295-6; 298;            Louis Napoleon, Emperor Napoleon III,
  reopen in New York 302; in First World                 160;.164; 176-8
  War 321, 324, 327; 339; form Acceptance             Louisiana, purchase of 70-2; 76; 1832 loan
  Corporation 340; 352                                  to 150; 154
Kindersley, Robert Molesworth (later Ist              Louisville and Nashville Railway, 217
   Baron), 299                                        Lutyens, Edwin, 274; 354
                                              Index                                           427
Macdonald, John, 257                                  Morgan, J. S., and Co., 254; 291; 293; 296-9;
MacDonald, Ramsay, 338                                  win parity with Barings in Argentina 307-
Madison, James, 143                                     8; 349
Madrid, 140; 169-70; 273                              Morgan, Grenfell and Co., 349; 351; 354-5;
Magoun, George, 218; 220; 223; 295                      360
Maine, 63-5                                           Morley, John, Ist Viscount, 318
Mallet, John, 27; 88                                  Morning Advertiser, the, 200
Manchester, 98; 201-2                                 Morning Post, the, 235
Manchester Ship Canal, 196; 201-2; 264                Morris, Robert, 61
Markby, Stewart and Co., 252                          Morris, Prevost and Co., 283
Maryland, 150; 152-4                                  Morrison, George, 217
Masaryk, Thomas, 352                                  Morton, Rose and Co., 215-16; 228
Massachusetts, 122; 1828 loan to 149-50; 153          Mosley, Nicholas, 270
Melbourne, William Lamb, 2nd Viscount,                Mount Stephen, George Stephen, Ist Baron,
  117; 118                                               227-8; 256-7; 278; 294
Membland, 188-9; 260; 263; 357                        Mullens and Co., 250
Mendelssohn and Co., 197; 328
Mercury, 131; 139-40; 168-70                          Napoleon Bonaparte, Emperor, 55-6; 59;
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, 288-9                   PO-157    8395599
Mesturas, James, 28                                   National City Bank, 287; 297; 299; 304; 325,
Metropolitan and District Railways, 287                  3425349
Mexico, 33; 97; Francis Baring in 103-5;              National Review, the, 317
  Barings as agents for 106-7; 109; 154;              Nevill, Lady Dorothy, 85n
  229-31; 234. 284, 303-4                             New Orleans, 72; 220
Meynell, Everard, 309; 350                            New York, 65; 69; 76; 97; 104; state loans to
Mildmay, Alfred (1871-1944), 183; 273;                   149; 152; 180; Tom Baring in 191; shift of
  275; 277; 279; 285; 294; 303; 309; 315; in             financial power to 208; Barings’ agency
  First World War 323-4, 326; 334; 338;                  moved to 219-20; 221; Baring, Magoun
  347; 350; 354; 358                                     opens in 223; 227-8; 251-2; Tom Baring
Mildmay, Anne (née Baring), 93                           in 267-8; Cecil Baring in 273-4; 281-2;
Mildmay, Francis Bingham (later Ist Baron)               287-8; financial centre of world 291-2;
  (1861-1947), 277                                       Telephone Company of 293-4; Barings’
Mildmay, Henry Bingham (1828-1905), 65;                 problems in 295-6, 298-301; 339; 351
  128; 164; 183-4; 189-90; 255; 261; 263;             New York Telephone Co., 293-4
  267; 273                                            New York Times, the, 248
Mildmay, Humphrey St John (1794-1853),                New York Tribune, the, 213
  93-4; 120; 124; timidity of 125-6; 128-30;          Nicolson, Sir Arthur (later 1st Baron
  132; 135; 139; 142; 151; 159; 163                     Carnock), 317
Millis, Howard, 360                                   Nixson, Thomas, 120
Milner, Alfred, Ist Viscount, 330                     Noetzlin, E., 304
Mincing Lane, office in, 27-8                         Nolte, Vincent, 63; 72; 91; 98
Mississippi, 151; 153-4                               Norman, Archibald, 192
Money, 201                                            Norman, Charles, 190; 192
Montagu, Samuel and Co., 361                          Norman, Montagu, 75; 342; 347-8
Montevideo, 238                                       Northbrook, Francis Thornhill Baring, Ist
Moran, Benjamin, 213-14                                 Baron (1796-1866), 29; 78; 114; political
Morgan, John Pierpont, 288; 293; 296-9;                 career of 118-19, 158; 195
  313; 356                                            Northbrook, Thomas George Baring, 2nd
Morgan, John Pierpont, Jr (Jack), 292; 298;             Baron and Ist Earl (1826-1904), 119; 194-
  307                                                   5; 252
Morgan, J. P., and Co., 196; 200; 202; 216;           Northern Railroad (of France), 141
  230; activities in Argentina 236-7; 284;            Norway, 164; 198
  291; relationship with Barings 292-4,               Nova Scotia, 164
  296-9; competition with Barings in Latin
  America 303-4, 307; 313; in First World             O'Connell, Daniel, 113
  War 325-7; 339-40; in Argentina 349-50              Ohio, 76; 151
Morgan, J. S., 351                                    Oil, 346
  428                                            Index

  Ontario, 346-7                                           Argentina 306
  Orange, Prince of, 164                                 Raphael, R., and Sons, 254
  O’Shea, Henry, 169                                     Rathbone, William, 128
  Otrante, Duc d’, 218                                   Reade, Essex, 258; 304-5
  Ouvrard, Gabriel-Julien, 55; 78-9                      Reform Bill (1832), 114-15
  Overend, Gurney and Co., 130; 182; 234                 Reid, Edward, 336; 360
  Overstone, Samuel Lloyd, Ist Baron, 121;               Reid, James, 261
     152; 162; 187                                       Reith, John, 343-4
                                                         Revelstoke, Cecil Baring, 3rd Baron (1864-
  Paice, Nathaniel, 18                                      1934), character 222-3, 228, 273; and
  Pall Mall Gazette, the, 250                               Baring Crisis 264-5; 281-4; on British
  Palmer, Samuel, 161-2                                     railways 288; 295-7; in First World War
  Palmerston, Henry Temple, 3rd Viscount,                   327, 331; 334; 336-7; 347; becomes Lord
     108; 172; 231                                          Revelstoke 357-8; 363
  Panama Canal, 211                                      Revelstoke, Edward Charles Baring, Ist
  Paraguay, 234                                             Baron (1828-1897), 162-3; joins Barings
  Paris, 70; 74; negotiations for indemnities in           164; 165; 179; 183-5; character of 186-7;
     79-85; 94; Francis Baring in 119-20;                  style ofliving 188-9; 190-6; and Guinness
     ascendancy of Rothschilds in 140-1; 166;              flotation 199; 206; 218; and Kidder
     as source of Russian loans 176; 194; 248;             Peabody 220-2; 227-8; visit to Argentina
     John Revelstoke in 269; competition from              231; 235; receives Sanford 239; over-
     284; 321; reparations conference in 356-7             invests in Argentina 239-40; and Baring
  Parish, David, 83-4                                      Crisis 244-6, 250-2, 254-5, 260-5; 267;
  Parish, Woodbine, 108-9                                  dies 268; 341
  Peabody, George, and Co., 181; 214                     Revelstoke, John Baring, 2nd Baron (1863-
  Peacock, Sir Edward, character, 336; joins                1929), 186; youth of 191-2; 194; visits
     Barings 337; 341-4; and Canada 346-7;                  Buenos Aires 240-2; and Baring Crisis
     354; 356; 358; leadership of Barings 359-             256-7, 259, 262, 265; master of Barings
    60                                                     267; becomes Lord Revelstoke 268;
  Peacock, Thomas Love, 97-8                               character 268-72; dominates Barings 273;
  Pearson, Dr, 336                                          274-7; political views 278-80; 282-3; 285;
  Peel, Robert, 89; 114; 116-18; 122; 137; 161;            and investment in Britain 286-9; and
     Was Wiel                                               international finance 291-2, 295;
  Pellegrini, Dr Carlos, 242-3                             negotiates with Morgans 296-9; 300; 303;
  Pennsylvania, 152-4                                      306-9; on Turkey 310; and Russo-
  Pennsylvania Railroad, 294                               Japanese War 311-12; and Russian loans
  Peru, 230-1; 303                                         313-16; and Baghdad railway 316-17; and
  Petroleos Mexicanos, 361                                 Trans-Persian railway 317-18; in First
- Philadelphia, 52; 61; 65-6; 69; 73; 76                   World War 320, 322-3, 326, 329-30;
  Phillimore, John, 360                                    stature in 1918 333-4; introduces Peacock
  Pitt, William, 31; 34-6; 39; 41; 51; 55; 113             to Barings 336-7; 338; and Loewenstein
  Plaice, Joseph, 49                                        341; 344-6; and Russian gold 347-8; 350;
  Platt, Professor D. C. M., 100; 141                       352; 354-5; attends reparations
  Pollen, Daphne (née Baring), 268; 334; 357               conference 356; dies 357; 358-9
  Portugal, 22; 55-6; 100; 1846 loan to 139;             Revelstoke, Louise-Emily, Lady (née
     1849 loan to 168; 281; 310; 322; 354                  Bulteel), 188; 250; 255; 260-2
  Pospisil, Dr Vilem, 352-3                              Revelstoke, Maude, Lady (née Lorillard),
  Poyais, 97                                               273
  Price, James, 167                                      Review of the River Plate, the, 257-8
  Prime, Ward and King, 150                              Reynolds, Joshua, 34
  Punch, 174                                             Richelieu, Duc de, 78-80; 85; 86
  Purton, Mathias, 167                                   Riestra, Roberto Norberto de la, 233
                                                         Robertson, John Parish, 100
  Railways (see also individual lines), 137-9; in        Robertson, William Parish, 101-3
    France 141; in Russia 142, 171, 173-6,               Roca, General Julio, 236; 240; 308
    311; in United States 210-11, 216-19; in             Romania, 310
    Canada 224-8; in Britain 288; in                     Romero, Dr J. J., 259
                                              Index                                           429
Rosas, Juan Manuel, 103; 108-11; 231                  Salvation Army, the, 316
Rosas, Manuelita, 232                                 San Martin, José de, 103
Rosebery, Archibald, Sth Earl of, 200; 258-9          Sanford, C. H., 238-40; 254; 258; 341
Ross, John, 294                                       Schacht, Dr Hjalmar, 356-7
Rothschild, Baron Alphonse, 209; 240; 242;            Schiff, Jacob, 294; 312
  248; 253                                            Schroder, J. Henry, and Co., 60; 281; 284;
Rothschild, Anselm de, 141                               295; 309-10; post-1918 alliance with
Rothschild, Anthony de, 140                             Barings 335, 344, 346, 351-6; 360
Rothschild, Carl, 95                                  Schuyler, George, 214
Rothschild, James de, 82-4, 94-5; 137; 150;           Sergeant, John, 75
  153; 229                                            Shaw, Richard Norman, 204-5; 261
Rothschild, Baron Lionel, 171                         Shaw-Stewart, Patrick, 129; 276-7; 280;
Rothschild, Lionel de, 351; 353-4                       321-2; 334
Rothschild, Nathan, 82; 96                            Shelburne, 2nd Earl of, see Lansdowne
Rothschild, Nathan (later Ist Baron), 187-8;          Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, 87
  199-200; 216; and Baring Crisis 245, 247-           Ships (owned or chartered by Barings), 133-
  9, 253-4, 258-9, 264; 269; 272; 278; and              4; 167-8; 203
  Russian loans 314-15; 316                           Shortt, Adam, 32
Rothschild, Salomon, 82-3                             Siemens and Co., 289
Rothschild, House of, 18; and French                  Sillem, Jerome, 83; 95
  indemnities 81-4; 89; 94-6; 119; 136-7;             Sillem and Co., 147-8
  pre-eminence in European loans 139-42;              Silver, 103; 139
  in United States 146-7, 150; in Spain               Slaughter and May, 360
   169-70; in Russia 173, 175, 178; 195-6; in         Slave trade, 34; 90
  United States 207, 209, 211, 214, 216;              Smith, Rev. Sydney, 51; 106; 115; 153
  229-30                                              Smith, W. H., 246-7
Rothschild, N. M., and Sons (see also under           Soda-ash, 20
  House of Rothschild), 60; 127; 130-1;               Southern, Henry, 231-2
   136-8; 178; acceptances of 180; 181; 195;          Southern Railway, 359
  foreign investments of 196; and Franco-             Spain, 22; 57; 100; mercury contracts in
  Prussian War 198; 199-202; and Baring                  139-40; 165; 168-70; 198-9; 310
  Crisis 245-9, 253, 263; 284-5; 291; 293-4,          Spectator, the, 317
  303; 305-6; 310; 312; 314; post-1918                Spencer, Charles, 6th Earl, 282
  alliance with Barings 335, 344, 351-5;              Spencer, John, Sth Earl, 278
   360                                                Spencer-Smith, Michael, 352
Routkowsky, I., 314; 328-9; 355                       Speyer Bros, 284; 293; 304; 310; 344
Royal Mail Group, 359                                 Speyer, Edgar, 278; 304
Russell, Conrad, 295                                  Stahremberg, Count, 49
Russell, Lord John (later Ist Earl), 158; 172;        Stamfordham, Arthur Bigge, Ist Baron, 326;
   212                                                   337; 347; 357-8; 363
Russia, 95; 122; tallow from 131-2; 141-2;            Stamp, Sir Josiah, 356
   164; Barings’ involvement with 170-6;              Stanley, Edward, Lord (later 15th Earl of
  Crimean War 171-3; loans to 197-8; and                 Derby), 230
  Baring Crisis 245-6; 281; 310-18; in First          Staples, Robert, 104-5
  World War 320, 322, 328-32; disposal of             Statist, the, 196; 205-6; 244
  gold 347-9                                          Stern Brothers, 181
                                                      Stieglitz, Baron Alexander, 131-2; 170; 172-
Russo-Japanese War, 304; 311-12;
   314-15                                                SLO,
                                                      Stillman, James, 287; 297; 299
                                                      Stirling, Duncan, 272
St Louis and Iron Mountain Railway, 219               Stratton Park, 49-50; 86; 118; 252; 358
St Petersburg, 28; 74; 79; 131; railway to            Sturgis, Harold, 190-1
   Moscow 142, 171; 170; Thomas Baring in
                                                      Sturgis, Russell, 129; 159; joins Barings 163;
   173; 174; 178; 246; 248; Maurice Baring               164-5; 167; 179; 181-4; retirement 189-
   in 275; 276; 282; John Revelstoke in 312-             90; 202; and American civil war 213
   13, 330; 316; 329
                                                      Sugar, 53; 131
Salisbury, Robert Cecil, 3rd Marquis, 247;            Sweden, 361
   249; 254
 430                                            Index

Talleyrand-Périgord, Charles Maurice de,                Villiers, Arthur, 335; 345-6; 351; 355; 360
   68; 79-80                                            Virginia, 76
Tallow, 131-2                                           Vogds, Family of, 14
Taylor, Frater, 343                                     Votte, Robert, 31-2; 35-6; 78
Taylor, Walker and Co., 345                             Vowler, John, 15; 17
Tear 205393 ts
ter Meulen, C. E., 339; 353                             Wagg, Edward, 248
Texas, 153-4                                            Wall, Charles, 28; 43; 50-1; 66; 114
Thackeray, William Makepeace, 30; 159                   Wall, Harriet (née Baring), 43; 114
Theobald, E. W., 301                                    Ward, James, 50
Thompson, F. M. L., 51                                  Ward, Samuel, 123; 189; succeeds father as
Thomson, Bonar and Co., 175; 178                          Barings’ agent 208; 209-13; 215; 217-20;
Thornton, Henry, 88-9                                     retires 220; and Baring Crisis 263
Times, The, 36; 65; 73; 81; 116; hostility to           Ward, Thomas (Tom), 220-1
   Barings over Russia 174; on Guinness                 Ward, Thomas Wren, 111, 112-13; 120-1;
   flotation 199-200; 235; 255; 269; 314; 321             123-4; 126; 128-30; 132; 136; 138;
Tin, 25; 282                                              appointed agent in USA 144; character
Tod, Alan, 335; 338                                       144-5; 147-9; dislike of Biddle 152; and
Tone, Sweny, 59                                           1841 crisis 152-6; on Canada 157; 159;
Tornquist, Ernesto, 305; 307-9                            166; purchases for France 177; 183; 189;
Touchet, Samuel, 18; 20                                   wish to retire 207-8
Trans-Persian Railway, 317-19; 355                      Washington, 67; 69
Trevelyan, Charles Edward, 130                          Weardale Iron Co., 135; 138; 179-80; 211
True Briton, the, 38                                    Webster, Daniel, 59; 146; 155
Turkey, 35; 171; 281; 310                               Weisweiller, Daniel, 169
Tyler, John, 146                                        Wellesley, Richard Colley, lst Marquis, 55
                                                        Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of,
Underground Electric Railway, 344                         79-81; 83-5; 86; 114-15
United States of America, the, War of                   West, Glyn, 343
  Independence 26, 40-2; 29; 38; 53-4; 59;              Western Railroad Co., 211
  Barings’ involvement in 1783-1829 61-77;              Westminster Bank, 354
  92; 98; 112; boundary dispute 117; 130;               Whitbread, Samuel, 87
   136; Barings’ involvement in 1828-1848               White, Major Ferdinand, 232-3
  143-57; 164; crisis of 1857 in 180-1; civil           White, George, 165; 167; 233
  war in 181; Barings’ involvement in 1848-             Wiggin, Timothy, and Co., 145; 148
   1890 207-23; civil war 212-14; Barings               Wildes, George, and Co., 145; 148
  lose government agency 214-15; 283-4;                 Wilkins, William, 86
   Barings re-engage in 291-4; in First World           Willing, Francis and Co., 52-3; 66
  War 321, 327; 339; 346; 355; speculative              Willing, Thomas, 68-9
  fever in 356; 357                                     Wilson, Thomas, and Co., 145; 148; 156-7
Urquiza, General, 232                                   Windham, William, 52
Uruguay, 110; 197; 229; 238; 244; 306                   Winsor, Robert, 298; 327-8
                                                        Wolcott, Oliver, 68
Van de Weyer, Elizabeth (née Bates), 160                Wood, J. Walter, 204-5
Van de Weyer, Jean Sylvain, 160                         Wool, 14-16; 19; 23; 26; 40; 131
Van de Weyer, Victor, 165                               World Bank, 360
Vansittart, Nicholas (later 1st Baron Bexley),          Wrangel, General, 348
   57; 80                                               Wraxall, Nathaniel, 39
Venezuela, 230
Verne, Jules, 283                                       Yardleys and Co., 345
Vickers, Armstrong and Co., 343-4                       York, Ernest, Duke of, 50
Vickers Sons and Maxims, 289; 305; 343                  Young, Charles, Baring, 126; 130-1; 135;
Victoria, Queen, 117; 118; 160; 261                        162; 164; 183; 226
Vienna, 56; 81; 139
Villéle, Comte de, 94                                   Zimmerman, Frazier and Co., 109; 233
ro]




      udeitieleaeal

      eles    a
(Continued from front flap)

finance, even the Government itself,
rushed forward to shore them up. No less
astonishing was their recovery from
humiliation and catastrophe.
Philip Ziegler, with a sharp eye for
personality and keen sense of period,
could not have better told this remarkable
story. His account lies on foundations of
honesty, fair dealing and good judgement.


PHILIP ZIEGLER was born in December
1929 and educated at Eton and New
College, Oxford, where he gained first
class honours in Jurisprudence. He then
joined the Diplomatic Service and served
in Vientiane, Paris, Pretoria and Bogota
before resigning to join the publishers
William Collins, where he was editorial
director for fifteen years. His books have
included biographies of William IV,
Melbourne and Lady Diana Cooper, a
study of the Black Death, and the official
biography of Mountbatten. He lives in
London with his wife and three children.




ISBN 000 217508 8

Front cover: A detail from Sir Thomas Lawrence’s portrait
of Sir Francis Baring, John Baring and Charles Wall.



Collins
8 Grafton Street London W1
