

> Colonel Wood
> 
> understood the hon. gentleman to have said, that a considerable portion of the sums voted for the staff was laid out on bands of music, instead of being expended in drilling the recruits. All he could say to this was, that strict 909 orders had been given that the musicians attached to a corps should be restricted to one drummer to two companies. The band was the most difficult part of a regiment to keep in order, and there was no disposition to have an unnecessary number of musicians. The hon. gentleman had spoken of the disorders in Ireland as if they amounted merely to a little riot. He could only say, that he should be very sorry to witness such riots in the country in which he lived. In this instance the hon. gentleman had taken a view of the subject very different from that taken of it by his friends near him, who had thought it desirable that martial law should be proclaimed in Ireland, which would not have been recommended, to put down a little riot. The hon. gentleman had stated the duke of York to have reduced 110 regiments to 94, in 1796. but that very circumstance arose out of the inconveniences previously experienced from the reductions having been made on that principle which the hon. gentleman seemed disposed to prefer. New corps had been raised early in the war; and these, when brought into the field had been found inefficient. 

> § Sir J. Newport
> 
> said, he would not have risen upon this question, but for remarks which had been made respecting the state of Ireland, in which he could not concur. His earliest wish had been to get an examination instituted into the state of Ireland, and a remedy applied to the evils which distracted that country. But there was a limit to investigation as to other things, and Ireland was in that state when investigation could not be instituted, and when, not riot, but insurrection, required the strong arm of the law. It was impossible for him to regard as a not what was open insurrection, and a defiance of all law and authority. The government of Ireland had been most scandalously deceived by men who ought to have had correct information. He alluded to the information given respecting Belfast and Mountrath. Most dreadful outrages and horrid assassinations had been committed. A Roman catholic clergyman had been attacked, because he had from the altar recommended peace and good order. Could he doubt that this was a state requiring additional military force? He trusted that these dreadful disorders would pass away, but it would be by the vigorous execution of the law in putting down violence. It would be imperious 910 afterwards to look into the causes of the disturbances. He never would concur in thinking that they ought not to be looked into and probed to the bottom. But while insurrection prevailed, he hoped no hon. member would seem for a moment to express any terms of mitigation. Having always been the advocate of peace and examination, he was now obliged to say that tranquillity must be first restored; and then he would urge a thorough, complete, and radical investigation of the evils of which Ireland complained, with a view to the application of a full, safe, and adequate remedy for them. 