

> § Sir H. Vivian
> 
> was of opinion, that reductions in the army had been carried as far as they possibly could. With regard to the waggon train he thought it desirable to keep it up as a skeleton; for it was well known to be very inefficient at its first establishment, and it was some time before it was brought into a state of discipline. As to the riding establishment, he considered it of vital importance that a uniform system of riding should be adopted throughout the army. He could not conclude without expressing his gratitude to ministers for having adopted a suggestion which he had made in the last session, for placing majors-general of the army on full regimental allowance instead of half-pay. 

> § Mr. Hume
> 
> began by pointing out the curious predicament in which the gallant officer and his friends stood, who last year had supported ministers in condemning reduction, and this year declared their satisfaction that such reduction had taken place. What was the reason on which 904 they justified this change? It had been said, that the diminution of force in the colonies was the cause which admitted of this reduction. But what was the fact? Why, there had been almost no diminution of force in the colonies between this year and last, and yet our army was to be reduced from 81,000 to 68,000 men. Thus inconsistent were the reasons which were adduced to justify an adherence to ministerial projects. The difference between the number of troops in our colonies last year and this, which amounted only to a few hundred men, was stated as a ground for being satisfied with reduction to the amount of 12,300 l. The whole of the saving on the vote before the House was 558,000 l. The noble lord had accused his hon. friends of being too prone to discontent, because they only asked a reduction of 10,000 men last year, and ministers had reduced 12,300. Now, the noble lord should have done him (Mr. H.) the justice to remember, that he had made a motion for the reduction of 20,000 men, and that he had been induced to withdraw it only by the persuasion of his hon. friends, who thought that a motion for 10,000 was more likely to meet with success. He had formerly gone back to 1792, as a period of comparison; and he could not help again pressing on the attention of the committee the necessity of following the example then left us. At that time, our military force, rank and file, was 36,363 men, and including officers 45,000. Now, what was the reduced vote of this year?—68,000, including 8,000 officers. We had then 36,000 rank and file. We had now 60,000. The marine corps then amounted to 8,000. Now it amounted to 15,000. The noble marquis had lately stated that this corps was employed as a land force, and, consequently, might be added to the land force when comparing the numbers of the army at different periods. Here, therefore, there was an addition to our army of 7,000 men over the marine corps of 1792. This was surely too much. We had nine or ten regiments locked up in the Ionian islands, which, with a better government of those islands, might be withdrawn. We had 12,000 men in the new colonies, a great portion of which might be reduced. In reckoning our military force at home, the militia, the constitutional force of the country, had been strangely overlooked by the noble lord. That force amounted to 63,000 men, and, together with the 905 volunteers, cost the public between 500, and 600,000 l. per annum, a sum sufficient for the pay of the rank and file of our army in 1792, exclusive of Ireland. The militia, the volunteer corps, the marines, and the artillery, were all additions to our military establishment, and ought to enable us to reduce the regular force in proportion. These species of force were either useful or they were not. If they were of use, they ought to have been brought into the noble lord's account; if they were not of use, the sum which they now cost the country ought to be saved. For his own part, he would rather pay for these constitutional troops, and take means to render them effective, in preference to keeping up the present amount of our regular military force. So absurd and defective was the present system, as regarded the militia, that instead of keeping serjeants to instruct the troops, he believed one half of the money appropriated for maintaining them was spent in drums, fifes, arid music. He would ask the House, what necessity there could be for maintaining a greater number of regular troops now than in 1792? He was not aware of any circumstance which required an increased military force, except, perhaps, the present situation of Ireland [hear! from lord Palmerston]. The noble lord said "hear!" but he forgot that he had embodied 3,000 men for this service. The disturbances in Ireland, were, in fact, nothing more than riots. These were, indeed, attended with bloodshed, and with many melancholy and distressing circumstances; but they had not that character of union which belonged to an insurrection. Taking the whole of our military establishment, he could show that it would bear a reduction of 20,000 men; and, instead of the small and inefficient saving about to be effected by ministers, it would be quite consistent with every purpose of safety to make such a reduction as would save half a million of money. The reduction which he meant to propose would, in effect, produce a saving to that amount. The noble lord had said, that it would not be consistent with the safety of the colonies to reduce the colonial establishment; but, surely, there were not the same apprehensions with regard to that of the household—a part of our military force which was the most expensive, and which had been greatly augmented since 1792. At 906 that period, the whole amount of the horse and life guards was 7,500 while last year it amounted to 17,000. The House might look at the difference of these amounts, and say whether there was not a large surplus which could be disposed of for the relief of the country' The life guards in 1792 amounted to 672; this year they amounted to 1032; the cavalry in 1792 were 4,376, now they were 5,916; the horse guards and other parts of the establishment were 2,909 in 1792, and vow they amounted to 5,104. Why, he would ask, should there be a larger number of these troops now than there was in 1792? They were not efficient to the defence of the colonies, and they were the most expensive troops in the pay of government. One life-guardsman was as expensive as two soldiers, and a common cavalry-man was equal in expence to two-thirds of a life-guardsman. Any one of these cost the country full as much as did one of those junior clerks who had been paid off, although the state of the accounts showed that more of these clerks had been discharged than was perhaps consistent with the regular discharge of public business. Rather than have discharged so many of these, would it not have been better to reduce the number of life and horse guards, who really were of no use but to attend upon the sovereign? Of such troops we now had 9,500, when 6,000 would be fully sufficient; for it was not necessary that we should have guards in such numbers stationed at the West India docks, the gallery in Pall-mall, the Opera-house, and the British museum; as if it were necessary to have military to protect the arts and sciences, when it had been always understood, that of these a military force was the enemy. He thought that a reduction of 360 men might be effected in the guards alone. But though he was prepared to show, that there was a disposable surplus of 20,000 men, he did not mean to propose the reduction of that surplus. He would leave a disposable surplus of 10,000 to meet contingencies, and reduce the other 10,000 l. He would now advert to the staff, which was in fact the most expensive establishment of them all, and which, if diminished in the same ratio with the reduction which he had suggested in the numerical amount of the army, would operate a very extensive saving. If the men alone were estimated at the rate of 33,000 l. per every thousand, then the 907 reduction of 10,000 would produce 330,000 l., and the reduction of the staff, in the same proportion, would give a half more, which would make a total saving to the public of about half a million; and this too, having a surplus of 10,000 of the line above the number in 1792, independently of militia, yeomanry, and other corps, which could he rendered efficient, if necessary, for the safety of the country. He could, indeed, see no harm in reducing the establishment of the line to the establishment of 1792. In the colonies there was a great increase; and yet, making allowance for the Ionian islands, the number of troops left a much greater proportion to the extent of the colonies than in 1792.—He would trouble the House with one observation relative to the mode in which ministers proposed to effect their reductions of the army. There were three ways by which this might be done—the reduction of corps, the reduction of companies, and the reduction of men in each; and he might refer to the statement of the finance committee to show that the reduction proposed by ministers was not the one which, even in its opinion, would be the most beneficial. Previous to 1792, there was no uniform system of discipline: every regiment then following its own; so that though they were efficient enough as separate corps, they could not act together, and therefore were unserviceable as an army. Now, however, since the introduction of an uniformity of discipline, they could act in larger masses, and thus far, the new organization was better than the old. Even then, however, the number of corps had been reduced; and surely there could be no good objection to a reduction of the number of corps now. Ministers, then, would do little service to the country by a simple reduction of the number of men, if they did not put the reduced army in a state more consistent with the necessities of the country. If they were to reduce the staffs, and other establishments, there would be a saving of 71,000 l. in every 8,000 men. Hence, although the same numerical establishment of men was kept up, as much would be gained by this reduction of the number of corps as would compensate for the additional pay which had been granted since 1792. He was at a loss how to reconcile the reduction of the corps to 550 men, with the pretended reduction of the expence; for if they had made the numerical, seduction which he proposed, and 908 kept the corps at 8,000, they would have effected a saving of upwards of 500,000 l. Now, why should they have reduced the corps to 550, when, by the other mode, there would have been a clear saving in the staff to the amount of 200,000 l.? The mode of reduction was, therefore, extravagant. They talked of keeping up skeleton regiments; but of what use were skeleton regiments for the performance of regimental duty? Ministers might say it was difficult to make any reduction in the number of regiments; but, in his opinion, nothing would conduce more to the efficiency of the army. The plan proposed by ministers was, therefore, the most extensive, and at the same time the most expensive. This reduction was objectionable both in its extent and in its mode: in neither the one respect nor the other was it the best for the country. If they were to do any good at all—if they were not to mock the country in the midst of its distress—then they ought to reduce, not the number of men merely, but the number of corps. The duke of York had reduced the number of regiments from 110 to 94. He had done this in 1796, when the country was involved in war. It had been found advantageous even then; and could it fail to be productive of advantage now? The present establishment was too large; and the proposal of ministers was not what the circumstances of the country demanded. They could easily dispense with 10,000 of the present army, and so re-model the remainde