

> Colonel Davies
> 
> said, he was prepared to show, that the proposed reductions were not conducted with a view to economy, and that if instead of two troops or two companies from each regiment, a certain number of entire battalions were reduced, the saving to the country beyond what was now proposed, would be 111,000 l.; as it was evident, that while the same number of men were reduced, there might be a much greater reduction of the officers, who formed so large a part of the expense of a regiment. He intended, therefore, to propose a reduction, in addition to what had been proposed, of four battalions of infantry, which would increase the numbers of the proposed reductions from 12,000 odd, to 15,000 men in addition to the staff corps and the waggon train, of which he should come to speak presently. He was sensible that in proposing so small a reduction, affecting too only the infantry, he was making a sacrifice of principle to expediency; for why, he would ask, was there to be main- 898 tained now 3,000 more cavalry than in 1792? In 1792, there were only 5,000 cavalry; there were now 8,300, so that making the largest allowance, there might be now a reduction of 1,500 or 2,000 cavalry. Much had been said of the increase of our colonies, as calling for an increase of our military force; but as to the cavalry, there was no pretence for this increase, as this description of force was never employed in the colonies. In the year 1792, the estimates were proposed half-yearly; and so far from its being thought by Mr. Pitt, as had been lately asserted, that the establishments of 1792 were on too reduced a scale, the estimates for the latter half of that year reduced the military force by 6,000 men. The force in the colonies was then only 13,200 men, being 1,700 men less than those at present employed in the colonies which we had then possessed. In the new colonies an enormous force was maintained. In Malta there were 2,000 men; in the Ionian islands there were 4,000 men. And why was this force necessary? Because, instead of giving the people a good government, we had driven them to desperation by acts of oppression. In the Cape of Good Hope we had 2,000 men. Why, it might be asked, had we no colonial militia? But, even on the supposition hat we could have no militia, the garrison it the Cape of Good Hope was double what was necessary. In the island of Ceylon we had also 2,000 men; hot there we had 3,600 colonial troops. Why had we, with such a colonial force, so large a body of regular troops? It was true, that me of the regiments in Ceylon was at the charge of the East India company; but, is that regiment was as much as was necessary, it was unnecessary that we should be at any charge on account of hat island. He might, therefore, safely say, that the establishments were too large n Ceylon, the Cape of Good Hope, the Ionion islands, and in Malta; so that here was ample room for the further reduction which he had proposed. He lad said nothing of the West India islands, where the establishments were too large by some thousands of men. These establishments were defended on account of the change created by the independence of South America. That change, however, rather conduced to the safety of our colonial possessions, as the South Americans would form a counterpoise against the North, of whom they 899 would be more likely to feel jealous than of this country.—He now came to the waggon train, which was set down in the estimates at a charge of 6,295 l. In the whole army there was, in time of peace, nothing, more preposterous and unnecessary than this corps. When the troops were in active service, he granted, the corps was highly useful to facilitate the movement of the army: but now they were scattered about the kingdom, and attached solely to the forge-carts. This corps was only military in name. They were, in fact, only waggoners attached to the army, subject indeed to martial law but not to discipline; so that while there were waggoners in the country there would be no difficulty in raising them. He should propose to reduce this corps. The staff corps, too, which amounted to 558 men, stood at a charge of nearly 25,000 l., whereas the ordinary charge for such a force would not be more than 11,000 l. As to this force, it was stated by colonel Brown, that it was useful when extensive field works were carried on, and in cases of emergency. But there were now neither field works nor emergencies. This corps was as numerous now as in 1810, in the heat of the war. He should propose its entire reduction, which would be a saving of 24,581 l. Another subject was one which he felt it invidious continually to recur to—connected as he was with the military profession; he meant the two majors who were now attached to each regiment. He should suggest, however, once more, that the second major of each regiment should be reduced, on this ground, that they had not been appointed till 1796, when they were so appointed on account of the contingencies, and the increase of numbers from 1,000 to 1,200. Yet now the numbers were reduced to one-half, and contingencies were so much less frequent, but the second majors remained. By their reduction 35,000 l. more would be saved. The charge for recruiting was also one on which great saving might be effected. The total charge was 58,782 l. The nett expense after deduction of the money paid for discharges, 45,000 l. This was for an army of 68,000 men, while in 1819 the sum paid was about 40,000 l. on an army of 80,000 men: including the sum paid for discharges, so that the increase of charge was 18,000 l., though the numbers to be recruited for were reduced from 80 to 68,000. This was a sign of the greatest 900 profusion in management. There was one corps in which the recruiting was managed without any expense, except that of bounties, as the parties reported immediately to the head quarters of the regiment. This arrangement might be adopted with respect to the whole army. As to the regiments on foreign service, the recruiting officers could report to the commander at the dépôts. The recruits too were twice charged, as borne on their respective regiments, and as recruits on their way to the regiments. By the change he proposed, the charge of 35 superintending officers would cease. The saving in this department might be 27,859 l. He saw a charge in the present estimates for wounded officers. Now, though he should be the last to object to any remuneration to officers really wounded, he saw no probability of cases arising in the present year to call for the vote in question. This amounted to 1,200 l. He now called attention to the riding establishment at Pimlico. He did not relieve there was a cavalry officer in the House, who would stand up and defend this establishment. It was, in fact, a mere job. Whatever the advantage of the new system of riding taught there might be, three years ago all regiments of cavalry had large detachments there who were thoroughly instructed, and were now quite competent to teach their comrades. If any thing more were necessary, one competent officer, with the title of riding-master general, to visit the regiments would be quite sufficient. This would be a saving of 1,450 l. The total reduction he should propose would be 176,415 l. under the following heads:—Four battalions in the colonies 80,000 l. staff corps 24,581 l.; waggon train 6,295 l.; second majors of every regiment of cavalry and infantry 35,000 l.; recruiting establishments 27,889 l.; riding establishment at Pimlico 1,450 l.; sum charged as remuneration for officers wounds, as we are now carrying on no hostile operations 1,200 l.; total 176,415 l. The hon. member called strongly on the House to support him in his proposed reductions, and not to listen to the tales of impracticability which they would hear from ministers: Last year, in like manner, the ministers had told them, that if only a part of what they had since done in the way of reduction were done, the consequences would be too dreadful to be contemplated. The members who had believed these asser- 901 tions had been exposed to the just reproaches of their constituents. He agreed with hon. members who said, that the reduction of expenditure should precede the reduction of taxation, but he now called on them to support the work of retrenchment, in the same spirit as they had done in the case of the two lords of the Admiralty; as he trusted they had not effected that reduction as a clap-trap, to avoid the necessity of greater and more important savings. He concluded by moving an amendment to reduce the numbers proposed from 68,802 to 65,502 men. 