

> § Lord Palmerston
> 
> stated, that the increase of the colonial force, even now, was only 1,678 men, of which number 588 came under the head of New South Wales; and no one who was aware of the great change which had taken place in that colony since 1792 could suppose that an increased force of 588 men was disproportioned to the new state of things. In the same way, it must at once be perceived that an increase of force was necessary in the American colonies. But, notwithstanding the change of circumstances, the number of men in the colonies was, on the whole, less than in 1792. In that year, the force abroad was 17,793 men; at present it was estimated at 14,965; being a reduction of nearly 3,000 men. The total amount was less considerable than in 1792, and where the number appeared greater, the circumstances sufficiently accounted for the increase. Now, the proposition of the hon. colonel was, to deduct from the force in the colonies 3,600 men. The hon. colonel had forgotten what had been already done, and what he and his friends had endeavoured to effect last year. Last session they proposed to reduce our military establishment 10,000 men. Government had in the interval not merely made reductions to the amount of 10,000, but of 12,300 men. The hon. gentlemen opposite had thus obtained a reduction of 2,300 men more than they demanded last year, and still they were dissatisfied. Then came the hon. colonel and proposed a reduction of 3,000 more. The appetite of the hon. gentleman, it must be confessed, was not easily gratified; for he not only was dissatisfied with the reductions, but the mode in which they were effected. If, however, his plan had been followed, of reducing by regiments rather than by companies, the saving would have been at least 50,000 l. less. Now with respect to 902 the staff corps, the hon. gentleman miscalculated the expense, and underrated the utility of this establishment. The staff establishment formed a corps of science, a corps of education—a corps not easily formed at first, and with difficulty restored if reduced. The body of officers consisted of men who had made the sciences connected with their profession their study, and who had acquired a knowledge and skill which could not always he found upon an emergency. The men of this corps were all artificers, who, though not like the officers, scientific, end highly educated, possessed manual skill and practical knowledge, which rendered them extremely useful in our foreign possessions. They were almost all abroad, and the advantage which their education gave them in directing works which could not be executed by the natives, might be easily calculated. Now, with respect to the waggon-train, he could not allow the justice of the hon. gentleman's observations. The corps was small, and was so necessary to the cavalry, that they could not move without it. The hon. gentleman had observed, that though useful in time of war, they could be of no service in time of peace. To that he would reply, that so long as we had cavalry, we must have some provision for their moving conveniently from one part of the island to another; and this they could not do without having a train like that in question. It was reduced now to a mere nucleus, on which to form an effective corps when necessary. The continuance of the establishment of second majors was disapproved of by the hon. gentleman; but he had miscalculated the saving which their reduction would occasion, and the source of hope and encouragement which their appointments held out to inferior officers. The saving accruing from their reduction, instead of being 35,000 l., as he had stated, would not amount to more than 13,000 l., if allowance were made for their half-pay. Considering the casualties which night occur on foreign stations two majors did not seem more than were necessary for the service of the regiment; and, at any rate, the establishment should be maintained as a reward to captains who were long without promotion. If the post of second major were reduced, a meritorious class of individuals would feel acutely the disappointment of their professional hopes. The hon. gentleman's observation with regard to the recruiting 903 service admitted of an easy reply. In the first place, the sum which he mentioned as paid for recruiting service, included items which he did not consider; namely, expenses for marching, and charges for purchased horses: the whole amount of the expenses which properly fell under the head of recruiting did not exceed 9 or 10,000 l.; and, in the second place, the plan of recruiting proposed by the hon. gentleman would be much more expensive and less effective. The present establishment was cheaper and more effective than any that had been proposed to be substituted. The hon. gentleman had expressed some surprise to see a charge for wounds in the estimates; but the fact was, officers were still arriving from abroad, and advancing claims for wounds received during the war. The riding establishment was more useful and less expensive than the hon. gentleman would allow it to be. So long as we had cavalry forces, they must be taught to ride; and great inconveniences would be prevented by having a uniform system for the whole of that part of the army. The plan proposed by the hon. gentleman, of instructing a certain number of officers, who might carry the knowledge of riding to the different regiments, like the subordinate instructors in a Lancasterian establishment, would not answer the purpose. The expense, so far from being 4,000 l., would, on the reduced scale, not amount to 1,000 l. 