

> § General Gascoyne
> 
> said, he would certainly vote against the proposed reduction. Honourable members talked of the state in which our army had stood previous to the late war; but, let it be remembered, that very heavy objections had been taken upon the breaking out of that war, to the condition now so lauded. The very small force which England brought into the field had been a source of astonishment and of displeasure to her allies. He (gen. G.) being on service in one of the brigades sent out upon that occasion, the brigade was so weak, that an Austrian general actually took it for a battalion, and asked whether all the British battalions were of equal force. The gallant member contended for the necessity of maintaining such a force as should have an eye to the northern as well as to the southern parts of that country; and concluded by declaring, that the seeds of war existed in every part of Europe, and that appearances were such as to justify measures of precaution. The hon. member for Aberdeen went on, taken up wholly by his figures and marking out reduction here and there in the army, without being possessed of the smallest military know, ledge himself, but denying that an officer could know any thing at all of the matter. He would tell that hon. gentleman, whatever his profession might be, whether it was in the way of slaughtering or of healing, that in this instance his calculations were far from being correct. 

> § Mr. Wilmot
> 
> said, he felt himself bound, in the outset of his speech, to protest against the expediency of any farther military reduction. Before, however, he stated the reasons of his dissent from such a measure, he would make a few observations upon what had fallen from the hon. member for Aberdeen. With regard to the reduction already effected in the colo- 911 nies, the hon. member had stated it as not exceding 400 men. If the hon. member meant to persist in that assertion, he (Mr. W.) could satisfy the House that a more monstrous assertion had never been put forth; for the reduction actually effected in the colonies amounted to 4,535 men. Upon the estimates of the present year, article "Stations abroad, India excepted," the numerical force, officers and non-commissioned officers included, stood at 27,943. The very same article, in the estimates of last year, gave, as the number of men, 32,467. Now, this reduction, the hon. member called, a reduction not exceeding 400 men. The very items, however, of the alteration should be stated to the House. In the old Leeward islands there had been a reduction of 370; in Jamaica and Honduras, 513; in North America, including Canada and the Bermudas, 863; at Gibraltar, 381; in the new Leeward islands, 208; at the Cape, 228; at the Mauritius, 192; at St. Helena, 1,492; and at Ceylon, 1,034; in New South Wales there was an increase of 153; in Africa 30; and in Malta and the Ionian islands 625: but the saving, he repeated, upon the whole alterations amounted to 4,500 men. So much, then, for the question of reduction effected; and now to the question of farther reduction. proposed. If the hon. and gallant member who had alluded to the state of the Cape would look to the character of the population of that settlement, and to the nature of the predatory hordes by which it was surrounded, he would scarcely think the number of troops at present maintained too great. With respect to Ceylon, considering the immense area of that country, its recent subjugation, and the reduction already effected, both of regular and local force, it was impossible to think of farther alteration without endangering the security of our possession. The increase of force in Malta and the Ionian islands had been ascribed to the operation of a certain course of policy. As the time would come, and at no very distant period, when that subject would be fully investigated, it would not be proper for him to introduce it upon the present occasion; thus much, however, he would say, that there was no subject on which the public had been more extensively and systematically deluded. Confining himself, however, to the colonies, simply, he had shown the House that the 912 calculations of the hon. member for Aberdeen were upon a wrong principle; and he defied that hon. member to contradict his statement. When it was seen that the old colonies were even at a lower establishment than in the beginning of 1792, he did trust that the House would reject, and with disdain, the proposition of the hon. member for Aberdeen. He did confess that he felt annoyed when the government was accused of having insulted the country by its offers of reduction. Mr. Burke had said, that the age of chivalry was past, and that of calculators had succeeded it. He really thought that the hon. member in his love fur calculation, forgot sometimes the true interests of the country. He could not think it possible that that hon. member could wish that England should forfeit her rank among the nations of Europe, and that by reducing her power of resistance she should invite acts of aggression. He could not believe that the hon. member had lost sight of the maxim— Si vis prcem Para bellum; but whatever might be the opinion of the hon. member on that point, he (Mr. W.) entreated of that House to consult petty savings less than the real and prospective advantage of the nation. 