                             INTRODUCTION


Few regions in the world have given rise to as much fantasy and as
much misunderstanding as the part of North Africa known as the
Maghreb.1 The three centuries of Ottoman rule, corresponding to
the golden age of the Barbary Coast corsairs, are chieﬂy responsi-
ble for this. The sea has always played an important role in North
Africa, but it was not until the sixteenth century, with the arrival of
the Ottomans, that it acquired such undisputed preeminence. It was
by sea that the Ottoman military contingents arrived, and it was the
ports of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli that became the capitals of those
new Ottoman provinces. And it was eventually by means of naval
warfare, rapidly transformed into a privateering war, that those
states that the Europeans would later call the Barbary Regencies
established their power.
   From the beginning of the sixteenth to the ﬁrst decades of the
nineteenth century, the Barbary corsairs struck fear into the hearts
of the occupants of the northern coasts of the Mediterranean and
plagued European imagination. In the south, on the other hand,
these seamen were considered the spearhead of Islam and were the
pride of the Muslims. On both sides of the Mediterranean the dom-
inant idea was of an almost permanent confrontation without any
particular change lasting for three centuries. In reality, this exag-
gerated vision of tense and constant confrontation is inaccurate. This
is not to say that the corsairs did not really exist! Their misdeeds,
or, if we prefer, their exploits were real enough, and for a long time
their boldness weighed heavily on navigation and the coastal popu-
lations of Mediterranean Europe. This one-sided European point-of-
view has persisted for a long time and numerous are the books in



   1
     We have frequently used the geographical term ‘Maghreb’, which, in addition
to the present countries of Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, usually includes the Kingdom
of Morocco, although this work deals primarily with the regencies that were Ottoman
provinces, which was not the case of Morocco. Although from time to time we
refer to the Moroccan commercial ﬂeet, the country itself is not included in our
study.
