                            introduction                             3

of records kept by the North African consulates. Firstly, copies of
passports that served as a sort of safe-conduct pass, provided for pri-
vateering captains by the consuls of those states having signed agree-
ments with the Regencies. Dedicated to privateering, the North
African seamen ignored normal maritime trade, which was in the
hands of the Europeans: the details of the charter contracts for the
ships that handled this trade appear in the registers of the consular
chancelleries. To this locally-held documentation must be added the
registers of the health authorities of the European ports recording
the arrival of all ships and including some very valuable informa-
tion concerning the vessels themselves.
   It has therefore been possible to study the seafaring activity of
the North African Regencies for that period in a both consecutive
and concrete manner and in a personalised, biographical manner.
Throughout we have attempted to present, quantitatively and in
detail, the facts related to privateering and maritime trade and also
to the diplomatic and commercial relations of the Regencies. At the
same time we have provided the personal histories of several of the
men, both corsairs and merchants, who were the actors in the story.
Here, however, there is an important reservation. Although these
sources exist, they are far from complete in their coverage of all the
Regencies and facets we had initially planned to treat for the entire
period of this study. For example, unlike what we know of the
Algerians we have traced the movements of the Tunisian corsair
ships but are not knowledgeable of the results of their campaigns.
The information available concerning port movements and com-
mercial activities in Algiers and Tunis, also Tripoli, is fragmentary;
whereas we can follow the North African ships’ frequentation in the
European ports (sadly, the Maltese archives end in 1816).
   During the three centuries of Ottoman rule the activity of the
Barbary corsairs, underpinned by the religious factor, provided a
fundamental basis for organisation and development in the Barbary
Coast Regencies. We therefore begin there. The special characteristic
of the Regencies from the seventeenth century resides in their con-
siderable autonomy in relation to the central power in Istanbul,
an independence translated by their diplomatic emancipation and
the establishment of dynasties in Tunis and Tripoli. The changes in the
relations between the Regencies and the European states reveal the
lessening of privateering activity in the eighteenth century, in favour
of increased trading. The year 1793, which marks the beginning of
