4                            introduction

the wars that arose in the wake of the French Revolution, heralded
a spectacular return to activity by the Barbary corsairs. Existing
sources enable us to study the ships, the men and the campaigns of
the corsairs in a systematic way and also make it possible to pre-
sent, for the ﬁrst time, an economic evaluation of privateering at the
change of centuries.
   In 1806, in the very middle of the wars of the First Empire, the
booming Barbary privateering activities suddenly came to an almost
complete halt. This did not result from interventions by European
states, most of them on the French or English side: it was the North
Africans themselves who took the initiative to reduce their priva-
teering and to devote themselves to another activity, sea transportation.
We know how rapidly the Greek-Ottoman merchant marine devel-
oped in this period, taking advantage of the neutrality of the Ottoman
Empire. What we ﬁnd in the case of North Africa was that the
regional shipowners and seamen followed the same example, thereby
demonstrating a real capacity to adapt to changing circumstances.
They were also accompanied and supported by North African mer-
chants attempting to establish themselves directly in Europe. Thus,
in the course of one short decade, the ports of Mediterranean Europe,
for the ﬁrst time in their history, started to welcome North African
shipping and merchants.
   The North African initiative ﬁlled a deﬁnite gap and was at ﬁrst
welcomed by the Europeans without signiﬁcant opposition. But quite
soon the competition represented by this trade and the Maghreb
shipping created ever-growing, stronger opposition: irksome local
administration was followed by oﬃcial interdictions. It was the return
to a peace generally in Europe that meant failure for the North
Africans. Incapable of competing with the massive return to North
Africa by European ships and merchants, the Maghreban sailors
went back to their old privateering activities. It was once too many:
and, unlike the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and the tacit
pact between both sides of the Mediterranean; there were no pacts,
all to the advantage of Europe. Not only was Algiers crushed by
Lord Exmouth’s ﬂeet in 1816, but Europe’s economic domination
became patently evident from this point on. After the abortive attempt
at marine transportation, privateering now became moribund, and
for the ﬁrst time in three centuries, the Maghreb found itself, as it
