2                                introduction

which terrible North African pirates are set against heroic European
sailors, defenders of the Cross against the Crescent. The change that
has recently taken place in European historiography is exempliﬁed
by the eminent Italian historian Salvatore Bono’s well-documented
work published in 1964, I Corsari barbareschi. In 1993, he brought out
another work bearing the signiﬁcant title: Corsari nel Mediterraneo,
Cristiani e musulmani fra guerra, schiavitù e commercio. The existence of
Barbary privateers has certainly not been refuted over the past thirty
years, but re-examined in its context and put into perspective. This
has had as a primary result the discovery by the European public
of an important fact that had been previously more or less hidden:
the existence of an active and eﬀective form of Christian privateer-
ing whose most famous practitioners were the Order of Malta.
   Within those three centuries of tormented and much-debated his-
tory, the years 1798 to 1818 occupy a special place. It was, during
those two decades, with events moving at a rapid pace, that there
was in the Maghreb a spectacular return to privateering activities,
then economic development and ﬁnally, the at-ﬁrst-sight unantici-
pated unexpected collapse of the Regencies, soon bringing about a
major shift in the destiny of the Maghreb.
   That series of events is the subject of this book, a work based on
substantial, varied documentation. The local sources include: oﬃcial
chronicles like those of Ben Dhiaf from Tunisia, and private ones
like those of Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan, a merchant from Tripoli, in
addition to compilations, especially the Tachrifats from Algiers. We
also used those available administrative archives, especially for Tunis,
regarding taxes, customs duties, and rent registers relating to the
estates of the ruling beys. Apart from using those sources, we have
also to a certain extent made them the subject of publications aimed
at facilitating their consultation and utilisation.2 For our speciﬁc pur-
poses, the register of the successive captures of Algiers is a particu-
larly valuable document, as it records the results of the Algerian
corsairs campaigns between 1765 and 1829.
   The European sources provide indispensable additional informa-
tion. Added to the voluminous consular correspondence are two sets


  2
    This is particularly the case of Algiers, with the works of Amine, Saïdouni, and
Shuval; and of Tunis, with those of Bachrouch, Benachour, Chater, Cherif, Valensi
and Zouari.
