10                           chapter one

who had recently converted to Islam, were invited by the Hafsid
sovereign to set themselves up in Djerba. In 1514, Arouj seized
Djidjelly, and, at the invitation of its inhabitants, became the ruler
of Algiers in 1516, before taking Tlemcen, where he was eventually
killed by Spaniards from Oran in 1518. His brother Khayr al-Din,
who had inherited a very diﬃcult situation, then made a decision
that was to have grave consequences: he called upon the Ottoman
sultan Selim, and in return for his assistance, oﬀered to place him-
self and his possessions under the sultan’s rule. The oﬀer was accepted,
and the sultan conferred upon him the title ‘Pasha’, appointed him
beylerbey (provincial governor), and, above all, sent him several thou-
sand seasoned soldiers with artillery. This constituted the military
force which, supported by the Sublime Porte, linking the naval mas-
tery of the privateers with the power and eﬃciency of a modern
and disciplined infantry, restored the religious and political order of
Islam in the Maghreb. After many attempts, Khayr al-Din ﬁnally
captured Peñon of Algiers from the Spaniards in 1529; in 1551,
Turgut (‘Dragut’ to the French) captured Tripoli, where the Knights
of Malta were stationed; and then in 1574, Sinan Pasha and Uluç
Ali took Tunis and Goletta from the Spaniards. The corsairs had
thus played a decisive role in the Muslim reconquest of North Africa
from the Spaniards.
   The Ottoman state organised its new provinces by placing them
under the pashas created in Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli. They had
considerable diﬃculty in establishing their authority faced with the
militia of the janissaries, the odjak, directed by its divan, or group of
principal oﬃcers, and also the taïfa, the fellowship of privateer cap-
tains, the raïs. The seventeenth century, which saw the apogee of
corsair activities, and therefore of the prestige and power of the raïs,
was also the period of increasing powerlessness of the pashas appointed
by the Porte. The de facto authority, acquired after a considerable
struggle, was in the hands of ﬁercely rival leaders from the divan or
the taïfa and who were attempting to concentrate power exclusively
in their own hands.
   Beginning in the second half of the seventeenth century, these
governorships underwent a fundamental transformation. The heads
in Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli who exercised power in the name of
the sultan attempted to extend their inﬂuence to the hinterland in
order to procure resources to supply the cities they ruled, and, in
particular, to raise the necessary funds to pay the janissaries. This
