                       the bases of privateering                           11

subjection was not only ﬁscal, it also became economic. Relations
with the European states, still marked by conﬂict, were now fur-
thered by commercial exchanges. The products of the Maghreb, pri-
marily of agricultural origin—cereals, leather, wool, oil—were sought
after by the Europeans, who in turn oﬀered various manufactured
goods prized by the North Africans. This trade was diﬃcult to rec-
oncile with the risks run by the European merchant ships in the
Mediterranean. Then, after 1660, naval supremacy in those waters
passed from the Spaniards to the English and, especially, the French.
The latter would subsequently obtain by force, repeated naval bom-
bardments,1 a number of peace treaties and commercial treaties with
the political entities that came to be known as the Barbary regencies.
The corsairs of the Maghreb were forced to respect the French ﬂag;
and also the English and Dutch ﬂags, after signing treaties obtained
by force by the English, or in the case of the Dutch, by substantial
gifts. In addition to the exchanges between North Africa and Europe,
trade was developing between the Maghreb and the other provinces
of the Ottoman Empire, in particular Egypt. The North Africans,
concentrating on privateering, had no merchant marine, and it was
the European ships, primarily French, that provided the maritime
links between the Maghreb and the rest of the Ottoman world, prac-
ticing what was known at the time as the ‘maritime caravan’.
   By the end of the seventeenth century, the Barbary regencies had
changed considerably. Their port-capital now extended its authority
over a substantial stretch of inland territory; it traded with the whole
of the Mediterranean and beyond; its government, operating as an
equal party, had signed treaties with the European powers, without
having to worry about the opinion of the sultan. The ﬁrst years of
the eighteenth century saw the culmination of this development. The
permanent state of war between Islamic North Africa and Christian
Europe came to an end, in spite of the ﬁerce opposition of the taïfas.
The corsairs’ period of glory was over, and the janissaries’ oﬃcers,
and their entourage, now had the sole power to designate the real
heads of the regencies. In 1705, Hussein Ben Ali in Tunis, in 1711,
Ali Chaouch in Algiers and Ahmed Karamânli in Tripoli, seized



  1
    French squadrons bombarded Goletta in 1672 and especially Algiers in 1682,
1683 and 1688, then Tripoli in 1683, 1685 and 1692.
