12                                    chapter one

power, and, more importantly, obtained from an Ottoman state
weakened by serious defeats at the hands of the Hapsburg Empire,
the right to be appointed pashas. What is more, the new pashas of
Tunis and Tripoli managed to pass their powers on to their descen-
dants, creating dynasties that lasted until 1835 in Tripoli, and as
late as 1956 in Tunis.

The Regencies in the Eighteenth Century

The Heads of State
In 1730, the oﬃcial titles of Hussein Ben Ali, founder of the dynasty
of the beys of Tunis, formed a long list of honoriﬁc names and
laudatory epithets that revealed the ambiguity of his position as well
as his acknowledged ambitions: ﬁrst of all, the real function of wâlî
(one responsible for) that suggests relations of vassalage with the
Porte; then the assumed dignity of mâlik (sovereign), which was slipped
surreptitiously among vaguer and more harmless terms, and which
appears at the very end of the list following the royal title ‘Our
Master’; the functional attributions of ‘Guarantor of Happiness’, ‘Our
Protector’; and ﬁnally, the epithets lavished on him by the syco-
phantic pens of the scribes: ‘the Gloriﬁed’, ‘the Highly-Placed’, ‘the
Eminence with Eﬃcient Virtues’.2
   This prominent ﬁgure, now legitimised and exceeding the prestige
conferred upon him through his nomination by the sultan, possessed
real power; he was considered indispensable, his authority uncon-
tested, even if for the most part a mere formality. This allegiance
consisted chieﬂy in symbolic acts: the Friday prayer in the Great
Mosque, the khutba, was oﬀered in the name of the ruling sultan;
coins struck in the North African mints bore his tughra (monogram);
letters to him exhibit an obviously aﬀected but indispensable defer-
ence: as late as 1827, Hussein, the dey of Algiers, was addressed as
“the Vizier assigned to protect the interests of the victorious odjak
of our master [. . .] whose servant I am.”3 There were also more
material displays of allegiance, like the obligation to participate mil-
itarily in wars in which the Ottoman Empire was engaged: Algiers,


  2
      Cherif, Pouvoir et société . . ., 1986, Vol. II, pp. 74–75.
  3
      Boyer, La Vie quotidienne à Alger . . ., 1963, pp. 85–86.
