16                          chapter one

usually farmed out, lizma, and the kaïds were often the principal
‘farmers’ (lazzâm). For all these tasks, both beys and kaïds depended
on permanent garrisons, whose diﬀerent locations give us an idea of
the way the governmental authority established its presence. In
Tunisia, in addition to Tunis, there were garrisons of Mamlukes in
Tabarka, Bizerta, Porto-Farina, Kelibia, Hammamet, Mahdia, Djerba
and Gafsa, as well as auxiliary troops, hanbas, zouaouas (zouaves) or
spahis, in Cape Bon, Sousse, Sfax, Gabes, Zarzis and Biban. Garrisons
of the regency of Algiers with detachments of janissaries were:
Zemoura, Mostaganem, Oran, Constantine, Bona, Biskra, Bugie,
Tebessa, Tlemcen, Mascara, Djidjelly, Hamza, Kechtoula, Tamenfous,
Benidjenet, and Merseddeban.
   – The tribal territories, often inhabited by semi-nomadic peoples
whose leaders recognized the authority of the bey or dey, and were
oﬃcially invested with the administrative and ﬁscal functions of kaïds,
without any intervention from the staﬀs of the beys. They also pro-
vided auxiliary troops to reinforce the army. These regions were vis-
ited once a year by the mehalla, in reality a mobile small army
appointed to levy taxes. That of Algiers, which included around
2,500 janissaries reinforced by local cavalry, set oﬀ in July and
combed the western province for four months then the province of
Constantine for another six months. Tunisia was covered by two
mehallas; one in the summer in the northwest after the harvest, and
the other in the winter in the Sahara and the south during the date-
and olive-picking season. Except when there were uprisings, rare by
the second half of the eighteenth century, the mehalla’s visit cannot
be considered a ﬁscal raid, and was in no way a pillaging expedi-
tion. It was henceforth an organised collecting and transporting of
taxes, in money and in kind, which also enabled the central power
to establish its presence and demonstrate its power throughout most
of the state.
   – The virtually-independent regions in remote areas diﬃcult of
access, the Aures and Saharan Sahel in Algeria, the region of the
Matmatas and outer edges of Tunisia on the southwestern Algerian
border, and the Fezzan and the Ghadames oasis in Tripolitania.
Opposed to all practical and ﬁscal submission, these regions, whose
perpetual ferment made communication in the interior diﬃcult, fre-
quently rebelled, threatening neighbouring regions and bringing about
reprisals from the central government.
