                           the bases of privateering                 17

M.H. Cherif has demonstrated clearly the three zones that existed
in Tunisia.4 By far the biggest region where the power was perma-
nently present was centred in Tunis and bordered by Bizerta, Beja,
Zaghouan and Hammamet. There was a coastal area from Sousse
to Mahdia, with enclaves like Sfax, Gafsa, Kairouan, Gabes, Tozeur
and Kef. Central Tunisia, from Zaghouan in the north to Gafsa and
Gabes in the south, a vast region covered by the mehalla. Finally,
extending along the Algerian borders from the Kroumirie range in
the north to the Chott region in the south, are the territories where
the authority of the bey was more or less problematical.

The Army
Established through force of arms, the regencies were also main-
tained in power by arms. Each sovereign was ﬁrst of all a military
leader, and the good condition of his army was at one and the same
time the justiﬁcation for his function and, often, the condition of his
own survival; it was also the guarantor of the existence of the state,
and of its security both within and without. Identical in the beginning,
the armies of the three regencies later evolved, and eventually,
by the eighteenth century, showed marked diﬀerences. In Tripoli,
the armed forces were composed of kuloghlus (sons of Turkish janis-
saries and local women) and of Arabs once Ahmed Karamânli became
pasha. A kuloghlu himself, Karamânli, shortly after seizing power, had
the Turkish janissaries murdered after the Ottomans attempted to
overthrow him with the support of the militia.
   Tunisia had a composite army that included a militia of janis-
saries estimated at eight thousand men at the end of the eighteenth
century. Half of these were recruited in Anatolia, and the rest were
kuloghlus, whom the beys used in combat, or sent on the mehalla,
while remaining suspicious of them. There was also a corps of
Mamlukes, consisting of around two thousand men primarily from
the Levant, but also from Europe. They were slaves who had been
bought and later freed by the bey, to whom they were totally devoted.
Some of them gained his favour, becoming familiars at the Bardo
palace, and rose to the highest positions, e.g. the famous Yussuf,



  4
      Cherif, op. cit., 1986, Vol. I, pp. 362–363.
