                      the bases of privateering                         15

whilst the beit el-mâl executed inheritances, executed conﬁscations
determined by the courts, and managed the fortunes of dignitaries
who had been relieved of their functions. The key post in Tunis,
especially during the time of Hammuda Pasha, was the sâhib at-tabaa,
the keeper of the seals; complemented by the bash kâtib, the head
clerk, who handled relations with the provincial kaids and foreign
states. In Tripoli, the kiaya was the leading civil dignitary as well as
being the principal advisor to the pasha.
   The governments of the regencies thus comprised ﬁve or six peo-
ple practicing “solidarity based on mutual suspicion”: they had areas
of responsibility that were common to all three regencies, but could
be extended considerably depending on the favour of the head of
state. Working for them was a staﬀ of khodjas, clerks responsible for
keeping records of decisions and accounts, and directed by the khod-
jas bashi, four of them in both Tripoli in Algiers. The hierarchy of
the khodjas bashi in Algiers was as follows: at the head there was the
bash defterdar, the head registrar, then came the mukataadji, who kept
the rolls and the pay records for the janissaries, no doubt assisted
by a third khodja, a fourth being responsible for the customs regis-
ters. To these governmental ﬁgures must be added the civil head of
the capital city strictly speaking i.e., the cheikh el-beled, or cheikh el-
medîna, who was assisted by naïbs (lieutenants) and amins (heads) of
the corporations.
   These oﬃcial ﬁgures all resided in the three capitals, but author-
ity over the hinterland was maintained by means of an administra-
tive structure common to all three regencies, allowing for a few minor
diﬀerences. Territories were divided de facto into three zones:
   – The makhzen, i.e., the territory that was permanently under author-
ity, governed by representatives of the head of state. The regency
of Algiers was divided into three provinces, the beyliks of Constantine
in the east, those of Titteri in the north, with their administrative
centre in Medea, and the western beylik, administered ﬁrst from
Mazouna, then Mascara, and ﬁnally from Oran from 1792, the date
of the recapture of the city by the Spaniards. Tripoli likewise dele-
gated a bey in Bengazi. The regency of Tunis included a consider-
able number of territories that were placed under the authority of
the kaïds who resided in Kef, Bizerta, Sousse, Monastir, Gabes, Sfax,
Djerba, Mateur, Djerid, Kairouan and Cape Bon. Beys and kaïds,
who bought their oﬃces, ittifâk in Tunisia, were responsible for keep-
ing order, dispensing justice and collecting taxes. The taxes were
