                            the bases of privateering                 25

succour to captured corsairs. Legend calls her the gayyâbat al-asîr, ‘she
who brings back the [corsair] captives’; votive objects, knives and
chains dating from this period are on display in Ras-Jebal.18 Another
Tunisian lady saint, al-Sayyida al-Mannûbiyya, engaged in similar
activities on behalf of captives.


                          Privateering and Diplomacy

Real diplomatic relations between the regencies and Europe did not
oﬃcially begin until the seventeenth century, and were at one and
the same time created and conditioned by the practice of priva-
teering. Throughout the sixteenth century, the situation was quite
simple: the Ottoman Empire—and therefore its North African
provinces—was in a constant state of war, on land and sea, with
the Austrian and Spanish Hapsburgs and their possessions and allies
in Italy. Since the time of François I, France, also an enemy of
Spain, had enjoyed the status of ally, a fact that was oﬃcially rec-
ognized in the Capitulations (article of a treaty), and had become
established in North Africa in the 1560s, with permission from Algiers
to establish a trading post—the Bastion of France, near Bona—and
to be represented by consuls in Algiers and Tunis. In the last years
of the sixteenth century, privateering and merchant ships, Dutch and
English, those other enemies of Spain, appeared in the Mediterranean,
being welcomed as such in the North African ports. In that same
period, the great naval battles which pitted the ﬂeets of the Ottoman
galleys against their Spanish counterparts, ceased almost totally after
the battle of Lepanto, being replaced by privateering vessels, which
attacked merchant ships as well as enemy coasts.

1600–1650: The First Agreements19
In around 1600, the various belligerents, exhausted by decades of
war, signed peace treaties, or at least lasting truces. This was the
case of Spain; with France in 1598, England in 1604, and the United



  18
       Henia, “Mémoire lignagère . . .”, 1992.
  19
       Cf. especially Wolf, The Barbary Coast . . ., 1979.
