                             the bases of privateering                      27

The new ﬂeets, especially that of Algiers, rapidly became powerful
and formidable:
       In Algiers, there are seventy ships, as many big vessels as polaccas or
       large barks, all going out on corsair campaigns, some carrying twenty-
       ﬁve cannons, others thirty-ﬁve and forty . . . On the seventh of August,
       in the year one thousand six hundred and thirty-four, I saw depart-
       ing from Algiers a ﬂeet of twenty-eight of these ships, the ﬁnest and
       best armed ships that it was possible to see. They sailed West, seek-
       ing Breton, Norman and English vessels that around that time of year
       sailed to Spain to load wine, oil and spices. About a week later, a
       squadron of ﬁve other ships taking the route for the Levant set out
       from the port. All the rest had already been at sea for some time.21
In spite of the capitulations contracted with the sultans by the French
in 1535 and renewed in 1569 and 1581, by the English in 1579
and the Dutch in 1612, which, theoretically protected their ships
from Ottoman attacks; their vessels, like those of the Spaniards and
Italians, were preyed upon by the Barbary corsairs. Information col-
lected for the ten-year period between 1613 and 1622 gives an idea
of corsair activities: during this decade, 963 prizes, most of them
admittedly of limited tonnage, were brought back to Algiers, 447 of
them Dutch and 253 French.22 Although most of the commercial
vessels were of modest size and could neither resist the corsairs nor
ﬂee, certain of them, notably English and some Dutch were of impres-
sive size and well-armed, but sailing alone with necessarily small
crews, they were vulnerable to a combined attack by several corsair
ships. Once seized, these captured ships reinforced the corsair ﬂeets.
The near impunity enjoyed by the corsairs in the ﬁrst half of the
seventeenth century was also due to another factor: the incapacity
of European military ﬂeets to intervene eﬀectively. The Spanish navy
in the Mediterranean was composed essentially of galleys, which were
almost powerless against the Barbary vessels and incapable of attack-
ing their home ports. The French, English and Dutch navies of
course had warships, but they suﬀered from three handicaps in rela-
tion to the corsairs: their limited numbers made it diﬃcult for them
to constitute a squadron capable of intervening; except in rare cases




  21
       Dan, Histoire de Barbarie et de ses corsaires, 1649, p. 315.
  22
       Wolf, op. cit., 1979, p. 190.
