22                                 chapter one

         taking possession of all souls except of those who fall as martyrs at
         sea, because it is God himself who takes care of them. God forgives
         all the sins of one who dies as a martyr on land, except his debts;
         whereas he forgives all the sins of one dying as a martyr at sea, includ-
         ing his debts.
It was therefore in an atmosphere of religious exaltation that the
corsairs carried out their campaigns:
         On leaving the port, he [the raïs] ﬁres a cannon shot to salute the
         house of the dey, and when he reaches the open sea, he ﬁres another,
         in honour of the highly-venerated muslim monk buried in the north-
         ern part of town, near the Bab el-Oued gate, one they call Sidi Abd
         al-Rahman.9
Group departures are also described:
         On the 4th of Redjeb, 1227 (1812), nine small and large ships left
         Algiers; may God give them safety for a companion, and may he make
         their route easy. So may it be, O God, protector of Muslims.10
Returns to port, especially if they were successful, were presented in
the same spirit:
         By the grace of the Most High, six warships from Algiers, bulwark of
         the Holy War, went out into the Ocean and there captured four ships.11
These mudjâhids, ﬁghters for the faith, were devoted to the cult of
saints, both male and female. When the booty was divided up, a
part of the proceeds was reserved for them.12 We know the names
of twenty-three male and two female saints who beneﬁtted from such
distributions in Algiers in the eighteenth century. The distributions
are described as follows:
         The clerk recording the capture of ships deducts from the booty taken
         from the enemy the share destined for the marabouts and the sum for
         buying back captives. These portions of the spoils are put in a chest
         deposited in the palace and placed in the keeping of the Khodja-Defterdar;


     9
      Venture de Paradis: Tunis et Alger, 1983, p. 146.
  10
      Devoulx, Tachrifat . . ., 1852, p. 28.
   11
      Registre des Prises, p. 102.
   12
      In 1799, the raïs Ben Tabak of Algiers captured a Portuguese warship, taking
79 prisoners. One of the prisoners was given to Sidi Aberrahman el-Talbi, the local
saint whose highly venerated tomb is located near the Bab el-Oued gate. The raïs
Hamidou did likewise in 1802, after capturing a Portuguese frigate and its 282–man
crew. Registre des Prises, pp. 70 and 77.
