                         the bases of privateering                               21

vided by the makhzen, the zouaouas (foot soldiers from Kabilia) and
the mounted spahis.

Privateering and Religion
In the relations between Europe and North Africa, the corsair war
was one aspect of the war the Muslims were waging against the
Christians. Originally set up to resist the Iberian Reconquista, and later
caught up in the maritime wars that pitted the Spanish-Italian ﬂeets
against the Ottoman navy in the sixteenth century, the navies of the
regencies pursued the same combat in the seventeenth and eight-
eenth centuries in forms adapted to the circumstances and to their
capabilities. The naval superiority of the Europeans in the Mediter-
ranean was widely established by the end of the sixteenth century,
and the North African captains tried to avoid confrontations with
the European warships, usually attacking their enemies weakest
points—their merchant ships or poorly protected coastal areas. The
regencies suﬀered the consequences of their activities in the almost
total demise of their maritime trade, in reprisals that took the form
of attacks against their coastal populations and naval bombardments
of their ports and especially their capitals. These were real wars,
exacerbated on both sides by the religious issue, and wars in which
slavery was practiced on both sides.7
   In the regencies, the corsairs were the heroes of Islam: they prac-
ticed the djihad, and in the eyes of the population, were the mud-
jâhid, ﬁghters for the faith, ghâzis, soldiers waging war against the
Inﬁdels. An eighteenth-century Tunisian chronicler, basing his obser-
vations on the hadiths, the sayings of the Prophet, described the virtues
of the corsairs:8
      In the year 1123 [1711], the emir [bey] armed his ships to ﬁght against
      the enemies of the Word of God [which] is the highest in its confor-
      mity to the word of the Prophet. He who ﬁghts at the sea has ten
      times the virtue of he who ﬁghts on land. The blood of the martyr
      [shahîd] that dissolves in the waves is like that of the martyr on land
      that ﬂows into the earth. God has charged the Angel of Death with


  7
    Cf. for example, Bono, “Achat d’esclaves turcs,” 1985.
  8
    Al-Wazîr Al-Sarrâj Al-Andalusî: al-H’ulal al sundusiyya, 1985, Vol. III, p. 159.
The author compiles the hadiths that ﬁgure in Suyuti: al-Gâmi al-Sagîr, II 76 and
II 41.
