                         the bases of privateering                            23

       the chest has two sections, one containing the marabouts’ share, the
       other the fund for ransoming Muslims. The ransom money was allo-
       cated as: 4 mahbubs for captains and 2 mahbubs for other captives. The
       marabouts’ share is distributed once a year, on the anniversary of the
       birth of the illustrious Prophet, under the direction of the Khodjet el-
       Kebir; this portion is divided into approximately 60 shares. The key to
       the coﬀer in question is entrusted to the Khodjet-Errekamdji.13
Indeed, the greatest fear of the Muslim corsairs was the risk of cap-
ture, and the prospect of ending up in the Christian galleys. At the
end of the seventeenth century, almost a quarter of Louis XIV’s
12,000 slaves came from the Ottoman Empire, including the Maghreb.
From the eighteenth century on, North African slaves were to be
found chieﬂy in Spain and Malta. After the capture of Malta in
1798, Napoleon apparently freed without ransom all the 2,000 Muslims
in the prisons.

The quantity and frequency of these captures by the Christians led
to the elaboration of a special jurisprudence by the Muslim theolo-
gians. This was particularly the case in North Africa, especially in
the western part, following the Iberian Reconquista and its extension
into the Maghreb. The possessions, rights and family of the captive
were protected until it could be determined exactly what had become
of him.14 The freeing of Muslim slaves took place in two diﬀerent
ways: diplomatic agreements between a Muslim state and a European
power generally provided for an exchange of captives, though this
was rarely eﬀective, with the result that buying back slaves, consid-
ered to be a religious duty, was strongly encouraged. Collections in
the mosques, legacies, and the allocation of a portion of the rev-
enues of religious foundations, the waqf-s, called habous in the Maghreb,
were the most widespread forms of this activity. Naturally, interme-
diaries—known as al-fakkâks—were indispensable. These were semi-
professionals with some knowledge of European languages who
circulated here and there in the Mediterranean. In order to bring
a successful conclusion to these diﬃcult negotiations, some of them


  13
     Devoulx, Tachrifat, 1852, pp. 47–48.
  14
     A captive’s wife could not be declared a widow nor ask for a divorce and the
return of her dowry until it had been proven that her husband, about whom no
news had been received, was deﬁnitely dead; whereas in the other cases, the legal
waiting period was 52½ months. Moudine, “Le rachat . . .,” 1996, pp. 128–129.
