26                                 chapter one

Provinces in 1609; while the Ottoman and Austrian Empires did the
same in 1606. Only Spain and the Ottoman Empire maintained
hostilities, particularly in the Maghreb. There followed a remarkable
ﬂowering of French maritime trade, but even greater was that of the
English and especially the Dutch, who could now frequent Italian
and Spanish ports. But the newfound peace meant many English
and Dutch corsairs, whether or not converted to Islam, were now
available and went over to serving the North African regencies. In
the period from 1609 to 1614, the Spanish state expelled hundreds
of thousands of Moors, most of whom took refuge in the Maghreb,
where they played an active role in society and the economy, all
the while nurturing a profound and lasting resentment against Spain.
Importantly, the seamen from the north brought with them the art
of sailing—and eventually of building—a type of ship that until that
time had been very little used by Mediterranean ﬂeets only com-
posed of rowing ships of various types. This vessel, capable of sail-
ing for long periods on the high seas, had gun ports on their ﬂanks
and had great cannon power. With thousands of renegades from all
over Mediterranean Europe, Tunis, Tripoli and especially Algiers,
in the ﬁrst half of the seventeenth century, became bases for corsair
raids, the repercussions of which were felt not only in the
Mediterranean but as far away as the British Isles.

In addition to these Ottoman ports there was also the Moroccan
port of Salé. Situated at the mouth of the Bou Regreb facing Rabat,
Salé, the only Atlantic port in Morocco not occupied by the Portuguese
or Spaniards welcomed the ﬁrst Muslims to arrive from Spain. These
were the Hornacheros, Arabic speakers from Hornacho in Estremadura,
who settled in Sla el-Bali on the right bank. After the expulsion
edicts of 1609–1610 came the Spanish-speaking Moors, or Andalusians,
who settled in Sla el-Djerid on the left bank.20 As of 1617, Salé, vir-
tually independent, with a population further swelled by the influx
of renegades, threw itself into the corsair war. Its corsair ships began
by raiding the Spanish coasts, then in 1622 appeared in the English
Channel before going oﬀ to ravage Reykjavik in Iceland (1627) and
Ireland (1631) in partnership with the Algerians.



  20
       Coindreau, Les Corsaires de Salé, 1948, pp. 35–40.
