                     the bases of privateering                      29

ing favourable grounds for an agreement with the Barbary corsairs.
The Dutch, too, used the three means at their disposal: in 1617, the
Dutch Ambassador in Istanbul organised a three-way meeting with
the Grand Vizir and the beylerbey, or governor, of Algiers. Apart from
its innovative character, this meeting had no practical oucome.
Without appealing to the Porte, the Dutch signed an initial treaty
with the Algerians in 1622—which the Algerians failed to respect.
Then they, too, tried the promising combination of force and nego-
tiation. In 1624, a Dutch squadron dropped anchor oﬀ Algiers, and
its commander, Admiral Lambert, demanded that all Dutch slaves
be freed and that a new treaty be signed and respected. He stated
that on his way to Algiers, he had beaten and captured Algerian
corsairs, and they would be hanged if his proposal were refused.
The Pasha and the Divan treated his announcement as bluﬃng, and
refused the oﬀer. Lambert kept his word, and the prisoners were
hanged from the topsails of his ships, which hoisted anchor shortly
afterwards. He continued to cruise along the North African coast,
and whenever he managed to capture any Algerian corsairs, he
returned to hang them just oﬀ Algiers. Agreement was then made
and a treaty signed in January 1626. In the same year, an almost
identical treaty was established with Tunis.

In the manner in which it was obtained and in its provisions, this
treaty would serve as a model for many agreements that would be
signed later by other European states. For one thing, from now on
the European negotiators would no longer be diplomats, but admi-
rals commanding a squadron of warships. In addition, the terms
employed and the principles contained in the texts provide an insight
into the diﬃculties and ambiguities of the relationship between Europe
and these corsair entities. The corsair ships were authorised to fre-
quent the Dutch ports, just as Dutch vessels could engage in trade
in Algiers. The Dutch slaves were to be freed for ransom or exchanged
for North African slaves held by the Dutch. The treaty provided for
the presence of a consul in Algiers, when one was not already in
place, to take care of the interests of the Dutch. Above all, the cor-
sairs of Algiers were granted right of access to the Dutch ships, which
were considered neutral, and also permitted to seize merchandise
and passengers from countries that were enemies of Algiers, in this
case the Spaniards, while refraining from molesting the Dutch, and
paying the freighting charges for the cargo they carried oﬀ. The
