30                           chapter one

implementation of the conditions of the clauses found in these treaties
signed by the French, the English or the other European states, and
the climate in which they had to be applied, would be sources of
insoluble problems.

First was the question of the slaves: only the Mediterranean European
countries held Muslim slaves who had been recruited by force by
each state and used them as rowers in their galleys. Freeing this irre-
placeable workforce was in practice impossible, a situation making
relations between the regencies and the Europeans very diﬃcult. The
Christians however could be bought back from their North African
owners, most often private individuals, the Catholics redeemed
through the mediation of the specialist religious orders, Mercedarians
and Trinitarians through private charitable organisations in the
Netherlands or by funds from the application of a 1% tax on for-
eign trade by the House of Commons in England. This was an
unavoidable source of tension and disputes, especially since the con-
suls did not have diplomatic status and could easily become hostages
themselves and end up in prison if a disagreement arose between
their countries and a regency. Because the North Africans had no
merchant marine, foreign exchange remained entirely in the hands
of merchants and European seamen interested in local products
(grain, leather, wool and oil) while oﬀering European merchandise
in return. Instead of butter, herring or cheese from the Dutch, the
local authorities insisted on ‘strategic’ materials that in principle were
forbidden to export to the Maghreb: gunpowder, cannons, shot,
masts, rigging and sailcloth. The clause granting the right of access
to ships naturally occasioned all sorts of abuses impossible to con-
trol. Finally, in that beginning of the seventeenth century, priva-
teering was a ‘raison d’être’, and for the time being the principal
source of revenue for the janissary militias in North Africa as well
as the source of glory, wealth and power of the raïs, whether Muslims
by birth or recent conversion.

The Table in the Appendix indicates all the treaties, ratiﬁcations
and revisions made between the Western states and the Barbary
regencies between 1605 and 1830. Although probably containing
some inaccuracies, the list reveals clearly the developments in the
relations between Europe and North Africa for that period spanning
two centuries. Except for an agreement signed in 1640 with Algiers
