28                           chapter one

their size and armaments were roughly the same as those of the cor-
sair ships, so they therefore did not outclass them; and ﬁnally, set-
ting out from the Channel or the North Sea with the intention of
operating in the Mediterranean was a long, expensive and uncertain
exercise.
   The near powerlessness of the European navies from a military
point of view, and the gravity of their situation, were the direct
causes of the diplomatic action initiated by the European states.
Their ﬁrst step was to approach Istanbul in order to win acceptance
by the pashas of the North African provinces of the capitulation
clauses concerning the protection of their ships and the return of
slaves. In 1604, the Bastion of France was captured and pillaged by
the Algerians. Henry IV protested to the sultan—who had the Pasha
of Algiers strangled and conﬁrmed the protection the French were
supposed to enjoy. But apart from this satisfaction, nothing actually
changed on the ground. Henri IV then adopted strong-arm tactics.
Lacking a ﬂeet, he called upon the services of a French condottiere,
Philippe de Beaulieu-Persac, who, in July 1609, with the help of the
Spaniards, destroyed the major part of the Tunisian ﬂeet at Goletta—
which of course did not prevent the Algerians from continuing to
seize ships. The only possible solution was to negotiate a direct agree-
ment with the Divan of Algiers, despite the fact that the ﬁrst such
agreement signed with Tunis in 1605 had produced hardly any con-
crete results. After a new and useless appeal to the Porte, talks began
in 1617, and seemed about to lead to some positive results in 1619.
Unfortunately, when the people of Marseilles learned that an Algerian
raïs had captured a Provencal vessel and executed most of its crew,
in reprisal they killed the Algerian delegation in an inn in the city.
Everything had to recommence, and it was not until 1628 that a
treaty was signed between France and Algiers. Over a twenty-year
period, France, the ﬁrst European power to attempt to establish ties
with the Maghreb, had used in succession the three possible means—
asking upon the Porte to intervene, using strong-arm tactics, and
making an eﬀort to negotiate—with results that were usually disap-
pointing in each case. The English adopted the identical approach,
and it was the English ambassador in Istanbul who, in 1622, nego-
tiated a ﬁrst peace treaty “with those of Algiers”.
   The Netherlands, which had become the most important country
for maritime shipping in Europe—roughly 1,200 Dutch ships a year
passed through the Straits of Gibraltar around 1620—was also seek-
