                        the bases of privateering                             33

port. This new disaster provoked a violent revolt in Algiers that
brought to power a raïs who took the new title of dey, with total
authority, at the expense of the pasha who had been appointed by
the Porte. A new treaty was signed in 1673, renewing the terms of
the earlier treaties. In March 1675, an English squadron came to
recover the vessels that had been captured by Tripolitan corsairs
who refused to return them. Admiral Narbrough blockaded the city
and destroyed part of the ﬂeet, forcing the pasha to sign a new
agreement in March 1676, and to return the captured ships. In 1686,
an English squadron arrived in Algiers to announce the death of
Charles II and renew the treaty in the name of James II; then went
on to Tunis, where an agreement was signed immediately.
   In the beginning of the 1680s, the France of Louis XIV was at
the height of its power. It was a period of brutal actions in a time
of peace: the annexation of Strasbourg in 1681, the occupations of
Casal in Piedmont in 1682 and Luxembourg in 1684, and the vio-
lent naval bombardment of Genoa in the same year. The French
were expanding their maritime trade in the Levant considerably,
encouraged by Colbert, and later, beginning in 1683, by his son
Seignelay, who continued to promote the expansion of the French
ﬂeet. It was in this context that the Algerians took note of the fact
that the majority of the Knights of Malta were French, and that
France had still not returned the North African slaves it was hold-
ing.24 Conﬁdent of their good relations with the English and the
Dutch following the recent signing of treaties with both countries,
Algiers declared war on France in 1682, and its corsairs seized a
French royal navy ship, selling its crew on the slave market. Louis
XIV now had a ‘legal’ reason for ﬁnishing oﬀ the Barbaresques of
Algiers.
   On 29 July 1682, Duquesne, who had sunk six ships from Tripoli
at Chios in 1681, arrived in the waters oﬀ Algiers at the head of
an imposing squadron that now included galliots with bombs whose
target, no longer the ships or the coastal fortiﬁcations, was the city
itself, behind the ramparts. He left on the 12th of September, after
causing signiﬁcant damage and refusing to enter into the discussions
proposed by the dey. He returned on the 26th of June 1683, and

  24
       In 1675, there were around 12,000 galley slaves in Marseilles, of whom one
quarter, 3,000 men, were ‘Turkish’ and North African Muslims. Zysberg, Les galé-
riens . . ., 1987.
