                     the bases of privateering                      37

there should be no further captures (article 12). In the case of vis-
its to Algiers by Dutch warships, article 11 stipulated that the own-
ers of Dutch slaves should be notiﬁed, so that they could anticipate
any attempts at escape. Finally, article 2 stated that although mer-
chandise brought to Algiers would be subject to the usual duties,
strategic material (gunpowder, arms, masts, spars, sailcloth and rig-
ging) would be exempt. Article 4 of the Franco-Algerian treaty pro-
vided for the reciprocal exchange of slaves, and article 11 speciﬁed
that French slaves captured before 1670 would be freed without ran-
som; article 24 allowed Algiers to establish a consul in Marseilles,
and article 28 granted French merchants three months to conclude
their aﬀairs and leave Algiers in the event of war with France; ﬁnally,
article 27 regulated the rules for saluting, according to the rank of
the visitor.
   Taken as a whole, the two treaties were very similar, and the
great majority of their articles were found in both documents. The
mercantile aspect of the treaty between Algiers and the Netherlands
is seen in particular in the easy terms oﬀered—indeed, demanded—
for strategic materials, and the compromises, if not actual weakness,
in the provisions related to Dutch slaves. The Franco-Algerian treaty
does indeed show much greater concern for the welfare of slaves,
especially French ones, and for the diplomatic aspect of relations,
even to point of stipulating the correct protocol for salutes.
   The period 1689 to 1714 was an era of great confrontations
between France and the other European powers. At sea, this meant
an increase in the presence of the warships of diﬀerent nationalities,
activity by European privateers, and the organisation of convoys for
merchant ships—in other words, most unsuitable conditions for the
Barbary corsairs! Two other circumstances also had the eﬀect of lim-
iting their activities: the wars waged by Algiers against Tunis, which
led to the occupation of Tunis in 1704—and also against the Spaniards
of Oran, with the capture of Oran in 1708—and land wars that
turned Algiers’ attention away from the sea; plus the growing inte-
gration of the regencies into maritime trade, within the Ottoman
Empire on the one hand, and with Europe on the other. For exam-
ple, the ever-increasing demand for North African grain, especially
for Provence, provided monetary resources from the sales themselves
and also customs duties, thus guaranteeing larger and surer reve-
nues than booty from privateering, a practice that had become risky
and uncertain. In fact, incidents and tensions were rare, and never
