                     the bases of privateering                        35

France would provide, free of charge, four mortars, 9,000 bombs
and a chief gunner for the Algerians to use in the siege of Oran,
all on the pretext that Oran was Spanish, and therefore the enemy
of France! At the same time, Tripoli became the object of the same
policy: bombardments by Duquesne in 1683 and then d’Estrées in
1685 culminating in the signing of a treaty in 1685, renewal of hos-
tilities by Tripoli in 1692 with the announcement of some French
reverses, in particular the naval defeat of La Hougue in 1692, which
led to further bombardments in 1693, and a new agreement that
took up the terms of the earlier ones that same year. In 1685, wish-
ing to avoid the fate of Algiers and Tripoli, Tunis, at the ﬁrst request,
signed a treaty based on the earlier ones.
    By the end of the seventeenth century, the three naval powers,
England, France and the Netherlands, had managed to establish rela-
tions with the Barbary regencies and obtain respect for their ships
and nationals in order to develop their commercial activities in the
Mediterranean. The manner in which these negotiations had been
conducted reveals much about the way the diﬀerent countries con-
ceived international relations in this period. The Netherlands pre-
ferred peaceful negotiation, and accepted to pay a regular subsidy
in both money and naval and military equipment, rather than to
risk a costly test of strength with an uncertain outcome. England
chose the strong-arm approach, operating eﬃciently and showing no
weakness in a realm in which she excelled i.e. war at sea. In four-
teen months, the English navy destroyed thirty corsair ships—enough
to persuade the heads of the regencies to sign peace agreements.
The glory and the grandeur of Louis XIV dictated the choice of
brutality above all others, though it was no more eﬀective for all
that. We should note in passing that operations carried out against
Algiers and Tripoli were more akin to siege warfare than naval bat-
tles, with the same results, mainly at the expense of the civilian pop-
ulations. The imbalance in strength between these states and the
modest corsair cities is clear, but the North Africans knew how to
make clever use of the rivalries between the states and how to proﬁt
from the international context to limit European ambitions and redress
sometimes diﬃcult situations.
    All things considered, only an article-by-article comparison of the
treaty signed by the Dutch and that obtained by France provides
a means of judging the eﬃcacy of the two diﬀerent diplomatic
