32                          chapter one

recognising the right of the English to punish the Barbary corsairs.
In eﬀect, the sultan was acknowledging the right of the regencies to
deal directly with the European powers.
   In reality, relations between the European states and the North
African regencies had reached an impasse. The treaties were not
respected by the North Africans for two main reasons: the Muslim
slaves chained in European galleys were never returned; and as we
have seen, privateering was not only an economic and religious nec-
cessity, it was also a political one, which, when it came to the exer-
cise of power, especially in Algiers, saw the heads of the militia
opposed to the raïs of the taïfa. On the other side, the Europeans
were exasperated by the capture of their ships and the diﬃculties of
getting returned captives—chieﬂy related to the sums demanded in
ransom. In the beginning of the 1670s, tensions were mounting and
new confrontations were in the making; but within half a century,
the conditions had changed dramatically. Since 1660 in particular,
the Netherlands, England and from then on, France, had thrown
themselves into a naval arms race which, from the 1670s on, saw
them equipped with much more powerful ﬂeets than those of the
decade 1620–1630. Not only did the number of ships increase, but
in addition, many of them were equipped with eighty, ninety and
even a hundred cannons, thereby totally outclassing the corsair ships.
   Nevertheless, the Netherlands, worn out after three successive wars
against England then drawn into a diﬃcult conﬂict with France
(1672–1678), was ready to make concessions. In 1679, a new treaty
was signed between the United Provinces and Algiers, picking up
the clauses of the previous treaties and detailing them in 21 articles,
with several additional provisions.
   On the other hand, the England of the Stuart King Charles II,
and especially the France of Louis XIV, refused to practice this pol-
icy, which they considered shameful, and made a deliberate choice
to use force. In 1670, an imposing English squadron sailed to Algiers
with orders from the Duke of York, First Admiral of England (the
future King James II) to use force if necessary. The English squadron
was then reinforced by a Dutch division: the combined ﬂeet ﬁrst
sank a big Algerian vessel and then, during a battle fought in
September near Cape Sparrel, destroyed seven others, including four
forty-four gun ships, with the killing of 2,200 Algerians, among them
several raïs. The following year a new English squadron attacked
Bugie and managed to destroy seven of the ships sheltering in the
