34                               chapter one

the bombardment—even more heavy and eﬀective than the previ-
ous year—was resumed. Hundreds of houses and many mosques
were destroyed, but relatively few inhabitants were killed, as many
of them had left the city. The Divan, without demanding ransom,
freed more than ﬁve hundred slaves and called for negotiations,
which Duquesne refused. A notorious raïs, Mezzo Morto, seized
power, galvanised the population, and retaliated by ﬁring French
captives from the mouths of his cannons! Although informed, the
Porte did not intervene: the great Ottoman oﬀensive against Vienna
was under way at the same moment, and the sultan did not want
France to form an alliance with his enemies. The situation was a
stalemate. In April of 1684, Tourville arrived oﬀ the coast of Algiers,
accompanied by an envoy of the sultan, guarantor of peaceful Franco-
Ottoman relations. Rapid negotiations were held, and three weeks
later a treaty was signed, essentially retaining the provisions of the
earlier treaties. This led to the arrival in Versailles of an important
personality, Hadj Djafar Aga, received in audience by Louis XIV
on the 4th of July 1684—the doge of Genoa would follow him not
long afterwards.25
   Having at long last managed to stand up to France, with their
galley slaves still in chains in Marseilles, and at peace with both the
Netherlands and England—that is, with no possibility of booty—it
was Algiers that took up hostilities with France again in 1687, with
predictable consequences. In the spring of 1688, another squadron
arrived and again violently bombarded the city. But d’Estrées was
called back to France as revolution in England drove James II from
the throne and war seemed inevitable. A French plenipotentiary
arrived unobtrusively in Algiers in April of 1689 to sign a new treaty
similar to the previous ones, but with the additional stipulation that


   25
      Naturally we ﬁnd the same European policy in Morocco. The Dutch signed
a treaty in 1656 providing for reciprocal passports, and the English did the same
in 1657. Louis XIV, after sending squadrons to Salé to carry out several fruitless
bombardments (the city was well protected by the sandbar of the river), managed
to arrange for a Moroccan ambassador to be sent to France, where he signed a
treaty in St. Germain-en-Laye in January 1682; another did the same at Whitehall,
England in April of the same year. It is true that since 1668, the city had been
under the authority of the Moroccan sultan, and that the sultan, Moulay Ismaïl,
wished to enter into an agreement with the European states, in particular France.
Coindreau, op. cit., 1948, pp. 188–196.
