40                           chapter one

imperative that an agreement be signed, but the question of Oran
had to be decided. In October 1790, as the Algerians began the
siege of Oran, a violent earthquake erupted, destroying the city and
killing more than two thousand people. An agreement was signed
in September 1791 and the Spaniards abandoned the city leaving
the Algerians to enter in February 1792.
   A fundamental principle of the corsairs was never to be at peace
with all the European states at the same time, including even those
that had signed peace treaties with them. Otherwise they risked see-
ing their activities cease; and if they abandoned privateering, or at
least the threat of it, they would lose the means of applying the pres-
sure that was indispensable for obtaining the gifts and ﬁnancial con-
tributions that were stipulated in the treaties. Thus Tunisia, unhappy
about France’s occupation of Corsica, which deprived it of the pos-
sibility of capturing Corsican ships, declared war on France. Retaliation
was not long in coming. In June 1770, a French squadron bom-
barded Bizerta, Porto-Farina and Sousse; a new treaty was signed
in September, with an added provision ceding Bizerta to the French.
A dispute around the issue of the payments to be made to Algiers
by Denmark degenerated into a war in 1772: a Danish squadron
arrived and bombarded Algiers without much success, before sign-
ing a new treaty and furnishing the required gifts. More serious was
the war opposing Tunis and Venice, which began in 1784 and led
to a blockade and the bombing of Tunisian ports before ending at
last in peace in 1792. In the years 1795–1797 the ﬂedgling repub-
lic of the United States, whose maritime trade was developing rapidly
(several dozen American ships were in the Mediterranean in the
1790s), being without a navy, was forced to sign peace treaties tied
to signiﬁcant payments in money and in kind.
   So, the very end of the eighteenth century, the Barbary regencies
had survived two centuries of pressure, blockades and bombardments
by European states much more powerful than they. Better still, they
had managed to exploit the latent threat of capture to obtain gifts
and regular payments, which were far superior to uncertain booty.
They had at last managed to win de facto—then oﬃcial—diplomatic
recognition, in total independence of the Ottoman state. From the
middle of the eighteenth century, the corsairs carried with them on
each of their campaigns a passport established by the French and
English consuls which protected them from pursuit by the warships
of those countries, granted them permission to anchor in their ports,
