                        the bases of privateering                            39

itated by the disappearance at that period of the use of galley slaves
in the European ﬂeets.29
   By the middle of the eighteenth century, the majority of the
European states were at peace with the Barbary regencies. The only
implacable states were those whose squadrons constituted the Catholic
ﬂeet that had faced the Ottoman ﬂeet at the Battle of Lepanto in
1572: Spain, the Kingdom of Naples, the Venetian Republic, and
the Order of Malta, with whom war continued when much later in
1732 Spanish troops managed to re-take Oran from the Algerians.
The political stability of the regencies described above also con-
tributed to a desire for the calming of hostilities. Furthermore, the
growing economic integration of North Africa into the great Ottoman
and international commercial continued, but with total maritime
dependence on European merchant ﬂeets, chieﬂy those of France.
These not only guaranteed shipping between North Africa and Europe,
but also provided links with the Ottoman Levant according to a
practice then called the ‘maritime caravan’. It is of note, however,
that disruptions in peace, as for example the Seven Years’ War
fought by France and England between 1756 and 1763, created a
confused situation from which the North African corsairs were able
to proﬁt; this naturally resulted in further tensions and the neces-
sary ratiﬁcation of earlier peace treaties.
   Immediately following the Seven Years’ War, the major diplo-
matic concern was the desire of the last states that were still at war
with the regencies to make peace with them. Venice, whose mar-
itime trade was undergoing a spectacular resurgence, needed peace
to maintain it. This was easily established with the three regencies
in 1764–1765. Things were understandably more diﬃcult with Spain,
but an initial treaty signed with Tripoli in 1785 was followed by
another with Tunis in 1791. Relations with Algiers, on the other
hand, were even more diﬃcult. On the 7th of July, 1775, a Spanish
armada initiated an attempt to take Algiers, landing troops near the
city and blockading the port. A month later, the expedition had
turned into disaster, and its survivors sailed oﬀ. In 1784, with the
American War of Independence over, a Spanish squadron than set
about bombarding the city, but with equally poor results. It was

   29
      France ceased to maintain its corps of galley slaves in 1748, Spain having
already abolished hers in the 1720s. Only Venice preserved a small number, based
in Corfu, for its surveillance of the Straits of Otranto.
