                          the bases of privateering                                41

and authorised them to request aid in case of need.30 When all was
said and done, it was the oﬃcial recognition of an activity that had
previously been considered contemptible, but was accepted from now
on—as long as it remained directed against other ﬂags! Finally, diplo-
matic visits were no longer one-way, in the form of admirals at the
head of threatening squadrons; the regencies now sent ambassadors
to the countries of Europe to resolve problems, but also as an act
of courtesy, as is seen in the case of Tripoli: Mohammed Khodja
went to Paris in 1719 to demonstrate Tripoli’s good will towards
France and to renew the treaty which was signed in 1720. In 1735,
another ambassador went to the Netherlands, another to Stockholm
in 1756, and one to Venice in 1764 on the occasion of the prepa-
ration of a new treaty; London received two ambassadors, one in
1765 and another in 1773. Abdel Rahman Aga went to Paris in
1774 to congratulate Louis XVI on his recent coronation and returned
in 1785 on the occasion of the birth of the dauphin.

Changes in the Corsair Fleets
The development of diplomatic and economic relations between the
Barbary regencies and the Western states necessarily reduced the
possibilities for the corsairs to carry out their activities. This was
compensated for by signiﬁcant payments and an increase in com-
mercial transactions, and the changes in the composition of the cor-
sair ﬂeets reﬂected the new situation.
   According to information gathered on the spot by the English
Admiral Narbrough, the armed ﬂeet of Algiers in 1676 included the
following: two vessels with 50 cannons, ﬁve with 40, one with 38,
two with 36, three with 34, three with 30, one with 24, and ﬁnally,
an indeterminate number of smaller ships armed with from 10 to
20 cannons. Taken all together, this represented seventeen ships
totalling 626 cannons which, according to the system of classiﬁcation
in use in the British navy of the period, would have been divided
and classed into seven third-rate, nine fourth-rate and one ﬁfth-rate
vessel. It was therefore an imposing ﬂeet comparable to that of
European navies, with the exception of those more powerful battle
squadrons.

  30
     After this date, the registers in which the consuls recorded the issue of these
passports constitute an essential source for studies of the activities of the corsairs.
