42                                     chapter one

   Sixty years later, the most powerful armed ships in Algiers, in
1737, had only 18 cannons in one and 16 in another; there were three
pinks with 10 or 8 cannons, and two xebecks with six and four can-
nons. These were sailing ships, although the small xebecks could use
oars. There were also nine galliots, a type of small galley with from
seven to seventeen benches of rowers, armed with from one to six
small cannons and several pedreros. In all, there were seventeen
ships totalling a hundred cannons. This naval force calls for several
observations: the Algerian ﬂeet was greatly diminished in number,
and even more in power, by comparison with the situation in 1676;
the ships were small, with weaker ﬁrepower, and incapable of oppos-
ing European warships; the models in use in the previous century,
of large vessel type, had disappeared, to be replaced by Mediterranean
vessels, pinks or xebecks, and there was a return to a signiﬁcant use
of boats with oars, the galliots. The composition of this ﬂeet meant
that its use was limited to ﬁne-weather periods and restricted to the
western Mediterranean, at best capable of reaching the Andalusian
or Sicilian coasts, but certainly incapable of venturing into the Atlantic.
The possibilities of captures during the Seven Years’ War led to a
more powerful ﬂeet: twenty-seven ships totalling 268 cannons were
at sea in 1761: 10 xebecks, two armed with 26 cannons and one
with 14, the others with only 4 to 8 pieces of artillery; eleven barks
with 8 to 16 cannons, a brigantine with 4 cannons, and four gal-
liots with from 9 to 18 benches of rowers and two small cannons
apiece. Not only had the number of ships greatly increased in com-
parision to 1737, but the number of sailing vessels had increased at
the expense of the galliots, an indication of campaigns farther aﬁeld
conﬁrmed by the presence of the two big 26-cannon xebecks. The
end of the century saw the multiplication of peace treaties and a
further decrease in the possibilities for privateering: in 1790, Algiers
armed only four ships, a bark with 26 cannons, a 4-cannon xebeck,
and two galliots, totalling only 36 cannons!
   Information concerning the ﬂeets of Tunis and Tripoli in the sev-
enteenth and the ﬁrst part of the eighteenth century is much more
fragmentary than for Algiers in the same period. Tripoli armed four
galliots in 1754, then seventeen in 1761—ﬁve xebecks and twelve
galliots—to make do with ﬁve ships in 1785, a xebeck with 18 can-
nons and 4 galliots.31 In 1764, Tunis armed ﬁfteen ships, totalling

  31
       Panzac, “Une activité en trompe-l’œil: la guerre de course à Tripoli . . .”, 1988.
