46                                 chapter two

   – the galliot was like the felucca, but often smaller, with a crew of
from 20 to 60 men.
All of these ships sat low in the water, required a good-sized crew,
carried few guns, and in general only went to sea from May to
October. But both feluccas and galliots were well adapted to corsair
activity, as they could easily lie in ambush along the coasts, and
attack even when there was no wind, or an adverse one; and they
were also inexpensive to build and equip.

2) Sailing vessels: the principal types that were in use in the Maghreb
were as follows:
   – the xebeck: “A small fast Mediterranean vessel, very slender. Some
are rigged with square sails carried by a pole mast [in one piece];
others have lateen sails spread on lateen yards; the foremast usually
inclined forward. The xebecks have a strong protruding stem [. . .],
and their rear section ends in a gallery that juts out well beyond
the stern [poop].”5 In the beginning, the xebecks had by both sails
and oars, but from the end of the eighteenth century, only the small-
est of them still used oars, used just to enter and leave the ports.
The smallest, carrying from 8 to 16 cannons, had from 40 to 80
men, and the largest, with from 20 to 30 cannons, could have a
crew of as many as 130 to 170 men.
   – the polacca: “A Mediterranean ship, usually with a pole mast and
square sails; some rigged like xebecks, and others with lateen yards
bearing Bermudo sails. The polacca is built in much the same way
as the pink.”6 It could also be either totally or partially rigged with
square sails. This ship closely resembled the pink, i.e. with a ﬂat
bottom and a long protruding stem. The crew, which naturally was
in proportion to its size, could number as many as 150 men; the
bark was a fairly similar type.
   – the bark: in reality the chitiha (‘saëte’ in eighteenth-century French),
a North African ship the size of the xebeck, ﬁtted with two masts:
“What characterises the chitiha is its immense foresail hoisted on a
gaﬀ, which by itself makes up the whole mainsail; the foremast is a
pole mast, and carries three square sails; there is also a small ring-
tail mast . . . and an inclined bowsprit.”7

  5
    Ibid.
  6
    Ibid.
  7
    Hennique, Les Caboteurs et pêcheurs de la côte de Tunisie, 1989, p. 7.
