                               of ships and men                                  47

   – the schooner: a ship with graceful lines, with two masts inclined
to the stem, and rigged with Bermudo sails (trapezoidal);
   – the brigantine: a two-masted ship equipped with “square” sails;
the brig that replaces it in this period is an improved version;
   – the corvette: “A low-built, slender, light warship, well rigged with
sails . . . It has three masts that carry from 20 to 30 guns.”8 It required
a crew of 150 to 240 men. Similar ships were used for purely com-
mercial purposes;
   – the frigate: “A three-masted ship that today carries 40 to 60
guns . . . the frigates resemble the ﬁrst-rate corvettes, but diﬀering
from them in size and in artillery.”9 The crew consisted of from 350
to 400 men;
   – the shallop, gun or mortar : most often equipped with a single high-
calibre cannon, of 24 pounds or more, or a mortar, with 20 to 30
men on board. It was used only for coastal and defensive purposes,
and rarely strayed from its home port. This type of vessel, which
appeared in the 1770s in Spain, was adopted by other regional
navies, in particular Russian and Ottoman Empire who had several
dozen at the time of the war that pitted the two powers against each
other in 1788–1792.10

With of course the exception of the shallops, all these ships had
decks, rode higher in the water than the sailing ships with oars, and
could navigate year round and in any weather. Polaccas, schooners,
brigantines and even xebecks could all be used for commercial pur-
poses, or be armed as corsairs by increasing their gun-power and
crews: their cannons, which were of low calibre, were put on deck,
leaving the hold free. On the other hand, the corvettes and frigates
were above all warships, their ﬁre-power being placed in the hull.11




   8
     Bonnefoux and Paris, op. cit., [1857].
   9
     Ibid.
  10
      Glete: Navies and Nations, pp. 710–711. These shallops were also in use in the
Baltic Sea during the same period.
  11
      Polaccas, schooners, brigantines and xebecks carried six- and eight-pound can-
nons, while the corvettes also had twelve-pound cannons and the frigates eighteen-
pound cannons. The Algerian shallops were armed with a big twenty-four-pound
cannon. A.H.N. Madrid, Argel 6147 of 2 April 1803.
