                                 CHAPTER TWO

                            OF SHIPS AND MEN


The resurgence of corsair activity in the Maghreb, which began in
the ﬁnal years of the eighteenth century, and would last until around
1816 to 1818, has left signiﬁcant, if uneven, archival documentation.
But for the ﬁrst time, it has been possible to draw up a quantita-
tive and numerical description of the practice, its features and results,
which has enabled us to present a more precise picture, one that is
in contrast to the more often impressionistic character that marked
studies from earlier periods.1 The diﬀerent naval powers of the regen-
cies, although fairly small, included a great variety of types of ships,
which can be divided into two ‘families’:2

1) Mixed ships, with both sails and oars:
   – the half-galley: This was a somewhat smaller galley, requiring a
good-sized crew (150 to 200 men), equipped with twenty rowing
benches, and lightly armed with 5 cannons in the prow;3
   – the felucca: “It can be considered a small version of the old gal-
leys, whose sails it has preserved, in the form of two sails with lateen
yards, carried on forward-inclined masts.”4 It had 8 to 14 rowing
benches, from 2 to 4 cannons, and boarded 40 to 80 men;


   1
      Apart from those related to Tripoli, and to some degree Algiers, these sources
have been known and published for some time without ever having been used—
to my knowledge—in the consecutive fashion to which they lend themselves.
   2
      It has seemed useful to bring together here the contemporary descriptions of
the types of ships most widely used by the sailors of the Maghreb for war and for
commercial activities. In reality, we have no illustrations of North African ships
strictly speaking, but only of European ships. The vessels used by the North Africans,
however, were either built in their dockyards with the help of European carpen-
ters, or were of direct European origin through capture or purchase. This is to say
that in that period, very few features apart from the ﬂags distinguished the ships
of the regencies from those of the European or American states. We believe this
justiﬁes our presenting them here. (See pp. 165–169).
   3
      Exclusively Tunisian, they were used very little, serving only in brief campaigns
in 1798, 1804 and 1812.
   4
      Bonnefoux and Paris, Dictionnaire, [1857].
