54                                 chapter two

and paid for by the wazir, the selected pieces were brought in small
coasters as far as Bugie, from which point seafaring ships transported
them to Algiers.30 An almost identical system, called Krista locally,
was operating in the regency of Tunis. The forests of Khrumiri,
which are an extension of the Kabylia forests, provided the lumber,
which was cut and roughly hewn on the spot, then hauled as far as
the port of Tabarka, from which point it was carried by sea to
Goletta.31
     A few days later, our captured vessels, entirely emptied, were totally
     demolished; the wood that could be used for shipbuilding was care-
     fully set aside, and the rest became wood for heating, which was in
     very short supply in the country.32
This scene of salvage, reported by the Dutch master of one of these
ships, must have been frequent in Algiers, and gives a good picture
of the constant preoccupation over the provision of timber. But a
ship is not only made of wood; it also requires metal ﬁttings, rope,
sails and cannons, which the Algerian state did its best to procure.
As we have seen, there were gifts of some complete ships, but the
hull of a ship lasts longer than the equipment necessary for outﬁtting
it, and presented a problem for the Algerian naval shipyards. Algerian
industry was far from being able to satisfy such demands on it.
    The many peace treaties signed between the dey and the European
states usually included clauses referring to monies to be paid, but
also related to military and especially naval supplies. For example,
in April 1787, the English gave Algiers four cannons with their gun
carriages, 200 kegs of powder, 400 cannonballs, 8 rammers, 9 gun-
cleaning brushes, 25 cases of shot, etc.;33 in 1811, Spain provided a


el-maoudj, a curved piece for the stem and the sternpost; the rebiba, or false keel,
which also included the framework of the ﬂanks of the submerged hull; el-khazen,
the belt or [midship] beam, the butt-jointed beam that ran along the planking of
the ship; el-kursia, that is, the ﬂanks above the waterline; es-sari, the mast. The work
was carried out not with a saw, but with an adze, a procedure in which only a
single piece could be carved from each trunk of a tree. Ibid.
   30
      Kerasta also supplied some of the timber and wood for construction and heat-
ing in Algiers.
   31
      Cherif, Pouvoir et société . . ., Vol. I., 1986, p. 171.
   32
      Metzon, Journal de captivité, 1950, p. 170.
   33
      Devoulx, Tachrifat . . ., 1852, p. 42. The other regencies, like Tunis, beneﬁtted
from similar gifts: in 1792, Denmark provided Tunis with 30 cannons, 6,000
cannonballs, 42 thick cables, 100 kegs of powder, 20 bales of sailcloth and 600
quintals of rope; in 1799, the United States presented the regency with 28 cannons,
