52                                chapter two

navy after capture, or, more often, manufactured in Tripoli but by
European workers with imported raw materials; and ﬁnally, major
repairs, as in the case of the frigate above, were also carried out
abroad. We possess few useful details on the Tunisian navy,22 but
fortunately some information is available for Algiers, which had the
most powerful navy in North Africa.
   According to the report of the Spanish consul mentioned above,
the origin of the Algerian ships in 1803 was as follows: one of the
two frigates had been built in Algiers and the other captured from
the Portuguese; the 34-cannon corvette was a gift from the United
States, as were the brigantine and the two schooners; another corvette
was presented by the Pasha of Tripoli in June 1815;23 the xebecks
came from Algerian shipyards, as did the galliots and the shallops;
the two polaccas were of Greek origin. We have only fragmentary
information for the next twelve years; we do know, however, that
one of the new frigates had been captured from the Tunisians, that
the 30-cannon corvette was a prize taken from the Greeks, and the
8-cannon brig was a captured American ship; the small schooner
with four cannons had been brought to Algiers by Turkish janis-
saries from Tunis who had revolted against the Bey.24 The other
vessels had very likely been built in Algiers, which would therefore
be an indication of the importance of the naval shipyards of this
regency, from which frigates, corvettes, brigs and shallops all emerged.25
   The reconstruction of the Algerian ﬂeet after its near destruction
in 1816 by Lord Exmouth’s squadron shows clearly how this regency
acquired its ships.26 In 1817, Algiers bought four ships: a 22-cannon
brig and a 14-cannon schooner from Leghorn, a 14-cannon brig
and a Neapolitan polacca with 16 cannons, and received as a gift



   22
      Like the other Regencies, Tunis exacted ﬁnancial contributions and shipments
of military hardware, especially naval, from European states wishing to sign peace
treaties. Thus in 1804, Spain provided the Bey with eight thousand piastres and
two xebecks armed with 26 cannons. Rousseau, Annales tunisiennes . . ., 1864, p. 242.
   23
      Devoulx, Tachrifat . . ., 1852, p. 43.
   24
      Devoulx, art. cit., 1869.
   25
      The Dey Hassan had asked the Directoire to send a naval engineer, and the
naval architect Geoﬀroy was designated. According to instructions received in Brumaire
of Year VI (October–November 1797), Geoﬀroy had allowed things to drag on,
and when Hassan died, the engineer was sent back to France by Hassan’s succes-
sor Mustafa. Belhamissi, Histoire de la marine algérienne . . . 1986, p. 79.
   26
      Devoulx, art. cit., 1869.
