                              of ships and men                              51

beginning of the nineteenth century, well before that of the ground
forces.

Construction and Maintenance
Most of our information about Tripoli comes from a report on the
pasha’s navy written by the French consul and dated 1st January
1820.21 Although the document covers a somewhat later period, it
gives an account of a situation that had lasted for several years. The
report states that the corvette, the three polaccas and two of the
xebecks, as well as the shallops, had been built in Tripoli by Spanish
carpenters who were also building a 20-cannon corvette and a 12-
cannon xebeck. The two other xebecks were captured Genoese ships
and the galliot was of Danish origin. As for the frigate:
       A ship that was no longer young when it was given as a present by
       the Emperor of Morocco to the Pasha of Tripoli in Barbary, in such
       a state of delapidation that, since it could not be suitably repaired in
       this port, the Pasha considered it appropriate to send it to Malta
       addressed to his agent on the island. This private Maltese national
       spent around a hundred and ﬁfty thousand francs on it, but at the
       same time, he opposed the return of the ship to Tripoli until he had
       been reimbursed his costs [. . .] As the aﬀair has already been thus for
       almost two years, there is reason to believe that the frigate, without
       any maintenance, is now in a worse state than before.
The report ends with a description of the conditions for the build-
ing and maintenance of Tripoli’s navy:
       One could estimate at around a hundred thousand francs the cost of
       replacing the equipment in the arsenal. As for the personnel, the Pasha
       provides no salary except to the Spanish master builder and around
       54 master carpenters and paid caulkers, some at 6 francs and others
       3 francs per day . . . The timber for construction is usually brought
       from Albania, the Morea, the Levant and Leghorn. The Kingdom of
       Tripoli provides only mulberry timber in very small quantities for
       curved sections that are carved by private individuals, and today this
       resource has even run out. All the cables and rigging come from
       Genoa, Leghorn and Malta.
The Tripolitan navy was almost totally dependent on Europe: the
ships were either of European manufacture incorporated into the


  21
       A.M.A.E., C.C.C. 34.
