                             of ships and men                        57

ence of these states: the corsairs were the heroes of the Dar el-Islam
(land of Islam), and fought its enemies in the Dar el-Harb (land of
war, land of inﬁdels). Those involved in corsair activities participated
in this double role: on the one hand, they exercised an essential
socio-economic activity, and on the other, they carried out an impor-
tantly religious mission. This explains the important place held by
these men in North African society.

The Shipowners and Fitting Out
Fitting out the corsair ships represented at one and the same time
a necessity for the state, a religious duty, and an economic invest-
ment that was practiced by two categories of people: the head of
state or his direct representatives on the one hand, and private indi-
viduals on the other. These practices varied according to the regency:
as far as it is possible to tell from references in the sources, which
are not very explicit, ﬁtting out the privateers in Tripoli was entirely
the aﬀair of the pasha. In Algiers, and especially Tunis, on the other
hand, both heads of state and private individuals ﬁtted out vessels.
   Private individuals who ﬁtted out ships in Algiers were in fact very
rare, which is hardly surprising for a state in which privateering
played a much greater political, ideological and economic role than
in the other regencies. It therefore seems normal that the deys who
followed each other, sometimes in rapid succession, should be guar-
anteed near-exclusive rights to this function. From 1798 to 1816,
239 Algerian corsair captains obtained passports from the French
consulate, which in some measure legalised their future activities.
Of these 239 ships, we note only 12 that were ﬁtted out not by the
dey but by a private individual.40 In 1798, a certain Ben Zerzou
equipped a xebeck ordered by the raïs Hassan that carried out four
campaigns, and another in 1799, which he entrusted to the raïs Ali;
also in 1798, el-Hadj Ali prepared another xebeck that went out on
two campaigns, and in 1800, it was the khaznadar (treasurer) who
equipped a corsair ship. After a complete hiatus of several years, the
terdjüman (palace interpreter) ﬁtted out a corsair that participated in
four campaigns in 1807 and 1808. From 1800 on, the rare examples



  40
       A.O.M. Aix, 1AA 42.
