                               of ships and men                                   49

  – Tripoli had at its disposal one frigate with 40 cannons, one
corvette with 20, three polaccas with 12, three xebecks with 12 can-
nons and one with 6, one galliot and ﬁfteen shallops each armed
with a large cannon.18
At the end of the eighteenth century the regency ﬂeets consisted of
only a limited number of ships, most of them of modest size and
Mediterranean type: xebecks,19 feluccas and galliots, chitiha-barks and
polaccas. This naval mediocrity reﬂected the relative decline of pri-
vateering in the second half of the eighteenth century, as previously
described. Although they had an identical purpose, there was an
appreciable diﬀerence in the composition of the three navies. Tunis
had a majority of small mixed ships, galliots supplemented by some
xebecks of limited power, with from 6 to 14 cannons, all obviously
earmarked for corsair activities. Tripoli had a ﬂotilla of the same
type, but on a more modest scale. Algiers’ ﬂeet had almost com-
pletely abandoned the galliot, concentrating on larger ships, heavily
armed xebecks and barks with from 16 to 34 cannons. In 1785, the
ﬂeet in Algiers numbered eight ‘big’ ships, totalling 204 cannons,
while Tunis had only six and Tripoli two, much more poorly armed,
with 82 and 28 cannons respectively. This diﬀerence resulted pri-
marily from the geographical conditions of privateering. Tripoli, and
especially Tunis, are close to the coasts of Sicily and southern Italy,
principal areas for the chase, where small oar-powered ships and
modest xebecks were perfectly suitable. Added to this was the fact
that the Tunisians and the Tripolitans avoided confrontation with
the European cruisers. The Algerian corsairs, at a greater distance
from these areas, had to cruise for longer distances and travel far-
ther aﬁeld, and did not hesitate to take to the high seas as far as
the Balaeric Islands or Catalonia, and even to cross the Straits of
Gibraltar.



  18
      A.M.A.A.E, C.C.C. Tripoli, 34.
  19
      The xebeck appeared for the ﬁrst time in Algiers in 1737. It was a small ship
lightly armed with four cannons, but because of its qualities (speed, stability, mix
of sails and oars, and ease of manœuvre), it had a promising future, at the very
time that its ﬁrepower was increased from the four cannons of 1737 to twelve in
1741, 18 in 1742, 26 in 1752, reaching 32 cannons, doubtless of fairly small cali-
bre, on a xebeck built in Algiers in 1763. Because of their size, the largest of these
ships no longer used oars. The ﬁrst xebecks appeared in Tripoli in 1761, and in
Tunis in 1768; in 1785 they were still fairly small in size.
