56                                  chapter two

      was a building of thirty metres, very tall, including a tower twenty
      metres in height. Its equipment consisted of a single furnace of care-
      ful construction. The mould designed to receive the cast metal was
      placed in a furrow dug under the conduit through which the molten
      metal ﬂowed. The piece was lifted from its mould by means of an
      enormous winch, and the cannons were bored in a highly complex
      system of towers activated by superimposed wheels up to the top of
      the building. In an annexe, small ovens and several forges were deployed
      in the manufacture of projectiles. Certain moulds of astonishing size
      served to make the cannonballs used in Peñon’s large ordnance.38
Another establishment, near Bab Azzoûn, manufactured the smaller
pieces. Here too were found vast vaulted premises where cannon
shallops were stored during the oﬀ-season. On the old Peñon site
there were also smithies and workshops for rope- and sail-making.
Although there are records of the presence of foreign engineers like
Master Antonio, builder of the raïs Hamidou’s frigate in 1802, it
appears that most of the supervisors were Muslim. On the other
hand, the manual labourers were primarily slaves assigned to tasks
according to their actual or supposed skills:
      Such craftsmen as blacksmiths, masons, carpenters, sail-makers, and
      those with a ﬁxed task, went to their workshops; the others were divided
      into small groups and, under the supervision of a warder, made to do
      the hardest jobs, such as unloading the ships or transporting heavy
      stones [to reinforce the harbour wall of the port], which rarely took
      place without a rain of blows from a stick . . . One of the secretaries
      led me to the workshop where sails were made, and where thirty slaves,
      all masters or pilots of small ships, were hard at work—while the cap-
      tains of the bigger vessels were in general free on parole, thanks to
      the consuls’ interventions.39


                                       The Men

Privateering played a considerable role in the life of the Barbary
regencies. It was an eﬀective part of the economic activity of the
region, involving, directly or indirectly, a considerable segment of
the population; it had a strong inﬂuence on the diplomatic orienta-
tions of the leaders, and provided a justiﬁcation for the very exist-


 38
      Boyer, Vie quotidienne . . ., 1963, p. 186.
 39
      Metzon, op. cit., 1950, p. 58.
