50                                chapter two

    The spectacular renewal of corsair activities beginning in the 1790s
led to a considerable increase in the North African ﬂeets. If the list
is limited to ships with more than ten cannons, Algiers had twelve,
Tunis eleven and Tripoli eight. This increase was accompanied in
addition by a change in the choice of these new ships, which from
now on would be European models, frigates, corvettes, brigs and
schooners. With the obvious exception of the shallops, all of these
ships had decks, rode higher in the water than the galleys, and were
able to navigate throughout the year and in all weathers. The ﬁrst
Algerian frigate, armed with 44 cannons, was built in Algiers in
1791, under spanish supervision. Tunis acquired a ﬁrst ship of this
type in 1796, and Tripoli in 1799. Another innovation was reported
for Algiers: the construction of ﬁfty shallops intended, in principle,
to protect them against landings at the port. This warlike posture
by Algiers was also shown against its North African neighbours, in
particular Tunisia, and led Algiers to reinforce its ﬂeet even further
as it encountered setbacks on land. “After the last Spanish bom-
bardment [in 1783–1784], the Algerians decided that from then on,
the state would always maintain 60 shallops with cannons and 40
bomb-vessels.”20 These shallops, assigned to protect the access to
Algiers, were used in 1807, 1808 and 1813 to carry out the block-
ade along the Tunisian coast. For the same reasons, Tripoli also had
ﬁfteen of these small vessels.
    These demonstrations of power, especially by Algiers and Tunis,
far more than a mere indication of the requirements for corsair activ-
ities, are a reﬂection of the rivalry between the two regencies. This
race for naval armament was expensive, and resulted in a sacriﬁice
of the number of ships in favour of more powerful ones. From 1815
on, the North African capital ship would be a frigate, armed with
from 40 to 50 cannons of the same type as those found in the con-
temporary European squadrons. Algiers had ﬁve of these, and Tunis
three. Although Tunis and Tripoli still possessed xebecks, Algiers
had totally abandoned ships of the Mediterranean type, notably the
galliots and the xebecks that had dominated the scene in North
Africa a half century earlier. The Europeanisation of the naval forces
in North Africa, at the same time that the Ottomans and the Egypt
of Mohammed Ali were making similar eﬀorts, took place in the


  20
       Venture de Paradis, op cit., 1983, p. 116.
