                          of ships and men                          63

century, but less so in the eighteenth century, when they represented
9.5% of the corsair captains in Tripoli between for example 1750
and 1770. We have no information about them for the ﬁrst part of
the nineteenth century, but everything would lead us to believe that
their numbers diminished rapidly from this time on. Aside from the
Maltese captain, there was a famous case—Peter Lyle, a Scottish
sailor who became one Murad, a corsair captain in Tripoli.
   In spite of the somewhat vague information concerning the ori-
gins of the raïs, we are left with the general impression that they
came from all the coastal provinces of the Ottoman Empire; with a
clear predominance of the Maghreb itself, followed by the Balkans
and the eastern Mediterranean islands. Anatolia provided very few
corsairs, and the Arab Near-East practically none. The respective
positions of the North Africans and the Levantines, in eﬀect Turks
or converted individuals, varies from port to port. The percentages
of converted corsairs above are approximate, and probably lower
than in reality, indicated by the limited use of nicknames, but they
still illustrate an important phenomenon: the opposition between
Tripoli and Tunis on the one hand and Algiers on the other. In the
ﬁrst two, where for a century the power had been in the hands of
a dynasty that was of course Turkish in origin, but from then on
was ﬁrmly established and Arabised, the recruitment of the raïs was
henceforth primarily from the Maghreb, and in particular local. In
Algiers, power was still in the hands of the dey, who was appointed
by the Turkish militia, the odjak, which was regularly renewed by
reinforcements from the Turkish East. The corporation of the raïs,
known as the taïfa, while less strict than the militia, still generally
respected this principle, which resulted in there being always a major-
ity of Turkish raïs.

The Careers
In Tunis, 615 departures on corsair campaigns, carried out by 192
captains, were recorded for the period between 1798 and 1816. Out
of this total, 85 of the captains, i.e., 44.3%, appear in the records
only once, and 26 (13.5%) twice. The majority of the raïs, 57.8%
of the total, were only active very brieﬂy, in fact, only occasionally.
One third, or 66 of them, went out on from three to nine cam-
paigns, and only ﬁfteen, 8% of the total, exceeded ten campaigns,
and of these only one reached the respectable ﬁgure of 23. True
professionals, therefore—those whose names were found in the registers
