66                                chapter two

The case of Hamidou, ﬁrst a ship’s apprentice then a sailor before
becoming the owner of a small ship with which he proved himself
before being able to obtain command of a large vessel, is exemplary.
Taking charge of a felucca or a galliot, even a small xebeck or
schooner, can come via experience only, but commanding a corvette
or a frigate of war with three or four hundred men on board requires
much more theoretical knowledge and skill, and unfortunately we
do not know how these were acquired. In examining the names of
the commanders of the bigger ships, however, when they are clearly
identiﬁable, it becomes apparent that they were rarely North African.
The frigate from Tripoli was captained by Murad (the Scot Lyle)
and the captains of the Tunisian corvettes and frigates were almost
always Levantine raïs, Kütchük Ali Arnaout (Albanian), Mustafa
Midilli (from Lesbos), Mustafa Morali (Morea) or Ibrahim Kiprisli
(Cypriot). We do not know whether these were true Turks, or, more
likely, Greek converts or descendants of converts; but they were from
the eastern Mediterranean where navigation was an ancient art and
better mastered than in North African. Appointing captains for the
corsair ships was the responsibility of the deys, beys or pashas, accord-
ing to methods that were probably similar to those practiced in
Algiers:
       This is how a new raïs is appointed. The dey informs the vekil khradg
       of the one he has chosen. According to the custom, the vekil khradg,
       with all the raïs assembled in the morning, announces the orders of
       the dey from his kiosk. The raïs who has been chosen presents his
       thanks by reciting the fatiha, that is, the ﬁrst chapter of the Al-Koran.
       All those attending including the vekil khradg do the same, with much
       gravity and reverence. When this is completed, the raïs rises and boards
       the vessel assigned to him and immediately calls for the hoisting of
       the ﬂag, ﬁring oﬀ ﬁve cannons. The other raïs also hoist their ﬂags,
       saluting their new colleague with ﬁve cannon shots.47


The Crews
The personnel of a large warship were numerous, and established
in a distinct hierarchy, as is shown in the following list for an Algerian
vessel:48


  47
       Venture de Paradis, op. cit., 1983, pp. 147–148.
  48
       Devoulx, Tachrifat, 1852, p. 29.
