62                          chapter two

others, 99 are described as Algerians, a designation that probably
applies across the whole of the Pashalik, to which we can add three
‘Moors’ and a captain from Bizerta, i.e., 103 ‘Arabs’. The 113 oth-
ers, the Levantines, constitute the majority of the Algerian raïs.
   No systematic geographical details are given in the available doc-
umentation for Tunis; on the other hand, 82 raïs out of 192 have
nicknames indicating their origins, either the Maghreb or the Levant.
It would doubtless be risky to conclude from this that the 110 others,
i.e., 57.3% of the total, were Tunisian, but it is surely true for the
great majority of them. Of these 82 raïs, 28 were North Africans:
ﬁve were described as coming from Djezairi, Algerians, three were
Gharbhis, from the west, three came from Monastir, three from
Tripoli, three were Zouaouis, one was from M’Saken, two were from
Djanet, one was from Bizerta, one from Djidjelly, one from Sousse,
one from Zuara, one from Tetuan, and one from Morocco. The
total group of North Africans represented 138 persons, i.e., 71.8%
of the total, which is close to Tripoli’s 75%. In the same way, the
indications about the ‘Levantines’ make it possible to localise the
recruitment zones of the corsair captains. With 22 names out of 54,
the islands of the eastern Mediterranean constitute the ﬁrst zone:
nine were from Crete, four from Lesbos, three from Rhodes, three
from Cyprus, two from Kos and one from Chios. The second recruit-
ment region was the Balkan coast, especially Albania, with twelve
raïs, and the Morea, with six; three others were from the area of
the Black Sea, one from Salonika, and one was described as a
‘Roumeliot’. There was also a captain from Istanbul, as well as one
from Smyrna, one from Fochia, and six listed as ‘Turks’. Similar
details found in Algiers conﬁrm this distribution: three Albanians,
one Cretan, a raïs from Rhodes, one from Smyrna, and one from
Tekirdag (Rodosto) on the Sea of Marmara.
   A number of these captains whose geographical origin is not listed
bear Turkish nicknames: thus we ﬁnd Uzun Ali (Ali the tall), Kütchük
Mohammed (Mohammed the short), Halil Burunlu (Halil [big] nose),
Kara Mustafa (Mustafa the black) etc. There are also Arab nicknames
that are doubtless references to the professions exercised by the raïs
before they enlisted in the navy. In that list one ﬁnds: Messaoud el-
Haddad (the blacksmith), Mohammed Sebag (the dyer), Mohammed
el-Hallâl (the butcher), Ali es-Saatchi (the watchmaker).
   Among the Algerians there was a Maltese, doubtless converted
from Christianity to Islam, as was very common in the seventeenth
