                            of ships and men                              61

   French diplomatic archives have preserved these sets of documents
for the three North African ports at the end of the eighteenth and
the beginning of the nineteenth century. In spite of their diversity
and their incompleteness, these documents enable us to gain a
quantiﬁable knowledge of corsair activities.42 They are complemented
by a remarkable Arab document that unfortunately relates only to
Algiers: the register of prizes recording the authors of the captures,
the composition of the booty, its value, and the manner in which it
was distributed according to the system of shares.43 The only indi-
viduals named in these documents are the raïs, or captains, and no
other members of the crew.

Origins
Records show the presence of 38 corsair captains operating out of
Tripoli between 1805 and 1816, 48 in Algiers, and 192 in Tunis
between 1798 and 1816. A degree of uncertainty associated with
these numbers arises from the identiﬁcation of the individual captains.
In most cases, the various titles and nicknames enable us to recog-
nize them without too much diﬃculty; however, sometimes we do
not know whether certain names refer to the same person or to
diﬀerent people with the same name. Except in Tunis, where this
professional group seems to be very numerous—almost two hundred
people—we ﬁnd in Tripoli, as in Algiers, that there are only a few
dozen active raïs. Quite often geographical origins are indicated,
admittedly in a general manner, but although this information con-
cerns the captain, it at times also includes his father or even grand-
father, the nicknames in some cases being accompanied by additional
details.
   In Tripoli, ten of the 38 captains, nearly a quarter, were consid-
ered Levantine, which, according to the thinking of the times, would
correspond to the islands of the eastern Mediterranean, Anatolia and
the Balkans—all Turkish-speaking regions. The others, by contrast,
would be Arabs or assimilated Arabs originating in the Maghreb.
This distinction is found in the other North African ports. Of the
239 passports delivered by the French authorities in Algiers between
1798 and 1816, 23 carry no references of this type. Of the 216

  42
     For Algiers: A.O.M., Aix-en-Provence, 1AA 42; for Tunis: M.A.E., Nantes,
A.R., Tunis 600; for Tripoli: M.A.E., Nantes, A.R., Tripoli 795.
  43
     Published in Devoulx, Le Registre des prises . . ., 1872.
