60                           chapter two

economy of the country and oriented it resolutely towards foreign
trade. Fitting out corsair ships thus represented one branch of their
activities, one likely to be abandoned if others, including maritime
activities, turned out more proﬁtable and more reliable—which is
what happened from 1806 on.
   All the Algerian corsairs set out from Algiers and all of those from
Tripoli took to the sea from the port of Tripoli, but their Tunisian
counterparts had seven diﬀerent bases. Naturally Goletta—the true
port of Tunis at the entrance to the lagoon—was the busiest by far,
with 525 departures (75.2%) of which 182 were underwritten by the
beylik, and the other 353 at the initiative of private individuals. A
quarter of the departures on corsair campaigns, however, were from
half a dozen other Tunisian ports: Bizerta, 13 departures, Djerba,
28, Monastir 29, Porto-Farina, 12, Sfax, 75 and Sousse, 16. They
reﬂect the involvement of their governors in the sphere of corsair
activities: each gave preferential treatment to the city placed under
his authority. The eight ships ﬁtted out by Hassan Nouira, kaïd of
Monastir, set out from his own port. Out of 98 corsairs chartered
by Mahmoud Gelluli, 75 were from Sfax where he was kaïd, 12 from
Sousse, where he also became governor, and 17 from Goletta. The
13 corsair ships equipped by Regeb Ben Ayed all left from Djerba
where he was kaïd, as did 13 others chartered by one of his rela-
tives, Ahmed Ben Ayed.

The Corsair Captains
Barbary privateering was conducted in a context of a generally-
observed respect for the diplomatic agreements signed between the
North African states and certain European states, as well as sub-
mission to the rules in use in the Maghreb governing the distribu-
tion of booty. Every corsair captain setting out on a campaign carried
a passport delivered by the consuls of these states, indicating, in addi-
tion to the date of issue of the document, his name and the type of
ship he commanded, details of its gunpower, crew, and the name of
its owner. This information was entered into a register and, in cer-
tain consulates, the secretary took note of the date of return and the
result of the campaign. These passports were intended to protect the
possessor from possible attacks from warships belonging to the power
that was signatory to the peace treaties: in return, the corsairs had
under no circumstances to attack the merchant ships of this power.
