                                of ships and men                   59

ships.41 Apart from eight cases in which the ships were ﬁtted out by
anonymous (and perhaps collective) ‘individuals’, the 508 others, are
designated by name and number twenty-seven: thirteen of these
appear only once or, rarely, twice, and can therefore be considered
very occasional participants. The fourteen others were much more
active; especially seven of them, because by themselves they supplied
430 of the vessels that were equipped by individuals, i.e., 83.5% of
the total. These fourteen individuals belonged to two social groups
that were closely connected. First of all, there were several impor-
tant merchants: Salah Bugdir, who ﬁtted out nine ships; Mohammed
Koptan eleven; and especially Ahmed and Yûnis Ben Yûnis, who
equipped thirty-six corsairs. But most of the ﬁtting out of vessels to
be used for privateering was done by highly-placed people with
important oﬃcial functions: Mohammed Hodja, amîn el-Tersane (direc-
tor of the arsenal) with seven ships; Ahmed Hodja, kiaya (governor)
of Bizerta, six; Mohammed Hodja, kiaya of Porto-Farina, 43, Hassan
Nouira, kaïd of Monastir, 8, Mohammed el-Ayashi, also kaïd of
Monastir, 31. Also found are members of the great families, like that
of Mahmoud Gelluli, kaïd of Sfax and then Sousse, with 98 corsairs,
and the Ben Ayed family—Mustafa, Regeb, kaïd of Djerba, and also,
Mohammed—who by themselves sent 78 ships on corsair campaigns.
These men, who founded their fortunes on trade and farming out
taxes found privateering a proﬁtable investment—at least until 1805.
Representative was Yussuf sâhib at-tabaa, the bey’s keeper of the
seals, with 127 vessels, was the biggest owner of corsair ships in the
regency.
   In addition to the principal minister and favourite of the bey, it
was the governors of the coastal provinces as well as those of the
regional ports of Tunis who ﬁtted out corsair ships in their own
names, thus demonstrating a strong contrast between an isolated
inland Tunisia and a coastal one with maritime interests. These
administrators, who bought their positions, were also traders, and
thus were in close commercial relations with the great merchants.
Indeed, both constituted the essential core of the group of emmi-
nent people who, during the long reign of Hammuda Pasha (1782–
1814), under his direction and with his support, powered the


  41
       Grandchamp, art. cit. 1957.
