                           of ships and men                            71

Soldiers and naval artillery were under the orders of an aga, who
had the rank of bulukbashi, an oﬃcer of the militia with a rank equiv-
alent to captain, assisted by odabashis, noncommissioned oﬃcers,
sergeants, and by a wakîl al-kharj, a kind of noncommissioned oﬃcer
responsible for stores. We do not know how the soldiers were allo-
cated aboard the ships, but we can speculate as follows: although
there were many men on all types of ships, the numbers seem par-
ticularly high on the mixed ships, xebecks, feluccas and galliots; tac-
tically nimble ships that sat low in the water, and for which boarding
was certainly the main way, if not the only way, to seize a mer-
chant ship. These were surely the vessels on which the largest groups
of janissaries served. The high-sided ships, corvettes and especially
frigates which were more tricky to manœuvre, overcame their prey
by the simple threat of opening ﬁre, and by their great size, so that a
ship under attack could not even contemplate resisting. Doubtless
the janissaries were less numerous on these ships, because less necessary.
    All this information is related to Algiers, where the janissaries con-
stituted the majority of the armed forces. On the other hand, although
it is likely that a segment of the on-board troops in Tunis came
from their ranks, the rest would have come from among the local
soldiers. Furthermore, we have seen that some of the owners of cor-
sair ships of the Tunis regency lived in the provinces, particularly
in Djerba, Monastir, Sousse and Sfax, where the garrisons of janis-
saries were small, even non-existent as in Sfax, the second corsair
port of the regency. Since there were almost no Turkish janissaries
left in Tripoli, its naval infantry was of entirely local origin. Like
the sailors, the janissaries and soldiers on board the ships received
the same pay they received on land. In 1788, the starting pay
for the soldiers of the militia of Algiers was 1¾ pataque-chiques every
other month; three months later the ﬁgure was doubled, and then
it increased every year until it reached the highest pay of 24 pataques
every other month. As for sailors, the attraction of serving on a corsair
ship was the prospect of captures and the hope of a share in the booty.

Life aboard Ship
During the summer of 1814, a Dutch ship ﬁshing for herring was
captured by corsairs from Algiers. The ship’s skipper, Gerrit Metzon,
who was freed in 1816, published the journal of his captivity in
1817. In it he described the daily life of the corsairs:
