70                               chapter two

other smaller ships.54 Although the pay and bonuses were limited,
there of course remained the attraction and the hope of valuable
booty.

The Janissaries (on-board Infantry)
In addition to the sailors as such, oﬃcers, noncommissioned oﬃcers
and sailors responsible for rigging the ship or for the guns, chosen
by the captain (with the exception of the khodja and the wakîl al-kharj
who were appointed by the dey), there were also janissaries on board
the ships. Serving aboard a corsair ship was an obligation for the
janissaries in the Algiers militia. In around 1800 to 1810, the mehal-
las had 2,200 to 2,500 janissaries, while the navy used around four-
teen percent of the full complement of the militia, i.e., at most 800
to 900 men.55 We do not know the ratio of janissaries aboard, but
if we compare their numbers with the maximum number of sailors,
2,500 men, we can assume that there was about one janissary for
three sailors aboard the Algerian corsair ships. This is conﬁrmed in
a document on the Algerian navy in 1820: “each complement of
ship’s personnel includes, in addition to its crew of sailors, a garri-
son of infantry formed from the Turkish militia, of not more than
a hundred men for the frigates, and not less than forty men for the
schooners and polaccas.”56
       These soldiers assigned during the year for service at sea were taken
       aboard vessels that belonged to private individuals as well as those that
       belonged to the state. It was the new recruits who were assigned to
       serve at sea. They took their riﬂes, pistols, swords, and a blanket for
       sleeping; their entire equipment. The beylik provided neither bunk nor
       hammock nor mattress; he supplied old sheets for binding up wounds
       and a medicine chest . . . [They] were not involved in ship manœu-
       vres; they were assigned to the musketry and to be the ﬁrst to make
       boardings with knives and swords. Their stations were on the quar-
       ter-deck, where soldiers could not go without permission, except to
       serve them.57



  54
     Ibid., p. 28.
  55
     This ratio is based on a study of the death registers for janissaries. Shuval,
“La ville d’Alger . . .”, 1994, p. 137.
  56
     Service historique de la Marine, S.H.M., BB7/8.
  57
     Venture de Paradis, op. cit., 1983, p. 150.
