68                               chapter two

terms of French origin, like ourdian (keeper) and mesteurdach (master-
of-the-axe, or carpenter) or of Italian origin, kamera (camera) and koma-
nia (compagnia).
   A report from the French consul general in Algiers dated 24 April
1820 provides information about the sailors and their salaries.49 At
that date, the personnel of the Algerian navy consisted of:
     [. . .] 100 Turkish captains or oﬃcers of various ranks,
     260 captains or koul-ogli oﬃcers, i.e., sons of Turks,
     360 oﬃcers each receiving the top salary of the militia, ﬁxed at 48
     pataques every two months,
     500 Moorish sub-oﬃcers of every listed rank, each receiving a salary
     of 36 pataques every other month on average,
     700 sailors, employed daily for the tasks of the navy in Algiers, who
     make up the corps of seamen. At the end of each six-day week, they
     are paid approximately three mozones plus 4 loaves at a mozones each,
     i.e., 4 mozones per day, which makes 24 pataques every two months.
     Each year on the First of April, the commanders, oﬃcers and non-
     commissioned oﬃcers of the 14 principal warships are chosen from
     among the 360 oﬃcers and 500 non-commissioned oﬃcers enrolled in
     such a way that as soon as ﬁtting out of one or several vessels is
     ordered the oﬃcers and non-commissioned oﬃcers are at their posts;
     and only then do they form the crews of sailors taken from among
     the 700 corps of seamen. If extra crew-members are needed, they
     pressgang Moors from the country into service.
This was the roll of enlisted personnel, i.e. those who were avail-
able, only some of whom were actually needed for the annual staﬃng
of the ships. The ratio of oﬃcers to sailors was excessive there; were
720 oﬃcers for 700 sailors, not counting the 500 noncommissioned
oﬃcers. In addition, even leaving aside the question of the accuracy
of the ﬁgures, it is not certain that this Western terminology corre-
sponds to the actual Algerian situation. It is very likely that besides
the hundred oﬃcers who constituted the taïfa of the raïs, an accept-
able total, the other oﬃcers were rather older sailors, receiving higher
pay than true noncommissioned oﬃcers. It is also noticeable how
the personnel of the Algerian navy reproduces the hierarchy of
regency society, the Turkish oﬃcer caste over the kuloghlus, who in


  49
     S.H.M., BB7–8. (“The Report of the Consul General chargé d’aﬀaires of the
King in Algiers concerning the naval forces of the Regency of Algiers, expenses for
the personnel, maintenance and replacement of equipment, as well as the total
annual revenues and expenses of this regency.”)
