                        the corsair campaigns                          77

One Consequence: War between Tripoli and the United States
In Chapter One, we saw how the United States yielded to the
demands of the regencies in 1795–1797, signing commercial treaties
and treaties of peace, with an agreement to pay tribute in money
and naval supplies, including warships. In 1796, the American gov-
ernment made the decision to equip itself with a wartime navy, some-
thing the country had totally lacked until this time. In October of
1800, the Pasha of Tripoli, displeased because of a delay in pay-
ments, called for a revision of the treaty, and especially for an increase
in the tribute monies. The American government replied by send-
ing three frigates and a brig to the Mediterranean, all the vessels
available at the time, arriving in Gilbraltar on the First of July, 1801.
   The conﬂict involved three types of action, usually initiated by the
Americans. There was ﬁrstly, pursuit, and if possible, the destruc-
tion or capture of the Tripolitan ships, like the polacca overpowered
by American brig in August 1801, or the surrender of the Meshûda,
Tripoli’s most powerful ship armed with 28 cannons, to the frigate
John Adams on 23 April 1803. The second form was the naval block-
ade of Tripoli, which was reinforced from spring to autumn by the
presence of larger and larger naval divisions; in 1805 it consisted of
six frigates, seven brigs and schooners and sixteen cannon shallops,
six of them Neapolitan. The blockade was reduced in the winter
period, maintained by just one or two ships. The purpose of the
blockade was meant to keep corsair ships from taking to the sea,
but it also led to serious disturbances in the maritime trade of the
port, including disruptions for ships ﬂying neutral ﬂags. A famous
incident now broke the incessant surveillance: on 31 October 1803,
while chasing two Tripolitan ships, the frigate Philadelphia ran aground
on rocks near Tripoli and the 308 members of the crew were taken
prisoner. On 2 November, the Tripolitan navy managed to reﬂoat
the ship and bring it into the port in triumph but on 16 February
1804 the lieutenant Decatur and several volunteers succeeded in set-
ting ﬁre to the ship and making their escape. The third form of
action was the bombardment of the city, with the intention of involv-
ing the civilian population and hoping they would exert pressure on
the pasha to sign a peace treaty. On three diﬀerent occasions dur-
ing August 1804, American ships bombarded the fortiﬁcations and
the city, but with mediocre results, as the Tripolitan ships, especially
the gun-vessels, retaliated eﬀectively, in spite of sustaining losses.
