                           the corsair campaigns                                79

   In an eﬀort to bring an end to a war that was dragging on, the
Americans now attempted a manœuvre of politico-military diversion.
William Eaton, the former American consul in Tunis, contacted
Ahmed Karamânli, the former Pasha of Tripoli who had been deposed
in 1795 by his brother Yussuf and had taken refuge in Egypt. Eaton
mounted an overland expedition that left from Alexandria, covering
the eight hundred kilometers that separated the city from Derna.
Supported by the ﬁrepower of the American ships, Eaton succeeded
in taking Derna on 27 April 1805 and in resisting two attempts by
Yussuf to retake it; but he was unable to go on to Tripoli. The stale-
mate situation opened the way for negotiations and a treaty was
concluded on 10 June 1805 that resulted in the liberation of the
American prisoners in return for $60,000 and the freeing of the hun-
dred captives from Tripoli who were in American hands.6


                         Day-to-Day Corsair Life

The Campaigning Season
The general impression that emerges from the graph below conﬁrms
what numerous works devoted to the Barbary corsairs and naviga-
tion of the period emphasise at every possible opportunity—mar-
itime activities were undertaken above all in the warmer months.
The three curves of the graph indeed show a limited number of
departures in the beginning of the year, then a steady increase peak-
ing in the summer months and then decreasing until December. A
closer look reveals that these curves are quite dissimilar from city to
city, like their ‘seasons’ of privateering activity. The season in Algiers
lasted for at least seven months, from March to September inclu-
sive, with very slight varieties from month to month, with 10% of
the total in March and 13.9% in August, the ﬁrst departures starting


   6
     This war between Tripoli and the United States was the subject of a televi-
sion series made by Syria in 1989 at the request of Libya. The director was Haytham
Haqi, very well known in the Arab world, and the role of the Pasha of Tripoli was
played by Hasanad Fedda, famous actor and director general of Syrian theatre.
The series was a great success in Libya as well as in Syria, as it was made and
televised shortly after the United States attacked Libya—this time by air. I am
grateful to Mr. Salam Kawakibi for providing this information.
