                       the corsair campaigns                        85

corsair from Tripoli, came to reclaim a Tripolitan ship captured by
Algerian corsairs and taken to Malta. On 10 January 1814, the raïs
Hassan from Tunis, at the head of an impressive crew, arrived to
take delivery of two frigates that had been ordered by the bey. Soon
after the disappearance of the Order of Malta, the geographical posi-
tion of the island, which had been an indispensable port-of-call for
navigators, made it an attractive stopover for the Barbary corsairs,
especially those from nearby Tunis and Tripoli, whose activities inte-
grated perfectly into the maritime practices of the Mediterranean.
   Stopovers, especially in Europe, explain the lengthy duration of
certain corsair campaigns, but these were not the only reasons.
Muslim ports also received the corsair ships, as is seen in the reg-
ister of captures related to Algiers, which in addition provides inter-
esting information on the traﬃc in booty. Out of the 122 entries
concerning the liquidation of captures made between 1798 and
1815 (entries that can cover several ships), twenty-one, i.e., 17.2%
of the total, were carried out elsewhere than in Algiers. These other
ports, like Oran and Morocco with one reference each were located
above all in the Maghreb. Tripoli is mentioned three times, and
Tunis eleven times. There were ports in the Levant like Candia, in
Crete, and even some ﬁnal European destinations like Gibraltar.
These destinations no longer ﬁgure after 1804; and in 1807, only
Morocco and Oran were still receiving ships captured by the Algerian
corsairs.
   Taking into account stopovers, references in correspondence and
in the varous administrative ﬁles of Ragusa and Austria, as well as
in the health authority registers, in particular in Malta; we can gain
a fairly clear idea of the areas preferred by the Barbary corsairs in
this period (Map No. 1). The corsairs from Tunis and Tripoli mainly
plied the Ionian Sea between Calabria and the islands of the same
name, as far as the Strait of Otranto, or the Tyrrhenian Sea between
Naples, Sicily and Sardinia. The Algerians frequented especially the
‘Mediterranean Channel’; as Braudel called it, between the coast of
Maghreb to the south the Andalusia extending to the Balearic Islands
and as far as Sardinia to the north. Naturally these were not pro-
tected hunting grounds, and the Algerians also seized Neapolitan
ships between Naples and Palermo, just as the Tunisians worked the
Catalonian coast, since we ﬁnd them in Barcelona. At times a group
took the risk of going farther aﬁeld: thus in 1810, a division of three
