                                 the corsair campaigns              81

In the middle of the eighteenth century, Tripoli’s modest ﬂeet con-
sisted of a few small xebecks and mostly galliots (70%) that could
hardly venture out into the sea outside the warmer months, when
they accounted for more than three-ﬁfths of the total sorties. There
were considerably fewer sorties in the spring, less than one-ﬁfth, even
fewer in the autumn, and almost none at all in the winter.7 The
contrast between this and the situation forty years later is striking.
Although the winter shows a marked decline in activities, the spring
and the autumn, with around a quarter of the annual sorties, now
only show a limited reduction compared to the summer, which only
accounts for a third. This is the result of a profound change in the
composition of the ﬂeet in the beginning of the nineteenth century,
which, like the ﬂeets of the other corsair cities, showed a much
greater emphasis on sailing vessels that rode higher in the water and
were more seaworthy than the ships with oars. From this period on,
the ships were used for most of the year, as is seen in the Table
below.
   The breakdown by months of the sorties for three types of ships
belonging to the regency of Tunis enables us to reﬁne these obser-
vations. The brig was used all year long, with somewhat more fre-
quent departures in April–May; the xebeck could be used over a
very long period extending from March to November; the galliot
only took to the sea in April, to be disarmed in September. The
annual activity of several Tunisian raïs provides ﬁrm evidence of
this. In 1798, Ibrahim Giritli, master of a two-cannon galliot with
15 benches of rowers and 70 men aboard, took to the sea for the
ﬁrst time on 26 April, and a second time on 17 July; in 1803,
Abdallah Ben Abdallah’s 14-row, two-cannon galliot with 60 men
aboard set out on 23 July, and again on 26 August. In 1798, Ali
Arnaout, captain of a xebeck with 22 cannons and 140 men, went
out on 23 March, 25 September, and ﬁnally 16 October; Baba Halil
Maghrebli, commander of a xebeck with 16 cannons and 120 men,
only began his outings for 1803 on 6 May, set out again on 19
August, and once more on 28 November; in 1815, Ismaïl Midilli
went out four times with his 12-cannon xebeck and 80 men, on 31
March, 2 June, 14 August, and a ﬁnal time on 8 November. The
lengthening of the annual period in which the sailing ships could be


  7
      Panzac, art. cit., 1988.
