84                               chapter three

from Tripoli, who had left the port seven days earlier, arrived in
Malta to have the damaged rudder of his bark repaired.11
   Malta was even directly involved in corsair activities. Certain cor-
sairs did not hesitate to stop over with a captured ship when they
felt the need, in particular to take on supplies, like the Tunisian raïs
Ali when he arrived on the First of September 1801 with a cap-
tured Neapolitan ship, and returned on 20 October 1804. Others
did likewise; Abdallah, a Tripolitan, on 28 September 1805, and
Omar Chelly, also from Tripoli, in October 1810. A few went so
far as to conﬁde to the director of the Maltese health authority—
surely heaving a big sigh—that they had not yet captured any ships!12
Even captured vessels with their captive crews aboard sometimes
stopped over in Malta. Between 10 and 12 December 1805, four
captured Neapolitan and Sicilian ships, without their former crews—
replaced by capture crews from Tunisian corsair ships commanded
by the raïs Ali Wahrânî, Fredj Ben Slam and Mohammed Morali—
came into port to take shelter brieﬂy in bad weather.13 More sur-
prisingly, a former Sicilian balancelle, with a seven-man capture crew
from Tripoli provided by the corsair Ali Gergachi, still had its eight
Sicilians on board when it arrived in Malta on 10 November 1815.
   There were many other reasons, sometimes surprising ones, for
the presence in Malta of the North African corsairs. On 2 July 1809,
a caique arrived with twelve Moors aboard. They explained that
they had come from the raïs Halil’s corsair xebeck that had dropped
them oﬀ near Marsala for a raid. At nightfall, however, they had
lost their way and had been unable to ﬁnd their way back to the
xebeck. However, the caigue was recognised by a Maltese shipowner,
Paolo Micallef: his xebeck had been chased by the same caique and
to avoid capture had run aground near Cape Passaro in Sicily on
the 27 June. Micallef lodged a complaint, demanding that the caïque
be seized as compensation for his loss and the case was submitted
to the English governor. On 29 December 1810, Omar Chelly, a


  11
     The “Etat des bâtiments corsaires appartenant à S.E. le Pasha de Tripoly” mentions
the departure, on 6 June 1805, of the bark of the raïs el-Hadj Osman. A.M.A.E.,
Nantes, A.R. Tripoli 795.
  12
     N.L.M. 818–4.
  13
     N.L.M. 818–4. These captured vessels boarded by capture crews have not
been included in the totals of corsair ships.
