                            the corsair campaigns                            89

this time attacking the neighbouring island of Sant’ Antioco, where
they captured 150 people.


                 Risks and Conditions of Corsair Life

Corsairs or Pirates?
We have already explained, by describing the diplomatic and admin-
istrative frameworks that the warships of the North African regen-
cies were required to respect, that they were considered privateering
and not pirate vessels. By way of contrast, alongside the presenta-
tion of these corsair activities, we thought it would be useful to pro-
vide an introduction to the actual pirates, who were encountered
quite frequently in the Mediterranean during this period. The fol-
lowing letter was sent by Vice Admiral Burgues-Missiessy, Commander
of the Navy in Toulon, to the Chamber of Commerce in Marseilles
on 19 August 1806:
       I have been informed in a letter that I have just received from Algiers
       that several barks belonging to pirates sporting the black ﬂag are cruis-
       ing in the Mediterranean, and that they are wreaking terrible havoc
       there. I am assured that they have already wrecked several ships
       and massacred their crews. A child from a Catalan boat managed to
       escape in a shallop, the pirates thinking him dead among the other
       slain sailors. Two of these barks have already been identiﬁed: one has
       a single mast and carries 3 cannons and 30 crew members, and the
       other is a brigantine with 10 cannons and 50 crew. It is believed that
       they came from the Adriatic Gulf. I hasten, Sirs, to advise you of this
       dire news so that you may give it the greatest possible public expo-
       sure, and so that our navigators may remain alert and be wary of
       encountering these villains.15
Everything is there: the black ﬂag, an uncertain nationality, the van-
dalising of the ship, and especially the killing of the crew in order
to leave no trace. The origin of the letter, Algiers, may seem sur-
prising at ﬁrst. Detailed descriptions of the pirate ships circulated in
this manner, like the list of seven vessels specifying, among other
things, that “ships 6 and 7 are commanded by Turks, their crews
are partially Turk, and the rest a collection of men from Mania and


  15
       A.C.C.M., M Q 5–1.
