                          the corsair campaigns                                93

by a British crew commanded by ﬁrst-oﬃcer James Weller and the
vessel arrived in Malta on 7 July. And there was worse: on the First
of August 1801, near the Island of Gozo, a corsair polacca from
Tripoli, armed with 14 cannons, encountered the 12-cannon American
brig of war Enterprise with 95 men aboard, at the very moment when
war was raging between the regency and the United States. The
battle ended in victory for the American vessel, which emerged almost
unscathed, while the Tripolitan ship, severely damaged, was granted
permission to return to Tripoli with 20 dead and 30 injured.
  The corsairs also experienced reprisals from the states with which
they were openly at war, notably the Kingdom of Naples.18 From
February to April 1798, a Neapolitan naval division, including in
particular the vessel Sannita, the frigate Aretusa and the corvettes Cerere
and Sirena, escorted several convoys of merchant ships between
Naples and Genoa or Leghorn. The ships then crossed the Tyrrhenian
Sea and gave chase to the Barbary corsairs. On 15 May, the two
corvettes seized a pink from Tripoli with a crew of thirty-ﬁve. On
18 May the Sannita chased and captured a Tunisian brigantine, while
the Aretusa recovered a Genoese polacca with a Tunisian capture
crew aboard.


                             Corsair Practices

The corsairs’ objective was to capture booty and prisoners and to
bring them back in the best possible condition to their home port,
avoiding storms, enemy ships—and diplomatic problems. Therefore
on both land and sea, they attacked coasts or ships whose sovereign
they considered be at war with their regency. The booty was sold,
and the slaves were usually redeemed later in a negotiated settle-
ment. This is to say that the corsairs avoided killing or injuring peo-
ple who represented a commercial value and did not destroy goods,
especially if they were transportable. They followed the practices



  18
     We know that Spain was at war with the regencies until the end of the eight-
eenth century, a situation not without risks: from 1740 to 1789, the corsairs
captured 955 Catalans, who became slaves in the Maghreb, whilst in the same
period, 916 Maghreban slaves were brought into the Catalan ports by the Spaniards.
Martin Corrales, “Esclavos norteafricanos”, 1996.
