                           the corsair campaigns                                97

climbed into the shallop, taking with them half a bag of bread, a
small amount of water, a compass, the ship’s papers and a little
money. The sea was rough, it was raining, and it was diﬃcult to
steer, so the shallop drifted until the morning of the First of September,
when the weather bettered and shore, which they recognized as the
Libyan coast, was only ten miles away. A providential encounter
with a ﬁshing bark saved them, as the ﬁshermen, on seeing the
ﬁrman of the Grand Signior, agreed to give them water and food, and,
more importantly, to tow them to Tripoli. Once safe in the port,
convinced that they had arrived in a friendly place, they fell asleep,
only to be awakened and brought before the ‘Raïs di Marina’.
    After a courteous interrogation about the shipwreck, and the pre-
sentation of the ship’s documents, the crew was stripped of the few
goods they had been able to save, in particular any coins, to which
were added the watches of those who had them, as well as the
objects and clothing that remained in the shallop. They were then
led to the fortress and the section reserved for slaves, and “subito li
misero al travaglio, facendoli portare da un luogo all’altro travi, tavole, pietre,
etc. Li miseri, infelici ancora morti dalla fame e dalla sete cascavano quasi per
terra ma con totto cioè dovessero farlo per forza.” The captain protested,
and had the consul notiﬁed, but in vain. Nevertheless, after several
days, he managed to arrange a meeting with the consul and pre-
sented a detailed deposition of all these “avvenimenti sinistri che mi
potrano arrivare a cause di quest’ingiusta detenzione, schiavitu e perdita delle
mie spedizioni.” It was the same scenario as the one endured by the
other Austrian captains, worse in this case for the shipwreck, and
by the awful disillusionment of one who believes himself to be saved
when in fact he has been reduced to slavery and condemned to hard
labour.
    The high number of captures of Austrian ships in identical con-
ditions by the corsairs of the three Regencies during the same period—
from July 1798 to October 1799—is certainly more than a simple
coincidence, and raises the question of whether this was a concerted
eﬀort by the trio. The aﬀair provoked vigorous protests on the part
of the Austrian ambassador in Istanbul, because the ships were car-
rying a ﬁrman from the sultan. The sultan sent emissaries to the
Maghreb to arrange for the release of the Austrian crews as well as
the ships and their cargo. In spite of their obvious reticence, certain
regencies obeyed, which proves that the authority of the sultan was
more than a mere formality. The crew of Captain Ivanich left Tripoli
