90                                chapter three

other Greek islands.”16 Admittedly, even compared to these pirates,
the Barbary corsairs were hardly civilised seamen with reﬁned meth-
ods, but their contemporaries, although they feared them, made a
clear distinction between the two types of marine occupation.

The Organisation of Corsair Campaigns
We have seen how the sorties were spaced out throughout most of
the year, and how great their hunting areas were, usually close to
jagged coast lines. Merchant ships went up and down these coasts,
hoping to ﬁnd a refuge if need be in this preferred territory of their
pursuers. The date of the issue of passports seems to indicate that
certain ships left at the same time, or at least on the same day,
which would suggest a concerted plan by the corsairs to act ‘in a
pack’. What is clear is that the Tunisian attacks against coastal tar-
gets, and particularly islands, employed several hundred men, some-
times even more, which indicates a deﬁnite organisation and an
ability to assemble many ships for a speciﬁc objective. To judge from
the Tripoli register, the only one that also shows the return dates,
they took place in a purely individual manner, which means that
the departure dates may simply represent a convenience for regis-
tration. The register of Algiers captures is much more explicit on
this question of corsair partnership, however. For the years 1798 to
1815, the document includes 122 reports on the division of booty
between those responsible for captures. We note that the number of
beneﬁciaries, who are listed against to a raïs and his ship, varies from
report to report in the same year. Out of these 122 captures or
group of captures, 78, i.e., 64% of the total, were made by a sin-
gle corsair who alone pocketed the proceeds from the operation. The
others result from partnerships: 18, or 14.8% of the total, involved
two corsairs and seven, 5.7%, involved three. Less frequently, there



    16
       “No. 1: a pink with square sails on the main mast, lateen sails on the for-
ward-inclined fore-mast, a mizzen mast with a lateen sail, a goose-beaked prow . . .
[. . .] No. 3: a ‘tratte’ or type of large local ﬁshing boat, captured in Smyrna, taken
to Maina and armed as a pirate ship. This tratte was rigged with two lateen sails
on removable masts that were taken down for the sails to be attached and hoisted;
it had eight pairs of oars . . . [. . .] No. 4: a galliot with three large and well-pro-
portioned lateen sails. This ship is very long, slender, and of Neapolitan construc-
tion, with a goose-beaked prow and a ﬂat stern . . .” A.C.C.M., M.Q. 5–1.
