                                the corsair campaigns                         95

their houses, were able to resist the corsairs’ attempts to break in—
about a thousand people in all. All told, aside from the booty as
such, the corsairs carried oﬀ to Tunis about 200 men, 150 children
and 550 women—almost nine hundred people—of whom ﬁfty, mem-
bers of consular families and Corsicans of French nationality, a
friendly nation, were set free by the bey, while the other unfortu-
nates had to wait many years for their freedom. This expedition, in
spite of its unusual size (the biggest of the period), was characteris-
tic of the raids on land. The corsairs came by surprise, seized every-
thing within arm’s reach, people and goods, backing oﬀ if there was
resistance, and departing as quickly as possible in order to avoid a
possible counter-attack. Most of the time, they avoided unnecessary
brutality and violence; for example, there do not seem to have been
any cases of rape during the attack on Carloforte.

The Capture of Ships
Although the rare captures of warships were the result of victory in
battle, the frequent captures of merchant ships generally took place
without violence, as the captured ships did not seek to resist, and
in any case, did not have the means to do so. The corsairs took
advantage of the surprise eﬀect and the terror they inspired, but
they preferred to use administrative and diplomatic arguments. In
this way, from 1798 to 1799, they boarded and inspected, and
declared fair capture, forty ships ﬂying the imperial ﬂag, vessels they
considered to be Venetian, which was in fact the case! The corsairs
worked on two levels: they knew very well that the vessels, Austrian
since 1798, had been Venetian before that, and they judged them
to be Venetian still in order to be able to stop them, because they
had not been paid the Venetian tribute since the disappearance of
the Republic. They now pretended to be unaware of the new polit-
ical ownership of the vessels, with the pretext that they had not yet
been oﬃcially notiﬁed of the transfer of sovereignty, when in fact
the captains had among their papers a personal ﬁrman from the sul-
tan! Captain Steﬀano Iovovich, master of the polacca Austria, gave
an account of his adventure to the Austrian consul in Tripoli:20 on



  20
       A.S.T., Governo per il littorale, Commercio per I barbareschi, B. 2.
