88                         chapter three

extremity, between Crete and the Syrian coast, was more or less
unhindered by those corsairs. Because the home ports of the ships
targetted by these activities were in the Adriatic, it is easy to under-
stand why the Ionian Sea, receiving maritime traﬃc in and out of
the Strait of Otranto, was a favourite hunting ground for the cor-
sairs. The places where the Austrian ships were captured were near
the coast, and more particularly, at points where the ships had no
choice but to pass, such as capes like San Vito, Santa Maria,
Spartivento or Colonus which they had to skirt around, or near
islands they were to obliged to pass. These observations are more
general in import, and in fact apply to the corsair wars as a whole.
   Littorals also were raided by the corsairs, who made brief land-
ings, several hours at most, to carry out surprise raids on the pop-
ulations. Their favourite places were the islands and the southern
territories of Italy. Without claiming to be exhaustive, which would
be almost impossible here, the following examples show clearly the
dangers to which these coastal populations were subjected by the
corsairs in this period. Ciro, a small town in Calabria, south of
the Gulf of Taranto, was attacked on three diﬀerent occasions in
1803 by corsairs, who carried oﬀ thirteen people on 3 June, six on
30 June, and another six on 27 July; they returned on 17 and 27
July 1804, and once again in June 1805, this time carrying oﬀ some
ﬁshermen they had captured several hundred yards from the shore.
The southern coast of the Adriatic, between Pescara and Brindisi,
was attacked eleven times between May and November, 1815, and
the list of the villages or nearby areas that were victims of the cor-
sairs is long: Silvi, Termoli, Vasto, Melito, Pizzo, Montauro, San
Foca, Lecce, Ostuni, Brindisi, Carovigno etc.
   The islands which were more isolated were of course very tempt-
ing targets. Sardinia and Sicily were often attacked, but the Barbary
corsairs seem to have viewed the smaller islands as easier prey. The
most tragic and famous case of this period, to which we will return,
was the attack against Carloforte, on San Pietro island, southwest of
Sardinia, on 2 September 1798. On 14 October 1799, a ﬂeet of
Tunisian corsairs attempted to take the island of Maddalena, north
of Sardinia. The resistance of the small garrison, which was sup-
ported by the local populace, caused the corsairs to re-embark: on
18 November, they attacked the Island of Giglio, between Elba and
Civitavecchia, but once again they failed. On 15 October 1815, how-
ever, the Tunisians renewed their 1798 exploit against Carloforte,
