92                              chapter three

campaign of the raïs Hassan, who related his misdeeds to the author-
ities of Tropea in Calabria after he was captured following the wreck
of his felucca. His account is conﬁrmed by the corsair register of
the Tunis regency, which mentions the departure on 18 September
1805 of a large four-cannon felucca with 40 men aboard, commanded
by the raïs Hassan Lazoghlu of Monastir. This was certainly the cor-
sair captain who had been ravaging the coasts of Sardinia and
Calabria, because after this sortie, he disappears from the register
of the regency. Hassan harrased merchant ships and captured a schi-
fazzo from Trapani that was transporting a cargo of oil, but, was
abandoned, according to a common practice, by its crew on the ﬁrst
sighting of the corsair ship, and a polacca from Genoa with 20 per-
sons aboard, including a woman. The two ships were taken to Tunisia
by capture crews of seven and nine men. Because his felucca was a
mixed ship equipped with oars, Hassan was also able to make coastal
attacks: he captured a swineherd and a cowherd, then two ﬁshing
barks with eleven men aboard. December was a dangerous month
for his deckless ship and its small crew, however, and a storm drove
him to the coast. He and his men were captured, his expedition
probably ended in a Naples prison.
   Misfortunes at sea, such as serious navigating incidents, in par-
ticular shipwrecks, were not uncommon. The cutter of Ibrahim
Zouaoui from Tripoli sank on 17 October 1810 as it was leaving
port, but the crew—or at least its captain—was able to escape, as
he was to be found commanding a brigantine shortly afterwards. On
19 December 1811, the raïs Omar Chelly returned to Tripoli laden
with booty, but his ship was driven into the rocks at the entrance
to the port and smashed to pieces.17
   Storms and rocks were not the only problems. Near Ancona, on
28 May 1803, ﬁve Tunisian corsairs came upon an ‘unidentiﬁable’
merchant polacca and captured it, without its crew which was able
to reach land in the ship’s shallop. A capture crew of ﬁfteen men
commanded by Mohammed Ali from Constantinople manned the
polacca and sailed it towards Tunis. On 5 July, near the island of
Linosa, halfway between Sicily and North Africa, the polacca was
then captured by the English brig Maddalena commanded by Captain
Becker. The Tunisian capture crew was put in chains and replaced


 17
      Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan, Al-Yawmiyyat . . ., 1984, p. 189.
