                       the corsair campaigns                         91

were groups of even more partners, from four to nine, and once,
eleven! Since partners changed several times in a given year, we do
not know how these reorganisations took place—whether they were
the result of chance encounters at sea, or of decisions made at the out-
set. An examination of the careers of the most active corsairs reveals
nothing very speciﬁc. It was noted however that some of them, such
as Ali Tatar, Hadj Sliman, Hamdan, Hassan and Hamidou, were just
as likely to go out privateering on their own as in a group; while oth-
ers like Kara Danguezli, Mohammed Ben Zeurman, Na"man, Tchelebi
or Hadj Yakub, always worked in association with another corsair.

The Campaigns
The Tripoli passport registers show that on 30 October 1815, the
raïs Mohammed Karabak left Tripoli in his ten-cannon xebeck with
70 men aboard. He arrived in Malta on 11 December to seek shel-
ter from bad weather, describing his campaign to the secretary of
the Maltese health authorities. He was sailing around Calabria and
encountered several merchant ships, whose oﬃcial papers he had
checked before letting them sail on: an Ottoman polacca from Corfu
transporting oil to Messina; an English bomb-vessel based in Malta
heading for Trieste; near Cape Spartivento, he had encountered two
Albanian (and therefore Ottoman) trabacolos, on their way from Sicily
to Dulcigno; and ﬁnally, an English xebeck that had set sail from
Cortone and was bound for Naples. In addition, he had captured
two Neapolitan ships, a xebeck and a bomb-vessel, the ﬁrst empty,
the second loaded with grain, which he had sent to Tripoli with six-
teen-men capture crews, which explains why he had only 38 men
on board his own ship. He had been able to capture only one of
the Neapolitan crews, as the other had managed to reach land by
means of its shallop. An entry shows his return to Tripoli on 22
December. Here, then, is an everyday Barbary corsair run, without
signiﬁcant incident, if we overlook the bad weather; but it took place
in the autumn, and in the end had been a lucky venture, resulting
in the capture of two ships and one crew.
   The majority of the hundreds of North African corsair campaigns
during this twenty-year period resemble that of the raïs Mohammed
Karabak, more or less successful concerning booty. But if routine
seems to predominate, the unexpected, more often bad than good,
was more frequent than it may seem. Another example is the
