96                         chapter three

11 September he had been at sea oﬀ Cape Ducato near Kefallinia
when two corsair ships boarded and inspected his ship, an opera-
tion to which he submitted without apprehension, as he had in his
possession a ﬁrman from the sultan, who in addition was at peace
with the emperor. At ﬁrst the good faith of the Austrian captain and
his evident conviction that everything was in order seemed to be
met with a courteous response from the Tripolitan raïs, but the cor-
sair captain was only being clever. First he separated the captain
from his ship, making it easier to capture the vessel, and then he
waited until the following day to demand the ship’s money. Once
on land, good manners disappeared and the unfortunate subjects of
the emperor, barefoot, attacked and jeered by the crowd, now realised
they were now slaves.
   It was the same fate for the crews of forty newly-Austrian ships,
like the brigantine San Giorgio, commanded by Captain Spiro Annetti,
who also made a report to his consul, this time in Algiers. He
explained that his ship had been chartered to transport 26 newly-
freed Barbary corsairs from Naples to Tunis. On his return journey,
on 29 October 1799, he was captured oﬀ the coast of Bizerta. The
scenario was exactly the same, but this raïs was more cynical, as he
did not even bother to look at the papers of the ship he had osten-
sibly boarded for inspection and admitted without beating around
the bush that he had received an order to arrest all ‘imperial’ ships.
The tried and tested method was of course put into eﬀect: the
Austrian crew was subdued and replaced with a large capture-crew.
Once again, there is no doubt about the good faith of the imperial
captain, or that of all the other commanders sailing under that ﬂag,
as is seen in the following extreme case of Captain Ivanich.
   On 25 August 1799, the brigantine Amazone, commanded by Cap-
tain Gaspare Ivanich, left Augusta, a port in eastern Sicily between
Catania and Syracuse, with a cargo of salt destined for Trieste. The
next day, a leak was discovered and the pumps were applied.
Nevertheless, the level of water in the hold continued to rise, and
it was determined that the breach through which the water was
entering was substantial. As the sea was getting rougher, the cap-
tain decided to lighten the ship by jettisoning the cargo into the sea.
In spite of this measure, the ship continued to sink, and on 27 August
at around 8 o’clock in the evening, when the vessel was about 120
miles east of Cape Passaro, the decision was made to abandon ship,
which sank shortly afterward. The captain and his nine-member crew
