94                                chapter three

accepted and used by their European contemporaries. Roaming the
seas, they attacked two types of prey, coastal villages, and more
importantly, merchant ships. We will now consider their methods
and the diﬀerent ways they behaved.

Raids on Land
The most spectacular example of a raid on land was the attack
against Carloforte on the island of San Pietro in September 1798.
The reason for this expedition, although like something out of a
novel, is considered to be true. A sailor from the island of Capraia
married to a young woman from Carloforte, thought, rightly or
wrongly, that his wife had been unfaithful to him; in a ﬁt of pique,
he became a ‘Turk’ in Tunis, and bent on vengeance, persuaded
the corsairs to attack the island of San Pietro, which he knew well.
On the night of 2 September, around a thousand Tunisians arrived
in ten ships and landed on the island, occupying the shore and block-
ing all escape routes by which the population could have ﬂed. The
sentry on duty at the fortress was beheaded before he could give
the alarm, and a party of corsairs invaded the island, throwing the
little garrison—which an oﬃcer was attempting in vain to assemble
and prepare to oﬀer resistance—into a state of panic. The soldiers
were captured and immediately taken aboard the ships. Meanwhile
other Tunisians ﬁring indiscrimately, were throwing the local popu-
lation into a panic then rampaged by torchlight all over the island
breaking down doors and seizing the terrorized inhabitants and
putting them in chains. With little regard for diplomatic immunity,
the corsairs also seized the consuls of Sweden, Denmark, France, the
Empire, the Netherlands and Spain as well as their families, after
pillaging their houses, the church and the rest of the houses on the
island. Twenty-four hours after they landed, on the night of September
3rd, the corsairs departed.19
    Speed was the necessary condition for the success of an opera-
tion of this magnitude, which explains why a number of inhabitants
managed to escape, hide in the countryside, take refuge on small
islands nearby or reach the coast of Sardinia. Some, barricaded in



  19
       Bono: I Corsari barbareschi, 1964, pp. 180–183.
