                        the corsair campaigns                             99

Metzon was led aboard one of the frigates and interrogated by its
commander, who, after inquiring as to the name and nationality of
his prisoner, attempted in vain to obtain from him information about
the ships that were present in Cadiz. He was taken back on board
his ship, from which the helmsman, his son and the cook had been
taken away.
    By then we were only ﬁve men remaining [. . .], but on the other
    hand, we had a Turkish pirate captain, a helmsman, three sailors, a
    sergeant and three soldiers. We left the frigates, which moved oﬀ
    towards the north as we moved south. [. . .] One can imagine in what
    a sad state, we found ourselves as from 25 June to 19 July we were
    forced to lie on the deck, on bare boards, wearing only a shirt, an
    old pair of trousers, and without a handkerchief or hat on our heads.
    [. . .] We no longer had any means of cooking our food, because we
    had been left with nothing. Through our passenger [who spoke Italian],
    we asked to have a mash of lard and ﬂour that had remained on
    board cooked for us every day. This was granted and we dipped a
    small piece of salted meat into a little salt water and fried it as well
    as we could in the pan. The captain also allowed us a barrel of wine
    to enable us to drink something while eating. [. . .] each time we were
    near other boats, we were locked up way below in the dormitories,
    guarded from the outside by a soldier.
    When we arrived on land, we were received by a young gentleman,
    impeccably dressed in the Turkish manner with braided hair and a
    long pigtail. He was one of the Christian servants of the bashaw. He
    signalled for us to follow him, bareheaded, to the place where his mas-
    ter was. [. . .] the bashaw received us seated on a stone bench, his
    legs crossed under his body in the Turkish manner, a pipe in his
    mouth with the end touching the ground. He was wearing a jacket
    embroidered in gold with magniﬁcent gold buttons, trousers of the
    ﬁnest cloth, and, on his head, a turban with gold edging. In a gruﬀ
    voice, he asked us if we were Dutch, to which we replied ‘yes’. Next
    he said a few words to two people who [. . .] we were led to the Naval
    base, and as we passed by we saw a great number of prisoners now
    in slavery labouring at various tasks; it gave us an inkling of our fate.
    Once through the gate to the base, they made us cross a large sec-
    tion of the city, whose streets were ﬁlled with numerous spectators,
    many of whom mocked and insulted us.
When the initial bustling and systematic pillaging, especially of cloth-
ing, were over, the diﬀerent stages following the capture of a ship
unfolded in the practical manner already described. One part of
the Dutch crew was kept on board the corsair while the prize ship
had a capture-crew boarded that included sailors and janissaries
