98                              chapter three

after a forced stay of ﬁve months and 23 days. Since some of the
ships as well as their cargo had already been sold, the Ottoman gov-
ernment agreed to pay damages of 200,000 piastres, leaving it to
the Austrian authorities to arrange for its distribution.
   If what one might call an abuse of conﬁdence was behind the
capture of the Austrian ships and the orderly methods of the cor-
sairs, this was not the case for most of the other ships they seized.
The Dutch Captain Gerrit Metzon’s description of his capture in
his Journal of Captivity in Algiers,21 already quoted above, is certainly
representative of the experience of most of the victims of the Barbary
corsairs during this period. On 19 June 1814, a herring boat from
Vlaardingen, Les Deux Frères, commanded by Gerrit Metzon, left
Cadiz loaded with salt and cork destined for the Netherlands. On
25 June, near Cape Saint Vincent, at the southwest tip of Portugal,
the vessel was boarded and its documents examined by corsairs from
three Algerian ships, two frigates and a brig, which had already cap-
tured two Danish vessels and a Swedish one.22 The Dutch crew,
immobilised in a calm, saw a shallop approaching:
       [. . .] we saw with terror and astonishment the turbans of the oﬃcers
       who were sitting in the back, and the rowers, almost naked, with dag-
       gers beside them; this was the announcement of the visit and the fate
       that awaited us. As they drew alongside, they jumped aboard, daggers
       in hand [. . .] and forced our men [who were taking a nap], naked as
       they were, onto the deck, while they stole everything they could ﬁnd.
       They kicked open the chests and took out whatever pleased them, so
       that, having arrived almost naked, they were completely dressed in less
       than a quarter of an hour. They threw whatever remained into their
       boat, and did not allow a single one of our men to take anything, or
       to put on any clothing; they threatened with death anyone who would
       dare to resist them. [. . .] They ragged me into my cabin and told me
       that I had to give them everything. Since I did not act quickly enough,
       as much from sadness as from pique, they pushed me out of the cabin
       and, once outside, one of the Moors stole my watch. Next they took
       everything it was possible to take, stuﬀed it in bags and threw the rest,
       just as it was, into their boat.




  21
     Metzon, op. cit., 1950.
  22
     “In the year one thousand two hundred and twenty-nine (1814), two frigates
captured (from the Swedes) a ship loaded with fabrics and two Dutch vessels with
cargoes of salt and cloth,” Registre des prises, p. 99.
