104                        chapter four

the total of captures was ten, when there were respectively nine and
twenty corsair ships on campaign.
Privateering booty consisted of three principal elements:
• the ships themselves, which by law were the property of the dey
  of Algiers, or his counterparts in Tunis and Tripoli;
• their cargoes after sale value divided equally among the owners
  of the ships and the corsairs;
• the slaves, acquired in raids on land as well as in maritime cap-
  tures. A variable number were allocated to the heads of state of
  the Maghreb regencies, and the rest sold for the beneﬁt of the
  shipowners and the corsairs.

The Ships
According to the prize register, the Algerians captured 211 ships
between 1798 and 1815. The activity of the Tripolitans was almost
totally stopped by the blockade imposed by the Americans from 1801
to 1805, whereas 81 captures were then recorded between 1806 and
1816, i.e., around a hundred for the period that concerns us, from
1798 to 1816. There remain the Tunisians, whose considerable activ-
ity we know from the frequency of their departures on campaign.
Though we do not know the actual results we can nevertheless esti-
mate that the number of ships taken by the Tunisians must have
been roughly equivalent to the Algerian captures, i.e., around two
hundred ships. In total, then, over a period of 18 years, we can
assess at around 500 vessels the number of captures made by all of
the North African corsairs. Although it is almost impossible to deter-
mine the eﬀect this had on the ensemble of the Western merchant
ﬂeets (ships operating on the high seas and coasters inclusive), it
remains a very impressive ﬁgure.
   The destiny of the captured ships diﬀered from one regency to
another. In Algiers they belonged by right to the dey, who disposed
of them as he saw ﬁt: sometimes he incorporated them into the ﬂeet,
which was the case, for example, of the Portuguese frigate captured
by the raïs Hamidou; or he might also have them dismantled in
order to recover the best materials, as reported by the Dutchman
Gerrit Metzon. More often, he sold them. In Tunis, the bey had
rights to only a third of the ship, with the rest going to the owner,
but as was often the case, especially in the nineteenth century; this
worked out to be about the same thing, as the head of state was
