112                             chapter four

and especially Sicily—remained free under British protection, and
were considered by the corsairs to be hostile territories, and therefore,
their ships were pursued.
   There remains the case of the Tunisians and the Greeks. This
time, the ships involved belonged to subjects of the Sultan, and orig-
inated in the nearby ports of Tunisia, the Cyclades Islands or
Anatolia—Ottoman provinces just like Algiers! This was a deliber-
ate decision of the Dey of Algiers, Hadj Ali (1809–1815), who through-
out his reign, ordered the corsairs to attack not only Ottoman ships,
but also Atlantic and North European, American, Danish, Swedish,
Dutch, even English and Moroccan vessels. We know that these were
usually captures of considerable value, irresistible to the greed of the
corsairs—in a period when circumstances had become unfavourable
to them—in spite of peace treaties and protests from the Sultan,
revealed in the ﬁrman of Mahmoud II addressed to the Dey of
Algiers, Omar Pasha, dated the ﬁrst days of the month of Ramadan
1230 (7–15 August 1815):
      The corsairs of the Regency of Algiers capture merchant ships belong-
      ing either to the subjects of the Sublime-Porte or to the nations that
      are at peace with it; they reduce their captains and their sailors to
      slavery and seize their cargoes. The Sublime-Porte, however, is respon-
      sible for these ships; they possess the appropriate safe-conduct passes,
      and the Sublime-Porte is at peace with them. The governments of
      Europe are constantly lodging complaints against you and exposing
      the fact that you are capturing their ships. This warning is for the
      purpose of causing you to cease these aggressions and to abandon this
      blameworthy course. Remember how I defended you in allowing you
      to recruit soldiers in Smyrna, and listening to the views of your agents
      throughout the Empire. I sent you ﬁrmans on the subject; further-
      more, I recently sent you a kopdgi bashi (an ambassador) named Mahomed
      to represent me in these matters. But during his trip, the Dey of
      Algiers, El Hadj Ali, died [He was assassinated on 22 March 1815].
      This kopdgi bashi went to Algiers in order to deliver written orders and
      oversee their execution. You above all, you Prince of Princes, and all
      of you, captains and heads of the regency, submit yourselves to God
      and his Prophet, and obey the orders of the Prince of believers, the
      Representative of God on the earth. May my ﬁrman be carried out,
      and may my orders no longer be disobeyed. This is my will.4


  4
      Devoulx, Le Raïs Hamidou, 1859, pp. 77–79.
