116                             chapter four

Neapolitans and Sicilians in Tripoli; because their sovereign had
refused to take any diplomatic initiatives, or to make the slightest
ﬁnancial eﬀort to free his nationals. The majority of these slaves
were land-dwellers carried oﬀ as entire families: out of a group of
155 Sicilians freed in 1804, the adults, between 20 and 50 years of
age, represented only 60% of the group—as against 90 to 95% when
the captives were sailors—whilst the remaining 40% was made up
of the youngest and the oldest, including many women.8 It would
take the expedition of Lord Exmouth in 1816 to bring about the
repatriation of some 1,500 Neapolitan and Sicilian captives from the
Maghreb, out of a total of around 3,000 people.
   Many of the captives, especially those belonging to the bey or the
dey, housed in penal colonies, were often compelled to do extremely
hard work, sometimes in the countryside, but most often in the arse-
nal, the workshops or on the building sites of the state,9 whereas
individual slave-owners reserved a less painful fate for their slaves.
In the Maghreb, however, the aim of slavery was not to acquire
cheap labour, even if this was the case in the short term, but to
receive ransom in exchange for the release of the captives. Whether
seized on land or at sea, the captives’ destiny, once on land, fol-
lowed the rules outlined by Venture de Paradis en 1788.10
      The bey [in Tunis] takes one man out of eight from the crew as cus-
      toms duty. The captain always belongs to him, even when there are
      only four men in the vessel. He also appropriates all the slaves, pay-
      ing three hundred piastres a head for them.
         The dey [in Algiers] . . . takes the captain, the pilot, the purser and
      the carpenter. The slaves are then sold at auction, and all proceeds
      above sixty Algerian sequins go to the khrasne [State Treasury]. Turk,
      Moor and Jew are all permitted to make bids. If there are fewer than
      8 slaves, the beylik always takes the captain for customs duty; if there
      are 11, he takes two people, the captain and the purser, and one out
      of ten above 20.



  8
      Bono, Siciliani nel Maghreb, 1989, p. 31.
  9
      Tachrifat, p. 79. “The Hadj Ali Pasha ordered his minister Omar Agha to build
a bridge on the Oued Chelif. This work was entrusted to workmen and unskilled
labourers, took more than three hundred Muslims and one hundred and sixty-seven
inﬁdel slaves of the Greek nation. Work on this bridge lasted two months, day and
night, and was completed on 30 redjeb 1229 [18 July 1814].”
   10
      Venture de Paradis, op. cit., 1983, p. 61.
