                  privateering and the economy                     111

carried out by the corsairs, it is important to note that they attacked
only the ships of countries with whom they considered themselves
to be at war. We know that the pretext usually cited was a lack of
respect for clauses, real or assumed, of a treaty made earlier with a
particular state, as in the cases of Spain, Naples and the United
States. The situation with Genoa was somewhat diﬀerent, because
the statute of the republic had changed at the time of Napoleon’s
Italian campaign, providing the regency with an opportunity to be
released from previous agreements. This was particularly true for the
ships of the former Republic of Venice, since 15 out of the 22
identiﬁed as Venetian had become Austrian, and the Algerians were
failing to acknowledge this fact, in order to be able to sieze them.
We may suppose, in the absence of further information, that the
ships designated as ‘Greek’ in the register of captures in this same
period probably came from the Ionian islands. This archipelago
was Venetian until 1797, before passing under French control. In
considering the ships to be ‘Greek’ and not French, just as they
treated as ‘Venetian’ the ships that had become Austrian, the Algerians
could declare them ‘fair game’. In this way, 29 of 55 ships identiﬁed
and captured in two years, i.e., half of them, were former Venetian
vessels.
   We have already noted that the regencies preferred never to be
at peace with all their potential enemies at the same time, in order
to keep the corsairs in ﬁghting trim and maintain a certain pressure
on the other countries. Whilst arrangements were soon made with
the Austrians, the French, the Spaniards and the Americans, the
Kingdom of Naples, until 1805, remained practically the only enemy
of Algiers. From 1806 on, the throne of Naples was occupied ﬁrst
by Joseph, the Emperor Napoleon’s brother, then in 1808 by Murat,
his brother-in-law. The agreements that controlled the relations
between France and Algiers, in particular those guaranteeing the
French ships protection from the corsairs, now also applied to the
Neapolitan ships, and these disappeared from the prize register until
1815. They were replaced in the following years by Portuguese,
Sicilian, Tunisian, Greek and one Sardinian ship. The pursuit of
Portuguese ships came to an end after the signing of a treaty in
1810 which, in addition to providing for the redemption of the
Portuguese captives, stipulated the payment of substantial compen-
sation. Although Piedmont and Naples were considered French from
this period on, their insular provinces, on the other hand—Sardinia
