110                         chapter four

yielded proceeds of 73,556 francs for each ship; the tartan Fedele,
230 tonnes and carrying ten men, commanded by Captain Antonio
Cerignac from Kotor, was transporting a cargo of raisins, cotton and
oak apples, valued in Algiers at 78,984 francs.
   The breakdown for the Spanish and Portuguese ships is almost
identical: there is a high proportion of smaller ships with less valu-
able cargos estimated at between 10,000 and 37,000 francs, con-
sisting of alfa, wheat, charcoal, sardines and tuna, all indicators of
coastal shipping, most likely in the Mediterranean, at least for Spain.
Several much more valuable cargoes were made up of sugar, cot-
ton and cocoa—exotic goods brought back from America by much
larger ships that were captured in the Atlantic as they approached
Cadiz or Lisbon.
   Captures of ships ﬂying other ﬂags, especially those from the coun-
tries on the North Sea and the Baltic, or America, were few, but
because these vessels were engaged in navigation over the long haul,
they were usually transporting valuable cargo. This was particularly
the case of the six Scandinavian ships, four Swedish and two Danish,
which had in their holds cargoes worth a hundred to two hundred
thousand francs consisting of coﬀee, sugar, cochineal (all American
products) but also fabrics and timber from their own countries. The
two Dutch ships, which were loaded with salt and fabrics, belong in
the same categories. Of the three American ships, two also carried
valuable cargos, 80,956 and 161,948 francs, consisting of ﬂour, anise,
opium, senna and tobacco.
   This cursory examination of the Algerian captures has given us a
picture of the maritime activity of the Mediterranean and its neigh-
bouring oceanic waters, a whole range of vessels from large ocean-
going vessels to small coasters, herring-boats and ships carrying exotic
goods from Northern Europe and the Americas. All of these ships,
which ﬂew many diﬀerent ﬂags (fourteen here) unfortunately ended
up in the hands of the corsairs of Algiers. After our examination of
the booty, we might be tempted to characterise the prizes as shares
in some vast lottery—with chance alone dictating the way the money
would be distributed—to some lucky and some unlucky corsairs. In
reality, things were much more organised and premeditated than
they might seem, as is apparent in a chronological presentation of
the captures.
   The years 1798 and 1799 saw a spectacular increase in corsair
activities, in this case Algerian. In spite of the number of captures
