                  privateering and the economy                    109

almonds, as well as industrial raw materials, cowhide, sulphur and
sponges. The average and valuable cargos, quite rare, were similar
to the previous ones, which indicates that the diﬀerence in value is
based above all on the size, and thus on the capacity, of the ship.
In fact, the great majority of the Neapolitan ships were small boats,
coasters that transported local products into the ports of the penin-
sula, inaccessible by land at that time, and to the islands.
   The Greek ships present quite a diﬀerent picture. The captures
can basically be divided into two groups, those of mediocre value,
at from 10,000 to 37,000 francs, which included almost half of the
ships, and the ships with valuable cargo, which constituted almost a
third. The cargo of the ﬁrst group consisted primarily of wheat, wine,
paper and soap. The second group included all of these, with the
addition of raisins and rice. Also of note is the lone ship that was
sailing on ballast, but carrying 202,000 francs in currency. There,
too, the diﬀerence in the value of the cargoes is less the result of
their composition, even though raisins were luxury goods, than of
the size of the vessels. The smallest ships provided local service, in
the Adriatic and the Ionian, and the second group voyaged the
whole of the Mediterranean, from Anatolia or Egypt to Western
Europe.
   Thanks to the documents concerning indemnities and the prize
registers, we can gain some idea of the Austro-Venetian ships cap-
tured by the Algerians. Of the two ships in the 10,000–37,000 franc
category, one was probably the 100 tonne polacca Due Benefattori with
eight men aboard, and commanded by Captain Luca Bersacina from
Venice. In the report of his losses, the captain speciﬁed that he had
been transporting soda, found in the prize register as ‘soap-earth’,
with an estimated value of 14,927 francs. The second ship in this
category is the brigantine Ulisse under the command of Captain
Agostino Orlandini d’Udine (Friuli), with a cargo of raisins and ﬁgs
entered in the register of captures at a value of 32,185 francs. The
higher level, with the 44,000–84,000 franc captures, includes twelve
of the ﬁfteen ships, that is 80%, of that nationality. Since three of
these were identiﬁed, we can form a good idea of these Algerian
captures: the 215-tonne brigantine Achille, with 14 men captained by
Antonio Premuda from Lusin (Dalmatia), and the 230-tonne brig-
antine Quatro Fratelli with 13 men under Captain Marc Antonio
Budenich, also from Lusin, were both transporting around 3,500
quintals of a variety of acorn used in dyeing and tanning, which
