120                         chapter four

freed in exchange for a payment of 95,000 Spanish piastres for the
630 captives who were still present in Tunis, i.e. 810 francs a per-
son. On 20 June 1803, the last of the Carlofortans ﬁnally reached
home and were reunited with those who had been freed earlier, a
total of 775 people. During the ﬁve year period; 11 were sold to
the Algerians on arrival, 23 had been freed earlier, 6 converted to
Islam, 117 died in Tunisia, and 95 births were recorded.

The captives who were victims of the Maghrebi corsairs in this period
can be divided into three groups:
   • the rich; freed relatively quickly, for a high, even very high, ran-
som individually-negotiated by private persons, family members, or
institutions: these captives were a real source of wealth for their own-
ers, who were usually the heads of the regencies.
   • the poor; sailors, ﬁshermen, peasants, who most often gained
their freedom after long years spent in penal colonies, and who
beneﬁtted from a collective release obtained by their governments
by means of the payment of a lumpsum. The price paid per per-
son was usually rather low, from 600 to 1,700 francs a person, against
a purchase price of between 500 and 1,000 francs.
   • slaves freed without the payment of a ransom after an exchange
with North African captives, or to honour earlier diplomatic agree-
ments, or at the end of a lost war. The hundred American sailors
set free in 1805 in Tripoli were examples of the ﬁrst situation; the
crews of the Austro-Venetian ships captured in 1799 were set free
without payment of ransom in the weeks and months following their
capture; after the terrible bombardment to which Lord Exmouth
subjected Algiers in 1816, 1,606 captive slaves were also freed with-
out ransom.
Although most of the slaves were employed in often unpleasant
tasks thereby providing for their own needs, a number of them,
in particular some of those who had lived on the land, were too
weak—or unable—to work, and were therefore dependent on their
masters. Furthermore, deaths were fairly frequent among the slaves:
ﬁfteen percent of the Carlofortans died in Tunis in under ﬁve years.
The corsairs’ problems increased with the free release of some
slaves, the mediocre sums paid for the ransoms, and the consider-
able investment necessitated by the campaigns; raising the question
