124                                  chapter four

based on the speciﬁc number of shares allotted to him: sailors received
three shares, as did the purser, the pilot, the aga of the janissaries
and the chief gunner, the janissaries themselves were only given one
and a half shares. The raïs had a much higher number of shares,
which varied according to the size of his ship, as the document
speciﬁes elsewhere. The captains of the corvettes and frigates received
from 32 to 45 shares; the xebeck captains were given from 25 to
28 shares, except for two small groups that received only 8 shares;
the captains of the brigs and polaccas were given from 20 to 25
shares, and schooner captains from 16 to 18 shares.17

The Corsairs’ Share
Naturally the value of a share was dependent on two factors: the
number of beneﬁciaries and the value of the captures, which varied
considerably, from less than 1,500 francs to over 300,000 francs.
The number of beneﬁciaries is directly related to the size of the crew
of the ship that had brought oﬀ the capture, and in particular, to
the number of corsairs participating in the operation. The result for
the beneﬁciaries could vary greatly from one capture to another,
with the value of a share going from one-eighth of a pataque-chique,
or 14 centimes, to 419⅜ pataque-chiques, or 472 francs. Out of the
264 corsair ships that ﬁgured in the prize register, we know the value
of the booty of 252 of them, along with the number of participants
in the diﬀerent captures, as well as the number of shares they rep-
resented and the value of the shares.
   The vast majority of the shares were not worth a great deal. We
know that the pay of a sailor was nine pataques a month, or 108
a year, and that he was a legal claimant for three shares of the cap-
tures. At that rate, it was only when a share was worth more than

  17
       By way of comparison, the following was the system of distribution, established
       by the Order of 2 prairial, year IX, for the French corsairs in the same period:
       before any distribution was made, 13 to 15% of the proceeds were deducted
       for various reasons, including 6% for customs duties. Two-thirds of the rest
       went to the shipowners. But these in principle did not receive their money until
       the general settlement of the campaign was completed, whereas the crew re-
       ceived the third part that was their due after each sale of a capture, which
       was described as the partial liquidation of the capture. The schedule of payments
       was as follows: twelve shares to the captain, ten to the vice-captain, six to eight
       to the oﬃcers, two to four to the petty oﬃcers, one and a half to the sailors, and
       one half to the ship’s apprentices.” Boyer, “Alger et les corsaires français”, 1990.
