                    privateering and the economy                      121

as to proﬁtability of slavery in the Maghreb in the beginning of
the nineteenth century—a question we really do not have the answer to.
   We should not forget that the changes that were taking place in
the Maghrebi navies of the period did away with the need for row-
ers on the corsair ships. In any case, to reduce slavery in the Maghreb
just to its economic dimension would be a misunderstanding, as it
was much more than that. It provided tangible proof of the regencies’
victorious struggles against the Inﬁdels, thereby providing a justiﬁcation
for their existence and the maintenance of their social structures.
Privateering was a source of potential enrichment for those who par-
ticipated in it directly. What share the corsairs came away with after
they had brought their captures into a safe port is not so clear.


                           Dividing the Booty

The Principles of Distribution
To produce a complete accounting report on corsair captures and
calculate the proﬁts to be shared out, it is necessary to analyse the
total investment, the purchase and depreciation of the ships and their
armaments, the provision of supplies, pay for the crews, etc.,—an
almost impossible task. The few useful facts on the subject in the
preceding chapters are too rare, scattered and vague to allow us to
venture such an evaluation. The only speciﬁc information concern-
ing booty that we have concerns the spoils taken by the corsairs of
Algiers, described in the prize register as we have already seen.
Before making use of this information, it is important to remember
that the division of booty was carried out according to precise reg-
ulations, which diﬀered from regency to regency.
   In Tunis, the rules for the distribution of booty were as follows:
   • The State: 12%, 10% of which was for the pasha, 1% for the
maintenance of the port, 1% for the marabouts;
   • The shipowners: 35–40% (in agreement with the captain, since
together they received half of the booty);
   • The sailors: 33%, including 10–15% for the captain, 8% for the
second in command, 3% for the pilot, 3% for the master sailmaker,
3% for the surgeon, 2% for the carpenter, 2% for the caulker, 2%
for those sailors who were slaves;
