126                             chapter four

together, the sailors left personal legacies estimated, on average, at
873 riyâls or pataques-chiques, as compared to 203 for the janis-
saries who had served on the ships. This considerable diﬀerence
resulted in part from a disparity in their rights to the booty, three
shares for the sailors as against one and a half for the soldiers, and
also from the short length of time the soldiers served on board, usu-
ally beginners, compared to the obviously much longer service of
the sailors. But for the janissaries, the corsair campaigns, even lim-
ited, were proﬁtable. The goods they left after their deaths were
worth twice as much as those left by their colleagues whose service
had only been on land: 203 riyâls as against 104.
   In any case, these ﬁgures, which certainly give us a general pic-
ture of the situation, are only average statistics, and thus impersonal.
Since no raïs died during a campaign in the years 1799 to 1803, we
have no information about what sort of legacy they left behind in
this period. However it is possible to calculate approximately what
their corsair life might have earned them oﬃcially.19 As examples,
we will present the earnings of several raïs whose careers that were
suﬃciently active and varied to demonstrate this essential aspect of
their profession.
   Kara Danguezli, who commanded a corvette in 1798, appears on
six diﬀerent occasions in that year in the register of captures. His
earnings varied greatly from one capture to another, with four cap-
tures netting below 60 riyâls draham sirar, (pataques-chiques), while
two exceeded one thousand riyâls, all of which brought him a total
of 3,648 riyâls for that year (4,104 francs-or). The following year, he
appeared on two occasions in the register, for a total of 622 riyâls,
after which he disappeared altogether, with no indication of why.
The case of Hadj Sliman is similar: in 1798–1799, he commanded
a xebeck, then moved to a frigate in 1800–1801; during his short
career, he participated in eight captures, which provided him with
earnings of 6,652 riyâls, and then he, too, appears to have given up
the pursuit of this activity.20 The example of Na’man is diﬀerent.


   19
      The reports seldom indicate the exact number of shares the rais received, but
since the type of ship they commanded is almost always listed, we can reconstruct
the ﬁgure with relative accuracy. In any case, what we are hoping to give here is
merely a general idea of the amounts, as close to reality as possible.
   20
      Neither he nor Kara Danguezli died during their campaigns, as they do not
ﬁgure in the death inventories.
