130                                  chapter four

ships were on a par with the weavers and cobblers. The oﬃcers of
the odjak ﬁgured better, between the masons and the tanners. As for
the raïs, their wealth was comparable with that of tobacco and fruit
merchants, who were outstripped by the agas. By and large, all these
military ﬁgures remained at a considerable remove from the fortunes
of the great merchants. Only the estates of Ali Tatar, Ahmed el-
Haddad, and of course Hamidou, could rival and perhaps equal, or
even exceed, those of the merchants and manufacturers of silk, the
symbol of luxury and wealth.

The State’s Share
The campaigns undoubtedly enriched the corsairs, at least the luck-
iest and boldest among them, but they also brought monetary gain
to the state. Attempting to assess the beneﬁts gleaned by the state
from the activities of the corsairs is a risky and a disappointing exer-
cise. With the present state of research there is no utilisable infor-
mation concerning Tripoli, and for the two other regencies, we possess
only unreliable and incomplete data that must be used with caution.
We know the total of the resources of the beys in Tunis for the
years 1214 and 1215 of the Hegira (1800–1802); an annual average
of 1,420,800 piastres, to which were added the revenues from the
corsair campaigns, 264,268 piastres, or a total of 1,685,068 pias-
tres.24 In those years corsair earnings provided 15.7% of the beylik’s
resources, at a time when we know that the corsair activities in
Tunisia were considerable. It is important to remember, however,
that although the bey received ten percent of the value of all the
captures, he only received the shipowner’s share for twenty percent
of the corsair vessels that he armed and ﬁtted out. The signiﬁcant
decline in corsair activities in the following years led of course to a
decline in his earnings.
   In the case of Algiers, for the years 1786 to 1788, the resources
of the deylik, not including corsair earnings and payments from the
European states, apparently came to around two and a half million
francs-or a year,25 although we cannot conﬁrm the accuracy of these
ﬁgures, used here only to give a general idea of the amounts. Thanks


  24
       Cherif “L’Etat tunisien et les campagnes . . .”, 1973.
  25
       Venture de Paradis, op. cit, 1983, pp. 242–247.
