                   privateering and the economy                      129

   These few facts about the raïs show that at least some of them
became rich as the result of their corsair activities. In the absence
of information on the incomes for Algiers the only points of com-
parison we have are the inventories drawn up after their deaths.
The statistical bases are more complete for the army, with at least
several dozen inventories for each grade, as opposed to only ﬁve to
seventeen for the civil professions. Nevertheless, even if merely indica-
tive, the information available has proved to be very instructive. With
the exception of the agas of the janissaries, who (in a purely hon-
orary manner) were at the top of the hiearchy of the odjak, the other
army oﬃcers left less on average than the raïs, with 305 to 325 riyâls,
compared to 520. This economic superiority of the marine over land-
forces is conﬁrmed by the legacies of simple janissaries. The aver-
age left by soldiers who had served aboard ship, 167 riyâls, was
almost twice that of those who served on land, which only reached
86 riyâls. In passing, it is worth noting that the respective estates
reﬂect the hierarchy of the grades: working up from the simple sol-
diers, shipboard or otherwise, then the corps of land oﬃcers, the
oﬃcers at sea, to the agas at the top. A comparison with urban civil
society gives an idea, at least as concerns wealth, of the place of the
military in Algiers society.
   By far the largest fortunes were those of two categories of mer-
chants, ﬁrst the silk merchants with an average of 6,916 riyâls and
then the pipe merchants with 4,459 riyâls. Next came the spice
merchants and tailors, but with an average worth of only a third or
a quarter of the ﬁrst group, 1,873 and 1,613 riyâls respectively. There
was a signiﬁcant gap between these and the third group, whose mem-
bers left an inheritance of between 516 and 685 riyâls, and included
brokers and tobacco and fruit merchants. With the exception of the
tailors, all of these legacies, whether large or small, were those of
merchants. The estates left by craftsmen and service providers were
on a lower level. There were those of the barbers, café owners and
tanners, between 426 and 469 riyâls, then the still more modest ones
of the cobblers, weavers, gunsmiths, blacksmiths and masons, between
181 and 246 riyâls. The poorest were the ﬁshmongers, who on aver-
age left to their heirs the equivalent of only 77 riyâls.
   Estates left by members of the military correspond to diﬀerent lev-
els of this very wide range (from one to ninety) from ﬁshmonger to
silk merchant. The janissaries in the infantry were close to the
ﬁshmongers, while their opposite-numbers serving aboard corsair
