                  maritime trade of the maghreb                    139

From 1766 to 1797, Tripoli’s maritime trade remained at a modest
level, just under two and a half million francs, and even showed a
slight decline over the thirty years. Imports were well below exports,
in spite of an appreciable rise between these two dates, due pri-
marily to the arrival of goods from Europe, which now exceeded
imports from the Ottoman provinces, 52% as against 48%. Exports,
while still of higher monetary value than imports, showed a marked
decline, almost 20%, between 1766 and 1797, which can be seen
both in the shipments to Europe and in those to the Ottoman
provinces. This drop reﬂects above all the decline, as well as the
diﬃculties, in the relations between the regency and Black Africa,
which is apparent in the signiﬁcant decrease in the proceeds from
gold dust and slaves. Considered overall, the bulk of the Tripoli
regency’s external trade was with the other provinces of the Ottoman
Empire, though relations with Europe were improving, with exports
to Europe passing from 35.1% in 1766 to 41.5% in 1797.

Tunis
The series of Tables on the following pages shows the main features
of Tunis’s maritime trade.

Points of Departure and Destinations
Most of the commercial ships in the Mediterranean in this period
were small in size and roughly similar, and so by merely counting
the number of ships, we can arrive at a fairly reliable estimate of the
amount of maritime traﬃc. Table No. 6 shows Tunis had direct
trade relations with the whole Mediterranean, with however a marked
preference for its western basin, 134 ships out of 184, or 72.8% of
the total. Europe was the principal destination, with 111 ships,
(60.3%), against 73 (39.7%) to Ottoman ports. Marseilles was by far
the major partner of Tunis, with 68 ships, 37% of all the destinations,
almost twice the number for Alexandria (37 ships). Malta was the
third preferred port: the island was supplied by Tunisia and served
as a stopover on the route to the Levant. Then came Leghorn and
Tripoli, Genoa, Smyrna, Barcelona, etc. Taking account of a few
probable gaps in our information, there were around 200 departures
a year; and adding the arrivals to this ﬁgure, the total movement in
the port of Tunis represented approximately 400 ships a year. Breaking
