                   maritime trade of the maghreb                         145

from four to six million livres for imports and from eight to ten mil-
lion for exports, i.e. a total of between twelve and sixteen million.
Tunis was therefore by far the most active of the ports in the
Maghreb, way ahead of Algiers and Tripoli. By way of comparison,
the maritime trade of Alexandria during the same period has been
estimated at around 40 million livres, Smyrna’s at 60 million,
Barcelona’s at 70 million, Marseilles’ at 230 million. Essential for
Tripoli and important for Algiers and Tunis, the commercial rela-
tions conducted by the regencies within the framework of the Ottoman
Empire, by integrating them economically into the system, reinforced
their participation in that vast political ensemble.


                The Economic Actors: The Carriers

The European Monopoly
In 1788, around two hundred merchant ships entered and departed
from the port of Tunis-Goletta, i.e. four hundred ship movements.
The activity of the port of Tripoli attracted a hundred ships a year,
i.e., two hundred movements. We lack satisfactory data for Algiers,
but it is not unreasonable to assume that the frequentation of ships
in this port was roughly the same as that of Tripoli. To these regional
capitals we must add the more limited traﬃc in the secondary ports,
such as Bona in the regency of Algiers; Bizerta, Monastir, Sousse
and Sfax in the regency of Tunis; and Misurata, Derna and Bengazi
in the Tripoli regency. We can safely estimate that ﬁve hundred
commercial ships stopped over every year in the ports of the Maghreb
at the end of the eighteenth century. This ﬁgure concerns only large
vessels on medium- or long-distance voyages, to the exclusion of the
small coasters and ﬁshing boats that also participated, within a
restricted radius, in the activities of these ports.
   In 1788 for Tunis, out of the 184 registered ships, 148 were
French, 26 Ragusan and 10 Imperial.4 According to the chancellor
of the British consulate, 92 ships made a stopover in Tripoli in 1765:


  4
    The absence of Venetian ships, which were active elsewhere, was due to the
war between the Regency of Tunis and the Serene (Venetian) Republic from 1784
to 1792.
