144                                   chapter five

pilgrims on their way to or returning from Mecca. In 1788, twelve
French ships in Tunis took on board from 50 to 250 pilgrims each,
for passage to Alexandria. In addition to these activities were the
irregular but steady relations with Tripoli, based chieﬂy on the ship-
ment of cereals in times of shortage due to poor harvests in one or
another of the regencies.
   The family archives of the merchants of Sfax, the major south-
ern port, conﬁrm this type of trade and the preeminence of the ties
with Alexandria, which were far more signiﬁcant than those with
Smyrna and Istanbul. Sfax exported agricultural goods from its hin-
terland (oil, almonds, pistachios, butter) and also products from its
ﬁshing industry (octopi and sponges) as well as woven goods from
Kairouan. Imports were very varied: from Egypt came linen, spun
cotton thread, rice and various types of fabric; Anatolia provided
textiles, tobacco, iron bars, pottery, weapons. This trade, which resem-
bles that of Tunis, but in provincial mode, illustrates the dynamism
of the merchants of the city, some of whom reached national if not
international stature, like the Gellulis.3
   Allowing for the gaps in information on the one hand, and the
wide variations noted on the other, it is very diﬃcult to estimate the
overall value of the commercial activities of Tunis; but we can still
hazard some ﬁgures to give an idea of the scale of business:
   • Trade with the Ottoman Empire: In 1782, imports from Alexandria
were estimated at 1,549,000 Tours livres (francs), and 1,050,000 in
1783; with exports at 1,500,000 livres and 1,164,000 livres respec-
tively. If we remember that trade with Alexandria mobilised half of
the ships linking Tunis to the rest of the Ottoman Empire, we can
safely double these ﬁgures. Annual imports as well as exports would
therefore have come to between two and three million livres, i.e.
from four to six million in total, with a reasonable average of ﬁve
million.
   • Trade with Europe: Imports from Tunis ﬂuctuated between 1.5
and 2.5 million livres, and exports from four to seven million, or a
total of somewhere between seven and ten million.
The maritime trade of Tunis at the end of the eighteenth century
taken as a whole mobilised an average 200 ships and represented


  3
      Zouari, Les Relations commerciales entre Sfax et le Levant . . ., 1990.
