                     maritime trade of the maghreb                            147

to discourage them from coming again, and so Arab merchants found
it almost impossible to sell their goods. But it was not only against
such diﬃculties that the dey of Algiers, for one, protested. Trade,
in particular international trade, must of necessity be based on a
pool of economic and also political information that would normally
be provided by the consuls present in the countries in question. The
European states maintained in the Levant and on the Barbary coast
an important network of consulates, all equipped with interpreters—
(dragomans), especially France;7 whereas the North African regen-
cies were totally lacking in such a service. But there were even more
serious diﬃculties than this diplomatic handicap.

The Maritime Caravan
We know that from the beginning of the seventeenth century, Barbary
privateering was particularly active, seriously hindering the naviga-
tion of European merchant ships. The situation changed in the last
quarter of the century, when France and England adoped a policy
of force to oblige the regencies to respect their ships. Backed up by
a system of treaties, this policy proved eﬀective, making it possible
for commercial navigation, particularly French maritime trade, to
develop. In the same period, the Ottomans lost their mastery over
the eastern Mediterranean to the Venetians at the time of the ﬁrst
war of the Morea (1684–1699). The Venetian vessels pursued the
Ottoman ships and blocked the entrance to the Dardanelles, thereby
preventing maritime links between Istanbul and the other provinces
of the Empire—Syria, Cyprus, Crete and especially Egypt. In 1686,
through an edict granted to Pierre de Girardin, the French ambas-
sador, the Ottoman authorities oﬀered favoured status to the French
merchant ships that were providing transport for the Ottomans, mak-
ing oﬃcial a practice that went back to the Middle Ages.
   This activity, known to contemporaries as the ‘maritime caravan’,
became increasingly important. The Ottomans, whether merchants,
administrators or pilgrims, appreciated the French ships (that would


   7
     In 1776, according to the Almanach royal, France maintained consuls or vice-
consuls in the Maghreb in Algiers, Tunis, Tripoli and Tangiers; in the Levant, in
Istanbul, in the Dardanelles, Rhodes, Naxos, Smyrna, Chios, Salonica, Coron, Paros,
Athens, Arta, Candia, Cyprus, Cairo, Alexandria, Rosetta, Saida, Tripoli (Syria),
Aleppo, Alexandretta and Baghdad.
