                     maritime trade of the maghreb                             149

   The Ottoman charterers and the captain of the chartered ship
had an agreement in the form of a standard contract which was
identical, whatever the captain’s nationality and whatever the lan-
guage used, based on a model established during the previous cen-
turies. The original, signed by the two parties and two witnesses,
was kept in the chancellery of the consulate of the commercial port
of the Levant where it was drawn up.9 In addition to the place of
signing and date, each contract included information about the cap-
tain and his ship, the charterer or charterers (name, residence, eth-
nic/religious group), the planned destination and places of stopover,
and ﬁnally, the cost of the voyage and the conditions of payment.10
   Studies of these ‘caravan’ contracts, already partially undertaken
for several of the ports, provide invaluable information about the
activity of the Ottoman ports and particularly about the Ottoman
charterers—with, however, two reservations. From 1732 the French
‘caravanners’ were required to register their contracts in the chan-
cellery, and in spite of the vigilance of the consuls, it is likely that
the habit of writing up contracts in the form of private agreements
without witnesses had not disappeared altogether, depriving the con-
sul of his fees—and the historian of a part of his source material!
The same situation could also apply to the caravanning ships of
other nationalities. The second unknown was related to the fact that
some of the ships arriving in Ottoman ports had been chartered
elsewhere, and therefore might not ﬁgure in the chancellery regis-
ter. This is particularly the case of ships making a ‘straight’ round-
trip, for example, a ship hired in Marseilles travelling to Tunis to
pick up a load of wheat, and immediately heading back to Marseilles.


               The Economic Actors: The Charterers

An examination of the caravan contracts provides the opportunity
of introducing by name the principal actors of the Ottoman maritime


   9
     A consequence of the legalisation of the maritime caravan was that contracts
had to be registered oﬃcially in the chancellery registers of the consulates. A num-
ber of these registers have come down to us. Most begin in 1686, e.g. those of
Algiers, Alexandria, Tripoli in Barbary, and Candia.
  10
     Since a ship was rented as a whole, the cargo was only mentioned when the
price for chartering or for freighting was based on the nature of the cargo.
