156                                  chapter five

deﬁnitely solid, especially with Egypt, with a regular ﬂow of pilgrims
and various agricultural products: rice, wheat, oil, and manufactured
items like the ‘Tunis-style hats’ or metalwork. A specialist in this
particular segment of maritime trade in a study of the activities of
a group of Tunisian merchants—the Sfax group—had the following
to say:
       The organisation of the trade [with the Levant], in its techniques, its
       instruments (weights and measures), its tools (routes and means of trans-
       port), its handling of information, its customs restrictions, dates back
       to the Middle Ages.14
As usual, of the 51 contracts, the overwhelming majority were drawn
up by Muslims, with 43, or 84.3% of the total, two by Jews, and
something new—six by Greeks. The presence of the Greeks in Tunis
is evidence of the commercial expansion of the Greek-Ottoman com-
munity in the Maghreb. It reﬂects the expansion of trade by these
Aegean merchants, already very active in the Levant and in Europe
since the last quarter of the eighteenth century. In contrast to Levantine
commercial activities, Tunisian maritime trade was particularly directed
towards Europe, and it was here that the most signiﬁcant changes
took place.
   The eﬀects of peace were felt in the destinations, as shipping con-
tracts for Marseilles were by far the most numerous, at 42, ahead
of Genoa with 24, oﬀset by the considerable reduction for Leghorn,
from 54 to 19 contracts, thereby conﬁrming the role of the Tuscan
port as a substitute when Marseilles was unavailable. Also of inter-
est is the not insigniﬁcant position of Spain (8 contracts), which until
this time had been almost totally absent from Tunisian commercial
activities, as well as the role of Malta, in the hands of the English,
who had reopened the port after the surrender of the French gar-
rison. But the statistic that holds the biggest surprise is the com-
munity membership of those who chartered vessels. The majority of
those who hired ships bound for Leghorn were still Jews, ten in all,
against two French charterers, but there were also seven Muslims.
The Muslim contracts were predominantly for Spain (six out of eight
contracts) and Genoa (12 out of 19). However, it is the community
membership of those who chartered ships bound for Marseilles that


  14
       Zouari, Les relations commerciales, 1990, p. 68.
