                  maritime trade of the maghreb                    151

Ottoman Empire, which was overwhelmingly in the hands of the
Ottomans, principally Muslims, and trade destined for Europe, which
was dominated by the Europeans themselves, followed by Jews, while
the Muslims only held a very small share. We must remember, how-
ever, that if the ships bound for the Ottoman Empire were all car-
avanners, the situation with the ships headed for Europe was diﬀerent,
as it included ships on ‘straight’ runs to and fro, obviously all char-
tered by Europeans leaving from European ports, again reinforcing
European domination of the commercial traﬃc of this type. This
contrast between the regions frequented by the Muslim charterers
on the one hand and those frequented by the Europeans on the
other—so clear in Tunis—was characteristic of the Ottoman Empire
in this period, and has also been observed in Alexandria, Candia,
Istanbul and Saida.
   Out of the dozens of charterers that ﬁgure in these contracts, we
have singled out thirteen of the most active, who hired at least three
ships in two years: six Europeans, the same number of Muslims, and
a Jew. In fact this last, Abraham de Joshua de Paz, who lived in
Tunis, represented a group of Jewish merchants known as ‘by-the-
day Jews,’ who hired out ﬁve ships all having Leghorn as their des-
tination. Of the six European charterers, three were French companies
established in Tunis; Arnaud et Cie, Arles et Cie, et Minuty et Cie,
the most active of them chartering ten ships. Although the ﬁrst two
houses did business primarily with Marseilles, the Minuty company
(which admittedly also chartered six ships for Marseilles), hired two
bound for Tripoli in Barbary, one for Alexandria and one for Djerba,
thereby demonstrating its willingness to operate throughout the
Ottoman Empire. The other three active charterers were Genoese,
and dealt exclusively with the European ports of Barcelona, Leghorn,
and principally Genoa. The most important of these was Dr.
Lagomarsini, the bey’s doctor and a prosperous merchant, who hired
ten ships in two years, four of which were bound for Leghorn and
Genoa and two for La Spezia.
   The most active Muslims charterers dominated the trade with the
Ottoman Empire. Ahmed Bariani from Tripoli in Barbary chartered
four out of ﬁve of the ships headed for Tripoli; Ahmed as-Sallâmî,
from Sfax, in choosing his destinations, also favoured his birthplace.
The four others who chartered ships belonged to two large families:
the Ben Ayeds, natives of Djerba, Ahmed and Regeb—the chief
customs oﬃcer in Tunis—chartered eleven ships, in partnership,
