                  maritime trade of the maghreb                    157

is completely new. Out of the 42 planned crossings, even taking into
account the straight round-trip crossings leaving from Marseilles, only
four contracts were drawn up for French ships, which is above all
an indication of the considerable decline of the French caravan. On
the other hand, the list included a Dutchman, ten Jews, and no less
than 27 Muslims!
   Fifteen European charterers drew up 23 contracts, of which eleven
appear only once. The case of four Maltese, three after arriving from
their island turned right around and went back, while the fourth
headed for Naples. An English widow, originally from Gibraltar,
chartered a ship for Genoa, an Austrian hired one to go to Trieste,
and a Dutchman—the consul Nyssen—chartered a ship for Marseilles.
In addition, there were four Genoese charterers who dealt almost
exclusively with Genoa, eight out of nine voyages. Andrea Poggi and
Giovanni Battista Re hired, respectively, three and four ships in 21
months. Of the four French charterers who had hired seven ships,
one for Genoa, two for Leghorn and the others for Marseilles, only
Barthez et Cie, with three ships, seems to have operated on a larger
scale than the others, but their activities were limited to the west-
ern Mediterranean, and unlike the situation ﬁfteen years earlier, they
no longer ventured to the Levant, at least not with the maritime
caravan.
   The Jewish group hiring ships were very similar to the Europeans,
both in their numbers and in their geographical orientations. There
were fourteen of them, chartering 27 ships, 26 of which went to
Western Europe and only one going to Sousse. Although over a
period of almost two years, nine of these merchants entered into
only a single contract, four of them demonstrated greater enterprise:
Abram Setbon chartered three ships; one for Sousse, one for Barcelona
and one for Marseilles; Nissim Attal sent three to Leghorn, and
David Bessis hired the same number, ships bound for Marseilles and
Genoa. Only one, Moïse Hay, was particularly active, chartering
eight ships: two for a period of three months, one for Barcelona,
one for Naples, and four for Marseilles. It is evident that the priv-
ileged trading relations of the Jews with Leghorn, which had been
quite marked during the previous decade, had mostly dwindled, and
that Marseilles and Genoa now seem to have become equally or
more attractive destinations.
   Unlike the French and the Genoese, the four Greeks who char-
tered ships were not based in Tunis; arriving from their diﬀerent
