148                                chapter five

later meet with competition from other Europeans) for their crews’
competence, superior to that of the Ottoman sailors; and especially
for the security they provided. Indeed, they protected Ottomans who
had chartered them from the risks they would be taking aboard ves-
sels ﬂying a Muslim ﬂag encountering hostile cruisers from the
Christian states that were still ﬁghting against the Barbary corsairs—
Venice, Naples and Spain—and especially the Order of Malta backed
by private Maltese corsairs. In the eighteenth century, the Europeans,
who already dominated international trade through this maritime
caravan, also had the lion’s share of the internal shipping of the
Ottoman empire. This activity, which was vital for the Empire, also
guaranteed considerable proﬁts, several million livres worth of ship-
ping transactions per year for the French alone,8 employed two or
three hundred European vessels and thousands of sailors.
    It is understandable, therefore, that French shipowners and mer-
chants took considerable pains to maintain, and even develop, an
activity that was so proﬁtable, solliciting and receiving the support
of the authorities. Their main argument was to convince Ottomans
who wished to charter ships to choose the French ‘caravanners’ rather
than Muslim ships. For that, Christian privateering activities had to
be maintained at suﬃcient level to discourage Muslim navigation,
or at least make it risky enough to persuade Muslim charterers against
it. At the request of the business community in Marseilles, the min-
ister of the Navy intervened, discreetly on several occasions, with the
principal leaders of the Order of Malta to urge them to take naval
action against the Barbary corsairs, not hesitating to ﬁnance them
if necessary. Furthermore, protected by peace treaties, signed and
renewed, the French ‘caravanners’ and the owners of their ships
wanted the activity of the Barbary corsairs to continue, but at a
modest level, as its existence justiﬁed the indispensable, ongoing pres-
ence of Christian corsairs: a status quo thereby eliminating possible
competition from the ships of the states that remained at war with
the regencies.


   8
     In around 1775, the maritime caravan brought in 400,000 livres a year to
Tunis (cf. Emerit, “L’essai d’une marine . . .”, 1955) and at least two million in 1786,
in spite of strong competition from the Ragusans and the Venetians. In addition,
earnings from the caravan largely compensated for the negative trade balance
between France and the Ottoman Empire. Carrière de Courdurié, “Un sophisme
économique . . .”, 1984.
