                     from privateering to shipping                         163

    Many of these ﬂags provide evidence of the changes that had
taken place in shipping in the Mediterranean since the end of the
eighteenth century. We have already mentioned the newfound impor-
tance of the Austrian ﬂag. But certainly the most striking change is
the position of the Ragusan ships: by supplying a quarter of Marseilles’
traﬃc, more than half of Leghorn’s, and a ﬁfth of Malta’s, the ﬂag
of the little Adriatic republic took on a preponderant role in the
western Mediterranean. Reappearing around the middle of the eight-
eenth century after a long period of decline, the Ragusan ships now
proﬁtted from the disappearance of the French to regain the posi-
tion they had held ﬁfteen years earlier. And ﬁnally, the real change
in these ports was the presence of ﬂags that had been virtually
unknown until this time: the ﬂag of Russia, complementing the activ-
ity of the Czar’s naval ﬂeet in the Adriatic, and an even greater
novelty—the ﬂags of the Ottoman Empire and the Barbary Regencies.
These were Muslim states, which for centuries had been looked upon
as formidable and feared enemies, and only a few short years ear-
lier—at least as far as the North African regencies were concerned—
had been considered hostile and had had their ships virtually barred
from the port of Marseilles. Their presence is an indication of the
profound political and psychological changes that had come about
in recent years, but also of the modiﬁcations and economic neces-
sities that had accompanied those changes.
    War started up again in 1803, and its eﬀects were soon felt. In
1804, Malta, which had remained under British authority—at least
the initial cause of the resumption of hostilities between France and
England—did not suﬀer from the war, and since it beneﬁtted from
British naval superiority, its traﬃc remained at previous levels. The
situation was altogether diﬀerent for the French ports, or those that
were French protectorates, such as Leghorn.2 The year 1804 marked
the beginning of the collapse of the traﬃc in Leghorn, which dropped
from 103 ships to 21, slightly picking up in the following years, with
32 ships in 1806. Although Marseilles held its own in 1804, it was
only to succumb in turn in the following years. In fact, from 1804
on, the French ﬂag disappeared totally, and the only ships that fre-
quented Marseilles and Leghorn were foreign, i.e. neutral. In 1804,

   2
     Since the Treaty of Aranjuez (21 March 1801), Tuscany had become the
Kingdom of Etruria, for the beneﬁt of the King of Spain’s son-in-law, and a ver-
itable French protectorate.
