158                           chapter five

provinces, they hired ships to return home, three to Morea and the
fourth to Crete. There remains the group that will be the most
important from now on, the Muslims. There are 42 names of Muslims
who chartered 106 ships. As with the other groups, the great major-
ity, 31 out of 42, appear in the records just once: ﬁve chartered two
ships, one a year; only six of them, with at least three contracts
each, demonstrated sustained activity during this period.
    First of all, there was the bey himself, who chartered ﬁve vessels,
for reasons that were sometimes diplomatic—such as the ship he
sent to Algiers—but also for commercial purposes, like the ones hired
for such destinations as Modon, Prevesa or Tabarka. Ahmed Ben
Ali Kassem, wâkil (representative) of the pasha of Tripoli in Tunis,
chartered three ships, two bound for Tripoli and one for Genoa,
illustrating the at-least partial reorientation of the trade of the Tunisian
merchants. This can also be seen in a change in the activities of
one of the most important personalities of the regency, Mahmoud
Gelluli, kaïd of Sfax, who chartered seven ships: three bound for
Alexandria, one for Barcelona, and three for Marseilles. Soliman Ben
Hadj had lost interest in all but European destinations, Barcelona
and especially Marseilles. The same was true of Soliman Melameli
Bachamba, whose ﬁve chartered ships went to Genoa, Marseilles,
Naples and Leghorn.
    And ﬁnally, there was that exceptional ﬁgure in the chartering
business, Yûnis Ben Yûnis, who hired 41 ships in 21 months. Three
of them were for a period of several months, which enabled him to
have ships available at all times. The others went out all over the
Mediterranean: ﬁve to Alexandria, six to Smyrna, one to Derna and
one to Tangiers, i.e., thirteen ships serving the Islamic world.
Simultaneously, one ship went to Trieste, one to Barcelona, one to
Malta, one to Mahon, four to Genoa, ﬁve to Leghorn and twelve
to Marseilles: 25 ships in all, voyaging over Europe. The commer-
cial orientations of Yûnis Ben Yûnis in the very early years of the
nineteenth century—one third in contracts for the Orient, two-thirds
for the West, perfectly reﬂect the new directions of the Regency of
Tunis, and of the Maghreb as a whole. Admittedly these tendencies
had existed before the French Revolution, but there was a new
politic: adding to their former domination of trade in the east, the
Muslim merchants of the Regency of Tunis would now attempt to
obtain a share of the European market.
