                    maritime trade of the maghreb                           159

The Shippers
The near-monopoly of maritime shipping between the Maghreb and
Europe that the French had enjoyed on the eve of the Revolution
was totally undermined several years later.
   In 1802 to 1803, the short period of peace between two decades
of war, the 163 charter contracts drawn up in Tunis that are avail-
able to us today were divided up as follows: 21 French ships (12.9%),
27 Austrian ships (16.6%), 91 Ragusan ships (55.8%) and 11 Russian
ships (6.7%). The ships of these four ﬂags totalled 150 contracts, or
92% of the whole. The thirteen others are listed as two Genoese, a
Moroccan, three Neapolitan, an Ottoman, a Sicilian, two Tuscan
and three Ionian15 ships. In spite of the restoration of peace, which
admittedly was of short duration, the French ﬂag was unable to rec-
tify a situation that was already becoming disastrous during the period
from 1794 to 1795. It now only occupied third place, after Austria,
whose captains were mostly Venetian, and whose territories, as we
have seen, had been allocated to it by Napoleon in the Treaty of
Campo Formio. By themselves, the Ragusans monopolised more than
half of the contracts, and from the beginning of the wars of revo-
lution, steadily improved their position in shipping in the
Mediterranean. Also noteworthy is the new and not insigniﬁcant
presence of the Russian ﬂag, which was in fact ﬂown by Ottoman-
Greek ships and crews.
   We do not know what criteria those who chartered ships used
when selecting them, but we can attempt to detect possible prefer-
ences, or, on the contrary, those vessels that were actually rejected.
Mahmoud Gelluli used two French ships and ﬁve Ragusan ships,
while Moïse Hay chartered three Austrian, a Neapolitan, and four
Ragusan ships. Yûnis Ben Yûnis might have been demonstrating a
preference for Ragusan ships, with 35 of his charters out of 41, or
85%, but he also used French and Austrian ships. If Arnaud et Cie
chartered two French ships, Barthez et Cie, plainly indiﬀerent to any


   15
      The Republic of the Seven Islands was composed of the Ionian Islands which
had been Venetian until 1797, French until 1799, and then established as an inde-
pendent republic under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Sultan, on the Ragusan
model, by the Russo-Turkish agreement of 21 March 1801. Fugier, op. cit., 1954,
p. 131.
