                        from privateering to shipping                                 165

ordinary mercantile expansion.3 The situation was completely diﬀerent
for the Maghrebi merchant ships, whose presence, as noticeable as
it was unexpected, merits our detailed attention.


                The Maritime Activity of the Maghrebi

The North African Presence in Europe
It was in Europe ﬁrst of all that the North African presence was
the most tangible and the most quantiﬁable. The best source for a
study of the arrival of ships in most of the European ports during
this period is the registers of the diﬀerent port health authorities. All
ships coming from the Levant and Barbary were required to provide
a statement from their captains to be recorded in a register, and to
undergo a compulsory period of quarantine.4 These documents enable
us to obtain information concerning the date of arrival, the name
and type of the ship and its ﬂag, as well as the captain’s name, the
point of departure, and often the stopovers, the composition of the
cargo, a description of any noteworthy incidents, and of course the
bill of health, providing information about the conditions of health
and hygiene at the port of departure. The four ports studied were:
Barcelona, the principal Spanish port in the Mediterranean; Marseilles
and Leghorn, both with strong and ancient ties to the Maghreb; and
ﬁnally Malta, which had come under British control, and whose
growing importance we have mentioned above. The details available
have enabled us to obtain two types of information: one, a series of
facts concerning the general development of maritime traﬃc between
the principal ports of Western Europe and the Maghreb; and the
second, a breakdown of the respective positions in this activity held
by the vessels ﬂying the ﬂag of the Barbary states.
The overall trend of the traﬃc in these ports shows a striking con-
trast for Marseilles and Leghorn against Malta. At the time of the
Peace of Amiens in 1802, relations between Leghorn, Marseilles and


   4
     Panzac, op. cit., 1986. For Marseilles: Archives départementales des Bouches du Rhône,
AD BDR 200E 553–568; for Leghorn: Archivio di Stato di Livorno, ASL MS 704–705;
for Malta: National Library of Malta, NLM, MS 818; for Barcelona, where this
type of document does not exist, we used a report on ship movements in a con-
temporary periodical, the Diario de Noticias, through the good oﬃces of Professor
Eloy Martin Corrales of the University of Barcelona, whom we wish to thank here.
