176                            chapter six

Leghorn
Of all the Mediterranean ports in the Napoleonic Empire, Leghorn
was probably the one that suﬀered the most from war, which is
conﬁrmed by the small number of Maghrebi ships arriving in the
port during those years. Out of the 34 ships noted in the documents,
twenty were from Tunis, six from Tripoli, ﬁve from Algiers and a
couple from the Levant.

Marseilles
Politically and economically sharing the same fate as Leghorn, the
great French port presents certain similarities with its Tuscan coun-
terpart. As with Leghorn, its relations with North Africa were seri-
ously aﬀected by the war and were maintained chieﬂy through the
good oﬃces of the Maghrebi ships. Here the Regency of Algiers was
in the privileged position with 55 ships, of which 39 represented
direct relations with Algiers itself, 16 with Tunisia and 12 with
Morocco. If the Levant was almost out of reach, the links with
Europe were far from negligeable—Europe now meant just Spain—
although with 19 ships, its position was superior to those of Morocco
and Tunisia.

Barcelona
As we have seen, the maritime traﬃc of the Maghrebi ships in
Barcelona was in stark contrast to the situation in the other European
ports. Relations between Barcelona and the Levant were nonexistent,
and direct ties with the Maghreb were greatly reduced, to barely a
ﬁfth of the total, primarily with the Regency of Algiers—twenty ships
against three with Morocco, the same number with Tunisia, and
only one with faraway Tripoli. The major activity of the Maghrebi
ships—Algerian, and even more importantly, Moroccan—consisted
above all in linking the Spanish ports to each other, and then to
France. The list of Spanish ports includes seventeen names of towns
spread all along Spain’s Mediterranean coast, from Algeciras to
Barcelona, passing principally via Malaga, Motril, Almeria, Aguila,
Cartagena, Alicante and Valencia.9 But even more than the coast,


  9
    Other ports mentioned one or two times are: Almazzaron, Ayamonte, Denia,
Jabez, Torrevieja and Xabea.
