170                             chapter six

until 1805, after the lifting of the American blockade imposed in
1800. The Algerians, who had maintained a more active involve-
ment in privateering than the Tunisians and Tripolitans, were still
ahead of the Moroccans, who, admittedly, divided their activities
between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic. Table No. 10 also
reveals the striking contrast between the considerable presence of the
Maghrebi in Malta, with 521 ships, and their small number in
Leghorn, 35. The Table also gives the geographical distribution of
the diﬀerent ﬂags. The Moroccans and even more so Algerians made
up the greater part of the Maghrebi presence in Barcelona, where
Tunisians were rare and Tripolitans absent altogether. Roughly the
same distribution was found in Marseilles. In spite of the relatively-
low numbers, it is still possible to observe that the Maghrebi pres-
ence in Leghorn was very diﬀerent. Tunisian ships represented more
than half of the North African vessels, followed by Tripolitan ships:
Algerian ships were rare, and Moroccan ones almost totally absent.
The contrast is even more striking for Malta, where Tunisians and
Tripolitans represented more than nine-tenths of the Maghrebi pres-
ence. Distance is obviously the principal factor in the distribution;
creating a northwestern zone dominated by Algerians and Moroccans,
and a southeastern zone where Tunisians and Tripolitans were by
far the most numerous.

Shipping Replaces Corsair Activities
Of the hundreds of stopovers in Europe of ships ﬂying North African
ﬂags, it is important to distinguish those of the corsairs from the
merchantmen, a distinction that is made in our source material.
Taken overall, out of the 818 Maghrebi ships passing through these
four European ports, 83 were entered as corsair vessels, i.e. only one
in ten. But their chronological distribution shows a totally new devel-
opment, as is seen in the case of Malta, by far the most heavily fre-
quented of the four ports.
