                   from privateering to shipping                    177

the Maghrebi ships linked the Balearic Islands to Barcelona: thirty-
nine ships, including 26 for Palma—as compared to 49 for the coastal
region—supplied this service from 1801 to 1808, the years that con-
cern us here.
   The second task to which the Maghrebi captains were committed
was providing links with France. A comparison of the French and
Spanish sources brings to the light the pendulum eﬀect of this traﬃc.
For example, in the entries into the registers for the winter of 1807–
1808: on 27 December 1807, the Moroccan raïs Abdelfassi Youssef ’s
merchant xebeck arrived in Marseilles from Cartagena; two months
later, on 28 February 1808, Abdelfassi Youssef reached Barcelona
from Marseilles; on 18 August of the same year, his arrival in Barcelona
was recorded, with no speciﬁc mention of his point of departure,
except that it was a French port. Another Moroccan, Ahmed Kardam,
arrived in Barcelona from Torrevieja on the First of January 1808;
he then left for Marseilles, which he reached on 4 February, leaving
shortly afterwards for Barcelona, where he landed on 20 March of
the same year. These movements between European ports were rel-
atively fast, since the quarantines were brief, unlike those for the
ships coming from the Levant and Barbary. This great inter-Spanish
coastal traﬃc, with its extension into France, represented three-
quarters of the activity of the Maghrebi ships in Spain from 1801
to 1808. Through an astonishing reversal of situations linked to cir-
cumstances, these ships were practicing the very trade to which the
Europeans had devoted themselves throughout the eighteenth cen-
tury, the maritime caravan, but this time in European waters.

Malta
Malta was certainly the most active port in the Mediterranean between
1804 and 1815, the war years of the Consulate and the Empire.
The single existing list of the ports of departure of the Maghrebi
ships arriving in Malta provides information about this activity, and
includes ﬁfty names of towns spread all around the Mediterranean
basin. Quite a few of these places ﬁgure only once, the products of
chance linked to a shipment of cargo or to some urgent necessity
for transport to Malta. On the other hand, there do appear to be
favoured destinations for the North African ships. Ships from ten of
the ﬁfty ports used for the departures account for 363 entries out
of 439, 82.7% of the total. These are:
