184                                 chapter six

Hassan. The section of this ledger that has been published, cover-
ing the years 1810 to 1832, includes numerous entries related to
maritime trade, primarily for the two years from 1812 to 1814.14
The author mentions the arrival and departure of various ships in
the port of Tripoli, but there is no way for us to verify his critera
of selection. We can nevertheless imagine that the ships that ﬁgure
in his ledger are those in which he had an interest, directly or
through associates; whilst vessels in his list may have been included
simply because he knew the captain, the charterer or the passengers.
Altogether, for the two-year period from 1812 to 1814, we have
found seven references to ships belonging to the pasha that ﬁgure
in the register of passports, and nineteen that are missing, whose
owners we are unable to determine with any degree of certainty.15
   Nevertheless, the merchant’s records also provide a list of the ships’
destinations: two vessels were going to or returning from Alexandria,
another three were going to or from Bengazi; other destinations were
Crete, with one ship, Istanbul and Izmir with seven, Leghorn with
one, Morocco with three, Marseilles with three, and Sfax with one.
The statistical base is very sparse, but one cannot help but be struck
by how little Europe is represented, with only four ships out of nine-
teen, when the Ottoman world (completed by Morocco)—especially
faraway Anatolia and the capital of that Empire—seems to have
carved out the lion’s share for itself. Without more complete infor-
mation, we cannot venture beyond this observation, but we feel that
an analysis of the traﬃc in Tripoli based on the movements of the
pasha’s ships alone should be used with prudence, and that the com-
mercial relations of Tripoli were more ‘oriental’ than we may at ﬁrst
think. Such an observation does not, however, contradict the idea
of the strengthening of economic ties between Tripoli and Europe.
   A comparison with the main features of the maritime trade of the
port of Tripoli almost half a century earlier has much to teach us.
We know that in the eighteenth century, this trade was provided by



  14
     Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan, op. cit., 1984, pp. 179–280.
  15
     Several of these clearly belong to private individuals, because the author speciﬁes
that they were rented by the Pasha; one left for Istanbul on 30 November 1813,
another, owned by Mahmoud Gomeira, left for Marseilles on 24 December 1813.
Similarly, the ship chartered by Youssef Missaoui belonged to Hadj Ali Ben Ibrahim.
