                   from privateering to shipping                    185

European ships, chieﬂy French. The movements of these ships in
the port of Tripoli from 1766 to 1773, the only years for which we
have any information, reﬂect quite clearly the nature of the mar-
itime links of the period. By comparing them carefully with the facts
we have gleaned from the passport register, we notice that in forty
years, the role of the European ports grew appreciably, passing from
26.7% to 42% of the total, chieﬂy at the expense of the Levant,
which declined from 29.2% to 17.9%. Bengazi was an important
destination in 1766, and its position became even stronger in the
beginning of the nineteenth century, at the expense of Tunisia. In
the period from 1766 to 1773, the Tunisian ports constituted 22.8%
of the total of Tripoli’s traﬃc, and 51.9% of the traﬃc of all the
Maghrebi ports. From 1805 to 1815, the ﬁgures dropped to 3.8%
and 9.4% respectively. It would not be unreasonable to believe that
part of the maritime trade between the two regencies was provided
by Tunisian ships, but what can be called a collapse was above all
the result of the boom in the trade of both regencies with Europe.
   In the years 1766 to 1773, Malta was already the principal part-
ner of Tripoli, ahead of Marseilles, but the war obviously accentu-
ated their diﬀerence in market shares, causing the traﬃc of Tripoli
to rise from 10.5% to 36.3%. Behind these ﬁgures, which reﬂect
both the changes and the constants in Tripoli’s maritime trade, it is
important to emphasise a fundamental reality. In the eighteenth cen-
tury, whatever trading partners the regency may have had, the links
were provided by European ships. In the beginning of the nineteenth
century, the vessels maintaining these links were primarily Tripolitan.
A question remains: What were all these Maghrebi ships transport-
ing around the Mediterranean and even beyond?


                     Maritime Transportation

In the absence of satisfactory sources, it is impossible to paint a com-
plete picture of the maritime traﬃc of the regencies of the Maghreb
in the beginning of the nineteenth century—and in any case, this is
not really our intention. On the other hand, we do know that from
this time on, the young commercial ﬂeets of the Maghreb would
handle an important segment of this trade, and also, that we pos-
sess a not insigniﬁcant amount of documentation related to them. It
