178                          chapter six

      Alexandria:     15             Smyrna:           23
      Bengazi:        18             Sfax:             55
      Crete:          13             Sousse:           31
      Djerba:         10             Tripoli:         121
      Morea:          17             Tunis:            62
Whatever else they were, these departure ports of the North African
ships in Malta were ﬁrst of all situated in the Ottoman Empire, with
a marked predominance of the Maghreb over the Levant, 295 against
68, or 81.2% and 18.8% respectively. It is of course readily apparent
that the two most heavily frequented Levantine ports were Alexan-
dria and Smyrna, followed by the ports of Crete and the Morea.
But the favoured partner of Malta was clearly the Maghreb: the
ports of the Regencies of Tripoli; Tripoli itself and Bengazi, total
137 arrivals; whilst those of Tunisia; Tunis, Djerba, Sfax and Sousse,
account for 158.
   In comparison to the three other ports, Malta also had two orig-
inal features. The ﬁrst is obviously linked to its importance, during
those years, at least, when it was frequented by great numbers of
ships (the Maghrebi alone represent several hundred); the second is
related to the island’s situation in the Mediterranean. Malta was a
port of call for ships with cargoes destined for the island itself, as
were Marseilles and Leghorn for their own trade, but, because of
its geographical position, it was also a stopover on the Mediterranean
maritime routes. On arrival in port, each ship was registered by the
Maltese health authority, with a brief indication of the type of ves-
sel it was. A distinction was made between those that must imme-
diately go into quarantine and those that could leave without submitting
to this formality, obligatory in every European port during this period.
The ﬁrst category usually had Malta as a ﬁnal destination, while the
others were merely stopping over. Out of 439 Maghrebi ships, 305
(70.5%) belonged to the ﬁrst category, the destination of their car-
goes or passengers was Malta itself. Not all merchandise that was
unloaded was destined for local consumption, and a signiﬁcant por-
tion of it was transshipped and taken to other ports. This activity,
to which we will return, gives evidence of Malta’s role as a cross-
roads for maritime trade in the Mediterranean during the wars of
the First Empire.
   Even though the role of the port as a stopover had diminished,
it still remained an important function, representing 30% of the pas-
sage of Maghrebi ships. Unfortunately, with the exception of a few
