                   from privateering to shipping                    183

• Maghreb 85 (40.1%): Algiers 3; Bengazi 56; Bona 7; Derna 5;
  Morocco 5; Misurata 1; Sfax 4; Tunis 4.
• Europe 89 (42%): Spain 1; Lisbon 3; Leghorn 5; Malta 77; Marseilles
  2; Trieste 1.
The pasha’s Tripolitan ships were present in the whole of the
Mediterranean Basin, and several even braved the Atlantic to serve
the ports of Morocco or Portugal. The majority of them (58%) pro-
vided the links with the Arabo-Muslim world, especially the Maghreb,
more than with the Levant. But Europe, destination of 42% of the
voyages, was an important destination. Although Alexandria and
Smyrna were the most heavily frequented of the Levantine ports, it
was chieﬂy the ports that depended on the pashalik of Tripoli,
Misurata, Derna, and above all Bengazi, that made up almost three-
quarters of the Maghrebi destinations. The ports of the regency of
Algiers, Algiers and Bona, like those of the regency of Tunis, were
only a very secondary destination. It is clearly the distribution of the
voyages to Europe that best reﬂects the eﬀects of the European wars.
Although Leghorn, and even more importantly, Marseilles, were now
no more than almost insigniﬁcant partners, Malta had become the
principal destination for the Tripolitan ships, with 77 voyages out of
212, i.e., 36.3% of the total. In fact, Malta, Bengazi, Alexandria and
Smyrna accounted for three-quarters of the activity of the Tripolitan
ships.
   Although the pasha of Tripoli owned the major part of the com-
mercial ﬂeet of the regency in those years, he was not the only
shipowner. Unfortunately, accounts and information concerning the
ships belonging to private individuals are fragmentary, although they
do give some idea of the situation. The ﬁrst indication of the existence
of these privately-owned ships comes from Maltese sources. For the
period from 1805 to 1815, there are entries concerning 121 Maghrebi
ships arriving in Malta from Tripoli, of which 117 were ﬂying the
ﬂag of that regency, while the passport register for Tripoli records
only 77 voyages with Malta a destination. Thus, the ships belong-
ing to the pasha were providing around two-thirds of the maritime
traﬃc, with the remaining third ensured by the ships belonging to
private individuals.
   A document in Arabic is a further source of information of great
interest, although it must be used with discretion. It is the contempo-
rary ledger of an important merchant in Tripoli, Hassan Al-Faqih
