                      from privateering to shipping                              181

series is incomplete, the result of the risks run by French ships, and
their small number in this period. Those that managed to cross the
Mediterranean bear witness in particular to the low level of French
maritime trade in Tunisia at the time of the First Empire. For two
quarters, the last of 1813 and the ﬁrst of 1814, the Consul attempted
to paint a picture of the movements in the port of Tunis including
therein the ﬂags of all ships. His reports, although only covering the
last six months of the war, are quite revealing as to Tunis’s mar-
itime trade situation at the time.
   In total, the document recorded 42 arrivals and 38 departures,
that is, 80 movements in the port in six months. Of this number,
Mahon,12 with 26 entries (32.5%) was the most important partner
of Tunis, followed by Malta, with twenty movements (25%). Next
came Naples, with ten movements (12.5%), Cagliari, six, Marseilles
and Leghorn, three movements each. Also appearing on the list were
Alicante, Genoa, Ancona, Palermo and Gibraltar. If the primacy of
Mahon is somewhat surprising, Tunis’s other trade relations are in
comformity with the international situation of the moment: the impor-
tance of Malta, Naples and Cagliari, close partners, and of course,
the disappearance of Marseilles and Leghorn, which we have noted
elsewhere. What leads us to question the completeness of this pic-
ture is the signal absence of the Ottoman world with just four move-
ments—a round-trip to Alexandria, an arrival from Bona and a
departure for Sousse—that represents a mere 5% of the Tunis traﬃc.
It is impossible to verify these ﬁgures, which reﬂect a certain real-
ity, but which surely attribute a better share than is deserved to
Tunis’s European connections.13



   12
      The importance of the port of Mahon is related in particular to the key role
of its quarantine post for the Spanish health authorities. Built in the last decade of
the eighteenth century, it received most of the ships coming from the Levant and
Barbary, obliged to submit to a very strict quarantine because the plague had been
rampant in the Ottoman Empire since 1812. Ships were not admitted into the
Spanish ports until they had undergone the quarantine. Panzac, op. cit., 1986, pp.
177–179.
   13
      The increasing rarity of links between Tunisia and the Levant was real, how-
ever, as is shown by the changes in the number of charters by the merchants of
Sfax, always biased towards the Levant. From 1801 to 1806, they hired an aver-
age of 24 ships a year; this ﬁgure fell to four or ﬁve in the period from 1807 to
1811, and to zero in 1812–1813, rising back to three at the end of 1814. Zouari,
op. cit., p. 196.
