                  from privateering to shipping                  187

was Muslim and the charter company European, since it was the
same situation in reverse. On 27 July 1810, the Algerian raïs Hadj
Mohammed Ben Soliman agreed, in a contract written and signed
by the two parties in Tetuan, to take a cargo of “320 to 335 quin-
tals of Mogador gum” to Algiers on behalf of François Lagarde, a
French merchant. Written in Spanish, this contract consisted of all
the articles that were found in the other documents of this type. But
there was something even more unexpected: contracts written accord-
ing to the same model, with the same clauses, between a Muslim
captain and the owner of the chartered ship, also a Muslim. For
example, the contract concluded on 11 February 1806 in the chan-
cellery of the Austrian consulate, between again Yûnis Ben Yûnis,
a merchant in Tunis, and now the raïs Saïd, commander of a brig
ﬂying the Tunisian ﬂag, at anchor in Porto-Farina. Note that the
contract bears the Christian date and the signatures of the charterer
and the representative of the illiterate raïs ‘in idioma arabo’.
   Yûnis Ben Yûnis treated a Tunisian captain just as he would a
Ragusan or French captain, drawing up in a European consulate a
charter contract that contained the same clauses and, very likely,
a price based on the same rates, payable in Spanish currency. By
this procedure, one of the most important merchants of the regen-
cies and very much involved in trade with Europe, he was openly
acknowledging the qualities of European maritime law with its pre-
cise details and written guarantees. In the same period, the char-
terers from Sfax, although they exchanged written contracts with the
Christian caravan captains, did not do so with the Muslim owners
of the local coasters serving the neighbouring ports of Djerba, Gabes
and even Tripoli, but trusted in simple verbal agreements.

The Cargoes
The ships’ cargoes provide the basis of our knowledge of maritime
trade. We know them because of the ships’ manifests, detailed inven-
tories which enable us to produce statistics, distinguish between
imports and exports, follow commercial trends—in short, let us make
a detailed evaluation of the economy of the port, region or country
in question. These practices were used by Europeans and Muslims
alike, with the diﬀerence that the practice of writing manifests had
become usual with the Europeans, whereas it was still rare for the
Muslims. The habit of having written documents now becoming
