186                                   chapter six

is therefore from this information that we will attempt to outline the
salient features of that activity, and to ascertain in what measure the
North Africans engaged in shipping resembled or remained distinct
from the Europeans they had partially replaced.

The Charter Contracts
Chartering, i.e. hiring a ship, necessarily involved the establishment
of a contract between its captain and the temporary user or users
of the vessel. This contract, which set forth the conditions of the
charter, could take diﬀerent forms. The simplest was the oral con-
tract, based on the good faith of those entering into it, often strength-
ened by the presence of witnesses. This was the method usually
chosen by the Muslim merchants using the services of ships com-
manded by captains who were also Muslims, most often for coastal
navigation or for voyages to ports in the Islamic world. Clearly this
type of agreement left no direct trace, but could be mentioned in
correspondence. The other method had a private character, but in
a simpliﬁed written form drawn up by the two parties. Examples of
such contracts are rare, as they were usually not preserved once the
voyage was completed but one dated 14 October 1803 between
Yûnis Ben Yûnis and Steﬀano Cavalli, captain of the Ragusan vessel
Pallade states:
      . . . the present [document], although privately written, is intended by
      the contracting parties to have the same force and authority it would
      have if it were a public act . . .16
We have seen how the Maghrebi charterers normally drew up con-
tracts with European captains based on precise and detailed word-
ing, in order to avoid, as far as possible, any risk of later disputes.
   In the early nineteenth century, this practice, seemingly usual
between representatives of two such diﬀerent cultures and henceforth
secular, was unexpectedly extended. The documents show that the
captains of Maghrebi merchant ships, who from now on were in
competition with the European ships, had adopted the same form
of charter contract. It was also the case, of course, when the captain


   16
      A.N. Paris A.P., 134/10. “. . . la presente, ben che privata scrittura, ma che intendono
le parti contraenti abbia la stessa forza e vigore come le fosse un’atto publico . . .”
