                   from privateering to shipping                   179

cases, the registers do not indicate the eventual destinations of the
ships. We have a few examples: the raïs Ismail’s Algerian polacca
which, on arrival in Algiers on 23 October 1806, landed a Maltese
woman before sailing for Istanbul in order to drop oﬀ thirty-four
Turks. On 8 August 1808, the Tunisian polacca of the raïs Ali Capta
arrived from Sfax with a load of paper, fezes and woolen fabrics to
be taken to the Levant. In 1810, a polacca from Tripoli stopped
over in Malta: after having unloaded 130 head of cattle and 30
sheep, it took on board 130 bales of cotton destined for Morocco.
   The traﬃc between the diﬀerent Maghrebi states and the European
ports was composed above all of ships ﬂying the ﬂags of those states.
In Marseilles, out of 55 ships arriving from the Regency of Algiers,
four were Moroccan, one Tunisian and ﬁfty Algerian; 121 ships
arrived in Malta from Tripoli, four of which were Tunisian and 117
Tripolitan, while in the group of 61 ships that linked Tunis to Malta,
it is no surprise to ﬁnd three Tripolitan and 58 Tunisian vessels.
This veritable ‘national preference’ is one of the striking features of
Maghrebi navigation, as is revealed in its frequentation of European
ports, or more precisely, of several of them. In spite of the quantity,
quality and diversity of the information gathered in Malta, Marseilles
and Barcelona, it is obviously indispensable to examine the move-
ments of the ships ﬂying the ﬂags of the regencies in the ports of
the Maghreb itself.

Ship Movements in Ports of the Maghreb
For our evaluations of the activity of the European ports we had
access to the registers of the various health authorities, documents
that are considered trustworthy. There is no equivalent source for
the Maghrebi ports, and therefore we have used a more heteroge-
neous and, most often, fragmentary or partial documentation. What
conclusions we can draw from it are nevertheless useful, and illus-
trate quite clearly the maritime activity of the ports of the regencies
during these exceptionally fruitful years.

Algiers
The information is mainly from commercial documents, chieﬂy a
few manifests of ships’ merchandise prepared for a small number of
ship charters and customs receipts related to vessels coming from or
going to Algiers. Here again, we cannot be exhaustive, as the source
