192                          chapter six

The Regency of Tunis
Three Tunisian ports had ongoing relations with Malta:
• Sfax: 22 references to food products, twelve to dates, seven to dried
  octopi, two to cereals and one to oil; 21 references to raw materials,
  including six to coal, six to wool, one to sponges and eight to a
  ﬁnished product, soap.
• Sousse: 47 references in all, of which 23 are to food products, nine
  to oil, six to cereals, three to beans, two to semolina and one to
  dates: in addition, there are 21 references to soap.
• Tunis: The references (88) are more numerous and more diver-
  siﬁed. There are nine references to cattle on the hoof, then 42 to
  agricultural products: 16 to cereals, nine to oil, seven to beans,
  ﬁve to dates, to which we must add the references to hazelnuts,
  semolina and olives. There are also 17 references to raw materials,
  seven to leather, six to wool, but also to barilla and to wax. Finally
  we should mention 20 references to ﬁnished products; including
  nine to soap, seven to hats, two to paper, one to woollen fabrics
  and one to angora wool shawls.
It therefore appears that Malta received a signiﬁcant amount of food
supplies from the Maghreb. Products from livestock farming and
agriculture exported by the two regencies represented 69% of the
references to cargo for the regency of Tripoli, and 55.4% for Tunisia.
They furnished mainly livestock, cereals, olive oil and dates. It can
be seen that the ﬁve North African ports were relatively specialised:
Bengazi exported mostly livestock, oil came from Tunisia (especially
Sousse), dates came particularly from Tripoli and Sfax, wheat from
Tripoli and Tunis. Although raw materials—wool, wax, leather—
came from almost everywhere, we should notice the importance of
articles made in Tunis, especially the ‘Tunis-style hats’, and soap
from Sousse. The presence of cotton, shawls, woollen fabrics and
paper is ﬁnally a reminder of the role of these ports in re-export-
ing goods. Once again, taking advantage of international circum-
stances, the North African ports managed to adapt, thanks to their
seamen and their entrepreneurs. The next chapter describes the ves-
sels, their crews and voyages in detail.
