190                          chapter six

provide details for both the French and the Tunisian ships, con-
cerning not only their cargoes, but also their origins. On 22 March
1810, Amor Galban, a merchant from Tunis, loaded into the Tunisian
xebeck of the raïs Ibrahim el-Kabat bound for Manfredonia; twelve
barrels of molasses, ten baskets of dates from Tunis, one case of wax
candles from Algiers and twenty bunches of grapes from Tunis. On
9 May of the same year, R. Forbes, an American merchant estab-
lished in Tunis, loaded a shipment of goods onto the Tunisian
schooner Fatima commanded by the raïs Mohammed Uskuplu, con-
sisting of 67 bales of cotton, 278 barrels of potash and 1,200 lengths
of timber all brought from the United States. The Fatima, which left
Tunis on 12 May, arrived in Marseilles on the 19th, according to
the register of the health authorities in Marseilles, which duly noted
its cargo. The list was identical to the one in the bill of lading pre-
pared in Tunis. Naturally the diversity in these shipments is also
found in the merchandise loaded onto the French ships in Tunis,
like Captain Antoine Ville’s schooner La Veloce, bound for Genoa,
which, on 9 January 1809, took on board a cargo consisting of 40
bales of cotton and four barrels of mastic from Smyrna, ﬁve baskets
of wax from Algeria, a case of elephant tusks from Morocco, barilla
ash from a captured corsair ship, along with soap, dates, alfa and
coils of rope from Tunisia.
    Exports from Tunis that were headed for Napoleonic Europe were
therefore made up of two categories of merchandise. The ﬁrst included
local products, such as wool, sponges, barilla, soap, dates and dried
fruits, supplying a time-honoured ﬂow of trade; and the second was
much more diversiﬁed, with products from much farther aﬁeld. The
list of goods brought to Tunis and then re-exported is very long:
Egyptian natron, wax from Algiers, senna, wool and barilla from
Tripoli, elephant tusks from Africa brought in from Morocco, valonia
from the Morea, and especially raw cotton from Smyrna. In 1810,
out of 67 ships that had set sail for the ports of imperial Europe,
Marseilles, Leghorn, Naples and Civita-Vecchia, 22 were transport-
ing cargoes of Anatolian cotton, with a total of 856 bales, 150,000
pounds weight, relatively little compared to the imports of Marseilles
alone in the years 1785 to 1789 (6.8 million pounds a year), but it
was an indication of eﬀorts made to lesson the eﬀect of the English
maritime blockade. In the holds of these ships could also be found
various exotic goods: coﬀee and pepper from Java, coﬀee and sugar
