188                           chapter six

established among the Muslims was however not an indication that
they were renouncing Muslim law. As for the regencies, we have
only a few dozen of these documents, which concern Tunisian ships,
and only for the period from 1809 to 1813. They are all the more
valuable for revealing the way maritime shipping was organised and
operated. The ship’s manifest, which was also called the declaration,
or bill of lading, was the receipt delivered by the captain, acknowl-
edging that he had loaded certain merchandise aboard his ship. It
included information about the ship, its captain, its destination,
detailed facts about the merchandise on board, including indica-
tions about which part of the cargo belonged to which individual as
well as the name of the consignees to whom the goods were to be
delivered.
   The manifests discussed here concern only Tunisian ships whose
papers, charter contracts and bills of lading were drawn up and
authenticated by the shipper in the presence of the chancellor of the
Austrian consulate in Tunis. We should not forget that the char-
terer was the one who hired the ship, whereas the shipper only fur-
nished the merchandise being carried. Each ship’s voyage therefore
necessitated two distinct documents, the charter contract and the bill
of lading. Both were provided for the ship of the raïs Ali Coli, whose
charter contract we possess, drawn up in the name of Yûnis Ben
Yûnis, as well as the bill of lading for the cargo dated 21 April 1813.
In addition, it was the raïs who was responsible for the sale of the
merchandise, acting as the supercargo. There was a single cargo,
which was composed of only two products whose origin was unusually
indicated: the salt was from Tunis, but the valonia, a type of acorn
that was used for tanning leather and dyeing fabrics, had been
brought aboard in Tunis and was being re-exported to Naples by
the shipper.
   A second example, from 9 December 1812, involves again only
one shipper, but an important personage, the bey’s prime minister,
who, alongside his high functions, or rather, thanks to them, doubled
as an active businessman, to this end making use of the services of
an agent. In this case the cargo was much more varied, primarily
cowhide, but also oil, dates, pistachos, scagliola (a type of millet) and
wax. The shipper added to this merchandise, in extremis, a consider-
able sum of money in Spanish currency, equivalent to about a hun-
dred thousand francs, whose ultimate destination we unfortunately
do not know. Here, too, the consignee was the captain, Hassan
