                      from privateering to shipping                            189

Morali, one of the most reputable Tunisian raïs, who was also a
businessman, which explains the trust shown in him by Yussuf sâhib
at-tabaa.
   The cargo listed in the third example, merchandise shipped in Ali
Mistiri’s xebeck, included a collection of goods destined for Malta
loaded by four shippers: Polizoi Crendiropulo and Antonio Vaﬁopulo,
both Ottoman Greeks, Gabriel d’Abram Enriques, a Jew, and Hadj
Abdan Seda, a Muslim, all Tunisian subjects. This religious coexis-
tence, found quite often in the business world, was strengthened here
by the merchants’ obligation to combine their loads of goods in order
to dispatch them. They hired a supercargo named Anastasio Janopulo,
as indicated in the health register for the port of Malta, which logged
the arrival of the ship on 14 February 1809. All the shippers had
diﬀerent consignees: those of the two Greeks, like those of the Muslim,
were Greek, whereas the Jew’s consignee was an Italian. The bill of
lading carefully distinguishes between the loads of the four merchants,
providing details for each of them, while the Maltese register enu-
merates in a single line the main goods that were unloaded: oil,
leather, paper, octopi, hats. Dividing up shipments was at one and
the same time an economic necessity and a measure of prudence.
   These three examples show that in practice, the charterer, who
went aboard the ship, was also the shipper, or one of the shippers.
If he was not present on the ship, he was represented by an associate,
who was therefore also a shipper. Another solution was for the one
who chartered the ship to designate an agent to handle his aﬀairs,
a supercargo, who in certain cases could be the captain of the ship
himself, especially when there were many shippers. The other bills
of lading that are available to us belong in one or another of the
categories we have described here.
   In 1810, the war between Imperial France and England and its
allies became markedly more economic, forcing the French consuls
to specify the port of origin of merchandise exported from the
Maghreb towards imperial ports. The statements preserved for Tunis17


   17
      “Merchandise coming from foreign countries included in the present certiﬁcates
are all accompanied by their certiﬁcates of original provenance from the consuls of
His Majesty in the places from which they come, and the captured objects have
been sold at public auction in a consulate before being shipped, as having come
from the diﬀerent captures taken by French corsairs to the ports of the Kingdom
of Tunis.” A.M.A.E., C.C.C. Tunis 39.
