                  from privateering to shipping                    191

from Cuba, tobacco and cotton from Virginia, quinine from Vera
Cruz, and on two occasions, packages of porcelain from Nankin,
China! Trade in these goods was particularly tied to international
circumstances. In the decade from 1805 to 1814, Tunis, because of
its neutrality of geographical position, became a centre of redistrib-
ution for merchandise bound for Europe. In such partially reorien-
tated maritime trade, the Tunisian ships had no shortage of work.
   The wars in the beginning of the nineteenth century were to pro-
foundly alter maritime trade in the Maghreb, partly by considerably
reducing the role of France, and further, by providing new partners
for the North Africans. We have seen the rapid increase in the mar-
itime links between the ports of the Maghreb and the regions allied
with England, Sicily, Sardinia or Spain claiming its allegiance to
Ferdinand VII. But the most striking case is that of Malta. Occupied
by the English from 1801 on, equipped with a powerful garrison,
the principal naval base of an important ﬂeet, and in addition, densely
populated; Malta became the favoured client of the nearby regen-
cies of Tunis and Tripoli. This emerges clearly from an examina-
tion of the cargoes of the dozens of North African ships that plied
back and forth from the Maghreb to Malta every year.
   Because the cargoes were often composed of shipments belonging
to several shippers, we have noted entries for each individual product.
We are not attempting to produce exact statistics, absence of pre-
cise information makes it impossible, but to indicate the principal
features of these commercial relationships.

The Regency of Tripoli
We noted 30 references to goods coming from Bengazi, including
26 related to livestock cattle, and especially sheep), two references
to wool, one to barley and another to oil. The list for Tripoli is
longer and more varied, with 238 references that can be divided up
as follows: 92 (38.7%) concern livestock, generally on the hoof, made
up of two-thirds cattle, one-quarter sheep, and the rest horses for
the British Army. The second group consisted of foodstuﬀs, with 73
references (30.7%): cereals (28 entries) dates (34 entries), and olive
oil (10 entries). The third group, which includes industrial raw mate-
rials, is much more varied, and includes leather (15 references), wool,
cotton, silk, alizarin (madder root), ostrich feathers and soap.
