200                              chapter seven

captured Neapolitan polacca to Captain Lichiardopulo, a Russian of
obvious Greek origin. On the First of February 1806, he sold a cap-
tured Neapolitan xebeck to a Sicilian captain, and on 15 June of
the same year, he sold another xebeck that had been captured by
one of his ships to an Ottoman, Niccolo Crissico, also a Greek. And
there are other examples: in the single year 1809, Yûnis Ben Yûnis,
on April First, bought a polacca from two Greeks; on 2 May, he
sold a Genoese brig to Mohammed Hodja in Porto-Farina, and on
14 August, he bought an American brigantine from its captain. In
addition, we know that he also owned another brigantine, for which
he hired a direttore on 9 September of the same year. Herein lies the
an explanation for the lack of freshness of the Tunisian ﬂeet and
those of the other regencies of the Maghreb.
   In a few short years, taking advantage of circumstances, the
Maghrebi states managed to acquire commercial ﬂeets composed of
several dozen ships each. The most dynamic in this enterprise were
the Tunisians and the Tripolitans, although in Tripoli the pasha was
virtually the only shipowner: in Tunis, alongside the bey, private
owners were in the majority. All told, the combined ﬂeets of the
Maghrebi states accounted for 140 identiﬁed commercial vessels, pos-
sibly up to 200. In 1788, at the height of its strength, the com-
mercial ﬂeet of Provence numbered around eight hundred ships; in
1813, at the peak of its development, the Ottoman Greek commer-
cial ﬂeet had over six hundred ships.1 This is to say that the total-
ity of the merchant ﬂeets of the Maghreb represented between a
quarter and a third of the contemporary Greek ﬂeet, a remarkable
situation for a region whose maritime tradition—for hundreds of
years—had been exclusively one of privateering. It demonstrates a
remarkable capacity to adapt to circumstances, and the will to estab-
lish control of an economic activity that was essential for these states
which were, after all, of only moderate size.




   1
     Pouqueville, Voyage dans la Grèce, 1821, Vol. V, pp. 68–71. The Island of Hydra
alone had 120 ships, that is, twice the number of the totality of the Tunisian ships.
