               the commercial fleets of the maghreb                 201

                           The Personnel

The Captains
There were commercial captains just like there were corsair raïs!
Information on them is found only in the records available giving
their names, the ships under their command, and their diﬀerent
stopovers or campaigns. Only the registers of the health authorities
cover the four European ports in our study, indicating the Maghrebi
captains who stopped over in their ports, but not telling us anything
of those who may have gone elsewhere. Nevertheless, to a certain
extent, they do enable us to retrace the careers of these men, and
to see whether—depending on circumstances—some of them might
have commanded both commercial and corsair ships.

Morocco
The question does not arise for Morocco, which abandoned the cor-
sair war at the end of the eighteenth century. The majority of the
captains of ships ﬂying the Moroccan ﬂag appear for only one, some-
times two voyages, but a few had more sustained activity. Abdelfassi
sailed to Barcelona ﬁve times between 28 January 1807 and 18
August 1808; Mohammed Mezero dropped anchor in Marseilles on
21 March and 26 November 1807, then again on 7 April 1808,
before stopping over in Barcelona on 8 May of the same year; Tager
Agem ﬁrst showed up in Marseilles on 24 July 1806, before mak-
ing regular calls at Barcelona, on 10 October and 29 November
1806, then on 2 February and 12 April 1807.

Algiers
Although Algiers was still involved in corsair activities between 1800
and 1815, shipping was now added to the picture. To judge by the
captains of these ships, the two activities seem to have been totally
separate, as we ﬁnd no corsair raïs among the captains of the com-
mercial ships that were frequenting the European ports in this period.
Therefore, at least in Algiers, it is likely that the corsair ships were
not put to another use, even when the campaigns slowed markedly
between 1806 and 1812. The taïfa, the corporation of corsair cap-
tains, had to be on its guard to avoid any real change from priva-
teering activity. There were many captains, but their careers were
