              the commercial fleets of the maghreb                  203

    31 October 1809       Marseilles   27 September 1813      Leghorn
    30 December 1809      Malta         4 February 1814       Malta
    11 May 1810           Malta        20 December 1814       Malta
First sailing a xebeck, Hassan Yussuf Morali then had a polacca
named Kara Soliman from 1809 to 1813, which he replaced with a
corvette in 1814. In eight years, he frequented the principal European
ports regularly, Malta under English rule as well as Leghorn and
Marseilles, which were part of the Napoleonic Empire, thereby illus-
trating the neutrality of the Tunis regency, and the advantages that
went along with it. In the next chapter we will see the economic
aspect of this navigation, and of the voyages undertaken by Morali
during those years.

Tripoli
The case of Tripoli is particularly interesting because of the avail-
able documentation, which, like that of the other regencies, consists
of the information found in the registers of the health authorities of
the European ports, completed by the records of the departures and
arrivals in the port of Tripoli of the Tripolitan ships belonging to
the pasha.
   This means that all the maritime activity of the ships of the regency
is revealed to us by diﬀerent observers. The comparison of the two
sources has proved to be particularly fruitful, not only in relation
to the ships, but also for our study on captains in the commercial
sector.
   We will begin with the type of information we have already
analysed in connection with the three other North African ﬂags. A
large number of commercial captains are found frequenting the prin-
cipal European ports, in this case mainly Malta, with 194 entries
out of 202, while there are only seven stopovers in Leghorn and
one in Marseilles.
   We should nevertheless remember that although Malta was of
course a destination, it was above all a stopping-oﬀ place, while the
other ports were pure destinations only. As with the other regencies,
there were many commercial captains in Tripoli; but those who
appear in the records more than a few times are rare. Among these
were Mohammed Zurieki, who stopped over in Malta on four diﬀerent
occasions, on 12 March and 2 June, 1809, 10 April 1810, and 7
December 1812; Ali Redjeb put into port in Malta four times in
