                the commercial fleets of the maghreb                            207

unpredictable and tied to his captures, while the captain of a mer-
chant ship was ﬁrst of all salaried.5 These incompatible systems of
remuneration, plus the preferred personal sphere of the individuals,
explains why captains in ‘mixed’ service were rare. There was, how-
ever, a certain basic diﬀerence from one regency to another. As far
as we can gather the separation between the two activities was total
among the Algerians and very frequent among the Tunisians; but
the Tripolitan captains were quite diﬀerent, a signiﬁcant group of
them alternated between corsair activities and shipping. The diﬀerence
in attitudes reﬂects quite well the role of the military class in the
various societies of the regencies. Algiers was dominated by the odjak
of the janissaries, for whom the military class was deﬁnitely superior
to the civilians. This view was also found in the taïfa of the raïs,
who must have viewed the change from captain of a warship to that
of a peaceful cargo ship as a loss of standing. The more mixed mil-
itary society of Tunis and the greater importance of the role of pri-
vate business in that regency had a tempering eﬀect on this attitude,
although it still existed to a considerable degree. Things were very
diﬀerent in Tripoli, where the janissaries had been totally replaced
in the beginning of the eighteenth century by the descendants of the
kuloghlus and local men. Added to this was the fact that the pasha,
as the owner of most of the regency ﬂeet, was in a position to impose
his wishes on his captains.6

The Crews
We possess 27 muster rolls for the crews of Tunisian commercial
vessels, recorded in the years 1803 to 1813. Each one includes a list
of all the men on board, with their names and their function on the
ship. A number of the rolls also provide the geographical origin of



  5
     We know very little about the pay of a captain, with its likely supplementary
beneﬁts, in the Maghrebi merchant marine in around 1800. But from this time on,
these were strongly inﬂuenced by European practices; we also ﬁnd bonuses paid by
the charterers as well as beneﬁts from personal trading, called pacotille, a practice
engaged in by the whole crew with the permission of the owner. This features, for
example, in the details of the cargo imported from Tunis to Leghorn on 25 January
1811 in the polacca of Hassan Youssef Morali.
   6
     To judge from the chronicle of Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan, a few private indi-
viduals were owners of commercial ships.
