214                                chapter seven

French ships would have been able to arrive from Tunis in this way.
The cargoes of these ships—soda for soap factories, sponges, oil, alfa,
even pistachios—were identical to those handled by the Europeans
in preceding years, and likewise, the consignees in Marseilles were
still the same.

Simple Crossings
In the beginning of the nineteenth century, navigation was still an
adventure, and it was never possible to be certain of a safe arrival.
Ibn Uthman, Ambassador of the Sultan of Morocco, Sidi Mohammed
Ben Abdallah, who played a vital role in redeeming Muslim cap-
tives at the end of the eighteenth century, made numerous cross-
ings, but he had a horrible memory of them. He described his trip
to Malta in 1788 in the following terms:
       Upon arrival in a place called Gulfu Alio [Golfe de Lion] we were over-
       taken by fear. This sea is calm from the island of Ibiza to Sardinia,
       over a distance of three hundred miles if one passes to the south of
       these islands; the distance is shorter if one passes between the islands
       and the continent of the Christians, for the traveller who leaves the
       islands to the right, except that this place is a ﬁerce enemy, pitiless in
       its horrors, because the passage is narrow and the water much rougher
       there than on the other side. Once in the middle of this part of the
       sea, the wind ceases, and the waves besiege us from all sides. Unlike
       the other seas, this one is disproportionately agitated by the wind. The
       waves draw back, then approach [the ship], rise and then break ﬁercely.
       How many times did they lift the ship up, to hurl it farther on! Our
       lives were saved only by the grace of the One who protects souls, the
       help in situations of distress. Sometimes a pit opens up between the
       waves and us and we in the ship are like worms on a piece of wood.
       Sometimes the crests become troughs, and at other times it is the
       opposite. We could no longer drink or eat, or say the prescribed
       prayers, or the one that is optional [. . .] The waves continued to
       advance towards the ship like racehorses in a hippodrome. In these
       awful moments the heart is thrown into confusion by this faithless sea.
       We should not be surprised this sea is called Gehenna.13
Admittedly, these are the reactions of only a single passenger, but
the risks were very real. The tartan of the raïs Sala Boulaba went
down with all aboard in these waters in October 1809. Navigation


  13
       Quoted in Moudine, “Le rachat des esclaves . . .”, 1996, p. 101.
