               the commercial fleets of the maghreb                         211

Ibrahim Haddad; and Mohammed Hodja hired Marco Castrapelli
from Chios for his polacca Kara Mabruka, commanded by the raïs
Mohammed Ben Ibrahim Morali, on the First of December 1812. On
21 April 1810, Halil Ben Hadj Ibrahim, a Turkish merchant based
in Tunis, hired Spiro Anneti as direttore of his brigantine, under the
command of the raïs Ahmed and ﬂying the Tunisian ﬂag. His contract,
guaranteeng him a salary of thirty Spanish piastres a month, clearly
deﬁned the direttore as the personal representative of the owner. He
was responsible for acting in the owner’s place and in his best inter-
ests in his dealings with the raïs, the oﬃcial commander of the ship,
who himself was required to carry out the decisions of the direttore.
Unfortunately we have no documents that refer to the relationship
between these two men, any more than we have for the raïs and
the other Christian oﬃcers aboard their ships. The rapidity of the
changes of crew members, aﬀecting the Muslims as much as the
Christians, makes it impossible to point to any particular diﬃculties.
What is striking is the signiﬁcant number of Christians in the new
Tunisian commercial ﬂeet. At one and the same time this highlights
the spectacular development of the young ﬂeet, which obviously ﬁlled
a real need, and exposes the crying shortage in competent person-
nel in this ﬁeld in the regency of Tunis. We lack the corresponding
facts for the other Maghrebi states, but is is very likely that their
situation is similar to Tunisia’s, at least in the case of Algiers.10


                         Commercial Navigation

A Convoy Arrives in Marseilles in 1809
On 5 November 1809 a convoy of merchant ships hove into view
in Marseilles. In these times of British blockade, the arrival of a
single ship was the talk of the town in a port whose activity had



   10
      We have the muster roll of a single Algerian ship, the polacca Yussuf, com-
manded by the raïs Mohammed Aga. On 13 February 1809, the crew of 14 men
was the Muslim raïs and able seaman; twelve others, a pilot, purser, a boatswain,
a cook and eight sailors were Christians, (ﬁve Ragusans, four Austrians, two
Neapolitans and a Levantine Greek). A ﬁne example of international cooperation
in the Mediterranean! A.O.M., Aix-en-Provence, 1A 118.
