                the commercial fleets of the maghreb                         213

earlier! The convoy took to the sea again on 24 September, but
when the ships encountered contrary winds they were forced to head
back towards the southwest, coming in to drop anchor at Bugie on
28 September, where they remained until 7 October. They hoisted
sail again and in two days arrived oﬀ Mahon on the island of
Minorca, but the weather had worsened considerably and the tar-
tan of the raïs Sala Boulaba became separated from the convoy.
Dropping anchor in the magniﬁcent sheltered bay of Mahon, the
convoy waited twenty days for Sala Boulaba to show, but in vain.12
On 29 October, the six ships took to the sea again, and on 2
November they arrived oﬀ La Ciotat where they remained until the
4th before ﬁnally coming in to drop anchor in the bay of Marseilles
on the following day. Altogether, the crossing had taken 50 days,
36 of which had been spent in stopovers and 14 in navigation.
   On seeing ‘clean’ bills of health, indicating that Tunis and Tunisia
were free of the plague, the oﬃcer on duty in the health authority
gave the new arrivals a minimum quarantine period of three weeks.
Passengers and merchandise were unloaded in the quarantine sta-
tion located north of the city, while the crews took the ships to a
cove of the island of Pomegue. At the end of the three weeks, passed
without incident, the ships picked up passengers and merchandise
and went to moor in the port of Marseilles, two and a half months
after setting sail from Tunis.
   Aside from the unusual situation of ships coming into the port
in convoy, arrivals of Maghrebi ships had been commonplace in
Marseilles, as in the other ports of Europe, for several years. In
1809, Marseilles received 37 ships from North Africa: 15 were under
the authority of the Napoleonic Empire, two were from Languedoc,
three from Provence, and the others were Ligurian. The 22 others,
that is, three-ﬁfths, were Maghrebi: four Moroccan, eight Tunisian
and ten Algerian. They had therefore largely replaced the European
ships, which were absent because of the extension of the war. Ten
years earlier, the vessels handling the transport of merchandise would
probably have been Ragusan, and twenty years before that, only




  12
     We did not ﬁnd Sala Boulaba in the documents in our possession for the
period after this date. It therefore seems likely that his tartan had gone down in
the storm.
