208                             chapter seven

the crew members, and, in the case of two of them, even ages. Some
give information about the same ship at diﬀerent dates, which makes
it possible to observe the changes in the crew of a ship with time.
These ships varied greatly in size, from a small felucca with a four-
man crew or a bomb-vessel with ﬁve, to a polacca with 45 and a
corvette with 55. The ﬂeet as a whole was mainly composed of brig-
antines and brigs with crews of 12 or 18, and polaccas with, as a
general rule, over 20.
   The personnel aboard these 27 ships totalled 472 men, including
the raïs. The composition of the crews of the great majority of them
(22 out of 27) was quite diversiﬁed. In addition to the raïs and the
sailors, we ﬁnd two direttori , 13 pilots, 14 pursers, 14 nostromos
(boatswains) and seven seconds-in-command, oﬃcers exercising super-
visory functions. Naturally their number varied in proportion to the
size of the ship. On 5 May 1810, the personnel on board Hassan
Yussuf Morali’s polacca Kara Soliman included the raïs, his second-
in-command, pilot, ﬁrst and second purser, boatswain and a boatswain’s
mate, i.e. six oﬃcers, then two gunners, a carpenter and a cook,
and 34 seamen, a total of 45 men. Seven ships had to be content
with a single oﬃcer, ten had two oﬃcers, and the ﬁve vessels with
crews of over twenty men, had three or more. While the ten Austrian
ships already referred to had a total of 111 men, 21 of whom were
oﬃcers, the crews of the Tunisian ships were much larger, averag-
ing 17 or 18 men as opposed to eleven, with a much lower ratio
of oﬃcers to crew, one oﬃcer for nine men, as opposed to one out
of ﬁve for the Austrians.7
   Because the muster rolls provided the names of the men, we have
been able to identify the religious of the members of the crew, mak-
ing a total of 274 Muslims and 198 Christians, or respectively 58%
and 42% of the total. Although the distribution of the simple sea-
men was obviously close to this ratio, 231 Muslims as against 158
Christians, i.e. three Muslims out of ﬁve men, there was a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the distribution of oﬃcers. Christians, with 38 positions
out of 50, occupied more than three-quarters of the oﬃcers posts
on the Tunisian ships. The two direttori, 13 pilots, 13 pursers out of
14, and 10 boatswains out of 14, were all Christians, whereas only



  7
      Most of them had a pilot or a boatswain and a purser.
