216                               chapter seven

ﬁrst was the polacca Messaouda, with a crew of nine men commanded
by Ahmed Hayrout, an Algerian. On the night of his departure a
storm broke imperilling the ship, whose deck was cluttered with
merchandise. The captain had several tonnes of barilla thrown
overboard. On 3 January 1810, a corsair from Mahon forced him
to return to port, where he stayed until 12 January. He left again,
but on the 15th, the ship ran aground on sandbanks a league and
a half from Bouc, to the great surprise of the captain who thought
himself ten leagues away from the spot. Thanks to the help of the
inhabitants, he managed to free himself: most of his cargo, 102 bales
of barilla out of 130, the osier and tackle were retrieved by two
skippers of lighter barges from Martigues. At last he arrived in
Marseilles on 30 January, after a diﬃcult voyage of 37 days. The
other ship that ran into severe diﬃculties was the felucca Teni with
a crew of eleven commanded by Hadj Ali Ben Mohammed, also
Algerian. Although the storm that struck during the night of 24 to
25 December spared him, his ship was hit again by violent winds
on the 29th, which broke the storm-jib yard,14 drowning the sailor
who had been stationed there. She made landfall at Port-Vendres
on 3 January 1810 and remained there until the 5th to have her
rigging repaired. On 6 January, the vessel encountered another strong
gale, which broke the rudder, forcing her to return to Port-Vendres.
When the repairs were completed, she took to sea again—only to
run aground on the Languedoc coast. Thanks to two local ﬁshermen
and the decision to jettison part of his cargo, he managed to reﬂoat
his ship and sail it to the channel of Aigues-Mortes. He stayed there
for three weeks for repairs, and it was not until 3 March 1810, 70
days after he had left Algiers, that he ﬁnally arrived in Marseilles.
Probable incompetence and obvious bad luck combined to make the
crossings of these two ships a succession of catastrophes. Incidents
of this kind are an indication of a demand for shipping that was
enough to tempt sailors like these to undertake such hazardous cross-
ings and to run the risks of winter navigation.
   Of course we also ﬁnd similar disparities in transit times between
ports, and similar navigational adventures among the ships arriving


   14
      The misaine (foresail) and vergue (yard) on the Atlantic coast were called respec-
tively trinquette (storm jib) and antenne (lateen yard) in the Mediterranean.
