210                            chapter seven

and 2 May 1810, he also substantially increased it, because the num-
bers went from 28 to 45, including the raïs. Between the First of
February and the 21st of April, 1813, the religious composition of
the crew of the raïs Ali Coli’s polacca Mabruka changed: in February,
there were six Muslims and fourteen Christians, and in April, thir-
teen Muslims and eight Christians.9 Only eight men ﬁgure in both
the crews; the raïs, two Muslim sailors and ﬁve Christians, includ-
ing the purser. An examination of the three muster rolls of the raïs
Yakub’s brigantine, for 21 July, 6 October and 11 December 1813,
shows the same partial replenishment of the crew after each voyage.
What seems to emerge in these muster rolls is that hiring was mainly
done for each individual voyage, and instability was the norm, which
is conﬁrmed by the examples of employment contracts that are pre-
served in the Austrian chancellery.
   On 16 October 1806, Djema Bugdir, commander of a trabacolo,
hired four sailors—Nicola Sciobel, Andrea Burich, Franco Lobrovich
and one Pietro—for a round-trip Tunis-Malta voyage. The men
promised to remain on board and not to jump ship in Malta, and
accepted fact that their salary, not speciﬁed, would be paid to them
only on their return. On 9 December 1809, the raïs Yussuf, comman-
der of a three-masted vessel, hired Pietro Villaneuva, who “s’obbliga
di piloteggiare la detta nave in qualità de Piloto da questa rada della Goletta,
per l’Arcipelago ﬁno a Smirne” (“who committed himself to piloting the
said ship, in the capacity of Pilot, from this port of Goletta through
the Archipelago to Smyrna.”) His salary would be forty Spanish
piastres, half of it payable on departure and the rest on the day of
arrival. The pilot would have a small room, and would be allowed
to take on-board free of charge a bale of silk and seven cantars
(around 350 kilos) of merchandise. The functions of direttore, on the
other hand, presupposed too many responsibilities to be limited to
a single voyage, and all three contracts related to direttori provide for
a monthly salary supplemented by various material advantages. In
addition, it was the owner of the ship and not the commander who
recruited the direttore. Thus Yûnis Ben Yûnis hired Nicolo Bogdanovich
on 8 April 1809 for his Brigantine Messaoud, commanded by the raïs


  9
    The four members of the Gargiulo family who were members of the ﬁrst crew
are absent in the second.
