             the commercial fleets of the maghreb                 217

from other ports. Sixteen Maghrebi ships arrived in Marseilles from
Tunis: Hassan Morali, in his polacca Kara Soliman, made the best
time, taking six days to cover the 470-mile crossing at 3.3 knots an
hour. He was certainly an excellent sailor, and his exploit can be
compared with that of the convoy described above. The latter left
Tunis on 15 September 1809, arriving in Marseilles on 5 November,
while Hassan Morali left on 25 October 1809 and arrived on the
31st. This means that he had faced the same climatic conditions as
the ships in the convoy, and still beat their time easily. The records
show ﬁve other direct crossings accomplished in from six to nine
days, whilst others took much longer. In addition to the six-ship con-
voy’s 50 day-voyage, there were two similar voyages that took 39
and 43 days, and others whose length is baﬄing. The Tunisian raïs
Yahya left Tunis on the First of November 1808 in his xebeck with
a crew of 25 aboard; arriving in Mahon on 10 November, he stayed
until 5 December before heading for Palma de Majorca, where his
ship was quarantined for 18 days. The quarantine over, he stayed
on in the port for 52 days before setting sail for Palamos, north of
Barcelona where he remained from 22 February until 30 March
1809 before ﬁnally reaching Marseilles on the First of April—in other
words, a voyage of ﬁve months! Unfortunately we do not know the
reasons for these prolonged stays in the Spanish ports.
   Such diﬀerences in the lengths of time required for these voyages
become apparent when there are documents related to several voy-
ages originating in the same port: the four crossings from Bona to
Marseilles lasted 7, 10, 11 and 83 days; ships covered the 700 miles
between Tetuan and Marseilles in anything from 13 to 82 days;
those coming from Cartagena, a distance of 500 miles, took 15, 45,
95 and 134 days; most of the vessels that provided the link between
Aguila, a port near Cartagena, and Marseilles managed the journey
in from 12 to 18 days, except for two: one covered the distance in
six days, and the other in 76! The length of this second trip can be
explained by the stopover in Palma de Majorca for the purpose of
making up the load, a quarantine, followed by another stopover, this
time at Port-Vendres to unload part of the cargo. Poor weather con-
ditions and the Maghrebi ships practising the maritime caravan
explain the sometimes surprising amount of time taken for these jour-
neys. Even though there were only a limited number of crossings
(in some cases only one) for most of the ports of origin, it seems
