              the commercial fleets of the maghreb                     209

the seconds-in-command were Muslim. This meant that in the major-
ity of cases, although the command was oﬃcially in the hands of a
Muslim raïs, decision-making and implementation of decisions eluded
him. Navigation as such, like the management of ﬁnances, and the
orders to the crew, came under respectively: the pilot, the purser
and the boatswain, almost all of whom were Christians.
   The geographical origins of these seamen was indicated in seven
of the muster rolls. The Muslims, mostly Tunisians, came from the
ports or surrounding areas of Bizerta, La Marsa, Tunis, Menzel,
Sfax, the Kerkena Islands, Djerba and Zuara. The Christians were
Italian, Dalmatian or Greek, although there is no indication of exactly
where they came from.8 These purely administrative lists of names
show family groupings, and mention places that give a more human
touch. Aboard the polacca Mabruka commanded by the raïs Ali Coli
were four members of the Gargiulo family: the direttore Vittorio, the
boatswain Natale, and two tars, Steﬀano and Antonio. We do not
know their precise relationships to each other, but it is not diﬃcult
to imagine that at the time of the discussions on their hiring, the
head of the family, probably Vittorio, insisted that all the members
of his family should stay together. Another example is the raïs
Mohammed Haddad’s polacca Beia, whose crew included 19 peo-
ple, of whom thirteen were Christians from the island of Procida.
Here too we ﬁnd members of the same family, the Lubranos: Pasquale
(50 years old) and Domenico (40), very likely two brothers, but also
Porﬁrio (18), probably the son of one of them.
   Two of the muster rolls show the ages of the crew members (for
both Muslims and Christians), a total of 35 men. The two raïs were
30 and 35 years old, the Christian direttore, an experienced man, was
45, and the boatswain 28. There were two ship’s apprentices, a
Muslim and a Christian, both twelve years old. As for the sailors,
seven Muslims and 22 Christians, most were from 20 to 40 years
old, although a few were 18, and among the Christians were also
two men in their ﬁfties.
   For several of the ships, we possess muster rolls of the crews for
diﬀerent dates. Not only did the raïs Hassan Yussuf Morali renew
the entire crews of his polacca Kara Soliman between 9 February 1809


 8
   One of the pilots, named Théric, who boarded the brig of Hadj Abdallah in
May 1813, came from Marseilles.
