              the commercial fleets of the maghreb                   215

was therefore uncertain and also slow, as the ships waited for favourable
winds, for the end of a storm, for merchandise and passengers to
be unloaded. It was not that people in this period did not wish to
travel rapidly, but weather could not be controlled, and they were
forced to adapt to it, which explains the variations in the length of
the maritime voyages.
   As we have seen, the registers containing the declarations of the
captains in Marseilles included brief notes about the crossings, par-
ticularly the dates of departure and any incidents along the way, as
well as the diﬀerent stopovers. 106 Maghrebi ships arrived in Marseilles
between 1805 and 1814, so from seventeen diﬀerent ports we have
in these registers an important document that enables us to recon-
struct the conditions of navigation in this period. The great major-
ity of these ships, 83 out of 106, were from North Africa, nineteen
from Spain, and four from the Levant. We will return later to the
economic aspects of the origins of these ships, in order to concen-
trate for the moment on the maritime aspects.
   It was not a question of coastal navigation. All of these ships were
involved in long voyages, which found them plying around the entire
Mediterranean. The nearest port of origin was Palma de Majorca,
situated 240 nautical miles, or 444 kilometres, from Marseilles, a dis-
tance covered by the two ships arriving from that port, on diﬀerent
dates, in three days—a very respectable average speed of 3.3 miles
or knots an hour. The case of Algiers provides a good illustration
of the uncertainties of navigation during this period, because of the
number of crossings (39) and the distance, 410 miles, involved in
crossing the Mediterranean. Twenty ships made the crossing from
Algiers to Marseilles without a stopover, taking an average of ten
days to make landfall, whereas nineteen, because of stopovers, required
an average of 42 days to complete the same crossing. The record
on this route was ﬁrst held by Mohammed Ben Ali, a Moroccan,
who covered the distance in ﬁve days in his bomb-vessel Messaouda,
an average of 3.4 knots an hour. An Algerian, Mohammed Bougemat,
matched the record in March 1806 in his polacca and bettered it
the following year, taking only four days to go from Bugie to Marseilles
(390 miles), or four knots an hour, which is remarkable for a com-
mercial ship of that period.
   Alongside these tactically-skilled captains, admittedly helped by
favourable winds, were other less lucky or more mediocre sailors.
On 24 December 1809, two ships left Algiers for Marseilles. The
