212                             chapter seven

been greatly reduced—but here was a whole convoy! Surprise gave
way to amazement when it was learned that these ships were ﬂying
the ﬂag of a Barbary regency Tunis. The raïs of the six ships began
by submitting to the orders of the health authority of the port, oblig-
atory for all ships coming from the Levant or Barbary, regions con-
sidered to be permanent sources of the plague. Each one presented
a declaration, which was registered in the presence of the health
authorities, who recorded information about the arriving ships and
the circumstances of their voyage. First came the corsair xebeck
Gamba, captained by the raïs Mohammed Morali, who was also the
commander of the ﬂeet. It was a large ship armed with 38 cannons,
with a crew of 200, loaded with barilla.11 Next came a second xebeck,
commanded by Hassan Yeiss, ﬁtted out as a merchant ship with no
artillery and ﬁfteen men aboard, also transporting barilla. After this
came Ahmed Tibib, skipper of a bomb-vessel with a ten-man crew,
transporting a thousand quintals of barilla soda and nine hundred
packages of osier. Mohammed Migdeis, commander of a large polacca
with a crew of thirty, submitted his declaration, listing a mixed load
of 27 bales of wool, 192 bales of sponges, 613 baskets of barilla soda
and three jars of oil. He was followed by Mohammed Hakim, also
commanding a polacca, with a crew of 26. In his declaration, Hakim
indicated the presence on board his ship of 21 passengers, includ-
ing the French consul in Tunis and his family. His cargo was made
up of 340 bales of wool, 24 baskets of escayolle (a type of grain), and
sacks of horns. The last to present his papers was the Algerian Hadj
Mohammed, commander of an Algerian vessel, the Messaoud, with
a crew of 24. He explained that on 5 August he had gone to Sfax
on behalf of the charterer of a Tunisian ship, to pick up 223 bales
of wool, 78 baskets of soap and 9 baskets of pistachios destined for
Marseilles, and that he had joined Mohammed Morali’s convoy on
15 September.
   Mohammed Morali stated that the convoy of seven ships had left
Tunis on 15 September. On the 19th, they had made a stopover in
Palma in the southern part of Sardinia, not far from Carloforte,
whose population had been carried oﬀ by Tunisian corsairs ten years



   11
      Barilla is soda obtained from burning certain plants that grow by the sea. It
is chieﬂy used for making soap.
