226                                  chapter eight

      took from my stock 100,000 francs worth of paper that was used in
      the manufacture of cartridges, without paying me for it.
Not unaturally Hamdân Khodja owned ﬁne houses. One, in the city,
was known as the dâr az-zarqâ (the blue house), the other was located
in the countryside and surrounded by a vast garden. He described
it with satisfaction in one of his writings, emphasising the luxury
objects it contained:
      [. . .] linens, rugs, Sèvres porcelain (this porcelain formed a collection
      of more than ﬁve hundred pieces), and a tea service that was also in
      Sèvres porcelain which had cost me three hundred francs in Paris, a
      complete set of pots and pans, every sort of earthenware, jars full of
      oil, butter and a thousand other provisions that we had the habit of
      keeping in the country.7
Of course, even if we take Hamdân Khodja’s ﬁgures with a grain
of salt, his fortune before 1830 was considerable, comparable to that
of the richest Tujjâr Egyptians at the end of the eighteenth century.8
Our merchant diversiﬁed his fortune: about half of it remained
invested in trade based on imports of fabrics and paper from Europe
and on the export of foodstuﬀs, especially cereals. These were the
goods that were found in his warehouses. But the other half of his
possessions consisted of rural properties whose production also sup-
plied his export trade: sheep for wool and leather, bullocks for labour
as well as for skins, cereals, honey and wax. Finally, Hamdân Khodja
had considerable debts due from two categories of clients: those who
were outside Algiers, who might be provincial merchants to whom
he had granted credit, and former residents of Algiers who had ﬂed
abroad. The overseas group was evidently the last dey Hussein and
his entourage, with whom Hamdân Khodja was in constant contact
in connection with business and money matters.




   7
     In the Miroir or Aperçu historique et statistique sur la Régence d’Alger, quoted by Amine,
“Commerçants d’Alger”, 1980, p. 376.
   8
     Hamdân Khodja estimated at 800,000 francs the value of the lost goods, with-
out specifying the value of the merchandise sold at a loss, or that of his urban real
estate, which is not mentioned here. The 800,000 francs he claimed here repre-
sented around 150,000 douros.
