224                             chapter eight

      ship. In the opposite case, send us, as soon as possible, either a batch
      of fezes from Tunis, or a batch of shawls from Djerba.3
The author of this letter, a merchant from Djerba established in
Alexandria, was in partnership with a merchant from Sfax who had
returned to his native city after having lived in Egypt and Anatolia.
The two men sent each other merchandise, informed each other of
the trends and needs of their local markets and sent instructions
about transferring funds on behalf of other merchants. Indeed, most
of these men were simultaneously members of several associations
with several diﬀerent partners. This trade proved to be very lucra-
tive. The partnership between Ali Ben Tazït and al-Hadj Mahfûz
Maqnî, established in August 1803 with an initial capitalization of
1,600 qirshes was interrupted in June 1809 after the death of al-Hadj
Mahfûz Maqnî. The accounts drawn up at this time show that the
initial capital of 1,600 qirshes had risen to 14,686 qirshes in six years,
a ﬁne gross result. These merchants, who were careful and no doubt
kept to their working methods, made considerable proﬁts in spite of
everything. Their fortunes were substantial without, of course, equalling
those of the powerful Egyptian merchants.4

Hamdân Ben Uthman Khodja
He was born in Algiers in 1773 to a family belonging to the high
administration of the regency. His father, who was of Turkish origin,
was a scholar, an alim and also the defterdar of the deylik. His mater-
nal uncle, Mohammed Amîn as-Sikka, an Algerian, was the director
of the monetary committee of Algiers during the last thirty years of
the eighteenth century. Hamdân Khodja, as a kuloghlu, received an
excellent education which gave him the opportunity to discover the
world. In 1784, when his uncle, in the capacity of âghâ al-hadiyya,
had the responsibility of taking the dey’s gift to Constantinople, he



  3
    Zouari, “Deux documents d’archives . . .”, 1985.
  4
    A. Raymond studied the incomes of the Egyptian merchants of the eighteenth
century through the inventories drawn up after their deaths. In the period from
1776 to 1798, 8.6% of the estates were worth more than the equivalent of 4,162
douros (Spanish piastres), and 3% 10,405 douros. The largest fortunes were between
around 80,000 and 200,000 douros. Raymond, Artisans et commerçants au Caire, 1973,
p. 411.
