            the maghrebi merchants and their trade                227

Ahmed and Yûnis Ben Yûnis
These two men from Djerba who had settled in Tunis while main-
taining close links with the region of their birth had a long and
signiﬁcant business career. Unlike most of the other families of
Tunisian notables, who were involved at one and the same time in
administrative responsibilities, farming out taxes, and practicing big
business—like the Gellulis and the Ben Ayeds—the Ben Yûnises lim-
ited their activities almost exclusively to the commercial. Thanks
chieﬂy to the many deeds preserved in the registers of the chancel-
leries of the European consulates in Tunis, we can follow the devel-
opments in their business activities from 1779 to 1813, a period of
thirty-ﬁve years. For reasons we do not know, the name of Yûnis
Ben Yûnis disappears completely from April 1786 to January 1793,
and is replaced by the name of Ahmed Ben Yûnis. After this date,
Yûnis Ben Yûnis reappears, while Ahmed no longer ﬁgures in any
of the numerous deeds that are available to us. In the Tunis of this
period there were two types of maritime activity that could be of
interest to businessmen: privateering and international trade. The
Ben Yûnises practised both.
   The Ben Yûnises and Privateering: The Ben Yûnises entered the cor-
sair world indirectly. On the First of July 1782, Yûnis Ben Yûnis,
acting as proxy for Ahmed Ben Ayed, kaïd of Djerba, sold to Minuty,
a French merchant established in Tunis, a Genoese pink captured
by the raïs Ibrahim Papasoglou, who was probably employed by
Ahmed Ben Ayed. Several years later, on 24 July 1788, Ahmed Ben
Yûnis played a similar role in the sale of a Maltese tartan for the
beneﬁt of the same kaïd from Djerba. In 1789, Ahmed Ben Yûnis
served in the same way as a middleman; ﬁrst on 14 September in
the name of Yussuf sâhib at-tabaa, the Bey’s Keeper of the Seals,
and then on 9 October, again for the kaïd of Djerba. It is of inter-
est that in both cases the buyer was a French company established
in Tunis, Etienne Fuzier & Cie, which thereby acquired two Neapolitan
ships that had been captured by corsairs from Tunis.
   Until this time, the Ben Yûnises had been involved only as inter-
mediaries in the activities of the privateering entrepreneurs, to whom
they were in a way obliged: the all-powerful favourite of the bey, and
especially the kaïd of Djerba, their home region. But as experienced
businessmen, they understood very quickly that the wars stirred up
by the French Revolution were turning international maritime trade
