            the maghrebi merchants and their trade                       223

regrettably unspeciﬁed) to two Jewish merchants; 1600 douros to
Rahmin and 300 to Jacob Farfar. These loans were followed by
another, for 20 douros, to Tosson the Turk, on 20 April.
The particular trait that characterised the activity of the Al-Faqih
Hassans was caution. They diversiﬁed their activities, took risks with
a certain amount of money in corsair campaigns, preferred maritime
trade, but did not neglect to oﬀer loans at interest. Above all, they
spread out the risks, never alone chartering a ship, acting only with
partners, and investing their capital in limited quantities as can be
seen in the contract concerning a voyage to Tunisia in October
1810. They had commercial relations with Jews and Muslims alike,
and their ﬁeld of activity was mainly limited to the Ottoman Empire:
Tunisia, Alexandria and Smyrna. The economic upheavals in the
Mediterranean, the new possibilities oﬀered, seem not to have aﬀected
them. This continuity recalls the practices of the merchants of Sfax,
neighbours of Tripoli, so well depicted in Ali Zouari’s description of
their routines! The correspondence of the merchants from Sfax pro-
vides information about their business methods, which was clearly
just like that of the Al-Faqihs. An extract from a letter of Ali Ben
Tazaït written in Alexandria and dated 23 April 1806, addressed to
Hadj Mahfûz Maqnî in Sfax, gives us a glimpse into the commer-
cial practices common to both.
    You are not unaware of the fact that we sent you, under the super-
    vision of your nephews Sidi Ahmad and Sidi Muhammad, and of Sidi
    al hadj Utman Bakkar, 625 kaïlas of wheat at the price of 5¼ qirshes
    and 6 ﬁddas per unit, as well as 1,000 bowls at the price of 68 qirshes,
    and a case of merchandise. The total cost was 4,530 qirshes. We informed
    you that you can sell all these articles as you wish, taking for your-
    self out of the proceeds the sum of 703.5 qirshes, which we will send
    you from Sma-"îl Sgayyar, to deduct 100 mahbubs and arrange to send
    them to our brother Sa"ban b. Tazaït, and to credit the balance to
    the accounts of our blessed association [. . .]
    We contracted to send you 120 bundles with Sa"îd b. al hadj Zikrî.
    In fact, I have not yet done this. Fear not, if God permits, they will
    arrive as soon as we have found a supercargo. We inform you that
    salt is much in demand in our markets these days. If you have an
    opportunity to ﬁnd a suitable ship in Sfax, rent it, load it with salt
    and send it without delay. At the present moment, salt costs 70 paras
    per kaïla here. If, with a little luck, this operation is willed for us by
    God, I will not fail to notify you immediately of the arrival of your
