               the maghrebi merchants and their trade                            225

took his nephew with him. After the death of Hamdân’s father, his
uncle brought him into his business and sent him in his stead to
Tunis, Leghorn, Marseilles, London, Gibraltar etc., thereby giving
him the opportunity to learn Turkish, French and English. Hamdân
Khodja became one of the most important merchants in Algiers,
where he was in very great demand from colleagues desiring to par-
ticipate in his commercial operations which extended to the Ottoman
Empire as well as to Europe.5 He became known as one of the rich-
est men in Algiers. When he became a victim of the French con-
quest of 1830, he sent a petition to King Louis Philippe to complain
about the atrocities committed against him by the French army,
describing his erstwhile fortune in order to back up his demand for
compensation:6
     Before the French government seized Algiers, I, your servant, was one
     of the most highly regarded and richest citizens. In my farms in Mitidja
     I had 10,000 sheep and ewes, 600 milk cows, 200 pairs of bullocks,
     60 camels, 200 stallions and mares, and in addition to this livestock
     I also had other riches in rural goods, such as 600 beehives, between
     5,000 and 6,000 kîla[1 kîla = around 25 kg] of wheat and barley, and
     on the threshing ﬂoor several thousand measures of such grain. As
     soon as Algiers fell into the hands of the French, the Arabs pillaged
     and destroyed all these goods. Out of goods worth 400,000 francs, I
     had nothing left. Everything was lost. But independently of my role
     as a farmer, I was also a merchant in Algiers, and was involved in
     great commercial activity, with funds of more than 300,000 francs in
     movement in Algiers as well as in the regency. After the occupation
     of this place by the French, it was not possible for me to get a penny
     from my debtors outside the city. As for those who lived in Algiers,
     most went abroad, and the French oﬃcers, after having questioned a
     great many people, came to the conviction that these debts which had
     been lost forever were worth a total of 300,000 francs. In addition, I
     had in stock a great quantity of commodities and fabrics that had not
     yet been sold. Since the caravans from the interior were no longer
     coming to Algiers, I was forced to sell all this merchandise at a loss.
     I had thus to give up both farming and my commercial activities.
     When the French army descended on Sidi Ferruch, Hussein Pasha



   5
      In 1814, he founded a commercial association to operate in the Balearic Islands,
Gibraltar and London. Thirty people participated with a capital investment of 14,406
riyals duru ﬁdda (pataques-chiques) of which 3,133 were for himself, his uncle and
his wife. Amine, “Commerce extérieur et commerçants d’Alger . . .”, 1991, pp. 339–341.
   6
      Temimi, Recherches et documents d’histoire maghrébine, 1980, pp. 93–94.
