222                         chapter eight

   • Privateering: Hassan Al-Faqih’s chronicle shows an interest in
corsair activities, but only in the campaigns of the raïs Omar Chelly.
We learn that Omar Chelly departed on a campaign on 21 November
1811 and captured several ships, which arrived in Tripoli on 29
November and 7 December, and that on 19 December, on his return
trip, his vessel was wrecked on the rocks at the entrance to the port.
There is no further mention of corsairs until 29 January 1813, with
an entry indicating that the same Omar Chelly had taken to the sea
again, in a period when we know that other corsairs were also active.
Everything becomes clear on 12 December 1811 when the author
of the chronicle lists his share of the captured booty, mainly rem-
nants of fabric and scarves, which gives reason to believe that the
Al-Faqihs were among those who had ﬁtted out the ship.
   • Maritime trade: This activity is better documented, beginning
on 31 October 1810 with the establishment of a bûlisa (bill of exchange)
for six thousand douros (Spanish silver piastres) between three part-
ners for Tunisia, of which 500 were provided by the author of the
chronicle. The other references are to goods received and to the
movements of ships on which the Al-Faquis had merchandise, par-
ticularly in 1813. On 12 June, the departure for Alexandria of a
ship commanded by the raïs Moursi, followed on 15 July by another
commanded by the raïs Zurieki for the same destination; on 5
September the raïs Ahmed set sail for Rhodes, and on the 30th, the
raïs Mahmoud Gomeira left for Marseilles. On 20 October the chron-
icler notes the arrival of a ship from Smyrna, on the 22nd the return
of the raïs Moursi, and shortly afterwards of another ship from
Smyrna.
   • Money-lending: The chronicle records that on 9 January 1812,
Abdul Rahim Toloz borrowed a hundred douros from the writer in
the presence of witnesses; on 2 November 1812, Al-Faqih lent some
money—the equivalent of 128 douros—to Ahmed Qadi, specifying
that he had obtained this sum from the sale of oil, and that the bor-
rower had used the money to cover shipping costs and and pay cus-
toms duties in a maritime transaction. On 18 December 1812, he
advanced the equivalent of 78 douros for a period of one month to
Hadj Hamida Ben Cha’ban. On 5 January 1813, he heaved a sigh
of relief because ‘thanks be to God’ he had managed to recover the
loan he had made to Ahmed Qadi two months earlier. There is an
entry for 11 March 1813 concerning two loans at interest (the rate
