               the maghrebi merchants and their trade                           233

of the war and the presence of the French, Alexandria was a risky
destination, which explains the increasing appeal of Smyrna.
   In fact, for Yûnis Ben Yûnis, the best business from this time on
was with Europe, from Lisbon to the west in the Atlantic to Trieste
at the far end of the Adriatic; but above all Genoa, with seven con-
tracts, Leghorn, nine, Malta, twelve, and Marseilles 15, in four years.
These four ports represented three quarters of the European desti-
nations and more than half of all his business put together. Their
growth becomes more apparent when considered in terms of annual
averages. In the decade between 1783 and 1792, the Ben Yûnises
chartered almost nine ships a year, of which more than eight went
to Ottoman ports, as opposed to only one every other year in Europe.
In the years 1800 to 1803, Yûnis Ben Yûnis chartered almost 22
ships a year, ﬁve or six of which went to Muslim ports and sixteen
to European ports. Admittedly, the Muslim world had lost part of
its economic appeal, which can be seen in the drop of a third of
the annual destinations, but the most striking feature of this period
is the extraordinary attraction to Europe. The expansion and reori-
entation of the Ben Yûnises’ business beginning in 1800 made the
management of their aﬀairs more complex and found them using
representatives in the principal places of their activities. An exam-
ple of this is the registration on 12 January 1802, by the Consulate
of Ragusa in Tunis, of a deed naming Joseph Vinent as the family
company’s agent and proxy in Mahon.
   Here again, the contracts provide information, albeit succinct,
about the composition of the cargo of 97 of the 228 chartered ships,
22 of them for the decade between 1783 and 1792 and 57 for the
years 1800 to 1803. As for the Muslim world, we discover in par-
ticular that the Ben Yûnises organised the passage of pilgrims for
Mecca from Tunis to Alexandria, 18 contracts out of the 22 we are
aware of, and that the other ships carried various types of mer-
chandise.13 Our information concerning goods destined for Europe
is more complete. First of all, there was wheat, with 25 contracts
out of 57, especially with destinations of Barcelona, Leghorn and


  13
     In Alexandria, the Ben Yûnises probably had to provide transportation for the
return trips of the pilgrims, with the help of local contacts; but the contracts from
Alexandria during this period have disappeared.
