236                              chapter eight

including the personnel of the consulate, who had been imprisoned
by the dey when he had been obliged in 1799, under orders from
the Sultan, to declare war on France after Napoleon’s conquest of
Egypt. Busnach became the indispensable intermediary between the
dey and the European powers. He intervened at the time of the
Anglo-Algerian tensions, and received the new English consul upon
his arrival in 1800. In 1801, he welcomed the Dutch, Danish and
Swedish consuls, calmed the disagreements between Spain and Algiers,
and in 1803, served as mediator between Portugal and the regency.
   Such a dominant role in both economic and political realms was
a very vulnerable situation for persons who were only dhimmis, or
members of a ‘protected’ group. Discontent and jealousy developed
in a segment of Algerian society. First of all among certain mem-
bers of the Jewish community, supporters of the former muqaddam
who had been dismissed by the dey, as well as among other Jewish
merchants; and later among the Muslim merchants, for whom Hamdan
Khodja served as spokesman: “These Jews have made their fortune
at the expense of the inhabitants of the regency; they all had the
advantage of this monopoly, while we [the Muslim merchants], unable
to buy at the prices they oﬀered, found ourselves excluded from this
trade.”14 Finally, there was dissent also among the corps of janis-
saries, who became furious when they realized that the dey made
no decisions without consulting Busnach and his associates. A ﬁrst
attempt to assassinate the dey, his principal ministers and his coun-
sellor was made in 1801. In 1804, Naftali Busnach managed to
escape once again from a janissary who wanted to kill him, and sev-
eral months later it was the dey who was wounded by four soldiers.
On 28 June 1805, Naftali Busnach was killed by a janissary for
whom he had refused to serve as mediator. The next day, with the
agreement of the dey, who saw in it a means of deﬂecting the anger
of the odjak against himself, the janissaries, accompanied by a seg-
ment of the Muslim population, gave themselves over to a pogrom
against the Jews of the city, wrecking a synagogue, pillaging shops—
the Busnach shops ﬁrst of all—and assassinating several dozen Jews.
Two months later, the dey Mustafâ was assassinated in turn.




 14
      Quoted in Amine, op. cit., 1991, p. 427.
