234                         chapter eight

Malta, and also barley, ﬁve contracts; 14 shipments of olive oil were
sent chieﬂy to Marseilles along with wool, and ﬁnally cattle went to
Malta. The cargoes shipped by Yûnis Ben Yûnis were all products
from Tunisian agriculture and livestock, and his activity quite natu-
rally ﬁts in with the external trade of the regency, whose main fea-
tures had been established and known for a long time. What is
striking, on the other hand, is the rapidity and eﬃciency with which
this merchant adapted to the new conditions. Up until 1793, the Ben
Yûnises were hardly distinguishable from such traditional Maghrebi
Arab merchants as Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan, or the tradesmen from
Sfax described by Ali Zouari. The Ben Yûnises saw very early that
the collapse of France’s role in Tunisia, along with the decline of
the French merchant ﬂeet, presented previously unknown possibili-
ties for expansion, and that this was a unique occasion that should
be grasped. They, and several of the notables around the bey of
Tunis, knew how to take advantage of the situation, demonstrating
a remarkable capacity for adaptation.

The Busnach and Bacri Families
These were two famous families of Jewish merchants in Algiers who,
at the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nine-
teenth not only played a signiﬁcant economic role but were also
involved in high-level political activities. Both families originated in
Leghorn, appearing in Algiers separately in the eighteenth century;
the Busnach family in 1721 and the Bacris, after a ﬁrst attempt in
1716, in 1770. Until around 1790, the two families were involved
in independent commercial activities, mainly between Algiers and
Leghorn, as can be seen in the charter contracts and the bills of
lading of the European caravanning ships. It was in the last decade
of the eighteenth century that their destinies underwent a change
that soon found them in extraordinary circumstances, but by diﬀerent
routes, before they joined forces.
   In 1782, the ﬁve sons of Michel Cohen-Bacri—Joseph, Mordecai,
Solomon, Abraham and Jacob—formed a partnership, but it was not
until ten years later that the upheavals in France, a country that
until this time had been closed to them as to all merchants of the
Maghreb, opened the way for a spectacular development of their
activities. In addition, the growing need for cereals of a France at
war cleared away the obstacles that had been hampering maritime
