            the maghrebi merchants and their trade                 235

trade since the seventeenth century and gave them their opportu-
nity. Without necessarily neglecting their relations with Leghorn,
where Solomon lived, or establishing themselves in Spain, in partic-
ular in Cartagena, the Bacris became the main suppliers of cereals
to Marseilles. This signiﬁcant role was due in part to the collapse
of the Compagnie d’Afrique and the near-disappearance of the French
merchant ships, as we have seen replaced by ships of neutral pow-
ers. In 1794, Jacob Bacri settled in Marseilles, opening a branch of
the family business, a proof if ever there was one of the important
position of France in the commercial activities of the Bacris, and,
vice versa, of the importance of France in the trade of Algiers.
   At the end of the eighteenth century, Naftali Busnach was an
equally important merchant in Algiers, but he also had close ties
with the ruling military class of the regency. First of all, he estab-
lished good relations with the bey of Titteri, Mustafâ Waznâgi, who
had fallen out of favour, appealing to the dey on his behalf and
urging that his name be cleared. When Mustafâ became bey of
Constantine, he made Naftali Busnach his advisor and ﬁnancier, a
position Naftali retained when Mustafâ became dey in 1798. In this
period, the Bacri and Busnach families already had family ties, because
not only was Naftali Busnach the brother-in-law of Joseph Bacri, but
also, he married his young sister Aziza to David, Joseph’s son. It
was probably around this time that the ﬁrm of Bacri Frères et Busnach
was founded. Strongly supported by the dey—who granted the com-
pany export monopolies, in which he himself had an interest, and
did not hesitate to send pressurizing letters to the Directoire—the
new company multiplied its commercial activities. These were car-
ried out primarily with France, but also with Italy and Spain. The
trade involved primarily the export of cereals and untreated skins in
quantities that are unfortunately diﬃcult to assess for lack of satis-
factory information. The company used chartered ships, but appears
in several documents as the owner of several ships that had been
originally captured by French corsairs and sold in Algiers.
   This economic domination was matched by an equally powerful
role in the political realm, which was played above all by Naftali
Busnach, who in February 1800 was made muqaddam, head of the
Jewish community, by the dey Mustafâ. Personal inclinations, but
also the importance of the ﬁrm’s economic relationship with France,
instilled in Bacri and Busnach a strongly pro-French attitude. They
managed to bring about the liberation of some French prisoners,
