232                        chapter eight

of the Ragusans to furnish the majority (82.2%) of Yûnis Ben Yûnis’s
charters in those years. But the other ﬂags he used illustrate the
unrest in the Mediterranean in this period. We know that the Austrian
ships were primarily ex-Venetian vessels, like those of the Ionian
islands. The Greek ships, whether sailing under the Russian or under
the more oﬃcial Ottoman ﬂag, experienced a rapid development
that increased in the following years. Finally, we note the humble
appearance of a single Tunisian ship in 1806. From 1807 on, the
activity of Yûnis Ben Yûnis was considerably cut back, to judge by
the charter contracts, but it is signiﬁcant that most of these were
now drawn up for Tunisian ships.
   We have seen how the commercial activities of the Ben Yûnises
were seriously disturbed by the revolutionary wars of the years 1793
to 1799. Since the contracts indicate the destinations of the char-
tered ships, a comparison of the destinations before and after this
period enables us to see how the Ben Yûnises took advantage of the
new situation in the Mediterranean. Comparing the years 1783 to
1792 and 1800 to 1803 is all the more instructive because by a
happy accident, the total number of ships chartered is exactly the
same in both cases: 87. The list of ports the Ben Yûnises were
involved with is long —27 destinations—located almost the whole
way around the Mediterranean, but there is concerning their traﬃc
shares an astonishing contrast between the two periods in question
(See Map 2). In the decade from 1783 to 1792, the Ben Yunises
did business primarily with the Ottoman Empire, with 82 contracts
out of 87 (90.9%), and certain ports in Europe and others located
on the periphery; Malta, Ragusa or Cagliari, ﬁve in all (5.7%). Ten
years later, things had changed dramatically. Europe now became
the favourite destination of Yûnis Ben Yûnis with 64 ships chartered
in four years (73.6%), way ahead of the Muslim world with 22 ships
(25.3%). But here, too, there were major changes. In the period from
1783 to 1792, the Maghreb was as attractive a location for the Ben
Yûnises as the Levant (41 ships), in particular Djerba, with Tripoli
in second place. But the preferred distant destination for the Ben
Yûnises was Alexandria, well ahead of Smyrna and Istanbul, the
capital of the Empire. In the beginning of the nineteenth century,
the Maghreb held little attraction for them, and it appears that their
link with their native island was severed from then on. There were
also changes in connection with destinations in the Levant: because
