            the maghrebi merchants and their trade                  237

   The Cohen-Bacris escaped the mob and along with three hun-
dred other Jewish families sought refuge in Leghorn, Tunis or Tripoli.
Some members of the Bacri family later returned to Algiers, and
Joseph even became a muqqadam in 1811, but their greatness and
their power had gone. They resumed their commercial activities but
no longer beneﬁtted from the support of the dey: they also became
involved in complex rivalries within the Jewish community, and fur-
thermore, they were handicapped by the pressure of debts and the
extra taxes exacted from them. The archives of the French consulate
in Algiers covering the period of around a year-and-a-half from
August 1808 to March 1810, give us a glimpse into the way the
Cohen Bacris—in this case Joseph, his son David and his nephew
Nathan, the son of his brother Jacob—carried on their maritime
trade. They imported a variety of goods, in 21 diﬀerent shipments
from Alicante and Cartagena and a single shipment from Marseilles,
and exported goods twice to Marseilles and twice to Leghorn. This
activity was only a pale shadow of what it must have been ten years
earlier. The Bacris no longer chartered entire ships, but had to be
content with shipping just a few items on each vessel.


                        Trade and Religion

The North African merchants who were engaged in maritime trade,
both Muslims and Jews, were integrated at one and the same time
into three social circles that constituted an increasingly complex
whole: the family, the religious community, and the political struc-
ture. On the professional level, the only one that concerns us here,
the ﬁrst, involved an almost total solidarity for the individual mer-
chant. The second necessitated cohesion and mutual assistance, but
did not rule out commercial competition between families. The third,
less easy to identify though real, led to rivalries, sometimes even ver-
itable confrontatons between the diﬀerent religious elements of the
regency; rivalries whose economic dimension revealed, even created,
social or political diﬃculties. Unlike the situations in Anatolia, the
Near East or the Balkans, where the merchants involved belonged
to three diﬀerent religions, but were actually members of four dis-
tinct communities—Muslim, Jewish, Greek and Armenian—we ﬁnd
only the ﬁrst two in the Maghreb, as the European merchants were
part of a diﬀerent system.
