228                        chapter eight

on its head, and that corsair activities oﬀered opportunities that were
not to be missed. In 1793, Ahmed Ben Yûnis ﬁtted out a modest
galliot with 16 men aboard which went out on two campaigns, and
another one the following year. Unfortunately we do not know the
results, but the operation must have been proﬁtable, since he then
ﬁtted out two corsair ships in 1795, this time xebecks with crews of
a hundred. We note four ships in 1796, and three in 1797. The
results seem to have justiﬁed the investments, because we have three
contracts of sale for ships captured in the month of November alone
made at the French Consulate for French buyers from Yûnis Ben
Yûnis who still continued to serve in his role of agent for the sâhib
at-tabaa.
   From 1798 on, it was Yûnis Ben Yûnis who ﬁtted out corsair
ships with seven campaigns in 1798, then from two to four in the
years from 1799 to 1803, up to seven again in 1804, and eight in
1805 (the last two years corresponding to the resumption of hostil-
ities at the beginning of the First Empire). Two types of ship were
used: modest galliots armed with two cannons with crews of ﬁfteen
to twenty men, and xebecks or brigs with ten cannons and crews of
60 to 80 men. The ﬁrst group went out on short crossings, the oth-
ers on campaigns much farther aﬁeld. The loyalty of the owners
towards their captains is evident. Out of the 36 campaigns organ-
ised by Yûnis Ben Yûnis between 1798 and 1805, sixteen were led
by three raïs: Ali Dermich Kiprisli, Kütchük Ali Arnaout and Salah
Ben Attia Zouari. Then suddenly, just when the activity of the ships
had picked up and the future seemed rosy for the corsairs, Yûnis
Ben Yûnis, along with a considerable number of other outﬁtters,
brought a deﬁnitive end to his privateering activities at the close of
the year 1805. In fact, his preferred ﬁeld of activity had always been
maritime trade, and although he continued to ﬁt out vessels, they
were now merchantmen. A symbol of this about-face in the situa-
tion was his purchase in 1809 of two commercial ships: on the First
of April he bought a polacca from two Greeks and on 14 August
he bought an American brigantine from its captain, William Brown.
Both of these ships were entrusted to Tunisian raïs.
   The Maritime Trade of the Ben Yûnises: We have 228 charter con-
tracts for commercial ships chartered by the Ben Yûnises between
1779 and 1813. This impressive number, in spite of the fact that it
reveals their considerable activity in maritime trade over thirty-ﬁve
