244                        chapter eight

as attractive to Jewish merchants as to Muslims, the Muslims seem
to enjoy a kind of exclusive relationship with Malta and Barcelona.
   The charter contracts show more or less explicitly the place of
residence of most of the merchants who chartered ships—one hardly
dares use the term ‘nationality’—which reveals a rather marked con-
trast between the merchants of the two communities. With the excep-
tion of a single Jewish charterer living in Algiers and another in
Tripoli, all the other Jewish merchants were Tunisian. It was quite
a diﬀerent story with the Muslims. Tunis was frequented by mer-
chants from virtually the whole of the Islamic Mediterranean, so
much so that the Tunisians themselves were in the minority, only
41.2% of the total. We ﬁnd 31 ‘Turks’ residing especially in Crete
and the Morea, and of course North Africans from Algiers, Tripoli,
and also Morocco. Altogether, the 60 non-Tunisian Muslims char-
tered 54 ships, while the 42 Tunisians hired 187. In fact, the major-
ity of these ‘strangers’ chartered ships in order to return home: this
was the case of the contracts for ships going to Coron, Modon or
Patras for the beneﬁt of ‘Turks’, like the contracts for ships bound
for Morocco, Tripoli or Algiers established by Moroccans, Tripolitans
and Algerians. As for the Cretans, they alone chartered all ten of
the ships bound for Candia. The only exception to this rule of
‘national’ preference was Alexandria, which was not only a great
Egyptian port, but also the port of pilgrims bound for Mecca, and
brought in ships from Algiers, Morocco, Tripoli, Crete, and of course,
Tunis. Only a minority of these, ten contracts out of 54, in partic-
ular four Moroccan and three ‘Turkish’ contracts, indicated Tunis
as a stop on the way to Europe, especially to Marseilles, Barcelona
and Malta.
   Of the 42 Tunisians, only a small number were consistently involved
in maritime trade, and it is not surprising to ﬁnd alongside other
personalities like Soliman Ben Hadj or Soliman Melameli Bachamba,
the name of the great owners of corsair ships, the bey of Tunis, the
Ben Ayed family, Mahmoud Gelluli, Yussuf Sahib at-tabaa, and espe-
cially Yûnis Ben Yûnis. The number of contracts related to these
diﬀerent ﬁgures involved in chartering ships is, however, puzzling.
The documentation used here includes 17 contracts connected with
Mahmoud Gelluli, ten for the bey, ﬁve for the three Ben Ayeds, the
same number for the Sahib at-tabaa, and 104 for Yûnis Ben Yûnis!
Such a disparity between the last-named merchant and all the
others leads us to believe that Yûnis Ben Yûnis could well have
