              the maghrebi merchants and their trade                           247

invest in several shîrkas at the same time. Furthermore, one of the
two associates, even in the interests of the partnership, might very
well invest a part of the collected capital in another partnership with
a third person. As a general rule, these partnerships lasted for at
least a year and no more than ﬁve years, as the partners would feel
the need to do their accounting—and to divide up the proceeds.
• The limited partnership, Qîrât: this was an ancient practice, already
used by the Prophet, which associated work and capital. A ﬁnancier
would entrust a sum of money or some goods to a merchant who
was assumed to be an entrepreneur, who would be responsible for
making a proﬁt from his partner’s capital. When the partnership
came to an end, if the business had prospered, the investor recov-
ered his capital, and after expenses were deducted, the proceeds were
divided between the two partners according to a percentage determined
in advance, usually in equal shares.18 In theory, if the enterprise
failed, the sleeping partner lost his capital and the active partner
lost his time and received nothing for his trouble. In reality, the con-
tract stipulated that the active partner must reimburse all or part of
the capital if it was proven that he had not respected the initial
terms contained in the contract, and could, in short, be accused of
professional misconduct.19 This type of contract was called a mudâraba.
There was also a variant called an al-musharaka. In this form, the
active partner was able to supply part of the necessary ﬁnancing,
and the rest was provided by a variable number of investors. In
1814, Hamdân Khodja mounted a commercial operation that took
him ﬁrst to Mahon, then to Gibraltar, and ﬁnally to London. To
do this, he raised 14,406 riyâls from thirty diﬀerent people, whose
contributions ranged from 160 to 1,500 riyâls. He himself provided
1,500 riyâls, his wife 1,000 and his uncle 333; unfortunately we do
not know the outcome of this operation.
   • Sales on credit: the daftars of the merchants contain a signiﬁcant
number of these. As a precautionary measure, Muslim law, following
the Koran, recommended entering into an agreement in writing:


   18
      When the active partner was young and inexperienced and the contributing
partner was a close relative making use of this procedure in order to provide train-
ing for him, the proceeds were divided up according to a ratio of one-third/two-
thirds. Zouari, op. cit., 1990, p. 161.
   19
      Ibid., pp. 180–182.
