240                         chapter eight

Tunisian Jews. A community may, however, include clearly-deﬁned
sub-groups, as is seen in the Jews of North Africa. Particularly in
Tunis where we ﬁnd two distinct groups: Tunisian Jews per se and
Jews from Leghorn, called Grana, who had settled in the Maghreb
in the eighteenth century. The charter contracts show that when-
ever there were associates, the Jews from Leghorn chose partners
who were also from Leghorn and never the ‘Tunisian’ Jews, and
that the ‘Tunisian’ Jews behaved in exactly the same manner when
choosing their associates. We see the same phenomenon with the
ﬁfteen ships chartered by Greeks between 1799 and 1806: seven
involved two partners, who were always Greek.

Community Rivalries
This compartmentalisation into communities in the maritime trade
of the North African regencies led to rivalries between the two main
groups involved, the Muslims and the Jews, with sometimes tragic
consequences. It is therefore tempting, if not also necessary, to assess
the importance and the role of these two communities in this ﬁeld
of activity. The problem is to deﬁne criteria that are suﬃciently con-
vincing and signiﬁcant to provide valid comparison. Although we
know that the Jews had a substantial role in the commercial life of
Tripoli in this period, we lack elements of information that would
be useful in forming an accurate evaluation. And we hardly know
more about the Muslims! The documentation for Algiers and Tunis,
however, though insuﬃcient and rather impressionistic, does enable
us to make out the key features of the two groups of merchants pre-
sent in both cities.

Algiers
The signiﬁcance of the role attributed to the Jews in the maritime
trade of Algiers resides primarily in the importance of the position
held by the ﬁrm Bacri-Busnach, and by the tragic end of Naftali
Busnach in 1805. There were other active Jewish merchants, but we
lack the kind of quantitative economic data on their activities that
would make it possible to gain a clear idea of their supposed pre-
eminence over the Muslims. Although we do not know the annual
turnover from the activities of the merchants in Algiers, or that from
the ships they chartered, we have quite an accurate idea of their
