            the maghrebi merchants and their trade                243

comparison to the Muslims in the maritime trade of the Tunis
regency in the second half of Hammuda Bey’s rule, which doubt-
less presents a rather diﬀerent picture from some received ideas on
the subject.
The destinations of these chartered ships, the ports and the coun-
tries with which these merchants maintained relations, reveal a marked
contrast between the merchants of the two communities. Out of the
66 ships chartered by the Jews—apart from three ships hired for
only several months—three went to the Maghreb and 60 to European
ports. With 23 ships, 36.5% of the total, Leghorn remained the tra-
ditional partner of the Jews of Tunis, as it had been for almost two
centuries. Marseilles occupied the second place, receiving 14 ships,
or 22.2%, ahead of Genoa with six ships and Messina with ﬁve.
Barcelona, Naples, La Spezia, with two ships apiece, were occasional
destinations, not to mention Malaga, Mahon, Malta or Trieste, with
one ship each. Although the majority of these 28 Jewish merchants
appear in contracts only once or twice, the frequency of the charters
of some of them suggests a steady activity. This was the case of
David Bessis, who appears on nine diﬀerent occasions, of Moses Hay
Darmon, who had eight contracts, six of which with his relative
Solomon Darmon, and Abraham Setbon, six contracts.
   On the other hand, maritime trade as practised by the Muslims
covered the whole Mediterranean. In spite of this, destinations in
the Maghreb accounted for only a very limited number of ships—
23—or 8.9% of the total of 257 ships chartered; here too three ships
were hired for several months. Eight of the ships did business with
the Tunis regency, and the same number with the regency of Tripoli,
four went to the Algiers regency, and three to Morocco. Links with
the the Levant were much more numerous, involving 83 ships, or
31.9% of the total. Alexandria, which received 32 ships, and Smyrna,
23, were the principal partners of Tunis, to which must be added
Crete, ten ships, the Morea, six, and faraway Syria, four, as well as
the capital of the Empire, three ships. Nevertheless, with 40.8% of
the total, the Muslim world was relatively neglected, to the advan-
tage of Europe, which received 152 ships, or 59.2% of the total.
We are therefore hardly surprised to discover that the destinations
favoured by the Muslims were Marseilles, which received 35 ships,
Malta, 27, Barcelona, 23, Leghorn, 19, Genoa, 17, Trieste, seven,
and the Balearic Islands ﬁve. If Marseilles, Leghorn and Genoa were
