            the maghrebi merchants and their trade               239

into a community that was in the extreme minority, primarily urban,
and whose members had a socially-inferior status. On the other hand,
only their integration into this community provided the Jews with a
recognized social framework, legal protection, and the possibility of
engaging oﬃcially in a professional activity. To be an Arab mer-
chant in the regency of Tunis was by itself a relatively insigniﬁcant
indication of a person’s standing. The merchant’s membership in a
community was therefore determined according to two diﬀerent cri-
teria that were also, to a certain degree, complementary. The ﬁrst
becomes apparent in the choice of associates at the time of the cre-
ation of limited partnerships, or simply whenever a ship was char-
tered. An examination of the company contracts of the merchants
of Sfax provides an excellent example of this. All the merchants or
members of merchant families who invested in these contracts were
Muslim. The idea of bringing a Jew into partnership could only have
been out of the question to them; but it is true that the Jewish com-
munity in Sfax was very small, consisting of only a hundred fami-
lies. The situation was the same in Tunis, however, where there
were many Jews, and where they were active in the economic life
of the city. The second criterion was geographic: to the member-
ship of a religious group was added one’s hometown. For example,
the partnership contract established in Sfax in December 1802 by
Hadj Mahfûz Maqnî includes the names of his associates and the
sums they entrusted to him on the eve of his departure for the
Levant. Of the ﬁfteen people who raised 16,250 Tunisian piastres,
thirteen were from Sfax, and their capital represented 15,650 pias-
tres, or 96.3% of the total.
   This marked preference for their fellow believers from the same
city is also seen in the charter contracts. An examination of the
available contracts for Tunis covering the period from 1799 to 1815
reveals that 160 were drawn up by Muslims; forty containing indi-
cations of the presence of one or two partners. Two of these con-
tracts were made out in the name of two Turks, Ahmed Aga and
Ahmed Bacha, who had Greek partners, from Crete like themselves.
A third contract however, consisted of a Muslim, Ahmed Constantini,
who chartered a ship in partnership with an Italian and a Jew. All
the other contracts involved exclusively Tunisian Muslims. We have
66 contracts for the same period that were made out by Jews, 29
of which involved partners—all were Jews, and more speciﬁcally,
