238                        chapter eight

The Family
This was the basic social structure, which we ﬁnd in all the religious
groups and which conditioned the very existence of these men as
well as their activities. All the merchants we have just introduced did
not work alone, but in association with their fathers, brothers, sons,
brothers-in-law, uncles, nephews etc. For these men, direct family
ties alone seemed suﬃcient to establish the reputation for reliability
that was indispensible to their profession. The family character—
even the hereditary character—of their trade was another common
feature of these merchants: all followed in the footsteps of their
fathers, who had initiated them into the business by bringing them
into partnership, a fact conﬁrmed by the several genealogical details
that we have for certain families. We saw Joseph Cohen-Bacri, son
of Michel, who himself was a merchant, enter into partnership ﬁrst
with his brothers, then with Naftali Busnach once he became his
brother-in-law, before establishing a partnership with his sons and
nephews. The situation was similar for the Gelluli family. Mahmoud
Gelluli (1750/55–1839) succeeded his father Bakkar as kaïd of Sfax
in 1782, and became kaïd of Sousse in 1801. Important customs
oﬃcial and major outﬁtter of corsair ships, he was engaged in big
business, like his father before him, who had begun in around 1770.
He formed a partnership, gradually handing over his activities and
functions to his descendants, his sons Farhat, Hassan, Hussein and
Mohammed, and Mohammed’s son Bakkar II. From 1766 to 1833,
the most important merchants in Sfax, representing 61 people,
belonged to just nine families. While we ﬁnd no merchant working
on his own, two families had more than ten members associated
with the family business: the an-Nûrîs with eleven and the Sallâmîs
with seventeen!

The Community
In the Maghreb at the end of the eighteenth century and the begin-
ning of the nineteenth, being a member of a community had diﬀerent
meanings, depending on whether the person in question was a Muslim
or a Jew. In the case of the Muslims, the individual and his family
were members of the principal religious group, which had a crush-
ing demographic, political and religious dominance in the country.
For a Jew, membership of his religious group meant being integrated
