246                            chapter eight

Commercial Practices17
The picture we wish to give of these practices is intended to be very
concrete and is based primarily on daftars (registers) and accounting
documents drawn from the private archives of Tunisian or Algerian
merchants from the period that concerns us. Being involved in this
trade presupposed the existence from the very outset of an initial
capital investment that could take diﬀerent forms. The simplest form
was when an individual merchant undertook this activity on his own,
using his own money. This is also the form for which there is the
least documentation, as the rare registers that have been preserved
were natually very vague concerning a merchant’s business opera-
tions, since he did not have to give account to anyone. In reality,
it seems that this solitary exercise, in which the merchant alone pock-
eted the proceeds, but also ran the risks on his own, was not very
often practised, and that instead, the various systems of partnership
were preferred. These required a written agreement that was recorded
either on a separate sheet or in the register of the contracting parties.
• The egalitarian partnership, Shîrka: in this form, which was widely
used, each partner committed half of the capital in money or in
merchandise. Following is an example:
      Praise be to the One and Only God. May God grant His eternal
      blessing and mercy to His Prophet Muhammad, his family and his
      companions. During the month of safar, blessed and of good omen,
      of the year 1222 [April-May 1807], the respected and honoured
      Mahmûd al-Gallûlî, owner of this ledger, and Sidi Ahmad al-Lawmî,
      enter into a partnership which has been happily concluded, and with
      the blessing of God, it will have a proﬁtable outcome. The capital of
      200 gold mahbubs is contributed in equal parts. It is entrusted to Ahmad
      al-Lawmî, the partner indicated above. It will be used to buy a con-
      signment of fezes, which he will take to Egypt. May God grant him
      success. So be it.
This very simple partnership existed only until its objective was
achieved and the accounts were rendered. Mahmoud Gelluli remained
in Tunisia, and it was his partner in this aﬀair who made the trip,
and of course deducted his travel expenses when the accounts were
rendered. This practice was not exclusive, and any merchant could


  17
     Most of the information used here comes from works already cited: Amine,
pp. 333–343, and Zouari, 1990, pp. 154–182.
