252                        chapter eight

which we know to have been among the principal destinations of
the ships coming from Tunisia. The information provided by these
agents, who were Muslim in the Ottoman ports and European in
Europe, were intended for the bey, but certainly will have beneﬁtted
the powerful personages around him, who were businessmen them-
selves. The decisions they made were based, at least in part, on this
information.

Intervention
In reality, the Maghrebi states had only limited means of interven-
tion in the sphere of maritime trade. The most signiﬁcant monopoly
on trade with the outside world was without doubt in the hands of
the three princes who granted export licenses (teskérés) to the mer-
chants, North African or foreign, who asked for them. This prac-
tice, aside from the gains it brought to the prince, also enabled him
to grant favours to a community, a restricted group, or even an indi-
vidual, by oﬀering the sort of preferential treatment that would enable
them to realise considerable ﬁnancial gains. This was how the ﬁrm
of Busnach and Bacri, thanks to concessions granted by the Dey
Mustafa, reached the dominant and dangerous position it held until
1805. In Tunisia, Hammuda Bey had used this method to support
Tunisian merchants at the expense of the Europeans. We know how,
before 1792, the Europeans, above all the French, dominated Tunisian
trade and held a near-monopoly of exports of local foodstuﬀs, in
particular grain and oil. All the documents show that Hammuda
Bey was concerned to defend and promote the economic interests
of the regency. The collapse of the French positions after the revo-
lutionary and imperial wars had provided the occasion for him to
succeed in his objective, at least partially, because at the end of his
reign, as the teskérés show, the Tunisians were handling almost half
of the trade, against the third covered by the Europeans.
   Compared to the teskérés, customs duties in the Maghreb repre-
sented only a minor deduction taken out of the proceeds from trade
with the outside world. In 1815, out of a sale price of 66 Tunisian
piastres for one qafîz (3.84 hectolitres) of wheat, the teskéré was 45
piastres, or 68%, plus export duties of 3%, 3⅓ piastres for the total,
which in fact represented 5% of the initial price of 66 piastres. In
the same year, the teskéré for oil was 3 piastres per metar (0.3 hec-
tolitres) bought at 12.5 piastres, or a rate of 24%, well below that
for wheat,23 with the customs duties remaining at 3%. The oﬃcial
