              the maghrebi merchants and their trade                         251

envoys known as wakils, who had neither diplomatic status nor a
regular salary, but were above all commercial agents representing
the interests of their masters. On occasion they might intervene in
other spheres, for example, in settling the legacies of nationals from
the regencies who had died in the cities where they were living, or,
as in the case of the wakil for Algiers in Smyrna, handle such mat-
ters as the recruitment of janissaries in Anatolia. Hammuda Bey of
Tunis was certainly the bey who maintained the most widespead
network of representatives during his reign. The following list is
doubtless incomplete, and the chronology of these wakils is uncer-
tain, but, in spite of these gaps, it provides a good indication of the
diversity of Tunisian interests at the end of the eighteenth and begin-
ning of the nineteenth century:22
     • Alexandria: Abderrahman Badreddin
     • Cairo: Abderrahman Touïr
     • Smyrna: Hadj Hussein Ben Daoud, Algerian
     • Tripoli: Regeb Ben Ali Kassem, a native of Djerba
     • Tangiers: Hadj Mohammed Merivi in 1798
     • Malta: a Maltese merchant in 1799, Mahmoud Gelluli in 1811–1813
     • Marseilles: the brother of Joseph Fremier, a French merchant based
       in Tunis, from 1795 to 1810; followed by Peretier
     • Genoa: Nicolo Petro Codriani, around 1810
     • Toulon: Paul Flamenq, then Molla Osman, a native of the Morea,
       in 1797
     • Lisbon: Aron Cardoso, a Portuguese Jew, around 1810
     • Cagliari: G.A. Rundaccio
The correspondence—mostly commercial in nature—addressed by
these wakils to Hammuda Pasha reveals an activity similar to that
of the representative engaged by Yûnis Ben Yûnis in Majorca. Their
locations are an indication of the principal cities, mainly ports, with
which the regency of Tunis maintained economic relations. First of
all, in the Muslim world there was Egypt then Alexandria and Cairo,
Smyrna and the two main Maghrebi ports, Tripoli and Tangiers.
There was no representative in Algiers, with which Tunis was at
war in this period. As for the European ports, it is not surprising
that we ﬁnd references to Marseilles, Genoa, Cagliari and Lisbon,



  22
     Most of this information was graciously provided by Dr. François Arnoulet,
whose scholarly research on the history of Tunisia is well known to researchers. I
should like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to him.
