                the maghrebi merchants and their trade             249

in these exchanges, because in addition to the three partners, other
merchants established throughout the Levant appear sporadically in
the records. This was a purely commercial trial, in which the mar-
itime aspect hardly ﬁgured, but a good number of cases were directly
linked with commercial navigation and the diﬃculties it could involve,
as the chronicle of Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan demonstrates.
In the spring of 1813, merchants from Tripoli chartered a ship com-
manded by the raïs Mursi in order to travel to Alexandria. Shortly
afterwards, the Navy in Tripoli informed them that hostilities had
broken out between the regency of Algiers and the regencies of Tunis
and Tripoli, which led to the closing of the ports. The merchants
abandoned their plans for the trip and asked the raïs to unload their
merchandise. He refused, stating that he had nothing to do with this
setback, and demanded instead that they pay transportation costs.
This aﬀair was not settled by a qadi but was submitted in June to
the arbitration of a local notable, a procedure that was often used
in simple cases. The notable decreed that the merchandise should
be unloaded and ordered the merchants to pay half of the charter
fee. In August of the same year, some other merchants became aware
that merchandise of theirs that had been unloaded in Tripoli had
been partially damaged by seawater when the ship passed through
a storm during the crossing, and held the captain responsible. The
arbitrator chosen by both parties decided that the captain should
buy the damaged goods at the original purchase price, but not charge
for the transport.21 These examples illustrate the two main risks asso-
ciated with maritime shipping: the complications of international
trade and the perils of the sea. They also show how, where possi-
ble, disputes were settled promptly and at reasonable cost, within
the same economic milieu, with reference to the Muslim commu-
nity alone.
   The use of European ships by Muslim merchants could lead to
complications when problems arose. Captain Vangeli Valsamacchi,
commander of the polacca San Teodoro, ﬂying the ﬂag of the republic
of the Ionian Islands, was to take from Marseilles to Mahmoud
Gelluli in Tunisia 1,100 piastres from Spain. The ship encountered
a violent storm and sustained serious damage, and the captain used


  21
       Hassan Al-Faqih Hassan, op. cit., 1984, pp. 209–216.
