248                               chapter eight

       To God alone be praise; may safety and peace be granted to the
       Messenger of God, written by Muhammad Abd al-Qâdir, who acknowl-
       edges his debt to Alî Bin Saîd al Bahhâr for the price of six bolts of
       Hindi cloth each costing twenty-four bûgû riyâls, sum which will be
       paid two months from the day of purchase. Transaction enacted dur-
       ing Ramadân, the month of the gloriﬁed God.20
• Money transfers: There were two procedures for these. In the ﬁrst
case, the merchant entrusted bags containing cash, surras, to people
responsible for delivering them to the merchant’s correspondent, who
would have been informed of their arrival by courier. The messen-
ger signed a discharge, but this never indicated the amount or the
composition of the contents of the bag. Depending on its destina-
tion, the bag might pass from messenger to messenger until it reached
its ﬁnal destination. This system, based on trust, was strengthened
by the fact that the bags were considered amânas, sacred deposits,
and for this reason, under religious protection. The second proce-
dure was the bulîsa, which could be considered as a kind of simple
letter of credit. Without being negotiable notes, as in Europe, bulîsas
provided a way to avoid having to send cash, and made it possible
to transfer money and make payments in diﬀerent currencies.
   • Litigation and disputes: At times disputes broke out in com-
mercial partnerships, usually between contributing and active part-
ners, such as Mahmoud Gelluli’s disagreement with Mohammed
as-Sallâmî and Ahmed al-Harrât in 1800. Mahmoud Gelluli had
entrusted 39,600 Tunisian piastres to the other two for the purchase
of goods in Egypt to be taken to Sfax and sold there. The aﬀair
was badly handled and the capital was lost. Gelluli took his part-
ners to court of the qadi ( judge), arguing that the instructions set
down in the act establishing the partnership had not been respected,
and demanding to be reimbursed for half of the lost capital. The
two accused merchants defended themselves, citing the particular cir-
cumstance of the ﬂuctuations in the market, but in the end they
were found guilty, and Ahmed al-Harrât had to sell part of his prop-
erty to pay Gelluli. The trial brought to light the amount of the
capital investment, the diversity of the trading routes used in acquir-
ing the merchandise in Alexandria for Sfax, but then sent to Smyrna,
Candia and Trieste; and ﬁnally, the number of merchants involved


  20
       Quoted in Amine, op. cit., 1991, p. 342.
