254                               chapter eight

pasha of Tripoli forced his subjects to use ships ﬂying the Tripolitan
ﬂag at the expense of European ships:
      [. . .] the Bey’s resentment because he [Raimbert, the French agent]
      did not want to accept Moorish tars in the crews of coral-ﬁshing ships.
      The real objective of this Prince was to train two to three hundred
      Tunisians in coral-ﬁshing in order to exclude foreigners later, and to
      grab from us the best branch of French industry on the Barbary coast.24
      [. . .] as concerns shipping business, or the caravan, which amounts
      to the same thing, it is the prohibition by the Pasha of his subjects’
      using any ships other than his, when he has any on hand in the ports
      from which they wish to export goods. The following example will
      prove this claim: a farmer producing wine and eaux de vie, of Jewish
      faith and subject of the Pasha, had chartered the same English bom-
      bard by which the present reaches you; he had even already loaded
      various kinds of merchandise destined for Malta. The Pasha let it be
      understood that he had to cancel this contract, unload his goods and
      ship them on a kirlangish belonging to himself and preparing to leave
      for the island [. . .] This Hebrew obeyed instantly without any protest.
      Who, after this, would risk being involved in the [maritime] caravan
      in a country where most of the merchants are subjects of the Pasha?25
In the preceding chapter we noted the rapid development of the
Maghebi commercial ﬂeets in the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury. For the most part using ships that had been constructed in
Europe, employing a majority Christian personnel, mainly in super-
vision, employing contractual methods that were also introduced and
spread by Europeans, the Tunisian captains and merchants strove
to establish themselves as direct competitors of the Christians in an
activity that was new to them—maritime shipping. Supported by
their leaders, a group of the most important and dynamic North
African merchants sought, at the same time, to play an active role
in the vast economic reorganisation that was taking place in the
Mediterranean following the French Revolution. This reorganisation
took the form of a considerable strengthening of Europe’s place in
the international trade of the regencies, in which these merchants
now made a major eﬀort to establish themselves. This often meant
them also setting up transactions and contracts in which they had


  24
     Letter of 11 August 1811, cf. Plantet, Correspondance des beys de Tunis . . . III,
1893–1899, p. 497.
  25
     Letter from the French Consul in Tripoli, 10 October 1814. M.A.E., C.C.C.,
Tripoli, 34.
