                 the maghrebi merchants and their trade            253

rates, in addition to being relatively low, were not always applied
with the necessary rigour. This is how the duties on imported mer-
chandise in Algiers, theoretically 12.5%, were in fact reduced to 5%
for the French and English merchants, and to around 4% for the
Jews. It is true that the Muslim merchants, technically liable for pay-
ing 5%, in fact paid around 1% of the value of the cargoes they
imported.
   The above rates are just averages, resulting from the speciﬁc con-
ditions of the custom’s administration and the collection of duties,
as the case of Tunisia shows. Like most of the taxes, the customs
duties were farmed out to a contractor on the payment of a sum
to the beylik, like the 17,000 piastres paid by Mahmoud Gelluli in
1808 for customs in Sfax. Gelluli, like his father Bakkar before him,
was also the chief customs oﬃcer of Tunis, and had authority over
the other customs administrations of the regency. When we realize
that Mahmoud Gelluli was also kaïd of Sfax and Sousse, and above
all, one of the principal Tunisian merchants and ship owners, we
have reason to doubt his promptness and fairness in paying the cus-
toms duties he was liable for! A judgement based on suspicion, it
might be said, but the eagerness with which the Tunisian merchants,
especially Muslim, but also Jewish, sought to enter into partnerships
with him is evidence of the gains to be had in sharing in his busi-
ness. Furthermore, the enormous variety of the goods and their pack-
aging, as well as the price ﬂuctuations to which the merchandise was
subject, made calculation of the customs duties very diﬃcult and the
object of continual contestation and attempts at fraud. This was par-
ticularly the case with foodstuﬀs, which were subject to strict con-
trols at the time of export, notably wheat and olive oil, which
merchants and captains attempted to leave with in a clandestine
manner, risking seizure of the goods and prison if they were caught.
   In order to promote the development of the maritime activities of
their nationals, the importance of which they perfectly well under-
stood, the Maghrebi states used various procedures that usually pro-
voked recriminations from the Europeans. Two examples: the ﬁrst
concerns the attempt by the bey of Tunis to initiate the Tunisians
into coral ﬁshing; the second demonstrates the way in which the



  23
       Chater, Dépendance et mutations . . ., 1984, pp. 183–184.
