250                       chapter eight

the money for repairs. Gelluli lodged a complaint with the consul
of the Ionian Islands through Mohammed Cherﬁ, and Valsamacchi
was represented by a certain Giovanni Barbera. On 14 March 1803,
the two representatives, under pressure from the consul, signed a
deed in which Valsamacchi agreed to mortgage his polacca and pay
the debt from of the charter fees for a voyage to Sousse and another
to Malta. In another example, on 20 November 1813, Yûnis Ben
Yûnis lodged a complaint with the Austrian consul in Tunis against
an Austrian merchant in Leghorn, S. Klieber. He reproached him
for having caused his brig Saad, which was ﬂying under the Tunisian
ﬂag, to lose a great deal of time waiting in vain for a cargo of mar-
ble. Yûnis Ben Yûnis demanded compensation for his ﬁnancial loss,
and announced that he would arrange for the seizure of whatever
belonged to Kleiber at his agent’s in Tunis, Marco Aurelio Pieve,
until the debt was repaid. Delays and the perils of the sea were at
the origin of disputes, but since the Tunisian merchants were deal-
ing with European opponents, they lodged their complaints with the
appropriate consuls; and furthermore, they obtained satisfaction, as
they were perfectly aware of the procedures to follow, and did not
hesitate to use threats if necessary. It is true that these were pow-
erful personages who moved in the immediate circle of the bey,
whom the consuls had to handle with kid gloves.

The Role of the State

Information
The regencies only maintained diplomatic personnel abroad or, as
we have seen, sent ambassadors to Europe, to a very limited degree.
On the other hand, various personages represented the dey, the bey
or the pasha in the Ottoman Empire. With each change in the head
of a regency, a special envoy was sent to Istanbul bearing the trib-
ute and a request for the ﬁrman of investiture for his master. He
returned from this trip bearing the precious document, the caftan
(ceremonial robe) of an Ottoman pasha, and laden with diﬀerent
gifts, which might take the form of military hardware. The bey of
Tunis, the dey of Algiers and the pasha of Tripoli, however, had
permanent envoys at their disposal in a number of ports of the
Ottoman Empire, and also in Europe. In Istanbul, they naturally
had envoys responsible for defending their interests and informing
them of the policies of the Ottoman government. There were also
