                        the western counter                         263

Gelluli, envoy of the bey of Tunis in Malta, explained to Youssuf
Sahib at-tabaa that the English governor was refusing to allow the
Tunisian ships to unload their merchandise and oﬀer it for sale.
Only the English had such permission, and the Tunisians waited in
vain until they realised that they had no choice but to go through
the local merchants. The Tunisians had also to contend with the
Greek merchants who had become established on the island, who
used the many available Greek-Ottoman ships, and had a perfect
knowledge of the places, practices and languages of the Ottoman
Empire.
   The graphs back in Chapter Six illustrate the annual frequenta-
tion of the Maghrebi ships in European ports. They reveal that after
a period of growth culminating in 1810 to 1811, their number
declined markedly beginning in 1812, in Leghorn as well as in
Marseilles and Malta. Administrative problems certainly account for
this, at least in part, but these were not the only factors contribut-
ing to the decline. There was also the war, to which we will return,
which saw the regencies opposing each other, and in particular,
Algiers imposing a blockade against Tunis and Tripoli in 1812 to
1813, which greatly restricted the shipping of those regencies. Further-
more, the plague reached Malta at the end of March 1813, keep-
ing ships away from the island until the spring of 1814. At this point
there was a decisive event: the restoration of peace following on the
collapse of the Empire of Napoleon I.

Peacetime: the Great European Return to the Maghreb
The Table below separated into three-year periods illustrates clearly
the vagaries of the arrival in Marseilles of ships from the Maghreb.
From 1805 to 1810, the number of ships was limited, a modest thirty
per year, but half of these were ﬂying the ﬂag of the regencies. It
was during the period from 1811 to 1813 that the real recession
occurred, reducing arrivals to only ﬁve ships a year; due to the rein-
forcement of the English blockade, the French customs policies and
the attitude of the administrations applying them. Peace took the
form of the reappearance, along with English ships and those of
their allies, of ﬂags belonging to states integrated into the French
Empire, in one way or another which could not venture out onto
the high seas, or even do any coasting, without risk of capture by
