260                               chapter nine

French consul in Tripoli to the minister of trade in Paris gives a
clear picture of the attitude of the French administration:
      The subjects of this regency have always had very close relations with
      the city of Leghorn. These have deteriorated since Tuscany became
      part of the French Empire [1808] because of changes and diﬃculties
      they experienced there. I never ceased, however, to encourage them
      to continue to import products from there and to export needed prod-
      ucts in exchange. In February and December 1808, two cargoes were
      shipped, and in October and December 1809, two more.1
The consul then listed the obstacles and inconveniences these ship-
ments had encountered:
      The ﬁrst [cargo] loaded onto an Austrian ship anchored at Porto
      Ferraio was sequestrated there for several months, and ﬁnally deliv-
      ered to the consignees with a guarantee that the value of the goods
      would be represented at the ﬁrst requisitioning, a promise that was
      not honoured until long afterwards. This signiﬁcant wrong only came
      about because of a letter from the head of this regency found in the
      ship’s papers addressed to the governor of Malta in order that the
      property of his subjects could be restored in the event that an English
      warship stopped the ship and took it to that island.
      The second [cargo] was not delayed, but on his return the captain of
      the Tripolitan ship who had transported it reported to the pasha that
      the entire crew had been subjected to questioning during which it
      became clear that the intention was to conﬁscate the ship and the
      cargo if it had been stopped an inspected at sea by the English.
      The ship carrying the third cargo, also Tripolitan, was subjected to
      the same exorbitant freightage as the previous one.
      The fourth shipment, loaded aboard another Tripolitan ship belong-
      ing to the regency, was sequestrated for over a year along with the
      ship because while it was on the high seas an English warship had
      forced it to take onboard some French prisoners [. . .] The soda that
      made up the bulk of the cargo was conﬁscated, although it was a
      product of the country and had arrived in Leghorn before the prohi-
      bition against importing it. The captain was taxed a thousand francs,
      which obliged him to make the trip from Paris to obtain an exemp-
      tion from this tax and to ﬁnd out from whom he was to collect the
      freight charges for the merchandise.2




 1
     A.N. Paris, F12 1850 B.
 2
     The quarantine registers recorded these ships as follows:
