262                             chapter nine

      whatsoever. They came to me despair shouting in an outbreak of:
      “Give us bread or kill us.” I arranged for them to be given suste-
      nance, but this was stopped as soon as I left Marseilles. What hap-
      pened when the Algerians returned here? They came en masse to the
      palace of the dey crying out “Char-Allah!” (God’s Justice) against the
      French consul. This event exposed me to the greatest danger. And in
      addition, the sequestrations may have been extended unnecessarily:
      they have exposed the merchandise to ruinous deterioration and in
      some cases even total loss for the owners.4
The consul then related the troubles of an Algerian ship whose
cargo of salted ﬁsh had rotted after an interminable holdup. When
notiﬁed, the dey of Algiers compensated the victims to a large extent,
by making use of the funds of the French consulate, which he had
sequestered during the Consul’s absence. In the face of such actions
on the part of the French authorities, North African ships are now
rare: the Tripolitans have deserted Leghorn for several years; and
whereas ten Algerian ships entered the port of Marseilles in 1810,
only one arrived in 1811 and one again in 1812. It seems that the
North Africans were speciﬁc victims of this hostile behaviour, it is
not experienced by other neutrals, such as the Ottoman Greeks.
Animosity towards the Barbary sailors was too old and too profound.
Their conversion from corsair campaigns to maritime trade too recent
for the old fear of them to disappear, and for the European spirit
of revenge to be silenced. The North African merchants also suﬀered
from this hostility, and it was their trade that paid the price.
   Fleeing the extension of the Napoleonic Empire, a number of the
English businesses in Leghorn, Trieste and Palermo took refuge in
Malta.5 At their instigation, the British authorities multiplied the
administrative harassment designed to discourage competition from
North African merchants. In a letter dated 8 January 1811, Mahmoud



   4
      The existence of more than 60 British businesses was noted in Malta in 1811,
as against 20 in 1806. Between these two dates, the oﬃcial value of merchandise
shipped from England to Malta was multiplied by twenty, making of the island ‘the
emporium and metropolis of Mediterranean trade.” Crouzet, L’Économie britannique
et le Blocus continental, 1958.
   5
      A Maltese ship contaminated in Alexandria was at the origin of the epidemic
whose ﬁrst case was reported on 7 April 1813. Although it was forcefully resisted,
the disease led to 4,572 deaths out of a population estimated at a hundred thou-
sand inhabitants. Cassar, Medical History of Malta, 1965.
