                           the western counter                              261

     Inevitably, all of these vexations, delays and losses annoyed the regency
     and caused it to retaliate more than once, with the result that great
     damage was done to our representation. However, after an interval of
     more than three years, during which imports and exports went else-
     where, there was a new consignment to Leghorn, which I myself had
     brought about in order to obtain raw materials for the Empire, and
     to put our customs oﬃces to work, for imports as well as for exports.
     I promised the pasha, who had supplied the ship, and whose subjects
     had furnished the merchandise, that he would have good reason to
     be satisﬁed with the way things would now be in Leghorn [. . .]
The ill will, not to say dishonesty, shown by the imperial oﬃcials
responsible for applying the decrees resulting from the continental
blockade policy took the concrete form of arbitrary taxes and unfair
conﬁscations, resulting in the collapse of a maritime trade that was
already experiencing diﬃculties. The victims were above all the
Maghebi captains, as is shown in the case above, in which three of
the four ships in question were Tripolitan. All the French consuls
posted in the Maghreb protested against this behaviour which they
considered both an economic and a diplomatic disaster. Delaporte,
the chancellor and interim chargé d’aﬀaires of the consulate in Tripoli,
enumerated clearly the purely administrative diﬃculties that had vic-
timised the Tripolitans in Leghorn. In the same period, Dubois-
Thainville, general consul of France in Algiers, presented a broader
and more incisive view of the problem which he too had reason to
deplore.3
     No one is persuaded more than I of the damage done to our enemy
     by the severity of our customs oﬃces, and it is primarily in foreign
     places—where one hears the cries of the merchants of London and
     sees the degradation of the English merchandise—that it is easiest to
     be convinced; but may I be permitted to say that the customs houses
     of Marseilles and Leghorn have perhaps shown to the citizens of the
     Barbary states a gratuitous harshness which in no way belongs to the
     Emperor’s policy. When in Marseilles in January 1811, various Algerian
     ships were sequestrated there: the crews had been forcefully removed
     from their vessels and thrown onto the street without any assistance


   – a polacca commanded by Ali Ambar that left Tripoli on 28 December 1808
and arrived in Leghorn on 17 January 1809.
   – The bombard of Ali Harsia, which left Tripoli on 14 January 1810 and arrived
in Leghorn on 13 March 1810, after a stopover in Tunis.
   – The brigantine of the raïs Mohammed Massa, which left Tripoli on 13 January
1810 and arrived in Leghorn on 14 March 1810 with 14 French prisoners.
   3
     Letter of 10 February 1813, A.N.P. F12–1848.
