268                              chapter nine

1812 to 1815, with sixty of them in the single year 1815! Apart from
its suddenness, this fresh upsurge endangered all ships frequenting
the Mediterranean, whatever their ﬂag. Contrary to the practices
established during the eighteenth century, in which only ships not
covered by a peace treaty could be attacked, the corsairs now attacked
practically all the commercial traﬃc within their reach. Once again
the principal victims were the ﬂeets of the Italian states: Roman,
Tuscan, Sardinian, Sicilian and especially Neapolitan vessels, which
were the preferred prey of the Tripolitans. Many Spanish and
Scandanavian ships were likewise victims, but especially the ships
that were under the authority of the great powers, and therefore, in
theory, protected from the greed of the North African raïs: there are
records of the capture of a French and three Austrian ships by the
Tripolitans, and an English and two American ships by the Algerians.
To the corsairs, any method was permissible for ensnaring their
victims, as was explained by the French consul in Tripoli when the
raïs Murad’s polacca departed on a corsair campaign:8
      The plan was obviously to deceive some valuably-loaded Portuguese
      or Spanish ship from Mexico or Brazil, or ﬂying the ﬂag of some other
      nation that was neither at peace nor at war with the regency, and
      surprise it outside the Straits [of Gibraltar], because they boarded
      twenty new uniforms in European style, each made up of a blue jacket
      with little silver buttons, a white linen waistcoat and trousers and a
      raphia hat. The captain decked himself out in a blue morning coat
      trimmed with gold braid, double on the collar and sleeves.
From now on, the North African corsairs’ greed and their contempt
for earlier treaties had no bounds: in addition to their other captures
they no longer hesitated to even take Ottoman ships. Having reached
this stage, corsair activities were now very close to becoming pure
and simple piracy, something the Ottoman state did its best to cur-
tail by sending threatening ﬁrmans to the heads of the regencies:
      Firman of Sultan Mahmoud to Omar, present dey of West Algiers:
      The corsairs of the regency of Algiers are capturing commercial ships
      belonging either to the subjects of the Sublime Porte, or to nations
      that are at peace with it; they reduce to slavery their captains and
      sailors and seize their cargoes. The Sublime Porte is responsible for




  8
      A.M.A.E., C.C.C. Tripoli 33.
