274                              chapter nine

on, as in Tunis, captives were considered in theory to be prisoners
of war.
   Having failed to obtain this provision for captives from the Algerians
at the time of its ﬁrst visit, the English squadron returned to Algiers
on 14 May. The meeting with the dey Omar in the presence of the
English consul McDonell was stormy. The dey refused to abandon
corsair activities, or to consult the sultan. Exmouth replied that if
this was the case, the situation was heading towards a breakdown
in relations: he announced that he would take the consul on board
with him and bombard Algiers. Tensions rose, the dey gave an order
for the arrest of all the English who were present in the regency,
notably in Bona and Oran. Finally, on 19 May, there was a return
to better feelings on both sides; gifts were exchanged and the English
squadron left for Gibraltar and thence England, arriving in the home
port on 30 June. Lord Exmouth’s tour was highly criticized in Europe,
including England, in the light of the results—disappointing com-
pared to those achieved by the Americans the previous year. He was
reproached for having merely redeemed captives, sometimes at very
high prices, and for accepting no more than ﬁne words about slavery
as such, in particular in Algiers. This was clearly set forth in the
Liberal Party newspaper, The Independent:
       You must know in England, long before this time, that our Admiral
       has been honoured with a mission to the Prince of Ruﬃans at Algiers,
       and that he has patched up something, which is called a Treaty with
       him, as if the ringleader of a banditti of Corsairs would adhere to any
       treaty longer than necessary and a superior force compelled his observ-
       ance of it. It is quite a farce to talk of a treaty with this rascal.14
War had hence become inevitable, and the weeks that followed were
spent organising a new squadron which again under the leadership
of Exmouth set sail on 28 July. On 9 August, the squadron arrived
in Gibraltar, where a Dutch squadron commanded by vice-admiral
Van Capellen was waiting for them. Thus the expedition took an
international turn, to the satisfaction of the Europeans.




  14
       Perkins and Douglas-Morris, Gunﬁre in Barbary, 1982, p. 74.
