272                                chapter nine

       political crises of nations, would constantly protect the coasts of the
       Mediterranean and perform the important task of pursuing and arrest-
       ing all pirates, on land and sea.
In order to back up his proposal and stigmatise not only the con-
tinuation of white slavery in the Maghreb but also the apparent
indiﬀerence towards it, Sydney Smith than refers to the eﬀorts—
crowned with partial success—of the Society for the Abolition of
Slavery, under the leadership of William Wilberforce, who in England
in 1807 obtained the abolition of the black slave trade. He pointed
out the opposition between the native inhabitants, that is the Arabs,
who were also victims, and the Turks, foreigners who since the six-
teenth century had mistreated and exploited them; whereas if only
they could be rid of them, the Arabs would be able to organise
paciﬁc states open to international trade. After presenting this cen-
turies-old scenario of the misdeeds of the Barbary corsairs along the
Mediterranean coasts and on the high seas, Smith proposed an orig-
inal solution: the establishment of a permanent international amphibi-
ous force, i.e., a ﬂeet with an onboard military contingent for operations
on land. Adding ﬁnally that he oﬀered to head this force, basing his
proposal on his experience and knowledge after twenty years as a
seaman serving in the Mediterranean.
   At ﬁrst Smith’s proposals met with only limited interest, even sus-
picion, even in England,12 and especially in France; and some people
went so far as to propose the restoration of the Order of Malta to
provide policing for the western Mediterranean. Things began to
change in the summer of 1815, however. To the impact of recent
American military successes against Algiers, which worried England,
and pressure from economic quarters, must be added the new open-
ness in European public opinion to the ‘humanitarian’ cause, an
opinion that was increasing in indignation with the multiplication of



  12
      The British position was clearly presented in an article from the Quarterly Review
for August 1816: “Generally speaking, they [the Barbary Regencies] kept their
treaties with England, which were ancient. From the point of view of our national
policy, it would be folly and bad faith if we acceded to the holy league imagined
by Sidney Smith. We do not wish to provide protection for a crossing in order to
defend foreigners, but if the Dey breaks his treaties with us or insults our ﬂag, the
question takes on a diﬀerent aspect: we will be able to maintain our rights, but we
will be able to do so on our own.” Cited in Valensi, Le Maghreb avant la prise
d’Alger . . ., 1969, pp. 102–103.
