                                 the western counter                                          271

prisoners. In July, Decatur went to Tunis then Tripoli to re-establish
relations between the United States and those regencies, which in
September received the visit of another American squadron, under
the orders of Commodore Bainbridge.

The Problem becomes International
However brilliant, this American campaign was only one in a long
series of intimidatory naval interventions that had been going on
since the seventeenth century, determined by each state according
to its current interests, with eﬀects which, as we know, were usually
of short duration. Although this type of intervention was still practiced,
in 1825 by Piedmont-Sardinia and of course by France in 1830, the
years from 1815 to 1820 saw a spectacular development—its exten-
sion internationally. The initiative for this came from the English
Admiral Sidney Smith who in the summer of 1814 addressed a mem-
orandum to the European governments entitled “Memorandum on
the Necessity and Means of Ending the Piracy of the Barbary States.”
The key passages of this document are as follows:11
      While discussions proceed on ways of bringing an end to the slave
      traﬃc on the west coast of Africa, [. . .] it is astonishing that no atten-
      tion is being paid to the northern coast of this same land, inhabited
      by Turkish pirates, who not only oppress neighbouring populations,
      but carry them oﬀ or buy them as slaves to be used in armed corsair
      ships, tearing from their homes honest farmers, peaceful inhabitants of
      the coasts of Europe [. . .] This shameful banditry not only disgusts
      humanity but hinders trade in the most harmful manner, because a
      sailor cannot navigate today on a merchant ship in the Mediterranean,
      or even in the Atlantic, without being haunted by the fear of being
      captured by pirates and taken to Africa as a slave [. . .] In order to
      shelter Europe forever from attacks by African corsairs and to see gov-
      ernments that will foster trade and be capable of living in harmony
      with civilised nations succeed to power in nations that have basically
      been pirate states since Barbarossa [. . .] a proposal to the nations that
      are the most interested in the success of this noble enterprise to com-
      mit themselves by means of treaties among themselves to provide their
      contingent with a combined Naval and amphibian force which, with-
      out compromising any country’s ﬂag and independent of wars or



  11
     “Mémoire sur la nécessité et les moyens de faire cesser les pirateries des États Barbaresques.”
Published in French, in Paris, in October 1814. Charles-Roux, France et Afrique du
Nord . . ., 1932, pp. 497–499.
