276                              chapter nine

port in the direction of the open sea. Added successively to the round
four-storey gun-battery tower topped with a lighthouse, built by
Barbarossa at the beginning of the sixteenth century, were several
important sections of fortiﬁcation that practically transformed the
peninsula into a vast casemated installation equipped with 180 can-
nons. In all, according to commander Boutin, Algiers was protected
by 658 cannons, 529 of them pointing towards the sea.
   Only the French possessed these speciﬁc details: they ﬁgured in a
report complete with maps and plans that had been drafted by the
above oﬃcer in the Engineers, commander Boutin, who had been
sent to Algiers in 1808 on orders from Napoleon the First when he
was planning an expedition to North Africa. The report would even-
tually serve as the basis for the taking of Algiers in 1830. Lord
Exmouth, lacking similar information, in January 1816 (and there-
fore before his ﬁrst paciﬁc tour), sent one of his oﬃcers, commander
Warde, to Algiers, for whatever purpose it might serve, to gather
the same sort of information as Boutin. Warde submitted his report
at the end of February 1816, just before the departure of the squadron.
He too, equally well-informed, described in detail the fortiﬁcations,
the placement and orientation of the openings, and the number and
calibre of the cannons, generally conﬁrming the information collected
by Boutin.16
   Tunis: Tunis was diﬀerent from Algiers and Tripoli as it was not
situated at the edge of the sea, but separated from it by a lagoon,
the Lake of Tunis, which had been impraticable for ships since it
had silted over in the seventeenth century. From then on, the real
port had been Goletta, built on a canal pierced through the tongue
of land separating the lake from the sea, and it was the fortiﬁcations
protecting this port, the only one threatened by naval attacks, that
were improved over the years. The citadel, founded by Khayr al-
Din Barbarossa in 1534, which had been considerably reinforced
and enlarged by Charles V beginning in 1535, was taken over by
the Ottomans in 1574 and partly demolished before being later
restored and improved. In the beginning of the nineteenth century,
it consisted of two large bastions dating from the time of Charles V,



  16
       Perkins and Douglas-Morris, op. cit., 1982, pp. 63–67.
