                             the western counter                           269

       these ships; they are in possession of safe-conduct passes, and the
       Sublime Porte is at peace with them. The European governments never
       cease to lodge complaints against you and to make it known that you
       are capturing their ships. I am giving you this warning in order to
       cause you to cease these aggressive acts and abandon this sanction-
       able course of action.
       Recall how I defended you in allowing you to recruit soldiers in Smyrna,
       and in listening to the speeches of your agents throughout the Empire.
       I sent you ﬁrmans on this subect; furthermore, I recently sent you a
       kapidji bashi named Mohammed with the mission of representing me.
       This kapidji bashi is in Algiers bearing written orders and is responsi-
       ble for supervising their execution. You, ﬁrst of all, prince of princes,
       and all of you, captains and heads of the regency, submit yourselves
       to God and to His Prophet, and obey the orders of the Prince of
       Believers, the Vicar of God on earth. May my ﬁrman be carried out,
       may my orders no longer be ignored. This is my will. [. . .]
       The ﬁrst days of Ramadan of the year 1230 [7–15 August 1815]9
In reality, the Sultan was virtually powerless when confronted with
the activities of the North African corsairs. Firmans and words by
emissaries from the Porte had no eﬀect. The only method the Sultan
had at his disposal for exerting pressure on the corsairs was his
option to grant or oppose permission for the recruitment of janis-
saries in Anatolia; but this was a limited argument whose eﬀect was
only felt over the medium or long term, while the action of the raïs
was immediate. Exasperated, the Western states decided to intervene
on their own. Most of them began by arming warships with instruc-
tions to patrol around the Mediterranean and show their ﬂags in
the ports of the regencies in order to demonstrate their resolve. In
1814, Algiers received the visit of a Spanish frigate, a Swedish frigate,
two French and thirteen English warships. The most famous episode
of this corsair hunt resulted in the end of the most famous Algerian
corsair, the raïs Hamidou.




  9
      Devoulx, op. cit., 1859, pp. 77–79.
