                             the western counter                                    277

linked by curtain walls and reinforced under Hammuda Bey by an
imposing demilune and equipped with a gun battery just above the
water-line in 1796.17 The citadel was equipped with a total of sixty
cannons for the protection of the canal, which had been widened
and deepened during the same period. On the other side of the
canal, a hundred metres from the citadel, rose the Little Fort, built
in around 1640 and armed with ﬁfteen cannons. Added to these two
forts was a fortiﬁed wall of little military value built under Hammuda’s
orders around the town of Goletta, and an arsenal for its navy. The
rest of the Bay of Tunis roadstead was equipped with little more
than a few lookout towers in poor condition, usually going back to
the Middle Ages, notably at Sidi Bou Saïd and La Marsa.
   Tripoli: The form of the city, encircled by ramparts, was roughly
rectangular and faced the sea to the north and the roadstead to the
east. The port itself was limited by the city, the breakwater of Fort
Mandry and a jetty about three hundred metres long that stretched
out from the fort towards the south. Our information on the defences
of the city is taken from contemporary maps of the expedition of
the Venetian admiral Angelo Emo to the Maghreb in 1784–1786,18
which were still viable for the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The northern approach to the city was impeded by the presence of
banks of reefs that lined the shore and the breakwater of Fort Mandry
and extend in a scattering of rocks and islets separating the road-
stead from the open sea. The wall surrounding the city was rein-
forced here and there by platforms and bastions equipped with
artillery on their upper levels. On the side facing the sea, the strongest
points of the defence were at the Pasha’s Castle, a quadrangular
enclosure punctuated with towers behind a moat and equipped with
twenty cannons. A large tower, known as the French Chateau, with
ﬁfteen cannons and built on the reefs in front of the north rampart,
and Fort Mandry, which covered the port with its 18 cannons, com-
plete the picture.19 In all, Tripoli was substantially protected, with



  17
      Djelloul, Fortiﬁcations de la Régence de Tunis, Vol. I, pp. 136–151.
  18
      Venice, Correr Museum, Photo Archives, M. 3328, 3330, 3332.
   19
      After the arrival of Lord Exmouth, the Pasha decided to build a new fort at
the tip of the breakwater in order to provide it with better protection. The bordj
al-djadîd (new fort) was completed in 1820. Rossi, Storia di Tripoli . . ., 1968, p. 274.
