                             the western counter                                    275

                                War On Algiers

The Military Forces Involved
After taking considerable time to organise the campaign with his
staﬀ, Lord Exmouth left Gibraltar on 24 August, alerted to the fact
that the Algerians, aware of his plans, were preparing for his arrival.
Given the imbalance in the naval forces of the warring parties, it
would be a maritime attack against land positions, a scenario that
had been enacted frequently, without any decisive success, in previ-
ous centuries—against Algiers especially but also against the other
North African ports. A description of the military forces involved
will make it easier to follow the unfolding of events and assess their
consequences.

The Coastal Defences of the Maghreb
Having lived under the constant threat of attacks from the sea rather
than from the land, the capitals of the regencies had equipped them-
selves with extensive fortiﬁcations which had been reinforced and
improved over the centuries.
   Algiers:15 built on a hillside, Algiers was roughly triangular in form,
with the citadel of the Casbah at the highest corner, protected to
the west by the fort of the Emperor, overlooking it by ﬁfty metres
and equipped with 35 cannons. The city proper was surrounded by
ramparts 2,500 metres long and 11 to 13 metres high, reinforced
with round towers and set behind a moat that was some ten metres
deep. The parapet walks around the battlements widened from time
to time to become terrepleins, ten in all, ﬁve of which faced the sea
and were equipped with batteries of cannons. In total, the ramparts
were armed with 89 cannons, 18 of which were at the Casbah. Two
forts, the Bordj-el Bahr, with 34 cannons, and the Bordj Bab Azoun,
with 69, formed the two other corners reinforcing the intersections
of the ramparts facing land with that facing the sea. The key ele-
ment in the defense against an attack coming from the sea was the
Mole, the former Peñon or Djeziret (the islets), which protected the


   15
      Boutin, Reconaissance des villes, forts et batteries d’Alger, 1927. An oﬃcer of the
corps of Engineers, Boutin made a proposal in 1808 for a land attack on Algiers
after a troop landing on the beach of Sidi Ferruch. His plan was used in 1830.
