270                            chapter nine

The Western Response

The Americans go it Alone
The Algerians took advantage of the Anglo-American war of 1812
to 1814 to extract an increase in the ‘gift’ made by the United States
and to attack the rare American ships present in the Mediterranean.
The Peace of Ghent, signed on 24 December 1814, freed the American
naval ﬂeet, and on 23 February 1815, the United States declared
war on the regency of Algiers. An American squadron under
Commodore Decatur,10 consisting of three frigates, two corvettes,
three brigs and two schooners, arrived in Tangiers on 15 June 1815
and discovered that an Algerian squadron of three frigates and sev-
eral other ships commanded by the raïs Hamidou was present on
the Spanish coast between Malaga and Cartagena. Decatur sent his
lightest ships on ahead as scouts to locate the Algerian ships, and
on 17 June one of them reported the presence of a large Algerian
frigate twenty nautical miles oﬀ Cape Gata. The Algerian vessel,
with Hamidou aboard, on learning the nationality of these ships, ﬁrst
attempted to ﬂee, then turned around in an eﬀort to reach Cartagena,
a neutral port, and attacked the American frigate Constellation, which
was soon assisted by the frigate Guerrière. The battle was ﬁerce, but
although according to witnesses the manœuvres of the Algerian ship
were swift and eﬀective, its artillery was much inferior, slower and
less eﬃcient than the murderous broadsides of the American ships.
The raïs Hamidou, injured at the start of the action, was killed shortly
afterwards on the poop of his ship by a large-bore cannonball. During
the battle, the other American ships in turn came to within cannon’s-
reach of the Algerian frigate, which then struck its ﬂag in surrender.
Out of a crew of 436 men, thirty Algerians were killed and a hun-
dred injured, as against three dead and eleven injured on the American
vessels. On 19 June, pursued by American ships, a 22-cannon Algerian
brig lost twenty men in battle; it attempted to make for the coast
but was captured and the 83 survivors of its crew taken prisoner.
Strengthened by these successes, the Americans arrived in Algiers on
29 June and quickly obtained the signing of a new treaty abolish-
ing the payment of any tribute and providing for an exchange of


   10
      It was Decatur who in the port of Tripoli in February 1804, had succeeded
in burning his frigate Philadelphia, captured shortly before.
