282                               chapter nine

   If we accept that the manning numbers provided for in the reg-
ulations of the British Navy were respected, there were around 5,600
men in the squadron commanded by Lord Exmouth, including land-
ing troops of a thousand naval infantry, plus 1,100 men on the shal-
lops, i.e. 6,700 men, to which was added the 1,300 Dutch seamen.
These 8,000 men were set against the land forces of Algiers gar-
risoned in the ramparts and forts of the city, numbering roughly ten
to twelve thousand men.24 Exmouth’s forces had on their side the
equipment, discipline, training, and conﬁdence gathered and demon-
strated during twenty years of war against France. Their opponents
were inspired by the religious fervour of Dar el-Harb warriors, reas-
sured by the strength of their fortiﬁcations, and convinced of their
invincibility, after the vain attempts of the Spaniards in 1775 and
1783–1784. While waiting for battle, the Algerian soldiers had very
likely sung a number of the songs composed thirty years earlier
during those Spanish attacks, such as this one written by a certain
Seferlioghlu:25
      We learnt of the approach of the Inﬁdels
      And they’d sent a warning to the city of Algiers:
      We prepared for war, crying out: ‘Allah, Allah!’,
      We drew our swords for the holy religion.
      The ﬂeet of the Inﬁdels came, and appeared.
      The soldiers of Islam all went out to the shore;
      They got ready the shallops and prepared the xebecks,
      They drew their swords for the holy religion.
      Beside every cannon the wick was alight,
      The warriors ( gâzi) like butterﬂies, rose up in ﬂight;
      Blood ﬂowed and mothers wept.
      They drew their swords for the holy religion.
      The shallops went out and confronted the ﬂeet;
      Many a warrior in red blood was covered;
      Angels in heaven and men on earth marvelled.
      They drew their swords for the holy religion.




   24
      Out of the eight thousand janissaries in the odjak in this period, it is probable
that only six thousand were in Algiers, the others being stationed in provincial gar-
risons. The janissaries in Algiers were reinforced by local auxiliaries. Shuval, “La
ville d’Alger . . .”, 1994, pp. 93–125.
   25
      Deny, “Chansons des janissaires . . .”, Song XIII, 1927, pp. 92–93.
