284                                chapter nine

       Seferlioghlu drank the wine of holy ardour;
       Without ceasing he gloriﬁed the Supreme Warrior,
       Good luck to the Turk, to the Arab:
       They drew their swords for the holy religion.
In any case, since the departure of Lord Exmouth in May 1816,
the Algerians were convinced that the English would return in force.
On the First of June, the dey wrote to the sultan:26
       From Malta, your janissaries are informed that an allied ﬂeet of the
       Christian nations with infantry is preparing to attack us; it is obvious
       that they have evil intentions towards us. We wish to inform Your
       Majesty that we are devoting all our will, attention, and all our vigi-
       lance, and will sacriﬁce our rest in order to defend the Muslim pop-
       ulation under our protection; because it is a duty that it is incumbent
       upon us, just as we will defend our coast against these enemies. [. . .]
       In any case, with our men and equipment we shall be strong. Sultan,
       may God preserve you in victory. The present Governor of Algeria,
       the Dey Omar. The 2nd of redjeb 1231 ( June First, 1816).


The Battle
The Anglo-Dutch ﬂeet arrived oﬀ the coast of Algiers on the morn-
ing of 28 August. Lord Exmouth dispatched ashore an oﬃcer and
his interpreter, a Syrian Christian named Abraham Salamé, whose
precise and detailed account is the principal Western source con-
cerning the events of that day. Salamé delivered to the Algerians an
ultimatum demanding the immediate liberation of all Christian slaves
without ransom, reimbursement of the sums paid in April for the
release of the Sardinian and Neapolitan captives, and an end to such
slavery. A deadline of one hour was given, which, for practical rea-
sons, was extended to two. Taking advantage of this extra hour, the
ships of the ﬂeet moved to their assigned positions just oﬀ the mole,
the port and the city, anchoring as near as possible to their even-
tual objectives, with the ﬂagship blocking the port serving as the
pivot of the manœuvre. Shallops armed with cannons, mortars or
rockets stationed themselves in the gaps between or in front of the
war-ships. All these manœuvres unfolded before the eyes of the
Algerian soldiers, who had quitted their casemate positions unaware


  26
       Temimi, Recherches et documents, 1980, pp. 109–110.
