                            the western counter                                  287

     half-burnt pieces of wood. But the most shocking and dreadful sight
     was the number of dead bodies which were ﬂoating in the water.29
The account of the events sent by the Dey Omar to the Sultan the
following September 12th conﬁrms Salamé’s description of the anchor-
ing of the English and Dutch ships, the British ultimatum and the
lack of response to it, as well as the results of the battle:30
     [. . .] the most frightful war ever seen in the course of human history;
     it lasted 11 hours and 23 minutes; in that sombre night, all the cor-
     sair ships and their commercial vessels were burned; there was not a
     single minute of respite, and at every moment a considerable number
     of shells were ﬁred; at the end of an hour, our port and our forts col-
     lapsed. The ﬁring was so intense that we were receiving a veritable
     hail of projectiles. Many of your servants, courageous heroes, fell as
     martyrs of this war, defending their religion and their Sultan; their
     souls have gone up to God and dwell in Paradise; may God grant
     them his mercy. The number of dead inﬁdels was four times higher
     than that of the Muslims; many were injured, their ships were dam-
     aged, two vessels were set on ﬁre. [. . .] Once more, the janissaries
     beg that you defend our religion and country, and ask Your Majesty
     to send, as before, soldiers, gunpowder and everything that is needed
     to defend the country and religion, along with any advice you might
     send that could enlighten us.
In order to mitigate his own responsibility, the Dey had consider-
ably exaggerated the European losses, and reproached the Sultan for
not having sent reinforcements and materiel prior to the battle. In
fact, the disproportion in damage and loss of human life between
the two camps was enormous; the English dead numbered 128, with
690 wounded, the Dutch 13, with 52 wounded. There is no precise
count of the Algerian losses; the estimates, which are very approxi-
mate, vary between three hundred and two thousand dead!31 It seems
clear that the greater part of the losses were due to the ﬁrst English



   29
      The American Consul, William Shaler, wrote to Washington: “The city has
suﬀered incredibly; there is hardly a house without some damage, and many are
ruined.”
   30
      Temimi, Recherches et documents, 1980, pp. 111–112.
   31
      The minimum ﬁgure was put forward by the Dey in a letter to the Sultan;
the American Consul, William Shaler, an eyewitness to the battle, estimated Algerian
losses at six hundred; Abraham Salamé, deeply shocked by the battle, assessed the
loss of life on the Algerian side at two thousand, which was probably an exaggeration.
