286                              chapter nine

of the brevity of the negotiations by the Dey, and the imminence
of the British action if the discussions failed. We have no informa-
tion concerning the discussions that took place with the Dey, but
since the deadline passed without an answer, the British negotiators
returned to their ship, while foreign shipping anchored in the port
of Algiers headed out to sea and out of danger.
   The bombardment of the city, extremely violent, began immedi-
ately, and from the very outset the English cannons, manned by sea-
soned crews, ravaged the Algerian gun batteries, which had been
taken by surprise. The Algerians made a recovery, bravely returned
ﬁre, and even organised a counter-attack: forty shallops armed with
small cannons and loaded with men moved towards the English ships
anchored at the entrance to the port. Three quarters of them were
eliminated by British cannon and riﬂe ﬁre, and the others turned
back to port. Cannonade and bombardment continued for hours
with the same intensity between the forts and the ships. The strict
record-keeping of the British Navy shows that the nine principal
English ships had used a total of 84 tonnes of gunpowder and 36,912
pieces of shot, 810 heavy mortar shells and around 500 rockets!27
Night fell, and the battle, increasingly turning to the advantage of
the English, was pursued into the night by the light of the ﬁres that
were ravaging the Algerian ships and the buildings close to the port.
   The following morning, 29 August, the British negotiators returned
ashore with the same conditions they had presented the previous
day. Salamé, again a member of the group, commented on the result
of the English bombardment:28
      This time I was indeed quite surprised to see the horrible state of the
      batteries and the mole, compared to the preceding day. I could not
      distinguish how it was erected, nor where the batteries had stood, as
      well as many ﬁne houses which I had seen in the city the day previ-
      ous, and I observed too, that they had not more than four or ﬁve
      guns mounted on their carriages, and that of all the rest, some were
      dismounted, and some buried in the rubble. Besides this, all the bay
      was full of the hulks of their navy, smoking in every direction, and
      the water inside of the mole was all black, covered with charcoal and



  27
     These rockets were primarily responsible for setting ﬁre to the Algerian ships
that were crowded together in the port.
  28
     Perkins and Douglas-Morris, op. cit., 1982, pp. 136–137.
