296                              chapter ten

arrived by sea to punish Djidjelly, which he had made his base.
Another Darqawi marabout, Ben Cherif, stirred up the province of
Oran and most of the Turkish garrisons there were massacred, with
the exception of those in Mostaganem, Oran and Mers el-Kebir.
The new bey of Oran appointed by Algiers was forced to reach the
city by sea, and it took him four years to recapture Tlemcen and
Mascara, where Ben Cherif was killed. In fact, from 1804 on, the
authority of Algiers was constantly under attack, especially between
1804 and 1811, and it was never fully restored.2
   This armed opposition from within had serious consequences.
Taxes and levies in kind and in coin were becoming more diﬃcult
to collect, reducing the resources of the deylik and therefore the dis-
bursement of ordinary pay, and, even more signiﬁcant, of funds to
meet the extraordinary demands of the odjak. In addition, the need
to repress uprisings mobilised more and more personnel and led to
substantial losses among the soldiers, weakening the garrison in Algiers.
All of these were causes of discontent among the janissaries and rea-
sons to incite mutiny. Between 1805 and 1818, seven deys succeeded
each other in Algiers, and all succumbed to a violent death: the last
one to the plague but six others assassinated by janissaries, dissatisﬁed
after having chosen them. Rejecting any reform and the slightest
infringement on their prerogatives, but incapable of competently
ensuring their military duties, the soldiers of the militia of Algiers at
the beginning of the nineteenth century constituted an anarchic mass,
ineﬃcient and demanding, that paralysed the leadership of the regency.

Tunis
Although the Husseinite dynasty had ruled Tunisia for a century,
the succession of the beys was always a diﬃcult matter, and the sud-
den death of Hammuda Pasha on 15 September 1814, after thirty-
two years of rule, again marked the beginning of a period of serious
political troubles. Ali, the father of Hammuda Pasha, had designated
him as his successor during his lifetime, at the expense of his ﬁrst



   2
     Following is an example among thousands depicting the situation in Kabilia:
“The aga, who had gone out to ﬁght the Kabils of the Beni-Abbas tribe, attacked
them on 20 hidja 1239 [17 August 1824], burned twelve of their dwellings, cut oﬀ
seven heads and took sixteen prisoners, who were taken to Algiers and sent to work
in the quarries located at Bab el-Oued.” Tachrifat, p. 36.
