                            the western counter                                  289

An Impossible Dialogue
     Under the forceful leadership of the Dey Omar, the Algerians rapidly
     undertook to restore the buildings, repair the fortiﬁcations and rebuild
     their ﬂeet.34 The city itself had not greatly suﬀered, as the buildings
     were chieﬂy of masonry; what had burned was the ships, the arsenal
     with its stock of timber and rigging. We saw in Chapter Two how
     Muslim solidarity had come into play, with the Sultan, the Pasha of
     Egypt and the Sultan of Morocco35 sending ships to replace some of
     those that had been destroyed by the English; consequently, beginning
     in the month of October, the ﬁrst Algerian corsairs took to the sea,
     followed by the Tunisians and the Tripolitans in 1817. Once again
     the Europeans were confronted with the recurrent activities of the
     Barbary corsairs.
The question was debated at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in
November 1818. The participants had diverging opinions on the
issue, primarily as to whether or not the Sublime Port could and
should be held responsible for acts committed by those who consid-
ered themselves its subjects. Finally, England and France, re-entering
the Alliance of Powers, were given the responsibility of informing
the regencies that they had to cease all corsair activities or face
reprisals from a ‘European League’ assigned to punish them. In
September 1819, a modest Franco-English squadron of six ships
under Rear-Admirals Fremantle and Jurien de La Gravière, arrived
to inform Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli of these dispositions. Although
the Pasha of Tripoli committed himself to respect this injunction,
the Dey of Algiers and the Bey of Tunis rejected it. The bey explained
his reasons in a letter addressed to the French Admiral:36




   34
      The Algerians had taken the precaution of deliberately sinking some of their
ships before the battle; these vessels were reﬂoated and it was not diﬃcult to restore
them to good condition. In 1825, the Algerian ﬂeet consisted of three frigates, two
corvettes, two brigs, ﬁve schooners, a polacca and a xebeck. Shaler, Esquisse de
l’Etat d’Alger, 1830, p. 61. A signiﬁcant fact: the dey of Algiers had reported the
destruction of all the ships of the regency, warships as well as commercial vessels,
but only ships in the ﬁrst group were replaced, as those in the second were of no
use after the restoration of peace in Europe.
   35
      The destruction of Algiers in 1816 was not unrelated to the decision of the
Sultan of Morocco to abandon corsair activities, which he announced oﬃcially in
1818. Coindreau, Les Corsaires de Salé, 1948, p. 204.
   36
      Quoted in Bachrouch, 1989, pp. 522–524.
