288                              chapter nine

broadsides when many Algerian soldiers were still outside their case-
mates. The dey now had no choice but to accept Exmouth’s con-
ditions. On 30 August, he signed the treaty, and freed without ransom
all the European captives who were still being held by the regency,32
abolished slavery and in a total reversal, paid the English 382,500
Spanish piastres in war reparations. On 31 August, Exmouth wrote
to the bey of Tunis and the pasha of Tripoli informing them of the
events in Algiers and demanding that they set free any captives they
were still holding. On 5 September, the ﬂeet left Algiers for home
making landfall in Gibraltar on the 12th; from there, after several
cursory repairs, it set sail for England, arriving on 6 October.
   The Algerians were naturally very bitter about the defeat they had
suﬀered, but even more furious that they had been tricked, as the
dey’s envoy reported to Istanbul: “The English violated the peace
agreement [made in April] by means of a ruse; they took advantage
of the deadline to get close to our fortiﬁcations (Kala"a) and the
entrance to the port. They had prepared cannons and arms, and all
of a sudden, they unleashed the battle.”33 The Algerians contended
that if they had not been fooled by the envoy’s negotiation yawl,
the English ships would never have been able to get within range
of their fortiﬁcations. A later incident between Algiers and England
in 1824 seems to vindicate their claim. In January, the British con-
sul was forced to leave Algiers after a disagreement over slaves. On
12 June, an English squadron of sixteen ships approached Algiers,
and Algerian men-of-war and shallops went out to meet them. There
was a ﬁerce battle, and the English ships withdrew. Six days later
the British squadron returned, reinforced by six new ships, and bom-
barded the city; but too far away, barely reached their targets and
returned to their base ﬁve days later after an unsucessful mission.




   32
      1,642 in all: 1,110 Sicilians and Neapolitans, 68 Piedmontese-Sardinians, 174
Romans, six Tuscans, 226 Spaniards, one Portuguese, seven Greeks, 28 Dutch, 18
English, two French and two Austrians. Perkins and Douglas-Morris, op. cit., 1982,
p. 147.
   33
      Temimi, Recherches et documents, p. 114.
