              the maghreb faces up to its problems                  295

to his assassination on 22 March 1815, but the new dey, Mohammed
Khaznadji, as a result of his attempts to correct abuses he had dis-
covered in the register of the janissaries, was executed on 17 June
of the same year. Omar Pasha did not survive the disaster that
resulted from the bombardment by Lord Exmouth’s ﬂeet, and was
assassinated in September 1817. Ali Khodja, newly elected, and aware
of the tyranny of the odjak against the power and the very lives of
the deys, abandoned the Djanina Palace near the port and with-
drew to the Casbah, along with the contents of the treasury and the
archives of the deylik, under the protection of a guard of two thou-
sand locally-recruited zaouaouas and six thousand kuloghlus. His eﬀorts
to re-establish order led to a new rebellion by the janissaries, which
was crushed this time by his new guard. Ali Khodja died of the
plague on the First of March, 1818, and his successor, Hussein
Khodjet el-Kheil, who was dethroned by the French conquest in
1830, died in exile in Leghorn in 1838.
   Parallelling the mutinies disturbing the capital were the frequent
uprisings in the provinces. Naturally, the inhabitants of the provinces
were all opposed to Turkish rule exerted through the garrisons
designed to provide support for the actions of the deys, for the col-
lecting of taxes in kind and in coin, and for the levying of auxiliary
troops. Although the opposition took the form of armed rebellion
everywhere, it took distinct forms according to region. There were
local particularities, notably in Kabilia, and even more in the Bibans
and Hodna mountainous regions separating the inhabitants of Algiers
from those of Constantine, which was ruled by the powerful Mokrani
family, who practiced a balancing act with the deylik, serving as
allies of Algiers at times, and as enemies at others. The Tunis regency
exerted its inﬂuence to the east, in an eﬀort to counteract the aspi-
rations of Algiers in the region, by encouraging the signs shown by
the beys of Constantine for their independence.
   But the most serious threat to the domination of the odjak of Algiers
was in the province of Oran, where the Darqawas brotherhood held
sway, more or less encouraged by the sultan of Morocco, Moulay
Sliman (1792–1822). In 1804, a Darqawi leader, Mohammed Ben
Abdallah Ben el-Harch, even managed to win over Kabilia, and, by
inciting a segment of the population, defeated the bey of Constantine,
who was killed on the Oued Zhour along with ﬁve hundred janis-
saries. Ben el-Harch was killed in 1807, when the raïs Hamidou
