                 the maghreb faces up to its problems                297

cousin Mahmoud, the son of his older brother and older than
Hammuda. Consequently when Hammuda died, Mahmoud believed
that he would ﬁnally be able to succeed to the throne. It was not
so. The all-powerful minister, the sâhib at-tabaa, managed to convince
the small informal council of the Ahl el-hâl wal-aqd 3 made up of the
members of the divan and principal military chiefs, to appoint Osman,
the brother of Hammuda, as bey, who in turn quickly conﬁrmed
Hammuda Pasha’s ministers in their functions. Osman, who was ill
and self-eﬀacing, in eﬀect let his sons and favourites rule in his stead.
Mahmoud and his supporters then mounted a coup d’état, which
ended in the assassination of Osman Bey on 20 December 1814 and
then the murder of his two sons Salah and Ali. The perpetrators
seized power the following day. There remained the problem of the
sâhib at-tabaa. Very powerful until this time, and also very rich,
because of his involvement in maritime and commercial activities
with the encouragement of Hammuda Pasha, he represented an
obstacle to the new bey’s entourage. He too was assassinated, on 22
January 1815, and his disappearance was greeted with satisfaction
by the European merchants, in particular the French, who consid-
ered, not without reason, that he had been an impediment to their
activities.
   The beys and their circle also had to contend with the weight
and inﬂuence of the Turkish militia in the aﬀairs of the state. They
were less powerful in both the military and the political realm than
the odjak of Algiers, but their power was real nonetheless. The pres-
ence of these janissaries, who in principal constituted the core of the
Tunisian army, provided evidence of the regency’s links with Istanbul,
and proof of its commitment to ﬁght for Islam. We have seen that
Hammuda Pasha was involved with the recruitment of the janis-
saries, and provided barracks for them; but at the same time, he
increased the proportion of local troops in his army at a time when
the spectacular reduction in privateering in favour of maritime trade
had further reduced the necessity for Turkish janissaries. On 30
August 1811, there was an uprising among the ﬁve thousand dis-
contented yoldash Turks, who planned to kill the bey and pillage the
city. Lacking leaders and speciﬁc objectives, however, they were



  3
      Literally, “those who have the power to bind and unbind”.
