290                             chapter nine

      We have received your notiﬁcation and have understood the whole
      content of your demand, in which you tell us that you have been sent
      to us [. . .] to hold discussions with us in the name of your sovereigns,
      as well as in the name of all the sovereigns of Europe, [resolution]
      that you tell us you formed at the conference last year in Aix-la-
      Chapelle, in which the abovementioned Powers agreed to appeal to
      the Barbary Powers to abolish the corsairs who leave from their ports,
      navigate, act as pirates and spoil universal trade through their rob-
      beries and acts of piracy.
      Our reply on the subject is:
      Let him be called robber and pirate who captures ships and takes
      belongings without reason, without justice, and outside all laws, disre-
      garding customs and treaties. As for us—thanks be to God!—we have
      never had evidence, or heard it said, that in our ports we have failed
      to respect customs or treaties; to deserve such intimidation from you
      [. . .] it is not appropriate, since in the past the goods of our own mer-
      chants have been taken, and treaties of friendship have been broken
      by people of whom we would never have believed it possible. [. . .]
      How can we agree to your demand that we never again arm our
      ships? And if it happened that war broke out between one of the
      Powers and the Ottoman Porte, what would we answer, when asked
      to arm our ships to go to its aid, following the custom that we have
      always practised?
In response to the challenge to suppress what the Europeans called
piracy harmful to maritime trade, the Bey of Tunis stated once again
the position of the regencies and the convictions of the Maghrebi:
their ships only went to war against their enemies; they honoured
past treaties agreed upon with the European states and respected
their nationals, while the reverse was far from true. Faithful subjects
of the Ottoman sultan, they were required to supply him with war-
ships if he deemed it necessary. These were respectable arguments,
which had been advanced for centuries and tacitly accepted for a
long time by the Europeans, who now rejected them.
   Thirty years earlier, it had appeared that the activity of the Barbary
corsairs was slowly dying out with the multiplication of bilateral peace
treaties between the regencies and the Western states, who had agreed
to pay for freedom of navigation and respect for their coasts. After
a quarter of a century of wars requiring the establishment of greater
military forces that ever before, the former enemies, aware of their
power, no longer accepted to be deﬁed by the little Ottoman provinces
of North Africa. They would no longer tolerate the capture of
Europeans and the practice of redeeming them with ransom money,
