294                             chapter ten

embodied and possessed the power—dey, bey or pasha—in the cap-
ital itself, but the provinces were also hotly contested areas. A cir-
cumstance that aggravated the situation was the fact that although
the regencies were all provinces of the Ottoman Empire and claimed
this status, particularly Algiers, the relations they maintained between
themselves were often tense, and periodically degenerated into open
conﬂict.

Internal Power Struggles

Algiers
Mustafa Pasha, who increased the state’s role in the economy, espe-
cially through the ﬁrm of Busnach and Bacri, was assassinated by
rebellious janissaries in August 1805, several weeks after the pogrom
against the Jews. Ahmed Pasha, who had been elected by the odjak,
was confronted by growing tensions with France, which was plan-
ning an expedition against Algiers. Above all, the Algerian army sus-
tained a serious defeat at the hands of Tunis in 1807 in the battle
of the Oued Sarrât. The janissaries sustained severe losses, and it
proved diﬃcult to replace them.1 Ahmed Pasha, accused by the janis-
saries of ineptitude and cowardice, was assassinated by them in
November 1808. His successor, Ali el-Rassal, proved incapable of
satisfying the requirements of the odjak, which was also divided into
factions: the unmarried yoldashes, who wanted to pillage the city, espe-
cially the souks, and the married yoldashes, who often had posses-
sions, and whose family members were at risk from the looters.
Unable to settle the problem and restore order, Ali was put to death
in February 1809, and replaced by Hadj Ali Pasha. Hadj Ali was
able to re-establish the dey’s authority, at least for a time, and in
order to satisfy the ﬁnancial demands of the soldiers, revived the
corsair campaigns, declared war on the United States, and renewed
hostilities with Tunis. The disastrous consequences of his policies led


   1
     The Algero-Tunisian war exacerbated the problem of the search for soldiers,
as the French consul in Tunis reported: “A ship coming from the Levant [ January
1807] carrying 150 recruits for Algiers dropped anchor at Goletta. The Bey kept
them for his own service, and the Algerian oﬃcers accompanying them were taken
as prisoner.” A.C.C.M., MQ5–1.
