302                                chapter ten

The Algerian threat continued throughout the summer:
       The regency could not send out any corsair ships through fear of the
       Algerians, whose naval forces numbering eight sailing vessels plus sev-
       eral frigates and corvettes appeared just outside this port on the 10th,
       11th and 12th of last August. Happily the only Tripolitan corsair ship
       that was still out at sea returned on the 16th of the same month.7
Finally, on 31 December, the pasha sent an emissary to ﬁnd a solu-
tion to a disagreement that was causing him great harm. Although
everything seemed to suggest that the situation between Tripoli and
Algiers was settled, it was not the case with Tunis, since the bone
of contention had existed for a far longer period, and was much
more serious. In 1811, the Sultan sent emissaries to Algiers and
Tunis in the hope that a lasting agreement could be concluded, but
in vain. It was the expedition of Lord Exmouth in 1816 that caused
the two regencies to recognize their common situation under the
European threat, and led to a rapprochement. In 1817, the new
dey, Ali Khodja, sent a representative to Tunis who agreed, in his
name, to cancel the requirement of the Tunisian tribute in oil and
to take responsibility of the behaviour of the Algerian raïs in Tunis.
A peace treaty was ﬁnally signed when Algiers agreed to recognize
that Tunis was an Ottoman pashalik of the same status as Algiers,
free of any dependence or vassalage. But beginning in 1820, the
Algierians broke this agreement by attacking Tunisia on land, cross-
ing the border to conduct raids, and also at sea, by seizing several
ships. As the bey was preparing to counteract these moves, the Sultan
intervened once again, and managed to restore peace, for which a
treaty was signed on 21 March 1821 with the same provisions as
that of 1817.8 The situation really was urgent. An uprising among
the Greek populations of the Ottoman Empire presented a serious
threat to the Ottomans, and confrontations between Muslim provinces
were no longer acceptable.




  7
      Bulletin des nouvelles, No. 2, 30 September 1811. M.A.E., C.C.C. Tripoli 34.
  8
      Chater, op. cit., 1984, pp. 275–277.
