              the maghreb faces up to its problems                  299

varied nature of the population, and the immensity of the territo-
ries that were theoretically submitted to the Karamânlis. This is how,
in 1813, Mohammed Bey, the eldest son of the pasha, after attempt-
ing in a ﬁt of rage to stab his father, was appointed governor of
Bengazi. Shortly afterwards, he rebelled against his father, who, in
February 1816, sent his second son, Ahmed Bey, at the head of a
veritable army, to bring him to obedience, and with him, the region
of Cyrenaica. Defeated, Mohammed Bey ﬂed to Egypt.
   The chronology of the provincial uprisings provided a sort of reg-
ular pattern to the reign of Yussuf Pasha. In 1803, the inhabitants
of Gharyan, a region a hundred kilometres south of Tripoli, revolted
and killed the chief treasurer of the regency, the son-in-law of the
pasha, before they were defeated the following year. In 1806 and
1807, the tribal confederation of the Awlad Suleymans, who con-
trolled the access to the Gulf of Syrte, started their own rebellion.
It was the oldest son of the pasha, Mohammed Bey, who put down
the rebellion, while another of his brothers crushed the Ghadames
revolt, in addition exacting an enormous ransom. In 1811, the Syrtan
inhabitants rose up once again, to be again crushed by Mohammed
Bey, who proﬁted from the occasion to ﬁrmly establish the control
of the Karamânlis in Bengazi.
   In the ﬁrst two decades of the nineteenth century in diﬀerent
degrees, the three Barbary regencies saw their political organisation
weakened and their power contested in the interior of territories that
they considered to be under their authority. The forms of this resis-
tance varied, and were not necessarily found in all three states.
Although there was everywhere the presence of the Ottoman janis-
sary militias who plainly exhibited their origins, their inﬂuence from
now on was very uneven. Essential in Algiers, their Turkish identity
remained substantial in Tunis, but no longer amounted to much in
Tripoli, while only Tunis and Tripoli experienced the disturbances
related to the tensions within the ruling dynasties. The sovereignty
of Tripoli was contested periodically, but was never in serious dan-
ger, while that of Algiers was opposed almost constantly, and often
in a very preoccupying manner. On the other hand, the regency of
Tunis, with its relatively limited territory, where the relief presented
few obstacles and only a small area was covered by desert, was only
troubled by limited opposition in the interior. It is signiﬁcant that
the kaïds were part of the immediate circle around the bey, and that
