              the maghreb faces up to its problems                 305

particular Tripoli, but not noted for the regency of Algiers. With
these reservations, two sorts of disaster should hold our attention,
because they were the most serious and had the most signiﬁcant
consequences and as a result we are better informed concerning
them.

The Plague
Our discussion will be limited here to retracing the course of the
disease and attempting to evaluate its overall impact on the popu-
lations and their activities. In this period, the pockets of the plague
were located in the eastern part of the Ottoman Empire, from whence
the disease reached the Maghreb, most often by the maritime route.
Despite the absence of sanitation measures, the distance separating
the Levant from North Africa spared the Maghreb, to a relative
degree, from the outbreaks in the eighteenth century. This was par-
ticularly the case of Tunisia, which remained mysteriously unscathed
over an eighty-year period, from 1706 to 1785, while records for
the same period show almost ten years of plague in Algiers, and
almost forty in Alexandria, with which the regencies were in constant
contact. Beginning in 1785, North Africa was included once again
in the terrible ‘relay race’ of the plague around the Mediterranean,
following the maritime and land routes chosen by travellers, mer-
chants, soldiers, sailors or runaways—all propagators of the disease.

The Epidemic of 1792–1801
In 1792, the plague arrived in the port of Algiers from the Levant.
From there it reached Oran by sea, and then spread overland, into
the interior of the province of Oran, where it reached Mascara in
1793, and on to Morocco from Oujda. One after the other, Fez
and Meknes were stricken in 1798, Rabat and Marrakesh in 1799,
and Mogador in 1800. At the same time, the disease spread towards
the east, touching Blidah and Constantinople in 1793, then arrived
in Tunis in 1794, by way of Kef. From the capital of the regency,
the plague then spread in all directions. To the north, by land, it
reached Bizerta in 1796, whilst in the south it arrived in Kairwan
then Gabes and from there following the coast to Tripoli, which had
already been infested by maritine traﬃc. In fact it had been ships
departing from Goletta that had ﬁrst brought the plague to Tripoli
in 1794 then, a year later, in 1795 to Sfax and Djerba. Varying in
