300                              chapter ten

the heads of tribes were closely supervised and integrated into the
apparatus of the state. Established for a century, the dynasties of the
Husseinites in Tunis and the Karamânlis in Tripoli had become
somewhat Arabised, and it was only when exasperated that the inhab-
itants revolted. The situation was altogether diﬀerent in the odjak of
Algiers, where the ruling authorities were perceived as foreign, which
gave the opposition in the interior, notably in the province of Oran,
a weight and a legitimation that were not found in the opposing
parties of the other regencies.

Algiers: The Dominating Regency
The militia of the janissaries, which ruled and administered the
regency of Algiers, maintained closer links than Tunis and Tripoli
with Istanbul and Anatolia, the base for the recruitment and renewal
of the odjak. This militia asserted its Ottoman identity much more
forcefully than its neighbours, and displayed expansionist tendencies
and a will to dominate, in particular in relation to Tunisia. Further-
more, until the end of the sixteenth century, the beylerbey of Algiers
exercised administrative supervision over Tunis; and in the periods
that followed, Algiers often intervened in the internal aﬀairs of its
neighbour. In 1756, the Algiers odjak seized Tunis in order to re-
establish the legitimate branch of the Husseinites there, pillaged it,
and imposed an annual tribute in olive oil (to light mosques) as a
demonstration of its ruling authority. There were frequent incidents
in Tunis, as when a group of Algerian raïs, during a stopover at
Goletta, refused to pay for the provisions they had requested, and
behaved with insolence and brutality. At the end of a half century,
Hammuda Bey tried to rid himself of this domination, and attempted
to capture Constantine in January, 1807. The attempt failed, but
the brilliant victory at Oued Sarrât in July eliminated the threat
from Algiers on land.
   It was at sea that Algiers attempted to take revenge:
      On 28 rabia-ettani of the year 1226 [22 May 1811], the raïs Hamidou
      captured a Tunisian frigate and led it to Algiers after a brilliant battle.
      The Algerian ﬂeet was made up of six warships and four gunboats,
      and the Tunisian ﬂeet of twelve warships, but the action only took
      place between the frigate of the raïs Hamidou and the Tunisian frigate
      in question. The battle lasted six hours, and did not end until well
      after the Acha [the prayer after sundown]. Forty-one men were killed
