                the maghreb faces up to its problems                         301

      on our frigate, and two hundred and thirty on the Tunisian frigate.
      May God have pity on them, as we are all Muslims.4
This extraordinary battle between the two ﬂagships within sight of
two squadrons that did nothing to intervene, perhaps in order to
spare Muslim lives, as the ﬁnal explanation might suggest, resulted
in an acceptance of the naval supremacy of Algiers. The threat was
taken seriously in Tunis:
      The Bey has ordered a state of naval alert against the Algerians; new
      batteries in masonry-work have been erected at Goletta and armed
      with heavy-calibre cannons. There will be ﬁfty cannon shallops and a
      thousand seamen to man the batteries and the gunboats.5
Taking advantage of the inactivity of the Tunisian ﬂeet of war, the
Algerians seized several Tunisian commercial ships in 1812, and
then, in 1813, set up a blockade along the Tunisian coast, which
they maintained with 39 gunboats and 11 bombard vessels. The
results were far from negligeable, and contributed to reducing Tunisian
commercial navigation, as is seen in the drop in the frequentation
of European ports by Tunisian ships. In the same period Algerian
arrogance was directed against Tripoli. In May 1811, after a dis-
agreement connected with the liquidation of Algerian prizes brought
to Tripoli:
      The Dey ordered his corsairs to seize Tripolitan property at sea, and
      already one of the regency’s ships returning from Morocco with a load
      of wheat has been captured, and a Greek-Ottoman ship with a cargo
      of live cattle, and also carrying cash from Tripoli, was pillaged dur-
      ing the crossing from Tripoli to Malta. No declaration of war has been
      made, nor has there been any notiﬁcation of a blockade. It appears
      that the Dey only wanted to retaliate, and pay himself back a hun-
      dredfold the sums that had been withheld from him. Meanwhile, that
      regency fears attack, arms and equips all its gunboat launches, dou-
      bles and triples the guard in its forts, and delays the departure of four
      corsair ships that had been ready to cast oﬀ.6




  4
     Tachrifat, p. 13.
  5
     Letter from the French consul, 2 January 1813, in Plantet, Correspondance des
beys de Tunis . . ., Vol. III, 1893–1899, p. 505.
   6
     Bulletin des nouvelles, No. 1, 10 July 1811. M.A.E., C.C.C., Tripoli 34.
