298                         chapter ten

ﬁnally defeated. Several hundred of them perished during and after
the battles, around the same number were deported, the majority
surrendered and a thousand ﬂed. Reconstituted in the following
years, the militia revolted again on the First of May, 1816. Angry
over the murder of the sahib at-tabaa, who had favoured the Turks,
and furious about the apparent submission of the Bey Mahmoud to
the ultimatum of Lord Exmouth, who had left the day before, the
janissaries forced the Ahl el-hâl wal-aqd to meet again and declare
that Mahmoud must be deposed in favour of his brother Ismaïl who
declined the oﬀer. Mahmoud assembled the troops who were loyal
to him, and, assisted by the civilian population, managed to recap-
ture Tunis, while a faction of the rebels took Goletta, seized ﬁve
ships and made their escape. The authority of the Bey Mahmoud
was never really contested again, and on his death in 1824 his son
Hussein II succeeded him.
   These troubles and disturbances in the capital were not without
consequence for the populations in the interior of the regency. The
increasing ﬁscal pressure, applied by Hammuda’s successors in an
eﬀort to compensate for the losses occasioned by the decrease in
maritime commerce and the near-disappearance of privateering, pro-
voked uprisings in the countryside. This was the case in 1817, when
the tribes of the Kef region in the west of the country launched a
rebellion. In the spring of 1819, the southern tribes living between
Sfax and the borders of Tripoli revolted in turn; and in 1824 to
1825, the tribes of the northeast also rose in rebellion. Admittedly,
none of these uprisings was as serious as those in Algiers, and they
could all be put down without too much diﬃculty. But after a third
of a century of peace during the reign of Hammuda, these agita-
tions revealed the profound discontent in the Tunisian population
towards his successors.

Tripoli
The Tripolitan troops, unlike those of the other regencies, included
only a few soldiers from Anatolia; there was no militia of Turkish
janissaries, with the usual risks of insubordination. On the other
hand, the other obstacles to the pasha’s authority were of the same
type as those already noted for his neighbours. There was insubor-
dination of certain members of his family, rebellion among the provin-
cial populations, and a feature that was peculiar to this regency: the
