                  the maghreb faces up to its problems            315

highly prized by the family of the bey and his circle. The Ben Dhiaf
chronicle gives the sums spent on building, improving and decorat-
ing the palaces, as well as on donations and gifts—clocks, racehorses,
jewellery, and valuable weapons—for the princes and favourites of
the bey. A study of the three principal products of the Maghreb
provides a better idea of trends and the increasing imbalance in
trade.

North African Production Diﬃculties

Cereals
Before the Revolutionary wars, ships arriving in Marseilles loaded
with cereals—mainly wheat, with occasional cargoes of barley—rep-
resented almost half of the ships coming from the Maghreb. Between
1775 and 1789, 690 cereal-carrying vessels were registered, as com-
pared with only 26 between 1815 and 1829! Among the 26, ﬁfteen
were from the regency of Algiers, including fourteen from Bona,
seven from Tunisia and four from Tripolitania. A collapse of this
magnitude was the result of a combination of two circumstances; the
ﬁrst originating in the Maghreb, and the second from outside. The
considerable reduction in the area in wheat cultivation, mentioned
above, was one of the results of the unrest of the population and
the lack of labour caused by the ravages of the plague. The result-
ing shortfall in the harvests was periodically aggravated by poor cli-
matic conditions like those of 1816 to 1820. At a time when the
crops were already insuﬃcient to feed the reduced population and
provide the necessary portion for the next sowing, it was impossible
to export; and, as we have seen, the local producers were sometimes
even forced to import wheat.
   The second cause of the decline in sales of North African wheat
in Europe was a new and very signiﬁcant source of competition from
southern Russia. This ‘New Russia’, with a surface area of around
250,000 square miles, bordering on the Black Sea, its population
growing from 200,000 inhabitants in 1789 to two million by 1823,
underwent spectacular economic expansion during this period.15 The
fertility of the land favoured the development of wheat cultivation,


  15
       Herlihy, “Russian Grains . . .,” 1963, p. 121.
