                 the maghreb faces up to its problems                          309

   At the end of the eighteenth century, and even more at the begin-
ning of the nineteenth, the Maghreb suﬀered from the deadly com-
bination of plague and famine. The great epidemic of 1784 to 1785
had taken place in a Maghreb that was relatively prosperous and,
at least in Tunisia, well-populated. The demographic consequences
of the epidemic, however traumatic for the inhabitants, were some-
how absorbed, and did not hinder the momentum of the economy,
as is shown in the continuation, even the increase, of commercial
exchanges with the outside world. A ﬁrst disturbing sign appeared,
however, with the beginning of a reduction in the amount of land
under cultivation, primarily because of a lack of labour force, since
the plague had ravaged the countryside populations. The eﬀects of
the second epidemic, from 1796 to 1797, were less drastic, but
because the populations were already weakened, the damage to both
agriculture and demographics was exacerbated. The severe food short-
ages of 1804 were followed by a decade of relative prosperity that
allowed a modest restoration both of crop farming and the econ-
omy. On the other hand, the years 1816 to 1820 were among the
most catastrophic, at least in the regencies of Algiers and Tunis, as
was the case in the whole western Mediterranean basin. The medieval
trio described above returned in force: a succession of prolonged
famines plus a severe epidemic of plague, in a context of uprisings
in the interior and instability and confrontation in relations with
Europe.11
   The outcome of this period of crisis was serious. Tunisia, the only
regency for which we have several quantiﬁable elements, lost a quar-
ter of its 1780 population, and the land now cultivated for cereal
crops represented barely more than half that of forty years earlier.
Perhaps to a diﬀerent degree, but as a result of the same circum-
stances, the other regencies had similar situations. In these condi-
tions, what was left of the maritime and commercial activities and
the Maghreb’s integration into the general economic situation?



   11
      Surprising as it may seem, famine neither promotes the spread of the plague
nor increases its severity. Admittedly it seems only logical that a population weak-
ened by lack of food would provide a more favourable environment for disease,
but epidemiology and historical studies of the plague show that the most lethal epi-
demics are unrelated to the dietary situation of the victims. Panzac, La Peste dans
l’Empire ottoman . . . 1985, pp. 45–47.
