322                            chapter ten

The currencies of Algiers and Tunis evolved along parallel lines, and
in a similar pattern. The diﬃcult years from 1816 to 1818 led to a
drop in value of about 20% in relation to the European currencies,
which were perfectly stable during this period. This weakness was
exacerbated in the 1820s, stabilising in around 1830 at a level that
was lower by half than the level in the decade beginning in 1800.
The changes in the Tripolitan currency came earlier, starting in
1805, and were also more serious, as there was an almost two-thirds
loss in value by 1815, although we lack the information that would
enable us to follow this trend beyond that year. These ﬁgures indi-
cate that Tripoli’s economy was more fragile than those of its
neighbours, and also more vulnerable because of internal problems
experienced by that regency at the time. This monetary deprecia-
tion, which reﬂected the various economic diﬃculties the North
African states were undergoing during this period, necessarily called
for state intervention. The successive monetary adjustments the lead-
ers of the three regencies were forced to implement (by striking new
currency or adjusting the rates of exchange) constituted but one form
of their action in the economic realm.


                  The Reactions of the Regencies

Demographic decline, falling production, destabilised foreign trade,
monetary depreciation, internal rebellions, tensions with Europe: from
1815 on, the general situation of the regencies continued to deteri-
orate. The earnings of the inhabitants and, even more, the resources
of the North African states, depended chieﬂy on peace within the
country, economic prosperity, and a satisfactory level of trade. In
the hope of re-establishing positions that were already sorely com-
promised the North African leaders took ﬁrm action in what they
considered to be priority areas.

First Attempts at a Sanitary Policy
Devastated for centuries by epidemics of the plague, the Muslims of
the Maghreb, like their co-religionists in the rest of the Ottoman
Empire, endured their own personal fate with resignation and with
compassion and charity towards others, without necessarily attempt-
