                 the maghreb faces up to its problems                       319

in particular, a little Tuscan village, launched its own fez-manufac-
turing operation in turn, ﬂooding the market with as many hats as
France or Tunisia. Competition was severe between the makers of
European fezes, perhaps of inferior quality but certainly cheaper,
and the Tunisian manufacturers, whose product was clearly better
made but more expensive. In spite of their loyalty, Levantine clients
were hard put to to resist the less expensive hats. The situation wors-
ened in the following years, as the French consul, Mathieu de Lesseps,
indicated in the beginning of 1830:
       The manufacturers [of fezes], few and ruined, sell in advance their
       putative products, that have lost their former standing in the Levant
       because of declining quality and the European imitations. One by one
       they go bankrupt, because of these forced sales, which exorbitant and
       usurious interest on money have made necessary, swallowing up prod-
       ucts, costs and proﬁts. The decline of this important export article is
       seriously damaging the trade in importation of Spanish wool, which
       has diminished considerably.19
Through these three examples—and there are others20—one can
grasp the enormity of the threat hanging over not only international
trade, but also the entire economy of the North African regencies.
European competition was now in a position to triumph, whether
in industrial goods like fezes or in agricultural products like wheat.
It could also inﬂuence prices of other commodities that it also needed,
as can be seen in the changes in the price of Tunisian oil, which,
whatever the ﬂuctuations in the harvests, continued to fall, 50 per cent
between 1820 and 1830. The result, as we know, was a drop in the
quantity and especially in the value of Tunisian exports at the same
time that imports were continuing to rise.




  19
     Quoted in Cherif, “Expansion européenne en Tunisie . . .”, 1970.
  20
     Other widely exported Maghrebi products, wool and sheepskins, were also sub-
jected to Russian competition. In the “Nouvelle Russie” 9,000 head of sheep were
recorded in 1806, and 3,700,000 in 1837, most of them merinos. Herlihy, op. cit.,
1963, p. 48.
