324                          chapter ten

with his eyes in particular on the Fezzan, whose capital, Murzuk,
was an essential cross-roads of caravan trails leading to Ouadaï,
Bornu, Kano, Sokoto, and the faraway and legendary Timbuktu on
the Niger.
   The kingdom of the Fezzan, which had been ruled for generations
by a local dynasty, was in theory a vassal of the pasha of Tripoli,
and as a result, paid him a symbolic tribute. Rather than taking the
risk of sending a Tripolitan army into the desert, Yussuf made use
of Arab tribes, investing their leaders with an oﬃcial authority that
it was then up to them to establish for themselves. In this way, al-
Mukkanî captured Murzuk, killed all the members of the previous
dynasty, and became the oﬃcial governor of the country, paying a
substantial tribute, while promoting the movements of caravans from
Tropical Africa to Tripoli. Another Arab chieftain, el-Kânemi, became
the strongman of Bornu and attempted to extend his authority to
the area around Lake Chad, while recognizing, in a more or less
formal manner, the authority of the pasha of Tripoli. Although it
was a diﬃcult and risky enterprise in these desert expanses, Tripoli
had managed, at least theoretically, by around 1820 to establish its
authority over the central part of the Sahara south of the pashalik.
   The data we have for the 1820s, however approximate, provides
an indication of the increase in the proportion of African products
exported by the regency. The ﬁgures show the African portion to
have been around 2.3 to 2.5 million francs, of which two-thirds—
slaves, gold-dust, ivory and ostrich feathers—came from beyond the
Sahara, while imports represented an average of between 2.8 and
three million francs. From this time on, therefore, there was a neg-
ative diﬀerence of half a million francs, which was a lot for a state
which, all things considered, was of limited size and importance.
Added to this was the fact that although imports were more stable,
even increasing, exports were subject to considerable ﬂuctuations. It
would take only one caravan being reduced in size, delayed, even
cancelled, for the shipments from Tripoli to collapse; just as the local
products—livestock, wool and cereals—were at the mercy of climatic
conditions. As it was very diﬃcult for the pasha to subject the small
and also highly dispersed population to increased taxation, only an
increase in trans-Saharan traﬃc, as far as he could control it, could
provide him with the necessary ﬁnancial resources.
