318                          chapter ten

of the product involves the raw materials used in making it, the wool
imported from Spain, and the vermilion dye from Portugal. Only
the workmanship, of very high quality, was Tunisian; craftsmen who
through their craftsmanship and techniques added considerably to
the value of the product. Looking again at the ﬁgures for foreign
trade in 1829, we ﬁnd that a million francs were spent on imported
raw materials, and 2.6 million received for the exported hats. Adding
local sales to these ﬁgures, we can estimate the value of fezes pro-
duced to have been at least three million francs, or a local proﬁt of
around two million francs. Much appreciated and in considerable
demand in the Levant, their primary outlet, the fezes were exported
in huge quantities, constituting four-ﬁfths of Tunisian exports to
‘Turkey’ in 1820.
   This prosperous industry had to contend with serious obstacles
however. Like all North African imports, the wool and vermilion
could only reach their ﬁnal destination after a detour via Marseilles
or Leghorn, and on European ships, which immediately increased
their cost considerably. It was not until the decade 1805 to 1814
that several North African merchantmen were able to go to Spain
and Portugal to acquire these products. But there were more seri-
ous problems. In the face of the success of the Fez, French manu-
facturers, beginning in the second half of the eighteenth century, and
then the Italians early in the following century, also threw them-
selves into this type of production, giving rise to an increasingly
intense competition with Tunisians. The Tunisians relied on the qual-
ity of their product, their ability to adapt to demands, and also the
ﬁdelity of a clientele that was resistant to change. They managed to
preserve their position in the Levant, in particular during the period
of the Revolution and the Empire, but experienced great diﬃculty
in holding their own when the European manufacturers returned in
full force after 1815. It is very hard to evaluate the production of
Tunisian fezes, and even harder to determine how many were
exported. The ﬁgures used here are estimates rather than hard facts,
but the picture they present is certainly close to reality. In the 1780s,
the production of Tunisian fezes must have been around 1,200,000
units, and the French production, located in Marseilles and in Orleans,
around 720,000–960,000. In the 1820s, the Tunis saw its annual
output drop to 720,000–840,000 units, while the output of the com-
bined French workshops was kept to the level of the 1780s. Prato
