               the maghreb faces up to its problems                323

ing to escape the divine will. Beginning in the second half of the
eighteenth century, however, following the example of a segment of
the Ottoman Muslim elite, in particular certain Turkish pashas, the
Tunisian beys tried to protect their territories from the plague by
following the European methods of quarantine. In the 1750s, trav-
ellers reported that Chikly islet, located in the Lake of Tunis, was
used as a kind of quarantine station. Later, the island of La Galite
oﬀ Tabarka was set apart for the same purpose: to subject ships sus-
pected of coming from plague-infested regions to an observation
period, and to prevent those aboard from disembarking in areas that
were as yet unaﬀected. These eﬀorts, clumsy, incomplete, and poorly
respected as they were, did not succeed; as born out by the terrible
epidemics that ravaged the regency at the end of the eighteenth and
the beginning of the nineteenth century. It would not be until the
1830s that more eﬃcient North African sanitary administrations would
be established, with the help of the presence of Europeans.
   There are records of similar attempts by Yussef Pasha of Tripoli,
who was also anxious to protect his states from the plague. In 1818,
at the height of the epidemic that was ravaging Tunisia, he estab-
lished a sanitary cordon along their common border, consisting of
a line of military posts set up to check on travellers and prevent any
who were suspected of being infected from entering the regency.
These measures did not prevent the disease from reaching the regency,
any more, indeed, than they would in 1826.

Territorial Expansion
If the odjak of Algiers already had considerable diﬃculty in main-
taining its authority over the vast territory that was theoretically
under its control, and the bey of Tunis seems to have limited his
ambitions to protecting himself from his neighbours, the situation
was completely diﬀerent for the pasha of Tripoli. From 1811 on,
the authority of the Karamânlis was ﬁrmly re-established all along
the coastal zone from Tripoli to Bengazi, as well as in the near inte-
rior, including the rich oasis of Ghadames. Yussuf then embarked
on a veritable policy of penetration into the interior of the northern
part of Africa. In 1815, an armed expedition seized the oasis of Sîwah,
located on the borders of Egypt in a strategic and trading position
of prime importance. Yussuf sought to penetrate into deepest Africa,
