332                             epilogue

up to the pressure from the West, or of adapting to the new con-
ditions. In fact, through a series of circumstances that they were far
from being able to master, and also because of their own risky behav-
iour, sometimes even irresponsible, the masters of the North African
regencies found themselves at the end of the 1820s in situations of
growing economic and political dependence on the European pow-
ers. The European merchants, money-lenders and ship captains all
beneﬁtted from the unfailing support of their respective consuls, who
did not hesitate to request, and obtain, the dispatching of warships
to enforce the claims, justiﬁed or not, of their nationals.
   Crises and tensions continued to multiply, but unlike the previous
centuries, their outcome was very diﬀerent now. The dey of Algiers,
exasperated by the contempt he had encountered when requesting
payment for money owed him, created repeated incidents with the
French consul, leading to the famous ﬂy-swatter episode of 29 April
1827. This altercation led to consul Deval’s return to France and
the dispatch of a French naval division to demand an apology. The
refusal of the dey meant the establishment of a maritime blockade
against Algiers beginning on 19 June 1827. In Tripoli, the French
consul, considering that he had been dishonoured by the pasha’s
attitude towards him at the time of a dispute with the English con-
sul, quit the regency on 5 September 1829. This was the period in
which rumours were circulating about an alliance being formed
between France and the Egypt of Mohammed-Ali to conquer the
whole Maghreb, causing extreme anxiety amongst the North African
leaders.
   Emboldened by the weakness of the regencies, some of the lesser
powers did not hesitate to demonstrate a sometimes excessive dis-
satisfaction, arrogantly demanding compensation on pretexts which
often barely concealed their other ambitions. In 1828, Filippi, the
consul of Piedmont-Sardinia in Tunis, considering that the Sardinian
ﬂag had been ‘insulted’ by the bey, arranged for a Sardinian naval
demonstration along the Tunisian coast. He repeated this exercise
in 1830, complaining of ‘new humiliations against Sardinian citizens’
and ‘violations’ of the Tuniso-Sardinian treaties. Surprised, the Tunisian
government demanded an explanation from Turin, that responded
by sending likewise a naval division, with its commander under orders
to set up a blockade if necessary. The Sardinian admiral, on his
arrival oﬀ the coast of Tunis on 18 May, saw most of his demands
