                                  epilogue                                 333

met, thanks to the intervention of the English consul.1 In fact, the
imminent possibility of a French expedition against Algiers had stirred
up similar ambitions on the part of the Sardinians towards Tunisia,
and the purpose of their expedition had been to test the waters and
evaluate the possible attitude of the diﬀerent parties. It was because
England was resolutely opposed to this prospect that the English
consul stepped in as mediator, in order to remove any pretext for
a Sardinian intervention.
   The French army, which had departed on 25 May 1830, landed
on the beach of Sidi Ferruch on 16 June and accepted the surrender
of Algiers on 5 July. On the First of August, the French frigate La
Bellone brought to Tunis an envoy extraordinary, the Count de La
Rochefoucauld; while a French squadron under the command of
rear admiral de Rosamel arrived oﬀ Tripoli on 8 August. That same
day, the bey of Tunis, followed on 11 August by the pasha of Tripoli,
signed new treaties with France. The two very brief documents, with
only ten articles each, were very similar in content. The ban against
all privateering was reiterated, as was the interdiction against the
enslavement of Christians and the exaction of any tribute from the
European states. The European states were to be free to establish
consulates, and their nationals would be allowed to import and export
any type of merchandise without hindrance. Furthermore, from now
on the bey or the pasha would be forbidden to establish any sort
of economic monopoly. The document concerning Tripoli also pro-
vided for a letter of apology from the pasha to the king in connection
with the French consul Rousseau, 800,000 francs of compensation
to be paid in two instalments, and information concerning the naval
and land forces of the regency. The treaty with Tunis stipulated in
addition that France would beneﬁt from exclusive rights to coral
ﬁshing in the Tabarka region, and be assigned a plot of land for
the erection of a monument to Saint Louis, who had died while lay-
ing siege to Tunis. With these texts, things were now very diﬀerent
from the numerous peace and trade treaties signed in the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries between the European states and the
Barbary regencies under terms of equality and reciprocity that in


  1
    This was chieﬂy a matter of compensation for Sardinian merchants, who had
been deprived of shipments of olive oil because of poor harvests in the Maghreb.
