328                                chapter ten

also what one author has called ‘ﬁscal expedients’. This expression
covers the more or less arbitrary conﬁscations, the sale of goods
belonging to the beylik, the use of treasury reserves, the more or
less justiﬁable collection of outstanding debts, etc. This policy, which
was developed especially after 1815—eﬃcacious in the short term as
demonstrated in the 1816 results (nearly 360,000 piastres)—reached
its limit rapidly, inexorably falling oﬀ in the following years, falling
from 270,000 piastres in 1817 to 180,000 in 1818, and down to
140,000 in 1819.
   Unfortunately we have no information concerning the Tunisian
budget for the following years, but what we do know of the poli-
cies of the bey indicates that the situation can only have worsened.
Expenditure remained at a high level, increased periodically by cat-
astrophes like the shipwreck of most of the Tunisian ﬂeet near
Hamman Lif in 1821, which resulted in the deaths of 1,500 sailors.26
The replacement of the ships that had been destroyed cost several
million piastres, half a million of which went into the construction
of a new frigate, which was built in Marseilles in 1822. The bey
Mahmoud, in an eﬀort to increase his revenues, undertook a revi-
sion of the ﬁscal system unchanged for over a century. Since it was
hardly possible to increase the high achour tax on worked land, which
had already been raised, it was the kânoun, tax on olive trees that
was increased, then replaced in 1819 by a much heavier achour. And
in particular, in the same year, the sale of teskeres, or export licenses,
was abolished and the bey took over the monopoly, following the
model set up in Egypt by Mohammed-Ali.
   Obliged to reimburse the European exporters for the value of the
unused export licenses because of poor harvests, the bey became the
sole middleman in the sale of olive oil, now the principal exportable
product of the regency and therefore its primary source of revenue.
By means of the achour paid in kind, as well as purchases of oil from
the producers at government-controlled prices at the time of the
pressing of the olives (mouchtara), the bey built up signiﬁcant stocks
of olive oil that he sold to European merchants. In 1824, still short
of funds, the bey introduced another money-making method: the
slam. This was an anticipated sale, at a low price, against the future



  26
       Four frigates, two corvettes and two brigs were destroyed.
