                             EPILOGUE


During the period from 1795 to 1815, the regencies demonstrated
their presence in the Mediterranean as rarely before. They began
by reactivating the corsair war with a fervour reminiscent of the sev-
enteenth century, but it was soon abandoned in favour of a new
activity, maritime transport with and serving Europe, thereby pro-
moting the development of an international North African trade.
This return to maritime activity, occurring at a moment that was
particularly propitious, during the wars of the First Empire, not only
beneﬁtted the maritime and urban society of the regencies, but was
also able to make its inﬂuence felt in the hinterland, whose pro-
duction was redirected little by little towards satisfying demands from
overseas. This boom was cut short by the return in force of the
Europeans, who were bent not only on appropriating the activities
now being carried out by the Maghrebi, but also on establishing
themselves permanently in North Africa. The years 1815 to 1818,
therefore, constituted a major transition period for the Ottoman
Maghreb, which was now almost totally forbidden to use the sea,
for the ﬁrst time in three centuries. Its destiny, which until that time
had been maritime, was sealed.
   Deprived of the revenue furnished by maritime activities, the lead-
ers of the regencies now sought, with little success, to compensate
for the considerable reduction in their income by means of an inten-
sive exploitation of the interior of their territories, even to the point
of attempting to extend their rule geographically. During the two
decades of maritime prosperity, the material Europeanisation of the
regencies, admittedly already begun in the previous century, had
increased considerably. Ships, arms, jewellery, construction materi-
als, objects of every kind, were added to the list of traditional imports
like fabrics and colonial products. Europe was now the principal—
even favoured—trading partner, whose currencies and contractual
practices were in regular use. For the Maghreb, Europe had become
a fascinating model, while still remaining the traditional enemy.
   Now in debt, weakened, marginalised, victims of natural disasters
and unexpected competition, prey to political instability and troubles
in their interior, the Maghrebi states proved incapable of standing
