2              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHU'S.              [1800.


addition of four brass 36-pounder carronades, was the same as
that of her sister-ship, the Kesistance, captured in March, 1797 ;*
and her   complement   may also be stated the same as the latter' s,
exclusive of about 60 passengers.
  The loss sustained by the American frigate     amounted to one
officer and 13 seamen and marines killed, and two officers and
23 seamen and marines wounded. That of the Vengeance is
                                             at 150 in killed and
represented, in the American accounts,
wounded but, according to a published letter from one of her
           ;


passengers, it amounted to only 20 men killed and
                                                      40 wounded.
   The officer killed on board the Constellation was Mr. James
Jervis, a young midshipman, who, with some of the men, fell
                                    " It seems this
overboard with the mainmast.                        young gentle-
                                       " was
man," says Commodore Truxton,                apprised of the mast
going in a few minutes, by an old seaman but he had already
                                                    ;


so much of the principle of an officer ingrafted on his mind, not
to leave his quarters on any account, that he told the men, if
the mast went, they must go with it which shortly afterwards
                                               ;




occurred, and only one man was saved."
  Although, undoubtedly, the American frigate was the superior
both in force and effectiveness, yet, had the Constellation made
a prize of the Vengeance, no one can deny that it would have
redounded to the honour of Commodore Truxton, and been a
subject of fair triumph to so young a navy as that of the United
States.  But, if it be true, as the French captain is represented
to have stated, that the flag of the Vengeance came down three
times during the contest, what was the Constellation about that
she did not attempt to take possession ? It would seem that the
Constellation, notwithstanding she was to windward, persisted
in remaining at too great a distance from her antagonist to
observe in the dark what the latter was doing. According to
Captain Pichot's account, indeed, the Vengeance lost all three
masts by the Constellation's fire and yet Commodore Truxton,
                                        ;

                          "        "
although so minute in his Journal as to tell us that, previous
to the action, he got "the large trumpet in the lee gangway
                "
ready to speak the French frigate, takes no notice of the loss of
her masts.
    The most extraordinary circumstance, however, remains to be
told.   The Vengeance, M. Pichot declares, was compelled, owing
to the inexperience of her crew, to   remain stationary for three
(lays,while jury-masts were erecting and, during the whole of
                                               ;


that time, the Constellation lay to windward, with her fore and
                         1
                             See vol. ii., p. 91.
