           NAVAL HISTORY OF GREAT BRITAIN.


               LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
          Having given an account of the first engagement fought
          between an American and a French frigate, we shall offer no
          apology for inserting in these pages an account of the second.
          On the 1st of February, at 7 h. 30 m. a.m., the United States
          36-gun frigate Constellation, still commanded by Commodore
          Thomas Truxton, being about five leagues to the westward of
                                    1



      Basseterre-road, Guadaloupe, working to windward, discovered
      in the south-east quarter, standing south-west, the French 40-gun

      frigate Vengeance, Captain Sebastien-Louis-Marie Pichot.
        The American commodore immediately went in chase                                 ;
                                                                                             and
      M. Pichot ran from him, for the reason, as alleged afterwards by
      some of the French officers, that the Vengeance had her decks
      encumbered with hogsheads of sugar, which she had brought
      from Guadaloupe, and was carrying to Europe. Let that have
      been as it may, at 8 p.m. the Constellation got within hail of the
      Vengeance, and received a fire from her stern and quarter guns.
      In a little time the former, having gained a position on the
      French frigate's weather-quarter, opened a very destructive fire                         ;


      and to which, from her position, the Constellation received a
      much less effective return than if she had run fairly alongside.
      The mutual cannonade continued, in this manner, until nearly
      1 a.m. on the 2nd; when the Vengeance, owing to the damaged

      state of the Constellation's rigging and masts, particularly her
      mainmast, was enabled to range ahead out of gun-shot, and the
      battle ended.
            The force of the                Constellation, in guns, men, and size, has
          already been given.
                                        2
                                             The armament of the Vengeance, with the
.   -~i                   'See vol. ii., p. 363.                2
                                                                    Ibid., p. 364.
            VOL.   III.                                                              R
