1800.]          FAIRY AND HARPY aND PALLAS.                           3

mizen masts still standing (her mainmast had fallen a few-
minutes after the firing had ceased), and yet did not bear down,
or evince the least inclination to renew the engagement.            The
Constellation, soon afterwards, made sail for   and anchored in
Port Royal, Jamaica and the Vengeance, no less happy than sur-
                      ;




prised at such an escape, steered for Curac^a, where she arrived
in a very shattered state.
  No sooner did the commodore's account of his rencontre reach
the United States than his fellow-citizens, particularly those of
his own, or the federal party, set to work to bring to an issue
on paper that which had been left undecided on the ocean.
They pronounced and published the action as a victory ate       ;



dinners, and drank themselves drunk in honour of it and, when
                                                     ;



the commodore arrived in port, assailed him on all sides with
addresses of congratulation, founded on assertions that the com-
modore's letter had never sanctioned, and from which, although
not possessed perhaps of a very extraordinary share, his modesty
must have recoiled.
  We formerly mentioned, that the merchants of London pre-
sented the commodore with a piece of plate for having captured
the Insurgente. Such was actually the spirit of party in the
United States, that the democrats abused Commodore Truxton,
calling him Tory, &c, for having accepted it.         About the
middle of the year 1800 the commodore was promoted to the
command of the 44-gun frigate President but the moment the
                                           ;


democrats came into power, on March the 4th in the succeeding
year, he was displaced, and, as a proof how liberal republics can
be, w as never afterwards put in command.    The more moderate
     r



among the democrats, however, did at length relent a little and
                                                            ;



Commodore Truxton got appointed (of all places for a commo-
dore !) sheriff of Philadelphia in which office he realized an
                                ;



independency.
  On the 5th of February, at 6 a.m., the British 16-gun ship-
sloop Fairy (armed similarly to Rattlesnake, vol. ii., p. 392),
Captain Joshua Sydney Horton, and 18-gun brig-sloop, Harpy
(same force as Racoon, vol. ii., p. 415), Captain Henry Bazcly,
weighed and set sail from St. Aubin's bay in the island of Jersey,
with the wind a fresh breeze at north-west, to reconnoitre the
port of St. Malo, and discover if a French frigate, which on the
preceding evening had chased the 14-gun brig Scaflower, Lieu-
tenant Murray, had got into that harbour. At 11 h. 30 m. a.m.,
Cape Frehel bearing south-east distant five or six miles, a large
ship, evidently a frigate, was discovered in the south-south-west
