6            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SIN3LE SHIPS.              [1800.


Loire, Eailleur, Harpy, and Fairy on tbs other ; the combatants
all on the starboard tack, with the wind, as before, blowing

moderately from the south-east.
   At about lh. 30 m. a.m. on the 6th, the Harpy fetched close
under the stern of the Eailleur, then engaging the Pallas with
great gallantry, and poured her broadside into
                                                 the French fri-
gate's quarter.   This was repeated with such destructive effect,
as to induce some one on board the frigate (especially as a man
had been shot while ascending the mizen-shroudswith a lantern
to repeat the signal of surrender) to hail the brig with the
               " Ne tirez
exclamation,              pas encore, messieurs, nous sommes a
vous."   The Harpy then ceased her fire, as about the same time
did the Loire, Eailleur, and Fairy. The Loire and Harpy each
lowered down a boat and sent her first-lieutenant (Edmund
Eayner and James Watson) to take possession of the prize.
Conceiving, from a bustle abaft on board the Eailleur, that a
man had fallen into the water, Lieutenant Watson yawed out
of his course in consequence of this, the Loire's boat reached
             :




the Pallas a few minutes before the Harpy's but the latter had
                                            ;



the honour of conveying Captain Epron to the Loire.
   The established complement of the Loire was 284 men and
boys but she had on board no more than 260, about 100 of
     ;



whom had " volunteered " from the prison-ships, and ran from
their quarters almost as soon as the action commenced.         Of
those 260 in crew, the Loire lost three seamen killed, and three
midshipmen (Wat kins Owen Pell, Francis William Eves, and
John Allen Medway), 15 seamen, and one marine wounded.
 The Railleur, out of a complement of 76 men and boys, had one
midshipman (William Prothers) and one gunner's mate killed,
 and three seamen and one marine wounded. The Fairy, out of
 a complement of 120 men and boys, had, in the day action, four
 seamen killed, her commander (slightly), purser (Mr. Hughes),
 and six seamen wounded, four of them badly but in the night
                                                ;


 action the Fairy had only one seaman wounded. The Harpy,
 out of a crew the same as the Fairy's, had one seaman killed
 and three wounded in her first action, but escaped without any
 casualty in her second making the total loss on the British side
                       ;


 nine killed and 36 wounded.
    The official letter of Captain Newman does not mention a
 word of any loss having been sustained by the Pallas a very
                                                        :



 improper omission, as it leads to an inference that the enemy's
 frigate struck her colours without having lost a man in the
 action.   That such was not the case is clear, as well from the
