1800.]          MUTINY ON BOARD THE DANa£                       9

The fire from the British frigate, however, was too powerful to
be withstood by so comparatively inferior a foe, and the Heureux
struck her colours.
  The Phoebe had three seamen killed, or mortally wounded,
and three slightly wounded the Heureux, 18 men killed, and
                             ;


25 wounded, most of whom lost limbs. The latter was a very
complete flush-decked ship, coppered and copper-fastened,
highly finished, and of large dimensions, measuring 598 tons.
She was therefore readily purchased for the use of the British
navy, and, under the same name, became classed as a 22-gun
post-ship.
  On the 15th of March the British 20-gun ship Danae, Captain
Lord Proby, while watching the French fleet in Brest, became
lost to the service under the following discreditable circum-
stances.   At 9 h. 30 m. p.m., Jackson, one of the captains of the
foretop,  and who had been secretary to Parker in the Nore
mutiny, assisted by some prisoners and a part of the crew,
rushed on the quarter-deck, knocked down the master, and cut
him severely over the head. They then threw him down the
main hatchway, and battened down the grating, placing over it
the boats filled with shot. By this means the remainder of the
crew were prevented from retaking the ship. When the mutiny
broke out all the officers, except Lord Proby, the marine-officer,
and the master, were in bed. On being informed by the marine-
officer of what had happened, Lord Proby attempted to get up
the after hatchway, but found it already guarded by nearly 20
men. One of them cut his lordship on the head and no pos-
                                                   ;



sibility existed of forcing the hatchway.
  Lord Proby and the marine-officer then contrived to muster
about ten cutlasses, four muskets, and some pocket-pi6tols.
These were distributed among the most trustworthy of about
40 men; who, when the business commenced, were asleep in
their hammocks.    The hope then was that the mutineers would
be forced to keep the sea; but the wind unfortunately changed,
and they were enabled the next morning, the 16th, to fetch
under Fort Conquete in Camaret bay, where they anchored the
ship.  Jackson then sent the jolly-boat on board the French
IG-gun brig-corvette Colombe, at anchor in the bay; and which
brig on the 14th, with a convoy under her charge, had been
chased in by the Danae herself. At 2 p.m. the first-lieutenant
of the Colombe, accompanied by a detachment of soldiers, went
on board the Danae, and asked Lord Proby to whom he snr-
rendered. His lordship replied, "To the French nation, but
