1800.]    CAPTURE OF THE CARMEN AND FLORENTINA.                   13

                                             of a convoy of 13
Spanish ship, of 10 guns and 70 men, part
ships and brigs, which had sailed on the 3rd from Cadiz, bound
to South America, under the protection of three frigates, two of
which were the Carmen, Captain don Fraquin Porcel, and
Florentina, Captain don Manuel Norates, both of
                                                the 34-gun or
12-pounder class.
  At daybreak all the Spanish convoy had disappeared except
a brig ; and she was so near and the weather so calm, that the
boats of the Leviathan and Emerald, under the orders of Lieu-
tenant Charles March Gregory, second of the Leviathan, were
detached in pursuit of her.    After " a smart skirmish of forty
minutes,"  but  in which no loss appears to have been sustained
                    "
on either side, the Los-Anglese," or Barcelona, of 14 carriage-
guns, six swivels, and 46 men, laden with bale goods, was cap-
tured by Lieutenant Gregory and his boat-party.
   By the time this brig had been secured, three sail were seen,
east, west, and south.   The Swiftsure, being to leeward (the
wind very light from the northward), was directed to chase
south, and the Emerald, east; while the Leviathan herself
steered to the westward. At noon the Emerald made the signal
for six sail in the north-east. On this the Leviathan put about
 and stood after the Emerald, and at dusk saw nine sail from the
 mast-head.
   It was at this time nearly calm   ;
                                         but at 11 p.m. a fresh breeze
 sprang up from the north-west. Profiting by it, the Leviathan
 and Emerald steered north, in the hope soon to cross the
 strangers. At midnight three sail were seen and at 2 a.m. on
                                                    ;


 the 7th, two of them were ascertained to be frigates, standing
 to the north-north-west, and close together.    The British 74
 and fritrate now steered a parallel course, proportioning their
 sail to that ofthe strangers, in order to be ready to commence
 the attack just before daybreak, the rear-admiral judiciously
 considering, that a fire commenced in the dark might alarm the
 convoy and lead to their escape.
   At dawn of day the Leviathan and Emerald bore down upon
 the Carmen and Florentina, who had evidently mistaken them
 for a part of their convoy.    On being hailed by the Leviathan,
 the weathermost frigate crowded sail to get off; as did also her
 consort, then close upon her bow.       Avolley of musketry failing
 to induce the nearest frigate to strike, the Leviathan gave a yaw,
 and fired all her guns before the gangway, in the hope to bring
 down some of the frigate's masts and yards, but without effect.
 In a few minutes, however, the Emerald, having in a very spirited
