4                LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.          [1800.

                                           to the westward, with a
quarter, running down close alongshore
light breeze nearly aft, or from the
                                     south-south-east. This was
the French 38-gun frigate Pallas, Captain Jacques Epron, from
St. Malo bound to Brest,   and the same, as it appears, that had
chased the Seafiower.
   At about 20 m. p.m., seeing no chance of bringing the Pallas
to action while she remained so close under the land, Captain
Horton tacked and stood off, in the hope that the frigate would
follow the two sloops to an offing.  This the Pallas immediately
did; and at 1 p.m. an engagement, within pistol-shot, com-
menced between her and the Fairy and Harpy, the latter close
astern of her companion. The action, during which the Harpy
obtained several opportunities of raking the Pallas, continued
until 3 p.m.    when the French frigate ceased firing, and made
                 ;


all sail to the northward and eastward, having the wind now
from the south-west.
    So great were the damages which the Fairy and Harpy had
 received in their rigging and sails, that it was not until
 3 h. 15 m. p.m. that the sloops were in a condition to make
 sail in chase.  About this time the Pallas, observing two sail
 nearly ahead, or in the north-east by north, hauled up to the
 northward and westward. Captain Horton immediately made
 the signal for the Harpy, who was the more advanced in the
 chase, to endeavour to gain the wind of the enemy. At 4 p.m.
 three sail, including the two already noticed as seen by the
 Pallas, were discovered by the two sloops.      No doubt being
 entertained that the vessels approaching were friends, the Fairy
 made the signal for an enemy which was repeated by the
                                   ;


 Harpy, both sloops firing guns every five minutes to enforce
attention to it.
  These ships, then working up from the northward with a light
wind from the south-east by south, were the British 38-gun
frigate Loire, Captain James Newman Newman          20-gun ship
                                                     ,


Danae, Captain Lord Proby, and 16-gun ship-sloop Eailleur,
Captain William James Turquand; and all of which had sailed
from Plymouth on the 27th and 28th of January, purposely to
intercept the Pallas and a corvette, expected to be on their way
from St. Malo to Brest. At 4 h. 15 m. p.m. the Pallas bore
away large and, in order to deceive her new pursuers and dis-
             ;


tract their attention, hoisted English colours, and endeavoured
to repeat the signal made by the Fairy and Harpy.             At
4 h. 30 m. p.m. Eoche Douvre bore from the Fairy north-north-
east distant six or seven miles      and at 5 h. 30 m. p.m. the
                                       ;
