12              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1800.


on the coast of Egypt, was standing in towards Alexandria
with the wind at north-north-west, a ship of the line, totally
                                             Aboukir island and
dismasted, Avas perceived aground between
the fort or castle. The Peterel  immediately  hauled to the wind,
and stood in the direction of the grounded vessel which
                                                      ;
                                                           was a
Turkish bO-gun ship, of remarkable beauty, commanded by
Indjee-Bey.
  At noon the Peterel anchored in four fathoms, about a mile
and a half to the south-east of Aboukir island and a number
                                                  ;




of djerms were seen to put off from the ships and pull
                                                       towards
the shore. At half-past noon three Turkish corvettes, that
                                                           had
come from the eastward, anchored about a mile outside of the
Peterel.  By this time the latter had hoisted out her pinnace        ;




and in it was immediately despatched the master, Mr. John
Thompson,   with nine men, to endeavour to set the ship on fire,
and prevent the French from obtaining any of the stores, guns,
or ammunition.
  The master was soon on board and by 2 h. 30 m. p.m., he
                                     ;



and his active party had completely set the ship in flames. In
another hour Mr. Thompson returned to the Peterel, bringing
with him 13 Greeks, all that remained of the 80-gun ship's
crew one part, with the commander, having surrendered to the
       ;


                                                to escape to the
French, and the other part having managed
three corvettes. To the nearest of these, not one of which, from
an alleged dread of being fired at from the shore, would afford
the slightest assistance in preventing the French from plunder-
ing the wreck, Captain Austen sent the 13 Greeks.
                                                      As a proof
that the captain's promptitude had been of use, the French had
already got out of the ship one of the quarter-deck guns,
                                                             and
were taking measures, when the Peterel entered the bay, to
remove the remainder. At 5 p.m. the Peterel weighed, and
stood back to the westward       ;and, not long afterwards, the
captain pacha testified his sense  of the service Captain Austen
had performed, by presenting him with a handsome sabre and
rich pelisse.
     On the 5th of April, in the afternoon, as a British scpiadron,
composed of the 74-gun ships, Leviathan, Captain James Car-
penter, bearing
                 the flag of Bear-admiral John Thomas Duck-
worth, and Swiftsure, Captain Benjamin Hallowell, and the
18-pounder 36-gun frigate Emerald, Captain Thomas Moutray
Waller, was cruising in the neighbourhood of the bay of Cadiz,
12 sail were discovered from the mast-head. Chase was given,
and at 3 a.m. on the 6th, the Emerald crossed and captured a
