1800.]   FAIRY AND HARPY IN CHASE OF THE PALLAS.               5

Pallas bore west, and the Harpy west by south, the breeze now
light from the south-eas-t.
  At 7 p.m. Captain Bazely received orders to   go ahead, as far
as signals were discernible between the two sloops, and make
the private signal to the two ships, the Loire and Danae, upon
her lee bow.   This was done, and subsequently the Fairy also
made the private signal  but it was not answered by either the
                          ;


Loire, Danae, or Eailleur, which latter was considerably ahead
and to windward of her two consorts. Notwithstanding this
apparent remissness, Captain Horton was tolerably satisfied that
the ships approaching were friends, and therefore stood on in
chase of the Pallas. We may add to this, that Captain Newman
also knew (although that is no excuse for not answering the
private signal), that the two ships and brig in sight were the
Pallas, Fairy, and Harpy    having learnt from Lord Proby, who
                              ;


had been detached for information to Jersey, upon what mission
the two sloops had sailed.
   At about 7 h. 45 m. p.m., observing ahead, and close under
the Seven Islands, a ship approaching, which was the Eailleur,
the Pallas tacked ;
                     and at 8 p.m., while passing about three
miles to windward of the Harpy, and at a still greater distance
from the Loire, both on the opposite or larboard tack, was fired
at, of course without effect, by the Loire.  The latter and the
Harpy then tacked in chase; and at about 9 p.m. the Loire
spoke the Fairy, who had also just tacked, and whose com-
mander informed Captain Newman of the name and force of the
Pallas, at that time "about a gun-shot and a half" upon the
Fairy's weather quarter.    Whether owing to bad management,
bad sailing, or disabled rigging from her previous action with
the two sloops, the Pallas was gradually gained upon by the
chasing ships, the Loire, Eailleur, and Harpy especially.
  At about 10 h. 30 m. p.m. the Loire had weathered her oppo-
nent so much as to be able to set her topgallant studding-sails,
and at 11 p.m. arrived up with the Pallas. The Eailleur, being
ahead of the Loire, was directed to fire her broadside and dr<qi
astern.  This the sloop did and immediately afterwards, the
                                  ;


nearest of the Seven Islands bearing south-west by south, dis-
tant about 750 yards, the Loire commenced a close action with
the Pallas, who opened a spirited fire in return.     In a little
time a battery upon the island, of several guns and a howitzer,
began a smart fire upon the British ships, and did considerable
damage to the Loire. In this way the action continued be-
tween the French frigate and shore-battery on one side, and the
