1800.]                 CAPTURE OF THE PALLAS.                   7

state of the ship's hull, which was pierced   by shot in several
places, as from the state of her lower masts, all three of which,
just before daylight on the 7th, went over her side in a squall.
   Captain Newman states that the crew of the Pallas numbered
350 but the officers of the latter swore in the prize-court that
    ;



they had 362 men when the action, meaning, we presume, that
with the two sloops, commenced. Hence the 12 men consti-
tuting the difference between the two statements were, in all
probability, killed in the preceding or day action.    A greater
loss than that must, we suppose, have been incurred in the
night action, when the Loire's heavy broadsides came into
play but, for the reason already stated, we are unable to give
        ;


the particulars.
  Instead of exhibiting the usual comparative statement, we
shall merely say that, unaided by any of her consorts, the
Loire, mounting 46 guns (long 18 and 9 pounders, with
32-pounder carronades), was more than a match for the Pallas    ;



and that the latter's defence was highly creditable to her
officers and crew.
  The Pallas was a remarkably handsome frigate of 1029 tons,
and had never before been at sea. She was of course purchased
by Government and, under the name of Pique, long continued
                   ;


a favourite 36-gun frigate in the lists of the British navy.
  For what, on one side at least, may be called a single-ship
action, the details of the occurrences which led to the capture
of the French frigate Pallas have given us considerable trouble,
and are not yet drawn up to our entire satisfaction. Not, how-
ever, because there has been so little said or written on the
subject, for few actions of the kind have given rise to so much
discussion as the pages of the Naval Chronicle can testify but
                                                            ;



owing to the obscure and contradictory statements which have
been published, all resting upon authority equally respectable.
At all events, no one can deny that the conduct of Captains
Horton and Bazely was highly gallant and praiseworthy. Nor
must the efforts of the Harpy be disparaged simply because she
was an 18-gun sloop. The Harpy was armed in the same
manner as the Pelican, that had rendered herself so famous in
beating off the Medee; and the former's 32-pounder carronades,
in the close and raking position in which they were frequently

fired, did considerable mischief to the Pallas, as Captain Epron
himself was candid enough to acknowledge.
   Although, owing to some omission in Captain Newman's
                                                               of
letter, a little delay occurred in doing justice to the claims
