1800.]
                   CAPTURE OF THE LIGURIENNE.                  11


Pelabond, after sustaining the fire of the Peterel, in a running
fight ofan hour and a half's duration, within 250 yards, and
sometimes half that distance only, of the shore, struck her
colours at which time the Peterel was within six miles of the
           ;



town of Marseille.
  Although this service was performed under a heavy fire from
a battery of four 24 or 18 pounders and although, for a few
                                       ;


minutes of the time the sloop remained on a rock, which her
stern had touched, the Peterel's damages were confined to a
few shot-holes in her sails, and to the upsetting of four of her
(12-pounder) carronades. Her first-lieutenant, gunner, and 30
men being absent in prizes, the Peterel had on board but 89 men
and boys of whom she did not have a man hurt. The Liguri-
               ;


enne had her commander and one seaman killed, and one sea-
man and one marine wounded.
  Admitting the active interference of the battery on shore to be
a fair set-off to the mere appearance of the Mermaid to leeward,
this affair was very creditable to the officers and crew of the
Peterel.    Lieutenant Pelabond, had he lived, would doubtless
have expressed his sentiments on the premature flight of his two
consorts.    As it was, the conduct of Captain Raccord, although
among the members of his court-martial we observe the fighting
names of Bombart and Infernet, was pronounced " irreproach-
able."   One thing we are bound to state the Cerf is there
                                               :


               " une
described as         demie-chebeck," and not as a ship-corvette.
The vessel, whatever might have been her rig or force, was, we
believe, totally wrecked  ;
                           but the Lejoille afterwards got off and
reached Marseille.
   The Ligurienne was a fine vessel of her class, well equipped
with stores of all kinds, in excellent repair, and not two years
old.  She was built in a very peculiar manner, being fastened
throughout with screw-bolts, so that she might be taken to
pieces, and set up again, with ease        and was originally in-
                                           ;



tended, according to the account given by the prisoners, to
follow Buonaparte to Egypt.       Screw-bolts were not qualifica-
tions required in a British cruiser and therefore the Ligurienne
                                   ;



being found unadapted in other respects, was not purchased
into the service.
   Before quitting Captain Austen, we shall relate another in-
stance of his good conduct and in which, without coming to
                              ;



actual blows, he performed an important, and not wholly im-
perilous service.  On the 13th of August, at 10 a.m., as the
Peterel, being then attached to the squadron of Sir Sidney Smith
