10             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1800.


not to mutineers." Both vessels then steered for Brest, where
                                            been chased during
they arrived on the 17th, after having
several hours by the frigates Anson and Boadicea, Captains
Philip Charles Durham and Richard
                                       Goodwin Keats; who, de-
er ived by Jackson's hoisting the horary and numerical signals,
supposed the Danae to be in chase of an enemy.
                                                     Lord Proby
had, however, thrown out of the cabin-window
                                                  and sunk, with
lead attached to it, the box containing the private signals.
   The officers of the Danae Avere landed at Brest but the ship's
                                                  ;



company, including the mutineers, were, to the astonishment
and chagrin of the latter, marched to Dinan prison. Vice-
admiral Bruix, together with the commandant of marines and
all the other French officers at the port, behaved with great

politeness and attention to Lord Proby and his officers;
                                                             the
whole of the former expressing their utter detestation of the
conduct of the mutineers. Captain Louis-Leon Jacob, formerly
of the 36-gun frigate Bellone, captured with the Hoche in the
year 1798, 'nobly offered to give louis d'ors for all the bank of
England notes of the officers. Several of the latter, soon after-
wards, were permitted to return to England on their parole.
  On the 20th of March, in the evening, as the British
12-pounder 32-gun frigate Mermaid, Captain Robert Dudley
Oliver, and 16-gun brig-sloop Peterel (armed like the Fairy),
Captain Francis William Austen, were cruising in the bay of
Marseille, Captain Oliver directed the Peterel to keep close in-
shore by way of deception, thereby to capture any vessels that
might be running along the coast.
  On the next morning some vessels of a convoy of 50 sail,
from Cette bound to Toulon and Marseille, under the protection
of an armed ship, brig, and xebec, were descried and chased,
and two of them, a bark and bombard, both laden with wheat,
captured. On the same afternoon, when near to Cape Couronne,
the Peterel came to action with the three armed vessels but ;



which, after a short contest, observing the Mermaid, although
at a great distance, beating up from to leeward, made sail to get
away.    The ship and xebec, one, the Cerf of 14 long brass
6-pounders and about 90 men, the other, the Lejoille (named
after the captain of the Genereux), commanded by the commo-
dore of the division, Captain (de vais.) Pierre-Paul Eaccord, and
mounting six long brass 6-pounders, and about 50 men, effected
their escape  by running on shore. The brig-corvette, which
was the Ligurienne of 14 long 6-pounders and two 36-pounder
carronades, all brass, and 104 men, Lieutenant Francois- Auguste
