20            LIGHT SQUADROXS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                [1800.

bestowed upon an     officer who had behaved so gallantly and
suffered so severely, Lieutenant M'Dermeit was promoted to the
rank of commander     ;
                       and we should, we confess, have been
gratified at seeing Lieutenant Pearce among the newly made
commanders of the year.
  We sincerely hope that those careful gentlemen, the established
                             having pusillanimously abandoned
pilots, got their deserts, for
the charge of their ships when their services were most required.
We wish we knew their names, in order to hand them down
with becoming infamy.    Fortunately the master of the Ann
cutter,Mr. Henry Moor, was competent to take charge of the
Dart and Mr. James Wheatland, mate of the Ann, also volun-
      ;


teered his services. These, with ^ome men obtained out of
smugglers, enabled Captain Campholl to send a pilot to each
gun-brig and fire-vessel.
   The Desiree was afterwards added to the British navy as a
36-gun frigate, and Captain Inman, very deservedly, was ap-
pointed to commission her.         One mistake we are bound to
rectify   it is as to the French gun-force of the Desiree, as well
          ;


as of one of the other frigates in her company.      In his letter to
Captain Inman, Captain Campbell states the main-deck guns of
both the Desiree and Incorruptible to have been " 24-pounders ;"
and every one of our contemporaries, relying on such good
authority, have assigned the Desiree guns of that caliber. But
this French frigate, in fact, was armed the same as No. 6 in the
table at p. 59 of the first volume, except in having two 8-pounders
more, and two carronades fewer than the number there spe-
cified.
  In the latter end of July, while the 14-gun cutter Yiper, com-
manded by acting Lieutenant Jeremiah Coghlan, and attached
to Sir Edward Pellew's squadron, was watching Port-Louis, it
occurred to the former young officer, that he might succeed in
boarding one of the cutters or gun-vessels, which were con-
stantly moving about the entrance of that harbour.      His first
step was to request of Sir Edward Pellew a ten-oared cutter,
with 12 volunteers. Having obtained the boat and men, Mr.
Coghlan, on the night of the 2Gth, placed in her a midshipman
of the Yiper, Mr. Silas Hiscutt Paddon, and six seamen, making
with himself a total of 20. With this ten-oared cutter, a boat
from the A'iper, and another from the Amethyst frigate, Mr.
Coghlan set out to board a French gun-brig, mounting three
long 24, and four 6 pounders, full of men, moored with springs
on her cables, lying in a naval port of difficult access, within
