16            LIGHT .SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHirS.             [1800.


intrusted to him.    The freshness of the wind prevented the
                                               until after daylight
boats from  reaching the enemy's anchorage
on the 11th; when, in opposition to a heavy battery, three
armed vessels, and a constant fire of musketry from the shore,
the British captured one gun-boat, Nochette, mounting two long
                                  one of six, the other of 10 guns,
24-pounders, two chasse-marees,
and eight merchant-vessels. The remainder of the convoy,
                                                        the rocks.
amounting to 20 sail, escaped capture by running upon
  This spirited little affair cost the British only three seamen
and one marine wounded. Among the officers not already
                                               the occasion, were
named, who distinguished themselves on
        Lieutenant          Jane  of the  Benown,   master's mate
acting              Henry
John Fleming, and Lieutenant Killogrivoff, a volunteer from the
Russian service.
  On the night of the 23rd of June the same British squadron,
with the exception of the Unicorn, having anchored off the
                                                        of Captain
Glenans, the boats, under the immediate direction
                                                           28 guns,
Martin, proceeded to attack a French corvette mounting
a brig of 18, lugger of 16, and cutter of 10 guns, lying at anchor,
in company with several sail of merchant-vessels, in Quimper
river.   At daybreak on the 24th the boats arrived off the
entrance of the river and, for their protection in ascending it,
                      ;



two divisions of marines were landed, that on the right com-
manded by Lieutenant Henry Burke of the Renown, and that on
the left by Lieutenant Mark A. Gerrard, of the Fisgard's marines.
The boats, under Lieutenant Robert Yarker, in the mean time,
                                                           that the
pulled with all expedition to the attack, but soon found
vessels had retired to an inaccessible distance up the river.
Lieutenant Yarker then landed, and stormed, carried, and blew
up, a battery mounted with two or three 24-pounders.
                                                             Two
other small forts, with their magazines, were also blown up by
the British before they returned to their ships, and that without
the occurrence of a single casualty.
  Having received information that a French corvette, with a
large convoy from Sable-d'Olonne bound to Brest, was lying
within the island of Noirmoutier, Sir John on the 1st of July
anchored in Bourneuf bay, with the intention of detaching the
boats of his three ships against this force, consisting of the
armed ship Therese, of 20 guns, a lugger of 12 guns, and a
cutter and two schooners, each of six guns, moored within the
sands at the bottom of the bay, in a strong position of defence,
and under the protection of six batteries at the south-east end
of Noirmoutier, besides flanking guns at every projecting point,
