22                LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHirS.         [1800.

never been dispensed with, we believe, previous to this gallant
affair.
     On the 4th of August, soon after daylight, the British 64-gun
                                                off the coast of
ship Eelliqueux, Captain Eowley Bulteel, being
Brazil with a fleet of outward-bound Indiamen under her protec-
tion,discovered four sail in the north-west or leeward quarter,
steering about north by east.     These were the French 40-gun
frigate Concorde,     Commodore Jean-Francois Landolphe, 36-gun
frigates      Medee, Captain Jean-Daniel Coudin, and Franchise,
Captain Pierre Jurien, and a captured American schooner fitted
out as a tender. This squadron had sailed from Eochefort on
the 6th of March, 1799 ; and, after committing serious depreda-
tions upon the coast of Africa, had refitted at Eio de la Plata.
  At 7 a.m., hoping to pick up a prize or two, the French com-
modore hauled his wind, tacked, and stood towards the convoy     ;




which, to facilitate the junction, bore down. At noon, when a
nearer approach brought into full view the China ships with
their two tiers of ports and warlike appearance, the French
ships bore up under a press of sail, and by signal separated.
  The Belliqueux immediately steered for the Concorde as the
largest ship ; and at 5 h. 30 m. p.m., after a partial firing of
about ten minutes' duration, by which no one on either side
appears to have been hurt, compelled the French commodore,
with a crew, as asserted, of 444 men, to haul down his colours.
In the mean time four of the Indiamen, the Exeter, Captain
Henry Meriton, Bombay Castle, Captain John Hamilton. Coutts,
Captain Eobert Torin, and Neptune, Captain Nathaniel Spens,
all 1200-ton ships, had been ordered by signal to proceed in
chase the first two, of the Medee, and the other two, of the
          :




Franchise.
  According to Captain Bulteel's letter in the Gazette, the
Medee, with a crew of 315 men, was captured at 7 p.m. by the
Bombay Castle and Exeter; but the following somewhat dif-
ferent, and, we must add, not very consistent account, appears
in the work of a contemporary      " The chase was
                                   :
                                                    long, and at
midnight Captain Meriton,   of the  Exeter, found himself coming
very fast up with the enemy, while the Bombay Castle, another
Indiaman, commanded by Captain Hamilton, was still very far
astern.   The position was critical, and the British officer, with
great presence of mind, formed his determination; running
alongside of the Frenchman with all his ports up, he com-
manded him to surrender to a superior force with this order,
                                                ;


sapposiug himself under the guns of a ship of the line, the
