1800.]           BOAT-ATTACK AT NOIEMOUT1ER.                        17

   Having assembled on board the Fisgjard, the boats pulled off
in the evening, in three divisions, containing between them 192
officers, seamen, and marines, under the orders of Lieutenant
Burke, assisted by Lieutenants of marines John Thompson and
Charles Henry Ballinghall, of the Benown, Lieutenant William
Dean, and lieutenants of marines Mark A. Gerard, of the Fisgard,
and William Garrett and Hugh Hutton, of the Defence. At
midnight the British in the boats boarded, and, after much
resistance and loss on the part of the French, carried the ship
and the three other armed vessels, together with 15 sail of
merchantmen; all, as well as the armed vessels, laden with
flour, corn, provisions, bale-goods,   and ship-timber, for the fleet
at Brest.   Finding it impossible to bring off his prizes, Lieu-
tenant Burke caused them to be effectually destroyed.
   In high glee at having performed this essential service without
any loss, the British now proceeded on their return but unfor-
                                                        ;



tunately, in attempting to pass over the sand-banks, the boats
took the ground, and in less than ten minutes, lay perfectly dry.
In this helpless situation, Lieutenant Burke and his party
became exposed to a continual fire from the forts on Noimioutier
island, and from about 400 French soldiers.      Notwithstanding
so formidable an opposition, the British commenced an attack
upon some other vessels afloat near them, in the hope to secure
one sufficiently large to carry them all off. This they accom-
plished, and, with great intrepidity and exertion, drew her up-
wards of two miles over the sands, until she floated by which
                                                            ;


time the men were nearly up to their necks in water. It appears
that 92 officers, seamen, and marines (several of them, including
Lieutenants Burke, Thompson, and Ballinghall, wounded) were
now taken prisoners but that the remainder of the party, num-
                     ;




bering in all 100, forced the French to retreat, and then got
back to their ships by means of the boats they had taken. This
was a very gallant, and, but for the latter half of it, would have
been a very successful and important, boat-service.
   On the 27th of .Time a British squadron, composed of the
r_'-pounder 32-gun frigate Andromeda, Captain Henry Inman,
28-gun frigate Nemesis, Captain Thomas Baker, one 20-gun ship,
two ship-sloops, one bomb-vessel, and 11 fire-ships, gun-brigs,
hired cutters, and luggers, assembled off Dunkcrque, to attempt,
the destruction of the four French frigates, Poursuivante, of the
44-gun or 24-pounder class, Carmagnole, of the 40-gun, and
Desiree and Incorruptible, of the 38-gun class and which four
                                                   ;



frigates had long been blockaded in that port.
  VOL.   111.                                                   C
