1800.]      BOAT-ATTACKS AT   ST. CROIX,   QUIMPER, ETC.      1   5


fours),   and 50 men and boys, Lieutenant Thomas Henry "Wil-
son, cruising off the Ylie passage into the Texel, discovered and
chased a French cutter-privateer, which, after the exchange of
a few broadsides, ran herself on shore but, as the Lark was
                                            ;



unable to get near enough to destroy her, this privateer even-
tually got off and reached in safety the Texel road.
  On the 25th, at 2 p.m., the Lark chased and soon came up
with another French cutter-privateer, which, after engaging the
lugger for some time, ran on shore upon the Ylie island. Here
the cutter, which was the Imprenable, Captain Sparrow, of 12
long 3, and two long 8 pounders, and a crew of 60 men, de-
fended herself pretty well for nearly an hour; at the end of
which her men began escaping to the shore, under the cover of
a party of troops estimated at about 100.
   Seeing this, Lieutenant Wilson put off in the Lark's small
boat, and directed the master, Mr. Thomas Geltins, to follow
in the large boat.  With his handful of men, and in the face of
a smart fire of musketry from the shore, to which by this time
all the   French crew had escaped, Lieutenant Wilson boarded
the Imprenable.    Finding his endeavours to get the cutter afloat
greatly impeded by the musketry from the troops, the lieutenant
detached the master in the large boat to dislodge them from the
sand-banks behind which they had taken shelter. This done,
the British succeeded, without the slightest loss, in getting off
the privateer, and carried her into Yarmouth roads. To add to
the value of this gallant exploit, the Imprenable had been a
great pest to British commerce in the North Sea.
  On the 10th of June Bear-admiral Sir John Borlase Warren,
cruising off the Benmarcks with the Benown and Defence 74s,
Captains Thomas Eyles and Lord Henry Baulet, and Fisgard
and Unicorn frigates, Captains Thomas Byam Martin and Philip
Wilkinson, detached the boats of the squadron to attempt to
cut out or destroy a convoy of brigs and chasse-marecs lying at
St. Croix, a small harbour within the Benmarck rocks, and known
to be laden with wine and provisions for the Brest fleet.
  In the evening the boats, eight in number, namely, two from
the Benowm, commanded by Lieutenant Henry Burke, two
from the Fisgard, by Lieutenant William Dean, and Lieutenant
of marines Mark A. Gerrard, two from the Defence, by Lieu-
tenant Thomas Stamp, and two from the Unicorn, by Lieutenant
William Brice, assembled on board the Fisgard, then at anchor
as near as possible to the shore. At 11 p.m., favoured by the
                                                       service
darkness, Lieutenant Burke proceeded to execute the
