1800.]       BOAT-ATTACK ANU CAPTURE OF THE CERBERE.             21

pistol-shot of three batteries, surrounded by several armed
small craft, and not a mile from a French 74 and two frigates.
  Undismayed by such formidable appearances, regardless of
the early discovery of his approach, as evinced by the gun-brig's
crew being at quarters, or even of the lost aid of the two other
boats, which in spite of all the endeavours of their respective
                                             —
crews could not keep pace with the cutter, in the very teeth
of all these obstacles, Mr. Coghlan and his handful of men
boarded the gun-brig on the quarter. Owing to the extreme
darkness of the night, the leader of this resolute band jumped
into a trawl-net  hung up to dry. In this helpless situation
Mr. Coghlan was pierced through the left thigh with a pike        ;



several of his men were also hurt and the whole were forced
                                   ;


back into the boat.
  Unchecked in ardour, the British hauled their boat farther
ahead; and again boarding the gun-brig, maintained against
87 men, 16 of whom were soldiers, an obstinate conflict, during
which many of the British were knocked overboard, and the
whole, a second time, beat back to their boat. Notwithstanding
this, however, the assailants returned to the charge with un-
abated courage and after killing six men, and wounding 2(
                   ;                                              I,



among whom was every officer belonging to her, Mr. Coghlan
and his truly gallant comrades carried the Cerbere. His own
loss on this splendid occasion was one man killed, and eight
wounded, himself in two places, and Mr. Paddon in six. With
the aid of the two other boats, the British towed out their prize,
under a heavy but ineffectual fire from the batteries.
   The language of Sir Edward Pellew, in his letter to Earl St.
Vincent, describing the affair, is so very energetic and appro-
priate, that we cannot do better than transcribe his words   "I
                                                             :




trust I shall stand excused by your lordship for so minute a de-
scription, produced by my admiration of that courage, which,
hand to hand, gave victory to a handful of brave fellows over
four times their number, and of that skill which formed, con-
ducted, and effected so daring an enterprise." The officers and
men of Sir Edward's squadron, to mark their sense of such dis-
tinguished bravery, gave up the Cerbere as a prize to the con-
querors and Earl St. Vincent was so much pleased with Mr.
         ;



Coghlan's intrepidity, that he presented him with a handsome
sword. Moreover, the young man obtained, what his aspiring
mind valued above all other gifts, a confirmation of his rank as
lieutenant; and that, although he had not quite served tin-
time which the regulations of the navy required, and which bad
