18               LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                              [1800


  Contrary winds and a succession of unfavourable tides afforded
no opportunity of making the attack until the 7th of July. On
that evening the ship-sloop Dart (sister vessel to the Arrow
                                                             the
already described ), Captain Patrick Campbell, followed by
                  1



Biter and Boxer gun-brigs, Lieutenants William Norman and
Thomas Gilbert, and the four fire-ships Wasp, Captain John
Edwards, Falcon, Captain Henry Samuel Butt, Comet, Captain
Thomas Leef, and Bosario, Captain James Carthew, with the
cutters and small-craft attending them, entered Dunkerque
roads. At about midnight the Dart and her companions got
sight of the French ships.   Soon afterwards one of the latter
hailed the Dart, and asked whence she came. The answer was,
" De Bordeaux." The Frenchman then desired to know what

convoy that was astern, meaning the gun-brigs and fire-ships.
The reply was, " Je ne sais pas."
   This conversation ended, the Dart continued to pass on un-
molested, until she arrived alongside of the innermost frigate
but one, when that frigate opened upon her a very heavy fire.
This the Dart was enabled to return ,vith 15 double-shotted
32-pounders, discharged in much quicker repetition than common,
owing to the carronades being mounted on the non-recoil prin-
ciple.   The Dart then ranged on, and boarded the innermost
frigate, the Desiree, by running her bowsprit between the latter's
foremast and forestay, having previously let go a stern-anchor
to check her own way.      The first-lieutenant, James M'Dermeit,
at the head of a division of seamen and marines, immediately
boarded the French frigate on the forecastle, carrying all before
him, but not without being badly wounded in the arm. He then
hailed the Dart, to say he had possession of the ship but as he          ;


feared the crew would rally, and he was wounded, he
                                                         requested
that an officer might be sent to take
                                         charge. Having cut her
stern-cable,  the Dart had just swung alongside the Desiree on                    ;


whose quarter Lieutenant William Isaac Pearce instantly leaped
with a second division of men. This officer
                                               completely repulsed
the French crew, who were
                                 rallying at the after hatchway.
Lieutenant Pearce then cut the frigate's cables, got the Desiree
under sail, and steered her over the banks that could not have
been passed half an hour later in the tide.
   In this dashing enterprise, which was concluded in about 15
minutes, the Dart had only one seaman killed, her first-lieu-
tenant, already named, one master's mate (James Hall), and
  i
    See vol. ii., p. 338 ; but the Dart appears   to   have mounted two additional car-
ronades on her quarter-deck or 30 in all.
