1800.]
                         SEINE AND VENGEANCE.                                 2 \

French captain instantly complied. Meriton gave him no time
for deliberation, but sent an officer and brought him on board,
and he delivered his sword to the English captain, in due form,
on the quarter-deck. The Bombay Castle was still at a great
distance, but on her coming up, the prisoners were quickly
taken out and divided. By this time the French captain began
to recover from his surprise, and looking very attentively at the
little guns on the quarter-deck, asked Captain Meriton what

ship it was to which he had surrendered.          Meriton drily
answered,
            '
                To a merchant-ship           :'   the indignant Frenchman
begged to be allowed to return with his people to the frigate
and fight the battle again." 1
  The remaining French frigate, the Franchise, by throwing
overboard a part of her guns, together with her anchors, boats,
and booms, and by the timely approach of night, effected her
escape ; as did also the armed schooner. Owing to the late
period at which the Concorde and Medee (both of which were
armed precisely according to the establishment of their respective
classes, already so frequently adverted to) arrived in a port of
England, and to the turn which affairs had then taken, neither
frigate was purchased for the use of the British navy.
   On the 20th of August, at 8 h. 30 m. a.m., the British 38-gun
                                               in the Mona pas-
frigate Seine, Captain David Milne, cruising
sage with the wind easterly and very light, saw, right ahead,
standing to the northward on the starboard tack, the French
frigate Vengeance, Captain Pichot (the Constellation's late an-
tagonist), not many days from Curacoa, bound to France.
                                                             The
Seine immediately made all sail in chase. At 10 a.m., the wind
having come more northerly, so as to prevent the Vengeance
from weathering Cape Eaphael on the St. Domingo shore, the
French ship tacked, and steered south-south-east under all sail.
At noon, or soon after, the wind shifted back to the eastward,
but was still very light and both ships continued under a crowd
                           ;



of canvas. At 4 p.m., the Vengeance began firing her stern-
chasers.   At 11 h. 30m. p.m., the Seine, having gained so in
the chase as to be close on her opponent's quarter, fired several
broadsides at her but the Vengeance still stood on, firing in
                     ;



return all the guns she could bring to bear.       This greatly
damaged the rigging and sails of the Seine, and compelled her,
at about midnight, to drop astern.
   The remainder of the night was occupied in reeving fresh
 rigging, and preparing to renew the combat                 ;
                                                                each ship carrying
                           1
                               Brenton, vol. ili, p. 341.
