 14           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIFS.             [1800.

as well as judicious manner, closed with the leewardmost frigate,
the two became so disabled in their sails and rigging, that after
firing a few straggling and ineffectual shot, and just as the
Leviathan had gained a position to discharge her broadside into
both frigates, they hauled down their colours.
   The Emerald immediately proceeded in chase of the third
frigate, but, appearing to lose ground in the pursuit, was re-
called and ordered to secure as many as she could of the convoy  ;


four of the largest of which, before dark, fell into her hands.
In the mean time the Leviathan lay by the two Spanish frigates,
until they were in a state to make sail ; which was not until two
hours after the surrender. The 74 then stood after the remaining
frigate but the latter had by this time so increased her distance,
       ;


that the Leviathan gave up the pursuit, and proceeded with her
prizes to Gibraltar.
  As a proof that the Carmen and Florentina had not struck
their colours without making an honourable resistance, the first,
out of a crew of 340, had one officer and 10 men killed, and 16
men wounded the second, out of a crew of 314, one officer and
               ;



11 men killed, her captain, first-lieutenant, and 10 men wounded.
Each frigate was laden with 500 quintals of quicksilver, for the
use of the mines at Lima. The Carmen measured 908, and the
Florentina 902 tons, and both were added to the British navy as
12-pounder 36-gun frigates.
   On the 12th of April Captain Joseph Baker, of the 16-gun
ship-sloop Calypso, being off Cape Tiberon, despatched the
master, Mr. William Buckly, in the six-oared cutter, with 10
men, properly armed and provided, and a swivel in her bow, to
cruise for two days under the cape, in order, if possible, to in-
tercept some of the small craft that usually navigate within a
mile of the shore. On the following day, the 13th, at 11 a.m.,
Mr. Buckly perceived, and immediately pulled towards, a
schooner lying becalmed under the land.         As the boat ap-
proached within hail, the schooner desired her to keep off, and,
finding the order not attended to, opened upon her a fire of
musketry.    Heedless of this, the British in the boat boarded,
and— after a short but smart conflict on the deck— carried the
French privateer-schooner Diligente, of six carriage-guns, 30
stands of arms, and 39 men actually on board.       In this very
gallant boat-attack, the British had only one man wounded the
                                                            ;


French, seven, and those dangerously.
  On the 21st of April, at 6h. 30 m. a.m., the British hired-
lugger Lark, of 14 guns (twelve 12-pounder carronades and twc
