1800.J             CUTTING OUT THE DESIREE.                     19

nine seamen and marines wounded while the loss sustained by
                                   ;


the Desiree, a fine new frigate of 1015 tons, was supposed to
have amounted to full 100 in killed and wounded together,
including nearly the whole of the officers present. The esta-
blished complement of the Desiree was from 300 to 350 men but
                                                            ;



it does not appear that the frigate had all her crew on board.

The exact number that was on board we are, however, unable
to state especially as, from some unexplained cause, no head-
         ;



money certificates were signed, or at least recorded.
   The four fire-ships were admirably conducted, and not aban-
doned by their officers until completely in flames on board the
                                                  :




Comet, indeed, the captain and one seaman were wounded by
the explosion. By alacrity, however, in cutting their cables,
during which they were exposed to the fire, within pistol-shot of
the Dart, and of the gun-brigs Biter and Boxer, the three remain-
ing French frigates escaped before the wind, and ran out of the
road to a short distance down the channel that passes within the
Braak sand. One of them here got on shore, but at daylight
on the 8th got off; and all three ships subsequently regained
their anchorage.
  During the attack the hired 14-gun cutter Kent, Lieutenant
Eobert Baron Cooban, found employment for some French gun-
boats that would otherwise have annoyed the attacking vessels.
In this cannonade the Kent had one seaman wounded and the
                                                       ;


12-gun hired cutter Ann, Lieutenant Eobert Young, and the
gun-brig Biter, Lieutenant Samuel Norman, had each one sea-
man, and the latter her commander, wounded, in the service
which they were respectively rendering. The better to direct
the enterprise, Captain Tnman, with 30 volunteers from the
Andromeda, had embarked on board the hired lugger Vigilant,
Mr. William Dean, master, and proceeded with the other vessels
into Dunkerque roads.    Captain Inman, very humanely, sent
the prisoners,   many    whom were dreadfully mangled, to
                        of
Dunkerque on their parole. For this he received the thanks of
Commodore Castagnier. If all the prisoners were thus sent
away, the reason is explained why there were no head-money
certificates.
  For his skill and gallantry in laying on board and capturing
the Desiree, Captain Campbell was advanced to post-rank, and
appointed to the 20-gun ship Ariadne in point of rank, cer-
                                       :




tainly a step forward, but from the Dart to the Ariadne nearly
two steps backwards, as respected the relative force and effec-
tiveness of the two vessels.  As the least reward that could be
