1800.]                    KENT AND CONFIANCE.                         31

  On the 9th of October the honourable East India Company's
ship Kent, of 26 guns (20 long 12, and six long 6 pounders),
commanded by Captain Eobert Eivington, being off the Sand-
heads, on her way from England to Eengal, fell in with tha
Erench ship-privateer Confiance, of 20 or 22 long 8-pounders,
commanded by M. Surcouff, a very able and experienced officer.
An action immediately ensued, and was maintained with great
bravery by tlite Indiaman, for one hour and 47 minutes during    ;


which the two vessels were frequently foul of each other. At
length the Kent was carried by boarding; her crew, besides
their inferior numbers, being very ill-supplied with weapons of
defence, while the assailants were all armed with sabres, pikes,
and pistols. After having given decided proofs of his bravery,
Captain Eivington received, at the moment of boarding, a
musket-shot through his head.
  Besides the loss of her captain, the Kent had 13 men killed,
including four or five of her passengers, and 44 men wounded,
including also several passengers. The loss on board the Con-
fiance does not appear to have been recorded.   It is, indeed, to
be regretted, that on these interesting occasions some capable
person does not take the pains to collect and publish the parti-
culars. Many highly creditable actions between merchant-ships
and enemy's privateers are either given to the public with such
marks of doubt that an historian is fearful of admitting them
into his pages       or they are so summarily stated, that the
                 ;
                                                                 account,
when the most is made of it, amounts to little more than that
one vessel was captured by another.
   The Confiance was a ship of 490 tons, and had, it is said, a
complement of 250 men. The Kent was a new ship, of 820
tons, and had probably about 90 or 100 men in crew, exclusive
of 38 male and three female passengers. Seven or eight of those
passengers had been taken from the Queen Indiaman, when she
was consumed by fire at St. Salvador. So long and manful a
resistance with such limited means, was very honourable to the
officers, crew, and passengers of the Kent.     In the following
month M. Surcouff arrived with his prize at the Isle of France.
   We may remark, in passing, what an advantage the Kent
would have derived, had she mounted on her quarter-deck and
forecastle a tier of 18 or 24-pounder carronades, instead of
                                                             long
sixes.   A few discharges of grape from the former would pro-
bably  have induced  the Confiance to keep at long-shot, and then
the Kent's 12-pounders, well plied, would either have
                                                      captured
or repulsed her.
