1800.]           CAPTAIN HILLY AR AT BARCELONA.                 27


pearance of so formidable a force, was seen to run into Vigo, and
to anchor at a spot near the narrows of Eedondela, and close to
some batteries. In the evening a division of boats, 20 in number,
from the ships of the squadron, placed under the orders of Lieu-
tenant Henry Burke of the Eenown, proceeded to attack the pri-
vateer which was the Guepe, mounting 18 long 8-pounders, and
             ;


manned with 161 men.
  At about 40 minutes past midnight the boats got alongside of
the ship, the crew of which had previously cheered, to show
that they were prepared. Notwithstanding this, and that the
Guepe's commander, Citizen Dupan, had laid over the hatches
to keep his men to their quarters, the British resolutely boarded,
and in 15 minutes carried the vessel; with the loss of three
seamen and one marine killed, three lieutenants, 12 seamen,
and five marines wounded, and one seaman missing, probably
drowned.
  Among the wounded officers was the gallant leader of the
party, Lieutenant Burke, an officer  who had previously dis-
tinguished himself on more than one similar occasion      and
                                                            ;



who, immediately after this additional proof of his gallantry,
obtained the rank of commander. The two other wounded
Lieutenants were John Henry Holmes and Joseph (misnamed in
the Gazette James) Nourse, both of the Courageux. The loss
on board the Guepe, as a proof how obstinately she had been
defended, amounted to 25 men killed and 40 wounded, including
among the mortally wounded her brave commander. This for-
midable French privateer had been fitted out at Bordeaux, and
was stored and provisioned, in the most complete manner, for a
four months' cruise.
  On the 3rd of September, at about 8 p.m., eight boats from the
74-gun ship Minotaur, Captain Thomas Louis, and armed
                                                               en
flute (late 12-pounder 32-gun) frigate Niger, Captain James
                                                            Lieu-
Hillyar, placed under the orders of the latter, assisted by
tenants Charles Marsh Schomberg, and Thomas Warrand, Mid-
                                                        and Lieu-
shipmen James Lowry, and Richard Standish Haly,
tenant of marines John Jewell, proceeded to cut out or destroy
two Spanish armed ships, or corvettes, at anchor in Barcelona
roads one, the Conception, alias Esmeralda, the other, the Paz,
         ;


each described as mounting 22 long 12 and 8 pounders, and laden
with stores, reported, but which did not prove to be the case,
for the relief of Malta.
   At the time these eight boats were detached upon the service,
one of them was boarding a Swedish galliot bound into the port;
