1800.]   BRITISH PRIVATEER         AND SPANISH GUN-BOATS.      29

performed as it was in the very teeth of a force both afloat and
ashore so very superior, reflected the highest honour upon the
victorious party.
  It is true that some altercation took place between the courts
of Spain and Sweden relative to the alleged seizure of the galliot
to surprise the ships but it led to nothing except, for a while,
                     ;



to mislead public opinion as to the merits of the case.     A con-
temporary states that the capture of the Paz and Esmeralda,
" led to the
               promotion of Captain Hillyar and Lieutenant
Schomberg."
             1
                If so, the operation as regards Captain Hillyar
at least, was rather a tardy one for he was not, we find, made
                                        ;




post until February, 1804, rather more than six months after the
senior lieutenant who had served under him at Barcelona at-
tained the same rank.
   On the 10th of September, as the British privateer-brig,
Bover, of Liverpool, Nova-Scotia, armed with 14 long 4-pounders
and 54 men and boys, under the command of Captain Godfrey,
was cruising near Cape Blanco on the Spanish Main, the Spanish
schooner Santa-Bitta, mounitng 10 long 6-pounders and two
English 12-pounder carronades, with about 85 men, and accom-
panied by three gun-boats also under Spanish colours, and
which, as well as the schooner, had the day before been equipped
by the governor of Puerto-Caballo, on purpose to capture the
Rover, came out from near the land to fulfil their orders. The
light breeze which had been blowing having died away, the
schooner and two of the gun-boats, by the aid of a number of
oars, gained fast upon the brig   keeping up as they advanced a
                                       ;



steady fire from their bow-guns, which the Bover returned with
two gims pointed from her stern, and, as her opponents drew
near, with her small-arms also.
   Apprised, by their motions, that the schooner intended to
board on the starboard quarter, and the two gun-boats (the third
appeared to keep aloof) on the opposite bow and quarter, the
Bover suffered them to advance until they got within about 15
yards of her she then manned her oars on the larboard side,
                 :




and, pulling quickly round, brought her starboard broadside to
bear right athwart the schooner's bow upon whose decks, then
                                                  ;




filled with men ready for boarding, the brig poured a whole
broadside of round and grape.        Immediately after this, her
active crew passed over to the guns on the opposite side, and
raked the two gun-boats in a similar manner. The Bover then
 commenced a close action with the Santa-Ritta, and continued
                         i
                             Breuton, vuL lii., p. 24.
