24                    LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                                [1 .-00.



every sail she could set. On the 21st, at 7 h. 30 m. a.m., the
Seine got again within gun-shot, and at 8 a.m. close alongside,
of the Vengeance. The action now recommenced, and con-
tinued, with unabated fury, until 10 h. 30 m. a.m. when the                   ;




Vengeance, having lost her foremast, mizenmast, and maintop-
mast, all of which had fallen in-board, and being terribly shat-
tered in her hull, surrendered. This was made known by an
officer, who hailed the Seine from the end of the French ship's
bowsprit.
  The Seine lost none of her masts, but had her mainmast
badly wounded, and received several shot in her remaining masts
and hull. Her loss, out of a complement of 281 men and boys,
amounted to her second-lieutenant (George Milne) 'and 12 sea-
men killed, and one lieutenant of marines (Archibald Mac-
donald), her master (Andrew Barclay), captain's clerk (Mr.
Home), 22 seamen, three marines, and one boy wounded. The
loss of the Vengeance, Captain    Milne merely says, "has been
very great." As 291 were the number of prisoners received out
of her, and 326, according to the deposition of her officers in the
prize-court, the number of persons on board when the action
commenced, we may fairly set down the killed at 35 and the                        ;



wounded, if in the usual proportion, were probably about 70
or 80.
   The Seine, late the French frigate of that name taken by the
Jason and Pique in June, 1798, l carried two long nines and
eight 32-pounder carronades more than the establishment of her
class. 2 The force of the Vengeance has already, on more than
one occasion, been referred to. 3 Captain Milne calls the
                                                           eights
of the Vengeance twelves but no French
                                  ;         frigate, not even the
Forte of 1401, nor the Egyptienne of 1430 tons, mounted a
heavier caliber than 8-pounders on the
                                          quarter-deck and fore-
castle.  Moreover the Vengeance, as Captain Milne admits, wag
a sister-vessel to the Eesistance and the
                                           latter, as has already
                                            ;


been shown, carried 8-pounders. 4 In
                                         calling the 36-pounder
carronades 42s, Captain Milne has only erred as other
                                                         captains
have done but, in adding, " The weight of metal I have
                  ;



mentioned in French pounds," he has given the French a caliber
they never possessed. With respect to " shifting guns on the
main and quarter decks,"              it
                                           appears, that the Vengeance had
every broadside port already filled.             But even admitting that the
  '
      See vol. ii., p. 248                      3   gee vol. i., p. 380. and vol. ii.,
  2 lor which see letter Z in the small         *                                      p. 90.
                                                    See vol. ii.," p 92
table at p. 101 of the first volume.
