1800.]
             LIEUTENANT BEAUFORT AT FUENGIKOLA.                  33

raents and, after all, is there not more honour in conquering a
         ;


brave than a cowardly enemy?
   As soon as she had cleared away the wreck of the Berceau's
masts, and properly secured her own, the Boston took her prize
in tow, and on the 14th of November anchored with her in Nan-
tucket road.   Atreaty of peace bad, since the 30th of September,
been signed at Paris between France and America and the  ;



Berceau, after being thoroughly repaired and refitted, was re-
stored to the French government.
   On the 27th of October, late in the evening, the boats of the
British 38-gun frigate Phaeton, Captain James Nicholl Morris,
placed under the orders of her first-lieutenant, Francis Beau-
fort, supported by Lieutenant George Bluish, lieutenant of
marines, Duncan Campbell, and midshipmen Augustus Barring-
ton Hamilton and Anthony Collings Stanton, proceeded to
attack the Spanish national polacre-ship San-Josef, mounting
two long 24-pounders in the bow, two long brass 18-pounders
                             and six 4 pounders, all brass, on
for stern-chasers, and four 12
her sides, having on board 34 seamen (out of a crew of 49, a
boat's crew being absent) and 22 soldiers or marines, and lying-
moored under the protection of five guns mounted upon the
fortress of Fuengirola, near Malaga.
  The launch, with an 18-pounder carronade in her, not being
able to keep up with the barge and two cutters, Lieutenant.
Beaufort was proceeding with only the latter, when he was
unexpectedly tired at by a French privateer-schooner, which
had entered unseen in the night, and lay in a position to flank
the ship. The three boats, however, still advanced      and on
                                                         ;


the 28th, at 5 a.m., in the face of an obstinate resistance of
musketry and sabres, boarded, carried, and brought off the
polacre.
  In this gallant affair one seaman was killed alongside.     Lieu-
tenant Beaufort was first wounded in the head, and afterwards
received several slugs through his left arm and in his body ;
Lieutenant Campbell received several slight sabre-wounds and ;


Mr, Hamilton was shot through the thigh while in the boat         ;


notwithstanding which ho gallantly boarded with the rest.        A
seaman also was wounded making the loss, on the part of the
                            ;



British, one killed and four wounded.     Of the San- Josef's crew,
six men were found badly, and 13 slightly, wounded.

   Being a fine fast-sailing little vessel, the San-Josef was im-
mediately commissioned as a British sloop-of-war under tho
name of Calpe, the ancient name of Gibraltar.       It would have
  vol. m.                                               D
