32                   LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                         [1800.


  Having already recorded two actions fought between Ameri-
can and French ships of war, we will here give a brief account of
the third the last, indeed, of any consequence which occurred
                 ;


                                                           of the
during the short interruption in the amicable relations
two countries. On the 12th of October, in latitude 22° 50' north,
                                                          Boston
longitude 51° west, the United States, 32-gun frigate
(of the same long-gun force,
                                we believe, as                  D
                                                  in the table at
   101 of the first volume, with   12 carronades, 3f-pounders, in
p.
addition), Captain Little, fell
                                in with the French ship-corvette
Berceau, of 22 long eights and two English 12-pounder carro-
nades, Lieutenant Louis-Andre Senes.                    An action ensued, and
continued with mutual spirit, for two hours when the Berceau,
                                                            ;




having had her masts reduced to a tottering state, and being
dreadfully shattered in hull, struck her colours to the
                                                        Boston                        ;



whose masts, rigging, and sails were also considerably wounded
and cut.
      Out of a crew of about 320 men and boys, the Boston lost her
purser and 11 seamen and marines killed or mortally wounded,
and eight others wounded who recovered. The precise loss of
the Berceau does not appear in Captain Little's letter.        are           We
only enabled to state, that, out of a crew of about 200, exclusive
of 30 passengers, it was very considerable in both killed and
wounded and that among the former was her captain. We
                 ;



may add, also, that the fore and main masts of the Berceau fell
over the side soon after her surrender.
   AVho can read of a two hours' resistance under such a dis-
parity of force as, without the aid of a comparative statement,
it is clear must have existed between these two ships, without

being surprised that no account of this action is to be found in
any French publication ? Is it, then, French victories only that
French ears can listen to, or French patriotism record ? Too
true it is. The most insignificant triumph is puffed up to the
skies, while an unsuccessful action, no matter how resolutely
and ably fought, is passed over in silence. This will never make
a navy.     Much credit is due to the American captain for his
candour (not the less estimable for its rarity on his side of the
Atlantic ) in publicly acknowledging, that " the captain of the
             1




Berceau fought his ship gallantly, so long as she was in a situa-
tion capable of being defended."     Captors, did they but know
their true interest, always gain by such acts of fairness.   The
public places a greater reliance upon their remaining state-
  1
      The Boston writers, for instance, in    that the two ships were " of nearly equal
iheir account of this very action, declared   force."
