28           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.               [1800.


and, to join this boat and give directions to
                                                  her commander,
Captain Hillyar pulled, in the first instance, for the galliot.
                                                                 On
arriving alongside the latter, the British  boats  hooked   on, and
they and the Swedish galliot of course stood together towards
the mole of Barcelona.
  Having approached within about three-quarters of a mile of
the nearest battery, and being reminded, by two shots which
passed over the galliot, that it was time to retire from under the
shelter of a neutral vessel, Captain Hillyar and his party pulled
away towards the object of attack. Shortly afterwards the
outermost of the two Spanish armed ships, the Esmeralda, dis-
charged her broadside at the boats, but without effect, her shot
falling short.   Pushing on with their accustomed alacrity, the
British were alongside the Esmeralda before the ship could reload
her guns. This was at 9 p.m. and in a few minutes afterwards,
                               ;



but not without a smart struggle, Captain Hillyar and his party
boarded and carried the Esmeralda.
   The announcement of this victory, by the cheers of the
British, was the signal for the Spaniards in the other ship to
cut their cable, and endeavour to run close under the battery at
the mole-head; but the ship canting the wrong way, and the
British being alert in their movements, the Paz, before 10 p.m.,
in spite of a heavy fire from four strong batteries, 10 gun-boats,
two schooners, each armed with two long 36-pounders, and a
fort upon Mount Ioni which threw shells, shared the fate of her
consort. At about 11 p.m. the two prize-ships, and the boats
that had taken them, covered as they stood to the offing by two
men-of-war, were brought off in safety; with a loss to the
British of only two seamen and one marine killed, the Mino-
taur's master, Mr. Eeid and four seamen wounded.         On board
the Paz, one seaman was killed and four wounded and on board
                                                    ;


the Esmeralda, two seamen were killed, and 17 wounded.
   Each of the captured ships is represented to have measured
about 400 tons, and to have been laden with provisions and
stores supposed for Batavia.    Besides which they were to have
taken on board between them 300 Batavian troops from the
island of Majorca. Admitting the crew (for no number is stated
in the gazette letter) to have amounted only to 50 men, we have
a ship of 400 tons, carrying, besides a cargo of provisions, 200
                           " 22 brass
men, and mounted with                  guns, 12 and 9 pounders."
We must therefore be permitted to consider, that the guns of
the Esmeralda were only 8 and 6 pounders and that even the
                                               ;



majority of the guns were of the lesser caliber. Still the exploit,
