30              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                [1800.

it for   an hour and a half   ;
                                  when finding her opponent's fire grow
slack, the Eover, by the aid of a light air of wind, backed her
head-sails, and brought her stern in contact with the schooner's
side.  The British crew then rushed on board of, and with
scarcely a show of opposition carried, the Santa-Eitta. The two
gun-boats, seeing the fate of their consort, sheered off, appa-
rently in a very shattered state.
   Notwithstanding this long and hard-fought action, the Eover
had not a man hurt while, on board the Santa-Eitta, every
                         ;


officer, except the commander of a detachment of 25 soldiers,
was killed; the whole of the killed, as found on the deck,
amounted to 14, and the wounded to 17. The prisoners, in-
cluding the latter, numbered 71. These, being too many to be
kept on board, were all, except eight, landed the Eover's cap-
                                                     ;


tain having previously taken from them the usual
                                                   obligation not
to serve again until exchanged.    This was an achievement that
did great honour to Captain Godfrey, his officers, and crew; and
proved how well the hardy sons of British America could emu-
late their brother-tars of the parent country.
   On the 8th of October, at 8 a.m., the British schooner Gipsy
(tender to the 74-gun ship Leviathan, Captain James Car-
penter, bearing the flag of Eear-admiral Duckworth), of 10 long
4-pounders and 42 men, commanded by Lieutenant Coryndon
Boger, cruising off the north end of Guadeloupe, chased and
soon overtook an armed sloop; which, on the schooner's
                                                          firing a
shot at her, hoisted French colours and began
                                                   cannonading in
return. During one hour and a half the two vessels continued
warmly engaged at close quarters when the Gipsy, receiving-
                                          ;


great annoyance from the musketry of her opponent, hauled a
little further off. Here the
                             Gipsy kept up a sharp fire with round
and grape shot, and at 10 h. 30 m. a.m. compelled the sloop, which
was the Quidproquo, of eight guns, 4 and 8 pounders, and 98
men, commanded by M. Tourpie, represented to have been for-
merly a capitaine de vaisseau, to strike her colours. Eighty of
the 98 men were Guadeloupe chasseurs and it was to save his
                                               ;


people from their powerful musketry that the Gipsy's com-
mander, with so much judgment, had hauled off to a            long-gun
range.
  The Gipsy had     three seamen killed, and
                                                nine, including
Lieutenant Boger, wounded the
                                  Quidproquo, her captain and
                                    ;


four seamen killed, and 11 wounded.
                                       Although upon a small
scale this action was not the less creditable to those
                                                              who, by
their skill and bravery, had brought it to a successful termination.
