3(3                LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              [1800.


commander, although not afforded an opportunity
                                                            of
                                                         repulsing
a ship like the Bellone, distinguished himself greatly by
                                                                his-

         in capturing privateers, and in protecting British con-
activity
                                  The serviceable and far from
voys from their depredations.
                  of the Netley, Lieutenant Francis Godolphin
inglorious career
                                            and December of the
Bond, began in the months of November
                 and, on one  occasion  in particular, Lieutenant
preceding year      ;



Bond captured a Spanish privateer, with more men in her than
he had on board as a crew.
  We shall pass over several cases in which the Netley captured
                               their prizes, to relate one instance
Spanish privateers and retook
of decided gallantry on the part of her commander and crew.
On the 7th of November in the present year, being off the rock
of Lisbon, Lieutenant Bond received information that a Spanish
privateer-schooner was lurking in the neighbourhood, and that
the vessels of the Newfoundland convoy, being dispersed, were
                                                  in the evening,
daily expected to approach the Tagus. Having,
stood in close to the shore, the Netley, after dark, discovered
the above privateer, and a brig-prize which she had that morn-
ing made, at anchor. Despatching
                                     her boat to take possession
of the brig, the Netley gallantly ran on board of, and, dropping
her anchor, carried, without the discharge of a shot or the loss
of a man, the Spanish privateer San-Miguel, alias l'Alerta, of
nine guns, described as 18 and 6 pounders, and 65 men. With
these her two prizes, the Netley, on the 8th, anchored in the
Tagus.
   On the 17th of November the British 71-gun ship Captain,
Captain Sir Richard John Strachan, 32-gun frigate Magicienne,
                                                         Lieu-
Captain William Ogilvy, and hired armed cutter Nile,
tenant George Argles, and lugger Soworrow, Lieutenant James
Nicholson, cruising off the entrance of the Morbihan, to
                                                            in-

tercept a French convoy, discovered the French 20-gun ship-
corvette Beolaise, the commodore of a convoy, endeavouring
to get under the protection of the batteries. The Nile, by her
skilful management, prevented the corvette from reaching the
north shore and the
               ;               latter, upon the   Magicienne's approach,
ran into Port-Navalo       ;
                               where she took the ground, and struck
her colours.
      Captain Ogilvy immediately despatched the boats of the Ma-
gicienne, under the orders of Lieutenants George Skottowe
                                                                    and
the Honourable Edward Bodney, to endeavour to board                 and
bring off or destroy the corvette but the Beolaise rehoisting
                                          ;



her colours, and making sail, fired upon the boats and ran-
