1800.J               MILBROOK AMD BKLLOXE.                    35
the schooner received a broadside from the ship, which was the
celebrated French privateer Bellone, of Bordeaux. Before the
Bellone could bring her second broadside to bear the Milbrook
had fired three broadsides, and by the time the former had fired
her third the schooner had discharged eleven broadsides. Such
was the rapidity of firing where no time was lost by
                                                     running out
the guns.
   The carronades of the Milbrook were seemingly fired with as
much precision as quickness for the Bellone from broadsides
                              ;


fell to single guns, and
                         showed, by her sails and rigging, how
much she had been cut up by the schooner's shot. At about
10 a.m. the ship's colours came down and Lieutenant Smith
                                        ;

used immediate endeavours to take possession of her.       Not
having a rope left wherewith to hoist out a boat, he launched
one over the gunwale but, having been pierced with shot in
                       ;


various directions, the boat soon filled with water. At this time
the Milbrook, having had 10 of her guns disabled, her
                                                           masts,
yards, sails, and rigging wounded and shot through, and all her
sweeps cut to pieces, lay quite unmanageable, with her broad-
side to the Bellone's stern.    In a little while a light breeze
sprang up, and the Bellone, hoisting all the canvas she could
set, sought safety in flight.
   Out of the 47 men of her crew, the Milbrook had eight sea-
men and one marine severely, and her master (Thomas Fletcher,
but who would not quit the deck), surgeon's mate (I.
                                                        Parster),
and one seaman, slightly wounded. The loss sustained by the
Bellone, as rumoured at Tigo, into which port she was com-
pelled to put, amounted, out of a crew probably of 250 or L'(J<)
men, to 20 killed, her first and second captains and 45 men
wounded.
  The guns of the Bellone, as has already been stated, consisted
of 24 long French 8-pounders and six or eight brass
                                                     3G-pounder
carronades. The ship, therefore, was almost quadruply superior
to the Milbrook and Lieutenant Smith, by his gallantry and
                 ;


seamanlike conduct, not only preserved from capture a valuable
convoy, but added, in no slight degree, to the naval renown of
his country.   This became appreciated in the proper quarter,
and Lieutenant Smith was promoted to the rank of commander.
Also the English factory at Oporto, to evince their sense of the
service performed by the Milbrook, voted Lieutenant Smith
their thanks, accompanied by a piece of plate of 50Z. value.
   There was another British schooner, armed much in the same
manner as the Milbrook, and cruising on the same station, whoso
