1800.]           THE ADMIRAL PASLEY AND SPANISH GUN-BRIGS.   07

further into the port. On seeing this the Magicienne recalled
her boats. Lieutenant Bodney, however, being determined not
to return empty-handed, gallantly captured, with his single
boat, a merchant- vessel from under one of the batteries.
  Being resolved to attempt the destruction of the corvette, Sir
Bichard sent the boats of his little squadron, under the orders
of Lieutenant William Hennah, assisted by Lieutenants Charles
Clyde and Richard William Clarke (the latter of the Marlbo-
rough, a portion of whose men were also present), and also, we
believe, by the two lieutenants already named of the Magicienne.
The enterprise, thus intrusted to Lieutenant Hennah, was con-
ducted with great judgment and gallantry and, notwithstand-
                                               ;



ing a heavy fire from the shore on all sides, the Beolaise was
boarded and destroyed. To add to the value of this exploit, it
was performed with no greater loss to the British than one sea-
man killed and seven wounded.
   On the 7th of December the Nile cutter, while cruising off
the mouth of the river Ailaine in Quiberon bay, discovered a
convoy of 15 or 16 vessels coming round the point of Croisic   ;


but, having just before detached the Lurcher cutter, Lieutenant
Bobert Forbes, to cruise off the Morbihan, Lieutenant Argles,
instead of going in chase, permitted the French vessels to
approach nearer to the point of St. Gildas, in order to have the
assistance of his consort in overtaking and capturing them.
   In the evening the Nile stood out from the shore and made
the necessary signals to the Lurcher, who, being to windward,
turned all the vessels and they made for the Vilaine. At 8 p.m.,
just as the battery on Pointe Saint Jacques was hailing her, the
Nile captured one small vessel, and manning her, sent her along-
shore by which means, before 4 a.m. on the 8th, five more
         ;



vessels were taken.    The whole coast was by this time alarmed,
and the battery of Notre Dame at the entrance of the river
Peners kept up so brisk a fire as to send three shot through the
last vessel boarded    but the British, notwithstanding, brought
                           ;


her off with only one man slightly scratched by a splinter. The
Lurcher, in the meanwhile, had succeeded in taking three more
of the convoy, making nine in the whole. This enterprise
reflects great credit upon the commanders and crews of the two
cutters and shows what serious annoyance may be done to an
             ;




enemy, even by such small vessels as the Nile and Lurcher,
 when under the guidance of an active and intelligent officer.
   On the 10th of December, the British armed brig Admiral
Pasley, of 1G guns, 1*1 of them 12-pounder carronades, with 40
