42                BRITISH   AND DANISH FLEETS.                [1801.

senior British officer, hailed the Freya, to say he should send
his boat on board the convoy.      Captain Krabbe replied that,
if such an attempt were made, he would fire into the boat. Both
threats were put into execution and an action ensued, which,
                                 ;


with so decided a superiority against her, ended of course in the
Freya's submission.     This affair, unhappily, did not pass off
without loss. The Nemesis and Arrow had each two seamen
killed and several wounded.       The Freya had also two men
killed and five wounded, two of the latter badly.    The English
vessels, accompanied by the Danish frigate and her convoy,
then proceeded to, and anchored in, the Downs where the;



Freya, by the order of Yice-admiral Skeffington Lutwidge, the
commander-in-chief on that station, still kept flying the Danish
ensign and pendant.
   As, besides this fracas, a somewhat similar circumstance had
occurred in the Mediterranean, the British government lost no
time in despatching Lord Whitworth to the court of Denmark,
to place the business on an amicable footing.       To give ad-
ditional weight to his lordship's arguments, he was accompanied
by a squadron of four sail of the line (to which six more were
afterwards added), three 50-gun ships, and several frigates and
smaller vessels, under Yice-admiral Archibald Dickson, in the
74-gun ship Monarch. On the 29th of August Lord Whitworth
terminated the negotiation with the Danish minister, Count
Bemstorff and a convention was mutually signed, agreeing that
             ;


the Freya and convoy should be repaired at English expense,
and then released; that the right of the British to search con-
voys should be discussed at a future day in London that Danish
                                                   ;

vessels should only sail under convoy in the
                                               Mediterranean, to
protect them from the Algerines, and should be searchable as
formerly and that the convention should be ratified by the two
         ;


courts in three weeks.
  Eussia, although the ally of England, took offence at the
attack upon the Freya, and particularly at the passage
                                                        through
the Sound of a British squadron. The first overt act of the
Emperor Paul's displeasure, was to sequester all British pro-
perty in his dominions the next, was to place his army and
                        ;




navy upon a war-establishment. On the 22nd of September,
however, about three weeks after it had been ordered, the seques-
tration was taken off. But on the 5th of November, the news
of the capture of Malta having excited fresh anger in the breast
of the emperor, an embargo was again laid on all the British
shipping in the ports of Eussia amounting, at this            to
                                                           time,
