                                       (     40      )




              STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY.



The abstract of the British navy, for the commencement of the
                    1
 present year, shows a considerable increase in its line-of-battle
total   but the number of line-cruisers in commission remains the
         ;


same as in the last abstract, and the lower totals exhibit, in re-
ference to the latter, a very slight improvement in their numbers.
As the one cause of this, the " Captured " column, owing chiefly
to the reduced state of the Dutch, and the blockaded state of
the French and Spanish navies, does not amount to half what it
did in the preceding year. 2
     A
     very slight diminution occurs in the wrecked and foundered
cases of the British na\y in the year 1800 and the accidental    ;


losses of that year, including the melancholy loss by fire, ended
the lives of upwards of 1300 British officers, seamen, and marines.
All four of the foundered vessels belonged to the sloop-classes,
and three of them had been French privateers. The number of
cruisers employed in watching the enemy's ports, the boldness
and perseverance with which their commanders performed that
arduous duty, and the frequent gales of wind which occurred
during the winter months of the year, render eleven wrecked
cases, out of so many ships as were then at sea, no extraordinary
number. 3
     The carronadc still maintained, and more than maintained, its
ground.        On the 21st of February, 1800, an admiralty-order
had issued, directing that in future all ships of 24 and 20 guns
should be fitted on the main deck for
                                        32-pounder carronades, in
lieu of the long nines they had hitherto carried. This was
                                                           giving
 i   See Appendix, Annual abstract, No. 9.        « See                      s
                                                          Appendix, No. 1.       ibid,,   No. 2.
