1801.]   ARRIVAL OF ADMIRAL PARKER IN THE SOUND.                 43

about 200 sail. This was followed, in December, by a convention
between Russia and Sweden, agreeing to the re-establishment
of an armed neutrality between those powers. Denmark also,
at the instigation of the first of these powers, and of Prussia,
was induced to join the confederacy.
  The menacing attitude thus assumed by the three principal
northern powers requiring to be met in a corresponding way by
England, the latter, on the 12th of March, despatched from
Yarmouth roads, under the command of Admiral Sir Hyde
Parker, in the London 98, with Vice-admiral Lord Nelson in
the St. George 98, as his second, a fleet of 15, afterwards aug-
mented to 18, sail of the line, with as many frigates, sloops,
bombs, fire-ships, and smaller vessels, as made the whole amount
to about 53 sail on board a division of which fleet had em-
                 :




barked, the 49th regiment under Colonel Isaac Brock, two com-
panies of the rifle-corps, and a detachment of artillery, the whole
under the command of Colonel Stewart.
   The nominal or paper force of the three powers against which
this fleet, was destined to act, was Russia 82, Denmark 23, and
Sweden 18 sail of the line, besides, between them all, about 89
frigates, corvettes, and brigs, and nearly twice the number of
armed small-craft. But Pussia, even as late as October in the
present year, did not possess more than Gl sail of the line; of
which number 31 were in commission in the Baltic, and the re-
mainder in the Mediterranean and Black seas. Those 31 ships
were divided between Petersburg, Archangel, Cronstadt, and
Revel. Perhaps the effective number, or that which might bo
brought to act as a fleet, did not exceed 20 sail of the line and
                                                             ;


these were badly equipped, ill-appointed, and worse manned.
The Swedes, at one time, had 11 sail of the line at Carlscrona
ready for sea, and, by all accounts, in tolerably fighting trim.
The Danish fleet at Copenhagen consisted, in the middle of
March, of 10 sail of the line ready for sea, exclusive of about
the same number in an unserviceable state.
  This makes 41 Russian, Swedish, and Danish effective ships
of the line, instead of 88, the number stated by several writers
to have been afloat in this quarter. It must have been a very
happy combination of circumstances that could have assembled
in one spot 25 of those 41 sail of the line and against that 25,
                                            ;


made up, as the number would be, of three different nations, all
mere novices in naval tactics, 18, or, with a Nelson to command
them, 15 British sail of the line, were more than a match.
 Without this explanation, it might seem the height of rashness
