1800.J         LIEUTENANT FITTOX AT CURACOA.                     39

Jamaica, and carried eight 12-pounder carronades, with a crew
of about 45 men and boys. The service upon which the Active
had been ordered by Captain "Watkins, was to watch the mouth
of the harbour of Amsterdam, while the Nereide cruised in the
offing. This the schooner continued to do for several days, stand-
ing in frequently so near, as to be just out of range of the long
18s and 24s on Fort Fiscadera, and in full view of five or six
French privateers lying moored close to the walls of it, and one
of which was the Quidproquo, already mentioned as captured
by the Gispy. Upon these privateers Lieutenant Fitton looked
                1


with a longing eye, till he could resist no longer. Observing
that, at a certain hour every clay, the officers went on shore at
the fort to dine and aware that, owing to his daily practice of
                 ;



standing across and across without molesting them, the priva-
teersmen or garrison paid very little attention to the Active's
manoeuvres, Lieutenant Fitton resolved to afford them an unex-
pected treat. Having seen the boats pass as usual, and being
in perfect readiness, the Active stood close in, and bringing her
broadside to bear, opened the contents of it right into the sterns
of the cluster of privateers.
    Instantly all was bustle on board the latter and in the fort,
and the boats, in their hurry back, became also exposed to a
 destructive fire from the schooner some of whose 12-pounder
                                              ;



 shot, so well and closely directed as they were, could not have
 fallen harmless even in the fort itself.   The instant he saw the
 guns of the latter in motion (and the people in charge of them
 appeared not very brisk), Lieutenant Fitton crowded sail away,
 in such a direction, however, as to expose no wider mark to tho
 enemy than the Active's stern. This, as he anticipated, the
 aiiillerists at the fort failed to hit  although some of the shot
                                          ;



 pierced the schooner's sails, and a feAV others fell near enough
 to dash the spray on board.       As the smallest of the five or six
 privateers had, undoubtedly, a larger number of men than the
 Active, any attempt by her to cut them out would have been
 madness in her commander. Probably the privateers were of
 opinion that tho Nereide, who with her boats might easily have
 executed the service, would shortly make the attempt for, in a
                                                          ;



 few days afterwards, they took advantage of a clear coast, and
 made sail, each laden with a cargo of plunder. Nor was Lieu-
 tenant Fitton in a situation to intercept any one of these mis-
  chievous freebooters, the Active having sailed for Jamaica with
  the captain of the Nereide's despatches.
                              1
                                  See p. 30.
