38            COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.                  WEST INDIES.       [1800.

men and boys, commanded by Lieutenant Charles I. Kevin,
being off Ceuta on her passage from England to Gibraltar with
despatches, was attacked in a calm by two Spanish gun-vessels
of the largest class. After an engagement of an hour and a half,
during the greater part of which the gun-vessels kept entirely
out of range of the Admiral Pasley's paltry carronades, while
the former, with then- heavy long guns were cutting the brig to
pieces, the Admiral Pasley, having previously thrown overboard
her despatches, hauled down her colours.
  As a proof that the Admiral Pasley had not been given away,
her loss amounted to three seamen killed, her commander (in
three places), master (Mr. Gibbs, badly), and eight seamen
wounded.    The captors carried their prize first to Ceuta, and
afterwards to Algesiras. Here we have an example showing, in
the clearest mauner, the unfairness of pronouncing upon the
merits of an action until its particulars are known. Fortunately
for the Admiral Pasley's commander, the court-rnartial that sat
upon him took cognizance of all the circumstances           and.    ;


although captured in a 16-gun brig by two Spanish gun-boats,
Lieutenant Nevin was honourably and deservedly acquitted.


               Colonial Expeditions.       — West Indies.
   On the 11th of September, while the British 12-pounder
36-gun frigate Nereide, Captain Frederick Watkins, was cruising
off the port of Amsterdam, in the island of
                                                Curacoa, the Dutch
inhabitants of the latter, tired out with the enormities of the band
of 1500 republican ruffians that were in possession of the west
part of the island, sent off a deputation to claim the protection
of England. On the 13th the
                                     capitulation surrendering the
island to his Britannic
                            majesty, was signed in form, by the
governor, Johan Eudolph Lausser, on the one part, and by Cap-
tain Watkins, of the
                        Nereide, on the other. The vessels] large-
and small, lying in the harbour of
                                     Amsterdam, numbered 44 but         ;

no ships-of-war were among them.
   In one of his despatches
                                  announcing this event, Captain
Watkins speaks of the "activity and spirited conduct" of Lieu-
tenant Michael Fitton,   1
                           commanding the Active schooner, then
in company with the Nereide.
                                      Among the many occasions
which called forth that eulogium, one,
                                            although it did not end
decisively, may merit a place here.     The Active was a schooner
of about 80 tons, tender to the
                                   Abergavenny 54, the flag-ship at
                         1
                             See vol. ii., p. 39S.
