50                   BRITISH   AND DANISH FLEETS.               [1801.


tremity of the Danish line. A similar station was assigned to
the Desiree. It was also intended that the 49th regiment under
Colonel Stewart, and 500 seamen, under Captain Fremantle of
the Ganges, should storm the principal of the Trekroner bat-
teries, the instant that the cannonade from the ships had
silenced its fire.
  At 9 a.m. the pilots and several of the masters were ordered
on hoard the Elephant. Their hesitation and indecision, about
the bearings of the shoal and the line of deep water, might well
provoke a more patient man than Lord Nelson.        At 9 h. 30 m.
a.m., however, the signal was made to weigh in succession. The
Edgar led. The Agamemnon was to have followed; but, having
anchored rather outside, than off, the end of the great shoal, she
could not weather it, and was obliged again to bring up, in six
fathoms water.    Here the current was so strong against her,
that, although the ship afterwards re-weighed, and continued
for a long time to warp with the stream and kedge anchors, the
Agamemnon was compelled a second time to bring up, nearly in
the spot from which she had last weighed. In the mean time
the Polyphemus, by signal, had followed the Edgar      ;
                                                          and the
Isis   steered after the former.    Owing to the unskifulness or
unsteadiness of her master, Mr. Alexander Briarly, who had
undertaken the office of pilot, the Bellona, in spite of a fair
wind and ample room, hugged the Middle Ground too closely,
and grounded abreast of, and about 450 yards distant from, the
rear of the Danish line.    Following closely, the Eussel also
grounded, with her jib-boom almost over the Bellona's taffrail.
   In compliance with the wish of the pilots, each ship had been
ordered to pass her leader on the starboard side, from a suppo-
sition that the water shoaled on the larboard shore    ;
                                                         whereas
Captain Hardy had proved, that the water kept deepening all
the way to the enemy's line. The Elephant was next to the
Eussel and Lord Nelson, as soon as he perceived the state of
         ;


that ship and the Bellona, ordered the helm to be put a-star-
board, and passed to the westward, or along the larboard beam,
of those ships as, very fortunately, did all the ships astern of
                ;


the Elephant.
  At the same moment that Lord Nelson's detachment weighed,
Admiral Parker's eight ships did the same and the latter took
                                              ;




up a new position somewhat nearer to the mouth of the harbour,
but still at too great a distance to do more than menace the
north wing of defence. A nearer approach, indeed, with both
wind and current against the ships, was impracticable      ;
                                                               in suf-
