1801.]
                             LORD NELSON AT COPENHAGEN.                                   51


ficient time, at least, to render any active service in the engage-
ment.
   At 10 a.m. the cannonade commenced                      ;   and, for nearly half an
hour, the principal British ships engaged were the Polyphemus,
Isis, Edgar, Ardent, and Monarch.
                                       At about 11 h. 30 m. a.m.
the Glatton, Elephant, Ganges, and Defiance got to their sta-
tions; as did several of the frigates and smaller vessels, and
the action became general. The Desiree was of great service in
raking the Provesteen, and drawing off a part of her heavy
                                                               fire

from the Polyphemus and Isis; particularly from the latter,
who bore the brunt of it, as her heavy loss will presently show.
Owing to the strength of the current, the Jamaica, with the
                                                        service in
gun-vessels, could not get near enough to be of any
the action; nor were the bomb-vessels able to execute much.
The absence of the Eussel, Bellona, and Agamemnon occa-
sioned several of the British ships to have a greater share of the
enemy's fire than had been allotted to them, or than they were
well able to bear. Among the many sufferers on this account
was the Amazon, who, with the four other ships intrusted to
Captain Eiou, had most gallantly taken a position (the three
frigates in particular) right against the Trekronen batteries.
  At the end of a three hours' cannonade, few, if any, of the
Danish block-ships, prames, or rideaus had ceased firing nor                          ;




could the contest be said to have taken on either side a decisive
turn. It was at this time that, in consequence, as is understood,
of the pressing solicitations of the captain of the fleet, founded
upon information received a full hour before that signals of
distress were at the mast-heads of two British line-of-battle
ships (the Bellona and Russel), and the signal of inability on
board a third (the Agamemnon), coupled with the imperfect
view which the London's distance from the scene of action
enabled Sir Hyde himself to take of the relative condition of
the parties in it observing also the zig-zag course and neces-
                         ;


sarily slow progress of the Defence, Eamillies, and Veteran,
which had been detached as a reinforcement to the vice-admiral,
the commandrr-in-chief was persuaded to throw out the signal
for discontinuing the engagement. 1
      The manner in which Lord Nelson received this signal is very
  '
      It is but common justice towards Sir         cient to maintain the attack; for it was
Hyde Parker to state, that he made     the         evident thai Sir Hyde's division could not
signal "to discontinue tlie action," in            proffer the least assistance: the signal
order that Lord Nelson might withdraw              was made with a generous intention, and
from the contest, if, owing to the different       Mr. Sonthey has added a note similar to
ships unable   to   reach thiir station, some      this in his Becond edition of his Life of
being u-yround, he     lell   his force Lnsnffi-   Nelson.— Eu.
