1801.]            LORD NELSON* AT COPENHAGEN.                  45

menced firing at the Monarch, who was the leading- ship, and at
the other ships, as they passed in succession. The distance,
however, was so great, that not a shot struck the ships nor did
                                                          ;



any but the van-ships fire in return, and these only two or three
broadsides.   The seven bomb-vessels, however, threw shells ;
200 of which were stated to have fallen in Cronenburg and
Helsingen, and, among other damages, to have killed two, and
wounded 15 men. The bursting of a 24-pounder on board the
Isis, whereby seven men were killed and wounded, was the only

casualty that attended the British in their passage through the
Sound.
   As the strait at Elsineur is less than three miles across, a
mid-channel passage would undoubtedly have exposed the ships
to a fire from Cronenburg castle on the one side, and from the
Swedish city of Helsinburg on the other but the latter, the
                                            ;


batteries of which, instead of being a subject of dread as the
pilots had given out, mounted only eight guns of a light caliber,
did not make even a show of opposition. On observing this, the
British inclined to the Swedish shore, passing within less than a
mile of it and thus avoided a fire which, as coming from nearly
             ;



100 pieces of cannon, could not fail to have been highly de-
structive.
   About noon, or soon after, the fleet anchored at some distance
above the island of Huen, which is about 15 miles from the city
of Copenhagen. The commander-in-chief, Vice-admiral Lord
Nelson, and Kear-admiral Graves, accompanied by Captain
Domett, and the commanding officer of the troops, then pro-
ceeded, in the Lark lugger, to reconnoitre the enemy's defences.
They were soon ascertained to be of the most formidable descrip-
tion. This led, in the evening, to a council of war at which,
                                                      :




as usual, much was urged to forego, or at least delay the attack   ;


but Lord Nelson prevailed, and offered, with 10 sail of the line
and all the small-craft, to carry the business through in a proper
manner.
   Admiral Parker, to his credit, cheerfully accepted the offer,
and granted to his enterprising second two sail oi the line more
than he had asked that is, two 50-gun ships, which in these
                    ;


northern parts are considered as of the line, partly because of
their light draught of water as two-decked ships, and partly
because a similar description of vessel is usually to be ft mud
in the opposite line.    The detachment thus intrusted to Vice-
admiral Lord Nelson, by the time the whole had joined, con-
sisted of the
