1301. J             LORD NELSOX AT COPENHAGEN'.                   49

  These 18 vessels were moored in a line from a mile to a mile
and a half in extent flanked at the north end, or that nearest
                       ;


the town, by two artificial or pile-formed islands, called the
Trekroner batteries, one of thirty 24, the other of thirty-eight
36-pounders, with furnaces for heating shot and both of which
                                                ;



batteries were commanded by the two two-decked block- ships
Mars and Elephanten.
   The entrance into the harbour and docks, which latter lie in
the heart of the city, was protected by a chain thrown across it    ;

also by some batteries on the northern shore, and particularly
by the Trekroner or Crown batteries already described. In ad-
dition to this, the two 74-gun ships Dannemark and Trekroner.
a 40-gun frigate, two 18-gun brigs, and several armed xebecs,
with furnaces for heating shot, lay moored in advantageous
positions off the harbour's mouth.    Along the shore of Amag       1



island, a little to the southward of the floating line of defence,
were several gun and mortar batteries thus making the whole
                                          ;


line of defence, in front of   Copenhagen, cover an extent of
between three and four miles. The Danish naval commanding
officer was Commodore Olfert Fischer, who had his broad
                                                            pen-
dant on board the Dannebrog 62 nor was there a want of men,
                                   ;



both skilful and brave, to work the Danish guns either afloat or
on shore. One spirit, indeed, seemed to animate all Denmark,
and that was to repel the invaders by every possible means.
   The day of the 2nd of April opened, as the British had hoped
it would, with a favourable or
                                south-easterly wind. The signal
for all captains on board the flag-ship was hoisted almost as
soon as it could be seen and at 8 a.m. the several captains
                            ;


were made acquainted with the stations assigned them. As cir-
cumstances, which will be mentioned in their place, prevented
the plan's being strictly followed, it may suffice to state, that all
the line-of-battle ships were to anchor by the stern abreast of
the different vessels composing the enemy's line, and for which
purpose they had already prepared themselves with cables out
of their stern-ports.    The Amazon, Blanche, Alcmene, Arrow,
and Dart, with the two fire-ships, placed under the immediate
directions of Captain Eiou, were to co-operate in the attack
upon the ships stationed at the harbour's mouth, and to act
otherwise as circumstances might require. The bomb-vessels
were to station themselves outside the British line, so as to
throw their shells over it and the Jamaica, with the brigs and
                           ;



gun-vessels, was to take a position for raking the southern <x-
                  Spelt Amak by Southey, and other authors.
                1


   VOL. III.                                                E
