18ol.]
                 LORD NELSON AT COPENHAGEN.                    53

and fresh men coming on board did not inquire whether the
flag had been struck, or, perhaps, did not heed it; many, or
most of them, never having been engaged in war before, know-
ing nothing, therefore, of its laws, and thinking only of defend-
ing their country to the last extremity."
  At all events it greatly, and very naturally, irritated Lord
Nelson; who at one time had thoughts of sending in the fire-
ships to burn the surrendered vessels. As a preliminary mea-
sure, however, his lordship wrote the celebrated letter to the
                                                " Vice-admiral
Crown Prince of Denmark, wherein he says          :




Lord Nelson has been commanded to spare Denmark when she
no longer resists. The line of defence which covered her shores
has struck to the British flag but, if the firing is continued on
                                  ;



the part of Denmark, he must set on fire all the prizes that he
has taken, without having the power of saving the men who
have so nobly defended them.         The brave Danes are the
brothers and should never be the enemies of the English." A
wafer was then given him, but he ordered a candle to be brought
from the cockpit, and sealed the letter with wax, affixing a
                                        "
larger seal than he ordinarily used.      This," said his lordship,
" is no time to        hurried  and
                                              '
                                     informal.'
                appear
  This letter was carried on shore, with a flag of truce, by
Captain Sir Frederick Thesiger (a young commander acting as
one of Lord Nelson's aides-de-camp), who found the crown
prince at the sallyport. In the mean time the destructive can-
nonade, still kept up by the Defiance, Monarch, and Ganges,
and the near approach of the Defence and Ramillies (the Veteran
far astern), silenced the fire of the Indosforethen, Holstein, and
the ships next to them in the Danish line.         But the great
Trekroncr, having had nothing but frigates and sloops opposed
to it, and that only for a time, was comparatively uninjured.
Tli is battery therefore continued its fire; and, as about 1500
men had been thrown into it from the shore, was considered
too strong to be stormed. It was now deemed an advisable
measure to withdraw the fleet out of the intricate channel
while the wind continued fair; and preparations were making
for that purpose, when the Danish Adjutant-general Lindolm
came bearing a flag of truce upon sight of which the Trekroner
                              :




ceased firing; and the action, after having continued five hours,
during four of which it had been warmly contested, was brought
to a close.
   The message from the crown prince was to inquire the par-
 ticular object of Lord Nelson's note.      The latter replied,   in
