 44                     BRITISH   AND DANISH FLEETS.           [1801.

 in the British     government to send to the Baltic so apparently
 small a force.
   In the hope that Denmark, in spite of her hostile demonstra-
 tions,would prefer negotiation to war, the Honourable Nicholas
 Yansittart, with full powers to treat, had, about a fortnight
 previous to the sailing of the fleet, departed for     Copenhagen
 in the 32-gun frigate Blanche,
                                Captain Graham Eden Hamond.
 Adverse winds kept the British fleet from reaching the Naze of
Norway until the 18th and still heavier gales, during the two
                             ;


succeeding days, scattered the vessels, especially the small-
craft, in all directions. To collect these, the admiral, on the
21st, anchored at the entrance of the Sound, within sight of
Koll point on the Swedish shore. Some of the smaller vessels
were unable to rejoin; and the Blazer gun-brig was driven
under the Swedish fort of Warberg, and there captured. In the
height of the bad weather the 74-gun ship Bussel parted com-
pany, by signal, to take the Tickler gun-brig in tow; and,
during the dark and hazy night that ensued, was only saved
from being wrecked herself, by the great exertions of her officers
and crew.
   On the 23rd the Blanche returned to the fleet, having on board,
with Mr. Yansittart, Mr. Brummond, the British
                                                  charge d'affaires
at Copenhagen and from the Danish
                    ;                  government, instead of a
reply of conciliation, came, as was to be expected, one of open
defiance.  Much valuable time had thus been lost, and the
Danes were taking advantage of it in
                                      strengthening their means
of defence the formidable
            ;
                             appearance of which had already
excited the surprise of the British
                                         envoy.
   The pilots, avIio, not having to share the honours, felt it to be
their interest to
                 magnify the dangers of the expedition, occasioned
a few more days to be dissipated in                 In the course of
                                      inactivity.
these Admiral Parker sent a
                                flag of truce to the governor of
Elsineur, to inquire if he meant to oppose the passage of the
fleet through the Sound.     Governor Strieker replied, that the
guns of Cronenburg castle would certainly be fired at any British
ships-of-war that approached. At length, at 6 a.m. on the 30th,
the British fleet got under
                            way, and, with a fine breeze at north-
north-west, proceeded into the Sound, in line ahead; the van
division commanded by Lord Nelson in the
                                                  Elephant 74, into
which ship, as a lighter and more active one than the St.
George, he had, the preceding day, shifted his flag; the centre
division, by the commander-in-chief; and the rear
                                                        division, by
Bear-admiral Graves. At 7 a.m. the batteries at Elsineur com-
