1801.]   LORD NELSONS DEPARTURE FROM THE BALTIC.                 63

now, by the decease of the Czar Paul, had become invested with
the imperial scepti'e. This induced Sir Hyde to return with the
fleet to Kioge bay where, on the 5th of May, he was found by
                   ;


a vessel that brought despatches recalling him from the com
mand. Shortly afterwards Admiral Parker sailed for England
in the Blanche, leaving the command of the fleet to Vice-admiral
Lord Nelson. Almost the first signal made by the new com-
mander-in-chief was, to hoist in all the launches and prepare to
weigh. On the 7th the fleet, by the addition of the St. George
now augmented to 17 sail of the line, a 54 and a 50 gun ship,
besides a few frigates and smaller vessels, set sail from Kioge
bay. On the 8th, after having by a flag of truce informed Vice-
admiral Cronstadt, that although Sir Hyde Parker had consented
not to interrupt the Swedish navigation, he should act against
the Swedish fleet if he found it at sea, Lord Nelson left
                                                          Captain
Murray, with the Edgar, Russel, Saturn, Agamemnon, Ardent,
Raisonable, Glatton, and a frigate to cruise off Carlscrona while,
                                                             ;


with the remaining 11 sail of the line, one frigate, and two brig-
sloops, the vice-admiral hastened to the gulf of Finland.
   On the 14th Lord Nelson anchored in Eevel roads but no;

Russian squadron was in that quarter. The bay had been clear
of firm ice since the 29th of April, at which time Sir
                                                            Hyde
Parker, with the fleet, was lying inactive at Kioge: and the
Russians had subsequently sawed through the ice in the mole,
and on the 3rd had sailed for Cronstadt. A communication with
the shore now took place and the Emperor Alexander repeated
                           ;


his friendly intentions, but expressed surprise at the
                                                       appearance
of the British admiral at Revel.   On the 17th the latter quitted
the road; and    on  the  19th the Russians and Swedes took off
the embargo that had been laid on British vessels in their ports.
Thus were the amicable relations between England and those
two powers once more restored.
   On the 6th of June, after having been at anchor some days off
Rostock, Lord Nelson retired to Kioge bay, and on the 13th
received the sanction of the admiralty to an application which
on account of the bad state of his health, he had made to return
to England.     On the 17th or 18th Vice-admiral Sir Charles
Morice Pole, in the 32-gun frigate ^Eolus, arrived to take the
command and on the 19th Lord Nelson quitted the Baltic in
          ;



the Kite brig. Vice-admiral Pole remained on the station until
the latter end of July when, there being no longer any oc-
                       ;


casion for so powerful a fleet in the Baltic, he was ordered
home.    Although his command had been short and pacific,
