60                               BRITISH       AND DANISH FLEETS.                             [1801.

                                               the stem of Lord
the fury of the battle placed themselves under
                                                       in such a
Nelson's ship, which they most successfully attacked,
manner that, although they    were below the reach of the stern-
chasers, the British marines
                             made terrible slaughter amongst
them : 20 of these gallant men fell by their bullets, but their
young  commander continued knee-deep in dead at his post, until
                                               1
the truce was announced."
                                   Danish accounts of this
  Having taken some notice of the
battle, we must not behave so disrespectfully as to neglect
best owing a word or two upon the English accounts.                                      According
to the misplaced "Note," which we formerly quoted from
Admiral Ekins's work, 2 Lord Nelson attributed the grounding
of the Bellona and Russel to his not having ordered his ships,
in so intricate and shallow a navigation, to cut instead of to
                                 time we ever heard that the
weigh. It is certainly the first
Vice-admiral was in this respect to blame: but we are con-
vinced that, of all other men, Lord Nelson was the most likely
to acknowledge an error, if he thought he had committed
one.
                                                                                                  to
     Although Admiral Ekins has not considered it necessary
give any account of the Copenhagen affair,            contempo-           another
rary has entered into it with rather more than
                                               his usual concise-
                                          "
ness.  Captain Brenton has also given a Plan of the battle ;"
but, as is often the case, the   engraved and the letter-press de-
scriptions do not    correspond. One important instance will
suffice :— The Bellona and Russel are placed in the plan, within
a ship's length or so of their actual stations but the letter-press   ;

                                 " much
tells us, that those ships were          exposed to the fire of the
Crown batteries ;" 3 which Crown batteries, as rightly laid
down in the same plan, are to the northward of the northern
extremity of the Danish line, or perhaps about two miles and a
half from the nearest of the two grounded ships, the Bellona.
The fact is, neither ship received or could receive a shot from
the Trekroner, although they both received several from the
Wagner and Provesteen and a Danish 36-pound shot, from one
                                           ;


of the batteries on Amag island, went through the centre of the
Bellona's mainmast.
   In almost all the published unofficial accounts, a misstatement
aho occurs respecting the Agamemnon. Lord Nelson in his
              " The
letter says          Agamemnon could not weather the shoal ol
                     :



the middle, and was obliged to anchor;" 4 but Captain Brenton
     i
         Naval Chronicle, vol. xiv., p. 393.            3
                                                            Brenton, vol     ii.,   p. 545.
     2   See vol. ii., p. 203.                          *
                                                            Ibid., p. 203.
