1801.1                  LORD NELSON AT COPENHAGEN.                                   61


tells    us,   that   "the Agamemnon grounded on the starboard
quarter of the Bellona," and Mr. Southey (but who, by-the-by,
is very poor authority in naval matters) declares that she -was
                                   1
"immovably aground."'
  The night of the 2nd of April was employed by the British in
bringing out          their      shattered       prizes,    and     in    floating their
grounded ships.             By the morning of the 3rd the whole of the
latter, except the Desiree were got off. During the five days
that the   negotiation was pending, all the prizes, except the
60-gun ship Holstein, were set on fire and destroyed. The gene-
rality of these were not worth carrying away       but Sir Hyde's     ;



reason for extending the order to the Zealand, a much larger
and finer ship than the Holstein, is not very clear.
   On the 9th, after some altercation as to the duration of the
armistice, one was agreed upon for 14 weeks; and Denmark
engaged to suspend all proceedings under the treaty of armed,
neutrality which she had entered into with Sweden and Bussia.
The prisoners, also, were to be sent on shore, and accounted for
in case hostilities should be renewed.      Moreover the British
                                         Copenhagen and else-
fleet had permission to provide itself, at
where along the coast, with all things requisite for the health
and comfort of the seamen.
  On the 12th, having despatched home the Holstein. Monarch,
and Isis, with the wounded men, Admiral Barker sailed from
Copenhagen road with the remainder of the fleet, except the St.
George and one or two frigates, and directed his course along
the difficult channel of the Grounds, between the islands of
Amag and Saltholm. This was both a tedious and a dangerous
navigation, as most of the men-of-war had to tranship their
guns into merchant-vessels and even then, several of the former
                                         ;



got on shore. The whole of the ships at length extricated
themselves       ;   and, to the astonishment of Danes, Swedes, Bus-
sians, and Brussians, entered the Baltic by this route.
  The British admiral's first object was to attack the Bussian
squadron at Bevel, before the breaking up of the frost should
enable it to effect a junction with the Swedish squadron at
Carlscrona but, in his way thither, hearing that a Swedish
                ;




squadron, reported at nine sail of the line, was at sea, Sir Hyde
steered for the northern extremity of the island of Bornholm.
The Swedish admiral, however, whose force consisted of only
six sail of the line, conceiving himself no match for a British
admiral with 1G, sought refuge behind the forts of Carlscrona,
                            Suuthey's Life of Nelson, vol. ii., p. 118.
                        1
