62          BRITISH, SWEDISH, AND RUSSIAN FLEETS.            [1801.


Here a negotiation was opened between Sir Hyde Parker and
the Swedish Viee-admiral Cronstadt which, on the 22nd, ended
                                      ;



in an agreement by his Swedish majesty to treat for the accom-
modation of all existing differences.
   By this time Lord Nelson had joined the admiral, and had
his flag again flying on board the Elephant.  How he had got
thither merits to be related.   On the 18th the St. George, having
removed her guns to an American vessel, and, by the excellent
management of Mr. Briarly, of the Bellona, whose local expe-
rience was very great, succeeded in passing the Grounds, was
ready to follow Sir Hyde but a contrary wind detained her.
                           ;


On the following evening Lord Nelson received intelligence from
the admiral, of the Swedish fleet's having been seen by one of
his look-out frigates. Instantly he quitted the St. George, and,
embarking in a six-oared cutter, with Mr. Briarly, set off to join
the admiral, although the latter was at a distance of 24 miles, in
the very teeth of the wind and current.       "The moment he
received the account," says Mr. Briarly, " he ordered a boat to
be manned, and, without even waiting for a boat-cloak (though
you must suppose the weather pretty sharp here at this season
of the year), and having to row about 24 miles with the wind
and current against him, jumped into her, and ordered me to go
with him, I having been on board that ship (the St. George) to
remain till she had got over the Grounds. All I had ever seen
or heard of him could not half so clearly prove to me the sin-
gular and unbounded zeal of this truly great man. His anxiety
in the boat for nearly six hours, lest the fleet should have sailed
before he got on board one of them, and lest we should not
catch the Swedish squadron, is beyond all conception. I will
quote some expressions in his own words. It was extremely
cold, and I wished him to put on a great coat of mine which
was in the boat   :
                     No, I am not cold
                      '
                                           ;  my anxiety for my
country will keep me warm. Do you think the fleet has sailed ?'
                         my lord.'—' If they have, we will follow
'
 I should suppose not,
them to Carlscrona in the boat, by God " The distance to
                                               !'


which place, Mr. Briarly goes on to state, was about 50 leagues.
At midnight, Lord Nelson reached the Elephant; and Mr.
Briarly returned to the St. George, to conduct her to Kioge
bay.
  On the 23rd a lugger joined the fleet, then not far from Carls-
crona on its way to the gulf of Finland, with despatches from
Count Van der Paklen, the Russian ambassador at Copenhagen,
containing overtures of a pacific nature from Alexander I., who
