 58                      BRITISH     AND DANISH FLEETS.                           [1801-


      Although, as, without reckoning the two prames which sank
 in shoal water while escaping and were probably recovered, the
 British had captured or destroyed 13 out of the 18 floating-
 batteries that formed the Danish line to the southward of the
 Trekroner islands, the victory was to them yet the Danes,          ;



 viewing Lord Nelson's message to the crown prince as the first
 overture to a cessation of hostilities, solaced themselves with
 the belief, that the affair, at the most, could only be considered
 as a drawn battle. "Whatever name the contest went by, it fully
 succeeded, as we shall presently have to show, in attaining the
 object for which it had been commenced.
   No nation could behave better, no men could fight more
 bravely, than did the Danes on this occasion but Commodore     ;



 Fischer, nevertheless, was a little in error in regard to his report
 to the crown prince.   That account states, that the British line,
 reckoning from the Defiance, did not stretch further northward
than the Zealand, and therefore did not engage more than two-
 thirds of the  Danish line of defence      while the Trekroner
                                                       ;



battery, and the block-ships Elephanten and Mars, with the
frigate Hielpern, did not come at all into action.    This is dis-
proved by the single fact, that the Defiance had her mainmast,
mizenmast, and bowsprit badly wounded by the very first broad-
side fired from the Trekoner battery.     Not only, then, was the
latter engaged, but the Defiance must have been stationed nearly
abreast of it, to have suffered as she did. It will be creditable
to Captain-lieutenant Lillenshield to suppose, that it was the
fire of the Defiance, and not the want of an antagonist, which
drove his ship, the 36-pounder frigate Hielpern, out of the                        line.
As to the Elephanten and Mars, they properly belonged to the
north wing of defence and many of their heavy shot, no doubt,
                               ;


fell among the frigates and sloops, appointed, owing to the un-
avoidable absence of more able ships, to act against this formi-
dable quarter of the Danish position.
   Commodore Fischer assures his countrymen, that the British
had two ships to his one, and therefore were doubly superior in
force.   Let us, without being over-minute, submit this assertion
to proof. Dismissing from the calculation the whole of the
Danish north wing, and the frigates and sloops opposed to it                            ;


also the bomb-vessels (for they really were useless), the two
                                                              ships
          1
aground, the Quintus redoubt and five adjacent batteries on
  1
    These were only partially effective.     deck, fired astern of the Isis, and with her
Although abreast of the Polyphemus, the      six foremost ones (leaving the two mid-
Russel, lying obliquely, or with her stern   ship guns on each deck unemployed),
to the westward, was enabled to fire         ahead of her. Doubtless many shot from
athwart the bows of that ship; while the     both grounded ships struck the Polyphe-
Bellona, with her six aftmost guns on each   nras and Isis.
