56                BRITISH   AND DANISH FLEETS.                          [1801.

 wounded the Alcmene, five seamen killed, and one lieutenant
          ;




 (Henry Baker), her boatswain (Charles Church), one master's
 mate (George Augustus Spearing), one pilot, 12 seamen, one
 lieutenant and two privates of marines wounded and the Dart,
                                                            ;



 her first-lieutenant (Eichard Edward Sandys) and two seamen
 killed, and one seaman wounded      making, including among the
                                     :



 killed the one missing in the Ganges, a total of 255 killed and
 688 wounded.
    Thus say the official returns but it would appear that these
                                 ;



 take no notice of the slightly wounded. As one instance, the
 Ardent, besides her 64 in the returns, had 40 wounded who
 were able to go to quarters. The whole of the slightly wounded,
 according to the testimony of officers in the fleet, would have
 swelled the wounded total to at least 950, and the total of
 killed and wounded to upwards of 1200.        More than half of
 the wounded enumerated in the returns are also represented to
 have died of their wounds. If this be correct, the loss may be
 stated thus killed and mortally wounded, 350 recoverably and
              :
                                                ;




 slightly wounded, 850.
   Even the smallest in amount of the two returns of loss here
 given could only have resulted from good and steady firing                     ;



and, truly, the British ships displayed the marks of it in their
hulls, lower shrouds, and lower masts, rather than, as on most
occasions, in their upper masts, running rigging, and sails. The
Glatton, indeed, had her foretopmast shot away     but it does not
                                                    ;



appear that any other ship's topmast, or even topgallant-mast,
came down during the action. Most of the ships had a part of
their guns rendered useless.       Of the Ardent's main deck
42-pounder carronades, more than half were disabled as were         ;


seven of the Glatton's 32, and two of her 68-pounders. It has
already been stated, that a part of the Bellona's heavy loss arose
from the bursting of two of her guns a similar accident, it is
                                         :



believed, occurred a second time (see p. 45) on board the Isis.
Both of these ships were very old, the one having been built in
1760, and the other in 1774 and their guns were probably the
                             ;


same originally established upon them.
   The damages sustained by the Danish ships, or floating-hulks,
may be summed up by stating, that the greater part of them
were literally knocked to pieces. To this condition they would
undoubtedly have been reduced, in much less time than tour
hours, the duration of the general cannonade, had the pilots
permitted the British ships to take a closer position to their
Danish opponents, than from 300 to 400 yards            ;
                                                                in which case
