54               BRITISH   AND DANISH   FLEETS,                          [1801.


writing, that  humanity was the object; that he consented to
stay hostilities; that the wounded Danes should be taken on
shore and that he should take his prisoners out of the vessels,
      ;



•md burn or carry off his prizes as he should think fit his lord-
                                                            :




ship concluded with a hope that the victory he had gained
would lead to a reconciliation between the two countries. Sir
Frederick Thesiger,   who had returned with the Danish                     ad-
jutant-general, was again sent with the reply; and the latter
was referred to the commander-in-chief for a final adjustment of
the terms.
  The opportunity afforded by this delay, the London being
nearly four miles distant, was not lost by Lord Nelson and the      ;



leading British ships, all of which were much crippled in their
rigging and sails, weighed or slipped in succession.          The
Monarch led the way, and touched upon the shoal but the         ;



Ganges, taking her amidships, pushed her over it. The Glatton,
drawing less water, passed clear but the Defiance and Elephant
                                 ;


grounded about a mile from the Trekroner and, in spite of the
                                            ;


exertions of their active crews, there remained fixed for many
hours.   The Desiree, also, at the opposite end of the line,
having gone to assist the Bellona, became fast on the same
shcal as the latter. The Bellona, however, was soon got afloat
by resources of her own. An experienced quartermaster, ob-
serving the Isis in the act of slipping, suggested to the first-
lieutenant that, if a boat were sent to pick up that ship's cable,
they might haul off by it. The hint was taken, and the Bellona
quickly freed herself from the shoal.
  Soon after the Elephant had grounded, Lord Nelson quitted
her, and followed the Danish adjutant-general to the London.
"While the conference is holding, we will proceed to show, as
well as we are able, at what expense England had brought
Denmark to so subdued a tone. Taking the ships in the order
in which they stand in a list at a subsequent
                                              page, the Desiree
had one lieutenant (Andrew King) and three seamen wounded                     ,


the Bussel, five seamen and one marine wounded the Bellona,
                                                    ;


nine seamen and two private marines killed, and her captain (leg
amputated), two lieutenants (Thomas Southey and Thomas
Wilks), one master's mate (James Emmerton), four midshipmen
(John Anderson, Edward Daubenny, William Sitford, and Wil-
liam Figg), 48 seamen, 10 private marines, one captain (Alex-
ander Sharp), and five privates of foot wounded the greater
                                                        :



part of this loss, unfortunately, arose from the bursting of two
of her lower-deck guns, owing, as is understood, to their
                                                                        having
