1801.]           SQUADRONS IN SEARCH OF M. GANTEAU3IE.           73

Plymouth with the account of her engagement with the Bra-
voure   and, in a day or two afterwards, Eear-admiral Sir Eobert
             ;



Calder, with seven sail of the line, two frigates, and a brig, was
detached from the Channel fleet in pursuit of M. Ganteaume        ,


not, however, to the Mediterranean, but, owing to a lack of
information on the subject, to the West Indies.
  Nothing can afford a stronger proof of the national confidence,
as well as fairness, in naval warfare, than the sending in pursuit
of an enemy's squadron a British squadron of the same numerical
force   but we cannot help asking, what was the use of selecting
         ;


six of the fastest two-deckers from the Channel fleet, when the
flag-officer incommand of them was to take his passage in a
three-decker? The question of force offers no obstacle, for
both the Caesar and the Malta were fully equal to the Prince of
Wales. The total number of three-deckers possessed by France
at this time was six and of these two only were in a service-
                         ;


able state whereas England had actually at sea 18 three-
                 ;



deckers, 13 of which, at this very time, were cruising off Brest.
The superior accommodations of a three-decker have, we know,
been alleged as a reason for retaining so many of them in the
service, especially to carry flags    but, in a fighting ship, the
                                         ;


comfort of the commanding officer, whether admiral or captain,
ought always to be a secondary consideration.
   The only British force, in a situation to molest Bear-admiral
Ganteaume, was the squadron of Bear-admiral Sir John Borlase
Warren, composed of the 80-gun ship Gibraltar, Captain Wil-
liam Hancock Kelly, 74-gun ships Eenown (flag), Captain John
Chambers White, Dragon, Captain John Aylmer, Genereux, Cap-
tain Manley Dixon, and Hector, Captain John Elphinstone,
<J4-gun ship Haerlem, with only a portion of her lower-deck guns
on board, Captain George Burlton, and two or three frigates
and smaller vessels.
  It was on the 8th of February, while cruising off Cadiz with
a part of this squadron, that the rear-admiral received the first
intelligence of the squadron of M. Ganteaume.    Sir John imme-
diately steered for Gibraltar; and, arriving there on the morn-
ing of the 10th, learnt that the French squadron had, 24 hours
before, passed into the Mediterranean.   On the 13th Sir John,
with his squadron, quitted Gibraltar, and steered for Minorca,
having previously despatched two frigates to reconnoitre the
ports of Carthagena and Toulon and on the 20th he anchored
                                     ;

•in the harbour of Port-Mahon. On the 24th, having thoroughly
refitted his squadron, Sir John sailed on a cruise        but;
