64                 BRITISH      AND FRENCH FLEETS.                 [1801.


Vice-admiral Pole found means to increase the high opinicn
that his predecessor had gained for the British navy in these in-
land seas,   bycarrying safely through the intricate 'channel of
the Great Belt, against an adverse wind, a fleet of line-of-battle
ships, two of which were three-deckers.
  For the successful result of the Copenhagen battle, and the
gallantry displayed in it by Lord Nelson and
                                               his associates, the
thanks of both houses of parliament were voted to the admirals,
captains, officers, and men of Sir Hyde
                                          Parker's fleet. Owing
to some political considerations, having reference, we believe, to
the ties that existed between the crowned heads of England and
Denmark, the only mark of royal approbation bestowed upon
the conquerors was the investment of Bear-admiral Graves with
the order of the bath. This infraction of the usual custom did
not, however, extend to the promotion of the junior class of
officers, all the lieutenants of the ships engaged, and perhaps
                                                                a
few others, being made commanders, and Captains Devonshire,
Brisbane, and Birchall, post-captains.


                       British and French Fleets.

     The continental war having ceased, by a treaty of peace con-
chided at Luneville on the 9th of February between France and
the Emperor of Germany, the first-consul began more seriously
than ever to entertain hopes of being able to plant his victorious
                                  " Tous les
legions upon British ground.                   moyens propres a
entretenir la haine de la nation contre la Grande-Bretagne fut
employes avec activite et avec succes. Les autorites, les ora-
teurs du gouvernement, les ecrivains publicistes, rivaliserent de
zele pour precher cette espeoe de croisade contre l*eternelle en-
nemie de la France." 1
   The port of Boulogne was to be the central rendezvous of the
grand flotilla; and on the 12th of July Buonaparte issued aD
order for the assemblage there of nine divisions of gun-vessels,
and of the same number of battalions of troops, besides several
detachments of artillery to serve the guns on board the flotilla.
Of which flotilla Bear-admiral Bene-Madeleine La Touch-Tre-
ville was appointed the commander-in-chief, with directions to
exercise the troops in ship-working, in firing the guns, in board-
ing, and in getting in and out of the vessels.
   These preparations, exaggerated as they were by the French
journals, spread no slight degree of alarm on the shores of
                   1
                       Victoires et Conquetes, tome xiv., p. IS.
