1S01.J
                                IXVASIOX-FLOTILLA.                           69

    Gun-frigate.
    40       Creole     ....        Captain Pierre-Paul Gourrege.
    36       Bravoure   ....          , ,
                                            Louis- Auguste Dordelin.

    Lugger, Vautour.

   On the 7th of January this squadron sailed from Brest, and
anchored in the road of Bertheaume and about the same time,
                                               ;


in order to draw the attention of the British cruisers in a dif-
ferent direction, the French ships at anchor in the minor ports
of the Channel and bay of Biscay made demonstrations of putting
to sea. In the hope to profit by this ruse, Bear-admiral Gan-
tcaume, on the 8th, got under way, and stood through the
passage du Baz but here, contrary to his expectation, he was
                        ;


discovered and chased by a division of the Channel fleet under
the command of Vice-admiral Sir Henry Harvey. This obliged
the French admiral to regain the coast and he soon afterwards
                                                     ;


came to an anchor at the mouth of the river Tilaine. Thence,
in order that the British might be led to suppose he had no
other object in view than the other French squadrons in motion
at this time, M. Ganteaume subsequently departed, steering for
the road of Brest where he anchored, as if the service he had
                            ;


been detached upon was executed.
  I Icre
         lay the French admiral, waiting for a northerly gale of
wind, to blow the British blockading force off the coast. On
the 23rd a storm arose, favourable alike in direction and vio-
lence and late on that night the squadron of M. Ganteaume
         ;


weighed and put to sea. The only safe passage under such cir-
cumstances, that of the Iroise, was now entirely free from
British cruisers but such was the violence of the gale that,
                        ;


besides carrying away the topmasts of several of the ships, it
separated the Indivisible and Creole from the rest of the
squadron.
  On the 27th of January, at 9               p.m.,       Cape Finisterre bearing
east half-north distant 25 leagues, the British 12-pounder 36-gun
frigate Concorde, Captain Robert Barton, while steering to the
eastward, discovered by the light of the moon seven large ships,
about two miles to windward, under easy sail, standing to the
westward. These were the Indomptable, Formidable, Desaix,
Constitution, Jean-Bart, Dix-Aout,                 and Bravoure, under the
orders of Commodore Moneousu.
  One of the 74s and the frigate immediately bore up in chase                     ;




whereupon the Concorde, casting off a Swedish ship she had in
tow, made sail ahead. In a little time the linc-of-battle ship,
hauling up again, steered to rejoin her squadron; while tho
