1801.]            CRUISE OP ADMIRAL GANTEAUME.                          71

were tolerably well matched; but, in practical gunnery, the-
relative execution shows that, if the two combatants had been
left to themselves, the British frigate, without some extra-

ordinary chance in her opponent's favour, must have come off
the conqueror.
      A
      writer in the French work so frequently quoted by us
declares, that the two frigates did meet by themselves, but that
Captain Dordelin, by closing with the intention to board
•'frightened    away Captain Barton," "effraya le capitainc
ennemi." 1    The latter assertion appears to be founded upon a
statement, although not quite so forcibly expressed, in the
despatch of Bear-admiral Ganteaume but who, be it under-
                                                     ;



stood, is merely reciting the report made to him by Commodore
Moncousu, as the substance of the information received by the
latter from Captain Dordelin himself.      It is Captain Dordelin,

therefore, who vaunts of his own prowess who declares that
                                                         ;
                                                                he
compelled the Concorde to run away, that her guns were
                                   "                  "
18-pounders, and that he heard       groans and cries proceeding
from her after the discharge of his first broadside. Crediting
the statement, M. Ganteaume strongly urges the minister of
marine to promote M. Dordelin from a capitainc de fregate to a
capitaine de vaisseaux but the first-consul appears to have seen
                             ;


further into the business than M. Ganteaume, and did not promote
the Bravoure's captain to that rank until two years and eight
months (September 24, 1803) had elapsed since the date of the
action upon the merits of which M. Dordelin founded his
pretensions.
  After this exploit by one of his squadron, Commodore Mon-
COU8U pursued his way towards the Straits ; and on the 30th, off
Cape Spartel, the first appointed rendezvous, effected his junction
with Eear-admiral Ganteaume              ;   who, on the preceding evening,
after a long chase, had captured the British ship-sloop, or fire-
si
   iip, Incendiary, Captain
                            Eichard Bailing Dunn. Imitating
the example of some British admirals and captains, M.- Gan-
                              "
teaume described his prize as of," when ho should have said,
                 28       The  Incendiary, we believe, mounted
' '
   pierced for,"    guns.
only sixteen 18-pounder carronades but the Spitfire and one
                                                 ;



or two others of the Incendiary's class, were established with
2 1 guns, for which, by opening their main-deck ports, they had

ample room.
      After destroying his prize, Bear-admiral Ganteaume stood
towards the Straits     and, on the morning of the 9th of February,
                         ;


                   »   Victoires et ConquCtes, tome xiv., p. 151.
