1801                   INVASION-FLOTILLA.                    65

England, and caused corresponding preparations, in the defen-
sive way, to be made by the British government.      Among other
measures taken to calm the public mind, was the appointment
of Vice-admiral Lord Nelson to the chief command of the de-
fence constructing and collecting along the coast from Orford-
ness to Beachy Head.
   On the 30th of July the vice-admiral hoisted his flag on board
the 18-pounder 32-gun frigate Medusa, Captain John Gore, at
anchor in the Downs ; and on the 3rd of August, having under
his charge about 30 vessels, great and small, Lord Nelson, by
orders from the admiralty, of which Earl St. Vincent was now
at the head, stood across to Boulogne    ;
                                            the port whence, as
already stated, the main attempt was to be made, and which
the French, informed by their secret intelligence that an attack
would be made, had recently been fortifying with great care.
   On the 4th the English bomb-vessels threw their shells
amidst the French flotilla, consisting of 24 brigs, lugger-rigged
flats, and a schooner, moored in a line in front of the town.
The effect of the bombardment was, by the English account,
the sinking of three flats and a brig, and the driving of several
others on shore ; but the French declare that only two gun-
boats were slightly damaged, and that not a man was hurt on
board the flotilla. Nor did the British sustain any greater loss
than one captain of artillery and two seamen wounded by the
bursting of a French shell.
   On the night of the loth of August, Lord Nelson despatched
the armed boats of his squadron, formed into four divisions,
under the respective commands of Captains Philip Somervillc,
Edward Thornborough Parker, Isaac Cotgrave, and Kobert
Jones, and accompanied by a division of mortar-boats, under
 Captain John Conn, to attempt to bring off the French flotilla,
 which had been much strengthened since the last attack. At
 about 11 h. 30 m. p.m. the boats put off from the Medusa, in the
 most perfect order but the darkness of the night, co-operating
                   ;



 with the tide and half-tide, separated the divisions.
   The first division, under Captain Somervillc, on getting near
 to the shore, was carried by the current considerably to the
 eastward of Boulogne bay. Finding it impracticable to reach
 the French flotilla in the order prescribed, Captain Somervillc
 ordered the boats to cast each other off and make the best of
 then- way. By this means, at a little before the dawn of day
 on the 16th, some of the leading boats got up to and attacked a
 brig lying close to the pier-head and, after a sharp contest,
                                   ;


   VOL.   III.                                        r
