72      BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   —MEDITERRANEAN.     [1801.


passed through them into the Mediterranean under a press of
sail.  The only sea-going ship at this time at Gibraltar, the
 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Success, Captain Shuldham Peard,
immediately weighed and steered after the French squadron.
Having no doubt that M. Ganteaume's destination was Egypt,
Captain Peard intended, if he could, to pass him on the passage,
and apprise Lord Keith of his expected arrival. On the 10th, in
the morning, the Success came up with the French ships off'
€ape de Gata, where the second rendezvous had been appointed,
and passed them in the night. During the whole of the 11th
and 12th, owing chiefly to light and variable winds, the French
squadron kept sight of the Success. Soon after dark the wind
began to blow fresh from the southward and, as the Success
                                          ;


went occasionally at the rate of nine knots an hour, Captain
 Peard flattered himself that he should see no more of his pur-
suers. At daylight on the 13th, however, the leading French
ships were close up with the British frigate. Finding escape
impossible, Captain Peard, with great judgment, put back to the
westward, not only to retard the French admiral in his progress,
but to expose him to the risk of meeting any British force that
might have been detached in pursuit. At noon the wind fell ;
and at 3 p.m., after two or three of the line-of-battle ships had
got within musket-shot and opened their fire, the Success
hauled down her flag.
  Learning from his prisoners, among whom were the officers
and crew of the Sprightly cutter, Lieutenant Bobert Jump,
captured and scuttled on the 10th, that Admiral Lord Keith,
and Bear-admiral Sir Bichard Bickerton were already, where
they did not arrive until more than a fortnight afterwards, upon
the coast of Egypt with a great force, and that Bear-admiral
Sir John Borlase Warren, with a force about
                                              equal to his own,
might be hourly expected in pursuit from the westward, Bear-
admiral Ganteaume steered for the gulf of Lyons, and on the
19th anchored with his squadron in the road of Toulon.     After
a captivity of only five days, during which every attention was
paid to their comfort by Bear-admiral Ganteaume and those
about him, all the British officers and men were
                                                 permitted to
depart in a Cartel for Port-Mahon ; where, on the morning of
the 26th, they safely arrived.
  It is now time to see what
                              steps had been taken, in conse-
quence of the escape of this French squadron from Brest, by
the commander-in-chief of the Channel
                                        fleet, Admiral Earl
St. Vincent.   On the 3rd of February the Concorde anchored at
