70        BRITISH    AND FRENCH FLEETS.            MEDITERRANEAN.           [1801.


Bravoure continued bearing away in chase of the Concorde. As
isoon as she had reached what was considered to be a distance of
about six miles from the French squadron, the Concorde hove
to, and, by the usual mode
                              of signalling, presently convinced
herself that the ship in chase of her was not a friend.
   After a mutual hail, an order to strike to a French frigate,
and a volley of musketry, the Bravoure ranged up on the Con-
corde's lee side, and gave and returned a heavy fire; until,
passing on, she shot so far ahead as to bring the
                                                     Concorde on
her larboard quarter. In this position the latter kept her op-
ponent warmly and closely engaged for about half an hour;
when the fire of the Bravoure ceased, and almost at the same
instant one of her boats and some other wreck fell from her
stern and larboard quarter. Captain Barton now concluded that
his antagonist, having discontinued the action, had surrendered;
but presently the Bravoure was observed making sail, and soon
stood away before the wind. The damaged state of the Con-
corde's running rigging delayed her in chasing and, at 3 a.m.  ;


on the 28th she lost sight of the Bravoure. At daylight, how-
ever, the Concorde again discovered the French frigate; but
the appearance of the latter's squadron to windward compelled
Captain Barton, not only to relinquish the pursuit of the Bra-
voure, but to attend to the safety of the Concorde.
   The latter' s loss in the action, out of a crew on board of not
more than 224 men and boys, amounted to four men killed and
19 wounded, one of them mortally. The loss on board the
Bravoure, out of a complement of about 320 men and boys, is
officially stated to have been 10 men killed, including her third
lieutenant and pilot, and 24 wounded, including her captain,
who had the misfortune to have half his hand carried away by
a grape-shot.
     The guns of the Concorde have already appeared                 ;
                                                                        but owing
to the bursting of one of her 28 1 main-deck 12-pounders on the
10th of the preceding August, whereby nine men were killed
and five badly wounded, and another 12-pounder was disabled,
the frigate mounted on the present occasion but 40 guns. The
Bravoure appears to have mounted 42 guns, two more than the
establishment of her class, on account of having, like the Con-
corde herself previous to her accident, 28 twelves on the main-
deck. In point of force, therefore, the Concorde and Bravoure

  i See vol.
             i., p. 223. We omitted to     guns on the main deck; but the total ol
mention, that the Concorde differed from   her guns is there correctly stated at 42.
her class in mounting 28, instead of 26
