G8                BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.     —CHANNEL.          [180L.


spatched upon        that service the boats of the Jamaica, Gannet,
and Hound sloops, and Tigress and Mallard gun-vessels, under
the orders of Lieutenants James Agassiz and Henry Le Vesconte.
The squadron at the same time stood in to cover the boats from
the fire of the military and of five field-pieces, posted behind
some sand-hills on the beach. In spite of this opposition, the
British succeeded in bringing off three of the French boats, and
would have brought off the others had they not been scuttled ;
they were, however, damaged as much as the time would admit.
The loss of the British on this occasion amounted to no more
than one seaman killed, and one midshipman (Thomas Hamblin),
and three seamen wounded. The captured flats were each about
45 feet long and 18 or 20 broad, and mounted one brass 8-inch
howitzer.
   After his repeated promises to send supplies and reinforce-
ments to the army he had left in Egypt, Buonaparte must have
felt sorely aggrieved that almost all his endeavours to do so had
been frustrated by the vigilance of British cruisers even the     :



offer of large rewards to the equippers of merchant vessels or

privateers that should first reach a port of Egypt with provisions
and military stores, served only to augment the number and
enhance the value of Lord Keith's prizes.
     Hitherto the efforts to relieve the Egyptian army had been
confined to such frigates and smaller vessels as might be able to
escape from Toulon or some other French Mediterranean port                 ;



but, no sooner did the first-consul learn the real destination of
the army under General Abercromby, than he contemplated the
forwarding of a reinforcement upon a grander scale. That re-
inforcement was to consist of seven two-deckers, the elite of the
Brest fleet, having on board 5000 troops under the command of
General Sahuguet.
  The officer intrusted with the charge of this secret and ha-
zardous mission was one of the ablest at this time belonging to
the republic, Bear-admiral Ganteaume and the following were
the ships of which this squadron was composed
                                               ;


                                                          :
                                                              —
      Gun-ship.
                                  Rear-admiral Honore' Ganteaume.
            Indivisible
       80                         Captain Antoine-Louis Gourdon.
            Indomptable           Commodore         Moncousu.
            Formidable            Captain Joseph Allary.
            Desaix                Commodore Jean- Anne Christy-Pal Here.
            Constitution          Captain Gilbert-Amable Faure.
            Jean-Bart               , ,   Francois-Jacques Meynne.
            Dix-Aout   .
                                    , ,   Jacques Bergeret.
