GQ          BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   —CHANNEL.        [1801.

carried the vessel, but were prevented from towing her off,
owing to her being secured with a chain, and owing to a heavy
fire of musketry and grape-shot, opened as well from the shore
as from three luggers and a second brig, lying within half pistol-
shot of the first. Thus compelled to abandon their prize, and
the daylight putting a stop to further operations, the boats of
the first division pushed out of the bay. The persevering efforts
of the officers and men of this division had cost them dearly    ;



theh loss amounting to one master's mate (Alexander Buther-
ford),14 seamen, and three marines killed, four lieutenants
(Thomas  Oliver, Francis Dickenson, Jeremiah Skelton, and
William Basset), one captain of marines (George Young), one
master's  mate (Francis Burney), one midshipman (Samuel
Spratley), 29 seamen, and 19 marines wounded ; total, 18 killed
and 55 wounded.
  The second division, under Captain Parker, was more suc-
cessful than the first in meeting less obstacles from the current,
and at about half an hour past midnight got to the scene of
action.   One subdivision of the boats, led by the captain, imme-
diately ran alongside of a large brig, the Etna, moored off the
Mole head, wearing the broad pendant of Commodore Etienne
Pevrieux. Nothing could exceed the impetuosity of the attack     ;



but a very strong netting, traced up to the brig's lower yards,
baffled all the endeavours of the British to board, and an instan-
taneous discharge of her great guns and small-arms, the latter
from about 200 soldiers stationed on the gunwale, knocked back
into their boats nearly the whole of the assailants.  The second
subdivision, under Lieutenant Williams, carried a lugger, but,
in attacking a brig, the Volcan, met with a repulse, and was
obliged to retire with the other subdivision. The loss sustained
by the British in the two subdivisions proved with what ob-
stinacy the contest had been maintained. It amounted to two
midshipmen (William Gore and William Bristow), 15 seamen,
and four marines killed, Captain Parker himself (mortally), two
lieutenants (Charles Pelly and Frederick Langford), one master
(William Kirby), one midshipman (the Honourable Anthony
Maitland), Mr. Eichard Wilkinson, commander of the Greyhound
revenue cutter, 30 seamen, and six marines wounded total, 21
                                                       ;

killed and 42 wounded.
  The third division, under Captain Cotgrave, displayed the
same gallantly, and experienced nearly the same opposition as
the two others had done and was equally compelled to retire
                           ;


without effecting the object. The loss of this division amounted
