1801.]                    INVASION-FLOTILLA.                      GT

-fo one midshipman (Mr. Berry) and four seamen killed, one
gunner, 23 seamen, and five marines wounded total, five killed
                                                 ;



and 29 wounded. The fourth division of boats, under Captain
Jones, not being able, owing to the rapidity of the tide, to get to
the westward of any part of the enemy's line, put back to the
squadron.
   The French say they captured four of the English boats, and
ran down several others and that then- loss amounted to only
                            ;


10 men killed and 30 wounded whereas that of the British
                                    :



amounted altogether to 44 killed and 12G wounded. Of course
the French boasted, and certainly not without reason, of the
successful opposition they had made to the persevering assaults
of the British.
   The appellation of gun-brig, and of fiat or raft, convey, with-
out some explanation, a very imperfect idea of the description of
vessels of which the Boulogne flotilla was composed. The brigs
were vessels of from 200 to 250 tons, armed with from four to
eight heavy long guns, generally 24 and 18 pounders, and in
some instances 36-pounders. The account of a comparatively
.small lugger-flat, taken at Havre in the early part of the present

year, may suffice for the generality of those at Boulogne. This
flat drew but three and a half feet water, had very stout bul-

warks, and carried 30 men in crew, besides 150 soldiers she   ;


was armed with one 13-inch mortar, one long 24-pounder, and
lour swivels, and had also abundance of small-arms.
      This was the last affair with the invasion-flotilla, except a
spirited little boat-attack performed in the neighboiu-hood of
Etaples. On the 20th of August, in the evening, as the British
24-gun ship Jamaica, Captain Jonas Rose, accompanied by four
or five brig-sloops and gun-vessels, lay at anchor off the above-
named French port, a large fire was seen, and a heavy cannonade
heard in the south-south-east. Captain Bose immediately got
under way with his little squadron, and at 10 p.m., while running
down to the spot, spoke Captain George Sarradine, of the brig-
sloop Hound. From the latter Captain Rose learnt that the
light proceeded from a cargo of pitch and tar belonging to a
vessel wrecked some time before, and which the boats of the
Hound and of the Mallard     gun- vessel had set on fire; that
six flat-boatshad come out from St. Valcry to attack tho
Ihitish, but had been driven on shore and then lay upon tho
beach.
  Being resolved to attempt the capture or destruction of these
French boats, Captain Rose, on the morning of the 21st, de-
