82      BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITERRANEAN.           [1801.


Egypt from Brest. The port of Toulon also lent its aid but,   ;



as no sea-going line-of-battle ships were now there, it could only
be by frigates. Two of these, the Egyptienne and Justice, each
having on board a quantity of troops and munitions of war,
anchored on the 3rd of February iu the old or western port of
Alexandria. The number of French troops at this time in Upper
and Lower Egypt, founded upon the returns published in the
Moniteur, consisted of nearly 21,000 fighting men. Here were
also about 900 sick, about 1000 sailors, 400 or 500 Greek auxi-
liaries, and perhaps 1000 or 1200 persons in civil employment       ;


and the commander-in-chief of the whole was, as already men-
tioned (see vol. ii., p. 450), General Abdallah-Jacques Menou, a
man very unfit for the station, and not at all liked by the army.
   After a considerable delay, arising from a twofold cause, the
tardiness of the Turks and the badness of the weather, the
British and Turkish men-of-war and transports, having on board
in the whole about 16,000 men, set sail from Marmorice, and on
the 1st, with the exception of the Turkish division consisting of
several gun-boats and kaicks, which in a westerly gale had bore
up for Marcie, Cyprus, and other neighbouring ports, arrived in
sight of the minarets of Alexandria.
  Just as Lord Keith and his fleet gained a sight of Alexandria,
the French frigate Begeneree, with 200 troops and a company
of artillery on board, besides a quantity of military stores, slipped
into the western port.     This frigate, in company with the Afri-
caine, had sailed from Bochefort on the 13th of February, and
since parted from her consort, of whose fate we shall hereafter
have to give some account. A contemporary states that the
Begeneree kept company with the British fleet during a whole
day, answering every signal that was made but we doubt the
                                                ;



assertion, no mention being made of it in the French accounts.
On the night of the 1st, or morning of the 2nd, the brig-corvette
Lodi also got into Alexandria from Toulon.
   On the same day the British fleet brought up in Aboukir bay.
Too much of that day elapsed, however, before all the ships
could get to an anchorage, to accomplish the disembarkation
previously to the approach of night and a succession of strong
                                      ;


northerly gales, attended by a heavy swell, then set in, and
lasted until the evening of the 7th. Preparations were instantly
commenced and at 2 a.m. on the 8th the troops began embark-
             ;




ing in the boats, the total number of which was upwards of 320.
 At 3 a.m. the signal was made for the boats to rendezvous near
 the brig-sloop Mondovi, Captain John Stewart, at anchor about
