80     BRITISH        AND FRENCH FLEETS.    — MEDITERRANEAN.          [1801.

and was restored to her rank in the British navy. This capture
of one, and destruction of a second French frigate, was per-
formed without any loss on the part of the British. A con-
temporary, with his accustomed inaccuracy in regard to the force
                                  "                    1
of ships, calls the Bravoure an     18-pound frigate," although
Captain Halsted, in his letter to Sir John Warren, expressly
states that the Bravoure mounted "twenty-eight 12-pounders
on the main deck, with 283 men." In adding that the Bravoure
was " of 46 guns," Captain Halsted must of course have adopted
the report of Captain Cockburn but, according to a document
                                        ;


now before us, the Bravoure was pierced, exclusive of two pairs
of bow-chase ports, for no more than 40 guns         although by
                                                         ;



filling every port on her main deck, we have elsewhere assigned
her 42.2
   Shortly after these French frigates, hitherto so annoying to
the garrison of Porto-Ferrajo, had thus been disposed of, Lieu-
tenant-colonel George Airey, whom General Fox had recently
sent to supersede Captain Gordon in the command of the few
British troops in the fortress, applied to Bear-admiral Sir John
Warren, who had arrived off Porto-Ferrajo on the 12th of
September, for a detachment of marines and seamen from the
squadron, to assist in an attack upon some of the French bat-
teries, those especially which shut up the port.         This was
acceded to, and arrangements were forthwith made for an active
co-operation on the part of the squadron, which consisted of the
Renown,    Gibraltar, Dragon, Alexander, Genereux, Stately, of
the line, Pomone and Pearl frigates, and brig-sloop Yincejo.
  On the 13th, at daybreak, the Dragon and Genereux, for the
purpose of creating a diversion, opened a fire upon a round
tower at Marciana and on the 14th, a little before daylight,
                            ;


449 marines and 240 seamen, commanded by Captain George
Long of the Vincejo, along with a party of Tuscans, peasants,
pioneers, &c, amounting in the whole to about 1000 men, were
landed in two divisions under the personal direction of Captain
John Chambers White, of the Renown. The attack was made,
and several of the French batteries were destroyed, and 55
prisoners, including three captains and two subalterns, brought
off; but, the force being found insufficient to complete the whole
business, the allied detachment was compelled to retire with a
loss altogether of 32 killed, 61 wounded, and 105 missing.      Of
this number the navy lost a very large proportion; namely,

Captain Long, while gallantly leading on his men to storm a
        i                                            -
            Brenton, vol. in., p. 50.                    See p. 70.
