76      BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   —MEDITERRANEAN.     [1801.


Tunis, Buonaparte had just concluded a treaty. Having come
to an anchor off Bengazi, the squadron began making prepara-
tions to land the troops but, so spirited and effectual was the
                           ;



opposition of the inhabitants, that the attempt was found im-
practicable. Just at this moment the squadron of Lord Keith,
or some of the advanced ships belonging to it, hove in sight to
the eastward. The Trench admiral immediately cut his cables,
and crowded sail from the coast leaving two of his store-ships,
                                 ;


which could not keep up with him, to be captured by the British
28-gun frigate Vestal, and one or two smaller vessels, then far
ahead of then- companions.
  On the 24th, at 3 h. 80 m. a.m., Cape Derna on the coast of
Barbary bearing south-west, distant about seven leagues, the
British 74-gun ship Swiftsure, Captain Benjamin Hallowell,
then, with the wind at north-west, steering towards the island
of Malta, to reinforce the squadron under Bear-admiral Sir John
Borlase Warren, discovered the squadron of M. Ganteaume hull-
down to leeward. From previous information Captain Hallowell
 concluded that the ships were those of M. Ganteaume, and
made all sail to escape.    At 5 h. 30 m. the Jean-Bart and Con-
stitution, by signal from the admiral, tacked and stood on until
they fetched into the Swiftsure's wake. At 8 a.m. the remain-
ing three French ships, having fore-reached considerably, tacked
also, until they arrived upon the lee quarter of the Swiftsure,
when they tacked again.
   Such was the very superior sailing of the French ships, that
by 2 p.m. the Indivisible, Dix-Aout, and Creole had arrived
nearly within gun-shot. Observing that the ships astern were
also fast coming up, Captain Hallowell determined to bear down
and engage the three nearest, in the hope to disable one of them,
and effect his escape to leeward. Accordingly, at 3 p.m., the
Swiftsure bore down under all sail, steering to pass astern of
the rearmost of the three French ships; whereupon all of
the latter tacked and stood towards her. In half an hour the
Indivisible and Dix-Aout, standing on in close order, opened
their fire within half gun-shot, and. by their superior rate of
sailing, baffled every effort of the Swiftsure to get to leeward.
In this way the action was maintained until 4h. 37m. p.m.;
when, the Constitution and Jean-Bart being within gun-shot on
the Swiftsure's starboard quarter, and closing fast, the Indi-
visible almost on board of her on the larboard bow, and the
Dix-Aout as near on the larboard quarter, the British ship struck
her colours.
