1801.]             SIEGE OF TOKTO-FEREAJO.                     73

earronades, and therefore but 40 guns in all, and that her
S-pounders were brass. Her complement, as deposed to by her
officers, was 352. The Carrere became added to the British
navy as an 18-pounder 3G-gun frigate, but her reign as a cruising
ship was a short one.
  Finding, towards the end of August, that the Phoenix was at
anchor alone off Piombino, a port on the main land of Tuscany,
distant about seven miles from the north-east extremity of Elba,
General Watrin sent orders to Captain Bretel at anchor in
Leghorn   mole, to get under way with his two frigates, and en-
deavour to capture the British    frigate.   Accordingly, on the
evening of the 31st, the Succes and Bravoure put to sea upon
that service.
   On the 2nd of September, very early in the morning, these two
frigates, just as they were about to enter the
                                               Piombino channel,
fell in with and chased the British 38-gun frigate Minerve,

Captain George Cockburn who, at 6 h. 30 m., made
                            ;
                                                      the signal
for an enemy to the Phoenix, then at anchor in the south-east
in company with the Pomone, who had rejoined two days before.
The two last-named frigates, getting quickly under way, bore up
in chase under all sail and at 9 a.m. descried the Succes and
                        ;


Bravoure to the northward, steering back towards Leghorn,
pursued by the Minerve.
  At about 10 h. 30 m. a.m., finding herself dropping astern of
her consort, the Succes ran aground on the shore of Vada and,
                                                           ;



upon receiving a shot from the Minerve in passing, hauled down
her colours without firing a single gun in return. While the
Minerve stood on in chase of the Bravoure, the Pomone took
possession of the Succes, or, as now again entitled to
                                                       be called,
the Success. The wind, shifting to the northward, frustrated
every attempt of the Bravoure to reach Leghorn; and the
French frigate, after missing stays, and vainly attempting to
wear, got on shore under the Antignano battery, about four
miles to the southward of the mole. Here the three masts of
tho Bravoure soon went by the board, and the ship became
totally lost.  Owing to the height of the surf and the approach
of night, and to the enemy on shore firing upon tho boats,
Lieutenant William Kelly, first of the Minerve, who had been
sent to board the Bravoure, was not able to bring away more
than a few prisoners.
   By the exertions of Lieutenant Charles Thompson of the
  'hoenix, and tho officers and men under his orders, the
 I                                                        Success
was at length got afloat without receiving any material injury,
