1801.]
                               BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                                    81

narrow bridge, two seamen, and 12 marines killed, one officer,
17 seamen, and 20 marines wounded, and one officer, 12 seamen,
and 64 marines missing; total loss to the navy, 15 killed,
33 wounded, and 77 missing.
  By the aid of a well-penned despatch, General Watrin makes
this repulse of the allied British and Tuscans, cover the troops
of the republic with glory.    He augments the assailants to 3000
men, and their loss to 1200, exclusive of 200 prisoners, and
declares that his batteries wholly dismasted a frigate, and sank
seven of the British boats. But, in spite of all these strong
incentives to success on the part of his troops, the French
general could make no impression upon Porto-Ferrajo of which                           ;


Lieutenant-colonel Airey, notwithstanding he lost the aid ol
Sir John Warren and his squadron on the 22nd of September,
continued to maintain possession until the treaty of Amiens re-
lieved him from his charge.     The important operations of this
year upon the coast of Egypt now demand our attention.
   In our account of the last year's proceedings of the British
and Spanish fleets, we noticed the assemblage at Gibraltar of a
powerful naval and military force under the respective com-
mands of Admiral Lord Keith and General Sir Balph Aber-
cromby.     On the 31st of January, after having stopped a short
               1



time at Minorca and at Malta, the bulk of the British force,
intended to art against the French in Lower Egypt, anchored
in the fine harbour of Marmorice on the coast of Karamania, in
Asia Minor. The fleet here assembled consisted of full-armed
line-of-battle ships, frigates, and sloops, reduced 64s, 50s, 44s,
and frigates, in number from 60 to 70 sail, including the follow-
ing squadron           :
                           —
Gun-ship.                                        (   Admiral (b.) Lord Keith, K.B.
  80      Foudroyant             .       .       I
                                                   Captain Philip Beaver.
                                                       ,,  William Younff.
                                                 ( Rear-admiral
          ,-       ,
                                                                (w.) Sir R. Bickerton, Bart.
                                                 \ Captain William Hope.
         Ajax                                              Hon. Alex. Inglis Cochrane.
  7
      *H Minotaur          ....                       ,


                                                       ,,
                                                           ,

                                                               Thomas Louis.
          Northumberland             .           .
                                                       ,   ,   George Martin.
         Tigre                                                 Sir William Sidney Smith.
         L
           S\vii'tsure     .    ...                    ,


                                                       ,,
                                                           ,


                                                               Benjamin Hallowell.

  As soon as news reached him that this powerful British arma-
ment had assembled at the island of Malta, Buonaparte could
no longer be in doubt respecting its destination. We have
already shown what efforts were made to get a squadron to
                                             1
                                                 See vol. ii., p. 451.
   vol.. III.                                                                              O
