1801.]          BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                  83

a gun-shot from the shore but such was the extent of the an-
                           ;



chorage occupied by so numerous a fleet, and so great the dis-
tance of many of the ships from any one given point, that it was
not until 9 a.m. that the signal could be made for the boats to
advance towards the shore.
  This was then accomplished, under the direction of Captain
Cochrane of the Ajax, assisted by Captain James Stevenson of
the Europa, George Scott of the Stately, John Larmour of the
Diadem, Charles Apthorp of the Druid, and John Morrison of
the Thisbe, and by the several agents for transports present in
the fleet. The right flank of the boat-flotilla was protected by
the armed cutter Cruelle, Lieutenant David M'Gie, and gun-
vessels Dangereuse and Janizary; and the left by the armed
cutter Entreprenante, schooner Malta, and gun-vessel Negresse,
besides  two armed launches, one on each flank, in place of the
Turkish gun-boats, which, as already mentioned, had parted
from the fleet. The launches, containing the field-artillery as
well as a detachment of seamen to co-operate with the army,
moved under the direction of their commanding officer, Captain
Sir William Sidney Smith, assisted by Captains Peter Eibouleau
of the Astrsoa, Daniel Oliver Guion of the Eurus, John G. Saville
of the Experiment, John Burn of the Blonde, and James Hillyar
of the Niger.    The bomb-vessels Tartarus and Fury, Captains
Thomas Hand and Eichard Curry, were advantageously posted
for throwing shot and shells at the enemy, and the sloops Peterel,
Cameleon, and Minorca, Captains Charles Inglis, Edward
O'Bryen, and George Miller, were moored as near as possible to
the beach, with their broadsides sprung towards it.
   The force winch the French were enabled to bring to the spot,
to oppose the disembarkation of the British troops and seamen,
in number just 7000 men, consisted of the whole garrison of
Alexandria (except the invalids and seamen), amounting, accord-
ing to the French accounts, to 1500 infantry and ISO cavalry,
exclusive of several detachments from Bosetta and elsewhere,
numbering altogether at least 2500 men. These French troops
were under the command of General Friant; who, with gnat
judgment, had stationed a part of his men, with 15 pieces of
heavy artillery, upon an almost inaccessible hill, which com-
manded the whole space of disembarkation, and others, with
field-pieces and mortars, in the different excellent positions
 which the ground afforded.
   .No sooner did the boats arrive near to the shore than a heavy
fiie of grape-shot and musketry from behind the sand-hills
