1801.]              PURSUIT OF M. GANTEAUME.                    75

British ships had gained upon the enemy    ;
                                               but the slow sailing
of the Gibraltar and Athenien induced the rear-admiral to order
the remainder of the squadron to shorten sail, and at dark, or
soon afterwards, every French ship disappeared.       Nor was
the enemy again seen ; as, while Sir John was hastening to the
southward and eastward, M. Ganteaume had stood back to the
noi-thward, and shortly afterwards re-anchored in Toulon.
   Buonaparte sent orders to M. Ganteaume to make a third
attempt to reach Egypt. Accordingly, on the 27th of April,
the persevering French admiral again set sail with his seven
line-of-battle ships and two frigates, besides one corvette and
two store-ships. Finding, when at Leghorn, into which port ho
had put by the way, to co-operate in the siege of Porto-Ferrajo,
that the Formidable, Indomptable, and Desaix, as well as tho
frigate Creole, were too short-manned to proceed on the voyage,
Eear-admiral Ganteaume ordered them back to Toulon; and,
with four two-deckers, one frigate, one corvette, and four store-
ships, stood away for the Straits of Messina.   These he passed
on the 25th of May    and on the 5th of June, while on his way
                      ;


to the coast of Egypt from off Erindisi, where he had expected
to be joined by three Neapolitan frigates, M. Ganteaume fell in
with and chased, but could not overtake, the British 18-pounder
.'!6-gun frigate Pique,   Captain James Young.
  On the 7th, being only about 70 leagues to the westward of
Alexandria, the French admiral detached the corvette Heliopolis
to reconnoitre the Egyptian coast, and ascertain the exact situa-
tion of the hostile fleet. On the 9th, at daylight, the Heliopolis
arrived close off Alexandria; and, after a distant chase by the
Kent and Hector 74s and Cruelle cutter, succeeded in entering
the port. The fact is that, in consequence of the information
brought to Lord Keith by the Pique on the evening of the 7th,
the British squadron, on the morning of the 8th, made sail to
the westward, in search of the hourly-expected French squadron.
So that, when the Heliopolis arrived in sight of Alexandria, the
chief part of the blockading force was abreast of the Arab's
tower, or about four leagues to the westward.
   The non-return of the Heliopolis leaving scarcely a doubt that
she had been captured by the British fleet, Pear-admiral Gan-
teaume, conformably to his instructions, searched to the west-
ward of Alexandria for a convenient spot to disembark the
troops, and found it as he conceived, at a small town situated
about 180 leagues to the eastward of Tripoli, and a dependence
upon that regency; with which, as well as with the regency of
