78         BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.    — MEDITERRANEAN.             [1801.


Phoenix and Mermaid, under the orders of Captain Lawrence
William Halsted, of the former. But these soon afterwards
departed on some other service, and the harbour of Porto-Fer-
rajo was blockaded by the French 28-gun frigate Badine, and
subsequently by the following French squadron             :
                                                              —
•iun-frigate.
  38     Carrere    ....     Captain Claude-Pascal Morel-Beaulieu
  36     Bravoure   ....             Louis- Auguste Dordelin.
  32     Succes     ....        , ,


                               , ,   Jac.-Fr.-Ignace Bretel, senior officer.

   Towards the latter end of July, to render still more critical
the state of the small garrison of Porto-Ferrajo, General Watrin.
at the head of 5000 men, landed on the island to supersede
General Tharreau in the command and, in pursuance of the
                                           ;


orders he had received from General Murat in Tuscany, the
newly-arrived French general began the most active preparations
for reducing the fortress.
  On the 1st of August Eear-admiral Sir John Warren, with the
Eenown and squadron, arrived off the island, and, chasing the
Bravoure and Succes into Leghorn, raised the blockade of
Porto-Ferrajo.
  On the 3rd, at 2 h. 30 m. p.m., the British 18-pounder 36-gun
frigate Phoenix, Captain Lawrence William Halsted, 18-pounder
40-gun frigate Pomone, Captain Edward Leveson Gower, and
12-pounder 32-gun frigate Pearl, Captain Samuel James Ballard,
cruising off the west side of the island of Elba, discovered the
Carrere, on her passage from Porto-Ercole to Porto-Longone,
with 300 barrels of powder on board, and a convoy of small
vessels in charge laden with ordnance-stores and provisions.
  At 8 h. 10 m. f.m., after "tiie interchange of a few shot from
bow and stem chasers, and a resistance alongside of about
10 minutes' diiration, the Carrere hauled down her colours to
the Pomone, the only British ship near enough to open a fire.
Out of her complement of about 320 men and boys, the Pomone
lost her boatswain (Thomas Cook) and one quartermaster killed,
and one lieutenant of marines (Charles Douglas, loss of a leg)
and one seaman mortally, and two other seamen slightly
wounded. The loss on board the Cari^re is not stated in Cap-
tain Halsted's letter but, according to the French account, it
                         ;


was tolerably severe. The whole of the convoy appear to have
escaped, and one or two of the vessels to have got into Longone.
   The Carrere was a fine Venetian-built frigate of 1013 tons,
and mounted the same guns as those assigned to her class, in
the small table at p. 59, vol. i., except that she had only two
