1801.]
                          SIEGE OF I'ORTO-FEKRAJO.

  The masts, yards, rigging, and sails of the Swiftsure were
completely cut to pieces; but, it having been the principal
object of the French to dismantle the ship, her loss, out of a
crew at quarters, owing to 59 being sick and 86 of her best men
having been taken from her by Lord Keith, of not more than
450 men and boys, amounted to only two men killed, and one
lieutenant (Lewis Davis) and seven men wounded, two of them
mortally. That the Swiftsure did not act quite so tenderly
towards her antagonists, appears by the French admiral's return
of loss according to which, the Indivisible had four men killed
             ;


and wounded, and the Dix-Aout six men killed and 23 wounded.
M. Ganteaume manned his prize by detachments from the ships
of his squadron and, after labouring at her for six days, in the
                 ;


most favourable weather (a tolerable proof of the state to which
she had been reduced), succeeded in placing her in a condition
to accompany him to Toulon where, on the 22nd of July, the
                                        ;




squadron safely arrived.
  In his public letter, Captain Hallowell, much to his credit, as
well as to the credit of his captors, speaks in the highest terms
of the treatment which himself, his officers, and men expe-
rienced from the officers of M. Ganteaume's squadron, and from
the French admiral in particular. On the other hand M. Gan-
teaume's report of the conduct of the Swiftsurc's captain has
called forth the following panegyric from a French naval writer       :

" Le
      capitaine Hallowell, se defendit avec opiniatrete, et n'amena
son pavilion que lorsqu'il se vit en danger de couler bas." l It
is almost unnecessary to state that Captain Hallowell and the
late officers and crew of the Swiftsure, on their return to Eng-
land, were most honourably acquitted for the loss of their ship.
   Having, by a treaty concluded on the 28th of March, upon
his own terms, got Naples to cede to him Porto-Longone, and
the whole of the Neapolitan part of the isle of Elba, the first
consul of France determined to possess himself of the remaining
or Tuscan portion of the island, including the strong fortress
of Porto-Ferrajo, but the garrison of which did not exceed 400
men.
  On the 2nd of May General Tharreau, with about 1500 men,
disembarked at Porto-Longone from the opposite port of Piom-
bino   and, after vainly summoning, and as vainly trying to
         ;


corrupt, Carlo de Fisson, the Tuscan governor, the French
general commenced his investment of the place.      The only
British force off the port at this time were two frigates, the
                     1   Victoires ct ConquOtes, tome xiv., p. 157.
