74      BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.         — MEDITERRANEAN.   [1801..


experiencing during the same night a heavy gale of wind, was
obliged to put back -with several of his ships damaged, and on
the 27th re-anchored at Mahon.
   On the 4th of March the rear-admiral again set sail, but with,
only five of his squadron, having left the Genereux behind, as
some protection in the event of an expected attack upon Minorca
by the Spaniards and French. On the 7th Sir John spoke two
vessels, who informed him that the King of Naples had concluded
an armistice with General Murat. Upon this intelligence the
rear-admiral steered for Palermo, to protect the British interests
in Sicily, as well as to effect a junction with the 74-gun ship
Alexander, Captain Alexander John Ball, and 64 Athenien, Cap-
tain Sir Thomas Livingstone. On the 18th, when off the island
of Maritimo, the Athenien joined as on the 22nd, off the small
                                     ;


island of Calita, did the Alexander.
  AVith his force thus augmented to seven sail of the line, in-
cluding two 64s, Sir John stood back towards Toulon, to<
blockade M. Ganteaume in the road but on the 2.r>th the brig-
                                         ;



sloop Salamine, Captain Thomas Briggs, joined from Captain
Dixon at Mahon, bringing information that the French admiral,
with seven sail of the line, three frigates, and three merchant-
vessels, had on the morning of the 19th again put to sea.    No
sooner, in fact, did the first-consul receive the mortifying
account, as well of the arrival of M. Ganteaume at Toulon
before his mission had been fulfilled, as of the capture of the
frigate Africaine, on her way to the coast of Egypt, than he de-
spatched from Paris his aide-de-camp, Gerard Lacuee, with
orders that Rear-admiral Ganteaume should sail immediately for
Alexandria   ;
              and that, should he find the port blockaded by a
superior force, he was to disembark the troops at any practicable
spot to the westward of Alexandria, between Tripoli and Capo
Basat. With this object in view, Bear-admiral Ganteaume
accordingly sailed, but on the same night experienced so heavy
a gale of wind, that one of his line-of-battle ships lost her main-
mast and put back, some of the other ships were greatly
damaged, and one of the merchant-vessels, having also parted
company, was fallen in with and captured by the British frigate
Minerva.
  On the 25th at daybreak, when about 14 leagues south-west
of the island of Toro, Sir John Warren obtained a distant sight
of M. Ganteaume' s weatherbeaten squadron, counted by the
Mercury at 10 sail, being three short of its original number.
Chase was immediately given    ;   and, before evening, some of the
