1801.]
                BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                   93

   This concluding operation of the campaign was effected after
a loss to the British army, in the four or five skirmishes which
had immediately preceded it, of only 13 rank and file killed, and
six officers, four sergeants, one drummer, and 113 rank and file

wounded, and to the British navy, in the attack upon Marabou,
of one midshipman (Mr. Hull of the Ajax) and one seaman killed
and two seamen wounded thus making the general loss on the
                             ;



part of the British in the Egyptian campaign, as far as it has
been officially reported, 330 killed, 1872 wounded, and 39 miss-
ing.   That of the French, commencing at the disembarkation of
the British troops in Aboukir bay, may be stated at from 3000
to 4000 men in killed alone an amount, great as it may appear,
                                 ;



considerably below what some of the English writers have
declared it to have been.
   The French ships-of-war found in the old or western harbour
were the Causse 64, the frigates Egyptienne, Justice, and
Eegeneree, and two small ex-Venetian frigates, of whose names
we are uncertain. The Dubois appears to have been broken up.
The Heliopolis was probably one of the ex-Turkish corvettes
restored to the captain pacha and the Lodi, since the middle
                                     ;


of May, had been despatched to France with General Eeynier,
sent home by General Menou. This remarkably fine brig, in
spite of the numerous British cruisers at that time in the Medi-
terranean, accomplished her passage in safety, arriving on the
28th of June at the port of Nice.
   In the division of the ships between the British and Turkish
naval commanders-in-chief, the latter received the Causse,
Justice, and one of the Venetian frigates and the former, the
                                                           ;



Egyptienne, Eegeneree, and the other Venetian frigate. What
became of the latter frigate we are unable to say; but the
Eegeneree, a ship of 902 tons, and a very fast sailer, was added
to the British navy as a 12-pounder 3G-gun frigate, by the name
of Alexandria.     The Egyptienne was also added to the British
navy, by her own name and, from her size and qualifications,
                        ;



claims a more particular notice.
   Of the two new ships of the line which Buonaparte, in his
letter to the Directory of April, 1798, contemplated to have
                                                       1




ready by the ensuing September, one, as already stated, was the
Spartiate, just ready to be, if not actually launched.  The other
ship either had already been, or then was, so altered in her con-
struction, that, instead of becoming a 74 of about 1700 tons
French, or 1900 English, she was launched on the 18th of July,
                         1
                             See vol.    Ii.,p. 125.
