86      BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.    —MEDITERRANEAN.            [1801.

sons elsewhere stated, she did not, in her way thither, meet M.
Ganteaume.
   Although it was on the 4th of March that General Menou had
become officially apprised of the arrival of the British expedition
in the bay of Aboukir, he did not, it appears, set out from the

head-quarters at Cairo until the 11th, nor arrive at the         camp
under the eastern walls of Alexandria before the evening of the
18th.  The reinforcement he brought with him augmented the
French force at Alexandria, according to the Moniteur, to 14,000
men, exclusive of cavalry, artillery, and guides but the French
                                                 ;



historians say, to only 9730 men, including 1380 cavalry, with
46 pieces of cannon. The effective force of the British army at
Bedah is represented not to have exceeded 10,000 men, including
only 300 cavalry, with, according to the French, 12 pieces of
movable artillery, and 30 pieces in the different redoubts thrown
up to protect the encampment. This is taking the numbers,
except in the case of the British artillery, which we believe to
be overrated, as each party has represented his own to be but,
                                                             ;




according to the statement on the opposite side, the British
force was 16,000, or the whole that had been landed, and the
French force between 11,000 and 12,000, an amount considerably
less than is admitted by the Moniteur.
   On the 21st, at about an hour before daylight, the French
attacked the British with great impetuosity but, after an obsti-
                                             ;


nate and sanguinary contest, were repulsed, with a loss estimated
by themselves at 800 killed, 200 wounded (a small proportion),
and 400 prisoners but other accounts represent the French loss
                  ;


on this day, in killed, wounded, and prisoners, at nearly 3000
men. Among the killed were Generals Lanusse, Boize, ana
Baudot, and, among the wounded, General Destaing, and
several other distinguished officers.
   The loss on the part of the British was also unusually severe      .




it amounted to 10 officers, nine
                                 sergeants, 224 rank and file, and
two horses killed, 60 officers, 48 sergeants, three drummers,
1082 rank and file, and three horses (a sufficient proof of the
small quantity of cavalry present) wounded, and three officers,
three sergeants, and 28 rank and file missing. Among the mor-
tally wounded was the commander-in-chief, by a musket-shot at
the upper part of the thigh and among the remaining wounded
                            ;


were Major-general Moore and Brigadier-general Hope, both in
the head, but not dangerously.
   The marines, having been appointed to the duty of Aboukir
castle and its vicinity, were not present in this action but the
                                                        ;
