1801.]
                 BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                  87

seamen, tmcler their gallant leader, Captain Sir Sidney Smith,
shared in it, and sustained a loss of one master's mate (Mr.
Krebs) and three seamen killed, Sir Sidney himself, but not
badly, Lieutenant Lewis Davis of the Swif sure, and 48 seamen
                                            ,




wounded-; making the grand total of the Eritish loss in the
Battle of Canopus, as the French have named it, amount to 247
killed, 1243 wounded, and 34 missing.
   General Sir Ralph Abercromby, at his own request, was con-
veyed on board the Foudroyant, where he breathed his last on
the 28th of March, leaving as his successor in the command of
the British army, Major-general John Hely Hutchinson, who
thus feelingly and eloquently expresses himself on the subject of
                                 " Were it
General Abercromby *s death   :
                                           permitted for a soldier
to regret any one who has fallen in the service of his country, I
might be excused for lamenting him more than any other person    ;


but it is some consolation to those who tenderly loved him, that
as his life was honourable, so was his death glorious.        His
memory w ill be recorded in the annals of his country, will be
          r



sacred to every British soldier, and embalmed in the recollection
of a grateful posterity."
   On the 26th a second Ottoman squadron arrived, having on
board about 5000 Turks and Albanians. This made the Turkish
force at anchor in the bay of Aboukir, including the Sultan-
Selim three-decker, of 110 guns, amount to six sail of the line,
and eight frigates and corvettes; all tolerably fine vessels, but
in bad hands.   On or about the 3rd of April the Turkish troops
were landed, and shortly afterwards, with a division of 800
British troops and eight pieces of cannon under Colonel Spencer,
were sent to attack the town and castle of Bosetta, which com-
mands the western branch of the Nile. After a fatiguing march
across the desert, the allied troops succeeded, with little or no
opposition from the few French troops, apparently not more than
800, there stationed, in gaining possession of this important post
which, besides giving to the British the unmolested navigation
of the Nile, enabled them to open a communication with the
friendly inhabitants of the Delta, and thus obtain supplies of
provisions for the numerous mouths they had to feed.
  On the 16th, at 11 h. 30m. a.m., the castle of Jullien, situated
on the banks of the Nile, and defended by 15 pieces of cannon,
four armed djerms moored under its walls, and a garrison of
nearly 400 men, part of the troops which had retired from
Bosetta, was attacked, on the side of the Nile, by a division of
British and Turkish gun boats, commanded by Captain Richard
