 SO       BRITISH     AND FRENCH FLEETS.          —MEDITERRANEAN.           [1801

 by a party of British cavalry, and surrendered upon honourable
 terms.
   On the same day on which this surrender took place, the
 small garrison, about 200, of the fort of Lesbeh, on the Damietta
 branch of the Nile, invested on the land-side by a Turkish force,
 and near the Bogaz of Damietta by a flotilla of British gun-
 boats, abandoned the post and retired upon Bourlos.    This post
 the two garrisons, numbering together about 700 men, also
 evacuated, and embarked on board five small vessels in the hope
 to be able to reach the new or north-eastern
                                              port of Alexandria.
 Four of these vessels were captured and carried into Aboukir
 bay but the fifth, after being chased in vain by a Turkish cor-
      ;



vette, succeeded in reaching the coast of Italy.
  Owing to delays from various causes,   among others perhaps
the non-arrival of more than about 300 of the
                                              troops expected to
join from the borders of the Bed Sea, the allied British and
Turkish forces marching towards Cairo, which is distant about
164 miles from Bosetta, did not until the 20th of June arrive at
Embabeh, a village distant a mile and a half from the fortress of
Giseh, on the banks of the Nile directly opposite to Cairo, and
in which fortress General Belliard had stationed a
                                                   garrison. On
the 22nd, while preparations were
                                             making to besiege Cairo and
its different forts by the allied forces
                                               (of which a numerous army
under the grand vizier now formed a part), General Belliard
sent a flag of truce to Lieutenant-general 1
                                             Hutchinson, offering
to capitulate upon honourable terms.    These were soon settled
and drawn up, and on the 27th, were signed by the
                                                      respective
parties.  By the terms of the treaty the French troops, of which
there were, in effective men, 8000, besides 1000
                                                 sick, and about
half as many in a convalescent         were to be           to a
                                         state,                  conveyed
port of France.
  Before we descend the Nile to
                                bring the campaign to a con-
clusion, some account must be given of the British and native
troops from Bombay, amountng to about 6000, which, according
to the original plan of
                          proceeding, were to have co-operated
with those disembarked on the shores of the Mediterranean.
   On the 21st of April the British 50-gun ship Leopard,
                                                         Captain
Thomas Surridge, bearing the flag of Bear-admiral John
Blankett,  anchored   in the road of Suez, with two or three
frigates and sloops, and about the same number of transports.
On the 22nd, at daybreak, an officer and a
                                               party of the 86th
regiment landed from the Leopard, and took possession of the
           i
               Promoted some time before, but we are uncertain
                                                                 when.
