1801.]
                BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                  89

Stevenson, assisted by Captain John Morrison, Eichard Curry,
and James Hillyar.
   On the 7th, having previously destroyed their gun-vessels with
all the provisions and stores on board of them, the French aban-
doned El-Aft and retreated towards Eahmanieh. On the same
evening the allied troops entered El-Aft, and on the 9th advanced
to Eahmanieh, where General Lagrange had taken post, with an
apparent intention of making a stout resistance. At 10 a.m.,
Captain Curry, with four flats and three armed launches, com-
menced an attack upon the French forts at Eahmanieh, and con-
tinued in action with them until 4 p.m., when his division was
relieved by the Turkish gun-boats. In this creditable affair the
navy sustained a loss of Lieutenant Hobbes and three seamen
killed and seven seamen wounded.     During the same night the
French general retreated towards Cairo, leaving in the fort his
sick and wounded, about 110 in number, under the command of
chef de brigade Lacroix. A detachment of 50 cavalry from
Alexandria were taken at the same time that Eahmanieh sur-
rendered. The possession of this important post effectually cut
off all communication between Alexandria and the interior of

Egypt and in gaining it the allied forces suffered no greater
         ;


loss than one drummer, four rank and file, and 10 horses killed,
and four officers, one sergeant, one drummer, 18 rank and tile,
and 18 horses wounded.
   Continuing their march towards the capital of Egypt, which
General Lagrange with his division had entered on the 13th, the
allied forces, on the 14th, fell in with and captured a French
armed vessel and 16 djerms, conveying wine, spirits, clothing,
about 5000Z. sterling in specie, some heavy pieces of ordnance,
and about 150 troops, from Cairo to Eahmanieh. Having
entered the Nile by the canal of Menouf, which joins the
Damietta and Eosetta branches, the French commanding officer
knew nothing of the retreat of General Lagrange, and the sur-
render of Eahmanieh. On the 17th a division of cavalry and
infantry under Brigadier-general Doyle, from previous informa-
tion furnished by the Arabs, intercepted a body of 550 camels
escorted by 560 French under the command of chef de brigade
Cavalier, going from Alexandria, which they had quitted on the
14th, towards the province of Bahireh, to procure provision, of
which the garrison of Alexandria were now in great want.
Finding himself likely to be overpowered, M. Cavalier very
properly quitted his sluggish charge, and with his troops
took to the desert.    Ilere the French officer was overtaken
