88     BRITISH   AND FREXCH FLEETS.     — MEDITERRANEAN.    [1801.


Curry of the bomb-vessel Fury, and on the land-side by the
British division of Colonel Spencer's corps, including the prin-
cipal part of the artillery. Two other divisions, it appears, were
sent against the tower of Abou-Mandhour and the village of
Gehdid. These were soon reduced but it took until the 19th,
                                    ;




at 6 a.m., before the castle of Jullien surrendered. This the
garrison, numbering 368 men, did upon honourable terms, after
a brave defence, in which they lost about 40 men in killed and
wounded.
  In the pocket of General Boize, left dead on the field of battle
at Canopus, was found a letter from General Menou at Cairo,
expressing a fear that the British had, or would, cut the canal of
Alexandria, and thus let the waters of the Mediterranean, or
those more immediately of Lake Madieh, into the basin of the
ancient Lake Mareotis, which for ages past had been dry, except
that a considerable portion of it, at certain seasons especially,
was impassable owing to the swampy nature of its bed. The
hint was taken, and on the 15th of April the cut was made        ;



but, although the first rush of water, from its volume, and im-
petuosity, was awfully grand, some time elapsed before the whole
area of the lake became covered. As soon as that was accom-
plished, the troops under General Menou, shut up in Alexandria,
and numbering, according to the French accounts, 6000 men,
became separated from the 4000 under General Lagrange, in-
trenched at El- Aft, and the 5000 under General Belliard, in
garrison at Cairo. If to these numbers, short as they are of the
returns published in the Moniteur, be added, the loss known to
have been already sustained, together with the several detach-
ments in Upper Egypt, particularly the garrisons of Salalieh,
Belbeis, Suez, Lesbeh, and Bourlos, our previous enumeration of
the French force spread over this country will not be considered
immoderately estimated.
  On the 26th of April, having left Major-general Cootein com-
mand of the army before Alexandria, Major-general Hutchinson
arrived at Bosetta, to press in person the operations against the
French in the interior of the country. On the 5th of May, Major-
general Hutchinson, with the combined British and Turks, in
number about S000, marched along the banks of the Nile, to-
wards the position of General Lagrange at El-Aft, accompanied
on the river by a division of British and Turkish gun-boats,
under the command, since the occupation of Bosetta and the
expected arrival of Bear-admiral Ganteaume upon the coast
(when Sir Sidney Smith returned to the Tigre), of Captain James
