 84      BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.       MEDITERRANEAN.    [1801,

 seemed to threaten them with destruction, while the castle of
 Aboukir on their right flank maintained a constant and harass-
 ing discharge of large shots and shells but the ardour of the
                                            ;


 British officers and men was not to be damped. No moment of
 hesitation intervened.  The beach was arrived at, and a footing
 obtained; the troops advanced, and the enemy was forced to
 relinquish all the advantageous positions he had held.     The
 boats returned without delay for the second division and, before
                                                      ;




 the evening of the 9th, the whole army, with a proportion of
 stores and provisions, was landed.
   A detachment of 1000 seamen, placed under the orders of
Captain Sir William Sidney Smith, formed part of the landed
force.   The duty of these was to drag the cannon up the heights     ;


a service they performed with their usual alacrity and perse-
verance, and in which, and in disembarking the army, they sus-
tained a loss of 22 seamen killed, three lieutenants (John Bray,
George Thomas, and Francis Collins), one master's mate (Bichard
Ogleby), three midshipmen (John Finchley, John Donellan, and
Edward Bobinson, the latter mortally), and 63 seamen wounded,
and three seamen missing. The loss sustained by the army, on
the same occasion, amounted to four officers, four sergeants, 94
rank and file killed, 26 officers, 34 sergeants, five drummers,
450 rank and file wounded, and one officer, one sergeant, one
drummer, 32 rank and file missing making a grand total of 124
                                    ;



killed, 585 wounded, and 38 missing.    The loss sustained by the
French, when they were driven from the hill, is stated by them
at 400 in killed and badly wounded but it was believed to have
                                        ;


exceeded that amount they left behind them eight pieces of
                        :



artillery, one of which was a 24-pounder, besides a great number
of horses.
  On the 12th the British army moved forward, and came in
sight of the French army which, having been reinforced by a
                            ;




body of 4400 troops under General Lanusse, including upwards
of 1000 cavalry commanded by General Bron, now amounted to
about 7000 men.     The French were formed upon an advan-
tageous ridge, having their right on the canal of Alexandria, and
their left towards the sea.    On the following day, the 13th, a
battle was fought, in which the detachment of seamen under Sir
Sidney Smith, and of marines under Lieutenant-colonel Walter
Smith, emulated the brave troops with whom they were asso-
ciated.  The British gun-boats on the lake of Aboukir, com-
manded by Captains Frederick Lewis Maitland and James
Hillyar, were also particularly useful in annoying the right flank
