1801.]
                      BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                               85

of the French army.     At length, after a sharp struggle, the
French were repulsed at all quarters, with the loss, as admitted
by themselves, of 750 killed and badly wounded; and the
British took up a position at the village of Bedah, distant about
a league from the town of Alexandria, having on their right the
sea, on their left the canal of Alexandria (then dry) and Lake
Madieh, and in front a sandy plain.
   The loss sustained by the British in this last encounter was,
on the part of the navy, one midshipman (Mr. Wright) and five
seamen killed, and 19 seamen wounded on the part of the
                                                      ;



marines, two lieutenants (Paul Hussey and John Linzee Spea),
and 22 rank and file killed, one major (William Minto), one
captain (Bobert Torkington), two lieutenants (Bichard Parry
                                                                                    1



and George Peebles), two sergeants, two drummers, 27 rank
and file wounded and on the part of the army, six officers, six
                       ;




sergeants, one drummer, 143 rank and file, 21 horses killed, 66
officers, one quartermaster, 61 sergeants, seven drummers, 946
rank and file, five horses wounded, and one rank and file missing                   :




grand total, 186 killed, 1135 wounded, and one missing.
  On the 18th of March the castle of Aboukir, mounted with
ten guns and two heavy mortars, and garrisoned, the French
say, with 3<X) men under chef de bataillon A'inache, after a bom-
bardment of two days, surrendered on honourable terms to a
detachment of the army under Colonel Dalhousie. "Whatever
may have become of the rest of the garrison, the prisoners taken
did not amount to more than 150 officers and men.
   On the same day, in an affair of patroles between the cavalry
of the two armies, the British sustained a loss of one quarter-
master, seven rank and file, and 18 horses killed, one officer,
six rank and file, and 12 horses wounded, and one quartermaster,
12 rank and file, and seven horses missing. On the same day,
also, a Turkish squadron, of two 74s, four frigates and cor-
vettes, and a few smaller vessels, anchored in Aboukir bay. It
was likewise on the same day that Generals Friant and Lanusse
despatched a vessel to France, with information of the actual
state of theFrench army and the commander was directed to
                                  :



look out on his passage for the squadron of M. Ganteaume,
whose intended arrival the Begenereo had announced, and to
inform him of the position of the British fleet. This despatch-
vessel appears to have arrived safe at Toulon; but, for the rea-

  1
    This pallant officer is the same men-   pension, but the liberality of government
tioned in the cutting out of the Mundovi.   was asleep on this occasion.
His wounds mi^ht have entitled him to a
