92      BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — MEDITERRANEAN.     [1801.

the French in Egypt, and thus accomplish the ultimate object
 of the expedition.
   On the night of the 16th about 5000 troops, under Major-
general Coote, embarked on Lake Mareotis, in the boats of the
men-of-war and transports, and in a quantity of djerms which
had been assembled for the purpose, and, escorted by the flotilla
of gun-vessels still under the orders of Captain Stevenson, pro-
ceeded to a position to the westward of the town of Alexandria.
Early on the morning of the 17th the detachment disembarked
with a slight opposition previous to which the French had set
                         ;



fire to their flotilla of 18 gun-boats, which had been stationed

opposite to Pompey's pillar, under the protection of a battery of
three long 18-pounders. The slight opposition experienced by
the British is acknowledged by the French to have been mainly
owing to the spirited demonstration which Captain Sir Sidney
Smith, with some sloops-of-war and armed boats, made upon the
town of Alexandria from the sea.
   On the night of the 18th a combined military and naval
attack was made upon the small fortified island of Marabou,
which protects the entrance to the western or great harbour of
Alexandria. The naval force consisted of the armed launches of
the squadron, under the command of Captain Cochrane of the
Ajax. Finding it in vain to hold out longer, the commandant
of Marabou, chef de brigade Etienne, capitulated on the 21st;
and on the same evening Captain Cochrane, with the ship-sloops
Cynthia and Bonne-Citoyenne, brig-sloops Port-Mahon and
Tictorieuse, and three Turkish corvettes, entered the harbour:
soon after which, to prevent the further progress of the British
to the eastward, the   French sank several merchant-vessels,
having previously moved their two 64s, frigates, and corvettes,
from Cape Figuiers close up to the town at the extremity of the
harbour.
  On the morning of the 26th four batteries on each side of the
town were opened against the intrenched camp of the French      ;


and on the 27th, in the evening, being thus pressed on all sides,
General Menou sent an aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-general
Hutchinson to request a three days' armistice, in order to give
time to prepare a capitulation. This was acceded to and on
                                                       ;



the 2nd of September Alexandria surrendered. By the terms of
the treaty the garrison, consisting of upwards of 8000 soldiers,
and 1300 sailors, were to be conveyed to France at British
expense, as had already been the case with the garrison of
Cairo
