1801.]         SIR   JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZ1RAS.               99

standing on in line ahead thus, Yenerable, Pompee, Audacious,
Caesar, Spencer, and Hannibal, Cape Tariffa bore from tho
Pompee north-east distant three miles. At 7 a.m. the Vene-
rable, opening Cabrita point, made the signal for seeing the
French ships, which were then warping further in shore, to get
completely under the protection of the batteries that defended
the road. The signal was immediately made by the Csesar, to
engage the enemy on arriving up with him in succession.
   Of the defensive means possessed by the French admiral, we
will now endeavour to give a description. The road of Algeziras
is open and shallow, with sunken rocks in different parts of it.

Upon a point of the coast, at the distance of rather more than a
mile and a half south-east of the town, stands Fort Santa-Garcia  ;



and, about the third of a mile from the town, in the same direc-
tion, another tower or fort.    Directly in front of the point on
which this latter tower stands, and at the distance from it of
rather more than a quarter of a mile, is a small island, named
Isla-Verda, upon which is a battery mounting seven long
24-pounders.    About, three-quarters of a mile, or rather less,
to the northward of the town, stands the battery of San-Iago,
mounting five long 18-pounders, and close to the northern ex-
tremity of this battery, near the water's edge, is the tower of
Almirante, but in what manner mounted we are unable to say.
Tliere are also several forts on the northern shore of Gibraltar
bay, but at too great a distance to afford any protection to the
road of Algeziras, except perhaps by throwing shells.         The
road, however, is admirably protected by the flanking fire of the
San-Iago and the island batteries. Tliere were also, at this time
in the road,14 heavy gun-boats   a description of force peculi-
                                 ;



arly advantageous, where an enemy is likely to be baffled by
light and variable winds, and perplexed with an intricate and
dangerous navigation.
   In a road thus defended by nature and art, M. Linois moored
his three ships in line ahead thus   :the Formidable abreast, or
nearly abreast, of the San-Iago battery, the Desaix about 500
yards astern and to the southward of the flag-ship, and the
Indomptable about the same distance astern of the Desaix. The
Muiron took her station a little within and to the northward of
Isl.i-Yerda.   Three of the gun-boats were anchored about a
quarter of a mile to the south-west of the last-named island      ;


four others between Fort San-Iago and the Formidable, and the
remaining seven off a point of land about half a mile to the north-
ward of the tower of Almirante.
