 100          BRITISH   AND FRAXCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1801.

   At about 7 h. 50 m. a.m., just as the Pompee with a fresh
breeze had shortened sail and hauled round Cabrita, tl>e battery
at the point fired several shot at her, but without effect.  At
8 a.m. the Venerable lay becalmed at a considerable distance
on the starboard bow of the Pompee and in a few minutes after-
                                     ;


wards that ship and the Audacious, who was on the Pompee's
starboard quarter, passed the Venerable to windward. At this
time the Caasar and two remaining ships were upwards of three
miles astern using every endeavour to get up.
  Hauling close up for the tower of Santa-Garcia and the island
battery, the Pompee, at 8 h. 30 m., received the fire of the
Muiron, and successively of the Indomptable, Desaix, and For-
midable. It now falling calm, the Pompee fired a broadside at
each of the two latter ships and at 8 h. 45 m. dropped her
                                ;


 anchor so close to the Formidable's starboard bow that the
hitter's buoy was on the Pompee's off or starboard side.        As
soon as she had clewed up her sails, and tautened her springs, the
Pompee opened a heavy fire upon the Formidable but who very
                                                   ;



soon, by warps from the shore, increased her distance.
   At about 8 h. 50 m. the Audacious, and in five minutes after-
wards the Venerable, baffled also by the want of wind, dropped
their anchors the one abreast of the Indomptable, but not so
              ;


near as her captain wished, and the other, from unavoidable
causes, at a still greater distance from the quarter of the Formi-
dable.   A furious cannonade now ensued between these three
British ships, and the four French ships, gun-boats, and bat-
teries.  In less than half an hour from its commencement, and
when the Formidable, for some cause or other, had suspended,
not to say ceased, her fire, the Pompee, owing to the strength
of the current, swang with her head towards her opponent's
broadside. In this situation, the Pompee could only ply her
starboard guns at the batteries of San-Iago and Almirante, and
at the gun-boats moored in front of them  ;
                                             all of which kept up
in return a very destructive fire.
   At about 9 h. 15 m. a.m. the Caesar got up; and, as she made
the signal for the ships to anchor in the best manner for mutual
support, dropped her anchor ahead of the Audacious. After
sending a spring on board of the Venerable, which ship was on
her starboard quarter, the Caesar opened her heavy broadside
upon the Desaix. The Hannibal, about five minutes afterwards,
got also into action, anchoring within hail of the Caesar, and
rather upon her starboard bow. The Spencer, baffled as much
as any of her companions and to leeward of the whole of them,
