1801.]        BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.               95

  We are unable to state what officers of the navy gained steps
in rank   but undoubtedly those serving on shore with the army,
          ;


and on board the    flotilla upon the Nile and the neighbouring

lakes, well merited the promotion they may have obtained.   The
following is the handsome manner in which the commander-in-
chief of the army speaks of their exertions: "The labour and
fatigue of the navy have been continued and excessive it has not
                                                         ;



been of one day or of one week, but for months together. In the
bay of Aboukir, on the new inundation, and on the Nile, for 160
miles, they have been employed without intermission, and have
submitted to many privations with a cheerfulness and patience
highly creditable to them and advantageous to the public
service."
  We   cannot dismiss the Egyptian campaign without observing,
that all the benefit derived from its successful termination, the
removal of the French army from Egypt, might have been at-
tained 18 months before, had Lord Keith not refused to ratify the
treaty entered into by Sir Sidney Smith. What blood and trea-
sure would then have been saved Treasure, indeed, could it but
                                      !



be known how the British government was defrauded by jobbers,
contractors, and agents of one sort or the other.  At all events,
the infraction of the treaty of El-Arich, how much soever others
may have suffered by it, eventually benefited him, whose con-
sent alone had been wanting to carry that treaty into effect.    We
now gladly quit the shores of Egypt and its military warfare, to
resume our narrative of naval operations and, in particular, to
                                             ;




give some account of the proceedings of the French and their
allies the Spaniards at the opposite extremity of the Mediterra-
nean.

                  British   and Franco-Spanish iieets.

  Very soon after the conclusion of the treaty of Luneville, the
              France began using every means in his power to
first consul of
detach from England the few powers that were on friendly
terms with her.    With Naples .Buonaparte succeeded but,    ;



although by the intrigues of his brother Lucienwith the famous
Godoy, the Prince of Peace, Spain was induced, on the 27th of
February, 1801, to declare war against her neighbour, and al-
though a powerful French army had crossed the Bidassoa,
Portugal remained firm. The subsequent irruption of a Spanish
army into the province of Alentejo, however, altered the tone of
the prince regent; and on the Gth of June, at Badajos, the
latter concluded a treaty of peace with Spain, and agreed, not
