102               BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                [1801.

s'echouer."   1
               The French ships did so but, the wind suddenly
                                                     ;



falling,they were a long time in wearing. The Formidable
brought up again with her larboard broadside to the enemy but               ;


the Desaix grounded upon a shoal directly in front of the town,
and the Indomptable upon one to the north-east of Isla Terda,
with her larboard bow presented to the sea.
  Desirous to take advantage of this state of the French ships,
as well as of the breeze which had just sprung up, the Cfesar,
making the signal for the squadron to do the same, cut her
cables and, wearing round the Audacious and Venerable, soon
          ;



brought her broadside to bear upon the Indomptable into whose       ;



bows, with her foretopsail to the mast, the Caesar poured several
destructive fires. At a little before noon the Audacious, having
likewise cut, passed between the Caesar and Indomptable and             ;



shortly afterwards the latter's foretopmast came down. The
Venerable and Spencer, in compliance with the signal, cut their
cables, and strove their utmost, but with little effect on account
of the calm that immediately ensued, to co-operate in the attack
upon the southernmost French ships and island battery. The
Venerable, indeed, had her mizentopmast shot away just as she
was in the act of wearing. The Pompee after remaining nearly
an hour without being able, on account of her position, to bring
a gun to bear, had also cut, and was now being towed out of
action by the boats of the squadron.
  Scarcely had the Audacious, in her new station, brought her
broadside to bear with effect, ere the calm frustrated her inten-
tions ;
       and that ship and the Cassar, without the power of re-
turning a shot, lay exposed to a heavy fire from the guns of the
island battery. To add to their perilous state, both ships were
drifting upon the reef that was near it. Again, a fine breeze
raised the hopes of the British ; but no sooner had the ships
prepared to take advantage of it. than it again died away.
   Frustrated thus, as much by the unfavourable state of the
weather as by the serious opposition experienced from the
enemy's batteries and shipping, and being prevented, by the
destruction of most of the boats and the absence of the remainder
in towing the Pompee, to storm the island, as had been intended,
with the marines of the squadron, Sir James Saumarez, at 1 h.
35 m. p.m. (by the Caesar's log, but at 1 h. 20 m. by the log of the
Audacious), discontinued the action. The Caesar and Audacious
then cut their cables and springs, and, profiting by a light breeze
                   1
                       Victoires et Conquetes, tome xiv.,
                                                          p. 160.
