                SIR         JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS.                          97
1801.]

Belley and his six newly-made French sail of the line. These
nine ships, with a Spanish squadron of six more under Yice-
admiral Don Juan Joaquin de Moreno, were then, as a case
more urgent than that of despoiling Lisbon, to carry a reinforce-
ment to Egypt    not, we believe, wholly from Toulon, but prin-
                    ;




cipally  from the Neapolitan ports of Ancona, Manfredonia,
Brindisi, and Otranto   at which several ports there were as-
                                  ;




sembled, in the month of June, as many as 32,000 French
troops.
  On the 13th of June, Bear-admiral Linois, with his squadron
of three sail of the line and one frigate, having on board a small
detachment of troops, under Brigadier-general Devaux, put to
sea from the road of Toulon, bound to Cadiz off which pork      ;




by the  last advices, were cruising two British 74s only, and

occasionally but one.    On the next day the French admiral
chased away some British frigates, left cruising in the gulf of
Lyons by Bear-admiral Sir John Borlase Warren who, with               ;



the Benown and squadron, was then about to enter tne hai -
bour of Yaletta, island of Malta, to revictual, preparatory to
his pursuit of M. Ganteaume, of whom he had just received intel-
ligence.   Delayed by head winds, M. Linois was not able, until
towards the end of the month, to double Cape de Gata.
   On the 1st of July the French ships, then working against a
strong west-north-west wind, were seen from Gibraltar where                   ;



the only British vessel of war at anchor was the 14-gun polacre-
sloop Calpe, Captain the Honourable George Heneage Lawrence
Dundas. On the 2nd M. Linois captured a small British brig
employed as a packet to Minorca and on the 3rd, when more
                                                  ;


than two thirds through the Straits, the French admiral was so
fortunate as to capture, but not until she had resorted to every
manoeuvre to escape which her skilful commander could devise,
the 14-gun brig-sloop Speedy, Captain Lord Cochrane. Learn-
ing now that Cadiz was blockaded by a superior force, Bear-
admiral Linois, with his squadron and prizes, bore up for Alge-
ziras.   On the 4th, at about 10 a.m., he rounded Cabrita point in
sight of the Calpe at her anchorage, and at 5 p.m. came to with
his ships in front of the town of Algeziras, still in full view of the
British at the rock.
  At this time the British squadron stationed off Cadiz consisted
of the

   Gun-sliip.
                                      (   Rear-admiral (b.) Sir James Saumarer.
    80    Uesar .       .     .   .

                                      | Captain Jahleel Brenton.
  VOL, III.                                                               H
