96                  BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                             [1801.


only to cede to her the conquered province of Alentejo, but
                                                            to

expel the English from the ports of Portugal. The effect pro-
duced upon Buonaparte by this separate concession to Spain,
and the measures taken by England to prevent either France or
Spain from reaping any solid advantage from their sinister at-
tempts upon her ancient ally, we shall advert to hereafter.
   Some time in the month of March, by his secret and corrupt
influence at the court of Madrid, Buonaparte got King Charles
to make over to France, either by sale or hire, six sail of the line
lying in the port of Cadiz and which ships were to be there
                                    ;


manned by French crews, and then, as was understood, to co-
operate with a Spanish naval force, in entering the Tagus and
sacking Lisbon. This was a plan which, as far as respected the
British property in the port, a French admiral, of whom honour-
able mention has already been made in these pages, recom-
mended as a feasible enterprise for the Brest fleet, when it
                                                                           "
put to sea in the beginning of the year 1795.         I propose,"
                      " to conduct the fleet of the
says M. Kergnelin,                                    republic to
Lisbon, to anchor in front of the capital, within musket shot of
the city and the palace of the king to send ahead of the fleet
                                                   ;


a frigate with a flag of truce, announcing that the fleet of the
republic comes not to do harm to the Portuguese, although the
allies and slaves of England, but to require that all the British
storehouses and ships be forthwith delivered up, under a penalty
of having the city rased to its foundation. This enterprise would
gain for France 200 millions, in cash or British merchandise                                    ;



England would receive a terrible shock, which would produce
bankruptcies and a general consternation       our fleet, without   ;



being buffeted about the sea, would return to Brest, loaded
                                           1



with riches and covered with glory and France would once;


more astonish Europe with a new triumph. 2
   We formerly noticed the return to Toulon from Leghorn of
three ships of Eear-admiral Ganteaume's squadron, on account
of the paucity of hands to work them. 3 These three ships, the
Indomptable and Formidable, of 80 guns, Captains Moncousu
and Lalonde, and Desaix, of 74 guns, Captain Christy-Palliere,
along with the ex-Tenetian 38-gun frigate Muiron, Captain
Jules-Francois Martinencq, were placed under the orders of
Eear-admiral Burand-Linois, with directions to proceed to Cadiz,
and there effect a junction with Eear-admiral Bumanoir-le-
  1
    Alluding to the storm from which the       2       For the original, see Appendix, No. 4.
Brest fleet suffered so much in January,       3       gee p. 73.
1795.   See vol, i., p. 262.
