1801.]        SIR   JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS.               101

could not get much nearer than was sufficient to expose her tc
the heavy fire of the Spanish batteries, from which, towards the
latter part of the action especially, hot shot, as well as shells,
were thrown.
  At a few minutes past 10 a.m. the Hannibal was hailed by the
Caesar, but no person on board the former appears to have heard
distinctly what was said. Soon afterwards a boat with an officer
came on board the Yenerable, bearing the rear-admiral's orders,
that Captain Ferris should "go and rake the French admiral;"
no doubt with the intention of supporting the Pompee, who just
at that time was in a very critical situation.
  Cutting her cable and casting herself by the spring, the Han-
nibal immediately made sail to the northward with what wind
there was, still blowing from the west-north-west.           Having
stood, in the direction of Rio Palmenos, into a quarter less six,
the Hannibal tacked for the Formidable      ;
                                               but about 11 a.m.,
just as she had arrived abreast of the tower of Almirante, and
was in the act of hauling more closely in shore, to cross the hawse
of the French ship, nearly within hail of whom she then was,
the Hannibal took the ground.       In this distressing situation,
the Hannibal with as many of her foremast guns as would bear,
opened a fire upon the Formidable, and directed the remainder,
with evident effect, upon the tower of Almirante, battery of San-
    o, and gun-boats.   The ship appearing to swing a little, an
effort was made, by letting go an anchor and heaving a strain

upon it, to get her afloat, but without effect. With some diffi-
culty, owing to the signal-halliards having been shot away, the
Hannibal apprised the admiral of her situation; and shortly
afterwards one boat came from the Caesar and another from the
Yenerable.    Finding that no assistance could be afforded by
them, Captain Ferris sent back the Yencrablc's boat, and sent
the Cajsar's officers and men in one of the Hannibal's cutters,
their pinnace having been sunk alongside by a shut.
  The light westerly breeze, by which the Hannibal had so gal-
lantly steered to her present unfortunate situation, appears to
have been very partial, as the other British ships all the while
lay nearly becalmed.   Soon after the Hannibal had grounded,
however, a light breeze sprang up from the north-cast. Hoping
by this means to get further from the reach of the British ships,
some of whom were observed preparing to take advantage of it
and approach nearer, M. Linois threw out the signal for his sln'ps
to cut and run themselves on shore, " de couper les cables pour
