110          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                 [1801.


their effect, had not Eear-admiral Dumanoir been on the spot to
unite his solicitations with those of Eear-admiral Linois. Thus
pressed, Admiral Massaredo, on
                                the afternoon of the 8th, ordered
Vice-admiral Don Juan Joaquin de Moreno, with five Spanish
and one Franco-Spanish sail of the line, three frigates, and a
                                          for a start by the land-
lugger, to anchor in the outer road ready
wind of the next morning. This movement was seen by the
                                                     off the port.
Superb, then with the Thames and Pasley cruising
  How these vessels happened to be here, when the Superb had
been ordered to follow the squadron to Algeziras, may require
some explanation. About three hours after the latter ship, still
                                             the rearmost of the
lying nearly becalmed, had lost sight of
                                      vessel from the Mediterra-
ships with Sir James, an American
nean gave information that she had seen a French squadron of
three sail of the line come out of Algeziras bay, and had left the
                                                  out of the Straits,
ships well towards the African shore, standing
Inclining to think that the French admiral,
                                             if   met
                                                  by        Sir
                                                        James,
as the American master had no doubt would be the case, would
run direct for the Mediterranean considering that, by the delay
                                  ;



which had unavoidably happened, the Superb had lost all chance
of joining the admiral in time to be of any service and having
                                                        ;




not the slightest apprehension of the result of a contest at sea
between three French and six British sail of the line, Captain
Keats .pxdged it to be the wisest plan to return off Cadiz, and,
with his 74, frigate, and brig, watch the motions of the immea-
surably superior force at anchor in that port.
   On the 9th, at daylight, the Franco-Spanish squadron put to
sea, all except the Saint-Antoine 74, which either got aground,
or, not being able to fetch out, came again to an anchor.  The
remaining five sail of the line, three frigates and a lugger, made
sail towards the Gut, preceded by the Superb, Thames, and

Pasley.   Early in the afternoon the brig came crowding into
Gibraltar with the signal for an enemy flying      ;
                                                     and at 3 p.m.,
while the Spanish squadron was hauling round Cabrita point,
the Superb and Thames, by signal from the Caesar, came to an
anchor in Gibraltar bay. Shortly afterwards the squadron from
Cadiz was seen from the rock to cast anchor in the road of
Algeziras. On the next morning the San Antonio, or, as her
recent change of ownership entitled her to be called, Saint-
Antoine, anchored with Eear-admiral Moreno's squadron.
   That the object of this reinforcement was to conduct in safety
to Cadiz the squadron of M. Linois was well known at the rock ;
and nothing could surpass the exertions of the British officers
