104                   BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.            [1801.


greater part of the guns that would bear, and had shot away her
fore and main masts, Captain Ferris ordered the firing to cease,
and the officers and men to shelter themselves in the lower part
of the ship. In a little while afterwards, or at about 2 p.m., the
Hannibal's colours were hauled down, and were presently re-
hoisted union downwards whether by the British, because the
                                    ;



battery and gun-boats still continued their fire, or by the French,
who had come on board to take possession, in order to           the
                                                                decoy
Calpe', then approaching from Gibraltar, we are not prepared to
          at all events Captain Dundas, deceived
say   :
                                                       by the signal, sent
his boats, with a laudable promptitude, to save the Hannibal's
people. The boats were detained by the French ; and, after firing
several broadsides at the enemy's
                                   shipping and batteries, the
Calpe' returned to Gibraltar.
    The loss and damage sustained generally
                                                     by the British
 squadron were very serious. The Csesar had her master (Wil-
 liam Grave), six seamen, and two marines
                                               killed, her boatswain
 f George William
                   Forster,) 17 seamen, one boy, and six marines
 wounded, and one master's mate (Eichard Best) and seven sea-
 men missing probably drowned in one of her boats. The main-
                  ;


 mast had been shot through in five
                                         places, and all her other
 masts and yards were more or less
                                        injured several shot had
                                                   :

 also entered her hull.   Her two barges, large cutter, launch,
and jollyboat, had been cut to
                                  pieces and her small cutter or
                                            ;


pinnace, as already stated, had been sunk as it lay alongside the
Hannibal.     The Pompee had her master (Robert
                                                         Roxburgh),
 one midshipman (Mr.
                        Steward), 10 seamen, and three marines
killed, three lieutenants (Richard Cheeseman, Arthur
                                                          Stapledon,
and Thomas Innes), two masters mates
                                                (Messrs. Curry and
Hilher), one midshipman (I. Hibberd), 53
                                                   seamen, and 10
marines wounded. In point of
                                  damages, the Pompee was even
in a much wor.se state than the
                                  Csesar, not having a mast, yard,
spar, shroud, rope, or sail, but which was more or less
                                                              injured
by the enemy's shot had it not been, indeed, for the aid of
                            :



several small craft and boats from
                                     Gibraltar, the Pompee would
probably have shared the fate of the Hannibal. The
                                                             Spencer
had one first-class volunteer
                                  (R. Spencer) and five seamen
killed, one midshipman (Joseph
                                    Chatterton), 23 seamen, and
three marines wounded. Her
              '
                                principal damages were confined
        ng8 ing and Sails The Venerab le had one midshipman
                                -

AV fr
(William Gibbons) and seven seamen
                                          killed, two midshipmen
(Silvester Austin and Martin
                                 Collins), 20 seamen, and three
marines wounded.       The Hannibal had her
                                                    captain's clerk
