1801.]   SIR JAMES SAUMA.REZ IN            THE GUT OF GIBRALTAR.           113

to   make sail ahead, and attack the sternmost of the enemy's
ships, none of which were then visible.  In an instant all sail
was set upon the Superb and, passing- the Caesar, she regained
                                ;


a sight of the hostile squadron.At 10 p.m. the wind freshened,
and the Caesar and A'enerable were then the only ships of her
own squadron seen by the Superb. At 11 p.m. the Superb had
so increased her distance, that the Caesar was full three miles
astern, and the Yenerable no longer visible. At 11 h. 20 m. p.m.,
observing a Spanish three-decker, the Eeal-Carlos, about a point
before her larboard beam, and a three and a two decker, the
San-Hermenegildo and Saint- Antoine, in a range with and on
the larboard side of the former, the Superb shortened sail and,        :


when about 300 or 350 yards from the Eeal-Carlos, opened a
fire upon her from her larboard guns.              At the third broadside the
Real-Carlos, whose foretopmast had just been shot away, was
observed to be on fire. The Superb instantly ceased engaging
the Spanish ship; and the latter continued her course before the
wind.   Shortly afterwards the Eeal-Carlos came suddenly to
the wind, and then dropped astern in evident confusion, she and
her two nearest companions firing their guns in all directions.
     The total destruction of her first opponent being now no longer
doubtful, the Superb again made sail, and at 11 h. 50 m. p.m.
came up with and brought to action the Saint-Antoine. After
a contest of about 30 minutes, part of which was close and
fought upon a wind, the French 74 ceased firing, and hailed
repeatedly that she surrendered.             Shortly afterwards the Caesar
and Venerable came up in succession, and, deceived by the Saint-
Antoine's broad pendant, which, owing to the halliards having
been shot away and got entangled amongst the rigging, still re-
mained flying, fired into her as did also the Spencer and Thames.
                                    ;



In a few minutes the discovery was made that the Saint-Antoine
had already surrendered, and the firing at her ceased.
   At about 15 minutes past midnight the Eeal-Carlos blew up,
but not until she had fallen on board of, and set in a similar
blaze, the San-Hermenegildo, who, having in the dark mistaken
the Eeal-Carlos for a foe, had been engaging her; and who, in
another quarter of an hour, exploded also. Thus, melancholy
to relate, out of 2C00 men composing the united crews of these
Spanish first-rates, two officers and 36 men that got on board
the Superb, and 2 02 who were fortunate enough to reach tho
Saint-Antoine and some of the other ships of their 8quadron,'
were all that escaped destruction.
                  1
                      Victoires ct Conquetes, tome xiv.,p. 16C.
  VOL.   III.                                                     1
