1801.]
                        SIR   JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS.                             107

lead the squadron, "it was not intended he should anchor" at
all, much less anchor where there was less water than his ship
drew nor, as far as we can learn, was any signal to anchor made
         ;


until the Caesar herself was compelled to bring up. The latter     1




                                       "              "
ship    represented to have anchored
        is                               immediately after the
Audacious whereas there was an interval of at least 25 minutes.
                    ;



The French, indeed, describe the attacking force as composed
of two divisions of three ships each and so far they are right.
                                                         ;



  As to the plate given to illustrate the action, it is so full of
mistakes, and, in many parts, so totally at variance with the
letter-press, that we shall pass it by as unworthy of any further
remark.            We cannot, however, leave unnoticed the statement,
         "
that,            at about twelve o'clock, Captain Ferris hauled down his
colours and surrendered ;" nor the charge against the Hannibal's
                                    "
captain, conveyed in these words      Nothing could exceed the
                                                     :



decision and intrepidity of Captain Ferris, although the result
of his manoeuvre  was unfortunate it is, however, clue to Sir
                                                         :



James Saumarez to state, that the squadron did not withdraw
from action until the Hannibal had surrendered. A contrary
assertion is made in the narrative of Captain Ferris an unac-                      ;


countable error, proving that the most correct officers may some-
times be deceived, and the more to be lamented in this
                                                       instance,
as bearing the sanction of an official document."                      >



  Our complaint against Captain Ferris is, that his account of
the time, which intervened between the " ships
         "                                           driving out of
the bay and the surrender of the Hannibal, is not
                                                        very clearly
expressed.   The captain might with propriety have stated, that
the Hannibal did not strike her colours until nearly half an hour
after Sir James Saumarez, from unavoidable causes
                                                       undoubtedly,
had discontinued the action and made sail for Gibraltar. Such
was the fact. Not a word is there to contradict it either in the
rear-admiral's official letter, or in the Caesar's log but there is            ;



ample proof in confirmation of it, as wc will now proceed to
show. No time whatever, beyond the day of the
                                                        month, and
that only by inference, appears in the letter of Sir James Sau-
marez    but the log of the Caesar says: "At 12 h. 30 m. made
             ;



signal for Hannibal being aground ;" that is, about half an hour
according to our contemporary, after the Hannibal had " sur-
rendered." " At 1 h. 35 m.," says the                    "
                                                           action
                                        flag-ship's log,
ceased ;" which, be it observed, is even fifteen minutes later than
the log of the Audacious dates the same incident whereas the               :




                                  i
                                      Brcnton, vol. iii., p. 35.
