108            BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                        [1801.

" Narrative " of
                  Captain Ferris fixes the time of the Hannibal's
surrender at " nearly two o'clock."
   A French account now before us also says: "L'Annibal,
echoue pres du Formidable, essuyant en meme temps le feu de
la batterie Saint- Jacques et celui du vaisseau francois, amena
son pavilion a deux heures du soir." l Of the four logs we have
been able to get a sight of, the only one which notices the sur-
render of the Hannibal is the Yenerable's. That says " At two,           :



observed the Hannibal cease firing and hoist the colours re-
versed." But there is another witness to the truth of Captain
Ferris's statement.    The Calpe in her log says " At half-past      :




one, the Hannibal grounded under a very heavy battery, and
was much shattered. At 4, she hauled her colours down, which
the enemy kept again flying. Sent boats to save the people,
which were all detained. Standing off and on, ships and forts
firing on us.   Half-past 6 bore up for the bay, and found the
squadron at anchor, and the Csesar and Pompee in the mole."
The mistake in the Calpe' s absolute time is of little consequence,
provided the relative time corresponds and that it does tole-
                                                    ;



rably well. It is clear, also, that the squadron had all anchored
at Gibraltar when the Calpe returned, and the Caesar and Pom-
pee had even gone into the mole. So much, therefore, for the
                                              ' '
assertion of Captain Brenton, that     the squadron did not with-
draw from action until the Hannibal had surrendered ;" as well
as for the "unaccountable error" of Captain Ferris in having,
in a manner the least offensive that can well be imagined, stated
the contrary.
   On the following morning, the 7th, Captain Brenton of the
Caesar, was despatched with a flag of truce, to endeavour to
negotiate the exchange of Captain Ferris, his officers and men.
After some correspondence between Sir James and the French
admiral, the latter permitted Captain Ferris, with all his officers
and wounded men, to depart on their parole and granted the     ;


same privilege to Captain Lord Cochrane and the officers of the
Speedy brig.
  Thus it stands in the first edition of this work, and so we yet
believe the fact to be but the brother of the officer who carried
                           ;


the message, says thus   " Sir
                               James Saumarez sent his captain
                               :



over to Algeziras with a flag of truce to the French admiral
proposing an exchange of prisoners, which M. Linois declined,
alleging that it was not in his power to consent to such a
measure, without first receiving the sanction of the minister of
                  1
                      Victoires et Conqugtes, tome xiv.,
                                                           p. 161.
