1801.]   SAILING OF BRITISH SQUADRON FROM GIBRALTAR.                    Ill

and men to get their damaged ships ready for sea. The Pompee
was in too bad a state to leave any hopes that she could be got
ready in time her men, therefore, were turned over to assist in
              :

                                   "
the repairs of the other ships.      The Cassar," says Captain
Edward Brenton, "lay in the mole, in so shattered a state, that
the admiral gave her up also and, hoisting his flag on board
                                         ;


the Audacious, expressed bis intention of distributing her men
to the effective ships. Captain (Jahleel) Brenton requested that
his people might remain on board as long as possible, and, ad-

dressing them, stated the admiral's intentions in case the ship
could not be got ready they answered, with three cheers, All
                               :
                                                                    '




hands to work day and night, till she is ready.' The captain
ordered them to work all day, and watch and watch all night               ;



by these means they accomplished what has, probably, never
been exceeded. On the 8th they warped her into the mole and
shipped the lower masts on the 9th they got their new main-
                                   ;


mast in. On the the 11th the enemy showed symptoms of sailing,
which only increased, if possible, the energies of the seamen.
On Sunday the 12th, at dawn of day, the enemy loosed sails;
the Caesar still refitting in the mole, receiving powder, shot, and
other stores, and preparing to haul out.
   "At noon the enemy began to move; the wind was fresh
from the eastward, and as they cleared the bay, they took up
stations off Cabrita point, which appeared to be the rendezvous,
on which they were to form their line of battle. At one o'clock
the enemy's squadron was nearly all under way; the Spanish
ships Beal-Carlos and Hermenegildo, of 112 guns each, off
Cabrita point the Cassar was warping out of the mole. The
              :




day was clear the whole population of the rock came out to
                  ;


witness the scene the line-wall, mole-head, and batteries were
                      ;


crowded from the dockyard to the ragged-staff; the Cassar's
band playing, Come cheer up my lads, 'tis to glory we steer ;'
                  '




the military band of the garrison answering with Britons strike
                                                            '




home.' The effect of this scene it is difficult to describe Eng-:


lishmen were proud of their country and foreigners, who beheld
                                                  ;


the scene, wished to be Englishmen.       So general was the en-
thusiasm among our gallant countrymen, that even the wounded
men begged to be taken on board, to share in the honours of the
                          1
approaching conflict."
   At 3 p.m., just as, in her way out of the mole she passed
under the stern of the Audacious, the Csesar rehoisted the flag
of Sir James
               Saumarez, and made the signal for the squadron
                           i
                               Brenton, vol. ili., p. 39.
