1801.J
                SIR   JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS.            105

(David Lindsey), 68 seamen, one lieutenant of marines (James
D. Williams), and five private marines killed, one lieutenant
(John Turner), her master (John Wood), one midshipman
(William Dudgeon), 44 seamen, one lieutenant of marines
(George Dunford), and 14 private marines wounded, and six
seamen missing, who had probably gone overboard with one of
the masts. The Audacious had eight seamen killed, and one
lieutenant of marines (Robert I. W. Day), 25 seamen, and six
private marines wounded her damages were not material. This
                            :




makes the total loss in the British squadron, 121 killed, 240
wounded, and 14 missing.
   The loss incurred by the French and Spaniards amounted,
according to their own published accounts, on the part of the
latter, to 11 men killed, exclusive of several wounded, and on
the part of the former, to 306 killed, including the captains,
Moncousu and Lalonde, besides 280, or rather, if the Madrid
Gazette account is to be relied on, nearly 500 wounded. The
French ships suffered considerably in their masts and hulls         ,



and five Spanish gun-boats were sunk, and two materially
damaged. The forts, also, received considerable injury from
the fire of the British ships. How then would it have been,
had the weather permitted the latter to bestow that fire with
full effect ?
   One would suppose it difficult to raise a doubt as to the
gallantry, whatever may have been thought of the prudence, of
the attack upon Algeziras; yet the French, in their version of
the affair, made it appear one of the most brilliant exploits which
their navy had ever performed. It was no less than that " three
French sail of the line and a frigate were attacked by six English
sail of the line and a frigate  that the English were completely
                                ;


beaten, and took refuge in Gibraltar, leaving in the possession
of the French the Hannibal, of 74 guns and that another ship
                                          ;


of the line struck, but was afterwards towed off by a great
number of English ^un-boats."
  Fortunately for the cause of truth, the Spaniards, as well as
the French, had a little self-love to gratify.  "The action,"
says the Madrid Gazette-Extraordinary, "was very obstinate
and bloody on both sides; and likewise on the part of our
batteries, which decided the fate of the day."    And, in another
        " The fire of our batteries was so
place    :                                 hot and well supported,
 that the enemy suffered most from them and particularly, it is
                                              ;

 to that of San-Iago wo owe the capture of the English .-hii> lor.
                                                              ;




 her bold manoeuvre, of attempting to pass between the French
