1801.]
          SAILING OF SPANISH SQUADRON FROM CADIZ.                       109

marine at Paris, to whom he had despatched a courier imme-
diately after the termination of the action." At all events both
                                               1




Captain Ferris and Lord Cochrane, with their respective officers,
the sole object, we believe of Captain Jahleel Brenton's mission,
were in England in the month of August.
  It would be almost superfluous to state the result of the
court-martial which was afterwards held upon Captain Ferris,
and the late officers and ship's company of the Hannibal. The
court, of which Bear-admiral Holloway was president, sat on
board the Gladiator, in Portsmouth harbour, on the 1st of
September. After the most honourable acquittal that a brave
man could desire, Captain Ferris had his sword returned to him
                                                             "
by the president, with the following address    Captain Ferris,
                                                       :



I have great pleasure in returning this sword to you, as I feel
assured, if ever you have occasion to unsheath it again, it will
be used with the same gallantry which you so nobly displayed
in defending his majesty's ship Hannibal."
  We formerly mentioned the transfer by Spain to France, for
immediate employment, of six ships of the line at anchor in
Cadiz harbour.- (in the 13th of June, in the morning, the two
French 40-gun frigates Libre and Indienne, after a few hours'
chase by the 74-gun ships Venerable and Superb, the only
British force then off the port, anchored in the road of Cadiz
from Brest, having on board Bear-admiral Dumanoir-le-Pelley,
Commodore Le Bay, and a number of other officers, as well as
of seamen, for the Franco-Spanish ships equipping in the port.
The remainder of the crews, not already arrived by these and
other conveyances, were daily expected from Brest, Lorient, and
Eochefort.
  The first step taken by Bear-admiral Linois, after getting his
grounded ships and prize afloat, and which, notwithstanding the
belief of Sir James Saumarez, that "the whole were rendered
entirely unserviceable," he soon did, was to send an express
overland to Admirals Massaredo and Dumanoir at Cadiz, im-
ploring them to come or send a squadron to his assistance,
before the British could get their ships repaired for renewing
the attack; adding, in his second despatch to the Spanish com-
mander-in-chief: "I have just received advice that the enemy
intends burning us at our anchorage it is in your power to
                                           :




save for the republic three fine ships of the line and a frigate, by
merely ordering the Cadiz squadron to come and seek us."
  Even these urgent calls would in all probability have failed in
          1                                        2       See p. 96.
              Brenton, vol. iii., p. 36.
