106                BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                           [1801.

rear-admiral's ship, the Formidable, and the shore, made hei
take the ground and, notwithstanding the utmost exertion to
                        ;




get her afloat, it was found impossible to move her then the                  :



fire   from the battery very soon dismasted her, and compelled
her to strike."
  We must, however, do the French the credit to state, that it
was their soldiers and artillerymen, disembarked from the ships,
that occasioned the Spanish batteries to b& so admirably served
as they were towards the middle and latter part of the action.
AVith respect to the supposed striking of the Pompee, it may be
explained by the fact, as noted down in that ship's log, that her
colours were shot away, but they were quickly rehoisted. "We
might be disposed to remark upon the ostentatious manner in
which the victory of "three unaided French ships of the line
over six British" was announced at the Paris theatres, but
that we should perhaps be reminded of what had occurred,
nearly two years before, upon an occasion of much less import-
ance, at one of the principal theatres of London.
   Being aware of the relationship which subsisted between a
contemporary and the distinguished officer who was the flag-
captain of Sir James Saumarez in this action, we naturally
turned to our contemporary's account, in the expectation of
seeing that account so fully and accurately drawn up, as to
afford some ground for the assertion, that none but a naval
officer can write a naval history.    For such we take to be the
meaning of the following passage in Captain Brenton's Preface                             :

" Other writers on the
                          subject, not having the advantage of
professional knowledge, have fallen into errors natural enough
to them, but which prove their incompetency to the task they
had undertaken. It has indeed been the misfortune of our
service, that its history has generally been written by men
who, however qualified by                classical   education, have                wanted
those indispensable requisites which can only be acquired by
professional habits, local knowledge, and constant attention:
hence it has arisen that many important events connected with
the navy have been improperly stated." &C. 1
  This writer informs us, that the Venerable "was directed by
the admiral to anchor between the batteries of Algeziras and
Green Island." 2 Had the " local knowledge w of Captain Hood
been of a par with our contemporary's, the Venerable would
have bought experience at a dear rate but, according to the
                                                         ;


letter of Sir      James Saumarez, although Captain Hood was to
         i                                           2
             Brenton, vol. i., p. vii.                   ibid., vol. iii., p. 33.
