114              BRITISH         AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                         [1801.


  The loss on board the Superb, in her action with the Saint-
Antoine (for in her short one with the Beal-Carlos, she does
not appear to have sustained any), amounted to one lieu-
tenant (Edmund Waller) and 14 seamen and marines wounded,
most of them severely. The Saint- Antoine, in crew and super-
numeraries, had on board 730 men, of whom about 200, in-
cluding those saved from one of the two three-deckers, were
Spaniards. The loss on board the Saint-Antoine, except that
Commodore Le Eay was wounded, has not been enumerated                                     ;


but from the half an hour's close cannonade of so well disci-
plined a ship as the Superb, it must have been very severe.
                                                                                          1



The latter, accompanied by the Carlotta, Calpe, and Louisa,
remained with the Saint-Antoine, while the rest of the squadron
stood on in chase.
   During- the latter part of the night it came on to blow very
hard and on the 13th, at 4 a.m., the only ships in company
        ;



with the Caesar were, the Spencer far astern, the Venerable and
Thames ahead, and the French 80-gun ship Formidable, at some
distance from and upon the lee bow of the latter, standing
towards the shoals of Conil, with a light air from off the land.
Sail was immediately made by the Caesar and her three con-
sorts   but the easterly wind soon afterwards failing, the Vene-
        ;


rable and Thames, who were nearer in shore, were the only ships
in a situation to chase with any prospect of success; and, as the
Formidable had only jury topmasts, they came up with her fast.
At 5 2 a.m. the French ship hoisted her colours, and at 5 h. 15 m.
commenced firing her stern-chase guns at the Venerable but                          ;



the latter, for fear of retarding her progress, did not fire in return
until five or six minutes afterwards, when the light and baffling
airs threw the two ships broadside-to, within musket-shot of
each other.
  At 5h. 30m. the Venerable's mizen topmast was shot away;
and at 5 h. 45 m. the Thames, by signal, hauled up and poured
a raking broadside into the Formidable; who fired from her
stern-chasers in return, but without effect. At 6 h. 45 m., by
which time the French 80 and British 74 had gradually ap-
proximated to a pistol-shot distance, the mainmast of the latter
came down by the board. Her standing and running rigging
being also cut to pieces, the Venerable fell from alongside her
  i
      Although when   first   fitted   (1S25),   ton, from an idea that the ship was crank,
carrying 24-ponnders on her main deck,           having induced the admiralty to issue an
the Superh mounted only 18-pounders in           order for the exchange,
her action with the Saint-Antoine, her             2             "
                                                      Misprinted seven" in the Gazette,
previous commander, Captain John Sut-
