1801.]      Abergavenny's tender and santa maria.                          123

overboard and, with his sword in his mouth, followed by the
             ;



greater part of his crew similarly armed, swam to, boarded, and
after a stout resistance carried, the Spanish schooner.
   In this splendid little affair, the tender lost two seamen killed
and five wounded and of her small crew, numbering originally
                           :



but 45, many were too sick to attend their quarters. Four or
five, also, who were in the sick-list, heedless alike of the doctor's
injunctions and their own feeble state, had, when the boarding
call was made, sprung over the side with their comrades          and   ;


one or two of them nearly perished, in consequence of their
inability to struggle with the waves.       The loss on board the
Santa- Maria, as acknowledged by her officers, amounted to five
men killed and nine wounded, including her commander, who,
poor fellow, had both his hands carried away by a grape-shot.
   It took some hours ere the tender, with the help of the
prize's anchors and cables (her own having parted in a gale four
days before), was again got afloat and, before that could be
                                              ;



effected, the 12-pounder, then in a disabled state, was obliged to
be thrown overboard. The Spanish inhabitants having collected
along and opened a fire from the shore, and the prize having
grounded too fast to be got off, Lieutenant Fitton set the Santa-
Maria on fire but not until he had taken out of her what was
                 ;


most wanted for his own vessel, and had landed as well the
living of her crew, for whom, being without a 'tween-decks, he
                       —
had no room, as from a respect to the scruples even of an
enemy    —the five that were dead. Having thus destroyed a Spanish
garda-costa of very superior force, the Abergavenny's tender
sailed back to Jamaica, and on the fourth day reached Black
Biver with scarcely a gallon of water on board.
  On the 2Gth of January, at 8 a.m., in latitude 45° north, longi-
tude 12 west, the British 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Oiseau,
Captain Samuel Hood Linzee, fell in with and chased the French
36-gun frigate Dedaigneuse, bound from Cayenne to Eochefort
with despatches. The Oiseau continued the pursuit alone until
noon on the 27th when, Cape Finisterre in sight, the British
                       ;



18-pounder 36-gun frigates Sirius and Amethyst, Captains
Richard King and John Cooke, joined in the chase. But so
well did the Dedaigneuse maintain her advantage, that it was
not until 2 a.m. on the 28th, that the Sirius and Oiseau got near
enough to receive a fire from her stern-chasers.
  After a running fight of 45 minutes, and a loss of " several"
men killed and IT wounded, among the latter her captain (not
named in the         official   letter) and   fifth-lieutenant,   the French
