1801.]   SIR   JAMES SAUMAREZ IN THE GUT OF GIBRALTAR.        115

opponent.     Profiting by the circumstance, the Formidable
continued to stand on but owing to the almost calm state of
                        ;



the weather, increased her distance so slowly, as to give consider-
able annoyance to the Venerable by the fire from her stern-
chasers. At 7 h. 50 m. a.m. the Venerable's foremast fell over
her side, and almost at the same instant the ship herself,
driven by the strength of the current, struck upon the rocky
shoals off San-Pedro, situated about 12 miles to the southward
of Cadiz. Having thus effectually rid herself of this her principal
opponent, the Formidable continued her course to the north-
ward, under all the sail she could spread, in the hope to reach
Cadiz before the enemy's two remaining line-of-battle ships
in sight, the nearest of which, the Caesar, was still at a con-
siderable distance, could approach within gun-shot.      At 8 a.m.,
just as the mizenmast of the Venerable had shared the fate of
the other masts, the gig of the Caesar, with Captain Brenton
on board, reached the ship (over which the stern-chase shot of
the Formidable were still flying), with discretionary orders to
Captain Hood, to withdraw his crew and destroy the Venerable,
should the combined squadron, which appeared so inclined,
 evince an intention of attacking her and the Thames had been
                                      ;



ordered to close for the purpose of receiving the people. Captain
 Hood, however, requested the rear-admiral to depend upon his
 exertions to save the Venerable, notwithstanding her critical and
 almost hopeless situation. Just as the Caesar's boat had quitted
the Venerable on her return, the appearance of the Audacious
 and Superb to the southward induced the Spanish admiral to
 haul up for Cadiz, where he and his ships were soon safely
 moored.
   In her smart encounter with a 6hip so decidedly superior to
 her in force as the Formidable, the Venerable had her master
 (John Williams), 15 seamen, and two marines killed, one lieu-
 tenant (Thomas Church), her boatswain (John Snell), two mid-
 shipmen (Ccorge Massey and Charles Pardoe), 73 seamen, and
 10 marines wounded. The Thames does not appear to have had
 a man hurt and we do not believe that any of the Formidable's
                :




 shot even struck her. The loss sustained by the Formidable
 herself, according to her captain's official report, amounted to
 20 men killed, or mortally wounded, but the remaining wounded
 M. Troude lias seemingly omitted to enumerate. The Sabina
 frigate had also one man killed and five wounded   ;
                                                       but whether
 from the fire of the British ships, or of two unfortunate threo-
 deckers that blew up, it is difficult to ascertain.
