116                 BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                       [1801.


  The British had now leisure to devote the whole of their
attention to the only remaining object, the safety of the Vene-
rable.    Fortunately for her gallant                     officers   and crew, the
weather continued calm and at 2 p.m., by the assistance of the
                                  ;



Thames who had anchored near, and of the boats of the Caesar
and Spencer, the Venerable was hove into deep water. The
Thames then took the dismasted 74 in tow, and stood with
her towards the flag-ship in the offing. At 6 p.m. the Vene-
rable cast off the Thames, and was taken in tow by the Spencer,
who made sail with her towards the Gut. Having cleared away
the wreck of her masts, the Venerable now got up a main top-
gallantmast for a foremast, the driver-boom for a mainmast, and
a studdingsail-boom for a mizenmast. Soon after dark a main-
topgallant-sail was set for a foresail, and before daylight on the
14th a mizentopsail for a mainsail.       So that by 8 a.m., the
Venerable had made herself sufficiently manageable to cast off
the ship of the line that was towing her, and take again to the
frigate.  Even this state of comparative seaworthiness had not
been accomplished without great exertions on the part of her
officers and crew   yet a contemporary states that, at sunset on
                          ;



the preceding day, which was little more than five hours after
she lay a dismasted hulk upon the rocks, the Venerable was
"in such efficient order as to be fit for action had an enemy
            1
appeared."
  For the service rendered to the country, by the prompt and
effective manner in which the combined squadron under Vice-
admiral Moreno and Rear-admiral Linois was chased and
attacked by the British squadron under Bear-admiral Sir James
Saumarez, the latter, with the captains, officers, and crews of the
ships under his orders, received the thanks of parliament and                ;


Sir   James himself,  for his conspicuous gallantry in going in
pursuit of a force so decidedly superior, was created a knight of
the bath, with a pension of 1200Z. per annum. The first-lieu-
tenant of the Caasar, Bhilip Dumaresq, was made a commander.
The first-lieutenant of the Superb and Venerable, the two ships
that bore the brunt of the action, were Samuel Jackson and
James Lillicrap and they also received that step in rank which
                      ;



was so justly their due.
   The Saint-Antoine, which, on account of the miserable fate
of the two Spanish three-deckers, was the only trophy carried
off by the British, became afterwards added to the navy of
her captors but being an old 74 of only 1700 tons, the ship
                ;


                              1
                                  Brenton, vol. iii., p. 42.
