122           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1801

of,a small key near Point Canoe on the Spanish Main. Here
Lieutenant Fitton errected a tent, landed his men and stores,
and, after making the best disposition his means woidd admit to
resist an attack, examined the state of his vessel. The main
beam, on which the gun rested, was found to be badly sprung.
This was irreparable. The vessel's rigging was decayed, and
he had no cordage her sails were split and torn, and he had
                    ;


neither canvas, nor even sail-twine. Being, however, a man of
resources, Lieutenant Fitton reduced and altered the shape of
the sails, the seamen using for twine what they unra veiled from
the remnant pieces. He then rigged the tender as a lugger, and
re-embarked his men, gun, and the few stores he had left.
  In this ineffective state, the tender bore up for Carthagena    ;



her commander intending to coast down the Main to Porto-
Bello, in the hope of being able to capture or cut out some
vessel that might answer to carry his crew and himself to
 Jamaica. On the 23rd of January, early in the morning, as the
 tender was hauling round Cape Eosario, a schooner was dis-
 covered, to which she immediately gave chase. The schooner,
 which was the Spanish garda-costa Santa-Maria, of six (pierced
 for 10) long 6-pounders, 10 swivels, and 60 men, commanded by
 Don Josef Corel, a few hours only from Carthagena, bore down
to reconnoitre the lugger. The latter having her gun below, and
as many of her men hid from view as the want of a barricade
would permit, the garda-costa readily approached within gun-
 shot.   Although he could have no wish to contend with so
powerful an adversary, Lieutenant Fitton could not resist the
 opportunity of showing how well his men could handle their
 12-pounder. It was soon raised up, and was discharged re-
peatedly, in quick succession, with evident effect.
   After about 30 minutes' mutual firing with cannon and
musketry, the Santa-Maria sheered off, and directed her course
for the isle of Varus, evidently with an intent to run on shore,
Her persevering though one gun opponent stuck close to her,
plying her well with shot, great and small but the tender was
                                           ;




unable, as her commander wished, to grapple the schooner,
because the latter kept the weather- gage. At length the Santa-
Maria grounded; and Lieutenant Fitton, aware that, if the
schooner landed her men in the bushes, no attempt of his people
would avail, eased off the lugger's sheets, and ran her also on
shore, about 10 yards from the Santa-Maria.    The musketry of
the latter as she heeled over greatly annoying the tender's men,
who had no barricades to shelter them, Lieutenant Fitton leaped
