118            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                    [1801.


alongside of her opponent, the Caesar abandoned the combat,
bore up in confusion, hauled on board her larboard tacks, and
joined the Venerable, to whom the Thames was affording suc-
cour.  It remained still to fight the Superb, who was on the
larboard bow of the French ship but the English ship bore up,
                                          ;




passed under the lee of the Formidable out of gun-shot, and
rejoined the other vessels. At 7 o'clock in the morning Captain
Troude was master of the field of battle. He got upon deck
the remainder of the shot, sufficient still for another hour's
action refreshed his gallant crew, who had so well seconded
       ;



him, and repaired his rigging his sails were in tatters, the
                                      ;


land-wind had ceased, and he found himself becalmed, within
gun-shot of the English squadron, the boats of which were
occupied in giving assistance to the Venerable. This ship had
now lost her mizenmast, and the current drove her upon the
coast.  At 10 o'clock, the wind having freshened, the Thames
attempted to take the Venerable in tow but not being able to
                                                   ;



get her afloat, she was wrecked between the Isle of Leon and
                             1
the point of San-Boche."
  The French government believed,              or affected to believe, all
this fanfaronade, and therefore could do no less than reward the
Formidable's   commanding officer.            This was done forthwith    ;



and, from a very young capitaine de fregate, M. Amable-Gilles
Troude was promoted to a capitaine de vaisseau, by commission
dated on the 14th of July, 1801, the very day on which, with
the aid of his pen, if not of his sword, he had added so greatly
to his own and his country's renown.



                Light Squadrons and Single Ships.

   On the 3rd of January, the British 38-gun frigate Melpomene,
Captain Sir Charles Hamilton, being off the bar of Senegal, the
latter resolved, with the concurrence of Lieutenant-colonel
Frazer, the commandant of the garrison of Goree, to attempt to
carry by surprise a French 18-gun brig-corvette and an armed
schooner at anchor within it in order, by their means, as vessels
                                 ;


of a less draught of water than the frigate, to get possession of
the battery that commanded the entrance to the river, and
eventually of the settlement itself.
  Accordingly, at 9 h. 30 m. p.m., five boats, containing 55
volunteers from the Melpomene, five from the crew of a trans-

               T For the original extract, see Appendix No. 5.
