1801.]
             THE MERCURY AND A FRENCH CONVOY.                 119

port in company, and Lieutenant Christie and 35
                                                     men from the
African corps, being 96 in all, placed under the orders of Lieu-
tenant Thomas Dick, assisted by Lieutenant William Palmer,
and by Lieutenant William Yyvian of the marines, quitted the
Melpomene upon the sendee intrusted to them. Having passed
in safety the heavy surf on the bar with the flood-tide, also the
battery at the point, without being discovered, the boats, at
11 h. 15 m., arrived within a few yards of the brig when the
                                                       ;




latter, by a single discharge of her two bow-guns, killed Lieu-
tenant Palmer and seven men, and sank two of the best boats.
Notwithstanding this, the three remaining boats pulled along-
side of, boarded, and, after a 20 minutes' severe contest, carried,
the French brig-corvette Senegal, of 18 long 8 and 12 pounders
(the latter carronades probably) and about
                                              60 men, commanded
by Citizen Eenou.
  In the mean time the schooner had cut her cable, and run for
protection nearer the battery the fire from which, and from
                                ;



some musketry on the southern bank of the river, frustrated
every attempt upon the former, although Lieutenant Dick had
turned the guns of the brig against her. Having effected as
much as he could, Lieutenant Dick cut the cables of the brig,
and made sail with her down the river but, owing to the ebb
                                          ;



tide's having made, and no one on board being acquainted with
the navigation across the bar, the Senegal grounded. After
several vain attempts to get off the prize, Lieutenant Dick and
his party quitted her and, with the three boats, succeeded in
                       ;



making his way to the ship, across a tremendous surf, and under
a heavy fire of grape-shot and musketry from the adjoining
batteries. The brig afterwards sank up to her gunwales, in the
quicksand on which she had grounded. The loss sustained by
the British in this spirited, although but partially successful
affair, amounted to one lieutenant (William
                                              1
                                                'aimer), one lieu-
tenant of marines (William A'yvian), one midshipman (Robert
Main), six seamen, one marine, and one corporal of the African
corps killed, one master's mate (John Hendric,) one surgeon's
mate (Eobert Darling), 10 seamen, one corporal and four
privates of marines, and Lieutenant Christie of the African
corps wounded; total, 11 killed and 18 wounded.
   On the 6th of January the British 26-gun frigate Mercury,
Captain Thomas Itogers, cruising in the gulf of Lyons, fell in
 with a convoy of about 20 sail of vessels, bound from Cette to
 Marseilles, under the escort of two or three French gun-boats.
 The weather being nearly calm, Captain Rogers despatched his
