1801.]
                      GARLAND AND ECLAIR.                   121

at the anchorage, the   Garland ran the Eclair on board, and
Lieutenants Mackenzie and Peachey, with 30 men, boarded and
carried the French schooner in the face of the batteries.
  This gallant exploit was not performed wholly without loss,
the British having had one seaman and one marine killed, and a
sergeant of marines and two seamen wounded. In defending
herself, which she appears to have done in a very
                                                   manful way,
the Eclair lost one seaman killed, two drowned, and her captain,
first and second lieutenants, and six men wounded. The schooner
had recently   sailed from Eochefort; and, although mounting

only four guns, was pierced for, and, being 145 tons, was
                                                          well
able to carry, 12 guns, the number she afterwards mounted in
the British service.
  Late in the month of December, 1800, the British 8-gun
schooner Active, Acting-lieutenant Michael Fitton, having re-
turned to Port Eoyal from a long cruise, needed a thorough
repair. To employ to advantage the intervening time, Captain
Henry Yansittart, of the Abergavenny 54, of which ship the
Active was the tender, allowed Lieutenant Fitton to transfer
himself and crew to one of the Active's prizes, the late Spanish
privateer N.-S. de los Dolores; a felucca of about 50 tons,
mounting one long 12-pounder on a traversing carriage, with a
screw to raise it from the hold when wanted for use. Having
embarked on board of her, and 6towed as well as he could his
44 officers and men, Lieutenant Fitton, early in January, 1801,
sailed out oc a cruise upon the Spanish Main.
  In her way along the coast, for every part of which her com-
mander was a pilot, the tender, whose rig and appearance were
an admirable decoy, destroyed two or three enemy's small
craft such as, although not worth sending in, were precisely
         ;



the kind of vessels which had recently been committing such
serious depredations on West India commerce. It may be
observed here, that small, swift-sailing, armed vessels, properly
commanded and appointed, are the only description of cruisers
which can operate with effect against the hordes of tiny, but
well-manned, and, to a merchant-vessel, formidable privateers,
that usually swarm in the West India seas. The Active herself
had perhaps raptured or destroyed more of these marauders
than any frigate upon the station and it need not be urged at
                                    ;


what a comparatively trifling expense.
  A succession of stormy weather, and the leaky state of the
 felucca's deck,   by which chiefly 22 of the men had been made
 sick, induced   her commander to steer for, and take possession
