1801.]   SIR       JAMES SAUMAREZ IN THE GUT OF GIBRALTAR.      117

never quitted Portsmouth after she arrived there. By way of
perpetuating an acknowledged error in the official letter of
Captain Keats to Sir James Saumarez, the Saint-Antoine, both
in Steel's lists and in the navy-office books, continued, and in the
latter still continues to be called the San-Antonio.
   Although from a desire to be impartial we invariably, if in
our power, consult the accounts on both sides of the question,
and are frequently enabled to extract, even on the subject of
British naval history, much useful information from an account
drawn up by a Frenchman or Spaniard, the best French account
we can find of the proceedings of the combined squadron under
Vice-admiral Moreno and Bear-admiral Linois is so amusingly
extravagant, that, if only as a relief to the dry matter-of-fact
detail of these pages, we are induced to subjoin a translated
extract: "At 4 o'clock in the morning, he (Captain Troude)
perceived in his wake four vessels which he knew were enemies      :




they were, in fact, a part of the English squadron the Caesar,
                                                            :




commanded by Admiral Saumarez, the Venerable, Superb, 1 and
frigate Thames.      The brave Troude prepared for action, and
strengthened his lower batteries by men from those of the
quarter-deck and forecastle. He was soon overtaken by the
Venerable and Thames the first discharged her broadside into
                               :




his larboard quarter, and the Formidable bore up to close this
adversary a most spirited combat ensued, yard-arm and yard-
               :




arm and frequently at no greater distance than the spunge of
     ;


the gun. The French captain ordered three round-shot to be put
into each gun. The Thames cannonaded him astern, but the
hitter's stern-chasers replied to her fire.  The two other enemy's
ships (now comes the inventive part of the story) successively
arrived up and, not being able to double the Formidable to
                   ;




windward, they took their stations upon her larboard quarter.
One of the first broadsides of the French ship carried away the
Venerable's mizentopmast, and soon afterwards her mainmast         :




the English vessel bore up but Troude followed her in this
                                      ;



movement to rake her astern, at the same time that he can-
nonaded the Caesar, who, finding herself close ahead of the
Venerable, could not return the fire not a French shot was
                                                   :




lost.   In this position the Venerable lost her foremast. Troude
now directed the whole of his fire at the Caesar, whom he closed
as much as possible.       After an engagement of half an hour,
 although the English ship, being able to carry more sail, ran
 past the Formidable and obliged the latter to manoeuvre to keep
                           i
                               The Spencer is here meant.
