1801.]               SIBYLLE AND CHIFFONNE.                       131

 been the extent of the loss on the British side. The
                                                        ship proved
to be   an English merchant-vessel but, as the French had all
                                            ;



quitted her and taken the crew with them, no particulars could
be obtained. Two men were found dead
                                              upon her decks, and
several are supposed to have been drowned in
                                                     attempting to
escape from the British when they boarded.
   On the 19th of April, at 8 h. 30 m. a.m., the British 38-gun
frigate Sibylle, Captain Charles Adam, observing signals flying
on St. Anne's island, one of the Seychelles, hoisted French
colours and at 9 a.m., having rounded the
         ;
                                                 island, discovered
in Mahe roads, close in
                           shore, a frigate with her foremast out,
accompanied by several small craft. The Sibylle immediately
backed her main topsail, cleared for action, and got
                                                         springs on
the anchors she then filled, and set the foresail. At 10 a.m.
             :



the French 36-gun frigate Chiffonne,
                                         Captain Pierre Guieysse,
fired a shot and hoisted her colours.        At 10 h. 15 m. a.m.,
having passed through a -winding and intricate channel formed
by various dangerous shoals, and discoverable only by the change
of colour in the water as seen
                                  by a man stationed at the mast-
head, the Sibylle anchored within about 200 yards of the French
frigate; not being able to get nearer, on account of a shoal that
lay on the Chiffonne's larboard or outermost bow.
   At 10 h. 25 m. a.m., having dropped her best bower under foot,
so as to bring her best broadside to bear, and substituted
                                                            English
for French colours, the Sibylle
                                    opened her fire, receiving in
return a fire from the Chiffonne, as well as from a
                                                            battery
erected in a raking position on the
                                        neighbouring shore. The
cannonade continued with tolerable spirit until 10 h. 42 m. a.m.,
when the Chiffonne struck her flag, cut her cable, and drifted
upon a reef. While an officer and party went to take possession.
the Sibylle veered away her cable, so that her broadside
                                                              might
bear upon the battery, which still continued its fire. No
                                                             sooner,
however, did a lieutenant and a few of the Sibylle's men land
upon the beach, than the battery also struck its colours.
   At the surrender of the frigate, a great number of her crew
took to the boats and escaped on shore and the men at the
                                                    ;


battery also escaped. The latter was found to consist of four of
the frigate's forecastle guns, mounted on a
                                              plank platform, de-
fended by fascines, and provided with a furnace for
                                                      heating shot.
The Sibylle's force in guns and men has already appeared. Of  1


the latter, she had only two seamen killed, and one
                                                       midshipman
slightly wounded.     The Chiffonne appears to have been armed
                          1
                              See vol. il., p 36b
