132           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.             [1801.


the same as the generality of French 36-gun frigates, and had a
complement of 296 men; of whom the Sibylle's fire killed 23,
and wounded 30. About 100, including those stationed in the
battery, escaped the remainder were made prisoners.
                 :




  Although the Chiffonne was certainly no match for the Sibylle,
the dangerous circumstances under which she had been
approached and attacked entitle the officers and crew of the
British frigate to a considerable share of credit. The Chiffonne
with 32 banished Frenchmen on board, had sailed from Nantes
on the 14th of April, 1800, and had      since, agreeably to her
orders, landed them upon the Seychelles.   The prize was a fine
frigate of 945 tons, and was afterwards purchased for the use of
the British navy in which, under her French name, she classed
                 ;



as a 12-pounder 36.
   The British 14-gun brig-sloop Speedy, Captain Lord Cochrane,
during one of her cruises in the Mediterranean, had so annoyed
the Spaniards by cutting up their coasting trade, that the
government despatched armed vessels in pursuit of her from
several ports. Early in April one of the seekers of the British
brig, the 32-gun xebec Gamo, by means of closed or hanging
ports, decoyed the Speedy within hail, and then, drawing them
up, discovered her heavy battery.       Against a vessel that
appeared to mount 36 guns, and to be numerously manned, the
Speedy, whose 14 guns were only 4-pounders, resolved not to
risk an engagement until she had tried the effect of a ruse. To
escape was out of the question, as the xebec sailed two feet to
the Speedy's one. The Speedy therefore passed for a Danish
brig of war, and, in addition to the colours at her gaff-end,
exhibited on the gangway a man dressed in a Danish officer's
uniform who also, in the short interchange of hailing that
        ;


ensued, conversed in Danish, or, which was the same thing, in
what passed for Danish.
   Not quite satisfied as to the national character of the Speedy,
the Gamo sent her boat with an officer. The latter, before he
well got alongside, was informed, kindly informed, that the brig
had lately quitted one of the Barbary ports and he was at the
                                             ;


same time reminded, of what he well knew, that a visit would
undoubtedly subject the Spanish ship-of-war to a long quarantine-
This was enough and, after a few mutual salutations and
                     ;



wavings of the hand, the two vessels parted company one     ;


glad at having escaped the plague, the other equally glad, one
might suppose, at having escaped capture. The truth is, how-
ever, that the Speedy's officers and crew were all impatience to
