1801.]
                           SPEEDY AND GAMO.                       103

combat their superior foe     ;
                                      and Lord Cochrane promised them,
if ever he met her again,     as he had no doubt he should, to give
full scope to their wishes.
  On the 6th of May, at daylight, being close off Barcelona, the
Speedy descried a sail standing towards her. Chase was given         ;



but, owing to light winds, it was nearly 9 a.m. before the two
vessels got within mutual gun-shot. The Speedy soon discovered
that the armed xebec approaching her was her old friend the
Gamo. Being then close under the latter's lee, the former
tacked and commenced the action.        The Speedy's fire was
promptly returned by her opponent, who, in a little while,
attempted to board but, the instant she heard the command
                       ;



given, the brig sheered off.  The attempt was again made, and
again frustrated. At length, after a 45 minutes' cannonade, in
which the Speedy, with all her manoeuvring, could not evade the
heavy broadsides of the Gamo, and had sustained, in con-
sequence, a loss of three seamen killed and five wounded, Lord
Cochrane determined to board. With this intent the Speedy
ran close alongside the Gamo and the crew of the British
                                          ;


vessel, headed by their gallant commander, made a simultaneous
rush from every part of her upon the decks of the Spaniard.
For about 10 minutes the contest was desperate, especially in
the waist but the impetuosity of the assault was irresistible
          ;
                                                                     :



the Spanish colours were struck, and the Gamo became the
prize of the Speedy.
  The Speedy's gun-force has already been stated at 14 long
4-pounders. Her number of men and boys at the commence-
ment of the action was 54. Of these the brig lost, in the board-
ing-attack, only one seaman killed, her first-lieutenant, Eichard
William Parker (severely, both by musketry and the sword), her
boatswain and one seaman wounded making, with her loss by
                                              ;



the cannonade, three killed and eight wounded. The Gamo
mounted 22 long Spanish 12-pounders on the main deck, with
                                 "
eight long eights and two          heavy carronades," probably
24-pounders, on the quarter-deck and forecastle.       Her crew
amounted to 274 officers, seamen, boys, and supernumeraries,
and 45 marines, total 319 of which number she had her com-
                                  ;


mander, Bon Francisco de Torris, the boatswain, and 13 men
killed, and 41 men wounded.
   The Gamo's was a force which was enough to alarm, and, in
abler hands, might easily have subdued, Bach a vessel as the
Speedy. A crew of 280 or 300 was the lowest number of men
that a ship, of the evident force and size of the Gamo, could be
