            BORDELAIS WITH CURIEUX AND CONSORTS.              12S
1801.]

under them, close alongside of the Bordelais.      The floating
wreck buoyed up all those brave men except two midshipmen,
Messrs. Spence and Auckland, and five seamen         who conse-
                                                     ;



quently perished, with the whole, if not the greater part, of the
brig's wounded.
  Nothing could exceed the gallantry of Captain Radelet, unless
it was the pusillanimity of his two brother-officers, Captains
Raybaun and Haymond and whose vessels, on account of the
                         ;



three hours' delay which had taken place in endeavouring to
save the crew of the prize, in shifting the prisoners, and in re-
paring the Bordelais' rigging and sails, effected their escape.
These two French brigs and schooner had been fitted out by
Victor Hugues at Cayenne, principally to intercept the outward-
bound AVest India fleet. It is but fair to mention, that a French
" Etat
        general de la Marine," of 1803, does not contain the
names of the two gentlemen represented to have been the
commanders of the Mutine and Esperance. The probability
therefore is, that they were not officers belonging to the French
navy.
     On the 18th of February,   at about 2 p.m., latitude 28° 24'
south, and longitude 18° 17' west, the British 18-gun brig-sloop
Penguin (sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two long-sixes),
Captain Robert Mansel, standing to the south-east with a fresh
breeze at north, discovered in the west-north-west three warlike-
looking ships apparently in chase of her. At 2 h. 45 m., finding
the private signal not answered, the brig, having previously
shortened sail, cleared for action, to be ready to receive the
leading ship which had edged away towards her, and, showing
              ;



12 ports of a side, appeared to be a corvette of at least 20 guns,
while her two consorts, apparently armed merchantmen, and
either her convoy or prizes, kept their wind.
  At 3 h. 45 m. the corvette, as if not liking the Penguin's
appearance, tacked and rejoined her consorts; whereupon the
Fenguin tacked also and stood after them. At 5 h. 10 m. p.m.
the Penguin arrived nearly within gun-shot of the sternmost
ship, when the corvette, firing a shot, hoisted French colours, as
did the others. All three ships then formed in line, and bore
 down for the brig's larboard quarter. The Penguin again tacked
 to close, and presently afterwards received and returned the fire
 of the three ships as they passed in succession. Being desirous to
 obtain the weather-gage, the Penguin stood on and at 6 h. 1 5 m.
                                                 ;




 p.m.,having got into the wake of the French ships, the brig a
 third time tacked.
