128                      LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                            [1801.


  Although her net complement, including 18 boys, was 261,
the Phoebe had sailed from Cor-k seven men short, and since
manned and sent to Gibraltar, one recaptured brig with seven,
and one detained brig with eight men so that her crew on        ;



board was reduced to 239. Of this number the Phoebe had
only one seaman killed, and her first-he utenant (John Went-
worth Holland), master (Thomas Griffiths), and 10 seamen
wounded.
  The loss on board the Africaine was truly dreadful. The
totalnumber of persons on board of her were 715 of which                      ;



number 315 composed the ship's regular crew, and the 400 were
troops and artificers of various descriptions. Of her 715 in crew
and supernumeraries, the Africaine had Commodore Saulnier,
one brigadier-general, two captains in the army, eight petty-
officers, three surgeons (actually killed
                                            in the cockpit, while

dressing the wounded !) and 185 seamen, marines, artillerymen,
troops, and artificers killed, and one general of division (Desfor-
neaux), one general of battalion, one general of cavalry, one aide-
de-camp, one major of battalion, her first-lieutenant, or capitaine
do fregate (Jean-Jacques Magendie, in the head), five other lieu-
tenants, two volunteers, two lieutenants of grenadiers, one lieu-
tenant of foot, three petty officers, and 125 seamen, marines, artil-
lerymen, troops and artificers wounded making a total of 200;




killed, and 143 wounded, the greater part of them mortally.        A
return to this effect, signed by Captain Magendie, was delivered to
Captain Barlow but the former stated in the return, that it pro-
                             ;



bably fell short of the real loss sustained, especially in killed.
   The force of the Phoebe, whose guns were in number 44, has
already appeared.
                     1
                       That of the Africaine consisted, according
to the return signed by Captain Magendie and subjoined to the
official letter, of 26 long 18-pounders on the main deck and 18

long 8-pounders on the quarter-deck and forecastle total 44
                   2                                                              :




guns also. If her eight 32-pounder carronades gave the Phoebe
a slight preponderance in broadside weight of metal, the decided
                                       of her regular crew, gave
superiority in number of men, even
the Africaine a still greater advantage in that very essential
point an advantage which would have
            ;
                                         been in the proportion
of nearly three to one, could the whole of the Africaine's crew
and supernumeraries, in the event of boarding for instance, have
been in a situation to act. But, as a combat to be decided by
great guns only, an allowance is requisite,
                                            and a considerable
        i
                See vol. ii., p. 104.
                                                 " IS de               "
                Misprinted in the London Gazette         9," instead of 18 de 8."
        2
