 124             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.               [1801.

frigate, when about two miles from the shore near Cape Belem,
hauled down her colours. The only British ship struck by the
shot of the Dedaigneuse was the Sirius and she did not have a
                                          ;


man hurt, but had her rigging and sails a trifle damaged, and her
mainyard and bowsprit slightly wounded. The Dedaigneuse, a
fine little frigate of 897 tons, was afterwards added to the British

navy under the same name as a 12-pounder 36.
   On the 29th of January, at noon, the British 24-gun ship
Bordelais, Captain Thomas Manby, while cruising to windward
of Barbadoes, discovered, in chase of her to windward, two men-
of-war brigs and a schooner. The Bordelais immediately short-
ened sail to comply with their wishes and, at sunset, the French
                                      ;


national brigs, Curieux, of 18 long 8-pounders and 168
                                                               men,
Captain Georges Badelet, and Mutine, of 16 long 6-pounders
and 156 men, and the schooner Esperance, of six 4-pounders and
52 men, got within gun-shot. At 6 p.m., having wore round, the
Bordelais was enabled to bring the Curieux to action, at about
10 yards' distance. Scarcely had the Bordelais opened her
                                                              heavy
metal upon the Curieux, than the latter's two consorts aban-
doned her.    When it was known that the Bordelais was a ship
of 625 tons, mounting twenty-two 32-pounder carronades and 2
long nines, with a complement of 195 men, the surprise will be
great that the Curieux alone should, for 30 minutes, sustain an
action with her and that, too, at a distance so favourable to a
                  ;



carronade-battery.
  On being taken possession of after having hailed that she had
struck, the Curieux's deck was found, as might indeed be ex-
pected, strewed from end to end with the dying and the dead.
The captain had had both his legs shot off, and survived but a
few hours and the brig's killed and wounded, in the whole,
             ;


amounted to about 50. The Bordelais, on the other hand,
escaped with only one man killed, and seven wounded includ-  ;


ing among the latter Lieutenant Bobert Barrie, who did not quit
his quarters, Master's Mate James
                                    Jones, and Midshipman John
Lions.
  It was not in the killed and wounded only that the French
brig afforded proofs of the obstinacy of her resistance her hull
                                                         :



had been so pierced with shot, that, in about half an hour after
she was taken possession of, the Curieux was found to be
sinking. Already had 120 prisoners been received from her            ;

and every exertion was now made to save the wounded. So
zealous were Lieutenant Archibald Montgomery and his 20 men
in performing this service, that, at 8 p.m. the vessel foundered
