126            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE         SHIPS.           [1801.

  Immediately on this the corvette hauled to windward, and her
two friends or prizes astern bore away and steered different
courses one of these ships, however, soon afterwards hauled
         :




up again as close as she could lie. In a few minutes the
Penguin arrived nearly abreast and to leeward of this ship              ;

when the latter, relying upon her weight and size, steered for
the British brig's beam, with the intention of
                                               running her down-
Two or three heavy and well-directed broadsides from the
Penguin, poured in just as the ship approached near, caused
the latter to let fly her top-gallant sheets, and haul down the
French flag.
   Scorning to stay to take possession of so unworthy an antago-
nist, when a ship more than equal to herself remained to be
subdued, the Penguin stood on close hauled, and at about 7 h.
25 m. observed the corvette upon her larboard and weather
quarter. In five minutes afterwards, just as the brig was about
to recommence the engagement, her
                                        foretopmast came down           ;


and, to add to the misfortune, it fell over on the larboard side,
and temporarily disabled the fore-yard. Seeing the
                                                       unmanage-
able state of her opponent, the French corvette, at 7 h. 45
                                                               m.,
bore close down; and a spirited action ensued,
                                                   during which,
until towards the latter part when the
                                         Penguin managed to get
her starboard broadside to bear, the brig's
                                               foretopgallant-sail
and rigging frequently caught fire from the explosion of her
guns. Notwithstanding this, the Penguin maintained the con-
testwith so much vigour and effect, that, at 8 h. 30 m., the
French ship sheered off and hauled to the wind on the larboard
tack.
  After several attempts to wear in pursuit, the Penguin found
it impracticable ; and the corvette and her two consorts were
presently out of sight. Although the action had lasted so long,
the very high fixing of the corvette, some of whose missiles were
iron bars from eight inches to a foot long, occasioned the Pen-
guin's principal damages to be in her rigging and sails and,   ;


from the same cause, the brig's loss amounted to only one man
killed and a few wounded.     Having in the course of the night
repaired her rigging and got up another topmast, the Penguin,
at daylight on the 19th, again saw her three
                                                  opponents, and
chased them into the island of Teneriffe.
  For the sake of Captain Mansel, and the officers and crew of
the Penguin, we regret not to have succeeded in
                                                     discovering
the name and other particulars of the ship, which they had so
gallantly fought     and so   fairly beaten.   If the vessel   was a
