130           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1801


frigates Andromache, Captain         Pellew, and Cleopatra,
                                Israel

Captain Eobert Lawrie, were cruising of Punta de Mulas, on
the north-east coast of the island of Cuba, a convoy of 25
Spanish vessels, known to be richly laden, were seen at an
anchor in the bay of Levita, protected by three armed galleys,
or gun-vessels, armed with long 24 and 18 pounders. The two
captains considering it practicable to capture or destroy this
convoy by the aid of their boats, the latter under the command
of Captain Lawrie himself, at about 9 h. 30 m. p.m., proceeded
to execute the service.
  Soon after midnight the boats arrived within gun-shot of the
galleys, and were received, quite unexpectedly, with a heavy
and destructive fire of grape, langridge, and musketry. In spite
of this opposition, the British gallantly pushed on, and boarded
several of the vessels but from the heavy loss they sustained,
                            ;


could only bring off one of the galleys. That loss consisted of
the first-lieutenant of the Andromache (Joseph Taylor), one
master's mate (William M'Cuin), one midshipman (William
Winchester, both of the Cleopatra), and six seamen killed, and
12 seamen wounded. Some of the boats had also been sunk by
the enemy's shot. The loss among the Spaniards on board the
captured gun-vessel was nine killed and several wounded.
   On the 3rd of April, at daybreak, the British 18-pounder
36-gun frigate Trent, Captain Sir Edward Hamilton, while lying
at an anchor among the rocks off the isles of Brehat, discovered
a ship, with French colours flying, under the protection of an
armed cutter and lugger, making sail with the flood from the
anchorage of Brehat towards Plampoul.         The boats of the
frigate, under the orders of Lieutenant George Chamberlayne,
assisted by Lieutenants Eobert Scallon and John Bellamy, lieu-
tenant of marines, Walter Tait, and Mr. Thomas Hoskins, the
master, instantly proceeded to endeavour to secure the ship.
   With the seeming intention of defending what proved to be a
prize recently made, the French sent many boats from the shore    ;


and these, assisted by the lugger, took the ship in tow. The
intrepid advance of the Trent's boats, however, caused the
shore-boats and lugger to cast off the ship, and prepare to
defend themselves.  A  sharp conflict now ensued at the end of
                                                 ;



which the French lugger and boats, although protected by five
batteries, were subdued and chased upon the rocks.       Shortly
afterwards the ship was boarded by the first-lieutenant and the
lieutenant of marines which latter, however, lost his right leg
                        ;



on the occasion. This, with two seamen killed, appears to have
