1801.]
                    PHCEBE AND AFRICAINE.                     127

national corvette, she probably was one of those which Buona-
parte had sent to Cayenne or the Seychelles with banished per-
sons; but, supposing the ship to have been a privateer, her
evident size and force, and the knowledge that some of the
French privateers, cruising at this particular period, were a
match for a British 28-gun frigate, will prevent that from
operating as the slightest disparagement, to the Penguin's action.
  On the 19th of February, at 4 p.m., the British 18-pounder
36-gun frigate Phoebe, Captain Eobert Barlow, being about two
leagues to the eastward of Gibraltar, beating up for that port
with a light breeze at west, discovered on the African shore,
nearly abreast of the fortress of Ceuta, a strange ship under a
press of sail, steering directly up the Mediterranean. The
Phoebe, having her head to the northward, immediately tacked
and stood for the stranger who, however, made no alteration in
                           ;


her course. At 7 h. 30 m. p.m. the Phoebe, by her superiority
of sailing, closed the stranger upon the larboard quarter; and
the latter, finding an action inevitable, shortened sail. Having
done the same, and being unable from the darkness to discern
her colours, the Phoebe fired a shot over the strange ship, to
induce her to bring to. Almost immediately afterwards the
French 40-gun frigate Africaine, Commodore Saulnier, with 400
troops, six brass field-pieces, several thousand stands of arms,
and a great quantity of ammunition (but not "implements of
agriculture," as erroneously stated in the official letter), which
she had embarked at Eochefort (and, having sailed with and
since parted from the 36-gun frigate Begeneree, similarly
freighted, was conveying to Egypt), altered her course to port   :




and, as soon as she could bring her broadside to bear, dis-
charged it at the Phoebe, but with little or no effect.
  Having altered her course so as to keep parallel with her
opponent, and got quite near to her, the Phoebe poured in a
well-directed, and, as it proved, most destructive broadside.
The two ships with their heads to the northward, then con-
tinued the engagement within pistol-shot distance, until 9 h.
30 m. p.m. when the Africaine being nearly unrigged, having
          ;


five feet water in the hold, her decks literally encumbered with

dead, and the greater part of her guns dismounted, struck her
colours.   Her masts were all badly wounded, and, had there
been any swell, would have fallen over her side. The Phoebe's
masts were also much injured, and chiefly owed their stability
to the smoothness of the sea.     Her rigging and sails, too, were
scarcely in better plight than those of the Africaine.
