1801.]                  PHCEBE AND AFR1CA1NE.                   129

one too, for that which a mere confrontation of figures can
never explain, the lumbered state of the French ship's decks      ;

an inconvenience which the troops themselves, by their valour,
their mistaken valour, contributed to increase. Although their
musketry could be of little or no avail in the dark, yet, upon
the same erroneous principle that so augmented the loss among
the soldiers on board one of the British ships at Copenhagen,
they considered it as a point of honour to remain on deck and
be mowed down by scores.
   Circumstanced as he was, Commodore Saulnier acted as wisely
in endeavouring to avoid a contest, as, when it
                                                actually began,
did the officers, ship's company, soldiers, and all that were on
board the Africaine, heroically, in defending their ship until she
was reduced to a sinking state, and they to half their original
number all by the heavy, the searching, the irresistible broad-
             ;


sides of the Phoebe.
  With ships so damaged in masts and rigging, and with so
many prisoners on board. Captain Barlow had still a most
anxious duty to perform. To increase the difficulties of his
situation, the westerly breeze freshened.   For four days the
Phoebe and her prize persevered in working to windward but  ;


on the fifth day, having made very slow progress and feeling for
the sufferings of the wounded, Captain Barlow bore up for
Minorca. On arriving off the south end of Majorca, the two
frigates got becalmed and it was not until a fortnight after the
                         ;



action, that the Phoebe and Africaine dropped their anchors in
the harbour of Port-Mahon.
   For his gallantry and good conduct in capturing the Africaine,
Captain Barlow was most deservedly rewarded with the honour
of knighthood and the Phoebe's first-lieutenant, already named,
                    ;


was as justly promoted to the rank of commander. Her second
and third lieutenants were Frederick Bedford and Edmund
I
  Icy wood, and her lieutenant of marines, Thomas Weaver; of
allwhom, as well as of his officers and crew generally, Captain
Barlow in his official letter speaks in the highest terms.
  The Africaine, a fine new frigate of 1059 tons, was of course
purchased for the use of the British navy; and, having the
ports for the requisite number of guns on the main deck, became
classed as a 38-gun frigate.    Probably because there was an
Africa already in the British service, the name of the Africaine
was changed to Amelia; under which name the Phoebes prize
long continued to be an active cruiser.
      On the 22nd of March, while the British 12-pounder 32-gun
      VOL.   III.                                      k
