1801.]   BOATS OF THE MERCURY AND CORSO AT TREMITI.            135

siderably decreased on the port of the vessels and battery.
Encouraged, however, by a felucca of 12 guns and two gun-
boats that came to their assistance, the Spaniards recommenced
firing, and by 3 h. 30 m. p.m., had their 20-gun xebec and two of
their gun-boats sunk by the fire of the two brigs in a little
                                                      :


while another of the gun-boats shared the same fate. The tower
and the remaining three gun-boats continued to annoy the brigs
with their shot, until about 6 h. 30 m., when the fire of the tower
slackened. The Kangaroo soon afterwards cutting her cable to
get to a nearer position, the gun-boats fled and, by 7 p.m., the
                                                 ;


tower was completely silenced.
   The Kangaroo and Speedy continued until midnight to be
annoyed by a heavy fire of musketry from the shore but, in the
                                                      ;


mean time, the boats of the two brigs, under the orders of Lieu-
tenant Thomas Foulerton, first of the Kangaroo, assisted by
Lieutenant Benjamin Warburton, of the Speedy, and by mid-
shipmen the Hon. Archibald Cochrane, William Dean, and
Thomas Taylor, had succeeded in bringing out three brigs laden
with wine, rice, and bread. On the return of the boats from this
service, Lord Cochrane himself, with his wonted zeal, took them
under his command, and went in-shore again, in the hope of
bringing away more, but found all the remainder either sunk or
driven on the beach. It was fortunate for the tower, that the
ammunition of the two brigs was by this time expended, or the
two enterprising captains would have razed it to its foundation   ;


as indeed, only the day previous, they had the adjacent tower
of Almanara, mounting two brass 4-pounders.
  The loss of the British, in the attack upon this Spanish
convoy, consisted of one midshipman (Thomas Taylor), killed by
a musket-shot in one of the boats, and two lieutenants
                                                         (Thomas
Foulerton and Thomas Brown Thompson), seven seamen, and
one marine wounded all belonging to the Kangaroo,
                      ;
                                                        although,
as Captain Fulling handsomely acknowledges, the
                                                    Speedy, from
situation and distance, was equally exposed to the
                                                     enemy's fire.
At the demolition of the tower of Almanara, however, the
Speedy did not wholly escape, Lord Cochrane himself having
received a bruise, and been a little singed as were also two of
                                             ;


his men.
  The British 28-gun frigate Mercury, Captain Thomas
                                                       Rogers,
having on the 25th of May, while cruising in the Adriatic, cap-
tured a small vessel just out of Ancona, received
                                                   intelligence
that the late British bomb-vessel Bulldog, which about three
months before, under the command of Captain
                                                    Barrington
