1801.]
                       VICTOR AND FLfeCHE.                         143

ness and perseverance, proceeded to execute the remainder of
their task, and brought all three vessels safe out of the harbour
without sustaining the slightest loss. For his gallantry and
address on this occasion, Lieutenant Pipon, early in the follow-
ing year, was promoted to the rank of commander.
   On the 2nd of September, at lib. 30m. a.m., the ritish 18-
gun ship-sloop Victor (sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two
sixes), Captain George Ealph Collier, being off the Seychelle
islands, discovered and chased a strange man-of-war brig.    At
5 h. 30 m. p.m., proving the better sailer going off the wind,
the Victor was enabled to bring to close action the French brig-
corvette Fleche, of 18 long 8-pounders, commanded by Lieu-
tenant Jean Baptists Bonnavie. The latter's 8-pounders being
no match for the former's 32-pounder carronades, the Fleche,
after receiving  and returning two broadsides, hauled her wind
and endeavoured to escape. Having had her driver topping-
lift, maintopmast-stay, and her principal braces on the starboard
side shot away, the Victor was unable to wear quick enough to
check the progress of her opponent who, by the time the two
                                      ;



vessels tacked, at 7 p.m.,   was half a mile to windward       :
                                                                   and,
even when the Victor had repaired her rigging, the Fleche con-
vinced her that, in sailing by the wind, the advantage was the
reverse of what it had been when going before it.
   In the little interchange of firing which had ensued, the Victor
had a master's mate and one seaman slightly wounded with,  ;


besides damaged rigging and sails, one shot through the fore-
mast, and a few in the hull. The Victor continued to pursue
the Fleche, and during the night was frequently within gun-
shot but the latter would not allow the British vessel a second
     ;



time to close. The chase continued all day of the 4th. At
sunset the Fleche was four or five miles to windward of the
Victor, and, by daylight on the 5th, was no longer to be seen.
   Judging, from the course which the brig was steering when
first seen, that her destination was the Seychelle islands, Cap-
tain Collier pushed for them; and, at 3h. 30m. p.m., the
Victor descried her late opponent standing in for the anchorage
of Mahe. The Victor proceeded under easy sail till 7 p.m.,
which was just as it grew dark, and then anchored in 11
fathoms. The ship not having a pilot, and no one on board
being acquainted with the channel, the master, Mr. James
Crawford, though ill of a fever, volunteered to sound it. Ac-
cordingly, in the course of the night, a boat, in which Mr. James
Middleton, the master's mate who had been wounded, also
