1801.]
                         CUTTING OUT THE CHEVRETTE.                        139

the force was reduced to more than a third, or to less than 180
men, to proceed without him. He did so and gave orders  ;



that, while one party was engaged in disarming the enemy's
crew on deck, the smartest topmen of the Beaulieu should fight
their way aloft, and cut loose the sails with their sabres and         ;



that others, who were named, should cut the cable        and he    :




appointed one of the ablest seamen in the boats, Henry Wallis,
quartermaster of the Beaulieu, to take charge of the corvette's
helm. Many other suitable arrangements were made; and the
nine boats, in high glee, hastened to the attack.
  At about 1 a.m. on the 22nd the boats came in sight of the
Chevrette who, after hailing, opened a heavy fire of musketry
               ;


and grape upon the assailants. This was presently seconded
by a fire of musketry from the shore. In the face of all this,
however, the British pulled undauntedly towards the ship. The
Beaulieu's boats under the command of Lieutenant Maxwell,
assisted by Lieutenant James Pasley, and Lieutenant of marines
James Sinclair, boarded the vessel on the starboard bow and
quarter the Uranie's, under Lieutenant Martin Neville, one of
           ;


the Eobust's, under midshipman Eobert Warren, and one of the
Doris's, under Lieutenant Walter Burke, on the larboard bow.
The attempt to board was most obstinately resisted by the
Frenchmen, armed with fire-arms, sabres, tomahawks, and pikes                ;



and who, in their turn, boarded the boats. Notwithstanding this
formidable opposition, and that, in their attempts to overcome
it, the British had lost all their fire-arms,
                                              the latter, with their
swords only, effected the boarding.         Those who had been
ordered        to   go   aloft,   fought their   way   to   their respective
stations  and, although some were killed, and others despe-
           ;




rately wounded, the remainder gained the corvette's yards.
Here the seamen found the footropes strapped up; but sur-
mounting every obstacle, the intrepid fellows quickly performed
the service upon which they had been ordered. Thus iv. less
than three minutes after the ship had been boarded, and in the
midst of a conflict against numbers more than trebly superior,
down came the Chevrette's three topsails and courses. The
cable, in the mean time, having been cut outside, and a light
breeze having sprung up from the land, the ship began drifting
out of the bay.
  No sooner did the Frenchmen see the sails fall, and their ship
underway, than some of them leaped overboard; while others
dropped their arms, and sprang down the hatchways.          The
British thereupon got possession of the quarter-deck and fore-
