1801.]
                CUTTING OUT THE CHEVRETTE.                             141

a little farther forward. For an instant, while looking round
to see where he should make his push, Brown stood exposed a
mark to the enemy's fire        ;   when, waving his cutlass, he cried,
" Make a lane there :" he
                           gallantly dashed among them, and
                                                           the
fought his way forward till he reached his proper station,
forecastle; which the men, animated by his example, soon
cleared of the enemy.         Here Mr. Brown remained during the
rest of the contest, not only repulsing the French in their fre-
quent attempts to retake his post, but attending to the orders
from the quarter-deck, and assisting in casting the ship and
making sail, with as much coolness as if he had been on board
the Beaulieu.
  Henry Wallis, who, as already stated, had been appointed to
take charge of the corvette's helm, fought his way to the wheel              ;




and, although severely wounded in the contest and bleeding,
                                                             this

brave seaman steadily remained at his post, steering the
Chevrette until beyond the reach of the batteries. Wallis had
been seven years in the Beaulieu, and was ever among the fore-
most in a service of danger. "If a man had fallen overboard
he was always fortunately in the way, and either in the boat or
the water during the time he belonged to the ship nearly a
          :




dozen men were indebted to him for their lives, which he had
saved by plunging overboard, sometimes even in a gale of wind,
at the utmost hazard of his own."
                                            1




   The Chevrette, when attacked, was bound with a cargo of
stores to Senegal, and thence to the island of Guadeloupe she      :




was a similar ship to the Bonne-Citoyenne but owing, we      ;



believe, to the probable successful termination of the pending
negotiation between the two countries,
                                         more than to anything
else, the Chevrette was not purchased for
                                           the use of the British
navy. Lieutenant Losack, on account of some misunderstanding
                                            the cutting out of
respecting the actual commanding officer at
the corvette, was promoted to the rank of commander. On the
9th of August, however, upon some facts coming to his know-
                                          of inquiry to be held
ledge, Admiral Cornwallis ordered a court
on board the Mars. The result was, that Lieutenant Keith
Maxwell received from the admiralty immediate promotion to a
commander's rank, and from the public at large that share of
credit which, had it not been for the official investigation of his
claims, he might never have obtained.
  On the 27th of July, at 1 a.m., in latitude 43° 34' north, and
longitude 11° 42' west, the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
                  i
                      Xaval Chronicle, vol. vii., pp. 216, 217.
