140              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE   SHIPS.            [1801.

castle  which, although but five minutes had elapsed since the
         ;


assault had commenced, were nearly covered with dead bodies.
Those of the corvette's crew, that had fled below, still main-
tained a smart fire of musketry from the main deck and up the
hatchways, but were at length overpowered and compelled
to submit.  In her way out, during a short interval of calm,
the Chevrette became exposed to a heavy fire of round and
grape from the batteries but a light breeze from the north-east
                             :



soon drove the ship out of gun-shot.     It was at about this
time that the six boats under Lieutenant Losack joined
company and Lieutenant Maxwell, of course, was superseded
             ;


in the command.
  The British had one lieutenant of marines (James Sinclair),
one midshipman (Eobert Warren), seven seamen, and two
marines killed, two lieutenants (Mai'tin Neville and Walter
Burke, the latter mortally), one master's mate (William Phil-
     three midshipmen (Edward Crofton, Edward Byrn, and
lips),
Eobert Finnis), 42 seamen, and nine marines wounded, and one
marine drowned in the Beaulieu's barge, which was sunk by the
enemy's shot total, 11 killed, 57 wounded, and one drowned
                 ;



or missing.  The loss sustained by the Chevrette was far
heavier.  The corvette had her captain, two lieutenants, three
midshipmen, one lieutenant of troops, and 85 seamen and troops
killed, one lieutenant, four midshipmen, and 57 seamen and
troops wounded total, 92 killed and 62 wounded.
                     ;


   It is such daring feats as these that ennoble the character of
the British navy and long will be remembered, long held up as
                         ;


an example for imitation, the cutting out of the Chevrette. A
few of the many instances which this enterprise afforded, of
individual heroism, have already been recorded in the pages of
a naval periodical work. We have selected the following     :




   Lieutenant Sinclair, of the marines, was killed in the act of
defending Mr. Crofton, midshipman of the Doris, who in his
efforts to get on board the corvette was wounded in two places.
Mr. John Brown, boatswain of the Beaulieu, after forcing his
way into the Chevrette's quarter-gallery, found the door planked
up, and so securely barricadoed, that all his efforts to force it
were ineffectual. Through the crevices in the planks he disco-
vered a number of men sitting on the cabin deck, armed with
pikes and pistols and with the fire of the latter was frequently
                         ;




annoyed while attempting to burst in. He next tried the quarter,
and after an obstinate resistance gained the taffrail. The officer
who commanded the party was at this time fighting his way up
