1801.]          CUTTING OUT THE CHEVRETTE.                       137

of eight 6 and 12 pounders, and a crew of 60 French and
Italians. Upon the appearance of the Mercury soon after-
wards, the pirate landed the greater part of her crew; who,
with a 4-pounder and musketry, posted themselves upon a hill
to defend their vessel, which lay       aground close to them with
hawsers fast to the shore.
   Being resolved to make an effort to stop the further career of
this  band of robbers, Captain Eogers despatched upon that
service the boats of the frigate and brig, under the orders of
Lieutenant William Mather, assisted by Lieutenant Wilson of
the marines. Notwithstanding that they were exposed to a
smart fire of cannon and musketry, both from the vessel and the
hill, the boats gallantly rowed in and while Lieutenant Mather
                                    ;


with the seamen boarded the Tigre, Lieutenant Wilson with the
marines landed to drive away the banditti from the hill the  :




Mercury and Corso at the same time overawed the pirates by
occasionally firing such of their guns as would bear.        The
marines succeeded in their object without the loss of a man, and
took several prisoners and the seamen, with equal good fortune,
                      ;



hove the tartan off the rocks and brought her out, together with
a quantity of plunder, consisting of bales of cotton and othcr
goods, which the Tigre had taken from vessels of different
nations.
  In the summer of this year, the three British frigates, Boris,
Captain Charles Brisbane, Beaulieu, Captain Stephen Pointz,
and Uranie, Captain George Henry Gage, by the orders of
Admiral Cornwallis, who since the 21st of the preceding Febru-
ary had succeedeed Earl St. Yincent (appointed first lord of the
admiralty) as commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet, were
stationed off the point of St. Mathieu, to watch the motions of
the French and Spanish fleets in Brest harbour. In the month
of July, while the above frigate-squadron was lying at anchor
about three miles to the south-south-east of St. Mathieu'e light-
house, and in full view of the combined fleet, the French 20-gun
ship-corvette Chevrettc was discovered also at an anchor, under
some batteries in Camaret bay a position in which the French
                                ;



considered their vessel almost as secure as if she was in the road
of Brest. It will, nevertheless, not be thought surprising that
the British resolved to attempt cutting her out. Accordingly,
on the night of the 20th, the boats of the Beaulieu and Doris
(the Uranie not then present) manned entirely by volunteer*,
and placed under the orders of Lieutenant Woodley Losack, ot
Ike Ville-de-PariB, purposely sent by the admiral to take the
