136          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              [1801.


Dacres, had entered the port unapprised of its being in posses-
sion of the French, was lying in the mole, laden with supplies
for the French army in Egypt, and ready for sea.       Captain
Eogers immediately made sail for Ancona, with the determina-
tion of attempting to cut out the Bulldog and soon after dark
                                           ;



the same evening, the Mercury anchored off the mole. At
10 h. 30 m. p.m. the boats of the latter, under the orders ot
Lieutenant William Mather, quitted the frigate and, at about
                                                  :




midnight, surprised    and carried the Bulldog, without even
having been hailed by the sentinels on the mole, to which,
while the ship was riding with three cables ahead, her stern
had been secured by the two ends of a bower cable. The sea-
men presently cut all the cables, and the boats began to tow
away their prize; but the alarm had now spread, and the
British became exposed to a heavy fire of cannon and musketry
from the mole.
  As there was a favourable light breeze, and the sails were set,
the Bulldog, in rather less than an hour, got without the reach
of the batteries. Unfortunately, however, the wind died away
to a perfect calm, and the current carried the prize along the
coast close to the shore; from which a crowd of boats, some of
them gun-boats, came out to attack her. Having the hatch-
ways to guard, to prevent the French crew from rising, and
being without a sufficient force to resist the gun-boats, which
were fast approaching, and had already several times raked the
ship, Lieutenant Mather reluctantly
                                      abandoned his prize but
                                                            ;


not until he had made three ineffectual attempts to set her on
fire.

   The loss of the British on this occasion amounted to one
seaman and one marine killed, and four seamen wounded. That
of the French on board the Bulldog is stated to have been 20
in killed, wounded, and drowned.     As soon as she descried the
prize standing out of the mole, the Mercury weighed
                                                       and steered
towards her; but the calm so retarded the progress of the
frigate, that the Bulldog was towed back
                                             to her former station
at the mole long before the Mercury could get near her.       The
          afterwards  succeeded  in putting to sea, but was taken
Bulldog
on her passage to Egypt by the 24-gun ship Champion, Captain
Lord William Stuart.
   On the 23rd of June, in the morning, the British 18-gun brig-
                                                        the rocks
sloop Corso, Captain William Bicketts, chased among
in the small islands of Tremiti, lying in the gulf of Venice, and
inhabited by a few renegadoes only, a pirate tartan, the Tigre,
