142           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                   [1801.

Immortalite, Captain Henry Hotham,       fell   in with   an enemy's
cruiser of a very extraordinary appearance, a ship with four
masts, which the former immediately chased, and at 7 h. 30 m.
a.m., the 38-gun frigate, Arethusa, Captain Thomas Wolley, in
sight, captured.  The prize proved to be the Invention, French
privateer, nine days from Bordeaux, on her first cruise, having
only been launched since the beginning of the month.
   The Invention had been designed by her commander, M.
Thibaut, and was peculiar in more respects than her masts, her
length being 147 feet, with only 27 feet in breadth of beam.
Her force consisted of 24 long 6-pounders on a single deck, and
two 12-pounder carronades, either on her poop or topgallant
forecastle, with a crew of 210 men and boys.     Her four masts
were nearly at equal distances apart, the first and third of the
same height, the second stouter and higher, and the fourth much
smaller.   She had four topgallant yards rigged aloft, and was
accounted a good sea-boat and sailer.
   On the 10th of August, while the British 12-pounder 32-gun
frigate Unicorn, Captain Charles Wemyss, and 16-gun brig-
sloop Atalante, Captain Anselm John Griffiths, were cruising in
Quiberon bay, the six-oared cutter of the latter, with eight men
commanded by Mr. Francis Smith, midshipman, in the face of
a brisk discharge of grape and canister from the French national
lugger Eveille, mounting two long 4-pounders, and four large
swivels, and of a cross-fire from two small batteries on the shore,
pulled up towards, boarded, and carried the vessel, the French
crew deserting her at the moment and escaping to the shore,
which was only a musket-shot distant. To add to the value of
this very gallant little exploit, it was achieved without a single
casualty.
  On the night of the 20th of August Captain Thomas Byam
Martin, cruising off Corunna with the frigates Fisgard, Diamond,
and Boadicea, sent Lieutenant Philip Pipon, with the boats of
the squadron, to attack the Spanish vessels in the port. The
boats immediately pulled for and entered the harbour         and
                                                              ;


Lieutenant Pipon and his party succeeded in boarding and
carrying the Neptuno, a new ship pierced for 20 guns, belonging
to his catholic majesty, a gun-boat mounting one long Spanish
24-pounder, and a merchant ship all moored within the strong
                                  ;


batteries that protect the port, and lying so near to them that
the sentinels on the ramparts challenged the boats' crews, and
opened upon them a heavy fire. Notwithstanding this oppo-
      the British officers and men, with their accustomed cool-
sition,
