138            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1801.


command, proceeded on the enterprise but the boats not pulling
                                       ;



     and the leading ones being too zealous to slacken their
alike,
efforts, the detachment separated.   In consequence of this acci-
dent some of the boats returned while the remainder, having
                                  ;



reached the entrance of Camaret bay, where they expected to
be joined by their companions, lay upon their oars until day-
break on the 21st. The service being one that required dark-
ness for its success, the boats now pulled back to their ships  ;


but the mischief was done they had been discovered from the
                           ;


Chevrette and the shore, and so much of the plan as contem-
plated a surprise was defeated.
   As a proof of this, on the same morning, the Chevrette got
under way, and, after running about a mile and a half further
up the bay, moored herself close under some heavy batteries,
one in particular upon a point of land off her larboard and inner
bow. The corvette then took on board a body of soldiers, suffi-
cient to augment her number of men to 339, had the arms and
ammunition brought upon deck, and loaded her guns almost up
to their muzzles with grape-shot.   The batteries, also, prepared
themselves temporary redoubts were thrown up upon the adja-
           ;


cent points, and a gun-vessel, armed with two long 36-pounders,
was moored as a guard-boat at the entrance of the bay. Having
thus profited by the discovery of the morning, the Chevrette
displayed in defiance a large French ensign above an English
one.    This was plainly seen by the three frigates, and served
but to inspire their crews with increased ardour to engage, and
with redoubled determination to reverse the position of the
flags.
  At about 9h. 30 m. p.m. the boats of the three        frigates,
joined by the barge and pinnance of the Eobust 74, numbering
15 in the whole, and containing between them about 280 officers
and men, still under the command of Lieutenant Losack, pro-
ceeded a second time to attempt the daring service of cutting
out the Chevrette. Shortly afterwards Lieutenant Losack, with
his own and five other boats, proceeded in chase of a boat from
the shore, supposed to be a look-out boat belonging to the Che-
vrette, and therefore proper to be secured. The remainder of the
boats, as they had been ordered, lay upon their oars or pulled
gently, awaiting their commanding officer's return.  Lieutenant
Losack not returning so soon as expected, the next officer in
command, Lieutenant Keith Maxwell, of the Beaulieu, consider-
ing that the boats had at least six miles to pull, and that the
night was already far advanced, resolved, notwithstanding that
