146             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1801.

                                        disabled state, the Sylph
Seeing the frigate in this apparently
made sail in chase but, on account of a severe wound in her
                     ;


mainmast and a rising sea, the brig was obliged, instead of tack-
ing, to wear, which retarded
                              her progress. While the Sylph was
thus slowly advancing, the frigate swayed up her foreyard,
                                            still without hoisting
wore, and made all sail for the land, but
any colours. As the brig's mainmast was every moment
                                                               ex-

pected to go over the side, as she
                                    was then making a foot and a
half of water per hour from shot-hole leaks, and as the stranger
was evidently a frigate of 14 guns of a side on her main deck,
                                            to wear and stand to
Captain Dashwood felt it to be his duty
the northward having already sustained a loss, by the preceding
                 ;



night's action, of one seaman killed,
                                      and one midshipman (Lionel
Carey) and eight seamen wounded, three of them dangerously.
  Before we submit any remarks upon the alleged name and
force of the Sylph's antagonist in this to her very creditable
                                       in which, about a month
action, we will relate another contest
afterwards, the brig was engaged almost in the same spot.
   The damages the Sylph had received rendering her return to
port indispensable, Captain Dashwood
                                        was directed by Admiral
Cornwallis, under whose orders he was cruising,
                                                   to proceed to
                                                       the Sylph
Plymouth. Having here undergone a complete refit,
sailed to rejoin the commander-in-chief off Ushant, and by the
latter was ordered to resume her station off the north coast of
                                    in the afternoon, Cape Pinas
Spain. On the 28th of September,
                                                           in the
bearing south distant 42 leagues, the Sylph chased a ship
north-west and, although before sunset the discovery was made
            ;


that the stranger was a French frigate of the same apparent
force as the one which the brig had formerly engaged upon this
coast, Captain Dashwood gallantly resolved to do
                                                 his utmost to

bring her to action.
  Being desirous, as before, to gain the wind of an antagonist so
decidedly superior, the Sylph made all sail for that purpose and
                                                             ;




the French frigate seemed equally determined to frustrate the
attempt. At 7 h. 30 m. p.m., however, after various manoeuvres,
during which the two vessels crossed each other three times, and
exchanged, at a very short distance, as many heavy broadsides,
the Sylph obtained a station within pistol-shot upon the frigate's
weather bow.    A severe conflict now ensued, and continued
without intermission for two hours and five minutes, when the
frigate wore and made sail on the opposite tack     ;leaving the
Sylph with her standing and running rigging cut to pieces, and
maintopmast badly wounded, but, on account of the skilful
