1801.]
                            SYLPH AND FRENCH FRIGATE.                                147

manner in which the brig was manoeuvred, and the unskilful
manner in which the frigate's guns (admitting them to have
been such as supposed) were fought, with so trifling a loss as
one person slightly wounded, Mr Lionel Carey, who had been
                                                 :




wounded in the former action.
  The following is the concluding passage of Captain Dash-
wood's letter to Admiral Coinwallis on the subject of this
                 "
second action      Having received certain information since my
                       :




return to this station, that the ship, which the Sylph was en-
gaged with some time since, was the French frigate l'Artemise,
of 44 guns and 350 men so I can with equal truth pronounce
                                         ;


this to be the same, from the many corresponding observations
which I made. She had then 20 men killed and 40 wounded,
and was obliged to return to St. Andero to refit and from the            ;


disordered state which she was in when making off, I have the
strongest reason to suppose she has now met with a similar fate,
particularly as a number of lights and men were seen hanging
over her bows, from which I infer she must have received con-
siderable damage and I think there is every probability of some
                             ;


of his majesty's frigates falling in with her, as I unluckily parted
with the Immortalite a few hours before."           Some additional
information is contained in the following note to a passage of
this letter
             " The French             of that        also       that
               :
                          journals        period    stated,
the captain was tried by a court-martial, and condemned to be
shot, for his conduct on that occasion  which sentence Buona-
                                                     ;

                                                           1
parte approved, and ordered to be carried into execution."
  We wish it were in our power to adduce some stronger evi-
dence than that contained in the two extracts above given, as to
the identity of the ship twice so gallantly engaged by the Sylph.
The old Artemise, it will be recollected, was blown up at the
battle of the Nile 2 consequently this must have been a new
                                     :



ship of that name  and, as the French had very wisely discon-
                                 ;


tinued building any more 12-pounder frigates, the Artemise of
1801 must have been a 40-gun frigate carrying 18-pounders, and
mounting in the whole at least 44 guns. Had the improbability
that such a ship would retreat from an 18-gun brig, or, in an
action of more than two hours' continuance, do no more execu-
tion than cut away a few ropes, send a shot through a topmast,
and slightly wound one man, struck the compiler from the
" French                             "
                     as forcibly as it has us, he would have
          journals
quoted the passage entire, and have given a name and a dad' to
the journal which contained so important an admission in favour
           i                                             2   See vol. li., p. 193.
                   Marshall, vol. ii., p. 456.
