1801.]                  TREATY OF AMIENS.                     151

peace was signed at Madrid between France and Portugal by     ;


the fourth article of which the latter ceded to France all that
part of Portuguese Guiana (nearly equal in extent to the whole
of French Guiana), which extends to the Carapanatuba, a
river that flows into the Amazon at some distance above Fort
Macussa.

                           East Indies.

  On the 21st of June the Dutch island of Ternate, after an
obstinate resistance of 52 days, surrendered by capitulation to
the military and naval forces of the honourable East India
Company, under the respective commands of Colonel Burr and
Captain Hayes.
  Upon the same principle, we believe, that induced them to
occupy the island of Madeira, the British government placed
garrisons in all the colonies or factories of Portugal, in the East
Indies, except Macao.


               Peace between England and France.

   On the 1st of October was signed in London, by Lord Hawkes-
bury, the secretary of state for foreign affairs on the part of
Great Britain, and by citizen Louis-Guillaume Otto, commissary
for the exchange of French prisoners in England, on the part of
Fiance, preliminary articles of peace between the two nations.
On the 10th, the ratifications were duly exchanged and, on the
                                                     ;


12th, his Britannic Majesty issued a proclamation, ordering a
cessation of arms by sea and land.     According to the pre-
liminary articles, five months from the date of the exchange of
ratifications was the longest period during which hostilities
could legally exist in the most distant part of the globe.
  In consequence of the proclamation, the British blockading
squadrons retired from the opposite coast at which time, how-
                                            ;


ever, the French ports were all alive.     In them ships were
getting ready, and troops embarking, for an expedition to St.
Domingo, where the blacks were in open rebellion against the
whites.  The Dutch and Spanish ports began also to exhibit an
unusual activity. England, therefore, with a becoming forecast,
delayed awhile disarming her ships.
  As any treaty of peace to which England is a party is neces-
sarilymade up, in a great degree, of colonial cessions, this
appears the proper head of the work under which to offer tlio
few remarks we have to make on the subject. And,
                                                     although
