152   COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.       —   N. AMERICA AND W. INDIES.
                                                                  [1801.

the definitive treaty between all the belligerents was not finally-
concluded until the 25th of March, 1802, at Amiens, we shall at
once state what change it effected, more particularly in the
colonial propriety of the different powers.
  Let us first briefly advert to the stipulations which affected
the European territory of the several belligerents. France got
back the small islands of Saint- Marcouf. Portugal was to
remain as before the war, except as to the province which, by
the treaty of Badajos, she had ceded to Spain. 1 The republic
of the Seven Islands was acknowledged. Egypt and the other
territories of the Sublime Porte were to be retained in their
integrity as before the war. Eor this article there would have
been no occasion, had the British government known, as well as
Buonaparte did, the issue of the Egyptian campaign. The
islands of Malta, Goza, and Comino were to be restored to the
order of St. John of Jerusalem as before the war       and the
                                                           ;


British troops were to evacuate those islands within three
months after the exchange of the ratification.     The French
troops were to evacuate Naples and the Eoman territory and        ;



the British troops, in like manner, were to evacuate Porto-
Ferrajo, as well as all the islands and forts which they might
occupy in the Mediterranean or Adriatic. The colonies now
demand our attention.

                            North America.

  England had taken from France the valuable fishery islands
of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon     but France, by the treaty of
                                      ;



Amiens, got them restored to her.


                             West Indies.

  England had taken from Holland all her possessions except
Dutch Guiana, and gave them all back to her. From Spain
she had taken Trinidad and Buonaparte, as a declared punish-
                        ;

ment to Spain for having made peace with Portugal without his
privity, allowed England to retain that fine island.   Portugal
so far benefited by the treaty of Amiens, that the boundary line
between the two Guianas was brought much nearer to its ancient
limit than it was by the treaty which her fears had just before
induced her to sign with France at Madrid. Denmark bad lost,
but now regained her three islands. Sweden, also, got back

                              1   See p. 96.
