144            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.             [1801.

embarked as a volunteer, proceeding on the service and, not-
                                                         ;



withstanding they were repreatedly fired at by a boat from the
French brig, these officers would not desist until they had
completely performed the duty upon which they had been
detached.
  Daylight on the 6th showed the Fleche lying at the mouth of
the basin or inner harbour, with springs on her cables, and a
red flag at her fore topgallantmast-head, the signal of defiance,
as afterwards understood. It was not merely the strength of
their position, or the difficulty of approaching it, that had
actuated the French officers to hoist this foolish signal: the
Fleche now mounted the whole of her guns which had not, it
                                                 ;



appears, been the case in the skirmish of the 2nd. Soon after
daylight the Victor weighed and made sail towards the channel     ;



the narrowness and intricacy of which, added to the unfavour-
able state of the wind, compelled her to use warps and her stay-
sails only.
  So fine an opportunity was taken due advantage of by the
Fleche, and the Victor became exposed to a raking fire, until,
shoaling her water, the latter, at about 9 p.m., came to with the
best bower.    The British sloop soon recommenced warping,
and continued it until 11 h. 45 m. p.m. when, letting go the
                                         ;


small bower with two springs, the Victor brought her broadside
to bear, and instantly commenced firing.        Between the two
vessels   an incessant cannonade was maintained until 2h. 20 m.
a.m. on the 7th, when the Fleche was discovered to be sinking.
In a few minutes afterwards the latter cut her cable, cast round,
and grounded at the bow on a coral reef. An officer and party
were sent from the Victor to board her and immediately the
                                             ;



French crew commenced setting fire to their vessel. Another
party from the sloop quickly followed the first and the British
                                                     ;


then took possession and struck the colours of the French brig.
Scarcely, however, had they succeeded in extinguishing the
flames, than the Fleche fell on her larboard bilge into deeper
water, and sank.
  Out of her 120 men and boys, the Victor, in this second, and,
for the present, decisive affair, had not a man hurt. This was
rather extraordinary, as several shot had struck her hull, some
between wind and water, and her rigging and boats had also
been a good deal cut. The loss on the part of the Fleche, out
of an alleged complement of 145 (including four lieutenants,
besides her commanding officer), from the number of dead and
wounded reported to have been found on her forecastle, was
