1301.]                     SYLPH AND FRENCH FRIGATE.                145

supposed to be very severe      but Captain Bonnavie acknow-
                                     ;



ledged to having had only four men killed the wounded he did
                                                :



not enumerate.
  Like the Chiffonne, the Fleche had brought from Nantes,
about four months back, and since deposited on one of the
Seychelle islands, 35 banished Frenchmen.       Some of her men
had been left sick at the Isle of Bourbon but, to compensate
                                                    ;



for their loss, 20 of the late Chiffonne's crew had assisted in
serving the guns. Had the action been carried on wholly at
close quarters, the heavy metal of the Victor would certainly
have rendered her too powerful to be an equal match for the
Fleche but, in that respect, the French brig had managed to
           ;



give herself the advantage by keeping ner adversary at long-
shot.   Great credit was therefore due to the officers and crew
of the Victor, for their gallantry, skill, and perseverance but ;

the Fleche was not eventually lost, the French having afterwards
weighed, and, we believe, refitted her.
  On the 31st of July, in the evening, the British 18-gun brig-
sloop Sylph, Captain Charles Dashwood, cruising off Santandcr,
or San-Andero, on the north coast of Spain, with a light air
from the southward, chased an armed schooner standing to the
north-east; but, before there was a possibility of arriving up
with her, a large frigate, then judged to be Spanish, but after-
wards believed to be French, was descried under the land ad-
vancing towards the brig, and to which frigate the schooner
fled for refuge.

  Finding      impracticable to gain the wind of the strange
                 it

frigate,       whose
                 hull, at sunset, was clearly discernible, the
Sylph shortened sail, hove to, and prepared for battle.        At
11 p.m. the frigate arrived within half gun-shot when, having
                                                        ;


in the usual manner ascertained the ship's hostile character, the

brig opened her fire. Soon afterwards the frigate approached
within hail, and a spirited cannonade was kept up for one hour
and L'O minutes when, having had her sails and almost all her
                       ;



running rigging cut to pieces, and one carronade dismounted,
and having received several shot between wind and water, the
Sylph edged away to repair her damages. Perceiving, however,
that the frigate either was unable or unwilling to make sail in
pursuit, the Sylph, as soon as she was out of gun-shot, hove to.
   On the 1st of August, at daybreak, the Sylph discovered her
late opponent, with her forcyard upon deck, about seven miles
off in the north-west, which was now to windward, the wind

having shifted to that quarter in a squall during the night.
  vol. in.                                                  L
