148           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                               [1801


of the Sylph's  commander and crew. Even the name of the
                                           "
French captain " condemned to be shot is not given and not            :




                               discover in the Moniteur, or in any
only have we been unable to
other French paper, a single paragraph calculated to throw light
                                            lists of French frigates
upon the subject, but, out of the many
occasionally before us, we have
                                  no recollection of the name of
the Artemise until it occurs in an English account of her destruc-
tion in September, 1808.
   On returning to Plymouth after his first action, Captain
Dashwood wrote an official account of it to Admiral Cornwallis,
and appears to have made an immediate application to the first
lord of the admiralty for a post- commission to which applica-;



tion the following, as we think, very sensible reply was trans-
                                 " I have read
mitted by Earl St. Vincent         :
                                                your official letter
with all the attention such  a recital merits but until the board
                                                          ;


receive official information of the force, and the nation to which
the vessel belongs, which the Sylph was engaged with, an ade-
                                                      the action."
quate judgment cannot be formed of the merits of
                                                                                      1




The circumstances, stated in the official account of the second
rencontre, very properly removed all doubt as to the ship en-
gaged having been very superior in force to the Sylph " and on            ;



the 2nd of the following November Captain Dashwood,          for his
meritorious conduct in the above actions," was promoted to post-
rank.   The first-lieutenant of the Sylph, upon both these highly
creditable occasions, was       Samuel Burgess            ;
                                                              but who, although
highly commended by Captain Dashwood in each of his letters,
remained a lieutenant for 15 years longer.
  On the loth of September, in the afternoon, the British 18-gun
ship-sloop, Lark, Acting-commander Lieutenant James John-
stone, being close off the island of Cuba, fell in with and chased
the Spanish privateer-schooner Fsperanza, of one long 8 and two
4 pounders, and 45 men; which for shelter, ran within the
Portillo reefs.  Lieutenant Johnstone immediately despatched
the Lark's yawl and cutter, with 16 men in each, under the
orders of Lieutenant James Pasley, assisted by Mr. M'Cloud,
midshipman, to attempt to cut her out. At about 10 h. 30 m. p.m.
the two boats found the privateer at anchor, waiting the attack                       ;



and, on their near approach, received a fire from her that severely
wounded several of the men. In spite of this, however, the
British boarded, and, after a short but severe contest, carried
the schooner. In this well-conducted and gallant boat-attack,
the British sustained a loss of one siaman killed, Mr. M'Cloud,
                        1
                            Marshall, vol. ii., p. 454.
