150       COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.— WEST INDIES, ETC.           [1801.


and 15 seamen    killed, and 13 officers
                                          and seamen wounded.
Considering the great disparity of force
                                         between the two vessels,
this must be pronounced a very gallant affair on the part of the
                                           and valour displayed
Pasley; and the judgment, promptitude,
                                                    him not only
by Lieutenant Wooldridge on the occasion, gained
the just applause of his superiors, but that to which he had an
equal claim, the rank of commander.

                  Colonial Expeditions.     — West Indies.
  The rupture between England and Denmark and Sweden
was soon followed by the seizure of the colonies of the latter by
the former. On the 20th of March the Swedish island of St.
Bartholomew surrendered by capitulation to a British naval
and military force, under Bear-admiral John Thomas Duckworth
and Lieutenant-general Trigge. On the 24th the Swedish island
of St. Martin on the 29th the Danish islands of St. Thomas,
              ;



St. John, and their dependencies   and on the 31st the Danish
                                        ;




island of Santa Cruz, all accepted the same terms as St.
                                                            Bar-
tholomew. On the 16th of April the French garrison evacuated
the Dutch island of St. Eustatia which, with the island of Saba,
                                    ;



was taken possession of by the 20-gun ship Arab, Captain John
Perkins, and a small detachment of troops
                                          under Colonel Blunt,
of the third regiment of Buffs.


                            Coast of Africa.

  As soon as the British government became apprised of that
article in the treaty of Badajos, by which   Portugal agreed to
exclude British shipping from her ports, a force was sent to
occupy the island of Madeira. On the 23rd of July a squadron
anchored in the bay of Funchal, and a detachment of troops
under Colonel Clinton landed and took possession, without re
sistance, of the two forts which commanded the anchorage.
   These prompt measures, on the part of England, induced the
prince regent to use his most strenuous endeavours
                                                      to prevent
the first consul of France, who would not acknowledge himseb
a party to the treaty with Spain, from overrunning Portugal with
 the powerful army which, under General Leclerc, Buonaparte's
 brother-in-law, was already upon the frontiers. Before, how-
 ever, matters became ripe enough for action, England and
 France had commenced the negotiations which ended in the
 treaty of Amiens; and, on the 29th of September,
                                                  a treaty of
