1301.]
             PASLEY AND SPANISH XEBEC OF WAR.                    149

and 12 seamen wounded within two of half the party. The
                            ;


loss on board the Esperanza was represented to have been 21
killed and six wounded  ;   including, among the former, the cap-
tain, Josef Oallie, and all his officers. Considering the unques-
tionable gallantry of this enterprise, we regret to see the name
of James Pasley in the list of lieutenants of the present day.
   On the 21st of July, soon after daylight, the island of Cabrera
bearing north-east distant six or seven leagues, the British hired
brig Pasley, mounting fourteen 12-pounder carronades and two
long sixes, with a crew of 54 men and boys, commanded by
Lieutenant William Wooldridge, fell in with a Spanish man-of-
war xebec, of 22 guns which at 7 a.m. hailed the Pasley and
                        ;



desired her to send her boat on board. The reply to this was a
broadside within pistol-shot distance and the Pasley continued
                                           ;



to engage her superior opponent until 8 h. 15 m.        when the
                                                           ;


xebec ceased her fire, and taking advantage of the calm which
had followed the heavy firing, pulled away with her sweeps.
The Pasley used her sweeps, but the xebec having more sweeps
and more men out-pulled the British brig, and before night
reached the island of Ivica. In this very creditable affair to the
Pasley, the latter had one seaman killed and two wounded.
   In a few months afterwards an opportunity occurred in which
Lieutenant Wooldridge was more successful. On the 28th of
October, Cape de Gata bearing west-north-west distant 20
leagues, the Pasley fell in with and was chased by the Spanish
privateer polacre-ship Yirgen-del-Eosario, of 10 guns (pierced
for 20), eight of them long 12, and two long 24 pounders, with
a crew of 94 men. Being to windward, the Bosario soon neared
the Pasley, and an animated engagement commenced. After
the action had continued about an hour, the Pasley, having had
her gaff and most of the stays and main rigging shot away,
found her opponent's guns, upon the whole, much too heavy.
As the readiest mode to reduce this inequality, the Pasley ran
athwart the hawse of the Bosario, and lashed the hitter's bow-
sprit to her own capstan.    The British crew in an instant were
on the Spanish ship's decks; and, after a sanguinary hand-to-
 liaml struggle of about 15 minutes' duration, carried the Bosario.
   The Pasley's loss amounted to her gunner, Mr. James Pooke,
 and two seamen killed, her commander (shot through the left
shoulder), master (Ambrose Lions, mortally), first mate (George
Davie), and five seamen wounded.      The loss on board the
privateer was very severe:      it   consisted of her first and second
captains,   second lieutenant, two        prize-masters,   the
