1801.]
               COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.      —EAST     INDIES.               153

St.    Bartholomew.       France had   lost all   her sugar islands but
Guadeloupe and its dependencies, and got them all restored to
her.
                              Coast of Africa.

  Holland had lost the Cape of Good Hope, but got that im-
portant settlement restored to her. To Portugal, Madeira
                                                         was
of course restored and France got back Goree.
                      ;




                               East Indies.

   Holland had lost Malacca and the islands of Amboyna, Banda,
and Ternate; also Trincomale and the remaining Dutch settle-
ments in the island of Ceylon. The latter were retained by
Great Britain; but all the former were restored to Holland.
Spain's East Indian territories had remained
                                                unmolested and        ;



such of Portugal's as had been recently garrisoned were restored.
Denmark still held Tranquebar. France had lost Pondicherry,
Chandernagore, and other settlements up the Ganges; also
Foul -Point on the island of Madagascar. The whole of these
were restored to her by the treaty of Amiens.
   Whatever grounds politicians might have for auguring, from
the terms of this solemn compact, a short-lived peace, certain it
is, that the activity which reigned
                                       on the ocean, an activity
much greater than any which had been witnessed during the
last two or three years of the war, gave to the treaty the air of
a truce, or suspension of arms, in which each of the belligerents,
some of whom signed it for no other purpose, was striving to
gain an advantageous position, in order, when the tocsin should
again sound, to be ready for the recommencement of hostilities.
French, Dutch, and Spanish fleets were preparing to put to sea;
and English fleets, to follow them and watch their motions who,   :




then, could doubt that, although the wax upon the seals of the
treaty concluding the last had scarcely cooled, a new war was
on the eve of bursting forth ?
