 162                       FRANCF AND ST. DOMINGO.             [1802.

 American for all the soldiers that only eight of the merchants
                                   ;


 were his subjects and that he cared very little about any of
                       ;


 them. He at length, however, agreed to give three Americans
 for the 21 soldiers, and three more for the eight merchants.
With this the American commodore was obliged to be satisfied.
Soon afterwards, finding his crew getting very sickly and his
provisions very short, Commodore Dale raised the blockade of
Tripoli, and steered for Gibraltar. During the winter months
the American squadron visited Tripoli only occasionally. In
March, 1802, having had all their arrears of presents paid up,
the regencies of Algiers and Tunis became satisfied with the
United States. Nothing, however, during the whole of this
year appears to have been done against Tripoli, although the
cruisers of that regency were capturing American vessels where-
ever they could find them.


                  French Expedition to St. Domingo.

   We have already noticed the bustle of preparation going on
in the continental ports, just when a treaty of peace had ap-
parently set fleets and armies to at least a temporary rest. An
expedition to the island of St. Domingo was the plan in agi-
tation.   Previously to any account of occurrences on the shores
of that ill-fated island, we will bestow a glance upon the changes
which the preceding two or three years had effected in a colony
that, when France owned it, was the most profitable of any in
the West Indies.
  Buonaparte, as soon as he had got himself placed at the head
of the French government, sent out to St. Domingo an arrete,
containing the programme of a constitution for the government
of the island and, by way of gilding the pill, he appointed the
              ;


celebrated black General Toussaint-Louverture, commander-in-
chief of the colonial army ; of which, owing to the unhealthy
state of the island and the impossibility of sending out reinforce-
ments, a very small portion were natives of France. Before the
close of the year 1799 Toussaint possessed himself of the Spanish
part of the island, including the city of Santo Domingo. Shortly
afterwards this gifted negro drew up, and finally got adopted, the
plan of a colonial constitution, in which he named himself gover-
nor of the island and president for life, with the right of appoint-
ing his successor. Toussaint probably would not have ventured
to take so bold a step, had he been aware that the war was
so near its close he knew that, while it continued, he should
                   :
