 160          AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES.               [1802.

more of them would shortly take place, the government of the
United States, since the latter end of May, had despatched to
the Mediterranean a squadron of three frigates and a sloop or
two, just half the force then in commission, under the orders of
 Commodore Dale which squadron also carried out presents to a
                  ;




tolerably large amount, for such of the regencies as yet remained
 at peace.
   On the 2nd of July Commodore Dale, with the 44-gun frigates
President and Philadelphia, 32-gun frigate Essex, and the brig-
sloop Enterprise, anchored in the bay of Gibraltar where were
                                                    ;


also lying, having come in to get a supply of water, a Tripoli-
tan ship-of-war, with the high-admiral's flag on board, carrying
26 guns, 9 and 6 pounders, and 260 men, and a brig of 16 guns,
6-pounders, and 1 60 men. The commanders of these vessels,
who were now performing quarantine, pretended not to know
that their government had declared war against the United
States but Commodore Dale became assured of the fact from
       ;


a communication with the shore. He soon afterwards made sail
for the coast of Barbary, and in the course of the month showed
his squadron off Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli in succession. The
two first of these regencies appear to have lowered their tone
a little on this rather unexpected visit. With Tripoli, however,
no arrangement was effected, and the war went on. After re-
maining off Tripoli about 18 days, Commodore Dale stood along
the coast to the westward as far as the island of Pidussa, then
6teered for Malta to get a supply of water and on the 16th
                                              ;


came to an anchor in the harbour of Valetta.
  On the 1st of August the United States schooner Enterprise,
of 14 long 6-pounders and 90 men, commanded by Lieutenant
Andrew Sterrett, being on her way to join Commodore Dale at
Malta, and not far from that island, fell in with a Tripolitan
polacre-ship, of 14 guns (probably 4-pounders, and it   is doubt-

ful if some were not swivels) and 80 men, commanded by Eais-
Mahomet Sous. An action immediately commenced within
pistol-shot, and continued for nearly two hours, when the Tripo-
litan colours were either shot away or struck. Elated with their
victory, the American crew gave three cheers, and quitted their
guns. In an instant the corsair rehoisted her flag, and renewed
the action with redoubled vigour, the Tripolitans brandishing
their sabres, and seeming desirous to board the Enterprise. The
crew of the latter, however, having flown back to their guns,
poured into their opponent so destructive a fire, that the barba-
rians unequivocally hauled down their colours.        Lieutenant
