158             STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY.             —AMERICA,        ETC.
                                                                               [1802.

of 202 ships of the line, 126, or, including those
                                                    building,
148, was the proper number to be confronted with the French
    l



number.

                         America and the Barhary States.

   Although this was a year of peace between England and the
other great powers, there were still some naval operations of a
warlike character going on, a summary of which may serve, if
to do no more, to keep alive the interest in such matters until,
by the general clash of arms throughout Europe, the annalist
is again called upon to record events of magnitude and
                                                         impor-
tance.
  It is too well known to be creditable to them, that the formi-
dable christian powers of Europe have long paid a tribute,
either in specie or kind, to the regencies of Algiers, Tripoli, and
Tunis, to induce these merciless freebooters to abstain from mo-
lesting the commerce of the former ; from making prizes of their
vessels and slaves of their people.     The United States of
America, having a considerable Mediterranean commerce at
stake, found it wise to follow the example of the older and
richer states of Europe.    It is difficult to say how much this
sop to the three-headed monster annually cost the American re-
public but, in articles of merchandise, timber, cannon, cordage,
       ;




money, and now and then a frigate or corvette armed and
equipped for war, we should consider that the United States did
not pay less to the three regencies than from 100,000 to 150,000
dollars per annum.
  In the month of October, 1800, the United States 32-gun
frigate George Washington, Captain William Bainbridge, was
lying at an anchor in the road of Algiers. The dey considered
this as a fine opportunity to get the presents, which he, as well
as the heads of the other regencies, annually made to the grand
seignior, conveyed to Constantinople. The demand for the
American frigate to be sent upon this mission was formally
made, and reluctantly complied with. Laden with presents to
the amount of a million and a half of dollars, encumbered with
100 Turks as passengers, and degraded by carrying the flag of
Algiers at her maintopgallantmast-head, the George Washing-
ton sailed for and arrived at Constantinople. Having there
disembarked her live and dead lumber, the American frigate
sailed upon her return, and on the 21st of January 1801, re-
anchored at Algiers.
            1   See Note * to that Abstract, i. the Appendix of this volume.
