 15G                  STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY.                                  [1802.

                                     "                        2
 ships ;"* one    among the              hospital-ships ;"        seven     among the
 " recei                    3
       ving-sbips ;" and there were seven others which, although
in service, some of them since 1800, were not registered at the
date of the abstract.4 Here, at once, is the number required.
With respect to the under-line totals, we have merely to deduct
from the 665, the 67 " hoys, lighters, and transports," and the
10 "hulks," and we have 588, a number which is four below the
abstract number. This trifling difference is to be found, if we
could stay to trace it, among the small craft, several of which
are included in the abstract, and not registered in the official
list; while others, as fire-vessels, river-barges, "barge-maga-
        "
zine,"    latteen-settee," &c, that assist to swell the latter, are
not to be found in the former.
   Having thus established the general correctness of the nume-
rical totals of Abstract No. 10, and through it, we hope, of its
nine tabular predecessors, we will, after premising that, should
any doubt arise respecting the proper classification of a ship,
a reference to the notes (which, in fact, are the key to the
abstracts) may clear up the point, proceed to draw a slight com-
parison between the first and last abstracts, the two between
which an eight years' war had intervened. In doing this we
shall confine ourselves to the line-totals, and even then, to tbe
cruising totals only. According to the latter, the numerical in-
crease is 13 ships but the most decided improvement is dis-
                        ;


coverable in the relative tonnages.   For instance, the 113 ships
in  No. 1 measured upon an average 1645 tons        while in the    ;


126 ships in No. 10 measure 1740 tons. The accession of the
five ships at B, C, and G-, and of 26 out of the 30 at K, L, and
M, have chiefly contributed to this important augmentation.
  The number of line-of-battle ships, added to the British navy
from the navies of foreign powers, were, French 27, Dutch 17,
Spanish 5, and Danish 1     total 50 5 a number that, besides
                                 ;
                                                   :



being considerably short of what Steel and other writers have
recorded, contains a larger proportion of ineffective ships than
they allow, as the following statement will show                    :
                                                                        —
  1 Sultan and Captivity.                      *
                                                   Athe'nien, Nassau (late Holstein), De-
  2
     Union, afterwards Sussex                Ruyter, Guelderland, Leyden, Texel (lata
  s
     Royal William, Cambridge, Grafton,      Cerberus), and Utrecht.
Chichester Yarmouth, Medway, and Rip-          s   See Appendix, No. 10.
pon.
