1802.]      TRIBUTE TO ALGIERS, TUNIS, AND TRIPOLI.               159

   The disgraceful use to which an American frigate had thus
heen put "deeply affected," to use the words of Mr. President
             " the
Jefferson,         sensibility, not only of the president, but of the
people    of the United States." The "indignity "was certainly
calculated to do all this but we cannot anywhere discover that
                          ;
                                          "
the Washington was sent " by force           upon her extraordinary
and humiliating mission. We think that both Captain Bain-
bridge and the American consul, Mr. Eichard O'Brien, made out
but a poor case to substantiate that fact.
   Whatever feelings the submission of these gentlemen may
have excited in their own country, its effect was a very natural
one in Algiers and the two neighbouring regencies they became
                                                       :



more loud and exorbitant than ever in their demands for money
and presents. Algiers, however, was partially appeased by the
seasonable arrival of a ship from America with the arrears of the
subsidy due to her. But, jealous of the favours shown to the
Dey of Algiers, the Bashaw of Tripoli became very outrageous.
In some of his conferences with the American consul, the
bashaw says " There is no nation I wish to be at peace with
                 :




more than yours but all nations pay me, and so must the
             —       ;


Americans." " Compliments, although acceptable, are of very
little value ;
                and the heads of the Barbary States know their
friends by the value of the presents that they receive from
them." To give a practical proof of his estimation of compli-
ments, the Bashaw of Tripoli, on the 14th of May, 1801, caused
the flagstaff of the United States in front of the consul's house
to be cut down; the customary mode, with these summary
gentlemen, of promulgating a declaration of war.
   Not to be behindhand with his two brother spoliators to the
westward, the Bey of Tunis made use of a somewhat ludicrous
                                                   "
pretext for levying a contribution upon his          friends."   On the
night of the 18th of June a fire broke out in the palace, and in
its progress consumed 50,000 stands of arms.           On the 20th the
American consul, Mr. William Eaton, having been summoned to
the Bey's presence, was told that his government must supply
                             "I                         "
10,000 stands of arms.          have," says the Bey,      proportioned
my   loss  among my friends,    and this falls to you to  furnish. Tell
your government to send them without delay." The consul
made a very proper reply; and upon the whole conducted
himself with becoming, and, as the result proved, successful
firmness.
  Expecting from the tcnour of the consular communications
from Algiers, Tripoli, and Tunis that a rupture with one or
