1802.]                  WAR WITH TRIPOLI.                      161

Stcrrett now ordered the corsair under his lee quarter, and kept
his men at their guns.   But the Tripolitan vessel, the instant
she got to the station to which she had been ordered, poured
another broadside into the Enterprise, and, hoisting the red or
Moody flag, made an attempt to board. The Americans were
now most justly incensed against the Mahomedans and the;



Enterprise, obtaining a raking position, brought down the cor-
sair's mizenmast, and well riddled her hull.  Seeing what was
now likely to be his fate, the Tripolitan captain implored for
quarter and bending in a supplicating manner over the waist-
         ;


barricade of his vessel, threw his colours into the sea, as the
surest indication of his sincerity.   The Enterprise immediately
ceased her fire and thus ended an action which had lasted just
                    ;


three hours.
  As a proof no less of the utter incompetency of the Tripoli-
tans as men-of-war's men, as of the skill to which the Ameri-
cans had already arrived in the use of their guns, the Enterprise
did not have a man hurt, and received very little damage in hull
or rigging while the corsair was greatly shattered in her hull
                ;


and two remaining masts, and sustained, out of her 80 men in
crew, a loss of 20 killed and 30 wounded, including among the
latter her captain and first-lieutenant.
   Agreeably to the instructions he had received, Lieutenant
Sterrett ordered the guns, swords, pistols, and ammunition of
his prize to be thrown overboard, and both her masts to be cut
away by the board. A spar was then raised to serve for a mast,
and an old tattered sail hung to it as a flag. In this condition
the corsair was sent to Tripoli; and it is related that, on her
arrival there, the bashaw marked his indignation by ordering the
wounded captain to be paraded through the streets mounted
upon an ass, and then to receive 500 bastinadoes. This was a
fine reward, certainly, for having held out, against a very supe-
rior antagonist, until nearly two-thirds of his crew were killed
or disabled.
   On the 21st of August Commodore Dale put to sea from
Malta with his squadron, and on the 30th captured a Greek ship
from Smyrna bound to Tripoli, having on board one officer and
20 soldiers, 14 merchants, and some women and children, all
Tripolitans.   Considering this a good opportunity to negotiate
an exchange with the bey for some Americans whom his cruisers
had taken, the commodore proceeded straight to Tripoli and,;



arriving off the port on the 3rd of September, sent on shore a
message to that effect. The bey said he would not give one
  VOL.   III.                                         M
