    1802.]            BUONAPARTE AND TOUSSAINT-LOUVIRTURE.                     163

have the protection of the English and that the ships of the
                                                      ;


       would prevent those of France from transporting any
    latter
troops to recapture the island, or from otherwise molesting him
in his possession.
   As soon as the negotiation between France and England had
assumed a favourable appearance, the ex-proprietors of estates
in St. Domingo, strengthened by the whole
                                                 body of French
merchants, who keenly felt the loss of so fair a portion of their
trade, applied to the first consul to send out an army and retake
the island. The nation at large seemed to have but one
                                                            feeling
on the subject; and Buonaparte, in despite, as he had himself
                                     1
declared, of his better judgment, gave orders to equip an ex-
pedition suitable to the magnitude of the undertaking. The
army was to be composed of 21,200 men, under General Leclerc                        ;


and the fleet to convey them to the Antilles was to consist of 33
sail of the line, and
                      nearly an equal number of frigates, ship and
brig corvettes, and flute-transports, under the command of Vice-
admiral Yillaret-Joyeuse.
   >n the 14th of December, 1801, after a
     I

                                              long delay by con-
trary winds, a fleet composed of 10 French sail of the line, under
the commander-in-chief, and of five Spanish, under Vice-admiral
Gravina, accompanied by six fri gates, four corvettes and smaller
vessels, and two transports, containing altogether 7000 men, set
sail  from the road of Brest. On the morning of the 17th, off
I           one French sail of the line, one frigate, one corvette,
    lelle-Isle,
and one flute, with 900 men on board, joined from Lorient; and
a squadron from Rochefort, under Bear-admiral La Touchc-
Treville, consisting of six sail of the line, six frigates, two
corvettes, and two despatch-vessels, and having on board 3000
men, was expected to join, but did not until the combined fleet,
on the 29th of January, 1802, reached Cape Samana on the
island of its destination.    One 74, the Duquesne, and one
frigate, the Cornelie, having on board 700 men between them,
had parted company which left 10,500 as the number of men
                               ;


to be disembarked from the first division of the fleet.
   The following were the dispositions for landing the troops                   ;


1000, under General Kerverseau, at Santo-Domingo              3000,        ;


under General Boudet, at Bort-au-Brincc 2500, under General  ;


Rochambeau, in Mancenille bay, to attack Fort-Dauphin, and,
 n carrying it, to proceed to the mole St. Nicolas, there to be
joined by 4000 men under General Hardy. While the ships
were proceeding to their assigned points of debarkation, two
                  1
                      See O'Meara's Napoleon in Exile, vol, ii., p. 199.
