172          BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.        [1803.

commanded by a lieutenant de vaisseau, abandoned her and
retreated to the shore   where, in concert with a party of military,
                         ;



they posted themselves behind some sand-banks that lay abreast
and within musket-shot of their vessel. From this position the
French soldiers and sailors kept up a constant fire upon the
people in the boats and on board the Favori and received a
                                                  ;



return from the British marines, until the lugger, by the exertions
of the prize-master and his men, had gamed a safe distance from
the shore. One seaman killed was the extent of the loss on the
British side.
     On the 14th of September, at 8 a.m., the Immortalite frigate,
in  company with the bomb-vessels, Perseus, Captain John
Methuist, and Explosion, Captain Bobert Paul, commenced an
attack upon the batteries that protect the town of Dieppe, also
on 17 gun-vessels building in the port, The firing was con-
tinued on both sides until 11 h. 30m. a.m.; when the lee-tide
making strong, and the town having taken fire badly in one
place, and slightly in two others, the frigate and bomb-vessels
weighed, and proceeded off St. Valery en Caux, where six gun-
boats were constructing. At 3 p.m. the British opened a firo
upon that place, and continued it for an hour, apparently with
some effect Captain Owen then retired, with the loss of one
              :



man missing and five men wounded.
  On the 13th of September, in        the evening, the British
18-pounder 32-gun frigate Cerberus, Captain William Selby,
bearing the flag of Bear-admrial Sir James Saumarez, anchored
as close to the town of Granville as the tide would admit,
having only 16 feet under her keel at low water. In company
with the Cerberus were the sloops-of-war, Charwell and Kite,
Captains Philip Dumaresq and Philip Pipon, Ealing schooner,
Lieutenant "William Archbold, and "Cartaret" cutter, with
whose commander's name we are unacquainted. As soon as the
bomb-vessels Sulphur and Terror, Captains Daniel M'Leod and
George Nicholas Hardinge, which were hourly expected, should
arrive, it was intended to bombard the port of Granville, in the
hope to destroy some of the numerous gun-boats lying within
the pier.
   At 11 p.m. the Terror came up but, having as well as the
                                     ;


Cerberus grounded at low water, it was not until 2 a.m. on the
14th, that Captain Hardinge could get to the station assigned
him. Being then judiciously placed by her commander, the
Terror commenced throwing shells from her two mortars, and
received an immediate return from the gun and niortar batteries
