1803.]           BOAT ATTACK Otf THE FAVORI.                 171

formidable to call for the fullest attention of an enemy. With
this view the British government, very soon after war was
declared, stationed cruisers, commanded by active and expe-
rienced officers, in front of all those ports along the Channel
frontier of France, from Ostende to Cape La Hougue, and thence
to Granville, at which divisions of gun-vessels were known to be
constructing or fitting out. Buonaparte's plan, for the employ-
ment of this apparently insignificant description of force in the
invasion of England, was not matured until the ensuing year ;
but, in the mean time, considerable activity prevailed among
the different entrepots along the above line of coast. On most
occasions, when any of the flotilla ventured from under the pro-
tection of their batteries, they were met, and either captured or
driven back, by the blockading force     ;
                                            and were sometimes
attacked with success, even when moored, as they considered,
beyond the reach of British enterprise.      We mean now to em-
body the most interesting of the skirmishes that ensued, during
the present year, between British cruisers and the French inva-
sion-flotilla.
  On the 14th of June, in the morning, the British 18-pounder
.">6-gun frigate Immortalite,Captain Edward "William Campbell
Rich Owen, and 18-gun brig-sloops Cruiser and Jalouse, Captain
John Hancock and Christopher Strachey, chased the two French
gun-vessels, Inabordable schooner and Commode brig, each carry-
ing one 18, and three 24 pounder long guns, on shore upon the
east part of Cape Blanc-Nez.   As soon as the flood-tide made,
the Cruiser and Jalouse stood in, and, anchoring with springs,
commenced engaging the batteries under which the gun-vessels
had grounded. At the end of an hour's mutual cannonade the
batteries were silenced and, in the face of a heavy fire of mus-
                        ;




ketry from the cliffs, by which Mr. Charles Adams, master's
mate of the Jalouse, the only person hurt, was badly wounded,
the boats of the three British vessels boarded and brought off
the French brig and schooner.
  On the 1st of August a French armed lugger, which the British
38-gun frigate Hydra, Captain George Mundy, had prevented
from entering the port of Havre, having hauled close to the
beach about two miles to the westward of the river Touque,
Captain Mundy despatched the Hydra's boats, under the orders
of Lieutenant Francis     M'Mahon Tracy assisted by Messrs.
John Barclay and George French, midshipmen, to endeavour to
bring off or destroy her. On the near approach of the boats the
crew of the lugger, which was the Favori, of four carriage-guns,
