104                       FRANCE AND ST. DOMINGO.                           [1802.

other French squadrons arrived at the rendezvous one from              :




Toulon, of four sail of the line and one frigate, under Bear-
admiral Ganteaume, with 2300 men the other from Cadiz, of
                                                    ;


three sail of the line and three frigates, under Bear-admiral
Linois, with 1500 men on board.    In the mean time, the 10,500
troops that had arrived in the first division, partly by intrigue
and partly by force, had effected their landing.
   It is foreign to these pages to enter upon the details of the
military operations which, after a brave and protracted resistance
on the part of the indigenes, led to their dispersion or surrender               ;


but even this did not take place until the remaining 6900 of the
21,200 French troops ordered upon the expedition arrived at the
island.   The black chief, who had exhibited so many traits of
moderation and generalship, after capitulating and being allowed
to return to his home, was suddenly arrested and conveyed on
board the Heros 74, lying off Gona'fves. On being brought on
board the French ship, this extraordinary man is said to have
uttered these words " En me renversant, on n'a abattu que le
                           .



tronc de l'arbre de la liberte des noirs, il repoussera par les
racines parcequ'elles sont profondes et nombreuses."
  Having been thus illegally dragged on board the Heros, Tous-
saint was most inhumanly, and contrary to all the assurances
held out to him by General Leclerc, transported to France, to
end his days in a prison. He was shut up in Fort de Joux, and
died six months afterwards in rather a mysterious way. On
this subject the following appears in a work of considerable
notoriety:    "I mentioned Toussaint-Louverture, and observed
that, amongst other calumnies, some of his (Buonaparte's) ene-
mies had asserted that he had caused him to be put to death
                               '
privately in prison.               It does not deserve         an answer,' replied
Napoleon  ;
            what possible interest could I have in putting a
              '




negro to death after he had arrived in France ? Had he died in
St. Domingo, then indeed something might have been suspected,

but, after he had safely landed in France,                      what object could
have been in view?' " l
  Whatever, in reality, was the mode by which Toussaint ended
his days, the act of forcibly withdrawing him from St. Do-
mingo, after he had honourably capitulated, proved in the end as
impolitic as it was cruel.Several enterprising black chiefs still
remained on the island  Clerveaux, Christophe, Faul-Louverture
                                   :




(nephew to Toussaint), and Dessalines and who, with the whole
                                                        ;


uf their countrymen, were exasperated at the treachery which
                  1
                      O'Meara's Napole"on hi Exile, vol. ii., p. 19a
