                      ADMIRAL CORNWALLIS OFF BREST.                     169
1803.]

the Marengo 74. for the French settlements in India, of which
he had heen appointed governor-general and whither the Ma-
                                                        ;




rengo, and the frigates Atalante, Belle-Poule, and Semillante,
and transports Cote-d'Or and Marie-Francoise, were carrying,
for the alleged purpose of taking possession of Pondicherry
agreeably to the third article of the treaty of Amiens, about
1350 troops.
  It appears by one or two paragraphs in the document alluded
to, that the first consul did not anticipate an actual rupture
      1



before the month of September. War was, however, declared by
England, virtually on the 16th of May, when letters of marque
and general reprisals were ordered, and formally in two days
afterwards and, had the declaration bore date in the preceding
              ;



February, no one acquainted with the avowed intentions of
Buonaparte could say it had issued a day too early. Simul-
taneously with the order for reprisals against French ships,
issued one for detaining ships belonging to the Batavian re-
public, Holland being to all intents and purposes a province of
France.
      Convinced that the peace of the world is generally held by a
thread, which the caprice of a minister may almost at any time
break, we shall not puzzle ourselves, or the reader, with endea-
vouring to investigate the causes of the war which commenced
in the year 1803, but shall plunge at once into the details of its
operations such operations at least as lie within our province,
              ;



those in which the navies of the several belligerents take a part.
  On the 17th of May, at 7 p.m., Admiral the Honourable
William Cornwallis, in whose able hands the command of the
Channel fleet still remained, having his flag on board the Dread-
nought 98, sailed from Cawsand bay, with a fleet of 10 sail of
the line and frigates, to cruise off Ushant and watch the motions
of the French ships in Brest harbour, five or six only of which
were in a state to put to sea. Of the remaining 21 ships of the
line which the port contained, some were fitting, others repair-
ing, and three were still upon the stocks, Vjut on the eve of being
launched. Could, therefore, a greater force than 10 sail of the
line have been sent to cruise off Brest, it would, in the divided
state of the French navy, have been wholly tinneccssary.
   Owing to the very reduced state of the Batavian navy, which,
including three or four ships in the ports of Spain, now consisted
of not more than seven sail of the fine and a few frigates in a
serviceable state, three British ships were all that were required
                  1
                      For the original of which see Appendix, No. 15.
