180.".]
                          INVASION-FLOTILLA.                   173

on the heights near the town, also from some guns mounted upon
the pier, and several gun-vessels stationed at the entrance of the
harbour. The fire was kept up until after 5 a.m. when the
                                                       ;


Terror was recalled, and, weighing, re-anchored at a greater
distance from the town, with a loss of only two men wounded
by splinters.
   Shortly afterwards the Sulphur bomb, whose bad sailing had
prevented her from beating up, arrived and anchored in company
with the Cerberus and squadron. In the evening both bomb-
vessels threw a few shells but the tide prevented them from
                              ;



getting near enough to produce much effect.
   On the loth, in the morning, all the ships were enabled to
take capital positions and soon after 5 a.m. the bombardment re-
                      ;


commenced with great spirit, and continued until 10 h. 30 m. a.m. ;


when the falling tide rendered it necessary for the British ships
to withdraw from the attack.      Although 22 gun-vessels, which
had hauled out of the pier and formed themselves in a regular
line, had united with the batteries around the port in replying to
the fire of the British, no loss and very little damage was sus-
tained by the latter.
  Shortly after getting under sail to remove into deeper water,
the Cerberus grounded upon one of the sand-banks. Nine of the
French gunboats, perceiving the situation of the British frigate,
attempted to annoy her, and began a heavy cannonade, but were
eventually compelled, by the fire of the Charwell, Kite, bomb-
vessels, and cutters, to retire for shelter into the harbour. After
remaining aground about three hours, the Cerberus floated with
the rising tide. The attack upon the French town and gun-
vessels then ceased ; nor was it known that any material effect
had been produced by it.
   On the 27th of September, in the evening, a division of sloops,
bombs, and smaller vessels, under the orders of Captain Samuel
.Jackson of the 16-gun ship-sloop Autumn, anchored off Calais,
the bomb-vessels to the north-east of the town, and the re-
mainder of the squadron abreast of the town and pier-head
battery.   The French immediately opened a fire from all direc-
tions, and the iirst shell fell within a ship's length of the Autumn
and burst under water. The vessels being at this time so close
to each other as to be in danger from the enemy's shells, Captain
Jackson directed them to weigh and re-anchor in more open
order, while he remained witli the Autumn in her original
station.  In this way the bombardment continued for several
 hours, with some apparent damage to the east end of the town,
