168                      BRITISH    AND FRENCH FLEETS.                                        [1803.


diately to be laid down, part in Flushing and Ostende, and the
remainder in ports of France. Gun-vessels and flat-bottomed
boats were also to be constructed at every convenient spot along
the shores of the Scheldt, the Weser, and the Elbe and a quan-                ;



tity of ship-timber, hemp, and other naval stores, to the value
of 20,000,000 of francs, was ordered to be immediately purchased
in Holland. In testimony, also, of his love for the naval service,
Buonaparte, since the 25th of January, 1802, had made his
brother Jerome an enseigne de vaisseau.
   In the road of Brest were lying four ships of the line nine                            :



others were in the docks, repairing and nearly ready and these                    ;



were ordered to be expedited by all possible means.          Three
were on the stocks, nearly finished and five lay in the inner
                                                        ;


harbour, waiting their turns to be docked making a total of 21   ;



serviceable line-of-battle ships in the port of Brest. There were
also lying up in the harbour six or eight old and worn-out
ships, including the Invincible and Terrible three-deckers.
   In the port of Lorient were three ships on the stocks, expected
to be launched in November         and two additional ones were
                                             ;


ordered to be laid down.       At St. Malo a 74 was ordered to
be built and at Nantes four frigates, exclusive of two Dutch-
               ;


built 74s, intended for the Scheldt squadron.         At Bordeaux
another of the latter was ordered to be built.       At Bochefort
three line-of-battle ships were building, and nearly ready three                      :



others were now ordered. At Toulon there were eight shij:>s of
the line afloat, two on the stocks nearly finished, and two others
about to be commenced. At Marseilles the last of the 10 Dutch-
built 74s for the Scheldt squadron was ordered to be laid down.
At Genoa a 74-gun ship and frigate were immediately to be put
in hand, from draughts prepared at Brest. 1    There were also
nine French line-of-battle ships at, or coming from, the island
of St. Domingo, and one, the Marengo, on her road to the East
Indies making a total of 66 skips, including 47 afloat, or soon
           ;

                         2
expected to be so.
  If it were not quite clear, from the very nature of these for-
midable preparations, thus carried on in the midst of peace, that
a renewal of the war with England was contemplated, no doubt
could exist, on a perusal of the instructions which, since early in
February, Buonaparte had drawn up for the guidance of General
Decaen. On the 6th of March this officer sailed from Brest, in
  1
      Precis des Evenemens Militaires, &c„       tenant-General des Arme'es du Roi.               A.
par   M le Comte Matliieu Dumas, Lieu-           Paris, 1822 ;
                                                   2
                                                                  tome xi., p. 189.
                                                       Sec p. 15S ; also Appendix, No. 14.
