 170         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.              —CHANNEL.           [1803,

 in the North Sea.  Four or five others were in the Irish Channel ;
 about an equal number cruised to the southward of Brest and,        ;


 of those remaining in Plymouth and Portsmouth, upwards of 20
 were fitting for sea, as fast as the dearth of seamen, and unfor-
 tunate want of stores, would admit.
    Although the watchfulness of Admiral Cornwallis, who, on
 the 9th of July, shifted his flag from the Dreadnought to the
 112 gun-ship Ville-de-Paris, precluded any addition to the Brest
 fleet from without the port, two fine ships joined it from within.
 Both were launched on the same clay, the 15th of August one             ;



the Cassard 74, the other, the celebrated three-decker on hand
since the year 1794, and which, under such highly- wrought
feelings, was then ordered to be named the Vengeur, to com-
memorate the supposed martyrdom of the 74 of that name,
captured and sunk in Lord Howe's action.
                                             1


   The summer passed, and the year nearly closed, without any
material change in the relative positions of the Brest and Channel
fleets.  On Christmas day, however, the strong south-west gales,
which, with short intermissions had blown for some weeks, in-
creased to so alarming a height, that the blockading ships, one
and all, were compelled to retire from the French coast, and
seek safety in Plymouth and other British ports. At this time
lay in the outer road of Brest, ready for sea, the Yengeur three-
decker, bearing the flag of Mce-admiral Laurent-Jean-Francois
Truguet, an 80, with Bear-admiral Ganteaume's flag, and six 74s,
attended by about an equal number of frigates and corvettes, but
they made no attempt to sail.
  Before the end of the year there were several other of the
continental ports opening into the ocean, which, besides Brest,
contained French ships of the line, and in sufficient number
when united to excite some attention. At Bochefort had re-
cently arrived, along with some frigates, two of the nine sail of
the line, already mentioned as at, or coming from, the island of
St. Domingo when the war broke out.        In Ferrol and Corunna
were lying five other of those line-of-battle ships, and a sixth,
ship (making the eighth in the whole), the Aigle 74, had put
into Cadiz.   To guard all these ports, except the last, was a part
of the duty of the commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet and,  ;


as soon as practicable, they were watched by British squadrons
corresponding in force with the French squadrons within them.
  Although a single gun-boat is not of a force to excite alarm,
several scores of such vessels, united in a fleet, are sufficiently
                          i
                              See vol. i., p. 193.
