 174        BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   —CHANNEL.         [1803.

but with none whatever to the British squadron. At length a
gale from the north-east obliged the ships to weigh and stand
off ;
     and thus the action ended.
   On the next day, the 28th, a division of gun-boats, taking
advantage of the absence of the British squadron, quitted Calais
for Boulogne and, although chased and fired at by the 36-gun
              ;


frigate Leda, Captain Bobert Honyman, they arrived in safety
at then* destination. On the 29th, a second division, 25 in
number, attempted to do the same and, after a three hours'
                                     ;


cannonade by the Leda, the whole, except the two which ran
on shore and were bilged upon the rocks, succeeded in reaching
the anchorage off the pier of Boulogne forming, with those
                                           ;



already there, a force of 55 sail.
   On the 31st of October, at 9 a.m., while the Leda frigate, in
company with the Lark and Harpy          sloops-of-war,   were   off

Etaples, working towards the shore against a strong east-south-
east wind, a large gun-brig, said to be of 12 long 24-pounders,
with six schooners and sloops under her convoy, was observed
coming out of the port. Captain Honyman immediately sig-
nalled the Plarpy and Lark to make sail in chase. About this
time, however, the British hired cutter, Admiral Mitchell, of 12
carronades, 12-pounders, and 35 men and boys, commanded by
Lieutenant Alexander Shippard, being close off Boulogne, the
port to which the vessels were steering, gallantly stood after
them and, at 10 a.m., brought the gun-brig to action, close
        ;


under the batteries of Portet. At the end of a two hours and a
half's engagement, the cutter drove the gun-brig and one of the
sloops on shore.
  The Admiral Mitchell's mast and cross-jack yard were wounded
in several places, by a shell which fell on board, and her sails
and rigging were a good deal cut by grape the cutter had also
                                               :



one carronade dismounted, and was hulled in several places.
Fortunately, however, her loss did not amount to more than two
men badly, and two slightly wounded. The strong land-wind
having entirely prevented the small British squadron in the offing
from acting, this affair was highly creditable to Lieutenant Ship-
pard, and the officers and crew of the Admiral Mitchell.      Our
attention is now called to the Mediterranean.
  The British naval force upon that station, at the breaking out
of the war, consisted of 10 sail of the line, under the command
of Bear-admiral Sir Bichard Bickerton, in the Kent 74. The
probability that this extensive and important station would soon
become the scene of very active operations, led to the appoint-
