1803.]
                         JUNCTION OF THE BRITISH FLEETS.                                175

ment of Yice-aclmiral Lord Nelson to the chief command. His
lordship, accordingly, on the
                              18th of May, hoisted his flag on
board his old ship the Victory, in Portsmouth harbour. On the
20th, at 5 p.m., accompanied by the 18-pounder 32-gun frigate
Ampliion, Captain Thomas Masterman Hardy, the Victory sailed
from Spithead, bound, in the first instance, to the fleet off
Brest, to ascertain if her assistance would be required by
Admiral Cornwallis in which event she was to remain with
                                  ;


the latter, and the vice-admiral was to proceed to his station in
the frigate.
  On the 22nd, at 4 p.m., the two ships arrived off the island of
Ushant, the appointed rendezvous but a severe gale of wind  ;


had blown the British fleet from its station. After a vain search
for the admiral, both at the rendezvous and nearer to Brest,
Lord Nelson, at 7 h. 30 m. p.m. on the 23rd, shifted his flag to
the Amphion, and at 8 p.m., made sail, with a fair wind, leaving
the Victory to follow, in case her services should be dispensed
with by the commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet.
   On the 25th, in the morning, the wind shifted from north-west
to south-west, and blew fresh. The foul wind, with a heavy sea,
continued until the night of the 30th, when a light air sprang up
from the northward. With the aid of this, the Amphion, on the
morning of the 3rd of June, entered the Straits, and at 9 h. 30 m.
p.m. anchored in the bay of Gibraltar.   On the 4th, at 4 a.m., the
Amphion weighed and made sail. On the loth, the frigate
reached Malta ; quitted it on the 17th, at 3 a.m., and on the 25th,
arrived off Naples, where his lordship expected to find the
squadron.   Sir Richard had, however, since the 4th, sailed for
Toulon    and thither the Amphion immediately bent her course.
              ;


A  succession of calms and light winds made it the 8th of July
ore Lord Nelson could reach his old cruising-grouud, where he
found Sir Richard, with the
<Jun ship.
    SO       Gibraltar   ....             (
                                            Captain George Frederick Ryves.
                                            Kear-adrniral (w.) Sir Richard Bickerton, Bart.
             Kent   •    •    •       -


                                          \ Captain Edward O'Bryen.
             Donegal                           ,,    Sir Richard John Strachan, Bart.
                    ....
                          .   .       .   .




    'Superb                                    ,,    Richard Goodwin Keats,
                    ....,,
             Belleisle
             Renown ....
                                                      John Whitby.
                                                      John Chambers White.
                                              ,,

    „,   I   Monmouth         ...                     George Hart.
                              ...             ,   ,


                                                      <   Jharles Marsh Sohomberg.
         [   Agincourt                        ,   ,



    Frigates, Active, Pheebe,
                              and (now) Amphion.

    The French line-of-battle force in Toulon consisted                              of seven
