iso:;.J
                      capture op the minerve.                   183
     " In the
           evening the Minerve, running close in with Cherbourg
in   a thickfog, mistook Fort de la Liberte for Pelee; and a
number of vessels being seen to the eastward, the pilot assured
the captain he might run amongst them without hesitation. The
helm was accordingly put up for the purpose, when just as the
ship was about to open her fire she grounded, and the fog at
the same tim<; dispersing, discovered her to be in a very perilous
situation.  She was on the western Cone Head, about six fur-
longs from Fort de la Liberte, of 70 guns and 15 mortars and;


one mile from the isle of Pelee, of 100 guns, and 25 mortars,
from both of which a fire almost immediately opened. This
happened about nine o'clock in the evening. Captain Brenton,
aware that strong and decided measures were necessary, and
that the launch of a frigate was not calculated to carry out a
bower anchor, immediately despatched his boats armed, to cut
out a vessel from under the batteries, of sufficient capacity for
the purpose whilst the launch, with her carronade, should be
                 ;



employed in diverting the fire of two gun-brigs, lying in such a
position ahead of the Minerve, as to annoy her greatly by a
raking fire. The yawl, being the first boat in the water, was
sent under the orders of the Honourable Lieutenant William
"Walpole, and the other boats were directed to follow as soon as
ready but the gallant officer, to whom the enterprise was in-
          ;



tnxsted, found his own boat sufficient.   He proceeded under a
heavy fire of round, grape, and musketry, and from her position
close to the batteries, cut out a lugger of 50 tons, laden with
stone for the works, and towed her off to the ship. Before the
bower anchor could be placed in this vessel, it was necessary
to clear her of her cargo, and that this might be done, without
adding to the shoal on which the ship lay, she was veered astern
by the ebb-tide to the length of a hawser. Unfortunately, the
moon shone with great brightness. The enemy's fire became
very galling the more so as no return could be made but from
                 :




the two forecastle guns, those of the main deck having been all
run close forward for the purpose of lightening the ship abaft,
where she hung. At 11 p.m. the lugger, being cleared, was
brought under the larboard cathead, to receive the small bower
anchor, and during this operation, was so frequently struck by
the gun-brigs, as to keep a carpenter constantly employed in
stopping the shot-holes. By midnight all was ready a kedgo
                                                       ;



anchor had been previously laid out for the purpose of warping
the lugger, but the moment the hawser became taut, it was shot
away.         Everything now depended upon the boats, which were
