1803.]                 DORIS   AND AFFRONTEUR.                    179

time to Agincourt sound. In this commodious
                                                harbour, Lord
Nelson and his squadron lay at anchor at the close of the
                                                          year        ;

the port of Toulon, and the force within it,
                                               being carefully
watched by Captain Ross Donnelly, of the Narcissus, with an-
other frigate or two in company.


                   Light Squadrons and Single Ships.
  On the 18th of May the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
Doris, Captain Richard Henry Pearson, cruising off Ushant, fell
in with and chased the French national
                                       lugger Affronteur, of 14
long eights and 92 men, commanded by Lieutenant Morce-
Andre Dutoya. Gaining fast upon the lugger the Doris fired a
shot wide of her, to induce her to shorten        sail,   but without
effect.   To a second shot, discharged this time at her, the
lugger fired a shot in return, and actually maintained a running
fight with the frigate, until the latter ran close alongside. Nor
did the Affronteur even then give up the contest, until her
captain and eight of her men were killed, and 14 wounded, one
of them mortally. The Doris received some slight
                                                         damage in
the hull and rigging, and had one man wounded, by the fire of
her puny but resolute antagonist.
   It is hard to draw the line between a resistance that is
                                                              pru-
dential, and one which is, as this has been pronounced, "fraught
with temerity. '
                   Had the lugger shot away the frigate's fore-
topmast, and thereby effected her escape, all would have united
in praising the skill and bravery of   M. Dutoya and his people.
Had the Affronteur surrendered at the first fire, few would have
admitted that her officers and men deserved to belong to a
national cruiser, even of her small class. At all events, in a
service where so much is to be effected by undauntcdness, it is
safer to praise the extreme of that quality, than not to censure
an over-cautious discretion.
  The capture of the Affronteur, it will be observed, took place
on the very day on which the declaratian of war issued from St.
James's. This, with the capture of two merchant-vessels on the
same or the following day, was made a subject of serious com-
                           "
plaint against England.      Centre le droit des gens, mais suivont
un usage trop commun de la part de 1'Angleterrc, les hostilites
pix'cedercnt la declaration de guerre. On croyait encore a Paris
les negociatkns en activite lorsqu'on y apprit, par une depeche

telegraphiquc du prefet maritime do Brest, que les Anglais
s'etaient empares de deux batimens marchands dans la baie
