180             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                     [1803i


d'Audierne le meme jour, ou le lendemain, ils attaquerent les-
            ;


bfitimens de guerre francais."
                                  1
                                    The fact is, so far from the
                    " in
negotiation being        activity," Lord Whitworth had obtained
his passports since the 12th of the month, and General Andreossi
had applied for his a week earlier. Moreover, it was only on the
25th of May that General Mortier, from his head-quarters at
Coerveden, summoned the Hanoverian electorate to surrender to
his army.
  On the 28th of May the French 36-gtra frigate Franchise, still
commanded by Captain Jurien, but with 10 of her guns in the
hold, and a reduced complement of 187 men, was captured by
the 74-gun ship Minotaur, Captain John Charles Moore Mans-
field, and two other 74s, which had chased from the Channel
fleet.  The prize was 35 days from Port-au-Prince, bound to
Brest. Being a tolerably fine frigate of 898 tons, the Fran-
chise was added to the British navy, by the same name, as a
12-pounder 36.
  On the 25th of June, in latitude 47° 10' north, longitude 20°
west, the British 24-pounder 40-gun frigate Endymion, Captain
the Honourable Charles Paget, fell in with, and after a chase of
eight hours, captured, the French ship-corvette Bacchante, of
18 long 12-pounders and 200 men, commanded by Lieutenant
Francois-Louis Kerimel and who persisted so long in his endea-
                               ;


vours to escape, that the Endymion's chase-guns killed his first-
lieutenant and seven seamen, and wounded nine others.
  When fallen in with, the Bacchante was on her way to Brest
from St. Domingo, whither she had sailed with despatches about
three months previous. The prize was a remarkably fine cor-
vette of 642 tons, and became added to the British navy, under
her French name, as a post-ship.
  On the 27th of June, at night, three boats belonging to the
British 38-gun frigate Lone, Captain Frederick Lewis Maitland,
cruising off the Isle of Bas, was despatched, under the orders
of Lieutenants Francis Temple and James Bowen, assisted
among others by Midshipman Philip Henry Bridges, to attack
the French 10-gun brig Ycnteux, Lieutenant Gilles-Francois
Montfort, lying close under the batteries of the island. Owing
to the heavy rowing of one of the boats, two only could get up.
These, in the most gallant manner, boarded, and after a severe
conflict of 10 minutes carried, the French brig whose 10 guns     ;


consisted of four long 18-pounders, and six 36-pounder brass
carronades. The Venteux was perfectly prepared for the attack,
                   i
                       Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 2.
