182             UUHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.            [1803,


water, managed so badly that the French frigate effected her
escape into Cape Nicholas Mole.
  The Hercule was a good deal damaged in her rigging and
sails,and had a few men wounded, but none killed. A French
account erroneously states, that the Hercule had 40 men killed
and wounded, including among the former her captain. Captain
                                                           as we
Ferris, in fact, was at Jamaica, and the first-lieutenant,
have stated, was the acting commander. The Poursuivante had
her masts, rigging, sails, and hull very much cut up, and lost
six men killed and 15 wounded.     Great credit was due to Cap-
                           and crew, for the skill and spirit
tain Willaumez, his officers
which they evinced upon the occasion. The Poursuivante, we
believe, eventually reached Eochcfort; but, as far as our
                                                             re-
searches go, this powerful frigate never afterwards went to sea.
Having been built in a Dutch port, and that as long ago as the
year 1794 or 1795, the Poursuivante, in all probability, was
found to be rotten and unserviceable.
  On the 30th of June, soon after daylight, as the Cumberland
and Vanguard 74s, Captains Henry William Bayntun and James
Walker, were cruising between Jean-Eabel and Cape Nicholas
Mole, a large ship was discovered steering down towards the
last-named port. The two 74s immediately went in chase, and
soon arrived up, the Vanguard on the starboard beam, and the
Cumberland on the larboard bow, of the French 40-gun frigate
Creole, Captain Jean-Marie-Pierre Lebastard.
  After receiving a few shot from the Vanguard, and firing one
in return, the Creole hauled down her colours.     The frigate had
quitted Cape-Francois the preceding day, and had on board
General Morgan, the second in command at the island, and his
staff,   together with 530 troops, but only 150 seamen.  Being a
fine large frigate, the Creole was added in her   own name to the
38-gun class of the British navy but, owing in a great degree
                                   ;


to the insufficient manner in which she was repaired at Port
Eoyal dockyard, the Creole, commanded by Captain Austin
Bissell, foundered on her passage to England, and
                                                   had it not
been for the presence of other ships, would have consigned her
officers and crew to a watery grave.
   On the 2nd of July the British 38-gun frigate Minerve, Cap-
tain Jahleel Brenton, grounded and was captured at the entrance
of the harbour of Cherbourg. The circumstances under which
this happened have been so fully detailed by Captain Brcnton's
brother, that we cannot do better than transcribe our contem-
porary's account.
