176       BRITISH         AND FRENCH FLEETS.       —MEDITERRANEAN.             ["1803.



ships, nearly ready for sea,
                             under Vice-admiral Eene-Madeleine
La Touche-Treville, two repairing in the arsenal, and five on the
stocks.  The ships afloat were the 80s Formidable and Indomp-
table, and 74s Atlas, Berwick (late British), Intrepide, Mont
Blanc, and Scipion the two in dock were
                            ;
                                          the late British ships
Hannibal, now Annibal, and Swiftsure and those on the stocks,
                                                       ;



were the 80s Bucentaure and Neptune, and 74s Boree, Phaeton,
and Pluton, the two 80s and the last-named 74 nearly ready for
launching.
  At this time nearly the whole of the Mediterranean coast was
subject, more or less, to the sway
                                   of France.  In Barcelona and
other Spanish ports, French cruisers were allowed to carry in and
sell their prizes, while to a British vessel admittance was prohi-
bited by an order of the government.                   Genoa was as much France
as Toulon, and in her dockyard was constructing a French 74, to
be named after her, the Genois. Tuscany was gradually becom-
ing French and so was Sardinia, although under the mask of a
                ;

                                          state in the two Sicilies
rigid neutrality. Except Naples, every
was obedient to the nod of Buonaparte ; who had set his emissa-
ries at work in the Morea, to excite the Greeks to an insurrection

against  the Turks, in the hope, by taking part with the latter, to
obtain Egypt as the price of, what could not fail to be, a success-
ful interference.

  Expecting, probably, that the Victory
                                        would not be detained
                                      continued on board the
by Admiral Cornwallis, Lord Nelson
Amphion, in preference to removing to a larger ship.                         Within
                                      as already stated, separated
forty hours after the Amphion had,
from the Victory, the latter fell in with the Channel fleet, and,
after a stay of scarcely two hours, was permitted to proceed on
her   passage to the Mediterranean.       On the 28th of May, in
latitude 45° 40' north, longitude 6° 10' west, Captain Sutton was
fortunate enough to fall in with and capture the French 32-gun
        Embuscade (late British Ambuscade ), Captain Jean-
                                                               1

frigate
Baptiste-Alexis Fradin,
                        30 days from Cape-Francois, bound to
Bochefort, with not the whole of her guns mounted, and with a
crew of only 187 men.
   On the 12th of June, in the evening, the Victory anchored in
Gibraltar, and departed thence on the afternoon
                                                of the 15th. On
the 9th of July, she anchored in the harbour of Valetta, island
of Malta, and quitted it on the 11th and on the 30th, at about
                                                   ;


4 p.m., a few leagues to the westward of Cape Sicie, the Victory
                                     then consisting of the Gib-
joined the Mediterranean squadron,
 J See vol. ii. p. 273.   The Ambuscade was restored to her rank in the British Navy.
