178       BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — MEDITERRANEAN.     ("1803.


the important discovery. Some time in the year 1802 the G4-
gun ship Agincourt, then commanded by Captain Eyves, was
detached by Sir Richard Bickerton, to proceed to the Magda-
lena islands, and, if possible, prevent the French taking pos-
session of them, as, according to intelligence recently received,
they were about to do, notwithstanding the treaty of Amiens.
At this period there did not exist a chart of those islands nor;



was it known that any ship-of-war had ever anchored among
them the Agincourt herself, indeed, was nearly lost in doing
      :



so.   No Frenchmen appearing, Captain Eyves spent the week
he was directed to remain there, in making a survey of the
islands   which he performed alone, there not being a single
          :



person on board able to assist him. In May, 1803, Captain
Eyves was promoted to the Gibraltar, and Lord Nelson, we
believe, named the anchorage Agincourt sound.
   On the 9th of November, having obtained a supply of water
and fresh beef for the squadron, Lord Nelson got under way and
sailed from the Magdalena islands but, owing to a continuance
                                     ;



of foul weather, ho did not arrive off Toulon until the 23rd. Here
the British admiral found the French squadron in the outer road,
to all appearance, just as he had left it a month previous.     On
the 24th the Excellent 74, Captain Frank Sotheron, joined the
squadron from England.
   The continuance of gales of wind, with a heavy sea from the
north-west to north-east, and a belief that Spain had at length
settled her neutrality, induced Lord Nelson to take his winter
station off Cape San-Sebastian, keeping frigates off Toulon, to
apprise him of the least movement on the part of the French
ships. Of the weak and ill-provided state of several
                                                        of his ships,
Lord Nelson, in his letters to the admiralty, complained very
                                                     " The
bitterly, and as it appears, not without reason.            Superb,"
says his lordship, "is in a very weak state, but Keats is so
superior to any difficulties, that I hear but little from her. The
Kent is gone to Malta, fit only for a summer passage. Every bit
of twice-laid stuff belonging to the Canopus is condemned, and
all the running rigging in the fleet, except the Victory's.      We
have fitted the Excellent with new main and mizen rigging it       :



was shameful for the dockyard (Portsmouth) to send a ship to
sea with such rigging."
  The severity of the weather, coupled with the inefficient state
of his squadron, compelled the British admiral, about the 12th
of December, to enter the bay of Palma, where the ships re-
mained until the want of water sent them, on the 21st, a second
