.2803.]                  CAPTURE OF THE MIGNONNE,                              181

and bad her deck covered with men. Of these she lost her
second officer and two seamen killed, her commander, with her
four remaining officers, and eight seamen, wounded.       The
British loss amounted to the boatswain (Mr. M'Gwier), four
seamen, and one marine wounded, two of the seamen dangerously.
  Even without reckoning the farce of the batteries, the capture,
by two boats' crews, of a brig armed and manned like the
Yenteux, was a truly gallant exploit and Lieutenant Temple,
                                               ;


the leader of the party, well merited the promotion which he in
consequence obtained. Mr. Bridges, also, of whose conduct on
the occasion Lieutenant Temple spoke in the highest terms, was
made a lieutenant.
  On the 28th of June, as a British squadron, composed of the
74-gun ships Cumberland, Captain Henry William Bayntun,
Goliath, Captain Charles Brisbane, and Hercule, acting captain
Lieutenant John B. Hills, was cruising off Cape Nicholas Mole,
iwo strange sail were discovered in shore.                   These were the
French 24-pounder 44-gun            frigate Poursuivante,          Commodore
Jean-Baptiste-Phillibert Willaumez,and 16-gun ship-corvette
Mignonne, Captain Jean-Pierre Bargeau, neither of them fully
armed or manned, two days from Cayes, bound to the Cape on
their way to France.
      The Goliath by signal went in chase of the Mignonne                  ;   and,
carrying up the breeze while the latter lay becalmed close under
the land, overtook and captured the corvette after the exchange
of a few harmless shot. The Mignonne had landed six of her
16 long 12-pounders (described as 18-pounders in the official
letter), and had on board a crew of only 80 men and boys.    The
prize, a remarkably last-sailing ship, Avas afterwards added to
                                      1


the British navy under her French name but, getting aground
                                                   ;


soon after she was commissioned, the Mignonne was obliged to
be laid in the mud in Port Eoyal harbour, Jamaica.
   When the Goliath's signal was made to chase the Mignonne,
the ( Cumberland made the Hercule's to endeavour to cut off the
Poursuivante. The Ilerculc made sail in very light and baffling
winds, and appears to have brought to to fire her broadside long
before there was any occasion.  hving to this the Poursuivante,
                                        (


untouched by a shot, gained considerably in the chase, although
the Ilerculc was evidently the faster sailer.
                                              Subsequently the
Hercule filled and got within gun-shot, and a smart action
onsucd but the British 74, owing perhaps to a dread of shoal
          ;




  1
      Tim Jamaica measurement of the Mignonne was 612
                                                        tons, but 500 was probably-
fiearer the mark.   See p. 26.
