1803.]                 LORD NELSON OFF TOULON.                             177

raltar, Belleisle, Donegal, Renown, and Monmouth, with the
three frigates, Active, Phoehe, and Amphion. On the same even-
ing, Lord Nelson shifted his flag to the Victory, taking Captain
George Murray as his first captain, and Captain Hardy as his
second, the latter being succeeded in the command of the Am-
phion by Captain Sutton, late of the Victory. The station off
Cape Sicie had been chosen by the vice-admiral on two accounts ;
one, should Spain, as was not thought unlikely, suddenly ally
herself to France, to prevent the junction of a Spanish fleet from
the westward the other, to be sufficiently to windward to be
                   ;


able, if the usual north-easterly gale should shift to north-north-
west, or north-north-cast, to take shelter under the Hyeres
islands, or under Cape San Sebastian.
  Early in the month of August the 80-gun ship Canopus, Rear-
admiral George Campbell, Captain John Conn, joined the British
squadron and on the 15th of the month the fine 80-gun ship
           ;



Neptune was launched at Toulon. This, in a little while, aug-
mented the French force in the road to eight sail of the line                ;


while Lord Nelson, having detached the Canopus and Mon-
mouth, was still left with only six, the Victory, Belleisle, Kent,
Renown, Superb, and Triumph the latter recently arrived, and
                                         ;


commanded by Captain Sir Robert Barlow. A French writer,
alluding to the British naval force in the Mediterranean at this
             "
time, says     L'amiral Nelson croisait avec dix-huit vaisseaux
               :


et un nombre correspondant do fregates.'*        This must have
                                                          1




explained to the satisfaction of the French people why their
admiral, with only eight sail of the line, made no effort to cap-
ture or drive away the blockading force.
  His ships being short of water, Lord Nelson, on the 24th of
October, steered for a newly discovered anchorage among the
Magdalena islands, on the north coast of Sardinia leaving, to      ;


watch the French force in Toulon, the frigates Seahorse and
Narcissus.   On the 31st, at G p.m., after a seven days' anxious
struggle with adverse gales and currents, dark nights and a rocky
and most intricate passage, the whole squadron anchored, with-
out an accident, in Agincourt sound, under the Sardinian shore               ;



a noble harbour formed by an indented bay in the latter, and
defended to the northward by the small islands of St. Estevan,
Spargiotou, Magdalena, and Cibrera.
  This being an anchorage, which, according to the declaration
of Lord Nelson, was one of the finest harbours he had ever seen,
we feel bound to state how Captain Ryves happened to make
                       i   Prdcis des Eveuemens, tome x., p. 5S.
   VOL. Ill,                                                           N
