192          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              [1803.


Sheerness, of eight 4-pounders and 30 men and boys, commanded
by Lieutenant Henry Eowed, having the look-ont on the French
fleet in Brest harbour, observed, close in-shore, two chasse-
marees stealing towards the port. Sending a boat, with seven
men and the mate, to cut off one, the Sheemess herself pro-
ceeded in chase of the other, then nearly five miles distant, and
close under a battery about nine miles to the eastward of Bee
du Baz. At 10 a.m. it fell calm, and the only mode of pursuing
the enemy was by a small boat suspended at the stern of the
Sheerness, and which with difficulty would contain five men.
Lieutenant Bowed acquainted the crew with his determination
to proceed in this boat, and called for four volunteers to accom-
pany him. Immediately John Marks the boatswain, and three
others, came forward and the boat with her five hands put
                       ;


off from the cutter, in chase of the chasse-maree, then about four
miles off, and, by the aid of her sweeps, nearing the shore very
fast.
   After the boat had pulled for two hours, the chasse-maree was
seen to run on shore under the above-mentioned battery, which
stood within a stone's throw of the beach. Notwithstanding
this, and that there were 30 French soldiers drawn up on the
beach to protect the vessel, Lieutenant Bowed continued his
pursuit and, as he and his four followers laid the French chasse-
        ;


maree on board on one side, her crew deserted her from the
other.   It was then that the soldiers opened a heavy fire of
musketry upon the British, who had just commenced cutting the
cable, and were using other means to get the vessel afloat.    In
order that the French soldiers might not see how to point their
pieces, the British seamen, although there was not a breath of
wind, hoisted the foresail; but of which the halliards, almost at
the same moment, were shot away. Fortunately for the enter-
prising crew now on board the chasse-maree, the tide was flow-
ing and aided their exertions the vessel got off, and the boat
                              :



commenced towing her from the shore. Fortunately, also, not a
man of the five was hurt, although, as afterwards counted, 49
musket-balls, intended for them, had lodged in the side and the
two masts of the chasse-maree.
   Scarcely had the prize been towed a third of a mile, when a
French boat, containing an officer and nine men, armed with
muskets, and who had pulled up in the wake of the vessel un-
observed by the boat ahead of her, suddenly made her appear-
ance alongside. In an instant, and without waiting for any
orders, John Marks, the boatswain, dropping his oar, and
