180;;.   I
               RECAPTURE OF THE LORD NELSON.                 191

master, who in the early part of the action had received a
violent contusion, which completely disabled him.
  On the 14th of August, when in latitude 48° north, longitude
1G° west, on her homeward voyage, the British East-India Com-
pany's ship Lord Nelson, Captain Ilobert Spottiswood, of 2G guns
(20 long 18 and six long 12 pounders), and 102 men in crew,
exclusive of passengers, was fallen in with by the French ship-
privateer Bcllone, of 34 guns, including 24 long eights on her
main deck, and 2G0 men. An action ensued, and lasted an hour
and a half, when the privateer succeeded in carrying her oppo-
nent by boarding, but not until the Bellone had been once
repulsed, and the Indiaman sustained a loss of five men killed
and 31 wounded. Placing an officer and 41 men in charge of
the Lord Nelson, the Bellone proceeded with her towards
Corunna. On the 20th a British frigate chased the two ships,
and would have retaken the Indiaman, had not the Bellone,
trusting to her great sailing powers, led away the former. The
Lord Nelson, now alone, was attacked on the 23rd by an English
cutter-privateer, of fourteen G-pounders ; and the latter, highly
to the credit of her officers and crew, maintained a two hours'
action before she was beaten off.
  On the 25th, at 1 p.m., in latitude 46° north, longitude 12°
west, the British L8-gun brig-sloop Seagull (sixteen 24-pounder
carronades and two sixes), Captain Henry Burke, discovered to
leeward and chased the Lord Nelson. At 5 p.m. the latter
hoisted French colours, and fired a gun. At 7 p.m the Seagull
having got within gun-shot, an action commenced which con-
                                                    ;



tinued, with very slight intermission, until G a.m. on the 2Gth;
when the brig, having received two shot between wind and
water, had her masts and rigging much wounded and cut up, and
her foreyard shot away in the slings, hauled off to refit. At
8 h. 30m., just as the Seagull, having replaced her damaged rig-
ging, was about to renew the action, a British squadron, of four
sail of the line, under Captain Sir Edward I'ellew, in the
                                                           80-gun
ship Tonnant, hove in sight. By noon, or a little after, the
Colossus, the advanced ship of Sir Edward's squadron, overtook
and recaptured the Lord Nelson. In her two actions, particu-
larly in that with the Seagull, the Indiaman had received con-
 siderable damage in hull, masts, and rigging her loss by the
                                                :



 brig's fire has not been recorded.    The loss sustained by the
 Seagull amounted to two seamen killed, and seven seamen and
 one marine wounded.
    On the 9th of September, at daylight, the British hired cutter
