188                   LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                                [1803.


keep her pumps incessantly going for three days. With respect
                                                                              1



to the fall of the topsail-yard, no notice is taken of it in the
Boadicea's log and the alleged damage to the hull of the
                        ;




Duguay-Trouin rests upon very questionable authority.
   On the 2nd of September the latter ship and her consort arrived
off Cape Prior.   Here they fell in with a British squadron, under
Commodore Sir Edward Pellcw. The only ship of this squadron,
in a situation to chase with any effect, was the Culloden 74,
Captain Barrington Dacres and at about 11 h. 50 m. a.m. the
                                               ;


latter commenced action with the Duguay-Trouin and Guerriere,
both of whom were well to windward. The French 74, being
the weathermost ship, got first into Corunna, the forts of which
fired at the Culloden as she approached.      With the frigate the
latter kept up a running fight until 2 h. 30 m. p.m.  when, being                 ;



almost in the jaws of the port, the British 74 was obliged to haul
off. The Culloden had four men wounded          and the Guerriere,    ;



according to the French accounts, six men killed and 15 wounded,
including among the latter her captain and first-lieutenant. The
frigate's masts and rigging were also much cut.
   On the 11th of July, in the forenoon, as the British 18-gun
brig-sloop Racoon (16 earronades, 18-pounders, and two long
sixes 2 ), Captain Austen Bissell, was working between the islands
of Guanda and St. Domingo, she observed, and immediately
bore up for, a French brig-corvette, lying at anchor in Leogane
roads.   The latter which was our old acquaintance the Lodi,
now reduced in force to 10 guns, 6-pounders, and 61 men, and
commanded by Lieutenant Pierre-Isaac Taupier, placed spi'ings
on her cables, and prepared to repel the attack of the British
vessel. At 3 h. 15 m. p.m., having anchored, with a spring on her
cable, within 30 yards of the Lodi, the Racoon commenced the
action.   After a mutual cannonade of 30 minutes' duration, the
French brig cut her cables, and began to make off; whereupon
the Racoon cut also, and, following closely, compelled her op-
ponent, at the end of ten minutes more, to strike her colours.
The Lodi was nearly unrigged by the Racoon's well-directed
fire, and sustained a loss of one man killed and 14 wounded.
The Racoon had only one person wounded, master's mate Thomas
Gill, whose left arm was carried away by a round shot.
   On the 17th of August, at 1 p.m., the Racoon, cruising off
  1
      Marshall, vol. i. p. 845.                      to be exchanged for 24s ; and, on Septem-
  2 The Uacoon's earronades had
                                      originally     ber 14, 1S02, the latter were again ex-
been 32-pounders (see       vol.   ii.,   p. 415);   changed for 18s. On this subject see vol.
but on March 3, 1800, these were ordered             i.,   p. 456, note Y*.
