 390              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                               [1803.

 miles to windward, nearly becalmed. The Eacoon
                                                          instantly
 weighed, with a fine land wind, and proceeded in chase. At
 6 h. 30 m. a.m. a brig, a schooner, and a cutter, all
                                                        apparently
 full of men, hoisted French
                             colours, and fired guns to windward.
 The brig attempted to get in-shore of the Eacoon, and her two
 consorts, with the assistance of their sweeps and boats, endea-
 voured to join her. The land breeze, however, carried the
 Eacoon within gun-shot of the brig which, after receiving one
                                      ;

 or two broadsides, struck, and proved to be the Petite-
                                                           Fille,
 French national gun-brig, having on board 180
                                               troops, including
 about 50 officers of all ranks.
   Scarcely had the Eacoon sent an officer and a small party of
men to secure her prize, than the schooner and cutter, having
got nearly Avithin gun-shot, commenced        firing.   Calms and
baffling winds prevented the Eacoon from getting nearer until
10 a.m., when the sea-breeze set in. At 11 a.m. the two vessels
bore up together, evidently with a determination to board the
Eacoon, the cutter steering for her bows, and the schooner haul-
ing out to pass astern. The British brig shortened sail to re-
ceive her two opponents, but kept herself under sufficient com-
mand to counteract their design.     When the assailants had
arrived within pistol-shot, the Eacoon fired a broadside at the
cutter, who speedily returned it with long guns and musketry.
The Eacoon then wore round and fired her opposite broadside
into the schooner   and so, alternately,
                     ;                              a
                                            maintaining   running
fight,  and preventing either from boarding. This mode of
engaging lasted more than an hour, both schooner and cutter
keeping up an incessant fire of musketry nor was it until she
                                          ;


had been literally beaten to a wreck, and had lost many men in
killed, that the cutter struck her colours.   She proved to be the
Amelie, a national vessel, carrying four carriage-guns, with
swivels, and upwards of 70 troops.
   Having taken possession of the cutter, the Eacoon crowded
sail after the schooner, the
                             Jeune-Adele, carrying six small guns
and 80 troops and which vessel, on being approached within
              ;


gun-shot and fired at, surrendered without further resistance.
Standing in-shore to rejoin her first prize, the Eacoon soon dis-
covered that the Frenchmen on board, while the latter was en-
gaging the cutter and schooner, bad overpowered the prize-crew,
and run the brig on shore among the rocks. Captain Bissell,
however, got back his officer and men. The loss on board the
cutter and schooner was about 40 in killed and wounded that;

of the Eacoon was only one person wounded, Mr. Thompson, the
