1803.]
               CAPTURE OF TWO CHASSE-MAREES.                   19^5


                                        in his hand, leaped from
neglecting to take any kind of weapon
the boat on board the chasse-maiee and, running to the side
                                      ;



close off which the French boat lay, stood, in a menacing atti-
                                                     until his four
tude, unarmed as he was, for at least half a minute,
companions, with a supply of muskets and ammunition, and
who could only quit their ticklish boat one at a time, got to his
assistance. If not astonishment at the sight, it must have been
a generous impulse, that prevented the Frenchmen from shoot-
ing or sabring the brave boatswain for they were,
                                          ;
                                                          it seems,

near enough to the vessel's side, to have done even the latter.
Seeing that Lieutenant Bowed and his four men were deter-
mined to defend their prize, the French boat, after a feeble
attempt to get possession, sheered off, the soldiers in her keeping
up, for a short time, as they receded from
                                               the vessel, an inef-
fectual fire of musketry.  The battery also opened a fire upon
the chasse-maree as she was towing off but it proved equally
                                              ;



harmless with that from the soldiers, both on the beach and in
the boat.
   The capture of two unarmed chasse-marees (for the mate had
taken his prize without any difficulty) would, indeed, be a
                             it not for the circumstances under
trifling occurrence, were
which one of them had been boarded and brought off circum-
                                                         ;




stances that ennoble the act, and rank it above many which are
blazoned in the Gazette, and yield to the parties both praise and
promotion. The navy-list shows, that Lieutenant
                                                     Rowed gained
no step in his profession indeed it was not, as the same docu-
                          :




ment proves, until nearly ten years afterwards, that he was made
a commander. As to the boatswain, he, it appears, on account
of the very station he filled, and, by every account so well filled,
was, according to the etiquette of the service, excluded from the
reward of promotion. It was only, therefore, from tbe Patriotic
Fund at Lloyd's that he could receive some testimony of the
hi°di opinion entertained of his services.      Lieutenant Eowed
himself made the application, founding it on the inability of the
                                                            "
admiralty, without violating precedent, to provide for the poor
fellow and who," adds his commander, and where was there a
         ;

                " exclusive of his
better judge?                        bravery, is a very good cha-
racter."   The committee, it is believed, presented Mr. Marks
with a handsome sum of money. Acts like this of Lieutenant
Rowed and his four men (the names of all of whom we would
record, did we know them) deserve to be made public, if only
 for the example they hold out, not of adequate reward certainly,
 but of the impunity which often accompanies the most hazardous
    VOL. III.                                         o
