 18G               LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                              [1803.

 the land induced the two French 74s in Cape Francois, tho
 Duquesne, Commodore Pierre-Maurice-Julien Querangal, and
Dugnay-Trouin, Captain Claude Touffet, accompanied by tho
40-gun frigate Guerriere, Captain Louis-Alexis Beaudouin, to
put to sea, in the hope to be able to effect their escape to
Europe. On clearing the harbour, the two 74s hauled to the
westward, but not unseen by a part of the British blockading
squadron which then consisted of the four 74-gun ships Belle-
             ;



rophon, Commodore John Boring, and Elephant, Theseus, and
 Vanguard, Captains George Dundas, John Bligh, and James
Walker.
   At about 9 p.m., when darkness favoured the manoeuvre, the
French ships separated, the Duguay-Trouin tacking to the east-
ward, while the Duquesne continued her course alongshore to
the westward. The Elephant being the weathermost of tho
chasing ships, was ordered to tack after the Duguay-Trouin        ;

while the commodore, in the Bellerophon,
                                            accompanied by the
18-pounder 32-gun frigates yEolus and Tartar, Captains Andrew
Fitzherbert Evans and John Perkins, pursued the
                                                  Duquesne. At
about midnight the Theseus and Tanguard joined in the chase.
On the 25th, at 7 a.m., the Theseus was detached in conse-
quence of a heavy firing being heard to the eastward. At 8 a.m.
a brigand battery opened a fire upon the
                                           Duquesne, which she
returned.   The Vanguard and Tartar, towards noon, were fast
coming up with the French ship and at about 3 h. 30 m. p.m.,
                                       ;


after an exchange of several shot from bow and stern
                                                         chasers,
the Duquesne struck her colours. It appears that the French
ship sustained no loss; nor did the British loss amount to more
than one man killed and one wounded on board the
                                                       Vanguard.
The prize, a fine 74 of 1901 tons, was afterwards added to the
British navy under her French name but
                                          being, in the following
                                               ;


year, carelessly run aground on Morant Keys,\vent to England
only to be broken up.
  The Elephant was not so fortunate as to make a prize of her
chase.   At daylight, when off Cape Picolet, Captain Dundas
saw the Duguay-Trouin about a mile from him, and
                                                     immediately
wore in pursuit. At 6 a.m. the French 74 opened a fire from
her stern chasers, and hulled the British
                                          ship two or three times.
Soon afterwards the Elephant gained a position upon the star-
board quarter of the Duguay-Trouin, and there fired into her
several distant broadsides. About this time the British
                                                           18-gun
ship-sloop       Snake,   Captain   William Boberts, made herself
known in the north-west quarter           but the appearance of the
                                           ;
