1803.J
                BOADICEA AND DUGUAY-TROUIN.                   187

Guerriere frigate to windward, or some other unexplained cause,
prevented the Elephant from maintaining- her position. Tho
consequence was, that both the Duguay-Trouin and the Guerriere
effected their escape.  The Elephant had a few shot in her hull,
and one in her bowsprit, and sustained some slight damage in
her rigging and sails; but it does not appear that a single man
on board of her was hurt.
  The French 74 and frigate steered straight for Europe, and
reached latitude 46° 40' north, longitude 11° 16' west, without any
occurrence worth notice. On the 29th of August, in the afternoon,
when as near as that to the port to which they were bound,
Ferrol, they fell in with the British 3S-gun frigate Boadicea,
Captain John Maitland. The latter immediately made sail in.
chase, and before dark ascertained that the strangers were-
enemies. On the 31st, at daybreak, the weather being foggy,,
the strange ships were not discernible. At 1 h, 30 m. p.m.,.
however, the fog having dispersed, and the wind shifted from,
west to east-north-east, the Duguay-Trouin and Guerriere again
made their appearance, and were now so near as fully to discover
that the largest and weathermost ship was a French 74.
   This would have justified Captain Maitland in discontinuing
the pursuit, except perhaps to watch the enemy's motions and
endeavour to ascertain his route. Being aware, however, that
French ships, ships, singly and in small divisions, were coming
from the island of St. Domingo and that they were mostly
                                    ;



armed en flute, and manned with a very sickly, as well as nume-
rically inferior crew, Captain Maitland resolved to have some
stronger proof that the two ships to leeward were not of that
description.   Accordingly the Boadicea stood on and at 2 p.m.,
                                                   ;



 when passing at the distance of about a quarter of a mile,
exchanged broadsides with the Duguay-Trouin. The fire from
the latter, although ineffectual, indicated that the ship was fully
armed and the Boadicea found it necessary to make all sail to
         ;



escape from her opponents so decidedly superior to her. The
Duguay-Trouin and Guerriere, who was considerably to leeward
of her consort, immediately wore round in pursuit of the British
frigate; but linding, at 2h. 50m. pjl,
                                           that the Boadicea was
gaining ground, the French 74 and frigate gave over the chase
and hauled to the south-cast.
   It is stated, in a contemporary work, that the Boadicea brought
down the Duguay-Trouins forctopsail-yard, and sent several
shot between wind and water     ;
                                   and that according to the testi-
mony of a prisoner on board the 74, the latter was compelled to
