1803.]            CAPTURE OF THE MINERVE.                              185

dressed, he heard the cheers of thecrew on deck, and eagerly
demanded what they meant. Being told the ship was off the
shoal, and would soon be clear of the forts  Then d n the  ;
                                                               '   —
legs!' exclaimed the poor fellow, and taking his knife from his
pocket, he cut the remaining muscles which attached them to
him, and joined in the cheers with the rest of his comrades.
When the ship was taken he was placed in the boat to be con-
veyed to the hospital but determined not to outlive the loss of
                      ;


liberty, he slacked his tourniquets and bled to death."
                                                        1


   To this account we have only to add, that, among the gun-
vessels which attacked the Minerve in her defenceless situation,
were the two brigs Chiffon and Terrible, each armed with eight
or ten heavy long guns. They, in fact, were the "chaloupes
             "
cannonieres alluded to in the French accounts. In capturing
the Minerve, the French got back one of their own frigates ;
and they represent her, truly, we believe, to have mounted,
including fourteen 32-pounder carronades and six nines on the
quarter-deck, and forecastle, 48 guns.
   In the month of January, 180G, and not before, Captain
Brent on was released from his captivity in exchange for Captain
Tnfernet, of the Intrepide, taken at the battle of Trafalgar. At
 a court-martial subsequently held at Portsmouth, Captain Brcn-
ton, his officers, and surviving ship's company were not only
most honourably acquitted for the loss of the Minerve, but
 highly praised for their gallant defence of her.
  On the 4th of July, in the evening, the British 38-gun frigate
Naiad, Captain James Wallis, sent her boats, under the orders
of Lieutenant William Dean, assisted by Lieutenant John Louis,
Lieutenant of marines IJobert Irwin, and Messrs. Gordon
Glenny, and Stewart, midshipmen, to cut out from among the
rocks and shoals of the Saintcs near Brest the French national
schooner Providence, of two guns and 22 men and boys, Lieu-
tenant Martres Preville, on her way from the foundry near
Nantes to Brest, laden with heavy cannon, 36, 24, and 18
pounders and some choice ship-timber. Notwithstanding all
the difficulties they had to encounter in the rapidity of the tide
and the number of rocks and shoals with which the French
schooner was surrounded and protected, the British boats
brought her safely off, without the occurrence of the slightest
accident.
   On the afternoon of the 24th of July a heavy squall from
                          1
                              Breaton, vol. Hi., p. 213.
