1S03.J
                       EACOOX AXD MUT1NE.                     189

San-Jago in the island of Cuba, in company with a prize-
schooner, observed an armed brig coming alongshore and who,
                                                       ;



soon afterwards, hauled her wind to speak a schooner which had
been avoiding the Eacoon since morning. At 3 p.m. the strange
brig and schooner bore up together, under all sail, with a strong
breeze. Captain Bissell stood off until certain of fetching them,
and then made sail in shore.      At 4 h. 15 m. p.m. the brig
hoisted French colours, and fired a gun, still keeping withiii
half a mile of the shore, under a press of sail. At 4 h. 20 m.
p.m. she fired her broadside at the Eacoon, and attempted to
cross the latter's hawse but the Eacoon although going eight
                         ;



knots through the water, put her helm hard a-port, and fired
her broadside, which, as the two vessels were nearly on board of
each other, brought down the French brig's studding-sails, top-
sails, &c. The latter then
                           luffed up, ran on shore in a small rocky

bay, and struck her colours. To avoid a similar late, the Eacoon
hove in stays, and, on wearing round, discovered the breakers
nearly under her stern. In about half an hour the French brig
rehoisted her colours, and was repeatedly fired upon, in passing,
by the Eacoon. Towards sunset the former's mainmast went
overboard, and the vessel fell on her beam-ends. As the French
brig had landed boats full of armed men, and lined the shore,
and the Eacoon was 44 men short of complement, including her
two lieutenants, Captain Bissell felt himself obliged to refuse the
application of the master, Mr. John Thompson, to go,
                                                               with
a few picked men, and endeavour to burn the vessel. By morn-
ing the latter had lost her remaining mast, and lay a perfect
wreck full of water.
  On this occasion the Eacoon sustained neither loss nor damage.
As to the name and force of his opponent, Captain Bissell says:
" I have since learned her name is La
                                         Mutinc, national brig,
carrying 18 long 18-pounders, and was full of men from Port-au-
Paix, bound to St.-Jago."  Such a force for a brig has not been
met  with.  The guns, if 18-pounders, must have been car-
ronades or, as is more probable, were long eights or sixes.
         ;



  On the 13th of October, in the afternoon, the Eacoon, still
commanded by the same enterprising officer, while cruising off
Cumberland harbour in the island of Cuba, observed several
vessels to windward coming close alongshore, all of which, before
sunset, hauled in towards the harbour.    Having heard of the
evacuation of Port-au-Prince, Captain Bissell anchored in a small
bay, in the expectation of seeing those vessels pass him in tho
night.   Baylight on the 14th discovered eight or nine sail, a few
