 196            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1803.

bravest manner, under a heavy fire from the guns and musketry
of the vessel, boarded and captured the French privateer-
schooner Eessource, mounting four 4-pounders, with a crew of
43 men, of whom two were killed and 12 wounded. On board
the cutter, Lieutenant Henderson and four seamen were
 wounded, one of the latter dangerously.
    On the 27th of October the British 16-gun ship-sloop Merlin,
 Captain Edward Pelham Brenton, and 14-gun schooner Mil-
 brook, Lieutenant Mauritius Adolphus Newton De Starck, dis-
 covered the French lugger-privateer Sept-Freres, of two carriage-
 guns and 30 men, commanded by Captain Pollet, endeavouring
 to get into Calais.  Captain Brenton immediately despatched in
 pursuit of her the boats of the Merlin, under the orders of Lieu-
 tenant Henry Clement Thompson, who had already lost an arm
 in the service. Finding her retreat effectually cut off by the
 British boats, the lugger ran herself on shore about half a mile
 to the westward of Gravelines. In the evening the Milbrook
 stood in, and anchored within musket-shot of the Sept-Freres    ;


 and, in the face of a heavy fire opened upon the schooner and
the boats by some field-pieces brought down to the beach, the
 British totally destroyed the French lugger, without
                                                        incurring
any loss, although the Milbrook was several times struck by shot.
   On the 3rd of November, while the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
Blanche, Captain Zachary Mudge, was lying at an anchor off
the entrance of Mancenille bay, island of St. Domingo, the
French cutter Albion, armed with two 4-pounders, six swivels,
and 20 muskets, and manned with 43 officers and men, was dis-
covered lying close to the guns of Monte-Christi, waiting to
carry her cargo, consisting of 52 bullocks, to the relief of the
garrison of Cape-Francois. As the cutter, notwithstanding her
proximity to the fort, which mounted four long 24-pounders and
three field-pieces, appeared to be assailable,
                                               Captain Mudge, on
the same day, despatched the launch, barge, and two cutters,
with 63 officers and men, under the command of Lieutenant
William Braithwaite, to attempt cutting her out. The boats
returned unsuccessful, not owing to any lack of zeal in officers
or men, but to their having proceeded to the attack in
                                                             open
day, with the sea-breeze blowing right into the bay. The bat-
tery, in consequence, had begun early to fire at the boats, and
soon convined Lieutenant Braithwaite that, should he even
succeed in capturing the cutter, it would, in the state of the
wind, be impossible to get her from the shore without a great
sacrifice of lives.
