 202             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.             [1803.


large and ripe field of canes adjoining would inevitably have
 been destroyed.
    The boats with the seamen passed the battery on the larboard
 side of the harbour undiscovered, but the privateer was upon
 her guard, and commenced a heavy fire on the British who, ;




 nevertheless, in the most prompt and gallant manner, boarded,
 and in a few minutes carried her. The seamen had one of their
 number killed and five wounded; the marines, although fired
 upon by two sentinels, had no one hurt. The Harmonie, mount-
 ing eight carriage-guns, with a complement of 66 men, had two
 of the latter killed and 14 wounded. The boats accompanied
 by their prize, repassed the larboard fort, within musket-shot,
 but were so fortunate as to escape without further loss. In the
 conduct of this enterprise, much judgment as well as gallantry
 was evinced without which, from the many obstacles opposed
             ;


 to success, the result might not have been so favourable.
   On the night of the 10th of December the British lS-pounder
 36-gun frigate Shannon, Captain Edward Leveson Gower, in
 company with the 16-gun ship-sloop Merlin, Captain Edward
 Pelham Brenton, while standing across from Cape la Heve to
 Cape la Hougue, in a gale of wind from the south-south-west,
was taken under the lee bow by the flood-tide, and carried up
towards the river Isigny; "and, when the captain supposed
himself to the northward of Cape Barfieur, he had that light-
house bearing about north." l The night was extremely dark
 and tempestuous, and the Shannon, about 8 p.m., struck the
ground. The Merlin just then got a glimpse of the land in a
flash of lightning, and instantly wore from it under her foresail
and close-reefed maintopsail. The Shannon, a fine new frigate
of 881 tons (sister vessel to the Tribune), just launched, was
totally wrecked: her officers and crew, fortunately, were all
saved, but made prisoners by the French.
   On the 16th, at 11 h. 30 m. a.m., Barfleur lighthouse bearing
north half-west distant four leagues, the Merlin discovered her
late consort the Shannon on shore under the batteries of Tatihou
island.   At 5 p.m., having approached quite near to the wreck,
Captain Brenton despatched two boats manned and armed,
under the orders of Lieutenants John Sheridan and
                                                            Henry
Clement Thompson, to endeavour to set fire to and destroy the
frigate a service which these officers effectually executed, with-
       :



out the loss of a man, although exposed to a heavy fire from the
                        i
                            Brenton, vol. iii., p 302.
