198                   LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              [1803.

     As yet, not a shot had been fired from the battery, although
itwas distant scarcely 100 yards from the cutter. Judging that
the best way to keep the battery quiet would be to maintain the
appearance of the Albion's being still in French possession, and
able to repulse her assailants, Lieutenant Nicolls ordered the
marines of his party to continue firing their muskets the sea-   :




men, meanwhile, busied themselves in getting the vessel under
sail. A spring having been run out from the cutter's quarter to
her cable, and the jib cleared, the cable was cut, and the jib
hoisted to cast her.At this moment the barge came alongside,
and Lieutenant Lake took command of the prize. Scarcely had
he done so, and the musketry by his orders been discontinued,
when the battery opened a fire of round and grape, which killed
two of the Blanche's people. However, the breeze being fair,
and blowing moderately strong, the captured cutter, with two
boats towing her, soon ran out of gun-shot, and without incur-
ring any further loss, joined the frigate in the offing.
  Cutting out an armed vessel is usually a desperate service,
and the prize seldom repays the loss which is sustained in cap-
turing her. The spirit engendered by such acts is, however, of
the noblest, and, in a national point of view, of the most useful
kind   :       its emulative influence spreads from   man to man, and from
ship to ship, until the ardour for engaging in services of danger,
services, the repeated success of which has stamped a lasting
character upon the British navy, requires more frequently to be
checked than to be incited. An attack by boats upon an armed
sailing-vessel, as respects the first foot-hold upon her deck
                                    " forlorn      "
especially, may be likened to the             hope of a besieging
army great ;
              is the peril, and great ought  to be the reward. So
the reward usually is, if the affair be represented in its true
colours to the proper authority. The same officer, who, when
about to transmit to his government the account of an engage-
ment between his ship and another, fears saying too much, lest
he should be chargeable with egotism, when, in the routine of
his duty, he has to write about an act performed exclusively by
his subordinates, enters minutely into the merits of the case,
points out those who distinguished themselves, and separates, as
well as he is able, the actual combatants from such as, by accident
or otherwise, did not partake of the danger; well knowing
that, without this act of justice on his part, promotion, honours,
and other rewards may light upon the undeserving, while he
who fought and bled, he who both planned and achieved the
enterprise, may find himself passed over and neglected.
