1603.]
             BOATS OF THE BLANCHE IN MANCENILLE BAY.         197

  With more judgment, a night attack was determined upon,
and Lieutenant Edward Nicolls, of the marines, volunteered,
with one boat, to attempt cutting out the vessel. His offer was
accepted and on the evening of the 4th the red cutter, with 13
             ;



men, including himself, pushed off from the frigate. A doubt
respecting the sufficiency of the force, or some other cause,
induced Captain Mudge to order the barge, with 22 men, under
the orders of Lieutenant the Honourable Warwick Lake, first of
the Blanche, to follow the red cutter and supersede Lieutenant
Nicolls in the command.    The second boat joined the first, and,
as soon as the two arrived abreast of the French cutter, Lieu-
tenant Nicolls hailed Lieutenant Lake, and pointed her out to
him but the latter professed to disbelieve that the vessel in
    ;



sight was the Albion he considered that she lay on the opposite
                       :




or north-east side of the bay, and with the barge proceeded in
that direction leaving the red cutter to watch the motions of
                 ;


the vessel, which Lieutenant Nicolls still maintained was the
Albion, the object of their joint search.
  It was now 2 h. 30 m. a.m. on the 5th, and the land wind was
blowing fresh out of the bay. An hour or two more, and the
day would begin to dawn, and the breeze to slacken, perhaps
wholly to subside. The men in the boat were few, but their
hearts were stout. In short the red cutter commenced pulling,
cautiously and silently, towards the French vessel the crew of
                                                   ;




which, expecting a second attack, had made preparations to
meet it. As soon as the boat arrived within pistol-shot, the
cutter hailed. Ecplyiiig to the hail with three hearty cheers,
the boat rapidly advanced, receiving in quick succession two
volleys of musketry.   The first passed over the heads of the
British but the second severely wounded the coxswain, the man
         ;


at the bow-oar, and a marine.   Before the French cutter could
fire a third time, Lieutenant Nicolls, at the head of his little

party, sprang on board of her.   The French captain was at his
post, and discharged his pistol at Lieutenant Nicolls just as the
latter was within a yard of him.   The ball passed round the rim
of the lieutenant's belly, and, escaping through his side, lodged
in the fleshy part of his right arm.  Almost at the same moment
a ball, either from the pistol of Lieutenant Nicolls, or from the
musket of a marine standing near him, killed the French cap-
tain.   After this the resistance was trifling and the surviving
                                            ;



officers and men of the French cutter were presently driven
below and subdued, with the loss, besides their captain killed,
of five men wounded, one of them mortally.
