194         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                [1803.

attacks.  Let him, therefore, who is disposed to calculate the
chances of personal risk that may attend the enterprise in which
he is called upon to embark, reflect upon the 49 musket-balls
which were aimed at, and yet missed, Lieutenant Eowed and
the four gallant fellows who were on board of this captured
French chasse-mare'e.
  On the 20th of September, at 5 p.m., the British hired-cutter
Princess Augusta, of eight 4-pounders and 26 men, commanded
by Lieutenant Isaac William Scott, being off the Texel, saw two
6chooners in the south-west, bearing down under British colours.
The cutter, however, siispected them to be enemies, and cleared
for action.  At 6h. 30m. p.m. the schooner hauled down the
English and hoisted Dutch colours. The largest, which was the
Union, Lieutenant St. Faust, mounting 12 guns, and stated to
have had on board 70 men, hailed from to-windward, and then
opened her broadside, which killed the cutter's gunner and boat-
swain, and mortally wounded Lieutenant Scott. The cutter was
not slow in returning the fire, and successfully repulsed several
attempts to board. Meanwhile the other schooner, the Wraak,
Lieutenant Doudet, mounting eight guns, and manned with
about 50 men, had ranged up under the cutter's lee, and now
poured in her broadside. This schooner also made a vain attempt
to board.   After an hour's engagement, during which the large
schooner's bowsprit was several times over the cutter's stern,
the latter beat off both her opponents, with the additional loss
of two seamen wounded, making a total loss of three, including
her commander, killed, and two wounded.
  In his dying moments, Lieutenant Scott recommended the
master to fight the cutter bravely, and desired him to tell the
admiral (Lord Keith) that he had done his duty. The lieutenant
certainly had done so in a manner that became a British officer   ;


and Mr. Joseph Thomas, the master, fully acted up to his com      •



mander's injunctions he, and the few hands about him, fought
                      :



their vessel heroically, and by so doing brought her off in safety.
The same Dutch newspaper from which we have extracted the
names of the two schooners, states, that the carpenter of the
Wraak was killed, and her first-lieutenant and several of her
men badly wounded.
   On the 9th of October, in the evening, the British 16-gun
brig-sloop Atalante, Captain Joseph Ore Masefield, chased and
drove on shore off the mouth of the river Pennerf, near St.
Guildas, two French ketches and one brig.     The wind blowing-
directly off shore, Captain Masefield conceived it practicable to
