1803.]          COMMODORE HOOD AT SAINTE-LUCIE.              203

French batteries. About three years and three months after
the loss of the Shannon, her late captain and officers, having
returned to their country, were honourably acquitted of all
blame by the sentence of a court-martial.
                Colonial Expeditions.   — West Indies.
     A renewal of the war brings us again to the round of suc-
cessful operations against the colonies of the weaker maritime
powers. On the 21st of June, at 11 a.m., Commodore Samuel
Hood, with the 74-gun ships Centaur and Courageux, Captains
Bendall Eobert Littlehales and Benjamin Hallowell, and some
smaller vessels, having on board a detachment of the British
army under Lieutenant-general Grinfield, anchored in Choc-
bay, Sainte-Lucie, for the purpose of reducing the island.
Before 5 p.m., by the able disposition of Captain Hallowell, the
whole of the troops were disembarked in good order. At 5 h.
30 m. p.m. the French outworks were driven in, and the town
of Castries taken. The commandant of Morne-Fortunee, the
principal fortress of the island, was then summoned to surrender.
Brigadier- general Nogues refusing to do so, the works were
stormed at 4 a.m. on the 22nd, and at 4 h. 30 m. were carried,
with a loss to the British army of 20 officers and men killed, and
110 wounded. What was the exact strength of the garrison, or
the loss which the French sustained in resisting the assault, docs
not appear by the official despatches but it is stated, to the
                                            ;


credit of the British, considering the custom on such occasions,
that not a Frenchman was hurt after possession of the place
had been obtained.
   On the third day after effecting this capture, the Centaur,
accompanied by some smaller vessels containing a division of
the troops, sailed from Sainte-Lucie to attack Tobago. On the
3 st the expedition arrived off the island, and on the same day
 1



the troops, covered by a heavy fire from the ships-of-war,
landed without loss. So rapid and so decisive were the move-
ments of the British, that in the evening General Berthier com-
manding at Fort Scarborough proposed a capitulation which,
                                                         ;




by half-past four the following morning, was acceded to, and the
island of Tobago again became a colony of Great Britain.
   Previously to the end of September the Dutch colonies of
1 >cnicrara,
             Fssequibo, and Berbico had only changed masters,
with equal facility, and happily without bloodshed. In the river
Hi mcrara was captured the Batavian 14-gun corvette Hippo-
menes.
