1803.]    BOATS OF THE BLANCHE IN MAXCEX1LLE BAY.                          199

   The captain of the Blanche had a fine opportunity, without
detracting from the bravery of one party, to state the good
fortune (call it nothing else) of the other. Here follows his
letter to the admiralty  "Having gained intelligence that there
                            :




was a large coppered cutter full of bullocks for the Cape,
lying close under the guns of Monte-Christi (four 24-pounders
and three field-pieces), notwithstanding her situation, I was
convinced we could bring her off; and at 2 this morning she
was masterly and gallantly attacked by Lieutenant Lake, in the
cutter, and Lieutenant Nichols of the marines, in the barge,
who cut her out.    She is ninety-two tons burthen, coppered
close-up and fastened, with two 4-pounders, six swivels, and
twenty muskets. This affair cost me two men killed, and two
wounded."
  The misstatements in this letter, now that the correct details
are confronted with them, discover their importance and it          ;



cannot be doubted that Captain Mudge had a favourite whom
he was determined to serve, no matter at whose expense. How
came he not to name Lieutenant Nicolls among the wounded ?
It was not a scratch of his finger nor a graze of his shin, but a
hole on each side of his body and a ball in his arm, that sent him
bleeding to the Blanche's cockpit. "Who would expect that, of
          "
the " two men wounded, one was a commissioned officer ? In
every case, except this, the rank, if not the name, of the officer
is stated in the official       letter; and, in some letters, the smallest
boy in the ship, if he has been wounded ever so slightly, may
find his name in the returns.        The name of Lieutenant " Nichols,"
however, as the commanding officer of one of the boats (not of
"
    the barge"), entitled him, in the estimation of the committee
at Lloyd's, to a second best claim upon their bounty            ;
                                                                        so that,
when the Patriotic Fund presented Lieutenant Lake, " for his
gallantry," with a sword valued at 50/., they gave Lieutenant
Nicolls one valued at 'SOI. Another quarter, equally deceived,
promoted one officer, but, until a subsequent explanation at
least, paid no attention to the claims of the other.
   Between the two attacks upon the Albion, another boat-party
from the Blanche captured, in a very gallant manner, a vessel
of superior force. On the 4th, in the morning, the launch, armed
with a 12-pounder carronade, and manned with 28 men, under
the command of Mr. John Smith, master's mate, attacked, and,
after an obstinate conflict of 10 minutes, boarded and
                                                       carried, as
she was coming out of the Caracol passage, a French schooner,
mounting one long 8-pounder on a pivot, and manned with 60
