1803.]       BOAT ATTACK OX FRENCH PRIVATEER.                195

cut the vessels out and. accordingly, soon after dark, the six-
                       ;


oared cutter under Lieutenant John Hawkins, and the five-oared
cutter under Mr. Eichard Burstal, the master, were despatched
upon that service, the Atalante standing in, as close as the
shoals would permit, to protect them.
  At 9h. 30 m. p.m. the two boats reached the French vessels,
when Lieutenant Hawkins, with his boat, boarded and took
possession cf the in-shore vessel, then fast aground within 120
yards of the beach but the British could not succeed in getting
                   ;


her afloat, owing to a heavy fire of musketry from a number of
troops drawn up on the beach, assisted by two field-pieces and
a party of troops, which had previously embarked from the
shore on board of the other two vessels. Thus frustrated in
his plan, the lieutenant cut the cable of the vessel, and then
abandoned her to go to the assistance of his coadjutor in the
other boat.
   In the mean time Mr. Burstal, with a sergeant of marines and
five other men, in defiance of a party of 10 soldiers armed with
muskets and bayonets, had boarded and carried the French
brig but not until the former had killed six of the soldiers,
     ;


hove two overboard, and drove the remainder, with the brig's
crew, down her hatchway. Finding that this vessel, besides
being light and of no value, was also fast aground upon a ridge
of rocks, Lieutenant Hawkins, who had now joined his com-
panion, contented himself with cutting the brig's cable; not
thinking proper, from motives of humanity, to set the vessel on
fire, as several people were heard below, supposed
                                                   to be wounded.
In this very dashing little exploit, Mr. Burstal's boat, in board-
ing the French brig, had one man killed and two wounded, the
only loss sustained by the British.
  On the 26th of October the British 18-gun ship-sloop Osprey,
Captain George Younghusband, being off Trinidad, saw and
chased a suspicious sail under the land. On arriving within
four miles of the stranger the Osprey found herself becalmed,
and at the same time discovered, from the number of sweeps
rowed by her, that the vessel was a privateer. The Osprey's
further progress being checked by the calm, Captain Young-
husband despatched three boats, under the command of Lieu-
tenant Bobcrt Henderson, in the cutter, to attempt the capture
of the schooner.    The unequal speed of the boats being greatly
in favour of the cutter, Lieutenant Henderson, apprehensive that
if he waited for his companions the privateer would escape, con-
tinued to pull ahead, and at length, with his 17 seamen, in the
