210           COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.    EAST INDIES.         [1803.


weighed and steered for Madras, where he arrived on the follow-
ing morning. Shortly afterwards the Dedaigneuse also arrived,
having seen the French transport as far on her way to the Isle
of France as the latitude of 1° 50' north.
  The message of the 8th of March, considered everywhere as
the signal of the approach of war between England and France,
reached Madras on or about the 5th of July. It is probable
that the intelligence was communicated to Admiral Eainier by
the Terpsichore. At all events, in a week or two after the
admiral's arrival at Madras, the British ships began taking on
board their war-stores. It was not, however, until the 3rd of
September that the king's message of the 16th of May, which
was tantamount to a declaration of war, reached that settlement  ;


nor until the 13th of September, that the news of the actual
commencement of war arrived at Fort William. The intelli-
gence had been received at Bombay on the 21st of August ;
where, two days afterwards, arrived the board of admiralty's
directions for the conduct to be pursued by Vice-admiral Eainier,
and which could not well have reached him at Madras earlier
than the first week in September.
  Eear-admiral Linois, with his squadron, arrived at the Isle of
France on the 16th of August and, about the latter end of the
                               ;




succeeding month, the French 20-gun corvette Berceau, it is
believed, brought out the news of the war.        On the 8th of
October (why he deferred sailing till then does not appear) the
French admiral, having detached the Atalante on a special mis-
sion to Mascat, a Portuguese settlement in Arabia-Felix, put to
sea with the Marengo, Belle-Poule, Semillante, and Berceau.
The ships retained on board a portion of the troops they had
brought from France, and with which they were now proceed-
ing to reinforce the garrisons of the Isle of Eeunion, or Bourbon,
and of the city of Batavia, the capital of Java.
   In the early part of his voyage M. Linois had the good for-
tune to fall in with and capture several richly-laden English
ships and, on making Sumatra, he resolved to pay a visit to
      ;


the road of Bencoolen, a British settlement upon that island.
A pilot belonging to the port, mistaking the Marengo for, what
by her colours she appeared, an English man-of-war, went off
to her, and anchored the French squadron just out of range of
a battery which commanded the road. Meanwhile the merchant-
vessels, having discovered the true character of the strange
ships, had cut or slipped and proceeded to Sellabar, a small
port about two leagues to the southward of Bencoolen. They
