 204             COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.    —WEST   INDIES.    [1803.

   About the middle of June, which was almost immediately-
 after theintelligence of the recommencement of hostilities
 reached the island of Jamacia, a squadron of ships sailed from
 Port Eoyal, to cruise in the neighbourhood of St. Domingo, and
 co-operate with the Black insurgents in freeing the island of the
 small remnant of Trench whom the scurvy and the yellow fever
 had yet spared, and who still retained possession of the line of
 posts on the sea-coast. Hitherto their ships had enabled the
 French to hold and provision these but the British ships soon
                                      ;


 drove away or captured the former, and effectually shut up the
 ports against all succours and supplies from Europe or else-
 where.
   By the end of October the only ports remaining in the hands
 of the French, in  what was formerly the French part of the
 island of St. Domingo, were Cape-Francois and the mole of
St. Nicholas.   At the latter port General Noailles commanded,
at the former General Eochambeau.        Cape-Frangois, besides
being blockaded at sea by the British, was invested on land by
the insurgents and the French garrison had the additional mis-
                 ;


fortune of being reduced to a state bordering on famine.
   Thus situated, General Eochambeau, on the 17th of Novem-
ber, proposed to Commodore John Loring, the commanding
 officer of the British blockading force, to evacuate the
                                                              Cape,
 provided he and his garrison were suffered to go to France on
 board one or more of the ships-of-war in port.        Such terms
 were of course rejected. The general then concluded a treaty
 with Dessalines, by which, in 10 days from the 20th of Novem-
 ber, he was to evacuate the Cape and its dependencies, and to
 be allowed, himself, and his troops, and their baggage, to retire
 on board the French ships lying in the harbour. By the fifth
day General Eochambeau had embarked his garrison, and hoped
to escape the English squadron but the latter was loo
                                 ;
                                                           vigilant
to afford the former even an opportunity of making the
                                                          attempt.
On the 30th, the day on which the truce expired, the Negroes
hoisted their colours upon all the forts, and began to
                                                           prepare
for sinking the French ships with red-hot shot, should
                                                         they any
longer delay their departure. To know the reason of this delay,
Captain Loring had sent in Captain Bligh with a flag of truce    ;


when, at a meeting between him and Captain Barre, the French
naval commanding officer, a rough sketch of a capitulation was
drawn up and signed, and General Dessalines was induced to
allow the French strips, with colours hoisted, to sail out of the
harbour. They were then, after firing each a broadside in
