                  COMMODORE LOR1NG AT ST. DOMINGO.           205
1803.]

return to a shot discharged athwart their bows by one of the
British ships, to haul down the French colours and surrender.
  The    40-gunfrigate Surveillante, accompanied by
                                                    some smaller
vessels, came out in this manner, and was
                                            taken possession of
by the  British but
                  ;
                    the Clorinde, another 40-gun  frigate, in her

way  out  grounded upon  the rocks under Fort St. Joseph at the
entrance of the harbour, and beat off her rudder. The frigate,
in short, was in so desperate a situation, that the British boats,
which had been detached to assist the French ships in getting
out of the mole, were returning to the squadron, upon a suppo-
sition that no efforts of theirs could save the Clorinde. The
ship, which was thus abandoned to her fate, had on board,
besides a small crew of from 150 to 200 men, General Lapoype
and 700 French troops, together with several of the officers'
wives, their women- servants, and children in all full 900 souls.
                                            ;



   Among the boats of the squadron employed upon the service
just mentioned, was the launch of the Hercule,
                                                  manned with
from 30 to 40 hands, under the command of Acting-lieutenant
Kisbet Josiah Willoughby. From slow-pulling, or from some
other unexplained cause, retarded in her progress, the launch
was among the rearmost of those boats. Anxious to rescue so
many persons as were evidently on board the Clorinde, from the
certain death that awaited them, either by perishing in the
Bhip or by being massacred, as was the
                                          execrable practice,
on the shore feeling it to be almost a stigma upon the cha-
                  ;


racter of the British navy not to make an effort to 6ave
human beings, political enemies especially, so critically circum-
stanced, Lieutenant Willoughby took      upon himself the whole
responsibility,       and put back with his launch towards the
grounded ship.
   Finding, as he approached the Clorinde, that her side was
crowded with men ready to spring into the first boat which came
alongside, and knowing that his people, as well as
                                                        those who
entered the launch from the ship, would fall an immediate sacri-
fice, the lieutenant searched for, and
                                       with difficulty procured, a
small punt.In this he embarked, directing the launch to lay off,
and was soon on board the frigate which He found heeling
                                        ;



much and beating heavily. Despairing now of saving the ship,
 Lieutenant AVilloughby yet resolved to put in practice every
 resource to save her numerous crew. As the most feasible plan
 which suggested itself, the lieutenant represented to General
 Lapoype that, as by the terms of the capitulation the French
 vessels of war were to haul down their colours when outside the
