1803.]
                                        EAST INDIES.                                    207

is an extraordinary one performed by M. Noailles on his short
                               "                     "
voyage to Cuba. It seems that une corvette anglaise crossed
the path of his brig (on what day or night is not stated), and
hailed her, to know if General Noailles was on board. The
French brig concealed her numerous crew, and, hoisting English
colours, declared that she also had been sent to intercept the
general and his garrison. The two vessels then steered in com-
pany and, in the night, General Noailles, at the head of 30
         ;



grenadiers, leaped on board of, and after a short resistance
                            "      The conqueror proceeded
carried, the   corvette anglaise."
with his prize to Havana, and died shortly afterwards of t«he
wounds he had received in the action. Notwithstanding the
grave manner in which this story is told, the British navy lost
no " corvette," or even 4-gun schooner, by capture in these
seas, in the year 1803.
  Thus, by the departure of the last European garrison from the
French part of the island of St. Domingo, were the negroes,
after a long and sanguinary struggle, freed from their invaders.
A part of the latter had previously escaped to the Spanish part
of the island and Generals Kerverseau and Ferrand, with a few
                        ;




troops, still occupied the cities of Santo-Domingo and San-Jago.
According to a French writer, France, by her expedition to this
island, lost 20 general officers and upwards of 40,000 men.
                                                                                          1




This amount must include colonial troops, and some reinforce-
ments which we have not been able to enumerate.

                                             East Indies.

  It has already been stated that, on the 6th of March, a small
French squadron, consisting of one 74, three frigates, and two
transports, with a French governor-general and about 1350
troops on board, sailed from the road of Brest, bound to the East
Indies, for the alleged purpose of taking possession of Pondi-
cherry, ceded to France by the treaty of Amiens.     On the 28th      2


of April, in a violent gale of wind, the Bclle-Poule parted com-
pany from the squadron and, although she called at Mada-
                                         :




gascar, this fast-sailing frigate anchored in Pondicherry road on
the 16th of June, being the 102nd day from her quitting Brest.
  The Belle-Poule brought out a French colonel, appointed
lieutenant-governor under M. Decaen and who now, in pur-      ;



suance ot his instructions, called upon the commanding officers
of the different factories to restore the settlement agreeably to
                                                                  2
             1
                 Victoires et Conquelcs, tome xiv., p. 330.               See p. 1C9.
