                                (   212   )




          BRITISH AND FKENCH FLEETS.



Between the second abstract of the present and the same of the
                1                     " Sea-service Commission"
preceding war, there appears, in the
column, a diminution of no fewer than 10 line-of-battle ships.
This arose chiefly out of the extensive plan of reform, projected
by the first lord of the admiralty, and since put in practice with
all the vigour and perseverance which characterised the pro-

ceedings of the gallant earl. Many old and useful officers, and
a vast number of artificers, had been discharged from the king's
dockyards the customary supplies of timber, and other im-
            ;



portant articles of naval stores, had been omitted to be kept up                ;



and some articles, including a largo portion of hemp, had ac-
tually been sold out of the service.             A
                                           deficiency of workmen
and of materials produced, of course, a suspension in the routine
of dockyard business.  New ships could not be built nor and                 —
                                          —
                                                                        ;


a very serious misfortune it was could old ones be repaired.
Many of the ships in commission, too, having been merely
                                                      2
patched up, were scarcely in a state to keep the sea.
  On the other hand, much  fraud  and peculation was    put a stop
to; many thousands cf pounds were saved to the country; and,
ifsome suffered who had done no wrong, others gained who
had long had their rights withheld. In short, Earl St. Vincent,
by his measures for reforming the civil branches of the British
navy, did much temporary evil, but he also did much permanent
good.
     A
     reference to the proper lists will give the names of the
                                                    3
purchased enemy's line-of-battle ships and frigates, also of the
                                                                                1
British ships captured or otherwise lost during the year 1803.'
                                              3 See
  1 See
         Appendix,   Annual Abstracts,              Appendix, No. 16.
                                              * See
Nos. 12 and 2.                                      Appendix, No. 17.
  J See
        p. 178.
