203                COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.— EAST INDIES.      [1803.


the article in the treaty. Owing to the want of orders, or tc
the informality of the application, the latter declined giving up
their charge and thus matters remained, when, on the 5th of
                   ;


                                     with the 50-gun ship Cen-
July, Vice-admiral Peter Eainier,
turion, Captain John Sprat Eainier, 74-gun ship Tremendous,
                                         Trident and Lancaster,
Captain John Osborn, 64-gun ships
Captains Thomas Surridge and
                                 William Fothergill, 44 en-flute
Sheerness, frigates Concorde, Dedaigneuse,
                                              and Fox, and ship-
       Victor, from Bombay,   partly in consequence of informa-
sloop
tion from England representing that the peace was not very
secure,  anchored in the road of Cuddalore, situated about 20
miles to the south-west of Pondicherry. Consequently, when,
on the morning of the 11th of July, Bear-admiral Linois, with
the Marengo 74, and Atalante and Semillante frigates, joined
the Belle-Poule, Pondicherry and its dependencies still remained
in the hands of the British.
   Aware that his own and General Decaen's mission to the East
had an         in view covertly inimical to British interests, the
              object
French admiral could well have dispensed with the presence of
a British squadron; and yet no sooner had he anchored than he
found himself overlooked by one, consisting of three sail of the
                      five smaller vessels. Two of the squadron,
line, a 50, and four or
the Trident and Victor, at this time lay at anchor in Pondicherry
road and the remainder, including the flag-ship, in the road of
      ;


Cuddalore. As soon as he observed the French squadron come
to anchor, the British admiral got under way, and advanced
nearer and, on being joined by the Trident and Victor, who
          ;


had weighed since noon, re-anchored at 7 p.m. about midway
between Cuddalore and Pondicherry roads. On the 12th, at
10 a.m., the French transport brig Marie-Francoise joined
Admiral Linois, and at 6 p.m. the brig-corvette Belier, with
despatches from France.       This vessel had quitted Brest ten
days later than the Marengo, and, it was understood, brought
out the substance of the king of England's message to his
parliament of March 8 with directions to M. Linois
                             ;
                                                         to repair
                                              his ships, already
instantly to the Isle of France, there to get
armed and manned on a war establishment, refitted and pro-
                                                 commence
visioned, and expect every day to receive an order to
hostilities against the English. This appears to have been the
substance of these despatches, but their full contents have not
transpired.   The instructions put into the hands of M. Decaen
when he sailed from France, and which appear to have been
drawn up by Napoleon himself, afford indubitable proofs of his
