206              COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS. —WEST INDIES.          [1803.

harbour, it would not be a greater sacrifice of national honour,
considering the situation of the Clorinde, if he did so imme-
diately, and gave the frigate up to him. Lieutenant Willoughby
would then, he said, hoist English colours, wait upon General
Dessalines, and demand, not only that the British flag should
be respected, but that, if assistance could not be procured
from the shore, and the Clorinde should be lost in the night
then fast approaching, the crew and passengers should be con-
sidered as prisoners to the British, and be protected until the
commanding officer of the squadron had it in his power to send
for them.
   General Lapoype readily assenting to the terms proposed, the
French flag was hauled down, and replaced by the British flag      ;

and Lieutenant Willoughby immediately hailed the Haytian
officer in command of Fort St. Joseph, and expressed a wish to
wait upon General Dessalines. Permission was granted, and
Lieutenant Willoughby, after experiencing some difficulty in
landing, obtained an interview with the Haytian general, who
not only received the British lieutenant with great urbanity, but
promised all that he requested. With the assistance thus ob-
tained, and that of two or three more boats which had just
joined from the squadron, and favoured by a sudden fall in the
wind, Lieutenant Willoughby succeeded in heaving the Clorinde
off the rocks.     Thus "to the uncommon exertions and pro-
fessional abilities," as Bear-admiral Duckworth happily expresses
it,of Acting-lieutenant Willoughby, was owing the preservation
of more than 900 people's lives, and the acquisition to the
British navy of a frigate which, with her late consort, the
Surveillante, continued, for many years afterwards, to be one of
the finest ships of the 38-gun class.
  Having now no French force to blockade at Cape-Francois,
Commodore Loring bore up for the mole of St. Nicolas, to
treat with M. Noailles, the French general in command there.
On the 2nd of December a proposition to that effect was made       ;

but the general declined acceding to the terms, alleging that he
had provisions for five months, and would not surrender until
the last extremity. The Bellerophon and squadron then pro-
ceeded with the prizes and prisoners to Jamaica. On the very
night on which the blockade of the Mole was raised, General
Noailles, having previously made his arrangements, sailed out of
the port, with his garrison contained in seven small vessels, and
arrived in safety at the island of Cuba.      Among  the French
" Victoires et
                 Conquetes," recorded in a work bearing that title,
