 180;}.]              ADMIRALS RAINIER AND LINOIS.                  209

bad faith towards England, particularly as regarded her Indian
                  1
possessions.
  It was not many hours before the arrival of the Belier, that

Captain Joseph-Marie Yrignaud, of the Marengo, accompanied
by the French admirals nephew, had paid a visit to Vice-
admiral Eainier, for the purpose of inviting the latter to break-
fast on the following morning with M. Linois.     The invitation
was accepted, and the 16-gun ship-sloop Eattlesnake, which had
just joined the squadron, was ordered to be ready to convey
Vice admiral Eainier to the anchorage of the Marengo and her
consorts.   But, whether it was owing to the peremptory nature
of his orders, or that he feared their warlike tenour
                                                           might
escape, and he and his ships be detained by the British admiral,
the French admiral at midnight, unseen and unheard,
                                                          slipped
his cables, and, with the
                          transport-brig Marie-Francoise, put to
sea under all sail.
  At daydawn on the 13th, to the surprise of the British, no-
thing was to be seen of M. Linois and his ships, either in the
road, where he had left his anchors, and even the longboats of
his ships fast at their grapnels, or, as far as the
                                                    eye could stretch,
in the offing.   In the course of the morning the principal part
of the British squadron got under way and set sail for Madras
                                                                      ;

but the admiral, with the Centurion and one or two of the
smaller ships, remained at the anchorage. On the same even-
ing the French transport ship Cote-d'Or, with 326 troops on
board, anchored in Pondicherry road and, at noon, the Cen-
                                                    ;


turion and Concorde got under way and anchored close to her.
  On the 15th, at daybreak, the Belle-Poule, who had sepa-
rated from her squadron and since been to Madras, appeared off
the road, in company with the Terpsichore frigate. The latter
cast anchor    but the Belle-Poule, after making some signals to
                  ;


the transport, stood away to sea. At 11 p.m. the Cote-d'Or
weighed and dropped out of the road, and in half an hour tho
Terpsichore was under all sail in chase of her. On the 16th, at
daylight, the Terpsichore hailed the transport, and ordered her
to return, but the French ship refused.      On this the frigate
fired a few shot, when the Cote-d'Or hauled down her
                                                        colours,
and quietly accompanied the Terpsichore back to the anchorage
On the 24th, in the forenoon, the French transport was allowed
to sail, attended by the British frigate Dedaigneuse, to see that
she went nowhere else but to her alleged destination, the Isle
of France.    On the same day, at 8 p.m., Vice-admiral Eainier
                       1
                           See p. Ifi9. ami Appendix, No. 15.
  VOL.     III.                                                 p
