1804.]                 INVAS'ON-FTOTILLA.                            217

Of these prames, or corvettes, 20, each with stalls for 50 horses,
were ordered to be constructed but the number was after-
                                    ;


wards greatly augmented.
   The first-class gun-vessels, rigged as brigs, were usually
armed with three long 24-pounders and an 8-inch mortar, and
the second class, with one 24-pounder forward, and a field-piece
abaft    ;
          some rigged as schooners, and some as luggers. 01
these two classes between 600 and 700 were constructed and,      ;


of a smaller and lighter class called "peniches " (rigged chiefly
as schuyts), about 400. The gun-vessels, as well as the prames,
were afterwards increased in number so that the armed vessels
                                            ;


of the flotilla amounted to 1339, and the transports to 954 total
                                                             ;


2293 vessels. The naval commander-in-chief of this numerous
flotilla was Vice-admiral Eustache Bruix,
                                            having as an assistant,
on account of ill health, Eear-admiralJean-Baimond Lacrosse, a
brave and intelligent officer, and the same, it will be recollected,
who commanded the Droits-de-FHomme at the time of her loss
   The ports of reunion for the flotilla were seven: Ostende,
Dunkerque, Calais, Ambleteuse, Yimereux, Boulogne, and
Etaples. Boulogne, as being situated directly in front of, and
only about 12 leagues distant from, the low land between Dover
cliff and Hastings point, waR made the main
                                                  depot, or capital.
Until the grand project of invasion was thought of, Boulogne
possessed a worthless harbour, formed by the estuary of the little
river Laine, and nearly dry at low water, with only one quay.
In a short time both banks of the river were lined with quays          ;

moles were constructed, a capacious basin dug, and a bridge
thrown across the river. By means of a dam the waters were
confined, and the vessels kept afloat and, to prevent any annoy-
                                        ;



ance on the part of the British, immense batteries were erected
at all the    commanding points. As a still further protection
against a bombardment, a strong line of heavy gun-vessels was
moored across the road; which, by nature, was difficult of
approach, on account of the numerous shoals and sand-banks in
its vicinity.   Vimercux. situated about a league to the north-easl
of Boulogne, was actually formed into a
                                          port expressly to receive
the flotilla; and the harbour of Ambleteuse was deepened and
enlarged, to answer the same purpose. A glance at the chart of
this coast will show how difficult the whole of these ports are of
access on account of the sands. No vessel, indeed, beyond a gun-
brig in size, can approach near enough to do any execution. The
tides, too, which cross each other in an extraordinary manner,
are very serious obstacles in the way of a             force.
                                                bombarding
