 222         BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.         [1804.


Helvoet, and Ostende, these ports were narrowly watched by a
force placed under the orders of Commodore Sir William Sidney
Smith, in the 50-gun ship Antelope whose accustomed anchorage
                                     ;


was near the north-east extremity of the Schonevelde channel,
about six leagues west-north-west, or thereabouts, of Flushing,
and rather more than the same distance, in nearly a south-south-
wost direction, from Ostende.      The following was the plan
adopted for a quick communication of intelligence. One vessel
took her station within view of distant signals (flags as large
as ensigns, expressing their import, not by colour, but by
number and position) from the commodore's ship; and the
vessel or vessels close off the enemy's port, on having anything
important to communicate, stretched out to the offing until
their signals were seen and answered by the intermediate
cruiser, and then resumed their station or otherwise, as circum-
stances might require.
  On the 15th of May the British force stationed close off the
port of Ostende consisted of the 18-gun brig-sloop Cruiser,
Captain John Hancock, and 16-gun ship-sloop Eattler, Captain
Francis Mason     ;
                   who kept up a communication with the
squadron cruising off Calais, by means of three or four gun-
brigs, under the orders of Lieutenant Patrick Manderston, of
the Minx. On the evening of this day 22 one-masted gun-
vessels and one schooner were seen to haul out of the harbour
of Ostende, and to take up an anchorage to the westward of the
lighthouse, within the sand. Captain Hancock immediately
made the signal of recalto the four gun-brigs, then standing
to the westward, and despatched the hired armed-cutter Stag,
Lieutenant William Patfull, with the intelligence to the commo-
dore. Having done this, Captain Hancock, as soon as it grew
dark, got under way with his two sloops and, the better to
                                              ;



prevent the escape of the division of gun-boats outside, which
were commanded by Capitaine de frigate Bernard-Isidore Lam-
bour, re-anchored within long range of the batteries at the pier-
head.
  On the 16th, at daybreak, the four British gun-brigs, being
stillin sight, when again recalled; but, as on the preceding

evening, they did not see or understand the signal. At 9 h.
30 m a.m. the Battler, who lay a little to the eastward of the
Cruiser, made the signal, first for five sail, and then for a fleet,
in the east-south-east. This was a strong division of the Gallo-
Batavian or Flushing flotilla, which had sailed from its anchor-
age in the Inner Wieling at daybreak on that morning, under
