220        BRITISH     AND FRENCH FLEETS.           — CHANNEL.    [1804.


present French government to Sir Sidney Smith, under whose
auspices, it will be recollected, Captain Wright, when a lieu-
tenant of the Tigre, had greatly distinguished himself, was a
narrative of the circumstances of the Yincejo's capture, drawn
up for the needless purpose of justifying her officers and crew
from the charge of pusillanimity advanced by the hireling press
of France. To show how differently the actual antagonists of
the British brig thought of her behaviour in the action, we have
only to subjoin the speech of Lieutenant Tourneur upon receiv-
                                "
ing Captain Wright's sword        Monsieur, vous avez noblement
                                   :



defendu lhonneur de votre nation, et la reputation de votre
marine. Nous aimons et estimons les braves, et Ton vous
traitera, vous et votre equipage, avec tous les egards possibles."
   Having, like a ship-sloop, a detached quarter-deck and fore-
castle with barricades and port-holes, and being, on account of the
smallness of her ports and the spaces between them, pierced for
10 guns of a side on the main deck, the Vincejo appeared to be
a much more formidable vessel than she really was. In point of
size, being only 277 tons, she was not much larger than a French
gun-brig, and, in point of armament, not nearly so effective. All
this was made known to the commanding officer of the French
gun-boats, by two deserters from the brig a few days before her
capture. The surprise is, that a vessel, so poorly armed and
manned as the Vincejo, should have been sent alone to cruise
in waters where she was so likely to be assailed by a tenfold
superior force.   Captain Wright, it appears, made frequent
complaints of this nature to Admiral Lord Keith but the latter
                                                   —
took an effectual way of silencing them, he menaced the enter-
                                                              ;




prising young officer with his displeasure.
                                            1


  The following portion of Captain Wright's narrative will show,
as well the effect produced upon his mind by the statements cir-
culated in France to his disadvantage, as the species of daring
service in which he  had employed the Vincejo for some weeks
                            —
previous to her capture a capture of the importance of which
the French government were so fully sensible, that they pro-
moted Lieutenant Tourneur on the spot to a capitaine de
fregate.
  "Had it ever occurred to me," says Captain Wright, "that
blame could in any manner attach to my conduct, under the
closest scrutiny of a court composed of my brother officers,
famed for the severity of their criticism on all that concerns the
honour of the country and the reputation of the navy, and who
                   1   Naval Chronicle, vol. xxxv., p. 450.
