216             BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.             [1804.

show his readiness to perform Lis duty against the enemies of
the nation, made use of the following laconic expression " TJn    :




mot, et l'armee est a la voile." Napoleon, feeling himself per-
sonally offended, removed the admiral from his command,
dismissed him from being a member of the council of state, and
ordered his name to be struck out of the list of the legion of
honour.
   The directions given by Napoleon to his minister of marine
were, that the Brest fleet of 23 (the Ocean included) sail of the
liue, under Vice-admiral Ganteaume, with from 30,000 to 40,000
troops on board, under General Augereau, should quit port at
the first opportunity that might occur in the month of Novem-
ber, proceed to Lough-Swilly bay in the north of Ireland, and
there disembark the men. Should any difficulty arise, the coast
of Scotland was to receive the troops. Vice-admiral Ganteaume
was then to call off the Texel, and, bringing away with him the
seven Dutch sail of the line and transports with 2500 troops on
board in that harbour, make his appearance before Boulogne.
The 30 sail of the line, by this means assembled, added to the
20 sail under M. Villeneuve approaching from off Bochefort,
would, it was considered, be sufficient to cover the grand flotilla,
and enable it to fulfil the ultimate object of all the expeditions
on foot, a disembarkation of its host of troops on the shores of
England and which, it was at last discovered, could not be
            ;



accomplished without the powerful aid of the larger vessels.
The year 1804, however, was not destined to witness the attempt,
much less the execution, of this gigantic, and, in the opinion of
most persons, impracticable undertaking.
  Before we proceed, as is now our intention, to narrate the
different engagements which, during the present year, ensued
between the British cruisers and the French flotilla, prepared
or preparing for the invasion of England, some account of the
vessels of that flotilla, and of the ports in which they were
assembling, will free the subject from much of the obscurity
that   must otherwise attend        it.   The armed     vessels   of the
flotilla were divided     into five or six classes.   It will suffice to
describe the prame, and the gun-vessel, or canonniere.                 The
prame was a remarkably strong-built vessel, measuring in her
extreme length about 110 French feet, and 25 in breadth, and
drawing from seven to eight feet of water. She was rigged as
a ship, and carried 12 long 24-pounders, with a crew of 38 sailors,
and upwards of 100 soldiers, the majority of them, from daily
practice, as useful on shipboard as the sailors themselves.
