1804.]                                  INVASION-FLOTILLA.                                           219

consisting of six brigs, first-class gun-vessels, with three guns,
one 24 and two 18 pounders, and from 60 to 80 men each six                                       ;



luggers, second-class gun-vessels, two guns, 18-pounders, with
from 40 to 50 men each five luggers, third-class gun-vessels,
                                           ;


one brass 36-pounder carronade throwing shells, and from 20 to
30 men each total, 35 guns (of which 30 were long 18 and 24
                       ;


pounders), and from 700 to 800 men, commanded by Lieutenant
Laurent Tourneur.
  By 8h. 30 m. a.m., having advanced within extreme range,
the gun-vessels began to open their fire.      They continued
gaining rapidly upon the brig until 9 h. 30 m. when they had                ;



approached so near that the Vincejo was obliged to sweep her
broadside to and engage, under the additional disadvantage that
her few men were fatigued by hard labour at the oar, and divided
during the action between the larboard guns and the starboard
sweeps. The Vincejo maintained this unequal contest for nearly
two hours, and that within grape and hailing distance. The
brig's hull, masts, yards, and rigging had at length received
great damage three guns were disabled and, owing to the
                           :                                          ;


booms having fallen upon the main deck (the brig having a
quarter-deck like the Port Mahon), and the loss, out of
her small effective crew, of two men killed and 12 wounded,
including Captain Wright himself, in the groin (but who would
not quit the deck), the fire was reduced to one gun in about five
minutes. Thus situated, the Yincejo had no alternative but to
strike her colours.
  The loss sustained by the flotilla could never be ascertained                                            ;




but, from the marks of blood on board the brig to which the
prisoners were first carried, and the evident damage
                                                         done to
several of the vessels, not a doubt was entertained as to its
severity.         A
             highly exaggerated account of this action appears
                                                            "
in a French work, in which the little Vincejo, described as   uno
                                                        " un
forte corvette," is associated with                                lougre anglaise," and the
                                                                                   1

French force is reduced to "quatre canonnieres."
      The subsequent mysterious death of Captain Wright in the
Temple at Paris struck all Europe with horror.    Although tho
                         doubt, it is but justice to state, that
affair is still involved in

Napoleon has strenuously denied having offered any violence to
                                            2
the person of this gallant British officer.   Among the papers
discovered at Captain Wright's death, and restored by the
                                                         2
  1
      Victoires   et       Conqugtes,   tome   xvi.,         See    O'Meara's     Napoleon in Exllo,
p. 33.
                                                       vol. i.   pp. 310, 449 ;    and vol. li., pp. S-V.
                                                       182,215.
