214         BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.      CHANNEL.        [1804.

such doubt existed, the work of preparation still went on, and
that with  all the enthusiasm for which the French are so cele-
brated.   Almost every department in the state voted a ship of
the line, each of the larger villages a frigate, and every commune
gave its prame, gun-vessel, flat-bottomed boat, or peniche. Ves-
sels for the flotilla were constructing, not only in the great naval

ports and in the small harbours along the coast, but upon the
banks of every river that contained more than three feet of
water no matter whether that river emptied itself directly into
      ;


the ocean, or first united its waters with those of the Seine, the
Loire, the Garonne, or the Ehine.       Even Paris became for a
time a maritime arsenal two slips were erected there, and
                            :




many vessels of the smaller kind were launched from them. A
due share of attention was also bestowed upon vessels of a more
warlike class. At Anvers, or Antwerp, on the river Scheldt, for
the first time during a great many years, the keels of ships of
the line were laid down.      The dockyards of Brest, Lorient,
Kochefort, and Toulon also displayed the new-laid keels of
several ships of force and magnitude.
  Our attention must now be directed to what is going on at the
first of the four last-named ports.    At the close of the preceding
year, the port of Brest was left, owing to the extreme severity of
the weather, without a blockading force. Before, however, the
new year was many days old, a favourable change enabled Ad-
miral Cornwallis to regain his station off Ushant, and to assemble,
by the 12th of January, 13 of his ships. Three or four more
subsequently joined. Such had been the exertions in Brest har-
bour during the winter months, that, by the latter end of April,
17 sail of the line, including two three-deckers, lay at anchor in
the road, ready for sea.
  The first day of the following month gave birth to a set of
directions, framed by Napoleon himself, for the improvement of
his fleet in Brest water.       He begins by complaining, that the
enemy should be permitted, with a small number of vessels, to
blockade so considerable a fleet as the one at anchor in that port.
He orders that the ships shall get under way every day, as well
to exercise the crews, as to harass the British, and favour the
passage of the flotilla coming from Audierne that 200 soldiers
                                                ;


shall be placed on board each ship of the line and who, besides
                                                    ;



being exercised at the guns and about the rigging and sails, are
to row in the ship's launch.   Premiums are to be given to those
who excel in these matters and nothing that can excite the
                                 ;



emulation of either soldiers or sailors appears to have been over-
