1804.]    PLAN OF OPERATIONS FOR THE BREST FLEET.                       215

looked. Every ship of the line is to be provided with a quantity
of 36-pound shells for her lower battery, and the men are to be
taught how to fire them off with effect.        The captains are
ordered not to quit their vessels to go on shore, and even the
commander-in-chief is not allowed to lodge elsewhere than on
board his ship. 1
   About ten days after the date of Napoleon's directions to the
minister of marine, Vice-admiral Decres, two sail of the line from
the inner harbour joined themselves to the 17 already at anchor
in the road.   It does not appear, however, that any movement
of consequence took place among the ships      either because the
                                                        ;


first consul's attention was too much engrossed by the new

dignity he was about to assume, or that he required the presence
of the fleet to assist in giving eclat to the imposing ceremony,
which, on the 14th of that same month of May, made him
Emperor of France.
   Even after the hustle of this business was over, the Brest
ships remained at their moorings until the 25th of July, when,
encouraged by a fine wind at east-north-east and a thick fog,
the advanced squadron, of five sail of the line and two or three
frigates, got under way, and stood for the passage du Kaz.      A
sudden return of clear weather, however, enabled the British
look-out cutter to discover and make a signal of the circum-
stance.    Immediately Eear-admiral Sir Thomas Graves, com-
manding the in-shore squadron, proceeded in chase but the       ;


French ships, in the mean time, had hauled to the wind, and
were working back to Brest road. No second attempt to escape,
of which the British outside were aware, was made during the
remainder of the year although, as will presently appear, an
                           ;



expedition of the utmost consequence had been designed to quit
Brest before the end of November.
  The number of ships of the line at this time ready for sea in
Brest road was 22, exclusive of the Ocean three-decker, repair-
ing in the docks, but expected soon to be afloat, the shipwrights
having been ordered to work at her by torchlight. This fleet
was now under the command of Vice-admiral Ganteaume. A
curious circumstance had led to the expulsion of this officer's
predecessor.   When, in the month of May, the officers of the
Brest fleet were called upon to put their signatures to a note for
conferring the imperial dignity upon Napoleon, Vice-admiral
Truguet, true to his republican principles, refused to sign tho
paper. He wrote to Buonaparte, assigning his reason and, fo         ;


                 >   Precis des Evenewens, torue xi., p. 195.
