1304.]
                       INVASION-FLOTILLA.                     223

the command of Bear-admiral Ver-Huell, bound to Ostende, and
consisted of the two ship-rigged prames (12 long 24-pounders
each) Ville-d'Anvers, bearing the admiral's flag, Lieutenant
Andre'   Dutaillis, and Ville-d'Aix, Captain Francois-Jacques
Meynne, 19 schooners, and 47 schuyts, in all 68 sail mounting
                                                      ;


between them upwards of 100 long 36, 24, and 18 pounders,
besides lighter pieces on the side, brass carronades, and mortars,
and carrying a body of between 4000 and 5000 troops.
  At 10 a.m., which was as early as the tide served, the two
sloops got under way and began working towards the enemy.
At about 11 a.m. the wind shifted to the south-west; which,
while it favoured the two sloops, headed the flotilla, then nearly
abreast of Blanckenberghe, and induced the Butch admiral to
bear up and put back towards Flushing.         At about noon Sir
Sidney Smith's squadron, consisting, besides the Antelope, of
the 36-gun frigate Benelope, Captain William Bobert Brough-
ton, and 32-gun frigate Aimable, Captain William Bolton, hove
in sight of the two sloops  and which squadron had weighed
                            ;


from the Schonevelde since between 10 and 11 a.m., in conse-
quence of an announcement by one of the in-shore ships,
that the Gallo-Batavian flotilla was making sail from the Inner
Wieling.
  At about 1 h. 30 m. p.m. the Cruiser came up with, fired at,
and compelled to strike, one of the rearmost vessels, a schuyt
mounting one long 36-pounder, and carrying five Dutch seamen
and 25 French troops. Making the signal for the Battler to
take possession, the British brig continued to stand on, in the
hope to close with one of the prames. Feeling himself, as the
French accounts state, somewhat nettled at having one of his
vessels captured by a force so comparatively insignificant,
Admiral Ver-Huell, took advantage of a slight change of wind
in his favour, and stood back towards Ostende with all his re-
maining flotilla except eight schuyts, which continued their
route towards the Inner Wieling. At about 1 h. 45 m. p.m.,
the Ville-d'Anvers fired a shot at the Cruiser, which passed
over her, and fell close under the bows of the Battler. Shortly
afterwards, the wind shifting six points, both sloops fell off in
their course, and found themselves nearly abreast of the lead-
ing prame, and upon the lee beam of the flotilla, then crowding
sail to get in-shore.    At a few minutes before 2 p.m., the
Ville-d'Anvers commenced a heavy tire upon the Cruiser and
Battler, and several of the schooners and schuyts also opened
 their fire. In a short time the two sloops were in the midst
