218        BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.     CHANNEL.        [1804.


  Corresponding exertions were making on the opposite side of
the Channel. An immense number of small vessels, armed each
with one or two heavy long guns, were stationed at the Nore
and at all the most assailable parts of the English coast as  ;


were also several large armed ships, mounted with heavy
carronades, and which ships, although not in a state to go to
sea, answered perfectly well for floating-batteries.
                                                        Mortella
towers were also erected along the coast; and an immense
army, composed of regulars, militia, and volunteers, were ready,
on the first summons, to rush to the point of danger. In mid-
channel and along the French coast, British cruisers were con-
                                                           of the
stantly on the watch, ready to blaze away upon the vessels
flotilla the instant they showed themselves outside the sands
and batteries by which they were protected. The commander-
in-chief on the Downs station, Admiral Lord Keith, had this
important service under his immediate direction and several
                                                    ;



enterprising officers had the command of flying squadrons, that
cruised close along the French coast.
  On the 20th of February, in the morning, the British hired
cutter Active, of six small guns and about 30 men and boys,
commanded by Lieutenant John Williams, being off Gravelines,
discovered, within three-quarters of a mile of the shore, 16 sail
of French gun-boats and transports running from Ostende
towards Boulogne. In spite of the great disparity of force,
Lieutenant Williams gallantly gave chase; at 10 h. 30 m. a.m.
commenced a running fight with the flotilla; and at 11 a.m.
compelled the outermost vessel, a horse-transport, to haul down
her colours. The delay in taking possession of the Jeune-
Isabelle enabled the other vessels to get under the protection of
the batteries, before the Active could again make sail in pur-
suit.
  On the 8th of May, at daybreak, the British lS-gun^brig-
sloop Yincejo, Captain John Wesley Wright (18-pounder
carronades, with a crew on board of 51 effective men and the
extraordinary number of 24 boys), having been becalmed close
to the mouth of the river Morbihan, coast of France, was carried
by the ebb-tide, in less than an hour, so near to the Teigneuse
rock, that she was forced to anchor to avoid running upon it.
Having sounded, the brig weighed and warped herself into the
fair channel, still baffled in her manoeuvres by a calm and a

strong tide directly against her. While in this situation, sweep-
ing with all her strength to get clear of the coast, a flotilla of
17 armed vessels was rowing towards her from the Morbihan         ;
