1804.J
                                   INVASION-FLOTILLA.                                    229

under the command of Captain Owen, in the frigate Immor-
talite, generally cruised just out of shell-range of the enemy's
batteries, anchoring occasionally, as the state of the tide ren-
dered necessary. It should here be observed, that, in addition
to the batteries, masked as well as open, all along the edge of
the cliff, there were seven or eight forts erected on the sands
at low water     where also lay ready several mortar-beds, over
                     ;


which the tide flowed, and to which the mortars were brought
as soon as it left them dry.
  On the 25th of August there were lying in the road of Bou-
logne, moored in line, 146 French gun-vessels, 62 of them brigs,
or first-class gun-vessels, the remainder chiefly luggers. Of
these gun-vessels, 45 composed the Havre division, which, under
Capitaine de vaisseau Fraugois-Henri-Eugene Daugier, had
since the 16th entered the road.  On the same 25th an unusual
degree of bustle and activity prevailed in the port, on account
of the presence of the French emperor, who had just done pre-
siding at the grand ceremony of distributing to the troops the
cross of the legion of honour. This imposing spectacle took
place on the 16th of August, the anniversary of the day on which
" Saint           "
        Napoleon had usurped in the French calendar the place
of " Saint Boch." Upwards of 80,000 men, taken chiefly from the
camps of Boulogne and Montr-euil, were present on the occasion.
  To amuse the French emperor, probably, Admiral Bruix, at
about 1 h. 45 m. p.m., ordered a division of gun-vessels, under
Capitaine de vaisseau Julien le Bay, to weigh, and, with the
north-easterly wind then blowing, work up towards Bointe-
Bombe near to which lay the British gun-brig Bruiser, Lieu-
            ;
                                                           " une
tenant Thomas Smithies, or, as the French writers have it,
grande corvette anglaise a trois mats," watching their manoeu-
                                                           1




vres.  In a short time a firing commenced between the parties,
and soon brought to the spot the Immortalite; who, at 2h.
30 m. p.m. opened her broadside upon the gun-vessels, and re-
ceived in return a heavy fire from the batteries, one shot from
which struck her under the main chains, but did no material
injury. It now became necessary to haul further from the shore                                 ;



and the Immortalite, having done so, lay-to about three miles
 off the port.

   1
       One would hardly suppose this possi-        de ligne," (meaning a 50 and a frigate,)
 ble, but it is no less true ;   and, as a proof   "deux frdgates de quarante-quatre, do
 what strange optica the writer was blessed        sept corvettes de guerre a trois mi
 with, he could not discover a single brig
                                                                                   —
                                                   deux longres, <'t. d un cutter." I're'cis d-s
                          "                        Euenemens, tome xi., p. 45.
 in the British squadron   :Lenrs forces se
                          " de deux vaisseuux
 composaieut," be says,
