232            BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.     [1804.

desirable object was to be attained chiefly by means of a novel,
or, rather, of a revived species of fire-vessel of a very peculiar
description.   It consisted of a coffer of about 21 feet long, and
three and a quarter broad, resembling in appearance a log of
mahogany, except that its extremities were formed like a wedge.
Its covering was of thick plank, lined with lead, calked and
tarred.   Outside this was a coat of canvas, paid over with hot
pitch.   The vessel weighed, when filled (done of course before
the covering is wholly put on), about two tons. The contents
consisted, besides the apparatus, of as much ballast as would
just keep the upper surface of the deck of the coffer even with
the water's edge. Amidst a quantity of powder (about 40
barrels) and other inflammable matter, was a piece of clockwork,
the main spring of which, on the withdrawing of a peg placed
on the outside, would, in a given time (from six to ten minutes),
draw the trigger of a lock, and explode the vessel. This " cata-
maran," as it was called, had no mast, and was to be towed to
the spot of its operation. On the opposite end to that to which
the tow-rope was fixed was a line, with a sort of grappling-iron
at its extremity, kept afloat by pieces of cork, and intended to
hook itself to the cable of the object of destruction, and swing
the coffer alongside.
  The appearance of about 150 vessels, moored in a double line
outside the pier of Boulogne, offered a fit opportunity for trying
the effect of these much-vaunted machines. Accordingly on the
1st of October, in the morning, Admiral Lord Keith, in the
Monarch 74, with three 64s, two 50s, and several frigates, sloops,
bombs, gun-brigs, cutters, and fire-vessels, anchored about five
miles from the French line off Boulogne. In the course of the
day, the Monarch, accompanied by three frigates and some
smaller vessels, weighed, and re-anchored just out of gun-shot of
the French batteries and flotilla. This movement, coupled with
the information previously furnished by spies, left no doubt in
the minds of the French as to the nature of the attack that was
about to ensue. Every defensive preparation had already been
made by Rear-admiral Lacrosse, whose flag was flying on board
the Ville-de-Mayence prame, stationed in the centre of the line.
Towards evening the French admiral despatched several gun-
boats and armed launches to a distance outside, that they might
be ready as well to give notice by signal of the enemy's approach,
as, if possible, to grapple and tow away the fire-vessels.     On
shore the batteries were all ready, and bodies of troops, with
numerous field-pieces, were stationed along the coast.
