                             LNVASION-FLOTILLA.                 233
1804.]

  On the 2nd of October, at about 9 h. 15 m. p.m., the four fire-
vessels, Amity, Devonshire, Peggy, and Providence, towed by
armed launches, proceeded upon the service assigned them. In
less than a quarter of an hour their approach was signalled by
the French videttes who, as soon as they found that the fire
                         ;



they opened was not returned, suspected the nature of the ves-
sels which, with a strong tide and fair wind, were fast driving
towards them. A scuffle now ensued between the French gun-
boats and the English launches and the latter, having towed
                                      ;


their charges to a proper distance, and ignited the fusees, left the
tide to perform the rest, and rowed back to their ships.    As the
fire-vessels approached the left of the French line, a heavy
cannonade commenced with a view of sinking them, but it
failed in its effect.        The Providence, entering among the gun-
boats, exploded at 10 h. 15 m., between No. 149 and No. 142,
stationed in the second line, wounding two men on board the
latter vessel.The explosion was awfully loud, and created con-
siderable alarm, as well along the French line, as among the
spectators on shore but no more mischief appears to have been
                         ;




done than has just been stated.
  In another 20 minutes the Peggy, passing through a vacant
space left purposely for her, exploded in the rear of the line, with
an effect as slight as the first, merely wounding an officer and
two men. A third fire-vessel, the Devonshire, exploded at about
1 a. ii. on the 3rd, wounding two men only.  The fourth, which
was the Amity, pointed to the admiral's prame but the Ville-
                                                      ;



de-Mayencc, slacking her cables, let the enemy drift harmlessly
by. This vessel, at
                     her explosion, appears to have effected even
less than her three companions.
   Four or five of the catamarans also exploded, the last at about
3 h. 30 m.   a.m.   ;
                        but only one, and that by an unexpected
occurrence, appears to have caused any destruction to the French.
A British boat, having just done towing a catamaran, was, the
French say, abandoned by her crew, but left with a sail up. If
so, it must have been as a ruse,
                                 and the English must have
transported themselves to another boat, as the enemy's gun-
vessel was approaching. Lord Keith's letter containing not a
word of details, the French accounts are all to which we have
 to trust.   A heavily-armed launch, or peniche (No. 267), ap-
 proached this vacant boat, into which 27 French soldiers and
 sailors instantly leaped.  Scarcely had the latter made off with
 their prize, before the peniche ran foul of the catamaran, and
 was instantly blown into the air, with the lo68 of all her remain-
