1804.]                     INVASION-FLOTILLA.                   231

blood of the poor man through whose body the shell had just
passed.   The Immortalite was twice struck by shot in the hull,
and had four men slightly wounded.         This frigate and her
division, to which the Bruiser gun-brig, commanded as before,
had since joined herself, now hauled off out of gun-shot. Some
of the French vessels were compelled to run on shore on account
of the shot-holes in their hulls and such of the remainder as
                                       ;


the batteries had not permitted to be materially damaged, bore
up for the road of Boulogne. On the two succeeding days some
slight skirmishes also took place, but nothing decisive could be
effected on account of the French batteries nor was any injury
                                                        ;


done to the British vessels beyond a wound in the Bruiser's
bowsprit.
  It is singular that the same French writer, who tells us of the
immense advantage which a host of these gun-vessels derived
from the gun and mortar batteries along the coast, should cite
                                                        "
the engagement or skirmish of the 26th of August, as une des
plus fortes epreuves de l'effet reciproque du feu des petits bati-
mens de flotille opposes a une ligne de vaisseaux et fregates
d'un rang tres-superieur." 1 The writer should have stopped
until a case occurred where a score or so of these gun-vessels,
having got beyond the reach of their protectors, suddenly found
themselves, in a fine commanding breeze, close to leeward of a
single British frigate, of the Immortalite for instance.        How
many of them, does he think, w ould escape capture or destruc-
                                           r




tion ?  None, provided the frigate stayed not to pick up the
drowning crews of those she crushed by her stem, or sank by her
broadsides and provided those vessels that hauled down their
            ;


flags to save themselves from the fate of their companions did
not treacherously rehoist them, because the frigate was too much
occupied to send a boat to take possession. None knew this
better than Napoleon.     The affair of the 26th of August, of
which he had unintentionally been an eye-witness, convinced
him. He did not say so, it is true       it was not his policy.
                                                 :



Within the short space of little more than five weeks, the French
emperor had witnessed, both what the Channel gales and the
Channel cruisers would do with his flotilla, if it fell in the way of
either.
  Towards the latter end of the summer a plan was submitted
to, and received the sanction of the British government, for
destroying such vessels of the invasion-flotilla as should moor
in any of the open roads along the French Channel-coast.    This
                   1
                       Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 45.
