1804.]                 INVASION-FLOTILLA.                           225

attacked, and after a two hours' action very nearly discomfited,
this formidable Gallo-Batavian flotilla.   Unfortunately the public
letter ofCommodore Sir Sidney Smith, although it admits that
"
  Captains Hancock and Mason bore the brunt of the attack,
and continued it for six hours against a great superiority of fire,"
was calculated to convey an impression, the letter in fact ex-
pressly states, that the Antelope, Penelope, and Aimable par-
ticipated in the action from its commencement. Sir Sidney says        :


" The
       signal was made to the Cruiser and Battler for an enemy
in the E.S.E. to call their attention from Ostend the squadron
                                                    ;



weighed," &c. But, in reality, neither of the sloops was in sight
of the Antelope for a full hour after she and her companions had
weighed nor does the log of the Antelope mention their names
            ;


until the following entry occurs   : "At 2, observed the Battler
and Cruiser commence firing on the enemy's flotilla." The log
of the Aimable refers to the first appearance of the two sloops in
                           " At
nearly the same manner   :
                                2, Cruiser and Battler brought the

enemy to action," &c. And how could the commodore well
have descried the two sloops earlier than the commencement of
the afternoon, when the Antelope had been at anchor full six
leagues (some accounts say nine) from their anchorage at such   ;


a distance, in fact, that it took the Stag, from 9 p.m. on the
15th to 5 h. 30 m. a.m. on the 16th, before her commander could
deliver his despatches to Sir Sidney?    Moreover, the first signal
of any kind, noticed in the log of the Antelope, is one made at
4 p.m., "to engage the enemy." Whereas, in proof that much
had been effected two hours before he was in a situation to
                                                        " Since 2
make that signal, Sir Sydney in his letter says         :




o'clock (a little earlier than was the case) the sternmost prame
struck her colours and ran on shore."
  But there is a more disinterested testimony in favour of the
claims of the Cruiser and Battler than is to be found in the
logs of any of the British ships. The French minister of marine,
Vice-admiral Decrus, under date of May 20, 1804, gives as the
substance of the report of Bear-admiral Ver-Huell, that an
English frigate and corvette, or, in other words, that an English
frigate-built and brig-rigged corvette, who were very near,
manoeuvred to cut off two of the gun-boats and a transport, &o.
" The
        action during two hours," proceeds the account, " was
extremely warm the two enemy's vessels were disabled and
                  :


retreated."   The rear-admiral goes on to state, that the port of
Ostende being left open, he steered towards it; but that Com-
modore Sir Sydney Smith, " having assembled his squadron,
  VOL.   III.                                               Q
