226               BRITISH     AND FRENCH FLEETS.     —CHANNEL.               ["1804.


attacked the flotilla within three leagues of Ostende," &c. As
this translation is at complete variance, in some material points,
with that which appears in the work of a contemporary, we will
here add the original passages, or so much of them as is neces-
       " Une                                    1
sary   :
              fre'gate et une corvette anglaise, qui etaient fort
                              " Le
pres, manoeuvrerent." &c.          combat, pendant deux heures,
fut extremement chaud, les deux batimens ennemis invent desem-
                                2   " Le Commodore
pare's et firent chasses."                               Sidney Smith, ayant
pu reunir sa croisiere, joignit la flotille gallo-batave atrois lieues
d'Ostende."
   From the above extracts, it is evident that Bear-admiral Ver-
Huell considered that he was attacked, and engaged for two
hours, by the Cruiser and Battler, before the Antelope, or any
other ship of Sir Sydney's squadron, fired a shot at him and                 ;



thus, like an honest man, did he report the fact to the official
organ of his government. But the appearance of Sir Sydney
Smith's official letter, in the columns of the Moniteur, made
M. Becres condemn the haste he had used in publishing the
report of the Butch admiral. Instead of the attack having been
made by two sloops, or, taking the literal translation, by one
frigate     and one sloop, it was here confessedly made by one
50-gun ship, three frigates, two sloops, and two cutters. Ac-
cordingly M. Bumas, and all the other French historians, reject
their own official account as too tame and inglorious, and
prefer incorporating in their pages the official account of their
enemy. This is particularly the case in one work, which, on
most other occasions, would scorn to glean its materials from
any source that was not decidedly French.
                                               3
                                                  We regret that
we were so far misled by Sir Sydney's letter, as, in the former
edition of this work, to have contributed to mislead the public
respecting the real merits of the engagement off Boulogne in
May, 1804.
  On the 17th, at daybreak, the four gun-brigs, commanded by
Lieutenant Manderston, having joined, were sent in, under the
direction of Captain Hancock, to see what could be done with
the French prame Ville-d'Anvers, aground to the eastward of
Ostende. The gun-brigs opened their fire, but received from the
numerous train of horse and other artillery assembled along the
beach, as well as from the heavy mortars and pieces of cannon
mounted upon the heights, so heavy a fire in return, that they
were obliged to desist and haul off. No loss appears to have
  1
   An English frigate and a cutter.— 2 The two vessels of the
                                                              enemy were
Breuton, vol. iii., p. 244.              dismattcd and sheered off,— Ih., p. 245.
                                           s   Precis des Eveuemens, tomexi, p. 19.
