1804.]                 INVASION" -FLOTILLA.                  227

been sustained by the gun-brigs but the Minx was struck by a
                                 ;



large shot in the hounds of her mainmast. On the morning of
the 19th the 16-gun ship-sloops Galgo, Captain Michael Dodd,
and Inspector, Captain Edward James Mitchell, co-operated
with the gun-brigs in a second attack upon the grounded prame   ;



but, protected by the powerful batteries on shore, the Ville-
d'Anvers floated with the rising tide and got safe into Ostende.
Five of the eight grounded schooners and schuyts were also
floated into the basin.
  Havre, owing to its central position on the French Channel-
coast, was made a temporary depot for the vessels of the flotilla
constructed to the westward, or in the Seine and the rivers flow-
ing into it. As soon as a sufficient number was assembled, they
were to be convoyed, by prames and gun-brigs, to the grand en-
trepot at Boulogne. In the month of July a British squadron,
composed   chiefly of sloops, bombs, and small craft, under the
orders of Captain Robert Dudley Oliver, in the 38-gun frigate
Melpomene, was stationed off Havre, to reconnoitre and harass
the port, and prevent, as well the vessels of the flotilla inside
from escaping, as those on the outside from joining. On the
23rd the bomb-vessels bombarded the town, set it on fire, and
compelled several of the vessels to retire behind the pier and up
the river. The mortar-batteries on shore opened a fire in return,
which, although continued for some time, inflicted very little
damage, and no loss on the British vessels. On the 1 st of August
a second attack was made, attended with nearly a similar result.
  On the 19th of July, in the afternoon, the wind, setting in
strong from the north-north-east, made so much sea, that the
French flotilla in the road of Boulogne became very uneasy. At
about 8 p.m., the lcewardmost brigs began to get under way,
and work to windward, while some of the luggers ran down
apparently for Etaples, leaving in the road at anchor 45 brigs
and 43 luggers. The British frigate Immortalite, Captain Owen,
with the 38-gun frigate Leda, Captain Robert Honyman, and
several small vessels, was then at anchor about eight leagues to
the westward of the town of Boulogne.           The commodore
immediately directed the 18-gun brig-sloop Harpy, Captain
Edmund Heywood, and the gun-brigs Bloodhound and Archer,
Lieutenants Henry Richardson and John Price, to run in and
open their fire upon such of the enemy's vessels as attempted
to stand off from the land.     The 16-gun ship-sloop Autumn,
Captain Samuel Jackson, was at this time getting under way.
and lost no time in giving her support to the Harpy and her two
