230           BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.     — CHANNEL.               [1804.


   Early on the morning of the 26th the Archer and Blood-
hound, commanded as before, fired at some luggers coming-
                               1



round Cape Grinez, but who kept too close to the shore to be
molested. Towards the afternoon a second division of gun-
vessels, under Capitaine de vaisseau Etienne Pevrieux, and two
sections of Prussian mortar- vessels, got under way, and, when
joined to Captain Le Pay's division, which was still manoeuvring
between Vimereux and Ambleteuse, formed a total of GO brigs,
and upwards of 30 luggers. The French emperor himself, it
appears, was at this time in the road in his barge, attended by
Marshals Soult and Mortier, and Admiral Eruix. At 4 p.m.
the Immortalite, followed by the Harpy, still commanded by
Captain Heywood, gun-brig Adder, Lieutenant George Wood,
and hired armed-cutter Constitution, commanded by Lieutenant
J. S. A. Dennis, made sail towards the flotilla, and in a quarter
of an hour afterwards opened her fire; as did the vessels astern
of her. The gun-vessels, however, kept near the shore, pur-
posely to draw the British within reach of the batteries. There
was no withstanding the temptation, and the Immortalite and
her three companions tacked and stood in, within three-quarters
of a mile of the batteries, which kept up an incessant fire.
   As if that were not enough to preserve the gun-vessels from
capture, the greater part of those in the road weighed and pro-
                               "
ceeded to their assistance.      Presque tous les batimens qui se
trouvaient en rade prirent part a ce combat, selon leur position,
et furent soutenus par le feu des batteries de la cote, quand
l'ennemi tenta de s'en approcher. Les mortiers a grande portee
                                   2
lui firent beaucoup de mal, &c."
   At about 5 p.m., while the Constitution with her 12-po under
carronades was engaging, in the most gallant manner, a heavy
gun-brig and two lugger-rigged yachts, painted with white
bottoms and green sides, and richly gilt, a 13-inch shell fell on
board between the companion and skylight, passed through the
deck, stove a skuttle-butt, and went through the cutter's
bottom. The hole being too large to be stopped, and the vessel
filling fast, a signal of distress was hoisted.  In a few minutes
the boats of the squadron were alongside, and the whole of the
crew were saved. A shell also fell on board the Harpy, and,
after killing one of her seamen, lodged in a beam on the main
deck, without doing further harm. The reason given for its not
exploding is a very extraordinary one. According to several
English accounts, the fusee was actually extinguished by the
      1
          See p. 227.          Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 47.
