228    BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.             — MEDITERRANEAN.   [1804.

consorts all four vessels maintaining an occasional fire during
         ;


the whole weather tide.
   At daylight on the 20th there were 19 brigs and eight luggers
only remaining in the bay and at about 6 a.m. these began to
                                 ;




slip singly, and run to the southward for the port of Etaples, or
Saint-Valery-sur-Somme, the Autumn and three brigs being then
too far to leeward to give them any interruption. As soon as the
tide permitted, the Immortalite and Leda weighed and stood in
close to Boulogne, when it was perceived that a brig, a lugger,
and several large boats, were stranded on the beach west of the
harbour. The crews of the vessels were endeavouring to save
from them what they could, but the tide most probably com-
pleted their destruction. Three other French brigs and a lugger
were on the rocks near the village of Portet, totally destroyed.
A brig and two luggers remained at anchor close to the rocks,
with signals flying the brig had lost her topmasts, topsails, and
                      ;


lower yards, and one of the luggers the head of her mainmast:
besides which the sea was making a perfect breach over them.
  In the French version of the affair no mention is made of the
presence of the British. All is ascribed to the fury of the gale,
which did, indeed, occasion sufficient havoc among the numerous
craft.   The exact number of gun-vessels that foundered, or were
stranded, is not stated    but the account acknowledges, that
                             ;



upwards of 400 soldiers and sailors were ingulfed with the
former, and that a great many perished with the latter. The
emperor was a spectator of the scene, and if we are to credit
the French writers, evinced much sensibility on the occasion.
"
  L'empereur, arrive de la veille a Boulogne, fut temoins de ces
desastres il se montra encore plus afflige que furieux; la sen-
             ;


sibilite chez lui parut bien superieure au depit, et l'orgueil de
son caractere ceda a la bonte de son coeur." 1 Napoleon, no
doubt, was taught a lesson by the disaster he saw that the :




shots and shells of British ships were not all he had to fear in
getting his immense armada across the English Channel.
   Boulogne being, as already mentioned, the head-quarters of
the grand armament preparing for the invasion of England,
occupied a due share of the latter's attention.      The British
squadron, which cruised off Boulogne in August, consisted of
from 15 to 20 vessels, under the command of Bear-admiral Louis
in the 50-gun ship Leopard.       The main body usually lay at
anchor, in 15 fathoms water, about 10 miles north-west of the
port ; and a detached or flying division, of five or six vessels,
                 1
                     Victoires et ConquStes, tome xvi., p. 138.
