224         BRITISH   AND FRENCH         FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.       [1804.

of the flotilla, engaging on both sides, and frequently assailed
by shot and shells trom the batteries of Blanckenberghe. Not-
withstanding all this the Cruiser and Eattler gallantly drove
on shore the Ville-d'Anvers prame, and four of the schooners.
  At 3 h. 45 m. p.m. the Aimable arrived up with, and opened
her fire upon, a portion of the flotilla close under the batteries
of Blanckenberghe.       At about 4 h. 30 m. p.m. the Penelope
and Antelope also got into action, and, by their heavy fire, drove
several other schooners and schuyts on shore. At 7 p.m. the
Aimable found herself near to the grounded prame, and received
from her a very destructive fire several artillerymen from the
                                     ;



shore having got on board the Yille-d'Anvers, and replaced her
crew, most of whom had fled upon her first grounding at which   :




time, too, her colours were either hauled down or shot away.
At about 7 h. 45 m. p.m., the tide having fallen and left the
British ships in little more water than they drew, the Antelope
made the signal to discontinue the engagement; and the
squadron drew     off into deeper water.    The Galio-Batavian
        or what remained of it, took this opportunity of getting
flotilla,
into the basin of Ostende whither they were accompanied by
                             ;


the division of French gun- vessels which, by the orders of Bear-
admiral Charles Magon, the commanding officer of the Ostende
flotilla,had on the preceding evening, as already stated, an-
chored to the westward of the lighthouse, and which had sub-
sequently gone to the assistance of Bear-admiral'Ver-Huel!.
   The loss on the part of the British, compared with the vigour
and duration of the firing, was of no great amount. The Cruiser
had one seaman killed, and her captain's clerk (George Ellis)
and three seamen wounded the Battler, two seamen killed and
                                 ;


three wounded the Aimable, one master's mate (Mr. Christie),
               ;


one midshipman (Mr. Johnson), four seamen, and one boy
killed, and one lieutenant (William Mather), her purser (Wil-
liam Shadwell), one midshipman (Mr. Conner), and 11 seamen
wounded; total, 13 killed and 32 wounded. Besides having
her rigging and sails a good deal cut, the Cruiser received two
large shot between wind and water. The Battler suffered also
in her rigging and sails ;
                         and the Aimable, in addition to her
damages aloft, was struck in several parts of her hull. The ac-
knowledged loss, on the Gallo-Batavian flotilla amounted to 18
killed and 60 wounded, 29 of the latter and four of the former
on board the two prames.
  From the sketch here given it now appears that the Cruiser
and Eattler, unsupported by any other ships, most gallantly
