1804.]                INVASION-FLOTILLA.                    235

places, her  main and maintop masts shot through, and her
rigging of every kind much cut.
  On the 23rd of October, at 4 p.m., a division of the French
flotilla,consisting of two prames, one with a commodore's broad
pendant, and 18 armed schuyts, put to sea from Ostende, and
steered to the westward, just as the Cruiser, Captain Hancock,
accompanied by the gun-brigs Blazer, Lieutenant John Hinton,
Conflict, Lieutenant Charles C. Ormsby, Tigress, Lieutenant
Edward Greensword, and Escort, Lieutenant Joseph Gulston
Garland, and hired armed cutters Admiral Mitchell and Griffin,
Lieutenants Eichard Williams and James Dillon, was standing
in to reconnoitre the port. Chase was given, and the headmost
prame, at 5h. 18 m. p.m., was brought to action by the Cruiser
and her consorts. The mutual cannonade continued until 6 h.
35 m. p.m. when the prame's fire, which had been confined to
            ;




musketry for the last half hour, entirely ceased. As, however,
the tide was rapidly falling, darkness coming on, and no person
on board was acquainted with the shoals to the westward of
Ostende, the Cruiser, then in less than three fathoms water,
hauled off and anchored.
   Meantime, in her eagerness to close with the prame, the Con-
flict ^un-brig had grounded ;  and, although the brig was in two
fathoms water, the prame steered safe in-shore of her. As soon
as the prame had passed out of gun-shot, Lieutenant
                                                         Ormsby
commenced lightening his vessel, in the hope to get her off. His
endeavours proving fruitless, the lieutenant and his men quitted
the Conflict, and pulled for the Cruiser, whose lights were then
in view. An attempt to bring away the gun-brig was afterwards
made by the Griffin and Admiral Mitchell cutters, manned, in
addition to their own crews, by the whole of the Conflict's crew,
and by 10 seamen and half the marines belonging to the Cruiser.
But the Conflict was found to be high and dry on the beach,
and in complete possession of the enemy the fire from whose
                                           ;


howitzers and field-pieces, besides greatly damaging the Griilin
in her advance, killed one and wounded seven of the
                                                          party,
including Acting-lieutenant Abraham Garland of the Cruiser
most severely, having lost his right leg very Ugh up. Two
seamen had also been wounded in the previous cannonade.
  On the 8th of December, in the evening, an attempt was
made, under the direction of Captain Sir Home Popham, of the
50-gun ship Antelope, by means of the Susannah explosion-
vessel and two carcasses, or catamarans, to
                                            destroy Fort Eouge,
the advanced pile-battery at the entrance of the harbour of
