                          INVASION-FLOTILLA.                237
1804.]


midway between the capes Sicie and Sepet. On the same after-
noon the French batteries at the latter place fired several shot
at the Amazon, while taking possession of a prize-brig in-shore   ;



and three French frigates came out of Toulon, and stood
towards her. On this the 74-gun ship Donegal, Captain Sir
Eichard John Strachan, and 38-gun frigate Active, Captain
Eichard Hussey Moubray, closed the Amazon          ; whereupon,
at 6h. 30 m. p.m., the French ships, including four others that
had just rounded Cape Sepet, tacked and put back.
   On the 10th of May the Leviathan 74, Captain Henry Wil-
liam Bayntun, accompanied by three bomb-vessels, joined the
fleet, which, on the day following, anchored among the Mag-
dalena islands. On the 14th the Gibraltar rejoined from Naples,
and on the 19th the British fleet weighed and steered for
Toulon. By this time the French fleet had also received an
accession of   force :  the 80-gun ship Bucentaure had been
launched, and, with seven other line-of-battle ships, lay in the
outer road ready for sea.     A
                              few other ships were in nearly the
same state of readiness in the inner road and the whole were
                                               ;


still under the command of Vice-admiral la Touche-Treville,

who had now the new 80 for his flag-ship.
   On the 24th of May, in the forenoon, as the Canopus, Donegal,
and Amazon, having been detached from the fleet, then out of
sight in the offing, were standing upon the larboard tack, with
a light air from the south-west, close to the eastward of Cape
Sepet, for the purpose of reconnoitring the fleet in Toulon, a
French line-of-battle ship and frigate were observed under sail
between the capes Sepet and Brun, which form the entrance to
the harbour. At half-past noon, when about three miles from
the shore, the Amazon, Donegal, and Canopus tacked in suc-
cession.   No sooner had the Canopus put about, than several
French gun-boats swept from under Cape Sepet, and, profiting
by the calm state of the weather, opened a distant fire upon
her and the Amazon.       The Canopus, in return, discharged
a few of her lower-deck guns, and stood on to the south-east
by east, with the wind, now a moderate breeze, from west-
 north-west.
   On hearing the firing, two French ships of the line and two
 frigates had .slipped their cables and made sail, to assist the
 line-of-battle ship and frigate already outside.  At 2 h. 30 m
 p.m., two more sail ofthe lino slipped, and followed the others      ;




 making now five sail of the line and three frigates that were in
 chase of the reconnoitring ships.       Shortly afterwards the
