242     BRITISH A,ND FRENCH FLEETS.       MEDITERRANEAN.      [1804.


already stated, was flying on board the 80-gun ship Formidable.
The British fleet outside of Toulon, although the Conqueror,
                                                  of only 10 sail of
Spencer, and Tigre had joined, still consisted
the line, the Gibraltar, Kent, and Triumph having parted com-
pany. Even had Lord Nelson's force been less, or the blockade
of the port actually raised, the French rear-admiral, as will pre-
sently appear, had received no orders
                                         to quit port.
   In a letter from Napoleon to his minister of marine at Brest,
of date September 29, are contained directions that Vice-admiral
Villeneuve, then appointed to the command of, and supposed to
have already joined, the Toulon fleet, should quit the road, if
possible, before the 21st of October, having previously
                                                            received
on board about 6500 troops under General Lauriston. The
fleet, stated to consist of
                            11 ships of the line and seven or eight
                                                  call for the Aigle
frigates, was to sail out of the Mediterranean,
at Cadiz, detach two of its fastest sailers, along with four
frigates and two brigs, having
                                   on board 1800 troops, to relieve
Senegal, retake Goree, ravage the British
                                                settlements on the
coast of Africa, and capture the island of St. Helena, wanted
as a depot for the French cruisers and their prizes in that
quarter of the globe while, with 10 sail of
                         ;
                                                  the line and fri-
gates, and the remainder of the troops,
                                             M. Yilleneuve was to
steer for Cayenne.    Having there taken on board the celebrated
General Victor Hugues, the French admiral was to proceed oft
Surinam, and effect a junction with a squadron of five sail of
the line and four frigates, under Bear-admiral Missiessy, M.
Villeneuve's successor at Bochefort, and who, it was supposed,
would already have fulfilled the first part of his mission. This
was, with 3500 men under General Legrange, to proceed to
Martinique and Guadaloupe; and, after leaving 1000 men at
each of those islands, to attempt, with the remaining 1500, the
capture of the island of Dominique, and, if possible, of Saintc-
Lucie. Having garrisoned the captured islands, Bear-admiral
Missiessy was to proceed off Surinam, and await the arrival of
Admiral Yilleneuve who, with his force now augmented to 15
                     ;


sail of the line, seven or eight frigates, and full 5000 men, was
to possess himself of Surinam, and the other Dutch colonies in
this quarter.     That done, the French admiral was to place
under contribution all the British West India islands, enter the
different roadsteds, and capture or burn the vessels lying there ;
                                               British commerce,
leaving in the Antilles, purposely to harass
the greater part of his corvettes, of which as many as possible
were to quit Toulon with the expedition. He was, next, to
