1804.]
           INIEXDED CRUISE OF ADMIRAL VILLENEUVE.             243

leave 1200 nien with General Ferrand at the city of Santo-Do-
mingo, raise the blockade of Ferrol, and, taking out the five
ships in that port, appear off Eochefort with 20 sail of the line.
Here Vice-admiral Yilleneuve would receive directions at what
point he was to join Vice-admiral Ganteaume and his 30 sail of
the line, 1 in order to fulfil the ultimate object in view, the de-
scent upon England.
   Napoleon, it appears, had wavered in his choice of an admiral
for the  Toulon command between MM. Bruix, Villeneuve, and
Itosily.  Owing to this or to some other delay, Vice-admiral
Villeneuve did not hoist his flag on board the Bucentaure until
the 6th of November, a few days anterior to which Lord Nelson
had returned to his station from Agincourt sound; whither,
since the 18th of the preceding month, the want of wood, water,
and provisions had driven the British fleet. On the night of
the 14th of November Lord Nelson received intelligence of the
seizure of the Spanish frigates, and had, in consequence, a part
of his attention directed to a scpiadron of five or six sail of the
line at anchor in Carthagena.     On the 25th of December the
Swiftsure joined Lord Nelson and on the 31st, in the evening,
                                  ;


the British fleet, owing to the absence of the Superb, reduced
again to 10 sail of the line, besides two frigates and a bomb-
vessel, cruised about six leagues to the southward and eastward
of Cape San-Sebastian. The French fleet in the outer road of
Toulon, now increased to 11 sail of the line and seven or eight
frigates, had since the 12th of the month been embarking the
troops allotted for the intended expedition, and was ready for a
start the moment a fair wind and a clear offing should afford
the opportunity.
  By the Swiftsure, or some small vessel that joined on the
same day, Lord Nelson received despatches from the admiralty,
respecting the conduct he was to pursue towards the Spaniards.
The despatches were dated September 19, and directed him to
take such measures of precaution only, as might be necessary
for opposing or counteracting any hostile attempts of the
Spaniards against the British dominions or trade. He was,
however, not to suffer any act of hostility or aggression, with
the exception of detaining Spanish ships with treasure on board,
to be committed by his fleet until he received further orders, or
had obtained positive information from unquestionable authority
<>i' hostilities
                 having been committed by the Spaniards against
the English. Additional directions, dated September 25, ordered
                              1
                                  Seep. 210.
