236         BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.          — CHANNEL.        [1804.


Calais but, if the French
       ;
                                    accounts are to be credited, little or
no damage was effected by the single explosion— that of the
Susannah— which took place. One carcass could not be fixed               ;



and the other, when fixed, would not go off. On the British
side not a man was hurt and it appears that the same good
                                ;



fortune attended the persons on shore. We must now quit, for
a while, gun-boats and catamarans to attend to the operations
of fleets of line-of-battle ships.
  Among the advantages which the British government had
contemplated by retaining possession of the island
                                                     of Malta, its

proximity to Toulon was not the least important
                                                    and yet Lord
                                                          ;


Nelson often emphatically declared, that he would as soon the
news of the sailing of the Toulon fleet reached him at St. Helen's
as at Malta. In proof of the force of that impression upon Lord
Nelson's mind, the Mediterranean fleet had not once entered
Valetta harbour since he had taken the command, the vice-
adnnral invariably, when he was compelled to seek a port, steer-
                                                      the preced-
ing for Agincourt sound where, on the last day of
                            ;



ing year, we left him and his fleet at anchor.
                                                  1
                                                    Lord Nelson
                                                of Malta was an
readily admitted, however, that the island
important out-work to Egypt, and, through the latter to India                ;




and that England, by possessing it, acquired a decided influence
in the Levant and over the whole of southern Italy.
   On the 4th of January, leaving the 38-gun frigate Amazon,
Captain William Parker, and some smaller vessels, to aid the
Sardinians, in the event of an expected invasion from the
neighbouring island of Corsica, the vice-admiral, with
                                                           the re-
mainder of his fleet, weighed and put to sea. On the 9th
Captain Keats in the Superb was detached, to settle
                                                           some
                                                         to the
dispute with the Dey of Algiers and, to give weight
                                            ;



negotiation, Lord Nelson himself, on the 17th,
                                               made his appear-
ance off the Barbary coast. The Superb having rejoined on
the following day, the fleet stood back to Sardinia, and on the
27th, at 5 p.m., again dropped anchor in Agincourt sound.
  Between February 1st and 8th the fleet cruised in the neigh-
bourhood of the French coast, and then anchored near the
island of Cabrera.    On the 19th Lord Nelson again put to sea,
and remained out until the 25th of March having on the 15th
                                                    ;


been joined by the 100-gun ship Boyal Sovereign, Captain
Pulteney Malcolm, from England. Weighing again on the 3rd
of April, the fleet passed between the island of Elba and Cape
Corse, and on the 9th, in the morning, took a station
                                                          about
                                i
                                    See p. 179.
