1804.]            LORD NELSON AND M. LA TOUCHE-TREVILLE.                         239

seven leagues; and at 1 h. 30m. a.m. on the 15th, having wore
and tacked several times, the lee division hove to. At 3 h. 45 m.
a.m. Lord Nelson again made sail, and at noon was only 11
miles to the westward of the north-west end of Porquerolles.
At 5 p.m. the Amazon and Phoebe joined the vice-admiral at                       ;

which time the French fleet, counted at 14 sail of ships, was
standing off and on between Cape Sepet and the last-named
island. At 6 p.m. the lee division again hove to for a short time.
At 7 p.m. the Incorruptible, Sirene, and Furet joined their
fleet  which, having effected the apparent object of the sally,
        ;


now stood back into port, and was followed, until well inside of
Sepet, by Lord Nelson and his division.
   This would have passed off as an occurrence of no moment,
had not M. La Touche-Treville thought proper to make it the
subject of an official communication to his government. He
admits having sent the two frigates and a brig-corvette to cruise
in the bay of Hyeres, as well as that he sailed out, with the
whole of his fleet, to prevent their retreat from being cut off by
a line-of-battle ship and two frigates detached by Lord Nelson.
He states truly, that the latter, upon tins, recalled his de-
tached ships, but most untruly, that the British admiral " ran
away."
  What Lord Nelson thought of the French admiral's exploit
may be gathered from a letter which, on the 18th of June, he
wrote to Sir John Acton " Mons. La Touche came out on the
                                        :




14th.   I was off the Hyeres with five ships he had eight of       ;


the line and six frigates. In the evening he stood under Sepet
again, and, I believe I may call it, we chased him into Toulon
the morning of the lath. I am satisfied he meant nothing be-
yond a gasconade but am confident, when he is ordered for
                             ;



any service, that he will risk falling in with us, and the event of
a battle, to try and accomplish his orders." 1 It was not until
some weeks after the date of this letter that Lord Nelson saw
a copy of the official one of M. La Touche. 2 The statement of
the French admiral gave his lordship much more concern than
it ought to have done      so much, indeed, that he transmitted a
                                    ;



copy of the Victory's log to the admiralty. It was sufficient for
M. La Touche that his assertion, taken in a larger sense than
he had probably anticipated, that of having chased the British
admiral with all the hitter's 10 sail of the line present, gained
credence in a quarter which immediately promoted him from
            1
                Clarke and M'Arthur, vol. li., p. 372
            '   For a transcript of the original Letter, see Appeudix, No. 19.
                                          igmal Lette
