240        BRITISH     AND FRENCH FLEETS.            —MEDITERRANEAN.               [1804,

" un               officier   de la legion d'honneur," to                " un
       grand                                                       grand
officier de l'empire,"        and conferred upon him, also, the lucrative
appointment of "inspecteur des cotes de la Mediterranee."
  Napoleon's letter, apprising M. La Touche-Treville of the
manner in which he had rewarded his gallantry, is dated at
Malmaison, the 2nd of July, and contains some important
directions relative to the proceedings of the Toulon fleet. The
vice-admiral is informed, that two battalions of picked troops of
the line, consisting of 800 men each, have received orders to
embark on board his ships, presumed to be 10 of the line,
ready for sea in the road. If seamen are wanted, the corvettes
are to be disarmed, and pressgangs sent to the port of Mar-
seilles. The orders about the employment of shells for the
36-pounders in the Brest fleet are here repeated, with an
assurance that, if fired at a distance of not more than 200 or
300 toises, they will produce a much greater effect upon the
hull of a ship than cannon-balls. 1
  M. La Touche-Treville is then directed, after having, if pos-
sible, deceived Lord Nelson as to his destination, to put to sea,
pass the Straits, sail wide of Ferrol to avoid heing seen by the
blockading squadron, and arrive off Bochefort where he is to ;


be joined by the six sail of the line, including the new ship
Achille then expected to be ready, in that port. With his 16
sail of the line and 11 frigates, the vice-admiral is then to pro-
ceed off Boulogne, either doubling Ireland, or otherwise, as
circumstances may warrant. The Brest fleet, composed of 23
sail of the line, with a strong body of troops on board, is in the
mean time to draw off the attention of Admiral Cornwallis, and
to oblige him to keep close to the coast of Bretagne, to be ready
to intercept it on its supposed route to the westward.        The
further destination of M. La Touche-Treville is left to be com-
municated to him when he arrives in the neighbourhood of
Boulogne which, Napoleon conjectures, will be in the course of
              ;




September, admitting the fleet to have sailed from Toulon, as
he trusts it will, about the 28th of July.
   For 16 or 17 days previous to the day last mentioned, a suc-
cession of heavy gales of wind had rendered it very difficult for
Lord Nelson to keep his station; especially as scarcely more
than half his ships were in a seaworthy state. 2 On the 19th of
July the Ambuscade frigate, with eight sail of transports, join-
ing from England, Lord Nelson wore and stood for the gulf of
Palma, with the double object of unloading the transports and
                                                                 2
       '
           Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 198.                   See p. 212.
