1804.J               BLOCKADE OF THE PORT OF TOULON.                              211

of sheltering- the        fleet.   The station off Toulon, in the mean
time,  was left in charge of Captain "William Hargood, of the
Belleisle, having in company the Fisgard and Niger frigates, the
Acheron bomb-vessel, and two transports.
   On the 2nd of August, when the violence of the wind had
driven these ships out of sight of the shore, five French sail of
the line and six frigates, under the orders of Bear-admiral
Dumanoir-le-Belley, in the Formidable SO, sailed out of Toulon,
for the sole purpose, as alleged, of practising manoeuvres. The
division cruised within six or seven leagues of the port until the
f>th,   when the Belleisle and her consorts making their appear-
ance, were telegraphed by the signal-posts on Cape Sepet as six
                  " six vaisseaux ennemis
sail of the line,                         ;" and the Neptune, of
80 guns, "pour rendrc            la partie egale," went out and joined
31. Dumanoir        :   so states the letter which M. La Touche-Tre-
ville  thought it worth while to send to his government on so
important an occasion.
  On the Gth the French squadron returned to Toulon, and the
Belleisle and her five highly-honoured companions approached
near enough to count seven of the ships standing into the har-
bour. On the 8th, in the evening, the Belleisle reconnoitred
the port, and observed 10 sail of the line, six frigates, and one
brig, at anchor in the road.      On the same day Lord Nelson,
with his fleet, anchored in a bay in the island of Bulla where,           ;


he had been informed, excellent fresh water could easily be pro-
           " A
cured.         very fine watering-place," says his lordship in his
diary,   "found  by Captain Hillyar, about five miles to the west-
ward of Borto-Torres, with the springs about 200 yards from
the beach, where 40 casks may be filled at the same time."
                                    weighed and put to sea but,
                                  l
   ( >n the 10th the Yice-admiral                                             ;



having by a severe gale of wind been blown under Cape San-
Sebastian, was not able, until the 2Gth, to reconnoitre Toulon.
In the outer harbour the Victory counted 20 ship-rigged vessels,
including 10 sail of the line and in the inner harbour, fitting,
                                     ;


one sail of the line and one frigate.
  On the 18th of August, in the night, Vice-admiral La Touche-
Treville died on board the Bucentaurc ;s and the command of
the fleet, until a successor should be appointed by Buonaparte,
devolved upon Admiral Dumanoir-lc-Bclley, whose flag, as
  1
      Since the first of the month, Lord   consequence of walking so often up to the
Nelson had changed his flag from blue to   siimal-post upon Sepet to watch us."
                                                                                   —
white, as Sir Ricnard Blckerton had from   tetter <;/' Lord NtUon, in Clarke and
white to red.                              M' Arthur, vol. ii., p. L!S"7.
  ! " The
           French papers say he died in
      VOL.   111.                                                     B
