 238       BRITISH    AND FKENCH FLEETS.         —MEDITERRANEAN.              [1804.

 French van-frigate, being on the weather-quarter of the Cano-
 pus, opened a fire upon her and the Donegal, which these ships
 immediately returned. With so superior a force it was in vain
 to contend, and Eear-admiral Campbell directed his little
 division to make sail.   At 3 h. 30 m. p.m., finding pursuit use-
 less, the French ships tacked and stood back to their port                            ;

 and at 9h 30 m. p.m., and not before, the Canopus and her two
 companions joined the Victory and the fleet. 1
   On the 13th of June, in the afternoon, two strange ships
 having been signalled as under sail off the east end of the island
 of Porquerolles, Lord Nelson, who, with the in-shore or lee
 division, consisting of the Victory, Canopus, Belleisle, Donegal,
 and Excellent, lay off the Hyeres, while Sir Eichard
                                                       Eickerton,
 with the weather-division, also of five sail of the
                                                     line, cruised
 about 20 leagues from the land, ordered the frigates Amazon
 and Phoebe, the latter commanded by Captain the Honourable
 Thomas Bladen Capel, to proceed in chase. Light winds made
it noon on the
                 following day, the 14th, before the two frigates
reached the entrance of the Grande-Passe and soon
                                                      afterwards,
                                                        ;


it being signalled that the
                             strangers were frigates, and known
that batteries were near them, Lord Nelson directed the Excel-
lent to lend her aid to the Amazon and Phoebe.      At 5 p.m. the
two French frigates, Incorruptible and Sirime, and 18-gun brig-
corvette Furet, were seen at anchor under the castle of
                                                          Porque-
rolles.  At 5h. 30 m. p.m. one of the forts fired at the Phoebe,
but the shot did not reach her. In another quarter of an hour
both British frigates having cleared for action, anchored with
springs on their cables, just out of gun-shot of the northmost
fort,.  Scarcely had the frigates done this, than the whole
French fleet in Toulon road was discovered getting under
                                                              way.
The Amazon and Phoebe immediately reweighed, and stood out
to sea.   The Excellent, having also been recalled by signal, put
about and rejoined her division; which, since 4h.
                                                      30m., had
bore up, with the wind at west-south-west, under all
                                                          sail, for
the Grande-Passe.
   At 5 p.m., or soon after, the Victory and the ships with her,
observing the French admiral coming out of Toulon with eight
sail of the line and four frigates, shortened sail and hauled to
the wind, in line of battle, on the starboard tack. At 8 p.m.
Cape Sicie bore from the Victory north-west by west distant
  1 The authors of the
                        quarto "Life of    their readers in a labyrinth of mistakes
Nelson," by confounding this sortie with   Seo Clarke and M' Arthur's Book. vol. ii«
another that occurred three weeks after-   pp. 366-7.
wards, have entangled themselves and
