234            BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.      H804.

ing crew, consisting of her commander and 13 soldiers and
sailors.   Those left in the captured boat gained the port of
Yimereux. This made the French loss amount, altogether, to
14 killed and seven wounded. The British had not a man hurt.
   Many were the anathemas hurled against England for the
barbarity of this attack by catamaran, but surely without
reason. Had she not a right to crush, in the ports of its forma-
tion if she could, the flotilla which, it was publicly declared, had
for its sole object the conveyance of troops for a descent upon
her shores? What is there, compared with explosion-vessels and
fire-ships, peculiarly gentle in the employment of red-hot balls,
and grape and langridge shot or, indeed, in any of the missiles
                                 ;


or weapons with which war is usually waged ? That the catama-
ran affair was a silly project was asserted with more reason than
that it was a cruel or an illegal one. It was a complete failure,
and, like every failure of the kind, conferred additional strength
upon that which it was intended to destroy. Under an idea, for
instance, that the British would improve their plans, and make
a second attempt at burning the flotilla, " une chaine de barrage "
was constructed, which completely sheltered the line of gun-
boats at Boulogne from explosion-vessels of every description.
   On the 8th of October, a division of French lugger-rigged
gun-vessels being perceived from the road of Jersey, creeping
along the coast of Normandy from the southward, the British
18-gun ship-sloop Albacore, Captain Major Jacob Henniker,
slipped and made sail, followed by a gun-brig and cutter; but
who, missing the sloop in the haze, returned to the anchorage.
Towards evening the Albacore, being near the Grosnez de
Flamanville, compelled five of the luggers to anchor close to the
surf, under the corner of a battery to the southward of Grosnez.
The wind being dead on shore and a lee tide making, the
Albacore layoff until the 9th, at 10 a.m.; when, with the
assistance of the weather tide, Captain Henniker stood in, under
a heavy fire from the battery and gun-vessels. At 11 a.m. the
Albacore anchored, with springs, close to the gun-vessels, and
within about 200 yards of the surf: the sloop then opened her
fire, and continued it until all five vessels were driven on shore,
and lay broadside-to in a heavy surf, which broke with great
violence over them. Their men, in great numbers, landed upon
the beach and some were seen bearing the wounded in their
           ;


arms. Having, owing to the strength of the wind, dragged her
anchor, the Albacore, at the falling of the tide, slipped and
hauled off, without any loss, but with her, hull struck in several
