252               LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                                [1804-.


  At 1 p.m., finding that M. Linois intended to cut off Ills rear,
Commodore Dance made the signal to tack in succession, bear
down in line ahead, and engage on arriving abreast of the enemy.
The manoeuvre was correctly executed, the Eoyal George lead-
ing, followed successively, in close order, by the Ganges, Earl
Camden, Warley, Alfred, and others. Thus formed, and carrying
topgallantsails, the British ships stood towards the French
ships and these, carrying royals, and some of them topgallant
       ;



studding-sails, were keeping more away to facilitate the junction.
   At about 1 h. 15 m. p.m. the French admiral opened his fire
upon the Eoyal George and the ships next astern of her. The
Eoyal George returned the fire in a very spirited manner, and
Was ably seconded, as they came up, by the Ganges and Earl
Camden. The Warley and Alfred were the next ships that got
into action. The Eoyal George was engaged about 40 minutes,
and fired about eight or nine broadsides the Ganges, about 35
                                                          ;




minutes, and fired seven or eight the Earl Camden, about 25
                                                 ;



minutes, and may have fired five broadsides and the Warley        ;


and Alfred, who came into action nearly together, were engaged
about 15 minutes. After the mutual cannonade had lasted in
this way just 43 minutes, the Marengo and her consorts ceased
firing, hauled their wind, and stood away under all sail to the
eastward.
  At 2 p.m. the Earl Camden made the signal for a general
chase, and the Indiamen pursued the French admiral until 4 p.m.                           ;




when, considering the immense property at stake, and fearing
that his charge might be carried too far from the mouth of the
Straits of Malacca, Commodore Dance made the signal to tack,
which was immediately obeyed. At 8 a.m. the British ships
anchored in a situation to enter the Straits in the morning, and
soon lost sight of the squadron of M. Linois.      The following
is the French admiral's account of the defeat which he acknow-

ledges to have experienced
                                 "          —
                                   The headmost enemy's ship,
                                        :




having sustained some damage, bore away but, supported by     ;



those astern, again brought her broadside to bear, and, as well
as the others, kept up a very spirited fire. The ships which had
tacked rejoined those which were engaging us, and three of the
first engaged ships manoeuvred to double our rear, while the re-
mainder of the fleet, crowding sail and bearing up, evinced an
intention to surround us.
                          1
                            By this manoeuvre the enemy would
  i We do not understand what is meant          raient pour nous doubler a l'arriere, tin-
                                                dis que le reste de la flotte, se couvrant
by this, and "yet the account clearly so
states, thus:  Trois de ceux qui avaient        de voile, et laissant arriver, annoncait le
des premiers pris part a Taction, manceuv-      projet de nous envelopper."
