246              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.             [1804.


prise ; such as, loading
                         the carriage-guns with grape, and the
swivels (of which there were eight) and wall-pieces with musket-
      spreading on the quarter-deck and in the arm-chest
                                                             the-
balls,
                                                             the
muskets, sabres, pistols, tomahawks, and pikes, filling
cartouch-boxes, placing, as sentries, one marine at each gang-
way-ladder, one at each bow, and two at the stern, tracing up
the boarding-nettings, and directing a sharp look-out to be kept,
by every officer and man of the watch (28 in number), yet
                                                             was
the Curieux, owing to the vigour of the onset and the hour
chosen for making the attack, unapprised of her enemy's
approach until too late to offer a successful resistance.
  At about three-quarters of an hour past midnight, after a
hard pull of 20 miles, and just as the moon was peeping from be-
hind a cloud, the Centaur's boats were hailed by the Curieux,
and then fired into by the sentries, by two of the starboard
<J-pounders, a swivel, and a wall-piece.
                                          The 12 marines returned
the fire with their muskets, and the boats pulled rapidly on. In
the midst of a scuffle alongside, the barge pushed for the brig's
stern.   Here hung a rope-ladder, to which two boats were fast.
Lieutenant Reynolds, and a seaman named Eichard Templeton,
ascended by it to the taffrail, and, in defiance of the swivels and
wall-pieces mounted at this end of the vessel, were quickly
followed by the rest of the barge's crew. In his way up the
                                                         cut
                                                          away
ladder, Lieutenant Eeynolds, with admirable coolness,
one of the tracing-lines with his sword, whereby the corner of
the netting fell, and thus enabled the three remaining boats to
board on the brig's quarter.
  Since the first alarm had been given, all the Curieux's officers
and men, headed by their brave commander, had been at their
quarters and a sanguinary combat now ensued, in which
         ;
                                                              the
French officers took a much more active part than a portion of
their men.    The French, however, were soon overpowered:
some were killed or badly wounded others thrown down the
                                       ;



hatchway and the remainder, finding themselves abandoned,
             ;


retreated to the forecastle. Here a line of pikes stood opposed
to the British; but all was unavailable. Handspikes and the
butt-encls of muskets became formidable weapons in the hands
of the latter, and soon laid the captain and most of the officers
near him prostrate on the deck. The majority of the surviving,
crew having by this time fled below, all further resistance pre-
sently ceased. The British were
                                   not long in cutting the cables
of their prize, nor in unfurling her sails and, in a very few
                                            ;




minutes, the Curieux, in the hands of her new masters,
                                                        stood out
