1804.]      COMMODORE DANCE AND ADMIRAL L1NOIS.              219

is as extraordinary as that she should have ultimately fled from
a vessel so much her inferior in guns, complement, and size. It
was, however, established, to the entire satisfaction of Commo-
dore Hood, that the privateer was the Grand-Decide from
Guadaloupe, and that she was so armed and manned. The
gallantry of Lieutenant Can* in attacking such a vessel, and the
ability and determination displayed by him, his officers, and
crew, throughout a contest which, in spite of the inequality of
force, terminated so creditably to the Eclair, merited all the
praise called forth upon the occasion.
   On the 5th of March, at 2 p.m., the Eclair, still commanded
by Lieutenant Carr, while passing Englishman's Head, Guada-
loupe, discovered a schooner, which shortly afterwards hoisted
a red pendant, stood into the Hayes, and anchored close under
some batteries on the shore. Upon a nearer approach, Lieute-
nant Carr ascertained that the vessel was a French privateer,
filled with men  :and he would then have sent in the cutter to
attack her, had not the wind from the westward blown fresh on
the shore. At 7 p.m. it fell calm and the cutter, commanded
                                  ;



by Mr. John Salmon, the master, having under him Mr. JohnB.
Douglas, the surgeon (also a volunteer), and 10 seamen, quitted
the Eclair, and proceeded towards the harbour in which the
privateer lay.
  Notwithstanding a smart fire from the battery at the entrance
of the harbour, and from the vessel herself, the master perse-
vered, and after a stout resistance of 10 minutes, boarded and
carried the French privateer-schooner Eose, of one long brass-
8-pounder on a pivot, and 49 men, well armed and fully pre-
pared.    Of these the privateer had five men killed, and 10,
including the captain and four that jumped overboard, wounded.
Of the 12 officers and men, who had in so gallant a manner
effected this capture not one was hurt.  The master's next diffi-
culty was, in a dead calm, to carry off his prize. This he and
his men at length did, by dint of towing and sweeping ; and,
although exposed to a fire of great guns and musketry from the
shore, reached their vessel without the .slightest accident. The
Eose was well found, and victualled complete for a three months'
cruise, upon which she was just going to sail, when the Eclair's
boat so gallantly intercepted her.
  On the .°)lst of January, Commodore Nathaniel Dance, of the
honourable East India Company's service, sailed from Canton
for Europe with the following 1G regular Indiamen, all of which
are denominated " 1200-ton ships," the registered tonnage ot
