244                LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              [1804..


the captains and commanders of the Mediterranean fleet to keep
a vigilant look-out, and to detain Spanish ships or vessels laden
with military stores.      On November 25, lest any misapprehen-
sion might arise, further instructions were sent out not to de-
tain, in the first instance, any ship belonging to his catholic
majesty, sailing from a port of Spain, but to require the com-
mander to return directly to the port whence he came and,     ;



only in the event of his refusing to comply with such requisi-
tion, was the admiral to detain and send the vessel to Gibraltar
or England he was further directed not to detain any home-
               :




ward-bound Spanish ship-of-war, unless she should have treasure
on board, nor merchant-ships of that nation, however laden, on.
any account whatever.

                    Light Squadrons and Single Ships.

  At the distance of rather less than a mile from the south-west
end of the island of Martinique, or Pointe du Diamant, and
about six miles south-east from the entrance to the harbour or
bay of Fort Boyal, stands the roche du Diamant, or Diamond
rock, in latitude 14° 24' north, longitude 61° 6' west. In height,
as measured by a quadrant, it is GOO feet; in circumference
rather less than a mile; and " in form very much resembling a
round haystack." The south side of the rock is inaccessible, it
being a flat steep, like a wall, but sloping a little towards the
top.   The east and the south-west sides are also inaccessible          ;


the first has an overhanging cave about 300 yards high, and the
other several caves of great magnitude. The west side, where
breakers run into the sea, affords the only landing. But even
this landing is not at all times practicable, on account of the
surf; and a person, when he has landed, has to creep through
crannies, and over dangerous steeps, until he reaches the north-
west side, where the eye is suddenly relieved by a sloping grove
of wild fig-trees.
   In the latter end of the year 1803 the British 74-gun ship
Centaur, Captain Murray Maxwell, bearing the broad pendant
of Commodore Samuel Hood, was cruising off Fort Boyal bay,
to watch the port and intercept the vessels bound in or out of it.
Finding that, as the Diamond had deep water all round, many
vessels escaped capture by running inside of it, Captain Hood
determined to take possession of and fortify the rock and make
                                                         ;


it a sort   of depot, or stationary ship of Avar, whence boats could
be detached to harass the enemy's trade.     A landing was effected    .;
