1804.]
               COMMODORE DANCE AND ADMIRAL LINOLS.                             253

have rendered my situation very dangerous.            The superiority of
his force was ascertained, and I had no longer to deliberate upon
the part I should take to avoid the consequences of an unequal
engagement profiting by the smoke, I hauled up to port, and
               :




steering east-north-east, I increased my distance from the enemy,
who continued the pursuit of the squadron for three hours, dis-
                                                  1
charging at it several ineffective broadsides."
   The Royal George had one man killed and one wounded, and
received several shot in the hull, and more in her sails compa-        ;



ratively trifling casualties, considering that she bore the brunt
<if the action, and was so long engaged.   Few shot touched either
the Ganges or the Earl Camden and no other loss or damage
                                              ;



appears to have been sustained by the British during this three-
quarters of an hour's partial cannonade. The fire of the Eoyal
George, and the three or four ships in her wake, being chiefly
directed at the rigging of the French ships, did not, according
to M. Linois, injure a person on board of them.
    With respect to the armament of the 16 Indiamen thus drawn
up in line of battle, they carried from 30 to 3G guns each but             ;


the strongest of them was not a match for the Semillante, and
some of them would have found it difficult to avoid yielding to
the Berceau. Some of the ships carried upon the main deck 2G
 medium 18-pounders, or "cannonades," weighing about 28 ewt.
    and of very little use guns of this description, indeed, have
                                   :




    long since been exploded. Ten 18-poundcr carronades on the
    quarter-deck made up the 36 guns.        Others of the ships, and
    those among the largest, mounted long 12 and G pounders.       No
    one of the crews, we believe, exceeded 140 men, and that number
    included Chinese, Lascars, &c. Moreover, in fitting the ships, so
    much more attention had been paid to stowage than to the
    means of attack and defence, that one and sometimes two butts
    of water were lashed between the guns, and the decks in general
    greatly lumbered.     Of the force of the French ships it will be
    sufficient to say that the Marengo, Belle Foule, and Semillante
    were armed as Nos. 4, 5, and 7 in the small Table at p. 59 of the
    first volume.    The force of the Berceau has already appeared,-
    and that of the brig is too insignificant to notice.
       The promptitude and firmness of Commodore Dance and his
    brave associates undoubtedly saved from capture a rich and
    valuable fleet. The slightest indecision in him or them would
    have encouraged the French admiral to persevere in his attack                    ;



     and, had he done so, no efforts, however gallant and judicious,
                                                      -   Sec p. 32.
               }   Set'   Appendix, No. 21-
