248           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                [1304.

tain Keynolds's wounds   were of too severe a nature to admit of
Ins taking the immediate charge of his new command. This
gallant young officer, indeed, breathed his last in the early part
of the ensuing September.
  The following passage occurs in a translated copy (all, we
believe, that has been published) of Lieutenant Cheminant's
letter to Governor Villaret: "I render justice to the English ;
they not only afforded the last military honours to the midship-
man Eourgonniere, but they afforded the most particular assist-
ance to the wounded, and not the value of a handkerchief was
taken from the crew."
   On the 5th of February, at 3 p.m., the British 12-gun schooner
Eclair (18-pounder carronades), Lieutenant AVilliam Carr, while
cruising about G8 leagues to the northward of the island of
Tortola, saw and immediately chased a strange sail to the
southward. In about half an hour the stranger was discovered
to be a ship standing towards the Eclair. At 4 p.m., having by
the usual mode of signalling ascertained that the vessel ap-
proaching her was an enemy, the schooner shortened sail and
cleared for action. At 4 h. 30 m. the ship, which from subse-
quent information was the celebrated French privateer Grand-
Decide, Captain Mathieu Goy, of 22 long 8-pounders, and a
complement including 80 soldiers, of about 220 men, being
within musket-shot on the larboard and weather bow of the
Eclair, hauled up her courses, hove to, and hoisted French
colours. When within pistol-shot, the Grand-Decide commenced
the action, by discharging her larboard broadside and a heavy
fire of musketry,and received in return the larboard broadside
of the schooner.  The Eclair then wore round and fired her
starboard broadside. In this manner the action continued,
without intermission on either side, until 5 h. 15 m. p.m. when
                                                           ;


the French ship slackened her fire, filled, and bore up, as ii
intending to rake the schooner but, instead of doing so, the
                                  ;



privateer ceased firing, and made all sail to the northward. The
Eclair instantly filled, and made sail in chase. At 7 p.m. the
Grand-Decide was getting away fast, and by 8 h. 30 m. had run
entirely out of sight.
   In this truly gallant exploit, the Eclair, out of her 60 men and
boys, lost one marine killed and four seamen wounded, and had
her standing and running rigging cut to pieces, and her barri-
cade, masts, and yards much damaged.         That a ship so power-
ful in guns and men as the Grand-Decide, should, in a 45
minutes' engagement, have done no more execution in personnel.
