1804.|         COMMODORE DANCE AND ADMIEAL LINOIS.                            251

                                                         and time
purpose to look after the China fleet, of whose strength
of departure Eear-admiral Linois had, as he declares, been duly
informed.
  At 1 p.m. the British commodore recalled the look-out ships,
and formed the line of battle in close order.            Admiral Linois,
as soon as he could fetch in the wake of the British fleet, which
he knew to be that expected from China, put about. The ships
of the latter continued their course under easy sail              ;   and, as the
French were now close astern, Commodore Dance expected his
rear to be attacked, and prepared to support it but, at night-
                                                          ;



fall, the French ships, preferring
                                   a daylight action, hauled close
to the wind. The Ganges brig was sent to station the country-
                                                             done
ships on the lee bow of the armed Indiamen, and, having
so, returned with some volunteers for
                                        the latter.
  The British ships lay-to all night, the men at their quarters-.
At daybreak on the 15th the French, having made a proper use
of the intermediate time, were about three miles to windward,
                                             " If the bold front
also lying-to. M. Linois in his letters says         :




put on by the enemy in the daytime had been intended as a ruse
to conceal his weakness, he would have profited by the darkness
of the night to endeavour to conceal his escape and in that   ;


case I should have taken advantage of his manoeuvres. But I
soon became convinced that this security was not feigned three            ;



of his ships constantly kept their lights up, and the fleet con-
tinued to lie-to, in order of battle, throughout the night. This
position facilitated my gaining the wind,
                                                    and enabled me to ob-
                          1
serve the enemy closely."
  Both parties now hoisted their colours.            Three of Commodore
Dance's principal ships and the armed brig hoisted blue ensigns                 ;



the remainder of the fleet, red and the whole of the China
                                      ;



ships, having been recently painted,
                                       cut rather an imposing

figure.  This circumstance, coupled with the information that
                                                              as he states,
only 23 ships and a brig had quitted Canton, led,
M. Linois to believe, that the three supernumerary ships formed
the escort to the fleet. Admitting this to have been the fact,
the French admiral was justified in making his advance with
caution. At 9 a.m., observing that the enemy's men of war did
not come down, the Indiamen formed in order of sailing, and
continued their course under an easy sail upon the starboard
tack; whereupon the three French ships and Batavian brig
filled on the opposite tack, and edged away towards the mer-
chant fleet.
                        1
                            See A.pp ndix. No. 20
