1804.]                  CUTTING OUT THE CURIEUX.                                    245>


anil in the coarse of the month of January, 1804, with incredible

difficulty, fiveof the Centaur's guns, three long 24 and two 18
pounders, were mounted in different parts of this stupendous
rock.   The mode of getting them from the ship to an eminence
so much higher than her mast-heads was characteristic and
ingenious a cable was made fast by one end to the ship and by
            :




the other to the rock, along which passed a traveller, or running
loop to this was suspended the cannon, or whatever else it was
     ;


desirous to remove, and which, by means of suitable tackles,
was dragged up the acclivity of the cable to the summit of the
        " Were
rock.            you to see," says a writer, who was on the spot,
'how, along a dire, and, I had almost said, a perpendicular
acclivity, the sailors are hanging in clusters, hauling up a four-
and-twenty pounder by hawsers, you would wonder; they
appear like mice hauling a little sausage scarcely can we hear
                                                      :


the governor on the top of the rock directing them with his
trumpet, the Centaur lying close under it, like a cocoa-shell, to
which the hawsers are affixed."            1



  One of the 24-pounders, fitted upon a circular carriage, com-
manded the landing place, and would reach in an eastern
direction nearly across the bay of Marin. Another was mounted
upon the north-east side, and the third 24 about midway up the
rock. Upon the summit, which commands an immense distance,
were mounted the two 18-pounders. As soon as these guns
were all mounted, and a sufficient quantity of powder and shot
for their use was brought from the Centaur, Lieutenant James
Wilkes Maurice, of that ship, with the rank of commander, and
a crew of 120 men and boys, for whom a four months' supply of
provisions and water had also been landed, hoisted his pendant
on board the British " sloop of war'"- Diamond-rock.
   On the evening of the 3rd of February four boats, containing
GO seamen and 12 marines, under the orders of Lieutenant
Robert Carthew Reynolds, of the Centaur, then at her old
station off the Diamond, were detached to attempt the capture
of the French brig-corvette Curieux, Capitainc dc
                                                  frigate Joseph-
Marie-Emmanuel Cordier, of 16 long 6-pounders and (supposed
to have been about 100, but Avith only, as admitted) 70 men,
lying at anchor close under Fort Edouard at the entrance of the
Carenage, Port lioyal harbour, Martinique, victualled for three
months, and all ready for a start to sea. Although the sus-
picion that an attack might be made by a part of the blockading
force had led to every commendable precaution to
                                                 prevent sm-
     Naval Chronicle, vol. xii., p. 206.       2   So registered in the navy-lisl   .
