1804.]                         LOSS OF    THE APOLLO.                    263

trees was gone, the starboard bow under water, the forecastle
deck nearly perpendicular, the weight of the guns hanging to
the larboard bulwark on the inside, and the bower and spare
anchors on the outside, which it was not prudent to cut away,
as they afforded resting places to a considerable number of
                                                            men,
there being only the fore channels and cathead, where it was
possible to live in, and about which were stowed upwards of 150
men    it being impracticable to continue
        :
                                          any longer in the head,
or upon the bowsprit, by reason of the breakers
                                                   washing com-
pletely over those places.    The night drawing on, the wind
increasing, frequent showers of rain, the sea washing over us,
and looking every instant for the forecastle giving way, when we
must all have perished together, afforded a spectacle truly de-
plorable, the bare recollection of which even now makes me
shudder. The piercing cries of the people this dismal night, at
every sea coming over them, which happened every two minutes,
were pitiful in the extreme the water running from the head
                                      ;


down all over the body, keeping us continually wet. This
shocking night, the remaining strength of every person was
exerted for his individual safety. From the crowding so close
together in so narrow a compass, and the want of something to
moisten their mouths, several poor wretches were suffocated,
which frequently reminded me of the black hole, with this only
difference, that these  poor sufferers were confined by strong
walls, we by water ; the least movement      without clinging fast
would have launched us into eternity. Some unfortunate
wretches drank salt water, several their own urine, some chewed
leather, myself and many more chewed lead, from which we
conceived we found considerable relief, by reason of its drawing
the saliva, which we swallowed. In less than an hour after the
ship first struck the ground, all the provisions were under water,
and the ship a wreck, so that it was impossible to procure any
part.           After the most painful night that it    is   possible to con-
ceive, on daylight appearing, we observed Lieutenant Harvey
and Mr. Callam again endeavouring to launch the boat. Several
attempts were made without success, a number of men belong-
ing to the merchant-ships being much bruised and hurt in assist-
ing; alternate hopes and fears now pervaded our wretched
minds fifteen men got safe on shore this morning, on pieces of
            ;



the wreck.           About three in the afternoon of Wednesday the 4th,
we had the inexpressible happiness of seeing the boat launched
through the           surf,   by the indefatigable exertion of the above
officers, assisted by          the masters of the merchant-ships, with a
