256             LIGHT SQUADEONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.               [1804..

was unable    to reach the spot in time, Captain O'Brien de-
spatched the armed sloop Fort Diamond, with Lieutenant
Thomas Forrest and 30 volunteers, to attempt the service and,
                                                            ;


in order to take off the attention of the battery from the move-
ments of the sloop, he sent in a different direction the frigate's
boats, joined   by two from the 44-gun ship Pandour, which had
just hove in sight.
   Having reached the anchorage, Lieutenant Forrest dashed in,
and laid the French schooner on board, the crew of which,
amounting to about 60 whites and blacks, after discharging her:
broadside and a volley of musketry, fled over the side to the
shore.   By the force with which the Fort-Diamond struck the
schooner, the chain by which the latter had fastened herself to
the shore was broken, and about 20 feet of it remained hanging
at her bows. The prize proved to be the privateer Mosambique,
armed with ten 18-pounder carronades, commanded by Captain
Vallentes, and fitted for a three months' cruise.       This very
gallant exploit was performed with so trifling a loss as one
master's mate (Mr. Hall) and one seaman wounded.
   On the 14th of March, in the morning, the British brig-sloop
Drake, still commanded by Lieutenant William King, cruising
off Englishman's Head, island of Guadaloupe, fell in with a
French privateer-schooner, and a large ship in company, appa-
rently her prize, but was unable to overtake either until the ship
ran herself on shore near the batteries of the Hayes. The Drake
now endeavoured to cut off the schooner but, having had her
                                            ;


maintopmast shot away and her rigging much damaged, was
unable to effect her object. About this time another ship hove
in sight in the offing, and appeared to be steering as if also with
the intention to run on shore. Despatching two boats, under
the orders of Mr. Bobson the master, to watch the first ship,
now observed to be again afloat, with directions to attack her
should she endeavour to escape, Lieutenant King made sail after
and recaptured the sail in the offing, an English merchantman,
valuably laden.
  The Drake's two boats, meanwhile, pulled in towards the
ship in-shore, the crew of which, except one man who had not
time to effect his escape, abandoned her as the former approached.
Possession of the ship, which had 18 guns mounted and was
very large, was thus easily obtained but in half an hour she
                                      ;


blew up, killing one master's mate, three seamen, and one
marine, and mortally wounding Mr. Kobson, who expired a few
hours afterwards, and badly wounding several of the small party
