 254                    LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                          [1804,

 could have prevented a part of the fle.it at least from falling- into
 his hands.    It would be uncharitable to call in question the
 courage of Kear-admirai Linois: one must therefore suppose
 that it was, as he has stated, the warlike appearance of those
 16 ships, the regularity of their manoeuvres, and the boldness of
 their advance, that led the French admiral to doubt whether a
 part of them were not national cruisers more especially as it
                                                          ;


 was an uncommon occurrence, during a war, for an East-India
 fleet to be without the protection of one or more
                                                    powerful king's
 ships.
   The commanders, officers, and crews of their respective ships
 that had thus distinguished themselves were liberally rewarded
 by the East-India Company, as well as by the committee for
managing the Patriotic Fund.
                                  1
                                      Commodore Dance, also, as
he well merited, received from his late majesty the honour of
knighthood. Among the sums of money voted to Sir Nathaniel
were 5000Z. by the Bombay Insurance Society and the answer        ;


of thanks returned by the commodore contains the following-
passage     :
             "  —
               Placed, by the adventitious circumstances of se-
niority of service and absence of convoy, in the chief command
of the fleet intrusted to my care, it has been my good fortune to
have been enabled, by the firmness of those by whom I was
supported, to perform my trust not only with fidelity, but with-
out loss to my employers. Public opinion and public rewards
have already far outrun my deserts ; and I cannot but be sensible
that the liberal spirit of my generous countrymen has measured
what they are pleased to term their grateful sense of my conduct,
rather by the particular utility of the exploit than by any indi-
vidual merit I can claim." Here is an instance of modesty and
candour as exemplary as it is rare, and which sheds an addi-
tional lustre upon the character of Sir Nathaniel Dance.
   On the 19th of February the British 14-gun brig-sloop Drake,
under the temporary command of Lieutenant William King of
the Centaur, while cruising off the port of Trinite on the north
side of the island of Martinique, discovered in the harbour,

   1 This                " Patriotic
           truly named               Fund,"    wounds, or palliating in some degree the
originated at a meeting of the subscribers     more weighty misfortune of the loss of
to Lloyd's Coffee-house, held on the 20th      limbs— of alleviating the distresses of the
of July, 1803, Brook Watson, Esq., in the      widow and orphan       — of smoothing the
chair.    The object is explained in the       brow of sorrow for the fall of dearest re-
third resolution:   —"That, to animate the     latives, the props of unhappy indigence or
efforts of our defenders by sea and land, it                  —
                                               helpless age and of granting pecuniary
is expedient to raise by the patriotism of     rewards, or honourable badges of distinc-
the community at large, a suitable fund        tion, for successful exertions of valour or
                             —
for their comfort and relief for the pur-      merit."
pose of assuaging the anguish of their
