258                LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                      [1804.


crew on board of 248 men. The one ship measured, 386/ and
                                                              2
the other, which was formerly the national frigate Kailleuse,
since given or sold to some merchants at Bordeaux, 857 tons.
The Osprey sustained a loss of one man killed and 16 wounded,
&nd was a good deal damaged in her sails and rigging.
                                                          The
                                                                          ^


/oss on board the Egyptienne, as afterwards ascertained,

amoimted,  out of a crew of 248 men and boys, to eight men
killedand 19 wounded       and the ship herself was very much
                                   ;



cut by shot in hull, masts, sails, and rigging a proof that the
                                                     :




                                             with quickness and
Osprey's carronades had been discharged
precision.
   It is exploits like these that afford examples of gallantry in
the true import of the word. Had Captain Younghusband, on
                                                       forborne to
discovering the size and strength of the Egyptienne,
attack her, no imputation would have rested on his professional
character. But he had a   higher   sense of the duties of a British
naval commander     he chose to wrestle with his powerful antago-
                          :




nist  and so vigorous and effective was his attack, that nothing
       ;


but lightness of heel saved the Egyptienne from becoming his
prize. In such a creditable
                            encounter we must not omit to state,
that Lieutenant Francis Augustus Collier was second in com-
mand of the Osprey.
  On the 25th, in the forenoon, this same Egyptienne fell in
with the British 14-gun ship-sloop Hippomenes (ten long 12, and
2 long 8 pounders, and two 24-pounder carronades, all Dutch
caliber), Captain Conway Shipley,
                                    and mistaking her probably
for the ship she had been so beaten by two days before, crowded
sail to get off. The Hippomenes pursued, and, after an arduous
chase of 54 hours, and a running fight of three hours and 20
minutes more, came up with and captured the French ship.
The Egyptienne struck the moment the sloop got fairly along-
side  and, owing to her feeble resistance, inflicted no greater
       ;


loss on the Hippomenes than slightly wounding one person,
Mr. John Lloyd, a master's mate.
  The bold front and rational confidence of the Egyptienne in
the beginning of the one action, and her panic-struck behaviour
and hasty flight in that of the other, occasion the principal dif-
ference in the merits of the two. The conduct of Captain Shipley
was much enhanced by his readiness to do justice to the per-
formance of his brother-commander of the Osprey, "whose
                        " astonished them."  It is probable that
gallantry," he says,
M. Placiard found a difficulty in persuading the merchants of
                                               2   See vol. i., p. 427.
           i   See vol. ii., p. 482, note F*
