1804.]             OSPREY AND EGYPTIENNE.                       257

belonging to the two boats. In all cases, where a vessel is
abandoned in this way, treachery should be suspected, and the
magazine be quickly examined. There can be little doubt that
the fellow who was behind his comrades, had laid the train
which produced the fatal explosion.
  On the 17th of March the British 16-gun brig-sloop Penguin,
Captain George Morris, cruising off Senegal bar, chased and
drove upon it the French privateer-schooner Eenommee of 12
long 6-pounders and 87 men, belonging to Senegal. Owing to
the continuance of the surf, no opportunity occurred of making
an attempt to destroy her until the morning of the 24th. At
this time the Renommee had shifted her position, from the efforts

apparently of two armed schooners, which, since the preceding
evening, had dropped down to the mouth of the river, and now
lay within 200 yards of her.
   Standing as close in as the shoalness of the water would
admit, the Penguin opened a fire upon the three vessels but,;



although shot were exchanged for an hour and a half, the brig
could not get near enough to force the two schooners to retire
up the river. At 10 p.m., therefore, Captain Morris despatched
the jolly-boat, under the command of Lieutenant Charles Wil-
liams, with directions to endeavour to destroy the grounded
schooner a service which was executed in the ablest manner
           ;


before 1 a.m. on the 25th, and that without any loss on the part
of the British.
   On the 23rd of March, the British 18-gun ship-sloop Osprey,
Captain George Younghusband, cruising on the Windward-island
station, discovered in the south-west quarter, and immediately
chased, the French frigate-built privateer Egyptienne, of 36
guns, Captain Placiard, with three merchant-ships under her
convoy. As soon as the Osprey had arrived within hail, tho
Fgyptienne hoisted her colours and fired a broadside. This
was instantly returned, and the two ships continued in close
action for one hour and 20 minutes at the end of which time
                                     :


the Egyptienne ceased firing, and began to make off, and her
convoy to separate on different courses. To the regret of the
British officers and crew, it was soon found that the French
Bhip, even with her topsails on the cap, outsailed their vessel.
The Osprey, however, continued the chase, until the Egyptitunc
disappeared in the dark.
  The force of the Osprey consisted of 16 carronades, 32-poun<l<rs
and two sixes, with a complement of 120 men and boys: that of
the Egyptienne was 36 guns, French 12 and 6 pounders, with a
  VOL.   III.                                          s
