 260            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.               [1804.

                               "
 national " 24-gun corvette      of 580 or 600 tons, out of a com-
 plement of 240 men and boys, did not, according to the admis-
 sion of her officers, sustain any grt ater loss than her first-lieu-
 tenant mortally, and five of her men slightly, wounded.    The
 damage done to the Blonde was confined to her rigging and sails,
and that comparatively trifling.
   In less than a quarter of an hour after the last boat with the
prisoners had quitted her, the Wolverine gave a heel and went
down thereby affording an irrefragable proof that the ship had
       ;


been defended to the last extremity, and that her officers and
crew were barely saved, by their surrender, from perishing in the
deep. The long duration of the action was not without its
effect.  The second privateer, either from bad sailing or bad
management, could not overtake one of the eight merchant-
vessels nor could the Blonde withdraw herself in time to do
           ;


more than capture two of the number the remainder effected
                                          :



their escape.
   A 50 minutes' close engagement between two ships so
decidedly unequal in force entitled the weaker, although the
vanquished party to at least as much praise as is usually
bestowed upon the victor in a well-matched contest. Had the
Blonde been a national ship, and even worse armed, worse
manned, and worse fought than she was, Captain Gordon and
his first-lieutenant would have been promoted for their gallantry,
and the conduct of all on board the Wolverine been held up as
an example of the devotedness of British seamen in upholding
the honour of their flag, and in protecting the commercial
interests of their country. But, as it was a privateer, a
                                                          "
                                                            paltry
privateer," in the words of the Annual Begister, which had
captured the king's ship, the action of the Wolverine and Blonde
was considered to be discreditable to the former, and therefore
not worthy to be recorded in the annals of the British navy.
To make success the sole criterion of merit is as unjust as it is
discouraging: where, then, is the stimulus to persevere in an
almost hopeless, or even in a barely doubtful cause and what
                                                        ;


more can a seaman do, than stand to his gun until his vessel
sinks under him ?
   This is as the account stands in our first edition      and,
                                                            ;



although not a line of the details here given is to be found in
any other publication, we may usefully add the following from
the work of a contemporary, published since and to whom, we
                                                ;



believe, that information on the subject was granted which was
                "
refused to us.    Captain Gordon, though many years a prisoner,
