1804.]                                 LOSS OF       THE APOLLO.                             261

was promoted to the rank of post-captain, and, on his return to
England, most honourably acquitted by the sentence of a court-
martial."   The admiralty list informs us, that Captain Gordon
              1



was made post on the 8th of April, 1805 it was this lapse of         :



nearly 13 months, and our unacquaintance, for the reason already
stated, with the requested particulars of his case, which occa-
sioned us to suppose that Captain Gordon had not been rewarded
in the manner he deserved.
   On the 26th of March the British 36-gun frigate Apollo,
Captain John William Taylor Dixon, and 28-gun frigate Carys-
fort, Captain Robert Fanshawe, sailed from the Cove of Cork
with 69 merchant-vessels under convoy, bound to the West
Indies.   On the 2nd of April, at 3 a.m., while steering south-
south-east with a strong south-west gale, to the astonishment of
every person on board, the Apollo struck the ground. The ship
continued striking very heavily, and making much water in                                    :



about 10 minutes, however, the Apollo beat over the shoal, and
having lost her rudder, could not be steered. The ship then put
before the wind, but, from the quantity of water she had made,
and was still making, with every probability of soon foundering.
In about five minutes, the Apollo struck the ground again, and
continued striking with such tremendous shocks, that it was
feared the ship would instantly go to pieces. The three masts
were then cut away, and the ship fell on the starboard side with
her gunwale under water. The violence with which the ship
struck the ground, and the weight of the guns, those on the
quarter-deck tearing away the bulwarks, soon made the frigate a
perfect wreck abaft only four or five guns, therefore, could be
                                   :




fired to alarm the convoy and give notice of danger.
   Most of the officers and men were entirely naked, the captain
among the rest and who stood upon the cabin skylight grating,
                          ;




holding fast by the stump of the mizcnmast, and making use of
every soothing expression which could have been suggested to
encourage men in so perilous a situation. Daylight, which ap-
peared at about 4 h. 30 m., discovered the land, at the distance
of about 200 yards, a long sandy beach reaching to Cape Mon-
dego, three leagues to the southward. At the same time the
melancholy sight presented itself of between 20 and 30 sail of
tin' convoy on shore both to the northward and southward, and

several of them perfect wrecks.    An appearance of the ship's
  1
      Brenton, vol.   iii.,   p. 391.   The mm-         that the ship was captured liy the British
plement of the Blonde is here reduced to                a lew months afterwards with 240 men os
"1«0 men;" hut, in confirmation of the                  hoard,
accuracy of our account, we             may statt*
