1804.]                     LOSS OF     THE WOLVERINE.                                259

Bordeaux again to place him in the command of one of their
privateers.
   Being 30 years old and much broken in her sheer, the Egypti-
enne was purchased into the British service merely as a prison-
ship. Her name was changed to Antigua      and she was stationed
                                                          ;


at English harbour, in the island of that name.
  On the 24th of March the British ship-sloop "Wolverine, of 13
      1
guns, Captain Henry Gordon, being in latitude 48° 15' north,
and longitude 23° 15' west, on her way to Newfoundland with
eight merchant-vessels under her protection, discovered to the
eastward, which was directly to windward, two large sail bearing
down for the convoy. At 2 h. 30 m. p.m. the strangers were
made out to be vessels of force, and soon afterwards to be
enemies. Finding it to be their intention to cut oft' the rear of
the convoy, the Wolverine tacked and, as she stood on between
                                               ;



the latter and them, signalled the merchantmen to make the best
of their way into port.
  At 4 p.m., having arrived within half gun-shot of the larger
vessel, which was the French frigate-privateer Blonde, Captain
Aregnaudeau, of 30 guns, including 24 long 8-pounders on the
main deck, the Wolverine hove-to on the starboard tack where-                  ;



upon the Blonde hauled her wind, and, after firing her broadside,
wore, with the intention of raking the Wolverine. To frustrate
this manoeuvre, and to maintain her leeward position, which, on
account of the extreme lowness of her ports and the consequent
necessity of using her weather-battery, was more advantageous
to her, the Wolverine, before she discharged a gun, wore also.
The Blonde then hove-to on the Wolverine's larboard beam,
within pistol-shot distance, and commenced a heavy and well-
directed fire with great guns and small arms; which was
returned by the British vessel with considerable spirit, although
one of her two long 18-pounders, in being shifted from the star-
board to the larboard side, got jammed in the groove, and
remained utterly useless. In this way the action continued for
50 minutes     when, having had her rigging and sails cut to
                 ;


pieces, her wheel shot away, and her hull low down, so pierced
with shot as to fill the hold with water, the Wolverine hauled
down her colours.
   Out of her complement of 7G men and boys, the Wolverine had
one midshipman, one boatswain's mate, one quartermaster, and
two seamen killed, and 10 seamen wounded, one of them
mortally.    The Blonde, formerly, it is believed, a French
   1   Kor the extraordinary manner in which this sloop was fitted, see vol. ii., p. 353.
