262           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                [1804.


                             or the 220 that remained (about 20
parting occasioned the crew,
having perished between  decks  and otherwise), by the captain's
                                                    soon after-
orders to remove to the forepart of the ship and,
                                                ;



                            the gangways. Several officers and
wards, the Apollo parted at
                                       were drowned. About
men, who attempted to swim on shore,
             succeeded in reaching the shore upon planks and
30, however,
spars among
       :      them were Lieutenant Edward Harvey, and Mr.
                                              was a dreadful
Callam, master's mate. The succeeding night
           old men and boys, including two young midshipmen,
one, many
dying through hunger   and fatigue. During the whole of it
                                the bowsprit.
Captain Dixon remained upon
  We shall 3give the remainder of the melancholy   details in the
                                          "
words of one of the officers of the ship:
                                            Tuesday morning pre-
sented us no better prospect of being relieved from the jaws of
death, the wind blowing stronger,
                                     and the sea much more tur-
bulent.  About noon, this day, our drooping spirits were some-
what raised by seeing Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Callam
hoisting out a boat from one of the merchant-ships to come
to the assistance of their distressed shipmates.     They several
times attempted to launch her through the surf, but being a
                                  the beach acting so powerfully
very heavy boat, and the sea on
         them, they could  not possibly effect it, though assisted
against
                                        and Portuguese peasants.
by nearly 100 of the merchant-sailors
Several men went    upon rafts this day, made from pieces of the
                                      the shore the wind having
wreck, but not one soul reached                 ;




shifted, and  the current setting out, they were all driven to sea      ;




among whom was our captain, who, about three in the afternoon,
went on the jib-boom with three seamen anxious to save the
                                            ;




remainder of the ship's company, and too sanguine of getting
safe on shore, he ventured upon the spar, saying, on jumping
into the sea, 'My lads, I'll save you all.' In a few seconds he
lost his hold of the spar, which he could not regain   : he drifted
to sea, and perished.    Such was also the fate of the three brave
volunteers who followed his fortune. The loss of our captain,
who,   until now, had animated the almost lifeless crews as well
                                                           ;




as the noble exertions of Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Callam, to
launch the boat, not succeeding, every gleam of hope vanished,
and we looked forward for certain death the ensuing night, not
                                       but the expectation of the
only from cold, hunger, and fatigue,
remaining part of the wreck going to pieces every
                                                          moment.
Had not the Apollo been a new and well-built ship, that small
portion of her could
                      never have resisted the waves and stuck so
well            particularly as all the after-part
                                                   from the chess-
       together,
