1804.J   GALLANT ATTEMPT TO CDT OUT THE CURIEUSE.              255

taking in cargoes in defiance of the blockade, two American
brigs and a schooner, moored within pistol-shot of a fort mount-
ing three French 24-pounders. Being determined to make an
attempt to cut out these vessels, Lieutenant King despatched
the boats of the Drake, under the orders of Lieutenant AVilliam
Cumpston, assisted by Mr. William Kobson, the master, upon
that service. The three American vessels were gallantly boarded
and taken possession of, in the face of a heavy fire from the fort,
and from two field-pieces: but, having no wind, Lieutenant
Cumpston and his party could only succeed in bringing out the
schooner, which was accomplished without loss.
   On the night of the 24th Lieutenant King himself, with 21
seamen and nine marines, landed and spiked the guns at the
fort and the two field-pieces, with the loss of one seaman

killed, and Lieutenant Cumpston and one seaman slightly
wounded.
   On the night of the 4th of March the barge and pinnace of
the 74-gun ship Blenheim, Captain William Ferris, having on
board 50 officers and men under the orders of Lieutenant Thomas
Furber, made a most gallant but unsuccssful attempt to cut
out the French national schooner Curieuse, lying chain-moored
close under a fort at the town of St. Pierre.   The schooner had
made very formidable preparations, having rigged out her sweeps,
on each side, traced her boarding-nettings to her lower mast-
heads, and there fastened them in the securest manner. Not-
withstanding all this, and a heavy fire of great guns and mus-
ketry, as well from the schooner herself as from a party of
soldiers drawn up on the beach, from the neighbouring forts,
and from an armed sloop and several smaller vessels, Lieutenant
Furber and those under him gallantly boarded and carried the
Curieuse but, no sooner were her cables cut than the schooner,
         ;


held fast by the chain, swang round and grounded upon the
beach.     The severe loss now sustained obliged Lieutenant
Furber to desist from any further attempts and the two boats
                                             ;


got back to the Blenheim, with one seaman, and two marines
killed, five officers (names not reported), 11 seamen, and three
marines wounded, and three seamen missing.
   On the morning of the 13th of March the British 18-pounder
36-gun frigate Emerald, Captain James O'Brien, observed a
French privateer-schooner, on account of inability to work up
to St. Pierre's, run in and anchor close under a battery at Seron,
just within the Pearl rock at the western extremity of Marti-
nique. As the frigate herself, being considerably to leeward.
