1804.]
                     WILHELMINA AND PSYCH k.                    269

passed about 50 yards to
                         windward of the Psyche, then, with
French colours flying, close hauled on the opposite tack. After
a mutual broadside, accompanied on the part of the French ship
by a hail to surrender, the Psyche tacked, and the Wilhelmina
wore each ship continuing to fire as her guns could be brought
     ;


to bear.   The plan adopted by the Psyche, of pointing every
alternate gun upon the broadside at her opponent's rigging, oc-
casioned the Wilhelmina, from the loss of bowlines and braces,
to come to the wind on the starboard tack with every sail aback.
While the British ship lay in this unmanageable state, the
French ship passed under her stern and, raking the Wilhel-
                                      ;




mina, knocked away the maintopmast, badly wounded the main-
                                  to her rigging and sails.
yard, and did considerable damage
  Having at length paid off and got before the wind, the Wil-
helmina brought her larboard broadside to bear and presently
                                                 ;




the Psyche evinced an intention to board the British frigate
upon the quarter but, on seeing that the latter was prepared to
                 ;




repel the attempt, the Psyche put
                                    her helm a-starboard and
sheered off. A furious cannonade was now maintained on both
sides, the yard-arms nearly locking, until the Psyche, ranging
ahead, crossed her opponent's bows. In practising this ma-
noeuvre, the Psyche brought herself in the wind but by throw-
                                                 ;




ing her hcadsai'ls aback, and keeping her after-yards square or
shivering,  the French ship paid off: not, however, until the
Wilhelmina, with her starboard guns, had poured in a raking fire
astern.     After this the two ships again got parallel to each
other, and again engaged so closely, that the yards were over-
hanging; when, at 7 a.m., profiting by her more perfect state
aloft, and her very superior powers of sailing,
                                                the Psyche ceased
firinsi', crowded all the canvas she could spread, and stood away

to the south-east.
   This being an action during the progress of which the com-
batants frequently changed positions, the details of it will be
better understood by a reference to the diagram in the next page.
  Ill calculated, indeed, was the Wilhelmina for a chase, either
from or towards an enemy. Her maintopmast was down her      ;




bowsprit wounded in two, and her foremast in 10 places her  ;


fore and main yards, and her main and mizen masts were also
wounded, and her lower rigging and all her boats more or less
damaged. Her aftermost forecastle bits were shot away, and
her hull was pierced with shot in several places.  A Captain
Wright, of the India-service, was on board the Psyche" during
the engagement, and subsequently mentioned, that the Wilhel-
