 268              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                                [1804.


deception, and it is generally in the power of the captain to give
a mercantile appearance to the hull of his vessel.                     This was par-
ticularly the case in regard to the Wilhelmina, she being a ship
of Dutch construction. It was the disguised appearance of the
Wilhelmina that induced the stranger, who we may now intro-
duce as the French frigate privateer Psyche, of 36 guns, Captain
Trogoff, after reconnoitring as she had done, boldly to approach,
with the determination of attacking the supposed Indiaman.
At 6 p.m. came on a squall with rain through which, in her
                                                       ;



eagerness to close with the latter, the Psyche carried all sail.
At 6h. 45 m., it being dark and cloudy, the Wilhelmina, who to
allow her opponent to come up had previously shortened sail,
hove-to.    At 9 p.m. the Wilhelmina filled, and, lowering her
topgallant-sails and driver, continued under easy sail, discover-
ing the Psyche at intervals through the flashes of lightning,
which were extremely vivid.
    On the 11th, at 3 h. 30 m. a.m., a heavy squall from the
north-north-west obliged the Wilhelmina to hand her topgallant-
sails and lower her topsails, and for the present, shut out the

Psyche from her view. At daylight, however, the latter re-ap-
peared, still in the north-east ; and the British frigate imme-
diately tacked, and with colours flying, stood toward her.  The
gallantry of this step will be better appreciated when it is
known, that the Wilhelmina mounted only 14 long 9-pounders,
and one 12 pounder carronade fitted upon trucks and used as a
shifting gun, on her main-deck, and four long 9-pounders (which
had been left by the Victorious at Madras) and two sixes on her
quarter-deck and forecastle, with a complement of 134 men and
boys, 10 of the men received out of the 50-gun ship Grampus,
to work the four extra nines x whereas the Psyche, formerly a
                                          ;



French national frigate, of the class and size of the Eailleuse,
or Egyptienne as subsequently named, mounted 24 long French
12-pounders on the main deck, and 10 (English, we believe)
18-pounder carronades and two French sixes on the quarter-deck
and forecastle, with a crew of 250 men and boys.
   At 5h. 30 m. a.m., being on the larboard tack, with the wind
still from the north-north-west, but moderate, the Wilhelmina

  1 A  letter from Captain Lambert to         lisher, and not by the writer, of the letter;
Vice-admiral Rainier, giving a short ac-      for the account in the text is not only
count of this action, and copied into all     taken from one of the officers who was
the London papers, contains, in the man       present in the action, but, with the ex-
ner of a postscript, the following para       ception of the four supernumerary guns,
graph:— "N.B. His Majesty's ship Wilhel-      agrees with the navy-office establishment
mina carries eighteen 6-pounders and 100      upon all frigate- flutes of the Willelmina's
                                 "
men." It is probable that this N.B."          class.
was added by the copyist or first pub-
