1804.]
                   WILHELMINA AND PSYCH^.                     267

the Batavian Admiral Killkert inside, with the late Captain
Carp's servant, and the effects of the deceased, in order that
they might he delivered to his relations.
  On the 3rd of April the British hired cutter Swift, of 77 tons,
eight 4-pounders, and 23 men and boys, commanded by
Lieutenant William Martin Leake, was fallen in with, engaged,
boarded, and after a stout struggle, and the loss of her com-
mander and many others of her small crew carried, by the
French xebec-privateer Esperance, of 150 tons, 10 guns (repre-
                                                     " 24 and
sented, by the ship that afterwards captured her, as
12 pounders," probably carronades), and a crew of 54 men,
commanded by Captain Escoffler.      The Swift, it appears, was
carrying despatches to Yice-admiral Lord Nelson off Toulon          ;


but which, we rather think (for very few, if any particulars
have been published), were thrown overboard previously to the
cutter's capture.  It does certainly seem strange, that, in a
navy such as that of England, despatches to a commander-in-
chief, upon an important foreign station, should be forwarded
by a vessel not equal in force to a frigate's launch, when armed
with her carronade and proper complement of men.
  On the 9th of April, at daylight, in latitude 7° 44' north, and
longitude 84° 30' east, the British armed en flute late 12-pounder
32-gun frigate Wilhelmina, Captain Henry Lambert, steering
west-north-west, with the wind at north by east, and accom-
panied by the country-ship William-Petrie, laden with govern-
ment stores for Trincomale, and which ship the frigate, being
bound to Madras, had been ordered to protect as far as the
courses of the two remained the same, discovered a sail in the
cast-south-east steering to the eastward.       Shortly afterwards
the stranger wore and stood after the British vessels. Towards
noon it fell calm, and the afternoon and night passed with very
little wind, the stranger, until dark, still in sight. At daylight
on the 10th, the wind then a light breeze from the north-east,
and the course of the frigate and her charge about west half-
north, the stranger was seen in the east by north, steering to
the south-west. In a little time the latter hauled to the wind on
the starboard tack, and steered directly after the former.      >1>-
                                                                <




 serving that the vessel was a ship of force, and suspecting her
 to be an enemy's cruiser, Captain Lambert directed the master
 of the William-Petrie, who had already arrived at the point for
 parting company, to alter his course after dark, and make tho
 best of his way to the port of his destination.
    The jury-rig alone of an armed en flute ship-of-war is a great
