1804.]
                 CUTTING OUT THE ATALANTE.                    266

and the   men were about to embark, the British 14-gun ship-
sloop Beaver, Captain Charles Pelly, joined company. The
latter, at his urgent request, was permitted to serve under
Captain Hardinge    ;
                     and at 9 h. 30 m. p.m., three boats from
the Scorpion, and  two from the Beaver, containing between
them about 60 officers and men, pushed off from the first-named
sloop.
  Having the flood-tide in their favour, the boats, in two hours,
arrived alongside of the Atalante, who had her boarding-nettings
traced up, and was fully prepared to resist the attack.
                                                  Captain
Hardinge was the first man that leaped on board. His boat
was promptly supported by the others and such was the im-
                                            ;



petuosity of the assault, that many of the Dutchmen quitted
their quarters and ran below " leaving to us," says Captain
                                 " the
Hardinge, in a private letter,         painful duty of combating
those whom we respected the most." These, the remainder of
a crew on board of 76, after a short but severe conflict, in which
they had their commander and three seamen killed, their first-
lieutenant, two other officers, and eight seamen badly wounded,
were overpowered. The British then set about securing the
hatches, which the party below, headed by a lieutenant, re-
peatedly attempted to force. The Dutch officer, however, re-
ceiving a desperate wound, his men relaxed their efforts, and
at length surrendered. Of the five boats employed, those of
the Scorpion only sustained any loss; and that was compara-
tively trifling, amounting to only one lieutenant (Buckland
Stirling Bluett), the sloop's master (Woodward Williams), one
midshipman (Edmund Jones), and two seamen wounded.
  The above private letter from Captain Hardinge contains
some interesting particulars, not less illustrative of the writer's
                                            " The
gallantry than of his goodness of heart.           decks," he says,
" were
        slippery in consequence of  rain;
                                           so that, grappling with
my first opponent, a mate of the watch, I fell, but recovering
my position, fought him upon equal terms, and killed him. I
then engaged the captain, as brave a man as any service ever
boasted   :he had almost killed one of my seamen. To my
shame be it spoken, he disarmed me, and was on the point of
killing me, when a seaman of mine," as Captain H. thought at
the time, but it was Mr. Williams, the master of the Scorpion,
"came up, rescued me at the peril of his own life, and enabled
me to recover my sword. At this time all the men were como
from the boats, and were in possession of the deck. Two were
going to fall upon the captain at once. I ran up, held them
