1804.1              HII'POMENES   AND BUONAPARTE.            273

peni, of 18 long S-pounders and 146 men.       The peculiar con-
struction of the Hij:>ponienes, a Dutch-built corvette, had been
taken advantage of in so disguising her appearance, that the
privateer, believing the ship to be an African trader, bore down
under English colours, to take possession of her. At 1 h. 30 rn.
p.m. the Buonaparte shortened sail, and the Hippomenes hauled
close to the wind to expedite the meeting.     At 1 h. 50 m. p.m.
the Hippomenes opened her fire at the privateer, who had now
changed her colours to French. The latter instantly returned
the fire, and a spirited action ensued. In the course of 10 or
12 minutes the Buonaparte ranged upon the weather-quarter of
the Hippomenes, and in a little time, becoming unmanageable,
fell on board her opponent, dropping stem-on a little abaft the
latter's fore-chains.     The guns of the Hippomenes, particu-
larlytwo carronades on the upper deck, a Dutch 24-pounder
and an English 12, in a very few minutes did serious injury to
the Buonaparte while the latter, from her tops, threw stink-pots
                ;




upon the decks of the former, thereby setting her on fire abaft.
  It was at this crisis that, having to prevent the privateer's
escape caused her bowsprit to be lashed to his ship's mainmast.
Captain Mackenzie called to his crew to follow him in boarding,
and secure the victory. He then, followed by his officers, and,
as he thought by at least 50 or GO of his men, rushed upon the
Buonaparte's forecastle. The onset was encouraging; for the
brig's crew, with scarcely a show of resistance, retreated abaft
the mainmast. Here the privateer's men rallied and well they
                                                    ;



might rally, for they now saw what a mere handful of enemies
stood upon their deck. The fact is, no more men had followed
Captain Mackenzie and his officers than made a total of 18
British opposed to whom, allowing an ample deduction for
         ;



previous loss, were 100 French.        The catastrophe may be
summed up in a few words. Captain Mackenzie, his officers,
and the few gallant fellows in company, defended themselves
until five of the party were killed and eight wounded, including
a master's mate severely, and the captain in as many as 14
places  ;
          and who, in endeavouring to regain his ship, fell sense-
less into her main chains, just a minute or two before the lashing

gave way and the vessels parted. Nine, including the captain
and master, got back to the Hippomenes. The first-lieutenant,
Mr. "William Pierce, and the purser, Mr. William Collman, along
with two seamen, were taken prisoners and the remaining fivo
                                           ;



lay dead upon the privateer's deck.
  The Hippomenes had been but recently commissioned at the
  VOL. III.                                          T
