272                  LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                         [1804.


call the Wilhehnina a British 12-pounder 32-gun frigate, or a
           "
frigate   of 32 guns," and you arm her, according to the admi-
ralty-order fixing her establishment, with 38 guns, including six
24-pounder carronades, and with a crew of 215 men and boys.
                       " a              "               "
Call the Psyche even       large," or a   frigate-built   privateer,
and you will scarcely raise her, in the reader's estimation, above
the Bellone, beaten off by the Milbrook, or the Blonde that cap-
tured the Wolverine. Even suppose the reader to rank the
"large French frigate-built privateer" with the Egyptienne,
beaten off by the Osprey, and afterwards captured by the Hippo-
menes, you have already made the implied full-armed Wilhelmina
more than a match for her, and have therefore reduced the
exploit of a British frigate far beneath that confessedly per-
formed by a British sloop. Omit the name of the privateer,
lengthen the duration of the action, and misstate the mode of its
termination, and you convert that which, if not a conquest, was
decidedly a victory, into a censurable defeat.     It is with us an
invariable rule not to state, without showing, that an action is
                           " hero."   Above all things, we avoid
gallant, or an officer a
making such an assertion when our own details, few as they may
be, prove directly the reverse. These remarks premised,
                                                             we sub-
                                                as it stands in the
join the account of the Wilhelmina' action,
                                      s

work of a contemporary.
  "Captain Henry Lambert commanded the Wilhelmina, of
32 guns, an old Dutch-built frigate, without one quality to
recommend her as a ship-of-war, unless it were that of looking
so unlike one in every respect that the enemy fearlessly ap-
proached her, and by that means were sometimes captured when
a chase would have ended in disappointment. This ship, in the
month of April, 1804, fell in, off the east side of Ceylon, with a
large Erench frigate-built privateer, which she engaged with
great obstinacy and fury for three hours, when the Frenchman
being much disabled, and the British frigate still more so, they
separated, nor was it in the power of our young hero to renew
the action, the enemy having so much the advantage of him in
                           1

point of sailing."
  On the 21st of June, at noon, the British ship-sloop Hippo-
menes,
          2
               now commanded by                  Captain   Kenneth Mackenzie,
cruising to windward of Antigua, in latitude 18° north, and lon-
gitude 58° west, with the wind at east, and
                                               her head to the
northward, observed in the north-east a brig, which afterwards
 proved to be the French privateer Buonaparte, Captain Paim-
                                                             -   See p. 258.
               '
                   Brenton, vol. iii., p. 344.
