266           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                [1804.


back, and then adjured him to accept quarter. With inflexible
heroism he disdained the gift, kept us at bay, and compelled us
to kill him. He fell, covered with honourable wounds."
  Having, in the manner related, possessed themselves of the
Atalante, the British had another enemy to combat a sudden
                                                       :




gale from an adverse quarter frustrated all their attempts to put
to sea from the road.     Captain Hardinge now secured his
prisoners, stationed his men at the Atalante's guns, got the
powder on deck, and made every arrangement to attack the other
Dutch brig. The dawn of day, however, showed the latter at
too great a distance to be approached, especially as the gale had
not in the least abated. In this perilous state the British re-
mained for 48 hours during which, two of their boats had
                      ;


broken adrift, and two others had swamped alongside of the
Atalante. At length, the wind again shifting, the Atalante
made a push to get out but the two captains found the naviga-
                          ;



tion so difficult, that it was three days ere they could accom-
plish their object.
  This, in all its bearings,  was an exploit worthy of British
seamen;   and every admirer of meritorious conduct will be
pleased to learn, that the officer who had so judiciously
planned, and so gallantly led on to, the attack, together with
his brave and able second, was immediately promoted.      Lieu-
tenant Bluett, also, as he well merited, was made a commander.
A step to post-rank is frequently not without its alloy    :
                                                                Cap-
tain Hardinge, no longer qualified to command a sloop, was
obliged to quit the Scorpion, a fine brig of 384 tons, just
                                                      "
launched, to be the captain of a dull, convoy-keeping   post-
ship,"  the Proselyte, of 404 tons, late a Newcastle collier;
a cruiser, which any privateer coidd have run from, and any
well-manned 18-gun brig, the Scorpion herself, for instance,
have captured.
   The following postscript to the private letter referred to at a
previous page affords a fine specimen of a British officer's
magnanimity: "In two days after the captain's death," says
                    " he was buried with all the naval honours
Captain Hardinge,
in my power to bestow upon him.     During the ceremony of his
interment the English colours disappeared, and the Dutch were
hoisted in their place. All the Dutch prisoners were liberated      ;


one of them delivered an eloge upon the hero they had lost, and
we fired three volleys over him as he descended into the deep."
To give to this affair, so honourable to those engaged in it, the
proper finish, Rear-admiral Thornborough sent a flag of truce to
