270                     LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  [1804.

mina's shot, comparatively small as they were, had reduced the
privateer to nearly a sinking state the latter, at the close of
                                                      ;


the action, having seven feet water in her hold, a circumstance
that sufficiently explains the manner of its termination.




                         •V
                                \
                                    \

                          p \
      5h.30m.   /   I
                                        /"^       \                       "W"




                                                                          J A.M.




  Of her 134 men and boys, the Wilhelmina had her boatswain
and three seamen mortally, and six seamen slightly, wounded.
It may here be remarked, that the additional height given to the
trucks of the Wilhelmina's main-deck carriages, to suit them to
ports constructed for 12-pounders, was found to increase the
facility of working the nines a circumstance which occasioned
                                              ;


her inferiority in number of men to be less sensibly felt. With
respect to the loss on board the Psyche, that ship, according to
the statement of Captain Wright, had her second captain and
10 men killed, and her commander (dangerously) and 32 men
wounded, 13 of them mortally.
  With such a disparity of force as evidently existed against
the Wilhelmina, this was an action highly honourable to the
British ship. It is true that the Wilhelmina's opponent was
a privateer but the Psyche, by all accounts, was a better ap-
                ;



pointed, better manned, and better disciplined ship, than many
frigates of the same force in the French navy.  Commanded by
no less a man than Captain Jacques Bergeret, already known
to us as the Virginie's gallant captain, the Pysche had sailed
from Madras in the beginning of February, bound to Pondi-
cherry on commercial pursuits.                        Thence she proceeded to the
