264           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.            [1804.

number of Portuguese peasants, who were encouraged by Mr.
Whitney, the British consul from Figuiera. All the crew then
remaining on the wreck were brought safe on shore, praising
God for a happy deliverance from a shipwreck which has never
had its parallel. As soon as I stept out of the boat, I found
several persons whose humanity prompted them to offer me sus-
tenance, though improperly, in spirits, which I avoided as much
as possible. Our weak state may be conceived, when it is con-
sidered that we received no nourishment from Sunday to Wed-
nesday afternoon, and continually exposed to the fury of the
watery elements. After eating and drinking a little, I found
myself weaker than before, occasioned, I apprehend, from
having been so long without either. Some men died soon after
getting on shore, from imprudently drinking too large a quan-
tity of spirits.  All the crew were in a very weak and ex-
hausted state, the greater part being badly bruised and
wounded. About 40 sail of merchant-ships were wrecked at
the same time on this dreadful beach. Some ships sunk with
all their crew, and almost every ship lost from two to twelve
men each yet the situation of the remainder was not equal to
          ;


that of the frigate's ship's company, as the merchant-ships
drawing a less draught of water, were mostly driven close on
the shore, and no person remained on board them after the
first morning. The masters of the merchant-ships had tents
upon the beach, and some provisions they had saved from the
wrecks, which they very generously distributed, and gave
every assistance to the Apollo's ship's company."
   Fortunately for the remainder of the convoy, Captain Fan-
shawe, without signal, wore just as it grew dark and, with all
                                                  ;


the ships who were near enough to see and adopt her change of
course, the Carysfort arrived in safety at Barbadoes.      Of the
Apollo's crew, 61 officers and men were lost but the number
                                              ;


that perished from the merchant-vessels was comparatively in-
significant, for the reason already given.
   On the 28th of March the British 18-gun brig-sloop Scorpion,
Captain George Nicholas Hardinge, having been detached by
Bear-admiral Thornborough to reconnoitre the Vlie passage
into the Texel, discovered two Dutch brig-corvettes at anchor
in the road.    At the outermost, which was the Atalante, of 16
long 12-pounders, Captain Hardinge resolved to make a dash
with his boats an attack by the Scorpion herself being imprac-
              ;



ticable, owing to the numerous shoals that surround the en-
trance.   On the 31st, just as a favourable opportunity occurred,
