1804.]               WILHELMINA AND PSYCH6.                     271

Isle of France, and arrived there in May.     In June or July news
of the war reached the island.        The Psyche was immediately
armed and equipped as a ship-of-war; but Captain Bergeret,
preferring employment in the national navy, sent out his ship to
cruise, under the command of Captain Trogoff, either the son
or nephew of the Trench admiral who commanded the
                                                           ships at
Toulon when Lord Hood entered that port in August, 1793 ;
Captain Trogoff was considered, in the eastern hemisphere, the
chief scene of his exploits, to be a brave, skilful, and
                                                         enterpris-
ing officer.
  On the other hand, it was Captain Lambert's good fortune to
have been preceded in the command of the Wilhelmina
                                                       by an
officer   who knew how to appreciate (and how few do) the art of
naval gunnery.    Captain James Lind had been indefatigable in
teaching his men to fire with precision and the effect of the
                                              ;


skill attained by the latter was visible in the execution
                                                           they did
to an antagonist, that otherwise, notwithstanding
                                                    they continued
to display, as no doubt they would, the characteristic
                                                         bravery of
British seamen, might, by her decided superiority of
                                                        force, -have
ultimately compelled the Wilhelmina to surrender.
   After quitting the latter, the Psyche proceeded, with all
haste, pumping day and night, to the Isle of France.     There she
arrived in almost a sinking state and, judging from the storm of
                                  ;


shot with which their late opponent had assailed them, her
officers publicly declared that the Psyche had "beaten off" (a

very commodious, and therefore a very frequent expression in
                                "
all similar   cases) an English   44-gun frigate." As soon as she
had repaired the most important of her damages, the Wilhelmina
pursued her route to the road of Madras, where she safely
arrived   ; and, as an additional proof of the discomfited state of
the Psyche', the Willi am-Petrie, whose cargo was valued at
411,1100/. sterling, although not wholly out of sight at the com-
mencement of the action, also arrived in safety at Trincomale.
  Captain Lambert's gallantry was rewarded, as it well merited,
by immediate promotion to post-rank and he was appointed to
                                          ;


the command of the 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Terpsichore, one
of the British cruisers upon the eastern station.     In so credit-
able an action we are pleased in being able to state, that the two
lieutenants of the Wilhelmina were George Tippet and George
Phillimore, and her master Thomas Curtis.
   From the details already given, it is evident that the character
of this action mainly depends upon the actual, in contradis-
tinction to the nominal, force of the combatants. For instance,
