274           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              [1804.

Dutch port in which she had surrendered to the British and   ;
                                                                 l




her complement had been made up, partly of draughts from other
ships-of-war, that is, by freeing each of them of a certain number
of skulkers, raw hands, and incorrigible rogues, and partly of
foreign renegadoes, who, tired of the restraints of a prison-ship
             " volunteered " their services to an
life, gladly                                      enemy, from whom
they meant to escape (and who can blame them?) the first
opportunity. Perhaps a portion of the crew consisted of pressed
men but pressed men were to be found on board of every ship
      ;


in the British navy.    Moreover pressed men have proved them-
selves, on several occasions, among the best men in the ship.
That they should be so will not appear strange, when it, is
considered that an officer, where he can, presses seamen and,;


if he has liberty to take three men out of ten on board a mer-

chant-vessel, he does not choose the worst. A pressed man or
a volunteer, if he has the heart of an Englishman, will not suffer
himself to be bearded by an enemy and it is far from impro
                                             ;


 bable that the majority of the eight or ten seamen who accom-
panied Captain Mackenzie in boarding the privateer, and who
suffered so heavily owing to the pusillanimity of their shipmates,
were pressed men.      Had the dastards but shown themselves on
the brig's forecastle, the colours, in all probability, would have
been hauled down; for it is known that, before the boarding
commenced, the privateer had lost five men killed and 15
wounded, besides being very considerably damaged in masts,
rigging, and hull.    It was on this account that the Buonaparte
felt no inclination to renew the combat        and, in the disabled
                                                 ;


state of the sloop-of- war's rigging, this truly fortunate privateer
soon effected her escape.
   It is very common for the captain of a ship, when writing the
account of any capture unexpectedly made without a contest, to
anticipate the prowess that would have been displayed by his
men, had the enemy possessed strength or courage enough to
put it to the test. Not quite three months before the affair of
the Buonaparte, the Hippomenes, it will be recollected, had the
singular good fortune to capture, almost without a blow, a
French privateer of 36 guns. Captain Shipley, who then com-
manded the Hippomenes, wrote thus in his official letter: "I
feel much pleasure in saying, the officers and men behaved with
that coolness and intrepidity inherent in Englishmen and, had
                                                         ;



the enemy allowed them a trial alongside, I am convinced her
eupcrior force would not have availed them much." The officers
                            l   See p. 203
