1804.]     BOATS OF THE GALATEA AT THE SAINTES.               279

   On the 12th of August, at 4h. 30 m. p.m., the British 18-
pounder 32-gun frigate Galatea, Captain Henry Heathcote,
cruising in the neighbourhood of Guadaloupe, ran down the
channel between that island and the Saintes islands, with the
intention of attempting to cut out the late British sloop-of-war
Lilly, which, it was understood, had gone into the Saintes, to
                                                      .




repair and refit as a French privateer. At 6 h. 30 m. p.m., ob-
serving the Lilly at anchor in the road near the Anse a Mire,
the Galatea hove to, hoisted out her boats, and sent them, in
the evening, manned and armed, to execute the service. The
boats returned soon after daylight on the 13th, without having
been able to discover the Lilly but the Lilly, and all who were
                                ;


interested in defending her, had discovered them, and were
making suitable preparations to resist an attack, should one
again be attempted. An officer and 30 soldiers were added to
the Lilly's crew, and a privateer schooner, which happened to
be in port, was moored athwart the hawse of the ship, in such a
manner as completely to enfilade the assailants in their approach.
So confident were the French in the means they had taken to
repulse the British, that the commanding officer on shore gavo
orders to the different outposts, and to those in command at tho
batteries, not to fire or do anything to excite a suspicion that
they were aware of the enemy's approach.
   Having hoisted in her boats, the Galatea, who had dropped
to leeward during the night, made sail and beat up, to recon-
noitre more fully the position of the Lilly. On nearing the
road, the Galatea discovered the French privateer schooner lying
close to the ship and, as a proof that there were batteries to
                  ;




protect both ship and schooner, the frigate was repeatedly fired
at with shot and shells, some of the latter bursting at no great
distance.   The Galatea continued turning to windward until
about 10 P.M., by which time she had nearly weathered the
Saintes.   Having hove to, the frigate hoisted out four boats,
embarked in them about 90 officers and men, armed the launch
with an 18-pounder carronade, and then towed the boats within
three miles north-west of the citadel. Casting themselves off,
the four boats, under the command of Lieutenant Charles Hay-
 man, first of the Galatea, assisted by several other officers, in-
 cluding Lieutenant Robert Hall, of the marines, and Mr.
 Michael Birbeck, the master, pulled towards the harbour,
 hoping, under cover of the night, to surprise the object of their
 attack.
   To prevent the possibility of such an occurrence, the Lilly, or
