    1804.]
                        LILLY AND DAME-AMBERT.                       277

    to her taffrail. In this state the French privateer made eight
    successive attempts to board, and was gallantly repulsed in all.
    On the ninth time, having killed the Lilly's captain, first-lieu-
    tenant, and others of her principal officers, and killed or wounded
    the greater part of her remaining crew, the Dame-Ambert, just
    two hours and 10 minutes from the commencement of the action,
    carried the British vessel.
      The Lilly had been a Bermudian trader, and in the year 1795
    was purchased for the British navy. She measured 200 tons,
    was armed with 14 carronades, 12-pounders, and twc long fours,
    and had a complement of 80 men and boys. Her exact loss in
    the action cannot now be ascertained. Her captain and first-
    lieutenant were among the killed, which, according to the
    French accounts, amounted to a great proportion of the crew            ;

    and her badly wounded, on the same authority, were 15 or 16,
    including all her remaining officers. The Dame-Ambert had
    been the British packet Marlborough, one of the largest in the
    service, recently captured.  She was afterwards refitted at Gua-
    daloupc, and armed with 1G long French 6-pounders, and a com-
    plement of 140 men. The French say, that their crew, when
    they fell in with the Lilly (but this wants confirmation), was
    reduced to 75 men, and that the Dame-Ambert lost in the action
    five men killed and 11 wounded.

      Nothing but the accidental circumstance of the Lilly's having
    three masts instead of two occasioned her not to be classed as a
    gun-brig and truly, if-she had been a gun-brig, she would have
              ;



    been ono of the least effective in the service. They all carry
    carronades of an 18-pounder caliber hers were 12-pounders,
                                                :



    and those of the old construction, short and badly formed,
    the derision of the merest tyro in naval gunnery. Unfortu-
    nately, owing to the mortality among the British officers, and
    the stigma that attaches to the capture of a king's ship by a
    privateer, no account of this action has been published, except
    in the French papers.     It   is   only to call things by their right
    names, and that which seems a disgrace becomes, in reality, an
    honour. A defeat like the Lilly's is more creditable than many
    a puffed-up victory, for which chaplets have been worn and
    rewards bestowed. The fact of her having been a sloop-of-war
    was not lost upon the captors; and "une corvette de fetat''
    occurs in more than one place in the French account of the
    action.  The prize was afterwards fitted out as a privateer, and
    named, after the Governor of Guadeloupe, Gcneral-Ernouf.
       On the 31st     of July, at daybreak, the British 18-poundcr
i
