282           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.             [1804.

the plan, not in the execution. The heavy loss sustained by the
boats proves that the British had effected as much as flesh and
blood could effect they had lost, in killed, wounded, and pri-
                    :




soners, more than two-thirds of their number       ;
                                                    and yet the
remainder would not yield, but bravely fought their way back to
their ship.  Much do we regret our inability to give a fuller
account of the various difficulties which Lieutenant Hayman
and his party had to contend with, in order that we may do
justice to the memories of the dead, and cheer the feelings
of the living, among those who, although unsuccessful in
their object, so nobly maintained the character of British
seamen.
   On the 17th of August, in latitude 49° 30' north, longitucta
12° 20' west, the British 38-gun frigate Loire, Captain Frederick
Lewis Maitland, fell in with the French ship privateer Blonde,
of Bordeaux, mounting 30 guns, 8-pounders on the main deck,
with a crew of 240 men the same ship that, about five months
                         ;



previous, captured the Wolverine. After a 20 hours' chase, in-
cluding a running fight of a quarter of an hour, during which
the Loire had one midshipman (Boss Connor) and five men
wounded, and the Blonde two men killed and five wounded, the
latter hauled down her colours.
   On the loth of September, at 6 a.m., the British 50-gun ship
Centurion, commanded by Lieutenant James Bobert Bhillips, in
the absence of Captain James Lind upon service on shore (and
who was also acting in the absence of the ship's proper com-
manding officer, Captain John Sprat Bainier, dangerously ill),
while at anchor in Yizagapatam road, waiting until two Indiamen
were loaded and ready to return with her to Madras, perceived
under the land in the south-west, at a distance of about 12
miles, three ships coming down before the wind, with all sail set.
At 9 h. 30 m. a.m. the strangers were made out to be a line-of-
battle ship and two frigates, the former with a flag at her mizen-
topgallantmast-head. At 9 h. 45 m. the French ships steered
directly in for the road, two without any colours, and the third,
the outermost frigate, with a St. George's ensign. The Centurion
immediately opened a fire at the headmost frigate, to induce her
to show her colours. Soon afterwards the 74 made signals,
which were answered by the frigates. This at once pointed out
that the ships were enemies, and a signal to that effect was
made by the Centurion to the two Indiamen in company, fol-
lowed by another, directing them to put into a port in view.
The Barnaby promptly answered the signal, cut her cable, and
