1804.]      THE CENTURION WITH MAEEXGO AND CONSORTS.                               283

ran on shore       j
                       1
                           but the Princess Charlotte, Captain John Logan,
who lay in-shore of the Centurion, kept at her anchors.
  The flag- ship was suspected to be what she really was, the
Marengo, Bear-admiral Linois and her two consorts were the
                                            ;



40-gun frigate Atalante, Captain Camille-Charles-Alexis Gaudin-
Beauchene, and 36-gun frigate Semillante, commanded as be-
fore by Captain Motard.     It is seven months to a day since we
left Bear-adniiral Linois, with a force a trifle greater than that
which he now possessed, running from a fleet of unescorted
Indiamen; a fleet which he had weighed from Pulo-Auro pur-
posely to capture, but which, under the able directions of Com-
modore Nathaniel Dance, put him and his squadron to flight.-
The French admiral afterwards proceeded to Batavia where, or           ;



on the passage to it, he was joined by the Atalante. Taking
in a supply of provisions, he steered for the Isle of France, and
arrived there on the 2nd of April, followed a day or two after-
wards by two of his frigates, with a valuable prize. Here his
discomfiture by the India fleet gained him the ill-will of General
Decaen, who wrote to his government on the subject, and we
believe, sent his despatches to France by the Eerceau.       After
waiting two months and a half at the Isle of France, M. Linois
put to sea with the Marengo, Atalante, and Semillante. Ho
cruised, first, to the southward of Madagascar, anchoring a part
 of the time, on account of bad weather, in the bay of Saint
 Augustin he then moved to a station near the island of Ceylon,
               :




 where he took several rich prizes. M. Linois subsequently
 entered the bay of Bengal, passed Madras at about L!< leagues'             I




distance, and visited the roads of Masulipatam and Cosanguay                                :




 thence he swept the coast of Golconda, and arrived on the 15th
 of September off Yizagapatam not without an object, for he
                                                ;



 had, the day previous, when off Masulipatam, received
                                                          informa-
tion from some country-boats, that the British frigate Wilhelmina
had recently sailed from that road, with an Indiaman in com-
pany, bound to Yizagapatam. It so happened that Vice-admiral
Bainier had substituted the Centurion for the Wilhelmina a                              ;


difference which the French admiral, to his cost, very soon dis-
covered.
  At a few minutes past 10 a.m. the Atalante, which was the
headmost ship of the three, was distant from the Centurion
about half a mile, and all three ships now hoisted French
colours. The Centurion immediately Cut her cable, and sheeted
home her topsails, which had been previously unfurled.                             This
    i   This ship ufterwards got into the surf, and was totally hot.   '


                                                                           Seep. 254,
