276             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.          [1804..


covered a French ship and brig steering to the southward.
These were the Charante, of 20 long 6-pounders, four swivels,
and 104 men, commanded by Lieutenant Joseph Samson, and
                                "
the Joie, of eight " 12-pounders (if not carronades, more likely
                                                        Lieute-
8-pounders), two swivels, and 75 men, commanded by
nant Benjamin Gadobert both vessels from Bochefort, but last
                          ;



from the Gironde, bound to Bayonne, the brig laden with cannon
and ordnance stores.
  At 5 p.m. the Aigle closed with the French ship and brig       ;


                                                      their now
and, from their not having altered their course, and
exchanging signals and shortening sail, Captain "Wolfe expected
that  theymeant to  engage.   To the surprise, however, of the
British, the Charente and Joie, after firing their starboard
broadsides without effect, ran upon the strand about 10 leaguea
to the southward of Cordouan, and within a stone's throw of
each other. The French crews then took to the boats; but,
these becoming swamped in the surf, many of the men were
drowned. The Aigle immediately anchored about a mile from
the beach, for the purpose of endeavouring to get the two ves-
            but the immense surf thrown up in consequence of
sels afloat ;
a recent westerly gale rendered fruitless every effort, although
persevered in for a whole night and part of the next day. Cap-
tain Wolfe was therefore obliged to destroy the French ship and
brig; a service which was effectually executed,
                                                 under the per-
sonal directions of Mr. Furlonger the master, and Mr. Steel the
gunner.
  On the 15th of July, at 2h. 30 m. a.m., Cape Boman in the
United States of America in sight, the French ship-rigged pri-
vateer Dame-Ambert, Captain Charles Lamarque (represented
as a reduced officer of the French navy), saw and chased a ship
to leeward. The latter, which was the British 14-gun ship-
                                                         desirous
sloop Lilly, Captain William Compton, being equally
of a meeting, the two ships by 9 h. 30 m. a.m. were near enough
for the Dame-Ambert to open her fire.      The British ship, how-
                                                            carro-
ever, was compelled to wait until her paltry 12-pounder
nades (not equal in effectiveness to 4-pounder long guns) could
reach her antagonist. Having disabled the Lilly in sails and
                                        her in crew, the Dame-
rigging, and considerably weakened
Ambert closed, in order to finish the contest by boarding. To
                                                                     -




do this effectually, the Dame-Ambert, who from the entire state
of her rigging possessed the facility of manoeuvring as she
                              in a raking position; and, having
pleased, stationed herself
swept  the   Lilly'sdeck by her guns, lashed the sloop's bowsprit
