1604.]
           BOATS OF THE GALATEA AT THE SAINTES.                281

  The object of the service, upon which the Galatea's boats had
been despatched on the evening of the 12th, was laudable inas-
                                                           ;



much as it was not only to recapture a ship that belonged to the
British navy, but to cut short the cruise of a privateer likely to
do a serious injury to British commerce. Nor was the number
of men sent, admitting it to have been each time the same,
inadequate apparently to the purpose in view, that of surprising
(for there lay the gist of the enterprise) and capturing the Lilly
at her anchors in the road. The boats returned without finding
the vessel. Having hoisted them in, the Galatea should have
made sail from, not towards, the spot where the privateer lay.
Instead of this, the frigate hovered off the port all the day,
observed a second privateer moored along with the first,
witnessed, and, the French say, felt, the strength of the batte-
ries, that protected both privateers   and yet, in the evening,
                                         :




Captain Heathcote, a second time, sends his boats to pass,
and, having accomplished or failed in their main object, to
repass, those batteries  ;batteries, the fire from which the
Galatea herself, much less her boats, would have been unable
to withstand.
  For an enterprise so doubtful in its expediency and so fatal
in its result, a brief English account would sufficeand none,
                                                       ;



indeed, appears to have been published. The French, on the
other hand, made public every particular       every particular, at
                                                   ;




least, which they thought would contribute to       aggrandise the
exploit performed by Lapointe and Lieutenant Mouret. But
they tell us nothing of any aid afforded by the schooner priva-
teer, or by the batteries whose united fire, nevertheless, pow-
                         ;


erfully co-operated in repulsing the assailants. That there were
forts, the account admits, openly, when alluding to the supposed
effect of some shells thrown at the frigate, and tacitly, when
dwelling upon the accident, which, the French declare, befel
three of the British boats, in their cndeavoui's to retire. These,
they state, and positively state, were sunk, with their crews.
With equal truth the French add, that there was a fifth boat
present, but which kept rather aloof during the boarding-attempt,
and suffered the loss of half its crew ere it got clear. "Trois
furent coulees, une quatrieme prise, et le cinquicme canot, qui
avait un peu tcnu 1c large, echappa avec la moitie de son mondc
hors de combat." 1
  Whatever were the faults of this enterprise, they existed in

                        Moniteur, March 2, 1805.
