£80                    LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.     [1804.


leather, the General-Ernouf, for that was the ship's new name,
had, just as it grew dark, sent one of her boats to row guard at
the entrance of the road. By this, the ship, the schooner, the
forts, and the town, became fully apprised of the approach of
the British    ;   who, finding no shot fired at them from the bat-
teries, no signals of alarm made  along the coast, naturally con-
cluded that they were unseen. Eager to be the first at the post
of danger, Lieutenant Hayman in the barge pushed ahead of
his comrades, and, at a few minutes past 1 a.m. on the 14th,
got nearly alongside of the Lilly. Then it was that the fire
began. Heedless of it all, the barge, followed by the other
boats, was soon in contact with the ship.   A dreadful struggle
ensued. Lieutenant Hayman fell, mortally wounded both by
musketry and the bayonet and, out of 26 or 27 officers and
                                   ;


men in the barge, three only, it appears, were left free from
dangerous wounds. The three remaining boats tried in vain to
overcome the numerous and still-increasing force opposed to
them. After sustaining nearly an hour's fire from great guns
and musketry, they were compelled to turn their bows to the
offing, leaving the barge to her fate. But the British were only
quitting one set of foes to get within the clutches of another.
The batteries now opened their fire, and a dreadful fire it was.
The cannonade continued, gradually slackening as the boats
receded from the shore, until 3 h. 30 m. a.m., when it entirely
ceased.
  Just as the day dawned, the miserable remnant of the expe-
dition reached the frigate. Out of about 90 officers and men,
who had quitted the Galatea on the preceding night, not more
than 20 returned in an unwounded state. Among the killed,
besides Lieutenant Hayman, was the master, and Mr. "Wall, a
midshipman and among the wounded were several officers,
                   ;



including Lieutenant Hall of the marines, who lost an arm and
was made prisoner. The number of killed and wounded together,
as reported on the return of the boats, was 44, including Lieu-
tenants Hayman and Hall, but not, as it would appear, the seven
killed and 14 wounded out of the 24 seamen and marines belong-
ing to the barge. The addition of these makes the loss of the
Galatea, in attempting to cut out the Lilly, 65 in killed and
wounded whereas the French acknowledge a loss of only four
           :




men killed and, although they do not enumerate the wounded,
               ;


name, as among them, Captain Lapointe, commanding the
General-Ernouf, and Lieutenant Mouret, commanding the detach-
ment of troops put on board by the commandant of the garrison.
