1804.]     GALLANT BOAT ATTACK ON TWELVE SETTEES.             275

of the Hippomenes afterwards proved how well they had merited
their captain's eulogmm ; but as to the men   —of them, however,
enough has been said.     Captain Paimpeni himself must havo
despised the wretches, to whose faint-heartedness he owed the
preservation of his ship while the mangled bodies of their late
                        ;



comrades, still reeking upon his deck, must have taught him to
discriminate between the counterfeit and the genuine British
seaman.
  On the 11th of July, at 10 p.m., three boats of the British
18-pounder 32-gun frigate Narcissus, Captain Boss Donnelly,
three of the 38-gun frigate Seahorse, Captain the Hon. Courtenay
Boyle, and four of the 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Maidstone, Cap-
tain the  Hon. George Elliott, under the orders of Lieutenant
John Thompson, first of the Narcissus, assisted by Lieutenants
John Eichard Lumley, of the Seahorse, Ogle Moore, of the Maid-
stone, and Hyde Parker, of the Narcissus, put off from the last-
named frigate, to make an attack upon 12 settees, chiefly with
cargoes on board, lying at La Vandour, in the bay of Hyeres,
distant between four and five miles from the ships. The vessels
were moored head and stern, close to the beach, to which also
they were completely secured, and were covered by a battery of
three guns.
   In the face of a tremendous fire of grape-shot and musketry,
as well from the settees as from the battery and the houses of
the town, Lieutenant Thompson and his party, about midnight,
succeeded in boarding and setting fire to most of the vessels.
One only was brought off, and a most costly prize she was; the
loss on the part of the British amounting to one midshipman
(Thomas Owen Roche), one marine, and two seamen killed, and
one lieutenant (John Richard Lumley), one master's mate
(Robert Mansell), three midshipmen (Thomas William Beding-
ficld,Thomas Alexander Watt, and John George Victor), 15
seamen, and three marines wounded, many of them severely.
The gallantry of attacks like these no one can dispute but who
                                                         ;



will say that, had all the 12 settees, instead of one of them, been
brought off, they would have compensated for the valuable blood
which had been spilt? Lieutenant Lumley's was a dreadful
wound, and one from which it was next to a miracle that he ever
recovered. His right arm was amputated at the shoulder-joint,
and a portion of the scapula removed with it.
   On the 12th of July the British 18-poundcr 36-gun Vigatc
Aigle, Captain George Wolfe, standing in for the Cordouan
lighthouse with a moderate breeze from the north-east, dis-
