278               LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.           [1804,


32-gun frigate Tartar, Captain Keith Maxwell, standing in to
leeward of the island ofSaona, West Indies, discovered from her
mast-head a small sail, to which she immediately gave chase        ;



keeping as close as possible to leeward of the island, in order to
prevent the latter's escape that way, and compel her to make
the attempt through the passage between Saona and St. Do-
mingo, a very narrow and intricate channel even for small ves
sels.  At about 7 a.m. the chase was made out to be a schooner,
full of men, using her sweeps to escape through the before-
mentioned channel. By carrying all possible sail, the Tartar,
at 8 a.m., got within range of shot but, owing to the short
                                       ;



tacks she was obliged to make, could use her guns to very little
purpose without losing ground in the chase. The schooner,
therefore, which was the French privateer Hirondclle, Captain
La Place, of 10 long 4-pounders and 50 men, notwithstanding
that several of the frigate's shot passed over her and through,
her sails, persisted in beating to windward until 10 a.m when,
                                                          ;




having advanced nearly half-way up the channel, she came to an
anchor under a reef of rocks.
   Finding the Tartar to be in six fathoms water, without the
possibility of anchoring in safety, or of effectually cannonading
the schooner, Captain Maxwell despatched three boats, under
the command of Lieutenant Henry Mullah, assisted by Lieute-
nant Nicholas Lockyer and several midshipmen, all volunteers,
to endeavour to bring out the privateer. The instant the boats
put off, the Hirondelle hoisted her colours, fired a gun, and
warped her broadside towards them. As the British advanced,
the privateer opened a fire from her large guns, and, as the boats
drew nearer, from her small arms also. In spite of this, and of
a strong sea-breeze directly on the bows of the boats, Lieutenant
Mullah intrepidly pulled up to the privateer and, after a short
                                              ;


but obstinate resistance, boarded and carried her, with the loss
only of one seaman and one marine wounded. The Hirondelle
had nine killed and six wounded, besides three missing, sup-
posed to have been drowned in attempting to swim on shore^
The number of British in the boats does not appear in the
official letter
              ;  but, admitting they amounted to 50, or even to
60 officers and men, and that they had an 18-pounder carronade
in the launch, still, against a vessel so well armed and prepared,
and under circumstances of weather which, by retarding the
progress of the boats, exposed them the longer to tbe privateer's
fire, the capture of the Hirondelle was highly honourable to the

parties engaged.
