1804.J            CENTURION WITH MARENGO AND CONSORTS.            285

of the bay and dread of grounding, had anchored, was far more
favourable to her than to the Centurion, the latter having, except
a 6-pounder or two, no other long guns than the 24s on her first
or lower-deck. In consequence, the Centurion's hull, masts,
yards, and rigging, were severely cut by the fire of her two
assailants several shot struck her between wind and water, and
              :



one went through the gunner's store-room. At length, at about
1 h. 15 m. p.m., a shot from the Marengo cut the cable of the
Centurion and, about the same time, the 74 cut or slipped her
                  ;



cable, hoisted her jib, and, accompanied by the two frigates and
prize, stood away to sea.       The Centurion also made some sail     ;


but, on getting a little further off-shore, brought up again with
the sheet-anchor, and continued her fire on the Marengo until
the latter was out of gun-shot. By 4 p.m. the Centurion was
again ready for action but the French squadron still pursued
                            ;



its course off-shore, and at sunset was standing before the wind
to the north-east.
  The principal damages of the Centurion have already been
enumerated.  Her loss was by no means commensurate it             :




amounted to only one man mortally, and nine sbghtly, wounded.
The Marengo suffered a good deal in her masts, yards, and
rigging and one shot carried away here fore-cap. Her loss
          ;


amounted to two seamen killed, and one cnseigne de vaisseau
badly wounded. The Atalante had also two men killed, besides
six wounded, one of them mortally.   The Semillante, thanks to
the forbearance of the Princess Charlotte, had no casualty to
complain of.
  It is difficult to understand what it was that induced M. Linois
to abandon an enterprise of such apparent ease as the capture
or destruction of a 50- gun ship by a 74 and two frigates. The
rear-admiral's official letter, as published in the Moniteur, is
a very  lame performance. Such excuses as, the shoalness of the
water—the great force of the battery on shore          — the "extra-
              "
ordinary   armament of the Centurion— the distance from a port
in which he could refit
                           —
                        and the rumour that two English line-of-
battle ships had been seen or heard of in the neighbourhood,
could only have suggested themselves to one who felt a little
ashamed at the want of energy he had displayed. The Centurion,
for instance, could not have drawn less water than a French
frigate of the class of those with the Marengo; and the two
        mounting between them upwards of 80 guns, and
frigates,
manned by at least 600 men, might have laid the Centurion on
board, or compelled her to run on shore.
                                             li
                                                  La premiere batterie
