292           COLONIAL POSSESSIONS.   —WEST    INDIES.       [1804.


person on board the squadron who had ever seen the island,
except Captain Boss and Mr. Fitton, Captain Bligh made sail
for his destination.   Owing to calms and variable winds, the
squadron did not, until the 30th of January, arrive in sight of the
island of Bonaire, which lies off the east end of Curacoa.       In
the evening the ships bore up, and early on the next morning,
the 31st, hove to about six miles to the eastward of the town and
harbour of St. Ann.   Captain Boss having embarked on board
the Gipsy, was despatched with a flag of truce and a summons
to the Dutch governor or fiscal, to surrender the island to the
British.  At 9h. 30 m. a.m. the Gipsy stood out of the harbour,
with the preconcerted signal flying, announcing that the terms
had been refused.
  The passage into the harbour is so narrow, that, even with a
fair wind (and it now blew off the land), a line-of-battle ship can
with difficulty enter and the batteries that command the har-
                      ;



bour and town including Fort Bepublique, against which from
its situation an attack by storm is impracticable, mounted

nearly 100 pieces of cannon. In the harbour were lying the
Dutch 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Hatslaar and two French
privateers.  Under these circumstances, no alternative remained
but to try the effect of a landing. Leaving, therefore, the two
frigates, as well to blockade the harbour as to cause a
                                                          diver-
sion of the enemy's force, Captain Bligh, with the two 74s and
schooner, bore up for a small cove, which had been pointed out
by Mr. Fitton as the most eligible spot for effecting a disem-
barkation.
  According to a previous arrangement the boats of the squadron,
containing all the marines of the four ships, 199 in number, and
a detachment of 406 seamen, had assembled on board the Her-
culo, and were commanded as follows        : the seamen of the
Theseus, by Lieutenants Edward Henry a'Court and Bichard
Henry Muddle, assisted by six midshipmen and her marines
                                                ;



by Lieutenants Earle Harwood and Bertrand Cahuac.         The
seamen of the Hercule, by Lieutenants John B. Hills and Nisbet
Josiah Willoughby; and the marines by Lieutenant Samuel
Perrot.  The seamen of the Blanche, by Lieutenant Charles
Woolsey, of the Hercule, in lieu of their proper commanding
officer, Lieutenant William Braithwaite, who, to his disgrace as
an officer and a gentleman, was incapacitated from filling his
proper station by habitual drunkenness. The marines of the
Blanche were commanded by Lieutenant Edward Kicolls, the
senior marine-officer in the squadron.     The seamen of the
