586           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                     [1804.

du fort," gravely says the French account, "n'est que de 8
canons de 32 ou 24. On ignore le nombre de la seconde, 4 pieces
de campagne avaient etc transporters par les troupes sur le
rivage."  The latter were so, and were 12-pounders but, as  ;


already related, could not reach the Marengo. Among other
mistakes, M. Linois states the Centurion to have carried " 2G
canons de 32 a la seconde batterie;" which, as she mounted
" 24
     (or rather 22) canons de 24 a la premiere batterie," would,
indeed, have been arming her "dune maniere extraordinaire."
Her second-deck guns were 32-pounder carronades and from;


the distance at which the action was fought, Captain Lind
would have greatly preferred the long 12-pounders for which
they had been substituted.
  A  half-laden merchant prize, although an Indiaman, or rather,
as was the case, a country ship, was a sorry recompense for the
defeat, and a defeat it was, which the French admiral had sus-
tained.  On the other hand, the officers and crew of the British
ship gave an honourable proof of what may bo done by a
judicious perseverance in resisting the attack of a superior force.
By conduct so laudable and exemplary, they preserved their
vessel, and exalted the character of their country and the two
                                                    ;


navies must continue to view, with very different feelings, the
defence of the Centurion in Vizagapatam road.
   An action between the single ships of two nations at peace is
rare.  Still more rare is an action, under similar circumstances,
between two squadrons. Should the occurrence happen, it is
usually at night, when the ships find a difficulty in understand-
ing each other's signals but, the instant the mistake is dis-
                          ;



covered, the firing ceases, and no breach is made in the amicable
relations of the two powers.    Unfortunately the next action in
order of date was fought between an English and a Spanish
squadron, not amidst darkness, but in the open day            not
                                                                ;


through any accident, but under express orders from the govern-
ment of one of the combatants; and, so far from the matter
being afterwards made up, it led to an almost immediate de-
claration of war by the party who had to complain of the
aggression.
   Without entering into a consideration of the political con-
nexion which at this time subsisted between France and Spain,
it may suffice to state that, towards the latter end of the summer
of 1804, the British government received intelligence, through
the officer, Bear-admiral the Honourable Alexander Cochrane, in
command of the squadron stationed off Ferrol, that an armament
