1804    '|
                         CAPTURE OF THE SPANISH TREASURE-SHIPS.   289

rated from the remainder of the hull, and except two passengers,
who happened to be on board the Medea.
  It is therefore quite clear, that the Indefatigable and any two
of her three consorts would have been a match, even in a time of
notorious war, for these four Spanish frigates. As it was, the
latter defended themselves with the characteristic bravery of
Spaniards, notwithstanding that they could have been in no
state of preparation, and that the melancholy loss of one of
their        number so early in the action increased the odds against
them.
  Two more circumstances conspired to invest this transaction
with more odium than perhaps would otherwise have attached
to it. One of those circumstances was the miserable fate of so
many poor souls at the explosion of the frigate, and the heart-
rending misfortune it entailed upon one, in particular, who had
been a passenger on board.    This gentleman, a Captain Alvear,
of the Spanish navy, with his wife, four amiable daughters, and
five sons grown up to manhood, had embarked in the Mercedes,

carrying with him a fortune, estimated at about 30,0007. ster-
ling, the gradual savings of 30 years' industry as a merchant in
South America. Not many minutes before the engagement
began, the captain and his eldest son had gone on board the
Medea and there, in a very little while, did he witness the
              ;



catastrophe that hurled his wife, his daughters, and his remain-
ing sons to destruction, and sent that treasure, which was mere
dross in the comparison, to the bottomless deep.
   The second circumstance alluded to was the tempting nature
of the lading on board these vessels.        The cargoes of the three
captured frigates consisted of Vidona wool, cascarilla, ratinia,
seal-skins, seal-oil, bars of tin, pigs of copper, dollars, and ingots
of gold, and netted very little short of a million sterling. There-
fore, as the Mercedes was similarly freighted, the total value of
what had been shipped on board the squadron probably amounted
to nearly a third of a million more. We must not omit to state,
that the British government restored to Captain Alvear, out of
the proceeds of the three cargoes, the 30,000/. sterling winch he
had lost in the Mercedes.
   Many persons, who concurred in the expediency, doubted the
right of detaining these ships; and many, again, to whom the
legality of the act appeared clear, were of opinion, that a more
formidable force should have been sent to execute the service,
in order to have justified the Spanish admiral in surrendering
without an appeal to arms.
  VOL.            III.                                        u
