1804.]              CAPTAIN BLIGH AT CURAQOA.                     291

vessels of superior force, which, in consequence of Captain
Tucker's imprudence, had been despatched in pursuit of her.
  In the early part of December, 1803, the 74-gun ship Theseus,
Captain John Bligh, arrived at Port Royal, Jamaica, from the
mole of St. Nicholas.   On the 17th Captain Bligh received an
order directing- him to proceed on the ensuing day off the city
of Santo-Domingo, and, in company with the 74-gun ship Yan-
guard, Captain James Walker, previously stationed there, to
blockade the port. Should the French in possession of the
town propose capitulation, Captain Bligh was authorised to
         :



treat with them, and was at the same time verbally informed by
Sir John Duckworth, in strict confidence, that he would receive
an order by the 74-gun ship llercule, Captain Richard Dalling
Dunn, to attack the island of Curacoa but that it was not his.
                                                   ;


Sir John's, intention that the safety of the line-of-battle ships
should be risked by attempting to force the harbour of St. Ann.
   On the 19th the Theseus sailed from Port Royal, and before
the end of the month arrived off the city of Santo-Domingo but;

the Vanguard was not there, nor, in fact, did that ship join at
all. On the 15th of January, 1804, Captain Bligh received his
orders by the Herculc, and by them was directed, taking with
him the three 74s, already named, also the 18-pounder 36-gun
frigates Blanche, Captain      Zachary Mudge, and Pique, Captain
William Bayne Hodgson Ross, and the 10-gun schooner Gipsy,
Acting-lieutenant Michael Fitton, to proceed without a moment's
loss of time off the island of Curacoa
                                           "
                                             having," says Sir John,
                                               ;

" received certain information that the
                                            garrison of Curacoa has
not been strengthened since the commencement of the war, and
consists only of 160 troops, with a frigate in the port whose
officers and crew are said nearly all to have fallen victims to the
climate."   Captain Bligh is then directed to summon the island
to surrender to his majesty's amis upon liberal conditions.       In
case of a refusal, and that he should have no reason to believe
there had been any augmentation of the garrison, Captain Bligh
is to land a part of the crews of the ships.       Then follows this
                   " But it is
nugatory salvo  :
                                my duty to caution you by no means
to hazard more than the object is worth." Nugatory, indeed;
for by what standard was the relative value of the object and
the means to be measured ?
   With his two 74s, two frigates, and one schooner, and with
no other knowledge of the state of Curagoa than was contained
in the paragrat.li already quoted from his orders, and with no
                             i   See p. 206.
