288             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                        [_
                                                                              1804 «


down close upon her weather-bow.      Immediately the Mercedes
fired into the Amphion, and in a few seconds afterwards the
Medea opened her fire upon the Indefatigable. The latter then
made the signal for close battle and it instantly commenced
                                            ;



with all the animation, on one side at least, which the prospect
of such trophies could inspire.
  At the end of about nine minutes the Mercedes blew up along-
side of the Amphion with a tremendous explosion.                In a minute
or two afterwards the    Fama struck her colours            ;    but, on the
Medusa's ceasing her fire, rehoisted them, and attempted to
make off.    The Medusa immediately bore up under the Spanish
frigate's stern, and poured in a heavy fire, but the Fama con-
tinued her course to leeward. Having sustained, during 17
minutes, the Indefatigable's heavy broadsides, and finding a new
                                                                                   r




opponent in the Amphion, who had advanced on her starboard
quarter, the Medea surrendered.    In another five minutes the
Clara did the same, and the Lively was left at liberty to aid the
Medusa in the pursuit of the Fama. At about 45 m. past noon
the Lively, being an admirable sailer, got near enough to fire her
bow-guns at the Fama and at 1 h. 15 m. p.m. this, the oidy
                         ;



remaining Spanish frigate, struck to the two British frigates in
chase of her.
  The force of the Indefatigable has already more than once
appeared that of the Lively was the full establishment of a 38,
            ;




numbering 46 guns, and the Amphion and Medusa each mounted
40 guns. The Lively had two men killed and four wounded ;
the Amphion, three men wounded, one or two of them by the
splinters which fell upon her decks when her unfortunate
antagonist blew up. No other loss, and but a very trifling
damage, was sustained by the British ships.
  The Medea was a fine frigate of 1046 tons, and mounted 42
guns, 18-pounders on the main deck, and eights on the quarter-
deck and forecastle, with a complement of 300 men of whom        ;


two were killed and 10 wounded. The three remaining frigates
were each armed similar to the Mahonesa, except perhaps in
having an additional pair of 6-pounders.     The Fama, out of
                                                        1


her 280 men and boys, had 11 killed and 50 wounded           the          ;


Clara, out of her 300, seven killed and 20 wounded and the           ;


Mercedes lost, by the fatal explosion, the whole of her 280 in
crew and passengers, except the second captain and about 40
men, who were taken off the ship's forceastle after it had sepa-
                             '
                                 See vol. i., p. 399.
