1804.]          CAPTURE OF THE SPANISH TREASURE-SHIPS.                   287

was fitting out in that port that a considerable Spanish force
                                       ;


was already collected there and that French troops were then
                                   ;


on their march thither, and near at hand. It is true that all
this was afterwards disproved by the Spanish government    but       ;


such proof could have no retroactive effect. Immediately on
the receipt of Eear-admiral Cochrane's information, the British
admiralty despatched a squadron off Cadiz, to intercept and
detain,       by force   or   otherwise,   the   four   Spanish   frigates,
known to be bound to that court with an immense quantity of
specie, which they were bringing           from Monte-Yideo, in South
America.
   On the 3rd of October the British squadron sent upon this
important service, and which consisted of the 44-gun frigate
Indefatigable, Captain Graham Moore, 18-pounder 32-gun
frigates Medusa, Captain John Gore, and Amphion, Captain
Samuel Sutton, and 38-gun frigate Lively, Captain Graham
Eden Hamond, assembled off Cape Santa-Maria. On the 5th,
a,t 6 a.m., that cape bearing north-east distant nine leagues, the

Medusa made a signal for four large sail bearing west by south,
the wind at this time being about east-north-east. The squadron
immediately wore, and made sail in chase.           At 8 a.m. the
strangers, which were the Spanish 40-gun frigate Medea, Eear-
admiral Don Joseph Bustamentc, and 34-gun frigates Fama
(with a broad pendant), Clara, and Mercedes, formed the line
of battle ahead, in the following order Fama, Medea, Mer-
                                                  :



cedes, Clara.   At 9 h. 5 m. a.m. the Medusa placed herself
within half pistol-shot, on the weather-beam of the Fama. Pre-
sently the Indefatigable took a similar station by the side of the
Medea and the Amphion and Lively, as they came up, ranged
          ;



alongside the Mercedes and Clara, the Amphion judiciously
ninning to leeward of her opponent.
  After ineffectually hailing the Medea to shorten sail, the In-
defatigable fired a shot across her forefoot       on which the
                                                         :




Spanish frigate did as she had been requested. Captain Moore
then sent Lieutenant Thomas Arscott to inform the Spanish
commanding officer, that his orders were to detain the squadron,
and that it was his wish to execute those orders without blood-
shed, but that the Spanish admiral's determination must bo
instantly made.    The boat not returning so soon as expected,
the Indefatigable made a signal for her, and, to enforce it, fired
a shot ahead of the Medea. The officer having at length returned
with an unsatisfactory answer, the Indefatigable, at about 9 h.
30 m. a.m., fired a second shot ahead of the Medea, and boro
