284            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.            [1804.


brought her broadside to bear    and the whole of it was im-
                                 ;



mediately poured into the Atalante, then within the distance of
200 yards at this time the Marengo and Semillante were
           :




ranging up on the larboard quarter of the Centurion. At 10 h.
10 m. a.m. the Marengo and Semillante opened their fire, which
the Centurion returned. After the action had continued about
a quarter of an hour, the Centurion's colours were shot away,
as also were those of the Marengo      but both ensigns were
                                            ;



promptly replaced. At 10 h. 45 m. a.m. the 74, whose rigging-
appeared much damaged, hauled her wind and stood out
followed by the frigates. A battery of three guns at the town,
under the command of Colonel Campbell of the 74th regiment,
had co-operated with the Centurion in resisting the unequal
attack.
  Abandoned for the present, the Centurion continued to stand
in-shore, and, in passing, hailed the Princess Charlotte, and
desired her to cut her cable, but without effect. About this time
Captain Lind joined his ship; and, finding her rigging and
sails too much cut to admit of her being worked to advantage,
anchored at the back of the surf, about a mile and a half to the
north-east of the town, in six fathoms water. Here the Cen-
turion, now too distant to be supported by the battery at the
town, prepared herself for renewing an engagement, which she
had no means of avoiding, without resorting to an alternative
not yet in contemplation.
   At 11 h. 15 m. a.m. the Marengo and frigates put about and
again stood in and in another quarter of an hour the 74, after
               ;



having repeatedly tried the range of her guns, dropped anchor
abreast of and about a mile distant from, the Centurion. Havine-
clewed up her topsails and furled her courses, the Marengo
recommenced the cannonade, supported occasionally by the
Atalante, who kept under sail on the Centurion's larboard
quarter, and lay nearer than the Marengo, and in a much
more annoying      position.   The   Semillante,   meanwhile, was
taking possession of the Princess Charlotte. Unambitious of
sharing glory with the Centurion, the latter had struck her
colours without firing a shot, although she mounted 24 long
12-pounders, with a crew of 71 men, and was a very formidable-
looking ship of 010 tons burden. Colonel Campbell had sent
to her assistance about 50 seapoys     but the boats saw the
                                        ;


shameful occurrence in time to save themselves by pulling back
to the shore.
   The distance at which the Marengo, doubtless from ignorance
