1804.]
                  CAPTAIN BLIGH AT CURAgOA.                    293

Pique, on account of the sickness of two of her three lieu-
tenants, werecommanded by Captain Ross, and her marines by
Lieutenant William Henry Craig; and the whole detachment
of seamen and marines, numbering 605 officers      and men, was
placed under the orders of Captain Dunn, of the Hercule.
   In passing Fort Amsterdam, situated on the south-east side
of the entrance to St. Ann, the two 74s were fired at, but with-
out effect, the shot falling short. At 11 h. 30 m. Fort Piscadero,
mounting 10 Dutch 12-pounders, and protecting the intended
point of disembarkation, opened a fire. This was immediately
returned by the Theseus, within half musket-shot, although the
ship was unable to remain alongside owing to a strong head-
wind and lee current. By making short tacks, however, the
Theseus brought her guns to bear with such effect that the fort
fired only an occasional gun when the ship was in stays.        At
1 p.m. the first division of seamen and marines in the boats
stormed and carried the fort without loss, and struck the Dutch
colours, which the enemy, on retreating, had left flying.   By a
rapid movement the British gained the heights, and, with the
loss of only four or five killed and wounded, drove the Dutch
soldiers from the position.     This done, the remainder of the
seamen and marines were landed, and the Gipsy schooner
anchored in the cove. Captain Bligh also went on shore and,;


as there was no anchorage for them, the Theseus and Hercule
continued to stand off and on, but, owing to the wind and cur-
rent, found a great difficulty in keeping their stations. During
the night several shot were fired at the ships from Fort
Amsterdam; but, although one or two went over the Theseus,
not one shot struck either ship.
   On the morning of the 1st of February two 18-pounder
carronades and a light field-piece were landed from the
Theseus, and, with great difficulty and some danger, were
dragged four miles to the advanced post at the height. This post
was situated about 800 yards to the westward of the town of
    -



St. Ann, which it in part overlooked, and was placed under the
command of Lieutenant Willoughby, while the post between
that and the point of disembarkation was commanded by
Lieutenant Hills. On the 2nd two long 18-pounders were landed,
and one or both were got to " Willoughby's battery;" as was
also one of the Dutch 12-pounders from Fort Piscadero.      But
this was not accomplished without some loss from the heavy
fire kept up by Fort Republique.       Four moro 18-pouncli r
carronades and another field-piece or two were landed and
