1804.]
                                 WAR WITH TRIPOLI.                                  301

excited indignation in every generous breast. The Americans
cannot deny, that the complements of their ships in the Tri-
                                 British seamen, supplied by a
politan war consisted chiefly of
Scotch renegado at New York, and by numerous other crimps
in the different seaport towns of the United States   and that            ;



those  complements were afterwards filled up, by similar
means, at Cadiz and other ports of the Mediterranean. Was
not Commodore Preble, on account of being detected in some
transaction of this sort, obliged to shorten his stay at Gib-
raltar, and to fix Syracuse, instead of Malta, for his next
rendezvous ? To such as know the facility with which, either
in the ships or on the shores, of the United States, a deserter,
                                                        " Ame-
or an emigrant, can obtain his naturalization, the term
         "
rican   requires an epithet to render it intelligible. In recording
                 "
the exploits of    Americans," it is but to lop off the qualifying
         "
adjunct adopted," and every native reader feels a hero's blood
flowing in his veins. On the other hand, should disgrace be
attached to the deed, Mr. Clark (the American naval historian)
and his brother writers, anticipating the reader's wishes, seldom
fail to state, that the parties were not American, but British

sailors." 1
   We must premise, also, that the only accounts we have to refer
to are those written by the Americans.     The Tripolitans have
no annalist to compile, no State-historiographer to magnify and
blazon, the feats performed by themselves nor
                                                  have they any
                                                              ;



acute and patriotic writer to expose the exaggerations, and dis-
prove the misstatements, published by their enemies. With such
a one-sided case before us we almost fear to proceed and yet                  ;



we should be sorry to omit recording, or, by doubting, to throw
a slight upon, an act of genuine gallantry, achieved by French-
man or American, Christian or Mahomedan.
                                                            from
   Feeling a laudable desire to prevent the Tripolitans
             use of the fine         which, by an accident so un-
making any                   frigate
toward, had fallen into their hands, Lieutenant Stephen Decatur,
of the United States 44-gun frigate Constitution, submitted to
Commodore Preble a plan lor setting fire to and destroying the
Philadelphia in the harbour of Tripoli.
                                              The commodore at
first thought the enterprise too hazardous, but at length gave
his consent.   On the 3rd of February, having embarked with 70
volunteers, including Lieutenant James Lawrence and Midship-
man Charles Morris, on board a Turkish prize ketch, newly
named the Intrepid, Lieutenant Decatur sailed from Syracuse,
          1
              James's Naval Occurrences between Great Britain and America, p. 73.
