1804.]
                 CAPTAIN BLIGH AT CURACOA.                        205

evening the Pique was obliged to bear up for Jamaica, ou
account of having damaged her rudder.
  Nearly one-half, or 30 out of 67, of the Hercule's marines
were Poles, part of the prisoners taken at St. Domingo and    ;



who, most inconsiderately, had been allowed to enter. On the
24th these " volunteers," very naturally, evinced so clear au
intention of going over to the enemy, that they were obliged to
be sent on board their ship with all haste. The re-embarka-
tion of the whole remaining force could now no longer be
delayed and on the 25th, by 9 p.m., every person was on board
          ;


an American schooner and one or two other vessels of a light
draught, except Lieutenant Hills and a small party left to
destroy Port Piscadero. At 11 p.m. this was effectually done,
and the lieutenant and his men soon joined their companions
afloat.
   The loss of the British, in the different skirmishes that had
taken place, amounted to one midshipman (Joseph Palmer),
eight seamen, two sergeants and seven privates of marines
killed, and three lieutenants of marines (Messrs. Harwood,
Cahuac, and Perrot, the latter with the loss of an arm), 16 sea-
men, two sergeants and 21 privates of marines wounded total,
                                                          :


18 killed and 42 wounded. The whole of the guns that had
been landed from the ships were also left behind, except, we
believe, two 3-pounder field-pieces; but the abandoned guns
were all rendered unserviceable, and the carriages, platforms,
&c. destroyed.
  The circumstances under which Lieutenant Terrot received
his severe wound are so extraordinary as to be worthy a recital.
During almost every day of the three weeks and upwards that
the advanced battery was held, Lieutenant "Willoughby, with a
recklessness of his person that, as it appears to us, the occasion
did not warrant, used to sit in a chair upon the ramparts or
breastwork of his little battery, exposed to a daily, nay almost
to an hourly, discharge of shot from one or two guns mounted
upon the Dutch fort above. The earth was ploughed up all
around, and one man, we believe, was killed close to the spot       ;


but still the table and chair, and the daring young officer who
sat there, remained untouched.      On one afternoon Lieutenant
Perrot was induced to scat himself in the chair. Scarcely had
he done so when a shot came, took off his left arm, badly
wounded the knee upon which it had been resting, and knocked
the table to atoms.
   Notwithstanding the ill success which had attended this, as
