296          COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.          —WEST    INDIES.   [1804.

                                                 "
Sir John himself not inaptly termed it, child of his own brain,"
the addition of the Vanguard's seamen and marines, and of a
heavy mortar or two, would have enabled Captain Bligh to cut
off the water from the Dutch garrison, and probably have com-

pelled the French faction that ruled the island to accede to the
proposed capitulation. The British officers and men behaved
most admirably and the masterly manner in which, for so long
                :



a time and under so many privations, Lieutenant Hills and
Willoughby, the latter in particular, maintained their respective
posts, elicited the strong praise of Captain Bligh who also, in
                                                           ;


reference to another officer, says to Sir John Duckworth: " Mr.
Fitton has throughout shown so much zeal and judgment, that
I should feel most happy if you can consistently give him a com-
mission appointing him lieutenant of the Gipsy." This recom-
mendation was attended to and, in a few days after the Gipsy
                            ;



anchored in Port Boyal, her commander, although the bearer of
despatches announcing a defeat, received, what years of active
employment and of hard and responsible service, what more
than one successful case of acknowledged skill and gallantry as
a commanding officer, had failed to procure him, his commission
                      1



as a lieutenant.
  On the 25th of April the British 74-gun ship Centaur, Cap-
tain Murray Maxwell, bearing the broad pendant of Commo-
dore Samuel Hood, accompanied by the three armees en flute or
reduced 44-gun ships Pandour, Captain John Nash, and Serapis,
Captain Henry Waring, and reduced 28-gun frigate Alligator,
Captain Charles Richardson, also the ship-sloop Hippomenes,
Captain Conway Shipley, brig-sloop Drake, Captain William
Ferris, and armed schooner Unique, Lieutenant George R.
Brand, with a fleet of transports having on board nearly 2000
troops under Major-general Sir Charles Green, after a passage
of 22 days from Barbadoes, arrived off the island of Surinam        ;


when immediate measures were taken to send a division of the
army, of about 700 men, under the command of Brigadier-
general Maitland, to land at Warapee creek. The direction of
the disembarkation being left to Captain Conway Shipley of
the Hippomenes, the latter, with that sloop, a transport, and
three armed vessels, landed the troops on the night of the 30th,
assisted by Captain Kenneth M'Kenzie of the brig-sloop Gua-
chapin ;
         and who, with great zeal, had quitted his sloop 50
leagues to leeward, with all her boats, on finding, from baffling
winds and currents, that she could not get up.
                                i   See p. 38.
