 298           COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.   — COAST OF AFEICA.       [1804.

 nications nearly intercepted by the activity of the armed boats
 of the British    whose provisions, stores, and cannon were
                     :



 already prepared for attacking fort New Amsterdam, mounting
 upwards of 80 guns. Aware of all this, the Batavian command-
 ant, Lieutenant-colonel Batenburg, on the 5th of May, sent a
 flag of truce  and shortly after the receipt of it a capitulation
                 ;


 was signed.
   Commodore Bloys-Van-Treslong, on the British claiming the
surrender of the ships, entered into the terms proposed. He
had stationed the Proserpine of 32 guns, 18-pounders, near to
fort New Amsterdam, and had extended a line of defence across
the river, with the Pylades corvette, of 18 guns, at the other
extremity, about a mile above the redoubt Purmurunt he had  :



also placed three merchantmen, of from eight to 12 guns, in the
centre, and had employed a schooner of 10 guns to reconnoitre
and cover the shore at Voorburg, should the British troops have
attempted to advance by that side.     Besides this force, the
Dutch commodore had seven gun-boats ready to act as occasion
required.
  This impoi-tant colony was gained, fortunately, with a very
inconsiderable loss on either side. That of the British navy
amounted to one lieutenant (James Edward Smith, first of the
Centaur), one midshipman (William Shuldham), one boatswain,
and two seamen killed, and three lieutenants (William King and
Robert Henderson, both of the Centaur, and George R. Brand,
of the Unique), and five seamen wounded and that of the army,
                                             ;


three privates killed, and 13 officers and privates wounded;
total of the British loss, eight killed and 21 wounded, and the
greater part owing to the explosion at Frederici. The Dutch
appear to have sustained no other loss than the three men
already mentioned as wounded in the battery at Braam's point.
The number of prisoners taken at Surinam, exclusively of staff
and detachments, amounted to 2001 ; and the total number of
pieces of iron and brass ordnance, about half of which were
dismounted, was 282.
   On the 17th of January, late in the evening, a French squa-
dron commanded by Lieutenant Jean-Michel Mahe, consisting
of the armed ship Oncle Thomas, oi 20 guns, and the schooners
Eenommee of 14, Oiseau of 10 guns, and Eosalie, Yigie, and
another of two each, fitted out at Cayenne, and having on
board 565 officers, soldiers, and sailors, anchored off the British
settlement of Goree. The officer commanding there, Colonel
Fraser, had at his disposal only 54 white men including officers,
