294              COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.       — WEST   INDIES.   [1S04.


mounted at one or the other of the posts and a constant   ;



interchange of firing was kept up between the British and
Dutch batteries. In this firing a French battery, mounted by
some of the guns, and manned by the crews of the privateers,
also took a part.
  On the evening of the 4th there was a smart skirmish between
the British at the advanced post and the enemy's sharpshooters,
in which the latter were repulsed and on the morning of the
                                         ;



5th a more serious affair took place between the marines under
Lieutenant Nicolls and a force of Dutch and French estimated
at 500 men.    Notwithstanding his numerical inferiority, Lieu-
tenant Nicolls, in the most gallant manner, repulsed the allied
forces but, pursuing the enemy too far, not without the loss
       ;


of nearly 20 in killed and wounded, chiefly from the cannon of
Fort Re'publique. On the next day, the 6th, the connonade
between the forts was resumed but Lieutenaut "Willoughby,
                                     ;


                                     his pieces at Fort Bepub-
finding it in vain to present any of
lique, directed them at
                         the town and at the shipping in the
harbour. By this means the town was partially set on fire ; and
the Hatslaar would probably have been destroyed, had not the
Dutch placed alongside of her, as a sort of fend-off, two large mer-
chant-vessels, whose hulls received the greater part of the shot.
  In this way passed a number of successive days, the force of
the British gradually decreasing, not merely by loss from the
cannon of the forts and in the different skirmishes, but from
fatigue and sickness. At length not an officer was left at the
advanced battery but Lieutenant AVilloughby and Midshipman
Eaton Travers and 63 of the men had been obliged to be re-
                   ;



embarked owing to an attack of dysentery a circumstance not
                                                      :




to be wondered at considering that both officers and men lay
upon the ground, without any of those conveniences
                                                         deemed
indispensable in the encampment
                                 of an army.   The force of the
Dutch, too, instead of amounting to only 160 regulars, consisted
of 250 effective men, besides a body of local militia, and the
crews of the vessels in the harbour. In addition to all this,
the Dutch learnt by deserters, nine of whom quitted in one
                         the British force, and that the squadron
night, the weak state of
must soon raise the blockade for the want of provisions.
  In this state of things Captain Bligh, on the morning of the
                                        Sir John Duckworth of
23rd, despatched the Gipsy to apprise
his intention, unless anything favourable should happen, to re
embark his people on the 4th of March. In the course of that
game       23rd, the   Dutch received a reinforcement; and in the
