 302                    AMERICA.   AND THE BARBARY STATES.                             [1804.

accompanied by the 18-gun brig Syren, Lieutenant Charles
 Stewart whose boats, covered by the
              ;
                                          brig's lire, were to co-
 operate in the attack.
    On the 18th, in the evening, the Intrepid and Syren arrived
off the harbour of
                      Tripoli but it appears that the two vessels
                                         ;
 "                      "
   by a change of wind separated, and that at 8 p.m. the Intrepid
entered the harbour alone. The
                                    Philadelphia lay within half
gun-shot of the Bashaw's castle and principal battery, with two
Tripolitan cruisers at the distance of about 200 yards on her
starboard quarter, and on the same bow a number of
                                                        gun-boats.
   All her guns were mounted and loaded." 1 At about 11
I'                                                            p.m.,
just as the Intrepid had arrived within 200 yards of the larboard
and outward side of the Philadelphia, the latter hailed and
desired the ketch to anchor on peril of being fired into. The
pilot of the Intrepid, as             he had been instructed, and who, we
imagine, was himself a mussulman, answered that they had lost
all their anchors.
                   Upon this the ketch was suffered to advance                                 ;

and, so well was the deception kept up, that a rope was per-
mitted to be made fast to the frigate's fore-chains,
                                                     by which the
Intrepid hauled herself alongside.
              Decatur and his party now gallantly sprang on
     Lieutenant
board, and, rushing upon the alarmed Tripolitans, killed about
20, and quickly subdued the remainder.     Having thus, in a
much easier manner than could have been anticipated, got pos-
session of the Philadelphia, Lieutenant Decatur directed her to
be set on fire which was done so promptly and
                    ;
                                                 effectively, that
the Intrepid herself was nearly involved in the flames. A fine
wind from the land, however, at that moment
                                                sprang up and                      ;


the ketch profiting by it, soon ran out of the harbour with the
gallant party who had so fully executed the bold and perilous
service intrusted to them. Although, as soon as the
                                                      Tripolitans
on shore had ascertained that the Philadelphia was in their
enemy's possession, the forts and surrounding vessels opened a
fire upon her, the Americans were so foi'tunate as to
                                                     escape with
only four men wounded.
  In the course of the summer, at two or three different periods,
the American squadron, assisted by some Neapolitan gun-boats,
and bomb-vessels, bombarded the town and batteries of Tripoli                              ;

and lieutenant, or rather captain (for he then had been de-
servedly promoted), Decatur, who commanded a gun-boat,
                                      "                 "
again greatly distinguished himself.    Captain Decatur, says
Mr. Clark, " having grappled a Tripolitan boat and boarded her
 1   Clark's Naval History of the United States, vol. i., p. 153. This wants confirmation.
