  300            AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES.
                                                                      [1804.

 manded the American squadron, at liberty to direct his whole
 attention to Tripoli.
                    Scarcely, however, had the American com-
 modore put his squadron into motion, ere it met with a
                                                                          very
 serious loss.
    On the 31st of October, at 9 a.m., the 44-gun frigate Phila-
 delphia, Captain William Bainbridge, being about five leagues to
 the westward of Tripoli, discovered and                chased a
                                                    immediately
 sail in shore, under
                      Tripolitan colours, standing before the wind
 to the eastward. The
                          Philadelphia soon opened her         andfire,
 continued it until 11 h. 30 m. a.m.     when, being in seven
                                                :



 fathoms water, and finding that he could not prevent the vessel
  entering Tripoli, Captain Bainbridge discontinued the pursuit.
 In working off from the shore under her topsails, and when about
 four miles and a half from the town of
                                         Tripoli, the Philadelphia
 struck upon a rock not laid down in the charts. A boat was im-
 mediately lowered to sound and, the greatest depth of water
                                  :




 appearing to be astern, the topgallantsails were set, and all the
 sails thrown flat aback.   Three anchors also were cut from the
 bows, the water in the hold started, and the guns thrown over-
 board excepting a few abaft, to defend the ship
                                                       against the
 attacks of the Tripolitan gun-boats then firing at her. All
                                                              this,
 however, proved ineffectual as did the attempt to lighten the
                              ;



ship forward, by cutting away the foremast. About sunset, ob-
serving a reinforcement of gun-boats approaching from Tripoli,
and having no means of defence left, the Philadelphia hauled
down her colours.  The Tripolitans immediately took possession
of the American frigate, and made prisoners of the officers and
men whose number, fortunately, did not at this time exceed
       ;


300.    About 48 hours afterwards, by great exertion and a
                                                              strong
 breeze in their favour, the Tripolitans got the
                                                       Philadelphia
 afloat, and towed her into the harbour.
    Before we proceed to give an account of the performances of
 American seamen, the introduction of a few lines, published
 eight years ago, and not since, to our knowledge, impugned,
will render it probable, that we may yet be
                                                recording, in part,
the exploits of British seamen     " It is
                                      :    fresh in the recollection
of many officers of the British navy, how difficult it
                                                        was, at this
period, to keep the seamen from deserting to the Americans.
The short peace of 1803 occasioned many of our ships to be paid
off; and the nature of the service upon which the Americans
were engaged, held forth a strong inducement to the manly feel-
ing of the British tar. It was not to raise his arm against his
own countrymen, but      against          barbarians,   whose foul deeds
