1804.]               PEACE BETWEEN AMERICA AND TRIPOLI.                                     303

with only 15 Americans     in 10 minutes her decks were cleared,
                                      ;


and she was captured. Three Americans were wounded. At
this moment Captain Decatur was informed that the gun-boat,
commanded by his brother (Lieutenant James Decatur), had
captured a boat belonging to the enemy but that his brother,   ;


as he was stepping on board, was treacherously shot by the
Tripolitan commander, who made off with his boat.       Captain
Decatur immediately pursued the murderer, who was retreating
within the lines    having succeeded in coming alongside, he
                            ;


boarded with only 11 men. A doubtful contest of 20 minutes
ensued. Decatur immediately attacked the Tripolitan com-
mander, who was armed with a spear and cutlass. In parry-
ing the Turk's spear, Decatur broke his sword close to the hilt,
and received a slight wound in the right arm and breast but,                            ;



having seized the spear, he closed and after a violent straggle
                                                     ;


both fell, Decatur uppermost. The Turk then drew a dagger
from his belt but Decatur caught hold of his arm, drew a
                       ;




pistol from his pocket, and shot him."
  An exploit fully equal to this is recorded of another American
officer :   —
          " Lieutenant
                        Trippe boarded one of the enemy's large
boats, with  only a midshipman, Mr. Jonathan Henley, and nine
men, his boat falling off before any more could join him. He
was thus left either to perish or to conquer 30 men with only
11.   Though at first the victory seemed doubtful, yet, in a few
minutes, the Tripolitans were subdued 14 of them were killed,
                                                           ;


and L'L' taken prisoners. Seven of these last were severely
wounded. Lieutenant Trippe received 11 sabre wounds, some
of them dangerous. The blade of his sword bending, he closed
with his antagonist. Doth fell. In the struggle, Trippe wrested
the Turk's sword from him, and with it stabbed him to the
heart."    1




  The American archives contain the records of several more
such desperate     feats between the American and Tripolitan
officers  and men. At length, however, an end was put to
all   hostility between the United States and the regency of
                                                    r
Tripoli, by a treaty of peace concluded in June 180. but not,                      >,

it
    appears, upon terms so advantageous as the Americans had
anticipated.
                1
                    Clark's Naval History of the United States, vol. i., p. 167.
