308                    BRITISH    AND FRENCH FLEETS.                [1805.


sently joined by the main body, forming a total, as counted,
                                                              of
40 sail of vessels, including 21 of the line.    This formidable
fleet had on board 2000 troops, and was provisioned for six
months. The British admiral, whose force in the course of the
day amounted to 24 sail of the line, strove his utmost to bring
the French fleet to action but the latter, after manoeuvring for
                                  ;



a few hours between Bertheaume and Camaret bays, returned
into port.
    Unlike a few former shifts of position and manosuvres in
                                      —
Brest and Bertheaume roads and which served the double pur-
pose of exercising the crews and of enabling the Moniteur
                                                                  to
insert a boastful paragraph, about offering battle to, and chasing
                                      —
away, the blockading force this was a real attempt to put to
sea.    Vice-admiral Yilleneuve had sailed from Toulon, and
Napoleon's object now was, that the two fleets should effect
their junction in the West Indies, and, after ravaging the British
                                                                the
possessions there, return to the Channel, augmented, by
Kochefort squadron on the route and by the combined squadron
at Ferrol on appearing off that port, to 56 sail of the line.     It
was then that the great blow was to be struck. All Napoleon's
letters written at this period betray his anxiety about M. Gan-
                                       "
teaume's departure. In one dated Au chateau de Stupinis, le
                                                 " Le non
21 Avril," he says to his minister of marine,             depart de
Ganteaume     me   contrarie  beaucoup ;'' and, in another dated at
the same place two days afterwards, wherein he informs M.
Decres that he has despatched a courier to Ganteaume, to in-
form him that Nelson had gone to Egypt in search of Yilleneuve,
                                    " Dieu veuille
Buonaparte emphatically adds              :
                                                   que mon courrier
ne le trouve point a Brest."
    After a vain endeavour, by forging news of disastrous events
to the English in India, to weaken by detachments abroad the
fleet off Ushant, Napoleon directs that, if Ganteaume cannot put
to sea before the 20th of May, he is to remain quiet.
                                                        1
                                                           The fact
is,  that M. Villeneuve'6  stock of provisions  was  expending fast,
and a longer delay might throw serious obstacles in the way of
the expedition.        The British blockading fleet still retaining its
menacing posture, the next plan was, that Vice-admiral Gan-
teaume should remove with his fleet to a position outside the
goulet, between Camaret bay and the east end of Bertheaume
bay.   To prevent the British from paying the spot a visit, when
thus temptingly occupied, directions were given to strengthen
the defences along the coast in the neighbourhood. This was so
                  i   Precis des Evenemens, tome xi„ pp. 228-239.
