1805.]           LORD GARDNER AND M. GANTEAUME.                               309

expeditiously as well as effectually done, that, by the first week
in May, upwards of 150 pieces of cannon were monnted on the
different batteries around Bertheaume and Camaret             The
                                                       bays.
object of ordering M. Ganteaume to this outer anchorage was
to facilitate his putting to sea, but, above
                                             all, to enable him to
effect his junction     with Vice-admiral Villeneuve             ;   who, on the
probability that the former would not be able to quit Brest in
time to meet the latter in the West Indies, had been directed to
hasten to Ferrol. Having there augmented his force to 34 sail
of the line, Yice-admiral Villeneuve was to take his choice of
four routes for reaching Boulogne. The first two
                                                   supposed a
junction with the Brest fleet, thus to appear before Bochefort,
                                                :



and, joining the five ships there and the one at Lorient, proceed
to Brest, and then, with 60 sail of the line, enter the Channel                  ;



or, as the Bochefort squadron occupied an equal number of
British ships, letting that remain, proceed straight to M. Gan-
teaume's anchorage, and thence to the Channel with 54 sail
of the line in either of which cases, it appears, Napoleon de-
             :




signed that Vice-admiral Ganteaume, although junior to M.
Villeneuve, should assume the command. All this was to bo
effected, if possible, without an action but, should one be un-
                                                    ;



avoidable, it was to be fought, for obvious reasons, as near as
possible to Brest.  The third and fourth routes were, either to
d.uible Ireland, and, calling for the Texel squadron of seven,
arrive before Boulogne with 41 sail of the line, or to pass
                                                                          straight
up Channel, out of view of the coasts or of the blockading fleet
off Brest, and, with 34 sail only, appear off Boulogne, four or
five days before the Channel fleet  could arrive there in which       ;


four or five days the flotilla was to cross and the descent b«
effected.1
           A fifth plan, left as an alternative to M. Villeneuve,
having reference exclusively to a distant service, is deferred to
the proper period for introducing it.
   It was at about the date of these orders that some reflections
in the English newspapers, cast upon the Brest fleet for not

sailing out and engaging a much inferior force, gave disquietude
to Napoleon, and caused him to write- thus to his minister <>f
marine: "Have inserted in the journals of Holland an article
against the system of blockade let it be made appear that we
                                        :




sail out of Brest when we choose     that Bruix sailed out such a
                                            :




day; Morard de Galles such a day; Ganteaume several times:
that in his last trip to Bertheaume, nothing prevented his
puttiug to sea, and that the English squadron did not so much
                   i   Precis des Evenemcns, tome \i., p. 253.
