1805.]        LORD GARDIER AND M. GANTEAUME.                   307

than many in England, how to analyze the accounts, and
separate the non-combatant from the combatant ships. Let it
then be kept in remembrance, that, at the commencement of the
year 1805, the British and the Franco-Spanish navies (leaving
the Batavian navy out of the
                                   question) were, as to number of
effective line-of-battle
                         ships, nearly upon a par.   What changes
took place in the relative numbers of these navies before the
close of this eventful year we shall now
                                           proceed methodically to
relate.
  The commencement of the year found Admiral Cornwallis at
his station off Ushant, with a force not
                                         exceeding 11 sail of the
line ; while the French fleet that
                                   lay in the road of Brest, ready
for sea, numbered, as has on more than one occasion been shown,
21 sail. On the 3rd of February, when the blockading
                                                             force,
by successive arrivals, had been augmented to 16 sail, the de-
parture of five, under Vice-admiral Sir Bobert Calder, to the
station off Ferrol and Corunna, left the admiral again, for a
short time, with only 11 sail. The perseverance with which,
during a period of 22 months, including two boisterous winters,
Admiral Cornwallis had maintained the blockade of Brest,
affected his health, and obliged him to suspend his arduous
labours, and seek a few weeks' relaxation on shore.        Accord-
ingly, on the 20th of March, the Ville-de-Faris anchored at
Spithead, and in the course of the day struck the flag at her
main.    The command of the Channel fleet devolved upon
Admiral Lord Gardner, whose flag was flying on board the Trent
frigate at Cork. In the mean time the fleet, cruising off Ushant,
and numbering 17 sail of the line, had been left in charge of
Vice-admiral Sir Charles Cotton, in the 12-gun ship San-Josef.
   On the 3rd of April, Admiral Lord Gardner, in the new first-
rate Hibernia, arrived off Ushant, and relieved Sir Charles Cotton
in tho command of the fleet, then consisting of 21 sail of the
line.   On the 11th a gale of wind drove the Iritish fleet from the
                                              1



French coast. On the 13th, in the afternoon, Lord Gardner,
with 17 sail, regained his station; and, the next morning, the
14th, in consequence of some intelligence received from his look-
out frigates, he despatched the Warrior 74 to reconnoitre the
harbour of Brest. At 5 h. 30 m. r.M. Captain William Bligh
rejoined, with the signal flying, that the French ships were
getting under way. Upon this tho 1 iritish ships formed in line-
of-battle to be ready to receive them.    On the following morn-
ing, the 15th, the French van-division, composed of nine sail oi
the line, appeared in sight off the Black Bocks, and was pre-
