1805.]                   INVASION- FLOTILLA.                  313

known his intention to attack the French fleet at its anchorage
early the next morning, anchored at 7 p.m. for the night, a short
distance to the southward of the outer Black rock; which
                     T
then bore from the A ille-de-Baris north half-east, St. Mathieu's
lighthouse east-north-east, and the Bee du Baz south half-east.
   On the 22nd, at 4 h. 30 m. a.m., the British fleet weighed,
and, with the weather hazy and the wind still at north by east,
stood in on the larboard tack for Camaret bay, in close order of
battle   the Yille-de-Baris leading, and next to her the 80-gun
         ;



ship Caesar, Captain Sir Bichard John Strachan, and 74-gun
ship Montagu, Captain Bobert Waller Otway. At 6 h. 30 m.
a.m., the Borquelle rock being close ahead, the ships of the
fleet tacked in succession.   On the haze clearing away a little,
the French fleet was seen at anchor but at 8 a.m. the ships of
                                      ;


the latter began getting under way. In 20 minutes afterwards
the British ships tacked in succession, and again stood in under
easy sail.    At 9 a.m. the Indefatigable, being ahead, stood
towards the French 80-gun ship Alexandre, Bear-admiral Wil-
laumez, who was leading the French fleet, then standing out in
line of battle.  At 9 h. 30 m. the Alexandre fired a broadside at
the Indefatigable, but without effect, and was answered by the
latter's main-deck guns, the distance being too great for the car-
ronades. On this the Indefatigable tacked, and the Yille-de-
 Paris and ships in her train made sail towards the French fleet;
but the latter presently tacked for the harbour's mouth, as if to
avoid an engagement. At 10 h. 45 m. a.m. the Caesar and
Montagu hauled out of the line to attack the Alexandre, who,
with the Foudroyant and Impetueux, formed the rear of the
French line. This, at about 11 a.m., brought on a fire from the
batteries, which the Yille-de-Paris, Caesar, and Montagu re-
turned, the three rearmost French ships already named, and the
Valeureuse and Yolontaire frigates also taking part in it. At
11 h. 30 m., the west point of Bertheaume bearing north half-
east distant one mile and a half, the British fleet wore and stood
out in order of battle, the batteries keeping up, until a quarter-
past noon, a constant fire of shot and shells.
   The damage done to the British van, principally by the bat-
teries, proved how well the latter were calculated to protect the
French fleet at its new anchorage. On board the Yillc-de-raris
one shell struck the spare anchor, and burst into innumerable
pieces, which flew in all directions.  A piece, weighing about a
pound and a half, struck Admiral Cornwallis on the breast, but,
being entirely spent, did not hurt him. A second piece struck
