310               BRITISH    AND FRENCH FLEETS.              [1805.


as   know of his being under sail that it is therefore impossible
                                      :




to blockade the port of Brest, especially in the months of
September and October. This article will show, that we have
no desire to put to sea, but wish merely to keep the enemy in
awe." Many of the London opposition journals, taking all this
for truth, became very strenuous coadjutors in Buonaparte's
plan of deception.
  On the 6th of July accounts reached the Channel fleet of the
arrival of the combined fleet of Martinique  and on the same
                                                         ;




day Admiral Cornwallis, having recovered his health, arrived in
the Ville-de-Baris off Ushant, and relieved Lord Gardner in
the command of the former, now consisting of 18 sail of the
line, and which, considering the force likely
                                                 to assail it from
different points, was rather critically situated. On the 11th, in-
telligence that the combined fleet was on its
                                                   return reached
Admiral Cornwallis from the admiralty, with orders for Rear-
admiral Sterling to quit his station off Bochefort, and, with his
five sail of the line, join Yice-admiral Calder off Ferrol.    The
circumstances under which these orders had been despatched
are deserving of attention.         The British brig-sloop Curieux,
Captain George     Edmund Byron Bettesworth, with the intelli-
gence, anchored at Plymouth on the 7th,
                                            in the morning    and
                                                              ;



at about 11 p.m. on the 8th the captain arrived at the admiralty.
The first lord having retired to rest, the despatches were not
communicated to him until early on the morning of the 9th. At
this Lord Barham was very angry, saying that seven or eight
hours had been lost. Without waiting to dress himself, he wrote
orders for Admiral Cornwallis to detach Bear-admiral Sterling
from off Bochefort to join Yice-admiral Calder, who was to take
a station to the westward of Cape Finisterre, while Admiral
Cornwallis himself, with the Channel fleet, was to cruise between
Ushant and Finisterre. By 9 a.m. the admiralty messengers
were on their way to Portsmouth and Plymouth, and on the
11th, as already mentioned, Admiral Cornwallis received
                                                               his

orders.  Such promptitude on the part of the British admiralty
                                         "
could not be credited by Napoleon.         Ce ne que le 20 messi-
                         "      le brick le Curieux est arrive en
dor" (July 8), says he,     que
                                     decider dans les vingt-quatre
Angleterre. L'amiraute n'a pu se
houres sur les mouvemens de ses escadres dans ce cas, il n'est
                                                     :



                                      devant Bochefort soit arrive
pas probable que l'ordre a. l'escadre
en trois jours. Je mete done en fait que cette escadre a leve

                         i   See Appendix, No. 26.
