1805.]
                 ADMIRAL CORNWALLIS AND M. GANTEAUME.                                 311

sa croisiere par des ordres anterieurs a l'arrivee du Curieux a
Londres." 1
   On the 20th Vice-admiral Ganteaume received orders to put
to sea, and endeavour to form a junction, first with the Eoehe-
fort squadron of five sail of the line, off the Lizard, and then
with M. Yilleneuve.     On the 29th the news of the latter's
action with Sir Bobert Calder reached the Channel fleet, and
on the 14th of August Sir Robert himself joined the fleet with
eight sail of the line  as, on the following day, the 15th, did
                                  ;


Lord Nelson from his long western cruise, with 11. The de-
parture of his lordship on the 16th, with two or three ships,
left the admiral with a force of 34 sail of the line.                     On the 17th,
on intelligence arriving that the Franco-Spanish fleet, numbering
27 or 28 sail of the line, had been seen off Ferrol, Admiral
                                                                2
Cornwallis detached to that station Sir Eobert Calder, with 18.
On the 20th, the Captain 74, from Plymouth, joined the Channel
fleet, which then amounted to 17 sail of the line.
   The affair off Cape Finisterre being considered to have
entailed an equal loss of ships upon the British and the com-
bined fleets, was not allowed to interrupt the grand design, in
which the latter had been allotted to take so important a part.
On the 20th of August, a little before the time when, as it was
conjectured, Yice-admiral "Yilleneuve would be off the port,
Vice-admiral Ganteaume received orders to quit Brest road,
where the fleet had recently been lying, and anchor in Ber-
theaume.    On the same day, at about 6 h. 30 m. p.m., the
French advanced squadron began to get under way, but not
unseen by the British 44-gun frigate Indefatigable, Captain John
Tremayne Rodd who, accompanied by the 38-gun frigate
                         ;



Niobe, and two or three smaller vessels, was reconnoitring the
harbour, and for that purpose had taken a station about four
miles south by east of the Black Bocks.        On the folio-wing
morning, the 21st, at 6 a.m., the whole French fleet, consisting
of the following 21 sail of the line, five frigates, one ship-
corvette, and two avisos, under Yice-admiral Ganteaume in the
Imperial (late Vengeur, a name that
                                     no one in France, consider-
ing the circumstance out of which it had arisen, could expect
would so soon have been changed), stood out of the goulct,
  «
       Precis dea Evenernens,   tome xii., p.     "insigne betise" on the part of Admiral
2(3.                                              Cornwallis.  Precis des Eveneu.eus, toiua
                                                             253.
    Napoleon ei:her thought, or affected
  -                                               xii., p.
U> ihlnk, this to be ail egregious lolly  ;
                                              —
