306                    BRITISH ANT* FRENCH FLEETS.                           [1805.


   By the second, third, and fourth articles, the King of Spain
engages to arm, and supply with six months' provisions
                                                              and
four months' water, from 25 to 29 sail of the line, and to have
them ready, with from 4000 to 5000 Spanish troops (in conjunc-
tion with 20,000 French to embark from Cadiz), by the 20th, or
at furthest, the 30th of March.     Of those 25 or 29 sail of the
line, Ferrol is to furnish  from seven to eight, and which are to
combine in their operations with the five French sail of the line
in that port    Cadiz is to supply from 12 to 15, and Carthagena
                  ;


six.     By the fifth article the two high contracting parties

mutually engage to augment their fleets by all the ships of the
line and frigates that may be subsequently constructed, repaired,
and fitted in their respective ports. The sixth article contains
an engagement on the part of Napoleon to guarantee to his
catholic majesty, as well the integrity of his European domi-
nions, as the restitution of all colonies that may be taken
                                                                from
                                                                 "
him during the war and that, should the fortune of arms, in
                            ;



accordance   with  the justice  of the cause which   their majesties
are defending," grant success to their armies and fleets, the
emperor will employ his influence to get Trinidad restored, and
also the treasure taken out of the four frigates.      The seventh
article contains a mutual undertaking not to make a separate
                                                            shall be
peace; and the eighth provides that the ratifications
exchanged within a month.
                              1
                                  To the treaty a note is appended,
signed by the Spanish ambassador, Don Frederico Gravina,
                                                              in
which he expresses a doubt as to the possibility of collecting a
sufficiency of sailors for the ships, and, above all, of having
                                                               2
ready, by the time stated, so many as six millions of rations.
  If Napoleon, with his 40 or 45 sail of the line, had calculated
to create such a diversion of the British fleets as should give
him a clear channel for his flotilla to cross, how must his expec-
tations have been raised now that he possessed the disposal of
upwards of 70 sail of the line. It is true that the public lists
and journals did show and insist, that the number of commis-
sioned line-of-battle ships belonging to England at the time
amounted to 105 but, as respects sea-going ships, the fact was
                        ;


not so the British navy could send forth no more than 83 sail
           :




of the line, and scarcely the whole of them.     Buonaparte had
constantly a Steel's list before him, and with the aid of the in-
formation derived from his numerous spies, knew, better by far
                                              2 For a
  l
       They were exchanged on the 18th of               copy of this important treaty,
                                            see vol. xi., p. 215, of Precis Ues Evene-
January.
                                            mens, &c.
