 314                BRITISH    AND FRENCH FLEETS.               [1305.

 and slightly wounded one of the midshipmen. No other person,
 it is believed, was hurt  but the ship had her hull struck in
                           ;


 several places, and her rigging and sails a great deal cut. The
 Caesar and Montagu both suffered in their rigging and sails the ;


 former, indeed, owing to the close position she took, lost three
 men killed and six wounded. The Montagu had the heel of her
 foretopmast shot away, but does not appear to have sustained
 any loss in men. Of the French ships, the whole of which by
 2 p.m. had re-anchored, the Alexandre, who was the Caesar's
 principal opponent, is represented to have had her mizentop-
 mast shot away, and, with two or three of the other ships, to
 have sustained some damage in rigging and sails. With respect
 to loss, the French accounts give it in the gross, merely stating
 that about 20 men were placed hors-de-combat by the fire of the
 British ships.
    Admitting that this was an affair in which the French advanced
 squadron alone had retired from the fire of the British, still the
 two fleets were wholly in sight of each other, and M. Ganteaume
 had but to stand from under the protection of his batteries to
 bring on a general action. Considering that he had 21 sail of
 the line to oppose to 17, we cannot suppose that the French
 admiral would have declined a battle, had he, from the nature
 of his orders, been permitted to engage.       To know that he was
 so restrained, and yet be compelled to keep his orders secret,
 must, to a brave officer like Vice-admiral Ganteaume, have been
 a sorry compensation for the public obloquy of the transaction,
glossed over even as it was, by imperial command, in the columns
 of the Moniteur.
    On every succeeding day, from the 23rd to the 30th of August,
some of the French ships got under way and manoeuvred about,
but the Brest fleet made no serious attempt to put to sea.
Matters remained in this inactive state until the 13th of De-
cember when, taking advantage of a brisk gale from the north-
        ;


east and the absence of the blockading fleet, which had retired
into port to victual and refit, a division of the French fleet, con-
sisting of 11 sail of the line, four frigates, and a corvette, quitted
the anchorage outside the goulet, and put to sea. A succession
of gales of wind, during the few days that remained of the year,
prevented Admiral Cornwallis from regaining his station off
Ushant, and concealed from his knowledge any positive in-
formation of the sailing of so large a division of the Brest fleet.
   As we have done on other occasions, so we shall here, give
some account of the different actions of the year fought between
