 1805.]
                            INVASION-FLOTILLA.                             321

the port, and stood to meet the flotilla, many of the brigs of
which had worked up abreast of Vimereux. By the time the
Immortalite and the leading ships had got within gun-shot, 49
brigs and 64 luggers were under way, and immediately the
batteries and the horse-artillery along the shore opened a fire
upon the British vessels but these reserved their fire until they
                             ;


could bestow it with more effect. At 4h. 30 m. a.m., having got
within half a mile north-west of Vimereux, the Immortalite,
Hebe, Arab, and a few other of the British vessels, commenced
firing  upon the nearest French brigs which latter, in a few
                                                   ;



minutes, re-anchored in great confusion, close under the bat-
teries.   Without having incurred any loss, and no greater
damage than a 9-pounder gun disabled on board the Arab, the
British squadron shortly afterwards re-anchored also about five
miles to the north-westward of Boulogne, Captain Owen having
previously sent one or two gun-brigs to look out off Cape
Grinez.
  By way of insuring to Admiral Ver-Huell a safe passage
during the remainder of his short but somewhat hazardous
voyage, Marshal Davoust, who had long been waiting for him
at Calais, had strengthened with men and ammunition all the
batteries on the coast between Calais and Ambleteuse one of        ;



which only, that on the promontory of Cape Grinez, mounted
55 pieces of heavy cannon, besides six immense mortars, placed
on a high platform, and where, from its importance as a point
of attack, the general of artillery, Lariboissiere, commanded in
person.  This was not all. General Sorbier, commandant of
artillery, had been ordered with a strong division of flying artil-
lery and long-range howitzers, "des obusiers a longue-portee,"
to follow the flotilla along the coast, and afford to Admiral Ver-
Huell the same protection as formerly, when Captain Hancock
with the Cruiser and Battler, gave so much annoyance to the
                                                           1
latter in his voyage from Flushing to Dunkerquo.
        On the 18th at 3 p.m., Admiral Ver-Huell, accompanied in his
schooner by Marshal Davoust, weighed from the road of Calais,
and, with his three remaining prames, and 21 out of his original
   gun-vessels (a tolerable proof how many had been damaged
•'•'2


or destroyed), steered straight for Cape Blanez ofl which, at
                                                       ;


some distance, lay the Trusty, Vestal, Ariadne, and about a
dozen sloops and other vessels, of a class the best adapted for
these shallow waters. At 4 p.m. the gun and mortar batteries
on Cape Blanez opened a tremendous fire upon the British who           ;




                                 i   See p. 222.
        VOL.   III.                                            Y
