1805.]                         INVASIOX-FLOT1LLA.                         323

the prarues who were ahead of the French gun-vessels, and with
            ;


the latter warmly engaged, as just related, by the Arab, Calypso,
and gun-brigs.   Soon          after 6 p.m. the Immortalite      and Hebe,
being within about half a mile of the shore, and a quarter of a
mile of the prames, opened a brisk fire upon the latter which         ;


they and the batteries returned with equal spirit, and, as might
be expected, with decidedly more effect. Two schooners, how-
ever, were driven on shore   soon after which, or at about 7 p.m.,
                                   :



the prames and the remainder of the gun-vessels ran in and
anchored under the protection of the batteries between the
towers of Endreselles and Ambleteuse. At about 7 h. 30 m. p.m.
the firing, in which the 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Eenommee,
Captain Sir Thomas Livingstone, baronet, had latterly taken a
part, wholly ceased and the British ships hauled off to repair
                       ;


their damages.
   The Immortalite had her foremast, maintopmast, and spanker-
boom shot through, also three of her boats: her rigging and
sails were much cut  her hull struck in several places, and the
                           ;


muzzles of two carronades shot away. Her loss amounted to
lour men killed and 12 wounded, several of them badly. The
Hebe had her maintopmast and mainyard wounded, her rigging
and sails much injured, and one carronade disabled she also       :



received three bad shot through her hull, and had three men
wounded, one of them mortally. The Eenommee escaped com
paratively unhurt. Captain Owen had gained for the Immor-
talite a high character along this part of the French coast. " Lo

Capitaine Owen, commandant la fregate lTmmortalite, fit
admirer son audace et sa perseverance sous le feu des batteries
de la rade." 1 By exaggerating tenfold the force of the British,
and by concealing the injuries done to the vessels of the flotilla,
it was declared, apparently with reason, that "l'Amiral Ver-
                                                                 1'
Huell s'acquit beaucoup de gloire dans cette jom-nce.      Of the
two French works usually quoted in these passages, one is written
by a military officer. The consequence is, that M. le Comte
Dumas has taken care not to overlook the assistance afforded to
Admiral Vcr-Huell by the batteries on shore while his contem-
                                                           ;

               " Victoires et
porary, in the                Conquetcs," writes as if every shot
or shell directed at the British came from the flotilla.     The
<sprit-de-corps has been here of use in aiding the development
of truth.
  Encouraged by the success of the flotilla to the eastward, and
favoured by foggy weather and a fine south- west wind, Captain
                  1
                      Precis des Evineniens, tome xii., p. 41.
