18C5.]                 INVASION-FLOTILLA.                       315

the British cruisers stationed off the French coast and the
invasion-flotilla. In the course of the spring the corps of Marshal
Davoust, encamped in the neighbourhood of Ostende, proceeded
to join the grand invading army, of which it formed the right
wing. This occasioned a corresponding movement in the Gallo-
Batavian flotilla; and accordingly the Port of Ambleteuse was
fixed upon as the point of rendezvous for the different divisions
stationed at Ostende, Dunkerque, and Calais. Admiral Ycr-Huell,
whom in the preceding spring we left at Ostende, whither he
had been driven by the squadron of Sir Sidney Smith, succeeded,
                                                        1



at length, in reaching Dunkerque    where a great portion of the
                                      ;


Gallo-Batavian flotilla had now assembled, and lay watching an
opportunity to get to the westward, by departing, a division at
a time, as the readiest mode to avoid discovery and molestation.
  On the 23rd of April, at 9 p.m., favoured by the darkness
and a fresh wind from north-east, the first division, consisting
of 33 gun-vessels and 10 transports, laden with stores from the
camp at Ostende, weighed from Dunkerque road. The division
passed Gravelines and Calais undiscovered when, just before
                                                    ;



daybreak on the 24th, the wind shifted to south-east, and then
to south-south-east.    Having a change of tide also against
them, the vessels were thrown into disorder. The greater part
of them now steered for an anchorage between the capes Blanc/,
and Grinez, while eight schuyts, which had kept too long on the
larboard tack, found themselves seven or eight miles from the
shore. In this state the division was gained sight of by a British
squadron, consisting of the 38-gun frigate Leda, Captain Robert
Honyman, sloops Harpy and Iiailleur, Captains Edmund leywoodI


and Valentine Collard, bumb-vessel Fury, Captain John Yelland,
and eight gun-brigs, the whole, except two of the latter which
were sailing guard off Ambleteuse, at anchor off Boulogne.
  The two gun-brigs off Ambleteuse, which were the Gallant
and Watchful, Lieutenants Thomas Shirly and Janus Marshall,
immediately chased north-east by signal, and the remainder of
the squadron weighed and stood in the same direction. At 8 a.m.
the above two gun-brigs closed with the eight armed Bchuyts,
and a smart cannonade commenced between the latter, aided by
the heavy batteries on shore, and the brigs. In a few minutes
four large shot from the batteries struck the Gallant between
wind and water, and compelled her to haul on the starboard
tack in order to stop the leaks, which were gaining fast. One
schuyt struck to the Watchful. The Railleur, and the gun-
                            »   See p. 23   1
                                                .
