1805.]                      INVASION- FLOTILLA.                               319

class gun-vessels; the latter under the command of two captains
of the Batavian navy, the former of the                  French capitaine de
fregate     Bernard-Isidore Lambour.             The     admiral,       with great
judgment, formed his division into two lines, in such a manner
that all the vessels could fire together with ease two of the       :



prames were placed in the centre of the outer line, where the
admiral himself commanded, and the other two at the extremi-
ties,which were the stations assigned to the two Dutch captains.
Several other gun-vessels were at Dunkerque, but they, being
of a smaller class, had retired into the harbour to escape the

fury of the north-west gales. Directions had been left by
Admiral Ver-Huell for these gun-vessels to follow, in two divi-
sions, as soon as an engagement should be seen to take place
between his division and the enemy.
   Owing to the numerous banks and shoals off Ostende and
Dunkerque, the British squadron in the vicinity, consisting of
the 20-gun ship Ariadne, Captain the Honourable Edward King,
three or four ship-sloops and bombs, and about as many gun-
brigs, was at anchor off Gravelines.     Ships loom large in thick
Aveather.   It must have been owing to this, that the French
mistook the Ariadne, a ship not above a third larger than either
                              " un
of the French prames, for           vaisseau rase," and her com-
                                                   "
panions (increased in number as well as size) for deux fregates,
trois corvettes k trois mats, et neuf bricks."   At 6h. 30 m. p.m.
                                                           1



the Ariadne and squadron discovered the flotilla, then just under
way but the lightness of the wind and the slow sailing of the
        ;


prames so retarded its progress, that its course was not clearly
ascertained until 7 h. 15 m. p.m. when instantly, the British cut
                                         ;


their cables and made sail, to meet the Dutcli admiral. At 9 h.
15 m. p.m. the Ariadne and one or two of her nearest companions
opened their fire upon the flotilla; and, notwithstanding the
shallowness of the water, the obscurity of the night, and Ihe
incessant cannonade maintained, both by the prames and gun-
vessels, and by the heavy batteries on the coast, the Ariadne
and her consorts succeeded in driving three or four gun-vessels
on shore, and in cutting away the mainmast and damaging the
rigging of the Yille-de-Geneve, the rearmost prame. With,
however, such powerful support from the shore, and the aid of
the long 24-pounders mounted by the prames, the bulk of the
flotilla, at 11 h. 30 m. p.m., came to anchor in the road of Calais.
The only British ship that appears to have sustained any injury
was the Ariadne herself: she had one sergeant of marines mor-
                   *   Victoires ct Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 76.
