320          BRITISH     AND FRENCH FLEETS.             — CHANNEL.                    [1805.


tally,   one lieutenant of marines dangerously, and two seamen
                                       sails a good deal cut.
slightly, wounded, and her rigging and
Some loss must undoubtedly have been incurred on the part ot
the flotilla, especially on board the Ville-de-Geneve and stranded
gun-vessels, but none has been recorded.
  The noise of the firing had caused a great bustle among the
                                                        the 50-gun
shipping in the Downs and, soon after midnight,
                                 ;



ship Trusty,     Captain   George  Argles,  28-gun  frigate Vestal,

Captain Stephen Thomas Digby, and three ship-sloops, weighed
and stood across towards Calais. On the 18th, at 4 a.m., the
Vestal, out-sailing the others, joined the
                                           Ariadne and squadron                              ;



and in half an hour afterwards the British recommenced the
action with the Dutch flotilla and the batteries in front of Calais.
After a two hours' cannonade, in which the nines of the Vestal
stood a very poor chance against the 36s and 24s of the forts
and gun-vessels, the frigate, with a corporal of marines mortally
wounded, made the signal to discontinue the action and, with                  ;



her companions, bore away to the westward, where a spirited
firinghad just commenced, and whither the Trusty and sloops
had already proceeded.
  Will it be believed that the following passage refers to the
Vestal and squadron?       "II y fut attaque le matin, avec aussi
                                                  dont deux vais-
pen d'effet que la veille, par dix-neuf batimens,
                                              1
seaux de ligne, onze fregates, et six bricks.    So also it stands,
                                                                for
merely substituting "cinq fregates, six grandes corvettes,"
"onze              in another French historical work.
                                                         2
                                                             These
           fregates,"
and other similar statements were no doubt originally framed to
exalt the flotilla in the opinion of the country, or to serve some
such temporary purpose. How careful, then, ought the his-
torian to be in compiling his materials     otherwise, he unknow-
                                                         ;


       assists in propagating  a falsehood, not merely by the pub-
ingly
licity of his work,
                     but by the sanction of his name.
   Informed of the approach of the Gallo-Batavian flotilla and
of the attack made upon it, Admiral Lacrosse, on the 18th, at
4 a.m., ordered several divisions of gun-vessels to get under
way   from the road of Boulogne, in order, by feigning an attack
                                                                   to operate a diver-
upon the British vessels at their anchorage,
sion in favour of Admiral Ver-Huell.                         The     Immortalite,       still
                          3
commanded by Captain Owen, accompanied by the 12-pounder
32-gun frigate Hebe, Captain Macajah Malbon, 20-gun ship
                                     the remainder of the
Arab, Captain Keith Maxwell, and
detached squadron, immediately weighed from their station off
                                                                  Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 11.
                                                 2 Victoires et
 i   Pr&is des Evenemens, tome xii., p. 44.
                                       »   See p. 230
