    322         BRITISH       AND FRENCH FLEETS.          —CHANNEL.         ["1805.


    immediately returned it, but to a great disadvantage, the Trusty-
                                                     received a large
    having, besides losing the use of her main stay,
    shot in her slop-room, which caused a great quantity of water to
    rush in, and obliged her to haul off and heave to, to try to stop
    the leak.    Meanwhile the flotilla proceeded without much
    further annoyance, until off Wissant where, the shore offering-
                                                     ;



    less resistance, the cannonade recommenced on the part of the
    British vessels, among which, by this time, were the Immorta-
    lite and a part of the detached squadron from off Boulogne.
    Such was the ardour displayed by the Arab to close with the
            that she found herself within musket-shot of the shore,
    flotilla,
    in two fathoms water.              The brig-sloop Calypso, Captain Mat-
    thew Forster, La Fleche, Captain Thomas White, and two or
    three of the gun-brigs, strove to emulate the Arab, and, by their
    united exertions, drove on shore, before 7 p.m., six of the gun-
    vessels.  The bank off Cape Grinez, and the shot and shells
    from the right face of its powerful battery, soon compelled the
    Arab, Calypso, La Fleche, and gun-vessels to haul off from the
    shore.  The Calypso had her captain wounded and the Arab            ;




    had her maintopgallant-yard shot away, her rigging much cut,
    and the head of her mainmast splintered, and a part of the top
    and crosstrees carried away by a shell, This ship also received
    several shot in the hull one of which, or the fragment of a shell,
                                   ;


    set fire to her on the poop, but the flames were fortunately extin-
                                        shot that fell on board of her,
    guished. By some of the other
    the ship had seven men wounded, two of them dangerously.
    The Fleche was the closest in shore owing to her light draft of
    water, so   much so indeed as to render it necessary for the
    French at Blanez to depress their guns one shot took off the
                                                            ;


                                  a boat under the booms, and went
    top of a man's hat, shattered
                                                    Fleche had five
    through the water-way on the off side. The
    men severely wounded and her running rigging much injured.
    The Arab and Calypso rendered themselves conspicuous objects
    from the shore, as appears by the following passage in one of
    the French accounts: "Une fregate et un brick, serrant la
                                                 1

     terre, s'engagerent de tres-pres."
       The Immortalite, followed by the Hebe, had, since 5 p.m., lay
     to between the end of the Banc-a-laine and Cape Grinez and              ;


                                             in a quarter less four
     even, when the former found herself
'




     (scarcely half a fathom more water than
                                             she drew), her distance
     from the flotilla was too great to do execution. The two
     frigates thereupon hauled off and threw all aback, to wait for
                          1
                              Precis des Evenemeus, tome xii., p. 45.
