316         BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEErS.   — CHANNEL.         [1805.


brigs Locust and Starling, Lieutenants John Lake and Charles
Napier, coming up, compelled six others, before 10 a.m., also to
surrender, but not until after a spirited resistance on the part of
the schuyts.
  Early on the morning of the 25th two other schuyts, which
had drifted off the land, were captured by the Archer gun-brig,
Lieutenant William Price, whose one seaman wounded was all
the loss sustained by the British. The eight Gallo-Batavian
schuyts averaged about 75 tons, mounted three guns each,
chiefly long 24-pounders, and carried, altogether, 142 sailors
and soldiers. The remainder of the division, assisted by several
armed launches, containing grapnels and hawsers, sent out from
Boulogne by Bear-admiral Lacrosse (since the death of Admiral
Bruix, on the 19th of March, the commander-in-chief of the
French flotilla) succeeded, after a while, in reaching Ambleteuse,
the port of its destination.
  On the 10th of June, at 7 a.m., a division of the French flotilla,
                       "                        "
consisting of the two corvettes-canonnieres Foudre, Capitaiae
de vaisseau Jacques-Felix-Emmanuel Hemelin, and Audacieuse,
Lieutenant Dominique Boquebert, each mounting 10 guns (four
or six long 18-pounders, the remainder brass 36-pounder car-
ronades, with upwards of 80 men), four gun- vessels, of three
long 24-pounders, and an 8-inch mortar each, three others of
one 24-pounder and a field-piece each, eight others, of two 4 or
6 pounders, and 14 transports, in all 31 vessels, sailed from the
port of Havre bound to Fecamp. By the time they had got
abreast of Brunevel, the French vessels were chased by the
British 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Chiffonne, Captain Charles
Adam, who, with the ship-sloop Falcon, Captain George Sanders,
gun-brig Clinker, Lieutenant Nisbet Glen, and the Frances hired
armed cutter, was cruising off the coast.
   At 9h. 30 m. a.m. the Chiffonne, then in 10 fathoms water,
considerably ahead of her companions, and close in with the
flotilla, opened her fire upon the van, where the Foudre had
stationed herself: but, in a quarter of an hour, shoaling her
water, the frigate was compelled to haul further off. At 10 h.
30 m. a.m. the frigate, followed by the sloop and gun-brig, recom-
menced firing. Shortly afterwards one of the French brigs
caught fire, but succeeded in extinguishing it, and some of the
other vessels ran on shore. Towards noon the Chiffonne, who
had bore the brunt of this attack, again hauled out into deeper
water. Shortly afterwards the van of the French flotilla ran
close under the batteries of Cap-de-Caiset, until joined by the
