1805. J                 INVASION-FLOTILLA.                     317

rearmost vessels, when they again bore up to proceed on their
course.   At 1 h. 30 m. p.m. the three British vessels again stood
in, and at 2 p.m.
                    recommenced tiring. The Falcon presently
became closely engaged with the two sternmost of the French
brigs, one of which was the
                              Audacieuse. As the British passed
along the coast, the forts kept firing shells and shots at
                                                             them
without the smallest intermission notwithstanding which the
                                    :



Chiffonne and Falcon continued the engagement, and at 3 h.
15 m. p.m. shot away a brig's foretopmast and then her main-
mast. The Falcon and Clinker, not sailing by any means equal
to the frigate, gradually dropped astern, and the flotilla sheltered
themselves completely under Fecamp batteries but the latter
                                                   ;




did not until 4 h. 30 m. p.m. cease firing at the Chiffonne.
  Several shot struck the Chiffonne in the hull, one of which
entered between wind and water;     and her rigging was also
much cut.  Her loss amounted to two men killed and three
wounded. The Falcon suffered in rigging and sails, and had
four men wounded the Clinker, one marine killed and one sea-
                    ;


man wounded by the same shot. The French admit a loss of
three men killed and 12 wounded, including among the latter
the commander of one of the gun-brigs.
   On the loth of July the British gun-brigs Plumper, Lieutenant
James Henry Garrety, and Teazer, Lieutenant George Lewis
Ker, while cruising off the port of Granville, on the coast of
Prance, found themselves becalmed, and likely to be carried into
danger by the strength of the tide. They therefore anchored
near the island of Chausey, but, owing to the exigency of the
moment, at too great a distance apart to benefit by any mutual
support, in the event of being attacked before a breeze sprang
up. The critical situation of these brigs being plainly seen from
Granville, which was not four leagues distant, Capitaine de
vaisseau Louis-Leon Jacob, commanding the several divisions of
the  flotilla that were assembled between St. Malo and Cher-

bourg, resolved to send some gun-vessels to attempt the capture
of the British vessels.
  Accordingly, on that same evening, as soon as it grew dark,
seven of the largest class of French gun-vessels, armed each
with three long 24-pounrters, and an 8-inch howitzer, and amply
supplied with men and musketry, swept out of the port, under
the command of Capitaine de fregate Joseph Collet. On the
16th, at 2 h 30 m., they arrived within long range of the nearest
brig, the Plumper, and opened a fire upon her from their heavy
long guns taking such a safe position, as they advanced, that
            ;
