31 S      BRITISH       AND FRENCH FLEETS.       CHANNEL.   [1805.

the brig's 18-pounder carronades could only at intervals be
brought to bear upon them. In the course of half an hour
Lieutenant Garrety, who, from the first, had conducted himself
in the bravest manner, had his arm shot away but he continued,
                                                   ;


for some time, to animate his men in repulsing the enemy.    At
length, at the end of an hour's cannonade, from which she had
greatly suffered in hull and crew, the Plumper surrendered.
  Having shifted their prisoners and manned the prize, the
French rested at an anchor, until the tide turned again in their
favour at 6 a.m. when, accompanied by the Plumper, they
                    ;



weighed, and stood for her late consort. At 8 h. 45 m. a.m. the
seven French gun-vessels and their prize commenced firing at
the Teazer; who, at 9 a.m., cut her cable, and, setting all sail,
tried to escape.  But, the calm continuing, the brig made little
or no progress and her opponents soon surrounded and cap-
               ;


tured her. The British loss on this occasion has been noticed
nowhere but in the French accounts. By these it appears that
the two brigs had, including Lieutenant Garrety, 17 men badly
wounded, the greater part on board the Plumper; but, with
respect to the killed, which probably amounted to four or five,
no intelligence was obtained. The loss on board the French gun-
vessels appears to have amounted to five men wounded, includ-
ing Captain Collet who, on the afternoon of the day on which
                        ;


he had captured them, entered Granville with his two prizes.
   The time approaching for concentrating near Boulogne the
invading-flotilla and the army it was to transport, Admiral Ver-
Huell, about the middle of May, became impatient to quit Dun-
kerque with the division of gun-vessels that lay at anchor in the
road and harbour. The majority of these he had himself, in the
latter part of April, conducted from Ostende, 1 and the re-
mainder had since arrived, by three or four at a time, as oppor-
tunity offered.   The right wing of the army, then encamped
between Ostende and Dunkerque, prepared to march; and
Marshal Davoust who commanded it, preferring a water-passage,
embarked with Admiral Ver-Huell. Unfavourable winds pre-
vented the latter from weighing nor did a change take place
                                            ;

until towards the middle of July   in the interim the marshal had
                                        ;



disembarked, and, with his corps, had marched for Ambleteuse.
On the 17th of the month, at 6 p.m., a light north-east wind
enabled the Dutch admiral to put to sea (if keeping close
                                                            along
shore can be called so) with the four prames, Yille-d'Aix, Ville-
d Anvers. Ville-de-Geneve, and Ville-de-Mayence, and 32 first-
                               i
                                   See p. 315,
