324         BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.        [1305j

Hamelin, whom we left at Fecamp with his division of gun-
vessels, resolved to attempt his passage to Boulogne.     Accord-
ingly, on the 23rd of July, at 5 h. 15 m. a.m., he put to sea with,
according to the French accounts, the Audacieuse and Foudre
brigs, six first-class gun-vessels, brig-rigged, 10 of the second
class (two or three brigs, the remainder luggers), and eight
armed pinnaces (luggers and schooners), total 26, or rather,
according to the logs of the several British ships, 34 sail.
   At this time the British 22-gun ship Champion, Captain
Bobert Howe Bromley, gun-brigs Clinker and Cracker, Lieute-
nants Nesbit Glen, and William Henry Douglas, and the Francis
hired armed cutter, lay at anchor at the distance of little more
than a league north-north-east from the jettees of the harbour.
The British vessels were soon under way to attack the flotilla        ;


and at 7 a.m., the Champion commenced action with the two
corvettes, and some of the heaviest of the gun-vessels.      The
latter presently run on shore under the batteries of Seuneville,
and the remainder of the flotilla hugged the coast so closely,
that the British vessels, in order to use their carronades with
effect, were compelled to approach within range of the batteries.
The consequence was, that they were soon cut up in their
hulls, masts, and rigging; but in spite of all the obstacles
they had to contend with, the Champion and the two brigs,
particularly the Cracker, compelled the French captain, at
about 10 h. 30 m. a.m., to shelter himself under the batteries of
St. Valery en Caux.
  What with the heavy long guns on board the flotilla, and
those mounted on the shore, the British vessels were consider-
able sufferers. The Champion had all three masts, particularly
her foremast, wounded, her rigging and sails much cut, and
several large shot-holes in her hull, very low down.          The
Cracker received a large shot through her foremast, which left it
in a tottering state, and had her shrouds and stays cut to pieces.
The Clinker also received some damage and coming out of
action, had three feet water in the hold.   It appears, however,
that the Champion was the only vessel that sustained any loss     :



she had two seamen killed, her boatswain (severely) and two
seamen wounded. The French admit that several of their
vessels were much damaged, and that they lost four men killed
and 22 wounded, 11 of them dangerously. As soon as it was
known that the Champion and her companions had stood
away towards the Downs to refit, M. Hamelin, leaving his
wounded men and the most damaged of his vessels, set sail
