1805. J       BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           333

although in September and November two attempts were made
to destroy the line of gun-vessels at anchor in the road, the
stormy state of the weather, in the last case in particular, ren-
dered them both abortive.

                   British and Franco-Spanish Fleets.

  The declaration of war by Spain, followed up so quickly as it
was by the hurried equipment of ships at all her principal
depots in fulfilment of the secret treaty which she had concluded
Avith France, 1 soon assembled a British naval force upon the
coasts of the former.    Off Ferrol, in which port lay, ready for
sea, five French and seven Spanish sail of the line, exclusively of
three of the latter fitting, cruised a British squadron of seven
sail of the line, under Bear-admiral the Honourable Alexander

Cochrane, in the Northumberland 74. In Cadiz one French and
seven Spanish sail of the line were ready for sea, and four of the
latter equipping    and in Carthagena, six Spanish sail of the line-
                    ;


were ready for sea. Off Cadiz was stationed a British squadron
of five, and occasionally six sail of the line, under Yice-admiral
Sir John Orde, in the Glory 98 and who, in conjunction with
                                    ;



Vice-admiral Lord Nelson, whom, with 10 sail of the line, we
left on the 31st of December cruising off Cape San-Sebastian, -

kept an occasional eye upon the ships in Carthagena.
   The junction of the six French and 20 Spanish sail of the line,
ready for sea in Ferrol, Cadiz, and Carthagena, with the 11
French sail of the line, also ready for sea in Toulon, was a pre-
liminary step towards the final success of the grand design which
reigned the master-thought in the mind of him, who, such was
the mean subserviency of Spain, had the whole 37 ships as much
under his command, as if the French flag waved at the peak of
every one of them. What efforts were made by the one party
to accomplish, and by the other to defeat, the important object
in agitation, will appear as we proceed in the details upon which
wo are now about to enter.
   Having detached the 38-gun frigates Active and Seahorse
Captains Bichard Hussey Moubray and the Honourable Courte-
nay Boyle, to watch the port of Toulon, Lord Nelson, on the
:5rd of January, made sail from his station off Cape San-Sebastian
towards the Magdalena islands, and on the 11th came to at his
old anchorage in Agincourt sound.         On the 15th the Superb
rejoined from Algiers ; whither she      had been sent to arrange
               1
                   See p. 303.               -'
                                                  See p. 243.
