1805.]                      IXVAS10X-FLOTILLA.                                327
                                                             "
June 9 in this year, to his minister of marine,                   quelle espece de
precaution elle peut prendre pour la mettre al'abri de la terrible
chance qu'elle court. Une nation est bien folle, lorsqu'elle n'a
point de fortifications, point d'armee de terre, de se mettre dans
le cas de voir arriver dans son sein une armee de cent mille
homines d'elite et aguerris. Voila le chef-d'oeuvre de la flottille              ;


elle coute de l'argent, mais il ne faut etre maitre de la mer que
six heures pour que l'Angleterre cesse d'exister." 1
   Even admitting that the Channel, Mediterranean, and North
Sea fleets of England were away, were no other ships to check
the course of the flotilla ? Let but a breeze have blown from
any point of the compass, and innumerable frigates, heavy fri-
gates too, sloops, bombs, gun-brigs, and cutters, would soon
have been on the spot. No shoals or shore-batteries would then
have interposed to prevent the guns of the British from pro-
ducing their full effect. The more numerous the French troops,
the greater would Lave been the slaughter amongst them, the
greater the difficulty for the sailors to manoeuvre the vessels.
Confusion would have ensued and the destruction or flight of
                                       ;


a part of the flotilla would, in the end, have compromised the
safety of the remainder.        Every hour's delay would have
brought fresh British vessels to assist in the general overthrow.
Admitting, however, that a considerable portion of the flotilla
overcame all these obstacles, and approached the British shore,
was there nothing further to dread? Were there really, as
Xapoleon fancied,
                     " no
                          fortifications, no army"?   The invaders—
would have made the discovery, to their cost, the moment they
arrived within shell and shot range. As they advanced nearer
they would have found the beach already occupied by the van
of an army composed of soldiers, who, if they had not fought at
"
   Lodi, at Zurich, at Heliopolis, at Iiohenlinden, and at
Marengo," were then fighting in England.
   But, in the event of a calm, would he not succeed ? was a
question frequently asked, as well by those who wished, as those
who dreaded, the invasion. Calms in the British Channel are
very uncertain they seldom continue more than 12 hours, and
                :




even then may prevail at one part of the coast and not at
another. Admitting that a calm existed at Boulogne and the
adjacent ports, some time would elapse ere, under the most
 favourable circumstances, the flotilla could make a start. It has
 done so, and the oars begin to move by this time, a boat from
                                                :




 every British ship that witnessed the preparation is half across
                    ;
                        Precis des Evenenicns, tome xL, p. 270.
