    326            BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.
                                                                 [1805.

    the respective commands of Rear-admiral Daniel
                                                            Savary and
    Capitaine de vaisseau Julien Le Ray, occupied the port cf Bou-
    logne, and were destined to carry the troops from the two camps
    to the right and left of the town, commanded
                                                      by Marshal Soult   ;.

    the fourth, named the right wing of the
                                               flotilla, commanded by
•




    Capitaine de vaisseau Francois-Henri-Eugene Daugier, occupied
    the port of Vimereux, and was to carry the
                                                      corps of Marshal
    Lannes, composed of sundry divisions of light infantry, among
    which were those of the grenadiers of the advance and of the
    reserve.   The Gallo-Batavian flotilla, assembled at the port of
    Ambleteuse under the command of Vice-admiral
                                                             Ver-Huell,
    formed the fifth grand division of the
                                              expedition, and was to
    carry the troops commanded by Marshal Davoust. The sixth
    or reserve division, lying in the port of
                                              Calais, under the com-
    mand of Capitaine de fregate Charles L'Eveque, was destined to
    transport the division of Italian infantry, and several divisions
    of dragoons, mounted and dismounted.
      The first four grand divisions only had a regular organiza-
    tion each was separated into two portions, called " escadrilles ;"
           :




    and each of the latter was to embark a division of the
                                                               army,
    composed of four regiments of the line, and one of light infantry,
    with its cavalry, artillery, and baggage. It would be
                                                             entering
    too much into detail, to explain all the regulations that contri-
    buted to perfect the system of this armament suffice it that
                                                      :




    everything was adopted which ingenuity could devise and ability
    execute, without much regard to the labour or the expense.
       Anxious to have ocular proof of the degree of celerity with
    which the army could be embarked, Napoleon, who arrived at
    Boulogne on the 3rd of August, ordered the operation to be
    executed twice in his presence. The result
                                                 surpassed his belief.
    Although the troops had to march from camps, the extremities
    of which were more than two miles from the
                                                   point of embarka-
    tion, one hour and a half after the beating of the generate, men
    and horses, all were on board.
      This, as well it might, excited the admiration of the generals
and other officers present, and all were elated at the prospect it
held out all, save the prime mover himself, and
               ;
                                                     he, although
he did not appear so, was filled with regret. His fleets were not
in the Channel, and without
                              them, he knew full well that his
plan could not succeed. Could he, by any means, have drawn
away England's ships from England's coast, he considered
England's fate as depending -apon his nod. " Je ne sais pas, en
verite," says the French emperor, in one of his letters, of date
