                               INVASION-FLOTILLA.                                      331
1805.]

                                    in possession of the Chan-
England, the combined fleet must be
nel), "I was unacquainted
                           with a very remarkable fact, which
deserves a place in history. I am indebted for the knowledge
of it to the Count Daru, whose able History of Venice we have
                                                   the intendant
already cited. In 1805 M. Daru was at Boulogne,
         of the army. One  morning  the emperor sent fcr him into
general
his closet.   Daru found him transported with rage, striding up
and down his apartment, and only breaking a sullen silence by
the abrupt and sudden exclamations— "What a navy !—what
an admiral !— what sacrifices lost !— my hopes are frustrated !—
this Villeneuve     Instead of being in the Channel he has put
                      !




into Ferrol !— I see it clearly he will be blockaded.— Daru, sit
                                            !



down there, listen and write. The emperor had, early that
morning,  received advices of the arrival of Villeneuve in a port
of Spain he saw at once that the conquest of England had mis-
               ;


carried that the immense expense of the fleet and the flotilla
           ;


was lost for a long time, perhaps for ever Then, in the violence
                                                           !




of a rage which would scarcely suffer another man to retain his
senses, he adopted one of the boldest resolutions, traced
                                                             one of
the most admirable plans of a campaign, that any conqueror
could have conceived, even when at leisure and perfectly com-
posed. Without hesitating, without stopping, he dictated the
whole plan of the campaign of Austerlitz, the departure of tho
different corps of the army, as well from Hanover and Holland,
as from the western and southern boundaries of France.         The
order of the routes, their duration, the points of convergence and
reunion of the columns             ;
                                       the attacks by surprise and by open
force, the various movements of the enemy, the whole is pro-
vided for: victory is assured in every one of the hypotheses.
.Such was the accuracy of this plan, and the immense foresight
it displayed,that upon a line of march of 200 leagues, lines of
operations of 300 leagues in length were conducted according
to the original design, day by day, and league by league, all
the way to Munich.      Beyond that capital the time alone
underwent some alteration but the points were reached, and
                                        ;



the ensemble of the plan crowned with success. Such, then,
was the military talent of this man, not less terrible to his
enemies by the mightiness of his genius, than to his country-
men by the severity of his despotism."       The truth of this 1




anecdote is corroborated by the author of the Precis dea Evene-
mens, who states, that he himself also heard it related by the
Comte Daru. 2
                                                  -                                 tome
   '
       For the original passage, see Appen-           Precis       des Evcnemens,          xii.,
 dix, No. 28.                                   p. 118.
