330        BRITISH   AND FRENCH FLEETS.   — CHANNEL.        [1805.


   Being in the constant habit of perusing, by the aid of inter-
preters, the contents of the London newspapers, Napoleon
must have seen, with a feeling of bitter disappointment, the
formidable preparations that were making to resist his army
on its landing those to obstruct the passage of the flotilla,
               :



he cared less about, having, as already has appeared, no in-
tention to make the attempt unless his fleets were in the tem-
porary possession of the Channel.      Buonaparte was not the
first foreigner who had reckoned too much upon the grumbling
character of the English he did not consider that, although
                          :



discontented with then* government, they were extremely jealous
of foreigners. He ought to have known that, in such a case, a
third party would experience much the same treatment as pro-
verbially follows a similar interference in domestic disagree-
ments the hitherto mutually opposed parties unite, heart and
      :




hand, to expel the intruder. The treatment which, at a subse-
quent period of his life, Napoleon experienced from the English
populace, tended, owing to a misconception on his part, to
strengthen the opinion he had originally formed of the
"canaille" to aid him in conquering their country. There,
again, he mistook the character of the people. It was not
love for his person which collected the crowds that flocked
from far and near to gain a sight of him it was curiosity,
                                                :



endemial curiosity, to behold a man who had compelled most
monarchs but their own to succumb to him    ;
                                             who had governed,
if  not conquered, all Europe, save the little insulated spot
in whose power he then was.      If they forebore to upbraid or
taunt him, it was because he was then' prisoner if they treated
                                                    ;


him with respect, and even with kindness, it was because they
felt some degree of awe in the presence of one who had been so

mighty a potentate, and commiserated his fallen greatness.
   Intelligence of the battle between Sir Bobert Calder and M.
Villeneuve reached the French emperor at Boulogne, between
the 3rd and 9th of August, probably about the 8th and on the
                                                        ;


11th he became acquainted with the arrival of the combined
fleet at Eerrol.  Buonaparte's rage was most violent, but it was
of short duration. This extraordinary man soon carved out work
for his army. The intelligent author of a French work now well
known in England has exhibited, in a single act of Napoleon's,
arising out of the circumstances above stated, a most extra-
ordinary instance of his transcendent genius.    "At the time I
was writing this passage " (one in which M. Dupin has given it
as his opinion that, before anything could be effected against
