1805.]                     INVASION-FLOTILLA.                      325

with the remainder, and reached Boulogne without further
interruption.
  The French, as usual, when they came to fight this battle over
again on paper, made it redound greatly to their advantage.
They dignified the Champion and the two gun-brigs by calling
them, "une fregate et deux corvettes;" and Captain Hamelin
is represented to have considered the squadron as "la memo
croisiere ennemie qu'il avait deja combattue," although the
latter consisted of two ships and a brig, and one of those ships
double the size and force of the Champion. As in most of the
other accounts, no allusion is made to the land-batteries, or to
the difficulties that the British must have experienced in navi-
                                " Les cris :i
gating so near to the shore.                  l'abordage a l'abord-
                                                               !



             the         " retentissaient
age !"  says     writer,                  dans la ligne francaise."
This, if we are to credit the French accounts, is about the hun-
dredth time that the same cry has been uttered and yet the ;


French sailors, for some reason or other, have not moved from
their own decks.
  If, by his perseverance in pushing on towards Ambleteuse,
Admiral Yer-Huell had got his gun- vessels somewhat roughly
handled by the British, he had brought down upon the latter
such a storm of shot and shells from the French batteries, as
compelled them to retire to repair damages, thereby leaving open
a passage for the remaining divisions of the Gallo-Batavian
flotilla at Dunkerque  some of which appear to have reached
                       ;


Ambleteuse in the course of the night succeeding the action.
On the next day, the 20th, an account was taken of the different
vessels of the flotilla, armed and unarmed, which then lay at the
seven ports, Etaples, Boulogne, Yimereux, Ambleteuse, Calais,
Dunkerque, and Ostende, whence the expedition was to depart.
The number of prames and gun-vessels at Boulogne alone
amounted to 578, and the number of transports to 526, together
1104 vessels and the total of the flotilla amounted to 1339
                ;


armed and 054 unarmed vessels, making a grand total of 2293.
These were destined to carry 163,045 men and 9059 horses, in-
                                                       1
cluding among the former, 16,783 sailors.
  The flotilla was separated into six grand divisions. The first
under the designation of the left wing, commanded by Eeai-
admiral Jean-Francois Courand, and stationed at the port of
Etaples, was destined to cany the troops from the camp of
jMontreuil, commanded by Marshal Xcy the second and third,
                                                   ;


called the left and right wings of the centre of the flotilla, under
                           i   See Appendix, No. 27.
