328               BRITISH    AND FRENCH FLEETS.           — CHANNEL.             [1805,


-the Channel with the intelligence, and                 the vessel herself, if less
than a frigate, is sweeping with all her strength in the same
direction.   A fleet of 1200 or 1300 vessels must be rather
awkward to manage particularly when assembled together for
                              ;


the first time, and possessed, as these variously constructed gun-
vessels necessarily were, of different powers of progression.
                                               raised and yet, as
Against the prames sad complaints were                                 ;



there were 17 of these vessels, armed each with 12 long
24-pounders,   and carrying altogether about 2000 men and 840
horses, they    must be waited for. All this would create con-
fusion.   Cross tides and partial currents would increase it.
                                                it is more than pro-
Signals would be necessary they would,   :




bable, amidst the many repeaters required to
                                                   transmit them, be
misunderstood.         A
                       part of the fleet stops, or pulls in a different
direction.    Delay ensues. Presently up springs a breeze and                     ;




which,   in all likelihood, blows either up or down, and not across
the Channel. In this case the weather wing of the flotilla begins
first to spread its sails, and, without great care, presses upon the
centre and that, in its turn, upon the lee wing. Meanwhile the
          ;


breeze has not travelled without company, as is evident from
the number of white patches that now skirt the windward
horizon, swelling and gathering at every moment.
                                                          Of the ope-
rations likely to follow, a slight sketch has already been given.
  But, in truth, no attempt would have been made by
                                                       the flotilla
to cross over, even were the Channel clear of British fleets, and
a calm, even a two days' calm, to prevail none whatever, unless
                                                          ;



a powerful French fleet lay off Boulogne, ready to afford its
protection. In a note dictated by him at his
                                                return from Bou-
logne, on the 1st of September, the French officer
                                                    thus unfolds
          " Je voulais                   "
his plan      :        reunir," says he,   quarante ou cinquante
vaisseaux de guerre dans le port de la Martinique, par des ope-
rations combinees de Toulon, de Cadix, de Ferrol et de Brest                            ;



les faire revenir tout d'un coup sur Boulogne  me trouver pen-   ;


dant quinze jours maitre de la mer                 ;
                                                       avoir cent cinquante mille
hommes et dix mille chevaux campes sur cette cote                          ;   trois   ou
quatre mille batimens de flottille, et aussitot le signal de l'arrive'e
de mon escadre, debarquer en Angleterre, m'emparer de Londres
et de la Tamise. 1 The construction of the heavy prames, and
the arming of the flotilla generally, were intended for no other
purpose th an to deceive the British into a belief, that Napoleon
did not contemplate the assistance of his fleet, and that, there-
fore, the object of sending M. Yilleneuve.to
                                               the West Indies had
                       1
                           Prdcis des Evfenemens, tome xii., p. 315.
