 1805.]                             INVASION-FLOTILLA.                                       ,J29


 really inview an attack upon some of the British colonies                                                 :



hence, the use of the few troops embarked, especially when
rumour had multiplied them fivefold, as Napoleon knew would
he the case. His own words prove that, in arming the flotilla
 with cannon, he was only practising a ruse de guerre upon
              "
 England.       Si cinquante vaisseaux de ligne," says he, in the
 same important document just quoted, " devaient venir prote'ger
 le passage de l'armee en Angleterre, il n'y avait besoin d'avoir a

 Boulogne que des batimens de transport et ce luxe de prames,      ;


de chaloupes canonnieres, de bateaux plats, de peniches, etc                                           ;


tous batimens armes, etait parfaitement inutile. Si j'eusse ainsi
reuni quatre mille batimens de transport, nul doute que 1'ennemi
n'eut vu que j'attendais la presence de mon escadre pour tenter
le passage; mais, en construisant des prames et des bateaux

 canonniers, en armant tous ces batimens, c'ctaient des canons
 opposes a des canons des batimens de guerre opposes a des
                                    ;


batimens de guerre, et 1'ennemi a ete dupe. II a cru que je me
 proposais de passer de vive force par la seule force militaire de
le flottille. L'idee de mon veritable projet ne lui est point venue                                    ;


et lorsque les mouvemens de mes escadres ayant manque, il s'est
apercu du danger qu'il avait couru, Feffroi a ete dans les conseils
de Londres, et tous les gens senses ont avoue que jamais 1' Angle-
terre navait ete si pres do sa perte."                        1



   The French emperor had, therefore, some reason to be sorrow-
ful, when he beheld so disciplined, so zealous, and so numerous
an army, without the means of safe transport to the goal of his
wishes. In his letter to M. Decres of June 9 (see p. 327), Na-
poleon appeared sanguine that he should succeed with 100,000
men in his note upon the flotilla, written in September and
         ;




already twice quoted, he states 150,000 as the number which
he had assembled for the purpose and, according to his confes-
                                                      ;


sions of much later days, he did not intend to carry over fewer
than 200,000 men.2 It is remarkable, too, that an increase in
the time, during which the channel was required to be clear of
British ships, accompanies each increase of the army that was to
                                                   "
conquer the country. Thus the letter says, six days," the
                                               :



note, "fifteen days," and O'Meara,
                                       3
                                          "two months."        It is
doubtful, however, if, at the time that the expedition (all except
the fleet which was to cover it) was declared to be ready, there
were as many even as 140,000 fighting men in a situation to
embark.
  1
                 des Evenemens, tome xii., p.             -
       Pr<5cis                                                O'JIeara's Napoleon in Exile, vul   i.
31G.                                                  p. 349.
                                    s
                                        Ibid., vol. ii., p. 378.
