3
    805.J
                            LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                             335

Gun-ship,                                   Vice-admiral (w.) Lord Nelson, K.B.
                Victory                     Bear-admiral (b.) George Murray.
                                        I Captain
                                                     Thomas Masterman Hardy.
    100
                                        j
                                            Rear-admiral (r.) Sir R. H. Bickerton, Bart.
                Royal Sovereign
                                        J   Captain John Stuart.
     80         Canopus     .
                                                 ,   John Conn.
            '



                Superb                           ,
                                                     Richard Goodwin Keats.
                Spencer                          ,
                                                     Hon. Robert Stopford.
                Swiftsure   .
                                                 ,
                                                     Mark Robinson.
                Belleisle   .                        William Hargood.
     74 \
                Conqueror                        ,
                                                     Israel Pellew.
                Tigre .   .     .
                                                 ,   Benjamin Hallowell.
                Leviathan                        .
                                                     Henry William Bayntun.
          ( Donegal         .
                                                 ,   Pulteney Malcolm.
     Frigates, Active and Seahorse.
                                             1




     The fleet made sail for the passage between the island of
Biche and Sardinia     a passage so narrow that the ships had to
                                    ;



proceed in line ahead, each, except the Victory who undertook
to lead the fleet, being guided by the stem-lights of her second
ahead. At 6 p.m. the Victory was clear, and at 7 p.m. every
ship in her train. Lord Nelson then despatched the Seahorse
round the southern extremity of Sardinia, to look into St. Pietro
for the French fleet, and to return immediately. At 8 h. 30 m.
p.m. the fleet, with now only one frigate attending it, bore away
along the island of Sardinia. On the following day, the 20th,
the vice-admiral appointed the Spencer and Leviathan, as the
two fastest-sailing ships, to be a detached squadron directing                 ;



Captain Stopford to keep on the Victory's weather-beam, to be
 ready to act as occasion might require. During the latter part
 of this, and the whole of the succeeding day, the fleet encoun-
 tered very hard gales from south-south-west to south-west                                   ;



 and, for a great part of the time, the ships were under their
    storm-staysails.
      On the L'L'nd, at 10 a.m., the Seahorse rejoined, having, on the
    preceding afternoon, been chased by the French 40-gun frigate
    Comelie, standing in for Pulla. The gale was so heavy and
    the weather so thick, that the Seahorse could not see the
    anchorage cither in that bay or in Cagliari, and, from the same
    cause, lost sight of the French frigate in the night. The Sea-
    horse, accompanied   by the Active, was sent back to Cagliari,
    but no French ships were lying there and a message to the   ;



    viceroy and consul at that port, carried by the Active, and for a
    reply to which Lord Nelson waited off the island of Serpentina,
      1
          fjord Kelson was continually complaining to the admiralty of the small    number ot
    frigates attached to his command.
