1805.]
                       LORD NELSON AND M. V1LLENEUVE.                  331

drove them, on the 20th, with the exception of four, back to
their port.  The missing ships were the Indomptable and
Cornelie already mentioned, and the frigates Hortense and
Incorruptible. The Cornelie, after sheltering herself at Genoa,
reached Toulon on the 22nd, as did the Indomptable in two days
afterwards but the Hortense and Incorruptible remained out
              ;



for six or seven weeks.
  It was on the 14th of February, when about 100 leagues to the
eastward of Malta, on his return to Sardinia, that Lord Kelson
wrote his celebrated letter to the first lord of the admiralty (Lord
Melville), explaining why he had considered Egypt to be the
destination of the French fleet.      "Feeling as I do," he says,
" that I am
             entirely responsible to my king and country for the
whole of my conduct, I find no difficulty at this moment, when I
am so unhappy at not finding the French fleet, nor having ob-
tained the smallest information where they are, to lay before you
the whole of the reasons which induced me to pursue the line of
conduct I have done. I have consulted no man, therefore the
whole blame of ignorance in forming my judgment must rest
with me. I would allow no man to take from me an atom of my
glory had I fallen in with the French fleet, nor do I desire any
man to partake of any of the responsibility. All is mine, right
or wrong therefore I shall now state my reasons, after seeing
          :




that Sardinia, .Naples, and Sicily were safe, for believing that
Egypt was the destination of the French fleet and at this mo-
                                                       ;



ment of sorrow I still feel that I have acted right. Firstly, the
wind had blown from north-east to south-east for 14 days before
they sailed       ;
                      therefore they might, without difficulty, have gone
to the westward.            Secondly, they came out Avith gentle breezes
at north-west and north-north-west. Had they been bound to
Naples, the most natural thing for them to have done would have
been to run along their own shore to the eastward, where they
would have ports every 20 leagues of coast to take shelter in.
Thirdly, they bore away in the evening of the 18th, with a strong-
gale at north-west or north-north-west steering south or south
by west. It bleAV so hard that the Seahorse went more than 13
knots an hour to get out of their way. Desirable as Sardinia is
for them, they could get it without risking their fleet,           although
certainly not so quickly as by attacking Cagliari. However I
left nothing to chance in that respect, and therefore went off

Cagliari.  Having afterwards gone to Sicily, both to Palermo
and Messina, and thereby given encouragement for a defence,
and knowing all was safe at Naples, I had only the Morea and
   vol. iil                                                    z
