338            BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                      [1805.

Egypt to look to.  For, although I knew one of the French ships
was crippled, yet I considered the character oi Buonaparte and              ;

that the orders given by him on the banks of the Seine would
not take into consideration wind or weather. Nor,
                                                     indeed, could
the accident of even three or four ships alter, in
                                                    my opinion, a
destination of importance therefore such an accident did not
                                  :



weigh in my mind, and I went first to Morea, and then to
Egypt. The result of my inquiries at Coron and Alexandria
confirms me in my former opinion and therefore, my lord, if my
                                                  ;



obstinacy or ignorance is so gross, I should be the first to recom-
mend your superseding me. But, on the contrary, if, as I flatter
myself, it should be found that my ideas of the probable desti-
nation of the French fleet were well founded, in the opinion of
his majesty's ministers, then I shall hope for the consolation of
having my conduct approved by his majesty who will, I am        ;



sure, weigh   my whole proceedings in the scale of justice."            1


  On the 27th, in the evening, the British fleet, every ship of
which, since the 21st of January, had remained prepared for bat-
tle, without a bulkhead up night or day, anchored in Pulla road,
bay of Cagliaria, to water. On the 2nd of March Lord Nelson
weighed, but, owing to the severity of the weather, was com-
pelled to re-anchor.    The wind shifting in the course of the
night to north-north-east, the fleet reweighed at daylight on the
3rd, and stood to the westward but before noon the wind re-
                                          ;


turned to the north-west, and blew so strong, that the fleet had
again to bear up for Pulla. The morning of the 4th brought a
return of the north-east wind but scarcely had the
                                      ;
                                                      persevering-
admiral taken advantage of it, than it again shifted to the north-
west. Blowing moderately this time, the fleet
                                                (some of the ships
having anchored for a few hours in the bay of Bouze) succeeded in
working to the westward of the gulf of Palma but, the wind          ;


increasing to a heavy gale, the British were compelled, on the
evening of the 8th, to run in there for shelter. On the 10th, in
the morning, after one or two fruitless
                                        attempts to get out, the
fleet weighed with a fine south-east
                                      wind, and passed between
the island of Vache and the main or, rather, the
                                              ;
                                                  Victory and a
few ships only went through this narrow channel, the remainder
of the fleet passing on the outer side of Vache.
  A continuance of fine weather brought into view, on the morn-
ing of the 12th, the high land over Toulon; and on the 15th, in
the evening, Lord Nelson gained his old winter
                                                  station, a few
miles to the eastward of Cape San-Sebastian. After
                                                      detaching
                  ,J   Clarke and M'Arthur, vol. ii., p. 307-
