1805.]
                      EOllD   NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                        339

the Leviathan off Barcelona, to induce a belief that he was
fixed on the coast of Spain, his lordship worked back to the
eastward, and on the evening of the 25th, arrived close off the
west end of the island of St. Pietro. On the following day, the
26th, the wind shifted from south-east to south-west, and
enabled the fleet, on the 27th, to anchor in the gulf of Palma,
where the victuallers and store ships were lying. On the pre-
ceding day, Bear-admiral Thomas Louis had joined in the 32-gun
frigate Ambuscade, Captain William Durban, and now shifted
his flag to the Canopus taking on board of her, in the room of
                                ;




Captain Conn, Captain William Francis Austen, who had accom-
panied the admiral from England. While Lord Nelson is pro-
visioning and refitting his ships, let us turn our attention to the
harbour of Toulon.
  Vice-admiral Yilleneuve used the utmost despatch in refitting
his ships.   The Annibal (late British Hannibal), being found
unserviceable, was replaced by the new ship Pluton to whom           ;


at the same time the former transferred the whole of her officers
and men. A similar exchange took place between the frigates
Uraine and Hermione. As to the Incorruptible, she had suf-
fered so much from her action with the Arrow, of which we shall
hereafter give an account, as to be for the present laid up. The
French fleet, therefore, consisted of 11 sail of the line, six frigates,
and two brigs, and still retained on board the 3500 troops under
                  1



General Lauriston. The departure of Lord Nelson for the gulf
of Palma, enabled M. Yilleneuve, on the evening of the 29th of
March, to sail from Toulon road with the whole of his fleet                        ;




which, on clearing Cape Scpet, steered south-south-west, with a
moderate breeze from the north-east.
  The wind on the following morning veered to north-north-
west, and, instead of increasing as had been expected, fell con-
siderably.   Owing to this the French fleet, during that and- the
succeeding day, made very little progress, and on the afternoon
of the 31st, Cape Sicie bearing north distant 10 or 12 leagues,
was discovered, and recognised by the British frigates Active
and Phoebe. These ships kept in sight of it until evening when            ;


the Phoebe bore up for the gulf of Palma, with a fresh breeze at
west-north-west, and the Active, in order to keep company with
the French ships, stood upon a wind to the south-west, but,
after dark, saw no more of them.        On the 1st of April, in the
morning, a Ragusian vessel informed M. Yilleneuve that, five
days before, she had seen the British fleet to the southward of
    Their names will be seen at p. 331,   tnting the Pluton for the Amribal, and the
  1



omitting the Incorruptible, and substi-   Herniione lor the Uranle.
