342                       BRITISH         AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                        [1805.

                                      So says M. Yilleneuve
different service, declined the junction.                                                        ;


but the Spanish ambassador at Paris asserted, that the refusal
to join came from the French admiral. Napoleon denies this
                                                  " Mais
roundly    adding, in his usual energetic way
              ;                                          que l'amiral     :




Villeneuve, passant par   le detroit et ayant des craintes, eut refuse
le secours de six vaisseaux, un ambassadeur, un homme sense ne
                                               1
se laisse pas dire de pareilles nigauderies."
   On the evening of the 7th a fresh breeze sprang up from th»
eastward (and yet at this very time Lord Nelson was plagued
with gales from the westward), and the French admiral con-
tinued his course towards the Straits. On the 8th, at day-
light, Gibraltar appeared in sight    and at noon the French     ;



fleet, formed in two columns, with the frigates ahead, entered
the gut, causing alarm-guns to be fired from all points of the
rock.    At 4 p.m. the French stood into the bay of Cadiz,
driving away Vice-admiral Sir John Orde and his five sail of the
line.   Finding the wind to blow strong off shore, M. Yilleneuve
anchored his ships, having previously despatched the Hortense
frigate into the harbour, to apprise the Spaniards of his arrival
and quicken their movements. In consequence of this, the
French 74-gun ship Aigle, Captain Pierre-Paul Gourrege, ship-
corvette Torche, and brig-corvette Argus, accompanied by five
out of the following six Spanish sail of the line and one frigate,
having 1600 troops on board, sailed out of the harbour and
anchored in company with the Toulon fleet                                 :
                                                                              —
    Gun-ship.
                                                   (   Admiral don Frederico Gravina.
                        Argonauta
         80                                        \ Rear-admiral don Antonio Escano.
                    _
                        San-Rafael                 . Commodore don Francisco Montez.
         78
                   <    Firme                      .
                                                       Captain don Rafael Villavicencio.
                  \ Terrible          .
                                                         ,   ,
                                                                 don Francisco Mondragon.
                   (    America                                  don       Darrac.
                                                                     ——
                                      .
                                                         ,   ,
         64       •>


                   ^    Espana                           , ,     don       Monios.


  On the 9th, at 2 a.m., the combined French and Spanish
     consisting of 17 sail of the line (12 French and five Spa-
fleet,
nish), one Spanish, and six  French frigates, one ship-corvette,
and three brig-corvettes, got under way, and steered a westerly
course;           leaving the San-Rafael, which had run on shore in
coming out, to follow to the rendezvous at Martinique, as soon
as she could be got off.
  The discreditable practice, adopted by the French emperor's
                                  i   Precis des Evenemens, tome si., p. 236.
