340             BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.            [1805.

Sardinia.   In consequence of this intelligence, which was cor-
rect, the French admiral, who, from previous information that
Lord Nelson was off Barcelona (a proof that the ruse with the
Leviathan had begun to take effect), had intended to pass to
the eastward of the Balaric islands, was induced to alter his
course and pass to the westward of them. The fleet accordingly
kept close to the coast of Spain, and on the 6th, in a calm,
arrived off the port of Carthagena where we will leave M. Vil-
                                             ;


leneuve awhile, to show what effect his activity had produced
upon the movements of him to avoid whom was so principal a.
point in the instructions given to the French admiral.
   Wanting water for his ships, Lord Nelson had, on the 1st of
April, removed from Palma to Pulla bay; whence he had again
sailed on the morning of the 3rd, steering to the westward, with
a moderate breeze at north-east. On the following morning,
the 4th, when a few leagues to the westward of the island of
Toro, the wind shifted to the north-north-west; and at 8, a.m.,
in the midst of hazy, unsettled weather and drizzling rain, the
Phoebe made her appearance in the offing, with the exhilarating
signal that the French admiral was at sea.        Cruisers were in-
stantly despatched in all directions; and, on the supposition
that the French fleet had continued its course to the southward
(as would have been the case, had the Eagusian vessel not
crossed it), the British fleet lay to all night, and, on the morn-
ing of the 5th, was about midway between the coasts of Barbary
and Sardinia.
  After waiting in this narrow channel until the 7th, the fleet
bore up for Palermo, in order to cover Sicily and the more
eastern parts of the Mediterranean, should the French have
passed to the northward of Corsica. Two more days having
elapsed without the slightest intelligence, Lord Nelson, on the
9th, being then off the western end of Sicily, stood to the west-
ward. Of this change of course to the westward, Napoleon
was for a long time unapprised. Even so late as a fortnight
afterwards he sent a courier to M. Tilleneuve, with information
that Lord Nelson was gone to Egypt; and, lest the latter
should learn that the French fleet had passed the Straits, he
ordered the insertion of a paragraph in the Dutch journals, to
the effect, that a French fleet had landed 6000 men in Egypt          ;

that the admiral had made a feint of passing the Straits, but, in
the night, had returned unseen along the African coast, and
thereby deceived Lord Nelson.
                               1




                   1
                       Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 231.
