 33G                BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.      [1805,

 produced no better intelligence. The Seahorse was then sent
 with despatches to Naples, and the Active directed to cruise for
 three days to the eastward, about five or six leagues from Ser-
 pentina, to speak any British ship that might be in search of the
 British admiral.
   On the 25th, at noon, Cape Carbonara, island of Sardinia,
 bore from the Victory north-north-east half-east distant three
 and a half leagues and on the next day, the 26th, the 18-
                          ;


pounder 36-gun frigate Phoebe, Captain the Honourable Thomas
Bladen Capel, joined company. On the 19th, at 4 p.m., when
sailing down the west coast of Corsica with a strong west-north-
west wind, the Phoebe discovered a disabled line-of-battle
                                                            ship,
the Indomptable, one of M. Villeneuve's fleet, standing in for
the land, under courses only, having carried away her topmasts.
The frigate immediately hauled up towards, and at 4 h. 45 m.
passed within hail of, the Indomptable, who had previously
hoisted French colours. Having ascertained that the dismasted
ship was an enemy's two-decker, bound apparently for Ajaccio
bay, the Phoebe did not, as it appears, make any attempt to
molest her, but bore up for the Magdalen islands, where Captain
Capel expected to find Lord Nelson. It was owing to this cir-
cuitous route that the frigate was so many days in joining the
fleet.

  Having sent in all directions to gain information, but without
effect, Lord Nelson continued his course to the eastward, and at
3 a.m. on the 29th, rounded the island of Stromboli.    As a proof
that, in his anxiety to overtake the       enemy, Lord Nelson had
passed a sleepless night, the following memorandum appears in
his diary   " Stromboli burnt
            :
                              very strongly throughout the night
of the 28th." His own persuasion was that the French fleet had
gone to Egypt and thither his lordship hastened, still detach-
                    ;


ing his frigates, as fast as they joined, to gather what tidings
they could.
   On the 4th of February, the Canopus made the land of Egypt.
On the 7th, the Tigre was sent into Alexandria but the Turks
                                                    ;


had nothing to communicate, and on the following day, the 8th,
Captain Hallowell rejoined the fleet. Lord Nelson, now half-
distracted, steered for Malta on the 14th, was within 100
                                     :



leagues of it and in a few days afterwards received from Naples
                ;



intelligence of what had really become of the French fleet. It
had, on the second day, after quitting Toulon, when crossing tho
gulf of Lyons, encountered a violent gale of wind, which
damaged several of the ships in their masts and rigging, and
