1805.]                   LORD NELSOX AND M. VILLENEUVE.                                343

orders, of altering official despatches for the purposes of decep-
tion, is nowhere more apparent than in the published correspon-
dence connected with this expedition. M. Yilleneuve is made
to say that he was joined by eight Spanish sail of the line from
Cadiz, thus: "Peu d'instans apres, un officier espagnol vinfc a
mon bord, et m'annonca que huit vaisseaux de S. M. C. ct une
frigate, sous les ordres de S. E. l'amiral Gravina, allaient
mettre sous voiles et avant minuit je les vis sortir successive-
                             ;



ment du port, et mouiller en dehors."   On the other hand, the
                                                         *



Madrid Gazette, of April 13, gives the correct number of ships,
both French and Spanish, that joined M. Villeneuve and so                       ;

does Napoleon himself, when writing confidentially to his
minister of marine "II parait que cinq vaisseaux etune fregate
                                 :


ont rallie l'amiral Villeneuve qu'un sixieme avait touche, mais
                                           ;

allait partir." ~ And yet no French writer, such is the perma-
nent injury of distorting historical facts, has been able to give a
consistent account of this transaction.
  Scarcely had daylight on the 9th made its appearance, than
the French admiral was constrained to shorten sail for his
Spanish friends and to the additional regret of M. Yilleneuve,
                         ;


the wind, before the close of the day, shifted to the westward.
An alternation of contrary winds and calms, coupled with the
indifferent sailing of one of the French (the Atlas) and two or
three of the Spanish ships, made it the 12th of May before the
fleet arrived in sight of the island of Martinique.  In the course
of the following day, the 13th, the five Spanish, and 11 of tho
12 French sail of the line, accompanied by the seven frigates
(one of them Spanish), one ship-corvette, and three brig-cor-
vettes, also by a large storeship, and the late British ship-sloop
Cyanc, a prize, anchored in the harbour of Fort Royal, or, as
named at the commencement of the republican dynasty, Fort-
de-France, but not without having sustained, in passing, a smart
cannonade from the Diamond rock. 3
   In the course of the same night, it is believed, the twelfth
French line-of-battle ship (probably, from her acknowledged
badness of sailing, the Atlas) anchored with her companions                                ;

and on the 16th, early in the morning, the Spanish 80-gun ship
San-Rafael, which had sailed from Cadiz on the 10th of April,
rounded Fointc-Saline. At 8 a.m. she hoisted a Spanish ensign
and pendant whereupon, by way of decoy, French colours were
                     ;


displayed at the flag-staff of the Diamond.         At 'J a.m. the
         1
             Mon. July 14, 1805.                  «   Tricis des Evencmcns, tome xl., p. 229
                                     3
                                         Seep. 215.
