1805.]              I-ORD   NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                             341

  Tlie line-of-battle ships making but slow progress against
the westerly and north-west winds, Lord Nelson despatched
some light vessels in advance to Gibraltar and Lisbon. On the
ICth, while the fleet was beating hard against a strong westerly
wind, to get round the southern extremity of Sardinia, and
obtain a glimpse of Toulon, a neutral vessel informed the Levia-
than that the French fleet had been seen on the 7th off Cape de
Gata. This was quickly followed by intelligence that M. Vil-
leneuve had passed the Straits on the 8th. The prevalence of
strong southerly and westerly winds made it the 30th ere Lord
Nelson got sight of the rock of Gibraltar and about this time
                                                           ;



he heard that M. Villeneuve had been reinforced by some ships
from Cadiz. There being no possibility of passing the Straits
with the pi-evailing wind, and the fleet standing in great need of
water and provisions, Lord Nelson, on the 4th of May, anchored
in Mazari bay, on the Barbary shore, to water, and sent the
Superb to Tetuan for cattle, fruit, and vegetables.
  We will now see what is become of the object of Lord Nel-
son's pursuit   of that which, as will clearly appear by the fol-
                ;



lowing letter from his lordship to Captain Ball, at Malta, dated
April 19, when the fleet was buffeting with head Avinds, was
the principal source of his uneasy frame of mind.     "My good
fortune, my dear Ball, seems flown away.     I cannot get a fair
                                    —
wind, or even a side wind dead foul dead foul !— but my mind
                                                     !




is fully made up what to do when I leave the Straits, supposing
there is no certain information of the enemy's destination. I
believe this ill-luck will go near to kill me but, as these are     ;


times for exertion, I must not be cast down, whatever I may
feel."   In another         letter,   of the same date, to              Lord Melville,
this extraordinary          man writes: "I am not made to despair;
what man can do shall be done. T have marked out for myscli
a decided line of conduct, and I shall follow it well up, although
I have now before me a letter from the physician of the fleet,

enforcing my return to England before the hot months. There-
fore, notwithstanding I shall pursue the enemy to the East or
West Indies, if I know that to have been their destination, yet,
if the Mediterranean fleet joins the Channel, I shall request,
with that order, permission to go on shore."                    '




  Beturning to M. Villeneuve, while off Carthagena, he sent a
boat on shore, to offer his services and the protection of his fleet
to the six Spanish ships ready for sea in the port but Bear-               ;


admiral Salzeeo, having been ordered with his squadron on a
                        '
                            Clarke and M'Artbur, vol. ii„ p. 40-1.
