 544           BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                    [1805.


Spanish ship, having unsuspiciously approached close under the
lee of the rock, on which English colours had just been substi-
tuted for French, received a fire as unexpected as it proved
annoying.    The San-Rafael quickly put her helm up, and,
returning one ineffectual shot as she wore, hastened out of range,
as fast as the little wind would permit her anchoring, the same
                                                       ;


afternoon, in company with M. Villeneuve's fleet.
  A  very different story from all this is told in the publication
which the Moniteur was compelled to insert in the shape of a
letter from M. Yilleneuve, and a translation of which, as of a
document of undoubted authenticity, went the rounds of the
                        " Le 19
English newspapers.             fioreal," says this arrant piece of
           " me trouvant a la hauteur
forgery,                                prescrite par mes instruc-
tions, j'ai, conformement a leur contenu, remis a l'amiral Gra-
vina ses depeches, et, snr le signal qui en a ete fait, six vaisseaux
de S. M. C, deux fregates et deux bricks de S. M. I., se sont
ranges sous son pavilion nous avons ete en vue le reste de la
                               ;




soiree, mais le lendemain je n'en ai plus de connaissance, et j'ai
lieu de le croire rendre a sa destination.     Le 24, au point du
jour, j'ai donne dans le canal de Sainte-Lucie, et dans la journee
le mouillai a la Martinique, avec l'escadre que m'a confiee S.M.
et deux vaisseaux et une fregate espagnols." The number of
French and Spanish ships that entered Martinique, as counted
both from the Diamond rock, and the Triton West-Indiaman
which lay in Basse-Terre road, Sainte-Lucie, agrees exactly with
the statement as Ave have given it. But, it being p.m. when the
ships passed, the two accounts are dated, according to log-time,
on the 14th instead of on the 13th of May. That the last is the
correct date appears, not only from the above letter (there being
no interest to deceive in that particular), but from an entry in
the role d'equipage of the French ship Formidable, to which we
have had reference.
   Even French historians were led into error by the Moniteur's
            " L'Amiral                             " ne se
forgeries  :
                        Gravina," says M. Dumas,            separa
point de lui (Yilleneuve) pour remplir une missicn particuliere,
et e'est encore un fait que nous devions retablir il mouilla a la;



Martinique avec le reste de la flotte combinee et ne la quitta
point ceci doit servir d'e.rratum au premier paragraphe de la
       :




page 131, ou, trompes par divers rapports officiels, nous avions
dit que l'amiral Gravina, apres s'etre detache' de la flotte com-
binee pour porter des secours ii Porto Bico et a la Havane, etait
venu la rejoindre a sa station aux iles du Yent."      The object    1


                  1
                      Precis des Evenemens, tome xii., p. 41V.
