                   LORD NELSON AND M. V1LLENEUVE.                                 345
1805.]

of all this fraud was evidently to induce the British government
to weaken still more the force in the Channel, by detaching a
greater number of ships to the
                                  West Indies and that object,
                                                            :




we believe, was partly accomplished.
   Lord Nelson, whom on the 4th of May we left refitting his
fleet in Mazari bay,
                       1
                         was enabled, early on the 5th, by the
emulation and activity of those he commanded, and by a sudden
change of wind to the eastward, to weigh and make sail to the
westward. Such, indeed, was Lord Nelson's haste to get away,
that the Superb was recalled from Tetuan, just as the cattle
and other refreshments for the fleet were being brought down to
the beach ; and which, in consequence, the ship was obliged to
leave behind. On the 7th, at 2 p.m., a failure of the breeze
obliged the Victory and some of the other ships to anchor in
Bozia bay, Gibraltar. In the course of the afternoon Bear-
admiral Sir Richard Bickerton, who was to be left as the com-
manding officer in the Mediterranean, shifted his flag from the
Boyal Sovereign to the Amfitrite (late Spanish) frigate and, a              ;




fine easterly wind now again springing up, Lord Nelson, at
6 p.m., weighed and stood through the Straits.
   It had been his lordship's intention, on the supposition that
the French were bound to Ireland, to have proceeded to a spot
about 50 leagues to the westward of Stilly but some intelli-;




gence, of an undoubted character, pointing to the West Indies
as the real destination of the combined fleet, Lord Nelson re-
solved, at every risk of professional censure, to follow it thither.
That     information        was derived from            Bear-admiral            Donald
Campbell (by birth a Scotchman), of the Portuguese navy, well
known to Lord Nelson, from having previously served under
him, and from having, on a former occasion, rendered some
essential service to the British. For his visit to the Victory,
Bear-admiral Campbell appears to have suffered most severely.
Notwithstanding the rigid secrecy observed by Lord Nelson, the
Spanish naval commander-in-chief at Algeziras got hold of the
circumstance, and made a formal complaint against the rear-
admiral.   This brought down the vengeance of the French
ambassador at the court of Portugal, and Bear-admiral Camp-
                                      2
 bell was laid upon the shelf.
   On the 10th, in the evening, the fleet anchored in Lagos bay,
 to clear some transports which had been left there by Sir John
 Orde, when the latter retreated from before M. Villeneuve.
 Having, in the course of the night, by extraordinary exertions,,
          1
              See p. 341.         2   Clarke and M'Arthur, vol. ii., p. 406.
