346                BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH SHIPS.                            [1805*


completed his ships to five months' provisions, Lord Nelson, at
9 a.m. on the 11th, weighed and sailed out of the bay. The
expected arrival from England of a fleet of transports, with 500O
troops on board under General Sir James Craig, induced his
lordship to remain a short time off Cape St. Vincent and on                  ;


the 12th, in the afternoon, the Queen 98, Eear-admiral Knight,
and Dragon 74, Captain Edward Griffiths, with their valuable
charge, joined company. In order to afford to the convoy an
additional protection in its passage through the Straits, Lord
Nelson detached the Boyal Sovereign and, with his remaining
                                                     ;


10 ships of the line and three frigates, namely, the Victory,
                                                                                          5

Canopus,       Superb,       Spencer, Swiftsure, Belleisle, Conqueror,
Tigre, and Leviathan, and Amazon, Decade, and Amphion,
crowded sail to the westward, in chase of an enemy's fleet
which he knew consisted of 18 ships of the line, and at least
treble his number of frigates. One of the British ships, too,
the Superb, not having been in a home port since the 16th of
January, 1801, was in a very crazy state and it was only upon
                                                         ;



the urgent solicitations of Captain Keats, that the Superb was
allowed to make one in the pursuing fleet.
  Lord Nelson has been accused of rashness, in being so eager
to engage a force nearly double his own but it should be re- ;



collected, that he fully expected to be joined, on reaching Bar-
badoes, by six sail of the line. During his passage to the West
Indies, Lord Nelson prepared a plan of attack, to be adopted in
case he should overtake the enemy's fleet. The plan met the
general approval of his officers but we cannot discover by it
                                            ;


whether the vice-admiral contemplated a meeting before or after
the expected reinforcement. 2
   On the 15th of May the British fleet made Madeira and ok                      :



the 29th the Amazon was sent on to Barbadoes, to enable Bear-
admiral Cochrane to have his ships ready for the expected junc-
tion.  On the 3rd of June Lord Nelson gained, for the first time,
certain intelligence that the combined fleet was in the West
Indies and on the 4th he anchored with his squadron in Carlisle
          ;



bay. Here he found Eear-admiral Cochrane, with only the
Northumberland and Spartiate 74s, his remaining four ships
having been detained by Eear-admiral Dacres at Jamaica. An
unfounded report, circulated, no doubt, on purpose to mislead,
  1 For this ship a contemporary has sub-         - That
                                                         plan, being the work of on
stituted the   Excellent, Captain Frank         acknowledged proficient, may with pro-
Sotheron, left by Lord Nelson in Naples         priety be transcribed into these pages. It
bay.   See Brenton, vol. iii., p. 429.          will therefore be found at No. 29 of the
                                                Appendix.
