1805.]            LORD NELSON AND M, VILLENEUVE.              351

 Icon, the capture and pillage of the British West India islands
 was mere child's play.
   On the 4th of June the combined fleet composed of the same
 vessels with which it had anchored, except the Santa Madalena
 Torche, Na'iade, and Cyane, and having on board, in addition to
 the troops it had brought out, a portion of the garrison of
Martinique, set sail from the harbour of Fort Eoyal, steering a
northerly course. On the same or following day the two 74s,
Algesiras and Achille, which had arrived at Guadaloupe on the
29th of the preceding month, and had sailed on the 2nd of
June in search of the admiral, effected their junction. On the 6th
 M. Yillcneuve lay to off the road of Basse-Terre, and received
on board his fleet a portion of the garrison of Guadaloupe.
   Thus reinforced, the French admiral, with his 20 sail of the
Jine, seven frigates, and two brigs, passed to windward of
Montserrat and Redundo, and to leeward of Antigua, with what
precise object in view has never been satisfactorily explained.
However concealment or a distortion of facts might suit the
policy of Napoleon, it was aiming a deadly blow at the reputa-
tion of his officers to make their public letters the channel of
his falsehoods.   In M. Yilleneuve's letter of 8 thermidor (2Gth
of July), published in the Moniteur of August 11, a void occurs
between the day of his departure from Martinique, " le 16
prairial," or 4th of June, and that on which he made Cape
            " le 21
Finisterre,          messidor," or 9th of July. Not a word is
there about the junction of the two 74s, or the abstraction of
the colonial garrison's a tolerable proof that one or more im-
                          ;



portant paragraphs had been suppressed.
   On the 8th, having doubled Antigua, as if with the real inten-
tion of operating   among the British islands, M. Villeneuve
received intelligence from an American schooner, that in the
north-north-east he would find a British homeward-bound
convoy, which had sailed the day previous from that island.
Chase was immediately given; and before night the Franco-
Spanish fleet overtook 15 sail of merchant-vessels, under the
protection of the British 28-gun frigate Barbadoes, Captain
Joseph Nourse, and 14-gun schooner Netley, Lieutenant Richard
Harward. The two men-of-war effected their escape but the
                                                        ;


merchantmen, valued with their cargoes at five millions of
francs, were captured.     The prizes were given in charge to the
Sirene frigate, with orders to escort them to
                                                Guadaloupe, and
rejoin the fleet off the Western Islands.
   Scarcely had the frigate and her rich convoy parted company
