 350              BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                    [1805.

who landed at the foot of the rock, to have amounted to at least
30 men killed and 40 wounded, exclusively of the loss sustained
on board the ships and boats. Three gun-boats and two rowing-
boats are stated to have been entirely lost. On his subsequent
h'ial by court-martial, Captain Maurice was not only most

honourably acquitted for the loss of the Diamond rock, but
highly complimented for his firm and determined behaviour.
   On the 1st of June, while the governor-general, General
Lauriston, Admirals Villeneuve and Gravina, and a number of
other officers, were inspecting the Diamond rock from the con-
tiguous shore, the French 40-gun frigate Didon, Captain Pierre-
Bernard Milius, ai'rived from Guadaloupe bringing fresh in-
                                                      ;


structions from Napoleon, and likewise intelligence that two
Trench 74s had ai'rived at that island as a reinforcement to the
combined fleet. The Didon had sailed from Lorient on the 2nd
of May, with duplicates of the instructions, with which, on the
day previous, Eear-admiral Magon, with the two new 74-gun
ships Algesiras, Captain Gabriel-Auguste Brouard, and Achille,
Captain Gabriel Denieport, had sailed from Bochefort.       In
those instructions Napoleon directs that Vice-admiral Ville-
neuve, and General Lauriston, having now with the 2100 troops
composing (see p. 348) the united garrison of Martinique and
Guadaloupe, the 3400 carried out by Bear-admiral Missiessy,
the 5100, including Spaniards in the combined fleet, and the 840
on board Bear-admiral Magon's two ships, upwards of 11,400
men to take St. Vincent, Antigua, Grenada; " et pourquoi ne
prendrait-on pas la Barbade ?" Certainly, there was no reason
Avhy, among the "ten Windward islands, including Tobago and
Trinidad," Barbadoes alone should escape free. Tobago having
been a French island, was not to be ill-treated, but such of the
other English colonies as it might not be convenient to retain,
were to be stripped and pillaged thus: " II ne faudrait point
maltraiter File de Tobago, parcequ'elle est francaise mais pour     ;



les autres colonies anglaises qu'on jugerait devoir abandonner

apres les avoir occupees, on pourrait en tirer la moitie des noirs,
lever une contribution sur les habitans, en oter l'artillerie, et
vendre les noirs a la Martinique et a la Guadaloupe."                   1



   Having done all this, and waited in the Antilles for the Brest
fleet 35 days from the day of receiving his despatches, Vice-
admiral Villeneuve was to proceed straight to Ferrol, to carry
into effect, in the way already explained, 2 the ultimate object of
the expedition and, compared to which, in the eyes of Napo-
                    ;


        1   Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 477.       a   See p. 309.
