1805.]
                 LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.               349

Enouf, were to lend their aid, and,   if   necessary, a portion ot
their respective garrisons, towards the fulfilment of this object.
The want of provisions in the fleet, or of unanimity in the
council, or some other unexplained cause, kept M. Villeneuve's-
ships in the harbour of Fort Royal until the latter end of May ;
when two of the 74s moved out to attack the Diamond rock,
which, with its sloop's company of officers and men, still per-
sisted to fire at and annoy every French vessel that passed within
range of its heavy cannon.
  The expedition destined to retake this very harassing and not
informidable "king's ship," consisting of the Pluton and Ber-
wick 74s, 36-gun frigate Sirene, 16-gun brig-corvette Argus,
Fine armed schooner, and 11 gun-boats, under the orders of
Commodore Cosmao of the Pluton, having on board from 300
to 400 troops of the line commanded by chef d'escadron Boyer.
On the 29th of May, at 5h. 30 m. p.m., the expedition sailed
from Fort Boyal. By the morning of the 30th the ships had
not made much progress but on the 31st, at daybreak, they
                             ;


were far to windward of the rock, and at 7 a.m. bore down
towards it. The Diamond had been blockaded ever since the
arrival of the combined fleet at Martinique    :  therefore Captain
Maurice, Avhen he saw Commodore Cosmao's squadron sail out,
anticipated its destination, and prepared accordingly.
   Considering it impossible to defend the lower works against
such a force as was approaching, Captain Maurice abandoned
them, spiking the two guns, drowning the powder, and cutting
away the launch from the landing-place. At 8 a.m. the ships
opened their fire which was returned by Hood's battery and
                   ;



Fort Diamond, the one being the 24-pounder about midway
up the rock, the other the two 18-pounders on its summit. The
ships bombarded the rock during the 31st of May and 1st of
June, and until 4 h. 30m. p.m. on the 2nd; when Captain
Maurice, having, as he states, "but little powder left, and not
a sufficient quantity of ball-cartridges to last until dark," threw
out a flag of truce. At 5 p.m. the Fine schooner hoisted a
 similar flag;
                and terms honourable to the garrison, which
 consisted of 107 officers and men, were agreed to the same
evening.
  In their defence of this extraordinary post, the British sus-
tained a loss of only two men killed and one man wounded.
The chef d'escadron Boyer enumerates the loss of the French
 troops, "from a hasty calculation," at about 50 in killed and
 wounded. Captain Maurico considers the loss of the French,
