348              BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                   [1805.

suis d' opinion, cependant, que Nelson est encore dans les mers
d'Europe. Le sentiment le plus naturel est qu'il devrait etre
rentre en Angleterre pour se ravitailler et verser ses equipages
sur d'autres biitimens car ses vaisseaux ont besoin d'entrer dans
                            ;


le bassin, et son escadre peut etre considered coinme etant en
tres-mauvaix etat." 1 The latter part of this statement was true
enough, but Napoleon did not seemingly reflect what might be
done by such a man as Nelson. The velocity, as well as the
direction, of the British admirals movements had quite out-
stripped the French emperor's calculations.
   That M. Yilleneuve was not, in reality, with 18 sail of the
line running from 11, is natural to suppose       and yet many
                                                       ;



persons, both in France and England, have thought otherwise.
Nor, indeed, could the French admiral's departure from Mar-
tinique have had any possible reference to the arrival of the
British admiral at Barbadoes, owing to the simple fact, that the
two occurrences took place on the same day. M. Villeneuve's
instructions, as well as we can collect what they were from the
mass of orders and counter-orders which issued on the subject,
may afford us some clue to the French admiral's proceedings.
  In the published correspondence between the Emperor Na-
poleon and his minister of marine, a break occurs of nearly seven
months, from September 29, 1804, to April 14, 1805. As, in
the interim, the Toulon fleet had twice sailed, and the last time
had got fairly to sea, this hiatus happens rather inopportunely.
Coupling the April and September instructions, however, we
may gather, that M. Villeneuve was neither to detach ships to
take St. Helena, nor, with the aid of the Bochefort squadron,
himself to capture Surinam and the other Dutch colonies in the
Antilles f but that, on being joined by the Spaniards, he was
to proceed straight to Martinique, and, with the 5100 men on
board the combined fleet, capture Sainte-Lucie, if not already
taken by the Bochefort squadron; leave a garrison there, and,
if necessary, strengthen the garrisons of Dominique, Martinique,
and Guadaloupe, the two latter of which had already, the one
1500, the other 1600 troops. He was then to wait a month in
the Antilles, in order to afford Tice-admiral Ganteaume an op-
portunity of joining with his 21 sail of the line and, to make
                                                            ;


the intervening time pass profitably as well as pleasantly, he
                                               "
was to do all possible injury to the enemy, faire tout le mal
possible a l'ennemi."  The  governor-generals  of Martinique and
of Guadaloupe, Yice-admiral Yillaret Joyeuse and General
                                                       2
         i   Precis des Evenemens, tome si., p. 267.       See p. 242.
