    352              BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                           [1805.

    than a rumour reached Admiral Villeneuve, derived, no doubt,
    from some of the prisoners, that Lord Nelson had arrived in the
    West Indies in search of him. Smarting under their heavy
    losses, and suspecting from the troops on board that
                                                          the com-
    bined fleet, even yet, was destined to act against some of the
    British colonies (nearly the whole of which, according to a
    French writer, had drawn up the capitulations they meant to
    propose to M. Villeneuve, and counted out the sums of money
    they could afford to pay him for their ransom ), the merchant-
                                                                    1




    masters did, most probably, exaggerate the British force under
    Lord Nelson, in the hope to drive the French admiral back to
    Europe. If so, the plan produced its effect for, on the 9th or
                                                                ;



    10th, all the troops which had been withdrawn from Martinique
    and Guadaloupe were precipitately embarked on board the
    Hortense, Didon, Hermione, and Themis frigates, with orders
to Captain La-Marre-la-Meillerie, of the Hortense, the senior
officer, to disembark them at the last-named island,
                                                      and then to
rejoin the fleet at the appointed rendezvous.
   That, in acting thus, the French admiral was but obeying his
orders, is to be inferred from the fact, that Napoleon anticipated
that M. Villeneuve would return straight to Europe on learning
                                    " Je haterai mon arrivee
that he was pursued.                             (a Boulogne) de
quelques jours, parce que je pense, que l'arrivee de Nelson"
                                          "
(whose force he in another place states at dix seuls vaisscaux"),
"en Amerique pourrait pousser Yilleneuve a partir pour le
Ferrol."-   The only act for which Napoleon blamed M. Yille-
neuve, was for not leaving at Martinique' and Guadaloupe the
troops which the fleet had carried out. In his anger, at the
partial failure of his projects,
                                 the French emperor did certainly
attribute this omission on the part of M. Yilleneuve to fright,
"epouvante," at the rumour of his being pursued; but, at a
subsequent day, when the thoughts of invading England had
long ceased to agitate his breast, Buonaparte frankly admitted
                                   3
that Yilleneuve was a brave man.
   On the 26th of June, when, having executed their mission,
they were returning to the fleet, the Didon, Hermione, Hortense,.
and Themis fell in with the Sirene and her valuable charge and                    ;



that but a short distance to windward of the spot whence the
latter had made sail 17 days before.    Coupling the time already
lost with the time it would still take to get a fleet of dull-sailing
merchantmen so far to windward as Guadaloupe, Captain La-
                                                2
1
    Victoires et Conquftes, tome xvi., p. 121.    Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 282.
                    J
                        See O'Meara's Napoleon in Exile, vol. i., p. 57.
