 1805.]                 LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                          353

Marre-la-Meillerie determined to bear up with them for Porto-
Rico.  On the following day, the 27th, when about 180 miles to
north-east of Barbuda, the British 18-gun ship-sloops, Kingfisher,
 Captain Richard William Cribb, and Osprey, Captain Timothy
 Clinch, appeared in sight to windward, and were chased by the
French frigates. In making sail to escape, the two sloops
hoisted signals and fired guns, as if to a fleet ahead. This had
the desired effect. The chasing ships immediately bore up;
and, in a very little time, the whole 15 merchant-vessels, with
all the rum and sugar and coffee on board, were in flames.     A
French writer confirms the fact; calling by mistake the two
sloops "frigates," and seeming to be unapprised of the ruse that
was practised. 1
  On the 30th of June, when about 20 leagues to the north-east
of the island of Corvo, the northernmost of the Azores, M. Vil-
leneuve was rejoined by his five frigates. On the same day the
Didon captured and burnt an English privateer, of 14 guns and
49 men. On the 3rd of July the fleet recaptured the late Spanish
galleon Matilda, with treasure on board to the estimated value
of from 14 to 15 millions of francs and at the same time cap-
                                                    ;



tured the privateer, the Mars, of Liverpool, who had made prize
of the galleon, and was conducting her to an English port.    The
privateer was set on fire, and the galleon taken in tow by the
Sin no frigate. Nothing further of consequence happened to the
combined fleet until it arrived off Cape Finisterre on the 9th of
July on which day a violent gale of wind from the north-east
     ;



carried away the maintopmast of the Indomptable, and other-
wise slightly damaged some of the ships. The wind moderated,
but continued to blow from the same adverse quarter, until a day
or two before the 22nd when, with a favourable change of wind,
                                   ;



occurred an event the account of which had best be deferred till
we have brought up the proceedings of the chasing fleet.
   After quitting Antigua on the 13th of June, 2 Lord Nelson,
still with no more than his own discretion for a
                                                 guide, hastened
towards Europe, and on the 17th of July came in sight of Cape
St. Vincent; ''making," observes the admiral in his         "
                                                     diary,   our
whole run from Barbuda, day by day, 3459 miles. Our run
from Cape St. Vincent to Barbadoes," he adds, "was 3227
miles so that our run back was only 232 miles more than our
         ;


run out, allowance being made for the difference of the latitudes
and longitudes of Barbadoes and Barbuda;
                                             average per day 34
leagues wanting nine miles."                   On the following day, the 18th,
             1
                 Victoires et Conqudtes, tome ivi., p. 128.   «   See p. 347.
   VOL. HI.                                                           2   A
