1805.]                 SIR   ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.                         363

statement of each ship's damage, every wounded topgallant mast
and spritsail-yard, every cut rope and shot-graze would have
been formally set forth and then, and then only, would a fair
                               ;



opportunity have been afforded of comparing the relative
damage on board the two fleets.
  It was extremely natural for the French writers to make the
most of the minute statement of damages published along with
the proceedings of the court-martial which sat upon Sir Eobert
Calder but they evinced very little candour, when they con-
             ;


fronted the whole loss on the British side with a part only of
the loss on their side, and then drew from it the inference that
their fleet had suffered the least in the action.           To have acted
impartially, they should have struck out of the British returns
the two ships that had sustained the heaviest loss, as a set-off
against the two prizes, whose united loss, although the French
were unable to enumerate it, they knew amounted to much more
than that of any other two, or any four ships in the combined
fleet. This would have made the numbers stand thus British           :



loss    killed and wounded, except of Windsor Castle and
         in
Malta. 108 Franco-Spanish loss in killed and wounded, except
                 ;


of San-Bafael and Firme, 171. But, if wo add the loss of the
two omitted ships on each side, as given (with respect to the
Spanish ships for the          first   time) in the preceding page, the
relative quantum of loss will be more than two to one in favour
of the British.
  Daybreak on the 23rd found the two               fleets       about 17 miles
apart, reckoning from their respective centres but, owing to;


the hazy state of the morning, neither fleet had of the other
more than a partial view. The ships of each were lying to, or
making very little way, with the wind as on the preceding clay,
a moderate breeze from the north-west by west. The British
fleet had just come to the wind on the larboard
                                                  tack, but the
combined fleet still remained on the starboard. The British
advanced squadron, consisting of the Barfieur, Hero, Triumph,
and Agamemnon, lay about five miles to windward of the main
body and, at the distance of about six miles to windward of
         ;


the former lay M. Yilleneuve's advanced squadron,
                                                       consisting
also of four sail of the line, besides a few frigates.  To wind-
ward of these again, at the distance of other five or six miles,
lay the body of the Franco-Spanish fleet.    To leeward of the
British main body, about five miles, lay the
                                               crippled Windsor
Castle, with the Dragon approaching to take her in tow      and          ;

still further to
                     leeward, at about an equal distance, lay the Malta,
