354              BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                       [1805.


being on his way to Gibraltar for provisions for his fleet,
                                                             Lord
Nelson fell in with Vice-admiral Collingwood, with the Dread-
nought 98 and two other sail of the line but who had not the
                                                      ;



slightest information to communicate beyond
                                                    what his own
sagacity— and that was of no common kind— suggested. Vice-
admiral Collingwood considered the voyage to the West Indies
in the right point of view, merely as a means of drawing off the
British force from the Channel, to admit of an attack upon
Ireland   ;
               it will be recollected, a disembarkation on Ireland
              and,
                                                                    1
was one of the preliminary steps in Napoleons plan.
  On the 19th of July the British fleet anchored in Gibraltar
          "                                              " I went
bay and on the 20th," says Lord Nelson in his diary,
      ;


on shore for the first time since June 16, 1803, and from having
my foot out of the Victory, two years wanting 10 days." On
the 22nd the fleet weighed and stood across to Tetuan to water,
anchoring at 8 p.m. in Mazari bay. On the 24th, at noon,
                                                              the
fleet again got under way and steered for Ceuta, and remained
                                                  and a thick fog.
during the night in the gut, with variable winds
On the 25th the 18-gun ship-sloop Termagant, Captain Robert
                                                   that the brig-
Pettet, from England, joined, with information
sloop Curieux, on her way home with
                                        Lord Nelson's despatches,
had, on the 19th of June, in latitude 33°
                            2                12' north, longitude

58° west, fallen in with the combined fleet, steering, at first,
north by west, but afterwards north-north-west. This intelli-
                                               five weeks after it
gence, stale as it was in being communicated
bore date, was the earliest of a positive nature which the vice-
admiral had received.
  After passing the Straits, Lord Nelson bore away to the west-
ward, and then proceeded off Cape St. Vincent, to be ready
                                                                 to

steer more northerly as circumstances might direct.    On the 3rd
of August the fleet was in latitude 39° north, longitude 16° west,
with light northerly airs. By his acuteness, Lord Nelson, about
this time, extracted from a log-book, found by an American
                                                       on fire and
merchant-ship on board a vessel which had been set
abandoned, but not destroyed, some far from unimportant
                                                             infor-

mation. The circumstances, as related by each of Lord Nelson's
                               "A
biographers,  are as follows        log-book and a few seamen's
                                    :




                    in the cabin, and these were brought to
jackets were found
Nelson. The log-book closed with these words: 'Two large
vessels in the W.N.W.;' and this led him to conclude
                                                     that the
  '
    See p 216; also a letter from Vice-
                                            2
                                                Both Southey in his, and Clarke and
admiral Collingwood to Lord Nelson on     M'Anhur in their, "Lite ot Nelson,
this subject, Appendix, No. 30.           make this the 19th of July; a serious
                                          mistake.    See p. 310.
