358             BRITISH            AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                    [1805.

vered and signalled 10 sail in the north-north-east, approaching
on the starboard tack. The frigates sent ahead to reconnoitre
presently augmented the number to 21 sail; namely, 17 British
ships, the lugger and cutter, and two Danish merchant-brigs,
one brought to by the Dragon, the other by the Egyptienne.
In the mean time the Defiance, the British look-out ship, and
which then lay about three leagues to windward of her fleet,
discovered and signalled a strange fleet in the south-west.
   At noon, latitude 43° 54' north, longitude (from Greenwich)
11° 38' west, Ferrol east-south-east distant 49, and Cape
Finisterre south-east distant 39 leagues, the Prince of Wales
made the signal to prepare for battle, and in a few minutes
afterwards to form the order of sailing in two columns. This
was followed by a signal to form the line and at 1 h. 15 m. p.m.,
                                                       ;



to keep in close order.  At 2 h. 15 m, p.m. the latter signal was
repeated and at 3 p.m. the Defiance having stood on until
           ;


within less than two miles of the enemy, joined and took her
station in the line, the ships of which, when in their places,
ranked as follows Hero, Ajax, Triumph, Barfleur, Agamemnon,
                           :




Windsor Castle, Defiance, Prince of Wales, Bepulse, Baison-
able, Dragon (then under a press of sail to leeward, as soon as
she should join), Glory, Warrior, Thunderer, Malta; most of
the ships with their topgallantsails set, and all, except the
Dragon, with their courses up, standing, as before, on the star-
board tack.
   At about the same time the ships of the combined fleet
formed themselves in line of battle, in the following order                           :




Argonauta,               America, Espana, San-Bafael, Firme,
                    Terrible,
Pluton, Mont Blanc, Atlas, Berwick, Neptune, Bucentaure,
Formidable, Intrepide, Scipion, Swiitsure, Indomptable, Aigle,
Achille, Algesiras.    At 3 h. 30 m. p.m., after having hove to
                               1



some time, the combined fleet filled, and under topsails, stood
on upon the larboard tack, rather off the wind, in a close well-
formed line one frigate ahead, another, the Sirene, who had
                ;



just taken the galleon in tow, astern, and the remaining five
frigates, in a second line, to windward of the centre and rear.
The British fleet was at this time nearly abeam, and about seven
miles distant        ;   but,      owing to the fog, neither fleet was more
than partially in sight of the other.
  Since 1 p.m. the Egyptienne and Sirius, then a short distance
to windward of the Defiance, had been ordered, by signal, to
keep sight of the enemy. The frigates accordingly made sail to
      i   For the names of their several commanders see pp. 334, 339, and 342.
