1805.]           SIR       ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.              361

manoeuvre, the Ajax put her helm up, and bore away to speak
the admiral.    On passing within hail of the Prince of Wales,
Captain Brown informed Sir Eobert Calder of the change of
position in the two vans. The Ajax then wore, and fell into
the line astern of the Glory thus making herself, instead of the
                                 ;



second, the twelfth ship from the van. At 5 h. 50 m. p.m., by
which time the five ships in line between the Ajax and Prince
of Wales had successively tacked, the latter, as she probably
would have done, had the Ajax followed her gallant leader into
the thick of the enemy's fire, hoisting the signal to tack in
succession, tacked also, and, in a quarter of an hour or 20
minutes, joined in the cannonade, now becoming general and
furious.   By 6 p.m. all the ships in the British line, except the
Dragon, which was still to leeward working up, had got round
on the starboard tack, and the greater part had found opponents
in the opposite line   ;but, what with the fog and the smoke, no
ship could see much beyond her own length.
   Owing to the disorder to which this gave rise, some of the
ships in both fleets had several opponents upon them at once.
On the British side, the Windsor Castle was a principal sufferer      ;


and the Ajax, Prince of Wales, Thunderer, and Malta, the last
especially, participated in this unequal warfare. On the part of
the combined fleet, the San-Rafael, Firme, and Espana, having
dropped to leeward, became greatly exposed to the fire of the
British.   Seeing the situation of the Firme, the latter's second
astern, the Pluton, gallantly bore up out of the line, and, for
a while, covered the Spanish ship from the destructive effects of
their enemy's fire but the Firme was too powerfully opposed to
                  ;



profit by the aid afforded her, and the Pluton herself with diffi-
culty regained her station.
   The critical situation of the Espana iuduced Captain Cosmao-
Kerjulien, a second time, to interpose himself between one of his
Spanish allies and the British line.      In this instance, bring
assisted by the Mont Blanc and Atlas, the Pluton succeeded,
and the Espana was rescued. Amidst the derangement of the
 Franco-Spanish line, the Atlas suffered most severely, and, but
 for the support of her friends, among whom the Neptune was
 foremost, would certainly have been captured.
    Soon after 8 p.m. the Firme, with the loss of her main and
 mizen masts, and subsequently of all her masts, struck and ;


 the San-Rafael, with the loss of her maintopmast, and sub-
 sequently of all her masts also, did not hold out many minutes
 longer. At 8 h. 25 m., at which time the British ships were dit*-
