1805.]                SIR       ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.                  359

get nearer to the latter      and the Sirius, the weathermost
                                    ;


frigate, as she passed from van to rear of the combined fleet,
made the signal of the exact number of line-of-battle ships and
smaller vessels composing it.   At 3 h. 20 m. p.m. Sir Eobert made
the signal to engage the enemy and at 3 h. 22 m., to tack toge-
                                         ;


ther.   At 3h. 26 m. the same signal was repeated and annulled.
At 3 h. 27 m. a signal was made for the starboard division to
make all possible sail, and steer south-south-west.
  At 3 h. 30 m. the same signal was made to the Hero, who pro-
bably had commenced tacking in obedience to the signal at 3 h.
22 m. At 3 h. 31 m. the signal was made to form the line of
battle in open order        ;
                                at 3 h. 53 m., to alter course one point to
starboard    and at 4h. 21 m., to tack in succession.
             ;


  The signal to tack in succession appears to have been made by
each commander-in-chief about the same time but, in the foggy
                                                          ;


state of the weather, neither fleet saw the commencement of the
other's manoeuvre.   The British tacked, to prevent their oppo-
nents escaping them on the opposite tack ; but the Franco-
Spaniards, who had hauled close to the wind on getting within
about three miles of the British fleet, wore, in consequence of
the Sirene, which bad the galleon in tow, making signals, by
guns fired in quick succession, that the rear was in danger of
being cut off.
  This was occasioned by the bold approach of the Sirius, who,
as soon as she had got sufficiently to windward to fetch into the
wake of the combined line, had tacked, with the intention of
attempting to carry, by boarding, the great object of the enemy's
solicitude. While making the necessary preparation to effect
his object, Captain Prowse discovered, through the haze on his
lee-bow, the enemy's van-ship, the Argonauta, approaching with
the wind nearly abeam.      The Sirius herself being now in
jeopardy,        Captain Browse         abandoned   his   design upon    the
galleon, and bore up to pass to leeward of the Franco-Spanish
line.  With a forbearance highly honourable to Admiral Gravina,
the Argonauta passed the British frigate without firing            ;
                                                                       and so
did the Terrible and America.   By the time, however, that the
Sirius had got abreast of the Espana, which was at about 5 h.
15 m. p.m., the Hero, the British van ship, then with
                                                      royals set,
hove in stays. Instantly the Spanish ships, all of whom had
royals and courses set, hoisted their colours and commenced the
action the Argonauta firing her larboard guns at the Hero,
         ;


and the Espana hers at the Sirius, which ship, in
                                                    consequence,
had two men killed and three wounded
