                                    (       356        )




   BKITISH AND FKANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.



On the 19th of February, in the afternoon, Vice-admiral Sir
Eobert Calder, in the Prince of Wales 98, was detached from
the Channel fleet to take the command of the blockading
squadron off Ferrol, in the room of Eear-admiral the Hon.
Alexander Cochrane, who with five sail of the line and a frigate
had quitted the station since the 24th of February for the West
Indies, in pursuit of the Eochefort squadron, also of five sail of
the line, and of the proceedings, of which we shall hereafter
give some account. On the 1st of March, in the evening, the
Prince of Wales arrived off Cape Prior, and joined six sail of
the line under the command of Captain the Hon. Arthur Kaye
Legge, in the Eepulse 74, the senior officer at the departure of
Eear-admiral Cochrane. The Franco-Spanish fleet in Ferrol at
this time amounted to 10 sail of the line ready for sea, and two
or three others fitting. Between the 22nd of April and the 31st
of May Sir Eobert, at no one time, had with him a greater force
than nine sail of the line, and for days together not so many.
   On the 15th of July the vice-admiral was reinforced by five
sail of the line under Eear-admiral Stirling in the Glory 98,
from off Eochefort. 1 This made Sir Eobert Calder's force con-
sist of the following 15 sail of the line and smaller vessels                    :




    Gun-ship.
                                                           (b.) Sir Robert Calder.
                Prince of Wales
           J                                      William Cuming.
                                        {Vice-admiral
                                          Captain
                                        ( Rear-admiral (b.) Charles
                                                                    Stirling,
      98        Glory   .   .   .

           -j                           \ Captain Samuel Warren.
                Barfleur    .               , ,       George Martin.
            I   Windsor Castle              , ,
                                                      Charles Boyles.

                                    1
                                        See p. 310.
