362             BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                          [1805.

united and scattered, the body of the combined fleet barely
within gun-shot to windward, and the shades of night combining
with the fog and smoke to render objects still more indistinct,
Sir Eobert made the night private signal to discontinue the
action.   At about 9 p.m. the "Windsor Castle, with her foretop-
mast gone, passed close to windward of the Prince of Wales,
and then bore up and was taken in tow by the Dragon who,                ;


with all her efforts, had not got up in time to take more than a
very slight part in the action indeed, it was nearly 8 p.m. when
                                    ;



the Dragon fell into line ahead of the Barfleur, who herself had
been unable to get very close to the enemy. The signal to dis-
continue the action being seen but by few ships, the general
firing did not cease until 9 h. 30 m. p.m. The British ships soon
afterwards brought too upon the starboard tack, with their heads
about south-west by west, and lay by for the night, repairing
their damages, in order to be ready to renew the contest on the
morrow.
   The loss in gross sustained by the British fleet, amounted
to 39 officers and men killed and 159 wounded; and, as Sir
Eobert Calder, in his official return, has, contrary to what is
customary, omitted to specify the names or qualities of the
officers killed and wounded, we are constrained to do the same.
One ship, the Warrior, escaped with entire impunity and the    ;


Hero, Agamemnon, Bepulse, Baisonable, Glory, and Dragon,
lost between them but three men killed and 14 wounded           nor         ;


were the Dragon's four men wounded by the enemy's shot, but
by an accidental explosion. No ship had a mast shot away but
the Windsor Castle and Agamemnon, nor a yard except the
Ajax. The loss on board the two prizes was stated to consist of
      1


about 600 in killed and wounded; but a careful comparison of
the number of wounded and unwounded prisoners, with the
number of men deposed to have been on board each ship at the
commencement of the action, has reduced the number con-
siderably.   In this amended state, the gross loss sustained by
the combined fleet amounts to 476 officers and men killed and
wounded. 2 With respect to damages, the French and Spanish
ships did not exhibit many marks in their masts and rigging                      ;


but some of them, undoubtedly, were much hit in the hull. One
ship, we believe the Atlas, had the head of her bowsprit shot
away; another, her fore-yard and foretopgallantmast and a           ;



third, a topsailyard.  Had a court-martial on the French, as was
the case with the British, commander-in-chief, called for a specino
                                        2   See Appendix, No. 32.
        1
            See Appendix, No. 31.
