1805.]            LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.             355

vessel   had been a Liverpool privateer cruising off the Western
Islands.    But there was in this book a scrap of dirty paper,
filled with figures.  Nelson, immediately upon seeing it, observed
that the figures were written by a Frenchman ; and, after study-
ing this for a while, said:
                              '
                            I can explain the whole.  The jackets
are of French manufacture, and prove that the privateer was in
possession of the enemy.    She had been chased and taken by
the two ships that were seen in the W.N.W. The prize-master,
going on board in a hurry, forgot to take with him his reckoning :



there is none in the log-book, and the dirty paper contains her
work for the number of days since the privateer left Corvo, with
an unaccounted-for run, which I take to have been the chase, in
his endeavour to find out her situation by back-reckoning.    By
some mismanagement I conclude she was run on board by one
of the enemy's ships and dismasted. Not liking delay (for I am
satisfied that those two ships were the advanced ones of the
French squadron), and fancying we were close at their heels,
they set fire to the vessel, and abandoned her in a hurry.'"
The compilers of the anecdote, unfortunately, have omitted the
dates, both of the last entry in the log-book, and of the day on
which the wreck was fallen in with. We might otherwise have
been able to show, that it was the late Liverpool privateer Mars
herself, which had given rise to Lord Nelson's speculations.   If
so, the jackets had probably belonged to some of the Matilda's
crew, and the scrap of paper been written upon by a Spaniard.
Whichever way it was, the inference remained just as the vice-
admiral had drawn it, that the capturing fleet had steered to the
northward.
  A northerly course thus appearing to have been taken by
M. Yilleneuve, a northerly course was taken by his ardent
pursuer, but, to the latter's regret, against northerly winds and
hazy weather. On the 8th of August the wind became more
favourable. On the 12th the Niobe frigate joined from the
Channel fleet, but, strange to say, still without intelligence.
On the 15th Lord Nelson himself joined Admiral Cornwallis off
Ushant, from whom he heard all that had happened, and, on
the same evening, proceeded with the Victory and Superb to
Portsmouth leaving the remainder of his fleet (except the
              ;




Belleisle, who steered for Plymouth) as a reinforcement to the
Channel fleet. 1 On the 18th the Victory and Superb anchored
at Spithead; and Lord Nelson shortly afterwards struck his
flag and went on shore.
                                  '
                                      Seep. 311.
