304           BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS                  [1805.


Thunderer, two       frigates, and prizes, all of          whom were out of
sight of the admiral.
  At 6 h. 30 m. a.m. the Prince of Wales, and the ships with
her, filled their maintopsails and at 8 a.m. the van-division,
                                       ;



by signal, bore up to close the former, which had then wore,
and, under their topsails, were running to leeward to join the
prizes and the ships with them. At 9 a.m., having concentrated
his fleet, the British admiral hauled up on the larboard tack,
and steered about north-east keeping between the Franco-
                                           ;



Spanish fleet and his three disabled ships.        Of these the
Windsor Castle was in tow by the Dragon, the Firme, by the
Sirius, and the San-Kafael, at present by the Egyptienne, who
had recently taken charge of her from the Malta.
   No sooner had the weathermost British ship bore up to join
the prizes than, imagining that the former, although under top-
                                     "
sails only, were flying in disorder,   fuyant en desordre," the
French admiral went with his staff on board the Hortense
frigate, and calling to him all the other frigates except the
Didon, which latter had been sent ahead to reconnoitre, ordered
them to inform his captains that he meant to bring on a decisive
action, and that they were to lay their ships as close as possible
alongside of the enemy.
                          1
                            While the five frigates were hailing
the line-of-battle ships successively, to acquaint them, " au porte-
voix," with their chiefs intention, the Didon, confiding in her
superior sailing, had approached very near to the British fleet            ;


so near, that the Triumph, at 11 a.m., for the want of a frigate
to perform the office, tacked and chased her away.
   Towards noon the wind veered more to the northward and got
very light, and a heavy swell came on from the same quarter.
At a few minutes past noon the combined fleet, formed in order
of battle, bore up towards the British fleet, then about four
leagues off in the east-south-east but, owing to the distance,
                                               ;



and to the extreme lightness of the breeze, it was not until
3h. 10 m. p.m. that the advance of the French and Spaniards was
noticed by the British. Immediately the ships of the latter
hoisted their colours, and hauled closer to the wind, awaiting
the expected attack. At 4 p.m., however, the ships of the com-
bined fleet, with colours also hoisted, and then distant about
three leagues from their opponents, hauled to the wind on the
same tack as the British ships; thus evidently declining, for the
present, a renewal of the engagement. For a fact so important,
and so utterly at variance with the statement at first given out
                 1
                     Victoires et Conqugtes, tome xvi., p. 142.
