1805.]                       SIR ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.                                 367

must equally take part in the action. 1 no signals to that effect
will be necessary they must proceed to the point where their
                               ;



co-operation may be most advantageous, whether to hasten the
surrender of an enemy's ship, or to cover a French ship too
closely pressed, and to take her in tow or otherwise assist her."
                                                                  2

No shyness betrays itself here an additional proof that, in his
                                                  ;



apparent disinclination to close with an inferior force, Vice-
admiral Yilleneuve was acting a compulsory part.
  On the 23rd of July the parties, in point of relative force, stood
nearly the same. The combined fleet had been reduced from
20 to IS ships, and the British from 15 to 14. But the one had
its seven frigates ready to act upon any service while the other        ;


had its two frigates employed in towing the prizes of the pre-
ceding day and which prizes, in the attention they otherwise
                   ;



claimed, impeded the British fleet in its progress, and prevented
it from attempting any manoeuvre whereby an
                                                 advantage might
be gained. Considering the little value of the vessels, the San-
Rafael, a ship of 34, and the Firme, a ship of 51 years old, and
both battered to pieces, their destruction would have been not
only a justifiable measure, but, under circumstances, the most
eligible that could have been devised.
   With respect to the power of commencing the action, a con-
tinuance of the same wind kept it where it had been on the day
previous yet, with the exception of an hours demonstration or
             ;




show-off, as it may be termed, the party possessing that power
declined to use it. On the 24th a change of wind, to nearly an
opposite point of the compass, produced a corresponding change
in the position of the two fleets; but still they did not
                                                          approach
nearer each other. The truth is, that since the close of the first
day's proceedings, Sir Robert Calder, unless some unlooked-for
advantage should offer itself, did not intend to be a second time
the assailant, he would neither attack nor retreat nor would
                       :
                                                                               ;


he deviate one point from the course necessary to convoy his
crippled ship and his two worthless prizes beyond the reach of
danger. Each fleet, therefore, on the afternoon of the 24th,
pursued its route, as if the other were not present, or that no
hostility existed between them.
  "
    Notre intention est que vous fassiez votre jonction en evitant
le combat," says Napoleon, in his instructions to                           M. Yilleneuve;
                       " Si vous
and, in another place,           prenez le parti de faire votre
reunion avec l'cscadre de Brest, vous devez tenter de le faire
sans combat."               Buonaparte,        also,   when writing to M. Decres,
     See p. 366.       2
 1
                           For the origiual of this curious production, see Appendix, No. 33.
