                             SIR ROBERT CALDER'S ACTION.                                    365
1805.]


by the French, some authority may be                             requisite.        "A midi,
toute la rlotte prit chasse sur l'ennemi, qu'on estimait a trois
lieues et demie le vent etait faible.
                         :                           A
                                        quatre heures, on n'avait
encore    gagnequ'une lieue k l'escadre anglaise il n'y avait par       ;




consequent pas d'espoir de l'atteindre avant la nuit, mais on
pouvait au moins l'approcher davantage cependant Yilleneuve  ;



fit signal a la flotte de serrer le vent, son intention etant de

n'attaquer l'ennemi que le lendemain ce signal etonna autant
                                                         ;



qu'il affligea les officiers et les marins   on previt des lors qu'on
                                                         ;

                                                             '
ne parviendrait plus k joindre l'ennemi."
    The British admiral resumed his course to the north-east, but
was soon driven from it by a change of wind; which, com-
mencing about midnight at north, became, by 8 a.m. on the
24th, north-north-east, and occasionally north-west, but it was
very moderate, amounting almost to a calm. This brought the
combined fleet nearly astern of the British fleet which was                    ;


now to windward, and might, in all probability, have renewed
the action. No attempt of the kind was made. Sir Robert, for
 reasons that will appear presently, continued with his prizes,
 under easy sail, working towards a British port, steering about
 south-east by east.     The combined fleet had steered the same
 course as the British fleet until 8 a.m. the ships then edged
                                                             :




 away and steered south-east by south. At 4 p.m. one ship
 only of the Franco- Spanish fleet was in sight of the British
 fleet, and by 6 p.m.
                        the two fleets had wholly disappeared from
 each other.
     In examining the merits of the affair between Sir Robert
 Calder and 31. Yilleneuve, we shall take each day's proceeding
 by itself. The battle was fought, as has already been shown,
 between 14, or, gratuitously adding the Dragon (for she was not
 engaged till at the very close), 15 British, and 20 French and
 Spanish sail of the line. Cases have occurred where the French
 have enumerated frigates as a part of the force opposed to them.
 Here, be it observed, there were seven on one side, and two only
 on the other those seven frigates had also been ordered, as will
                     :




 hereafter be made manifest, to take a part in the action, and one
 frigate did, for a short time,
                                   with other ships, engage the Wind-
  sor Castle.    If, between the four 80-gun ships
                                                        in the combined

  fleet, and the four 9H-gun ships
                                       in the British, any allowance is

  expected for the nominal (for it is not real *) superiority of the
  latter, let four of the five surplusage frigates
                                                       be added to 1ho

                                                                    *   See vol. ii., p. 208.
         1
             Vktuires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 143.
