1805.J           SIR    ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.              373

  The first step taken by M. Villeneuve on reaching Vigo, was
to despatch a courier to Ferrol, as well to apprise the two rear-
admirals of his arrival, as to be put in possession of any fresh
instructions which they might have to communicate.        Mean-
while the French admiral proceeded to disembark his sick and
wounded, also the prisoners made on the voyage. M. Ville-
neuve then took on board a supply of water, and, as may be
supposed (for it is not acknowledged), commenced refitting his
ships.  The French, indeed, were sedulous in concealing the
state of their ships but the Spaniards on shore gave out, that
                    ;


the Terrible, America, and Espana, the two last especially, were
considerably  damaged and a neutral merchant-master, who
                         ;


rowed round the ships in the harbour, declared that the lar-
board or engaged side of the Atlas was like a riddle, and that,
in the hulls of the two last-named Spanish ships, innumerable
shot-holes were visible.
  On the 29th or 30th the courier returned, if not with any
additional instructions, with the important intelligence, that on
the 28th, the day of his departure, no British ships were in
sight   from Ferrol or Corunna.        No time was to be lost.
Accordingly, on the 30th of July, leaving behind him the
America. Espana, and Atlas, not because they or any one of
them had been so battered in the action of the 22nd as to
render them for the present ineffective ships, but simply
because they were "slow sailers" and might "delay the pro-
gress of the fleet," M. Villeneuve, with 13 French and two
Spanish sail of the line, seven frigates, and two brigs, got under
way, and steered for Corunna Avith a wind blowing from west-
                                ;



south-west, so fair, and at the same time so strong, that even a
slow-sailing merchantman, much more a slow-sailing man-of-
war, would have found no difficulty in keeping company. On
the evening of the very day, the 1st of August, on the morning
of which the British fleet, which had so recently arrived off the
port, was driven from its station, the combined fleet entered
Corunna.
   Learning, while at this anchorage, that the Eochefort squadron
was at sea in search of him, M. Villeneuve, on the 5th, de-
spatched the Didon frigate to endeavour to find I\I. Allemand,
and enable him to join. On the 9th, in the evening, the combined
fleet, the French part of which consisted, besides the whole of
the ships named at page 358, except the Atlas, of the 74s Argo-
naute, Duguay-Trouin, Fougueux, Heros, and Bedoutable, and
the Spanish part, of the Principe-de-Asturias, three-decker, 80s
