368                      BRITISH       AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.                            [1805.


asks,  "A quoi aboutissait une bataille?" and immediately
answers the questions himself, "A rien."
                                              1          —
                                                 If one admiral,
therefore, had the misfortune to act under orders that forbade
him to fight unless with such odds in his favour as would insure
success, the other was also controlled, in some degree, by extra-
neous circumstances sufficient, if not to excuse him for declining
                                   ;


to assail an equal force, to justify him in acting a peculiarly
cautious part, when himself assailed by a force decidedly supe-
rior.  Sir Eobert Calder knew that the very ships composing
his fleet had been abstracted from watching as many enemy's
ships as had composed the combined fleet on his first meeting
it; he himself, with 10, had been ordered
                                              from off a port in
which lay 15, waiting, as he had every reason to believe, solely
for his departure, to slip out and join M. "Villeneuve.      Rear-
admiral Stirling, also, with five ships, had been called from off
another port, out of which he knew, and informed Sir Robert,
that five French ships had been seen getting under way just as
                                                              2
the blockading squadron was disappearing from the coast         and                       ;



which five ships, since known to have sailed on the 16th, were
endeavouring to effect their junction, either with M. Yilleneuve
at sea, or with Rear-admiral Gourdon at Ferrol.           So well
grounded were Sir Robert Calder's apprehensions on this head,
that, on the 23rd of July, Rear-admiral Allemand, with his
squadron, was on the very spot on which the battle of the
preceding day had been fought. Moreover, Sir Robert had
been ordered by the admiralty, and by the commanders-in-chief
of the Channel and of the Mediterranean fleets, to be on his
guard in case of a junction between the fleet of M. Villeneuve
and the squadron from Ferrol whose united force would have
                                                     ;


been at least 35, and, if the Rochefort squadron had joined, 40
sail of the line.
      Matters would have passed                          off,   and Sir Robert Calder's
success, in having, with a fleet of 15 sail of the line, captured
two out of an enemy's fleet of 20 sail of the line, been taken as
an earnest of how much more would have been effected had the
parties met on fairer terms.  But the accounts on shore marred
all.  The British admiralty suppressed an important paragraph
in Sir Robert's letter to Admiral Cornwallis   taking care that         ;


the published extract (to confirm the delusion, stated to be a
      "
  copy of the official letter) should end where hopes were held
' '




                                                           2 See Minutes of the court-martial
      1
          Pre'cis   des Evenemens, tome   xi., pp.                                            upon
248, 252, and 276.                                       Sir Robert Calder Rear-admiral Stirling's
                                                                            :


                                                         evidence
