1805.]
                            SIR   ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.                             371

and mounted on her first and second decks the same nominal
force as the French 80, No. 3, in the small Table at p. 59 of
the first volume, upon her quarter-deck and forecastle 10 long
8-pounders (two of them brass) and 10 carronades, 36-pounders,
and upon her poop six 24-pounder carronades, total 88 guns;
with a complement, on the morning of the action, of 800 men
and boys, and 104 soldier-passengers. The Firme was built at
Cadiz in the year 1754, and measured 1805 tons. Neither the
San-Eafael nor the Firme, as a proof how little their destruction
would have been felt, was ever employed in the British service
except as a prison-ship.
   When, at 8 p.m. on the 26th, he had seen his prizes to the
prescribed latitude, Sir Eobert Calder, with his 14 sail of the
line, wore and stood back to the rendezvous off Cape Finisterre,
in the expectation of there being joined by the fleet under Lord
Nelson. On the 27th, at a little before noon, the wind changed
to the north-west, and the vice-admiral shortly afterwards
reached the rendezvous. Not finding Lord Nelson there, Sir
Eobert, with the wind at west, steered for Ferrol and, arriving         ;



off that port on the 29th, sent in the Dragon to reconnoitre. On
a report from the latter, that the combined fleet had not entered
Ferrol, Sir Eobert concluded that M. Villeneuve had proceeded
to the southward, and he resumed the blockade of the port.
   On the 31st the vice-admiral sent the Malta to England to
get refitted. Taking due advantage of this circumstance, one of
the French writers gravely asserts, that almost every ship ot
Admiral Calder's fleet was obliged to return to an English port
to get repaired 1 and Napoleon, as soon as he learnt that the
                        j


Windsor Castle and Malta had been ordered home, directed his
minister of marine, in his letter of condolence to the Prince of
Peace on the loss of the San-Eafael and Firme, to acquaint the
        "
latter,   que deux vaisseaux ennemis sont arrives coulant bas a
            2
Plymouth."      Eespecting these two "sinking" ships, the
Windsor Castle did not enter the harbour of Plymouth, but
refitted herself in Cawsand bay, and in three weeks was again
at sea; and the Malta would have been only half that time in
port, had she not required to be newly coppered.
   On the 1st of August, in the forenoon, Sir Eobert Calder was
driven by a strong south-westerly wind far to the north-east of
his port.   On the 2nd, at noon, agreeably to his orders from
Admiral Cornwallis, the vice-admiral detached, to resume the
                                                  5
  1
       Victoires et ConquStes,    tome xvi., p.       Precis <ies   Evenemens, tome   xii., p
144.
