 366                   BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1805.

former which will be leaving three opposed to the British two,
               ;


because one of the latter, the Egyptienne, mounted 21-pounders
on her main deck. When, also, it is considered, that, from the
weight of metal, and number of men she carries, a French 74 is
of greater force than a British 74, no objection on the part of
the French or Spaniards can be urged against an estimate
which, grounded on the numerical line-of-battle strength on
each side, fixes the ratio of force in their favour as four is to
three.
  With, then, the inferiority of one-fourth in point of force, the
British succeeded in capturing two ships out of the adverse line.
If these were slow sailers and bad workers, how many slow
sailers and bad workers did the British fleet contain ?  If the
density of the fog obstructed the French and Spaniards in their
manoeuvres, what effect must it have had upon the British, to
whom, in spite of all that had been urged to the contrary, so
many signals were made and so few seen or understood and           ;



who actually performed the evolution, which brought on the
close action, without a signal at all ? The tacking of the Hero,
for instance.          Certainly, too, the fog, combined with the smoke,
incommoded the British, who were to leeward, more than the
French and Spaniards, who were to windward.                  A
                                                         victory,
therefore, it was that Sir Bobert Calder had gained, but not a
"                  " brilliant "
  decisive," nor a               victory. To have made the action
decisive, one way or the other, was exclusively in the power of
M. Yilleneuve but he kept his wind, and the firing ceased,
                       ;



owing principally, if not wholly, to his having hauled out of gun-
shot.
   It may throw some light upon the proceedings of M. Yille-
neuve, both in this action and generally since he last quitted
Toulon, if we transcribe a portion of the instructions which, on
the eve of his departure, he addressed to the captains of his
fleet.  "I do not," he says, "intend to go in search of the
enemy I would even avoid him in order to get to my destina-
           :




tion but, should we meet him, let there be no discreditable
       ;


evolution it would dishearten our men and insure our defeat.
                   :




If the enemy be to leeward of us, having the power to adopt
what evolution we please, we will form our order of battle, and
bear down upon him in line abreast each ship to close with her
                                           ;


natural opponent in the enemy's line, and to board him should a
favourable opportunity present itself."        —
                                          "Every captain, who is
not closely engaged, is not in his station and a signal to recall
                                                   ;


him to his duty will be a stain upon his character. The frigates
