370                  BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                                      [1805.


Spanish fleet ; in the chase of                      it, he brings on a partial engage-

ment, and captures two ships. He is tried and reprimanded,
because it is believed that, had he renewed the action, he would
have obtained a more decisive victory. What would they have
done with Calder, in England, if he had commanded the superior
fleet, and had lost two ships, in avoiding an engagement which

presented so favourable a chance to skill and valour ? What
would they have done with the captains P" 1
   We stated, a page or two back, that the French official ac-
counts of the meeting between M. Villeneuve and Sir Eobert
Calder were dictated by the French emperor. As this is a very
serious charge,  we shall endeavour to substantiate it. The
Moniteur published two letters, as from Admiral Villeneuve,
giving an account of the action       one dated July 27, in the
                                                            ;




paper of August 11 the other dated July 29, in the paper, 'of
                               ;




August 14. Both letters, of course, make a good story; and
both commend (the last, in set terms) the noble behaviour of
Admiral Gravina and the Spanish ships. And yet a letter from
Napoleon to his minister of marine, dated on the 13th of August,
contains these sentences " De quoi done se plaint Villeneuve
                                         :


de la part des Espagnols ? lis se sont battus comme des lions." 2
Hence, the commendations in the published letters were not the
sentiments of the nominal writer nor, by a fair inference, could
                                                        ;



any of the misstatements in those letters be laid to the charge of
M. Villeneuve. But the Moniteur of August 13 contained, with
a translation of Sir Eobert Calder's letter, very copious remarks
upon every part of it.             And Napoleon, in his letter to M. Decres
of August 11, after observing upon the statements in the British
official    account, proceeds thus: "L'arrivee de Villeneuve a la
Corogne fera tomber ces gasconnades, et, aux yeux de l'Europe,
nous donnera l'air de la victoire cela est beaucoup. Faites :




sur-le-champ une relation, et envoyez-la a M. Maret : void comme je
la             All that follows M. le Comte Dumas has left
      concois." 3
blank.   Enough, however, remains to show who penned the
remarks in the Moniteur and yet these very remarks, without,
                                     ;




apparently, their real origin being suspected, were translated
into most of the London journals.
   On the 31st of July, after having been escorted by the fleet
beyond the probable reach of the Bochefort squadron, the two
prizes anchored in Blymouth Sound.        The San-Rafael was
built at Havana in the year 1771, measured 2130 tons English,
                                                      2 Precis    des Evenemens, tome
 1
     For the original, see Appendix, No. 34.                                            xii., p. 251.
                                             3
                                                 Ibid., p. 248.
