1805. J                SIR ROBERT CALDER's ACTION.                             369

out of a renewal of the engagement;                 thus: " They are now in
sight to windward  and, when I have secured the captured ships
                          ;


and put the squadron to rights, I shall endeavour to avail myself
of any opportunity that may offer to give you a further account
of these combined squadrons."    The suppressed paragraph Avas
this :"At the same time it will behove me to be on my guard
against the combined squadrons in Ferrol, as I am led to believe
they have sent off one or two of their crippled ships last night
for that port; 1       therefore, possibly I       may find it necessary to
make a junction with you immediately off Ushant, with the
whole squadron." The admiralty, it is true, may have acted
thus upon the oral information of the officer bearing the
despatches   and which, in every version of it, conveys an abso-
               ;



lute intention on the part of Sir Eobert Calder to renew the
action.  Several of the British captains also understood that to
be the nature of the message delivered to them by Lieutenant
Nicholson, just as he was quitting the fleet for England.
  The French official accounts, really dictated by the French
emperor, but purporting to be the statement of the French com-
mander-in-chief, claimed the victory as theirs, and boasted that
the combined fleet had repeatedly chased the British fleet, and
at length compelled  it to fly. These accounts, translated into
English, and published in all the newspapers of the country,
rivetted the effect produced by the admiralty bulletin, and
spread far and wide that spirit of discontent which finally com-
pelled Sir Robert Calder to demand a court-martial upon his
conduct. That court-martial, which sat on board the Prince of
Wales, in Portsmouth harbour, from the 23rd to the 26th of
             "
December,      severely reprimanded" the British admiral, for in it
having done his utmost to renew the engagement on the 23rd
and 24th of July; but the sentence admitted, that his conduct
had not been actuated either by cowardice or disaffection. The
preceding details, now for the first time so fully given to the
public, will enable even a landman to form some opinion of the
justice of the sentence pronounced upon Sir Robert Calder.
  The following remarks of an eminent French writer will show
what he thought, as well of that sentence as of the " victory "
which M. Yilleneuve, by his master's arts, had been made to
                                             "
say that lie had gained over the British.      Admiral Calder,''
says  M.   Dupin, "with an inferior force, meets the Franco-
  1
    This may have arisen from the Defi-      when on the morning of the 23rd 18 only
Mice's signal of the preceding day at noon   were counted.
                       "
b&ving been for 22 sail of the line,"
   VOL. HI.                                                          2 B
