372                   BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.            [1805.


blockade of the now vacant port of Boehefort, Rear-admiral
Stirling, with four sail of the line     and, on the same evening,
                                                    ;



with his remaining nine sail, regained his station off Ferrol. On
the 9th, at 3 p.m., the Dragon reconnoitred, in a very gallant
and effectual manner, the neighbouring ports of Ferrol and
Corunna, and found M. Villeneuve's fleet lying at the entrance
of the latter harbour making, with the ships at anchor in the
                                  ;


harbour of Ferrol, 29 French and Spanish sail of the line, ready
for sea.   In this state of things, Sir Robert, with his nine sail of
the line, abandoned the blockade, and on the 14th joined
Admiral Cornwallis off Ushant.
   It has already on more than one occasion appeared, that
M. Villeneuve's primaiy destination, after quitting the West
Indies, was the harbour of Ferrol, there to effect a junction
with the Rear-admirals Grandallana and Gourdon and their
respective squadrons. Accordingly, after losing sight of the
British fleet on the evening of the 24th, the combined fleet
steered as direct a course for Ferrol as the prevailing north-
east wind would permit.       M. Villeneuve, no doubt, soon found
that the masts and yards of many of his ships were not in a
state to withstand a strong head or beating wind and a heavy
sea moreover, it became necessary that the sick and wounded
      :



should be landed as early as possible. Under these circum-
stances, the French admiral acted wisely in bearing up for the
bay of Vigo where, on the evening of the 26th, he came to an
                  ;



anchor with his fleet.
  In Napoleon's instructions to Vice-admiral Villeneuve, of
May 8, was contained an alternative that, if by events in
America, or in the course of his homeward voyage, the latter
should find himself in a situation not immediately to appear
before Brest or enter the Channel, he was to order away upon a
cruise Rear-admiral Gourdon's squadron, accompanied by three
or four of the fastest sailing ships out of the squadron of Vice-
admiral Grandallana       and that then, joining himself to the
                                 ;



remainder of the latter's ships, and to the Rochefort squadron,
he was to proceed off Cadiz, and enable the squadron from
Carthagena to enter that port. With his powerful fleet,
M. Villeneuve was next to occupy the Straits of Gibraltar, strip
the road of its shipping, and (a feasible plan, indeed !) the town
of its stores and provisions. Having effecte.d all this, he was tc
steer for the Channel, and endeavour to perform the last, and,
in Napoleon's estimation, the only important, article in his in-
              1
structions.
                         1
                             Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 254.
