 378           BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                     [1'805.


 unwillingness of the French admiral, even though he had under
 him so powerful a fleet, to sail out, in the face of 11 English
 sail of the line cruising off Cadiz, and enable the Carthagena
 squadron to form a junction with Admiral Gravina. In a letter
 of September 17, Napoleon complains of M. Yilleneuve for
                                                               this,
 and directs his minister of marine to order out the latter, with
 the French ships alone (" mon escadre," not " les escadres franco-
 espagnols," or "la flotte eombine'e"), upon anew expedition.
 M. Villeneuve is to proceed off Naples, and disembark, at some
 point on the coast, all the troops on board the French ships, in
 order that they may join the army under General
                                                        Saint-Cyr.
 He is then to capture the English ship of the line (Excellent 74)
 and Russian frigate cruising in the bay of Naples to do all         ;



 possible injury to the English to intercept an expedition (Sir
                                       ;


 James Craig's) which Napoleon supposes to be destined for
 Malta, and then to enter Toulon where M. Villeneuve was to
                                            ;

find everything necessary for                              and revictualling his
                                repairing
ships.  Part of the plan, if not    previously accomplished, was
to call at Genoa for the new 74
                                      Genois; and then, with the
Boree (launched at Toulon, June 26) and Annibal 74s, there
would be a fleet of 21 sail of the line in Toulon. The emperor's
brother Jerome, who had been appointed to the
                                                                  40-gun frigate
Pomone, was also, with the assistance of the Boree, and of the
Annibal, if the latter could be made serviceable, to do all possible
mischief to the British in the Mediterranean.
   But the most extraordinary part of this letter is
                                                        Napoleon's
apparent persuasion, that the "excessive pusillanimity" of M.
Villeneuve would prevent him from
                                       undertaking the expedition.
He therefore directs, that Vice-admiral Rosily be despatched to
supersede M. Villeneuve in the command and who is to carry
                                                       ;

out orders to the latter to return
                                   immediately to France, to render
an account of his conduct. " J'estime done,"
                                                    says Napoleon,
"qu'il faut faire deux choses: 1°. Envoyer un courrier extra-
ordinaire a 1'amiral Villeneuve, pour lui
                                          prescrire de faire cette
manoeuvre 2°. Comme son excessive pusillanimite l'empechera
           ;


de 1'entreprendre, vous enverrez, pour le remplacer, 1'amiral
Rosilly, qui sera porteur de lettres qui enjoindront a 1'amiral
Villeneuve de se rendre en France pour rendre
                                                   compte de sa
conduite." 1
  Harsh and very unmerited was this treatment of M. Ville-
neuve. The main point in the French admiral's instructions had
always been, to avoid an engagement, and to bring his fleet
                 1
                     Precis des Evenemeus, tome xii., p. 261.
