374           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           1805.


Argonauta and Neptnno, 74s Terrible, Monarca, Montanez, San-
Augustin, San-Francisco de Asis, San-Ildefonso, and San-Juan-
Neponiuceno, and 64 San-Fulgencio, making altogether 29 ships
of the line, exclusive of frigates and corvettes, weighed and
made sail from Ferrol and Corunna but, the wind being scant,
                                     ;


M. Villeneuve, on the 10th, anchored at Zerez, a small port near
Ferrol.  On the following day, the 11th, the fleet again weighed,
and, with a fine easterly wind, got out to sea.
  With respect to M. Villeneuve's real destination after quitting
Ferrol, not a word, beyond conjecture, appears in any French
naval history. The course steered by the combined fleet, when,
on the afternoon of the 13th, the British 12-pounder 32-gun
frigate Iris, Captain Edward Brace, fell in with it abreast ot
Cape Ortugal, was about west-north-west which, with the wind
                                          ;


at east, evinced an intention on the part of the French admiral,
as soon as he had joined M. Allemand's squadron, then supposed
to be (and really) hovering about the coast, to carry his 34 sail
of the line straight to the British Channel.    On the 14th the
wind shifted to north-east; and at 2 p.m. the advanced French
ship, which had been chasing the Iris since 6 p.m. on the
preceding day, quitted her and bore up for the combined fleet.
At 4 h. 30 m. p.m. not a ship of that fleet was to be seen from
the Iris, then in company with the 38-gun frigate Naiad,
Captain Thomas Dundas. On this very day, the 14th, the
Bochefort squadron was spoken by an American ship, within
two degrees north-east       of Cape Ortugal, namely, in latitude
40° 18' north, and longitude 9° west from Greenwich. In two
days afterwards M. Allemand anchored in Vigo bay, but did
not, it appears, find any instructions left there by M. Villeneuve
for his future guidance.
   About half an hour before the combined fleet lost sight of the
British frigates Naiad and Iris to windward, the British 74-gun
ship Dragon, accompanied by the 36-gun frigate Phoenix,
Captain Thomas Baker, having in tow her prize the late French
frigate Didon, both much disabled, hove in sight to leeward.
One of the French advanced frigates was then speaking a Danish
ship, from Lisbon to the Baltic, which had that morning been
boarded by the Dragon, and by the latter been informed, that
25 British sail of the line were near her. On gaining this import-
ant information from the Dane, the effect of which the Dragon
took care to strengthen by firing guns and hoisting signals, the
French frigate made several signals, and then tacked towards
her fleet which, when last seen by the Dragon, at about sun«
          ;
