376                  BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                        [1805.

Calder and M. Villeneuve, Napoleon directed his minister of
marine to impress upon the latter, how highly dishonourable it
would be to the imperial fleets, that a three hours' skirmish, and
an action with 14 (a singular admission for Buonaparte to make)
sail of the line, " qu'une echauffouree de trois heures et un en-

gagement avec quatorze vaisseaux," should defeat the grand
plan.    For some days after M. Villeneuve had sailed from
Ferrol, Napoleon, ignorant of the circumstance, betrayed the
utmost impatience for his departure. He asks if, with 28 or 30
French and Spanish sail of the line, the French admiral would
allow himself to be blockaded by 13, or even by 20, English
sail of the line.  The emperor directs that, if less than 23 of the
latter are before Ferrol, M. Villeneuve is to sail out and attack
them; and that, if Allemand joins with his five, making "35
sail of the line," he is not to be stopped by less than 29 English
sail   of the line.
  M. Villeneuve,  in short, is always to attack, when he is
                                                           " ne
superior in numbers, counting two Spanish ships for one,
comptant deux vaisseaux espagnols que pour un," and making
some allowance for the three-deckers in the British fleet. This
was paying a sorry compliment to the Spaniards, and is hardly
reconcilable with Napoleon's declaration, made in another letter
of the same date (August 13), and equally meant to be private,
that the Spaniards had "fought like lions." 1        Finally, the
French admiral is to save the imperial flag from the shame of
being blockaded at Ferrol by an inferior force that is, he is to   ;


save 18 French, and " 12 Spanish sail of the line, 30 in all,
                            "

from the shame of being blockaded by less than 24 British sail
of the line, the number which, in Napoleon's estimation, equalizes
the two forces. 2 The same letter authorizes M. Villeneuve, if
he should think fit, to man the frigates Guerriere and Bevanche,
lying at Corunna, with the officers and crew of the Atlas, left at
Vigo. He is also at liberty to disembark all his troops, except
as many as he thinks will be serviceable on board the fleet.
  On some day between the 22nd of August and the 4th of
September, Napoleon first became apprised of the Franco-
Spanish fleet's arrival at Cadiz. If he had previously condemned
M. Villeneuve because, in spite of wind and weather, he did not sail
from Ferrol, what must he have thought of the latter, now that,
instead of going straight to Brest, he had suddenly changed his
route and sailed for Cadiz ? Some of Napoleon's expressions are
very severe.    "Villeneuve," he says, "est un de ces homme6
   i                      2   Precis des Evenemens, tome xii., pp. 246, 249, 250, 254.
       See p. 370.
