 382                   BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.              [1805.

 indeed would be impossible without mixing with the ships
 engaged.   The enemy's fleet is supposed to consist of 46 sail of
 the line   British 40
                   :     if either is less, only a proportionate
                                 :




number of enemy's ships are to be cut off. British to be one-
fourth superior to the enemy cut off. Something must be left
to chance. Nothing is sure in a sea-fight beyond all others,
                                                          :



shot will carry away the masts and yards of friends as well as of
foes but I look with confidence to a victory before the van of
           ;



the enemy could succour their rear and then that the British
                                                  ;


fleet would, most of them, be ready to receive their 20 sail of
the line, or to pursue them should they endeavour to make off.
If tne van of the enemy tack, the captured ships must run to
leeward of the British fleet; if the enemy wear, the British must
place themselves between the enemy and the captured, and
disabled British ships and should the enemy close, I have no
                                     ;


fear for the result.
   "
     The second in command will, in all possible things, direct
the movements of his line, by keeping them as compact as the
nature of the circumstances will admit. Captains are to look
to their particular line, as their rallying point; but, in case
signals cannot be seen or clearly understood, no captain can do
very wrong if he places his ship alongside that of an enemy.
   '   '
           Of the intended attack from to-windward, the enemy in the
line of battle ready to receive an attack             :




                                                              British.




                                         Enemy.

   " The divisions of the
                            British fleet will be brought nearly
within gun-shot of the enemy's centre. The signal will most
probably then be made, for the lee line (three lines ?) to bear up
together to set all their sails, even their steering-sails, in order
               ;


to get as quickly as possible to the enemy's line, and to cut
through, beginning at the twelfth ship from the enemy's rear.
Some ships may not get through their exact place, but they will
always be at hand to assist their friends. If any are thrown
round the rear of the enemy, they will effectually complete the
business of 12 sail of the enemy.   Should the enemy wear to-
