1805.J     LORD NELSON IN COMMAND OF THE MED. FLEET.           379

fresh and entire into the English Channel.   Doubtless M. Yille-
neuve had, from the first, been much retarded in his proceedings
by the natural supineness of his Spanish friends and who, now
                                                  ;


that they knew the object of all this voyaging to and fro, must
have felt less inclined than ever to co-operate with the French
admiral.
  On the 22nd of August Yice-admiral Collingwood was rein-
forced by four sail of the line under Bear-admiral Sir Richard
Bickerton   ;
              but who subsequently shifted his flag from the
Queen 98 to the Decade frigate, and proceeded to England for
the recovery of his health. On the 3Uth Sir Bobert Calder, last
from off Ferrol, where he had learnt that the combined fleet,
nine days previous, had made sail for Cadiz, joined with 18
line-of-battle ships. 1  Some of these were occasionally detached
to Gibraltar for water and provisions and with the remainder
                                              ;


Yice-admiral Collingwood continued to cruise before Cadiz,
until the evening of the 28th of September, when Yice-admiral
Lord Nelson arrived, to take the chief command of the Medi-
terranean fleet. His lordship had sailed from Portsmouth in
his old ship the A'ictory, on the morning of the 15th, accompa-
nied by the Euryalus frigate. On the 18th, when the two ships
were off Plymouth, the Ajax and Thunderer joined. On the
26th Lord Nelson despatched the Euryalus ahead, to acquaint
Yice-admiral Lord Collingwood with his approach, and to direct
that, on his assuming the command, no salute should be fixed
nor colours hoisted, in order that the enemy might be unap-
prised of the arrival of a reinforcement.
   The force now under Lord Nelson consisted of 27 sail of the
line, 22 of which cruised about 15 miles off Cadiz, while the
remaining five, under Bear-admiral Louis in the Canopus, were
stationed close off the harbour, to watch the motions of the
combined fleet. Considering that, if he kept the main body of
his fleet out of sight of land, the French admiral, being ignorant
of the exact amount of the British force, might feel disposed to
put to sea, Lord Nelson retired to a distance of 16 to 18 leagues
west of Cadiz. The force close off the harbour was now re-
duced to two frigates, the Euryalus and Hydra; and it may here
be remarked that Lord Nelson was continually complaining, ;is
he had done in the preceding war, of the few frigates attached
to his command.         Beyond these two frigates, at convenient
intervals for distinguishing signals, were three or four sail of the
line, the westernmost of which could communicate directly with
                             i
                                 Seep. 311.
