 380          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.


 the easternmost ship of the main body. The new station taken
 by the fleet possessed the additional advantage, that, in case
 the usually strong westerly gales should prevail, the danger was
 lessened of being forced into the Mediterranean in which event
                                                 ;


 the Franco-Spanish fleet, on the first change of wind, might
 easily effect its escape.
   On the 1st of October the      Euryalus frigate, Captain the
Honourable Henry Blackwood, reconnoitred the port of Cadiz,
and plainly discovered, at anchor in the outer harbour, and appa-
rently ready for sea, 18 French and 16 Spanish sail of the line,
four frigates, and two brigs. On the 2nd Lord Nelson detached
Rear-admiral Louis, with the Canopus, Queen, Spencer, Tigre,
and Zealous, of the line, to Gibraltar, for provisions and water.
On the same day a Swedish ship from Cadiz, bound to Alicant,
informed the Euryalus, that the combined fleet had re-embarked
the troops on the 30th of September, and intended to put to sea
the first easterly wind.    This intelligence, meeting the rear-
admiral on his way to the eastward, induced him, on the 3rd, to
return with his squadron to the fleet but Lord Nelson, con-
                                        ;




ceiving the whole to be a stratagem to draw him nearer to Cadiz
for the purpose of obtaining a more accurate knowledge of his
force, ordered the rear-admiral to proceed in the execution of his
orders.
   On the 4th, twice in the course of the day, several Spanish
gun-boats, taking advantage of the calm state of the weather,
pulled out from Cadiz and attacked the Euryalus and Hydra        ;


but, after the exchange of a few ineffectual shot, the former
retired to the harbour's mouth.    On the 7th the Defiance joined
from England, and on the 8th the Leviathan from Gibraltar.
On the same day, with the aid of a fine south-east wind and
clear weather, the Euryalus was again enabled to count 34 sail
of the line in Cadiz harbour. The proximity of the Euryalus to
the entrance of the harbour may be judged by the frigate's bear-
ings at the time she tacked to stand out. They were, Rota
point north half- west, San-Sebastian south half- west distant two
miles and a quarter.
   The possibility that the Cadiz, Carthagena, and Rochefort
ships might effect a junction, and thereby present a force of 46
sail of the line (a rumour indeed prevailed, that the Brest fleet
was out, which, without the junction of the Carthagena and
Rochefort squadrons, would have made the combined fleet 54
or 55 sail), induced Lord Nelson, on the 10th, to draw up and
transmit to the flag-officers and captains of his fleet, a plan of
