180.5.]                 BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                  383

gether, o: bear up and sail large, still the 12 ships, composing,
ki the first position, the enemy's rear, are to be the object of
attack of the lee line, unless otherwise directed by the com-
mander-in-chief: which is scarcely to be expected; as the
entire management ot the lee line, after the intentions of the
commander-in-chief are signified, is intended to be left to the
judgment of the admiral commanding that line.      The remainder
of the enemy's fleet, 34 sail of the line, are to be left to the
management of the commander-in-chief, who will endeavour to
take care that the movements of the second in command are as
little interrupted as
                        possible."
  With the crews of so many ships to victual, Cadiz had become
much straitened for provisions. To remedy the evil in part,
especially as regarded his own fleet, the French emperor had
ordered shipments to be made at Nantes, Bordeaux, and other
ports in the bay of Biscay. The carriers were nominally Danish
vessels, that landed their cargoes at Ayamonte, Conil, Algeziras,
and at some other little harbours between the latter port and
Santa-Maria, whence they were conveyed in coasting-boats to
Cadiz without any interruption.      As some check to this, a
vigorous blockade had been adopted by Vice-admiral Colling-
wood, and was still maintained by his successor who consi-
                                                    ;


dered it a more likely mode to drive the combined fleet to sea
than a bombardment by Congreve rockets, as had been contem-
plated by the British admiralty.     The arrival of the Naiad,
Bhoebe, Sirius, Juno, and Niger frigates, with one or two smaller
vessels, enabled Lord Nelson to detach a part of them   ;
                                                         and the
interruption thereby given to the coasting-trade was of increased
annoyance to Cadiz and the shipping within it.
   Between the 9th and 13th of October the Boyal Sovereign,
 :<1]< isle. Africa, and
I
                         Agamemnon joined the fleet. The Bril isfa
force off Cadiz was now at its greatest height, 29 sail of the
line; and the whole force under Lord Nelson's command,
including the five ships recently gone to Gibratar, amounted
to 33 sail of the line. Since the 10th the Franco-Spanish fleet
had moved to the entrance of the harbour, and evinced every
disposition to put to sea the first opportunity.    On the 14th
Lord Nelson, as he had been directed, detached to England Sir
Robert Calder, in the Prince of Wales, and on the 17th was
obliged to send the Donegal to Gibraltar, to get a ground tier
of casks.  This done, the fleet under his lordship's immediate
command consisted of the following 27 sail of the line, four
frigates,   one schooner, and one cutter   :
                                               —
