1805.]                 SIR    ROBERT CALDER's; ACTION.                       375

set, was       steering north-west.        Shortly after this, it is believed,
M. Villeneuve altered his course and steered to the southward.
That M. Yilleneuve first steered a north-west, and then a south
course, is indeed admitted by a French writer.    "II mit a la
voile Je 13 par un bon vent d'est, n'ayant en vue aucune force
ennemie il fit d'abord route au nord-ouest, et cbangeant tout a
           ;




coup de direction, il mit le cap au sud, longea hors de vue la
cote de Portugal, attera six jours apres sur le Cap St. Vincent,
oil il s'empara de quelques bati-mens marchands, et entra a Cadix
le 21 aout, le jour meme qu'il etait attendu a Brest.*' 1 The
dates in this account are wrong those given by us have their
                                              :



correctness proved by the roles d'equipage of several of the
ships belonging to M. Villeneuve' s fleet.
   Keeping out of sight of the Portuguese coast, the combined
fleet, on the 18th, arrived off Cape St. Vincent, and there cap-
tured and burnt three merchantmen, bound from Gibraltar to
Lisbon, under convoy of the British l(j-gun brig-sloop Halcyon,
which vessel, however, managed to effect her escape. On the
20th, at 10 a.m., Cadiz bearing north-east distant about nine
leagues, the combined fleet, steering south-east, with the wind
at west-south-west, discovered three British sail of the line
right ahead. At 1 p.m. the latter, which were the 98-gun ship
Dreadnought, Vice-admiral Cuthbert Collingwood, Captain
Edward Kothcram, and 74s Colossus and Achille, Captains
James Nicholl Morris and Bichard King, tacked to reconnoitre.
On this, the advanced ships of the combined fleet, which had
shortened sail, chased away the British to the southward and             ;


at 3 p.m. M. Villeneuve and his whole fleet bore up for the
harbour of Cadiz. At midnight, having been joined by the
74-gun ship Mars, Captain George Duff, from Tangier bay, Vice-
admiral Collingwood, with his four sail of the line, tacked in-
shore, and, before daylight on the 21st, gallantly resumed his
station off an enemy's port, in winch lay, ready for sea, including
six Spanish ships previously at anchor in the harbour, 35 French
and Spanish sail ot the line. A seventh Spanish ship, the Glorioso
 74, had formed part of Bear-admiral Alava's squadron but, on        ;



the 31st of the preceding May, this ship, finding that a frigate
 and two brigs were the only British force off Cadiz, put to Bea,
 and, after exchanging a i'ew ineffectual broadsides with the
 frigate, which was the Lively, Captain Graham Eden Hamond,
 effected her escape into Carthagena.
    As soon as he was apprised of the battle between Sir Iiobcrl
                        i
                            Prexb des Evenemens, tome xii., p. 71.
