1805.]               BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                          381

attack, in which, hourly expecting to be reinforced, particularly
by a squadron of fast-sailing two-deckers under Yice-adniiral
Thornborough, he calculates, by anticipation, the strength of
his fleet at 40 sail of the line.          As this plan,   or ''General
Memorandum," of which a translation appears in several French
historical works, is universally considered to be a complete
masterpiece of the kind and particularly as it agrees in prin-
                           ;




ciple with that adopted in the great battle presently to be
detailed, we shall offer no apology for inserting it entire in these
pages.
   "Thinking it almost impossible," says the noble chief, "to
form a fleet of 40 sail of the line into a line of battle, in variable
winds, thick weather, and other circumstances which must occur,
without such a loss of time, that the opportunity would probably
be lost of bringing the enemy to battle in such a manner as to
make the business decisive I have therefore made up my mind
                                       ;


to keep the fleet in that position of sailing (with the exception
of the first and second in command), that the order of sailing is
to be the order of battle placing the fleet in two lines of 16
                                   ;




ships each, with an advanced squadron of eight of the fastest
sailing two-decked ships      which will always make, if wanted,
                               :




a line of 24 sail, on whichever line the commander-in-chief may
direct.   The second in command will, after my intentions are
made known to him, have the entire direction of his line, to make
the attack upon the enemy, and to follow up the blow until they
are captured or destroyed.
  " If the
           enemy's fleet should be seen to windward in line ot
battle and that the two lines and the advancing squadron could
fetch them, they will probably be so extended that their van
could not succour their rear. I should therefore probably make
the second in command's signal, to lead through about the
twelfth ship from their rear, or wherever he could fetch, if not
able to get so far advanced. My line would lead through about
their centre; and the advanced squadron to cut two (cut
through?), three, or four ships ahead of their centre; so as to
insure getting at their commander-in-chief, whom every effort
must be made to capture. The whole impression of the British
fleet must be, to   overpower two or three ships ahead of their
commander-in-chief (supposed to be in the centre) to the rear
of their fleet. I will suppose 20 sail of the enemy's line to ho
untouched it must be some time before they could perform a
            :




manoeuvre to bring their force compact to attack any part of the
British fleet engaged, or to succour their own ships; which
