1805.]           BUONAPARTE'S TREATMENT OF M. VILLENEDVE.                                 377

qui ont plutut bcsoin d'eperon que de bride." Again, he asks,
" Ne sera-t-il done
                    pas possible de trouver dans la marine un
bomme entreprenant, qui voit de sang froid, et corame il faut
voir, soit dans le combat, soit dans les diflerentes combinaisons
des escadres?" 1
   The French emperor's sentiments will be found fully developed
in the following set of charges which he is represented to have
drawn up with his own hand : "First; he (Villeneuve) did not
disembark at Martinique and Guadaloupe the 67th regiment and
the troops that Admiral Magon had on board. Secondly; he
placed these colonies in jeopardy by sending back to them, by
four frigates, 1200 men only of the pick of the garrisons.
Thirdly; he conducted himself ill in the battle of the 23rd of
July, in not re-engaging a disabled fleet which had two ships in
tow. Fourthly that, having arrived at Ferrol, he left the sea
                          ;



to Admiral Calder, while he waited to be joined by five sail of
the line, and did not cruise off Ferrol until that squadron arrived.
Fifthly he (Villeneuve) was informed that the fleet saw some
             ;



enemy's ships having the Didon frigate in tow, but he did not
chase those ships and oblige them to cast off the frigate. Sixthly                             ;


he departed from Ferrol the 14th of August, 2 and, instead of
going to Brest, proceeded to Cadiz, thereby violating his positive
instructions.  Seventhly and finally he knew that the squadron
                                                            ;


of M. Allemand was to go to Vigo for orders, and yet he sailed
from Ferrol without giving that officer any new orders, having,
on the contrary, sent him (by the Didon, it is probable) instruc-
tions quite opposite, and such as endangered the squadron,
which received orders to repair to Brest, while Villeneuve him-
self steered for Cadiz."
                                    3
                                        In these charges two important facts
disclose themselves  one, that M. Villeneuve, in spite of all the
                               :




nonsense published in the Monitcur, did not, on the 23rd of July,
attempt to bring to action Sir Robert Calder's fleet; the other,
that something unexpected, and which, by a fair inference, Mas
the false intelligence received through the Danish ship from the
Dragon 74, caused the Franco-Spanish fleet to run from an
Fnglish ship of the line and two disabled frigates, and subse-
quently to change its destination from Brest t<> Cadiz.
  A part of Napoleon's vexation with M. Villeneuve arose, no
doubt, from the dissatisfaction with which the Spaniards viewed
the loss of their two ships. This was augmented by the apparent
  1
      Precis des Evinemens, tome        xii.,   p.
                                                       ;1
                                                          This extract is of too Important a
25rt.                                                character not to be given in the original  :

  2     As to this and other dates, see p. 375.      it "ill therefore be found in the
                                                                                       Appendix,
                                                     at .No. 36.
