388                  BBITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                         [1805,


success often attends the most skilful, and always the most for-
tunate he will endeavour to turn our rear, to pass through our
            :




line, and, such of our ships as he may succeed in cutting off,
will endeavour to surround    and reduce with clusters (pelotons)
of his own.    In this case a captain would do better to trust to
his courage and ardour for glory, than to the signals of the
commander-in-chief; who, himself engaged and covered with
                                                            " There is
smoke, would perhaps be unable to make them."
                                                        1

                                               " in
nothing to alarm us," adds M. Yilleneuve,            the sight of an
English fleet their 74-gun ships have not 500 men on board
                     ;                                                                   ;

                                                   "
the seamen are harassed by a two years' cruise (alluding to the
                                                      "
state of Lord   Nelson's ships in January, 1805)          they are not
                                                                    ;


more brave than we are, they have infinitely fewer motives to
fight well, and possess less love of country.    They are skilful at
manoeuvring. In a month, we shall be as much so as they are.
In fine, everything unites to inspire us with hopes of the most
glorious success and of a new era for the imperial marine."
                                                                     2


The most remarkable feature in this plan is, that it persists in
ordering the movements to be conducted in close line of battle,
even while it admits that the enemy, in all likelihood, will adopt
a different mode of attack, that of cutting off the rear of the
line and making of it an easy conquest.       Such, however, were
the ancient rules of naval tactics       and France did not yet
                                                     ;



possess a Eodney or a Nelson to be the first to break through
them.
   Shortly after the Franco-Spanish fleet had formed, as already
mentioned, in five columns, one of the advanced frigates made
the signal of 18 sail of British ships in sight. On this the com-
bined fleet, still on the larboard tack, cleared for action, and at
about 5 p.m. tacked and stood towards the mouth of the Straits.
Shortly afterwards the four British frigates approached, and
were chased by the Argonauta, Achille, and a few other ships                             ;


to which, as a reinforcement, and to serve also as a squadron
of observation, were added the Principe-de-Asturias, Aigle,
Algesiras, and San-Juan-Nepomuceno, under the command of
Admiral Gravina, with orders to reunite with the main body
before nightfall. At 7h. 30 m. p.m. the Aigle made the signal
of 18 British ships in line of battle to the southward; and
shortly afterwards the combined fleet wore and stood to the
north-west.
      A
     little before daybreak on the morning of the 21st, finding

                                                 2   For the original passages, see Appcn-
  1
       Victoires et ConquStes, tome xvi., p.
109.                                           dix. No. 36.
