390         BRITISH   AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.

   On the 20th, at daybreak, the British found themselves near
the entrance of the Straits, but saw nothing of the enemy. The
fleet thereupon wore, and made sail to the north-west, with a
fresh breeze at south- south-west. At 7 a.m. the Phoebe made
the signal that the enemy bore north and by noon the Victory
                                              ;


and fleet were to the south-west of Cadiz, and within eight or
nine leagues of it, standing to the west-north-west on the lar-
board tack. At 2 p.m. the fleet was taken aback by a breeze
from the west-north-west, and at 4 p.m. wore and again came to
on the larboard tack, steering north. At 5 p.m., just after the
Euryalus had telegraphed that the enemy appeared determined
to go to the westward, the Victory telegraphed, that Lord Nelson
relied upon Captain Blackwood's keeping sight of the enemy
during the night and the Naiad, shortly afterwards, made the
                 ;



signal of 31 sail of the enemy, bearing north-north-east.      At
8 h. 40 m. p.m. the British fleet wore and stood to the south-
west and at 4 a.m. on the 21st the fleet wore again, and
      ;




steered, under easy sail, north by east.        At 6 a.m., Cape
Trafalgar bearing east by south distant about seven leagues,
the Victory and ships with her obtained a sight of the com-
bined fleet, also bearing about east by south, and distant, as
already mentioned, 10 or 12 miles.
   At 6 h. 40 m. a.m. the Victory made the signals (Nos. 72 and
13), to form the order of sailing in two columns, and to prepare
for battle; and hi 10 minutes afterwards, the signal No. 76,
to bear up.   The two columns of the British fleet accordingly
bore up to the eastward under all sail. This prompt mode of
attack was that which Lord Nelson had previously directed, 1 in
order to avoid the inconvenience and delay of forming a line of
battle in the usual manner.
   The near approach of the British fleet rendering an action
unavoidable, the French admiral, at 8 h. 30 m. a.m., made the
signal for his ships to wear together, and form the line in close
order upon the larboard tack thereby to bring Cadiz on his lee
                                    ;



bow, and to facilitate, if necessary, his escape to that port. It
was near 10 a.m. before the manoeuvre was completed; and
then owing to the lightness of the wind, the partial flaws from
off the land, the heavy ground-swell, and the incapacity or

inexperience of some of the captains, the Franco-Spanish line
was very irregularly formed so much so that, instead of being
                                :




straight, it was curved or crescent-like and, instead of the ships
                                                  ;




being in line ahead, some were to leeward, others to windward, of
                            i   See p. 380.
