1805.]
                               BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                     391

their proper stations. For the most part, indeed, the ships were
two, and in a few cases three, deep thus accidentally presenting
                                                   ;



more obstacles to the success of the plan of attack decided
upon by the British admiral, than if each French and Spanish
ship had been in the wake of her leader.
                                            The ships, generally,
were under topsails and topgallant-sails, with the main topsail
shivering, and lay a point, or rather more, off
                                                the wind.
    Owing to the lightness of the breeze, the British fleet, after
bearing up,   made very slow progress, scarcely going, with
                                       While thus gradually
studding-sails set, three knots an hour.
nearing the enemy's line, Lord Nelson, dressed in the same
threadbare frock uniform-coat which was his constant wear,
having for its appendages, sewed amidst the folds of the left
breast, the same four weather-tarnished and lack-lustre
                                                         stars

always to be seen there, visited the different decks of the
V ictory ; and addressing the men at their quarters,
                                                     cautioned
them not to fire a single shot without being sure of their object.
    Considering that the Victory, both as being the van-ship of a
column and as bearing the flag of the commander-in-chief, would
draw upon himself the whole weight of the enemy's fire, and
thereby doubly endanger the life of him to whom all looked up
for the success of the day, the principal officers present expressed
among themselves a hope that Lord Nelson might be persuaded
to allow the Temeraire, then close astern, to go ahead. Captain
Blackwood undertook the delicate task of broaching the matter
to the admiral. He did so         and Lord Nelson smiling signifi-
                                            ;
                                     "
cantly at Captain Hardy, replied,      Oh yes, let her go ahead ;"
                                                         !




meaning, if she could. At about 9h. 40 m. a.m. the Temeraire
was accordingly hailed, 1 to take her station ahead of the Victory.
At about the same time Lieutenant John Yule, who then com-
manded upon the forecastle, observing that the lee or starboard
lower studding-sail was improperly set, caused it to be taken in
for the purpose of setting it afresh. The instant this was done,
Lord Nelson ran forward, and rated the lieutenant severely for
having, as he supposed, begun to shorten sail without the
captain's orders.  The studding-sail was quickly replaced and                       ;



the Yictory, as the gallant chief intended, continued to lead
the column. 3

    i   But not, it Is believed, as stated in a   Victory's quarter in order to pass her and
popular little work, "by his lordship."           lead, 1/ord Nelson hailed her; and sp> nk-
See Authentic Narrative of the Death of           ing, as he always did, with a slight nasal
                                                                    " 111 thank
l^>rd Nelson, by William Heatty, M.D.,            intonation, said,             you, Captain
Ire., p. S9.                                      Harvey, to keep in your proper Station,
    -
        When the Tre'me'raire ranged up on the    which is asttrn of the Victory."— Eu.
