180o.J                       BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                     389

that the British were to windward instead of to leeward, and that
their force, instead of being only 21 sail of the line, was nearly
equal to his own, the French admiral abandoned his plan of re-
                                        and ordered the three
stricting his line of battle to 21 ships,
columns composed of the latter, without regard to priority of
rank among the ships, to form in close line of battle on the
starboard tack, upon the leewardmost division, consisting of the
12 ships in advance under Admiral Gravina and Rear-admiral
Magon, and to steer south-west.
  The order in which the French and Spanish ships (the latter
we have distinguished by italics) ranged themselves, beginning
at the van, or south-east extremity of the line, was, according to
a credible French account, 2 as follows                :
                                                           — Principe-de-Asturias,
Achille,  San-Mdefonso, San-Juan-Nepom-uceno, Berwick, Argo-
nauta, Montanez, Argonaute, Swiftsure, Aigle, Bahama, Alge-
siras, Pluton, Monarca, Fougueux, Santa- Ana, Indomptable,
San-Justo, Eedoubtable, San-Leandro, Neptune, Bucentaure,
Si/iitisima-Trinidad, Heros, San-Augusttn, San-Francisco-de-
Asis, Mont-Blanc, Duguay-Trouin, Formidable, Buyo, Intrepide,
Scipion, Neptuno ; extending over a space, admitting a cable's
length, or 200 yards, to be betwixt each ship, of nearly five miles.
  This manoeuvre executed, daylight found the two hostile fleets
at the distance apart of not more than 10 or 12 miles, and there-
fore fairly in each other's sight.   The centre of the Franco-
Spanish fleet at this time bore about east by south of the centre
of the British fleet, and the wind was a light breeze from west-
north-west, accompanied by a heavy westerly swell.
  It was on the 19th, at 9h. 30 m. a.m., while the British fleet
was lying to about 16 leagues west-south-west from Cadiz, that
the Mars, who, with the Defence and Agamemnon, then formed
the cordon of communication between the Euryalus and Victory,
repeated the signal, that the enemy was coming out of port.
Lord Nelson immediately made sail in chase to the south-east,
with light and partial breezes, mostly from the south-south-west,
At 3 p.m. the Colossus repeated the signal, that the enemy was
at sea.  Towards evening Lord Nelson directed that the fleet
should observe the motions of the Victory during the night                              ;




that the Britannia, Dreadnought, and Prince, being heavy sailers,
should take their stations as most convenient to them and that            ;


the Mars, Orion, Belleisle, Leviathan, Bellerophon, and Poly-
phemus should proceed ahead, carry a light, and steer for tin
Straits' mouth.
   1
       See preceding page.        a   See Tretis des Eveneniens, tome xiii., p. 187
