1805.]
                             BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                 335

to take advantage of the exit of                 a formidable French fleet, to
effect its junction with the                seven sail of the line hitherto so
closely blocked         up in the port of Carthagena.                  That, indeed,
would be but the return of a similar favour, granted nine years
before to the French Eear-admiral Eichery.
                                              1
                                                 Every exertion
was therefore made to fill up the complements of the six ships,
which, in all other respects, had been ready for sea ever since
Vice-admiral Villeneuve's arrival.   Of the two that had been
present in Sir Eobert Calder's action, one, the Argonauta, had
since been repaired and refitted but the damage done to the
                                                ;



other, the Terrible, proved of so serious a nature that she was
disarmed, and her crew divided among the short-manned ships.
  On the 9th or 10th of October, the French troops having re-
           2
embarked, the Franco-Spanish fleet, with the exception of one
ship, the San-Fulgencio 64 (for some unknown reason detained),
moved to the entrance of the harbour, to be ready for a start at
a moment's warning. From the 10th to the 17th hard gales
from the westward continued to blow, with very slight inter-
missions.       On the 17th, at midnight, the wind shifted to the
eastward and on the 18th Admiral Villeneuve informed Admi-
            ;


ral Gravina of his intention to put to sea on the following day.
On the same evening, as a preparatory measure, a strong force
of gun-boats drew up in line across the entrance of the harbour                      ;


and on the 19th, at 7 a.m., the Franco-Spanish fleet, by signal
from the commander-in-chief, began getting under way, with a
light breeze at north by east.
  This and every other movement of the Franco-Spanish fleet
Avas seen and reported by the British reconnoitring frigates.
Owing to the lightness of the wind, 12 ships only succeeded in
getting out, and these lay becalmed till early in the afternoon                      ;




when, a breeze springing from the west-north-west, the whole
12 stood to the northward on the larboard tack, accompanied,
at the distance of not more than two or three miles to wind-
ward, by the British frigates Euryalus and Sirius. At 8 a.m.
the wind, still very light, shifted to south-west, and the course
of the ships became north-west by west the point of San-Sebas-
                                                      :




tian at this time bearing from the Euryalus east half-south dis-
tant about four miles. At daylight on the morning of the 20th
the remainder of the combined fleet in Cadiz harbour, consist-
ing, with the ships already outside, of 33 sail of the line, five
frigates, and two brigs, weighed and put to sea with a light
breeze at south-east while the ships in the offing, as was                        ire-
                                                          2
                 >   See vol. i., p. 345.                     See p. 380.
  VOL. III.                                                                 2 C
