18^5.]               BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                     387

began to baffle the ships in their progress.  Meanwhile the
Euryalus and Sirius kept their stations, watching every ma-
noeuvre.  At 8h. 30 m. a.m. the Agamemnon with a heavy
merchant-brig in tow, was unconsciously running into the midst
of the enemy's ships   ; when, at length, after repeated signals,
enforced by guns from the Euryalus, the British 64 (but still
without casting off her deeply-laden prize) hauled to the wind
on the starboard tack and got clear. Although ordered by tele-
graph from the Euryalus, whose captain was senior to Sir
Edward Berry, to hasten to the British fleet, then to the south-
ward of the former, with intelligence of the number and posi-
tion of the enemy, the Agamemnon continued standing to the
north-west with her prize in tow. This seemed an unaccount-
able remissness on the part of Lord Nelson's favourite ship.
   The Sirius was also in some danger. She had waited so long
for the return of her boat from an American vessel, that the
enemy's advanced ships found themselves near enough to chase
and fire at her but the frigate, crowding sail, effected her
                 ;


escape.    Between 2 and 3 p.m. the horizon cleared, and the
wind shifted to west-north-west.        Whereupon Vice-admiral
 Yilleneuve ordered his fleet to form in five columns, agreeably to
a plan which he had previously communicated to his flag-officers
and captains.    The fleet accordingly divided itself into two
parts.   The first part, consisting of 21 sail of the line, and
denominated the line of battle, then subdivided itself into three
squadrons of seven ships each of which the centre was com-
                                     ;



manded by M. Villeneuve himself, the van by Vice-admiral Alava,
and the rear by Bear-admiral Dumanoir. The second part, or
corps de reserve, divided itself into two squadrons of six ships
each the first was under the orders of Admiral Gravina, and
     ;


the second of Bear-admiral Magon.
  At the time of communicating the foregoing plan of formation.
Admiral Villeneuve reminded his officers of the instructions he
had given to them previously to his quitting Toulon at the
commencement of the year. In case of being to windward,
                                 1



M. Yillcneuve's directions then were, for the line to bear down
together, and each ship to take her opponent in the enemy's
line, whom she was to engage closely even to boarding.       If, on
the contrary, the opposite fleet lay to windward, his fleet was to
                                         " The
wait the attack in close line of battle.       enemy," says the
French admiral, "will not confino himself to forming a line of
battle parallel to ours, and engaging us with his cannon, where
                             1   See p. 366.
