1805.J                         BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                  401

whole broadside of a French 80, she is about to pour her broad-
side into the stern of a second French 80, we have endeavoured
to illustrate by the first set of figures in the       preceding diagram.
  Although the work of scarcely two minutes, and although not
a mast or yard of the Bucentaure was seen to come down, the
effects of the British three-decker's broadside upon the personnel
of the French ship, as acknowledged a day or two afterwards by
Vice-admiral Villeneuve, and long subsequently by his flag-
captain M. Magendie, was of the same destructive character as
the broadside poured by the Royal Sovereign into the stern of
the Santa- Ana. The amount which the Bucentaure 's officers
gave, as the extent of their loss in killed and wounded by the
                    "
Victory's fire, was   nearly 400 men." They represented, also,
that 20 of their guns were dismounted by it, and that the Bucen-
taure was reduced to a comparatively defenceless state.
  Prevented by position, even had she not been incapacitated
by loss, from returning the Victory's tremendous salute, the
Bucentaure found an able second in the Neptune. This fine
French 80, the moment the Victory's bows opened clear of the
Bucentaure's stern, poured into them a most destructive fire.
Among other damages occasioned by it, the flying jib-boom and
sprit and sprittopsail-yards were cut away also the starboard
                                                   ;


cathead was shot completely off, notwithstanding its immense
stoutness.          The bower-anchor, and a sheet-anchor stowed near
it,   were also quite disabled
                          and a third anchor on that side was
                                    ;


much injured. Several shot also entered the Victory's bows
between wind and water, and the foremast and bowsprit were
badly wounded.
  The Neptune, fearing, as the Victory advanced, that she
intended to run on board other, set her jib, and keeping away a
      ranged ahead but, Captain Hardy having decided to run
little,                    ;


on board the ship on his starboard hand, and into which a
broadside had been poured the instant it would bear with effect,
the Victory put her helm hard a-port. This quickly brought
her head in the direction of the Redoutable; who, with her
foremost guns continued to aid the Neptune in raking the
Victory, and with her aftermost ones fired occasionally at the
Tetueraire, as the latter drew out from the wake of her leader.
Just, however, as the Victory was coining in contact with her,
the Redoubtable shut most of her lower-deck ports, and tired
from them no more. In about a minute after she had shifted her
helm, the Victory ran foul of the Redoutable; the sheet -anchor
of the one striking the spare anchor of the other.
      VOL.   III.                                           2 D
