1805.J                        BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                 399

'This is too          warm work, Hardy, to last long;' and declared
that, through all the battles  he had been in, he had never wit-
nessed more cool courage than was displayed by the Victory's
crew on this occasion." l
   In a few seconds afterwards, as the Bucentaure slowly forged
ahead, a large French ship was seen upon her lee-quarter, and
another ship astern of the former, in the act of ranging up, as if
with the intention of completely closing the interval. Now it
was that Captain Hardy represented to Lord Nelson the im-
practicablity of passing through the line without running on
board one of the ships. His lordship quickly replied, "I cannot
help it: it does not signify which we run on board of. Go on
board which you please take your choice." 2 At this moment,
                                   :



such had been the effect of the heavy and unremitting fire to
which she had so long been exposed, the loss on board the
Victory amounted to 20 officers and men killed, and 30 wounded                          ;

a loss that would have been still more severe had not the enemy's
guns been pointed at the rigging and sails, rather than at the
hull of the ship.   In consequence of this, every studding-sail
boom on the foremast (the Victory, unlike other ships, had no
booms rigged out upon her mainmast) had been shot off close to
the yard arm, and every sail, especially on the foremast, was like
a riddle her almost new foresail, indeed, had from 80 to 100
             :




yards of it stripped from the yard. This clearly shows what an
advantage the centre and rear had lost in not having opened an
earlier fire upon the Eoyal Sovereign.     "Quel but avantagcux,"
                       "
says a French writer,    offraient aux canonniers ces deux groupes
de vaisseaux, dont chacun presentait une quantite de mats et do
vergues et une masse de cordages et de voiles, oil pas un boulet
ne devait etre perdu." 3
  At 1 P.M.* the f!8-pounder carronade on the larboard side of
the Victory's forecastle, containing its customary charge of one
round shot and a keg filled with 500 musket-balls, was fired
right into the cabin windows of the Bucentaure. As the Victory
slowly moved ahead, every gun of the remaining 50 upon her
broadside, all double, and some of them treble shotted, was

  i
      Beatty's Narrative, p. 27.               know also that, owing to the death early
  2
      Ibid., p. 30.                            in the action of the two
  3
                                                                          persons whose
      Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p.    places (in succession) it was to lake
HO.                                            minutes, the lop nines were written the
                                                                 .




    According to the Victory's log, at four    next day. Moreover, the log oi the
                                                                                   Spar-
minutes past noon ; hut that would allow       tiate, one of the best, kept in the fleet,
fourteen minuies only tor the Victory,         says:
                                                    —   "At 12 h. 59 m. Victory com-
wiili scarcely a breath of wind, to            menced firing."
                                        go a
distance of at least a mile and a half. We
