394           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                  [1805.

admiral Alava, was in the same            direction  from the Eoyal
Sovereign, the leader of the lee column.           The Spanish com-
mander-in-chief, Admiral Gravina, in the Principe-de-Asturias,
was the rearmost ship of the fleet. Of the frigates it may
suffice to state, that they were ranged in an inner line con-

siderably to leeward of the fighting line. One, however, in the
centre, believed to have been the Ehin, was so near as to be
seen by the Royal Sovereign repeating signals a circumstance
                                                        ;


that induced Vice-admiral Collingwood, a few minutes before
the action commenced, to telegraph Lord Nelson, that the
enemy's commander-in-chief was on board a frigate.
   According to the average time noted down on board the dif-
ferent ships of the British fleet, it was just at noon, the wind
very light, the sea smooth with a great ground-swell setting
from the westward, and the sun shining, in a beautiful manner,
upon the fresh-painted sides of the long line of French and
Spanish ships, that the Fougueux, the second astern of the
Santa- Ana, whose station was a little abaft the centre of the
combined line, opened by signal a fire upon the Eoyal Sovereign,
then bearing on the French ship's larboard bow, and consi-
derably within gun-shot also bearing from the Victory south-
                            ;



east, distant about two miles, and from her own second astern,
the Belleisle, about west by south three-quarters of a mile.
Immediately the three British admirals hoisted their respective
flags, and the ships of both divisions of the fleet,
                                                      the white
or St. George's ensign  a measure adopted to prevent any con-
                        ;



fusion in the heat of battle, from a variety of national flags.
As an additional mark of distinction, each British ship carried,
or was ordered to carry, a union-jack at her maintopmast-stay,
and another at her foretopgallant-stay. At the Victory's main-
topgallantmast-head, also,      was    fast   belayed       Lord Nelson's
                                                   "
customary signal on going into action, No. 16,       Engage the
enemy more closely ;" consisting   of two flags, quarter red and
white over blue, white, and red, or the Dutch republican ensign
reversed.  At about the same time that the firing commenced,
the ships of the combined fleet hoisted their ensigns, and the
admirals (with the exception, to which we shall presently
advert, of the French commander-in-chief) their flags.        In
addition to her ensign, every Spanish ship also hung to the end
of the spanker-boom a large wooden cross.
  At about 10 minutes past noon, having reached a position
close astern of the Santa- Ana, the Eoyal Sovereign fired into
her, with   guns double-shotted   ;
                                      and with such precision as, by
