 392                BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                         [1805.


      Shortly after this fruitless          attempt to induce Lord Nelson to
 yield the post of danger, the captains of frigates were ordered
 back to their ships and Captain Blackwood, in his way to the
                           ;



 Euryalus, called on board the Temeraire, and explained, what
 appears to have been but indistinctly heard, the object of the
 previous hail. Some time after quitting the Temeraire, Captain
 Blackwood boarded the Leviathan, then the fifth ship of the
 weather-column, and acquainted her captain, that it was the
 commander-in-chiefs wish, that the Leviathan, as a previous
 signal had signified, should fall into the line between the
 Temeraire and Victory. From the known zeal of Captains
 Harvey and Bayntun, no doubt can exist as to the earnestness
 of their endeavours to reach the honourable stations assigned
 them but the Temeraire was unable to do so from the causes
         ;


 already assigned, and the Leviathan did not receive the
 message by Captain Blackwood until the head of the column
 was too near the enemy to render any change proper or even
 practicable.
   The direction in which the     combined fleet now lay, with a
 home-port scarcely seven leagues off on the lee-bow, and the
 evident forging ahead of the ships, whereby that distance was
 every minute diminishing, induced Lord Nelson to steer a trifle
 more to the northward, and to telegraph his second in com-
 mand, "I intend to pass through the van of the enemy's line,
 to prevent him from getting into Cadiz." The reversed order of
 that line, in the prevailing state of the wind, had produced
 another danger to be guarded against        it had brought the
                                                        :


shoals of San-Pedro and Trafalgar under the lee of both fleets.
Accordingly, at 11 h. 30 m. a.m., the Victory made the signal
(No. 63, with the preparative), for the British fleet to prepare
to anchor at the close of day.
   This done, no other signal seemed wanting, when Lord
Nelson remarked, that he must give the fleet something by way
of a fillip. After musing awhile, he said, "Suppose we tele-
                                                          "
graph that Nelson expects every man to do his duty.'
                '
                                                              The
officer, whom  he was then addressing, suggested whether it would
not be better, " England expects," &c. Lord Nelson rapturously
exclaimed, "Certainly, certainly!" and, at about 11 h. 40 m.
a.m., up went to the Victory's mizen topgallantmast-head, the
firstflag of the celebrated telegraphic message, "England
EXPECTS THAT EVERT MAN WILL DO HIS DUTY ;" a signal which,       '


  1 There is not, that we are aware of, a    following is a minute of the several flags,
single publication which gives this mes-     as noted down on board of more than one
sage precisely as it was delivered. The      Bhip in the fleet
                                                             :
                                                                 —
