398             BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.        fl8(Jo.


occasionally by the Eedoutable astern of the latter, continued
upon her a very heavy and destructive fire. To this heavy and
unremitting cannonade the Victory neither did, nor from her
position could, bestow any return. In a very few minutes, how-
ever, after the firing had opened upon her, one of the foremost
guns on the starboard side went off by accident. In a private
ship this would scarcely have been noticed but, as happening
                                               ;


on board the ship of the commander-in-chief, it excited the
attention of the fleet, and was minuted down in the log of one
ship, the Polyphemus, as a real commencement of the action by
the Victory thus " About 20 m. past 12, Victory fired upon by
            ;
                       :



the enemy's van, which was returned with a few of her foremost
guns on the starboard side."
   Seeing, by the direction of her course, that the Victory was
about to follow the example of the Eoyal Sovereign, the French
and Spanish ships ahead of the British weather-column closed
like a forest.   This movement, headed by the stoppage in the
headway of the Santa- Ana, and by the bearing up of the two
Spanish ships ahead of her in the manner already related, divided
the combined line nearly in the centre, leaving, including the
Eedoutable from her station astern of the San-Leandro, 14 ships
in the van, and 19 in the rear, with an interval between them of
at least three-quarters of a mile.
  Just as she had got within about 500 yards of the larboard-
beam of the Bucentaure the Victory's mizentopmast was shot
away about two-thirds up.        A
                                 shot also struck and knocked to
pieces the wheel and the ship was obliged to be steered in the
                   ;



gun-room, the first- lieutenant (John Quilliam) and master
(Thomas Atkinson) relieving each other at this duty. Scarcely
had two minutes elapsed before a double-headed shot killed
eight marines on the poop, and wounded several others; on
which the admiral ordered Captain Adair to disperse his men
round the ship, that they might not suffer so much from being
together. Presently a shot, that had come through a thickness
of four hammocks near the larboard chess-tree, and had carried
away a part of the larboard-quarter of the launch as she lay on
the booms, struck the fore-brace bits on the quarter-deck, and
passed between Lord Kelson and Captain Hardy; a splinter
from the bits bruising the left foot of the latter, and tearing the
buckle from his shoe.      "They both," says Doctor Beatty,
  instantly stopped, and were observed by the officers on deck
' '




to survey each other with inquiring looks, each supposing the
other to be wounded.       His lordship then smiled and said,
