39G             BRITISH   AND FRANCO SPANISH FLEETS.        [1805.

  So incessant was the fire kept up by all these ships, that the
people of the Royal Sovereign frequently saw the shots come hi
contact with each other. Aware, at length, of the injury
which they were thus sustaining by their own cross fire, and
observing that three or four British ships were fast approaching
to the support of their gallant leader, the four two-deckers, one
by one, drew off from the Royal Sovereign, and left her to
combat solely with the Santa- Ana who, although in force
                                        ;


rather more than a match for her antagonist, began already to
exhibit proofs that, in practical gunnery, she was decidedly her
inferior.
     For upwards of 15 minutes the Royal Sovereign was the only
British ship in close action.   At the end of that time, when the
former had taken a position upon her opponent's lee bow, and
was making the best possible use of it, the Belleisle, hauling up,
fired a broadside into the lee quarter of the Santa- Ana, and then
bore away towards the Indomptable. Owing to some of the ships
astern of the Fougueux pressing forward to support the centre,
while others remained with their sails aback or shivering, the
Franco-Spanish line (if line we must call it) was becoming even
more irregular than it had been. The slanting direction in which,
on account of this movement, the British lee column was obliged
to advance, enabled the ships to discharge their starboard guns
at the enemy's rear; and an interchange of animated firing
ensued, the smoke from which, for the want of a breeze to carry
it  off, spread its murky mantle over the combatants,
                                                          and in-
creased the confusion into which the rear of the combined fleet
had already been thrown by the crash at its centre.
   Lord Nelson had already, in a two-decker, evinced how little
he dreaded coming in contact with a Spanish first-rate and even
                                                       ;


the towering and formidable-looking four-decker at present in
front of him had, on that very occasion, been driven from her
purpose by his well-known prowess. But, although he directed
the Yictory to be steered towards the bow of his old opponent,
it was not with the intention of attacking her  :  a Spanish rear-
admiral, whatever the force of his ship, was considered an un-
worthy object while a French vice-admiral commanded the
fleet.   Lord Nelson did not feel a doubt, and the sequel proved
he was correct, that M. Villeneuve was in one of the two or
three ships next astern of the four-decker; and, knowing that
to fetch a ship lying to at a distance ahead, he must keep her on
his lee bow, he ordered the Victory to be steered in the manner
just related.
