                                                                                        n
                                BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                               39
1805.]


  Although every glass on board the Victory was put in re-
                             the French
quisition to discover the flag of           commander-in-chief,
all the answers to the repeated questions of Lord Nelson on the

subject ended in disappointment. The four-decker's flag
                                                           at the
mizen could be made out, and some signals were occasionally
seen at the main of two or three of the ships, but no French flag
at the fore. 1 Often did the little man himself, with his remaining
eye, cast an anxious glance    towards the Franco-Spanish line in
search of the ship which he meant the Victory first to grapple
with   and so lightly did Lord Nelson value personal risk, that,
           ;



although urged more than once on the subject, he would not
suffer those barriers from the enemy's grape and musketry, the
hammocks, to be placed one inch higher than to facilitate his
                                                                  —
                                             —
view of objects around him they were accustomed to be
stowed. The Victory, meanwhile, was 6lowly advancing to a
gun-shot distance from the enemy's line.
   At 20 minutes past noon, which was about 20 minutes after
the Fougueux had opened her fire upon the Eoyal Sovereign,
and about 10 after the latter had passed under the stern of the
Santa-Ana, the Bucentaure fired a shot at the Victory, then,
with studding-sails set on both sides, steering about east and
going scarcely a knot and a half through the water. The shot
fell short.   Two or three minutes elapsed, and a second shot
was fired which, the Victory then about a mile and a quarter
                    ;


distant, fell alongside. A third shot almost immediately followed,
and that went over the ship. One or two others did the same,
until, at length, a shot went through the Victory's maintop-
gallant-sail   affording to the enemy the first visible proof that
                        ;



his shot would reach. A minute or two of awful silence ensued                               ;


and then, as if by signal from the French admiral, the whole
van, or at least seven or eight of the weathermost ships, opened
a fire upon the Victory, such a fire as had scarcely before been
directed at a single ship. In a few minutes a round shot killed
Mr. John Scott, Lord Nelson's public secretary, while he was
conversing with Captain Hardy.
   Since the commencement of the firing the wind had gradually
died away to a mere breath. Still the Victory, driven onward
by the swell and the remains of her previous impetus, was going
slowly ahead in the direction now of the interval between the
Santisima-Trinidad and Bucentaure; both of which ships, aided
  I   It       was probably signals, made when   down between a Spanish four-decker and
the Victory         was much closer, that gave   a French two-decker, with admiral s flags
                    entry in the log of
rise to the following                            at the main."
                "
the Spartiate :— Observed her bearing
