1805.J
                        BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                               411

of their relative positions, to the advantage of the Tonnant.                 It
was, doubtless, while the Tonnant's attention was thus occupied
that the Monarca, being left to herself, and having suffered com-
paratively little in the action, re-hoisted her colours.
   While thus fast to the Algesiras on her starboard side, the
Tonnant fired her larboard aftermost guns athwart the hawse of
the Mars at the Pluton lying upon the hitter's larboard bow, and
her larboard foremost guns at the San Juan Nepomuceno lying
upon her own bow. Meanwhile the Mars, until she and the
Pluton dropped astern, fired several well-directed shot into the
larboard quarter of the Algesiras. The position of the Tonnant
and ships around her at this time, which was about 1 h. 35                   m
p.m., we have endeavoured to illustrate by the following diagram                 .




                                   /     lh. asm.   p.m.
  «*•   « PJt                     /                                   Pluton
                     Monarca
                                                            »**
                                       M.nar.                       \\
          T„„„.S»<
                                                                         San.Juart


                                                            \




                                                                $$^
                                                          Alg«s?^


  At about      1 h. 40 m.     p.m.,   Captain Tyler received a severe
wound, and was obliged to be taken below. The command of
the Tonnant thereupon devolved upon Lieutenant John Bedford.
In the mean time an animated cannonade was kept up between
the two ships by which the Algesiras soon lost her foremast,
                 ;


and the Tonnant her main and mizen topmast. The Algesiras
made a serious attempt to board but the marines of the Ton-
                                            ;


nant maintained so steady and well-directed a fire, that the
French crew did not succeed, except in the case of one man, who
contrived to enter one of the Tonnant's maindeck ports, and
whose life, to the credit of those who took him, was spared. At
about 2 h. 15 m. p.m., just as her main and mizen masts were
about to share the fate of her foremast, the Algesiras, after a
very gallant defence, struck her colours and Lieutenant Charles
                                                      ;



Bennett, with Lieutenant of marines Arthur Ball, and about 48
 men, stepped on board and took possession of her. In another
 quarter of an hour the San Juan hailed that she surrendered                         ;
