402                   BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                                  T1805.


  Very soon afterwards, or at about 1 h. 10 m. p.m., the two
ships dropped alongside of each other.      This account corre-
sponds with that given by the French.           "Nelson," says
M. Parisot, " voyant qu'il (the Eedoutable's captain) n'etait pas
dispose a plier, fit venir le Victory au vent tout d'un coup, et
le laissant tomber en travers, il aborda de long en long le Ee-
doutable." 1 Owing to the slight impetus in the Victory, caused
by the want of wind, the concussion of the firing would proba-
bly have separated her from the Eedoutable, had not the
Victory's starboard foretopmast studdingsail boom-iron, as the
ships were in the act of rebounding off, hooked into the leech of
the Eedoutable's foretopsail.     This held the ships together;
and, with the lower deck guns of the Victory touching the side
of the Eedoutable, and the latter 's mainmast in a line about
midway between the former's fore and main masts, the two ships
                                     2
fell off a few points from the wind.
   Almost immediately after the Victory had got hooked along-
side the Eedoutable, Mr. William Willmet, the boatswain of the
former, found a ready means of clearing the French ship's gang-
ways by firing the starboard 68-pounder carronade, loaded as the
larboard one had been, right upon the Eedoutable's decks. The
guns of the middle and lower decks were also occasionally fired
into the Eedoutable, but very few of the 12-pounders, on ac-
count chiefly of the heavy loss among those who had been
stationed at them. The Eedoutable, on her part, fired her
main-deck guns into the Victory, and used musketry, as well
through her ports into those of the Victory, as from her three
tops down upon the latter's deck. In her fore and main tops,
also, the Eedoutable had some brass cohorns, which, loaded
with langridge, were frequently fired with destructive effect
upon the Victory's forecastle. The larboard guns of the Victory
were fired occasionally at the Bucentaure but it was with little;



or no effect, the latter ship continuing to move to the north-
ward, while the Victory and Eedoutable kept inclining their
heads to the eastward. The Santisima-Trinidad also received
into her starboard or lee quarter and stern a portion of the
Victory's fire.
  Never allowing mere personal comfort to interfere with what
he considered to be the good of the service, Lord Nelson, when
the Victory was fitting to receive his flag, ordered the large
skylight over his cabin to be removed, and the space planked
  •
        Victoires et Conquetes,   tome xvi., p.     -   See   second   position   in   diagram at
t.71.                                             p. 400.
