 404                      BRITISH       AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [180.!


of the marines, and two seamen, who had come up on seeing
the admiral fall, now, by Captain Hardy's direction, bore their
revered and much-lamented chief to the cockpit where we will   ;



for the present leave him.   The position of the Victory and of
the ships near to her at the time Lord Nelson received his
wound, drawn up with as much accuracy as the case admits,
will be found in the following diagram                 :
                                                           —
                                                                   Bucent.


             1   h. 25 m.     P. .If.
                                              \.      wt?-
                    V                                                        Trinid.



 \                            'vv       Victory.                       -s4>-
                 Redout
  \
Turner




     Ft.   Nept.     4t^~~
   Previously to our entering upon the account of each ship's
proceedings, we will endeavour to present a general view of the
engagement, and of its immediate result. Soon after the first
four ships of the British lee division had cut through between
the centre and rear of the Franco-Spanish line, the remainder
successively as they came up, pierced the mass (for it could no
longer be called line) of enemy's ships, in various directions,
and found opponents as they could.      Meanwhile the leading
ships of the weather-division had begun to engage in a similar
manner, a little ahead of the centre. The action, which had
commenced, as we have elsewhere shown, at noon, arrived at its
height about 1 h. 30 m. p.m.    At 3 p.m. the firing began to
slacken, and, at about 5 p.m., wholly ceased. Of the 14 van-
ships of the combined line, reckoning to the Redoubtable inclu-
sive, three only were captured in their places. The remaining
11 wore out of the line. Of these 11, three were captured, and
eight escaped four, by hauling to windward, and four by run-
                          ;



ning for Cadiz. Of the 19 rear-ships, 12, including one burnt,
were taken, and seven escaped into Cadiz making, as the result
                                                           ;
