 1805.]                     BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                     403

up, so as to afford him a walk amidships, clear of the guns and
ropes.  Here, along an extent of deck of about 21 feet in length,
bounded abaft by the stancheon of the wheel and forward by
the combings of the cabin ladder-way, were the admiral and
Captain Hardy, during the whole of the operations we have
just detailed, taking their customary promenade.      At about
1 h. 25 m. p.m., just as the two had arrived within one pace of
the regular turning spot at the cabin ladder-way, Lord Nelson,
who, regardless of quarter-deck etiquette, was walking on the
larboard side, suddenly faced left about. Captain Hardy, as
                   1



soon as he had taken the other step, turned also, and saw the
admiral in the act of falling. He was then on his knees with his
lefthand just touching the deck. The arm giving way, Lord
Nelson fell on his left side, exactly upon the spot where his
secretary, Mr. Scott, had breathed his last, and with whose
blood his lordship's clothes were soiled.
  On Captain Hardy's expressing a hope that he was not
                                                           "
severely wounded, Lord Nelson replied            They have done for
                                                       :




me at last, Hardy."           "I hope not," answered Captain Hardy.
"Yes," replied his lordship, "my backbone is shot through." 2
The wound was by a musket-ball, which had entered the left
shoulder through the fore part of the epaulet, and, descending,
had lodged in the spine. That the wound had been given by
some one stationed in the Eedoutable's mizentop was rendered
certain, not only from the nearness (about 15 yards) and situa-
tion of the mizentop in reference to the course of the ball, but
from the circumstance that the French ship's maintop was
screened by a portion of the Victory's mainsail as it hung when
clewed up. That the ball was intended for Lord Nelson is
doubtful, because, when the aim must have been taken, he was
walking on the outer side, concealed in a great measure from
view by a much taller and stouter man. Admitting, also (which
is very doubtful), that the French seaman or marine, whose shot
had proved so fatal, had selected for his object, as the British
commander-in-chief, the best dressed officer of the two, he
would most probably have fixed upon Captain Hardy, or, indeed,
6uch, in spite of Dr. Beatty's print, was Lord Nelson's habitual
carelessness, upon any one of the Victory's lieutenants who
might have been walking by the side of him. Sergeant Seeker
   1
     This may be relied upon as correct,    the ground-work of every other published
although, completely at variance with the   account, including tliut in the first, edition
account published by the Victory's sur-     of this work,
                                              *
geon (Bealty, p. 32), and which, owing to         Beatty's Narrative, p. 33.
its upparent authenticity, has been made
