 408                     BRITISH         AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                             [1805.

 the Belleisle and Neptune. In five minutes more the Defiance
 took off the fire of the Aigle and at 3 h. 25 m. p.m. the Swift-
                                                     ;



 sure, passing astern of the Belleisle, commenced engaging the
 Achille, who about this time lost her main and mizen topmasts.
 As the Swiftsure passed close iinder the Belleisle's stern the two
 ships cheered each other and to signify that, notwithstanding
                                             ;


 her dismasted and shattered state, the Belleisle still remained
 unconquered, a union-jack was suspended at the end of a pike
 and held up to view, while an ensign was being made fast to the
 stump of her mizenmast. Thus, by the timely arrival of her
 friends, saved from behig crushed by the overwhelming force
 around her, the Belleisle ceased firing.  Observing soon aftei'-
 wards on his larboard beam a Spanish two-decker that had
 already surrendered, Captain Hargood sent the master, Mr.
 William Hudson, and Lieutenant Owen of the marines (who
 volunteered although wounded), in the only remaining boat, the
 pinnace, and took possession of the 80-gun ship Argonauta. The
 position of the Belleisle, at the time she was so fortunately
 relieved, we have endeavoured to illustrate by the following
 diagram         :
                     —
                                                                                 Argonauta

                         Enp.
                           "ii
                                wilts.
                               Svv'lfts.
                                                                                     §-K.
                                                                           F,
                                 <^ \                                           AoL*s\

                                                 \
                     ,                                   ^                                           r
                                                                                                   Js s
s*                                                           ...
                                                                                            ;



             -                                               BelUUe/.'i          \
     Aiglc


                                                         3A        A'.m.   t.M
                               P«ly P   lt

                                             ^.
                                                         .
                                                             Neptune


    The Belleisle's hull was knocked almost to pieces: both sides
 of it were about equally damaged. Ports, port-timbers, channels,
 chain-plates, all exhibited unequivocal marks of the terrible maul-
 ing she had received. Her three masts and bowsprit, as we have
 6een, were shot away, and so was her figure-head. Her boats
