406           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805

British ships, no ship except the Belleisle, and that with merely
a broadside in passing, asserts that she fired into the Santa- Ana.
Here is the proper place to notice the modesty with which Vice-
admiral Collingwood, in his official despatch, refers to the part
                              "
taken by his own ship.          The commander-in-chief in the
"Victory," he says, "led  the   weather column, and the Boyal
Sovereign, which bore my flag, the lee. The action began at
12 o'clock by the leading ships of the columns breaking through
the enemy's line, the commander-in-chief about the tenth ship
from the van, the second in command about the twelfth from
the rear, &c." The Boyal Sovereign is not again mentioned,
except in reference to matters that occurred subsequently to
the battle.
  The loss    sustained by the Eoyal Sovereign was tolerably
severe   :she had one lieutenant (Brice Gilliland), her master
(William Chalmers), one lieutenant of marines (Robert Green),
two midshipmen (John Aikenhead and Thomas Braund), 29
seamen, and 13 marines lulled, two lieutenants (John Clavell
and James Bashford), one lieutenant of marines (James le
Vesconte), one master's mate (William Watson), four midship-
men (Gilbert Kennicott, Grenville Thompson, JohnFarrant, and
John Campbell), her boatswain (Isaac Wilkinson), 69 seamen,
and 16 marines wounded.
   Bespecting the Santa-Ana's loss in killed and wounded, no-
thing is known beyond the amount already specified as the
alleged effect of her opponent's raking fire. That the Spanish
ship's loss must have been uncommonly severe may be inferred,
as well from the length and closeness of the action, as from the
fact, that her starboard side was nearly beaten in by the Boyal
Sovereign s shot. Among the Santa-Ana's dangerously, if not
mortally wounded, was Vice-admiral A lava and it was under-
                                              ;


stood that her killed and wounded comprised a great proportion
of officers.
   After having, for the space of 20 minutes, sustained the tre-
mendous fire opened by the rear of the combined line, and after
having suffered, in consequence, a loss of between 50 and 60 men
in killed and wounded, the Belleisle, at about a quarter past
noon, exchanged a few shot with the Monarca, and passed
through the line abreast of the Fougueux, then distantly raking
the Boyal Sovereign.     In hauling up on the larboard tack, the
Belleisle was enabled, owing to the advanced position of the
latter, to pour a full broadside into the lee quarter of the Santa-
Ana.     Bearing away a little, the Belleisle then passed close
