1805.]              BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                      407

astern of the Tndomptable who, quickly wearing, exchanged a
                           ;


few broadsides with her, and then bore up to the south-east.
In the mean time the Belleisle was engaged with a Spanish
ship, the San-Juan-Nepomuceno, at some distance on her star-
board beam.     At about 45 minutes past noon the Belleisle's
maintopmast was shot away and, as the enemy's rear ships
                               ;

were now pressing forward to support the centre, her situation
became extremely critical.
   At 1 p.m. the Fougueux ranged up in the smoke on the Belle-
isle's starboard beam, and struck her at the gangway with her
larboard bow, rolling at the same time with her fore yard over
the British ship's quarter-deck.     The Fougueux immediately
began engaging the Belleisle, and in 10 minutes shot away her
mizenmast about six feet above the deck, the wreck falling over
the larboard quarter. In about 10 minutes more, on the Mars
beginning to engage her, the Fougueux, who had received a
smart fire from the Belleisle's aftmost guns, dropped astern and
hauled to the northward. At 1 h. 30 m. p.m. the French Achille
came ranging past the stern of the Belleisle, then with her head
a little to the southward of east, and stationed herself on the
latter's larboard quarter.   In this position, the Achille kept up
a steady fire, with comparative impunity, on account of the
wreck of the Belleisle's mizenmast masking her aftermost guns.
Meanwhile the Aigle, having replaced the San-Juan, was dis-
tantly cannonading the British ship on the starboard side        ;


and the San-Justo and San-Leandro, as they stood athwart the
bows of the Belleisle to join Admiral Gravinainthe rear, opened
a passing fire.
   Thus in a manner surrounded, the Belleisle soon had her
rigging and sails cut to pieces, and at 2 h. 10 m. p.m. lost her
mainmast about four feet above the deck the wreck of which
                                               ;


fell upon the break of the poop, while the
                                              topmast, with the
yards, sails, and shrouds, hung over upon the larboard side,
where already lay the wreck of the mizenmast. Her larboard
guns thus completely covered by wreck, the Belleisle was pre-
vented from returning by a single shot the Achilles animated
and destructive fire. At 2h. 30 m. p.m., driven from her capital
station upon the bows of the Victory and Temeraire, by the
approach of the Leviathan, the French Neptune placed herself
across the starboard bow c f the Belleisle and at 2 h. 45 m. the
                                           ;


foremast and bowsprit of the latter, still engaged by two other
ships, were shot away by the board.
   At 3 h. 15 m. p.m. the Polyphemus interposed herself between
