                       BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                    409
1805.]

and anchors shared the same fate. If the Belleisle s damages
weie severe, her loss of men was not less so: she had two lieu-
tenants (Ebenezer Geall and John Woodin), one midshipman
(George Nind), 22 seamen, and eight marines killed, one
                                                           lieu-

tenant (William Ferrie), one lieutenant of marines (John Owen),
her boatswain (Andrew Gibson), two master's mates (William
Henry Pearson and William Cutfield), one midshipman (Samuel
Jago), one first-class volunteer (J. T. Hodge), 67 seamen, and
19 marines wounded.
  In her way down astern of the                   Belleisle, the     Mars suffered
severely from the heavy raking fire of the ships ahead
                                                         of her,
the San-Juan-Nepomuceno, Pluton, Monarca, and Algesiras.
As the Mars was directing her course to cut the line between
the first two of these ships, the Pluton, who was to windward of
the San-Juan, ranged ahead            :
                                              whereupon, to avoid being raked
by so close an opponent, the Mars hauled up, with the intention
to pass on and cut the line ahead of the San-Juan. In attempt-
ing this manoeuvre, the Mars was followed and engaged by the
Pluton.   Having by that time had her rigging and sails greatly
damaged, the Mars was obliged to come head to wind in order
to avoid running on board the Santa-Ana whereby the Mars   ;




lay with her stern exposed to the Monarca and Algesiras. At
this moment, however, the Tonnant came up, and soon found
full employment for both of those ships.     Meanwhile, as she
paid off in her completely unmanageable state, the Mars became
also exposed to a heavy fire from the Fougueux, then with her
larboard guns engaging the Belleisle, and presently received
into her stern a most destructive fire from the Pluton a fire              ;



that almost cleared the poop and quarter-deck of both officers
and men. It was at about 1 h. 15 m. P.M., while Captain Duff
was standing at the break of the quarter-deck looking over the
side, that a cannon-shot from the Pluton struck him on the
breast, knocked off his head, and cast his body on the gangway.
The same shot killed two seamen, who were standing close
behind their captain. The command now devolved upon Lieu-
tenant William Hennah.      By this time succour was at hand                         ;



and, while the Fougueux made off to the northward in the di-
rection of the Temeraire, the Pluton stood away to the south-
east to join Admiral Gfavina.             1



   The Mars had her maintopmast and spankcrboom shot away,
and her three lower masts, fore and main yards, and foretop-
mast, very badly wounded          :   her foremast, indeed, was left in so
               1
                   See becond set of figures in diagram at p. 411.
