410           BRITISH   AND FRANCOvSPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.

shattered a state that it subsequently fell overboard.   The main
piece of her rudder was badly wounded, her stern and quarters
much cut, and nine of the poop-beams, besides sundry knees, &c,
shot to pieces. The ship bad also some guns disabled, and had
received several shot between wind and water. The loss on
board the Mars was proportionably severe she had her captain,
                                            :



one master's mate (Alexander Duff), two midshipmen (Edward
Corbyn and Henry Morgan), 17 seamen, and eight marines
killed, and two lieutenants (Edward William Garrett and James
Black), her master (Thomas Cook), one captain of marines
(Thomas    Norman),     five   midshipmen (John Young, George
Guiren, William John Cook, John Jenkins, and Alfred Luck-
raft), 44 seamen, and sixteen marines wounded.
   With respect to the injuries sustained by the Pluton, the ship
is represented to have been unable, after the action, to muster

more than 400 effective men out of a complement of about 700      :




consequently, her loss must have been severe. It appears, also,
that the Pluton made three feet water an hour from the shot
she had received in the hull.
   Having, as already stated, fired at the ships that were pressing
upon the Mars, the Tonnant steered straight for the larboard
bow of the Algesiras, then moving slowly onwards the same as
her companions in the line, and very near to her present leader,
the Monarca. As the Tonnant advanced, the Algesiras, having
already her maintopsail to the mast, backed her mizentopsail,
and thus enabled the former, at about 45 minutes past noon, to
run close under the Spanish ship's stern. Pouring in a raking
fire, the Tonnant hauled up, and engaged the Monarca along-
side but, dreading to encounter so large and powerful a ship,
      ;


the latter fired a few ineffective shot, dropped astern, and struck
her colours, although she afterwards rehoisted them. The Ton-
nant's people believed, although they were not certain, that the
Monarca struck but the Spartiate, who, not being engaged
                 ;


until late, had leisure for observation, saw the flag hauled down
and in her log says accordingly "At 1 h. 7 m. a Spanish two-
                                  :




decker struck to the Tonnant."
   Filling her main and mizentoppails, the Algesiras now evinced
an intention to cross the stern of the Tonnant, who, by this time,
had had her foretopmast and mainyard shot away but the Ton-
                                                   ;



nant, putting her helm hard-a-port, ran the Algesiras on board,
and defeated the manoeuvre. The bowsprit and anchors of the
Algesiras getting entangled with the main rigging of the Ton-
nant, the two ships were held fast together, greatly, on account
