1805.]                      BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                          405

of the first day's proceedings, nine French (including one
                                                            burnt),
and nine Spanish sail of the line captured, total 18, and nine
French,   and  six Spanish sail of the line escaped, total 15 of          :



which latter number four French ships got away to the south-
ward, and 11, five of them French and six Spanish, and most of
the ships much shattered, with all the frigates and
                                                    brigs, reached
the bay of Cadiz.
   So far as to the collective operations of the two fleets in the
Trafalgar battle. Our attention is now due to the individual
exertions of the ships on each side and we shall proceed to
                                                    ;



give the most accurate account that our researches, far and
near, have enabled us to obtain, taking the British ships of each
division in the order in which,
                                  according to the best judgment
to be formed from the variety of times noted down in their
                                                              logs,
they successively got into action.
   The Eoyal Sovereign we left just as, after 15 minutes of close
action with three or four ships, the Belleisle had come to her
relief.   The latter, passing on to the eastward, left the Eoyal
Sovereign upon the Santa-Ana's starboard bow.         In a short
time the Spanish three-decker lost her mizentopmast and, at           ;


the end of about an hour and a quarter from the commencement
of the combat, her three masts fell over the side. At about
2 h. 15 m. p.m., after a hot, and with the
                                           exception of the Belle-
isle's broadside, an uninterrupted
                                    engagement between the two
ships from 10 minutes past noon, the Santa-Ana struck to the
Eoyal Sovereign.
   This occurrence took place just as the mizenmast of the
Royal Sovereign came down, and when her fore and main
masts from their shattered condition, were ready to follow it.
No sooner, indeed, did the Eoyal Sovereign, in order to put
herself a little to rights, move a short distance ahead of her
prize, than her mainmast fell over on the starboard side, tear-
ing off two of the lower-deck ports. The foremast, having been
shot through in several places, and stripped of nearly the whole
of its rigging, was left in a tottering state. Hence the English
three-decker was reduced to almost, if not quite, as unmanage-
able a state as the Spanish three-decker, which she had so gal-
lantly fought and captured.
  The French accounts say " Le vaisseau la Santa-Ana, vail-
                                        :



lamment attaquc par l'amiral Collingwood, fut non moins vail-
lammcnt defendu par le vice-amiral A lava mais, accable par   ;



le   nombre,   il   dut ceder."     1
                                            And yet out of the 2P>
                     1
                         Victoires et ConquStes, tome xvi., p. 179.
