1805.1                BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                            415

so, in her efforts to close, received the fire of two or three
enemy's ships, the Colossus ran past the starboard side of the
French Swiftsure J who had just before bore up, as well to
                  ;


avoid being raked by the Colossus, as to bring her larboard
guns to bear upon the Bellerophon. The density of the smoke
on the starboard side hid from view all the enemy's ships in that
direction, until, having run a short distance to leeward, the
Colossus found herself close alongside of the Argonaute, whose
larboard yard-arms locked into her starboard ones. A spirited
cannonade now ensued between the two ships, and lasted for
about 10 minutes, when the Argonaute's fire became nearly
silenced, except from a few of her aftermost guns a shot from
                                                          ;


one of which, just as the ships, driven apart by the concussion
of the guns, began to settle broadside off, struck Captain Morris
a little above the knee. As soon as, by this lateral movement,
 she had cleared her yards, the Argonaute paid off, and went
 away, receiving into her stern the parting fire of the Colossus.
 The latter, in the meanwhile, was firmly engaged on her lar-
 board quarter, with the French Swiftsure, and also with the
 Bahama, who lay close on that ship's larboard bow, and fired at
the Colossus across the Swiftsure's fore-foot.
   At a few minutes before 3 p.m., having forged ahead, the
Swiftsure got between the Bahama and Colossus, and being thus
more fully exposed to the latter's well-directed broadsides, soon
slackened her fire and dropped astern. The Colossus was now
enabled to devote her sole attention to the Bahama who, on    ;


her mainmast falling, as it presently did, over her engaged side,
showed an English jack from the hen-coops on her poop, to
denote that she had struck. Meanwhile the French Swiftsure
endeavoured to bear up under the stern of the Colossus but the    ;



latter, wearing more quickly, received a few only of the former's
larboard guns, before she poured in her starboard broadside.
This brought down the French Swiftsure's mizenmast. At the
same time the Orion, in passing, gave the French ship a broad-
 side, which brought down her tottering mainmast; whereupon
the Swiftsure made signs to the Colossus of having surrendered.
 In hauling up to take possession of her two prizes, the latter
 lost her wounded mizenmast over the starboard side.
    The mainmast of the Colossus was so badly wounded, that
 she was compelled, during the ensuing night, to cut it away;
 and her damages altogether were extremely severe. Her only
  remaining stick, the foremast, had been shot through in several
                         1
                             See the diagram at p. 413.
