1805.]                        BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                            419

muzzles came into contact with the Eedoutable's side       and            ;



consequently at every discharge there was reason to fear that
the enemy would take fire, and both the Victory and the Teme-
raire be involved in her flames. Here then was seen the asto-
nishing spectacle of the fireman of each gun standing ready
with a bucket full of water, which, as soon as his gun was dis-
charged, he dashed into the enemy through the holes made in her
side by the shot." 1
   The respectability of the authority has induced us to give this
quotation entire, yet we positively deny that the Victory's guns
were fired in the manner there stated. Not only have our in-
quiries fully satisfied us respecting this fact but we doubt even
                                                     ;


if the Temeraire had come in contact with the Bedoutable at the

period to which the statement refers. When, too, the Temeraire
did lash herself to the Eedoutable, all effective opposition on the
part of the latter had ceased, to the Victory at least and, after;



firing a few shot, and ascertaining that the Temeraire was foul
on the Eedoutable's starboard side, the Victory began to busy
herself in getting clear, to seek a more worthy antagonist.   This
hitherto disputed fact, the details of the Temeraire' s proceed-
ings, into       which we are now about to enter, will more clearly
establish.
  Being an extraordinarily fast sailing line-of-battle                 ship, the
Victory, urged as she was, would probably have been, like the
Royal Sovereign, far ahead of the ships in her wake; but that
the Temeraire, having on board very little water or provisions,
                            "
was, what the sailors call,   flying light." After the Temeraire,
having closed the Victory, had, instead of leading the column
as at first proposed, been directed to take her station astern of
the Victory, 2 the dismantled state of the latter from the enemy's
shot, rendered it very difficult for the Temeraire to avoid going
ahead of her leader and to keep astern she was obliged, besides
                             ;


cutting away her studding-sails, occasionally to yaw or make a
traverse in her course. Hence the Temeraire shared with the
Victory, although by no means to so great an extent, the damage
and loss sustained by the head of the weather column from 111
enemy's heavy and incessant raking fire.         Shortly after the
Victory had poured her larboard broadside into the Bucentaure's
stern, the Temeraire opened her fire at the Neptune and Re-
doutable. "When the Victory put her helm a-port to steer
towards the Redoutable, the Temeraire, to keep clear of her
leader, was compelled to do the same; receiving, as she passed
             1                                 s   See Note, p. 391.
                 Beatty's Narrative, p. 31.
