412           BPJTISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.         [1805.

and Lieutenant Benjamin Clement was sent in the jolly-boat
with two hands to take possession. The boat being damaged by-
shot, swamped, before she reached a quarter of the way.      The
two men could swim, but not the lieutenant. While the latter
was clinging to the boat, a shot struck her and knocked off her
quarter. The boat then turned bottom upwards and Lieute-
                                                   ;


nant Clement held fast by the boat's fall until one of his two
companions, a black man, Macnamara by name, swam to the
Tonnant, and returned with a rope that lead out of the ship's
stern port. By this means a brave young officer, who had been
in two or three of the general actions of the preceding war, was
saved to his country.
   Among the damages sustained by the Tonnant in the hull,
was a bad wound in the rudder, a portion of the head of which
was shot away and a great part of her starboard quarter-piece,
               ;


with the rails and gallery, was carried away by the Algesiras
when the vessels got foul. The loss on board the Tonnant
amounted to one midshipman (William Brown,) 16 seamen, and
nine marines killed, her captain (severely), boatswain (Bichard
Little), the captain's clerk (William Allen), one master's mate
(Henry Beady), 30 seamen, and 16 marines wounded. The
Algesiras had upwards of 200 men killed and wounded, includ-
ing several officers, and among the mortally wounded, the brave
and highly-respected Bear-admiral Magon, who had previously
been wounded in two places, but would not quit the deck.
   After having captured the Algesiras and disengaged herself
from her prize, the Tonnant fired several shot at the squadron of
M. Bumanoir passing to windward but, having no boat left,
                                     ;


could not send again to take possession of the San Juan. That
Spanish ship, however, was shortly afterwards engaged and
secured by the Breadnought.
   In consequence of the novel mode of attack adopted by the
commander-in-chief, each British ship, as she bore up in line
ahead, was obliged to follow in the wake of her leader until
close upon the enemy's line her commander, then, acting up to
                            ;


Lord Nelson's instructions, as contained in the memorandum at
a previous page, that no captain could do very wrong who
placed his ship alongside that of an enemy, attached himself to
the first Frenchman or Spaniard that crossed his path. Most
of the captains had also received, on the morning of the action,
Lord Nelson's verbal directions, transmitted through the captains
of the frigates, that they were to break the enemy's line where-
ever they conveniently could. This, in effect, discretionary
