1805.]
                              BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                              421

was on the eve of surrendering. A party of the Victory's officers
and men quickly ascended from the middle and lower decks and,               ;


after an interchange of musketry, the French crew, who, in
addition to the unexpected opposition they experienced, found
that the curve in the hulls of the two ships prevented their step-
ping from one to the other, retired within-board.
  The repulse of this very gallant assault cost the Victory
dearly.   Captain Adair and 18 men were killed, and one lieu-
tenant   (William Ram, mortally), one midshipman (George
Augustus Westphal), and 20 men wounded. Captain Adair met
his death by a musket-ball received at the back of the neck,
while standing upon the Victory's gangway encouraging his
men, and several seamen and marines were also killed by the
French musketry but the lieutenant and midshipman, and four
                      ;



or five seamen standing near them, were struck by a round shot,
or the splinters it occasioned, which shot had come obliquely
through the quarter-deck, and must have been fired from one of
the Eedoutable's maindeck guns pointed upwards in the manner
already described.
  The account which the French give                          of the origin of this
boarding attempt, and of the cause that led to its failure, is as
follows: "In the twinkling of an eye" (alluding to the time
when Lord Nelson was carried below), "the quarterdeck of this
            T

ship (the A ictory) was deserted the gallant fellows of the Re-
                                                :




doutable wanted to rush upon it; but the rentrde of the two
vessels presented an obstacle.    In order to obviate this, Captain
Lucas directed the main yard of his ship to be lowered, mean-
ing to make of it a bridge whereon to pass on board the Victory.
At that moment the three-decker Temeraire ran foul of the Re-
doutable on the side opposite to that on which the Victory lay,
pouring in at the same time the whole of her broadside. The
effect of this fire was terrible upon the crew of the Redoutable,
the whole of whom were then assembled upon the forecastle,
gangway, and quarter-deck. Nearly 200 were placed hors de
combat. The brave Captain Lucas, although wounded, remained
on deck. The junction of the Temcrairc giving fresh courage
to the crew of the Victory, the latter recommenced firing, but
soon afterwards ceased in order to disengage herself from the
 French ship.'   -1



   Is it likely that a French 74 would attempt to board a British
 three-decker fast to her on one side, while a second British
 three-decker was foul of her on the other? "We have not a
                          1
                              For the original, see Appendix. No. 37.
