 418           BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.             [1805.

 was attributable to the close and unremitting cannonade kept
 up, for more than an hour, by the English Achille.     On the
 other hand, the principal part of the latter's
                                                damage and loss
 was caused by the steady fire and determined opposition of the
 Berwick.
   We quitted the Victory at about 1 h. 30 m. p.m., or just as
Lord Nelson had been carried to the cockpit, mortally wounded
from the mizentop of the Eedoutable. 1 So destructive to the
 Victory was the fire kept up from the Eedoutable's tops, as
well as from her second deck guns, occasionally
                                                pointed upwards,
that, within a few minutes of Lord Nelson's fall, several officers
and about 40 men, nearly the whole of them upon the third or
upper deck, were killed or wounded.        A single 18-pounder
carronade on the poop, mounted upon an elevating
                                                        carriage,
might very soon have destroyed the Eedoutable's mizentop and
all that were in it; but the             had  no
                                Victory           guns whatever
mounted on her poop. The same effect might have been
                                                             pro-
duced upon the fore and main tops by one of the 68-pounder
carronades; but their carriages would not give the required
elevation.  Nor, we believe, could the 68-pounder on the
starboard side be even fired a second time upon the decks of
the Eedoutable, 2 owing to some accident that had since be-
fallen it.

   Although, from the loss of the men stationed at them, the
12-pounders of the Victory were for the most part abandoned,
the larboard guns, her 24 and 32 pounders
                                                   upon the decks
below continued to fire, for a few minutes (until the
                                                            English
Neptune and ships astern of her intervened), distantly at the
starboard quarters of the Bucentaure and
                                               Santisima-Trinidad,
and the starboard guns, with much more certain
                                                       effect, right
into the hull of the Eedoutable.    " The starboard guns of the
lower and middle decks," says Dr.                "
                                       Beatty,     were depressed,
and fired with a diminished charge of powder, and three shot
each, into the Eedoutable. This mode of firing was adopted
by Lieutenants Williams, King, Yule, and Brown, to obviate the
danger of the Temeraire's suffering from the Victory's shot
passing through the Eedoutable     ;  which must have been the
case if the usual quantity of powder, and the common
                                                         elevation,
had been given to the guns. A circumstance occurred in this
situation, which showed in a most striking manner the cool in-
trepidity of the officers and men stationed on the lower-deck of
the Victory. When the guns on this deck were run
                                                         out, their
               1   See p. 403.            2   See p. 402.
