1805.]                  BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                    417

 action ensued, which lasted an hour.        The Argonauta now
 attempted to set her mainsail to shoot ahead, but, failing in that,
 ceased firing, shut her lower-deck ports, and, as it appeared on
board the Achille, threw an English jack or ensign over her lar-
board quarter.
   At this moment two French ships came up, and one of them
soon found other employment for the English Achille than
taking possession of the Argonauta. The French Achille edged
down on her English namesake's larboard quarter, and engaged
her in passing to windward and the Berwick, who had been
                               ;



distantly engaged w ith the Defence, ranged up on the English
                    T




Achille's starboard side, between the latter and the Argonauta.
The French Achille passing on in the direction of the Belleisle,
and the Argonauta dropping to leeward, the English Achille
and Berwick were left in fair single combat. The action con-
tinued for upwards of an hour, when the Berwick hauled down
her colours, and was taken possession of by the Achille.
   The masts of the latter, although all standing, were badly
wounded, and so was her bowsprit her hull had also received
                                      :




considerable damage. The loss on board the English Achille
amounted to one midshipman (Francis John Mugg), six seamen,
and six marines killed, and two lieutenants (Parkins Prynn and
Josias Bray), one captain and one lieutenant of marines (Palms
Westropp and William Leddon), one master's mate (George
Pegge), three midshipmen (William H. Staines, William J.
Snow, and William Smith Warren), 37 seamen, and 14 marines
wounded.
   The Argonauta, the English Achille's first steady, opponent
appears to have suffered greatly in rigging, hull, and crew, but
to have had no spars of any consequence shot away        her loss
                                                            :



is represented to have amounted to nearly 400 in killed and

wounded, including among the dangerously wounded her
captain.  It is doubtful if the whole of this damage and loss
was inflicted by the English Achille the Argonauta must have
                                          :




exchanged some broadsides in passing with other British ships.
The Berwick was dreadfully cut up in her hull, and her three
masts were left in a tottering state. The Achille's officer, who
took possession of the ship, counted, upon her decks and in her
cockpit and tiers, 51 dead bodies, including that of her gallant
captain, M. Camas; and the wounded of the Berwick, accord
ing to the report of her few surviving officers, amounted
                                                               to

nearly 200: her loss in officers was very severe, the quarter-
deck having been twice cleared. Nearly the whole of this loss
  VOL.   III.                                         - R
