420           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1805.

the Redoutable, a fire that carried  away the head of her mizen-
topmast. When, after striking the Redoutable, the Victory
again brought her head to the northward, the Temeraire stood
slowly on a short distance to the south-east and then hauled
                                               :




up to pass through the enemy's line. Meanwhile the Victory
had, as already stated, dropped alongside the Redoutable, and
the two ships were paying off to the eastward.
   Scarcely had she begun to haul up, so as to avoid being raked
by the French Neptune, ere the Temeraire discovered, through
the smoke, the Redoutable driving towards and almost on board
of her.   Even had the breeze, now barely sufficient to fill the
sails, permitted the Temeraire to manoeuvre to clear herself from
the Redoutable, the Neptune, who, to avoid getting foul of the
Redoutable and Victory, had wore and come to again on the
same tack, and at this time lay with her larboard broadside
bearing upon the starboard bow of the Temeraire, opened so
heavy a raking fire, that in a few minutes the latter' s fore-yard
and main topmast were shot away, and her foremast and bow-
sprit, particularly the latter, greatly damaged.    In this un-
manageable state, the Temeraire could do no more than continue
to cannonade the Redoutable with her larboard guns.       This the
former did until, having, as she had done those on the opposite
side, shut down her lower-deck ports, the Redoutable, at about
1 h. 40 m. p.m., fell on board the Temeraire, the French ship's
bowsprit passing over the British ship's gangway a little before
the main rigging and where, in order to have the benefit of
                  ;



bestowing a raking fire, the crew of the Temeraire immediately
lashed it. The raking fire was poured in, and very destructive,
as we shall soon show, did it prove.
   Most of the few effective men, left upon the Victory's upper
deck after the Redoutable's destructive fire formerly noticed, 1
being employed in carrying their wounded comrades to the
cockpit, Captain Hardy, Captain Adair of the marines, and one
or two other officers, were nearly all that remained upon the
quarter-deck and poop. The men in the Redoutable's mizen-
top soon made this known to their officers below and a con-
                                                     ;


siderable portion of the French crew quickly assembled in the
chains and along the gangway of their ship, in order to board
the British three-decker, whose defenceless state they inferred,
not merely from her abandoned upper deck, but from the tem-
porary silence of her guns on the decks below, occasioned by a
supposition that the Redoutable, having discontinued her fire,
                            i   See j>. 418.
