414          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.


upon Lieutenant William Pryce Cumby. Shortly afterwards the
Montanez dropped out of gun-shot astern, and the Bahama and
French Swiftsure became engaged with the Colossus. The
musketry from the Aigle had by this time played sad havoc upon
the Bellerophon's quarter-deck, forecastle, and poop. At 1 h.
40 m. p.m. the Aigle, who had once or twice vainly attempted to
board her opponent, dropped astern, exposed as she fell off to a
raking fire, first from the Bellerophon herself, and then from the
Eevenge.  The Bellerophon, now quite in an unmanageable state,
fired a few shot at the Monarca,who instantly hauled down her
colours for the last time, and was taken possession of by the
former as, nearly at the same time, was the Bahama, who had
       ;



previously struck, to relieve herself from the destructive fire of
the Colossus.
   The Bellerophon had her main and mizen topmasts shot away,
her foretopmast, all three lower masts, and most of her yards,
badly wounded, and her standing and running rigging nearly
cut to pieces. In hull also she was much injured, having had
several knees and riders shot away, and part of her lower deck
ripped up, besides other damage. Her loss consisted of her
captain, master (Edward Overton), one midshipman (John Sim-
mons), 20 seamen, and four marines killed, one captain of marines
(James Wemyss), her boatswain (Thomas Bobinson), one
masters mate (Edward Hartley), four midshipmen (William N.
Jewell, James Stone, Thomas Bant, and George Pearson), 96
seamen, and 20 marines wounded. A great proportion of this
heavy loss unfortunately arose from the explosion of a quantity
of loose powder spilt about the decks from the cartridges and
                                                            ;


which, but for the water that lay around the entrance of the
magazine, must have destroyed the ship and all on board of her.
   Although no particular account can be given of the damage or
loss sustained by the Aigle, it may with certainty be stated, that
she suffered greatly in masts, rigging, and hull, and lost in
killed and wounded, from the successive fire of the Bellerophon,
Eevenge, and Defiance, nearly two-thirds of her crew, including
among the killed her captain and first-lieutenant, and among
the wounded several of her officers. The loss on board the
Monarca does not appear to have been recorded but it must
                                                    ;


have been severe, from her first action with the Tonnant, and
from the length of time she was exposed to the close and unin-
terrupted fire of the Bellerophon, one of the best manned,
although one of the smallest 74s, in the British fleet.
  At 1 p.m., or thereabouts, after having, during 10 minutes or
