 41 G                BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                       [1805.


 places    two of her anchors and three of her boats had been
             ;



 destroyed, and some of her guns disabled. Four of her star-
 board lower-deck ports had also been knocked away by running
 on board the Argonaute, and her hull in every part of it was
 much shattered. The Colossus lost in the action her master
 (Thomas Scriven), 31 seamen, and eight marines killed, her
 captain, two lieutenants (George Bully and William Forster),
         1



 one lieutenant of marines (John Benson), her boatswain (Wil-
 liam Adamson), one master's mate (Henry Milbanke), eight
 midshipmen           (William Herringham, Frederick                  Thistlewayte,
 Thomas G. Beece, Henry Snellgrove, Bawden M'Lean, George
 Wharrie, Timothy Benou, and George Denton), 115 seamen,
 and 31 marines wounded.
    The Argonaute, the first broadside-opponent of the Colossus,
 although she lost none of her masts, must have suffered severely
in the huB, having had, according to the French accounts,
nearly 160 of her crew killed and wounded she, nevertheless,  :




effected her escape. Some of the French writers are very severe
in their strictures upon the conduct of the French Argonaute.
It appears that the Hermione frigate, in compliance with the
practice of the French navy, hoisted the signal, for ships unen-
gaged to engage, and, finding no attention paid to it, added the
number of the Argonaute, and kept both signal and pendant
flying for one hour.
                        2
                           The Bahama and French Swiftsure,
reduced to the state of wrecks, suffered a proportionate loss of
men the first having had nearly 400 killed and wounded,
         ;



including among the former, her captain, and the second very
little short of that number.

   Being close astern of the Colossus and sailing well, the
English Achille became, in a few minutes after the former,
warmly engaged. Having passed close astern of the Montanez,
the Achille luffed up and engaged that ship to leeward. In less
than a quarter of an hour the Montanez sheered off, and the
Achille made sail to succour the Belleisle, then lying to leeward
totally dismasted, with three enemy's ships upon her.       While
on her way to perform this duty, the Achille found herself
obstructed by the Argonaute.      The British 74 immediately
brought to on the Spanish 80's larboard beam, and a close
  i
      "With a truly gallant spirit, Captain   had come down     to take the Colossus in
Morris would not go below, but, applying      tow, Capiain Morris, having become faint
a tourniquet to his thigh, remained at bis    from loss of blood, was carried below, and
post near the head of the poop-ladder
                                              was landed in his cot some days after-
until, to avoid the fall of the mi/.enmast,
                                              wards at Gibraltar.
                                                2
be descended to the quarter-deck. Alter           Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p.
the battle was over, and the Agamemnon        178.
