428          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1805.

soon found herself in a similar position astern of the Santisima-
Trinidad, whose main and mizen masts came down with a tre-
mendous crash, just as the Leviathan was in the act of second-
ing a fire which her leader had so successfully opened. The
English Neptune then luffed up alongside the Santisima-Tri-
nidad to leeward, while the Conqueror, with her starboard guns,
kept up a distant fire upon her to windward. At about 2 h. 30 m.
p.m. the foremast of the Spanish four-decker shared the fate of
her main and mizen masts, and she lay an unmanageable wreck
upon the water. At this moment the Neptune had her attention
suddenly called off by the movement that was making in the
combined van, some of the ships of which, on bearing up, raked
her, and caused the principal part of the damage and loss which
she sustained in the action.
    The Africa 64, having had the misfortune to lose sight of her
fleet in the night, was, when the firing commenced, broad upon
the Victory's larboard beam, and nearly abreast of the van-ship
of the combined line.    Seeing her danger, Lord Nelson ordered
the Africa's signal to be thrown out, to make all possible sail.
The intention of this signal appears to have been misunderstood ;



and, instead of using means to run his ship out of danger,
Captain Digby set every sail he could spread to hasten her into
it.  Passing along, and exchanging broadsides in succession with
the ships of the combined van, the Africa, with much less injury
done to her than might have been expected, bore down ahead of
the Santisima-Trinidad.
    Meeting no return to her fire, and seeing no colours hoisted
on board the latter, Captain Digby concluded that the four-
decker had surrendered, and sent Lieutenant John Smith in a
boat to take possession. Upon the lieutenant's reaching the
quarter-deck, and asking an officer who advanced to meet him,
whether or not the Santisima-Trinidad had surrendered, the
Spaniard replied, "Non, non," pointing at the same time to one
Spanish and four French sail-of-the-line then passing to wind-
ward. As, for the want of masts, the Santisima-Trinidad was
settling fast to windward of the two fleets, and he had only a
boat's crew with him, Lieutenant Smith quitted the Spanish ship
(the crew of which, singularly enough, permitted him to do so),
and returned on board the Africa.
    The Santisima-Trinidad remained without a prize-crew until
5h. 30m. p.m.; when the Prince, by signal, boarded and took
her in tow. The Trinidad's loss, although we are unable to par-
ticularize it, is described to have been, and no doubt was,
