430              BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1805.

board tack, and presently observed that all the ships of the
combined van ahead of the Santisima-Trinidad were tacking or
wearing, as if to double upon the headmost ships of the British
weather column, and place them betwixt two fires. Sure of
                                       —
finding an opponent among those and, such is the confidence
inspired among the ships of a British fleet, as sure that, if likely
to be overmatched, some friend or other would hasten to her
rescue— the Leviathan stood on to the north-east.
  A Spanish 74, the San-Augustin, who was steering south-
east, appeared to be desirous to measure her strength with the
British 74   and at about 3 p.m., when within 100 yards, put
             ;


her helm hard a-starboard, in the hope to be able to rake the
Leviathan ahead. To frustrate a manoeuvre so likely to be
serious in its effects, the Leviathan put her helm hard a-port,
and, having fresher way than the San-Augustin, felt its influ-
ence more quickly. The consequence was, that the guns of the
British ship were brought to bear before those of her antago-
nist  and, loaded with three shot each, were discharged, with
      :



admirable precision, and at the distance of less than 50 yards,
into the starboard quarter of the San-Augustin.     Down went, in
an instant, the Spanish ship's mizenmast, and with it her colours,
and feeble was the return she bestowed.
   The probability now was, that, as the Leviathan kept forging
ahead, and could not, on account of the previously damaged
state of her rigging, back her sails, the San-Augustin would be
able to wear under her stern. To prevent this, the Leviathan,
putting her helm a-starboard, ran on board the San-Augustin,
in such a way, that the latter's jib-boom entangled itself in the
former's larboard main rigging, thereby exposing the San-
Augustin's upper-deck to the poop carronades and marines of
the Leviathan. A smart and well-directed fire soon drove the
Spaniards below     ;
                     and Lieutenant John Baldwin, third of the
Leviathan, at the head of a party of seamen and marines, leaped
on board the San-Augustin, and carried her without further
opposition. The British 74, with her stream-cable, then lashed
the prize to herself. Scarcely had the Leviathan effected this,
ere the Intrepide, another fresh ship from the combined van,
came crowding up, and, after raking the Leviathan ahead,
ranged along the starboard side but waited only to exchange
                                   ;


a passing fire, as the Africa and one or two other British ships
were fast approaching to the assistance of their friend. The first
two set of figures in the following diagram will assist in explain-
ing the manoeuvres of the Leviathan and her Spanish opponent       :
