1805.]
                   BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                     423

when, early in the forenoon, she had been lowered down from
the quarter.
  Very soon after these young midshipmen had been despatched,
a lieutenant of the Victory, looking out of one of her aftermost
ports on the starboard side, saw a second French
                                                     two-decker
lying close upon the Temeraire's starboard side and, as the
                                                   ;



Victory, a few minutes afterwards, was in the act of booming
her bows off from the Redoutable, the same officer read the
name upon the stern of each French ship. The circumstances
under which the second French ship came in contact with the
Temeraire, we shall now proceed to relate.
   In our account of the proceedings of the Belleisle and Mars,
we noticed the hauling off from the former of the French ship
Fougueux. After quitting the Belleisle, the Fougueux stood
slowly across the wide space between the Santa-Ana and
Eedoutable, steering a course directly for the starboard beam of
the Temeraire, then with her head nearly east. The object
of the Fougueux was probably to pass to windward of the
Temeraire and rake her or it might have been (and the French
                         :



 crew were actually assembled on the forecastle in apparent
                                                                of
 readiness) to board the British three-decker, the appearance
 the latter indicating that she was much disabled, and her colours
 being at this time down, owing to the fall of her gaff. Indeed,
 as the number of men with which the Temeraire had begun the
 action was only about 660, and as, of the number at this time
 fit for duty, not perhaps exceeding 550, nearly the whole were
                                                              that
 below, whither they had been sent by Captain Harvey,
 they might not be injured by the hand-grenades constantly
 thrown from the Redoutable's tops, the Fougueux, with her
 700, or, allowing for a slight loss, 680 men, might have
                                                          made a
 serious impression upon the Temeraire's decks.
   AVhile Captain Harvey devoted his attention to the Redoubt-
 able on the larboard side, the first-lieutenant, Thomas Fortescue
 Kennedy, assembled a portion of the crew on the opposite side,
 to receive the Fougueux.    Not having yet discharged her star-
 board broadside, the Temeraire was in perfect readiness there,
 but delayed firing until the Fougueux arrived so close that she
 could not well escape. At length the latter got within 100 yards.
 Instantly the Temeraire's broadside opened, and a terrible crash
 was heard on board the Fougueux. Crippled and confused, the
 French ship, at about 2 h. p.m., ran foul of the Temeraire, and
 was immediately lashed, by her fore-rigging, to the latter ship's
                                                        Mr. James
 spare anchor. Lieutenant Kennedy, accompanied by
