426          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1805.


nant of marines (Simeon Busigny and John "Kingston), her car-
penter (Lewis Oades), one midshipman (William Pitts), 35
seamen, and eight marines killed, and one lieutenant (James
Mould), one lieutenant of marines (Samuel J. Payne), her boat-
swain (John Brooks), one master's mate (Francis S. Price), one
midshipman (John Eastman), 59 seamen, and 12 marines
wounded. A part of this heavy loss in killed and wounded
arose from the following accident            —
                                  A stinkpot thrown from
                                         :



the Bedoutable entered the powder-screen on the quarter-deck,
and caused a destructive explosion upon the main deck. Had
it not, indeed, been for the presence of mind of the master-at-

arms, John Toohig, who was quartered in the light-room, the
fire would have communicated to the after-magazine, and pro-

bably have occasioned the loss not only of the Temeraire, but of
the ships lashed to her.
   The damages and loss of the Bedoutable, jammed as she had
been betwixt two such formidable antagonists, might well be
severe.    The fall of her main and mizen masts has already been
stated:   her foretopmast and bowsprit shared the same fate.
Her rudder was destroyed, and her hull shot through in every
direction, above and below water.     An 18-pounder gun, and a
36-pounder carronade near the stern, bad burst, and 20 of her
guns, including nine low-deckers on the side opposite to the
Victory, lay dismounted. Out of a crew of 643, the Redoutable
had, according to the French official returns, 300 killed and 222
wounded, including nearly the whole of her officers. Neither
the damage nor the loss of the Fougueux was by any means so
severe as that incurred by the generality of the captured ships.
None of her masts had, at this time, actually fallen, although
one or more of them had been badly struck, and her loss could
not have well exceeded its reputed amount, 40 in killed and
wounded, including among the latter her first-lieutenant, and
among the former her captain.
   We formerly mentioned that Captain Blackwood went on
board the Temeraire with the commander-in-chiefs instructions
to Captain Harvey. 1 After quitting the latter, Captain Black-
wood proceeded to the Leviathan, and informed Captain
Bayntun that Lord Nelson had consented that his ship should
precede the Victory in going into action. From her station
astern of the Conqueror, the Leviathan immediately crowded
all sail to reach the enviable post assigned her :
                                                   but, owing to
the late hour (about 11 h. 30 m.) at which the message was
                           i
                               See p. 392.
