 1805.]                    BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                   425

 shot away   and her fore and main masts and their yards, bow-
               ;



sprit, jib-boom, maintopmast, and cap, and fore and main tops,
were badly wounded. All her rigging was cut to pieces, and
her spare spars were rendered unfit for use hull much damaged,
                                                          :




particularly in the wales, clamps, and waterways and some               ;


shot had been received between wind and water. Several beams,
knees, and riders were injured, and ports and port-timbers
knocked off. The starboard cathead was also shot away, and
the starboard bower and spare anchor totally disabled.
  The loss on board the Victory will show, that the top-cohorns
and musketry of the Eedoutable had made ample amends for
the comparative silence of her great guns. Besides Lord Nelson
and his secretary, the Victory had one captain of marines,
(Charles W. Adair), one lieutenant (William Earn), two mid-
shipmen (Eobert Smith and Alexander Palmer), the captain's
clerk (Thomas Whipple ), 32 seamen, and 18 marines killed,
                                 1



two lieutenants (John Pasco and George Miller Bligh), two lieu-
tenants of marines (Lewis Buckle Eeeves and J. G. Peake), three
midshipmen (William Eivers, George Augustus Westphal, and
Richard Bulkeley), 59 seamen, and nine marines wounded. This
was according to the official account            ;
                                                     but 27 additional wounded
nun reported themselves to the surgeon after the returns had
been drawn up. 2 Among this number was included the boat-
swain, William Willmet; who, although painfully wounded in
the thigh, did not quit his quarters.
  The damages of the Temeraire were scarcely less than those
of the Victory. The former had her maintopmast, the head of
her mizenroast, her fore-yard, and her fore and main topsail-
yards shot away, her fore and main masts so wounded as to
render them unfit to carry sail, and her bowsprit shot through
in several places. Her rigging of every sort was cut to pieces,
and lier starboard cathead and bumpkin were shot away also                    ;


the head of her rudder at the water's edge, by the fire of the
Bedoutable, while rounding the lattcr's stern. Eight feet of
the starboard side of the lower deck abreast of the mainmast
was also stove in, and the whole of her quarter-galleries on
both sides were carried away by the two ships that had run foul
of her.
      The Temeraire's loss amounted to one captain and one lieute-

  1
    This gentleman was killed by the       his body,  and is, perhaps, the only in-
wind of a round shot, whilst Bpeaking to   stance on record of such an event.
Mr. (now Sir) George Westphale.      He      *
                                                 Beatty's Narrative, p. 61.
bad no wound or scratch on any part of
