1805.]
                        BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                         429

extremely severe   :   she had been exposed to the raking fire, in
succession, of four ships, the Victory (distantly         and partially),
Neptune, Leviathan, and Conqueror   and her hull, in conse-
                                                  ;




quence, had been dreadfully shattered, especially about the
stern and quarters.
  Before we proceed in our relation of the further part which
the Leviathan took in the action, we will briefly state what
damages and loss were sustained by the Neptune, Conqueror,
and Bucentaure. The Neptune's masts were all more or less
wounded, but not dangerously so, and her standing and run-
ning rigging somewhat damaged she had received nine shot
                                          :




between wind and water, and had incurred a loss of 10 seamen
killed, her captain's clerk, 30 seamen, and three marines
wounded.
   The Conqueror had her mizen topmast and maintopgallant-
mast shot away, her fore and main masts badly wounded, and
her rigging of every sort much cut several shot had also struck
                                              ;


her on the larboard side between wind and water. The loss on
the part of the Conqueror, up to the period of the Bucentaure's
surrender (her further loss will be shown presently), was com-
paratively trifling: she had one seaman killed, and one lieu-
tenant of marines (Thomas Wearing), one lieutenant of the Rus-
sian navy (Philip Mendel), and seven seamen wounded.       Tht.
damages of the Bucentaure in her masts have already been
described her hull also was much cut up and her loss in killed
          :
                                                      ;


and wounded, according to the verbal report of her few surviv-
ing officers, amounted to upwards of 400 officers and men,
including among the slightly wounded Admiral Yillencuve and
his captain.
  Leaving the Santisima-Trinidad to the care of the English
Neptune, the Leviathan stood on towards the French Neptune,
then amusing herself in the manner we have related, 1 with now
a second French ship, the Fougueux, joined to the Temeraire.
As the Leviathan approached, and before she was in a position
to fire a shot, the Neptune, at whom the Temeraire had just
brought some of her foremost guns to bear, wore round, and, in
going off before the wind, at least enabled the former to identify,
by the name on her stern, the French ship that chose to fly,
the moment an antagonist appeared, who was in a condition
to oppose her. although, evidently, not of force enough to main-
tain the combat with any prospect of success.
   Disappointed here, Captain Bayntun hauled up on the lar-
                                '
                                    See p. 424.
