 1805.]
                                  BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                    431


                                             "2^    AeofflBin-

      \            San-Aug.



Leriath.
           -S
             L
                                               4 P. M>


                                                                                          Ajar
                              I

                                                                          \
                                                             San-Anpr.
                                                                              \

                                                           Lev    S&              1




                                                                                      Orion

                3 P.M.




                                                                          y
                                                     "i^tp       Africa



    In this        spirited,      and,   for its   undisturbed occurrence in a
 general action, rather singular combat, the Leviathan's damages
 and loss, although we are not enabled to exhibit them sepa-
 rately, were, it is certain, of trifling amount. Including what
 she had previously sustained, the Leviathan had the main piece
 of her head shot through, all three masts and bowsprit, and
 most of her lower and topsail yards wounded, her mizentopsail
 yard shot away, and a great part of her rigging cut to pieces.
 She received eight shot between wind and water, and had one
 long 32 and one long 18 pounder, and one 18-pounder carro-
 nade, completely disabled.   Her loss amounted to two seamen
 and two marines killed, one midshipman (J. W. Watson), 17
 seamen, and four marines wounded. Besides the loss of her
 mizenmast, the San-Augustin had her remaining masts injured,
 and her hull struck in several places, particularly near the star-
 board quarter her loss was represented by her officers to have
                         :




 amounted to 160 in killed and wounded, including among the
 latter her captain, Don Felipe Xado Cagigal.
   Being, except the Leviathan, the nearest British ship to tho
 Intrepide, the Africa was the first that brought the latter to
 action. This, at about 3 h. 30 m. p.m., the Africa most gallantly
 did, and, in spite of her decided inferiority of force, maintained
