422                 BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETF                           [1805.


doubt, therefore, that the French account is in this respect cor-
rect.  In fixing the relative time of these occurrences, we should
say that, in about five minutes after Lord Nelson was earned off
the deck, or at 1 h. 35 m. p.m., the boarding indication commenced.
Admitting the contest, when the Te'meraire put an end to it, by
lashing the Eedoutable's bowsprit to the fore part of her main
rigging, and pouring in her destructive raking fire, to have con-
tinued five minutes, that would fix the time of the Temeraire's
getting foul, as Ave have already stated it, atlh. 40m. p.m.;
and another five minutes may be allowed for the ship to drop
early alongside.
  Less considerate than either of her antagonists about fire,
although in equal if not greater danger from its effects, the Be-
doutable continued throwing hand-grenades from her tops and
                                                              "1
yard-arms (" les grenades pleuvent des hunes du Eedoutable )                         J


some of which, falling on board herself, set fire to her larboard
fore chains and starboard fore-shrouds.    The fire from the fore-
shrouds presently communicated to the foresail of the Temeraire                      ;



but, by the active exertions of her forecastle-men, led by the
boatswain, the flames on board both ships were presently ex-
tinguished. The Victory's crew, after having put out a fire
that had spread itself among some ropes and canvas on the
booms, also lent their assistance in extinguishing the flames on
board the Eedoutable, by throwing buckets of water from the
gangway upon her chains and forecastle.
  All further hostility having, as well as it might, ceased on
board the Eedoutable, Captain Hardy ordered two midshipmen,
Messrs. David Ogilvie and Francis E. Collingwood, with the
sergeant-major of marines and eight or ten hands, to go on
board the French ship, and (not to "take possession," 2 for, had
that been deemed of any importance, a lieutenant would have
been sent, but) to assist in putting out a fire which had just
broken out afresh. This party, not being able to step on board
for the reason already given, embarked from one of the Victory's
stern-ports in the only remaining boat of the two that had been
towing astern, and got to the Eedoutable through one of her
stern-ports.   As a proof, too, that all hostility had then ceased
on board the French ship, the Victory's people were well
received.    Their boat, we believe, was soon afterwards knocked
to pieces by a shot.    The other boat had been cut adrift by a
shot just as the Victory was about to open her fire, and was
afterwards picked up with her oars and tackle as complete as
                                                    2
   i   Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvl., p. 174.       Beatty's Narrative, p. 55.
