                     BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                    427
1805.]


delivered, the Leviathan did not get further ahead than just
abreast of the Conqueror, before the Victory was beginning to
suffer from the enemy's fire.
   The necessity of shortening sail for awhile, to facilitate the
endeavours of the Leviathan to pass ahead to her newly-allotted
station, and the almost calm state of the weather after the firing
had lasted a short time, made it 1 h. 45 m. p.m. before the
English Neptune became closely engaged. At this time, having
with all her endeavours been unable to go ahead, the Leviathan
had resumed her station in the line, and was close in the wake
of the Neptune, and a short distance ahead of the Conqueror.
Hauling up towards the nearest ship, the English Neptune soon
found herself close under the stern of the Bucentaure. The
broadside of the Neptune, as she passed on in this direction,
shot away the Bucentaure's main and mizen masts nearly by the
board, and doubtless killed or wounded a great many of her
crew. The Leviathan poured in her fire within 30 yards of the
French ship's stern, and the Conqueror soon afterwards did the
same.
   The Conqueror then hauled up on the lee quarter and beam of
the Bucentaure, and shot away her foremast. In a few minutes
afterwards the ship of the commander-in-chief of the combined
fleet, whose fate had been previously sealed by the Victory's
tremendous broadside, hauled down her colours, and was taken
possession of by the Conqueror. The officer in charge of the
boat was Captain James Atcherley, of the marines, who had
with him but five hands, a corporal and two privates of his
corps, and two seamen.     On the captain's stepping upon the
Bucentaure's quarter-deck, M. Villeneuve and his two captains
presented their swords, but conceiving that it more properly
belonged to Captain Bellow to disarm officers of their rank,
Captain Atcherley declined the honour of receiving them.
Having secured the magazine and put the key in his pocket, and
placed two of his men as sentries, one at each cabin-door, Sap-
                                                             <




tain Atcherley, accompanied by the French admiral and his two
captains, pulled off, with his three remaining hands, and at
length boarded, not the Conqueror, who had proceeded in chase,
but the Mars, her sister-ship where on account of some mistake
                                  ;


about the nature of the message sent by Lieutenant Hennah, the
acting commander of the Mars, to Captain Hardy, the French
officers were ordered to remain.

   Hauling up, after having raked the Bucentaure, the Neptune
                                                      1



                         1
                             See diagram at p. 404.
