424            BRITISH   AND FRANCO -SPANISH FLEETS.       [1805.


Arscott, master's mate, and Mr. Eobert Holgate, midshipman,
and 20 seamen and six marines, then boarded the Fougueux in
her larboard main rigging. On the French ship's quarter-deck
lay Captain Beaudoin, mortally wounded        ;
                                               and the second
captain and other officers were encouraging the men to repel the
boarders. In the ons^t, however, the second captain became
severely wounded whereupon the French crew suffered them-
                   ;


selves to be driven off the quarter-deck by the British, few as
they were and, in 10 minutes from the time of her being
           ;



boarded by Lieutenant Kennedy and his 28 followers, the
Fougueux was completely in the possession of the Temeraire.
  This occurrence took place at about 2 h. 10 m. p.m.; and it
was within five minutes afterwards, or at 2 h. 15 m. p.m., that
the Victory, by fire-booms and the slight assistance which her
helm and sails could afford, disengaged herself from the Be-
doutable. While the Yictory gradually got her head to the
northward, the three fast-locked ships from which she had just
parted, the Bedoutable, Temeraire, and Fougueux, swang with
their heads to the southward.
   Scarcely had the Victory broken away from the group, ere
the main and mizen masts of the Bedoutable came down. The
mainmast, falling on board the Temeraire, carried away the
stump of the latter's mizen topmast, broke down the poop-rail,
and with its wreck encumbered the whole after-part of the ship.
This accident put an entire stop to the Redoutable's hitherto
formidable musketry (even admitting it to have continued till
this time, which we doubt), and her only remaining antagonist
prepared to take possession. The mainmast of the Bedoutable,
as it lay upon the Temeraire' s poop, forming a bridge of easy
descent, this was soon accomplished and, at about 2 h. 20 m.
                                       ;


p.m., a portion of the British crew, headed by Lieutenant John
Wallace, second of the Temeraire, stepped on board, and took
quiet possession of the gallantly-fought Bedoutable. About the
time that this occurrence happened, having got her head well
to the southward, the Temeraire was enabled to fire a few of
her foremost guns on the larboard side, clear of the Eedoutable's
bows, at the French Neptune whereupon the latter, who also
                                ;


observed the Leviathan approaching, ceased her aimoyance and
bore away.
  Before we enter upon the proceedings of any other ship, we
will give a brief description of the damage and loss sustained
by the Victory and Temeraire and the two French 74s on board
of them. The Victory's nJzentopmast, as already stated, was
