1805.]              BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                       437

Scipion, and, as the Neptuno was considerably astern, succeeded
in cutting- her off. At 4 p.m. the two British 74s wore, and got
close alongside of the Spanish 80 who, after defending herself
                                 ;


in the most gallant manner, surrendered at about 5 h. 10 m. p.m.
with the loss of her mizenmast and fore and main topmasts, and
with, no doubt, a serious loss in men, although it has not been
recorded. Having been captured directly to windward of the
Temeraire and her two prizes, the Neptuno drifted upon and fell
on board the former. This gave rise to the extraordinary mis-
take contained in Lord Collingwood's official despatch, repre-
senting that the Temeraire had been boarded by a French ship
•on one side and a Spaniard on the other.
   The Minotaur had her foretopsail-yard shot away and both
                                                         ;


she and the Spartiate had their masts, yards, and rigging in
general a good deal damaged. The Minotaur had three seamen
killed, her boatswain (James Eobinson), one midshipman (John
Samuel Smith), 17 seamen, and three marines wounded; and
the Spartiate had also three seamen killed, and her boatswain
(John Clarke), two midshipmen (Henry Bellairs and Edward
Knapman), 16 seamen, and one marine wounded. A great pro-
portion of the loss suffered by these two ships was no doubt
inflicted by the Neptuno who, as the Intrepide was the last
                         ;




French, was herself the last Spanish, ship that struck to the
British on this eventful day.   We have still some arrears to
bring up in the lee column, a task we shall hasten to execute.
   It was about '1 p.m. when the Dreadnought got into action
with the San-Juan Nepomuceno, then surrounded by the 1'rin-
cipe-dc-Asturias, San-Justo, and a French 80-gun ship, the
Indomptable. In about 15 minutes the Dreadnought ran on
board of and captured the San-Juan who had previously been
                                      ;



engaged by the Tonnant, Bellerophon, Defiance, and some
other ships, and was nearly in a defenceless state. Without, as
it would appear, staying to take possession of the Spanish 74,
the Dreadnought pursued and fired at the Spanish three-decker        ;



but, after the exchange of two or three broadsides, a shot from
one of which struck off the left arm of Admiral Gravina, the
Principe-de-Asturias made sail and effected her escape.
   The Dreadnought had her masts cut with shot, but none
carried away her loss amounted to six seamen and one marine
             :




killed, and one lieutenant (James L. Lloyd), two midshipmen
(Andrew M'Culloch and James Sabbin), 19 seamen, and foui
marines wounded.      Besides being       dismasted,   the San-Juar
Nepomuceno was much shattered in her hull, and sustained »
