432            BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.          [1805.

the contest for nearly three quarters of an hour      ;
                                                          when the
Orion came up, and opened a fire upon the Intrepide's starboard
quarter.    The Orion then wore round the French ship's stern,
and, bringing to on the lee bow of the latter between her and
the Africa, whose fire, without any disparagement to her, was
nearly silenced, maintained so heavy and well-directed a can-
nonade, that in less than a quarter of an hour the main and
mizen masts of the Intrepide, already injured by the Africa's
fire, fell over her side.    The proximity of the Conqueror, and
the approach of the Ajax and Agamemnon, left to the Intrepide
no alternative but to strike her colours. This the French ship
did at 5 p.m., having been greatly damaged in hull as well as
masts, and incurred a loss, according to the representation of
her officers, of nearly 200 in killed and wounded. The second
set of figures in the last diagram will show the track of the Orion
in her way towards, and during the time she engaged, the
Intrepide.
  The Africa had her maintopsail-yard shot away, and her bow-
sprit and three lower masts so badly wounded that none of the
latter could afterwards stand. Her remaining masts and yards
were also more or less injured her rigging and sails cut to
                                  ;




pieces ;
        and her hull, besides its other serious damage, had re-
ceived several shot between wind and water. Her loss amounted
to 12 seamen   and six marines killed, one lieutenant (Matthew
Hay), one captain of marines (James Tynmore), two master's
mates (Henry West and Abraham Turner), three midshipmen
(Frederick AVhite, Philip J. Elmhurst, and John P. Eailey),
30 seamen, and seven marines wounded a loss which, consider-
                                         ;


ing that her complement was only 490 men and boys, and that
Captain Digby had voluntarily engaged so superior a force,
proves that, although but a 64, the Africa had performed as
gallant a part as any ship in the British line. The Orion, who
came so opportunely to the aid of the Africa, had her foremast
wounded, and her maintopsail-yard and maintopgallantmast
shot away. The loss on board the Orion, however, amounted to
only one seaman killed, and two midshipmen (Charles Tause
and Charles P. Cable, both slightly), 17 seamen, and four
marines wounded.
  It was at about 2 h. 30 m. p.m. that the whole of the Franco-
Spanish van, except the Santisima Trinidad, who lay dismasted
abreast and to leeward of the Bucentaure, equally a wreck and
either a prize or in the act of becoming one, began to put about,
some by staying, others by wearing, in obedience to a signal
