1805.]
                            BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                               433

made by the commander-in-chief at 1 h. 50 m. p.m. to the follow-
ing purport    "The French fleet, engaging to windward or to
                 :




leeward, orders the ships which, from their present position, are
not engaging, to take such a position as will bring them the most
                      " L'armee navale
quickly into action."                   Franchise, combattant au
vent ou sous le vent, ordre aux vaisseaux qui, par leur position,
actuelle, ne combattant pas, d'en prendre une quelconque, qui
                   promptement possible au feu.''
                                                                    1
les reporte le plus                               It appears
                                      Dumanoir had signalled
that, five minutes before, Eear-admiral
the commander-in-chief that the van had no enemy to contend
with.
  According to the admiral's previous instructions to his cap-
tains, the above signal was to be considered as casting a stigma
upon those to whom it was addressed. At all events no imme-
                                       2

diate attempt was made by the generality of the ships to comply
with the signal, and those that were the most prompt in obeying
it were baffled by the calm state of the weather.   The Formi-
dable, and one or two of the other ships, had to employ their
boats to tow themselves round. Hence the manoeuvre was slow,
partial, and imperfect.    When the 10 ships did at length get on
the starboard tack, five (four French and one Spanish), under
Bear-admiral Dumanoir, hauled their wind, and the remaining
five kept away, as if to join Admiral Gravina, then to leeward
of the rear, in the act of making off.
   It was in the height of all this confusion in the combined van,
that the [Britannia, Agamemnon, Orion, and Ajax got inter-
mingled among the French and Spanish ships, which had Avore
and edged away in the manner related. The Britannia appears
to have been engaged, a short time, with the San-Francisco-de-
Asis, and subsequently with the Bayo three-decker. It was con-
sidered on board the Britannia, that the ship she engaged, after
the San-Francisco-de-Asis, was the French Neptune, with " a
tier of guns on her gangway."       Owing to the obscurity occa-
sioned by the smoke, and to the want of wind to blow out tho
flags, a mistake respecting the colours might easily be made                     ;


and certainly the Neptune had no guns on her gangway, but
was a regular 80, similar to the Bucentaure.
   The Agamemnon and Ajax also exchanged a few broadsides
with some of the ships that had bore up and the Orion, as;



already stated, was the first, after tho Africa, that became
closely engaged with the Intrepidc.      Tho latter and tho San-
Augustin were the only ships of the five, that seemed to have
                                                             -   See p. 36G.
         1
             Victoircset Conquetcs, tome xvi., p. 173.
  VOL.   III.                                                           2 F
