440           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.             [1805.

for a short time ;  when these two ships, with most of the others
near them, bore up and made off. The Thunderer's main and
mizen masts and bowsprit had a shot in each, but otherwise her
damages were not material. Her loss amounted to two seamen
and two marines killed, and one master's mate (John Snell), one
midshipman (Alexander Galloway), nine seamen, and one marine
wounded. The Principe-de-Asturias, at the time she bore up to
escape, had been partially engaged by the Eevenge and Defiance,
and had received two broadsides from the Prince, in addition to
the contest she had previously maintained with the Dreadnought
and other British ships hence her damages and loss were com-
                         :




paratively severe. None of the Spanish three-decker's masts
appear to have been shot away, but that all were more or less
damaged may be inferred from the fact, that her main and mizen
masts were unable to withstand the gale that ensued. The loss
sustained by the Principe-de-Asturias amounted to a lieutenant
and 40 men killed, and 107 men badly wounded, including
Admiral Gravina himself, as already mentioned, in the left arm
(which was afterwards amputated, but too late to save his life),
and some other officers.
   Finding her rigging and sails too much cut to enable her to
follow the Principe-de-Asturias, the Defiance stood for the Aiglo,
whose crippled state had prevented her from making sail. At
about 3 p.m. the Defiance ran alongside of the Aigle, lashed the
latter to herself, boarded her with little resistance, got possession
of the poop and quarter-deck, hauled down the French colours,
and hoisted the English in their stead when, suddenly, so
                                            ;


destructive a fire of musketry was opened upon the boarders
from the forecastle, waist, and tops of the Aigle, that the British,
before they had been well five minutes in possession of their
prize, were glad to quit
                          her and escape back to their ship.
   As soon as the lashings were cut loose, the Defiance sheered
off to a half-pistol-shot distance, and there kept up so well-
directed a cannonade that, in less than 25 minutes, the Aigle,
the fire from whose great guns had also been nobly maintained,
called for quarter, and was presently taken quiet possession of.
The Defiance afterwards took possession of the San-Juan Nepo-
muceno; which ship, besides her crippled state from the pre-
vious attacks she had sustained, had already surrendered to the
Dreadnought. On the coming up, therefore, of the latter ship,
Captain Durham sent the San-Juan's captain and officers to
her.
  The Defiance had her bowsprit and fore and main masts shot
