438                 BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                              [1805..


                                           and wounded, in-
loss, as represented, of nearly 300 in killed
cluding among the mortally wounded her gallant commander.
  Having yawed to starboard to allow the Dreadnought to pass
on to the Spanish three-decker, then the rearmost enemy's ship
by two, the Polyphemus attempted to haul up again but,                              ;


finding the English Swiftsure close upon her larboard quarter,
she was obliged to wait until the latter passed ahead. It was at
about 3 h. 25 m. p.m. that the English Swiftsure, having passed
the Belleisle's stern, opened her fire upon the French Achille;
who, passing along the larboard beam of the Belleisle, edged
away to the south-east, followed and engaged by the former.
The Swiftsure presently succeeded in crossing her opponent's
stern and in getting to leeward of her l when the Polyphemus,
                                                          -




who had received a heavy fire from the French Neptune, in
passing between the latter and the Belleisle, advanced on the
French Achille' s weather-quarter. In about 40 minutes after
the Swiftsure had commenced the action with the Achille, the
latter, having had her mizenmast and fore-yard shot away, and
having also caught fire in the fore-top, ceased engaging, and, as
it appeared to the Polyphemus, waved a union-jack at her star-

board cathead. The Polyphemus then stood away to assist the
Defence in engaging the San-Ildefonso, but who struck before
the Polyphemus got up and the Prince three-decker bore down
                                   ;


between the French Achille and English Swiftsure, just as the
latter, considering the Achille a beaten ship, was hauling off
to seek a more worthy opponent.       But the business of the day,
at this end of the line at least, was now nearly over.
   The Swiftsure had her mizentopmast shot away, and mizen-
mast badly wounded, and lost seven seamen and two marines
killed, and one midshipman (Alexander Bell Handcock), six
seamen, and one marine wounded. The Polyphemus had her
main and maintop masts badly wounded, her spanker-boom cut
through, and one lower-deck gun disabled, but escaped with the
slight loss of two men killed and four wounded.
   While the Eevenge was attempting to pass through the
enemy's line, and just as she had put her helm a-port, to place
herself athwart the hawse of the Aigle, 2 the latter's jib-boom
caught the mizentop-sail of the former and, before the two    ;



ships got clear, the Eevenge was enabled to pour into the Aigle's
bows two deliberate broadsides. The Eevenge then stood on,
and, while hauling up on the larboard tack, received a tre-
  1   See diagram at p. 403, where the tracks     -   See second set of figures in diagram at
cross.                                          p. 413.
