434                  BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                           [1805.


any other object in view than a retreat. The San-Francisco-de-
Asis might reasonably have declined closing with the Britannia                            .;



but the Heros appears to have had no three-decker opposed to
her, although she probably was one of the ships that raked the
British Neptune, after the latter had silenced the Santisima-
Trinidad. The Heros had her captain killed, but sustained no
other loss of consequence, and A'ery slight damage. What loss
the Kayo suffered is not known but she did undoubtedly incur
                                              ;


a loss, and had her masts and rigging tolerably wounded and
cut up.
   The Britannia, with some slight damage to her masts and still
less to her hull, had one lieutenant (Francis Boskruge), eight
seamen, and one marine killed, her master (Stephen Trounce),
one midshipman (William Grant), 33 seamen, and seven marines
wounded.      The Ajax was very slightly damaged, and had
only two seamen killed and nine wounded.             The principal
damage sustained by the Agememnon Avas a large hole below
the quarter, probably from a shot fired by one of M. Dumanoir's
ships.   In consequence of this the ship made four feet water an
hour her loss consisted of only two seamen killed and eight
      :


wounded. 1
   The five French and Spanish ships which hauled to the wind,
after wearing in the manner already stated, were the Formi-
dable, commanded by Bear-admiral Dumanoir, Duguay-Trouin,
Mont-Blanc, Scipion, and Neptuno. The very British ships that,
from their disabled state, were calculated to offer the least oppo-
sition, having little or no sail to force them to leeward, lay
nearest to the track of M. Dumanoir's squadron. Among those
the Victory, Temeraire, and Boyal Sovereign were the most
exposed. The Yictory, with her mizen topmast gone, lay with
her head to the northward, having the Bucentaure, a mere hulk,
a point or two on her weather bow, two or three ships' lengths
off, and the Santisima- Trinidad, another hulk, at a somewhat

greater distance on her lee bow. At about three-quarters of a
mile astern of the Victory, or rather upon her weather-quarter,
lay the Temeraire with her two prizes.          The head of the
Temeraire, and of the Bedoutable also, whose mainmast still
held her fast to the former, was pointed to the southward and                    ;


her crew were busied in booming off the Fougueux from her
starboard side, to be ready to salute the French ships as they
passed. The Boyal Sovereign, with only her foremast standing,
lay a short listance astern and to leeward of the Temeraire, in
          1   The Agamemnon expended 6781 lbs. of powder, and fired 1145 shot.
