1805.]               BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                    441

through in the centre of each, also her mizenmast, three top-
masts, jib and driver-booms, and gaff wounded her rigging
                                                   :



and sails were likewise much cut, and her hull struck with shot
in several places. She had one lieutenant (Thomas Simens), her
boatswain (William Forster), one midshipman (James AVilliam-
son), eight seamen, and six marines killed, and her captain
(slightly), two master's mates (James Spratt and Robert Browne),
two midshipmen (John Hodge and Edmund Andrew Chapman).
39 seamen, and nine marines wounded. The Aigle, although
her principal masts do not appear to have been shot away, had
received several shot through them, and was otherwise much
disabled. Her hull was pierced in every direction, and her
starboard-quarter nearly beaten in. The Aigle had been suc-
cessively engaged by six or seven British ships, and had con-
ducted herself in the most gallant manner. Her loss amounted
to about 270 in killed and wounded, including several of her
officers.
  Of the 19 ships composing the combined rear, 11 have been
captured, and seven have quitted the line and run to leeward    ;

thus leaving one ship only, the French Achille, whose fate
remains to be shown. This ship, in her successive encounters
with the English Achille, Bclleisle, Swiftsure, and Polyphemus,
had lost her mizenmast, maintopmast, and foreyard, and having
since,   owing, inall probability, to her swivels or
                                                     musketry
there, caught fire in her fore-top, was without the means of
extinguishing the flames on account of the destruction of her
engine by the enemy's shot. The only alternative left was to
cut away the mast. At 4 h. 30 m. p.m., while the crew were
preparing to do this, so that it might fall clear of the ship, a
broadside from the Prince cut the mast in two about its centre  :


and the wreck, with its flaming top, fell directly upon the boats
in the waist.  These soon caught fire, and so in succession did
the decks below.
   After the discharge of one or two broadsides, the Prince
discovered the accident that had befallen her antagonist, ami,
wearing, hove to, and in company with the Swiftsure, sent her
boats to save as many as possible of the French Achille' s crew :


in which laudable attempt, soon afterwards, the Pickle schooner
and Entreprenante cutter zealously employed themselves. This
was a dangerous service, on account of the French ship's guns,
when heated discharging their contents. The Swiftsure's boats
had two or three men killed and wounded in consequence. The
Achille had already suffered a heavy loss in killed and wounded,
