 436          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805»

commander. Just as Lieutenant St. George, having moved on a
step or two had turned his face round, was in the act of smiling
on his friend, a cannon-shot took off the head of the latter, and
struck the former senseless on the deck.
  In passing the Yictory, M. Durnanoir's squadron, having
kept away a little for the purpose, exchanged a few distant
and ineffectual shot with her. By the time the van-ship, the
Formidable, had arrived abreast of the Temeraire, the latter
had succeeded in clearing her starboard broadside of the
Fougueux, who now lay athwart the Temeraire' s stern, with
her head to the eastward, and consequently with her stem
exposed to the raking fire of the enemy. One or two broadsides^
were exchanged between the Temeraire and the ships to wind-
ward; and the fire from the latter cut away the main and
mizen masts of the Fougueux, and killed and wounded some of
her people. One shot also shattered the leg of a midshipman
belonging to the Temeraire, who had been sent on board the
Redoutable to assist Lieutenant Wallace, and who died the
same evening, after having undergone amputation by the French
surgeon.
  A  great deal of odium has been cast by the English journals
and even by grave historical works, upon Rear-admiral Duraa-
noir, for having fired upon the French and Spanish prizes in his
passage to windward of the fleets. Admitting the inutility of the
                               "           "
act to be an argument (its       barbarity   is none, because the

prisoners ought   to have been stationed  below) against the pro-
priety of its adoption, it surely was the duty of the French
admiral to fire at, and injure as much as he could, the different
British ships within the reach of his guns.    In his letter to the
editor of the Gibraltar Chronicle, whose gross inaccuracy on
another point we shall soon have to expose, M. Dumanoir
positively denies that he intentionally fired at the prizes but
                                                             ;



how, let us ask, was it possible for the shot to pass clear of
them, when, in some instances, they lay within less than their
own length of, and, in others, absolutely masked, the ships that
had captured them ?
   The hauling to windward of M. Dumanoir afforded to the
Minotaur and Spartiate an opportunity which, as the two rear-
most ships of the weather column, they would otherwise have
sought in vain. At about 3h. 10 m. p.m., having hauled close
on the larboard tack, the Minotaur and Spartiate lay to with
their main topsails to the masts, and exchanged broadsides in
passing with the Formidable, Duguay-Trouin, Mont-Blanc, and
