1805.]             BATTLE OF TRAFALCxAR.                        439

mendous fire into her lee quarter from the Principe-de-Asturias   ;



who, in conjunction with three two-deckers, probably the Nep-
tune, Indomptable, and San-Justo, nearly fresh ships from the
centre, continued cannonading the Revenge, until the Dread-
nought and Thunderer came up and engaged the Spanish three-
decker. The latter, who, it appears, would suffer no British
ship to get to leeward of her, soon afterwards bore away, along
with the most efficient of the ships in her company.
  The exposed situation of the Eevenge had occasioned her
damages and loss of men to be very severe. Her bowsprit, three
lower masts, maintopmast, and gaff were badly wounded she   :



had received nine shot below the copper her stern, transoms,
                                                    ;



and timbers, and several beams, knees, riders, and iron stand-
ards, were very much wounded, and so was her hull generally.
She had several chain-plates shot away, several of her lower-
deck ports destroyed, and three of her guns dismounted. With
respect to the loss, the Eevenge had two midshipmen (Thomas
Grier and Edward F. Brooks), 18 seamen, and eight marines
killed, and her captain, master (Luke Brokenshaw), one lieute-
nant (John Berry), one captain of marines (Peter Lily), 38 sea-
men, and nine marines wounded.
   At about 2 h. 30 m. p.m. the Defence commenced firing at the
Berwick who, in less than half an hour, hauled off and was
         ;



engaged, as already stated, by the Achille.      The Defence,
                                                        1




shortly afterwards, began engaging the San-Ildefonso, and, at
the end of an hour's action, compelled the Spanish ship to
strike.  The Defence had her mainmast shot through and
wounded in several places, her gall' cut in two, and her lower
and topmast rigging much injured she had, also, several hang-
                                       :




ing knees and chain-plates carried away, one shot-hole through
the knee of the head, and five between wind and water. Her
loss amounted to four seamen and three marines killed, and 23
seamen and six marines wounded. The San-lldefonso, having
been engaged by one or two other British ships before the
Defence arrived up, had suffered greatly in masts, rigging, and
hull, and lost a full third of her crew in killed and wounded.
   It was about 3 p.m. when, having bore up to assist the
Revenge, the Thunderer wore athwart the hawse of the Principc-
de-Asturias, and having raked her distantly, brought to on tho
starboard tack. In about five minutes the French Neptune
came to the assistance of the Spanish three-decker (into whom
the Dreadnought was now firing), and engaged the Thunderer
                            1
                                See p. 4   1   6.
