1805.]                                   BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                          447

conveyed through the surgeon, to visit him in the cockpit.
"They shook hands affectionately, and Lord Nelson said:
 Well, Hardy, how goes the battle ? How goes the day with
1


    —
us?' 'Very well, my lord,' replied Captain Hardy:      we have                           '




got 12 or 14 of the enemy's ships in our possession; but five of
their van have tacked,                      and show an intention of bearing down
upon the Victory.                        I have therefore called two or three of our
fresh ships round us, and have no doubt of giving them a drub-
bing.'
        —           '
         I hope,' said his lordship,      none of our ships have
                                                          '




struck, Hardy.'
                                 —   '

                    No, my lord,' replied Captain Hardy ; there
                                                                                               '




is no fear of that.'  Lord Nelson then said ' I am a dead man             :


          I am        fast it will be all over with me soon.'
                                                              "1
Hardy.         going                           :




   Captain Hardy, in a minute or two, returned to the deck.
Soon afterwards the Victory opened her larboard guns upon
Kear-admiral Dumanoir's squadron passing to windward, and
tired a few of her foremost starboard guns at the Swiftsure, then

preparing to rake the Colossus.
                                 2
                                    The concussion of the firing
no affected Lord Nelson, that, apostrophizing his ship, he called
out: " Oh, Victory, Victory, how you distract my poor brain !"
Then adding, after a short pause, "How dear is life to all men !"
M. Dumanoir's ships passing on to the southward, and the Orion
ranging up athwart the Swiftsure's stern, the Victory ceased her
fire and, after an interval of about 50 minutes from the conclu-
    ;


sion of his former visit, Captain Hardy descended a second time
to the cockpit.
                  " Lord Nelson and
                                     Captain Hardy shook hands
again   and ;
             while  the captain retained his lordship's hand, he
congratulated him, even in the arms of death, on his brilliant
victory which, he said, was complete, though he did not know
                    ;


•how many of the enemy were captured, as it was impossible to
perceive every ship distinctly. He was certain, however, of 14
or 15 having surrendered. His lordship answered, That is well,                     '



•but I bargained for 20 ;' and then emphatically exclaimed, An-                                    '




chor, Hardy, anchor!'
                                           —
                           'I suppose, my lord, Admiral Colling-
wood will now take upon himself the direction of affairs.'  Not                                —   '




while I live, I hope, Hardy,' cried the dying chief; and at that
moment endeavoured ineffectually to raise himself from the bed.
'
 No,' added he,      do you anchor, Hardy.' Captain Hardy then
                                    '




said, Shall we make the signal, sir V
        '
                                                         —    '

                                             Yes,' answered his lord-
       for, if I live, I'll anchor ;' meaning," adds the doctor in a
            '

ship,
      " that in case of his
note,                          lordship's surviving till all resistance
on the part of the enemy had ceased, Captain Hardy was then
to anchor the British fleet and prizes, if it should be found prac-
                1                                                 2
                        Beatty's Narrative, p. 42.                    Sw; diagram at p. 436.
