                               BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                  451
1805.]

memorial of British naval valour ever exhibited no pen can do        ;




justice, no description can convey an adequate idea of the
glories of that day    and the event, which deprived us of our
                                ;



favourite chief, consummated his earthly fame, and rendered
his name for ever dear to his country.        Had not his trans-
cendent virtues been shaded by a fault, we might have been
accused of flattery. No human being was ever perfect, and
however we may regret the blemish in the affair of Caraciolli,
we must ever acknowledge, that the character of Nelson, as a
                                                                                     1
public servant, is not exceeded in the history of the world."
   "                           "
     Nelson," says M. Dupin,     ought to be held up as a pattern
for admirals, by the extreme pains he took to impress upon his
flag-officers and captains the spirit of the enterprises which he
resolved to undertake. He unfolded to them his general plan
of operations, and the modifications Avith which the weather or
 the manoeuvres of the enemy might force him to qualify his
original design.    When once he had explained his system to
the flag and superior officers of his fleet, he confided to them
the charge of acting according to circumstances, so as to lead,
in the most favourable manner, to the consummation of the
enterprise thus planned.   And Nelson, who was allowed to
choose the companions of his glory, possessed the talent and the
happiness to find men worthy of his instruction and confidence                             ;



they learnt, in action, to supply what had escaped his fore-
                                                     2
thought, and in success, to surpass even his hopes."
  Just as the battle with the combined fleet had terminated,
Cape Trafalgar was seen from the Royal Sovereign, bearing
 south-east by east distant eight miles. Hence the name given
 to this battle  of which the immediate result, as a French
                         ;



 writer, not always so liberally disposed, has been brought to
 admit, was 17 French and Spanish ships captured, and one
 French ship burnt, if not after the flag which she had so long
 and so gallantly supported had been struck, at least when, an
 enemy's three-decker having attacked her, she had ceased to
 make resistance, and when 200 of her officers and men (unfor-
 tunately all that could be saved out of a crew, as deposed by her
 officers, originally numbering 700) were being received on board
 the tenders of the British fleet. Four other ships, as we havo
 seen, had hauled to the southward     and, no four British ship-
                                                     ;


 being sufficiently to windward, and at the same time sufficiently
 perfect in their rigging and sails, for an immediate pursuit, they
 effected their escape.    Meanwhile Admiral Gravina, with 11
         1                                 *   For the original, see Appendix, No. 39.
             BrentoD, vol. iii., p. 463.
