448               BRITISH.    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                                  [1805,


            Captain Hardy remained with the dying chief in all
            1
ticable."
about three (not " eight 2 ) minutes. In about a quarter of an
                          "

hour after the captain had quitted the cockpit, Lord Nelson
became speechless and, great as must have been his previous
                          ;




sufferings, he expired without a struggle or a groan at, by the
Victory's time, 4 h. 30 m. p.m., or, according to the time we have
thought it preferable to use, about ten minutes or a quarter ot
an hour later. 3
   The moment it was announced to him that Lord Nelson was
no more, and not previously as stated by Doctor Beatty, 4
Captain Hardy directed Lieutenant Alexander Hills to take the
punt, the only remaining boat, proceed in her to the Eoyal
Sovereign, and acquaint Vice-admiral Collingwood, not that
Lord Nelson was actually dead, but, to save the feelings of a
dear friend of the deceased, that he was mortally or dangerously
wounded.      Shortly afterwards Captain Blackwood came on
board the Victory, to inquire after the safety of his friend and
patron, and then learnt the first tidings ol Lord Nelson's wound
and death. Captain Hardy, soon afterwards, embarking with
Captain Blackwood in the Euryalus's boat, went himself to
acquaint Vice-admiral Collingwood with what had really hap-
pened, as well as to deliver to the new commander-in-chief Lord
Nelson's dying request, that, for their preservation in reference
to the shore and the prospect of a gale, the fleet and prizes, as
soon as was practicable, might be brought to an anchor. Bosom
friends as they always had been, Nelson and Collingwood were
diametrically opposed in their plans of proceeding ; as was most
                                     "
evident when the latter exclaimed      Anchor the fleet ? Why,
                                               :




            thing I should have thought of."
it is the last                                Accordingly it
was not done, and the consequences followed, which we shall
presently have to relate.
  To die in the arms of victory is, of all deaths, that which a
true warrior most covets. What, then, was there so particularly
to deplore in the death of Lord Nelson ? Had he survived the
battle, he would perhaps have passed some 15 or 20 years
                                                               in in-
  i
    Beatty's Narrative, p. 47.  to England, and not thrown overboard."
  3
    Ibid., p. 49.               And when after the ejaculation of "Oh,
                                                                                    "   How dear
  3 Doctor
            Beatty's official report of the   Victory, Victory !" he added,
course and site of the ball, as ascertained   is life to all men." That his last wish was
since death, will be found in the Appen-      for his country is beyond a doubt; but the
dix, No. 38.                                  human heart may retain feelings of affec-
  The editor of this new edition differs      tion for those it loved, and who loved it,
greatly in opinion with Mr. James, rela-      and find a relief in its expression, although
tive to the suppression of all the conver-    dying on a bed of glory, wrapped in the
sation related by Beatty. Surely there        arms of victory,
was no wandering of thought when Nelson            *
                                                       Beatty's Narrative, p. 46.
           "
requested that his carcass might be sent
