450             BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                 [1805.

of this or any other nation, recorded in history       ;
                                                           his talents, his
courage, his fidelity, his zeal, his love for his king and country,
were exceeded by none. Never had any man the happy intuitive
faculty, of seizing the moment of propitious fortune, equal to
Nelson. His whole career, from his earliest entrance into the
service, offers to the youth of the British navy the most illus-
trious examples of every manly virtue whether we view him as
                                           ;


a midshipman, a lieutenant, as the captain of a frigate, or a com-
mander-in-chief.     We  have seen him, as captain of the Aga-
memnon, in Larma bay, writing his despatches while his ship
lay aground in an enemy's port we have seen him as captain of
                                    ;



a 74-gun ship, on the 14th of February, lay a Spanish first-rate
and an 84-gun ship on board, and with his little band of heroes
rush from ship to ship, and take them both. Equally great in
the hour of defeat as of victory, see him at Teneriffe with his
shattered arm going to the rescue of his companions and saving
their lives, while every moment of delay increased the peril of
his own by                   and exhaustion        see him walk
                                                         up            the
              —hemorrhage
                                               :




ship's side    hear him command the surgeon to proceed to ampu-
tation   and see the fortitude with which he bore the agonizing
         ;


pain.   Follow him to the Nile, and contemplate the destruction
of the fleet of France, and the consequent loss of her vast army
led by Buonaparte.     How great was his professional knowledge
and decision at Copenhagen, when, despising death, he refused
to obey the signal of recal     ;because he knew that by such
obedience his country would have been disgraced, the great
object of the expedition frustrated, and Britain, overpowered by
the increased energy of the northern confederacy, might have
sunk under the multiplied force of her enemies. See him on the
same occasion sit down in the midst of carnage, and address a
letter to the Crown Prince of Denmark, which, while it gave a
victory to his country, added to her glory by stopping the use-
less effusion of human blood.    We have seen him the patient,
watchful, and anxious guardian of our honour, in the Mediterra-
nean, where, for two years, he sought an opportunity to engage
an enemy of superior force. Three times we have seen him
pursue the foes of his country to Egypt, and once to the West
Indies.   And these great steps he took entirely on his own re-
sponsibility, disregarding any personal consideration, any cal-
culation of force, or any allurement of gain. Coming at last to
the termination of his glorious career, the end of his life was
worthy of all his other deeds       ;   the battle of Trafalgar will
stand, without the aid of sculpture or painting, the greatest
