444                BRITISH     AND FRAXCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                          [1805

Spanish ships closed for mutual support whereby the latter    ;


not only prevented each other from firing at such of the British
ships as were still bearing- down, but became too seriously
occupied with close antagonists, to bestow much attention upon
distant ones.
  We    regret our inability to particularize, as usual, the loss
sustained by the ships of the Franco-Spanish fleet. Of the many
that were captured, not one has her loss stated in the British
official account; and neither the French nor the Spaniards,

except in the case of the Bedoutable and of one or two Spanish
ships, have published any returns. It is therefore impossible
for us to do more than point to the effects of the British shot
upon the majority of the French and Spanish ships, deducible
from the state of their masts and rigging already so fully
described leaving it to be inferred, that the antagonist of a
               ;


British ship seldom has her masts shot away, until her hull has
been greatly shattered, and a large proportion of her crew killed
or disabled.
  While the British ships are securing their prizes, and getting
the latter and themselves into a state to keep the sea and while             ;


the more fortunate of the French and Spanish ships are profiting
by the occasion to effect their escape from the scene of so much
disaster, we will conduct the reader to the cockpit of the Victory,
Avhere lay the chief hero of this triumphant day eking out the last
remnant of that life's blood which he had so often before lavishly
shed in the cause of his country. The manner in which Lord
                                                              " The
Nelson received his wound has already been described.
ball," emphatically adds Doctor Beatty, and who states that he
has it still in his possession, "was not fired from a rifle piece:"
and yet Messrs. Clarke and                   M
                                    'Arthur, and after them Mr.
Southey, have since declared, that the Bedoutable and all the
French ships had riflemen in their tops, and that it was one of
these who aimed at and wounded Lord Nelson. 1 With marked
illiberality, too,      the gentlemen exult over the supposed death of
"the fellow;"- who at least did his duty on the occasion, and
none sooner than the noble victim would have been ready to
acknowledge it. A French writer, well known in England for
his general accuracy and candour, says     "Dans la Vie de Nelson,
                                                      :




ecrite par Southey, panegyriste salarie de la cour de lAngleterre,
sous le nom de poete laureat, il est dit qu'au combat de Tra-
falgar Nelson fut tue par un des arquebusiers tyroliens, apostes
pour tirer sur lui. C'est une grossiere imposture il n'y avait           :




                                                          2
   1
       Clarke and M'Arthur, vol. ii., pp. 445, 449.           Southey, vol. ii., p 264
