 446              BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.              [1805.

and having been considered authentic, the objectionable circu-
lation of private remarks has been much increased by other
authors having transferred them to their pages, and under
which the press, in reference especially to Messrs. Clarke and
M 'Arthur's two ponderous volumes, may be said to have
groaned. To our increased regret, a slight mistake, which we
made, but hastened to correct and apologize for, has been the
ostensible cause of the appearance, very recently, of a third
edition of Doctor Beatty's doubtless well-intended, but much
misnamed, "tribute of respect to the memory of the departed
hero."  The discrepancy that exists between our present and
our former account of the Victory's proceedings in the battle of
Trafalgar, shows       how much we erred,     in relying   upon the
accuracy of statements which, as emanating from an officer of
the ship, we took to be authentic. In justice to ourselves we
must observe, that it was owing to causes over which we had no
control, and not to any lack of exertion in collecting facts, that
the whole of the amended statements now given did not appear
in the first edition of this work.
   After Lord Nelson had been laid upon a purser's bed on the
deck of the cockpit, he was stripped of his clothes, for the pur-
pose of having the wound examined and the course of the ball
probed. The surgeon soon ascertained that the wound was
mortal and Lord Nelson himself appears, from the first, to have
          ;



entertained a similar opinion. His sufferings from pain and
                                  " He          called for
thirst were manifestly great,            frequently             drink,
and to be fanned with paper, making use of these words
                                                                '
                                                          Fan,
                                                            :


                           "
fan,' and
              '
            Drink, drink.'    He kept constantly pushing away
the sheet, the sole covering upon him and one attendant was as
                                         ;




constantly employed in drawing it up again over his slender
limbs and emaciated body. This recklessness about exposing
his person afforded a strong proof of the injury done to his
intellect; and well would it have been for Lord Nelson's
memory, had the listeners around his dying couch possessed
discernment enough to distinguish, and friendship enough (as
writers) to separate, the irrelevant uttcrings of a mind in a
paroxysm of delirium, from the patriotic effusions of the same
mind, w hen lit up, for a moment or so, by a ray of returning
          T



reason.
  In about an hour and 10 minutes after Lord Nelson had
received his wound, or at about 2 h. 35 m. p.m. Captain Hardy
found a moment's leisure from his anxious duty on deck to
comply with the frequently repeated request cf the admiral,
