1S05.1                     BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                445

pas uii seul Tyrolien sur notre flotte il n'y avait pas nitme
                                                    ;


d'armes carabinees." 1
   "While the men," says Doctor Beatty, "were carrying him
(Lord Nelson) down the ladder from the middle deck, his lord-
ship observed that the tiller-ropes were not yet replaced and              :



desired one of the midshipmen stationed there to go upon the
quarter-deck and remind Captain Hardy of that circumstance,
and request that new ones should be immediately rove. Having
delivered this order, he took his handkerchief from his pocket
and covered his face with it, that he might be conveyed to the
                                               -2
cockpit at this crisis unnoticed by the crew.'
   Although the very unlikely circumstance, that a practised
seaman, like Lord Nelson, would expect the tiller-ropes to have
been rove when the wheel was shot away and the ship foul of
another, coupled with the fact that no orders to that effect
reached the second in command, renders it doubtful if any
remark was made by his lordship about the tiller-ropes, or even
about the relieving tackles, the usual substitutes when the Avheel
is gone, the covering of his face and stars with his handkerchief

(of which there is no doubt), lest the crew of the Victory should
be disheartened at the sight of the bleeding body of him upon
whom they justly reckoned so much, proved that even the pangs
of death could not weaken the interest which the hero felt in
the final success of the day.
   "It must occur to the reader,'' says Doctor Beatty, "that
from the nature of the scene passing in the cockpit, and the
noise of the guns, the whole of his lordship's expressions could
not be borne in mind, nor even distinctly heard, by the different
                           3
persons attending him."       Doctor Beatty has not, however,
scrupled to give to the world every disjointed sentence, every
half-uttered word, which he or his relators could catch from the
lips of a dying, and at times, such was the intensity of his suf-
ferings, irrational man. Our strictm-es upon the conduct of Lord
Nelson in the bay of Naples show, that we would blink nothing
which we considered to be the fair subject of historical obser-
vation but we should have rejected as matters irrelevant to tho
          ;



subject, the rhapsodies of a disordered mind more especially,  :



when the subject to which they related was wholly of a pri-
vate, and, compared with passing events, of an uninteresting
nature.
      Doctor Beatty's narrative having gone through two editions
                                           -
      Dupin's Voyage dans la Grande Bre-
  1
                                               Beatty's Narrative, p. 35
tagne, tome iv.,'p. JO.                    3
                                               Ibid., p. 52.
