 1805.]                   BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                        449

glorious inactivity   ;
                          for nothing more,          and certainly nothing
greater, was left for him to do.             His time come, he would have
died, not on a midshipman's pallet in the cockpit of the Victory,
but on a down bed in a chamber of his seat at Merton. "What a
contrast     Lord Nelson's friends, strictly such, did probably
              !




wish a slight modification in the manner of his death that he     —
had died on the spot where he had fallen, and where he wished
he had remained, the Victory's quarter-deck, and that the only
words heard from his lips had been the last which he actually
uttered   :
            " —
              I have done my duty      I praise God for it."
                                              ;


  As,  in bestowing our humble tribute of praise upon the pro-
fessional character of Lord Nelson, we may not, after all that
has been written upon the subject, be able to steer clear ot
plagiarism, we shall be contented with transcribing three, as
they appear to us, not less eloquently than justly drawn opinions.
The first, penned by an Englishman and a friend to the deceased          ;


the second, either by, or for, the author of a contemporary work         ;


and the third, by a Frenchman who, if not personally an enemy
of the British admiral, belonged to a nation whose brightest
hopes had been humbled by repeated acts of his skill and valour,
by the last act in particular.
   "
     Thus," says Doctor Beatty, "died this matchless hero, after
performing in a short but brilliant and well- filled life, a series of
naval exploits, unexampled in any age of the world. None of
the sons of fame ever possessed greater zeal to promote the
honour and interest of his king and country none ever served;


them with more devotedness and glory, or with more successful
and important results. His character will for ever cast a lustre
over the annals of this nation, to whose enemies his very name
was a terror. In the battle off Cape St. Vincent, though then in
the subordinate station of a captain, his unprecedented personal
prowess will long be recorded with admiration among his pro-
fession.  The shores of Aboukir and Copenhagen subsequently
witnessed those stupendous achievements which struck the
whole civilized world with astonishment. Still these were only
preludes to the battle of Trafalgar in which he shone with a
                                                  ;



majesty of dignity as far surpassing even his own former renown,
as that renown had already exceeded everything else to be found
in the pages of naval history the transcendently brightest star in
                                     ;


a galaxy of heroes. His splendid example will operate as an ever-
lasting impulse to the enterprising genius of the British navy."
  "Thus," says Captain Brenton, "fell the greatest sea-officer
                           1

                               Beatty's Narrative, p. 53.
  vol. in.                                                      2 o
