442                BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                         [1805.


including among the latter her captain and the principal part of
her officers leaving not a doubt, that the ship had most gallantly
               ;


conducted herself throughout the engagement.
  It was at about 5 h. 45 m. p.m. that the Achille exploded, and
with her perished her then commanding-officer, Enseigne do
vaisseau Charles-Alexandre Cauchard, and a great portion of
her crew. It may be, as the French say, that the Achille at this
time had her colours flying; but the ship certainly had, two
hours before, made signs of submission, and was, in conse-
quence, spared by the British ship (Polyphemus) then in action
with her. The damages of the Prince consisted of a shot in her
bowsprit, three shots in her foremast, and the same in her mizen-
mast but she experienced the singular good fortune, as a ship
       ;


of this fleet, not to have a man of her crew injured.
   We have now, according to the best information in our power,
gone through the details of each British ship's preceedings in
the battle of Trafalgar. Should justice not have been done to
the exertions of any particular ship on this glorious occasion,
we hope it will be attributed, rather to the confused manner in
which the attack, the latter part of it especially, was carried on,
than to any deficiency of research in us. How far the published
accounts on either side are calculated to guide the historian, has
already in part appeared, and will be more fully shown when
some of those accounts pass under review. As to the accounts
furnished exclusively for this work by individuals present in the
battle, much as we, and through us the public, owe to them,
they are, in many instanceSj imperfect, obscure, and even con-
tradictory. Nor can it be wondered at, considering how each
officers attention must have been absorbed in the immediate
duties of his station and how few yards, beyond the side of his
                            ;



own ship, the smoke of so many combatants would permit him
to see.
  According to the official returns the aggregate loss in killed
                                                                  l
and wounded on the part of the British amounted to 1690                                 ;


of which  amount  about   six-sevenths, or 1452, fell to the share
of 14 out of the 27 ships in the fleet. "With a few exceptions,

  i The
         following is a recapitulation of     badly wounded, and subsequently replaced
the loss of men and masts sustained by        by new ones.    Acolumn has been added,
the British fleet, the ships of each column   with the names, as accurately as we have
                                              been able to get them, of the officers act-
being ranged in the order in which they
appear to have bore down to the attack.       ing as first, second, third, and fourth lieu-
The masts " left tottering," actually fell,   tenants of the Victory, first and second of
or were taken down a day or two after         the Royal Sovereign, and first of the ships
the action.   Besides these, many bow-        remaining, at the close of the battle,
sprits, masts, yards,
                      and topmasts, were
