3805.]                          BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                  4fil


ally.     Those who, writing when Spain was at peace and France
still    war with England, declared, that "the Spaniards,
         at
throughout the battle, showed a more uniform firmness and
spirit than the French," did but prove how completely their
                                        1




judgment was held in thraldom by their politics. Thinking to
compliment Spain at the expense of France, the same writers
wished their readers to infer, that there was a want of
unanimity between the ships of the two nations. That a native
of France or of Spain, as some excuse for his country's share of
the defeat, should have alleged a want of co-operation in her
ally, might be expected    but is it not singular that Englishmen
                                    ;



should resort to such a method to enhance the victory which
Englishmen gained at the battle of Trafalgar ? Not only does
no French or Spanish writer, as far as we can discover, make
any complaint of the kind, but it was obvious to many of the
British ships engaged, that the French and Spanish ships came
indiscriminately to each other's aid when attacked       and that,          ;


as they had been stationed in the line, so they mingled in the
battle, without the slightest national prejudice.
   All Europe must recollect how, the instant Sir Eobert Calder's
action became known in France, the Moniteur filled its columns
with the details. For weeks together, long accounts were pub-
lished, and great pains taken, in several successive numbers, to
refute the British statements, and to prove that the engagement
terminated in a victory to the combined fleet. Far otherwise was
it when the news of the battle of Trafalgar reached Paris.      A
grave-like silence was imposed        not a word, not a whisper
                                                  :




transpired. Not, at least, until towards the end of the year,
when the captain and principal surviving officers of the Eedout-
able had the honour to figure in public as heroes, the single
prowess of whose ship, even in Napoleon's opinion, shed a lustre
upon the events of a day in other respects so disastrous to the
French.     The French emperor appears to have believed every
tittle of the account transmitted to him by Captain Lucas, and a

great deal more than even that account contained for, at a sub-         :




sequent day (March 2, 1806), in his address to the legislative
body, his imperial majesty had the effrontery to use these words,
and these words only, in reference to the fate of his fleet at the
battle of Trafalgar "The storm has occasioned to us the loss
                            :


                                                      " Les
of a few ships, after a battle imprudently fought."
tempetes nous out fait pcrdre quelques vaisseaux apresun combat
imprudemment cngag6." The writer of the French work, from
  1
      Clarke and M' Arthur, vol. ii., p. 455.   Mr. Soulhey indulges in the same strain.
