454          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.


British ships near at hand being almost in as dismasted a state
as the prize.
  In this state was passed the whole of the blowing night of the
21st; and the morning of the 22nd found
                                         the Algesiras separated
from the British fleet, and drifting bodily towards the rocky
shore to the northward of Cape Trafalgar. On the evening of
that day, being three miles only to windward of the spot where
the Fougueux was then beating to pieces, Lieutenant Bennett
ordered the hatches to be taken off, to afford to the French
crew an opportunity of saving the lives of the 650 beings whose
existence was now at stake. The French crew rushed on deck,
                                               his party in the
and, after confining Lieutenant Bennett and
after-cabin, began to rig jurymasts.     Three topgallantmasts
were soon stepped, and some small sails set upon them. "With
the aid of these, the Algesiras bent her head to the northward,
and   presentlybrought the port of Cadiz about two points on
her lee bow. The ship, however, still continued in so unma-
                                                           and the
nageable a state, owing to the strength of the wind,
                  away  of the        that she barely trailed along
frequent blowing               sails,
the shore clear of the rocks. At length the Algesiras reached
Cadiz and, to the credit of those whose prisoners they then
       ;



v/ere, Lieutenant Bennett and his
                                      49 companions were allowed
to return to their friends outside in one of the two French
frigates, which, by Yice-admiral Collingwood's permission gra-
tuitously conveyed to the governor of Andalusia, the Marquess
of Solano, went with a flag of truce to receive, upon the usual
conditions of not serving again till exchanged, the wounded
Spaniards found on board the captured ships. In return for this
courtesy, the Spanish governor offered the use of the Cadiz
hospitals for the British wounded, and pledged the honour of
Spain that they should be carefully attended.
  The Bucentaure, another hull, having on board Lieutenant
Richard Spear and a party of men from the Conqueror, by
whom, amidst the severity of the gale, a vain attempt had been
made to take her in tow, drifted towards the shore, and was
compelled for safety to anchor near the castle of San-Sebastian.
On the following day, the 22nd, the Bucentaure was wrecked on
the Puerques but her crew were all, or the greater part, saved,
                  ;



including the British. These were taken out of the wreck by
the boats of one of the French frigates and, notwithstanding
                                          ;



that the Gibraltar Chronicle, of November 9, in this year, con-
                                                     "
tains a long paragraph, filled with abuse of the       dastardly
              " infamous and           crew    the
French,"  the                 cowardly      of      frigate," for
