460                BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                                [1805.

the San-Eafael, taken by Sir Eobert Calder, may be referred
to 1 and, for a 74, the San-Ildefonso, captured on the present
  r


occasion. The guns of the latter consisted of 58 long 24-pound-
ers on the first and second decks, four long 8s and 10 iron
36-pounder carronades on the quarter-deck and forecastle, and
six iron 24-pounder carronades on the poop; total 78.      The
presence of these carronades renders it probable, that most if
not all of the other Spanish ships in the fleet carried a pro-
portion of them, thereby adding four at least to their rated
number of guns.
  The force of that fine and powerful ship of war, a French 80,
has already appeared in the statement of the guns found on
board the Franklin. 2 It is doubtful, however, if either of the
French 80s in the combined fleet carried any brass long guns                                :




if not, their guns, instead of being 92, would be 86, as formerly
mentioned to be the establishment of the class, 3 and as sub-
sequently ascertained to have been the armament of the For-
midable, and of the ships in this fleet. All the French 74s captured
out of this fleet were found to mount, upon their first and second
decks, the 58 guns already so frequently specified, except the
Berwick and Swiftsure, which, having been English ships,
carried 28 instead of 30 guns on the second deck. Upon the
quarter-deck many of the ships appear to have mounted, by
filling the cabin ports, 20 instead of 16 long eights thus                         :



making their total force, including four, and in some instances
six, brass carronades on the poop, 82, and in                the latter case 84
guns.   These were exclusive of brass cohorns in the tops, the
fire from which, at close quarters, had in this very engagement

proved extremely destructive. Most of the captured French
ships were also found to have on board one field-piece (in some
instances two), with carriage and apparatus complete.
   No deduction need be made for inexperience in the Franco-
Spanish crews for the whole of the 18 French, and nine out of
                      ;


the 15 Spanish, ships had been some time at sea, and 13 of the
former had, as recently as the 22nd of the preceding July,
gained over the British what the French considered, a victory.
The British and the Franco-Spanish fleets, therefore, which met
and fought off Cape Trafalgar on the 21st of October, 1805,
with the exception of a difference in force of say a sixth in
favour of the latter, were fairly opposed.
   The French and Spaniards, in general, fought bravely some                   :



individual ships, indeed, of both nations behaved most heroic-
        1                    2   See vol. ii., p. 208.   3   See vol. i., p. 59.
            Sae p. 370.
