1805.]
                       BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                      459

  In reviewing the merits of the battle of Trafalgar, we shall
take the number of ships in each line, 27 and 33, as a fair cri-
terion of the relative force of the two fleets. It is singular that
the aggregate of the rated number of guns on each side, 2148
and 2626, affords about the same result, a full sixth part in
favour of the French and Spaniards. The real number of guns
on each side would very slightly reduce the disparity.  few  A
examples will establish this.       The Victory and Temeraire
mounted, the one two, the other four, guns only more than the
numbers of their respective classes, or 102 guns each. Those
of the Victory consisted, in equal divisions upon her first,
second, and third decks, of 90 long 32, 24, and 12 pounders, and
of 10 long 12-pounders and two 68-pounder carronades on her
quarter-deck and forecastle. The guns upon the three principal
decks of the Temeraire were 86 long 32 and 18-pounders (30 of
the latter on the third or upper deck), and those upon the
quarter-deck and forecastle were four long 18-pounders and
twelve 32-pounder carronades. These two ships, therefore,
although of different rates (first and second), mounted the same
number of guns and the 98 was actually 50 lbs. heavier in her
                 ;


broadside tlian the 100.
  As the Victory and Temeraire were the two ships of the
British fleet whose rated and real number of guns approximated
the nearest, so were the Tonnant and Belleisle, the latter in
particular, the two in which there was
                                           in that respect the

greatest difference.  The Tonnant, for instance, whose rate was
80, mounted 90 guns    and the same number were mounted by
                       ;



the Belleisle, although Bhe was only a 74. The latter was even
the heavier ship in broadside force, the age and weakness of the
former having required the substitution of 18 for 24 pounders
on the main dirk; while the Belleisle was enabled to carry on
her main deck a whole tier of the larger of those calibers. No
other 74-gun ship, however, in the British fleet, to our know-
ledge, mounted more than 82 guns    and that number would of
                                             ;



course include six light poop-carronades.
   "\\ ith
           respect to the gun force of the ships in the Franco-
Spanish fleet, our previous statements upon the subject have left
little to add.  The force, in long guns, of the Santisima- Trinidad,
and of a Spanish first-rate of the class of the Santa-Ana and
Principe-de-Astnrias, has already appeared; and so has tho
force of a Spanish 80 and 74 gun ship of the old or small con-
struction. 1   For an 80 of a more recent build and equipment;
                           >   See vol. ii., p. 75.
