 452           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.            [1805.

 French and Spanish ships of the line, and all the smaller vessels,
 was running to the north-east. Several of these ships, the
 Indomptable, Heros, San-Francisco-de-Asis, and Montanez, in
 particular, having scarcely a hole in their sails, were in excellent
 order for flight. Others were in tow by the frigates and the
                                                           ;


 whole in the course of the night anchored about a mile and a
 half from Eota, not being able to enter the bay or harbour of
 Cadiz on account of the strong south-south-east wind then blow-
 ing in shore. In the offing, however, the wind was still from
 the west-south-west.
    At 6 p.m. Vice-admiral Collingwood, now the commander-in-
 chief of the British fleet, shifted his flag to the Euryalus frigate
                                                                    ;


 and at 6 h. 15 m. p.m. the latter, taking the Eoyal Sovereign
 in tow, stood off-shore with her.       At this time several of the
 British ships were more or less dismasted, and very few in a
 condition to curry sail and out of the 27 in the fleet, 14 were
                          ;



 tolerably damaged in hull. Of the 17 prizes, eight were wholly,
 and the remainder partially, dismasted. Some of these ships,
 too, were nearly in a sinking state, and none were without shat-
 tered hulls. To add to the perilous condition of the British
 fleet and prizes, the ships were then in 13 fathoms water, with
 the shoals of Trafalgar but a few miles to leeward. Fortunately
 the wind, which was at west-south-west, and therefore dead on
 the shore, blew moderately but there was a very uneasy swell,
                              ;



 highly distressing to the ships, particularly the dismasted ones.
 At 9 p.m., which was about four hours too late, the vice-admiral
 made the signal for the fleet to prepare to anchor. It is stated,
that few of the ships had an anchor to let go, their cables having
been cut by shot. Towards midnight the wind veered to south-
 south-west, and freshened considerably.           Taking immediate
advantage of this favourable change, the vice-admiral made the
signal for the ships to wear with their heads to the westward.
Four of the dismasted prizes, in proof that their cables would
hold, had previously anchored off Cape Trafalgar.        The remain-
ing ships wore, as directed, and drifted to seaward.
   On the 22nd, at 8 a.m., the Euryalus cast off the Eoyal
Sovereign, and signalled the Neptune to take the latter in tow.
In the course of the forenoon the vice-admiral issued a general
order of thanks to the officers and men of the fleet for their
valour and skill in the action and he also ordered a day to be
                                  ;



appointed for returning thanks to G-od for the success which had
attended the British arms. During the whole of this day, the
22nd, the wind blew fre6h from the southward, with repeated
