                        BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                         455
1805.]


alleged ill-treatment of the British taken out of the Buccntaure,
the latter, by their own acknowledgment, were treated with
humanity and kindness. Unfortunately, the co-authors of the
"Life of Nelson," with reckless haste, have copied into their
      1
pages the atrocious falsehood and, to give additional currency
                                      ;


to a statement so accordant with their repeatedly expressed sen-
timents towards the French, Messrs. Clarke and                   M
                                                       'Arthur have
omitted to add, that they took the paragraph from the columns
of a newspaper.
   The north-westerly wind, that blew on the morning of the
23rd, being fair for quitting: his anchorage at the bay or entrance
of the outer harbour of Cadiz, Captain Cosmao-Kerjulien, the
senior French officer in the port, weighed and made sail, with
the Pluton, inefficient as she was, Indomptable, Neptune, Bayo,
and San-Francisco-de-Asis, the five frigates, and the two brigs,
hoping to be able to recapture some of the remaining prize-
hulls, then driving about the coast.     It is doubtful if any of the
remaining six French and Spanish ships in Cadiz, unless it was
the Heros and Montanez, were in a state to put to sea. At all
events the Principc-de-Asturias and San-Leandro had each
rolled away her main and mizen masts soon after anchoring on
the night of the lilst. Nor could Admiral Gravina, as Vice-
admiral Collingwood supposed, have commanded the squadron,
as he was then suffering the pains of a mortal wound.
  Soon after the above five sail of the line, five frigates, and
two brigs had 6ailed out, the wind shifted to the west-south-
west, and blew with extreme violence, raising such a sea, that
most of the prizes broke their tow-ropes, and drifting far to
leeward, were in part only again secured. The Franco-Spanish
squadron making its appearance about noon, the most efficient
of the British line-of-battle ships cast off the hulls of which
they had with so much difficulty recovered possession, and by
3 p.m. were formed in line, to the number of 10 sail, between
the greater part of those prizes and the ships of M. Cosmao.
The odds were far too great for the French commodore, even
had the wind been in his favour, to venture within gun-shot                ;



but his frigates soon effected the principal object for which he
had sailed out: they recaptured the Santa-Ana and Ncptuno,
and carried both safe into port. The recapture of the two
Spanish prizes was not, however, without its alloy. On the 24th
the fine French 80-gun ship Indomptable was wrecked ofl the

                    1
                        Clarke and M'Arthur, vol. ii., p. 466.
