1805.]
                         BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                   457

had sailed out of Cadiz on the 22nd, consisted of 10, instead of
five sail of the line,was doubtless the reason that as many as
10 sail of British line-of-battle ships had been ordered to cut
adrift their prizes, and form in order of battle. This untoward
circumstance, and the continuance of bad weather, determined
A'ice-admiral Collingwood to destroy all the leewardmost of the
captured ships.      Accordingly the Santisima-Trinidad was
cleared, scuttled, and sunk by the Neptune and Prince but, in
                                                        ;




spite of every pains to remove the wounded by lowering them
down in cots from the stern and quarter-gallery windows, 28 of
them perished in the ship. The south-west gale increasing to a
most violent degree, it took several days to collect and anchor
the remaining hulls preparatory to their destruction. Notwith-
standing every exertion was used on the part of the Defiance,
the Aigle drifted into Cadiz bay on the night of the 25th, and
was stranded on the bar off Port Santa-Maria.
   The few remaining prizes were at length anchored between
Cadiz and about six leagues to the westward of San-Lucar and;


on the 28th the body of the British fleet lay also at anchor to
the north-west of Lucar, the Royal Sovereign without any
masts except jury main and mizen ones, and the Mars with
main and mizen masts only, each ship having lost her foremast
in the last severe gale. Between the 28th and 30th the Intrepide
was burnt by the Britannia, and the San-Augustin by the
Leviathan and Orion; and the Argonauta was scuttled and
sunk by the Ajax. Another of the hulls, the Berwick, after having
anchored in apparent safety, was wrecked off San-Lucar, entirely
owing to the frenzied behaviour of a portion of the prisoners
who cut the cables. The Donegal, being at anchor near, cut her
cables, and, standing towards the drifting ship, sent her boats
to save the people on board.   This noble proceeding of Captain
Malcolm was only partially successful, when the Berwick struck
upon the shoals and in her perished about 200 persons.
                  ;



   As a practical proof of the benefit that might have been
derived to the fleet and prizes by attending to Lord Nelson's
dying injunctions, the Defence, accompanied by her prize, the
San-Ildefonso, anchored on the evening of the action, and
weathered the gale in safety. The example of these ships was
followed by two other of the prizes, the Swiftsure and Bahama         ;



and, with the assistance rendered by the Donegal and Phoebe,
these also were saved. The fourth and only remaining prize,
the San-Juan-Nepomuccno, being less disabled, had not been
in such imminent danger, and was already safe in the offing.
