456           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.             [1805.


town of Eota, situated on the north-west point of the bay
»f Cadiz.  Unfortunately the Indomptable had on board, in
addition to her own, the survivors of the Bucentaure's crew,
amounting to nearly 500 men      making in all 1100 or 1200
                                        ;



souls, of whom not more than 100 are represented to have been
saved.   The San-Francisco-de-Asis parted her cables, and went
on shore in Cadiz bay, near Fort Santa-Catalina her crew, :




except a small portion, were saved. The Eayo, three-decker,
another of M. Cosmao's squadron, not being able to enter
Cadiz bay, anchored off San-Lucar, a town at the mouth of the
river Guadalquivir, a few leagues to the north-west of Eota.
There the Eayo soon rolled away her masts, which had been
previously wounded by shot.
  Observing that some of the leewardmost of the prizes were
running for, and had already approached very near to, the
Spanish coast, the Leviathan obtained leave of the commander-
in-chief to endeavour to bring them to anchor.  On the 24th, at
daylight, when standing after the Monarca, the
                                                Leviathan dis-
covered the Eayo, with Spanish colours flying, still at an anchor
off the shoals of San-Lucar.     At this time the 74-gun ship
Donegal. Captain Pulteney Malcolm, from Gibraltar, was
                                                           1




stretching in from  the southward,   on the larboard tack, with a
moderate breeze from north-west by north, and steering direct
for the Spanish three-decker.    At about 10 a.m., just as the
Monarca had got within little more than a mile of the Eayo,
who was at about an equal distance from the Donegal and Levia-
than, the latter fired a shot wide of the Monarca, in order to
oblige her to drop anchor.      The shot falling about midway
between the Monarca and the Eayo, the latter, conceiving pro-
bably that it was intended for her, hauled down her colours, and
was taken possession of by the Donegal who presently  ;



anchored alongside and took out the prisoners. Meanwhile the
Leviathan kept standing on towards the Monarca, and on board-
ing her, found that she was in a sinking state. Captain Bayn-
tun, as quickly as possible, removed all the Englishmen, and
nearly the whole of the Spaniards. It was well the Leviathan
did so, for, in the gale of the ensuing night, the Monarca parted
her cable and went on shore.          A
                                    similar fate, a day or two after-
wards, attended the Eayo and, of the 107 officers and men put
                            ;



on board by the Donegal, 25 were drowned the remainder wero
                                                  :




made prisoners by the Spaniards.
  The supposition that the Franco-Spanish squadron, which
                                •
                                    See p. 383.
