1805.J                       BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                        453

squalls but, through the skill and activity of British seamen,
             ;



the whole 13 prizes, that remained under way, were got hold of,
and towed towards the appointed rendezvous in the west, round
the Neptune and Royal Sovereign.
  At 5 p.m. the Eedoutable, in tow by the Swiftsure, being
actually sinking, hoisted a signal of distress. The latter ship
immediately sent her boats, and brought off part of the prize-
crew, and about 120 Frenchmen, which were as many as the
boats would contain. At 10 h. 30 m. p.m. the Redoutable being
with her stern entirely under water, the Swiftsure cut herself
clear.  At about midnight the wind shifted to north-west, and
stillblew a gale. At 3 h. 30 m. a.m. on the 23rd, attracted by
the cries of the people, the Swiftsure, who had wore to the
southward, again sent her boats, and, from three rafts which
the French crew, amidst a dreadful night of wind, rain, and
lightning had constructed from the spars of their sunken ship,
saved 50 more of the sufferers making a total of about 170,
                                      :



including 70 out of the 222 described as wounded.
                                                                     1
                                                        Captain
Lucas had been previously removed to the Temeraire. The
remaining survivors of the Redoutable's late officers and crew,
and 13 of the Temeraire's, and five of the Swiftsure's men,
perished in her.
  Other casualties were the consequence of this night's gale,
The Fougueux, having on board, besides a great portion of her
late crew, 30  men belonging to the Temeraire, drifted on the
rocks between Torre-Benneja, and the river Sancti-Petri, and
was totally wrecked, with the loss of all on board, except about
25 persons.
   When the Algesiras parted from the Tonnant, 2 the situation
of Lieutenant Bennett and his small party was critical in the
extreme. The ship had lost all three masts nearly by the
board. Her hull had been much battered by shot but, so far       ;




fortunately, no holes were below the water-line. Of her anchors
the two at the bows were all that remained one of these was
                                                        :



broken in the shank, and the stock of the other shot nearly
away. On board the Algesiras at this time, including 40 or 50
wounded, were about 600 Frenchmen and the whole of these
                                            ;



were to be kept in subjection by 50 British. The prisoners were
sent below, and the gratings secured over them. It was then
found that not a man could be spared from guarding the hatch-
ways, to rig jurymasts and endeavour to work the ship off a lee-
Bhore nor was there any chance of being taken in tow, the few
         ;



                                                a
                     Seep. 421.
                 •
                                                    See p. in.
