1805.]                      BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                      471

kind may easily have happened, we can see no difficulty in sup
posing.   For instance, Lord Nelson, when he drew up his in-
structions, was almost certain that the combined fleet would
sail with an easterly wind, and therefore be found to windward.
Hence the principal part of the memorandum is filled with the
plan of atack from to-leeward. The attack from to -windward,
being a very doubtful contingency, occupied much less of his
lordship's attention.   Nor did he, of course, write a line of the
memorandum. The secretary, or the clerk, wrote it by his
lordship's dictation.   How easy, then, for either of the former
                     " The
to have mistaken,          signal will be made for the three linen
                             " The
to bear up together," for           signal will be made for the lee
line to bear up together?"      The two words once miswritten
would scarcely be looked at again especially as all the prin-
                                                    ;



cipal officers of the fleet had heard Lord Nelson repeatedly
describe, in his own clear and energetic manner, the plan which
he meant to adopt.
   But, after all, what was the signal by which the British fleet
actually steered towards the fleet of the enemy     AVas it No. 81,'?



with the east compass signal, "Alter the course together to
     "                                    "
east ?    Or, rather, was it not No. 76,    Bear up in succession" x
to that point ?    That No. 76 was the signal hoisted, the author
of "Naval Battles" must have been satisfied, because it is so
stated in the quotation which he himself makes from the log of
the Bcllerophon. 2 The argument about the British ships " tail-
ing away" because of their inequality of sailing, can hold good
only until it is known that, with the exception perhaps of the
Royal Sovereign, Belleisle, Yictory, and Temeraire, the ships
in the  two principal divisions sailed nearly alike. And with
respect to the Britannia, Prince, and Dreadnought, Avhose slow-
ness was far more conspicuous than the velocity of the ships just
named, they were allowed to depart from the prescribed order
of sailing in line ahead, that they might steer obliquely between
the two columns, and by that means get more of their sails to
draw.
   Having thus, as we conceive, shown the fallacy of the pre-
mises, by which a tactical writer of the present day has hoped
to throw a new light upon a celebrated naval battle fought 20
years ago, we shall merely observe, that his remaining state-
          3


   1
     The signal merely expresses, " Bear      nal, as that to be used
                                                                      " when the fleet
                                                                                         is

up and sail large, on the course steered by   to bear up in succession."
the admiral, or that pointed out by sig-        2   Kkins's Naval Battles, p. J- 1,
rial;" but the 14lh article ot the printed
                                                3   Mr. James's new edition was pub
"bailing Instructions" refers to this sig-    lished    m 1826.
