1805.1                       BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                             465

              Unfortunately for the fame of those concerned, this
          '

places-
soul-inspiring passage contains not a word of truth.   The mis-
take arose thus          —
                   The Spanish ship Neptuno, after having, with
                     :



the loss of her mizenmast and other damage, surrendered to the
Minotaur and Spartiate, drifted on board the Temeraire, while
the latter hadstill foul of her, on the lee or larboard side, the

late French ship Eedoutable, and scarcely clear of her astern,
the Fougueux. 1
  Long before Captain Harvey and his officers landed in England,
a spirited representation of this their valorous exploit was exhi-
bited in the London printshops and many persons to this day
                                              ;



have not the most remote idea that the fact was ever questioned                                 :




especially as, although the            London Gazette contained two or
three supplementary letters from Vice-admiral Collingwood, not
a hint was given that the first contained a misstatement. For
even the letter, showing that the admiral had overrated by one
(20 for 19) the number of prizes made on the 21st and 24th, was
written by Captain Blackwood at the office of the admiralty.
That the various periodical publications of the day should place
full confidence in an uncontradicted official statement was to be

expected; but it will hardly be credited that, nearly 20 years
afterwards, an historical writer, who, at the period of the battle,
had attained the rank of commander in the British navy, and
who boasts, and may well boast, of the "great opportunities he
                                                       2
eujoys of obtaining the most correct information," should first
                                "
declare that the "real facta of the Trafalgar battle are detailed
 " in the admirable letters of Vice-admiral               3
                                            Collingwood," and then
do no more     than  cast  a reluctant  doubt  upon  the passage in
question, by the following note: "Subsequent information has
proved this statement wanted confirmation:"
                                                 4
                                                    a note that, Ave   —
verily believe,  would   not have  been  added, but for our positive
denial in the first edition of this work, of the statement to which
it refers.
   "I have not only," says Vice-admiral Collingwood, "to
lament, in common witli the British navy and the British nation,
in the fall of the commander-in-chief, the loss of a hero whose
name will be immortal, and his memory ever dear to his country,
but my heart is rent with the most poignant grief for the death
of a friend, to whom, by many years' intimacy, and a perfect
knowledge of the virtues of his mind, which inspired ideas
                                                  -
   1
     For the position of ttiese three ships           Brenton, vol. iii., Preface, )>.   I.
                                                  3
just before tin- Neptnno surrendered, see             Ibid., p. 473.
                                                  •
 digram at p. 135.                                    Ibid., p. 475.

   VOL. III.                                                                 2 u
