464               BRITISH     AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                         [1805.

                                                It was probably-
Bath, and Captain Hardy was made a baronet.
                                                        and the
owing to a paucity of vacant ribands of the Bath,
intention of the British government to institute a new military
order of merit, that the remaining captains of the Trafalgar
fleet received no honorary distinctions.      Medals were of course
granted   in  the  customary   way.    The   first-lieutenant  of the
                                                    of the Ajax and
Victory, the lieutenants acting as captains
Thunderer, and the first-lieutenants of the Mars
                                                     and Bellerophon,
whose captains had been killed in the action, were promoted to
                                               and fourth lieutenants
post-captains and the first, second, third,
                   ;


of the Victory, the first and second lieutenants of the Boyal
                                            of all the other ships
Sovereign, and the first lieutenants
engaged, were made commanders.
                                          Four midshipmen of the
Victory, three of the Eoyal Sovereign,
                                           two of the Britannia, and
one belonging to every other ship of the line and frigate present
in the action, were also promoted to lieutenants.
   Passing over as unworthy of notice a ludicrous account of the
state of the British fleet after the action, inserted by some wag
in the Journal de Paris of the 7th of December, we shall bestow
a few words upon the accounts of the battle published in
                                                         to the secre-
England. The letter of Vice-admiral Collingwood
      of the            claims  our first attention.   This letter has
tary         admiralty
been praised for its style we wish we could say as much of its
                                    :



                                              of the enemy's line is
accuracy. The accidental irregularity    "
              as the result of design.     They   formed their line of
represented
battle," says the admiral,
                              with great closeness and correctness."
                                    ' '




 "The structure of their line was new it formed a crescent con-
                                                     :



                                        fire opened every alternate
vexing to leeward." "Before the
                                   to windward of her second ahead
ship was about a cable's length
and astern, forming a kind of double line." With such authority
for a guide, no wonder that tacticians should set about investi-
                                                " the double crescent
 gating M. Villeneuve's new
                               line of battle,
                          1
 convexing to leeward."
   "A circumstance occurred during the action," observes Vice-
                         " which so
 admiral Collingwood,                 strongly marks the invincible
spirit  of British seamen when engaging the enemies of their
country, that I cannot resist the pleasure  making         in            it   known to
their lordships.  The Temeraire was boarded, by accident or
design, by a French ship
                           on one side, and a Spaniard on the
other the contest was vigorous, but in the end the combined
         :




ensigns were torn from
                       the poop, and the British hoisted in their
  1
      Fur the representation of this line, see Ekins's Naval Battles, part 2, plate xxix.
(51) Fig. 4.
