1805.]                         BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                            469

that fleet, that the plan of attack from the windward was, by
previous concert, to have been of a different and still more for-
midable nature for, as the order of sailing was the order of
                       ;



battle, and the enemy seen to leeward, the commander-in-chief
in that case would bring the British fleet nearly within gun-
                           '




shot of the enemy's centre, and the signal, most probably, then
be made up for the lee division to bear up together, to set all sails,
even steering-sails, &c.' The secret memorandum at the end of
these remarks, will best explain his lordship's intention and
remove the doubt.              We
                          therefore venture to give the approach
as in fig. 1, Plate XXVIII. The lee division bearing up toge-
ther, followed soon after by the centre      the fleet originally  ;



formed in the order of sailing upon a wind on the larboard tack                    :




the enemy formed in close line convexing to leeward, heads to
the northward. This must be considered as the preconcerted
plan of attack but that it may have deviated from the exact
                   ;


design, from circumstances to which events of this nature are
always liable, it is easy to believe and it will be particularly
                                                       ;



apparent to sea-oflicers for, supposing a line, like that of Lord
                                    :




Collingwood'8 of 15 ships, all in their station when the signal to
bear up together should be made and supposing the signal to
                                                   ;


be obeyed with equal alacrity by all yet the different rates of
                                                           ;



sailing in them will soon be conspicuous     and the advantages of
                                                               ;


some over others, neither to be reckoned upon nor accounted
for, they will consequently be found to tail away as in the fin.                '_'.



Be it as it may, it will be readily admitted that, both from the
design and the execution, no mode of attack could have been
formed better calculated for effecting the purpose of the deter-
mined chief; the capture or destruction of the centre and rear
               1
of the enemy."
   In his interpretation of Lord Nelson's plan of attack from to-
windward, the writer of this passage is certainly borne out by
the literal meaning of the words, " the lee line to bear up toge-
ther ;" but the context ought to have convinced him, that tin's
could not have been the mode of attack contemplated by Lord
Nelson. If the ships of the lee line were to "bear up together,"
so must those of the weather and the advanced lines; and then
Bee how the ships would have been arranged                             :
                                                                           —



                               1
                                   Ekins's Naval Battles, p. 268.
