1805.]
                          BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                               463

the Victory again sailed, and on the 22nd, when crossing the
nats from Margate, was boarded by Commissioner Grey's yacht,
the Chatham, which had been despatched by the Board of
Admiralty to receive Lord Nelson's body, and convey it to
Greenwich. The body was removed into the coffin made from a
part of the wreck of the Orient, burnt at the battle of the Nile,
and which had been presented to Lord Nelson by Captain Hal-
lowell, of the Swiftsure, in 1799.  This coffin with its contents
was placed within a leaden coffin. The latter was then soldered,
and never afterwards opened. On the coffin's being lowered into
the yacht, the Victory struck, for the last time, Lord Nelson's
flag at the fore, and the same was hoisted half-mast high on
board the yacht.
   On the 24th, at 2 p.m., the yacht, having in the passage up
had military honours paid to her illustrious charge on both sides
of the river, anchored off Greenwich; and at 7 p.m. the body
was landed at the centre gate of the royal hospital, amidst an
immense crowd of spectators. The awful and imposing ceremony
which subsequently took place having been minutely described
by other publications, we shall content ourselves with stating,
that on the 9th of January, 1806, this first of naval captains was
buried at St. Paul's cathedral, with all the pomp and solemnity
                        1
befitting the occasion.
   The honours paid by a grateful country to the memory of
Lord Nelson were commensurate with his worth, and with the
importance of the achievement which he had died in consumma-
ting.  His brother William was made an earl, with a grant of
6000?. per annum; 10,000/. were voted for each of his sisters,
and 100,000/. for the purchase of an estate. Two ships, a first
and a second rate, were ordered to be built, one of 120 guns,
named Nelson, the other of 98 (afterwards increased to 120)
guns, named Trafalgar.
  The living participators in the great and glorious victory
received also their share of the national honours and rewards.
A  unanimous vote ol thanks of both houses of parliament was a
matter of course.        Vice-admiral Collingwood was made a baron
of the united kingdom, under the title of Baron Collingwood,
of Caldburne and llethpoole, in the county of Northumberland,
with a grant of 20002. per annum. Rear-admiral the Earl of
Northesk was honoured with the insignia of the order of the
  1
    See Clarke and M'Arlhnr, vol. ii., p.   the Gentleman's Magazire And the Ni.val
460, ct teq. See also tli Annual Register   Chronicle, vol. xv., p. 45.
for the year 1BU6, the January Number of
