 470           BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.

  The confidential friends of Lord Nelson, many of whom are
now living, can testify, that he had the strongest objection to
 the plan of bearing up in line abreast, and that he attributed the
 partial success of Lord Howe on the 1st of June to his having
 adopted that mode of attack. His own plan appears to have
 been, to bring his force, in the most effective state, into contact
 with the force of the enemy, and, for that purpose, to present
 while advancing to close, the smallest possible front to the
 enemy's fire. As the leading ship of the attacking line or
 column would of necessity receive the whole weight of that fire,
 Lord Nelson very naturally chose the post himself. If more
 lines or columns than one, the commanding officer of each
 would of course follow the example of the chief.
   In order to make quick, as well as decisive work of it, Lord
 Nelson purposed, in the first instance, cutting off a portion of
the enemy's line: he then left everything to the valour and
 address of his captains; well observing, that no captain could
 do very wrong who placed his ship alongside that of an enemy.
 The greater the confusion, the greater were his hopes of success,
because he knew that the British, besides being better prepared
for fighting their guns on either side, or in any direction, were
better skilled in working their ships than the French or
Spaniards. A gale of wind, or a dark night, was accordingly
considered as a ship or two in his favour. The reason that
Lord Nelson gave, for placing so little dependence upon evolu-
tions, was, that he generally found the inconvenience, which
resulted from the mistakes too frequently made, to outweigh
the benefit expected to be derived from the most correct per-
formance of the manoeuvre. Hence the sum of Lord Nelson's
tactics was, to close his enemy, and to overpower and annihilate
him as quickly as possible.
   There are, we believe, very few of the captains present in the
Trafalgar battle, with whom we have not conversed or corre-
sponded and yet no one of them has ever raised a doubt as to
         ;


the meaning of Lord Nelson's instructions, or the manner in
which he purposed to bear down upon the enemy's fine. That
the expression used in the memorandum is at variance with
what we still contend was the meaning of the gallant chief, we
have already admitted but would not so simple an alteration
                         ;


as the change of one word to another of similar sound, and of
another word from the singular to the plural number (an inter-
polation we have ventured to make in our transcript of the
memorandum '), reconcile the difference ? That a mistake of the
                             1
                                 See p. 382.
