468          BRITISH   AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                    [1805.

had passed on to the southward, and left the Spanish Xeptuno
to her fate. Another division of the sketch would answer for
three hours later in the day.       The Victory, for example, appears
with her mizenmast and maintopmast gone whereas that ship        ;


did not lose her mizenmast until 7 p.m., nor strike her maintop-
mast (at which time her fore one also was struck) until within
a few minutes of the same period.       Of the remaining ships
scattered over this much-vaunted plate, few that are named are
correct either in their positions or the state of their masts. The
Temeraire lies with her head directly where her stern ought to
be, and, instead of having her three lower masts and their yards
(the lore-yard broken in two), and her foretop and topgallant-
masts, standing, is represented as bare as a hulk.
  An attempt to sketch the state, positions, and relative bear-
ings of nearly 50 vessels, spread over an extent of at least five
miles,  was not very likely to succeed especially when the
                                                         ;



draftsman was on board a ship situated at one extremity of the
line.  If it was a degree of presumption in
                                                "a
                                                    young gentle-
man, a midshipman of the Neptune," to attempt a sketch of so
complicated, so numerous, and so expanded a group of figures,
as must have been spread over the field of Trafalgar, what was
it in a post-captain of 16 years' standing, quite away from the
                               "                  " a view of the
spot, to entitle Mr. Herbert's   rough sketch,"
British and combined fleets at the conclusion of the battle of
                                                             " an
Trafalgar," and to recommend it to the British public as
invaluable memorandum of the battle P" 1
  For an unprofessional writer to arraign the merits of a work
on naval tactics, would seem to be a presumption equal to the
highest degree of that which we have just been condemning.
But tactical reasoning, like all other reasoning, must be built
upon facts, or upon what are assumed as facts. Surely, then,
to inquire into the reality of those alleged facts, is within the
province of a writer, whose avowed purpose, to the extent of
his subject, and of his ability, is to separate truth from fiction.
  Bold as is the assertion, yet do we confidently make it,              —
Admiral Ekins has entirely misunderstood the principle upon
which the battle of Trafalgar was fought. After describing the
plan of attack, as set forth in Vice-admiral Collingwood's letter,
and illustrated by a diagram taken from one in the possession
                                               "
of the board of admiralty, the writer says       Whatever degree
                                                             :




of credit the above plan may be entitled to, backed as it is by
the vice-admiral's letter, it is well known to all the captains of
                        1
                            Brenton, vol   iii.,   p. 459.
