466              BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.           [1805.


superior to the common race of men, I was bound by the
strongest ties of affection a grief to which even the glorious oc-
                               ;


casion in which he fell does not bring the consolation which
perhaps it ought. His lordship received a musket ball in his
left breast about the middle of the action, and sent an officer to
me immediately with his last farewell, and soon after expired."
  Admiring, as we must, the feeling and impressive manner in
which the death of Lord Nelson is here adverted to, we are
obliged to refer to a previous page of this work for a satisfactory
proof that the statement with which the extract concludes is in-
correct. 1  The death of Lord Nelson in the moment of victory,
and the delay until then of any announcement to the second in
command that the first was incapable of acting, show that the
following passage in Vice-admiral Collingwood's letter, as far as
regards the inference meant to be drawn from it, rests upon no
                    " The
better foundation.         Royal Sovereign having lost her masts,
except  her tottering foremast, I called the Euryalus to me while
the action continued, which ship, lying within hail, made my
signals   ;
           a service which Captain Blackwood performed with
great attention."
  The few signals, made by the Euryalus for the dismasted
Eoyal Sovereign, while the action continued, must have been
such only as the second in command of the fleet had been
directed to make, if necessary, to his own division or column.
How, indeed, could it be otherwise, when Lord Nelson flatly
refused to give up the command of the fleet, and did not breathe
his last until the action had virtually terminated ?    Even then,
agreeably to the rules of the service, the Victory's flag remained
flying.
  Among the numerous omissions and misstatements that per-
vade the      official   accounts of this celebrated battle, the most
extraordinary, as well as the most unjust, is the neglect to notice
the services, or even to mention the name, of the Victory's cap-
tain of the officer who, from a few minutes before the action
      ;



was at its height to the moment of its successful termination, a
period of three hours, acted in the capacity, and held the re-
sponsibility,    of the      commander-in-chief.     Unfortunately   the
mere omission of Captain Hardy's name in the public letter of
Vice-admiral Collingwood is not all the injury done to him.
That might have arisen from unintentional neglect, and have
been atoned for, in part, by a subsequent explanation and apo-
logy.  But nothing short of the most humiliating acknowledg-
                                   1
                                       See p. 443.
