462              BRITISH      AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                        [1805.

which we quote the passage, adds in a note, " That of Trafalgar.
We have already shown that the storm was not the sole cause
of these losses. Was it not committing an outrage upon the
French nation thus to misstate the result of this imprudently
fought tattle V
                 "
                   Celui de Trafalgar. Nous avons fait voir
plus haut que les tempetes ne furent pas les seules causes de
ces pertes.   N'etait-ce pas outrager la nation francaise, que
de denaturer        ainsi    les   resultats     de ce combat imprudemment
           1
engage f'
  The account, given in the French work from which this
extract is taken, of the proceedings of the generality of French
and Spanish ships engaged at Trafalgar, is tolerably fair, but, to
our regret, very brief partly, no doubt, in consequence of the
                               ;



sad havoc caused by the gale that so quickly succeeded the
battle. In one point the French writer, who is evidently a
naval officer, is quite wrong. He states, that the Bucentaure,
Santisima-Trinidad, and Eedoutable, sustained, for some time,
nearly the whole united efforts of the 12 ships in Lord Nelson's
column.2 The ample details given in these pages afford the
most complete refutation of that statement. The fact is, that
the leading ship of the lee column, the .Royal Sovereign, was in
hot action, after having cut through the combined line, for up-
wards of a quarter of an hour before any ship did or could come
to her assistance.   The Victory and Temeraire were also closely
engaged for even a longer period, before the three or four ships
astern of them could get to their support. The nature of the
attack, combined with the lightness of the breeze, was such,
indeed, that the whole business was done by 12 or 14 ships of
the 27 and that without the slightest disparagement to the
       ;


conduct of the remainder.
   On the 28th the Victory, towed by the Neptune, arrived at
Gibraltar; where she found, among other ships, the Belleisle,
who, having been taken in tow by the Naiad, sent to her assist-
ance by Captain Hardy, had anchored in the bay on the third
day after the termination of the battle in which she had per-
formed so distinguished a part. On the 3rd of November, having
been partially refitted, the Victory sailed for England, passed
the Straits on the 4th, and on the 4th of the following month,
anchored at St. Helen's, having on board, preserved in spirits,
the body of the lamented hero, whose flag she had so long
borne, and which was then flying on board of her, but in a
melancholy position, at half-mast. On the 10th of December
       1
           Victoires et G'onquetes, tome xvi., p. 217.     2
                                                               Ibid., p. 182.
