1805.J                        BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                                  467

ment could nullify the statement, that Lord Nelson sent to
inform Vice-admiral Collingwcod of his mortal wound " imme-
          "
diately  after he had received it and that the latter thereupon
                                        ;


took upon himself the direction of the fleet, and ordered the
           "
Euryalus,    while the action continued," to make his signals.
Truth, however, will ultimately prevail  and Captain Hardy ;

became rewarded, not only in a baronetcy, but in the marked
approbation of the board of admiralty, who have never lost sight
of him when a service was to be performed that
                                                      required the
exercise of a large proportion of those qualities which charac-
terize the good officer.
  Two published accounts of this battle, one historical, the
other tactical, come next under consideration. In the first few
details are given, except in reference to the
                                               proceedings of the
Victory and, as the relation of the occurrences, on board that
              ;




ship, including the manner of Lord Nelson's death, is little more
than a transcript from the works of Doctor Beatty, Messrs.
Clarke and M'Arthur, and Mr. Southey, the value of that part
of the account may be appreciated by what has already
                                                          appeared
in these pages.   Nor have the other authorities, upon which our
contemporary has relied for information, benefited him a whit
more. Where, for instance, did he learn that the captain of the
liedoutable was " mortally wounded?" or that the Tonnant,
                                                       1



and not the Bellisle, came to the assistance of the Royal
             2
Sovereign ? or that the San-Augustin, and not the Neptuno,
struck to the Spartiate and Minotaur ?3
   But, for these errors of the pen, the pencil is to atone, in the
           " a
shape of       rough sketch of the action taken after the firing
had ceased in the rear, and the enemy's van had wore to recover
the prizes." This is the description given by the draftsman in
     "
his    Key to the plate ;" but, according to the statement of
                                         "
Captain Brenton liimself (p. 458), the     very moment" referred
to is two hours afterwards, or just as Lord Nelson had expired
in the cockpit of the Victory.     As is often the case in much
more elaborate performances of the kind, one time will answer
as well as another.    For instance, the Formidable and the four
ships in her train are seen just hauled up on the starboard tack,
almost ready to begin firing at the nethermost British ship, the
Neptune. Let us suppose this to have been at about - li. 30 m.
p.m.   But then the Minotaur and Spartiate are also represented
on the starboard tack whereas they were not so until about
                                  ;




4 h. 30m. p.m., after M. Dummoir and his four countrymen
                                            Ibid               »
     i
         Brenton, vol. iii.. p. 455.               p. 46ti.        Ibid., p. 467.
