1805.J               BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.                      473

Queen Charlotte was placed where Lord Howe wanted to get,
but never could get, a little before the lee beam of his antagonist.
Among others, the officer, whose duty it was (and who would
have succeeded, but for the hasty flight of the Montagne and
the loss of the Queen Charlotte's foretopmast 3 ) to place the
British ship in the desired position, went to see the picture. At
the first glance the gallant seaman pronounced the picture a
libel upon the Queen Charlotte      inasmuch as, had she been in
                                       ;


the position represented, it would have been her fault for letting
the Montagne escape. Whether it was owing to this capital
blemish, or to the half a dozen minor offences against truth in
different parts of it, we cannot say, but the picture gradually
sank into disrepute, and eventually became, we believe, lodged
with an eminent printseller for some debt amounting to less
than a third of its prime cost. After lying rolled up in a corner
of one of his rooms, encased in dust, for a number of years, the
printseller was fortunate enough, as we have understood, to find
a purchaser in his late majesty's surveyor-general of the Board
of Works.
   The painting, thus restored to credit and the light, was in-
tended to be hung up, as a national memento of the naval
victory to which it relates, in the council-room of St. James's
palace.   As a companion to it, a picture was required, repre-
senting the Victory engaged in the battle of Trafalgar. The first
marine painter of the day undertook the task and, in due time,
                                                     ;


the large area of canvas, which, to correspond with the other
picture, became necessary for this, was covered with all the
varied tints which Mr. Turner knows so well how to mingle and
combine, to give effect to his pictures and excite the admiration
of the beholder.
   Unfortunately for the subject which this splendid picture is
meant to represent, scarcely a line of truth, beyond perhaps the
broadside view of the Victory's hull, is to be seen upon it. To
say what time of the day, or what particular incident in the
Victory's proceedings, is meant to be referred to, we do not
pretend for the telegraphic message is going up, which was
         ;


hoisted at about 11 h. 40m. a.m., the mizcntopmast is falling,
which went about 1 p.m., a strong light is reflected upon the
Victory's bow and sides from the burning Achille, which ship
did not catch fire until 4 h. 30 m., nor explode until 5h. 4.~> m.
p.M the foretopmast, or rather, if our memory is correct, the
    ,



foremast, of the British three-decker is falling, which never fell
                          1
                              See vol. i., p. 165.
