±72            BRITISH       AND FRANCO-SFAXISH FLEETS.       [1805.

nients are, for the most part, equally ill-founded. As to the
"six plans of the battle, delineated by the same band, to the
accuracy of which, many who were engaged have borne testi-
mony," if the three plans not published tends as little to
           1


" illustrate " this          as the three which the writer
                    great victory,
has selected for his work, a great deal of pains and expense has
been bestowed to a very little purpose. The three plans selected
are the fourth, fifth, and sixth, representing different periods of
the action, from the moment the combined van began wearing,
to the termination of the battle by the capture of the Neptuno.
In every one of these plans, the Victory is represented clear of
the Eedoutable, but upon the starboard tack, with her head to
the southward. The Agamemnon is shifted from the weather,
to the lee column and equally misplaced in their relative posi-
                   :




tions are the Orion, Africa, and their gallant opponent, the Intre-
pide.   In short, there is scarcely a ship, among those of the
British especially, that seems to be in her proper situation. Nor
are these plans little unpretending sketches, but large and costly
copper-plate engravings, by their imposing size, numerous
figures,and laboured appearance, calculated to enthral the
judgment, and to divert, if not to defy, the efforts of criticism.
  If a printed misstatement upon an important point of history
may be justifiably set right, have we not an equal privilege over
a painted misstatement of the same nature; especially when
produced under circumstances the most likely of any to inspire
a confidence in its accuracy ? Previously to our submitting any
remarks upon the merits of the painting of the Victory going
into, or (for, as we shall presently see, it is doubtful which is
meant) coming out of, the battle of Trafalgar, we will endeavour
to relate  how it happened that that distinguished artist, Mr.
J. M.   W. Turner, of the Royal Academy, became engaged to
trace with his powerful pencil so interesting an epocha in
British naval history; a subject which, well executed, would,
we conceive, have done that gentleman as much honour as any
of his previous performances.
  Soon after the battle of the 1st of June the justly-celebrated
marine painter, P. J. de Loutherbourg, was employed by some
enterprising individual to represent the Queen Charlotte engaging
the Montagne. In about four years the picture, which measured
12 feet by eight and a half, and cost, we believe, 5001., was
completed, and soon afterwards exhibited to the public. With-
out descending to minutia?, the grand mistake in it was, that the
                         '
                             Ekins's Naval Battles, p. 271.
