474            BRITISH    AND FRANCO-SPANISH              FLEETS.        [1805.


at all, and the Eedoutable is sinking under the bows of the
Victory, although the French ship did not sink until the night
of the 22nd, and then under the stern of the Swiftsure.
  We   are sorry to be obliged to add that, with all these glaring
falsehoods and palpable inconsistencies upon it, the picture
stands, or until very lately did stand, in that room of the king's
palace, for which it was originally designed. The principal
reason urged for giving to this very costly and highly honoured
performance so preposterous a character, is that an adherence to
truth would have destroyed the pictorial effect. Here is a ship,
shattered in her hull, and stripped of the best part of her sails,
pushing into a cluster of enemy's ships without a grazed plank
or a torn piece of canvas to fire her first gun. Here is sym-
bolized the first of naval heroes, with chivalric valour, devoting
himself to his country's cause and yet, says an artist of high
                                        ;
          " there is a lack of                                      We
repute,                        pictorial materials."         hope some
public-spirited individual, if not the State itself, will show whether
this is really the case   for it is almost a national disgrace that
                           ;


there should yet be wanted a picture which, in accuracy of re-
presentation, no less than in strength and brilliancy of execution,
is calculated to illustrate, and to stand as a lasting memorial of
one of the greatest sea-battles that ever has been, or that per-
haps ever will be fought         a battle to the success of which
                                  :




England at this time owes, if not her political existence, her
prosperity, happiness, and exalted station.
   To any artist, who may consider it worth his while, or within
his powers, to attempt such a picture, the following remarks, in
addition to those he will find a few pages back, 1 may not be un-
useful.   Let his point of view be the small cross in the diagram
at p. 400.   He will then have, for his two principal figures, the
Victory on the right, and the Bucentaure on the left. Behind
these will be the Neptune and Eedoutable both firing, the       ;


latter her foremost guns, the former her whole broadside, right
into the bows of the Victory.         On the extreme right of the
picture will be the bows of the Temeraire, and on the extreme
left, the stern and quarter-galleries of the Santisima-Trinidad.
Quite in the foreground may be represented the boat, which a
shot had cut adrift a few minutes before. With this hint to
the painter, we end our long, but, we hope, not uninteresting
account of the battle of Trafalgar.
                     '
                         See pp. 394, 395, 400, 401, and 422.
