 498                                           APPENDIX.

 admirals and captains, would certainly be decisive ; the second or third rear-

ships of the enemy would act as they pleased, and our ships would give a good
account of them, should they persist in mixing with our ships.     The other
mode would be, to stand under an easy but commanding sail, directly for their
headmost ship, so as to prevent the enemy from knowing whether                                  I   should

pass to leeward or to windward of him.   In that situation, I would make the

signal to engage the enemy to leeward, and to cut through their fleet about
the sixth ship from the van, passing very close they being on a wind, you,
                                                                ;



going large, could cut their line when you please.   The van-ships of the
enemy would, by the time our rear came abreast of the van-ship, be severely
cut up, and our van could not expect to escape damage.    I would then have

our rear-ship, and every ship in succession, wear, continue the action with
either the van-ship or second ship, as it might appear most eligible from her

crippled state ; and, this mode pursued, I see nothing to prevent
                                                                   the capture
of the five or six ships of the enemy's van.     The two or three ships of the
enemy's rear must either bear up or wear ; and, in either case, although they
would be in a better plight probably than our two van-ships (now the rear),
                                                             as to give our
yet they would be separated and at a distance to leeward, so
ships time to refit ; and              by that time, I   believe, the battle       would, from the
judgment of the admirals and captains, be over with the rest of them. Signals
from these moments are useless, when every man is disposed to do his duty.
The great object is, for us to support each other, and to keep close to the
enemy and to leeward of him.                 If the enemy are       running away, then the only
signals necessary will be, to engage the enemy as arriving up
                                                                   with them, and
the other ships to pass on for the second, third, &c. ; giving, if possible, a close
fire into             the enemy in passing, taking care to give our ships engaged notice of

your intention."
                            — Clarke and M' Arthur's Life of Nelson,        vol.   ii.,   p.   427.



                                         No. 30.— See p. 354.
                          VICE-ADMIRAL COLL1NGWOOD TO LORD NELSON.
           " We
                      approached, my dear lord, with caution, not knowing whether we were
to expect you or the               Frenchmen first. I have always had an idea that Ire-
land alone was the object they have in view, and still believe that to be their
ultimate destination.  They will now liberate the Ferrol squadron from
Calder, make the round of the Bay, and, taking the Rochefort people with
them, will appear off Ushant, perhaps with thirty-four sail, there to be joined
by twenty more. This appears a probable plan for, unless it be to bring
                                                                    ;




                                 ******
their powerful fleets and armies to some great point of service, some rash

attempt at conquest, they have only been subjecting them to chance of loss,
which I do not believe the Corsican would do, without the hope of an adequate
reward.
The French government never aim at little things, while
view.             I
                                                                            great objects are in
                      have considered the invasion of Ireland as the real mark and butt of
all        their operations.      Their flight to the West Indies was to take off the naval
force, which proved the great              impediment to their undertaking."
                                                                                    — Clarke and
M Arthur's Life of Nelson, vol.
      1-

                                             ii., p. 416.
