                                       C     507      )




              NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS.


                         NOTE TO ABSTRACT, No. 9.
  *   The hired vessels numbered about 104. In consequence of the mistake
of a unit in the "Tons," of class t, not discovered until after Abstract No. 9
was printed, this total exceeds by 1 the corresponding total in Abstract No. 8.



                            NOTES TO ABSTRACT, No. 10.
  W*. The purchased ship of this class was the Cornwallis, late a teak-built
Indiaman.
  X*.     A very ancient class revived.         " Advice
                                                               boats, so called   officially, are
said to    have been employed, for the         first time, in     1692, before the battle       oil

Cape La Hogue, in order to gain intelligence of what was passing at Brest."
See Derrick, p. 113, note *.
   * As the hired vessels had
                              begun to be discharged, they now numbered only
about 62.    This Abstract, having been put to press along with the one which
                                                           "
precedes it, contains the same deficiency of a unit in the   Tons," that is re-
marked upon in the single note of Abstract No. 9.
  Owing to an inadvertency on our part, two 74s, one of the N, the other of
the       class, that were, late in   the year 1801, ordered to be built, have been
left out of the     " Ordered" column.      The addition of them will make the line
numerical grand total 191, and the general numerical grand total 783.




                      NOTES TO ABSTRACT, No. 11.
  (a)     With the view to render the remaining Abstracts more perspicuous and
useful, a     partial    alteration has been    made in the manner of heading them.
Instead of beiug confined to "Cruisers," this compartment now extends to

every ship fitted or about to be fitted for sea-service; and lines are drawn to
show the totals, as well of the former, as of the less material portion of the
navy.
  (6) This head has also been slightly altered       and in particular the " &c."
                                                           ;


has a different signification from that assigned to it in note J to No. 1 Abstract.
See vol. i., p. 450.       It signifies that all the ships and vessels of this, as we
shall call   it,   the second compartment, which are not commissioned for harbour-
service,    remain      in ordinary until   sold or taken       to   pieces, a period   which    is

sometimes extended to several years.
   VOL. III.                                                                       2 R
