                          NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS.                            509

in the preceding Abstracts. The names of the ships in the second column
will,without the exception formerly requisite, be found in the proper list in
the work    and where, among the vessels in the first column, a purchased
              ;


British merchantman rates above a gun-brig, the circumstance will be adverted
to in a note.

  (6) Late the Erave, French privateer ; presented by the merchants of Bar-
badoes to the British government, and on that account named Barbadoes.
     (c) These had been British merchant-vessels.
     (d) Also these.
     (e)   The Scorpion   ;
                           built from the draught of the Cruiser.       See vol. ii.,
p. 482, note Y*.          The four British-built vessels,exclusive of these, in the
" Sea-service"
                   total, are the remnant of eight, built of fir in 1795, measuring
about 369 tons each, and now nearly worn out.       Considering the fine qualities
of the Cruiser, it is rather surprising that, during six years, three vessels only
should have been built from her draught.      These were launched in 1798, and
were not      brig, but ship rigged : consequently they belong to class S.      The
Osprey, Snake, and Victor, were, however, found fault with as ships; and all
others from the same draught were thenceforward constructed as brigs.  As a
man-of-war, a ship has a decided advantage, in action, over a brig.     A ship
will lie to more closely, and, if she loses her mizenmast or spanker, has still
a trysail on the mainmast; whereas, the moment a brig has her gall or rnain-
boom shot away, she loses the use of her boom mainsail, and is no longer
manageable.  It may, however, be said on the behalf of brig-rigged vessels,

that many of their apparent faults arise from an improper mode of handling
them.
     (/) These, also, had been British merchant-vessels.
     (g)The hired vessels numbered about 34.



                        NOTES TO ABSTRACT, No. 13.
     (a)   The Hibernia; ordered in 1790, and intended to be of the same tonnage
as the Ville-de-I'aris, but afterwards lengthened eleven feel.
                                                         Began building
November, 1792; launched Novewber 17, 1804.
  (6) The Namur; reduced from a 90 to a 74 gun ship, under the direction
of Mr. Robert Seppings, the master builder at Chatham.           It having occurred
to the philosophic     mind of this ingenious architect, that, by not removing the
solid bow in the wake of the second deck, in order to substitute the osnal
flimsy fabric, called the beak-head, the ship would acquire additiousl strength
in that part of her frame, as well as afford some protection to her crew when

going end-on upon an enemy, the circular bow of the Namur was allowed to
remain.   The advantages of this important alteration struck every one who
saw the ship when finished; and subsequently, as we shall hereafter have oc-
casion more fully to relate, every ship in the British navy was ordered to bfl
constructed with a solid circular bow instead of a beak-head.

     (c)   Had been Indumen, and were built of teak.
     (d)   The same.
