508                       NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS.

                       "
   (c)
                         has been substituted for " Launched," as being more
          The term " Built
explicit,and contrasting better with " Purchased."     In the preceding Ab-
stracts every ship down this pair of columns formed part of the
                                                                   " Total of

Increase," and having, in the generality of cases, been included among the
"Ordered to be built" of an antecedent year, became reckoned twice over.
To obviate this, a double line now excludes the built ships from the increase                     ;



and the increase-total, without any other deduction than the decrease-total
may require, proves the grand total. For instance, the grand total of N, by
the former method, must have been produced thus:                      15   |
                                                                               26032 (the corre-
sponding total in No. 10 Abstract)   3   5168 = 18 31200—1 1743 = 17
                                         +    |               |                   |           |



2t»457, instead of by simply adding the 2   3425.  |


            " &c." includes
   (d) The                   ships converted to sheer-hulks, breakwaters, and
similar uses.

  (e)     The correction of a mistake of 50 tons in one ship (the Cornwallis, see
note     W* in the preceding page), occasions this total to exceed by that amount
the corresponding total in the preceding Abstract.

  (/) See last note.
  (g) This division
                    of the armees en flute into "Troop-ships" and "Store-
     "
ships  tends to simplify the arrangement, but it was not adopted in the
official register until   a   much later period.       There, as elsewhere observed, the
reduced ships, with few exceptions, ranked, until very recently, along with
their full-armed classmates. The lower columns of the first compartment are
now no longer in blank, the substituted term at the top admitting all ships
                                 " for sea-service."
fitted or about to be fitted
                                      unit remarked upon in notes * to Nos. 9
  (A) The addition of the deficient
and 10 Abstracts, appears in the excess of this total over its corresponding one
in the latter.

   (i) This is merely a separation
                                   from various other classes of such stationary
                                  official list, and might have been made a class
ships as are so registered in the
from the first. In strictness, the three commissioned harbour-service ships at
T, T, and W, and all others, which may appear in that column throughout
the series, ought to belong to it: but, as the official list continues them in
their         classes, we have done the same.
         original
   (k)The " Small Yachts," with the exception of the Medina, not being com-
manded by naval officers, this class has been reduced and the one next above
                                                                  ;

                                                                     "
it, now including the   Medina, will henceforward be denominated       Royal
Yachts."
   (I)    This being a year of peace, no hired vessels were attached to the navy.
As to the grand total of " Tons," see notes e, f, and h.



                          NOTES TO ABSTRACT, No. 12.
                                                           ••
                         in note \ to No. 2 Abstract, that    captured vessels
   (a) It was remarked
are also purchased from the captors before they can enter the service."   The
nn.on of these two columns under the head of "Purchased,'" subject to the
distinction pointed out, claims a preference, therefore, over the plan adopted
