510                        NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS.

   (e)     The two latest-built frigates of this class were launched in 1786, the
Aquilon of 724, and the Thames of 656 tons. As the ships in general were a
full third smaller than those of any French frigate class, the class was con-

sidered not worth keeping up until the year 1804, when some newly-discovered

properties in the Thames at her breaking up caused seven frigates to be laid
down from her draught, one of old oak and named after herself, the remainder
of fir.This was at a time, too, when scarcely a single 12-pounder frigate be-
longed to the French or any foreign navy.    Frigates carrying 18-pounders
were justly preferred, and, with the French in particular, were rapidly in-
creasing in number.
   (/) Had been a British merchant-vessel; and so had every one of the 13
ships next below her in the same column.
   (gr)
        This will exemplify the exception to the generality of cases adverted to
in note c to No. 11 Abstract.    According to the method adopted previously to
the date of the latter, 41 built or launched gun-brigs would have been sepa-
rated from the 48 at b, and the difference, 7, have become the apparent number
that had been ordered to be built.         No deduction would here have been re-
quisite towards proving the  grand total : at the same time the true number
ordered could only be obtained by noticing that none had been left as building
in the preceding Abstract. For a case in point a reference may be made to
                                                                    "
the same class in Abstracts No. 10 and 9. Now, the " Ordered          column
shows, at one view, and without any operation of figures, the precise number
of ships ordered to be built within the year.

   (h) See last note.
   ( *')
           These vessels were a disgrace to the British navy.   They were built at
Bermuda, of the pencil-cedar, measured about 78 tons, mounted four 12-pounder
carronades, and were manned with 20 men and boys.       In point of force, three
of them united were not more than a match for a single gun-boat, as usually
                                  ' men-of-war " raised a
armed.   Their very appearance as                         laugh at the ex-
pense of the projector.  Many officers refused to take the command of them.
Others gave a decided preference to some vessels built at the same yard, to be
employed as water-tanks at Jamaica. Moreover, when sent "forth to cruise
                                to " burn, sink, and destroy
against the enemies of England,
                                                               all they met,

these "king's schooners" were found to sail wretchedly, and proved so crank
and unseaworthy, that almost every one of them that escaped capture went
to the bottom with the unfortunate men on board.

   (k)     Number of hired vessels about 140.




                                   END OF VOL. III.


      LONDON   :   PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, STAMFORD STREET
                                    AND CHARING CROSS.


J.D.& CO.
