                  	  

Early	  Journal	  Content	  on	  JSTOR,	  Free	  to	  Anyone	  in	  the	  World	  
This	  article	  is	  one	  of	  nearly	  500,000	  scholarly	  works	  digitized	  and	  made	  freely	  available	  to	  everyone	  in	  
the	  world	  by	  JSTOR.	  	  

Known	  as	  the	  Early	  Journal	  Content,	  this	  set	  of	  works	  include	  research	  articles,	  news,	  letters,	  and	  other	  
writings	  published	  in	  more	  than	  200	  of	  the	  oldest	  leading	  academic	  journals.	  The	  works	  date	  from	  the	  
mid-­‐seventeenth	  to	  the	  early	  twentieth	  centuries.	  	  

	  We	  encourage	  people	  to	  read	  and	  share	  the	  Early	  Journal	  Content	  openly	  and	  to	  tell	  others	  that	  this	  
resource	  exists.	  	  People	  may	  post	  this	  content	  online	  or	  redistribute	  in	  any	  way	  for	  non-­‐commercial	  
purposes.	  

Read	  more	  about	  Early	  Journal	  Content	  at	  http://about.jstor.org/participate-­‐jstor/individuals/early-­‐
journal-­‐content.	  	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

JSTOR	  is	  a	  digital	  library	  of	  academic	  journals,	  books,	  and	  primary	  source	  objects.	  JSTOR	  helps	  people	  
discover,	  use,	  and	  build	  upon	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  content	  through	  a	  powerful	  research	  and	  teaching	  
platform,	  and	  preserves	  this	  content	  for	  future	  generations.	  JSTOR	  is	  part	  of	  ITHAKA,	  a	  not-­‐for-­‐profit	  
organization	  that	  also	  includes	  Ithaka	  S+R	  and	  Portico.	  For	  more	  information	  about	  JSTOR,	  please	  
contact	  support@jstor.org.	  
CENSORSHIP        AND LITERATURE              UNDER      NAPOLEON          1.

    THE Napoleonic regimewas largelyoccupied with the elabora-
tion of a systemcompetentto curb the unbridledindividualismthat
the Revolutionhad evoked, and of which the great Corsican was
himself the chief.exponent. Such a system could be but slowly
elaborated,and it is not strangethat it was never fullyapplied; the
parts of it that were concerned with the moral and intellectual
conditionsof individuallife and withthedevelopmentand expression
of public spiritwere still largelyin a state of experimentation when
the Empire passed away. It was only in i8io that the educational
machinewas fullyset up with the organizationof the University,
and it was in the same year thatthe controlof publicationthrougha
formalcensorshipwas providedforby the establishment,      as a bureau
of the Ministryof the Interior,of the DirectionGenerale de l'Im-
primerieet de la Librairie.
    In the followingpages I propose to examine closely the prin-
ciples and practice of this Direction Generale as disclosed in its
weeklyreportsthroughthe period I8Io-i8I4.        The bureau however
cannotbe representedas constituting    the completecensorshipof the
period, even with regard to the press, for the police supervision
that up to i8io had been all-powerfulover all agencies of public
expressionand intercourse,was limitedby the establishmentof the
 formal censorship only with respect to non-periodicpublications.
 And even here the censorshipfrequentlyfound itself impeded by
 the police; there had been a bittercontestbetweenthe Ministries
 of Police and of the Interior all throughthe workingout of the
 imperial decree of February 5, i8io, by which the Direction
 Gxneralehad been established,and both Fouche and Savary con-
 tinued to resentthe curtailingof police jurisdictionthatthe decree
 represented. The presentarticlethereforeis not a fullexpositionof
 censorshipunder the later Empire,but a studyof one branchof it,
 fromthe pointof view chieflyof the administrative    attitudetoward
 literatureand esprit public.1 It is based on the authoritativeand
 detailedaccountof the operationsof the censorshipthatis preserved
    1 The substantial monograph of M. Henri Welschinger,La Censure sous le
PremnierEmpire (Paris, I887), aims to cover the whole field and does so with
considerable success. The author, however, has passed over the bulletins of the
Direction Generale somewhat hastily, and has occupied himself rather with the
                                    (288)
                   and LiteratureunderNalpoleonI.
          Censorship                                                             289

forus in theweeklybulletinsof the DirectorGeneralto the Minister
of the Interior,who wa.s supposed to lay thembeforethe Emperor.
These extendwithsome breaks fromApril, i8io, to January,I8I4.
They were prepared by the Director General on the basis of the
reportsof the censors and inspectors(for the departments,of the
prefetsalso), and no doubt often incorporatedthe ideas and even
the language of the individualreaders,thoughin general the forn
of statementimpliesthe director'sown examinationand conviction.
At times the directoris requested by the ministerto undertakea
personal reading and report; aggrieved authors had the right of
appeal to the minister,but this seems to have been but rarelyexer-
cised (I find but one instance of the manuscriptbeing sent to
anothercensor,who reversedthe decision of the first). It is clear
that the ministergave close attentionto the bulletinsand we find
him not infrequentlyorderingor suggestingchanges. It is impos-
sible to say how far they came under the eye of the Emperor or
how far the minister's interventionswere thus caused. As in
January,I813, the latterassertedthathe had long soughtto impose
 leniencyon the bureau, it is fair to assume that his attitudewould
 date back to the strong expressions of dissatisfactionwith the
 censorshipused by Napoleon in the Counciltowardthe end of I8I 1.2
 But the Emperor's earlier interventionswere spasmodic and were
 probablynot followedup. He did not like the censorship,for he
 was verysensitiveas to the suspicionthathe was afraid to let people
 say what theythought;but, as withthe police tyranny,he could not
 dispense with it. It is clear however that he finallyinterposed
 decisivelyin the interestsof leniency,the permanentresultsbeing
 evident from the statisticsof censorship operation given in the
 subjoined note.2 In i8i i more than thirtyper cent. of the manu-
 fortunesof the more noted writers than with the general attitude and influence
 of the bureau. The extracts fromthe bulletinsgiven here and by M. Welschinger
 may be usefully supplementedby the citations from those of i8io published in
 I870-I87I by M. Charles Thurot in the Revue Critique d'Histoire et de Litt6rature.
 I have used these bulletinsin two different
                                           manuscriptsof the ArchivesNationales,
 indexed as "AF IV. I049, Rapports du Ministere de l'Int&rieur", and "AF IV.
 1354,  Pieces Ministerielles"; there are 5 in all, blanks existing for June,July,
 August,and September,of i8io, and for Julyand August of I8I2.
     2 Bulletin   statistics, I8I0-I8I4:
       Date.            No. bulletins.     No. MSS.   No. corrections. No. prohibitions.
       i8io                    I5            422           64                 3
       i8ii                    48            669          I63               76
        I8I2                   4I            57I           43               2I

        I8I3                   5I            585            2               I4
        I8I4                    3              I5           0                2

                              I 58         2,262          272              ii6
290                             VictorCoffin
scripts examined were correctedor prohibited,but in I8I3 only
somewhatless than threeper cent. We should of course take into
      Welschinger it is true asserts that the imperial interventions" ne produisit
aucun effetutile et l'arbitraire continua" (p. 46), but it is evident that he had
not examined the bulletins closely enough,and was probablybasing his statement
upon general literarycomplaints such as that quoted by him from Villemain. I
have not found the document from which Welschinger quotes the Instructions
issued by M. de Pommereul to the censors, December 22, I8I2, in pursuance of
the new orders; according to this the followingprinciples were now laid down:
" Lorsqu'un ouvrage vous est soumis, qu'il soit bien ou mal ecrit, spirituel ou
non, contenantdes idees sages ou deraissonnables,ce ne sont point la des motifs
pour proposer d'en suspendre ou arreterla publication. L'ouvrage est-il obscene?
Sa publicite serait-elle contraire aux reglementsde police municipale? Alors
a-t-il pour but de reveiller des passions, de former des factions, de semer du
trouble dans l'interieur? Le danger qu'il presente avertit assez de reclamer la
defense de sa publication. L'intention liberale de Sa Majeste est que, a ces
exceptions pres, la presse jouisse d'une entiere liberte." Welschinger admits
that these new directions were followed by "une certaine detente dans la
repression", but declares that it did not last. So far as the records show
it lasted throughthe rest of the period. The cases of the two manuscriptsset
down as prohibitedin January,I8I4 (though only I5 had been submittedto the
censors), will be found on examination to bear out this conclusion; both were
reportedby the directoras being markedlyof an objectionable political tendency,
and yet in both instances the ministerdisapproved the action and ordered recon-
sideration (of the final outcome we have no information). As a matter of fact
the milder regime had set in earlier than is indicated above, and quite suddenly,
showingthat some externalpressurehad been applied; for the monthsof January,
February,and March, I8I2, with i85 manuscriptsexamined, there were io prohi-
bitions and 39 corrections,while for the monthsof April, May, June, September,
October, November,and December (there were no bulletinsfor Julyand August),
with 386 manuscriptsthere were only 4 corrections and I prohibitions. The
activity in correctionof the year i8ii and of the firstthree months of I8I2 iS
even more strikingthan the prohibitions; it was in January,i8ii, that Portalis
was replaced by de Pommereul,and but for the proverbial activityof the "new
broom" we should not have expected this result. Portalis had beenveryvigorous
in his plans for corrections,and it may be that these plans came to the stage of
application only after his removal. The manuscripts " corriges" were for the
most part simplymutilated. This activitynaturallyaroused much complaint,and
to this doubtless were due the strong expressions employed by the Emperor in
the Council of State, December I3, i8iI (Locre, Discussion sur la Liberte
de la Presse, etc., Paris, t8i9, p. 296 ff.), though they seem also to have been
caused in part by his irritationat the demand of the bureau for larger appro-
priations. He intimated that it might be necessary to abolish the Direction
Generale, and declared that "II est necessaire que la direction de l'imprimerie
prenne des idees plus liberales. On sent maintenant tous les abus de cette
institution. . . . Elle devrait savoir que la censure n'est etablie que contre
les libelles qui provoquent a la r6volte; qu'elle laisse parler librement sur le
 reste; qu'elle souffreles caprices de la presse. II est fort egal a l'Rtat qu'un
 extravagantvienne dire par exemple: que c'est Louis XI qui a fait la revolution.
 . . . On r6glementebeaucoup trop. II est beaucoup de choses qu'un gouverne-
-mentsage abandonne a leur cours naturel. L'amour du mieux n'enfantepas tou-
                  and LiteratureunderNapoleonI.
         Censorship                                                          291


account the presumedefficacyof the censorship,the effectsof the
makingknownof its principlesand prejudices to authorsand pub-
lishers; but the examinationof the bulletinsof the directorshows
thattherewas a real and forcedrelaxingof the earlieractivity,and
thatthis leniencywas distastefulboth to the individualcensorsand
to M. de Pommereul. Afterthe inaugurationof the milderregime
thebulletinsof the DirectorGeneralchangein tone,and are devoted
mainly to descriptivestatementsand to more or less jocular and
trivialcriticism. It is clear that the bureau was no longer taking
itselfveryseriously;thereis no furtherreferenceto the early edu-
cationalcampaign,and we get on the whole the impressionthat the
worthyM. de Pommereuland his censorsare more or less marking
time.
    The directactivityof the censorshipproper seems to have been
 confinedalmostentirelyto Paris and its vicinity,forin the provinces
 it is probable that the change broughtabout by the establishment
 of the new bureau amounted to but littlemore than a change of
 address of the prefectoralreportsfromthe Ministryof the Police to
 the Ministryof the Interior. No doubt throughoutthe Empire as
 in Paris the surveillanceof the police continuedas before,but their
 activitywas now detached fromthat of the prefetsactingas agents
 of the formalcensorshipwhichexisted as a bureau of the Ministrv
 of the Interior.3 I shall not delay on this provincial censorial
 activity,forit is of minorimportance,and is representedbut slightly
 in the bulletinsof the Director General; the provincialpress had
 virtuallyceased to exist as a mediumor factor in public opinion,
 and the publicationprovinciallyof a new book had become a rare
  event. The activityof the censorshipin Paris had of course refer-
  ence verylargelyto the readingpublicof the provinces,thoughfrom
jours le bien; et les innovations sont rarementheureuses". It will be remem-
bered that Napoleon's interventionsin administrationwere frequentlynot followed
up, and that theyoftenoccurred under such circumstancesas justifiedthe impres-
sion that theydid not proceed fromclear convictionand settled policy and conse-
quentlycould not be safely regarded as laying down rules of action. But in this
case there is no reason to doubt that his attitude continued consistent and that
the censorshipbegan to resDondto it by the spring of 18I2.
     3 Reference is frequently made in the bulletins to informationi furnished by

 the prefets in pursuance of the instructions " donnees a MM. les Prefets par le
 Directeur General de la Librairie ". Inspectors of the censorship were employed
 in the surveillance of distribution through local booksellers and through colpor-
 teurs throughout France, but it is not clear whether they reported directly or
 through the prefets, or what their relations were to the similar agents of the
 police. The large range of this surveillance as compared with that of the police
 is probably indicated in the reference of the bulletins to efforts of its agents to
 furnish extended information as a basis for a policy of improving popular reading.
292                            Victor Coffin

pointsof view whichseem to becomeless prominentas timepassed.
It is the provinces mainly that are in view when the censorship
planned most aggressively,took itself most seriously; the firstdi-
rector,CountJosephPortalis,a strenuousand pedagogicbureaucrat,
enteredupon his work with much enthusiasmas to the opportunity
offeredto direct popular reading and thus mould public opinion.
His second report as Director General, dated May 31, i8io, ad-
dressed to the Emperor direct,was prefacedby some general con-
siderations.
    J'ai recueilli[he says] des renseignements sur l'etatde l'imprimerie
et de la librairiedans toutesles Partiesde l'Empire,sur le nombreet
l'espece des livres qui s'impriment  et qui se vendent,sur le nombre
et l'especede ceux qui s'importent, sur l'espritdes journauxetrangers
et leurTendancegenerale. En Francedans les Departements        on n' im-
primeque des livres de Piete, des livres elementairesou classiques.
La Publicationd'un nouvelOuvragey est un Phenomene,et la Reim-
pressionde quelquesancienslivresimportants      n'y est pas moinsrare.
Neanmoinsqa et la on remarquequelquescompilations       de jurisprudence
et quelques nouvelleseditionsdes ecrivainsdu siecle de Louis XIV.
C'est la Librairiequi doit fixerla toutemon attention.Les Libraires
vendentpeu et louentbeaucoupleurslivres. Cet Usage est peu favorable
au Progresdes Connoissancesutiles. II populariseles livresfrivoleset
favorise l'oisivete. Plusieurs Prefets,beaucoup d'Tveques, quelques
Librairesmeme se plaignentde la Circulationpresque ouvertedans
leursDepartements    d'ungrandnombred'Ouvragesqui a forced'outrager
les Moeurs,les Lois et les Bienseancessociales,outragentla Nature
meme.. .. J'ai recueilliles titresde trente-cinq     ouvragescontreles
Moeursqui circulent,    malgreles effortsde la Police.
                                 of the means at the disposal of
Afterpointingout the insufficiency
the censorshiphe concluded:
   Sire, la DirectionGeneralede l'Imprimerie ne doit pas se bornera
re'primer seulement,son plus beau Ministeresera d'inspirer. Si Votre
Majeste daigneagreermes vues en recueillant par Degres la Statistique
personnellede la France savante et litteraire,je parviendraia con-
noitrenos ressourceset a les rendredisponibles.
   It is no doubt the views and probablythe language of Portalis
that we findin a circularissued fromthe Ministryof the Interior
to the prefets October 9, I8IO,4 and apparently referred to in
    4 The policy here expounded by Portalis can be traced back in considerable
degree to Bonaparte's earlier counsellors in the Consulate. The state papers of
P-tiennePortalis, father of Joseph, one of the leading administrativespirits of
the Consulate,will be foundto outlineit to some extent; in I802 we findRoederer,
conseiller d'etat, charged provisionally with the conduct of public instruction,
reportingto the Ministerof the Interiorhow he had judged it " tres utile de faire
faire pour l'an XI un Almanach populaire qui fasse connaitre a Deux Cents mille
Paysans leur premierMagistrat et beaucoup de choses utiles ", and how only the
                 and Literatlure
        Censorship             underNapoleonI.                           293
later reportsof the prefetsas Instructionsof the Director General.
This documentis of much interestwith respectboth to the censor-
ship and to the literaryand intellectualconditionsof the time.
    II est [it asserts] une multitudede petitsecritsque nos pressesre-
produisentchaque annee en grandnombre,et qui sont la bibliotheque
des pauvreset les premierslivresde l'enfance;il est impossiblequ'il ne
fixe pas l'attentiond'une sage administration:ils ont une influence
directesur l'espritdu peupledes villes et des campagnes;il leur doit
toutesses connaissancesacquises. Ses opinions,ses prejuges,ses affec-
tionsen dependent   pltlsou moins. II croity reconnaitre   les conseilsde
la philosophiedu siecle,les veritesdemontrees     par une experienceuni-
verselle,l'opiniondes hommeseclaires,le ton et les usages des hommes
polis, le langage du jour, et la peinturedes moeursdu temps. On
s'e'tonnequelquefoisdu progresuniverselde certainesopinionsnuisi-
bles, qui frappetroptard les regardsde l'autorite;mais on en aurait
prevenules effets,  si l'on avait,des l'origine,empechela circulationde
quelques ecrits obscurs qu'on a meprisesautant qu'ils paraissaient
meprisables. De ce nombresont les almanachs,les calendriers,les
annuaires,les recueils de contes,d'anecdotes,de chansons,de pro-
nostics,de cantiques,de complaintes,les relationsdes evenements
recens,les jugemensdes courscriminelles,     les ab&cedaires,croix de par
Dieu, et autresmenusouvrages. Leur nombre,cependant,         est tellement
multiplie,et leur apparitionsi journaliere,qu'il est impossiblede les
soumettrea l'examende MM. les CenseursImperiaux; des-lors,j'ai
cru devoireveillersur ce pointvotresollicitude,et vous invitera les
 faireexamineravec soin.
Directions follow as to this surveillance,especiallywith regard to
the necessityof removing
toutce qui peutinquieterles espritsfaibleset credules,toutce qui tend
a fortifier
          des prejugessuperstitieux ou a les fairenaitre,enfintoutes
limitedmeans at his disposal preventedhim fromdoing "cent choses semblables"
(AF IV. I050).     The circular of i8io was responded to very promptlyby some
of the prefets; the prefetof the Bas-Rhin writes in the same month that he " a
fait disparaitrede plusieurs almanachs soumis a son examen par ordre du Direc-
teur de la Librairie, des chansons" and other material, while from the Depart-
nielntof the Po it is soon announced that good results are already followingfrom
these steps. A bulletin of this period refers to these popular publications as
appearing in "des millions d'exemplaires". They were spread abroad mainly by
colporteurs; the director's bulletin of December 29, i8io, describes one of the
manuscriptslisted as passed without change as "un de ces opuscules qui com-
posent la Bibliotheque du Peuple et la Pacotille des Colporteurs. On travaille a
les epurer et le Directeur Gen6ral de la Librairie se propose de les remplacerpeu
a peu avec l'aide et le concours de MM. les Prefets par des ecrits dignes des
 Lumieres du Siecle et propres a entretenirdans les Ames ou a y allumer des Sen-
timensd'Amour et de fid6litepour les Souverains, l'espritd'Honneur,de Bravoure,
 et de Generositequi doivent formerparmi nous le veritable esprit national ". A
 bulletinof the previous monthhad expressed the intentionof undertakinga simi-
 lar supervision of text-books: " Ce serait le seul moyen de rendre leur travail
 non seulement sans danger, mais d'une utilite incontestable, et cette m6thode
 aurait encore l'avantage de doubler leur m6ritecomme auteurs en leur imprimant
 ce caractere d'originalit6qui leur manque".
294                        Victor Coffin

les predictionspolitiquesqui interesseraientla tranquillitede l'Stat,
                                                          ou excite-
            des craintessur la stabilitede nos institutions,
inspireraient
raientdes inquietudespourl'avenir.
The chansonset contesare to be revisedin the interestsof decency
and morality,though "il faut se souvenir dans quel pays et dans
quel siecle nous vivons, et se garder de confondrel'enjouementet
la gaiete avec la licenceet le vice ". Betterthingswere to be incul-
cated by substituting
des faitsglorieuxtiresde l'histoirede l'Empireet de nos armees,des
maximesde morale,des actes de courage,des exemplesd'humanite.
On propageraitainsi ces sentimentsd'honneur,de franchise,de loyaute,
d'amourpour le souverain,qui doiventcaracteriserla nationfranqaise;
on nourriraitson enthousiasme  pour le Fondateurde l'Empire; on la
                                  nationauxet la pratiquede tous les
              avec nos institutions
familiariserait
devoirs.
    It is evidentthata policyof thissortwould be subjectto fluctua-
tions dependentlargelyon personal and otherfleetingelements. It
may be conjecturedthat no field of administrationcould be more
in need of elucidationfromthe personal side than that of censor-
ship; in most cases however the necessary informationis almost
unattainable. The two quite commonplaceofficialswho wer.eat the
head of the bureau duringthe period were of verydifferent   origins
and characteristics. The generaloutlinesof those of the firstoccu-
pant of the post, Count Joseph Portalis, will perhaps have been
already indicated; the son of one of the most remarkableof the
early Napoleonic statesmen,he had been caught early by the great
machine,was laborious and pedantic,a born bureaucrat,with little
of the father'sgreat talentand personality. His career was short,
for early in i8ii he came under suspicionof lukewarmnessin the
crusade against papal emissaries. His successor, the Baron de
Pommereul,who had been one of the youngBonaparte's examiners
on his passage frommilitaryschool to active service,was older and
more pliable,and kept the place to the end. As it was his business
to make enemies and as the enemies he made were more or less
addictedto personalitiesthroughpracticein the professionof letters,
we perhapsmay discountthe statementsthat come down to us about
him from aggrieved authors; it is clear however that he was not
misled by the enthusiasmsthat had firedhis predecessor,that he
sailed close to the wind,thatthe desiresof the man higherup found
in him no damaging resistance. As to the ten or twelve obscure
readers whose work lies behind the bulletinswe know little more
than the names; they were styled imperial censors to distinguish
                 and LiteratureunderNapoleonI.
        Censorshif5                                           295
themfromthose attachedto the Ministryof Police, and had retain-
ing fees of one thousandtwo hundredfrancsyearlywithadditional
pay for work done. In addition to the general utilitymen the list
included a learned antiquary,whose functionit was to nose out
plagiaristsin the interestof the revenue (a tax being imposedon all
reproductions),a sound Gallican theologian,and a couple of repre-
sentativesof the Ministryof Foreign Relations.
    My illustrationsof the spiritand operationof the censorshipby
extractsfromthe director'sweeklybulletinswill necessarilybe too
limitedto show its scope fully. It will be convenientto group the
materialunder threemain heads, political,educational,literary.
    Works in the fieldof politicsor government  were of course aban-
doned withoutdefense to the vigilanceof the censor,sure to greet
them with suspicion. General attacks on the existing order were
naturallyprohibited,and therewas also a steadyendeavorto prevent
criticismor even discussionof any of the new institutions. This is
easily explainable and not unreasonable; it is for the most part in
line with one of the most steadily applied principlesof the Na-
poleonicadministration(a principle,by the way, not steadilyapplied
by the older absolutism),viz., thatof preventingany expressionsof
public opinion with regard to the principlesor acts of established
authorities. No officialact more surely evoked the imperial dis-
 pleasure than a resortto the public press in the case of collision
 betweenauthoritiesor between authoritiesand the public. Public
 opinion was not openly recognized; that an officialshould publicly
 assume that there was a public opinion or that it could express
 itselfon currentpublic questions,was to show himselfas harking
 back to the evil revolutionarydays and thoroughlyunfittedfor his
 post. It was again one of the most thoroughlyestablishedprin-
 ciples of the censorshipthat any public recallingof the memoryof
 the revolutionaryor Bourbon pre-revolutionarydays should be
 frownedon, should be presumedto indicatequestionablemotivesor
 incapacityfor good citizenship;disparagingcomparisonswere not
 to be toleratedand people with inconveniently   long memorieswere
 sufficientlya nuisance to be classed with criminals.
     In applyingthesegeneralpositionsthe censorshipfounditselfat
 times more or less embarrassedand not infrequentlyseems guilty
 of inconsistency. It was hard to draw the line betweenpreventing
 unwelcomereferencesand completelyignoringthe recentpast; his-
 tory was being made so rapidly that it was. difficulto keep up.
 More than once the censor was obliged to interferewith otherwise
296                       Victor Coffin

quite harmless geographicalbooks because they referredto states
thathad but recentlypassed away and mightbe supposed to be still
regretted;the tabooingof the name of Bourbon presenteddifficulties
in the historicalinstructionof youth. One enterprisingeducator
found himselfdeprivedat one strokeof two hundredpages of his
work, " qui n'6taientpas en harmonieavec les principesde notre
gouvernement",while the manuscriptof anotherwas entirelysup-
pressedbecause it did not seem fittingto let him entertainthe public
with his fancies as to the futurerelationsof France and Austria.
The prohibitionof M. Debrai's Essai sur la Force, la Puissance, et
la Richesse Nationale was probably due mainly to the author's
unwise praises of the English commercialsystemin his advocacy
of such "pensees triviales" as that governmentsought to admit
withouttaxationall raw materialnot indigenous,and thatthe foreign
policyof a countryshould be based on its commercialinterests.
    It was to be expectedthatthe censorshipshould show a constant
zeal in guardingthe sacred person of His Majesty, a zeal that was
not always appreciated. Napoleon would have homage, but he
wanted it to be in good taste and to have at least the appearance of
spontaneity;it always irritatedhim to have this spontaneitytoo
closely associated with officialpressure. One of the chief ways in
which we find the bureau exhibitingtendernessfor the imperial
susceptibilitiesis in its watchfulnessover referencesto individuals
who had lost imperialfavor; the tactless author who concludedhis
articleon GeneralKleber in an Histoire des Geneeraux   FranCaiswith
"un 'loge dem'sure que la malveillanceou la sottise auraient pu
faire envisagercommeun traitlance d'une main impuissantecontre
une gloire et une renommeeau dessus de toutesles gloires", found
that "cet eloge a disparu". A later appearance of the Egyptian
theme seems to have occasioned more embarrassmentto M. de
 Pommereul. In I8I2 he prohibitedthe Egyptiad, an heroic poem
on the Bonapartistconquest,because the authorhad not risento the
heightof his theme. " Ce n'est point par un ouvrage si inferieur
que Sa Majeste doit etrelouee. II lui faut un Homere. Alexandre
ne voulait etre peintque par Apelles." But an additionalobjection
 was conveyedin the carefullyworded query, "l'Empereur n'ayant
 pas conservel']gypte, conviendrait-ilde faire une grande epopee de
 sa conquete?" The ministerto whom the reportwas made passed
 over this delicate point, and remarked that, while any unfitting
 allusions were to be suppressed,he did not thinkthe poem should
 be prohibitedsimplybecause of its mediocrity. The clemencyhere
 suggestedwas extended withevidentregretin thecase of an Histoire
                 and LiteratureunderNapoleonI.
        Censorship                                               297
de Bonaparte (a title which,by the way, was ordered changed to
that of Meirnoirespour servir a l'Histoire de Napole'on le Grand),
where however there were suppressed " quelques details sur les
premieresannees de la vie du heros et differansdiscours mis dans
sa bouche".
     II est tropdifficile[remarksM. Portalis] de traiterun pareil sujet
dignement    pour qu'on soit etonnede l'imperfectionde tant d'ouvrages
enterpris  sur un themesi beau et si fecond. On souffre de voirtraves-
tir,ou rendreen mauvaistermesce qui est grandet beau de sa nature
. . .mais il faut compatira l'empressement     du public. . . et a la
bonneintention   des ecrivains.
That, however,there were limitsto the censor's receptivityof the
Emperor's praises is shown by the suppressionin a drama of a
eulogy of His Majesty on the ground that it had been put in the
mouthof one of the rogues of the piece.
    Any presentationsof the recenthistoryof France or of Europe
would necessarilyinvolve the very delicate matterof the revolu-
tionaryoriginsof the existingregime; it can occasion no surprise
to find the censorshipvery sensitivein regard to such references
and on the whole decidedlyaverse to having the period dealt with
at all. This is in line with the whole spirit of the administration,
anxious, not necessarilyto deny its originor its earlier principles,
but to leave unstirredall dangerous questions and events, and to
continuequietlywith its task of reconcilingall interestsand classes
to the new institutionsand to one another. This is well illustrated
by the correctionsand remarksconcerninga productionentitledLes
Tombeaux du Dix-Huitieme Siecle. " L'auteur ", we are told,
"passe en revue tous les hommes remarquablesde cette centurie
dont il feintde visiterles tombeaux. . . . Le Directeur de la Li-
brairie pense qu'il etait au moins inutile d'evoquer de pareilles
ombres. II ordonne la suppressionde tous les tombeaux revolu-
tionnairesa commencerpar celui de Louis XVI ". It was not often
indeed that any commendatoryreferencesto the men eitherof the
Old Regime or of the Revolution escaped a jealoius pruning. An
educationaltreatiseon the model of Rousseau's rmile was subjected
to correctionbecause the centralfigurewas describedas a noble of
the Old Regime forcedby the Revolutionto emigrate. " On a fait
disparaitrecette indication", says the director,"on n'a pas besoin
 d'avoir emigrepour donnerune educationchretiennea ses enfans".
The recallingof the Bourbon past was perhaps even more frowned
 upon than referencesto revolutionarydays; and when duringthe
 Emperor's absence in Russia the bureau became aware that manu-
298                       Victor Coffin

scriptsin favor of the old dynastywere being passed fromhand to
hand the nervousnessbecame extreme. A Vie du General Monck
was prohibitedbecause of the suspicion that only an adherentof
the exiled Bourbons could have any interestin calling attentionto
the restorerof the House of Stuart; an Histoire du Bourbonnais,
it is intimated,would have been suppressedif the authorhad not had
the good judgment to stop "au monment      oiu la race des anciens
seigneursde ce nom s'eteint".
     This vigilancewas no doubt very discouragingto historicalre-
search,but thoughquite a numberof brief historiesof France ap-
pear only to be sadly mutilated,we do not seem on the whole to
have lost much thatwe cannot do without. We should like indeed
to have had preservedthe work which aimed to presenta studyof
the statementsas to local conditionsand instructionsent up with
the deputiesto the Rtats Generaux of I789; it was rejectedbecause
it was constantlyharpingon the vague idea of popular power and
sovereignty,and because it presumed to propose reformsin the
Napoleonic laws. No such regretperhaps will be extended to a
Dutch publicationentitledDelicia Poetica, proscribedbecause " une
tresgrandepartiede ce recueila son originedans les opinionsexaltees
de I792 et I793 ". The differencespresentedby these earlier eras
are stronglyinsistedon in a criticalreferenceto the appearance of
a new editionof De Flassan's Histoire de la Diplomatie Franmaise;
althoughthe work is not proscribed,objection is expressed to the
 disclosures it makes of the diplomaticsecrets of the old French
 state.
   Mais l'ouvrageest deja publie; I'anciennediplomatie,  memecelle du
regnede Louis XVI., est aussi vieillieque si elle avait deux milleans.
Tout est changeautourde nous. II ne s'agit pas seulementd'une nou-
velledynastie,
             ce sontles tempsqui ne sontplusles memes. L'Empereur
a commenc6une nouvelleere pour le mondepolitique,memel'ordre
social,memeI'artde gouvernercommecelle de vaincreet de combattre
sontrenouvellesen entier.
   It is perhaps surprisingthat the prejudice against publications
relatingto the French Revolution was not also extended to those
thatdealt withthe precedingAmericanone; on the contrary,in I8I3
we find an approvingnotice of a translationfrom the Italian of
Botta's Histoire de la Guerre de l'Inde'pendancedes rtats-Unis.
This was probablydue to the part taken by France in that struggle,
especiallysince France was again at war withEngland. It certainly
would not seem to be explainable by any tendernesstoward the
contemporaryUnited States, if we may judge by a referenceto a
workunfortunately   not approvedbecause objectedto by the Minister
                 and LiteratureunderNapoleonL.
        Censorshzip                                           299

of Foreign Relations as inopportune. This was entitledAperCu
des rtats-Unis au i9 Siecle jusqu'en i8io, by M. F6lix Beaujour:
"Les Anglo-Anericains", remarks the director," ne se sont pas
encore presentes devant un miroir plus fidele. Ils seraient bien
connusen France si cet ouvrage peu etendumais plein et substantiel
pourraitvoir le jour ". We may I thinkassume that the reflection
in this mirrorwas not complimentary.This interventionof the
Ministryof Foreign Affairsrecalls an importantlimitationof the
bureau's freedomof action. It was not only constantlyinterfered
withby the police,but it was obligedto referto various departments
of the administrationsuch projected publicationsas were likelyto
be of particularinterestto them-a referencethat was especially
importantformanuscriptsin the provinceof the Ministredes Cultes.
One of the interventions    fromthe diplomaticside is of interestas
displayingone of the embarrassingsides of the censorialsystem; it
is with regard to the prohibitionof a volume entitled Versailles,
Paris, et Londres, describedby the directoras not ill-intentioned
but very stupid. " Mais dans un pays", he explains, " ou le public
croitque les ouvrages politiquessont faitespar ordredu Gouverne-
mentou publies sous sa censure,il est impossiblede laisser paraitre
de telles rhapsodies". This leads to the reflectionthat manifestly
an active censorshipwould proceed very easily fromcorrectionsto
suggestion. There are manyinstancesof such suggestions;as in the
case of the text-bookon geographyto which the Foreign Office
 insistedon adding some maps, or of the translationof Costigan's
 Lel4terson the Government,   Manners and Customs of Portugal, to
 which the translatorwas required to add various remarkson the
 duplicityof the English conductin that country,and on the great
 improvement    effectedby the short sojourn of the French.
     This last instancerepresentsan attitudewhichwe findthe censor-
 ship frequentlyexhibiting;for the numberof manuscriptson Eng-
 lish affairsor containingreferencesto England thatwere submitted
 was surprisingly  large. In spite of the war and of the Napoleonic
 commercialpolicy the intellectualrelations between the countries
 continuedto subsistin a large degree,and evidencesof the facthave
 a good deal of interest. 'The receptionof English thoughtin France
 was stillsuch as frequentlyto disturbthe censorship,which lost no
 opportunity                                      does not it is true
              of discreditingit. This inhospitality
 oftenextendto purelyliteraryproductions,the frequenttranslations
 in this fieldbeing seldom interferedwith. But in all other ways
 every opportunityis taken of workingagainst " cette Anglomanie
 que nos ecrivains du siecle dernier nous ont si imprudemment
300                        Victor Coffin

inoculeset dontceux du siecle presentaurontquelques peines a nous
guerir". Every occasion is seized to revileBritishinstitutions;even
trialby jury (almost the only part of the revolutionaryinnovations
in judicial procedurethatNapoleon had let live) was referredto as
" n'offrantaucun avantage au degre de civilisationoiunous sommes
parvenus". Eulogies of the British constitutionreceived short
shrift;a book entitledAnecdotes Anglaises et Americaineswas in
 I8I3 stronglyapproved of as disclosing the vices of the British
system,showing (to use the language of the bulletin) " que la con-
stitutionanglaise ne donne au peuple qu'elle regitni la garantieni
les droitsni les libertesdont on pretendqu'il lui est redevable; que
si les Anglais ont une moralite,leur gouvernement  dans ses rapports
publics n'en reconnaitet n'en -pratiqueaucune ". One instance of
theseattacksis of interestin more than one way; it is in connection
with the passing of a book concerningLord Elgin's antiquarian
 activitiesin the Levant in I799.
   Les anglais [the bulletinproceeds] qui n'ont pas le sentiment   des
beaux arts,qui n'ontencoreproduitaucun grandpeintre,aucun grand
sculpteur,aucun grand musicien,ont heureusement      beaucoup d'or et
non moinsd'orgueil;ils y joignentune jalousie nationalequi les excite
a se montrer toujoursnos rivales. M. de Choiseul-Gouffiera illustreson
ambassadepar son beau voyagede la Grece. Le Lord Elgin a voulu
l'imiteret faireaussi son voyagepittoresque.... Elginobtintde la Porte
la permission de fairedes fouillesa Atheneset on sait qu'il en a abuse
au dernierpoint. Les magnifiques   bas-reliefsdu templede Thesee ont
ete briseset mutilespour en ravirquelquesfragments,    et l'insouciance
Ottomanea ete moinsfataleaux restesd'Athenesque la cupiditeet la
barbariede cet Anglais.
   The attitude of the censorshiptoward educational books and
problemscan perhapsbe regardedas of even more interestthan the
mannerin which it carried out the policy imposed upon it in the
fieldof politicalauthorship. The importanceof the trainingof the
young was now being realized in a new sense; while the freedom
of the eighteenthcenturywas stilldemandedby some defiantspirits,
the vast majorityhad fallen in with the declared policy of the new
governmentof entrenchingSociety and the State behind the old
religious and moral bulwarks, and developing anew a sense of
disciplineand a respect for authoritythat would harmonize with
and be a secure prop for the restored monarchicalsystem. The
gropingsof the Revolutionaryand early Napoleonic years toward
the settingup of educationalmachineryhad now at lengthproduced
a systemthatseemed a marvelof centralization;the new University
of France, embracingall stages and conditionsof the educational
process,was organizedand operating. It was organized,as was the
        Censorshipand Literature under Napoleon I.               301

censorship,as a section of the Ministryof the Interior,and the
DirectorGeneralin this firstperiod seems animatedby the ambition
of being reallya co-ordinateeducationalforce,if not of developing
a superioreducationalcontrol. Count Joseph Portalis was a very
serious youngman, and (as has been shown in part above) he lost
no time in magniloquently enunciatingextendedplans for influence
throughhis officein general education,as well as for the direction
of the adult spirit. His firstgeneral bulletin set forththis pro-
grammeexplicitly;afterdwellingupon the unsatisfactory   character
of popular publications,he proceeds:
   11me sembleque ce n'estque par le Decretdu 5 fevrier[establishing
thecensorship], que VotreMajeste a achevede ressaisirla plenitudedu
Pouvoirsouverain. La Philosophiemoderneavait depouillele Sacerdoce
de l'Empireabsoluqu'il pretendait sur les ames,maiselle ne l'avaitpoint
restituea la Puissance Civile. L'Enseignementpublic restaiten des
mainsindependants   et cetteindependance    n'etaitpas moinscontrairea
un bon ordreet a l'interetde l'P:tatque l'asservissementde cet enseigne-
menta des Corpsetrangersal'a:tat. Le grandPrincipede l'uniteetait
viole. Aujourd'huil'UniversiteImperialeou le Corpsenseignant,     la Di-
rectionGeneralede l'Imprimerieou la Censure,et le Ministeredes
Cultes,forment un Ensemblecomplet,    Oeuvreprodigieuxde Votregenie
et par lequel Votre Majeste s'est remiseen possessionde cetteSouve-
rainetedes espritset des Moeursque les Legislateursanciensavaientsi
precieusement maintenuet que dans les sieclesmalheureux    les ignorants
dominateurs  des nationsavaientlaisse echapper. Ce qui importe,Sire,
c'est que ces grandsPrincipesde Droit public,ces belles et fecondes
Maximesde Gouvernement     soientdeveloppes.
In later bulletinsof the year Portalis followedthis up by pointing
out the measures he had taken or was meditatingfor reinforcing
the work of the schools in popular education; some of these I have
already referredto. With such aims text-bookswere sure of being
regardedcritically,and I have shown above how this care was ap-
plied in the field of recent history. The historicaltexts however
seem to have remainedquite unequal to the aims of the director.
    Pourquoi ne remarquerait-on    pas [he cries] combiena ce sujet il
 seraitdesirablequ'on put distinguerau milieude tant de productions
 indigentes qui paraissentsur l'histoirede notretemps,deux centspages
 eloquentes, richesde faitsnonencoreexposeset appuyessur les temoig-
 nages les plus authentiques,                la gloirede la Patrie et de
                              qui retracassent
 son augusteChefsous des couleursviveset nobles,et qui pussentfamil-
 iariserles elevesdes Lycees avec les hautsfaitsdu Fondateurde l'Em-
 pire,commeils le sontavec ceux des herosde l'antiquite;qui gravassent
 dans leursmemoires   les nomsdes bataillesd'Jenaet de Friedlandcomme
 le sont ceux des bataillesd'Arbeleset Marathon,et qui leur fit con-
 naitreau moinsaussi bien l'originedu Code Napoleon que celle des
 douze tables. Un des tortsde notreeducationmodernea toujoursete
 de nourrirexclusivement   la jeunessede souvenirsetrangers.
    AM. HIST. REV., VOL. XXII.20.
302                         Victor Coffin

On another occasion after dwelling again on this defect the di-
rectorannounces his intentionof enteringupon a reformby com-
pilations for the use of young children,as it was of special im-
portanceto apply the improvementat a tender age.
    The taste of the Baron de Pommereul in text-bookswas ap-
parentlynot so exacting as that of his predecessor. In January,
1813,he approved,thoughwithdoubt as to the title,an Alphabetdu
Roi de Rome, "qui se compose de 24 lecons sur les vertus neces-
saires 'a un chef de gouvernement,suivies chacun d'un trait de la
vie de l'Empereurqui offrel'exempleet l'applicationde cettevertu".
He was howeveras dissatisfiedas Portalis with the quality of the
historicaltexts,and grudginglypassed a new Instructionsur l'His-
toirede France withthe remark," Voila depuis peu d'anne'es'a peu
pres le cinquantiemequ'on publie, et tout mauvais et insignifiants
qu'ils soienton les achete. C'est veritablementdistribuerles poisons.
Cet abbreviateurs'est jette dans l'histoiredes Gaulois, et nous a
mene jusqu'a la bataille d'Austerlitz." A Biographie des Jeunes
Gens, which is described as a bookseller's speculation,leads the
directorto complainthat" il est bien facheux que l'Universite,faite
pour donner une directiona' l'enseignement,n'ait pas occupe son
nombreuxet opulent6tat major 'a refairetous les livres d'enseigne-
ment,qu'elle aurait remplid'un autre espritque celui qu'y peuvent
 mettretant de ridicules et ignorans compilateurs,de celui en fin
 qui seraiten harmonieavec nos moeurs,nos lois, et notregouverne-
 ment". M. de Pommereulreturnsto thisdemandon theUniversity
 on anotheroccasion, attackingits inactivityin spite of its "grand
 etat major de conseillers,d'inspecteurs,de recteurs,de proviseurs",
 etc. But in the fieldof historicalresearchhe foundon one occasion
 more activitythan he could approve of, when with grave distrust
 he passed M. Serlet's Histoire Critique des Re'volutionsRomaines
 depuis Romulus jusqu'a Auguste.
     Nous avons longtempslu l'histoireRomaine [remarksthe bulletin]
 avec une admirationpresque superstitieuse.     . . . Les tempssont ex-
 tremement    changes. Ce n'est plus un doute raisonnablequ'on essaie
 d'inspirer, c'est une satirequ'on en veut faire. Tous les recitssontdes
 fables. Nos docteursmodernesdans leurs lecons publiquesnientque
 Regulusse soitimmolea sa patrie,commesi cet acte de devouement,    vrai
 ou faux,n'etaitpas toujoursune admirablelecon a donneraux eleves.
 . . . qu'y a-t-ildonc a gagnerpour nos descendantsa vouloirleur per-
 suaderque tantd'actesd'heroismet de vertun'ontpointeu lieu? Cette
 critiqueindiscretet tropfacileme paraitun des plus grandstraversde
 l'espritde nos nouveauxpedagogues.
      For my presentpurpose the exercise of the censorshipin the
 interestsof religion and moralitymay be classed as educational.
        Censorshipand Literature under Napoleon I.              303

But it is a large additionalfieldof activity,evokingfrequentinter-
ventions,and can only be glanced at. Here the censorshipcannot
be accused of bigotedor devotionaltendencies,its spiritbeing rather
the secularizingspirit of the eighteenthcentury,temperedby the
conditionsestablishedthroughBonaparte'srestorationof the Church.
Harmony between the new Charlemagneand his pope had indeed
long since departed,but the State for statesmanlikereasons con-
tinuedto demand respectfor the Church,and to uphold its place as
one of the chief props of societyand government. In the fieldof
morals the austere and pedagogical Portalis was much more severe
than his older and more militarysuccessor; both the ministerand
the Emperor however seem to have intervenedin the later period
against a policy that was charged with being Puritanic. As we
should expect,it is M. Portalis who is particularlyconcernedto up-
hold the Churchas the basis of moralityand an indispensableprop
to Society and the State. He even enterson the Herculean labor
of keepingthe novel of the day in line with decencyand safe theol-
ogy. " Les romans", he says, " sont la bibliotheque des anti-
chambres,et si elle est infesteede declamationscontrela croyance
salutaire d'une Providence divine, ses lecteurspauvres et violents
et sfirsde l'impunite,seront des sots, comme le dit tres bien Vol-
taire, s'ils n'assassinentpas leurs maitrespour voler leur argent".
Seizures and confiscationsof obscene books and prints are fre-
quentlyreferredto. A manuscriptis reportedas shorn of "quel-
ques details obscenes", while in anotherthe author is required to
cast a veil "sur des nudites trop revoltantes" (the veil which one
ingenious writer attemptedto furnish by writingonly the first
lettersof his objectionablewords was not regardedby M. Portalis
as sufficiently   opaque). Another romance is prohibited on the
ground of immoralityin allowing the adventuresof two rogues to
be wound up by a happy and prosperous marriage; "Le roman
n'est precisementobscene,mais il est au moins d'une tres mauvaise
moralite. C'est le vice menant"aun etat prospere."
    The learned MI. Lenoir in his Histoire des Arts eniFrantce,too
 engrossedin his researchesto have noticed that the revolutionary
 tone was no longerin fashion,had permittedhimself.tomnake    slight-
 ing referencesto divinityas " une inventionde l'ignorance", as also
to the great legislatorsof mankind.
    On l'a priede modifier ces locutionsqui attaquentl'existencede Dieu,
l'immortalite de l'ame,et le respectdu au legislateur. On peutdans un
ouvragede philosophiedisputerles pointsles plus importants     de la re-
ligionnaturelle,mais il ne fautpas dans un livrepour ainsi dire popu-
laire glisserdes maximescontraires'a des dogmesqui n'appartiennent
pas moinsa la sociabilitequ'a la religion.
304                        Victor Coffin

The criticismof manuscriptsin the fields of dogma or religious
philosophywas furnishedby an ecclesiastic of decided Gallican
convictions,and he was instructedto hold an even course between
maintainingrespectfor religiousthingsand encouragingmysticism
or excessive piety. The frequentlyexpressed apprehensionas to
mysticism(we mightalso say as to undue piety) is perhaps pecu-
liarly French; a religious revival was however making headway,
and therewere good political reasons for not encouragingit. The
Souvenirs Continuels de 1'Jternite'by M. Lasausse, described by
the Director General as an "espece de missionaire'a l'imagination
bouillante", was suppressedbecause the authorhad addressed him-
self con arnore to the task of terrifyingthe frivolous and was
thoughtlikely to have much success. Another and more philo-
sophical book on the same subject was passed with the contemptu-
ous remark,"Lira qui pourra". A theological work in support
of the doctrineof the Immaculate Conception is prohibitedwith
the wish that "ces jongleries du i4e siecle" mightbe relegatedto
the age whichhad produced them; this particulardecisionthe min-
 ister did not accept, but forwardedthe manuscriptto the Ministre
 des Cultes. A treatiseon Divine Love is rejectedbecause contain-
 ing " des germesde quietismequi ne me paraissentpropresqu'a en-
 tretenirl'illusionde quelques faiblesimaginations"; in this case also
 theministerordersa new report. Les Anges Gardiensdes Hommes
 is in the Dutch language and the censor recordsthe fact with satis-
 faction,for in his opinion it is a homily,"la plus triste,la plus
 froide,la plus ennuyieusedont on ait pu s'aviser".
     It was to the fieldof belles-lettresthat most of the attentionof
 the censors was directed,and their literarycriticismsare often of
 very considerableinterest,more especially perhaps with regard to
 the origins of French romanticism. Of the iI6 manuscriptssub-
 mittedto the censorshipin the monthof April, I8I2, seventy-six
 were literary;we may probablyregardthis as a representativepro-
 portion. Even when not consideredobjectionablethese productions
  were describedin the bulletins,and the descriptionswere frequently
  accompanied by reflectionsas to the literaryconditionsand tend-
  encies of the day. The studentof public spirit in France will find
  here much informationconcerningpopular reading and the intel-
  lectualtastesand habitsof the period; thereare valuable indications
  also in the field of comparativeliterature. If space permittedit
  would be of interestto presentreferencesto and decisionsconcern-
  ing the lightliteratureof the day in a sufficientdegree to show not
                         but somethingof the literaryfashionsof the
  onlyits characteristics,
                  and Literature under Napoleon I.
        Censorshzip                                                      305

time,and of the conditionsunderwhichthe literaryartistwas work-
ing. Of the few notablebooks of these fouryears Mme. de Stael's
L'Allemagne is practicallythe onlyone dealt within these bulletins;
as the tribulationsof Mme. de Stael are well knownand as the for-
mal censorshipplayedonlya subordinater6le I will not lingeron the
episode.5 The productionof theperiodwas forthe mostpartunim-
portant,and this dearth of notable authorshipwas naturallyasso-
ciatedwitha strongtendencyto translationand withpopularsupport
of translations. One of the most interestinginstances is that of
Scott's Ladyi of the Lake, examined by the censorshipin two inde-
pendentversionsof the earlypartof I8I3 (the originalhad appeared
in I8Io).  M. de Pommereuldoes not attemptcorrections,but sol-
emnlyinformingtheministerthatthepoemdeals witheverything        that
is marvellousin a worldof knightsand fairies,adds, " L'imagination
 dans ce champ si vaste serait trop malheureusesi elle n'y trouvait
 pas de quoi interesser"; in which we may assume that he was not
 voicing national feelingbut was simplyexhibitinga lack of sym-
 pathy with the romanticschool. In the followingmonththere is
 recordedthe submissionof a translationfrom Schlegel of what is
 entitledCours de Litte'ratureDramatique,the originalof whichhad
 appeared in Germanyabout two years before. We are surprisedto
 findthe book passed withoutchange,in view of Schlegel's close asso-
 ciationwith MIme.de Stael and of the severe commentsnow made
 on the work by the Director General.
    Compositiontout-'a-fait germanique,des longueurs,du vague, une
metaphysique  obscure,des niaiseriesde pedant. Au traversde cette
bigarruredes observations  fines,une eruditionrare.... Schlegelparait
peu connaitrenos tragiquesfranqais,et dans ses elogesou ses censures
n'enditriende neufou de saillant,maisil denigreMoliereavecunmepris,
une betiseet une ignorance,dontl'exces va jusqu'au ridicule. Le Ciel
pour le punirde cette impertinence    semblelui avoir 6te le jugement
lorsqu'iltraitedu teatre anglais. Son idolatriepour Shakspearsest
pousse jusqu'au delire; aussi admire-t-ilbeaucoup Calderon qui lui
parait un petitShakespeare. M. Schlegel ne gate pas ses Allemands.
II peintassez naivement les vacillationsde leurtheatre,livretour-a-tour
a de platsimitateursou 'a des reveursincertainset chimeriques.
 The leniencyhere shownto Herr Schlegel was extendeda littlelater
 to a young author who " parait un eleve de l'ecole allemande tres-
 peu favorable'a notretheatre"; this was Guizot,thenin his twenlty-
 sixth year, and the Vie de Corneille which we see thus emerging
 from the jaws of death was perhaps his entryinto the world of
 authorship.
     5 Mme. de Stael's clashes with the censorship and the police will be found
 detailed by Welschinger,togetherwith the fortunesof some other notable authors.
306                        Victor Coffin

     In the variegatedarray of minor literaryproductionsthat the
bulletinsbringbeforeus the leadingplace was takenby effortsin the
fieldof romance. And it is to these romancesthat the criticaland
correctivelabors of the censorshipwere mainlydirected; Portalis in
particularwe have seen stronglyimpressedwith the necessityof
regulatingthis "reading of the antechamber". It is interestingto
findthat most of these romances are eithertranslationsor imita-
tions of the English,and that the species advancingmost rapidlyin
favor is the historical. This species however was decidedlynot in
favorwith eitherM. Portalis or M. de Pommereul. In November,
i8io, the formerlaboriouslydescribes the demeritsof a work of
imaginationwhich was masqueradingunder the title of Le Pessi-
misme ou le Fin du i8me Siecle; it is, he declares,in turn critical,
philosophical,moral,historical,and lewd, but particularlyobjection-
able because of its travestyof history. "On a pense . . . qu'il
n'appartient'a personnede meler des noms connus a des recitschi-
meriques, et que les malheurs des peres devaient etre pour leurs
enfansde serieuseslecons et non l'objet d'un vain amusement". At
a later period M. de Pommereulimpolitelyrefersto a romance as
"de l'espece batarde qui n'est ni l'histoireni le roman et qu'on dit
historique". Translation from and imitationsof Mrs. Radcliffe,
Miss Edgeworth,and other Britishstory-tellersfrequentlyappear,
and the originals are usually referredto with respect. There is
some translationfromthe German,but it is usually into Dutch for
consumptionin Holland. Such a book is Le Chevalierde la Ve'rite,
describedas "tres plat mais sans danger"; the directoradds, "II
parait que la Hollande fourmillede traducteursqui pillenttoutes
les litteraturesvoisines, et qu'elle fournitpeu d'ecrivains dans sa
langue qui sachenttirerleurs ouvrages de leur propre fond". The
romancesof Germanoriginare evidentlytoo heavy to be used in the
original,but theyseem to be makingheadway in adaptationsor imi-
tations. A proposof L'Anneau Lumineux outles Misteresde l'Orient,
the bulletinremarks," Des noirceurset des monstrositesAnglaises,
notrelegeretenous faitpasser a la melancholieallemande". To this
melancholycategoryprobablybelonged the romance by Mme. de
Rome, the most of which was taken up by the heroine's recital of
her misfortunes  to the daughterof her jailor, and the onlyadmirable
featureof whichin the censor's opinionis the patienceexhibitedby
the jailor's daughter. The last bulletinof the series, of January,
 I8I4, refersto Sindall et Annesly ou le Fatux Ami, as a "roman
traduit de l'allemand. Sans vraisemblance comme sans interet,
remplijusqu'a satietede maximestrivialeset de ces details insipides
        Censorshizand Li/eratureunderNaIpoleonI.              307

que les Allemands sont habitues 'a prendrepour du naturel et que
nos ecrivains,je ne dis pas nos auteurs,s'empressentde copier faute
de talentet d'imagination. La traductionest devenue un metier,et
celui qui nuit la plus au maintiendu gofit." M. de Pommereul
seems to the last unconsciousthat theremay be any connectionbe-
tween this deplorable conditionof things and the activityof the
officeover whichhe was presiding.
     Among the literaryfashionsof the period that are indicatedin
the bulletinsis, we are surprisedto learn, a demand for books on
Mme. de Maintenon; " I1 est", we are told, " a la mode d'en parler
et de la vanter". The output of poetryseems slight and the di-
rector'sremarksabout specimenssubmittedare usually disrespect-
ful. M. Cantalou would publish Oeuvres Poe'tiques et Lyriques;
he is allowed to, but the censor crosslyremarksthat he has made a
mistake in the title for there is nothingin the book remotelyre-
semblinga poem or a lyric. A producerof Pensees Tristes is de-
 scribedas a poet who has lost his mistressand been thrownthereby
 into a melancholythat he labors to make interestingand profitable;
 " mais les grandeset veritablesdouleurssont muets". A translation
 of selectionsfrom Pope is received with an amiabilitythat is ex-
 ceptional,and with some remarks on the literaryconnectionsbe-
 tween France and England that are of interest. "Voltaire est le
 premierqui ait fait connaitrePope en France. Depuis ce temps
 Le Tourneur nous familiarisaavec Young et Shakspeare comme
 Prevot nous avait fait gofiterRichardson, mais c'est l'emigration
 pendant la revolutionet le retour des emigres qui a surtout fait
 parminous la fortunede la litteratureanglaise".
     I have perhapsyieldedsomewhatto a natural tendencyto dwell
  disproportionately on the trivialitiesand illiberalitiesof these re-
  ports. A more extended survey would reveal much sound sense.
  But it is not necessaryto moralize on this episode in the historyof
  censorship. As censorshipsgo it was perhaps on the whole not a
  very bad one, and it may be doubted whetherthe literatureand
  learningof the First Empire would have been distinguishedunder
  any conditions. Sober thought and modest worth were not in
  fashion; the imaginativefaculties were dulled or satiated amidst
  the engrossingmarvelsof every-dayfact. Literaturewill be trivial
  when men think it such, and public spirit cannot endure without
  ideals. France under Napoleon had lost the sense of proportion,
  and France paid the penaltyin various ways.
      It was in May, 1813, between two German battle-days,that
   Count Beugnot,fallinginto conversationwiththe Emperoron these
308                        Victor Coffin

matters,suddenlyfoundhimselfviolentlyreproachedwithbeing one
of those " ideologues" who would have freedomof the press and
other such excesses of revolutionarydays. And puttinghis hand
to the hilt of his sword, Napoleon cried, " Tant que celle-la pendra
a mon c6te,et puisse-t-elley pendreencore longtemps,vous n'aurez
aucune des libertesapres lesquelles vous soupirez". That sword
was brokenwithinthe year,and on April 3, I8I4, the Senate which
had accepted all the tyranniesof the regimeand which had never
once dared to use the defensesof freedomthatthe Constitutionhad
pretendedto endow it with,passed solemnlyan Act of Deposition
which in its recital of these tyranniesdeclared that Napoleon had
" constammentsoumise'a la censurearbitrairede la police,la liberte
de la presse, etablie et consacree comme l'un des droits de la na-
tion". It was not an accurate statement,and the Senate had no
rightto utter a reproach; before the end of the year these same
senatorshad joined in the setting-upof the censorshipof the Res-
toration.
                                               VICTOR COFFIN.
