

Schroeder was certainly interested in getting the two fields to talk to each other and learn from each other, and to do so, he felt that he had to try to understand, and react seriously to, the most fundamental ideas put forward by IR theorists. It was in that spirit that he published an important article called “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Realist Theory” (1994).[5] He dealt with “a question seldom if ever discussed, yet clearly important for international historians and arguably also for international relations theorists, namely, whether neo-realist theory [the theory developed by Kenneth Waltz and his followers] is adequate and useful as an explanatory framework for the history of international politics in general, over the whole Westphalian era from 1648 to 1945, the period in which the validity of a realist paradigm of some sort is widely accepted even by non-realists.”[6] To get at that issue, he examined four neorealist “theses or generalizations” in the light of the historical evidence; three of them had to do with the balance of power.[7] The main conclusion he drew from that study was hard to miss. Neorealism, he said—or at least the neorealism of Kenneth Waltz, which was the main focus of his analysis—“purports to predict and explain the persistent strong tendency toward balance in the system,” but Waltz’s claims did not stand up to historical analysis: “the more one examines Waltz’s historical generalizations about the conduct of international politics throughout history with the aid of the historian’s knowledge of the actual course of history, the more doubtful—in fact, strange—these generalizations become.”[8] The balance of power mechanism, he argued, was not nearly as powerful as neo-realists like Waltz seemed to think. He ended the article by advising historians “not to adopt the neo-realist paradigm”—and by advising theorists “not to assume that the facts of international history” supported it.[9]

That article led to a sharp rejoinder from two political scientists, Colin Elman and Miriam Fendius Elman. In a long letter to the editor of the journal in which Schroeder’s article had appeared, the Elmans complained about his “unfortunate conflation of neo-realism with Waltz’s Theory of International Politics.” They criticized him for equating self-help with balancing (whereas in reality, in their view, self-help was a much broader concept). And they charged him with misunderstanding even Waltz’s theory (Schroeder, they said, had incorrectly assumed that the theory should explain processes and not just outcomes, and had mistakenly claimed that Waltz believed that “balances of power operate everywhere and at all times”).[10]

Schroeder’s reply was quite extraordinary. He essentially threw up his hands in frustration and announced that he would “not discuss neo-realist theory further, at least not in this journal.” He did not resent what the Elmans had written, he said, but he did regret “the great amount of time and trouble (unprecedented in my experience) which proved to be involved in publishing an article which has little connection with and no profit for my main work.” He had “heard from a number of historians about the article.” Some of them had “said in effect, ‘Why do you bother? You know this kind of theory does historians no good.’” Schroeder himself had long believed “that this attitude was wrong in regard to IR theory in general, including many of the theories generated by or spun off from neo-realism.” But he had now come to the conclusion that the historians who took that view were right. This exchange with the Elmans had convinced him “more than ever that neo-realist theory in general has little to offer the historian. It addresses only questions, the answers to which we knew already, and its explanatory framework is the night in which all cows are black.” “I attacked Waltzian neo-realism,” he said, “because I believed that it was a coherent, influential theory which had something definite to say about history, which could be falsified and should be. But neo-realism in general as the Elmans present it is not a coherent theory; one could apply to it the verdict of the physicist Wolfgang v. Pauli: ‘Not even wrong.’ Hence, I will devote myself from now on to the history of international politics, and leave neo-realists to deal with the results, or ignore them, as they see fit.”[11]