

All of this was bound to make one wonder what the real issue here was, and in particular about how all this talk about balancing was related to the core question of whether the basic structure of the international system—that is, its anarchic structure—made for war, as Waltz and other leading neo-realists claimed. Schroeder himself came to see that the kind of empirical analysis he had done in the “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Realist Theory” article was not a very effective way of dealing with this issue. The basic problem here, he concluded, was conceptual in nature. Even on a theoretical level, he now argued, the behavior of states in an anarchic world could not be seen, in essence, as a “simple and straightforward struggle for power for purposes of survival and security.” An important countervailing force was bound to come into play: “The same structure of anarchy that compels units that wish to survive and flourish in the international system to engage in a perennial struggle for power likewise drives them with equal force to engage in a perennial quest for order.”[23]

This provided him not just with an important framework for thinking about international politics on a grand scale, but it also gave him a kind of springboard for talking about some very basic questions about how international politics was changing over time. For he did not think that the system should be viewed as a never-ending tug of war between these two tendencies, with neither of them ever getting the upper hand for long. He believed that over the long term, the need for order was winning out and would prevail in the end. He believed, that is, that there was real progress in history—that history was actually “going somewhere.” Order was being built; power politics was coming to an end; and, indeed, the historian had a role to play in this process. “It is time for historians, especially international historians,” he felt, “to recognize that the age of classic international politics, governed by the structural determinants of anarchy, self-help, and balance of power, is over—even if some leaders and states in some corners of the world do not yet recognize it, and even if the exact dimensions and contours of the new system are not fully clear. What is clear is the duty and opportunity of historians to join in the investigation, to help show how this decisive change came about, to uncover its deeper roots—in short to write the history of international politics as it is, the story of long-term structural change.”[24]

Historians had a duty to deal with these issues? Schroeder himself, as someone who did “not believe that the indefinite continuation of ‘realist’ power politics in the nuclear age” was “rational or tolerable,” obviously felt he personally had a moral obligation to concern himself with these questions.[25] That point came through even more clearly in a piece he had published in the Journal of the Society of Christian Ethics in 2004.[26] But was that the right sort of attitude for an historian to have? Otte, for one, finds that approach somewhat problematic. He recognizes that the moral tone Schroeder often took gave his arguments a “special power.” But he also notes a certain “tendency towards vituperation whenever individual powers are seen to have deviated from the correct, system-conforming course of action.”