

But Schroeder’s emphasis on norms and moral values, as opposed to material factors, meant that his whole approach was almost bound to have that kind of flavor. Indeed, for him it was the system’s “rules, practices, norms, aims, and constitutive procedures,” and not, for example, the distribution of military capabilities or economic resources, that defined its structure.[27] And Schroeder’s emphasis on norms was a hallmark of his work. As Levy points out, Schroeder explained the success of the Vienna settlement in terms of the new norms and rules it established; this, Levy writes, “constitutes his most influential and enduring contribution to historiography and perhaps to international relations theory.”

For de Graaf that emphasis on norms and rules is probably the most appealing aspect of Schroeder’s work. Schroeder might have been a highly skilled practitioner of traditional diplomatic history, but he also helped open the way for new approaches—those that emphasize “cultural practices, norms, institutions and more constructivist approaches to international relations.” He “anticipated a more constructivist and linguistic approach to international relations by trying to follow the way in which ‘principles,’ ‘rules,’ and ‘discourse’ were developed through time. In short, with his seminal The Transformation of European Politics he waved goodbye to the ahistorical and oftentimes anachronistic understanding of the ‘states system,’ and opened up new vistas into deconstructing genealogies of state interests and international alliances.”

It was perhaps ironic that someone as conservative as Schroeder—someone who believed so strongly in the autonomy of diplomatic history as a field of inquiry—would leave this kind of legacy. But when scholars follow their own instincts in trying to make sense of the past, they can never be quite sure where their efforts will lead—and that’s part of what makes historical work so rewarding.

* * *

The forum begins with some personal remarks about Paul Schroeder by Robert Jervis, which were written after the rest of the forum had been completed. The Jervis comment, I think, gives an exceptionally good feel for what Schroeder was like, both as a scholar and as a person.

Participants:

Marc Trachtenberg is a Research Professor of Political Science at the University of California at Los Angeles. He is the author of several books and many articles dealing mostly with twentieth century international politics. Those writings (with direct links to full-text versions, when available) are listed on his c.v.: http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/polisci/faculty/trachtenberg/cv/cv.html. He is also the author of The Craft of International History: A Guide to Method (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006), which was designed to help younger scholars learn how to do work in this area.

Robert Jervis, Adlai E. Stevenson Professor of International Politics at Columbia University, is the Founding Editor of ISSF. He is a member of the American Philosophical Society and the National Academy of Sciences. His most recent book is How Statesmen Think (Princeton University Press, 2017).