

A more specific example of traditional IR’s excessive stress on force is its conception of alliances as aggregating strength. This indeed can be the function of alliances, but they are at least as often instruments by which states restrain their partners. Sometimes the restraint is multilateral, which was the case with the Concert— these states minimized the degree to which they would act unilaterally, or if not acting jointly at least being careful to give due weight to the others’ interests and standing. In other cases, the main function may be to restrain one particular partner, an argument that has been embraced by several IR scholars.[41]

In 1999 Colin and Miriam Elman brought together historians and IR scholars to discuss how their respective disciplines analyze historical problems and episodes. For the resulting book, Paul and I were tasked with writing the concluding chapters.[42] In my draft, which was finished before Paul had started his, I argued that many historians fell into the trap of what I thought was moralizing in seeing the past through the lens of current concerns and values. I did not mean to include Paul in this category, and as I expected he realized this. What surprised me, however, was the argument, made in his chapter and explained even more strongly in conversation, that historians should render moral judgments. Tearing down the habits and norms that sustained well-functioning systems deserved to be not only explained, but condemned. Dead leaders were no longer able to defend themselves or to be held accountable by their peers or constituents. It was then up to historians to do so. As Otte indicates, “The often moral tone of his assessments…. lends them a special power. But it also encourages his tendency toward vituperation whenever individual powers are seen to have deviated from the correct, system conforming course of action.” I would not disagree, but I think that for Paul this was not a bug, but an essential part of the program, if I can use this well-worn phrase. These judgments were not the only purpose of writing history, but they were central to it because as historians and citizens we have the duty to render moral judgments. International behavior being what it is, vituperation often is merited.

It is important that his explanations and judgments were deeply informed by his approach as an historian. By this I mean that he not only examined states’ policies and behavior but asked how they had arrived in the position they were in and then had faced the available choices. One fine example is a paragraph that I continue to find extraordinarily illuminating in which Paul recasts the traditional argument about the balance of responsibility between Napoléon and the kings of Prussia and Austria for the resumption of the war:

I find it inexplicable that good historians can simply assert what is technically true, that Prussia started the war of 1806 or Austria that of 1809, and not ask themselves what could have induced so timorous and irresolute a king as Frederic William III, eager only to enjoy further peace and neutrality, to gamble everything on war against the French? Or what could make so narrow-minded and fearful a sovereign as Emperor Francis, whose highest ambition was to hang on to his hereditary estates in peace and who had been thoroughly beaten by France in three great wars, throw the iron dice again alone and unsupported in 1809? That demands explanation.[43]