

A Bird’s-eye Perspective on the European States System

In short, Schroeder’s work has spread its wings wide over Europe, and has touched upon the outer-European world to sketch one of the most comprehensive and deep historical visions of the European states system so far. Even so, a close-reading the sources and the introduction of more non-European, colonial sources to the post-1815 period would reveal it to be an even more transformative period in European and global politics than Schroeder has made it out to be through his bird’s-eye perspective of 1994. Moreover, ‘touching down’ from that systemic perspective would have revealed a far more emotive content to the international system than Schroeder allowed for. This international system was never a technocratic ‘system,’ it was a world, imbued with deep experiences of trauma and new horizons of expectations, where new languages of security, balance, moderation, and empire emerged out of the ashes of the Global Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. It was a world that did not end as a system in 1822, nor in 1848,[65] but transformed itself, and was constantly reconfigured, as a system of conflict and security, of empire and revolution throughout the long nineteenth century. The various ministerial conferences, ambassadorial meetings,[66] the making of international law, and the inter-imperial ‘rage for order’ initiated by the empires of Europe did not cease to exist, but in fact spread across the world and intensified in scope and impact up until the First World War and beyond, when European ambitions and emotions set the world in flames once again.

# Essay by Jack S. Levy, Rutgers University

The passing of Paul W. Schroeder is an enormous loss for scholarly communities that are engaged in the study of international relations, as well as a personal loss for all those who had the good fortune of knowing him. Schroeder was a brilliant and innovative historian who repeatedly challenged the conventional wisdom regarding the historiography of Europe from the mid-eighteenth to the early twentieth century. He wrote on an extensive variety of historical subjects, but his writings demonstrate a remarkable thematic unity across those subjects. Schroeder developed his often contrarian arguments with impeccable logic, supported them with careful attention to detail based on an incomparable command of primary and secondary sources, and presented them with elegant prose and a literary flair. Schroeder has had, and his work will continue to have, a profound impact on our understanding of European history. As H.M. Scott writes, “eighteenth- and nineteenth-century international history will never look the same again.”[67] T.C.W. Blanning describes Schroeder’s book on The Transformation of European Politics, 1763-1848[68] as “one of the towering achievements of modern historical scholarship” by “the greatest international historian of our age.”[69]

I leave a more detailed assessment of Schroeder’s many contributions to historiography to the two distinguished historians contributing to this Forum. I focus instead on some of Schroeder’s many and varied contributions to the field of International Relations (IR). Schroeder was well-versed in the IR literature and drew on it effectively in his historical writings.[70] He used theory “only to illuminate particular developments rather than the other way round,”[71] but in fact Schroeder made important contributions to theory development in the IR field. Examples include his theoretical analysis of concert systems, his critique of neorealist balance of power theory, and his analysis of the role of alliances as instruments of intra-alliance management.[72] Schroeder published articles in leading IR journals and edited volumes, and he often participated in meetings of the International Studies Association and the American Political Science Association.[73] His extensive contributions to theories of conflict and cooperation in international politics require me to be selective. I begin with Schroeder’s systems orientation and his view of international history and politics as an autonomous field of study. I then turn to his critique of balance of power theory and his conceptualization of alliances of tools of management and influence, and then to his argument about the transformation from an eighteenth-century balance of power system to a nineteenth century concert system. I end with a discussion of Schroeder’s sometimes neglected discussions of issues in qualitative methodology.[74]