

This is a good note on which to end. Students of international relations have benefited enormously from Paul Schroeder’s many books and articles. Schroeder was an IR theorist as well as an historian. IR scholars are particularly grateful that Schroeder found the time to interact with many of us at the annual meetings of our leading associations and at more focused workshops. We will miss him greatly, but we will never stop learning from his scholarly work. If IR scholarship were as well-grounded in international history as Schroeder’s historical analysis was informed by IR theory, our understanding of international relations would be significantly enhanced.

# Essay by T.G. Otte, University of East Anglia

Paul W. Schroeder and the Nineteenth-Century International System, or Viewing the World from the Windows of the Ballhausplatz

I cannot pretend to have known Paul Schroeder, who died at the end of last year.[122] His work, of course, has long been familiar to me, as it must be familiar to any international historian. We met only once, at a conference in the mid-2000s. Its ostensible purpose was to examine the uses of the Schroederian systemic approach to the study of nineteenth-century international history. I struck a somewhat discordant, or sceptical, note – much to the horror of the conference organizers and some of the attendees. The object of my gentle barbs took my feeble attempt at iconoclasm in good humour: “Most of my British friends think that it doesn’t work.”

***

My scepticism, in whatever soil it may be rooted, does not diminish my respect for the brilliance of Paul Schroeder’s scholarship. Few knew old Europe as intimately as he did, few in North America and scarcely more in Europe. His work on the Metternichian period and the origins of the Crimean War established a new standard for studying Habsburg and European affairs in the first half of the long nineteenth century.[123] His later magnum opus on great power politics between the end of the Seven Years’ War and the great European revolutions of 1848 became an instant classic, on a par with A.J.P. Taylor’s Struggle for Mastery, which covered the period after 1848, though it preceded Schroeder’s study by four decades.[124]

Taylor wrote from a radical liberal, nonconformist perspective that reflected his own North Country background and upbringing. For all his mastery of the intricacies of European diplomacy, he looked askance at this Hobbesian theatre of egotistical (and ultimately foolish) struggles between states. Schroeder’s perspective was quite different, altogether more conservative and focused on order and stability.[125] He emphasized the ability of governments to learn practical lessons from the destruction wrought by Napoleon’s wars and to embrace the need for a new regime of collective security. Taylor saw in Klemens von Metternich a shallow cynic and a hypocrite, who “[i]n the usual way of statesmen who rule over a decaying empire, … urged others to preserve the Austrian monarchy for their own good. He invented an ‘Austrian mission’.”[126] Schroeder, by contrast, and perhaps oddly for a devout Lutheran, took that ‘Austrian mission’ more seriously; he approved of the Austrian Chancellor’s efforts to preserve order and peace.[127]