

Realist History

The first of his critiques along these lines that attracted wide attention was his critique of realist history that used the concept of the balance of power. His analysis of the balance of power was not confined solely to the concept, but extended to generalizations about the balance of power both within diplomatic history and especially within IR theory. Writing in 1994 in the realist-sympathetic journal, International Security, he lambasted political scientists, specifically Kenneth Waltz, for seeing the balancing of power as a law.[150] States, including great powers, responded to bids for hegemony in a variety of ways. They did not just balance, they hid, joined the stronger side, or tried to transcend the problem by creating a different order.[151] Nor is it the case that when they did resist, they did so for realist concerns about shifts in power. He said that states resisted Napoléon Bonaparte not because of the logic of the balance of power, but because he continuously attacked them and they had no choice but to defend themselves: “They resisted because France kept on attacking them.”[152]

Looking at what today we would call the neorealist narrative of international history, he concluded:

The more one examines Waltz’s historical generalizations about the conduct of international politics throughout history with the aid of the historian’s knowledge of the actual course of history, the more doubtful—in fact, strange—the generalizations become…I cannot construct a history of the European state system from 1648 to 1945 based on the generalization that most unit actors within that system responded to crucial threats to their security and independence by resorting to self-help, as defined above. In the majority of instances this just did not happen.[153]

When I first read his piece, it hit me like a bombshell. It confirmed what I had long suspected that realist theoretical lenses were driving what scholars were seeing and that a more critical perspective would see things more precisely. This did not mean that there were no patterns, but that the realist pattern was not the only one, nor necessarily the correct one. Schroeder’s piece was to play a central role in my philosophy of science critique of the neo-realist research program.[154]

Schroeder was a breath of fresh air. At that stage of my career I had not delved deeply into reading specialized histories, and the standard works that I read on European history, like A.J.P. Taylor, were very conventional, and often used realist assumptions and concepts, like the balance of power and national interests, to carry the story along without any real or careful explication of whether these were causally appropriate or historically accurate propositions.[155] As an IR theorist who was critical of realism, I felt that too many of the conventional historians were applying realist concepts to make a narrative rather than deriving these concepts from patterns they saw in the historical record,[156] unlike Hans Morgenthau who insisted that this is what he had done.[157]