

Thus far I have talked about Schroeder’s lasting contributions to the historiography of European international relations and to theories of cooperation and conflict. It is worth noting, however, that Schroeder also made some methodological contributions that might be easy to miss in the larger body of his work. Among other things, he had some important and interesting things to say about counterfactual analysis. Although he showed little interest in using counterfactuals to explore potential “what if’s” in history for their own sake, he was more enthusiastic about using counterfactual analysis “to shed light on what actually did happen, why it did, and what it means.”[114]

As to how to use historical counterfactuals to shed light on causality in the real world, Schroeder departed from the standard approach to counterfactuals. That approach basically asks if the outcome would have been different if actors had made different decisions or if certain events, like a failed assassination, had turned out differently. This leads some historians to argue that counterfactual analysis is inherently a method for supporting an anti-determinist and contingent world view.[115] Schroeder turned the question upside down, and asked about the conditions that would have been necessary for alternative outcomes to occur.[116] He applied this method quite effectively to the question of the outbreak of the First World War, and concludes that the war was unavoidable.[117] He was hardly the first scholar to reach this conclusion, but his method and the logic of his argument is unique. Schroeder’s approach also demonstrated that counterfactual analysis as a method contains no inherent biases towards contingency in human affairs, though particular applications of the method may do so.

The argument that the First World War was unavoidable led Schroeder to ask another question that has received far too little attention. If the First World War was unavoidable because of underlying conditions pushing towards war, and if those conditions had been in place for several years, how do we explain the fact that the numerous pre-war crises did not escalate to a great power war? Why was the First World War delayed for so long despite the presence of propitious conditions for a general war? Schroeder contends that the real question was not “Why World War I? but “Why not?” He argued that “the wars that did not occur . . . [are] harder to explain that the one that did.”[118] Schroeder asked these critical questions about the First World War nearly a half century ago, and they have yet to be answered satisfactorily.[119]

I could say more about Schroeder’s important and relatively unique interpretation of the outbreak of the First World War, but I limit this discussion by looking at Schroeder’s first study of the war in 1972. This was a response to Joachim Remak’s article entitled “The Third Balkan War,” which argued that the war originated from a series of localized Austro-Serbian disputes in the Balkans.[120] Consistent with the systemic orientation that was to characterize nearly all of his subsequent work, Schroeder rejected Remak’s localized war interpretation and argued that World War I was the product of a systemic crisis. This interpretation is nicely captured by the main title of Schroeder’s article, “World War I as Galloping Gertie.” This was the popular name for a bridge that collapsed a few months after it was built in 1940, when a wind-induced swaying of the bridge led to self-amplifying pressures and eventually the buckling of the bridge. Schroeder described the “intertwined and interacting forces” as follows: “the very devices built into a system to keep it stable and operative under stress, subjected to intolerable pressures, generate forces of their own which cause the system to destroy itself.”[121] This statement applies equally well to Schroeder’s assessment of the balance of power system of the late eighteenth-century (or of any period, for that matter).