

The external relations of states were not dependent on other systems. They were not functions of societal processes or side-products of economic developments. The French Revolution after 1792 serves as a useful case study here, for the course of events in France and the dynamics within the revolutionary regimes were affected, indeed determined, by international events.[129] Post-Napoleonic international politics became more stable, stability itself now being seen as a key strategic objective. International morality also improved. Interstate robberies, so common in the eighteenth century, were now frowned upon. Here, incidentally, Schroeder’s arguments are problematic, and underline the extent to which his own reading of the Vienna settlement forms a sort of Procrustean bed for earlier periods. Certainly, as Ragnhild Hatton and others have sought to demonstrate, notions of a “Society of Europe,” underpinned by understandings of what would later be called collective security, were highly developed before 1815.[130]

If Schroeder was conversant with International Relations theories, he nevertheless had his own quite distinct definition of an international system. It was filtered, it seems, through Michael Oakeshott’s ideas about constituent practices of politics.[131] In this manner, Schroeder developed the idea of “shared rules” and “collective understandings” about the conduct of international politics as the determinants of a “system.”[132] This is the key to the Schroederian “systemic approach,” which makes it simultaneously less rigid and yet more resilient than, perhaps, many standard IR concepts; and in this it may well prove to be more fruitful for historians and political scientists alike. In essence, it is people who make any system work; and “the international system changes when enough persons change their minds about it.”[133]

So far, so good. The necessity of ‘systemic analysis’ is easy to stipulate. Its practical application is more difficult to accomplish. It is worth noting that Schroeder himself was less interested in examining how change came about, and, even more so, that he was by no means consistent in his analytical approach even within the same work. Thus, in the introduction to Transformation of European Politics, he defined his version of systemic analysis as

simply a consistent attempt to determine not only how the game of international politics turned out and how the decisions, policies, and actions of individual states led to that outcome, but also how these individual policies and actions were shaped and limited by the shared rules and understandings, and how these collective understandings were in turn challenged and altered … by violations or different versions of the rules.

Only consideration of this kind of systemic analysis, Schroeder contended, could reveal “the restraints and possibilities which … the prevailing ‘system’ imposes.”[134] If this more supple understanding implied that historical scholarship consisted of some sort of parsing of the grammar of past international politics, Schroeder himself did not consistently adhere to it. When discussing the effects of the Peace of Paris of 30 May 1814 and the gradual emergence of a post-Napoleonic international constellation, for instance, he referred to the “system’s members … consist[ing] of two world powers, more invulnerable than ever; three major Continental powers, distinctly weaker and more vulnerable; and a host of smaller intermediary bodies.”[135] This appears no longer to be a system defined as a category of thought and action, but rather a real-world phenomenon.