

What exactly constituted a balance in general goods, however, could have been more precisely specified. The closest he came to this was saying an equilibrium involved a common meeting ground or a “balance of status and satisfactions.”[180]

If his analysis had stopped with that essay, his contribution would most likely not have had the impact it eventually did, at least within IR theory proper. This is because while it was clear that a political equilibrium is not based on Realpolitik balancing power through the use of power politics, it is not so obvious what a political equilibrium is or how it is brought about.

The Vienna Peace Settlement

All this was cleared up by Schroeder pointing to what this equilibrium was in history. For him the political equilibrium he had in mind was what was embodied in the Concert of Europe and the Vienna settlement. Once he moved in this direction he made a new and many ways more far-reaching contribution to both IR theory and the diplomatic history of Europe. Of course, the Concert was nothing new to Schroeder, since his second book was on Prince Klemens von Metternich’s policy following the Congress of Vienna.[181] What was new was his emphasis on linking the Concert with his idea of political equilibrium in contrast to the balance of power.[182]

Two publications embodied this contribution—the 1992 essay, “Did the Vienna Settlement Rest on a Balance of Power” and the major book, The Transformation of European Politics, 1763-1848.[183] For Schroeder the Vienna Settlement “rose not from a balance of power but from a mutual consensus on norms, rules, respect for law, and an overall balance among the various actors in terms of rights, security, status, claims, duties and satisfactions rather than power.”[184] The actual settlement lived on beyond the specific agreements in the informal institution of the Concert of Europe that can be seen as the embodiment of that political equilibrium.

The Concert can be seen as having three norms.[185] The first according to James Richardson,[186] was that it provided a framework for the territorial arrangement of Europe after the Napoleonic War. The second norm ruled out any unilateral change in the status quo,[187] and created the principle of conference diplomacy—any of the major states could call a conference to deal with an international problem and “…no power could refuse an international conference….”[188] This norm entailed that the Concert make decisions on the basis of what was in the collective interest of all the major states in contrast to the unilateral resort to force and power politics to get one’s way. The five great powers decided the great European questions and thus acted as collective rulers–“the Directory of Europe.”[189] Third, there was the well-known conservative norm, that they would be opposed to revolution,[190] underscored by their restoring the Bourbons to power. This norm would later lead to a split in the Concert between the three monarchical states–Austria, Russia, and Prussia–and liberal England and France. Of these three norms, the second, on conference diplomacy, was the most important and the most transformative.