

The Balance of Power Concept

Schroeder’s earliest theoretically oriented work was on the balance of power concept.[170] The classic piece was his 1989 argument that balancing language as actually used by decision makers and diplomats in nineteenth century did not correspond to the ways in which some scholars discussed the balance of power. While he made several points, four are particularly important for IR theory. First, he said, “explicit balance language was not used very much” and that “most of the time it seems to have been ignored.”[171] It should be noted Schroeder reached this conclusion after reading a large number of primary documents typically from 1850 to 1914 (see his impressive appendix). Second, important events that should have provoked a discussion of the balance did not. He listed numerous examples in note 14, like Austria’s loss of Venetia or the correspondence in the 1890’s on the formation of the Russo-French alliance.

Third, he maintained that a central rule of the balance of power—that the independence of states, “be preserved—was often violated.”[172] Last, and reminiscent of Ernst Haas’ political science critique of the concept,[173] Schroeder listed the variety of uses and meanings, many contradictory, to which the concept was put. Unlike some political scientists, including myself, he did not conclude, that “the concept is useless.”[174] He maintained that the concept was useful, especially to historians because the idea had a history, and by implication scholars could trace how the idea was used and for what purpose. He also paraphrased Prince Talleyrand and said the idea was useful (to actors) because it was “a gift of God enabling men to conceal their thoughts.”[175] In other words it was a phrase that permitted political actors to justify [opportunistically] their policy in terms of an idea that was so elastic that it could “hide” a number of things. As Jeremey Black notes the very flexibility of the concept gives it value and utility.[176]

Schroeder concluded his study on the Nineteenth Century balance of power by saying that one of the meanings sometimes associated with the idea of balance of power was the idea of “political equilibrium,” and he advocated that this concept be substituted for the concept of the balance of power. He recognized that such a phrase might be just as vague and subject to manipulation, but he also maintained that it better captured what actors actually sought; namely that a stable international system “depended mainly not on balancing power against other power but balancing other vital factors.”[177] In fact, he maintained “that pure balance of power politics destroys political equilibrium rather than sustains it.”[178] Later in the essay he affirmed,

The balance statesmen usually envisioned and sought, however, was not minimally a balance of power or based on power, operating by using the power of certain states to check others and keep anyone from growing too powerful or aggressive. It was instead a broader balance in general political conditions and goods, a political equilibrium.”[179]