

While this is the big picture, Schroeder’s book made a contribution because it remains the definitive study of the war: it researches specific points, and sifts through the archives, which means that the specific events one needs for a lecture or to clarify one’s own thinking can be located. For example, one question that bothered me was the precise role Stratford, the British Ambassador in Constantinople, played in the way the Sultan responded to the Vienna Note (which was a peace proposal to which all the major states had agreed as the Concert of Europe). The Note fell apart because the Sultan recommended amendments. I wanted to know: What was the role of Stratford in this debacle? Did he suggest that the Sultan take this tack? Did he deliberately undermine it as some, like the Queen and even Clarendon, the Foreign Secretary, worried? The answer provided was subtle and nuanced:

“Encouraged by Redcliffe’s private disapproval of the note, the Porte on August 19 demanded amendments to it…This demand for amendments…was tantamount to a rejection and blocked any settlement, while Redcliffe’s attitude encouraged the Turks to expect more Western support.”[216]

Here was the answer to my set of questions. Most importantly, Stratford did not “whisper” into the ear of the Sultan and actually suggest he offer amendments, rather the Sultan offered amendments because he knew Stratford disapproved of the Note and equally important, he knew that Stratford could be expected to get him more Western support.

One could make an argument that this book is probably Schroeder’s most important contribution to diplomatic history based on archival research. It is a book that one does not read through once, but continually consults as one is lecturing, writing and thinking about the case. Others have and will continue to produce books about this case that give very different interpretations, and are easier to read,[217] but they are unlikely to surpass it, first because of the depth of archival research and second because of the analytical skill with which he handles what he finds in the archives.

The second historical case where Schroeder made a major contribution was an area that was more competitive and intrinsically more intractable—1914. Here he made at least two major contributions, both of which were exercises of interpretation rather than a result of extensive archival investigation. The first was his “Galloping Gertie” essay[218]—one of the finest articles to make the case for the primacy of structure in bringing about war in general and war specifically in 1914. It was basically a think piece, cogently argued, using an analogy to the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington that fell due to internal pressures on the support structure produced by external winds.[219] Schroeder argued that:

the very devices built into a system to keep it stable and operative under stress, subjected to intolerable pressures, generate forces of their own that cause the system to destroy itself.[220]