

In other words, the structure of the system fell apart and brought about the war; the contingent actions of decision makers reacted to the structure falling apart and hence were secondary to the causal process that brought about the war. Schroeder then turned the question around from “Why World War I?” to why did it take so long for the system to break down or put more succinctly, “Why not until 1914?”[221] The remainder of the essay was a long review of specific policies by the major states and how they led Austria to take a desperate and ultimately self-destructive decision. This part of the essay is very much an historian’s answer to why the system collapsed and political scientists will generally prefer his more theoretical answer given elsewhere.

Schroeder’s theoretical answer was straightforward and built nicely on his work about the Concert of Europe. Basically, World War I for him was brought about because the collective rule of the Concert was abandoned by Russia in favor of more unilateral policies. Russia failed to sympathize with Austria’s nationalist problems and more importantly failed to see how this abandonment would break down the prevailing political order that had maintained the Vienna Peace System. Unable to gain satisfaction or gain security from a deadly threat, Austria turned to the use of force and with its ally sought to impose a solution through the use of force. Instead of a collective solution that would meet and satisfy the needs of all the major states, a unilateral solution was chosen. Schroeder derided Russia for the failure of Austria to gain security through collective rule. Schroeder painted this picture in several essays. He concluded his essay on the balance of power with a discussion of 1914 saying the war was a result of “the disappearance of political equilibrium” and with it the attempt to collectively balance rights and satisfactions.[222] Fifteen years later he explicitly indicted Russia.[223] Going back to the question in Galloping Gertie of why the peace lasted so long, Schroeder now asked not what decisions brought about the war, but told the reader to first find “what were the roots and sources of this long peace [1763-1914] and on that basis better explain its breakdown…” The answer was that “Russia defected” and had little concern for protecting Austria’s existence as a great power.[224] Russia failed to recognize let alone deal with Austria’s problem. Instead of seeing it as a problem for all the major states it went off on its own, and Austria did the same thing. Later he was more explicit and went into detail on how a breakdown of the international system led Austria to make the decision for war that it did in July 1914.[225] Here he placed Austria’s decision in a systemic context and saw the outbreak of the war as a result of a breakdown of the Vienna Peace System.

Schroeder’s systemic point has influenced many political scientists in terms of their understanding of the origins of the war, but for many political scientists, this factor was not the only or necessarily the main factor.[226] On the contrary, for him it was, and this led him to participate in the debate on whether the war was inevitable.[227] Much of this debate centered on the disagreement between Richard Ned Lebow and William R. Thompson with the latter taking a more structural perspective.[228] In this debate, Schroeder elaborated his position on the Long Peace in greater historical detail and included a counter-factual analysis to show that the war was mostly [my emphasis] inevitable in that the underlying structure made actions that would lead to war more probable.[229] This piece is interesting because it tries to avoid a strict deterministic view of the role of structure while giving it primacy. [230]