

Diplomatic Histories

Although many political scientists are drawn to Schroeder’s work because of his theoretical insights and relevance to international relations, it must be remembered that he was first and foremost a diplomatic historian and it is in this discipline that his major contributions lay. His period is from 1763 to 1914 Europe and the main countries he specialized in were the Great Powers with an emphasis on Austria. There are three topics where he is generally considered to have made a major impact: the Concert of Europe, the Crimean War, and the First World War. The extent to which non-historians read work on these topics depends on their interest in European history. However, let me say a little about my own journey to these works of Schroeder to underline why I think it is important to delve into these works. After I wrote The War Puzzle,[213] which sought to integrate all the major statistical findings within quantitative international politics into a coherent explanation, I decided that I needed to begin a systematic study of historical cases covered in the Correlates of War data–not only of the war data, but the much more refined MID data.[214] I was pushed along in this decision by my students many of whom (especially the ROTC students) in my Causes of War undergraduate course wanted to study wars and not just statistical analysis. I added some cases to give the numbers some flesh and bones, but eventually spun off another course, Crisis Diplomacy, for which I used James Richardson as the main text. Preparing for that course led me to Schroeder’s specialized histories and his contribution to diplomatic history qua history. Those who want to understand international relations must know certain periods or at least some cases in depth. Schroeder’s work on the Concert, the Crimean War and the First World War are good places for peace researchers to start, since the Correlates of War data many of us use begin in 1816. Once I included these cases in my course, I came to turn to his work on them year after year as new questions arose in my course and my thinking.

Austria, Great Britain, and the Crimean War is a mammoth book based on archival work. It is a specialist’s book and not one that can be appreciated or even understood unless one already knows quite a bit about the case. What was important about the book for me is that it helped me figure out questions raised in Richardson (1994) as well as Rich (1985) about the Crimean War.[215] Both suggested that the war was an unnecessary war (an interesting concept in and of itself for anyone grounded in realism) and that decision makers in England divided fundamentally on whether to enter the war because they could not agree on the national interest.

Opening the black box permits one to more easily see that in 1853 there was no England, let alone a Britain—there was Lord Aberdeen (Prime Minister), Lord Palmerston (Home Secretary), Lord Clarendon (Foreign Secretary), and Lord Stratford de Redcliffe (Ambassador to the Porte) struggling to control foreign policy while Queen Victoria looked on aghast. What strikes any student of classical realism is the complete absence of any widely shared conception of the national interest. Palmerston and Aberdeen—the consummate hard liner and the accommodationist— not only had different conceptions of the national interest but different foreign policy aims, something that should not happen if the national interest was as objective and easily read as realists implied. Two things become very clear to any IR scholar who reads this book—a) it makes little sense in this case to refer to England as a proper noun or as a unitary rational actor and b) the idea of the national interest provided little guide to making decisions about peace and war in 1853-1854. In short, IR theory should provide more of a guide than it does in this case. Let me make it clear these were not lessons that Schroeder derived or even asserted, but ones that hit IR theorists and peace researchers on the head as they read his history. It is important to note that he did not make these points against realism in an analytical fashion (as he did in “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Theory”), but made them by the way he wrote his history.