rough the endless reams of manuscript with which I flooded his groaning in-tray. My thanks are also due, albeit posthumously in the case of my father, to my parents for their constant encouragement and support. My superiors at the University of Southampton were unfailing in their patience at my frequent absences, and long incarceration at the keyboard. Amongst my friends and colleagues, Tony Kushner and Rory Muir both read versions of the manuscript and provided me with many useful sug­ gestions and ideas, and John and Sue Zlosnik came gallantly to the rescue with a modern-day version of bagajes y alojamiento at a moment of desperate crisis. The editor of the series ‘War, Armed Forces and Society’, Dr. Ian Beckett, also proved most helpful, whilst the National Army Museum in London kindly supplied the cover photograph. All the staff of the assorted archives at which I have worked have been polite and efficient without exception, but I should particularly like to mention those of the Biblioteca del Senado in Madrid, and of the archives of the University of Southampton. Of the former, the xii Preface solicitude of Doña Rosario Herrera, Don José Luis Martín Consue­ gra, Don Roberto Carrasco Pérez, and Don Rafael Duran Aranda made my work there a real pleasure. At Southampton, Dr. Christo­ pher Woolgar and his assistants, Sue Donnelly, Karen Robson, Mary Cockerill and Candy Godwin, have all contributed immeasurably to my work, and are to be congratulated on the success of their sterling efforts to catalogue and preserve the Wellington Papers. I should also like to thank all the numerous people who smoothed my path during my research in Spain, especially Don Juan Balansó (Agencia EFE), Don Javier Pascual (Centro de Estudios Constitucio­ nales), Coronel D. Juan Barrios, Coronel D. Fernando Redondo and Capitan D. Manuel Ramos (Servicio Histórico Militar), Don Amadeo Saguar Delgado and Don Julio Rodriguez Aramberri. On a personal level I was insulated from the loneliness of the long-distance researcher by many Spanish friends, of whom I should especially like to remember Doña Concha Bocos Rodríguez, Doña Marta Requena Martinez and Don Miguel Llopis. Their kindness has not been forgotten. Finally, and above all, I must thank my wife, Alison, who has had to live with the consequences of this work for eight years, and to whom the result is humbly dedicated. Charles Esdaile, Southampton, September 1987. EL FERROL SANTANDER CORUNA SANTIAGO ILBAO TOULOUSE [/BAYONNE SAN MARCIAL OVIEDO ESPINOSA ZORNOZA REINOSA FRANCE SAN SEBASTIAN 'LEON BURGOS ASTORGA FIGUERAS TUPELA •PALENCIA MEDINA DE GERONA' KMOZA LERIDA MARIA • BELEIHTE TO SALAMANCA ALCANIZ •ALBA DE TORMES ALMEIDA ^S^CBARCELONA SOMOSIERRA 'CIUDAD RODRIGO TORTOSA ..lt BUSACO TALAVERA ALMONACIO •fSAGUNTO ARANJUEZ OCANA VALENCIA CIUDAD REAL ELVAS 5PAIN ALBUERA CASTALLA ALICANTE •BAILEN ALCOLEA CORDOBA R.TAGENA GRANADA MALAGA CADIZ ALMERIA BARROSA GIBRALTAR 1 The Iberian peninsula MOUNSDEREY TARRAGONA Chapter 1 The Spanish army under the ancien régime The standing army was the sine qua non of absolute monarchy. Without the emergence of such forces, no European monarch would ever have been able to exert any authority beyond that permitted to them by their subjects. Although other factors were also important, the growth of royal power was closely related to the formation of efficient professional armies financed through the medium of such bureaucracies as the French Intendance and the Prussian Generalkriegskomissariat rather than the Estates. Because they could now feed their armies and keep them within reasonable bounds, mon­ archs were freed from the spectre of another Thirty Years’ War. As a result, they could engage in limited military campaigns that were designed to enhance the position of their dynasties. Territory gained through warfare provided taxes and recruits that could be used to expand the armed forces; by the same token, such victories under­ mined the power of rival rulers. Furthermore, the combination of regular armies with efficient civilian bureaucracies provided decisive advantages on the domestic front: hence the determination of every petty princeling to maintain an army of his own, even one so tiny as to be useless for any military purpose. Supported by disciplined armed forces, rulers could weld their possessions into a coherent state, impose their authority upon the nobility, ensure that revenue was collected, and overawe a frequently recalcitrant populace. Nor was the standing army solely an instrument of coercion. The con­ stant demand it furnished for arms, uniforms and equipment pro­ vided a considerable stimulus for the national economy, just as the existence of a garrison provided a guaranteed market for local farmers and traders. Soldiers could also be mobilised to provide cheap labour for capital projects of all sorts. Finally, the army also 2 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War furnished the nobility with an outlet for their military traditions and their social aspirations that at the same time served to reinforce their subordination to the throne. The attractions of a standing army applied as much to Spain as they did to any other European country. However, the circum­ stances surrounding the accession to the throne of the Bourbon dynasty in 1700 had lent such a force redoubled importance. When Felipe V arrived in Spain he discovered that the Hapsburg army had dwindled away almost to nothing. Furthermore, large parts of the country, together with a majority of the upper nobility, refused to accept his rule and rallied instead to the cause of the Archduke Charles of Austria. Felipe’s very survival was therefore bound up with the creation of a new army, for which naturally enough he chose the forces of Louis XIV as a model. Even when the war ended in a Bourbon victory, Felipe continued to rely heavily upon the army as the central pillar of his rule. Not only was the officer corps loaded with privileges of every sort, but the military administration was utilised as the basis for the entire Bourbon government. In addition to the creation of a French-style Intendance, Spain was divided into a number of Captain Generalcies whose incumbents were as much provincial governors as they were military commanders. Yet in thus exalting the army the Bourbons had created a rod for their own backs. Because the officer corps was dominated by the upper nobility, its privileges were guaranteed to become a source of considerable social tension. In addition to the jealousy which was generated by this situation among the petty hidalguía and those men who though notable were not noble, such a policy proved counter-productive. One of the central aims underlying the formation of all standing armies had been the political emasculation of the nobility. However much they now exercised authority at the behest of the Spanish King rather than as of right, the grandeza had been elevated to a position of great power. Yet Louis XIV had specifically counselled Felipe V ‘to allow the grandees to retain all the external prerogatives of their dignity whilst excluding them from all affairs that might augment their credit*.1 By allowing the magnates to dominate the army, the Bourbons had given them a means of resisting the efforts of the monarchy to restrict the power of the nobility. Although the ability of the grandees to subvert the officer corps was restricted by the serious tensions which their predominance had engendered within its ranks, those same tensions Under the ancien régime 3 constituted a further source of danger: years of frustration were to create the possibility of the subaltern officers being exploited by opponents of the régime. Riddled by social and economic tensions, detested by much of civilian society, and dominated by that section of the nobility with most reason to oppose the Bourbons - for the general trend of government policy was to erode the influence of the aristocracy - the Spanish army was transformed into a veritable ‘Trojan Horse*. For all the importance which the Bourbons placed upon the army, it suffered from numerous defects, of which one of the most impor­ tant was the complexity and inefficiency of its administration. In theory, the authority of the King as Commander-in-Chief was exer­ cised through the medium of the Supreme Council of War, which comprised the War Minister, the senior officers of the various branches of the army, and a number of other officers who were appointed by the King to represent military opinion as a whole. Originally this body had been the supreme authority in all matters pertaining to the army, as well as the highest court in the system of military justice. However, by the late eighteenth century most of its administrative functions had been taken over by the Ministry of War, and it had essentially become a simple court of justice.2 In recognition of this development, in 1803 Carlos IV ordered a con­ siderable reduction in its membership: henceforth it was to consist only of a President, six officers and four civilian legal advisers.3 With the increasing marginalisation of the Supreme Council of War, the administration of the army was centred upon the Minister of War, who transmitted the orders of the sovereign to the Inspectors who headed its different branches. These numbered ten — line infantry, Swiss infantry, cavalry, dragoons, artillery, engineers, provincial militia, Guardias de Corps, Guardias de Infantería, Carabinieros Reales. The Inspectors had the task of implementing the decisions taken in the Ministry of War, presided over the administration of the fuero militar, and dealt with all personnel matters. They also watched over the internal economy of the units for which they were responsible, and ratified all recommendations for promotion.4 The centralisation of authority in the hands of the Ministry of War was vitiated by the fact that its staff was too small to be able to cope with the burdens with which it was faced. Nor was its authority total, for the chief responsibility for the army’s pay and supply lay with the Ministry of Finance. The administration was therefore 4 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War disproportionately expensive, and prone to considerable duplication of function. Factionalism was also endemic, particularly as the divi­ sion of the army into so many separate branches was a recipe for the emergence of powerful vested interests. Ironically enough, there existed a perfectly satisfactory alternative to the Inspectorates in the Captain Generalcies. Although there was good reason why the Captains General should not have been the Inspectors of the forces they commanded, which consisted of all the troops who were garri­ soned within their particular regions, there was none why these putative divisions should not have taken the place of the separate Inspectorates: to maintain both was simply to generate unnecessary expence. Matters were not improved by the situation with regard to the command of thé army. Ultimately, of course, this lay in the hands of the monarch, who in peacetime delegated his functions to the Captains General. This arrangement was logical enough, except for the fact that as soon as war broke out, the troops were mobilised into field armies commanded by specially appointed generals, who might or might not also be Captains General. Whilst this system was reasonably satisfactory as long as the army operated outside Spain, should it ever be called to do so within the national frontiers it was clear that the potential for confusion would be immense, as the Captains General would continue to wield their territorial authority independently of the commanders in the field. No attempt was made to use the Captain Generalcies as the basis for a system of permanent divisions, nor was there any general staff, despite the fact that both institutions had existed in France since 1763. Instead, on the out­ break of hostilities the commander of e