 forces already in Spain duly seized the vital border fortresses of Pamplona 64 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War and San Sebastian. Meanwhile, a new army marched into Catalonia, occupying Figueras and Barcelona. On 10 March Marshal Murat entered Spain as Napoleon’s personal envoy and commander-inchief of all the 100,000 French troops in the Peninsula. He brought with him yet another army corps at whose head he immediately set out for Madrid. Only a few days before the French went into action Godoy and Carlos IV had received a list of sweeping demands from Napoleon which included the cession of the left bank of the Ebro to France. As this demand could never have been met, it was clear that it was only being presented in order to furnish a pretext for Napoleon to enforce a change of government in Madrid. Faced by the stark choice between war and surrender, Godoy decided to fight. He had already withdrawn the division of the Marqués del Socorro from southern Portugal, and he now ordered these troops to join all the other forces in central Spain behind the line of the river Tagus. Protected by this rearguard, the Spanish royal family could then retire to Seville from whence they could either preside over resistance to the French or join their Portuguese counterparts in fleeing to South America. Urgent messages were also dispatched to every military commander in the Peninsula, even in the occupied areas, to make ready for war.121 Logical as this plan was, as Toreno noted, ‘proposed by the Príncipe de la Paz, it did not have a single supporter*.122 As it was universally believed that the French intended no more than ‘the regency of Fernando and the ruin of Godoy’, the latter’s attempts at resistance were regarded as a desper­ ate shift to evade the retribution that was about to come down upon his head.123 The femandinos shared in this general conviction: believing that the arrival of Murat’s army in Madrid would herald at the very least the downfall of Godoy, they had absolutely no interest in resisting the French. On the contrary, they now sought not only to prevent the outbreak of war, but to install a new regime in Madrid that would be looked upon with favour by the Emperor. In order to achieve these aims, a two-pronged strategy was adopted. Whilst Fernando and his adherents in the court sought to dissuade Carlos IV from the idea of resistance, Montijo and Infantado prepared an insurrection.124 Their aims were in the meantime being facilitated by a number of officers and officials who on their own initiative had already taken action to sabotage Godoy’s orders.125 Never a man to relish decisive action, the King had been thoroughly confused by the fortuitous The era of Godoy 65 arrival of a number of flattering messages and gifts from Napoleon, and therefore agreed that the question should be referred to the Council of Castile. Having long since been won over to the femandino cause, the Council ruled that there was no need to concentrate troops at Aranjuez because the court was in no danger. In a clear testimony to the aspirations of the disaffected magnates, it also stated that before taking a decision on any matter that affected ‘the existing political and military system’, the King should in future always consult the opinion of his leading subjects. In short, the governance of Spain should take full account of the views of the grandeza.126 Although he still ordered the Guards to concentrate at Aranjuez, on 16 March Carlos bowed before the mounting pressure and issued a proclamation renouncing the idea of flight and reiterating his confidence in Napoleon.127 The conspirators nevertheless continued with their plans for an insurrection, a task in which they were aided by the excited state of public opinion. The wildest rumours were circulating to explain the crisis, with Godoy being variously accused of trying to evade the just deserts that were being prepared for him by Napoleon, and of betraying Spain to the Emperor in return for an endorsement of his personal power. There was also a strong belief that in an obvious moment of national danger, it was the duty of the King not to run away, but to protect his subjects.128 When the Conde de Montijo and some of his confederates began to preach the need to go to Aranjuez to prevent the flight of the royal family in the villages around Madrid, they therefore met a ready response. Thousands of people began to pour into the real sitio, where they besieged the palace and set a watch on all the roads leading out of the town.129 Aranjuez could produce its own mob even without their assistance, for the departure of the court would have represented economic disaster for its inhabitants as most of them were in some way dependant upon the royal palace. As Blanco White noted, ‘Madrid and the real sitios would sink into insignificance were the court to be moved to a distance. The dissolution of the most wretched government fills its dependants with consternation.’150 Important though the popular aspect of the Motin de Aranjuez undoubtedly was, it should not be allowed to obscure the fact that the spearhead of the revolt was wholly military. But for the desertion of the armed forces to the rioters, there is no reason to suppose that the riots would have been any more dangerous than the Motin de 66 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War Esquiladle of 1766. However, the Guard had been subverted by its hatred of Godoy, as had already been suggested at the time of the Affair of El Escorial: not only had Fernando’s escort of Guardias de Corps attempted to prevent the removal of incriminating documents from his apartments, but elements of the garrison of Madrid had demonstrated in his favour.131 As the Guards were well aware that the departure of the royal family would lead to their being ‘levelled with the rest of the army’, the numerous femandinos amongst their officers, such as the three Palafox brothers, had no difficulty in persuading their men that the monarchy was in danger.132 Their efforts soon bore fruit: all the Guard units already at Aranjuez ‘engaged to support the people’, and fraternised with the excited crowd, cheering Fernando to the echo whenever he appeared in public. Meanwhile, still further exciement was caused by the orders issued on 16 March for the battalions of the Guardias de Infantería that were still in Madrid to march immediately for Aranjuez.133 Although tempers were now at fever pitch, the necessary pretext for a rebellion - preparations for the immediate departure of the royal family - stubbornly refused to materialise. At the same time, it was known that the arrival of the troops of the Marqués del Socorro was imminent, and that their support could not be guaranteed. With Murat’s army coming ever closer, the conspirators seem to have decided to precipitate a crisis. There is no evidence to suggest that the royal family was going anywhere, but on the afternoon of 17 March a rumour suddenly spread that Fernando had told an officer of his bodyguard, ‘The journey is tonight and I do not want to go.’134 What happened next is uncertain, but it seems likely that the conspirators laid plans to initiate the coup at midnight that same night.135 In the event, however, the final spark was almost certainly accidental. Late in the evening of 17 March a group of Godoy’s hated Guardias de Honor were confronted by an angry crowd of guardsmen and civilians outside the royal palace. In the ensuing quarrel a shot was fired, whereupon the mob immediately poured into the streets and made straight for Godoy’s residence in search of the favourite. The few loyal sentries were swept aside and the building was ransacked, but Godoy himself escaped by hiding in a roll of carpet.136 Two days of intermittent rioting followed in which the Guards played a leading role. Of their officers, only Diego de Godoy attempted to restore order, and he was quickly arrested by Montijo. Throughout the disturbances events were orchestrated by the Count The era of Godoy 67 so as to bring growing pressure on the terrified Carlos and Maria Luisa, whilst reassuring and encouraging Fernando, who by all accounts was nearly as frightened as his parents.137 The King and Queen were quickly persuaded firstly to dismiss Godoy, and then to have him imprisoned when thirst drove him out of his refuge. The disturbances continued, however, for the femandinos were determined to show Carlos that his position had become untenable. The final blow was delivered on the morning of 19 March, when a delegation headed by the Principe de Castelfranco, the commander of the Guardias Walonas, warned the King that fresh violence was expected. Asked whether the troops could be relied upon, Castel­ franco replied that only Fernando could answer for their loyalty. Weary and demoralised, Carlos IV could take no more, and finally abdicated his crown into the hands of the triumphant Fernando.138 In a development heavy with significance for the future, the fall of the favourite had been brought about by the first pronunciamiento in Spanish history. In order to achieve their ends, the femandinos had had no option but to appeal to the discontent that had been occa­ sioned by Godoy’s rule in certain elements of the armed forces. In response, the Royal Guards had duly 'pronounced’ against Godoy in favour of the alternative regime of Fernando VII. The rest of the army then went over to the rebellion en masse, soldiers being promi­ nent in the rioting that broke out in Madrid and other cities follow­ ing the arrival of news of the events at Aranjuez.139 Deprived of their only means of actually enforcing their authority, Carlos and Maria Luisa were left with no choice but to surrender. As far as Godoy is concerned, the total desertion of the army is suggestive of the failure of all his efforts at military reform: in the last resort the army was no better prepared for a major war in 1808 than it had been in 1792. Although Godoy had brought about many changes of detail, these paled into insignificance beside the funda­ mental problems that remained untouched. If the responsibility for this situation must in part be attributed to the favourite’s own shortcomings, it is also clear that few statesmen could have over­ come the obstacles to reform posed by Spain’s financial problems, or the hostility to all forms of progress that had been engendered in the mind of Carlos IV by the French Revolution. Be that as it may, however, the army had been given no reason why it should reject the fernandino propaganda. By competing with Godoy for the loyalties of the military, the conspirators had reduced the ancien régime to The Spanish army in the Peninsular War 68 tatters, as well as opening a veritable Pandora’s Box. For the first time the army had assumed its classic role as the arbiter of Spanish politics. As one officer remarked to his tertulia, ‘Gentlemen, we have cured a cold and caught tuberculosis.’140 Chapter 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Notes Toreno, op. cit.,1, p. 45. Clonará, Historia orgánica, VI, 51-55,297. Bourgoing, op. cit., II, p. 69; Priego López, op. cit., I, p. 116. Godoy, op. cit., 1,112-13;M. Foy, Histoire de la guerre de la péninsule sous Napoléon (Paris, 1827), I, p. 340; L. Crusy de Marcillac, Histoire de la guerre entre la France et FEspagne pendant les années de la révolution française (Paris, 1808), I, p. 12; Schepeler, op. cit., I, p. 279. Real Cédula, 4 February 1793, cit., Sanchez, Colección, I, p. 307; Bourgoing, op. cit., Ill, p. 243. Real Cédula, 24 March 1794, cit., Sanchez, Colección, II, 12-15; Bourgoing, op. cit., Ill, p. 294. ‘Discurso o corección fraterna de un amigo al Sr. D. Antonio Despuig, Obispo de Orihuela’ (MS), RAH. 9-31-7: 7021, 204-10; ‘Papel anó­ nimo al General Conde de la Unión’ (MS), RAH. 9-31-7: 7025, 220-3; G. Anes Alvarez, Economía e ilustración en la España del siglo XVIII (Barcelona, 1972), 172-9 (hereafter Anes, Economía e ilustración). Real Cédu