ara el servicio y maniobras de la infantería of 1807 gave almost no guid­ ance as to how the new tactics should be employed. In particular, it was not realised that the infantry column was unlikely to achieve its objectives unless the enemy was first battered by concentrated artil­ lery fire and harassed by a strong skirmish screen. Horse artillery might also be brought up in close support, and cavalry sent in to exploit any breakthrough achieved by the infantry. Yet the few treatises on the subject that were published in Spain merely con­ ducted an arid debate on the relative merits of column and line without making any attempt to place them in their proper context.63 The attitude that was taken towards the light infantry is particularly indicative of the manner in which the reformers failed to grasp the full implications of the tactical debate. Godoy certainly increased the proportion of light infantry in the Spanish army - indeed, in 1802 he formed two new regiments, Campo Mayor and Navarra — but the continued organisation of these troops into separate units suggests that they were still regarded as agents of the petite guerre of the eighteenth century, rather than as a battlefield adjunct of the line infantry, as was increasingly the case in the rest of Europe. The old distinction between light and line infantry was fast disappearing, each battalion instead being provided with its own integral light company or simply being expected to send out a proportion of its strength as skirmishers as required, independent of its precise nomenclature. In the Spanish army, by contrast, the provision of skirmish cover The era of Godoy 51 was woefully inadequate. The regulations of 1802 had left the army with twelve light infantry regiments, each of which consisted of a single battalion of six companies, but without a proper divisional organisation it was impossible to distribute these units on an even basis. The line infantry, meanwhile, were not trained to fight in open order. Nor were they provided with their own light companies, except in the case of a few units commanded by progressive officers who acted on their own initiative.64 The only official concession made in this direction by the new infantry regulations of 1802 was to adopt the Prussian practice of detailing a few men in each company — in this case eight - to act as skirmishers. A Spanish battalion of some 750 men could consequently deploy only thirty-two skirmishers compared with the 100—150 of its French counterpart. The absence of a proper tactical manual concerning their use ensured that the few skirmishers that the Spaniards could deploy would be very ill-trained.65 In addition, in 1806 the light infantry were deprived of the simple and practical costume by which they had hitherto been characterised in favour of the conventional bicorn and tailcoat of the rest of the army. The result, as a later critic noted, was that the cazador became impeded by ‘a stiff cravat that does not let him turn his head, a coat whose useless tails get caught on branches, a cartridge box that continually bangs against him, a sabre that gets between his legs, tripping him up at every instant, and above all a pack that impedes his progress even when he is walking normally’.66 If Godoy’s failure to pay proper attention to the role of the skirmisher marred the reforms he effected in the Spanish infantry, his efforts with regard to the cavalry had almost no effect whatsoever. In 1796 he had stated his intention to merge the dragoons, an arm which he regarded as having long outlived its original function, with the rest of the cavalry, and to increase the proportion of light horse. By new regulations that were issued in 1803, he duly added the eight regiments of dragoons to the existing force of four regiments of light cavalry to create six regiments of hussars and six of chasseurs. The twelve regiments of line cavalry were left untouched except that, in common with all the mounted units, they each received a fifth squadron that was designed to act as a depot.67 The reorganisation certainly made administrative sense in that the dragoons had hitherto been organised as a separate branch of the service, a wholly unnecessary expense in view of the fact that they had long since become totally indistinguishable from the rest of the cavalry. Yet 52 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War changing the nomenclature of particular regiments did nothing to address the army’s shortage of mounted troops, let alone the funda­ mental problems that afflicted the Spanish cavalry. After 1795 the number of regiments remained static at twenty-four. Furthermore, in 1808 they could only muster 14,440 rank and file out of an estab­ lishment of 16,164.68 The difficulty was not so much one of manpower as of horseflesh. To Godoy’s credit, he did make every effort to remedy the deleter­ ious effects of centuries of mule breeding: horses were imported from Normandy, Africa and Denmark to improve the breeding strains; a royal stud was established at Aranjuez; horse breeding was encou­ raged by financial and legal concessions; and the privileges of the mule breeders were reduced.69 Yet for the time being the quality of the horses available to the army remained as poor as ever. It was perhaps for this reason that the few cavalry units engaged in the War of the Oranges do not seem to have distinguished themselves: indeed, the Maria Luisa hussar regiment even earned itself the scornful nickname of ‘Mari huye’ (‘run-away Mary’).70 Horses were also in such short supply that when Godoy briefly sought to declare war on France in 1806, he was forced to appeal to the general public to donate remounts to the army.71 This appeal was unavailing: when the army took the field against Portugal in 1807, most cavalry regiments could only mount one or two squadrons, and in 1808 the army possessed only 9,526 horses out of an establishment of 13,296.72 Compared with these issues, the changes brought about by Godoy in 1803 were purely cosmetic, but even these did not survive for long: much to the favourite’s annoyance, in 1805 he was forced to restore the dragoon regiments to their original state.73 On the eve of the War of Independence the cavalry therefore consisted of twelve line regiments, eight dragoon regiments, two hussar regiments and two chasseur regiments; each regiment consisted of five squadrons. The reform of the technical branches of the army proved some­ what less nugatory. Godoy’s promise to Maria Luisa in 1804 that he would create 'cuerpos facultátivos such as Frederick himself would not have been able to establish’ was not entirely an idle boast.74 In 1802 the engineers were provided with a regiment of sappers and miners to act as a reliable source of skilled labour for their opera­ tions, and a general reform of the whole corps the following year increased its size, raised its pay, and created an engineering academy at Alcala de Henares.75 Similar encouragement was given to the The era of Godoy 53 artillery, of which Godoy himself was titular commander from 1803 to 1808. New regulations were introduced for the artillery school at Segovia, a central artillery park was established in Madrid, the corps was reorganised and increased in size by the Ordenanzas of 1802 and 1806, and some measures were taken to place its civilian drivers under military discipline.76 As a result of these changes, in 1808 the artillery consisted of four field regiments, each of ten batteries of six guns. Two of the batteries in each of the first three regiments consis­ ted of horse artillery. There were also nineteen companies of garrison artillery and five companies of pioneers. A comprehensive tactical manual was also produced which included many of the tactical innovations seen on on the battlefields of the Revolutionary Wars, with the artillery being enjoined to employ their guns in concentrated masses rather than in scattered individual batteries.77 The value of these reforms was seen at Bailén, where the Spanish gunners quickly succeeded in silencing their opponents and dominating the battlefield.78 Many problems remained, however. For example, British officers who served in the Peninsula frequently found the Spanish engineers to be obstinate, opinionated and ignorant of anything other than the construction of permanent works of fortification.79 Except in the case of the horse batteries, nothing was done to provide the artillery with its own transport, with the result that it was still left at the mercy of civilian contractors and teamsters. Once again, in short, Godoy had merely interfered in matters of detail whilst leaving fundamental problems unaddressed. Nowhere was this more visible than with the organisation of the army taken as a whole. To be fair to Godoy, the papers submitted to the Junta de Generales y Ministros in 1796 show that he had had every intention of establishing both a general staff and a system of permanent divisions. The War of the Oranges of 1801 afforded him an opportunity of putting both these ideas into practice, but with the return of peace Carlos IV ordered him to abandon them.80 In the same way, the military administration and the supply system remained as cumbersome as ever. The overall result of Godoy’s rule was, if anything, to make matters worse than before. The ranks of the cuerpo politico became swelled by place­ men appointed as a result of Godoy’s favour: to take just one example, the number of Comisarios de Guerra grew from sixty-nine in 1792 to 190 in 1807.81 Godoy’s rule also saw a further prolifer­ ation of the army’s administrative organs. Although on the one hand 54 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War the favourite streamlined the organisation of the Supreme Council of War, on the other he removed the artillery from the competence of the Intendance in an attempt to increase its privileges vis à vis the rest of the army.82 However sincere was Godoy’s devotion to the cause of military reform, it is clear that he did little to prepare the army for involve­ ment in a struggle of the magnitude of the Napoleonic Wars. Although it continued to suffer from many problems — shortage of manpower, inferior officers, defective organisation, and a chaotic administrative system — the trouble was not its quality. Contempo­ rary observers were by no means unimpressed with the troops of the old army: for example, after its escape from Denmark in 1808 Sir James Leith wrote of the division of the Marques de la Romana: ‘They are indeed very fine troops, and I conceive their coming... of great importance.’83 Indeed, wherever the forces of the ancien régime were able to fight the French without their ranks having been excessively diluted by the masses of raw levies unleashed by the rising of 1808, they were able to acquit themselves with honour. The greatest weakness of the army was not its courage, but the complete inability of the military system to support a major war. Even had the army been made capable of rapid expansion, it was doubtful whether a larger force could have been maintained in the field. As was demonstrated by the expeditions against Portugal of 1801 and 1807, Spain could hardly deploy forces of the limited size available before 1808, let alone the mass armies of the War of Independence: in the War of the Oranges, Godoy’s operations were gravely delayed by the problem of providing the army with adequate trans­ port, whilst in 1807 the invasion forces only avoided starvation by resorting to wholesale pillage.84 The responsibility for this lamentable situation must in part rest with the favourite. It is extremely unlikely that he ever fully grasped the extent of the changes that were necessary before Spain could face a war with France, and had he done so it is unclear that he had either the energy or the personal authority necessary to force an acceptance of such radical reform upon an unwilling Spanish establishment. Furthermore, if the government was un