able to find the finance that was necessary to underwrite his reforms and to ensure that the army was adequately paid and supplied, it was in part because of the undoubted venality of Godoy’s régime. The favourite’s incontrover­ tible taste for riches, and the general extravagance of the court placed The era of Godoy 55 a heavy burden upon Spain’s slender resources. Furthermore, his régime was marked by a huge upsurge of nepotism, of which his family were the first beneficiaries. Godoy’s brother-in-law, brothers and uncles were all appointed to the rank of lieutenant general or above; in several cases they also occupied important positions in the military hierarchy. In addition, between 1793 and 1795 alone Godoy appointed eight captains general, fifty-five lieutenant gen­ erals, and 101 mariscales de campo; by 1808 he had raised the total number of generals from 330 to 411.85 Such prodigality undoubtedly had a most debilitating effect. The large number of promotions was a heavy burden on the treasury, incompetence and corruption were widespread, and the court itself became a scandal. The favourite was constantly bemoaning both the decline in the standards of public life and his own isolation.86 Yet he failed to see that matters would not improve whilst he allowed himself to be surrounded by ‘a crowd of flatterers’, and showed himself to be especially accommodating to ‘those who appear at his public levees attended by a handsome wife or blooming daughter’.87 The sycophantic atmosphere of the court, Godoy’s personal greed and ostentation and the persistent rumours of his liaison with Maria Luisa made his claims to be leading a national renaissance sound exceedingly hollow. The ilustrados whose support was essential to the favourite if he was ever to lend real authority to his rule therefore stayed aloof: all too often the ‘reformers’ were mere opportunists who had attached themselves to Godoy to further their personal ambitions. Godoy’s undoubted failings contributed to his difficulties, but the foreign policy to which he had committed Spain in 1796 proved to be incompatible with the programme of reform that it was supposed to facilitate. Although none of its numerous critics have yet suggested a viable alternative, the fact remains that by plunging Spain into a maritime conflict with Great Britain, the alliance with France com­ pounded the blow already dealt to the treasury by the conflict of 1793-95. The concomitant British blockade disrupted Spain’s trade with her colonies and ended the flow of bullion that had hitherto formed the central basis of her revenue. The result was an acceleration of the already severe rate of inflation, and the depreci­ ation of the vales reales." In order to reduce the pressure upon it the government sought to cut its expenditure — a measure that was in itself a serious obstacle to reform - but it was prevented from doing 56 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War so by the ever growing demands of the alliance with France: aside from the costs of the naval campaign against the British, between 1796 and 1808, Spain was twice compelled to invade Portugal as well as to dispatch expeditionary forces to Italy and Denmark. After October 1803 she was also supposed to be paying France a monthly subsidy of six million francs. Even the two and a half years of peace with Great Britain that Spain was granted following the Treaty of Amiens of March 1802 were insufficient to allow a restoration of her finances. With the government perpetually teetering on the verge of bankruptcy, Godoy was unable to effect a significant change in the position of the army. At the same time, the alliance was inflicting severe damage on the domestic political situation. The massive inf­ lation caused by the war was not matched by a corresponding increase in wages. Commerce and industry slumped, a series of bad harvests produced widespread distress, and in some areas the general misery was increased by serious epidemics of yellow fever.89 Meanwhile, Madrid, in particular, experienced a steady influx of immigrants from the provinces fleeing poverty, starvation and pes­ tilence. The huge numbers of paupers who clogged the city consti­ tuted a distinct threat to public order, as shown by the outbreak of severe bread riots in 18O2.90 They were also ripe for exploitation by the hostile camarilla that had emerged in the Spanish court around the figure of the jealous and embittered heir to the throne, Prince Fernando. The origins of the femandino party lie in the hatred which Fer­ nando had conceived for his parents’ favourite. Deeply resentful of the manner in which Godoy had usurped their affections, the Prince became convinced that he intended to seize the throne for himself, or at the very least to alter the order of succession in favour of one of the younger infantes, who were reputedly the offspring of the supposed liaison between Maria Luisa and Godoy. His jealousy made him a natural focus for all those who bore a personal grudge against the favourite or who opposed his policies, most notably Fernando’s erstwhile tutor, Juan de Escoiquiz, and Godoy’s inveterate enemy, José Antonio Caballero. A large number of noblemen, many of them with commissions in the Royal Guards, also became supporters of Fernando. If some of them, such as the Conde de Montijo and the Duque del Infantado, had personal reasons for their hostility, it is also by no means impossible that they saw the weak figure of Fernando as The era of Godoy 57 an ideal puppet king whose accession to the throne would enable them to turn back the gradual erosion of the privileges of the nobility at the hands of the Bourbon monarchy. The disparity of their motives did not prevent the femandinos from uniting in a pro­ gramme of action designed to blacken the reputation of the régime. To spread their propaganda, the favourite’s enemies were able to avail themselves of the current fashion amongst the nobility for adopting popular dress and mingling with the Madrid crowd. For­ tified by an armoury of scurrilous broadsheets, it was easy for them to bring the reputation of the court into ever greater disrepute and to paint an exaggerated picture of the ‘Golden Age’ that would follow the accession to the throne of Fernando as el rey deseado.91 By November 1803, Godoy was complaining to Maria Luisa that it was unsafe for him even to appear in the streets.92 It was also increasingly apparent that the French alliance was doing nothing to check the maritime power of Great Britain. In 1797 the British defeated a Spanish squadron at Cape St. Vincent, and seized the island of Trinidad, a gain which they followed a year later by that of Menorca. Seaborne assaults on Cádiz, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, El Ferrol, and Puerto Rico were only beaten off with difficulty. Following the renewed outbreak of hostilities in Novem­ ber 1804, Franco-Spanish sea power was shattered at the battle of Trafalgar in October 1805, and in June 1806 a British force occupied Buenos Aires. Even the subsequent expulsion of the invaders the following year was of little comfort for it had been achieved entirely by the efforts of the creole militia, much to the stimulation of colonial self-confidence. The alliance was just as unsatisfactory in a political sense, for France had shown herself to be quite prepared to trample on her ally’s diplomatic interests whenever it suited her. Rather than reinforcing Spain’s independence in the international arena, the Treaty of San Ildefonso had brought about her subordi­ nation to a foreign power. Godoy was by no means unaware of the disadvantages of the continued liaison with France, but his ability and wisdom were unequal to the hazardous task of extricating Spain from the Napoleonic embrace. His blundering efforts to provide her with an alternative foreign policy, first of all by building a power­ bloc of neutral states and then by a singularly ill-timed attempt to join Prussia in the campaign of 1806, only succeeded in hastening direct French intervention in the Peninsula. However, although Napoleon was well aware of Godoy’s readiness to betray France, his 58 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War initial reaction was to attempt to buy the favourite’s continued loyalty by exploiting his cupidity, a policy which tallied with the Emperor’s determination to force Portugal to enter the Continental System. Acting with the agreement of the Spanish government, in October 1807 Napoleon dispatched an army of 25,000 men to invade Portugal under General Junot. The details of the enterprise were finalised by the Treaty of Fontainebleau (27 October 1807). Spain was to furnish Junot with the support of an army of 27,000 men, in return for which Portugal was to be dismembered, and large portions of it given to Godoy and Carlos IV’s son-in-law, the erstw­ hile King of Etruria, as independent principalities. The introduction of French forces into the Peninsula sparked off the chain of events that led to the outbreak of the War of Indepen­ dence. Godoy’s military reforms were thus to be put to the test in dramatic fashion. Another aspect of the effect of his rule on the army was also to be revealed: in March 1808 disaffected elements of the Royal Guards mounted a successful pronunciamiento against his rule in the so-called Motin de Aranjuez. The army had clearly been politicised, and in a sense that was hostile to Godoy. That this should have been the case seems extraordinary in view of the importance which he had placed upon military affairs. Had the officer corps been entirely the preserve of the upper nobility, then its hostility might have been understandable: not only could the favourite be regarded as an interloper, but he had also shown himself to be firmly opposed to the ambitions entertained by certain grandees of turning back the advance of the monarchy at the expence of the magnates. For example, when the Conde de Montijo published a manifesto in 1794 which combined a panegyric of the nobility with a fierce critique of the manner in which their authority had been usurped by the throne, Godoy had him arrested and sent into internal exile in Avila.93 The widespread sale of patents of nobility in order to bolster the government’s finances, and the prodigality with which the favourite showered titles, of which the number more than doubled between 1788 and 1798, upon his protégés was equally offensive, for it clearly threatened to cheapen the status of the hidalguía.94 Finally, the support which Godoy had given to the publication of Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos’ highly controversial Informe sobre la ley agraria was extremely alarming in view its bitter denunciation of such bastions of the nobility as the mayorazgos.95 Godoy was there­ fore almost certain to incur the hostility of many senior generals, but The era of Godoy 59 the disadvantaged mass of subaltern officers might still have been expected to rally to his support as their natural representative. When their loyalties were put to the test, however, Godoy was seen to be totally isolated. Ironically, Godoy’s very reformism earned him many enemies in the army, especially in the Royal Guards. Godoy and his fellow reformers had always regarded the Guards as being both highly expensive and of limited military value, but the Junta de Generales y Ministros had refused to allow them to implement plans for their reform.96 Only the poor performance of the household troops in the War of the Oranges allowed the issue to be resurrected: Godoy complained to Maria Luisa that the Guardias de Corps had been extremely dilatory in reaching the front, and that the officers of the Guardias de Infantería were the worst in the army.97 His disgust with the Walloon regiment reached such a pitch that he advised Carlos and Maria Luisa to dismiss ‘half the Guardias Walonas and all their officers’, remarking that the regiment was ‘not only useless but harmful’.98 In 1803 Godoy accordingly issued new regulations