ect, but he was by no means solely the frivolous incompetent of legend. Pitchforked into a position of power that was far beyond his talents, his response to the crisis in Spain’s international position engendered by the French Revolution displayed a degree of realism and intelligence for which he has never been given credit. When Godoy came to power in November 1792, Spanish policy was essentially to conciliate the The era of Godoy 37 revolutionary régime in the hope of saving both the hapless French royal family and the Family Compact of 1761. The new Secretary of State continued these efforts, but the French rejected his advances, and not only sent Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette to the guillotine, but declared war on Spain on 7 March 1793. It was a conflict from which she was far from ready despite the attempts that had been made since 1791 to increase the size of the army. A depot battalion was added to every line infantry regiment in an attempt to provide them with a steady flow of recruits, and the army’s order of battle had been strengthened by the addition of the Malaga line infantry and Gerona and Tarragona light infantry regiments. The light regiments and the cavalry also received an increase in their personnel.2 The shortage of manpower nevertheless remained as acute as ever: with most infantry regiments below half strength, Spain could deploy only 55,000 men on the Pyrenean front.3 To some extent the shortfall was made up by the volunteers who came forward in large numbers in response to the Church’s presentation of the war as a crusade against the enemies of religion. The regular army was also supplemented by a number of irregular units, such as the traditional somatenes and miqueletes of Catalonia. Entire bands of smugglers from the Sierra Morena were even formed into ‘free corps’ on the German model, albeit with limited success as they showed more interest in pillaging the civilian population than in harassing the enemy.4 The wave of enthusiasm was nevertheless insufficient to overcome the general dislike of military service: the call for volunteers had to be sweetened by the offer of extremely advantageous terms of service, and even then a sorteo had to be imposed in February 1793, to the accom­ paniment of the wholesale impressment of vagos.5 Such enthusiasm as there was was soon dissipated by the course of the war, whose strategy was controlled by a council of generals sitting in Madrid. It was decided that the Spaniards should adopt a defensive stance in the western Pyrenees, whilst a large army under General Antonio Ricardos struck into the French province of Roussillon. Yet so many men were tied down in the static defence of the western frontier that Ricardos was left with insufficient troops. Although he was able to brush aside the polyglot levies who faced his veteran troops without difficulty, the Spanish general was also hampered by a want of heavy artillery: as usual, the Spaniards had found it all but impossible to amass the draught animals that they needed to bring forward their siege guns. As a result, the advance 38 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War petered out under the walls of Perpignan, and Ricardos went into winter quarters. Although the Spaniards ended the campaign by winning two minor battles at Trouillas and Boulou, the operations of 1793 represented a squandered opportunity. With France beset by foreign invasion and internal revolt, she had been wide open to a Spanish attack, but by the end of 1793 the great crisis was over. The invaders been driven back, the counter-revolutionaries crushed, and the French armies reinforced by the levée en masse. Strengthened by the arrival of large numbers of fresh troops, in April 1794 the French launched a counter offensive which soon bundled the outnumbered Spaniards back over the frontier. This initial success was followed up by fresh attacks, which by the end of the year had over-run the province of Guipúzcoa and the important fortress of Figueras. Meanwhile, the Spanish army continued to be dogged by a want of recruits. After a call made in March 1794 for 40,000 fresh volunteers had failed, Godoy therefore had no choice but to impose a second sorteo in 1795.6 The use of conscription was very much a last resort, for the populace was increasingly war weary. Revolutionary propaganda was beginning to make some headway, whilst attempts to draw more heavily on Catalan and Valencian manpower had met with fierce popular opposition.7 The sorteo was therefore palliated by limiting the number of men taken in any one area to one in every fifty inhabitants and promising that the cons­ cripts would only serve for the duration of the war.8 Other sources of manpower were also raided to reduce the need for conscription to a minimum: generous amnesties were offered to deserters who would re-enlist, two new Swiss regiments were formed, bringing the total in the army up to six, and several units of French émigrés were incorpo­ rated into the army as the Borbón line infantry regiment.9 Godoy’s achievements were not unimpressive in view of the war’s growing unpopularity. Sufficient men were raised to form no fewer than ten new Spanish regiments. The light infantry received the First and Second Regiments of Barcelona, the Second Regiment of Vol­ untarios de Aragón, the Cazadores de Barbastro, and the Volunta­ rios de Valencia. The new line infantry regiments were those of Jaén, Ordenes Militares, Voluntarios de Castilla, Voluntarios del Estado, and Voluntarios de la Corona. Finally, the cavalry gained the Húsares de María Luisa and the Húsares Españoles. Nor was this accession of strength made only on paper, for the censuses of 1787 and 1797 show that the number of soldiers in Spain rose in the The era of Godoy 39 intervening decade from 77,884 to 149,340.10 Yet it was obvious that the army’s ramshackle logistical system could not support such an increase in the size of the armed forces, or at least to maintain them in the rugged border regions in which the war was fought, for the troops were all too often ragged, shoeless and half-starved. The British were later to claim that they could not have kept the field in Catalonia at all but for the supplies convoyed for them by the Royal Navy.11 As the war dragged on into 1795, it became clear that peace was rapidly becoming a necessity. Spain’s finances were exhausted, a republican conspiracy had been uncovered in Madrid, the Basque provinces and Catalonia were showing disturbing signs of separa­ tism, and the French armies were once again on the advance. On 22 July 1796 Godoy therefore made peace with France by means of the Treaty of Basle. All of Spain rejoiced, including the King and Queen, who rewarded Godoy with the title of Príncipe de la Paz. The title was not undeserved: not only was peace most welcome, but Spain’s losses were restricted to the island of Santo Domingo. Although he had succeeded in extricating Spain from a difficult position at a very moderate cost, Godoy still faced the problem of the attitude which Spain should adopt towards Britain and France in the light of the collapse of the Family Compact. His response was to revert to the classic Bourbon position of the eighteenth century. With Britain and France still at war with one another, the ideal position for Spain would have been one of armed neutrality. However, as it was clear that neither of the two belligerents could be relied upon to respect the neutrality of any country, let alone one that was situated so close to the seat of the conflict, Godoy reasoned that Spain could only remain neutral if she possessed ‘forces that are superior, or at least equal, to those which can be deployed against [her] by the warring powers’; otherwise her neutrality would be ‘no more than an illusion, a chimera to excite laughter and scorn’.12 As Spain did not possess such forces, she would clearly be forced to choose between one or other of the two belligerents. In Godoy’s eyes, the logical choice was France. If the Spanish army had just shown itself to be unable to contain the French on land, Spain still had the powerful navy bequeathed to her by Carlos III; added to the French fleet, it might yet bring victory in a war against Great Britain. At the same time, ‘perfidious Albion’ had proved herself to be a most unreliable ally, harassing Spanish trade and stirring up revolution in the colonies whilst yet denying Spain adequate assistance in the 40 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War campaign against France.13 Encouraged by the growing moderation that had become apparent in France with the advent of the Directory and the ever more threatening attitude adopted by the British government, it was but a short step to the resurrection of the Family Compact by means of the Treaty of San Ildefonso of 18 August 1796. This offensive and defensive alliance against Great Britain has been castigated as ‘the origin of the ruin and desolation of Spain’.14 With the benefit of hindsight, it is obvious that, for all its promises of mutual support, in reality the treaty threatened ultimately to reduce Spain to the status of a mere satellite. Yet Godoy was not as foolish as he has been portrayed: as he wrote to Maria Luisa in 1801, he was only too well aware that ‘France can be trusted with nothing, nor ... will the French ever be allies of anything other than their own interests’.15 Hence the strenuous efforts that he made to limit the obligations that Spain was placed under by the alliance. As far as he was concerned, in fact, the Treaty of San Ildefonso was a mere stratagem that would allow Spain to buy the time necessary to achieve the armed neutrality that was counselled by her interests. Despite the incontestably disastrous results of this foreign policy, none of Godoy’s numerous critics have been able to suggest an alternative course of action. Moreover, the reformism that charac­ terised his rule suggests that Godoy was perfectly serious in his desire to escape the French, even if the movement was ultimately unsuccess­ ful. Following the precedent already established by Carlos III, he made a serious attempt to promote agriculture, trade, industry and education, to encourage the arts and sciences, and to curb the power of the Church. Above all, however, Godoy was determined to achieve the reform of the army: even though he probably did not realise the full extent of the changes in warfare that had been wrought by the French Revolution, he certainly regarded military reform as essential if Spain was to have any chance of retaining her political independence. Together with a number of progressive offi­ cers, including Tomás de Moria, Benito Pardo de Figueroa and the Marqués de Casa Cagigal, he mapped out a programme of reform which he laid before Carlos IV in a long manifesto dated 26 February 1796. Its main elements were that the army should be given an adequate system of recruitment, that the columnar tactics used by the French with such success should be introduced, that training and discipline be improved through the establishment of ‘camps of The era of Godoy 41 instruction’ and new military açademies, that the army be pruned of corps such as the Royal Guards and provincial militia whose dubious military value was far outweighed by their cost, and finally that significant changes be effected in the supply system, the officer corps, the cavalry, the artillery and the engineers. To achieve these ends, Godoy urged the King to establish a special commission charged with the task of producing a specific plan of action.16 Still pleased with his favourite for ending the war, on 16 April 1796 Carlos IV duly appointed twenty-three senior generals and bureaucrats to be members of the Junta de Constitución y Ordenan­ zas del Ejercito (more commonly known as the Junta de Generales y Ministros). Their task was to examine the size, composition, organi­ sation, recruitment, training, tactics, provisioning, maintenance, privileg