 for the two regiments of Guardias de Infantería. On the pretexts that both units had fallen well below strength and that the Walloons now contained very few men of that nationality, the number of battalions which each contained was reduced from six to three and their total strength reduced from 370 officers and 8,494 men to 196 officers and 6,026 men. Aside from the obvious blow that had been dealt to their pride, promotion prospects in the Guardias de Infantería were severely reduced by the attachment of the many surplus officers to their old units as agregados," Such was the depth of the bitter hostility to the favourite that was engendered in their ranks that the Guardias Walonas are reported to have danced for joy on hearing the news of his downfall.100 Godoy was equally unpopular with the Guardias de Corps: after the Motin de Aranjuez its members were only narrowly dissuaded from murdering him and, as his gaolers, treated him with extreme brutality.101 This unit was initially saved from a similar fate to that meted out to the Guardias de Infantería by the personal opposition of the Queen, but it was highly jealous of the manner in which Godoy’s personal guard of light cavalry, the Guardias de Honor del Generalísimo-Al mirante, had succeeded in usurping its right to escort the royal family, a duty that brought with it considerable opportunities coming to the attention of the King or Queen.102 In 1807 the unit’s hostility was redoubled, for Godoy 60 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War finally achieved his goal of reducing its strength by abolishing its fourth company.103 The burning hatred with which Godoy was regarded in the Guards was not shared with the same intensity by the rest of the army, but there was still little love lost for the favourite. Aside from the fact that both officers and men were as vulnerable to femandino propaganda as any other section of Spanish society, conditions were hardly conducive to the encouragement of their loyalty. Far from building up a strong nucleus of support for the favourite, Godoy’s lavish disbursement of patronage proved counter-productive. As a later historian pointed out, ‘however numerous the legion of his ... clients, much greater was that of the discontented, the prejudiced and the envious’.104 For the majority of regimental officers there was little chance of obtaining Godoy’s patronage: indeed, their already slender hopes of promotion were reduced still further by the influx of new officers engendered by the formation of large numbers of new regiments, the encouragement given by Godoy to clientage and nepotism, and the increased premium that was being placed upon membership of the military estate. Aside from causing frequent disputes with regard to precedence, as even Godoy admitted, the general effect was to increase the number of agregados, much to the detriment of the hopes of many officers for advancement.105 The economic difficulties faced by the lower strata of the officer corps showed no signs of abating. Inadequate at the best of times, their pay was being steadily eroded by inflation, and was often badly in arrears. In 1796 conservative elements of the Junta de Generales y Ministros had suggested that the pay of the officer corps should be raised by an average of fifteen per cent from the savings that could be effected by abolishing the allegedly superfluous third battalions of the line infantry regiments.106 It was not until 1802 that Godoy was able to introduce a pay rise of forty-three per cent, however. Since the cost of living had risen by fifty-nine per cent in the period 1780-98 alone, even this was a case of ‘too little, too late’.107 Nor did it do anything to alleviate the hardship experienced by retired and invalid officers without private incomes, whose meagre pensions, already devalued by inflation, were now paid in the rapidly depreciating vales reales. To make matters worse, many of the administrative posts on which they had depended for an adequate reward were now occupied by placemen of Godoy.108 The widespread financial distress offended the honour of the The era of Godoy 61 officer corps as much as it did its physical well-being. As the military ethos made the honour of an officer inseparable from the mainten­ ance of his dignity and status, it followed that the first task of the régime must be to ensure that the army was ‘full of ostentation and splendour’.109 Godoy’s rule fell manifestly short of this ideal. If many officers were suffering from a reduced standard of living and limited hopes of advancement, the rank and file were poorly dressed, ill housed and badly fed, sometimes to the extent that they were reduced to eating berries and roots in order to survive. Even the pampered Guardias de Corps did not escape the general air of penury, finding it difficult to provide adequate forage for their horses.110 Against this background, Godoy’s immoderation was certain to cause real offence to many officers: hence the fury that was aroused by his creation of the magnificently uniformed Guardias de Honor del Generalísimo-Almirante in 1801 as a sub-unit of the Carabinieros Reales.111 The impression of frivolity to which his actions gave rise undermined Godoy’s genuine claim to be a military reformer. Such suspicions were strengthened by his evident obses­ sion with the army’s uniforms, the dress of the line infantry being altered no fewer than four times between 1801 and 1806. In the face of such evidence, it was hardly surprising that many officers should have dismissed his reformism as the fruit of mere caprice.112 The simmering military discontent had serious effects on Godoy’s programme of reform, for many officers chose to show their opposi­ tion to his rule by adopting the attitude of passive resistance exemplified by the refusal of certain generals to take part in the War of the Oranges on the grounds that the army was unfit to take the field. The favourite’s correspondence with Maria Luisa provides further evidence of his isolation. In August 1803 he complained, ‘The recruiting of the army is only going forward slowly and without the necessary energy. Everything, everything, is like this.’113 Two years later, he gave further vent to his frustration, grumbling, i will attempt to ensure that the outstanding matters are resolved once and for all, but I have not yet been able to do this because of my inability to move men in the manner necessary;... men who obey humbly... are now unknown: everyone wishes to command and none to obey.’114 The effect of this non-co-operation was to reinforce the favourite’s dependence on Carlos and Maria Luisa, for he could only proceed in his reforms as far as they were prepared to back him against the military establishment. Thanks to the efforts of Godoy’s 62 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War enemies to persuade them to identify all reform with the onset of revolution, they simply would not furnish him with the support which he needed. One by one, the favourite was therefore forced to abandon or to curtail many of his most radical schemes. Any attempt to step outside the bounds of the permissible led to disaster: for example, in 1804 he was forced to dismiss Tomás de Moria, one of his most able subordinates, for proposing to reform the Guardias de Corps.115 For all Godoy’s unpopularity, the army cannot be said to have been ready to overthrow his rule before 1808. The clique of conser­ vative generals who had replaced his supporters in the military administration responded to Godoy’s return to favour in 1800 by intriguing with Caballero to bring about the favourite’s renewed disgrace.116 The following year one of their number, Gregorio Gar­ cia de la Cuesta, attempted to use his position as president of the Council of Castile to block an attempt by Maria Luisa and Godoy to have themselves declared co-regents in the event of the death of Carlos IV.117 Yet Godoy was able to overcome this challenge to his position without difficulty: the offending generals were either dis­ missed from office altogether or packed off to a decorous exile abroad.118 The vast majority of the army remained quiescent, but subsequent events suggest that it was no more willing to come to Godoy’s aid than it was actively to seek his destruction. Military loyalties were finally to be put to the test as a result of the intrigues of the fernandinos. Ever since Godoy’s attempted breach with France in 1806, they had believed that that the best way for Fernando to consolidate his position was to present himself as a loyal ally of Napoleon. To this end, secret negotiations were entered with the French ambassador for Fernando to be given a bride from the Bonaparte family. Once the Prince had attained this tangible demon­ stration of Napoleon’s support, it was then intended that he should confront Carlos IV and demand Godoy’s removal from power. However, the plot was betrayed to the favourite, and on the very night of the signature of the Treaty of Fontainebleau Fernando was arrested in his apartments at the palace of El Escorial and arraigned on a charge of high treason. Amongst the many incriminating docu­ ments found in his possession was the draft of a letter to Napoleon imploring his protection, and orders that were to be put into effect in the event of the death of Carlos IV, appointing the fernandino Duque del Infantado to be Generalísimo in place of the favourite.119 The era of Godoy 63 The actual details of the so-called ‘Affair of El Escorial’ are of considerably less importance than its consequences for Spain’s increasingly precarious situation. Godoy’s own position was immeasurably worsened, as his allegations were universally rejected as a devious plot to destroy Fernando; although the Prince was ultimately pardoned, the favourite was henceforth regarded as a tyrant. Not only was the regime now totally isolated at home, but for the first time Napoleon began seriously to consider the possibility of overthrowing the Bourbon monarchy. If his move against Portugal had had the useful side effect of allowing him to send troops into Spain, until now his policy had been directed towards ensuring the continued loyalty of his Spanish allies with the promise of Lusitanian acquisitions. The revelation of serious dynastic feuding in the Spanish court led him to re-evaluate his position. Ever suspicious of Great Britain, he was afraid that she might exploit the chaos with which Spain seemed threatened as a result of the Affair of El Escorial to wean her away from her alliance with France. Even if this did not occur, conflict within Spain would negate her value as an ally and severely compromise the position of the French forces that had been sent to Portugal. Aside from these miltary pressures, other factors were also encouraging the Emperor to intervene, including his interest in seizing control of the revenues of the Spanish empire and in annexing the area north of the river Ebro, and his desire to transform Spain into a reliable satellite state. Given the general detestation of Godoy and Spain’s defenceless situation, the project seemed to offer every advantage.120 Though as yet undetermined as to the precise form his intervention should take, from November 1807 onwards Napoleon began to send large numbers of French troops into northern Spain. Although increasingly perturbed, Godoy had no option but to maintain the fiction that the new arrivals were on their way to Portugal or had come to defend Spain against a British attack. The Emperor had in the meantime been reviewing his options. Initially inclined to dethrone Carlos IV in favour of Fernando, he eventually came to the conclusion that the latter would be no more reliable as an ally than Godoy. The logical course of action therefore seemed to be to overthrow the Bourbons altogether and to replace them with a puppet monarch drawn from Napoleon’s own family. After a short period of ever increasing tension, in February 1808 the French