ivity, vigilance, and attention to business than exists in their administra­ tion of the government... At nine o’clock every morning... the Supreme Junta assemble to transact business, and they remain until two o’clock ... They again assemble in the evening at seven o’clock and remain until eleven The war of the Junta Central 117 or twelve o’clock, agreeable to the business on hand. All the Secretaries of State and other public officers are always ready to give audience even to the lowest peasant if he wishes it... and they dispatch business with a prompti­ tude and regularity which does them infinite honour. There are no holidays on the different days, not even on Sundays .. . You hear of no turtle feasts, haunches of venison or country seats, no expense for messengers carrying the red box at an enormous expense as in England from one watering place to another.8 The root of the problem was not so much the misdeeds of the Junta Central as the politico-military situation with which it was faced. As Spain’s fortunes continued to deteriorate, so the pressure, and, indeed, the necessity for reform, became ever greater. Yet the Junta simply had no means of meeting the demands that were placed upon it and of translating its undoubted goodwill into effect. Every branch of the bureaucracy had been thrown into complete confusion by the revolution. As with the officer corps, the Intendance had become filled with the placemen of the provincial juntas, many of whom were not only totally incompetent but also inclined to treat their posts primarily as a source of personal gain.9 As for the Ministry of War, it was swamped under the immense amount of work that had been generated by the creation of large numbers of new regiments and the appointment of equally large numbers of new officers.10 In addition, although the Junta Central had proclaimed itself to be the supreme government of Spain, the authority of the provincial juntas effectively remained untouched, especially as they continued to con­ trol almost all the national revenue.11 An excellent illustration of the impotence of the Junta Central may be found in the situation relating to the supply of the Spanish armies on the Ebro in the autumn of 1808. Even before the campaign had actually begun, the Spaniards found themselves in serious diffi­ culties: food was short, the men’s clothing was in rags, and, despite the wintry weather, there were hardly any tents, blankets or greatcoats.12 As usual, British observers were quick to blame this situation on the inactivity of the government, of which Lord William Bentinck wrote, ‘The Central Junta have certainly not done and are not doing their duty. They have sacrificed the public interest to their own private views of ambition and advantage.’13 Yet only twentyfour hours before Bentinck had written this letter the Junta had issued a decree in which it noted the sufferings of the troops and ordered the provincial juntas to open a public subscription for the supply of clothing to the army, and to reward those citizens who 118 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War would make voluntary donations of clothing themselves. In addi­ tion, the juntas were authorised to place orders for uniforms with civilian contractors.14 In the same way, it had authorised the Junta of Valencia to raise a loan of 2,000,000 reales from the propertied classes, as well as issuing orders to increase the production of saddles and muskets.15 However, the practical effect of these orders was almost non-existent, either because of the disruption caused by the French offensive of November-December 1808 or because of the neglect and incompetence of the provincial juntas. The only remedy was for the Junta Central to have made its authority effective, but, in view of the widespread opposition to its rule, the only means of doing so would have been to achieve a dramatic military victory. Given the numerous defects of the forces which it had been bequea­ thed by the revolution of 1808, such a policy was not only unlikely to bring success, but also liable to increase Spain’s difficulties. The Spanish armies which took the field in the autumn of 1808 had by now begun to assume the aspect which they were essentially to retain for the rest of the war. On the one hand, the Bourbon veterans had been subsumed into the forces of the revolution, whilst on the other the raw levies of May 1808 had had sufficient time to acquire some of the rudiments of drill and military discipline. Between a half and two thirds of the troops were still composed of men who were little better than armed civilians.16 Yet in theory there was no reason why these men should not have been turned into good soldiers: during the campaign that followed British observers fre­ quently found occasion to praise ‘the patience and ... the cheerful­ ness of the Spanish soldier under the greatest privations’.17 The problem was not so much the men as the officers. As the Duke of Wellington remarked long after the war had ended, ‘The Spaniards make excellent soldiers. What spoils them is that they have no confidence in their officers — this would ruin any soldiers — and how should the Spaniards have confidence in such officers as theirs?’18 In much the same vein in May 1812 he had written to Henry Wellesley, ‘Subordination and habits of obedience ... can be acquired by soldiers only in proportion as they have confidence in their officers: and they cannot have confidence in officers who have no knowledge of their profession, ... have no subordination among themselves, and never obey an order’.19 Wellington’s opinion of the Spanish officer corps was shared by many other British observers.20 It would be tempting to attribute the The war of the Junta Central 119 blame for this situation entirely to the influx of new officers who had entered the army in 1808. Many of the insurgent authorities had certainly showered commissions upon their supporters without any regard for their suitability. When the Supreme Council of War was charged with the task of examining the reasons for Spain’s defeats, it concluded that this rash of appointments had been amongst the most serious and proposed that every commission issued since 1808 should be annulled.21 By then, however, the damage had been done: because dismissing the new officers was clearly a political impossibi­ lity, Spain was left encumbered with a mass of officers who were so incompetent that they attracted the ridicule even of their own men.22 Yet this is too simplistic an explanation of the problem. There is considerable evidence to suggest that many of the men appointed to command the new regiments were actually drawn from the mass of retired and supernumerary officers that had existed before 1808. In some units between one third and one half the officers had actually seen service before 1808, whilst, of the thirty infantry captains in the Fourth Army who were eligible for promotion to the rank of sargento mayor in February 1813, only four had been civilians at the beginning of the war.23 To maintain that the revolution was solely responsible for the poor quality of the patriot officer corps would therefore appear to be wishful thinking. Reports of misconduct among the officer corps are in any case so common that it is impossible to believe that the problem was confi­ ned to any one group within its ranks. Aside from the question of incompetence, absenteeism was widespread.24 Rather than enduring the miseries of active service, many officers seized any available pretext to travel to such cities as Cádiz, Seville and La Coruna, in which sanctuaries they lived in the best style they could afford and served only ‘to make a military appearance in the streets and gaming houses’.25 The problem of absenteeism was compounded by the cavalier fashion in which many generals appointed serving officers rather than supernumeraries to be their aides-de-camp.26 On the battlefield many officers proved to be worse than useless, British observers accusing them of placing themselves in the rear of their regiments, so as to be ‘foremost in the front when running away’.27 So serious did the problem become that in 1809 the Junta Central attempted to deprive all infantry officers of their horses in order to prevent them from absconding so easily.28 The fact that they had horses at all is symptomatic of the indiscipline prevailing in the 120 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War officer corps, for the Ordenanzas did not permit officers below the rank of captain to be mounted. In a similar breach of regulations, large numbers of common soldiers were employed as servants, a practice that removed large numbers of troops from the fighting line (by 1811 it was estimated that at least ten per cent of the Cádiz garrison were so employed).29 Gambling and whoring were wide­ spread, whilst fanciful non-regulation uniforms and extravagant moustaches were very much de rigeur.30 Equally essential were vast quantities of baggage that served merely to encumber the movements of the Spanish armies.31 Far from attempting to set a good example to their subordinates, many senior officers were instead inclined to look upon their posts as ‘a recompense for the bad times they had endured in the lower ranks’.32 Corruption was common. On the one hand, generals commandeered much-needed military transport for the use of their large personal entourages, which often included their mistresses as well as numerous servants, barbers, cooks and valets.33 On the other, regimental commanders exaggerated their returns of strength, permitted their men to go sick on the slightest excuse, and connived at desertion so as ‘to receive to their own emolument the pay of those who shall fall short of the number’.34 With officers of this nature, it was impossible to expect that the Spanish levies could possibly have been transformed into an ade­ quate fighting force in the few months of respite bought by the victory of Bailén. Sapped not only by their lack of training, but by material wants of every description, the Spanish armies presented a sorry picture. Writing of the Army of Castile, for example, Whitting­ ham described it as ‘a complete mass of miserable peasantry, without clothing, without organization, and with few officers worthy of the name. The... principal officers have not the least confidence in their troops, and, what is yet worse, the men have no confidence in themselves’.35 His pessimism was shared by Lord William Bentinck who informed Lord Castlereagh that in the event of a French attack, ‘... the Spaniards could not much be counted upon. The ignorance and inexperience of their officers and men scarcely entitles them ... to the appellation of good and regular troops. In case of necessity... it would not be reasonable to place much dependence on the stea­ diness and support of a Spanish army constituted as they are at present’.36 Such worries were only too well founded. The history of the Spanish War of Independence is replete with examples of the fragility The war of the Junta Central 121 of armies such as those which faced the French along the Ebro in the autumn of 1808. In the first place, the reaction of raw troops to combat was quite unpredictable. Though sometimes capable of the utmost heroism, particularly in the defence of fortified positions, they were also liable to sudden outbreaks of panic, of which the routs that took place on the eve of the battle of Talavera (28 July 1809), and at the battle of Belchite (18 June 1809), provide excellent examples.37 Even when the Spaniards stood their ground, throughout the war the state of their drill was generally so poor that they were incapable of performing anything other than the simplest manoeuvres on the battlefield. As the Duke of Wellington complained to Henry Wellesley after the battle of Albuera (16 May 1811): The Spanish troops, I understand, behaved admirably. They stood like stocks, both parties at times firing upon them,