attempted to make good the shortfall by offering free pardons to bandits, smugglers and deserters who would agree to enlist.57 Reliance on the voluntary principle may have been politically necessary, but it could not provide the army with an adequate supply 126 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War of manpower, for the patriotic fervour of 1808 seems to have been insufficient to outweigh ingrained popular hostility to military service.58 Indeed, some British observers gained the impression that the Spanish people were not interested in fighting the French at all: as Sir George Jackson put it, that there was ‘much froth, but little substance’.59 Events such as the defence of Zaragoza demonstrate that these remarks were over-harsh, but it is hard to escape from the impression that the general desire to fight the French did not produce more than a limited number of recruits for the regular army: between May and November 1808 its strength only rose from 131,000 to 215,000 men.60 Even these forces could not be deployed to the best possible advantage. Because the new government had been unable to wrest de facto control of the armed forces from the provincial juntas, it could not prevent them from keeping a part of their troops at home, or at the very least from delaying their dispatch to the front.61 Not that the Junta Central was much better, however: the large numbers of troops belonging to the Army of Andalucia who were still in Madrid at the time of the French attack make it difficult to contest the allegations later made by General Castaños that the Junta had attempted to reinforce its domestic position with the aid of troops purloined from his army.62 As many other units were still not ready to take the field, the result was that only 150,000 men actually reached the front in time to meet the French counterattack.63 As Napoleon had amassed an army of over 230,000 men, the Spaniards were heavily outnumbered. They were also qualitatively inferior: unlike its predecessor, the new French Army of Spain was largely composed of the disciplined veterans of the Grande Armée. Nor were the Spanish forces on the Ebro concentrated to receive the impending blow. The council of war of 5 September 1808 had agreed to a joint plan of campaign which called for the bulk of the Spanish forces to mass in Old Castile. In the meantime, José Palafox was to attempt to turn the eastern flank of the French army which was then concentrated in the area between Miranda de Ebro, Vitoria and Pamplona.64 However, in the absence of a commander-in-chief, the plan had little chance of being carried into effect, and was soon ruined by the actions of General Blake. Blake had been extremely perturbed at the prospect of bringing the Army of Galicia, or, as it had now been renamed, of the Left, into the Castillian plains on account of his want of cavalry.65 Ignoring the agreed plan, he therefore advanced along the skirts of the Cantabrian mountains and The war of the Junta Central 127 then struck northeastwards towards Bilbao. Since Palafox had sim­ ultaneously advanced on the right flank, the outnumbered and inferior Spanish armies were now strung out along a very wide arc around their opponents, and were thus exposed to defeat in detail. As if that was not serious enough, there was a yawning gap in the centre of their line between Blake’s Army of the Left and Castaños’ Army of the Centre - a clumsy amalgam of the Armies of Andalucia, Castile, and Valencia and Murcia—which had moved forward to the line of the Ebro between Logroño and Tudela. The gap should have been filled by the Army of Extremadura, but this force had been badly delayed in reaching the front, and had only just begun to come up when the French offensive began in November. As a result, the main road to Madrid was almost undefended.66 Rather than concentrating their armies whilst there was still time in the favourable defensive positions offered by the line of the river Ebro, the Spaniards instead chose to compound their errors. At a second council of war held on 20 October Castaños and Palafox agreed that whilst they launched an offensive towards Pamplona, Blake should be requested to press eastwards along the coast towards Irun. The French would thereby be surrounded and forced to surrender in a gigantic repetition of the battle of Bailén.67 Fool­ hardy though this plan may have been, it is but fair to point out that the generals were no longer free agents. Thanks to the bombastic outpourings of the patriotic press and pernicious influence of the battle of Bailén, the civilian population had no conception either of the miserable state of the Spanish armies or of their dangerous strategic situation: not only were the people ‘exhibiting most happily the most perfect contempt for French courage’, but it was widely believed that 300,000 Spaniards faced perhaps 80,000 starving and disease ridden Frenchmen.68 The chances of disaster were now increased still further by a renewed outbreak of political intrigue. The advent of the Junta Central had not put an end to the political ambitions of José Palafox, who was still determined to purge all the partisans of Godoy who had survived the turmoil of May 1808. It was therefore inevitable that both Castaños and Blake should have attracted his particular enmity. Not only were both of them potential regents, but Castaños was one of the last of the commanders appointed by Godoy and Carlos IV still to retain his position. Moreover, his obvious patrio­ tism gave the lie to much of the black propaganda that had been French forces : Spanish forces : The war of the Junta Central 129 heaped upon the previous régime. In his own eyes Palafox therefore had good reason to remove both generals, and he was now provided with what seemed to be an excellent opportunity for doing so. The wild excitement generated by the battle of Bailén and the retreat of the French had created an expectation of further successes, but the expected victory had stubbornly failed to materialise. As the popu­ lation was completely unaware of the lack of men and supplies that had effectively paralysed the operations of the Spanish armies, it was an easy task for the palafoxistas to portray Castaños and Blake as being at the best lukewarm in their support for the patriot cause. Trading on the renown José Palafox had won from his successful defence of Zaragoza in the first campaign of 1808, his representa­ tives in the Junta Central, Francisco Palafox and Lorenzo Calvo de Rozas, began to poison the minds of their fellow deputies against the two generals. These intrigues soon bore fruit: Blake was sent a series of peremptory orders to advance immediately, and a military com­ mission dispatched to Castaños’ headquarters with the task of speeding up his operations.69 The composition of this body, which consisted of Francisco Palafox, the Conde de Montijo, and the Marqués de Coupigny, is significant. The vested interest of Francisco Palafox does not require further dilation, but it should be noted that both he and Montijo shared a common reputation as foolish and persistant troublemakers who were ever given to intrigue for its own sake. Montijo, moreover, was related to the Palafox family, and had been one of the leaders of the aristocratic clique who had engineered the coup at Aranjuez. As far as this group was concerned, a palafoxista dictatorship was now the only means of achieving their ends. As for the Marqués de Coupigny, he had commanded one of the two Spanish divisions that had borne the brunt of the fighting at Bailén, and had ever since been bitterly jealous of the fame which it had brought to Castaños.70 The disasterous effects of injecting political intrigue into the con­ duct of war soon made themselves apparent. During the second half of October substantial French forces had begun to press in upon Blake’s isolated position in Vizcaya, and had forced him to evacuate Bilbao. Blake should have retreated immediately, especially as the French were already threatening his line of retreat, but at the crucial moment a letter arrived from Francisco Palafox ordering him to attack the French.71 Paralysed by indecision, Blake wavered between the two alternatives, and was eventually defeated by the French at 130 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Espinosa de los Monteros on 10—11 November. Finally compelled to retreat, he then discovered that the invaders had blocked the road at Reinosa, leaving him with no option but to abandon all his guns and baggage, and to flee northwards into the wilds of the Cantabrian mountains from where the survivors of his army eventually reached safety in León. By then, however, Blake was no longer at their head. Back at Aranjuez, as Lord William Bentinck reported, ‘the Junta here are very impatient for the attack of [i.e. upon] the French, and are very angry both with Castaños and Blake for their apparent inactivity’.72 Even before the defeat of Espinosa it had therefore decided to replace the latter general with the Marques de la Romana, who was newly arrived from Denmark.73 His disgrace was soon shared by Castaños who since the end of October had been locked in conflict with the commission sent to his headquarters by the Junta Central. Far from aiding his operations, this body had been stirring up discontent among his subordinates and collaborating with José Palafox to make his task impossible.74 At the same time, mysterious rumours began to spread that Castaños was under the influence of creatures of Godoy and even that he was in the pay of the French.75 As Sir George Jackson noted, the result was that: Castaños is at present very unpopular at Madrid, and such is the state of the public mind ... that I would not answer for his life should he prove unsuccessful. Indeed, it appears to me that that he has no alternative but to conquer or fall gloriously on the field.76 With his erstwhile popularity reduced almost to nothing, the victor of Bailén was unlikely to survive the growing discontent. On 14 November the Junta ‘yielded to the popular demand which has generally and loudly condemned the inactivity and supineness of General Castaños’ and agreed to his replacement by the Marqués de la Romana.77 However, as La Romana was at that moment about to take the command of the Army of the Left in distant Cantabria, it was decided not to tell Castaños, but to leave him in situ until such time as his replacement could actually take up his new appointment (how La Romana was actually to take command of two armies at once was never made clear: there was no suggestion that he should ever be appointed as a central commander-in-chief).78 The chaos that beset the Spanish command could not have come at a worse time, for on 10 November the great offensive of the French The war of the Junta Central 131 army had finally begun under the command of Napoleon himself. Pouring through the gap in the Spanish centre, the invaders had overwhelmed the newly arrived Army of Extremadura outside Burgos at Gamonal (10 November 1808), and had then fanned out across the plains of Old Castile. Whilst the Emperor led one column southwards towards the capital, other forces struck out northwards and eastwards so as to surround the Armies of the Left and the Centre. Thanks to Blake’s break-neck flight across the Cantabrian mountains, the former managed to escape, but the paralysis which reigned in the headquarters of the latter prevented it from either escaping the trap that had been set for it, or from launching an offensive that might have diverted the attention of the enemy from a march on Madrid. After a fortnight of inconsequential manoeuv­ ring, quarrelling, confusion and intrigue, the combined forces of the Armies of the Centre and Aragón were beaten at Tudela on 23 November. Total disaster was only averted by the fact that the turning column sent by Napoleon from Old Castile to block the Spanish retreat had not been able to reach its designated posi