orenzo Calvo de Rozas.47 His dictatorship was now secure, but Palafox nevertheless felt the neces­ sity of providing it with a greater measure of legitimacy. To this end he convoked the long-since defunct Cortes of Aragón. When it assembled on 9 June, Calvo de Rozas demanded that it should appoint the Captain General Jefe Político y Militar - or, in other words, Dictator - of Aragon, but the Cortes refused to agree to this proposal. Instead, although quite prepared to confirm Palafox in the Captain Generalcy, it voted that a junta should be elected to exercise the sovereign power. Somewhat taken aback by this unexpected display of independence, Palafox responded by postponing birther discussion of the issue until the next session. There was no other session, however: before it could be held, the French had attacked The army and the revolution 93 the city, and thus put an end to all political discussion. In the meantime, Palafox's appointment as Jefe Político y Militar of Ara­ gón was brazenly published as fact, a lie that was thereafter consis­ tently to be maintained by all his numerous partisans.48 No civilian junta was ever formed in Zaragoza, Palafox remaining in power until the city finally succumbed to a second French siege in February 1809. His success was due in part to the prestige which accrued to him from the French failure to take Zaragoza in the siege of June—August 1808. At the same time, however, he was himself a part of the revolutionary movement. Ruling as a popular dema­ gogue, he was careful to retain the support of local society by showering his patronage upon all and sundry, abolishing unpopular measures of taxation, fraternising with the crowds, and appealing to the vanity of the population, not only by issuing a series of bombastic proclamations, but also by rewarding the popular heroes of the siege.49 In this manner, Palafox was able to escape from the onslaught experienced by many of his fellow officers even after they had joined the uprising. Had the purge of the high command solely been restricted to those generals who had refused to join the insurrec­ tion, then its traditional explanation would have continued to be acceptable. The very fact that the killings and arrests continued stands testimony to the presence of other explanations for the violence besides that of simple patriotism. In the Canaries, for example, the Captain General declared for the rising as soon as news of its outbreak had been received from the mainland, only to be overthrown by a group of his subordinates headed by Colonel Carlos O’Donnell.50 Nor was joining the patriots sufficient to save the Captain General of Galicia firstly from being replaced by the more malleable Joaquín Blake, and then from being murdered by a mob of his own soldiers.51 More junior officers also found themselves under attack: in Ronda, for example, a mob stormed the house of Pedro Agustín Girón after being persuaded by a friar that a guillotine was hidden there.52 It is difficult to pinpoint the responsibility for such attacks on particular individuals, but it is nevertheless apparent that the mood of anger and suspicion from which they sprang was in part the work of the army’s enemies. The clearest example of this process comes from Asturias where the ardent liberal Alvaro Florez Estrada forged a letter purporting to come from Fernando, in which he made the most unfavourable comparisons between the heroism of the Spanish people and the pusillanimity shown by los Castaños, Morias 94 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War y otros generales,53 The generals were also fettered by the provincial juntas’ efforts to ensure that the army would remain firmly under their control. Many of them placed their armed forces in the hands of new commanders who owed their advancement entirely to the revolution, as in Murcia and Asturias where the command was given to retired officers of the provincial militia.54 Another example is Joaquin Blake whom the Junta of Galicia promoted from the rank of Brigadier to that of Lieutenant General. Civilian commissioners were often sent to the various headquarters in the style of the répresentatives-en-mission of the French Revolution.55 The juntas could also rely upon their control of the sinews of war: as each provincial army was ‘dependent on its own junta for bread’, the commanders could simply be blackmailed into submission.56 The Junta of Seville provides an excellent example of how this control could be exerted. After the victory of Bailen (19 July 1808), in which the Spaniards forced an entire French army to surrender, the logical course would have been for General Castaños to have followed up his success as fast as possible. Instead, he was forced to return to Seville and prevented from marching on Madrid until it was clear that only in this fashion could the Junta ‘settle the government of the country according to their will and pleasure’. Despite the fact that the military situation demanded that he should now advance to the Ebro, he was not allowed to proceed a step further on pain of the pay and supply of his army being entirely cut off.57 The inability of the generals to resist such pressures did not bode well for the success of the war which the uprising had brought in its train. At this stage, however, their greatest problem was not so much their freedom of operation as the quality of the forces which they had at their disposal. The bulk of the old regular army had been deployed around the coast of Spain or in its maritime possessions so as to ward off potential British raids. A large part of it had therefore remained in Spanish hands, for the French zone of control was still limited to a corridor connecting the area around Madrid with the frontier for­ tresses of San Sebastián and Pamplona. Outside this axis the invaders only held Figueras and Barcelona. In all the patriots could reckon upon a little over 100,000 men, but, dispersed as they were, these troops were everywhere in need of reinforcement. Practically the first act of all the new authorities had therefore been to declare all men to be eligible for military service, although the number of volunteers The army and the revolution 95 was at first great enough to allow them to leave such measures in abeyance.58 As far as the generals were concerned, the ideal course would have been to channel the new levies into the units of the old army, as was actually done to some extent in both Galicia and Andalucia. In their eyes, any unit in which the proportion of raw recruits amounted to more than one third of the whole was not to be trusted in the slightest.59 In some cases, of course, such a policy was rendered impossible by the total absence of regular troops, as in both Old Castile and Aragón where Cuesta and Palafox were forced to form their levies into new regiments faut de mieux.60 The civilian notables had other ideas, however. Preferring to form ‘as many corps and companies as there were men of a certain influence desirous of a command*, they broke up such regular units as they had, or at least contrived to starve them of recruits.61 Their motives were simple. The patronage engendered by the creation of large numbers of new regiments would allow the provincial juntas both to gratify their own supporters, and to build up a substantial party in the officer corps whose interests would be bound up with the survival of the revolution. Should the juntas be so inclined, they would also be free to throw the military estate open to a far wider spectrum of society than had been the case before 1808. Whether this was actually done is a moot point, however: in an edict of 14 June 1808 the Junta of Seville stipulated that aspirants to the post of officer cadet would have to produce exactly the same documentation as they would have done before the revolution.62 At least two hundred new infantry regiments appeared in the course of 1808.63 Their organisation and strength varied enor­ mously, but the majority consisted of no more than a single battalion — as each regiment had its own headquarters, the more regiments that were created, the greater the patronage. Of negligible fighting value at the best of times, many of the new regiments did not even represent a notional addition to the army’s ranks. A number of them only existed on paper, notwithstanding the appointment of a full quota of officers. In Catalonia, for example, the provincial junta decreed the formation of forty Tercios de Miqueletes, each of one thousand men, only to find that the population would not enlist, preferring to serve in their traditional capacity as somatenes.64 Several other units, such as the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz, served no other purpose than to allow the notables to indulge in patriotic martial posturing and enjoy the fuero militar whilst yet 96 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War avoiding service in the field. Generally limited to those men who could afford to pay for their own uniforms and equipment, the members of these units were not expected to serve outside their own cities. At best, they could be regarded as a civic militia, whose job was as much to protect the notables from the mob as to protect Spain from the enemy.65 Spanish mobilisation in 1808 was also affected by the ingrained hostility to the army in general, and to military service in particular. Several officers who were engaged upon the organisation of resistance found themselves under attack by mobs who were con­ vinced that they were actually French agents.66 In Vizcaya, for example, the provincial junta refused to form any regular units at all, and chose instead to rely entirely upon bands of irregulars in the style of the Catalan somatenes.67 As for the general populace, they clearly preferred the picturesque and the novel to service in the ranks of the old army. When General Castaños* victorious troops finally entered Madrid after the battle of Bailén, the inhabitants showed no interest in the regular soldiers who had actually borne the brunt of the fighting, and instead flocked to see the Lanceros de Jerez, a troop of Andalucian horsemen dressed in bull fighting costume.68 An added inducement to enlist in the ranks of the new regiments was their high pay: whereas private soldiers in the regular army earned a meagre half a real per day, their counterparts in the new regiments received from three to six.69 The result was that the regulars often found it impossible to gain the recruits which they needed; still worse, they also lost many deserters to their rivals.70 The mere creation of masses of new regiments was not enough to prepare Spain for war against the French. As a later analysis put it: Victories are not won by large armies, but by those which are well organized and well constituted ... Experience has shown ... that the reunion of considerable forces, far from being useful, is harmful and disadvantageous unless they are disciplined ... Such masses of men, which are improperly given the name of divisions and armies, do not provide more than an apparent strength that, taken for real in moments of excitement and illusion, leads only to the most unfortunate disasters ... To create soldiers, it is not enough to issue uniforms to men whose individual courage is not matched by knowledge of military service ... a truth which is all the more apparent in arms like the cavalry and horse artillery where at least four months is needed to make a soldier.71 The rising, in short, had given Spain not an army, but the raw material of an army. Means had to be found by which the new levies The army and the revolution 97 could be armed and maintained, they had to provided with an adequate proportion of cavalry and artillery, and, above all, they had to be given the solidity and reliability of regular troops through the imposition of military discipline. Otherwise patriot Spain could expect only to be over-run. The central problem which she faced was how this was to be a