 in response to the ever more alarming reports that were arriving from Madrid and Bayonne.15 In his preparation of the uprising in Zaragoza, Palafox at least had the excuse that the Captain General was an avowed enemy of a popular revolt. Examples may also be found of conspiracies from which the legitimate authorities were excluded in the clear know­ ledge that the latter were actually in favour of resistance. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the chain of events surrounding the Captain General of Seville, the Marqués del Socorro. Socorro had been the commander of the Spanish division sent to invade 84 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Portuguese Extremadura in October 1807, and was currently at Badajoz following his abortive march on Aranjuez. On 4 May 1808 in company with the acting Captain General of Extremadura, the Conde de Torre del Fresno, he received a copy of the famous Bando de los Alcaldes de Móstoles, a call to arms that had been penned in the village of Mostóles in the wake of the Dos de Mayo and then distributed throughout southwestern Spain. A number of circumstances surrounding the Bando suggest that its authorities. Not only were all of its authors (an Intendant, an official of the Concejo Supremo del Almirantazgo and two village alcaldes) of the Concejo Supremo del Almirantazgo and two village alcaldes) quintessential civilian notables, but it was addressed not to the Captains General or their representatives, but to the local magis­ trates.16 Socorro and Torre del Fresno proved themselves worthy of greater faith, however. On 5 May they issued a proclamation stating that all good Spaniards should arm themselves, and ‘make ready to defend the fatherland’. In addition, messages were sent to many of their fellow military commanders, including the Captain General of the Campo del Gibraltar, Francisco Xavier Castaños, asking them for support.17 The response to this appeal raises serious questions with regard to the nature of the uprising. It was only to be expected that most of the generals contacted by Socorro and Torre del Fresno should have rebuffed their appeals, for many of them had already chosen the path of collaboration. The only exception was Castaños, but for reasons best known to himself he chose to not to reveal his own plans for revolt. Yet the general turmoil should surely have produced an enthusiastic response from the civilian population and the various interest groups who were implicated in the anti-French conspiracies. Nothing of the sort occurred, however: the proclama­ tion of 5 May was simply ignored. It would in consequence appear that the Spaniards were not prepared to accept the leadership of the military hierarchy, even when the latter were prepared to take action. For their part, Socorro and Torre del Fresno seem now to have despaired of all hopes of resistance. Leaving the Count at Badajoz, Socorro fled southwards to take refuge with the powerful garrison of Cádiz. Even as he did so, moves were already afoot to raise his Captain Generalcy in revolt against him. In Seville prepar­ ations for an uprising had been underway since the arrival in that city of one Nicolas Tap y Núñez, a successful entrepreneur who had been imprisoned by Godoy some years earlier on charges which Tap The army and the revolution 85 claimed to have been unjust. Motivated by a typical mixture of patriotism and revenge, he joined forces with a group of local patriots and discontented notables headed by the Conde de Tilly to subvert the garrison and and provoke an insurrection.18 The common theme that was shared by almost all the individual foci of revolt was a desire to overthrow the established military authorities. This goal proved attainable on account of the attitude adopted by most of the generals towards the uprising. Aside from Socorro and Torre del Fresno, the only senior officers prepared to do anything to instigate resistance to the French were Castaños and the Commandant General of Guipúzcoa, the Duque de Mahón. Even before the Dos de Mayo, Mahón had attempted to secure the border fortress of San Sebastian from the French, and then to raise the Basque provinces in revolt.19 In Andalucia, meanwhile, Castaños had been negotiating with the governor of Gibraltar, Sir Hew Dalrymple, with a view to securing British intervention in Spain. Fortified by Dalrymple’s promises of support, he eventually fixed upon Fernando’s santo — 30 May — as the day he would declare war on the French.20 These were very much the exceptions to the rule. Far from instigat­ ing resistance to the French, most generals attempted to calm the excited population in accordance with the instructions which they had received from from the French-controlled Junta de Gobierno in Madrid. In Valencia, Zaragoza, Granada and La Coruña, the Captains General sought to suppress the conspiracies that emerged in their garrisons.21 As for those generals caught in the French zone of occupation, they almost unanimously offered their services to the invaders.22 When the uprising actually broke out, a few senior officers did rally wholeheartedly to the patriot cause, including the Captain General of Canarias, the Marqués de Casa Cagigal, and the commanders at Oporto, Segovia, and Alcala de Henares.23 Such officers were in a minority, however: most commanders either opposed the rising or sought some means of temporising, only to find themselves assailed by charges of treason and cowardice.24 In the eyes of many generals, there were powerful military and political reasons why a popular rising should be opposed. An illumi­ nating example of their thinking is provided by a letter that was dispatched by Gregorio Garcia de la Cuesta, the Captain General of Old Castile, to the Ayuntamiento of León on 29 May 1808: 86 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War My mode of thinking is, and always will be, to conform exactly with that of my government. It is to the government, and not to private citizens, that the task of deliberating on the affairs of state corresponds. Anything else would be opposed to the first duties of a vassal and a Catholic, and would produce anarchy, that is, the destruction of the monarchy and the state ... All the members of the royal family have solemnly renounced their rights to the crown of Spain, absolving their vassals of their oaths of loyalty... We must therefore attempt nothing against their express determination, nor against the provisions of the Supreme Junta that governs us in the name of the Emperor of the French ... The Emperor will give us a King in these circumstances in which we neither have one nor know who has the right to act in this capacity. Thus, prudence and the private... good demand that we await this choice with tranquility. The indications are that it will be favour­ able to us since 150 enlightened Spaniards of all classes have already been called to Bayonne to propose and discuss the reforms necessary for the defence of this Kingdom. It is evident to me that all sensible and patriotic Spaniards think in the same manner, but as there are many among the masses who do not reason ... they are unfortunately being swept towards an insurrection ... by the sort of malevolent and rebellious men who always hope to prosper from disorder ... In whose cause will they fight? Who will lead them? How will they be supplied with arms, munitions and supplies, supposing that all prudent and sensible men will be on the opposing side in order to defend their existence and property? What successes could an undisciplined mob be sure of against veteran armies? ... if against all expectation they were to prevail, do they not consider that their own leaders would be bound to dispute the supreme command, and finish up by completely destroying their liberty and existence?25 That Cuesta was no coward is obvious from his later record in the War of Independence: until he was incapacitated by a stroke in August 1809, he fought a series of campaigns that showed him to be an implacable opponent of the French, albeit one without much military talent. Instead, he was bound by legitimist thinking, and convinced that a rising would lead not only to revolution, but also to military catastrophe: in his memoirs he specifically points out the defenceless nature of Old Castile, which was virtually devoid of regular troops and could easily be overrun by the French.26 When revolt broke out in his capital of Valladolid on 1 June 1808 in response to the news of the risings elsewhere, he at first refused to grant the demands of the crowd that he take command of the insurrection, and is supposed eventually to have done so only when he was actually dragged out for execution. Self-preservation was undoubtedly the major reason for his capitulation, but it is still significant that he later chose to rationalise it by reference to the need The army and the revolution 87 to bring the rebellious multitude to military and political order. As he wrote to the insurgent Junta of León: Since I am unable to resist the torrent of public opinion, it would appear necessary to give way before it and ... through the imposition of military discipline... direct its impulse towards the best order possible.27 Cuesta had been extremely lucky. A noted opponent of Godoy, Fernando had rewarded him with the Captain Generalcy of Old Castile. As a result, he possessed sufficient prestige for the patriots to look upon him as the natural leader of the uprising, notwithstanding the fact that it had been the work of ‘country gentlemen and various other persons of science and probity’ - or, in short, the civilian notables.28 Few other commanders shared his good fortune, as may be seen from the case of the Marqués del Socorro. Following the failure of the call to arms that he had issued in the immediate aftermath of the Dos de Mayo, Socorro had come to the conclusion that the only sensible option was to collaborate with the French. He was confirmed in this belief by the sudden appearance of a British fleet off Cádiz on 24 May. Unbeknown to Socorro, its presence was the work of General Castaños who had arranged for the Royal Navy to neutralise the French squadron that had been sheltering in Cádiz ever since the battle of Trafalgar. Completely unaware of Castaños’ activities, Socorro immediately assumed that Cádiz was under attack. Rejecting the British admiral’s protestations of friendship, he strengthened the town’s seaward defences and appealed to Marshal Murat for help. Amusingly enough, Socorro actually sent a message to Castaños warning him of the impending British assault, but even when he was informed of the true state of affairs, the Marquess still refused to co-operate, apparently on the grounds that bringing in the British to eject the French would merely be to replace one foreign domination by another.29 Unrest was growing in Cádiz, however, and on 28 May it exploded into revolt. Whilst a large crowd besieged Socorro’s palace, the Conde de Montijo presented him with the demands of the Junta of Seville that he join the uprising forthwith. Seeing that he had no option but to comply, Socorro gave way, but in so unenthusiastic a manner as effectively to sign his own death warrant. As with Cuesta’s letter to the Ayuntamiento of León, the proclamation issued by the council of war which Socorro summoned to decide on what to do provides valuable evidence of the proccupations of the generalato. After commencing by stating his pleasure 88 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War at the patriotism of the inhabitants of Cádiz, Socorro went on to point out that an uprising would nevertheless amount to the height of folly. Cádiz would be left exposed to British treachery; the harvest would be lost for want of labour; the improvised levies who would constitute the bulk of Spain’s forces would be certain of defeat; and the French would be justified in inflicting the most severe punishment upon the civilian population for having had the temerity to