 interfere in the conduct of war. In addition, Socorro maintained that resistance was not only futile but unnecessary, given that the Spanish royal family had abdicated their rights to the throne of their own free will, and had never ceased to proclaim their friendship with Napoleon. If the population nevertheless insisted on going to war, then Socorro would agree to lead them, but only if they would accept the need to accept military discipline and to form into regular units, for he would not be responsible for the masssacre that would other­ wise be certain to ensue. Above all, the people must realise that they were on the brink of a long and bitter struggle that would require a major financial and economic, as well as military, effort.30 Realistic though these words were, they were hardly calculated to reassure the increasingly angry crowd of Socorro’s enthusiasm for the cause. After a night of growing tension, rioting broke out, almost certainly at the instigation of the Conde de Montijo, whose very presence suggests the existence of a fernandino plot to remove Socorro from power. The troops then went over to the mob, and the unfortunate Marquess was dragged out of his palace and murdered.31 Between them Cuesta and Socorro may stand as exemplars for the rest of the generalato. Their refusal to consider the idea of a people’s war was mirrored by the Captain General of Aragón, who described the zaragozanos* desire to turn themselves into soldiers overnight as ‘a ridiculous pretension’.32 Their suspicions of the British were the reflection of a widespread distrust of ‘perfidious Albion’, which the outbreak of war did nothing to relieve. Even the staunchly patriotic Castaños had refused to accept Dalrymple’s maladroit suggestions that British troops should garrison Cádiz, Ceuta and Menorca, and that Britain should be granted ‘commercial advantages to enable her to sustain the contest in which she was engaged’.33 In the same way, the Captain General of Mallorca at first would not send troops to the mainland for fear that the British would take advantage of their absence to seize the island, whilst the provincial juntas proved most unwilling to allow British troops to land at major ports such as Cádiz The army and the revolution 89 and La Coruña.34 Finally, their fear of popular disorder was not only shared by generals who had opposed the uprising or only joined it under pressure. If Socorro’s successor, Tomás de Moria, who was one such officer, issued a series of proclamations that were expressly calculated to suppress popular enthusiasm, similar fears were also expressed by such supporters of the patriot cause as Blake and Palafox.35 Opposition to the rising proved unavailing. In the last resort the authority of the Captain General, like that of the absolute monarchy itself, rested on the bayonets of the standing army. That the rank and file and many junior officers were no longer to be trusted was clearly shown by events in the French zone, Portugal and Denmark. Napoleon had assumed that the 28,000 Spanish troops whose garri­ sons had actually been occupied, or who were serving with his forces outside Spain, could simply be incorporated into the imperial war machine. Nothing could have been further from the truth. The only units to accept their new masters with docility were the Swiss regi­ ments of Reding mayor and Preux, but both of them went over to the patriots as soon as they were hazarded on the field of battle. As for the rest of the troops, many regiments chose either to disband themselves or to march to join the patriots en masse. Officers who refused to co-operate were attacked and deposed, or simply aban­ doned to their own devices. Those regiments which did not join the insurrection as a body experienced wholesale desertion and in some cases disintegrated altogether.36 The unrest even spread to the 13,000 Spanish troops cantoned in distant Denmark. Although deeply unhappy at the turn which events had taken, their comman­ der, the Marqués de la Romana, could see no means by which he could take action, and therefore sought to temporise with the French. Even when he was provided with the hope of rescue by the Royal Navy, the accounts of his subordinates suggest that his vacilla­ tions were only brought to an end by the threatening attitude adopted by the officers and men under his command.37 With their troops in this temper, the generals had no hope of restoring order; indeed, to attempt to do so was often literally suicidal. In the first few days of the rising, aside from the Marqués del Socorro, the Conde del Torre del Fresno, the Captain General of the Naval Department of Cartagena, and the military governors of Villafranca de Panades, Tortosa, Málaga and Ciudad Rodrigo were all murdered. Amongst the many officers who were deposed and 90 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War imprisoned were the Captains General of Aragón and Catalonia, and the Commandant General of the Costa de Asturias y Santander.38 Those who succeeded in escaping the purge only did so by throwing in their lot with the insurgents, albeit with varying degrees of enthusiasm. If some, like Cuesta, were to serve the patriot cause without reserve, others remained opposed to the rising, sending secret appeals to the French for help and attempting to sabotage the insurgents’ operations. In a few cases, like that of Tomás de Moria, they merely bided their time until a suitable opportunity came for them to escape.39 The established order having thus been swept away, the way was open for the creation of new organs of political authority. In most areas of Spain, these took the form of a network of local and provincial juntas. The membership of these committees generally consisted of the original leaders of the insurrection, to whom was added an admixture of notables who were elected or co-opted from the local community. Often presided over by leading churchmen or even those generals who had survived the initial turmoil, these bodies may nevertheless be said to have been dominated by the civilian notables. The spectre of military authority was still not laid to rest, however, for few generals followed the example of Francisco Xavier Castaños who had immediately placed his troops at the disposition of the Junta of Seville.40 So strong was the habit of giving way to the claims of the army that the civilians found themselves unable to press home their advantage. In Catalonia the provincial junta had deposed the existing Captain General, the Conde de Espeleta, in favour of the Marqués del Palacio. However, it first allowed itself to be beguiled into transferring itself from Lérida to Palacio’s headquarters at Tarragona, and was then overawed into offering him not only the presidency of the Junta, but also supreme executive authority.41 Elsewhere, rather than seeking to insinuate themselve into the confi­ dence of the juntas as in the case of Palacio, the generals instead chose the path of open confrontation through the formation of personal dictatorships. These attempts may be classified as having either been ‘legitimist’, in that they justified themselves by reference to the viceregal status enjoyed by the Captains General before 1808, or ‘populist*, in that they based themselves upon an appeal to the crowd. Of the former, the best example is the régime established by Garcia de la Cuesta in Old Castile. Despite the fact that he had almost no regular troops The army and the revolution 91 with which to back up his authority, Cuesta was able to browbeat his civilian rivals into accepting him as their master. A provincial junta was established at Valladolid, but its function was simply to maintain order, enlist recruits and amass the sinews of war.42 Cuesta’s political survival was in part a tribute to the strength of his character, which by all accounts was particularly obdurate, but a number of other factors also reinforced his position. Unlike Catalo­ nia or Valencia, for example, Old Castile did not have a recent tradition of resistance to the Bourbon monarchy or its representa­ tives. In addition, unlike most of his fellows, Cuesta carried with him the seal of Fernando Vil’s personal approval. For the time being, therefore, no one sought openly to challenge his position. Yet as soon as this was done, the Captain General was found to be a ‘paper tiger’: in an era where power in the last resort rested upon an appeal to the populace, the forms of the ancien régime could not survive unless backed up by the sort of military force that was no longer available to Cuesta or any of his fellows. The fragility of his position is demonstrated by the fate of the Conde de Conquista when he attempted to establish a similar regime in Valencia. Having initially agreed to accept the presidency of the provincial junta, he suddenly assumed supreme political and military authority and ordered the arrest of all those who refused to obey him. Supported by the crowd, his civilian subordinates promptly threatened to put him on trial for treason. With his bluff having thus been called, Conquista had no option but to relinquish his ambitions.43 The weakness of the legitimist position is underlined by the survival of the dictatorship established by José Palafox in Zaragoza. A similar example of populist militarism may be found in Córdoba where the commander of the local Resguardo, Pedro Agustin Echávarri, briefly set himself up as dictator of the city. However, defeated by the French at Alcolea on 7 June 1808, Echávarri was soon forced to flee.44 Palafox proved far more durable. Whereas Cuesta had essentially ruled in opposition to the notables and the mob, Palafox was from the very start careful to co-opt the former and to shelter behind the latter: as one, admittedly hostile, observer put it, ‘Palafox governed Zaragoza in the midst of confusion; the agitators who acted as the instruments of his power made speeches in front of his lodging... demanding in the name of the people that which he wished to be done.’45 An examination of the manner in which he gained power certainly reveals both a high degree of stage 92 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War management, and total reliance upon popular pressure. When the growing discontent spilled over into an uprising on 24 May 1808, Palafox was still in hiding outside the city. Guillelmi having been deposed following his refusal to arm the people, the conspirators incited the crowds to call for his replacement by Palafox. As soon as the cry had been taken up, one of their members was immediately on hand to lead a delegation to fetch that officer from his hiding place. Palafox affected surprise and even terror at their appearance, and then adopted an attitude of the most exaggerated reticence, refusing to accept the command unless it was offered him with proper form by the Audiencia. By the time that body had been assembled two days later, the mob had worked itself into a frenzy and was threaten­ ing the unfortunate councillors with death. Yet Palafox still refused to give way and the ensuing delay gave rise to rumours that he was being detained against his will. The Audiencia’s palace was promptly invaded, and its terrified occupants had to beg Palafox on bended knee to save them. Having thus created the impression of being a selfless patriot pushed to the fore by forces beyond his control, he at last agreed to accept the Captain Generalcy, though not without a further display of reluctance.46 On taking power, the new Captain General’s first action was to rid himself of the godoyista Intendant, Ignacio Garciny. The rising had caught Garciny in Madrid where he had gone in an apparent attempt to ingratiate himself with Fernando VII. As soon as he heard of events in Zaragoza, he wrote to Palafox to offer his services, but all his approaches were ignored and he was not even permitted to return. Instead, Palafox replaced him with one of his chief confeder­ ates, a wealthy merchant named L