chieved in the midst of war and revolution. Aided by the financial and material assistance that began to pour in from Great Britain, the contents of Spain’s own arsenals, and the contributions of the population, the new authorities were at first able to dominate the logistical question, albeit in a somewhat haphazard fashion: General Castaños’ Army of Andalucia was already going hungry as early as the battle of Bailén.72 A more immediate problem was posed by the question of discipline. Many of the levies immediately deserted or simply dispersed to their homes, whilst others perpetrated serious disorders in the pursuit of rabid witch­ hunts against suspected traitors. Attempts to curb their exhorbitant pay were met by riots, and they often proved a greater terror to the civilian population than the French.73 It was therefore not long before even the provincial juntas began to see the value of military discipline as means of controlling the popular disorder which they had themselves unleashed.74 Yet the levies often refused to be disci­ plined. In Jaca, Santander and Oviedo officers who attempted to bring their troops to order were immediately accused by them of trying to stifle their patriotic spirit.75 However, for all their refusal to allow themselves to be militarised, the patriot levies were as voci­ ferous in demanding that they be led against the French as they were prone to accuse their generals of treason if they proved unwilling to do so.76 Given time there was no reason why the levies should not have been turned into soldiers, but time was not a commodity that was possessed by the insurgents. As the French responded to the uprising by sending out punitive expeditions in all directions, fighting actually began almost immediately. The result was predictable. As a British liaison officer wrote in 1809: Crowds flocked to arms, but while untaught to bear them were from time to time hazarded all at once in the field, creating confusion from the want of military knowledge of their leaders as well as their unsteadiness... Though in some instances I have observed that the ... peasantry have acted against the enemy with peculiar resolution and resistance, it has always been in very particular actions, in strong passes, in woods, or where 98 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War the knowledge of the country has peculiarly favoured them. Almost in every instance where reliance has been placed upon the favourable results of a general action in which the Spanish troops were employed, combined with the new militia and peasantry, a failure has been the consequence.77 Nobody could deny the courage of the Spanish levies. Placed in a situation where they were not required to manoeuvre and where they were safe from the French cavalry, they displayed a ferocity that astonished even their own leaders. Hence the failure of the French assaults on the cities of Valencia, Zaragoza and Gerona. In the open, however, they were absolutely helpless. The very men who put up such a desperate resistance at Zaragoza had only days before been scattered by the French with almost no loss to themselves at Tudela, Mallén and Alagón. Moreover, however long it would have taken, even Zaragoza must ultimately have fallen had not the French aban­ doned the siege in the wake of the battle of Bailen. The civilian defenders might have fought the French to a standstill in the streets of the city, but they could not forever have remained impervious to the establishment of a proper blockade: the most exalted patriotism is not proof against starvation. The real salvation of Zaragoza may be regarded as the victory of Bailén. So influential were the myths generated by this battle that for once it is worth examining its campaign history in some detail. On 24 May a French column commanded by General Dupont had set out from Madrid with orders to crush the Andalucian insurgents and secure the vital port of Cádiz. On 7 June Dunpont defeated Echávarri at Alcolea, and went on to sack the defenceless city of Córdoba. Alarmed at his own isolation, he had then drawn back to Andujar to await reinforcements. His inactivity continued for some weeks, dur­ ing which time Castaños was able to prepare his army for action. Eventually forced to move against Dupont by popular pressure, at least he was able to do so with the cohesion of his forces still intact: having been badly shaken by the fate of Echávarri’s levies at Alcolea, the Junta of Seville had permitted Castaños to fill up the ranks of the old regiments and even to send home a mass of unwanted recruits.78 Profiting from Dupont’s continued inactivity, Castaños had decided to envelop his opponent. Pinning him down with a demon­ stration in his front, he dispatched the divisions of Reding and Coupigny along the south bank of the Guadalquivir with orders to cross the river further east and then to strike northwards to cut the main road to Madrid. Unknown to the Spanish commander, The army and the revolution 99 •JAEN French Farces: C2-» Spanish forces: 3 The campaign of Bailén however, Dupont had received the divisions of Gobert and Vedel from Madrid as reinforcements. Gobert’s troops were mostly eche­ loned along the high road to protect communications with Madrid, but Vedel was stationed at the town of Bailén, sixteen miles to the east of Andujar, where he was well positioned to repel any thrust on the part of Reding and Coupigny: indeed, the mere news of his presence proved sufficient to deter the former from attempting to cross the Guadalquivir on 15 July. Matters would now have remained at a stalemate, but for the fact that on the same day Castaños had demonstrated against Dupont’s position at Andujar with such determination that the Frenchman had concluded that he was heavily outnumbered and had sent to General Vedel asking him for reinforcements. Vedel had in the meantime concluded that Reding, whose performance on 15 July can only be described as lacklustre, was no threat to his position. Receiving Dupont’s mes­ sage, he marched to join his chief with his entire command, except 100 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War for a small detachment that was left to watch the Guadalquivir. He arrived at Andujar on the afternoon of 16 July, only to discover that Castaños had never pressed his attack. Moreover, in Vedel’s absence from Bailén, on the morning of 16 July Reding had fallen upon his rearguard at Mengibar. Although they were supported by a detach­ ment of Gobert’s division, the French were routed and forced to flee north-eastwards along the road to Madrid. Vexatious as this was, the French position was still very strong. With 21,000 men concentrated at Andujar, Dupont could launch a sudden strike on either Castaños or Reding, and defeat them before they could come to each other’s aid. Instead of doing so, however, he chose to send Vedel back to Bailén with orders to chase Reding back over the Guadalquivir. Meanwhile, Dupont himself would continue to watch Castaños at Andujar. On the morning of 17 July Vedel duly marched back to Bailén, but when he got there he could find no trace of Reding. Hearing rumours that a Spanish force had seized the passes by which the road to Madrid crossed the Sierra Morena, Vedel immediately assumed that they must belong to Reding and set off in pursuit, continuing his march as far as La Carolina where he picked up the troops who had been defeated at Mengibar. In reality, however, Reding had merely fallen back across the river in order to rest his troops. It was only after being joined by the division of General Coupigny (which had spent the previous few days demonstrating against the ford of Villanueva midway between Andujar and Mengibar) on 18 July that Reding bestirred himself and marched to occupy Bailén. Bivouacking there that evening, he planned to move on Andujar the next morning. To his astonishment, however, at dawn on 19 July he was himself attacked by Dupont. Although he had had no idea that Bailén was in danger, Dupont had still become alarmed at the gap which had opened between himself and Vedel, especially as it had become clear that only a part of the Spanish army was facing him at Andujar. On the morning of 18 July the French general had therefore resolved to retreat. Had this deci­ sion been implemented immediately, there seems little doubt that Dupont could have got away, but a number of factors led him to delay his march until nightfall, thereby enabling Reding and Coupigny to get across his line of march. Even though the French army had been split in two and a part of it trapped, all was not yet lost. On the one hand, Dupont had sufficient forces with him to stand a reasonable chance of breaking through had he launched them The army and the revolution 101 against the Spaniards in a concentrated mass. On the other, it was open to Vedel, who had now decided to return to Bailén, to take Reding and Coupigny in the rear. Yet neither occurred: whilst Dupont squandered his forces in a series of piecemeal assaults that the Spaniards were easily able to beat off, Vedel was so dilatory in his return that he only arrived when the battle was already lost. With his artillery silenced, every unit in his army defeated, his troops exhausted by the effects of a night march and then a day of battle without water in the full heat of an Andalucian summer, and Casta­ ños’ main body rapidly coming up in his rear, Dupont was forced to surrender. Even then, Vedel might still have got away, for his troops were still intact and possessed a safe line of retreat to Madrid. However, the Spaniards secured his capitulation as well by promising that all the French forces would be returned to France by sea. As a result, some 19,000 men fell into Spanish hands. In view of its immense repurcussions, it is important that the battle of Bailén should be placed in perspective. The troops of Reding and Coupigny had fought extremely well, but they had only had to face around half the forces available to the French, Dupont having been accompanied by only 11,000 men. Dupont’s troops had been as mediocre as his conduct of the battle, whilst those of Castaños had largely consisted of disciplined veterans. Disastrous though Bailén was, there was also no reason why the mass of French troops still in central and northern Spain could not have maintained their positions until such time as reinforcements had been sent by Napoleon. Rather than standing their ground, however, on 1 August the French evacu­ ated Madrid, and retired behind the river Ebro. Not only had the campaign been lost by the French rather than won by the Spaniards, but tiie contribution of the Spanish people was by no means so great as was later to be claimed by proponents of the Nation-in-Arms. Popular resistance had certainly helped demoralise the French, whilst armed civilians had fought with great courage in the defence of beleaguered Spanish cities. In the field, however, the raw levies had proved to be a liability. Problems even occurred when they were employed in guerrilla operations. In Catalonia, for example, although the somatenes proved adept at harassing the French columns, they could never be relied upon to appear at a given place and time, and were notoriously unwilling to serve outside their home districts.79 If the French were soon bottled up in Figueras and Barcelona, the situation would undoubtedly have been different had 102 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War the invaders had more troops at their disposal, or the somatenes not been supported by regular troops brought from the Balearic islands. Patriot Spain was blind to such nuances, however. Thanks in large part to the powerful undercurrent of anti-militarism which had accompanied the uprising, both the provincial juntas and the press represented the Spanish successes as die fruit of popular heroism and magnified them beyond all reason. Just as Dupont’s half-trained conscripts were described as ‘the conquerors of the world*, so