 minor Spanish victories were compared to those of Jena and Auerstadt.80 The press, in particular, became ever more euphoric, inventing victo­ ries were none had taken place, playing down the significance of Spain’s frequent defeats and giving credence to foolish rumours, of which perhaps the most absurd was that the Spanish uprising had inspired the people of France to overthrow Napoleon.81 Whilst it could be argued that such propaganda was necessary to encourage popular resistance, its effects were to some extent counter-produc­ tive, for patriot Spain became filled with increasing over-confidence and complacency.82 A further obstacle to the effective prosecution of military operations existed in the political struggle that now broke out over the establishment of a new central government. At the beginning of the uprising, the fragmentation of Spain into its consti­ tuent regions had been a positive blessing, for the French had been denied the chance to decapitate the uprising at its very inception.83 A consolidation of authority was now essential, however, for, as one British liaison officer wrote: No regular or combined system of action is to be expected from any of the armies, whose movements and operations have nothing to depend upon but the caprices of the respective juntas, who are solely activated by narrow­ minded, short-sighted policy, never extending their views beyond the pre­ cincts of their respective districts.84 According to the general report, the administration of the juntas left much to be desired owing to the incompetence, ambition and inexperience of many of their members.85 If such charges are perhaps too sweeping, their attitude to the common cause certainly left much to be desired. For example, having first declared itself to be the supreme government of Spain and the Indies, the Junta of Seville embarked upon a blatant programme of empire building, sending out emissaries to take control of Cádiz, Granada and Badajoz. Socorro’s murder brought Cádiz within its orbit almost immediately, but Badajoz and Granada both refused to accept its The army and the revolution 103 tutelage. A move on the part of the Conde de Tilly to bring the latter to heel by the dispatch of an army was only scotched by General Castaños. Unable to overcome the resistance of its Spanish rivals, the Junta then switched its attention to the annexation of southern Portugal.86 In the meantime, it also sought to make an alliance with the Juntas of Galicia and Catalonia by suggesting that the three of them should divide Spain between them, and rule in conjunction with one another.87 Similar aspirations were displayed elsewhere. The Junta of Galicia attempted to establish its preponderance in the northwest through the establishment of a Cortes del Norte which would bring the Juntas of Asturias and Old Castile under its influence.88 The Junta of Extremadura attempted to seize the Portuguese fortress of Elvas.89 In Aragón, José Palafox had been extending his power base by sending out officers, arms and supplies to many towns within a wide radius of his capital.90 From the very beginning of the uprising, he and his supporters made repeated calls for the election of a single regent - who would presumably be none other than Palafox himself - to rule Spain in the absence of the monarch.91 These ambitions and jealousies inevitably had a severe impact on the war effort. Often threatened by rival factions in their own districts, the various authorities attempted to retain as many troops under their direct control as possible. When the Junta of Seville refused to permit Castaños to march on Madrid, the Juntas of Granada and Jaén demanded the return of the troops they had 'lent* him for the campaign of Bailén.92 The Junta of Asturias consistently refused to send more than a token force of troops beyond its borders on the grounds that it needed the bulk of its forces to maintain order at home.93 Because they were the only regular troops that he had, Cuesta refused to send his cavalry to join the Army of Galicia, even though they were of no use to him on their own and could greatly have facilitated the operations of General Blake.94 Thanks to the Junta of Extremadura’s designs on Elvas, a large part of its forces had still not reached the front when the French finally launched their counterattack in November.95 With their British allies becoming increasingly restive, it was clear even to the most obstreperous of the new authorities that they would have to agree to the formation of a central government. Under what auspices this should be done was unclear, however. The institutions of the ancien régime were both unrepresentative and 104 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War politically suspect. Nor were the provincial juntas prepared to toler­ ate a military dictatorship camouflaged as a regency. As the Junta of Seville argued in a proclamation of 3 August 1808: ... the moment has arrived to establish a civil government of the entire nation... to which the military will be subordinated. The confidence of the nation - and by implication its resources and wealth — will necessarily be given to the civil government. Without the civil government, the army would find itself in the indispensable necessity of having to use violence to obtain support. It could never win the confidence of the public by such means, however, any more than it would be able to make use of the nation’s resources, so that it would end by destroying the general good ... which is the sole aim of all government. Do not let us vainly flatter ourselves with talk of the dictators of Rome ... Very wise restrictions were placed upon them and... their powers limited to a very brief period. The risk of despotism... forced the adoption of very strict precautions which the customs of our times no longer permit. Spain has learnt wisely from past centuries. She has never established a military dictator. Her military commanders ... have been the first to embrace this state of affairs, which is as old as the monarchy itself.96 An interim solution to the problem was eventually found in a plan that had originally been put forward by the Junta of Murcia. Each provincial junta was to send two representatives to a national con­ gress known as the Junta Central that would elect a new government.97 The Junta of Seville jibbed at these proposals, but threats from the British, popular unrest and its own fear of the military soon convinced it of the need to give way. After some negotiation it was duly agreed that the congress should meet at the neutral site of Aranjuez.98 The revolutionary authorities were not alone in their contemplation of the formation of a new government. In Madrid a legitimist faction had coalesced around the Council of Castile which had been attempting to promote its own claims in this area ever since the French had evacuated Madrid.99 Its president, the Duque del Infantado, had accompanied Fernando to Bayonne, but had then joined the suite of Joseph Bonaparte. Returning to Madrid with el rey intruso, he had changed sides again on the arrival of the news of Bailen. Yet this display of opportunism had not been suffi­ cient to deter the British liaison officer, Charles Doyle, from encou­ raging him to ‘crush private piques ... and pour the energies of the different provinces into one stream’.100 Why Doyle should have placed such confidence in the Duke is unclear: not only had he been totally discredited by his defection to King Joseph, but the accounts of his vapidity are legion.101 At the same time, the Council of The army and the revolution 105 Castile’s unpopularity was shown by the contemptuous reception given to its attempts to seize the leadership of patriot Spain.102 Doyle’s flattery was nevertheless sufficient to encourage Infantado to approach his fellow generals for support. Hardly surprisingly, Blake would not co-operate, but Cuesta was delighted to join the plot.103 The dictator of Old Castile had never reconciled himself to the revolution, and had quickly become embroiled in a series of disputes with the civilian authorities. His relations were especially poor with the Junta of Galicia, which had been pressing him to send his handful of regular cavalry to join Blake’s army. His anger was exacerbated by the defeat of Medina de Rio Seco (14 July 1808), which Cuesta attributed to Blake’s failure to give him adequate support (Blake, in contrast, blamed the defeat on Cuesta).104 The conflict was fuelled by the political situation in Old Castile. The president of Cuesta’s puppet junta, Antonio Valdés, had soon tired of the Captain General’s pretensions. After Medina de Río Seco, he had therefore fled to join the Cortes del Norte, whose authority he was now ordering Cuesta to recognise.105 Even with Cuesta’s support, Infantado still needed the help of General Castaños. Not only did Castaños command the largest army in Spain, but he had acquired immense prestige from his victory at Bailén. In return for his assistance in crushing the provincial juntas, he was offered a place in a triumverate composed of himself, Cuesta and Infantado, which would govern Spain with the aid of the Council of Castile. However, unlike most of his fellows, Castaños was realistic enough to realise that the revolution had to be accepted as a fait accompli, and would therefore only agree to the convocation of a council of war that would elect a commander-in-chief.106 Within a very few days his common sense had been vindicated, first of all by the result of the council of war of 5 September, and then by the downfall of General Cuesta. As the council of war could not even agree on a common candidate for the post of supreme commander, it is hard to see how the generalato could have found the unity neces­ sary to bring about a successful military coup.107 The impotence of the generals was underlined by the collapse of Cuesta’s dictatorship as soon as he attempted to challenge the new government. At the Cortes del Norte, the fugitive Junta of Old Castile had selected Valdés and the Marques de Quintanilla to be its representatives to the proposed congress at Aranjuez. To reach their destination, however, they had to cross Cuesta’s domain. Furious at 106 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War what he regarded as a fresh act of defiance, the Captain General arrested them at Segovia on charges of treason and rebellion.108 This action naturally excited a great deal of alarm, but the nascent Junta Central refused to be over-awed. Its president-designate, the Conde de Floridablanca, wrote to Cuesta ordering him to release his prisoners immediately, relinquish the command of his army, and come to Aranjuez to stand trial. Moreover, the two deputies who had been sent to act in place of Valdés and Quintanilla were refused recognition.109 Cuesta’s first reaction was to claim that the Junta Central had no authority other than to elect a regency.110 His defiance met with no support, however. Castaños wrote to him condemning his actions out of hand, and warning that they could provoke civil war.111 Even the Council of Castile disowned his rebellion and advised him to submit.112 Sensing the direction in which events were moving, the officer whom Cuesta had placed in charge of the captives decided to release them. Deserted by his own subordinates and deprived of his hostages, Cuesta had no option but to surrender and come to Aranjuez as ordered. It was to little avail that the Supreme Council of War later determined that he had acted within his rights: by that time, the Army of Castile had been disban­ ded and amalgamated with the forces of General Castaños.113 Cuesta’s humiliation left the way clear for the establishment of the Junta Central. Most of the provincial juntas had intended that this body should either elect a new government or function as a mere co-ordinating committee that would direct their efforts towards a common goal.114 In the event, however, on 26 September