 but they were quite immovea­ ble, and this is the great cause of all our losses. After they had lost their position, the natural thing to do would have been to attack it with the nearest Spanish troops, but they could not be moved. The ... Spaniards can do nothing but stand still, and we consider ourselves fortunate if they do not run away. In view of the vital role played by the Spaniards at Albuera, these words must be considered somewhat churlish. Yet the fact remains that as late as 1812, Wellington was still being forced to complain that the Spaniards could ‘neither advance nor retreat in order’, all their movements being carried out ‘à la débandade9.39 In practical terms, therefore, the Spanish armies could at best be expected either to march directly upon the enemy or to defend a position against attack. As long as no crisis intervened, they could generally be relied upon to to carry out either role with considerable determination. Although both battles were ultimately lost, the attacks delivered by the Spaniards at the battles of Valls and Medellín (25 February and 29 March 1809) stand witness to the courage with which they were capable of pressing home their assaults; indeed, at Medellín, a counter charge by two regiments of French dragoons was actually repulsed by Spanish infantry formed in line.40 As shown by the example of Albuera and their victories at Bailén, Alcañiz, Tamames and San Marcial, the Spaniards could often show equal courage when on the defensive. Yet the Spanish infantry were always vulnerable to their oppo­ nents. Particular problems were caused in the early days of the war 122 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War by their shortage of skirmishers. The heavy screen of tirailleurs who preceded the advance of the French columns were always able to drive back their Spanish counterparts, and then to direct a destruc­ tive fire upon the immobile battle line behind them. As their casual­ ties mounted, particularly among their officers, and their own vol­ leys proved ineffective, so the Spaniards would sooner or later begin to waver, at which point the waiting French columns would charge home to administer the coup de grace41 The vulnerability of the Spanish infantry was accentuated by the weakness of their cavalry. Because of their complete inability to manoeuvre in the face of the enemy, it was essential for the Spaniards to protect the flanks of their defensive line with a powerful force of mounted troops, particularly in the perfect cavalry country constituted by the open plains of the Castiles. Throughout the war, however, the Spanish cavalry was execrable. In the first place, suitable horses and trained horsemen were few and far between: hence the frequent appeals that were made in 1808 for substantial numbers of British cavalry to be attached to the Spanish armies.42 Furthermore, the punishing condi­ tions of warfare in the Peninsula, which Wellington referred to aS ‘the grave of horses’, made such cavalry as could be collected the subject of constant erosion. Inferior saddlery and deliberate neglect (occasioned by the ‘infamous practice of purposely giving the horse a sore back that the dragoon may be sent with the horse to Seville*) only accentuated the wastage.43 Even so, the Spaniards managed to field a substantial number of cavalry during the campaigns of 1809, and on occasion had more mounted troops than did their opponents. The problem was there­ fore ultimately one of quality rather than quantity. As the Duke of Wellington had complained after the battle of Talavera: The Spanish cavalry are ... in general well clothed, armed and accoutred, and remarkably well mounted, and their horses are in good condition ... But I have never heard anybody pretend that in any one instance they have behaved as soldiers ought to do in the face of the enemy. They make no scruple of running off, and after an action are to be found in every village and every shady bottom within fifty miles of the field of battle.44 Although the Spanish cavalry did score a few successes, many Spaniards would have agreed that on the whole the remark was fair comment.45 The cavalry had been thrown into even greater disorder by the uprising than the infantry, it being that much more difficult to improvise a scratch force of mounted troops. Such new regiments as The war of the Junta Central 123 were formed lacked the training to do anything other than, at best, to gallop upon the enemy in wild, and extremely vulnerable, disorder.46 With time, of course, the training of the cavalry did improve, but, despite Wellington’s comments, it seems certain that their horses were smaller than those of their opponents, as well as being severely undernourished, with the result that they could neither deliver a successful charge of their own nor withstand one delivered by the enemy.47 The inferiority of their cavalry placed the Spaniards at a serious disadvantage in any action that took place where the terrain was at all open. In battle after battle the course of the fighting would tend to assume a common pattern. Drawn up in linear order, the patriot armies would await the onslaught of their opponents, or alterna­ tively march against them in a frontal attack. If they were on the defensive, the infantry would generally stand their ground, and on the offensive they might sometimes even drive back their opponents. On the flanks, however, the Spanish cavalry would be put to flight with monotonous regularity, thereby opening the way for a torrent of French horsemen to burst in upon the flanks and rear of the unfortunate infantry. Caught entirely by surprise, the infantry would not have the time to form square, and could only flee for their lives, to be ridden down or captured in their thousands. The collapse would frequently be so rapid that there would be no time to evacuate either the baggage or the artillery; indeed, when the moment came for the gunners to hitch up their pieces, they would frequently discover that their civilian drivers had absconded with the draught animals at the first sign of danger.48 The tactical inferiority of the Spanish armies was exacerbated by the poor quality of their commanders. A few generals won renown for the skillful and determined defence of the fortresses entrusted to their charge, whilst others showed themselves to be competent subordinates when placed in command of a division. With a number of exceptions, their courage and devotion was beyond question. For the most part, however, their personal bravery was not matched by their capacity to take command of a complete army. To be fair to the Spaniards, it should be stressed that their generals were really not so very different in their quality from those of any other nation, even Wellington frequently being driven to distraction by the failings of his subordinates. The difference was that the political and logistical conditions of warfare in Spain were much more complicated than 124 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War elsewhere in Europe. Furthermore, Spain did not possess a native Wellington or Napoleon who could have led a collection of wellmeaning mediocrities to victory. Nor were the Spanish generals well served by their headquarters. In the absence of a permanent general staff, which was not formed until 1810, each general appointed his own staff officers. The result was that the headquarters of the Spanish armies became filled with an ever-changing collection of well-connected young noblemen with little idea of how to fulfil their responsibilities.49 It was therefore hardly surprising that the Spanish army which took the field in the autumn of 1808 should have been poorly trained, organised, equipped and commanded. It is less apparent why there should have been so little improvement during the course of the long struggle which followed. As the Duke of Wellington complained in 1809: ... it is extraordinary that when a nation has devoted itself to war... for the last two years, so little progress has been made in any one branch of the military profession by any individual, and that the business of an army should be so little understood. They really are children in the art of war, and I cannot say that they do anything as it ought to be done, with the exception of running away and assembling again in a state of nature.50 The explanation for this paradox may be found in the relentless nature of the war in which the Spaniards were engaged. Only in the autumn of 1808 between the retreat of the French armies to the river Ebro and the subsequent counterattack that was launched by a furious Napoleon was there a lull in the fighting of the sort that the Junta Central needed to restore order to its armies. Whether enough could ever have been achieved to forestall the Emperor’s revenge is a moot point, but contemporary observers were convinced that the Junta was not making the best use of its opportunities. As Lord William Bentinck alleged, ‘they are more preoccupied with trifles and nonsense about their own rank and state than with great national measures’.51 The Junta’s concern with its own status was far from being entirely frivolous, however. Although it was essential that it should impose its authority on patriot Spain, its rule was under attack from the very earliest days of its existence; indeed even some of its own members continued to demand that it form a regency and proceed to the election of a Cortes.52 Convinced that a regency would inevitably produce a military dictatorship, the dominant faction within the Junta instead attempted to defuse the unrest by The war of the Junta Central 125 issuing an ambitious manifesto öf social and political reform, only for this to attract renewed criticism of its priorities.53 The Junta’s reformism was far from being irrelevant, for the pressure for reform generated in reaction to the rule of Godoy, Maria Luisa and Carlos IV had been redoubled by a growing belief that Spain could only emerge victorious from the struggle against Napoleon if she was prepared to put an end to the abuses that had brought about her downfall in 1808. However, unless the government could amass sufficient troops on the Ebro to hold off the counter-stroke that at that very moment was being made ready by Napoleon, there would be no time to implement the most apposite programme of reform. In this respect, all the patriot authorities must be held to be gravely at fault. After the battle of Bailen, Spain had fallen into a paralysing ‘vertigo of triumph’, thanks to the general exaltation of the supposed victory of the heroic Spanish people over ‘the strongest and most warlike tercios of the north’.54 Although not entirely proof against such excesses, the Junta Central did at least proclaim the need to raise a huge new army of 550,000 men.55 Its mean, of putting such declarations into effect were extremely limited, however. All that it could do was to decree a reduction in the number of exemptions from the sorteo and the formation of an urban guard known as the Milicias Honradas.56 The actual process of recruitment had to be left to the provincial juntas. At the begin­ ning of the war many of these bodies had decreed the introduction of universal conscription, but fear of popular unrest and lack of resources ensured that this never became a reality. The precise situation varied from province to province, but most of the Spanish armies were initially composed of volunteers rather than conscripts. In May 1808, for example, the Junta of Seville had declared all male inhabitants ultimately to be liable for military service, with the proviso that unmarried men would be taken before men with fami­ lies. However, it also decided that conscription should not actually be enforced until the supply of volunteers had been exhausted. Although fifty thousand men came forward, this was still well short of the Junta’s stated target of 200,000. Yet rather than resorting to impressment, the authorities instead 