 finally invaded Portugal in August 1810, he withdrew before them to the impregnable lines of Torres Vedras outside Lisbon. There he remained throughout the winter until starvation finally forced the French to retreat in March 1811. Wellington was soon back on the Portuguese frontier, but for the rest of the year the French remained sufficiently strong to frustrate any further advances. For the best part of two years the French were therefore left free to concentrate upon reducing the remaining patriot enclaves. By January 1812 they had occupied Oviedo, Lérida, Tortosa, Badajoz, Tarragona and Valencia. Whilst it is true that disaster was occa­ sionally precipitated by the ineptitude of certain generals, the Spaniards for the most part lacked the strength to make head against these offensives, for their troops remained as ragged, starving, disease-ridden, ill-equipped and unpaid as ever. So desperate was the position in some areas that the soldiers actually had to be dismissed to their homes for want of food and clothing.15 Most of the armies could field only a small proportion of their available strength (6,000 out of 23,000 in the case of the Army of Galicia in September 1810), and they were often only able to do so at all after their copious wants had been made up by the British.16 In short, for the most part the The Spanish army in the Peninsular War 160 c) January 1812 d) December 7812 Territory occupied by the French 5 The Spanish War of Independence, 1808-14 Spanish armies remained ‘unfit for anything more than mere guer­ rilla warfare’.17 In this capacity it has to be said that the Spanish army often performed with distinction. For example, for most of 1811 and 1812, General Francisco López Ballesteros’ division of the Army of the Left operated with considerable success against the French forces in Andalucia. Originally based in the mountains of western Andalucia, in September 1811 his forces were sent round by sea to Algeciras, from where they launched repeated raids against the French positions around Ronda and Malaga. Every time that the invaders concentrated a field force against him, Ballesteros would simply retreat under the guns of Gibraltar whence he could defy them with impunity. In the meantime he would have invariably given The army and the liberals, 1810-14 161 considerable assistance to the guerrillas, for the French would have been forced to abandon their pursuit of the irregulars and strip their garrisons so as to provide a respectable field force. Left to their own devices, the partidas would then swarm down from their mountain strongholds and attack the inadequately protected French bases, with the result that the invaders would have no option but to give up their operations against Ballesteros. With their operations complemented in this fashion by those of the regular army, the guerrillas attained their maximum importance during this period. According to one Spanish estimate, by the end of 1812 they numbered 38,520 men organized into twenty-two different partidas.19 They may even have saved Spain from being overcome altogether, keeping resistance alive until Wellington’s army was at last able to break free of the stalemate on the Portuguese frontier: thanks to the guerrillas, the conquest of Spain required a much larger army than that which Napoleon had been able to deploy there, but, as Wellington had pointed out in 1810, the invaders ‘cannot increase their force in the Peninsula, even admitting that they possess the military means, without increasing their pecuniary and other difficulties and distress’.19 Yet for all the damage that these forces inflicted upon their opponents, they could not prevent the French advance. As Sir Thomas Graham noted in 1810: There are points where it is of infinite consequence to the cause that there should be armies for, useful and important as the services of the guerrillas are, that is not enough, let them be ever so much spread over the face of the country. They never can stop the march of a considerable body of the enemy and protect a country as Blake has done lately in Murcia, and O’Donnell has so successfully done in Catalonia.20 Although many guerrilla leaders formed their bands into disci­ plined military units, the irregulars were frequently just as poorly trained, officered and equipped as their colleagues in the rest of the army.21 Particularly towards the end of the war, they were frequen­ tly able to get the better of small forces of the enemy, but a major French offensive left them with no choice but to take evasive action. Nor were the guerrillas any more able to reconquer territory that had fallen to the invaders as the French had only to retreat within one of the fortified bases from which they held down the countryside to be entirely safe: until they had been supplied with artillery by the British after 1812, the guerrillas had no means of conducting formal sieges.22 Yet another problem was presented by the guerrillas’ lack of 162 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War co-ordination. Many of their chieftains were as intent upon estab­ lishing themselves as petty dictators in their own localities as they were upon fighting the French. Not only did they refuse to co-operate with one another militarily, but they ruthlessly suppressed any bands that emerged to challenge their predominance in their home districts.23 Nor were most of the guerrilla leaders prepared to accept the authority of the military commanders (to whom they were offi­ cially subordinated).24 To have relied upon them as the chief instru­ ments of any concerted plan of operations would therefore have been impossible. Yet even had the guerrillas been free of these deficiencies, they could not have taken the place of a regular army. As the Duke of Wellington pointed out: Independent small bodies operating upon the enemy may be extremely useful when these operations are connected and carried on in concert with those of a large body of troops which ... occupy the whole of the enemy’s attention ... but when the enemy is relieved from the pressure of the larger body, the smaller body must discontinue its operations or be destroyed. In short, it is impossible to believe that the guerrillas could ever have achieved ‘the considerable and lasting advantages . . . that would have provided the government with the means of raising armies’.26 So sharp a critique of the guerrillas may well appear incongruous in view of the undoubted successes which they scored in northern Spain in the course of 1812 and 1813. With the assistance of a British naval squadron, the Cantabrian partidas of Longa, Jaureghui and Porlier succeeded in temporarily clearing the French from most of the Basque coast, and in capturing the major port of Santander (3 August 1813). In Navarre, meanwhile, the redoubtable Francisco Espoz y Mina built up a force of nearly 10,000 men with which he bottled the French up in Pamplona. So complete was his domination that he established an effective provincial administration, complete with its own hospitals and armament workshops. Finally, in Aragon, the garrisons of Marshal Suchet were faced by the partidas of Durán, Gayan and Villacampa, as well as by expeditions dispatched from the direction of Catalonia. Moreover, the major Spanish formations were no longer mere bands of irregulars, but disciplined formations of veteran troops that were often stronger than the punitive columns that the French were able to dispatch against them. They had even been supplied with a certain amount of artillery. Towards the end of 1812 their operations received a tremendous boost from the advance of the Duke of Wellington into the hinterland of Old Castile after the The army and the liberals, 1810-14 163 battle of Salamanca. Forced to concentrate all their forces to repel his offensives, the French had no option but to bring forward the troops who had hitherto been fighting the guerrillas. In Aragón, whose garrison was left more-or-less intact, the invaders managed to hold their own, but in Navarre and the Basque country the guerrillas were able to run amok. Communications with France were badly disrup­ ted, whilst in February 1813 Mina forced the surrender of the French garrison of Tafalla, having first defeated a column of over 3,000 troops that had been sent to relieve it (11 February 1813). This exploit was followed in March by the storm of Fuenterrabia on the very borders of France, and the annihilation of two battalions at Lerin (31 March 1813). Attacks on the towns of Huesca and Sos were both beaten off, but the French nevertheless decided to evacu­ ate the latter and almost suffered the destruction of the column sent to its relief when Mina attacked it at Castiliscar (2 March 1813). In response to this activity, the French Army of the North launched a powerful offensive against the partidas. To ensure their defeat, its commander was authorised to draw upon the Army of Portugal, five of whose six divisions were eventually to be sucked into the struggle. Although communications with France were placed on a more secure footing, and Mina forced to retreat into Aragón, the guerrillas had not been destroyed. Furthermore, Mina’s arrival in Aragón coincided with the withdrawal of a significant proportion of its garrison in response to Suchet’s fears of an allied advance on Valencia from the direction of Alicante. The French hold on Navarre and the Basque country had merely been strengthened at the expense of their control of Aragon. Still worse, the reverse inflicted on Mina and the Cantabrians had been achieved by detaching troops from the forces whose task it was to contain Wellington. Though it is hard to see an alternative to this decision, it was one for which the French were to pay dearly.27 These campaigns clearly illustrate the limitations of guerrilla war­ fare. Although Mina and his colleagues were able to score significant successes whenever the French were short of manpower or otherwise distracted, they could not hold their ground in the face of a determined counter-offensive. Unless there was a serious failure of political will on the part of Napoleon - which still could not be foreseen even in the aftermath of the Retreat from Moscow - the French would therefore have to be forced to disgorge their conquests by conventional means. In order to build an army that would be 164 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War capable of such a task, it was essential that ‘effectual measures should be adopted to feed, pay, clothe and discipline the Spanish troops’.28 How this was to be achieved was by no means clear, for the Cádiz government was effectively bankrupt. Cut off from most of the territory that still remained free from French occupation, its resources were confined to such taxes and patriotic contributions as it could raise in Cádiz itself, the shipments of bullion that were periodically received from Latin America, and the limited financial assistance that could be provided by Great Britain. These resources were simply insufficient to meet the demands on the public treasury, which were calculated early in 1811 as a minimum of 1400,000,000 reales per year. Nor was it possible for the régime to raise additional revenue in the form of loans, for it was hardly an attractive target for investment. Finally, the administration was in such disorder that the government could not make effective use of the limited resources that it still possessed.29 Matters were now to deteriorate still further, for in 1810 revolution broke out in Latin America with effects that can only be described as devastating. In 1809 alone 344,000,000 reales had been received from the American colonies, but the figure was reduced by eighty per cent in 1811, and ninety-three per cent in 1812. In 1810 overall revenue had amounted to 407,700,000 reales, in 1811 to 201,600,000, and in 1812 to 138,000,000?° Although the British repeatedly attempted to persuade the Spaniards that the best 