 oppose the only measures that might have rendered the army an efficient fighting force, and to embark upon a ferocious attack upon the remaining prerogatives of the military estate. The ascendancy of the liberals after 1810 was initially the product of the weakness of the so-called ‘Regency of the Five’ that was established in Cádiz after the fall of the Junta Central in January 1810. Hopes that the Regency would be able to exercise absolute power soon proved chimerical as its effective leader, General Casta­ ños, was simply too mild a character to provide dynamic leadership.1 Cut off from the rest of Spain by the French blockade of Cádiz, its writ did not even run unchallenged in its own capital. A new Junta of Defence had been formed in Cádiz which had taken advantage of the general confusion to proclaim itself to be the sovereign government of Spain. Although it eventually agreed to recognise the Regency, its de facto control of the customs revenues allowed it to retain con­ siderable influence.2 Even had this not been the case, the Regency was as inefficient and unrealistic as any of its predecessors. As one British officer complained to Wellington, ‘From the little I have seen of the Regency, they appear to differ from the Junta but in name... with one exception ... which is that your brother [i.e. Henry Welle­ sley, who was British ambassador] has only five blockheads to transact business with instead of thirty four’.3 So weak a body had little chance of withstanding the rising clamour for a Cortes, or of influencing the manner in which it was formed. As Cádiz’s powerful commercial community made it by far the most radical city in Spain, the Regency had to abandon all hope of giving separate represen­ tation to the Church and the nobility, and instead to agree to a unicameral assembly. Although the franchise was still effectively limited to the propertied classes, there was therefore nothing to stand in the way of the general pressure for reform whose existence had been confirmed by the response to the Junta Central’s appeal of June 1809 to all sabios y personas ilustradas to submit their views on the priorites for a new Cortes. Interestingly, in addition to calling for a wide range of political, social, legal, economic and educational reforms, the Informes sobre Cortes laid much stress on demands for the abolition of the privileges of the military estate and for the replacement of the army by a national militia.4 Of course, this reformism did not necessarily amount to a desire to transform society, for many reformers drew their inspiration from an idealised 156 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War view of traditional institutions and wished only to build upon the existing foundations of the ancien régime. However, for the group of men who were to become known as the liberals, the time had come for a true revolution. Although it is conventional to regard the liberals as being the representatives of the revolutionary bourgeoisie, such a definiton is misleading. Whilst their ranks certainly included men such as law­ yers, merchants and minor officials, they also contained noblemen, dissident clergymen and army officers. If the ideas of the Enlighten­ ment and the French Revolution had played some part in their political formation, the war itself had been equally important as a factor in their radicalisation. What distinguished the liberals from the rest of the political nation was therefore not so much their social origins as their vision: unlike their fellows they were convinced that neither the political gains of 1808, nor Spain herself, could be saved unless the ancien régime was swept away once and for all. In the eyes of the liberals, the disasters of 1808 had been the product of centuries of despotism. Spain had to be given her liberty, or else she would inevitably have to endure similar humiliations in the future; indeed, she would have no future at all, for the French would eventually overcome her resistance and reduce her to slavery. The powers of the monarchy therefore had to be limited by means of a constitution, and the sovereign power restored to the Spanish people assembled in its Cortes. In addition, it would also be necessary to remedy the archaic nature of Spanish society. Henceforward all men were to enjoy full civil rights and equality before the law. The privileges and exemptions of the army, the Church, the Mesta, the guilds, the municipalities, the historic kingdoms and principalities, the nobility and the military orders were all to be abolished. In their place Spain was to be given a unified code of law, a common fiscal structure, and a centralised and uniform system of government. Drawing upon the writings of earlier reformers such as Jovellanos, the liberals were also convinced that the regeneration of Spain required massive social and economic change. Above all, the individual must enjoy complete control of his own property, whilst the vast tracts of land held in entail by the Church and the nobility should be made available for profitable exploitation. The liberals were accordingly to abolish all restrictions upon the acquisition and sale of land, and to expropriate the lands of the municipalities and the religious orders. Mention of the latter brings us to the question of the liberals’ policy with regard The army and the liberals, 1810-14 157 to the Church. Though far from being anti-catholic, the liberals were not prepared to tolerate the theocratic pretensions entertained by some members of the hierarchy, and desired the reform of those elements of the Spanish Church that they deemed to be harmful to progress, or conducive to despotism. Hence their attack upon the religious orders and the Inquisition, and their support of the free­ dom of the press.5 The number of committed liberals was actually very small, and yet between 1810 and 1813 they were able to dominate Spanish politics, and to force through almost all their proposals. In large part this was due to the circumstances in which the Cortes was elected. Voting could only be conducted with any facility in those areas that remained unoccupied by the French. Deputies for the occupied regions had to be selected from those of their inhabitants who hap­ pened to be resident in Cádiz with the result that many of them were far more liberal than might otherwise have been the case. As long as the Cortes was based in Cádiz, the liberals also enjoyed local support from both the press and the crowd. Yet for all the fluctuat­ ing nature of their parliamentary majority, which was often seri­ ously reduced over particularly radical measures, they had little need of such assistance. They had a coherent plan, their very lack of numbers allowed them to function as a tightly organized caucus, and their leaders numbered many of the most able figures in the Cortes. As a result they were enabled to exploit the vaguely reformist lean­ ings of the bulk of their fellow deputies, whilst sweeping aside the very few outright reactionaries. Nicknamed.the serviles (the slavish ones), the conservatives’ very sobriquent stands witness to their initial unpopularity.6 The liberals’ first objectives were to establish the sovereignty of the people, and to neutralise the highly conservative Regency. Since there was general agreement that the Cortes should hold absolute power in the absence of the King, this was a simple task. When the assembly finally met on 24 September 1810 a motion was immediately introduced declaring the sovereign power to reside in the Cortes, and requiring all the authorities of the state, including the Regency, to take an oath of allegiance. The resistance of certain of the regents to this demand provided a pretext for their replacement by a new ‘Regency of the Three*, whose members, Gen­ eral Blake and Admirals Ciscar and Agar, were all noted for their docility. As far as the army was concerned, the only opposition came 158 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War from the notoriously traditionalistic Marques del Palacio, who refused to take the required oath of allegiance and was promptly imprisoned. For the rest, even such noted frondeurs as La Romana and Infantado placed themselves unreservedly at the orders of the Cortes.7 However tempting it might be to suspect that such support was largely the product of political opportunism, it is clear that many generals were genuinely delighted at the advent of the Cortes. As Manuel La Peña proclaimed, ‘The hope of saving the fatherland is reborn’.8 Their optimism rested on the hope that the new régime would at last be able to put the Spanish war effort on a proper footing. Until 1810, in their own eyes at least, they had consistently been denied the means that they needed to fight the war whilst nevertheless being held responsible for defeats whose real origin lay in the chaotic legacy of the national uprising of 1808. The ad hoc nature of Spain’s mobilisation had led to the army being swamped by large numbers of new regiments composed entirely of raw recruits officered by men of neither talent nor experience. The resultant disruption had been magnified by the collapse of the supply system, the complete indiscipline of the guerrillas, the insubordination of the provincial juntas, and the refusal of the Junta Central to appoint a commander-in-chief. Considering the superiority of the French for­ ces, defeat had been inevitable.9 With the greater prestige that had now accrued to the central government, it was possible to hope that the Cortes would now address itself to a thorough reorganization of the army, the provision of an adequate system of recruitment and supply, the militarisation of the guerrillas, and the establishment of a mando único™ The priorities of the liberals were entirely different, however, for they insisted that the Spanish people had gone to war with France, not simply to sustain the rights of an absolute monarch, but to regain their liberties.11 According to this theory, the fervour which had thus inspired the insurgents of 1808 had enabled them to achieve great victories, but thereafter their ‘holy fury’ had been allowed to subside: political reforms had not been instigated and the revolution had degenerated into a mere war. Once more upon familiar ground, the French had thereupon naturally gained the advantage.12 It followed that Spain could only be saved by ‘a true revolution in which the general effervescence would lend her the strength to resist armies born of a similar upheaval’.13 The first task of the Cortes was thus to restore the liberty of the nation, for the best way of winning the war The army and the liberals, 1810-14 159 was not military reform but the introduction of a constitution. After its promulgation El Redactor General could even go so far as to argue that the Constitution of 1812 ‘has been the most formidable army that the French have had to face, for it has transformed what they regarded as a horde of savages into a nation of free men’.14 For the first eighteen months of the Cortes’ existence, its attention was therefore wholly absorbed by the formulation of the famous Constitution of 1812. However, far from bringing about the liberation of Spain, the constitutional debate coincided with a further decline in Spain’s fortunes. Not only did Cádiz remain besieged, but the French armies occupied an ever greater area of patriot Spain. Following the close of the Austrian campaign in 1809, Napoleon had determined to bring an end to the ‘Spanish ulcer’. Heavy reinforcements were therefore poured into the Peninsula so as to enable the French commanders to form a powerful striking force with which to drive the British from their stronghold in Portugal. In the face of such a threat, Wellington could not but adopt a defensive strategy. Retaining his army within the Portuguese frontier, he remained a passive observer whilst the French armies reduced the Spanish fortresses of Astorga and Ciudad Rodrigo. When the French