Known as the National Guard, this force was effectively to be a self-sufficient army in its own right, but its members were to be part-time militiamen who could be relied upon to retain their links with their communities and to remain free of the corruption of military life.85 The formation of the National Guard had been prefigured in the Constitution of 1812, and the liberal military writer, Sancho, eventually produced a detailed scheme for such a force, taking as his model the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz.86 However, it was not until 15 April 1814, that the Cortes finally decreed its formation, by which point it was far too late, for the newly returned Fernando VII was already on the point of overthrowing the Constitution.87 The advent of military reform as the subject of regular discussion in the Cortes soon revealed its divisive nature as an issue. The liberals bitterly opposed every attempt to discipline the guerrillas, and con­ doned their many excesses.88 The gulf between liberal and orthodox military opinion became still more apparent with the formation of the Comisión de Constitución Militar in June 1812. As far as the officers who made up the bulk of its membership were concerned, its task was to restore order, system and discipline to the army.89 In contrast, the liberals believed that its aim should be to make the 174 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Ordenanzas ‘perfectly analogous with the political system’.90 This contradiction was brought to light when the liberals ensured the defeat of a motion introduced by General Llamas, one of a number of soldiers with seats in the Cortes, calling for the commission’s purview to be limited solely to military affairs.91 Writers such as Florez Estrada also claimed that the officers of the old army from whom the commission was largely recruited could hardly be expected to carry out their duties in the right spirit.92 Even avowedly liberal officers took offence at this attitude, whilst they pointed out that, unless adequate measures were taken to ensure the pay and supply of the army, no beneficial effects could be expected from the most laudable reform of its Ordenanzas.93 Despite their protests, in October 1813 the Cortes decided to establish a second commission drawn from its own members to examine the all-important question of the Ord­ enanzas, leaving the original body to deal solely with the anodyne questions of organisation and tactics.94 However logical this decision may have been from the liberal point of view, many officers would be certain to construe it as a deliberate abdication of the Cortes’ responsibilities with regard to the army, whose situation remained as parlous as ever throughout 1812 and 1813. The immense amount of clothing and equipment that was received from Great Britain did something to remedy the various material deficiencies, but nothing could ameliorate the chronic shortage of money: by 1813 the failure of their pay had driven some officers to beg in the streets, whilst others are reputed to have died of starvation.95 Even the considerable abilities of the Duke of Welling­ ton proved insufficient to the task of setting the army to rights. Although he introduced a series of administrative and organisational reforms that should have done much to assuage its difficulties, their effect was undermined on the one hand by the chaotic domestic situation of patriot Spain, and on the other by a wave of growing anglophobia. Encouraged by the anti-British sentiments that were voiced with ever greater frequency by the liberal press, the Regency and its ministers did everything in their power to obstruct the Duke’s activities. Angry and frustrated, Wellington was driven to resign his command in August 1813. He was eventually reinstated by the Cortes, but nothing could be done to remedy the effects of the long months of inter-allied conflict. The problems of the Spanish army remained unresolved, as was graphically shown when Wellington was forced to leave most of his allies behind when he invaded France The army and the liberals, 1810-14 175 at the end of 1813 for fear that otherwise their pillaging would turn the French peasantry against him.96 In the face of this situation, the liberal programme was an irrele­ vance, unless, as one officer was overheard to remark, the soldiers were expected to clothe themselves in the pages of the military constitution.97 Nor was the liberal programme any more satisfac­ tory in terms of its analysis of the Spanish war effort. The liberals maintained that Spain’s successes in 1808 — which they greatly exaggerated — had been gained by the unaided efforts of the Spanish people, whereas in reality it had been shown beyond all doubt that an armed citizenry was no match for a regular army. As for the only field battle won by the Spaniards, Bailén had been gained by the despised ‘slave soldiers* of the ancien régime. Nor were the parallels that were drawn with the French Revolutionary Wars any more appropriate. France’s early defeats were caused not by reliance upon the old regular army but by its disintegration. As for the levée en masse, it could never have been forged into a powerful weapon of war had it not been for the organisational and tactical legacy of the ancien régime, the genius of the revolutionary leaders, and the numerous veterans of the old army to whom the revolution had for the first time offered the chance of professional satisfaction. Developments since 1808 had undermined the liberal arguments still further. Much emphasis had been placed upon the Voluntarios Distinguidos de Cádiz as the model for a new army, for this regiment not only conformed to liberal theories of military organisation, but had also supposedly performed prodigies of valour during the siege of Cádiz. However, the Volunteers had taken advantage of the riots of 1809 to secure a guarantee that they would never have to serve outside the walls of the city; indeed, there is a strong possibility that its members had fomented the disorder with precisely this end in mind.98 Since Cádiz is situated upon a promontory that juts out into the sea from an island off the coast of southern Spain, such service as they per­ formed was anything but arduous: even during the siege of 1810-12, all that they had to endure was an occasional bombardment. The other feature of the war effort on which the liberals looked with particular favour was the guerrillas. Yet the partidas could not take the place of the regular army, whilst popular resistance was not nearly so all pervasive as the liberals inferred. In the first place, the urban population (in which number were included a considerable number of the peasantry and the agricultural proletariat) was 176 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War generally noted to be indifferent or even openly sympathetic towards the French." Furthermore, as the war progressed the guerrillas became more and more separate from the civilian population. Rather than slipping back to their homes after every operation, they coalesced into individual bands, adopted military forms, and estab­ lished semi-permanent bases. Thereafter they lived off the people as much as they lived among them. Although they might provide the guerrillas with various degrees of support, most of the inhabitants remained aloof from their operations and ‘very lukewarm’ to the allied cause because the partidas could offer them no protection against French reprisals.100 They hated the French, but as the British diplomat, Thomas Sydenham, complained: It is a passive feeling, which murmurs under the oppression and tyrranny which it suffers without exerting itself to remove or diminish what it complains of. The people pay their contributions ... whenever they are demanded... by the enemy. Of course they complain of these exactions and are happy to see the English, who relieve them from the continuance of these exactions ... But if they complain in secret, or to us when the French have left them, it does the enemy no harm, nor us any good.101 The Spanish people might have taken a leading role in precipitat­ ing the struggle against the French, but their participation in it had been considerably less than the liberals imagined. The whole rationale underlying the programme of reform that had culminated in the Constitution of 1812 was therefore open to question. At all events, as the serviles gleefully pointed out, it had not saved Spain from her prostration.102 So great was the liberal refusal to take account of reality that it is hard to escape from the conclusion that their military policy was motivated by factors other than than an objective consideration of the strategic situation. In their drive to create a Nation-in-Arms and to ensure that the army could never again be used as a tool of despotism, they had simultaneously redressed many of the grievances which the civilian notables, from whose ranks they sprang, had felt against the military estate before the outbreak of war. A satisfactory career in the officer corps was now open to all men of a reasonable degree of property and edu­ cation, the military courts had been stripped of much of their competence over disputes between officers and civilians, and the army had been deprived of all share in the local administration. If only on a subconscious level, the liberals had allowed their sectional interests to colour their thinking with regard to the war. Had they The army and the liberals, 1810-14 177 been able to bring about a significant change in the army’s fortunes, then it is possible that they might have been able to secure their political objectives without too much difficulty. However, with the army utterly humiliated by its experiences during the campaigns of 1812 and 1813, a violent reaction was inevitable. It is possible to argue that the army could never have been brought to accept the changes that had been effected in its relationship with the rest of society, particularly as the war does not seem to have caused the bourgeoisification of the officer corps with which it has often been credited.103 Evidence has already been given to suggest that many of the officers who were employed in the new regiments that were raised in 1808 already possessed commissions. The same is true of the generalato', of the 458 new Spanish generals appointed in the course of the War of Independence, at least 174 had already been officers before 1808, whereas only eight had definitely been civilians and another one a member of the rank and file. Furthermore, although the percentage of titled noblemen had declined from twenty-three per cent to only fourteen, there were still complaints that the aristocracy continued to enjoy greater favour than their fellows.104 Several important changes had nevertheless taken place. The decree of 17 August 1811 that abolished the privileges of the nobility had still not opened the officer corps to every Spaniard, as the military academies charged their cadets eight reales a day for their tuition.105 However, at least it was now possible for prosperous commoners to embark upon a military career. Only time would tell whether merit really would triumph over inherited privilege, but there were still numerous officers who knew that they owed every­ thing to the revolution and therefore could not afford a return to the ancien régime. At the same time a desire to emulate the triumphs of the French armies led many others to espouse the cause of social and political reform within the army itself. Self interest and conviction therefore coincided to produce a nucleus of liberal support within the officer corps, particularly in the Estado Mayor General.106 Yet the writings of liberal soldiers such as Sancho and Albo often betray a residual belief that the army officer was not simply one more citizen, but rather a being set apart to whom society owed a special debt of gratitude. In their frequent emphasis on the need to abolish the privileges of the