tion in time.79 In consequence, the way was still clear for Castaños to adopt the only logical course of action left open to him, which was to withdraw the Army of the Centre into central Spain, leaving José Palafox to defend Zaragoza as best he could. The Junta Central had belatedly sent orders for Castaños to do just that, taking with him two divi­ sions of the Army of Aragón, but the Palafoxes could not contem­ plate such a move. Loudly proclaiming Zaragoza to be the ‘citadel of Spain’, they proposed that both armies should retreat within its walls. After every effort had failed to persuade Castaños to accede to this futile plan, Francisco Palafox retaliated by instructing all the Army of the Centre’s stragglers to rally on Zaragoza, inciting its troops to desert, and seizing its military chest, which had been sent to the city for safety. As for the order placing two Aragonese divisions under the command of General Castaños, who was by now in full flight with the French in hot pursuit, it was simply ignored.80 On reaching Sigüenza, Castaños received orders to return to the capital to take up his position as the head of the Junta General de Guerra. On his journey, he was on several occasions attacked by angry mobs, and then was arrested as soon as he arrived in Seville, remaining in prison until November of the following year. His downfall was the work of the palafoxistas, who were alleging that 132 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Castaños had betrayed the Army of Aragón at Tudela and was now proposing to abandon Zaragoza to its fate—or, in short, that he was a traitor.81 Desperate for a scapegoat who could be blamed for Spain’s misfortunes, the Junta Central was only too happy to give credence to their insinuations, leaving the hero of Bailén to become the villain of Tudela. Yet much of the responsibility for that defeat belonged to the palafoxistas, who showed a total lack of concern for the interests of the nation. Whilst they had been intrigueing against their rivals, Spain had been beaten to her knees. As soon as he had heard the news of Tudela, Napoleon had launched an offensive against Madrid. Sweeping aside the few Spanish troops that were left to oppose him at the battle of Somosierra, the Emperor arrived before the capital on 2 December. For a brief moment the population attempted to defend themselves, but their resistance was as inef­ fectual as it was disorderly, and the city surrendered two days later. The troops who had fought at Somosierra in the meantime fled southwestwards in a state of total mutiny, murdering their comman­ der, General San Juan, and pillaging all the towns on route in the process.82 Nor were the Armies of the Left and the Centre in much better condition. The former was described as having ‘the appear­ ance of a large body of peasants, driven from their homes, famished and in want of everything’.83 As for the Army of the Centre, the Duque del Infantado, who had taken it over following the departure of Castaños, wrote: I saw a ruined army, and troops who presented a most distressing appear­ ance. Some were entirely barefoot, others almost naked, and all disfigured ... by the most ravenous hunger (there were many who had had no bread for eight days, and misery and hunger had reached such a pitch that... many had died of hunger along the roads and in the mountains). They appeared more like walking corpses than men ready to defend their fatherland ... Battalions had been formed from fractions of different regiments; the strength of the largest was less than 600 men, and some had only 100... The cavalry were in the same state... the greater part of the horses could hardly bear the weight of their riders.84 The Army of Catalonia also having been badly beaten at Cardedeu and Molíns de Rey (16 and 21 December 1808), the only force left in any semblance of order was José Palafox’s Army of Aragón. However, on 20 December it had once more been besieged in Zara­ goza and was therefore incapable of doing anything to prevent the French from over-running the rest of Spain. Exactly two months The war of the Junta Central 133 later it was forced to surrender after a defence that was marked as much by the ineptitude of José Palafox as the heroism of its defen­ ders. Spain therefore lay prostrate before Napoleon, and would doubtless have been overrun altogether had it not been for the British army under Sir John Moore. This force had been assembling in the area of Salamanca and by sheer good fortune had escaped attack by the French. Striking eastwards against the French communica­ tions in Old Castile, Moore stung the Emperor into sending almost the whole of his disposable field force against him. There followed the famous ‘Retreat to Corunna’ in which Moore was forced to run for the sea with an overwhelmingly superior French army in hot pursuit. After a successful rearguard action at La Coruña, the British were evacuated (though Moore himself was killed), leaving the French in fruitless possession of the strategic cul-de-sac of Galicia. The effect of this campaign was to win a vital respite for the Junta Central and its shattered armies, for it was impossible for the French to follow up their successes in central Spain whilst their armies were embroiled in the far north west. Furthermore, once conquered, Galicia could not be abandoned, and instead had to be used as a base for fresh offensive operations. As a result, for months afterwards two whole army corps were tied down in a futile campaign in Galicia and northern Portugal that had no relevance whatsoever to the real French objectives. Napoleon had left Spain early in January 1809 under the impres­ sion that the war in the Peninsula had been reduced to the status of a mere mopping up operation that could safely be left to his lieuten­ ants. However, he could not have been more wrong. Moore’s offen­ sive had given the Junta Central a chance to reconstitute its battered armies south of the Tagus and to establish a new capital at Seville, from where it was to continue to defy the invaders for the whole of the next year. Far from attacking the Spaniards, the French forces in central Spain were for a long period actually forced to surrender the initiative to their opponents. Yet the strategic outlook had immeas­ urably worsened for the patriot cause. With the French once more in control of Madrid, the Spanish armies were condemned to fight a long series of operations on external lines in the wide plains of the Castiles. At the same time, the Junta Central had suffered a shattering blow to its already tarnished reputation, with the result that the Spanish war effort was certain to be subjected to the same tensions that had sabotaged it in the campaign of November—December 1808. 134 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War Forced by the French offensive to flee to Seville, the Junta Central had responded to the shock of defeat by making a determined effort to restore its authority. Not only could this be seen to be essential with respect to the war effort, but its political opponents had been seeking to capitalise upon its temporary eclipse: indeed,the irrepress­ ible Junta of Seville had even declared itself to be a new provisional government.85 The Junta Central had already enlisted the aid of the Marqués de la Romana to enforce its rule in the north west by appointing him Jefe Politico, or Viceroy, of Old Castile, León, Astu­ rias and Galicia.86 On leaving Madrid it had also sent out twelve of its members to act as its representatives to the provincial juntas, whose authority it proceeded strictly to limit by a decree of 1 January 1809.87 Measures were also taken to end the disorder which had raged in the army ever since the national uprising. Correctly identi­ fying one of the chief problems as the haphazard creation of large numbers of new regiments, it prohibited the formation of any more until all existing units had been brought up to strength.88 An attempt was also made to bring spontaneous popular resistance under the control of the government by the establishment of rules for the organisation of guerrilla bands.89 Finally, an investigation was begun of the officers’ commissions issued by the new authorities, which eventually ruled that many of them should be annulled.90 These decrees were by no means the end to the Junta’s efforts to reform the army. In May 1809, for example, the office of Inspector General was re-established in both the infantry and the cavalry, whilst the strictest obedience to the Ordenanzas was enjoined at all times. A number of new military academies were also created in the hope that they might do something to improve the quality of the officer corps.91 Yet these efforts were unavailing. Powerful vested interests had been thrown up by the rising of 1808 which the Junta Central simply lacked the strength to overcome: for example, any attempt to disband even a single one of the new regiments caused a storm of protest that sometimes ended in mutiny.92 Against such opposition, the government could only have made headway had it possessed the support of the provincial juntas. However, the latter were convinced that the Junta Central’s only object was to perpe­ tuate its rule, whilst they had also been enfuriated by the decree of 1 January 1809, which they regarded as a stratagem to deprive them of all the perquisites of office. They were therefore less than co-opera­ tive, and actively sought to prevent any attempt to interfere with The war of the Junta Central 135 regiments which they identified as their own.93 In some cases, they also refused to accept the authority of the commissioners sent out by the Junta Central, those sent to Valencia and Cádiz both being driven out by outbreaks of rioting.94 The numerous aristocratic generals who were opposed to the Spanish revolution on principle, or who desired to see a resurrection in the power of the nobility, constituted a further source of resistance. It was, for example, suspected that the Conde de Montijo’s presence in Cádiz at the time of the rioting there was anything but a coincidence.95 The chief members of the legitimist faction were Infantado, Cuesta and La Romana. Infantado was currently in Seville as President of the Council of Castile, but was very resentful of having been relieved of the command of the Army of the Centre after it had been defeated at Uclés (13 January 1809). Cuesta, on the other hand, had been appointed to the command of the Army of Extremadura by the junta of that province, an appointment which the Junta Central felt it had no option but to confirm. However, he was still furious at his removal from the command of the Army of Castile, and his anger had in no wise been assuaged when that force had been incorporated into the Army of the Centre in October 1808. As a result he was only too happy to renew his intrigues of the previous summer with Infantado.96 The other wing of the military opposition to the Junta Central consisted of the clique of noblemen who had been behind the Motin de Aranjuez, and who still hoped to translate its benefits into reality through the creation of a regency. Until the fall of Zaragoza the leading figure of this group had been José Palafox, whereupon his place was taken by his younger brother, Francisco, aided and abetted as usual by the Conde de Montijo. It was axiomatic to these officers that the reputation of José Palafox should be defended as the founda­ tion of their appeal to the public, for which reason they devoted much energy to claiming that his downfall was the result of trea­ son.97 At the same time, they sought actively to overthrow the Junta Central, to which end Montijo organised a revolt in Granada in April 1809. Francisco Palafox travelled to join him from Aragón, but the rising had collapsed before he got there, leaving him unable to do more than make lame denunciations of the provincial authorities. Montijo, in the meantime, was arrested and sent into in