defects of the army’s supply system were also cruelly exposed. Much of the food and equipment that reached the unfortunate soldiery was rotten, or so badly made as to be completely useless.121 Although the armies were in effect expected to live off the country, much of the interior of Spain was simply too poor to support them.122 Furthermore, when food was available the civilian population were frequently able to charge exhorbitant prices for their produce.123 Nor did the army possess an adequate system of transport: aside from the difficulty and expense of hiring sufficient animals and carts, the drivers often went unpaid, and therefore displayed an understandable tendency to abscond with their charges at the first opportunity.124 Hence the misery that was the perpetual lot of the Spanish armies throughout the Peninsular War. Its effect upon them could not have been more serious. It was clear, for example, that men who were starving and dressed in rags could hardly be expected to bear themselves as disciplined veterans upon the battlefield.125 Furthermore, privation brought the death of thousands of soldiers, whilst many others deserted to avoid a similar fate. With its cadres of veterans subjected to further erosion, the army was never able to reduce the proportion of raw recruits that filled its ranks. One of the reasons why the incidence of desertion was so high was The war of the Junta Central 141 that it was an easy option. The lack of marching discipline off the battlefield and the frequent routs upon it made it simple for a soldier to slip away from the ranks. Once the deserter had gone, he was very often almost impossible to apprehend because the troops were generally dressed in clothing that resembled that of the Spanish peasantry.126 Even if he was caught, he knew that he was unlikely to be shot, for there was a marked reluctance to execute men who had only run away to avoid starvation.127 It should be stressed that a great many deserters and dispersos simply returned to their homes, where they were generally allowed to remain in peace by the French.128 However, an indeterminable proportion of them chose instead to join one of the numerous bands of guerrillas that had sprung up all over Spain in the wake of French occupation. Nor was this an end to the drain on the strength of the regular army which the guerrillas represented, for they were joined by many young men who might otherwise have become soldiers, whilst some of their leaders went so far as to impose conscription themselves or to impress detachments of regular troops which fell into their hands.129 It was inevitable that service with the guerrillas should have been more popular than service with the regular army, especially in view of the anti-militarism which had characterised Spanish society before 1808. They offered ‘more freedom and less discipline’; they did not require men to leave their home districts; they had a reputa­ tion for success whereas the regular army could only offer defeat and starvation; and, above all, they offered substantial material benefits, the Junta Central having decreed that all money and other personal effects seized from the French became the property of whoever had taken it.130 Whilst it would be a gross exaggeration to suggest that all of the guerrillas were mere bandits, they were often the subject of bitter complaints and became firmly associated with the idea of personal gain; as a popular epigram had it: Viva Fernando y vamos robando?131 The men who joined the guerrillas were not entirely lost to the patriot cause, for the partidas undoubtedly involved the French in enormous difficulties. Yet by sapping the strength of the regular army, they exacerbated the military crisis facing the Junta Central. The constant haemorrhage of trained troops could only be borne if an equivalent number of recruits was sent to replace them. However, there were too few volunteers, and the provincial juntas were for the most part unwilling to enforce the decrees of conscription which they 142 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War had promulgated in 1808. As for the few recruits that could be obtained, many of them had to be rejected on account of their poor physique, whilst others either deserted at once or had to be dismissed to their homes because there was no means by which they could be paid or fed.132 As a result, the Spanish armies were very much a finite resource, which should have been husbanded with the utmost care. By the summer of 1809, this ought to have been fully apparent to the Junta Central, but circumstances constrained it to ignore what was miltarily advisable and instead, as Wellington put it, to allow the conduct of operations to become determined by ‘political intrigue and the attainment of trifling political objectives’.133 Despite, and in part because of, its efforts to consolidate its dom­ estic situation through the achievement of military victory, the posi­ tion of the Junta Central had continued to deteriorate. Although the various conspiracies against its rule in the early part of 1809 had been quashed, its failures had kept alive a demand for political reform that the promise of a new Cortes had done nothing to ameliorate. This pressure was seconded by the British government, which naturally expected the Spaniards to make a productive contri­ bution to the common cause. Matters came to a head following the campaign of Talavera of July 1809. Blaming its failure on Spanish bad faith and incompetence, the Duke of Wellington withdrew the co-operation of his army from the Spaniards, advising the Junta Central henceforward to adopt a defensive strategy.134 To comply with such advice was impossible, however, for the Talavera fiasco engendered a new wave of discontent.135 Furthermore, the opposi­ tion now had a new and potent leader in the person of the Marqués de la Romana. The quintessence of the military aristocracy, La Romana had been horrified by the situation that he found on his return from Denmark in December 1808, confiding to Sir John Moore ‘that had he known how things were, he neither would have accepted the command nor have returned to Spain’.136 Appointed by the Junta to act as its viceroy in the northwest, he had immediately shown his enmity by refusing to recognize the authority of the commissioner whom it had dispatched to his headquarters.137 Nor was he prepared to tolerate the pretensions of the provincial juntas. On 2 May 1809 he accordingly descended on Oviedo and dissolved the Junta of Asturias, which he replaced by a new council dependent upon himself.138 He would have gone on to deal with the Junta of Galicia in similar fashion, had not the Junta Central forestalled him The war of the Junta Central 143 by recalling him to Seville to take up a position as one of its members.139 Bringing La Romana to the capital brought him into contact with a natural ally, for Francisco Palafox was still a member of the Junta despite his participation in numerous plots against its rule. Follow­ ing the battle of Talavera, Palafox had joined with Infantado and the Junta of Seville in yet another conspiracy to overthrow the government by means of a military coup. However, the plan had been ruined by the British ambassador, the Marquess of Wellesley, who had warned the Junta Central of its existence when the conspi­ rators had approached him for support. Wellesley had refused to disclose any of the names of those involved, but the government had nevertheless been able to end the immediate danger by transferring all the regiments stationed in Seville.140 Yet no sooner had they dealt with this threat than they were challenged by La Romana, who was by now being billed as the saviour of Spain.141 In October 1809 the commission that had been established to examine the question of political reform issued its report. This called for a rotating five-man comisión ejecutiva drawn from the ranks of the Junta Central to exercise the sovereignty until such time as the Cortes could meet. La Romana responded by issuing a manifesto of his own in which he denied the legitimacy of the Junta Central, made numerous accusa­ tions against its probity, and demanded the immediate establishment of a regency.142 The Junta ordered the suppression of this document, but it was published by La Romana’s brother, who was the Captain General of Valencia, with a postscript calling for the Marquess to be made sole regent.143 The Junta went ahead with the plan for the comisión ejecutiva, and even appointed La Romana to be its first president, but it had been badly shaken and therefore resumed its quest for military victory with even greater intensity. Predictably enough, the only result was the double defeat of Ocaña and Alba de Tormes (19 and 29 November 1809) in which the Armies of La Mancha and the Left were shattered with the loss of 40,000 men and 59 guns. Their defeat represented the end of the road for the Junta Central. Thanks to the staunch support of the new British ambassador, Henry Wellesley, the Junta was able to over­ come the fresh intrigues sparked off by the catastrophe, and even to imprison the Conde de Montijo and Francisco Palafox, but it was now so discredited that it had no option but to promise to convoke the Cortes by 1 March 1810.144 However, the military situation was 144 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War now so bleak that there seemed little chance of the patriot cause surviving till that date. With the conclusion of the war against Austria in October 1809, Napoleon was now pouring fresh troops into the Peninsula with a view to the invasion of Portugal. A large proportion of the forces already in Spain were thus relieved for service against the patriot stronghold of Andalucia. To face the impending offensive, the Spaniards had only the relics of the Army of La Mancha - some 30,000 men - to defend the entire length of the Sierra Morena, for the British had withdrawn into Portugal and the Armies of the Left and of Extremadura were simply too far away to be able to offer much assistance. Nor was there any means of making up the huge losses that had been suffered at Ocaña: having been drawn upon incessantly for almost a year, the finite military resources available to the Junta Central were all but exhausted. When the French offensive against Andalucia began on 19 January 1810, it therefore swept all before it. With the French bearing down on Seville, the Junta Central fled for the relative safety of Cádiz, only for revolution to break out in their wake. During the interval following the battle of Ocaña, a large amount of black propaganda had been circulating with regard to the government, alleging that its members were mere ‘creatures of Godoy ... promoted by the intrigue of whores, pimps and cuck­ olds’.145 On 24 January the resultant discontent erupted in open revolt. Having previously ignored several orders that should have taken him out of Seville, the Marques de la Romana released the imprisoned Montijo and Palafox, who had allegedly been behind much of the unrest. The original intention of the conspirators seems to have been to constitute themselves as a regency, but they were soon dissuaded from their pretensions by the rapid approach of the French. Realising that Seville was defenceless, La Romana hastily abandoned the city after once again securing the command of the Army of the Left. He was followed by Palafox and Montijo, and the Junta of Seville was therefore left to proclaim itself to be the supreme government of Spain. Its rule proved short-lived, for Seville surren­ dered to the French on 31 January 1810. Meanwhile, on reaching Cádiz the fugitive Junta Central had immediately established a regency headed by General Castaños.146 The French triumph was by no means total. Not only had some relics of the Army of La Mancha succeeeded in evading their assail­ ants, but Cádiz had been saved from certain enemy occupation by The war of the Junta Central 145 the