ternal exile in Badajoz.98 Nor was this the limit to the intrigues directed against the Junta Central in the early part of 1809, for the Junta of Seville had 136 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War become involved in a scheme known as the ‘grand plot of the grandees*, whereby the Junta was supposed to seize power in the capital whilst a number of disaffected generals, including the Duque de Alburquerque and Francisco Palafox, simultaneously took con­ trol of the armies in the provinces." The existence of these intrigues placed the Junta Central in an impossible position: it could not surrender to the demands of its opponents for fear of a military dictatorship, but resisting their demands laid it open to charges that it merely wished to hang onto power for its own sake. After much deliberation, its members agreed that the only possible political solution was for the convocation of an entirely new Cortes. On 22 May 1809 it accordingly issued a decree promising that such a body would meet within one year, and asking that all interested citizens should submit their ideas as to how it should be organized and the sort of reforms that it should undertake. The task of producing a plan of action was placed in the charge of a special commission of the Junta, headed by the universally respected Jovellanos.100 In the meantime it sought to defuse the situation by by playing one general off against another, and ensuring that armies that were commanded by men known to be hostile to the Junta were always counter-balanced by others which were commanded by its friends.101 In order to restore its battered credibility, it also sought to achieve military victory, launching a series of offensives against the French positions in central and northern Spain. Although politically indispensable, such a strategy took little account of the military situation. After their traumatic experiences in the autumn and winter of 1808, the Spanish armies were in desperate need of a period of rest and reorganization. As the decisive battles of the ensuing campaigns could not but be fought out in the open terrain of the meseta, their glaring inadequacies were certain to be more exposed than ever. Finally, the French enjoyed a central posi­ tion, whilst the Spaniards would be operating on external lines. The continued parochialism of the provincial juntas also constituted a serious obstacle to an offensive strategy, for in many cases they were still inclined to hoard their troops and military supplies within their own borders.102 In view of these difficulties, it would have been far more appropriate to adopt a defensive strategy of the type later envisaged by the Memorial Militar y Patriótico del Ejército de la Izquierda whereby the regular armies would limit themselves to holding their positions in the mountains surrounding the French The war of the Junta Central 137 zone. In the meantime, the French would be worn down by the guerrillas of the interior, supported if necessary by small bodies of regular troops, leaving the generals free to train their forces for an eventual counter offensive.103 An embryonic form of this strategy was already being implemented in Galicia where the Marqués de la Romana had succeeded in stirring up a considerable outbreak of guerrilla warfare. Whilst the French wore themselves out chasing the partisans, the Marquess kept his army hidden in the shelter of the mountains that ran along the northern frontier of Portugal, emerging only to launch the occasional raid on isolated French positions. However, the mere presence of his army prevented the invaders from applying all their forces against the insurgents, just as the activities of the latter prevented a decisive blow from being launched against La Romana. In this manner, the struggle might have been continued indefinitely. However, there was little chance that this strategy could have been adopted. Aside from the political need for a dramatic victory, few of the Spanish generals shared La Romana’s caution, their ambitions having been greatly excited by the victory of Bailén.104 Further­ more,generals and government alike were limited in their freedom of action by the pressure of public opinion. Responsibility for this situation ultimately lay with the civil and military authorities them­ selves. Rather than being honest about their defeats, many generals preferred to dress them up in their dispatches with exaggeration and half truths.105 Nor was the Junta Central much better: desperate to retain the support of public opinion and to maintain popular enthusiasm for the war, its statements and proclamations often bore little resemblance to the actual military situation.106 The Gazeta de Valencia's coverage of the campaign of November-December 1808 may be taken as a good example of the sort of distortion that could result. On 22 November, eleven days after Blake’s defeat at Espinosa de los Monteros, it reported that he had beaten the French. On 16 December, twelve days after the fall of Madrid, it announced that the capital was defending itself heroically and added news of a wholly fictitious Spanish victory in Old Castile. On 30 December Madrid was still holding out, and a non-existent army marching to its relief from Talavera. The loss of the capital was finally acknowledged on 3 January 1809, but two weeks later it was reported that Napoleon was now besieged there by a huge Anglo-Spanish army.107 The outcome of this bombast, which unfortunately continued 138 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War throughout the war, was that ‘the minds of the people were filled .. .with the most determined belief of the superiority of the Spanish army, which now in the public opinion neither admits of nor requires improvement, being already perfect’.108 So great was the general confidence in victory that any show of caution was ascribed to cowardice or to a want of patriotic fervour, the Marqués de la Romana winning the scornful nickname ‘Marqués de las Romerías’ (Marquess of the Pilgrimages) on account of his constant marching and counter-marching in the mountains of Galicia.109 Many gen­ erals, who might otherwise have inclined to caution, were therefore forced into giving battle in the most unfavourable circumstances for fear of being lynched as traitors.110 If an offensive strategy was to be adopted, then it was essential that the Spanish armies should strike hard and fast, for their only hope was to make use of the advantage of surprise conferred on them by the guerrillas to catch the French off balance. Yet speed and decision were precisely the factors that were most often absent from the conduct of the Spanish generals. Not only did the armies tend to be encumbered by unnecessary quantities of baggage and swarms of non-combatants, but the half-trained soldiers rarely kept their ranks and straggled along without any semblance of order.111 Even when they did manage to make reasonable time, they frequently had also to contend with the vacillation of their commanders. Realising that they were likely to be dismissed or even accused of treason if they were defeated, many generals lost their nerve at moments of crisis. Paralysed by indecision, they procrastinated until it was too late either to strike a telling blow or to save their armies by a timely retreat. Alternatively, they would attempt to evade their responsibili­ ties by convening a council of war, a procedure that invariably tended only to increase the confusion.112 A further problem which beset the generals was the possibility of intervention on the part of the Junta Central, which regarded its armies as much as pawns in the political game as instruments of military victory. At certain moments, it therefore became more important that they should be conserved intact than that they should be committed against the enemy. Perhaps the most significant example of such a situation occurred during the crucial Talavera campaign of the summer of 1809. The success of this venture — a concentric advance on the French forces occupying Madrid — depended on the actions of the Army of La Mancha, which was then The war of the Junta Central 139 commanded by a placeman of the Junta named Venegas. Whilst the British army of the then Sir Arthur Wellesley and the Spanish Army of Extremadura under General Cuesta advanced against Madrid from the west, Venegas was supposed to push forward form the south. By pinning down the forces facing him, it was hoped that Venegas would enable Wellesley and Cuesta to march on Madrid with overwhelming numbers. However, on 18 June 1809, the Army of the Levante had been destroyed at Belchite in Aragón. As its commander, Joaquin Blake, had been a loyal supporter of the Junta Central, it became essential that the Army of La Mancha should remain in good order so as to provide a counterweight to Cuesta’s Army of Extremadura. Secret orders were therefore sent to Venegas ordering him on no account to allow any risk to befall his army. Provided with an excellent pretext to pander to his natural caution, Venegas therefore stayed his hand and allowed the French to escape the trap that had been set for them.113 The tactical inferiority of the Spanish army was thus compounded by the fumbling and hesitant manner in which it was committed to battle. Nor could its deficiencies ever be remedied, for every time that a Spanish force was beaten, which was generally every time that it took the field, it had to be remade virtually from nothing. Not only were casualties frequently enormous, but the Spanish levies lacked the discipline and cohesion necessary to retreat in good order from the battlefield. Every defeat therefore entailed the complete disinte­ gration of the army that had been involved, with the consequent loss of much of its equipment.114 Moreover, scattering all over the countryside, many of the survivors took the opportunity to slip away to their homes or to join the guerrillas.115 In the light of the loss of so many men who might otherwise have gone on to form a cadre of veterans, it was to no avail that the Spanish armies should have sprung back to life again as quickly as they were defeated. Each reincarnation merely duplicated the deficiencies of its predecessors, and inevitably went on to share their experiences. It is possible that something might have been done to arrest this cycle of defeat and reconstruction had the Spanish army been placed under the command of British officers, as had been done with the Portuguese. However, even had this been politically possible, such a plan would have made little difference unless the Spaniards were also properly maintained, a task that was quite beyond the capabilities of the Junta Central.116 Substantial aid was received from Great 140 The Spanish army in the Peninsula War Britain, including 155 artillery pieces, 42,800 rounds of artillery ammuntion, 200,277 muskets, 39,000 sets of belts, 6,660,000 musket balls, 15,400 barrels of powder, 23,477,955 cartridges, 61,391 swords, 79,000 pikes, 40,000 tents, 50,000 canteens, 54,000 packs, 92,100 uniforms, 343,900 pairs of shoes and boots, 39,100 shirts, 1,600 shakos and hats, 472,212 yards of linen, calico and wool, and £1,412,354 in cash and bills of exchange in the period May 1808-May 1809 alone?17 In addition, the end of the war between Britain and Spain had reopened communications with the Spanish empire. As the Americans had initially responded to the war with a great upsurge of patriotic enthusiasm, the Junta Central had been bolstered by the arrival of large consignments of bullion.118 Yet so great were the resources had been lost to the French that Toreno estimates that without the support it received from Britain and America the Junta would have been totally bankrupt.119 The logistical problem was compounded by the the revolution of 1808, which had greatly increased the cost of Spain’s mobilisation whilst simultaneously disrupting the efficient utilisation of her resources.120 The 