ed to their former glory, the army remained in the greatest disorder. Satisfying the demands of every member of the officer corps would have been impossible as it now contained some 16,000 members, of whom only 8,200 could be accommodated even by the 184,000-strong army which Spain pos­ sessed in 1814.9 However, the burdens incumbent upon the reduc­ tion in its size necessitated by Spain’s desperate financial situation were not shared equally. The regiments that were disbanded were those formed in the course of the war, just as the officers who were placed on half-pay were the commoners and petty hijosdalgo. As for those officers who were fortunate enough to retain some appointment, their material conditions remained as bad as ever. In December 1814 Francisco de Paula Guervos complained of having gone unpaid for three months; when he did finally receive some wages, it was in the form of una porción de papel para irlo de cobrar Dios sabe donde. Left ‘without money or health’, he saw himself reduced to the choice of ‘death or robbery*.10 Guervos’ regiment Soria - was reduced to such straits that in 1815 its commander refused to march against Napoleon unless his men were paid.11 As for Guervos himself, weak from old wounds as well as imprisonment at the hands of the French, he fell ill and died on 30 November 1815.12 Meanwhile, as El Empecinado protested, Fernando conti­ nued to shower his favours upon young noblemen who had not even served in the war and ‘persons who retired to Cádiz, Ceuta and other places of safety and looked down from the midst of their pleasures on 1814 and after 197 the massacre of their brethren’.11 In this atmosphere it was not long before the original nucleus of liberal officers was joined by many others whose discontent stemmed from disappointed hopes of promotion or a sincere conviction that Fernando was betraying the army’s professional interests. The spread of liberalism was further aided by the widespread penetration of freemasonry amongst the officer corps, for this provided conspi­ rators with a safe medium of communication.14 The first evidence of the growing military opposition came in September 1814 when Francisco Espoz y Mina led an abortive coup at Pamplona. Although he was a noted servil, the famous guerrilla had been refused the viceroyalty of Navarre, and deprived of the command of his division of sometime guerrillas, which was disbanded. Furthermore, when Mina travelled to the court, he was snubbed in public by Fernando. Furious at this treatment, he returned to Pamplona and attempted to raise the garrison in revolt. However, the rank and file refused to heed his appeals, and Mina was left with no option but to flee across the Pyrenees.15 Mina’s coup was only the first in a series of military conspiracies and rebellions that beset Spain between 1814 and 1820. Aside from several more-or-less shadowy intrigues which were uncovered before they could come to fruition, the chief revolts were those of Porlier in 1815 at La Coruña, and Lacy and Milans del Bosche in Catalonia in 1817. As in the case of Mina, however, the rebels came to grief on the refusal of the rank and file to join a revolt against el rey deseado and the chief protagonists were shot. Yet in 1819 a new threat emerged to Fernando in the form of the unrest that began to take hold of the army that had been assembled in Andalucia for dispatch against the American rebels. For want of ships to take them across the Atlantic, in some cases the troops had been waiting in their camps since 1815, where they had been forced to endure the usual privations commensurate with service in the Spanish army. Many of them had been pressed into the ranks by force or were convicted criminals, and none of them had any enthusiasm for the war in America. Meanwhile, a group of liberal officers led by Rafael Riego, Evaristo de San Miguel and Antonio Quiroga had begun to lay plans for revolt. They were initially able to persuade their commander, the Conde del Abisbal, to join them. For the first time they also won over the soldiery by promising them that they would not be sent to America, and that they would be paid in full, given land and allowed 198 The Spanish army in the Peninsular War to go home. The coup was initially scheduled to take place in the summer of 1819, but had to be postponed at the last minute when Abisbal suddenly defected from the plot, apparently because he had suddenly lost faith in its success. Yet for reasons which are unknown, the conspirators were allowed to remain undisturbed, and continued to prepare for revolt. On 1 January 1820 Riego duly ‘pronounced’ in favour of the Constitution of 1812 at Las Cabezas de San Juan, assuring his troops that the mere promulgation of this document would be enough to bring the war in America to an end. However, when the rebels attacked Cádiz they were driven off by a young absolutist officer named Luis Fernandez de Córdoba: unlike the troops of the expedi­ tionary army, the garrison was not faced with the prospect of being shipped across the Atlantic and thus had no reason to abandon Fernando. A period of stalemate ensued in which the rebel forces marched from one Andalucian city to the next in a desperate attempt to acquire popular support, whilst the Madrid government attempted to put a field force together with which to quell the insurrection. Although this did not prove easy, for a time it appeared that the rebels were doomed. However, kept alive almost solely by the courage of Rafael Riego, the flickering flame of the Andalucian revolt gave fresh heart to Fernando’s opponents in the rest of Spain. On 21 February a second military rebellion broke out in La Coruña, which was swiftly followed by other risings in Zaragoza, Barcelona, Tarragona, Gerona and Pamplona. The final blow was delivered by Abisbal, who was now in command of the forces that had been sent against Riego. Sensing which way events were moving, he changed sides yet again and led his army over to the rebels. Deserted on all sides, Fernando was left with no option but to surrender.16 By 1820 a large part of the officer corps may therefore be said to have been won over to the cause of liberalism, or at least to have become so disillusioned with el rey deseado that they were no longer prepared to defend him. Yet that does not mean that most officers had become liberals. Whilst it is true that some of the conspirators had been motivated primarily by ideological considerations, others were clearly influenced chiefly by their personal ambitions, or even by sheer opportunism. Still others, such as the Conde del Montijo (who - inevitably - was implicated in many of the intrigues of the period 1815-19) were mere adventurers. Bored and frustrated by the realities of peacetime life, many young officers became addicted to 1814 and after 199 the gesto heroico for which the’ pronunciamiento offered so many opportunities. Success — as in 1820 — brought instant advancement, and failure the prospect of a glorious death. Personal characteristics and considerations aside, however, what united these officers and enabled them to win the support of their fellows was a growing sense that the aspirations of the army could be as safe in the hands of the liberals as of the absolutists. For a great many officers, the alliance with the forces of revolution had been no more than a marriage of convenience designed to attain their professional ends. They were no more liberal in 1820 than they had been in 1814, as was suggested by their desertion of the constitutional regime in the face of the French invasion of 1823. Their experiences of the years immediately following the trienio liberal, during which Fernando temporarily disbanded the army and instead relied upon a royalist popular militia, were more than sufficient to alienate them from the cause of absolutism. Most officers therefore fought for the liberals during the Carlist War of 1833—39, but as the nineteenth century wore on so the general trend of military opinion was to become more and more reactionary. In part this was a reflection of the increasing tendency of the bourgeoi­ sie — to whom most officers could trace their origins — to become conservative rather than revolutionary as it gained an ever greater stake in the political system. Yet it was also a reflection of the perceptions acquired in the course of the War of Independence, whose humiliations the officer corps attributed to the breakdown of discipline and national unity.17 The chaos caused by the guerrillas, the collapse of the central government, the parochialism of the provincial juntas, the failure to appoint a mando único, and the anti-militarism of the liberals were therefore regarded as evils that must never be repeated. The result was a strong belief in the need to uphold the unity of Spain, to maintain a strong government, to protect the authority and integrity of the army, and to ensure the continuance of law and order. As the army regarded these interests as being synonymous with those of the nation as a whole, it followed that it possessed the duty to overthrow any government whose actions militated against them. The chief legacy of the War of Independence was thus to afflict Spain with an army that not only possessed a tradition of political interventionism, but equated its own interests with the national good. By burdening her with a swollen officer corps that far The Spanish army in the Peninsula War 200 outstripped her actual needs, it also made the military’s aspirations in terms of employment, promotion, and conditions of service so much the harder to satisfy. With the proclivities of many officers towards caudillismo encouraged by the contempt for civilian authority that had been stimulated by the events of 1808—14, a lasting obstacle had been erected to Spain’s emergence as a modem democracy. Yet at the same time change had become inevitable, for the politicisation of the Spanish army sounded the death knell of the ancien régime. So long as the military had remained an unthinking tool of royal power, for all the changing structure of Spanish society and the emergence of revolutionary ideologies, absolutism might have hoped to emulate the survival of the eastern European empires. In Spain as in so many other countries, war was indeed the midwife of revolution. Epilogue Notes 1 H. Wellesley, op. cit., p. 73. 2 M. Pintos Vieites, La política de Fernando VII entre 1814 y 1820 (Pamplona, 1958), 95-102. 3 Real Orden, 4 May 1814, cit. Toreno, op. cit., Ill, 400—5. 4 Wellesley, op. cit., p. 74; cf. also Whittingham, op. cit., p. 265. 5 Callahan, op. cit., 112-14. 6 E. Christiansen, The Origins of Military Power in Spain, 1800-1854 (Oxford, 1967), p. 18. 7 E.g. Alcala Galiano, op. cit., I, p. 410. 8 Busquets, op. cit., p. 14. 9 C. Seco Serrano, Militarismo y civilismo en la España contemporánea (Madrid, 1985), p. 38; Estados de la organización y fuerza de los ejércitos españoles beligerantes en la península durante la guerra de España contra Napoleón Bonaparte (Barcelona, 1822), p. 218. 10 F. Guervos to his parents, 24 December 1814 and 17 January 1815, RAH. 11-5-7:9003, Nos. 58,60. 11 F. Guervos to his parents, 9 May 1815, RAH. 11-5-7:9003, No. 62. 12 Death certificate of F. Guervos, RAH. 11-5-7:9003. 13 Remonstrance of El Empecinado to Fernando VII, cit. Wellesley, op. cit., 79-80; Girón, op. cit., II, 18,22—4. 14 Alcala Galiano, op. cit., I, p. 424. 15 Girón, op. cit., II, 12-14; Whittingham, op. cit., p. 367. 16 Alonso, op. cit., 152—4; Seco Serrano, op. cit., 43-5. 17 Cf. J. Gómez de Arteche, ‘Juan Martín, El Empecinado: la Guerra de la Independencia bajo su aspecto popular’, La España del Siglo XIX, I, 81-132. Appendix 1 Order of battle of the Spanish Army, 1788 (a) Royal Guard Guardias de Corps (three companies), Guardias de Alabarderos (one company), Guardias Españolas (six battalions), Guardias Walonas (six battalions), Carabinieros Reales (four squadrons). (b) 