In Vienna, Archduke Karl had arrived at a similar conclusion a decade earlier, in his treatise*On War against the New Franks*(1795). ‘How was it possible that a well-equipped, balanced, disciplined army had been defeated by an enemy with raw troops, lacking cavalry, and with inexperienced generals?’ His answer, like August’s, concentrated narrowly on strategic and tactical questions: Austria had fought a defensive war, it had been preoccupied with its lines of supply, and it had fragmented and dispersed its forces in an easily punctured cordon of defence.62Although aware of military reforms carried out by Austria after defeat in 1805, officers and ministers in other German states had fewer reasons and less opportunity, given the swingeing nature of French demands for money and troops from its allies in the Confederation of the Rhine, to implement changes on the Prussian model. Patriotism –or loyalty to a particular state –existed within a narrow reading public and beyond, but it was of limited significance for the reform of German armies.
## II. Patriotism and Its Limits
The transformation of the German armies which occurred in the 1800s and 1810s was at once part of a broader movement of reform and a direct response to the changing imperatives of combat.63More and more soldiers entered the army and the relationship between civilian –particularly urban –society and the military became closer, at the same time as military institutions, codes, and traditions were collapsing or were being replaced. These developments were accompanied in Prussia after 1806 and Bavaria after 1813 by debates within the military and the state about the necessity of a ‘patriotic’ reorganization of the army. To Prussian reformers such as Scharnhorst, the allies had lost and France had won primarily because the French had been more motivated than their opponents. ‘The struggle was indeed too unequal: one side had everything to lose, the other little,’ he had written in 1797.64French soldiers, as well as officers, had believed in 1792 that they were threatened with subjugation and the disappearance of the state at the hands of their enemies, which pushed civilians and combatants to make extraordinary sacrifices. This sense of fighting for survival had combined with the desire for a free society and with a longer-standing national pride –‘The French nation has always deemed itself to be the only people which is enlightened, intelligent, free and happy, despising all other nations as uncultured, bestial and wretched’ –to create a new type of soldier and, as a corollary, new forms of combat: ‘the reasons for the defeat of the allied powers must be deeply enmeshed in their internal conditions and in those of the French nation.’65
When war recommenced on the Continent in 1805–6, the allies demonstrated that they had still not learned their lesson. Prussia had treated the conflict ‘like an autumn manoeuvre’, averred Scharnhorst from Hamburg on 13 November 1806:
> I was the only one who knew all the different parts of the great military machine, but I was transferred to Hanover with a small corps, as quartermaster general, and only then, when they could not help themselves, did I come to a larger army.
> 66