

It was more and more difficult for such rulers and their governments, confronted by popular scepticism and resistance, to pretend that their armies had a patriotic purpose.
The transfer of the states and armies of the Confederation of the Rhine to the Coalition against Napoleon in the autumn of 1813 proved to be painful for many of the participants, particularly officers and officials, and it was rarely accompanied by expressions of patriotic or ‘German’ feeling. Wilhelm, the commander of the Badenese contingent still trapped in Leipzig in mid-October, gave a vivid account of the travails of the remaining regimes allied to France. Having been told by Napoleon, whose forces had left the city on 19 October, that he no longer enjoyed French protection, the King of Saxony had already begun to negotiate with the Crown Prince of Sweden, who was acting on behalf of the Coalition, when he heard a ‘vivat’ outside the building in which the talks were taking place. Thinking that it might be for Napoleon, the monarch went into the square to witness a crowd rejoicing at the arrival of Tsar Alexander: ‘With sadness’, recorded Wilhelm, ‘I noticed how no one made way for the worthy old gentleman, who was now abandoned by everyone, after fortune had turned against him.’114The tsar, ignorant of the King of Saxony’s presence, acknowledged the crowd and left the square with the crown prince, who had not bothered to tell him of the Saxon monarch’s plight. ‘I shall never forget the impressions which this day left me with,’ wrote the later Margrave of Baden, having observed the Habsburg Kaiser ride into the market square, to a vivat from the Badenese troops, ‘many of whom were former [Austrian] subjects’:
> In the morning, I saw Emperor Napoleon and his army, made up of so many different parts, withdraw, and now I was confronted by the same colourful picture of diverse nations and peoples (
*> Völkerschaften
*> ), as I viewed the allied army.
> 115

Cut off from the French forces but without orders to switch sides from Karlsruhe, ‘whose situation’ was ‘very difficult because of the proximity of the French border’, Wilhelm surrendered and was taken prisoner by the Prussian army, which also took control of the Badenese soldiers.116On 21 October he had an audience with the King of Prussia, who assured him that he understood ‘the painful situation of the grand duke fully and [understood] that other states, too, [had] recently been in the same position, and he would, therefore, ensure that all possible allowances were made’.117
On returning to Baden in December 1813, Wilhelm found that ‘the mood’ was an ‘unusual’ one:
> One was ill-disposed to anything French in its entirety, but people did not really trust themselves to voice their opinion, partly out of fear of a further turn in the fortunes of war, partly out of shame in front of the Grand Duchess. Everything which had to take place did so, therefore, but without enthusiasm for the so-called German business.
> 118

The government and army of Württemberg were in a similar predicament, caught after 8 October, as King Friedrich explained in a letter to Napoleon, between an advancing Bavarian and Austrian army and a retreating French one. Friedrich’s decision to declare his state’s neutrality did not mean, he assured the emperor, that his feelings had changed, ‘but my steps have to be guided by unchangeable necessities’.119As in Baden, the king’s decision seems to have produced mixed feelings among Württemberg’s soldiers and to have met with few public expressions of patriotic sentiment, even though the very contortions of the governments of the*Rheinbund*states betrayed a perceived need, which occasioned increasing discomfort, to cast their participation in the Napoleonic Wars in a patriotic light. The principal changes had been forced on the German states, most of which had been required to fit into Napoleon’s military system. In former ecclesiastical territories, small principalities, and city states, this meant the imposition of military service for the first time.120The next section assesses the extent to which they, along with the larger German states, managed to reform and expand their armies, with –potentially, at least –profound consequences for the place of the military in the German lands.
## III. The Levée en Masse and Conscription
The French levée en masse challenged contemporary assumptions about warfare. Although it failed to recruit more than half the cohort –even in 1794 –and later was restricted by Napoleon through the reintroduction of ‘substitution’ and preferment for the propertied classes, the system had allowed the mobilization of 750,000–800,000 men (1794), after the National Convention had introduced conscription for an additional 300,000 soldiers in February 1793, of whom about 75,000 were sent to fight in the Vendée. The French army in 1789 had numbered 180,000, but it had since shrunk as a result of desertion, the departure of foreign troops, and the flight of 60 per cent of active officers –6,000 –into exile by the end of 1791.
The 80,000 or so Prussians, Austrians, Hessians, and émigrés who had crossed the French border in mid-August 1792 had met little resistance, and took the fortress of Verdun, the last major defence before Paris, on 2 September. The initial plan, drafted in Potsdam in May, had been for a force of 42,000 Prussians to enter France through Luxembourg, with 56,000 Austrians entering through Belgium on its right flank, and about 20,000 Austrians attacking from the Breisgau –of a total force there of 50,000 –on its left flank. It had been scaled down as a consequence of internal squabbling, with Vienna and Berlin not wanting to do the other’s bidding, but also because of the Coalition’s confidence that a smaller army would suffice to capture French fortresses, which was the military planners’ main concern. The allies were shocked, therefore, to be stopped by a superior number of French troops under General Charles François Dumouriez –64,000, including reserves, against the allies’ 34,000, depleted by dysentery –at Valmy on 20 September.121As Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who witnessed the battle, recorded at a much later date, ‘the French could not be shifted’:
> The greatest consternation spread through the army. Only that morning all they had had in mind was skewering the French and eating them for breakfast. Indeed, it was this unconditional confidence in this army and its commander [the Duke of Braunschweig] which had seduced me into joining this perilous expedition. But now everyone kept his own counsel, did not meet the eyes of his comrades, and if he did give tongue, it was only to curse or complain.
> 122