---
source_url: "https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=24357"
final_url: "https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "ea9f2966d644050acde0db7b7622f8fb0ba1cfaf81c77c2ad8728393e05fceee"
title: "H-Net Reviews"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

H-Net Reviews

 Ute Planert. Der Mythos vom Befreiungskrieg: Frankreichs Kriege und der deutsche Süden: Alltag – Wahrnehmnung – Deutung 1792-1841. Krieg in der Geschichte. Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh Verlag, 2007. 738 pp. EUR 68.00 (cloth), ISBN 978-3-506-75662-6. 

 Reviewed by James M. Brophy (Department of History, University of Delaware) Published on H-German (April, 2009) Commissioned by Susan R. Boettcher 

 Remembering to Forget War 

In the last decade, historians have dramatically redrawn the fault lines of the French Revolution and Napoleonic era on German society and political life. Because of sharply focused regional studies, hazarding general statements about the Napoleonic impact on "Germany" or on "Germans" has become increasingly difficult. To cite but a small sampling of the new research, Karen Hagemann's book on Brandenburg-Prussia (2002), Michael Rowe's study on the Rhineland (2003), Katherine Aaslestad's work on Hamburg (2005), and Robert Beachy's monograph on Leipzig (2005) collectively locate deep and significant differences in regional reception of these events. As the conventional lodestar for general surveys, Prussia thus acts as a poor proxy for attitudes and behaviors developed in Saxony, the Rhineland, Hanseatic cities, or elsewhere. Ute Planert confirms this emphasis on regional difference with a brilliant study of the Napoleonic wars in southern Germany. During Prussia's decade of neutrality after 1795, southern Germany became a sustained battlefield for Austrian, French, Russian, Hungarian, and Allied armies, thereby generating its own intense relationships to the revolutionary era. With this penetrating evaluation of everyday civilian life in war, Planert reconstructs the material, political, and sociocultural frameworks within which the general population perceived and interpreted the war. Wielding an impressive array of evidence, Planert argues that "the idea of the nation" exerted little influence on everyday life in southern Germany (p. 659). Rather, "inherited loyalties, localisms, and confessional attitudes determined the world view and actions of most people" (p. 659). This general conclusion may not astonish the informed reader, but the work's depth of argumentation, broadly integrative regional framework, and its blend of methodological approaches will: this is an innovative study. By combining a substantive social history of the war years with an exacting analysis of postwar memory work, Planert juxtaposes the voices and views of the war years with those of the Restoration to underscore striking incongruities between experience and official memory. Readers can discern first-hand how the "mystic chords" of national memory had little grounding in social experience.