

By bringing the reader so palpably close to the life-world of the southern German Jedermann, Planert has broken new ground. But her synthetic portrait of village life should be considered the start of new research program, and less so a comprehensive conclusion. For example, questions on the evolving nature of village political culture still need to be answered. On the one hand, the book's interpretations of village life emphasize deep-seated continuities of religious custom and dynastic loyalty that rendered southern Germans fundamentally indifferent to the rhetoric of national liberation. On the other hand, the book's last section turns on the tension between the Napoleonic era's heterogeneous political experience and the Restoration's subsequent manipulation of that memory: the former offering a broad range of attitudes, from territorial loyalty to constitutional liberalism to Francophilic Bonapartism; the latter, a cardboard caricature of dynastic loyalty to national sacrifice. The ways in which the many kinds of lived political experience redounded into a post-Napoleonic popular political landscape deserve greater attention. Analyses of village politics do not always permit readers to assess the broad middle ground between hidebound traditionalism and a full conversion to statist nationalisms. In other words, spurning official viewpoints does not translate into general indifference to changing ideals of governance and citizenship. As evinced by the book's last section, the region's future role in constitutional and oppositional politics was significant--and clearly has a history. But to what degree did villagers apprehend and internalize the new political era? In spite of political and socioeconomic rupture as well as the dynamic communicative flow of soldiers and goods, Planert's view of village politics can be too static. Building on Planert's study, future research should assess more fully how the oral, print, and symbolic communication of a new political era bled into village life over a quarter century. In this way, historians will be able to establish cultural continuities between the Napoleonic era and the political landscape of nineteenth-century civil society.

Such a comment detracts in no way from the larger point at hand: historians are indebted to Planert for this extraordinary work. The book should not only spur additional work on everyday life in the Napoleonic era, but also hone the research design that Planert has conceptualized so intelligently. 

If there is additional discussion of this review, you may access it through the network, at: https://networks.h-net.org/h-german.
