

Juxtaposed with this analysis, the final section's examination of official and non-official memory in subsequent decades takes on a pronounced interpretive piquancy. At the lower levels of society, Planert notes, Germans grieved through the tradition of religion, commemorating their fallen in ways that corresponded to the ritual and calendar of their church. In local settings, families and parishes prayed for their fallen soldiers, including those who fought for Napoleon. Grassroots veteran organizations in Baden, Württemberg, and Bavaria also manifested the complex legacy of allegiance and memory by embracing a range of political credos: dynastic loyalty, nationalism, liberalism, and Bonapartism. But the politics of official memorialization was not so accommodating. With Bavaria leading the way, official memory redacted the era's numerous legacies and meanings. Alliances with the French were conveniently overlooked, just as celebrations of 1815 distorted the participation and engagement of governments and citizens of the Rhenish Confederation. Bavaria, Baden, and Württemberg molded the memory of the Wars of Liberation to consolidate and fortify their territorial sovereignty. Just as Ludwig I erected monuments that elided Bavaria's spilled blood for Napoleon, so too William I erected a column in Stuttgart to fashion himself as a pioneer of the anti-Napoleonic alliance. Substantiating Ernest Renan's claim that forgetting is crucial for creating states and nations, the book further confirms the notion that monuments are rarely built to remember.

The book's combination of social, cultural, and political history amounts to an extraordinary achievement. Methodologically, Planert has successfully blended various strains of social history to render both the structure of wartime life and its perceptions from the general populace. Her sedulous recovery of first-hand subjective accounts of ordinary Germany is particularly noteworthy, and her success should spur a discussion about their wider application for nineteenth-century social history. Historiographically, the volume's findings on southern German life provide scholars with a new level of empirical and interpretive depth for discussing regional response to Napoleonic war and politics. By reasserting the "polyphonic" complexity of southern German society through an adroit blend of methodological approaches, Planert has further demonstrated the significance of the "new military history" for virtually all facets of history. Finally, the author commendably transcends the usual limitations of regional history by situating southern Germany in the larger sweep of European history. The narrative brings alive the region's trans-European character: its enduring connections with Habsburg imperial culture; its longer strained relations with France and its multiple forms of Francophobia and Francophilia; and its cultural and political transfers and affinities with the Rhineland and Switzerland. What emerges is a comprehensive framework of south-central European history that attests its salient differences from the experience of Prussia and northern Germany.