

Marshalling a range of archival materials, most notably the ego-documents of ordinary people, Planert assesses how such individuals from Swabia, Bavaria, and parts of Baden experienced and perceived the region's sustained series of military campaigns between 1792 and 1814. Setting aside the perspectives of state officials, military elites, and publicists, the book probes how villages and towns endured military life and the miseries that attended war. The first 450 pages thus compose a remarkable social record of civilian life in Napoleonic wartime, providing thick descriptions of communities that stood in the crossfire of war. The quotidian miseries of those communities that faced foreign and domestic armies on the march were unrelenting and numerous: plunder, corruption, and extortion; impressment, rape, and violence; tribute, taxes, and tolls; provisioning, billeting, and conscription; disease, epidemics, and infections; and pregnancy, prostitution, and ruined family life. With its tales of destroyed crops, surrendered harvests, extorted tribute, and the unrelenting burdens of billeting soldiers, Planert's evidence supports the view of Roger Dufraisse and others that rural agricultural villages were in fact the greatest economic victims of Napoleon's wars. The author makes a convincing case that the survival of family and village loomed far more paramount to average people in those years than did the abstract ideal of national liberation.

Because of incessant fighting between 1792 and 1814, loyalty toward any one army or political cause remained unfixed. In varying degrees, all soldiers raped and plundered; all were loathsome. With the comparative basis of accommodating numerous armies (Habsburg, Russian, Allied, revolutionary French, and the émigré troops of Louis-Antoine-Henri de Bourbon-Condé), ordinary Swabians, Bavarians, and Badenese generally viewed every army as a misfortune, regardless of its provenance. The swagger of Condé's army caused Badenese subjects to welcome French revolutionary troops as liberators, but this view soon evaporated with French mistreatment, as it did with subsequent occupying armies. Because of earlier war experiences, southern Germans feared their Allied liberators in 1814 as much as they did the French. Drawing on diaries, church books, chronicles, and letters, Planert does not find an inchoate subjectivity of national citizenship taking shape during the war years, but rather one of fractured political allegiance. The Rhenish Confederation's promise of peace and stability, for instance, undermined any universal animus against Napoleon. On the contrary, southern Germans celebrated Napoleon after 1806 and fought with French armies as frequently as they did with Austrian or Allied colors. (Significantly, thirty thousand Bavarians fought for Napoleon in 1812.) Not surprisingly, then, when the Allies rallied to fight the French in 1813, villagers resorted to the usual tricks for avoiding military service and furthermore condoned the act of desertion, which was particularly high in 1813-14. Amidst such flux, religion remained the principal template for framing the war's supralocal and metaphysical meanings. Catholic imperial loyalties, priests' injunctions of divine punishment, and such forms of popular piety as millenarianism, Christian superstition, veneration of saints, and pilgrimages guided political attitudes more than any putative reorientation toward national ideals. Similarly, dynastic loyalty toward the Wittelsbachs spurred popular support of territorial defense more than nationalist sentiment. In short, Planert discounts the thesis that ordinary southern Germans perceived the wars as the "birth years" of a "national uprising." By persuasively contextualizing the conflicting circumstances for producing political allegiance, and by avoiding the plot reductions of subsequent national narratives, the book instead stresses the multivocal and polyvalent responses to a quarter century of war and upheaval.