

Secretary Lord Hawkesbury that ‘Political differences and other more trifling dissension have long prevailed between parties at Portsmouth’ 44 and there was particular animosity between the Garrett and Carter families, where their different political views were reinforced by a commercial rivalry as they were both involved in brewing and competed for naval contracts.

Lord Bolton was particularly aggrieved at the contrast between the conduct of the two: Sir

John Carter ‘uniformly acted as an impediment to the measures of Government, and during the whole war had, I believe, not contributed one farthing except by involuntary payment of taxes to the efforts of the Country in its defence’ whilst William Garrett had been generous with money and time in his command of Portsmouth Volunteers during the French

Revolutionary War. 45 Tensions within Portsmouth about volunteers in the 1790s had already attracted the attention of satirists, sufficient to stimulate Charles William’s 1798 print It is not all gold that glitters, or volunteers settling about pedigree and precedence. 46 William Garrett also singled out particular odium for the Deacon family, describing them as ‘those friends of

#### mischief discord envy and hatred’. 47

Despite these factors, initially all went well in Portsmouth, with the mobilisation of large numbers to help defend the town, so conforming to models of loyalism through voluntary military service. Although the hopes for 3,000 part-time soldiers in the town proved to be optimistic, 48 eighteen infantry companies were established in Portsmouth and

Portsea each of 80 privates, and their numbers were limited by government policy. 49 Men that were part of the shore establishment of the navy also contributed to the figures, with a separate corps from the Victualling Office and the expectation that 800 to 1,000 dockyard workers could help man the fortifications in an emergency. 50 We lack the detailed quantitative analysis and population data to make robust comparisons, but nevertheless

Portsmouth mobilised a significant proportion of its male, military-aged population. 2,000 volunteers paraded during inspections by the Duke of York (the Commander in Chief) and the Prince of Wales in August 1803, so at least a third of adult males in the area were in the

volunteers. 51

Participation in public parades played an important part of the process of making them into soldiers in their eyes and those of others. 52 In a printed general order after the

August review, the Duke of York expressed his:

most sincere satisfaction, from having had this day an opportunity of personally witnessed the effects of the spirit of unanimity and loyalty in the inhabitants of

Portsmouth and its vicinity, of which he had previously received the most favourable

report from Major General Whitelocke. 53

In the Duke’s eyes the volunteers represented the success of the town in overcoming its existing political divisions – through a reference to effect of unanimity – in the cause of national defence. And there were further examples of their voluntary efforts to aid the garrison of the town. During a volunteer parade in the evening of 7 August 1803, signals from the Isle of Wight indicated that there was an enemy force off the coast and the volunteers duly assembled across Portsea Island, ready for action; 54 and on 3 November 1803 garrison duty in Portsmouth was taken by the volunteers whilst the regular troops engaged in