

Portsea Island was fortified, and particularly noteworthy were the Hilsea lines that stretched across the north of the island and controlled its single access road, reinforcing the separation and distinctiveness from the mainland. The geography of this militarised space has been examined Raymond Riley, and his figures show that over half of the surface area of

Portsmouth was accounted for by fortifications and related spaces. 28

Portsmouth was also distinctive because of the size of the town that was enclosed within the fortifications, with some 15,000 inhabitants within the defences of Portsmouth and

Portsea. Chatham dockyard was heavily defended but the town was outside of the ‘Chatham lines’ as they were known, and Devonport was also separate from Plymouth. Likewise, there were large modern fortresses outside of Inverness in the Scottish Highlands, Dover in Kent,

St Peter Port (Guernsey) and St Helier (Jersey), often designed to dominate the town and surrounding area. Elsewhere across Britain there were other towns enclosed by walls, but the fortifications were usually old and the town small, a good example being Berwick upon

Tweed on the English-Scottish border. 29 In fact, Portsmouth was comparable to the fortress towns of continental Europe, particularly those on both sides of the Rhine: a contemporary guide to Portsmouth claimed its works were ‘as complete a work of the kind as any in

Europe: being no ways inferior in strength or beauty to any of the so highly vaunted

#### fortresses of the continent.’ 30

These fortifications required a large garrison, and even with some 6,600 men (including militia regiments) 31 the authorities still felt it necessary to explore ways of mobilising Portsmouth’s population to help defend the town. As Lord Bolton put it ‘by taking upon emergency the duty of the Garrison and charge of the works under proper command will liberate a very important portion of the regular force [British Army soldiers] for other purposes’. 32 During the French Revolutionary Wars (1793-1801) three volunteer units were raised in Portsmouth, 33 and as war loomed with Napoleonic France in the spring and summer of 1803, offers were made to resurrect this force and expand it. 34 The mobilisation of

Portsmouth’s population into part-time forces meant that distinction between civilians (although this term was not current in the period) and the army in the town would be blurred.

Of course, a large proportion of the residents in Portsmouth had connections with the armed forces either directly, such as the 4,000 dockyard workers, or indirectly through the trade and

services. 35 But this was not the same as taking up arms and being trained. The situation in

1803 meant that the inhabitants of the town were expected to, and indeed wanted to be seen to, contribute to its defence. With such a heavily militarised space, one might expect the civilian population there to be attuned to military life, although proximity does not necessarily engender good relations. Also, both contemporaries and historians have suggested that urban environments fostered larger and better trained volunteer units; 36 using this equation the Portsmouth Volunteers ought to have ranked as some as the best in the country.