

Western has argued that the threat of Revolutionary and Napoleonic France infused within the volunteers a greater sense of political purpose as a counter-revolutionary force.

3

Such

instances of loyalty were prompted by invasion threats that had punctuated Britain’s wars with France from the 1740s to 1815, and that of 1803-5 was only the latest although probably most serious and quite different from those of before. 4

Yet in Portsmouth, the King’s birthday parade proved to be the finale to a sense of unease, and even outrage, amongst three volunteer officers (sometimes joined by a fourth) at

Whitelocke’s command of them, leading them to quit in protest after three earlier attempts to give up their commissions. 5 These events were the result of a dispute concerning

Whitelocke’s authority and jurisdiction over, and actions towards, volunteers in Portsmouth.

Far from being a popular expression of loyalty to the monarch and defence of the realm, the much hoped-for mobilisation of Portsmouth’s civilian population into volunteer units was

stymied; in fact by late 1804 the force was in disarray and could barely muster a third of its established strength. 6 As others have discussed, the eighteenth century military was peculiarly sensitive and picky about precedence and ritual. 7 Nor are we short of examples of inefficient, ill-disciplined, and short-lived units, as John Cookson highlighted in his work on the Sutton Volunteers in Cambridge, 8 or local social politics fermenting squabbles in auxiliary military forces. 9 What makes this case intriguing is that it happened at Britain’s primary naval base and the detailed records left by the officers shed light on the nature – and especially the limits – of loyalism, so applying to a different context Mark Philp’s caution that participation in loyalist activities did not necessarily mean acquiescence. 10

What follows embraces Matthew McCormack’s exhortation for closer scrutiny of loyalism across the eighteenth century through a case study of the Portsmouth Volunteers. 11

The quarrels that took place in Portsmouth produced voluminous correspondence, far more so than in other cases. The Lord Lieutenant – Thomas Orde-Powlett, Baron Bolton 12 – was an assiduous record keeper and his correspondence for the volunteers in Hampshire take up two volumes, with a further two volumes about Portsmouth alone. Supplementing these are the letters between Lord Bolton and the Home Office, those from generals in Portsmouth with the War Office and Commander-in-Chief, alongside reporting in the Hampshire Telegraph and Sussex Chronicle (itself published in Portsmouth). All told, this provides just shy of 100 items for the twelve months from the first raising of the volunteers to their near collapse by the end of 1804. 13 This wealth of information permits us to examine the interplay between rhetoric, behaviour, and identity of these soldiers, played out in the militarised space of

Portsmouth. Moreover, it allows us to go beyond official and top-down correspondence, which was usually dominated by the military authorities and tended to shroud such incidents within a discourse of soldierly discipline or efficiency, which, perforce, has been reflected in the scholarship on volunteers and their conduct. 14