

The extensive correspondence and commentary that permits an exploration of the reasons for the failure of the Portsmouth Volunteers also provides a corpus through which representations of these actions can be examined at a much deeper level than has hitherto been the case. Before embarking on this, it is important to delineate the context and structure of this correspondence. The key actors / writers broadly form a quartet, each with a different position: the aggrieved officers of the volunteers and their advocates; General Whitelocke;

Lord Bolton; and government officials (mainly the Secretaries of State for the Home

Department). Little has been written about the genre of official or public business correspondence, 15 but certainly there were conventions to it that were observed. Generally, we can assume that the letters were read and composed sequentially, and cross-references between items are evidence of their conversational nature. Yet they were kept as a record and so these letters themselves may have consolidated attitudes towards the other parties by providing evidence that reinforced particular views. Additionally, there was a distinction, albeit vague, between public and private. Sometimes Lord Bolton categorised letters as ‘private’ even though they were sent to others who held official roles. In these cases, the author commonly offered a personal opinion. For example, when Bolton reported the incident on the King’s Birthday to Lord Hawkesbury he wrote ‘I have taken the liberty this for the present to mark, private, because I could wish of course, as I dare say, your Lordship would to avoid any public enquiry’, 16 and writing to Hawkesbury again a week later, Bolton felt it his duty to present matters in a ‘frank manner’ in a private letter giving his opinion of

Whitelocke. 17 However, the use of a letter following its delivery was in the hands of its recipient, something Bolton accepted when he noted in a letter to Lord Hobart that any part of

his private letter could be considered public. 18

Besides the volume of material, there are several factors that suggest that

Portsmouth’s example is instructive. The volunteer force has received the attention of

#### scholars recently, including John Cookson, Austen Gee, and a chapter in Linda Colley’s

Britons to name a few, but frequently the discussion focuses on the national and regional pictures, glossing over local circumstances. 19 Yet as Katrina Navickas and Jon Newman have shown in Resisting Napoleon, careful examination of the implementation of national legislation and policy at a local level reveals much more complex responses. 20 Besides the value of additional detailed studies, the specific political and physical environment of

Portsmouth brought its part-time soldiers into closer contact with the government and the army. The particular circumstances there were as close as we can get to volunteers acting under the governance of the army, and so it presents an opportunity to explore the commitment of those who had enlisted as part-time soldiers.