

Whilst Portsmouth has had plenty of historical attention, understandably focused on the Royal Navy, the dockyard, and its defences, 21 this work has largely ignored the social aspects of mobilisation. The scholarship on Portsmouth’s extensive fortifications tends to consider form and function, assessing their effectiveness for the defence of key strategic points (in Portsmouth’s case the dockyard and harbour) rather than the experience of mobilising the population to help man them. In part, this is because the large scale organisation of civilian-soldiers in Portsmouth during this period was chiefly confined to the

Napoleonic Wars until the rifle volunteers of the Victorian era. 22 Nevertheless, the historiography on Portsmouth has missed the opportunity to study Britain’s fiscal-military state where its domestic and external interests overlapped, and to expound upon John

Brewer’s outline of wartime mobilisation’s impact on power relationships and local

government.

23

This is particularly relevant for Portsmouth as its fortifications came with a military bureaucracy, and as Michael Wolfe has shown in his study of walled towns in France a synthesis between urban, military, and political history in the space of enclosed towns can tell us important things about the relationship between society and the state. 24 What follows is

an exploration of the interaction between this specific environment, the military establishment of the town, and the local forces raised to supplement its defence at a time when the town, and Britain, was under serious threat of invasion. Although there is much that is distinctive about the Portsmouth Volunteers, it provides a useful illustration of the shape and limits of loyalism as well as relationships between civilians and the state in the period.

Portsmouth and its volunteers

At the outbreak of war in 1803 the government encouraged the recruitment of part time soldiers into volunteer corps to help bolster Britain’s defences against the threatened invasion from Napoleonic France, and the Portsmouth area was, superficially, no different from other parts of the British Isles and soon had its own units. 25 Like many towns across the

British Isles, volunteer soldiering provided Portsmouth with a means of expressing urban pride and loyalism within a national framework. 26 What made Portsmouth unusual was its substantial military infrastructure, which was both physical and administrative, headed by its governor. Portsmouth was an important, if not the principal, naval base in the United

Kingdom and successive British governments had invested heavily to protect the town, with the fortification of Portsmouth going back as far as the King Edward IV. The configuration of these defences was entwined with developments in cannon technology, such that by the late

1700s Portsmouth had all the features of eighteenth century military engineering: ditches, ramparts, bastions, a glacis, and ravelins (and the list could go on). 27 Moreover, the whole of