

The context for the development of the volunteers in Portsmouth was complicated by parallel lines of bureaucracy that had overlapping jurisdictions in the town and which were especially confusing regarding the management of the volunteers. The army had more authority in the town than the rest of Britain, and although Daniel Defoe noted in 1724 that the civil government was not much interrupted by military arrangements, inhabitants were examined at the town gates, and were expected to ‘keep garrison hours’ and so were not let out or in of the town after nine o’clock at night. 37 The expansion of the old town was impossible because building was forbidden near the fortifications, and during wartime, the governor (and by extension his staff) had considerable authority. 38 The situation was further confused by the liminal status of volunteers, particularly the extent of army control over them. In March 1804 Charles Yorke (the Home Secretary) clarified to Lord Bolton that volunteers were completely under Whitelocke’s command whilst they were under arms and that the volunteers were required to notify him of any drills or movement when armed; the fact that this clarification was sought is indicative that such authority was not well

established.

39

Additionally, the town was governed by a close corporation of the Mayor and alderman, 40 and the whole of Portsea Island fell within the purview of the county authorities, headed by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Bolton, who reported to the Secretary of State for the

#### Home Department in all matters of ‘internal defence’. So, for example, when Whitelocke

wanted to arm the Portsmouth Volunteers the application had to be approved by the Home

Secretary, even though equipment was stored for them within Portsmouth garrison. 41

Nor was it just the army that was important in the town. As Britain’s primary naval base the Royal Navy also had a significant influence there and large numbers of men were employed in the Royal dockyards and Victualling yard, besides the transient population of sailors. Those working in these yards were ultimately accountable to the Navy Board and the

Admiralty, introducing a further level of administrative complexity and potential friction.

Generally, however, the army and county authorities shied away from direct involvement in the affairs of the Navy regarding the military training of naval personnel. Sir Charles Saxton, commissioner of the navy for the dockyard, 42 was left to make arrangements himself for the dockyard workers, whilst the attempt to make the Victualling yard men into an effective unit was thwarted when the Admiralty would not release Captain Henry Deacon (who although a captain in the Navy was not employed) to command the force, and so he could neither get pay as an army Major or naval Master and Commander for commanding the corps. 43

Muddying the situation further were the political and social tensions within the town, which were often personal and fractious. In 1804 Lord Bolton explained to the new Home