

placed in command of them.

Considering the sensitivities of the Portsmouth Volunteers, Whitelocke’s conduct was ill-judged, leaving aside its legality, and led to him being increasing characterised as a military despot. Whitelocke, and the field officers he appointed, successively offended the four officers in ways that they would be particularly sensitive to. In February, the recently appointed Major Maxwell ordered the four volunteer companies commanded by Captains

Garrett, Greetham, Hickley, and Mottley to wear black belts instead of white – uniforms were a delicate issues for volunteers – distinguishing them with a visible marker of their lower status within the garrison. 100 This was only staved off by intervention from the Home

Secretary who clarified that Whitelocke had no authority to change volunteer uniforms. 101 At the same time, Whitelocke publically verbally abused Captain Mottley over a matter of authority: Whitelocke had forbidden any volunteer officer from taking command of other volunteer companies without his express permission, but the officer concerned had taken command of four volunteer companies the previous day as they marched back from parade at the request of the lieutenants commanding them as he was the senior officer. The interesting

aspect of this very one-sided row was that the volunteer officer clearly felt affronted at being spoken to in such a way ‘at his own door’ and in front of so many people, yet Whitelocke equally felt at the garrison commander that he could admonish a volunteer officer wherever he saw them. 102

We shall probably never know the full extent of Whitelock’s interactions with the volunteers, but enough remains to explore how his character and actions were regarded with increasing hostility. Initially, Whitelocke’s actions were viewed as a result of him being duped by the Corporation, almost with some sympathy, 103 and considered ‘idle and vain’, 104 but such opinions were soon revised and his behaviour was progressively depicted as oppressive and violent. 105 In February, William Garrett highlighted Whitelocke’s ‘bombastic and tryannic threats and orders.’; 106 in March, Captains Garrett, Greetham, Hickley, and

Mottley were subject to ‘a Torrent of violent abuse against us, our conduct, our Principles and our Characters’ from Whitelocke; 107 whilst in April they justified another wish to resign due to his continued hostility. 108 The conclusion to these tensions came during the preparations for the celebrations of the King’s birthday in 1804, in which the three Captains felt Whitelocke’s actions continued to demonstrate the latter’s prejudice against them.

Initially excluded from the invitation to parade, their inclusion became conditional on them accepting Whitelocke’s authority with the concomitant potential for him to publically demean them. Although they paraded, the three Captains wrote to Lord Bolton at the earliest opportunity offering their resignation. 109 This time their wishes were fulfilled and despite further efforts by Bolton to appoint a new commanding officer the Portsmouth Volunteers