

Military Secretary), 117 besides potential misrepresentations locally. 118 In parallel to the worsening characterisation of Whitelocke’s actions, so the three Captains became increasingly concerned about their public reputations, suggesting in March that ‘We are in Constant apprehension that our feelings will be hurt or our Characters injured’. 119 In the wake of the King’s Birthday parade Whitelocke threatened to refuse the resignations so that the officers concerned could be publically dismissed ‘with disgrace’. 120 The only salve to these ruffled egos proved to be Lord Bolton’s continued care and attention to them. The martial spaces in Portsmouth also played their part in amplifying these concerns, as they provided places where the control of the army could be exercised to the detriment of reputations and in a very public way. This has been alluded to in the incident on Southsea Common and the rebuking of Captain Mottley outlined above, but the most instructive

#### example of this came in the preparations of the King’s Birthday parade. When the three

Captains’ companies were included in the instructions for the parade, the place of assembly was changed to the glacis and they were told that if their companies were not up to strength then they would be intermixed with the others. This was potentially a serious affront to their status and the attachment of their men to them, as this re-arrangement would be played out in a very open space and in full view of all of those on the ramparts both other soldiers and civilians. Changing the place of assembly certainly altered the perceptions of Garrett,

Greetham and Hickley such that they stated it was impossible for them to follow

Whitelocke’s orders. Potentially denied the opportunity to demonstrate their loyalty, these officers later acquiesced, but they were further agitated by Whitelocke during the march to

Portsdown Hill when he sent them a message stating that he was pleased to see the men parade but not the officers, which was taken as a further attempt to separate their men from them. In this context, Whitelocke’s threats to disarm and disband three companies whilst still on duty after the parade provided an additional example, not that one was needed, of the potential power Whitelocke had to publically embarrass volunteer officers. 121

Conclusion

Lord Bolton was probably relieved when Whitelocke left Portsmouth and took up the position of Inspector-General of Recruiting, thus avoiding the inquiry that Bolton thought was inevitable. There is no direct evidence of the government engineering this appointment, but the timeliness of the move suggests a desire to remove Whitelocke from further trouble.

Bolton attempted to be fair in his judgement ascribing the troubles to mistakes and misunderstandings on both sides. In some ways the collapse of the Portsmouth Volunteers was a clash between a ‘simple soldier’ and the mentalities of citizen-soldiers acted out inside the unusual space of Portsmouth, and the incident could be added to the catalogue of tense civil-military relations in Britain that stretched well beyond the long eighteenth century.