

Nevertheless, there were more fundamental issues in play at Portsmouth. The case of the

Portsmouth Volunteers indicates that incidents which superficially appear ill disciplined or peculiar (certainly from the army’s perspective) were a manifestation of different interpretations of loyalism brought out through service in the force. Moreover, it questions the pluralism of loyalism that has often been cited as the reason for its success in the

period. 122

The loyalism expressed by the three Captains, and which they were so concerned to defend, was not a straightforward obedience to the government and its policies, and was more complex than constitutional propriety and support for the established order argued by Gee. 123

It was underpinned by the desire to act in a generous and public-spirited way within a national legal framework. By noting the irregularities in Portsmouth the officers made comparisons with the rest of the country and so evinced their ideas of the nation. Repeatedly, they re-affirmed their desire to serve ‘King and Country’ and although the territorial definition of this country were never openly expressed as England or Britain, because they had such a concern for the law we can see that they were imaging a Britain where

Parliamentary legislation applied. The nature of their country was therefore jurisdictional as much as it was social and cultural, and was elastic depending on the applicability of relevant laws. The Portsmouth volunteers were acutely aware of the national legal picture and how it played out in a local context: they highlighted peculiarities that appeared to prejudice them.

At once loyalism was both parochial and national, and shows that volunteering was more nationally conscious than is suggested by John Cookson’s ‘national defence patriotism’, whilst equally more attuned to locality than is implied by Colley’s Britishness which overlaid

and superseded other identities. 124

The volunteer officer’s royalism also reveals more about their identity and their relationship to the state. The ‘King’ that they felt a duty towards and wish to serve through volunteering was an abstract relationship but it also manifested itself in their interactions with monarch’s representatives. In Portsmouth’s case, there were two: the Lord Lieutenant appointed to the county and the military officers appointed to the garrison. In Whitelocke and

Bolton they came to represent two different faces of the state, the former under direct control of the central authorities whilst in Bolton we find someone able to adapt the application and communication of the state’s wishes. Certainly, the volunteer officers who resigned conveyed

their preference for Bolton as the more ‘civil’ representative of the monarch rather than the military, as did the government officials in the Home Office. The volunteer officers were hyper-sensitive to any manifestations of the outright authority of the army without due regard to the law as well as individual and collective feelings. Bolton’s role proved to be instrumental in the incident not escalating further still (and indeed it having been unheard of until now), and as Lord Lieutenant he became a crucial mediator between the government, communities, and individuals. Mass mobilisation through the volunteers brought the tensions between the two channels of state power to the fore, and the volunteer officers’ recourse to legalism provided a bastion against this mobilisation descending into military despotism and the consequent loss of their ability to represent their actions to others and to shape their performance as loyalists. Herein lies an explanation for the paradox of the success of the