

Lord Bolton had brokered. This caused the schism in the unit outlined above that proved irreparable. 76 Whitelocke and Lord Bolton had asked for Lieutenant-Colonel George Duke, a half-pay officer living in Hampshire, to be the commander of the Portsmouth Volunteers but in September he was employed by the Government in the role of an inspecting officer of volunteers. 77 The Duke of York, unaware of the local July agreement about the commanding officers, allowed Whitelocke to recommend officers for these appointments and he nominated

Majors Hugh Maxwell and William Cater. 78 Furthermore, Whitelocke’s arrangements were in effect establishing the volunteers into larger units, which challenged their status as

independent companies.

Lord Bolton knew nothing of Whitelocke’s measures, despite regulations that all volunteer officer appointments should be passed through him as Lord Lieutenant to the

Secretary of State for the Home department, who then laid them before the King. Although

Bolton at first thought there was some mistake, 79 as he looked further into the appointments he was troubled by Whitelocke’s actions as it became clear that Whitelocke had bypassed the approved channel for commissioning volunteer officer and had gone directly to the

Commander-in-Chief. 80 Moreover, those chosen by Whitelocke were particularly inappropriate: Major Carter was a nephew of the Mayor of Portsmouth and an inhabitant of the town, a double transgression of the July agreement to appoint independent officers from outside the town to command the unit; and the second appointment was used as patronage by

Whitelocke, whereby the position was offered to Major Maxwell of the 48th Foot in an exchange with the husband of Whitelocke’s sister-in-law. 81

In response to these appointments made by Whitelocke, three officers (Captains

George Garrett, William Greetham, and J. A. Hickley) offered their resignations in January

1804. In the inquiries that followed, loyalism tempered by a punctilious observance of the law was a key component of their identity, their understanding of loyalism, and their vision of the nation. William Garrett, a brother of one of the volunteer captains who acted as an advocate and intermediary for them, reported to Lord Bolton on the ‘illegal and indecorous conduct’ 82 conduct of Whitelocke, whilst also highlighting that Majors Maxwell and Carter had no legal authority over the volunteers. 83 Such views were not restricted to William

Garrett who was endeavouring to justify and support upset parties. Both Lord Bolton and

Charles Yorke were shocked by Whitelocke’s circumvention of the official methods for the recommendation of volunteer officers. Bolton questioned Whitelocke as to how he could sanction an arrangement that was ‘conducted by means totally different from those established by the Legislature, and directed by the King?’, 84 and Charles Yorke ‘certainly expected that the Recommendation of the Persons to be appointed to these situations would be made by your Lordship to the Secretary of State, to be by him transmitted in the usual way through the Commander in Chief for His Majesty’s approbation.’ 85