Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


\TY. 


/ 


• 


•      *•.. 


•^ 


•  -•. 


^  ^  i''-> 


HISTORY 


OP 


THE  WAR  IN  AFGHANISTAN. 


FBOM 

THE  UNPUBLISHED  LETTERS  AND  JOURNALS 
OF  POLITICAL  AND  MIUTART  OFFICERS  EMPLOYED  IN  AFGHANISUa 
THBOUGHOUT  THE  ENTIRE  PERIOD  OF  BRITISH  CONNEXION 

WITH  THAT  COUNTRY. 


BY  JOHN  WILLUM  KAYE. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 

VOL.  11. 


LONDON: 
RICHARD  BENTLEY,  NEW  BURLINGTON  STREET. 

^nibltejber  In  <9i])inat5  to  ^tx  ina|tstQ. 

1851. 


^■^■'-   ^t-iv^-f"? 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  II. 


BOOK  V. 

[1841—1842.] 

CHAPTER  L 
[NoTember— 1841.] 

TJLQM 

The  Outbreak  at  Caubol — ^Approaching  Departure  of  the  EuToy — ^Imme- 
diate Causes  of  the  Rebellion— Death  of  Sir  Alexander  Bumes — His 
Character — Spread  of  the  Insorrection— Indecision  of  the  British  Autho- 
rities       1 

CHAPTER  n. 

[Noyember — 1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection — ^Attempted  Moyement  on  the  City— Attack 
on  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort — Loss  of  the  Commissariat  Fort — Captain 
Mackemde*s  Defence — Capture  of  Biahomed  Sheriff's  Fort — ^Attempts  to 
Corrupt  the  Enemy 26 

CHAPTER  IIL 

[Noyember— 1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection—- General  Elphinstone — His  Infirmities — ^Re- 
call of  Brigadier  Shelton  to  Cantonments — Capture  of  the  Ricka-bashee 
Fort — Intrignes  of  the  Afghan  Chiefs — ^The  Enyoy's  Correspondence 
with  Mohnn  Lai 43 

CHAPTER  IV. 
[Noyember— 1841.] 
Action  on  the  Beh-mem  Hills— The  last  of  our  Snooesses— Looked-for 
Adyent  of  Sale's  Brigade— Arriyal  of  Pottinger  and  Haughton— The  Siege 
of  CharekuT— Destruction  of  the  Goorkha  Regiment— Withdrawal  of  Sale 
to  Jellalabad— Question  of  Concentration  in  the  Balla  Hissar 59 


CHAPTER  V. 
[Noyember — 1841.] 
Progress  of  the  Insurrection— State  of  Affiurs  in  the  Balla  Hissar— Shah 
Soojab^The  Action  of  the  23rd  of  Noyember— Defeat  of  the  Britiih 
Troops— Negotiationt  with  the  £D«arf  ..^ %o 


IV  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VI. 
[Noyember — December:  1841.1 

FAOB 

Progress  of  Negotiation— Arriyal  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan— His  Character 
— ^Negotiations  continued — ^Deaths  of  Meer  Musjedee  and  AbdooUah  Khan 
— Bevival  of  N^^tiations— The  Draft  Treaty 97 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

[December— 1841.] 
Preparations  for  the  Retreat— Evacuation  of  the  Balla  Hissar— Progress  of 
the  Negotiations — Continued  Delay — Variations  of  the  Treaty — Designs 
of  the  Envoy — Overtures  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan— Death  of  Sir  Wil- 
liam Macnaghten — His  Character  131 

CHAPTER  Vm. 

[December:  1841 — January:  1842.] 

The  Capitulation — Supineness  of  the  Garrison — Negotiations  resumed — 
Efforts  of  Major  Pottinger— Demands  of  the  Chiefs— The  Final  Treaty— 
Humiliation  of  the  Garrison — General  Remarks 166 


BOOK  VI. 

[1841  —  1842.] 

CHAPTER  I. 

[November:  1841 — January:  1842.] 

Sale's  Brigade— Evacuation  of  Gundamuck — Skirmishes  with  the  Enemy 
— Occupation  of  Jellalabad — State  of  the  Defences — Successful  Sallies — 
The  Fortifications  repaired — ^Disastrous  Tidings  from  Caubul — Summons 
to  Surrender — Arrival  of  Dr.Brydon 195 

CHAPTER  n. 

[January — 1842.] 

The  Retreat  from  Caubul — Departure  of  the  Army— Attack  on  the  Rear- 
Guard— The  First,  Day's  March— Encampment  at  Begramee— The  Pas- 
sage of  the  Khoord-Caubul  Pass — ^Tezeen—JugduUuck— Sufferings  of  the 
Force— Negotiations  with  Akbar  Khan — Massacre  at  GuDdamuck— Es- 
cape of  Dr.  Brydon 218 

CHAPTER  ni. 

[1841—1842.] 

Efforts  at  Retrieval — Close  of  Lord  Auckland's  Administration — Embarrass- 
ments of  his  Position — Opinions  of  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls — Efforts  of  Mr. 
George  Clerk— Despatch  of  the  First  Brigade — ^Appointment  of  General 
Pollock — Despatch  of  the  Second  Brigade— Expected  Arrival  of  Lord 
Ellenborough — Further  Embarrassments  251 

CHAPTER  IV. 
[January — April  :  1842.] 
The  Halt  at  Peshawur- Position  of  Brigadier  Wild— His  Difficulties— Con- 
duct of  the  Sikhs — ^Attempt  on   Ali-Musj id— Failure  of  the  Brigade — 
•  Arrival  of  General  Pollock— State  of  the  Force — Affairs  at  Jellalabad — 
Correspondence  between  Sale  and  Pollock 288 


CONTENTS.  V 

CHAPTER  V. 
[April— 1842.] 

PAOB 

The  F<ndnK  of  the  Khjbor  Pasa— State  of  the  Sikh  Troops— Bfr.  Clerk  at 
the  Court  of  Lahore — ^Views  of  the  Lahore  Dorbar—Effbrts  of  Shcre 
Sln^ — ABsemblage  of  the  Army  at  Jumrood — Adyance  to  Ali-Musjid — 
Affidn  at  Jellalabad— Defeat  of  Akbar  Khan — Junction  of  Pollock  and 
Sale 319 


BOOK  VII. 

[1842.] 

CHAPTER  I 
[January — ^April:  1842.] 
The  Last  Days  of  Shah  Soojah— State  of  Parties  at  Caubnl— Condition  of 
the  Hostages — the  New^  Zemaun  Khan — ^Letters  of  Shah  Soojah — 
His  Death — Question  of  his  Fidelity — His  Character  and  Conduct  consi- 
dered   358 

CHAPTER  n. 

[NoYember:  1841— April:  1842.] 

Affiurs  at  Candahar— EyQ  Tidings  firom  Caubul— Maclaren's  Brigade — 
Spread  of  the  Insurrection— Arrival  of  Atta  Mahmed — Flight  of  Sufder 
Jung — ^Attack  on  the  Douranee  Camp— Continued  Hostilities — ^Attack 
upon  the  City — Action  in  the  Valley  of  the  Urghundab— Fall  of  Ghuznee 
—Defence  of  Khelat-l-Ghiliye— Movements  of  England's  Brigade 390 

CHAPTER  in. 
[AprU — June:  1842.] 

The  Halt  at  Jellalabad — ^Positions  of  Pollock  and  Nott — Lord  EUenborough 
—Opening  Measures  of  his  Administration — Departure  for  Allahabad — 
His  Indecision— The  Withdrawal  Orders— Their  Effects— The  "Missmg 
Letter" — ^Negotiations  for  the  Release  of  the  Prisoners 455 

CHAPTER  IV. 

[January — April:  1842.] 

The  Captivity— Surrender  of  the  Married  Families — Their  Journey  to 
Tezeen — ^Proceed  to  Tugree — Interviews  between  Pottingcr  and  Akbar 
Khan — Removal  to  Budeeabad — Prison  Life — ^Removal  to  Zanda — Death 
of  General  Elphinstone 481 

CHAPTER  V. 

[December:  1841— June:  1842.] 

Stoddart  and  ConoUy— Intelligence  of  the  Caubul  Outbreak — Arrest  of  the 
English  Officers — ^Their  Sufferings  in  Prison — Con6lly*s  Letters  and 
Journals — Death  of  the  Prisoners  502 

CHAPTER  VI. 
[April— July:  1842.] 

Affairs  at  Caubul — ^Elevation  of  Futteh  Jung— Opposition  of  the  Barukzyes 
—Arrival  of  Akbar  Khan— His  Policy— Attack  on  the  Balla  Hissar— Its 
Capture— Conduct  of  Akbar  E[han— Baruluye  Strife— Defeat  of  Zemaun 
Khan — Situation  of  the  Hostages  and  Prisoners ^^^ 

VOL-  II.  6 


\ 


VI  CONTENTS. 

BOOK  VIII. 

[June — December:  1842.] 

CHAPTER  I. 
[June — September:  1842.] 

The  Advance  from  Jellalabad — ^InstractionB  til  Lord  EUenboroagh— The 
Qaestion  of  Responsibility — ^Employment  of  the  Troops  at  Jdlalabad — 
Operations  in  the  Shinwarree  Valley — Negotiations  for  the  Release  of  the 
Prisoners — ^The  Advance — ^BCammoo  Ehail — Jugdulluck-— Tezeen — Occu- 
pation of  Caubul 551 

CHAPTER  II. 

[May— September:  1842.] 

The  Advance  from  Candahai"— The  Relief  of  KheUt-i-Ghilzye — ^Reappear- 
ance of  Aktur  Khan — General  Action  with  the  Donranees— Surrender  of 
Snfder  Jung — The  Evacuation  of  Candahar — Disaster  near  Mookoor — 
The  Battle  of  Goaine — ^The  Recapture  of  Ghuznee—Flight  of  Shumshoo- 
deen  Khan — Arrival  at  Caubul   582 

CHAPTER  m. 

[September — October:  1842.] 

The  Re-occupation  of  Caubul— Installation  of  Futteh  Jung — The  Recovery  of 
the  Prisoners — ^Their  Arrival  in  Camp — ^The  Expedition  Into  the  Kohistan 
— ^Destruction  of  the  Great  Bazaar — ^Depredations  in  the  City — ^Accession 
ofShahpoor — ^Departure  of  the  British  Army  610 

CHAPTER  IV. 

[October— December:  1842.] 

Eflbct  of  the  Victories— Lord  Ellenborough  at  Simlah— The  Manifesto  of 
1842— The  Proclamation  of  the  Gates — ^The  Restoration  of  Dost  Mahomed 
—The  Gathering  at  Ferozepore — Reception  of  the  Troops — The  Courts- 
Martial — Conclusion 644 

Appendix   671 


ERRATA  IN  VOL.  IL 

Page  6,  note,  for '*  the  Envoy's  nephew/' read  *Hhe  Envoy's  connn." 

„  574,  line  19,  for  "  Lockyer  and  his  Dragoons,"  read  *'  Lockwood  and  his 
Dragoons." 

„  579,  line  5,  dde  '^  for  a  moment." 

„  592,  line  12,  for  on  "  the  20th  of  July,"  read  "  on  the  26th  of  July." 


THE  WAR  IN  AFGHANISTAN. 


BOOK  V. 

[1841—1842.] 


CHAPTER  L 

[November— 1841 .] 

The  Outbreak  at  Caubul — Approaching  Departure  of  the  Envoy — Imme- 
diate Causes  of  the  RebeUion — Death  of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes — His 
Character — Spread  of  the  Insurrection — ^Indecision  of  the  British  Autho- 
rities. 

Brightly  and  cheerfully  the  month  of  November 
dawned  upon  the  retiring  envoy  and  his  successor. 
Macnaghten  was  about  to  lay  down  the  reins  of  office, 
and  turn  his  face,  in  a  day  or  two,  towards  Bombay. 
Burnes,  rejoicing  in  the  thought  of  being  "  supreme  at 
last,"  was  stretching  out  his  hand  to  receive  the  prize  he 
had  so  long  coveted.*  The  one  was  as  eager  to  depart 
as  the  other  to  see  the  departure  of  his  chief;  and  both 

•   Burnes,  however,    though    he  dahar :  "  I  have  not  as  yet  received 

spoke  and  wrote  confidently  of  his  a  line  from  Lord  Auckland,  and  fear 

nomination — not  with  the  title  of  En-  that  my  letters  have  fallen  into  the 

voy  and  Minister,  but  that  of  Resi-  hands   of  the   Philistines.      We   are 

dent — ^had  not  received  any  official  (much  to  Sir  Alexander's  chagrin) 

announcement  of  his   appointment,  still  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  ques- 

On  the  1st  of  November,  Macnaghten  tion  of  the  succession. — [Af5.  C'or- 

WTote  to  Major  Rawlinson  at  Can-  respondenceofSirW.H.MacnaghJtiaiP^ 

VOL.  n.  B 


2  THE  OUTBEEAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

were  profoundly  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  the 
great  administrative  change  was  about  to  be  effected 
under  an  unclouded  sky.* 

There  were  others,  however,  who  viewed  with  dif- 
ferent eyes  the  portents  that  were  gathering  aroimd 
them — others  who  warned  the  Envoy  and  Burnes  of 
the  dangers  of  such  a  confederacy  as  had  been  formed 
against  the  British  in  A%hanistan.  Among  these  was 
Mohun  Lai.  Before  the  arrival  of  Captain  Macgregor 
from  the  Zoormut  country,  he  had  been  deputed  to 
accompany  General  Sales's  camp,  and  on  his  return  to 
Caubul,  he  had  laid  the  result  of  his  observations,  whilst 
on  that  expedition,  before  Sir  Alexander  Burnes.  En- 
tering fully  upon  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  confe- 
deracy, the  Moonshee  emphatically  declared  his  opinion 
that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  disregard  such  threaten- 
ing indications  of  a  coming  storm,  and  that  if  the  con- 
spiracy were  not  crushed  in  its  infancy,  it  would  become 
too  strong  to  be  easily  suppressed.    Burnes  rephed  that 

the  day  had  not  arrived  for  his  interference — that  he 
could  not  meddle  with  the  arrangements  of  the  envoy ; 
but  that  Macnaghten  would  shortly  turn  his  back  upon 
Caubul,  and  that  measures  should  then  be  taken  to  con- 
ciliate the  Ghilzyes  and  Kohistanees,  by  raising  their 
allowances  again  to  the  point  from  which  they  had  been 

♦  In  the  letter  above  quoted  (No-  however,  adda   in  the  former    let- 

vember  1,  1841),  Macnaghten  says:  ter:  "But  these  are  ticklish  times, 

'*  Macgregor  does  not  know  whetner  and  the  aspect  of  afiairs  in  Tugao 

or  not  the  chiefs  are  at  the  bottom  of  and  Nijrao  is  threatening 

the  business.     He  suspects  they  arc,  I  don't  know  when  I  can  get  away 

but  I  think  not,  and  I  trust  that  in  a  from  Caubul,  for  I  am  very  unwif- 

day  or  two  all  will  be  riffht  again."  ling  to  leave  affairs  in  an  unsettled 

And  in  another  letter  addressed,  on  state/- — [MS,  Correspondence  of  Sir 

the  same  day,  to  Captain  Macgregor  IV,  H,   Macnaghten,\      He  had  in- 

himseir,  he  says,  "I  trust  that  the  tended,  as  he  wrote  on  the  27th  of 

business  last  reported  to  you  was  the  the  preceding  month,  to  leave  Cau- 

expiring  cflbrt  of  the  rebels,  and  that  bul  on  the  1st  of  November;  but 

if  the  chiefs  are  really  innocent,  the  to  retain  charge  of  his  office  until  he 

party  will  have  dispersed,  and  than-  reached  Ferozepore.  —  [3/<S'.   Corre^ 

nahfl  have  been  re-established."   He,  epondence,'] 


MEETING  OF  THE  CHIEFS.  3 

reduced.  On  the  1st  of  November,  Mohim  Lai  again 
pressed  the  subject  of  the  hostile  confederacy  upon  the 
expectant  minister.  Bumes  stood  up  from  his  chair, 
and  said,  with  a  sigh,  that  the  time  had  come  for  the 
British  to  leave  the  country;*  but,  on  the  same  evening, 
he  congratulated  Sir  WiUiam  Macnaghten  on  his  ap- 
proaching departure  at  a  period  of  such  profound  tran- 
quiUity.f 

On  that  very  evening  the  hostile  chiefs  met  and  deter- 
mined,  in  conclave,  upon  the  measures  to  be  taken  for 
the  overthrow  of  the  British  power  in  Afghanistan.  To 
rouse  the  people  into  action  by  a  skilful  use  of  the  king's 
name,  seemed  to  be  the  safest  course  of  procedure.  But 
doubts  arose  as  to  whether  it  were  wiser  to  enlist  the 
loyal  sjmoipathies  of  his  subjects,  or  to  excite  their  indig- 

*  I  most  give  Mohun  Lai's  own  we  must  leaye  this  country.  Taj 
wordsjin  spite  oftbeir  eccentric  phrase-  Mahomed,  son  of  Gholam  Mahomed 
ologj:  ^'On  the  1st  of  November,"  Khan,  the  Douranee  chief,  came  at 
he  writes,  *'  I  saw  Sir  Alexander  ni^ht  to  him,  and  informed  what  the 
Barnes,  and  told  him  that  the  con-  chiefs  intended  to  do,  but  he  turned 
federacy  has  been  grown  very  high,  him  out  under  the  pretended  aspect 
and  we  should  fear  the  consequence,  that  we  do  not  care  for  such  things. 
He  stood  up  from  his  chair,  sighed.  Our  old  friend,  Kaib  SherifiT,  came 
and  said  he  knows  nothing  but  the  and  asked  him  to  allow  his  son,  with 
time  has  arrived  that  we  shoidd  leave  100  men,  to  remain  day  and  ni^ht  in 
this  country.**— [Xtf^ter  of  Mohun  Lai  his  place  till  the  Ghilzye  affair  is  set- 
to  J,  R.  Cowin^  Esq,^  January  9, 1 842 :  tied — but  he  did  not  agree." — ^Letter 
MS.  RecordsJ]  In  a  letter  to  another  of  Mohun  Lai  to  Dr,  James  Bumes : 
correspondent,  Mohun  Lai  makes  a  mS.  Correspondence,'] 
similar  statement ;  and  adds  that,  f  '^^  ^  stated  on  the  authority  of 
upon  the  same  night,  Taj  Mahomed  Sir  William  Macnaghten :  *'  I  may  be 
called  upon  Bumes,  to  no  purpose,  considered  culpable,"  he  said,  in  an 
with  a  uke  warning:  **  On  the  Ist  unfinished  memorandum,  found  after 
of  November  I  saw  nim  at  evening,  his  deaUi,*'for  not  havine  foreseen  the 
and  informed  him,  according  to  the  coining  storm ;  to  this  i  can  only  re- 
conversation  of  Mahomed  Meerza  ply  that  others,  who  had  much  bettor 
Khan,  our  great  enemy,  that  the  opportunities  of  watohingthe  feelings 
chiefs  are  contriving  plans  to  stand  of  the  people,  had  no  suspicion  of 
against  us,  and  therefore  it  will  not  what  was  coming.  The  late  Sir  A. 
be  safe  to  remain  without  a  sufficient  Bumes  was  with  me  the  evening  be- 

fuard  in  the  city.  He  replied,  that  if  fore  the  insurrection  occurred,  and  it 
e  were  to  ask  tne  Envoy  to  send  him  is  a  singular  fact  that  he  should  have 
a  strong  guard,  it  will  show  that  he  congratulated  me  on  my  approaching 
was  fearing ;  and  at  the  same  (time)  departure  at  a  season  of^  such  pro- 
he  made  an  astonishing  speech,  by  found  tranquillity."  —  \Unvuhhshed 
saying  that  the  time  is  not  far  when  Papers  of  Sir  W,  n,  Macna^im^ 

b2  % 


4  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

nation  against  him.  It  might  be  announced,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  the  King  had  given  orders  for  the  destruction 
of  the  infidels ;  or  a  report  might  be  spread  that  he  had 
declared  his  intention  of  seizing  the  principal  chiefs,  and 
sending  them  prisoners  to  London.*  It  would  seem  that 
the  rebels  did  both.  AbdooUah  Khan,  Achekzye,  de- 
clared the  latter,  in  a  letter  to  the  principal  Sirdars,  and 
the  former  was  accomplished  by  forging  the  King's  seal 
to  a  document,  ordering  the  destruction  of  the  Fering- 
hees,  or  rather,  forging  the  document  to  the  seaLf  Men 
of  different  tribes  and  conflicting  interests  had  made 
common  cause  against  the  Feringhees.  Barukzye,  Po- 
pulzye,  Achekzye,  and  Ghilzye  chiefs  were  all  banded 
together.  Why  they  should  have  fixed  upon  that  parti- 
cular 2nd  of  November  for  the  first  open  demonstration 
at  Caubul  it  is  not  easy  to  conjecture.  To  have  waited 
a  few  days  would  have  been  to  have  waited  for  the  de- 
parture of  the  Envoy,  of  the  Greneral,  and  of  a  consider- 
able body  of  troops  from  A^hanistan.J     The  suppo- 

*  *'  The  immediate  cause  of  the  sion  of  strength.    But  his  Majesty 

outbreak,**  wrote  Macuaffhten,  in  the  has  behaved  throughout   with    the 

memorandum  quoted  in  £e  preceding  most  marked  fidelity,  judgment,  and 

note,  *^  was  a  seditious  letter  from  prudence.     By  forced  orders  from 

Abdoollah  Khau,  Achduje,  to  seve-  him  for  our  destruction,  by  the  well- 

ral  chiefs  of  the  greatest  influence  in  known  process   of  washing  out  the 

Caubul,  assuring  them  that  it  was  the  contents  of  a  genuinelj  sealed  paper, 

intention  of  his  Majesty  to  seize  and  and  substituting  their  own  wiclced 

send  them  to  London.    The  plot  was  inventions.  ♦  ♦  ♦  ♦"    {Sentence  kft 

in  the  tirst  instance  confined  to  but  a  imperfect,) — [Correspondence  of  Sir 

few  individuals ;  but  success  having  Tr.  A  Macnaghten.j 

attended  the  fint  eiforts  of  the  con-  (  "  ^^  ^    difficult    to    account,'* 

spirators,  the  infection  rapidly  spread  writes  Brigadier  Shelton,  *^  for  their 

over  all  parts  of  the  countrv."  having  broken  out  so  soon,  knowing 

t  "  The  principal  rebels,**  wrote  that  toe  Envoy,  General,  and  all  the 
Sir  William  Macnaghten,  in  a  letter  troops,  except  my  brigade,  were  to 
to  Lord  Auckland,  of  which  only  a  march  in  three  or  four  days.**— [A/.S'. 
fragment  has  been  recovered,  "met,  Records."]  Macnaghten  says:  "Those 
on  the  night  before,  and  [relying]  on  who  were  foremost  in  the  rebellion 
the  inflammable  disposition  of  the  were,  up  to  a  day  or  two  before,  the 
people  of  Caubul,  they  first  save  out  loudest  in  their  professions  of  friend- 
that  it  was  the  order  of  his  Majesty  ship,  and  most  constant  in  their  visits 
to  put  all  infidels  to  death,  and  this,  at  my  house.  It  will  be  seen  from 
ofcourse,  gained  them  a  great  acces-  the  opinions  I  have  recorded  from 


ABDOOLLAH  KHAN.  5 

sition,  indeed,  is,  that  however  widely  spread  the  dis- 
affection, and  however  extensive  the  confederacy,  the 
first  outbreak  was  not  the  result  of  any  general  organi- 
sation, but  was  the  movement  only  of  a  section  of  the 
national  party.  It  was  too  insignificant  in  itself,  and 
there  was  too  little  evidence  of  design  in  it,  to  have 
sprung  out  of  any  matured  plan  of  action  on  the  part  of 
a  powerful  confederacy.  What  that  confederacy  was 
may  be  gathered  firom  Macnaghten's  admission,  that 
when,  early  in  December,  he  met  the  Afghan  leaders 
at  a  conference,  he  saw  assembled  before  him  the  heads 
of  nearly  all  the  chief  tribes  in  the  coimtry.* 

The  meeting  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  November  was 
held  at  the  house  of  Sydat  Khan,  Alekozye.  Foremost 
among  the  chiefe  there  assembled  was  AbdooUah  Khan. 
By  nature  proud,  cruel,  and  vindictive,  this  man  was 
smarting  under  a  sense  of  injuries  inflicted  upon  him  by 
the  restored  Suddozye  Government,  and  of  insults  re- 
ceived from  one  of  Shah  Soojah's  British  allies.  On  the 
restoration  of  the  King,  AbdooUah  Khan  had  been  dis- 
possessed of  the  chiefship  of  his  tribe,  and  had  ever  since 
been  retained  about  the  Court,  rather  as  a  hostage  than 
as  a  recognised  officer  of  the  government.  Ever  ready 
to  promote  disaffection  and  encourage  revolt,  he  had 
seen  with  dehght  the  rising  of  the  Ghilzyes,  and  during 
their  occupation  of  the  passes  had  been  eagerly  in- 
triguing with  the  chiefs.  Aware  of  AbdooUah  Khan's 
designs,  Burnes  sent  him  an  angry  message — caUed  him 

ihe  earliest  period  of  my  arrival  in  tion  all  the  principal  Douranee  chiefs 

this  countrj,  that  I  considered  a  re-  had  been  summoned  b^  the  Shah  to 

bellion  a  probable  event  at  any  time,  Caubul,  the  object  bemg  to  destroy 

and  that  much  disaffection  prevailed  their  power  by  removing  them  from 

among  the  troops ;  but  I  had  nq  more  all  immediate  connexion  with  their 

reason  to  expect  the  outbreak  at  the  tribes.    At  Candahar  they  could  at 

particular  period  of  its  occurrence  any  time   create    disturbance.      At 

than  at  any  other/'  Caubul  it  was  thought  they  would  be 

*  At  the  Envoy^s  express  requisi-  harmless. 


6  THE  OUTBBEAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

a  dog — and  threatened  to  recommend  Shah  Soojah  to 
deprive  the  rebel  of  his  ears.  When  the  chiefs  met 
together  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  November,  this  in- 
dignity was  rankling  in  the  breast  of  the  Khan.  The 
immediate  course  to  be  pursued  came  under  discussion, 
and  he  at  once  proposed  that  the  first  overt  act  of  vio- 
lence on  the  morrow  should  be  an  .attack  on  the  house 
of  the  man  who  had  so  insulted  him.  The  proposal 
was  accepted  by  the  assembled  chiefs ;  but  so  little  did 
they  anticipate  more  than  a  burst  of  success  at  the  out- 
set, that  not  one  of  them  ventured  personally  to  take 
part  in  a  movement  which  they  believed  would  be 
promptly  avenged. 

Day  had  scarcely  dawned  on  the  2nd  of  November, 
when  a  rumour  reached  the  cantonments,  and  was  at  once 
conveyed  to  the  Mission-house,  that  there  was  a  com- 
motion in  the  city.*  Macnaghten  heard  the  intelligence 
with  composure.  There  was  nothing  in  it,  he  thought,  to 
startle  or  to  dismay  a  man  with  sound  nerves  and  a  clear 
imderstanding.  Presently  a  note  was  brought  him  fi:om 
Bumes.  It  stated  that  there  was  great  excitement  in  the 
city,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his  residence ; 
but  it  spoke  slightingly  of  the  disturbance,  and  said  that 
it  would  speedily  be  suppressed.  Assistance,  however, 
was  sought.  Bumes  wanted  military  support;  and 
Macnaghten,  still  little  alarmed  by  the  tidings  that  had 
reached  him,  hurried  to  the  quarters  of  the  General.  It 
was  thought  to  be  only  a  slight  commotion.  And  so  it 
was — at  the  outset.     But  before  any  assistance  was  sent 

QnoJ*^^     Gonolly,     Macnaghten*!  immediately,  heard  the  firing  in  the 

BflpMw,  who  waa  to  have  accompa-  city,  and  hastened  to  conyey  the  in- 

nied  him  to  Bombay,   waa    giying  telii^ence  to  Macnaghten.    He  afler- 

directions  about  the  packing  of  some  wards  accompanied   the    Enyoy  to 

of  the  Envoy's  chattels,  when  an  General    Elphinstone's    quarters. — 

Afghan  rushed  wildly  in,  and  an-  [Statement  of  Emaurn'OoUm-Khan^a 

nounced  that  there  was  an  insurrec-  chuprassie  in  the  service  of  Lieutenant 

tion  in  the  city.     Conolly  went  out  JohnConoUy:  MS,  Eecords.'] 


IKCBEDULITY  09  BURNES.  7 

to  Bumes,  he  had  been  cut  to  pieces  by  an  infuriated 
mob. 

The  houses  of  Sir  Alexander  Bumes  and  of  Captain 
Johnson,  the  paymaster  of  the  Shah's  troops,  were  con- 
tiguous to  each  other  in  the  city.  On  the  preceding 
night,  Captain  Johnson  had  slept  in  cantonments.  The 
expectant  Resident  was  at  home.  Beneath  his  roof  was 
his  brother,  Lieutenant  Charles  Burnes;  and  Lieutenant 
WiUiam  Broadfoot,  an  officer  of  rare  merit,  who  had 
been  selected  to  fill  the  office  of  military  secretary  to  the 
new  minister,  and  had  just  come  in  from  Charekur  to 
enter  upon  his  new  duties.  It  was  now  the  anniversary 
of  the  day  on  which  his  brother  had  been  slain  by  Dost 
Mahomed's  troopers,  in  the  disastrous  affair  of  Purwun- 
durrah;  and  it  must  have  been  with  some  melancholy 
recollections  of  the  past,  and  some  dismal  forebodings  of 
the  future,  that  he  now  looked  down  from  the  upper  gal- 
lery of  Bumes's  house,  upon  the  angry  crowd  that  was 
gathering  beneath  it. 

Before  daylight  on  that  disastrous  morning  a  friendly 
A%han  sought  admittance  to  Burnes's  house,  eager  to 
warn  him  of  the  danger  with  which  he  was  encompassed. 
A  plot  had  been  hatched  on  the  preceding  night ;  and 
one  of  its  first  objects  was  said  to  be  the  assassination  of 
the  new  Resident.  But  Burnes  had  nothing  but  incre- 
dulity to  return  to  such  friendly  warnings.  The  man  went. 
The  insurgents  were  gathering.  Then  came  Oosman 
Khan,  the  Wuzeer,  crossing  Burnes's  threshold,  with  thp 
same  ominous  story  on  his  Hps.*    It  was  no  longer  per- 

•  "  Befbre  dayligbt  a  well-wisber  truth,  and  paid  no  heed  to  what  he 

of  Burnes  came  to  report   to  him  said.      Shortly  after,    the  Wuzeer, 

that  a  plan  had  been  hatched  during  Oosman  Khan,  arrired  (by  this  time 

the  night,  which  had  for  its  chiS  the   mob  was    assembhng).      The 

object  his  murder.    Unfortunately,  Wuzeer    urged   him   to    leave  his 

Sir  Alexander  oould  not  be   con-  house,  and  proceed  to  cantonments. 

▼inced  that  the  man  was  telling  the  Sir  Alexander  scorned  the  idea   of 


8  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

mitted  to  the  English  officer  to  wrap  himself  up  in  an 
impenetrable  cloak  of  scepticism.  Already  was  there  a 
stir  in  the  streets.  Already  was  an  excited  populace  as- 
sembling beneath  his  windows.  Earnestly  the  Afghan 
minister  spoke  of  the  danger,  and  implored  Burnes  to 
leave  his  house — ^to  accompany  him  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
or  to  seek  safety  in  cantonments.  The  EngHshman,  deaf 
to  these  appeals,  confident  that  he  could  quell  the  tumult, 

quitting  his  house,  as  he  had  every  danger,  was  not  admitted,  nor  was  his 
hope  of  quelling  the  disturbance ;  messas^e  ever  delivered.  ^^  On  the 
and  let  the  worst  come  to  the  worst  day  of  the  murder,"  says  this  wit- 
he felt  too  well  assured  that  neither  ness,  *^as  early  as  three  o'clock  in  the 
the  Envoy  nor  General  would  permit  morning,  a  Cossid  (Wullee  Mahomed) 
him  to  Vq  sacrificed  whilst  m  the  came  to  me.  I  was  on  duty  outside ; 
performance  of  his  public  dutjr,  so  he  said,  *  Go,  and  inform  your  mas- 
long  as  there  were  6000  men  within  ter  immediately  that  there  is  a  tumult 
two  miles  of  him/* — [^Captain  John'  in  the  city,  and  that  the  merchants 
sorCs  Journal:  MS,  Records.']  *'The  are  removing  their  goods  and  valua- 
Kinff*s  minister  went  to  Burnes  early  bles  from  tne  ^ops.*  I  knew  what 
in  tne  morning  of  the  2nd,  and  my  master  had  said  on  the  subject 
warned  him  of  what  was  about  to  the  da^  before,  so  I  did  not  like 
happen — of  the  danger  of  remaining  awakenme  him,  but  put  on  mv  chu- 
in  his  house — andreouestedhimto  ac-  prass,  and  went  to  the  Char  Chouk. 
company  him  to  the  ISalla  Hissar ;  but  Here  I  met  the  Wuzeer,  Nizam-ood- 
he  was  deaf  to  all  entreaties,  incredu-  Dowlah,  going  towards  my  master*s 
lous,  and  persevered  in  disbelief  that  house.  1  immediately  tunied  with 
any  outbreak  was  intended ;  yet  I  am  him,  and  on  my  arrival  awoke  my 
told  he  wrote  into  cantonments  for  a  master,  who  dressed  quickly,  and 
military  force  to  protect  him.** — [Let'  went  to  the  Wuzeer,  and  tdked  to 
ter  of  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS,  jf2e-  him  some  time.**  As  this  man  speaks 
cords.'^  llie  native  friend  said  by  of  what  he  saw,  and  what  he  did  on 
Captam  Johnson  to  have  warned  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  November, 
Burnes  early  in  the  morning  of  the  I  conceive  that  his  evidence  is  the 
2nd  of  November  that  his  fife  was  best  that  is  now  obtainable.  He 
in  danger,  was  Taj  Mahomed,  who,  states  that  *^  Sir  Alexander  Burnes 
as  stated  in  a  previous  note,  on  the  was  duly  informed  by  his  Afghan 
authority  of  Mohun  Lai  (and  the  servants,  the  day  previous  to  his 
same  story  is  told  b^  Lieutenant  murder,  that  there  was  a  stir  in 
Eyre  and  Ladv  Sale,  m  their  jour-  the  city,  and  that  if  he  remained  in 
nals),  visited  Burnes  on  the  preced-  it  his  life  would  be  in  danger ;  they 
ing  night.  Bowh  Singh,  Bumes*s  told  him  he  had  better  go  to  the 
chuprassie,  the  only  surviving  witness  cantonments ;  this  he  declined  doing, 
of  what  passed  in  that  officer's  house  giving  as  his  reason  that  the  Af- 
upon  the  fatal  morning,  says  that  his  ghans  never  received  any  injury  from 
master  did  not  wake  before  the  arri-  him,  but,  on  the  contrarv,  he  had 
val  of  the  Wuzeer,  and  that  the  man  done  much  for  them,  and  that  he  was 
(Wullee  Mahomed  by  name),  who  quite  sure  they  would  never  injure 
had  called  to  warn  Burnes  of  his  him.** 


D£ATH  OF  ALEXANDER  BUBNE8.  9 

and,  scorning  the  idea  of  quitting  his  post^  rejected  the 
firiendly  counsel  of  the  Wuzeer,  and  remained  to  face 
the  fury  of  the  mob. 

But  even  to  Alexander  Bumes,  incredulous  of  im- 
minent danger  as  he  was,  it  seemed  necessary  to  do 
something.  He  wrote  to  the  Envoy,  calling  for  support. 
And  he  sent  messengers  to  Abdoollah  Khan.  Two 
chuprassies  were  despatched  to  the  Achekzye  chief,  as- 
suring him  that  if  he  would  restrain  the  populace  from 
violence,  every  effort  would  be  made  to  adjust  the 
grievances  complamed  of  by  the  people  and  the  chiefs. 
One  only  of  the  messengers  returned.  He  brought  back 
nothing  but  wounds.  The  message  had  cost  the  other 
his  life. 

In  the  mean  while,  from  a  gallery  in  the  upper  part  of 
his  house,  Bumes  was  haranguing  the  mob.  Beside  him 
were  his  brother  and  his  friend.  The  crowd  before  his 
house  increased  in  number  and  in  ftiry.  Some  were 
thirsting  for  blood ;  others  were  greedy  only  for  plunder. 
He  might  as  well  have  addressed  himself  to  a  herd  of 
savage  beasts.  Angry  voices  were  lifted  up  in  reply, 
clamouring  for  the  lives  of  the  English  officers.  And 
too  surely  did  they  gain  the  object  of  their  desires. 
Broadfoot,  who  sold  his  life  dearly,  was  the  first  to  fall. 
A  ball  struck  him  on  the  chest;  and  the  dogs  of  the  city 
devoured  his  remains. 

It  was  obvious  now  that  nothing  was  to  be  done  by 
expostulation — nothing  by  forbearance.  The  violence 
of  the  mob  was  increasing.  That  which  at  first  had 
been  an  insignificant  crowd  had  now  become  a  great 
multitude.  The  treasury  of  the  Shah's  paymaster  was 
before  them;  and  hundreds  who  had  no  wrongs  to  re- 
dress and  no  poUtical  animosity  to  vent,  rushed  to  the 
spot  hungering  after  the  spoil  which  lay  so  temptingly 
at  hand.      The   streets    were  waving  with   a   sea   of 


10  THE  OUTBBEAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

heads;  and  the  opposite  houses  were  alive  with  people. 
It  was  no  longer  possible  to  look  unappalled  upon 
that  fearfiil  assemblage.  A  party  of  the  insurgents 
had  set  fire  to  Bumes's  stables  ;*  had  forced  their  way 
into  his  garden;  and  were  calling  to  him  to  come 
down.  His  heart  now  sank  within  him.  He  saw 
clearly  the  danger  that  beset  him — saw  that  the  looked- 
for  aid  fi:om  cantonment  had  failed  him  in  the  hour  of 
his  need.  Nothing  now  was  left  to  him,  but  to  appeal 
to  the  avarice  of  his  assailants.  He  offered  them  large 
sums  of  money,  if  they  would  only  spare  his  own  and 
his  brother's  Itfe.  Their  answer  was  a  repetition  of  the 
summons  to  "  come  down  to  the  garden."  Charles 
Burnes  and  a  party  of  chuprassies  were,  at  this  time, 
firing  on  the  mob.  A  Mussulman  Cashmerian,  who  had 
entered  the  house,  swore  by  the  Koran  that  if  they 
would  cease  firing  upon  the  insurgents,  he  would  convey 
Burnes  and  his  brother  through  the  garden  in  safety  to 
the  Kuzzilbash  Fort.  Disguising  himself  in  some  articles 
of  native  attire,  Burnes  accompanied  the  man  to  the  door. 
He  had  stepped  but  a  few  paces  into  the  garden,  when 
his  conductor  called  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  This  is 
Sekunder  Burnes  l"f  The  infuriated  mob  fell  upon  him 
with  frantic  energy.  A  firenzied  mooUah  dealt  the  first 
murderous  blow ;  and  in  a  minute  the  work  was  com- 
plete. The  brothers  were  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Afghan 
knives.  J  Naib  Sheriff,  true  to  the  last,  buried  their 
mutilated  remains. 

So  fell  Alexander  Burnes.    In  the  vigour  of  his  years 

•  Hyder  Khan,  wbohad  been  cut-  J  This  is  Bowh  Singh's  statement, 

walof  the  city,  and  had  been  removed  He    says:    "His   brother,    Captain 

through  Bumes's  instrumentality,  is  Burnes,  went  out  with  him,  ana  was 

said  to  have  brought  fuel  for  the  pur-  killed  dead  before  Sir  Alexander/' 

pose  from  some  contiguous  hummams  Mohun  Lid  says  that  Charles  Burnes 

or  baths.  was  killed  before  his  brother  went 

t  Statement  of  Bowh  Singh^  a  chu*  down  to  the  garden, 
prassie  in  Bumes*8  service. 


CHARACTEB  0¥  SIB  A.  BUBNES. 


11 


— ^in  the  pride  of  life — ^within  a  few  feet  of  the  goal 
whicli  lie  had  long  held  so  steadily  in  view.  It  has  been 
said  that  he  predicted  the  coming  storm ;  and  by  others 
again  that  he  refused  to  see  it.*  He  may  have  warned 
others ;  but  he  rejected  all  warning  himself.  It  was  only 
in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  man  that  he  should 
have  been  subject  to  such  fluctuations  of  feeling  and 
opinion.  Sometimes  sanguine — sometimes  desponding — 
sometimes  confident — sometimes  credulous — he  gave  to 
fleeting  impressions  all  the  importance  and  seeming  per- 
manency of  settled  convictions,  and  imbued  surrounding 
objects  with  the  colours  of  his  own  varying  mind.  At 
one  time,  he  could  discern  with  intuitive  sagacity  the 
hidden  dangers  besetting  our  position  in  Afghanistan, 
and  iUustrate  his  views  with  an  impressive  earnestness 
which  caused  him  to  be  regarded  by  his  official  superior 
as  a  wildly  speculative  alarmist.  At  another,  when 
destruction  was  impending  over  his  head— when  the 
weapon  was  sharpened  to  immolate  him — he  saw  nothing 
but  security  and  peace;  and  turned  away  from  the 
warnings  of  those  who  would  have  saved  him,  with  an 
incredulous  smile  upon  his  lips.  This  instability  was  a 
grievous  fault;  and  grievously  he  answered  it.  But 
though  unstable,  he  was  not  insincere.  K  he  deceived 
others,  he  first  of  all  deceived  himself.  If  he  gave  ut- 
terance to  conflicting  opinions,  they  were  all  his  opi- 


*  Lieutenant  Mackenzie,  late  of  the 
41st  Regiment,  who  has  illustrated 
the  melancholy  history  of  our  Cau- 
bul  disasters  in  a  poem  of  twelve 
cantos,  says,  in  a  note,  "  I  am  enabled 
to  state  positively,  on  the  authority 
of  a  letter  from  Sir  Alexander  Bumes 
himself  (one  of  the  last  he  ever  wrote, 
and  addressed  to  an  officer  of  high 
rank,  and  one  of  his  most  intimate 
friends)  that  poor  Bumes  had  long 
foreseen  the  crisis  which  had  ar* 
rired;  for,  in  the  letter  alluded  to, 


he  states  his  conviction  in  the  most 
solemn  terms  that  he  was  a  marked 
man  and  would  inevitablv  bo  the 
first  victim — but  nevertheless  he 
would  never  flinch  from  doing  what 
he  conceived  to  be  his  duty,  al- 
though all  his  warnings  had  been 
disregarded."  Yet  on  the  day  be- 
fore his  death,  as  has  been  shown 
in  a  preceding  note,  he  said  that  he 
felt  no  apprehensions  of  danger,  as 
he  had  always  been  a  friend  to  the 
Afghans. 


12  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

nions  at  the  time  of  their  birth.  He  was  a  man  of  an 
eager,  impi^sive  temperament;  the  slightest  vicissitudes 
of  the  political  atmosphere  readily  affected  his  mercurial 
nature ;  and  he  did  not  always  think  before  he  spoke. 
Hence  it  is  that  such  varying  opinions  have  been  attri- 
buted to  him — all  perhaps  with  equal  truth.  A  passing 
doud,  or  a  transient  gleam  of  sunshine,  and  Afghanistan 
was  either  in  the  throes  of  a  deadly  convulsion,  or 
lapped  in  heavenly  repose. 

It  was  the  hard  fate  of  Alexander  Bumes  to  be 
over-rated  at  the  outset  and  under-rated  at  the  close  of 
his  career.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  justice  has  yet 
been  rendered  him — whether,  on  the  one  hand,  what 
was  innately  and  intrinsically  good  in  him  has  been 
amply  recognised,  and  whether,  on  the  other,  the  ac- 
cidental circumstances  of  his  position  have  been  suffi- 
ciently taken  into  account.  From  the  very  commence- 
ment of  the  Afghan  expedition  Bumes  was  placed  in  a 
situation  calculated  neither  to  develop  the  better  nor 
to  correct  the  worse  part  of  his  character.  In  his  own 
words,  indeed,  he  was  in  "the  most  nondescript  of 
situations."  He  had  little  or  no  power.  He  had  no 
supreme  and  independent  control  of  afiairs;  nor  had 
he,  like  other  political  assistants,  any  detached  employ- 
ment of  a  subordinate  character ;  but  was  an  anomalous 
appendage  to  the  British  mission,  looking  out  for  the 
chance  of  succession  to  the  upper  seat.  In  such  a  posi- 
tion he  felt  uneasy  and  unsettled ;  he  lived  rather  in  the 
future  than  in  the  present;  and  chafed  under  the  re- 
flection that  whilst,  in  all  that  related  to  the  manage- 
ment of  public  affairs,  he  was  an  absolute  cypher  at  the 
Afghan  Court,  much  of  the  odium  of  unpopular  acts 
descended  upon  him;  and  that  much  of  the  discredit  of 
failure  would  attach  to  him  if  the  measures,  which  he 
was  in  nowise  permitted  to  shape,  were  not  crowned 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION.  13 

with  success.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  if  fairer 
scope  had  been  allowed  for  the  display  of  his  abilities, 
and  a  larger  amount  of  responsibility  had  descended 
upon  hini,  he  would  have  shone  with  a  brighter  and  a 
steadier  light,  and  left  behind  him  a  more  honourable 
name.  His  talents  were  great ;  his  energies  were  great. 
What  he  lacked  was  stability  of  character.  Power  and 
responsibility  would  have  steadied  him.  He  would 
have  walked  with  a  firmer  step  and  in  a  straighter 
course  under  a  heavier  burden  of  political  duties.  As 
it  was,  all  the  environments  of  his  life  at  Caubul  were 
too  surely  calculated  to  unhinge  and  unbalance  even  a 
more  steadfast  mind.  It  is  right  that  all  these  things 
should  be  taken  into  account.  It  is  right,  too,  that  it 
should  never  be  forgotten  by  those  who  would  form  a 
correct  estimate  of  the  character  and  career  of  Alexan- 
der Burnes,  that  both  have  been  misrepresented  in  those 
collections  of  state  papers,  which  are  supposed  to  furnish 
the  best  materials  of  history,  but  which  are  often  in 
reality  only  one-sided  compilations  of  garbled  docu- 
ments— counterfeits  which  the  ministerial  stamp  forces 
into  currency,  defrauding  a  present  generation,  and 
handing  down  to  posterity  a  chain  of  dangerous  lies. 

Burnes  and  his  companions  fell.  There  was  a  great 
plunder  of  property ;  the  treasury  of  Captain  Johnson, 
the  Shah's  paymaster,  was  sacked  ;*  the  noise  in  the  city 
was  growing  louder  and  louder,  and  the  multitude 
swelling  in  numbers,  and  waxing  more  terrible  in  ex- 

♦  '*  The  insurgents,"  B&p  Captain  of  one  lakh  and  seventy  thousand 

Johnson,  "gained  possession  of  my  rupees    (17,000/.) ;    burnt    all    my 

treasury  by  imdermining  the  wall,  office    records    for  tJie    past    three 

and  of  my  house  by  setting  fire  to  years,  which    comprise    unadjusted 

the  gateway.     They  murdered  the  accounts  to  nearly  one  million  ster- 

whole  of  the  guard  (one  subadar  and  ling,  and  possessed  themselves  of  all 

twenty -eight    sepoys,    besides    non-  my  private  property,  amounting  to 

commissioned  officers) ;   all  my  ser-  upwards  of  ten  thousand  rupees." — 

vants  (male,  female,  and  children) ;  ICaptain    Johnson's   Journal :    MS. 

plundered  my  treasure  to  the  amount  Becords.'} 


14  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

citement  and  wrath.  But  still  no  measures  were  taken 
to  quell  the  riot  or  chastise  the  rioters ;  no  troops  were 
poured  into  the  city ;  no  British  officer  led  his  battalions 
to  the  charge,  or  opened  upon  the  enemy  with  a  shower 
of  unanswerable  grape.  The  escort,  at  Bumes's  house, 
held  for  some  time  in  painful  inactivity  by  his  misplaced 
forbearance,  had  fought  with  a  desperate  energy,  which, 
in  the  end,  cost  them  their  lives;  and  the  guard  at  the 
pay-office,  with  scarcely  less  constancy  and  courage,  had 
protected  their  charge  until  overwhelmed  by  the  rush  of 
their  assailants,  and  slaughtered  almost  to  a  man.  What 
could  these  little  bands  of  loyal  men  do  against  the  surg- 
ing multitude  that  flooded  the  streets  ?  Emboldened  by 
impunity,  the  licentious  crowd  pushed  on  to  new  deeds 
of  murder  and  rapine ;  and  soon  the  whole  city  was  in 
a  roar  of  wild  tumultuous  excitement.  Shops  were 
gutted;  houses  were  burned;  men,  women,  and  children, 
in  the  residences  of  our  officers,  mixed  up  in  indiscrimi- 
nate slaughter; — and  all  this  with  six  thousand  British 
troops  within  half  an  hour's  march  of  the  rebellious  city. 
From  the  Balla  Hissar  the  King  looked  down  upon 
the  disturbed  city  beneath  him.  But  even  from  that 
commanding  position  little  could  be  seen  of  what  was 
going  on  below  in  the  narrow  winding  streets,  which 
scarcely  presented  more  than  an  expanse  of  flat  house- 
tops to  the  gazers  from  above.  A  report  had  been  in- 
dustriously propagated  that  the  insurgent  movement  had 
been  favoured,  if  not  directed,  by  the  monarch  himself; 
but  his  conduct  at  this  moment  was  not  such  as  to  give 
colour  to  the  suspicion,  which  soon  began  to  shape  itself 
in  the  minds  of  his  British  supporters,  and  which  has 
not  even  now  been  dislodged**    He  was  agitated,  panic- 

*  I  sliall  not  stop  bere  to  eza-  in  a  subsequent  portion  of  the 
mine  the  question  of  the  fidelity  narrative  it  will  be  fully  invcsti- 
or  infidelity  of  Shah  Soojah;  but    gated. 


INSIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  FIBST  MOVEMENT.  15 

struck,  but  not  paralysed*  The  only  movement  made, 
on  that  ill-omened  November  morning,  to  crush  the  in- 
surrection at  its  birth,  was  made  by  the  King  himself. 
He  sent  out  a  regiment  of  Hindostanee  troops — that  re- 
giment which  was  still  commanded  by  the  Indo-Briton 
adventurer  Campbell,  who  had  rendered  Shah  Soojah 
good  service  in  his  attempt  to  expel  the  Barukzye  Sir- 
dars.* Futteh  Jung  and  the  Wuzeer  went  with  them. 
They  moved  down  with  some  spirit  upon  the  city ;  but 
shaped  their  course  with  such  little  wisdom  that  they 
were  soon  in  disastrous  flight  They  should  have  moved 
along  the  base  of  the  hill  to  the  outer  extremity  of  the 
short  thoroughfare  in  which  Bumes's  house  was  situated. 
But  instead  of  this  they  attempted  to  make  their  way 
through  the  heart  of  the  city,  and  were  soon  entangled 
with  their  guns  in  its  narrow,  intricate  streets.  Thus 
embarrassed,  they  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 
They  lost,  it  was  said,  two  hundred  of  their  number,f 
were  compelled  to  abandon  their  guns,  and  were  soon 
to  be  seen  hurrying  back,  a  disorderly  rabble,  to  the 
shelter  of  the  Balla  Hissar. 

In  the  mean  while.  Brigadier  Shelton,  with  a  body  of 
infantry  and  artillery,  had  made  his  way  to  the  Balla 
Hissar,  and  arrived  in  time  to  cover  the  retreat  of  Camp- 
belFs  regiment,  and  to  save  the  guns  from  the  grasp 
of  the  enemy.  "  Soon  after  my  arrival,"  says  the  Briga- 
dier in  his  narrative  of  these  proceedings,  **  wounded 
men  were  coming  in  from  the  city.  I  was  then  informed 
that  they  belonged  to  the  King's  Hindostanee  Pultun, 
which  his  Majesty  had  sent  into  the  city  with  two  six- 

•  In  1S34. — [5cc  Booh  /.,  Chap"  posing  the  march  of  the  regiment 

ter  F//.]  Eye-witnesses  affirm  that  the  latter 

f  This,    however,    in   all   proba-  fought  with  little  gallantry  on  this 

bility  IS  a  verj  exaggerated  state-  occasion.    It  is  said,  too,  that  Futteh 

ment.     There  were,  jprobablj,  not  Jung,   instead  of  encouraging   the 

more  than  two  or   three   hundred  Hindostanees,  encouraged  the  msur- 

people  in  the  Caubul  bazaars  op-  gents. 


16  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

pounders.  I  despatched  the  light  company  of  the 
54th  NJ.  to  the  gate  of  the  Balla  Hissar  leading  into  the 
town,  and  soon  after  the  remainder  of  the  King's  Pultun 
and  the  two  guns  were  driven  in.  The  latter  they  were 
obliged  to  abandon,  fortunately  sufficiently  under  the 
wall  to  enable  me  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting 
possession;  but  too  near  the  houses  for  me  to  bring 
them  in.  I  disposed  a  covering  party  accordingly,  but 
on  the  enemy's  opening  his  fire,  the  Shah's  men  rushed 
back  into  the  gateway,  and  thus  abandoned  the  enter- 
prise." "  I  mention  this,"  adds  the  Brigadier,  "  because 
it  was  said  his  Majesty  was  implicated  in  exciting  the 
rebellion — for  in  such  case  he  never  would  have  made 
80  noble  an  effort,  and  the  only  one  that  was  made  to 
strike  at  the  root."* 

On  that  day  nothing  else  was  done.  Deserted  by  his 
personal  attendants,  in  the  hour  of  danger  Shah  Soojah 
seems  to  have  sunk  into  a  pitiable  state  of  dejection  and 
alarm.  The  defeat  of  his  Hindostanees  had  given  a 
deeper  shade  to  his  despondency ;  he  was  incapable  of 
acting  for  himself  or  of  offering  counsel  to  others,  and 
all  who  sought  his  presence  were  struck  by  the  anxious 
expression  of  his  countenance  and  the  feeble  petulance 
of  his  manner.  Nothing  effective  had  been  done,  and 
nothing  more  was  to  be  done  at  all  on  that  memorable 
day — General  Elphinstone  had  been  talking  about  to- 
morrow, when  he  should  have  been  acting  to-day.  And 
so  the  evening  of  the  2nd  of  November  fell  upon  an 
irritable  people,  established  and  fortified  in  resistance  by 
the  indecision  of  the  authorities,  against  whom  they  had 
erected  themselves,  and  the  inactivity  of  the  army  by 
which  they  might  have  been  crushed. 

It  is  the  common  opinion  of  all  competent  authorities 
that  a  prompt  and  vigorous  movement,  on  the  morning  of 

•  Statement  of  Brigadier  Shelton:  MS,  Records. 


INSIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  FIRST  MOVEMENT.  17 

the  2nd  of  November,  would  have  strangled  the  insurrec- 
tion at  its  birth.  The  Afghans  freely  admitted  this.  A 
Popidzye  chief  who  was  present  at  the  meeting  at  Sydat 
Khan's  house  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  November,  told 
Major  Rawlinson  that  not  one  of  the  chiefs,  who  then 
leagued  themselves  together,  ventured  to  stir  from  his 
house  until  the  afternoon  of  the  following  day.  They  ex- 
pected that  the  first  onset — the  attack  on  the  houses  of 
Burnes  and  Johnson — would  be  successful :  but  they  were 
under  an  equally  strong  conviction  that  the  violence  would 
be  promptly  avenged  by  the  troops  from  cantonments, 
and  they  therefore  refrained  from  committing  themselves 
by  taking  any  personal  part  in  the  imeute.  It  seems  to 
have  been  the  impression  of  the  majority  that  such  an 
outbreak  at  the  capital  would  operate  as  a  warning  that 
the  British  in  Afghanistan  would  hardly  neglect,  and  that 
we  should  be  glad,  therefore,  to  withdraw  our  forces  in 
the  spring  and  leave  the  Douranees  to  their  own  devices.* 
"  Not  only  I,  but  several  other  officers,"  says  Captain  John- 
son, "  have  spoken  to  Afghans  on  the  subject;  there  has 
never  been  one  dissenting  voice,  that  had  a  small  party 
gone  into  the  town  prior  to  the  plunder  of  my  treasury 
and  the  murder  of  Burnes,  the  insurrection  would  have 
been  instantly  quashed.  This  was  also  the  opinion  of 
Captain  Trevor,  at  that  time  living  in  the  town."t  Cap- 
tain Mackenzie  has  given  an  equally  emphatic  opinion 
to  the  same  effect.  "  During  our  expedition  into  Kohis- 
tan,  under  General  MacCaskill,"  he  writes,  "  I  accompa- 
nied it,  having  been  placed  by  General  Pollock  in  charge 
of  Shah-Zadah  Shapoor  and  the  Kuzzilbash  camp.  In 
my  frequent  communications  with  Khan  Shereen  Khan, 
some  of  the  late  leaders,  and  other  chiefs  of  the  Kuz- 
zilbash faction,  all  the  circumstances  of  the  late  insurrec- 

•  Private  Correspondence.  t  ^Toumal  of  Captain  Johnson :  MS. 

VOL.  n.  c' 


18  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

tion  were  over  and  over  again  recapitulated,  one  and  all 
declaring  positively  that  the  slightest  exhibition  of  energy 
on  our  part,  in  the  first  instance,  more  especially  in 
reinforcing  my  post  and  that  of  Trevor,  would  at  once 
have  decided  the  Kuzzilbashes,  and  all  over  whom  they 
possessed  any  influence,  in  our  favour.  Khan  Shereen 
Khan  also  confirmed  the  idea  that  an  offensive  move- 
ment on  the  opposite  side  of  the  town  by  Brigadier 
Shelton,  had  it  been  made  in  the  early  part  of  the  fatal 
2nd  of  November,  would  at  once  have  crushed  the  in- 
surrection."* Mohun  Lai  says,  that  in  the  first  instance 
no  more  than  thirty  men  were  sent  to  surround  Sir 
Alexander  Burnes's  house,  and  that  the  rest  were  drawn 
thither  subsequently  by  the  hope  of  plunder.f  Captain 
Johnson  says,  "  The  mob  at  the  first  outbreak  did  not 
exceed  100  men.  They  however  speedily  increased; 
the  plunder  of  my  treasury,  my  private  property  a»d 
that  of  Sir  Alexander,  and  seeing  that  no  steps  were 
taken  to  save  either  the  one  or  the  other,  nor  even  what 
was  of  more  considerable  value  to  us  at  that  time,  the 
life  of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes,  was  too  great  a  temptation 
to  the  inhabitants  of  Caubul,  and  when  800  men  would 
have  been  sufficient  in  the  morning  to  have  quelled  the 
disturbance,  3000  would  not  have  been  adequate  in  the 
aftemoon."J 

«  Letter  from  Captain  Colin  Mac-  insigliificaiice  of  tlie  movement,  and 

kenzic  to  Lieutenant  Ejre. — lEtfre^s  the  facility  wi^  which  it  might  have 

JoumaL']  been  sappressed.    It  seems  probable 

t  Letter  of  Mohun   Lai   to  Mr,  that,  as  Mohun  Lai  says,  there  were 

Colvirif  Private  Secretary  to  the  Gover'  only  some  thirty  men  there  by  pre- 

nor- General:  MS,  vious  concert,  but  that  the  number  was 

t   Captain    Johnson^ $   Journal,  —  swelled  by  accidental  rioters,  moved 

Eyre  says  that  the  commencement  of  by  the  greed  of  plunder.    To  the 

the  insurrection  was  **  an  attack  by  evidence  already  adduced  in  the  text, 

certainly  not  300  men  on  the  dwellings  may  be  added  that  of  Lalla  Gunga^- 

of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes  and  Captam  deen,  a  hospital  gomastah  (or  stewanl) 

Johnson."    The  precise  number  of  attached  to  Captain  Johnson^s  esta- 

the  rioters,  at  the  commencement  of  blishment,  who  says,  "  For  three  or 

the  outbreak,  is  of  little  consequence,  four  days,  it  was  the  general  belief 

All  are  agreed  in  opinion  as  to  the  that  there  was  no  formidable  foe  to 


THE  QUESTION  OF  RBSt^ONSIBILITY.  19 

The  question,  then — and  it  is  one  of  the  gravest  that 
can  be  asked  in  the  entire  course  of  this  historical  inquiry 
— ^is,  how  came  it  that  an  insurrectionary  movement, 
which  might  have  been  crushed  at  the  outset  by  a  hand- 
ful of  men,  was  suflfered  to  grow  into  a  great  revolution  ? 
It  is  a  question  not  to  be  answered  hastily — not  to  be  an- 
swered At  all  without  the  citation  of  all  available  evidence. 
It  is  fortunate  that,  at  least,  the  facts  of  the  case  are  to 
be  ascertained  with  sujBGicient  distinctness.  It  is  certain 
that,  on  the  first  receipt  of  authentic  intelligence  of  the 
outbreak  in  the  city,  Macnaghten  repaired  to  Elphin- 
stone's  quarters  to  seek  military  aid.  Shelton,  in  his 
narrative,  says,  that  much  valuable  time  was  lost  at 
the  outset.  "  The  Envoy,"  he  writes,  "  must  have  had 
notice  by  7  A.M.,  so  that  much  valuable  time  was,  I  fear, 
lost  by  remaining  quietly  at  home,  receiving  reports,  in- 
stead of  acting  promptly  and  with  decision."*  But  the 
imputation  is  not  warranted  by  the  real  facts  of  the  case. 
"  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  November" — such  is  the 
evidence  of  the  Envoy  himself — "  I  was  informed  that  the 
town  of  Caubul  was  in  a  state  of  commotion ;  and  shortly 
afterwards  I  received  a  note  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir 
A.  Bumes,  to  the  eflfect  that  his  house  was  besieged,  and 
begging  for  assistance.  I  immediately  went  to  General 
Elphinstone."f  General  Elphinstone  himself  says :  "  On 
the  2nd  of  November,  at  half-past  7  a.m.,  I  was  told 
by  Colonel  Oliver  that  the  city  was  in  a  great  ferment, 
and  shortly  after  the  Envoy  came  and  told  me  that  it 
was  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  but  that  he  did  not  think 

contend  against— perhaps  merely  a  ing — they  are  coming.* " — [Af5.  Re' 

small  body,  similar  to   a   gang  of  cords.'] 

decaiis.     l£  at  this  time  an  attack  ♦  PrivaU  Correspondence  of  BHga' 

had  been   made   upon   the  city,  it  dkr  Shelton :  near  Caubul^  May  2Sth, 

would  have  been  well.    One  'pul-  — [MS,  Records.'] 

ton'  would  hare  been  enough*    The  f  Sir  WiUiam  Macnaghten^s  Report 

people  were   in    great   terror,  and  to  the  Secretary  of  Government,    left 

said  every  moment,  *They  are  com-  unJinishedathisdeaih.'-^lMS, Records."] 

c2 


20  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUX. 

much  of  it,  and  that  it  would  shortly  subside."*  Captain 
Johnson,  too,  writes  that,  on  receiving  in  cantonments 
intelligence  of  the  outbreak,  he  went  to  report  what  he 
had  heard  to  Captain  Lawrence,  military  secretary  to  the 
Envoy.  "  The  latter,"  he  adds,  "  had  just  received  a 
note  from  Burnes  on  the  subject,  and  was  on  the  way  to 
the  General's."  Thus  it  is  established  that  Macnaghten 
lost  no  time  in  seeking  the  advice  and  assistance  of  the 
military  commander. 

Let  us  next  see  what  was  the  result  of  the  visit  to  the 
General.  "  I  suggested,"  says  Macnaghten,  "  that  Briga- 
dier Shelton's  force  should  proceed  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
thence  to  operate  as  might  seem  expedient;  that  the  re- 
maining troops  should  be  concentrated  in  the  canton- 
ments, and  placed  in  a  state  of  defence,  and  assistance, 
if  possible,  sent  to  Sir  A.  Burnes.  Before  Brigadier 
Shelton  could  reach  the  Balla  Hissar,  the  town  had  at- 
tained such  a  state  of  ferment  that  it  was  deemed  im- 
practicable to  penetrate  to  Sir  A.  Bumes's  residence, 
which  was  in  the  centre  of  the  city." 

General  Elphinstone's  report  is  meagre  and  unsatis- 
factory, and  does  not  even  allude  to  any  supposed  ex- 
pediency of  supporting  Sir  Alexander  Burnes: — "  It 
was  proposed,"  he  says,  "  that  Brigadier  Shelton,  with 
two  regiments  and  guns,  should  proceed  to  the  Balla 
Hissar;  and  the  Envoy  sent  his  military  secretary.  Cap- 
tain Lawrence,  to  intimate  his  wishes,  and  obtain  the 
King's  sanction  to  this  measure,  the  Balla  Hissar  being 
considered  a  commanding  position,  and  the  fittest  route 

to  enter  the  city The  troops,  horse  artillery 

(four  guns),  with  a  company  of  the  44th  Foot,  the 
Shah's  6th  Infantry,  and  a  wing  of  the  54th  N.L,  moved 
under  Brigadier  Shelton,  about  twelve  o'clock,  into  the 
Balla  Hissar ;  the  rest  of  the  troops  were  concentrated 

*  Report  of  Major-General  Elphinstone. 


BRIGADIER  SHELTON's  REPORT.  21 

in  cantonments,  which  arrangements  occupied  the  rest 
of  the  day," 

Brigadier  Shelton's  report  is  much  more  expUcit  and 
inteUigible.     It  throws  a  flood  of  Ught  on  some  of  the 
dark  places : — "  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  Novem- 
ber," says  the  Brigadier,    "  I  passed  under  the  city 
wall    about    seven    o'clock,   when  the    cavalry  grass- 
cutters,  who  were  in  the  habit  of  going  through  the 
town  for  their  grass,  told  me  that  the  city  gate  was 
shut,  and  that  they  could  not  get  in.     All  was  quiet 
at  this  time ;  and  I  rode  home,  thinking  some  robbery 
might  have  taken  place,  and  that  the  gate  might  have 
been  shut  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  thieves.     About 
eight  or  nine  o'clock   various  reports  were  in  circu- 
lation, and  between  nine  and  ten  I  got  a  note  from 
Greneral  Elphinstone,   reporting  a  disturbance  in  the 
city,  and  desiring  me  to  prepare  to   march  into  the 
Balla  Hissar,  with  three  companies  64th  N.I.,  the  Shah's 
6th  Infantry,  and  four  guns,  all  I  had  in  camp  (the 
remainder  of  my  brigade  having  been  called  into  can- 
tonments).   I  soon  after  got  another,  telling  me  not  to 
go,  as  the  King  objected  to  it.     I  replied  to  this  note, 
that  if  there  was  an  insurrection  in  the  city  it  was  not  a 
moment  for  indecision,  and  recommended  him  at  once  to 
decide  upon  what  measures  he  would  adopt.     The  an- 
swer to  this  was.  to  march  immediately  into  the  Balla 
Hissar,  where  I  would  receive  further  instructions  from 
the   Envoy's   military  secretary,  whom   I  should  find 
there.    Just  as  I  was  marching  oflF,  a  note  came  from  the 
latter  person  to  halt  for  further  orders.     I  then  sent  in 
the  engineer  officer  to  see  the  cause ;  but  he  was  cut 
down  by  an  Afghan,  in  dismounting  from  his  horse,  just 
outside  the  square,  where  his  Majesty  was  sitting.     Soon 
after  this  the  secretary  himself  came  with  orders  to  pro- 
ceed,    I  then  marched  in,  when  the  King  asked  me,  as 


22  THE  OUTBBBAK  AT  OAUBUL. 

well  as  I  could  understand,  who  sent  me,  and  what  I 
came  there  for."*  He  was  not,  indeed,  allowed  to  ope* 
rate  upon  the  disturbed  city.  All  that,  drcimistanced 
as  he  was,  Shelton  could  do,  was  to  cover  the  retreat  of 
the  Shah's  Hindostanees,  who  had  been  sent  out,  as  we 
have  seen,  against  the  insurgents,  and  been  disastrously 
beaten. 

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  Brigadier  Shelton  must 
be  acquitted  of  all  blame.  He  recommended,  on  the 
morning  of  the  2nd  of  November,  prompt  and  decisive 
measures,  but  he  was  not  empowered  to  carry  them  into 
effect.  The  responsibility  rests  with  the  Envoy  and  the 
General,  and  must  be  equally  shared  between  them.  It 
does  not  appear  that  either  recognised  the  necessity  of  a 
prompt  attack  upon  the  disturbed  quarter  of  the  city. 
The  Envoy,  always  considerate  and  humane — sometimes 
to  a  point  of  weakness — desired  to  spare  the  inhabitants 
of  Caubul  those  dreadful  scenes  of  plunder  and  violence 
which  ever  follow  the  incursion  of  a  body  of  retributive 
troops  into  an  offending  city.  But  such  tender  mercies 
are  often  cruel.  In  such  cases  the  most  vigorous  mea- 
sures are  commonly  the  most  humane.  It  is  hard  to  say 
how  much  human  life  would  have  been  saved  if,  early 
on  the  2nd  of  November,  a  few  companies  of  infantry, 
and  a  couple  of  guns,  had  been  despatched  to  that  por- 
tion of  the  city  where  Sir  Alexander  Burnes  and  his 
companions  were  standing  at  bay  before  a  contemptible 
rabble,  which  would  have  melted  away  at  the  approach 
of  a  handful  of  regular  troops. 

Burnes  did  not  believe  the  outbreak  to  be  a  formi- 

♦  Letter  of  Brigadier  Shelton^  May  stone,  and  arrived  there  about  nine 
28,  1842 :  MS,  i2ecord!9.— The  enci-  o'clock.  So  Lady  Sale.  Brigadier 
neer  officer  sent  hj  Shelton  to  uie  Shelton*8  report  confirms  the  accu- 
Balla  Hissar  was  Lieutenant  Sturt,  racy  of  that  portion  of  Lady  Sale's 
who  had  been  despatched  to  the  Bri<  narrative — based,  it  is  to  be  pre- 
ffadier's  camp,  at  Seeah  Sunch,  with  sumed,  upon  the  information  of  Lieu- 
instructions  from    General  Elphin-  tenant  Sturt 


THB  QUESTION  OF  BESPONSIBILITY.  28 

dable  one-^Macnaghten  did  not  believe  it  to  be  a  fojs 
midable  one— and  Elphinstone  was  entirely  swayed  by 
the  opinions  of  his  political  associates.  Hence  came  the 
indecision  and  inactivity,  which  were  attended  with  such 
disastrous  results.  Bumes  and  Macnaghten  were  right 
up  to  a  certain  point ;  but  all  beyond  was  lamentably 
wrong.  The  outbreak  was  not  formidable  in  itself;  but 
it  was  certain,  in  such  ^^  ticklish  times/'^  very  soon 
to  become  formidable.  There  are  seasons  when  slight 
indications  of  unrest,  such  as  might  commonly  be  dis* 
regarded,  assume  a  portentous  and  alarming  aspect,  and 
demand  all  the  vigilance  and  energy  of  the  custodians  of 
the  public  safety.  Such  a  season  had  now  arrived ;  the 
minds  of  the  people  were  in  a  feverish,  inflammable 
state,  and  it  required  very  little  to  bring  on  a  dangerous 
paroxysm  of  irrepressible  violence  and  disorder.  Mac- 
naghten was  unwilling  to  believe  that  the  chiefs  were 
connected  with  those  October  disturbances  which  had 
blocked  up  the  passes  between  Caubul  and  Jellalabad, 
and  thought  that  the  Ghiljee  rising  was  of  a  local,  ac- 
cidental character,  with  which  the  Caubulees  had  no 
connexion,  and  in  which  they  took  no  interest;  but 
Brigadier  Shelton  has  declared  his  conviction  that  the 
majority  of  the  insurgents  who  took  possession  of  the 
passes  were  sent  out  from  the  city,  and  that  many  of 
them  passed  through  his  camp  at  Seeah  Sungh.f 

Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  very  certain  that  even  an  inci- 
dental  outbreak  in  the  city  of  Caubul  ought  not,  at  such 
a  season,  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  matter  of  light  con- 
cern. But  an  attack  upon  the  residence  of  a  high  poli- 
tical functionary  could,  in  nowise,  be  looked  upon  as 
an  incidental  outrage,  proceeding  neither  from  political 

*  See  the  expression  of  the  Envoy>        f  Letter  from    Brigadier   Shelton, 
in  a  letter  quoted  at  the  commence-    May  28,  1842. — [MS,  Eecords.^ 
ment  of  the  chapter. 


24  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

causes,  nor  conducing  to  political  results.  It  was  an  emer-* 
gency,  indeed,  that  called  for  promptitude  of  action,  un- 
restrained either  by  shortsighted  considerations  of  hu- 
manity or  feelings  of  official  delicacy  and  reserve.  Too 
anxious  to  conciliate  the  wishes  of  the  King,  the  Envoy 
forbore  from  all  aggressive  measures  until  his  Majesty 
had  been  consulted ;  and  when  he  learnt  that  Campbell's 
regiment  had  been  sent  out  against  the  insurgents,  he  be- 
lieved that  the  insurrection  would  be  speedily  put  down. 
But  in  such  a  crisis  the  British  minister  might  have 
acted,  without  any  breach  of  official  rectitude,  on  his 
own  independent  judgment,  and  taken  upon  himself  to 
decide  at  once  what  was  best,  not  only  for  the  King, 
whom  English  money  and  English  arms  were  supporting 
on  his  throne,  but  for  what  was  of  infinitely  more  im- 
portance, the  honour  of  the  British  nation. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  imderstand  these  restraining  in- 
fluences ;  but  when  all  due  allowance  is  made  for  them, 
it  must  still  be  admitted  that  at  such  a  time,  and  under 
such  circumstances,  nothing  short  of  a  prompt  move- 
ment  upon  the  disturbed  quarter  of  the  city  should 
have  been  counselled  by  the  Envoy  and  ordered  by 
the  General.  There  is  nothing,  indeed,  but  the  imprac- 
ticability of  the  movement  that  can  be  urged  in  ex- 
tenuation of  its  neglect.  The  Envoy  has  declared  that, 
by  the  time  Brigadier  Shelton  had  reached  the  Balla 
Hissar,  it  was  impracticable  for  a  body  of  troops  to 
penetrate  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Burnes's  house.  But 
what  was  impracticable  then  was  not  impracticable  some 
time  before  ;  and  Shelton  would  have  reached  the  Balla 
Hissar  much  sooner,  but  for  the  respect  shown  to  the 
wishes  of  the  King,  the  delay  in  ascertaining  those  wishes, 
and  the  vacillating  orders  which  his  Majesty  thought  fit 
to  issue  on  this  momentous  occasion.  The  attack  on  the 
city  should  have  been  made  some  hours  earlier  in  the 


WISDOM  AFTER  THE  EVENT*  25 

day.  The  movement  may  have  been  impracticable  after 
the  hour  when  Shelton  reached  the  Balla  Hissar ;  but 
why  was  it  not  made  before  f  The  only  point  to  be  de- 
cided by  the  Envoy  and  the  General  was,  what  body  of 
troops — whether  from  Shelton's  camp  or  cantonments — 
could  be  most  expeditiously  despatched  to  the  disturbed 
quarter  of  the  town,  and  most  eflFectually  suppress  the 
disturbance?  But  instead  of  directing  all  his  thoughts 
to  this  one  great  object,  the  Envoy  thought  about  the 
wishes  of  the  Shah  and  the  comforts  of  the  people  ; 
whilst  the  General,  too  glad  to  be  saved  the  trouble  of 
thinking  at  all,  readily  adopted  Macnaghten's  opinions, 
and  believed  that  the  fires  which  had  broken  out  in  the 
city  might  be  left  to  die  out  by  themselves. 

Still  it  must  be  remembered,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
wise  after  the  event,  we  are  passing  sentence  on  the  con- 
duct of  men  who  had  not  then  the  fiill  information 
which  lights  us  to  a  more  correct  decision ;  and  that  if 
they  had  dragooned  down  the  insurrection  at  the  outset, 
destroying  innocent  life  and  valuable  property,  they 
would  certainly,  by  one  party  at  least,  have  been  im- 
peached as  incapable  and  dangerous  alarmists.  It  would 
not  improbably  have  been  said,  that  they  had  by  a  pre- 
cipitancy, as  mischievous  as  it  was  uncalled  for,  turned 
friends  into  enemies,  confidence  into  mistrust,  repose 
into  irritation,  and  sown  broad-cast  the  seeds  of  fixture 
rebellion  over  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the 
land. 


26         FR0GBES6  OF  THE  IN8UBBECTI0N. 


CHAPTER  n. 

[November,  1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection — Attempted  Movement  on  the  Citv — Attack  on 
Aimiomed  SherifTs  Fort— Loss  of  the  Commissariat  Fort — Captain  Mac- 
kenzie's Defence— Capture  of  Mahomed  SheriflTs  Fort — Attempts  to  cor- 
rupt the  Enemy. 

On  this  disastrous  2nd  of  November,  the  British  authori- 
ties in  the  Caubul  cantonments,  instead  of  acting  to-day, 
had  been  talking  about  doing  something  to-morrow.  That 
something  was  a  conjoint  movement  from  the  cantonments 
and  the  Balla  Hissar  on  the  Lahore  gate  of  the  city. 
The  opinions  of  General  Elphinstone  on  this  subject  are 
on  record.  On  the  2nd  of  November  he  wrote  to  the 
Envoy:* 

My  dear  Sir  William, 
Since  you  left  me,  I  have  been  considering  what  can  be  done 
to-morrow.  Our  dilemma  is  a  difficult  one.  Shelton,  if  rein- 
forced to-morrow,  might,  no  doubt,  force  in  two  columns  on  his 
way  towards  the  Lahore  gate,  and  we  might  from  hence  force  that 
gate  and  meet  them.  But  if  this  were  accomplished,  what  shall 
we  gain?  It  can  be  done,  but  not  without  very  great  loss,  as  our 
people  will  be  exposed  to  the  fire  from  th^  houses  the  whole  way. 
Where  is  the  point  you  said  they  were  to  fortify  near  Bumes's 
house?  If  they  could  assemble  there,  that  would  be  a  point  of 
attack;  but  to  march  into  the  town^  it  seems,  we  should  only  have 

*  This  letter  is  without  date,  but    been  written  on  the  2nd  of  Novem- 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  having    ber. 


THE  FIB8T  MOVEMENT  FBOM  CANTONMENTS.  27 

to  come  back  again;  and  as  to  setting  the  city  on  fire,  I  feari  from 
its  construction,  that  is  almost  impossible.  We  must  see  wliat  the 
morning  brings,  and  then  think  what  can  be  done.  The  occupa- 
tion of  all  the  houses  near  tiie  gates  might  give  us  a  command  of 
the  town,  but  we  have  not  means  for  extended  operations.  If  we 
could  depend  on  the  Kuzzilbashes^  we  might  easily  reduce  the 
city.  Yours,  truly, 

W.  K.  Elphinstone.* 

The  movement,  however,  was  fixed  for  "  to-morrow.'^ 
That  morrow  was  one  of  early  bustle  and  activity  through- 
out the  British  cantonment.  Before  day  had  broken,  the 
drums  beat  to  arms.  Intelligence  had  come  in  that  a  large 
body  of  men  were  marching  over  the  Seeah  Sungh  hills. 
They  were  believed  to  be  enemies,  but  they  proved  to  be 
iHends.  The  37th  Regiment  of  Native  Infantry  had  been 
called  in  from  Koord-Caubul  on  the  preceding  day;  and  it 
bad  made  good  its  march,  in  the  face  of  no  feeble  oppo- 
sition, bringing  in  its  baggage  and  its  sick  in  an  orderly 
manner,  very  creditable  to  the  commanding  oflScer.f  Two 
guns  of  the  mountain-train  accompanied  the  regiment. 
Any  addition  to  the  cantonment  force  was  valuable  at  such 
a  time ;  and  the  37th  Regiment  was  regarded  as  one  of  the 
best  in  the  service.  Still,  although  when  our  resources 
were  thus  increased,  a  movement  was  made  upon  the  city, 
so  small  a  force  was  sent  out  that  it  was  compelled  to 
retreat. 

The  movement,  such  as  it  was — the  first  attempted  by 
the  British  force — was  made  three  hours  after  noon.  The 
enemy  had  by  this  time  increased  mightily  in  numbers. 
Thousands,  long  ripe  for  revolt,  were  now  ready  to  declare 
themselves  on  the  side  of  the  national  party.  All  the  sur- 
rounding villages  poured  in  their  tributaries,^  and  swelled 
the  great  tide  of  insurrection.   At  noon,  on  the  preceding 

*  UnpubUsked    Correspondence   of       t  "  As  soon,**  sajs  Mohun  Lai,  in 

Qtnercd  EfphingUme,  a  letter  to  Mr.  Colvin,  **  as  the  mor- 

t  Major  GrifBths.  der  of  Sir  Alexander  (whose  name 


28         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

day,  the  road  between  the  cantonments  and  the  city  had 
been  scarcely  passable;*  and  now  all  this  intervening 
ground  was  alive  with  an  angry  enemy.  In  the  face  of  a 
hostile  multitude,  it  was  little  likely  that  a  weak  detach- 
ment could  penetrate  into  the  city.  The  party  sent  out 
on  this  hazardous  service,  under  Major  Swayne,  consisted 
of  one  company  of  H.  M.'s  44th  Regiment,  two  companies 
of  the  5th  Native  Infantry,  and  two  Horse  Artillery  guns. 
The  whole  affair  was  a  failure.  The  only  fortunate  cir- 
cumstance was  that  this  feeble  detachment  retired  in  good 
time.  Owing  to  some  misconception  of  orders,  no  party 
had  been  detached  to  co-operate  with  them  from  the  Balla- 
Hissar;f  and  if  they  had  forced  their  way  to  the  Lahore 
gate  of  the  city,  the  whole  detachment  would  have  been 
cut  to  pieces.  As  it  was,  the  party  was  fired  upon  from 
the  Kohistan  gate,  near  which  it  ought  not  to  have 
gone; J  and  it  was  soon  only  too  obvious  that  a  further 
advance,  in  the  face  of  such  an  enemy,  would  be  a  profit- 
less sacrifice  of  life.  Major  Swayne  brought  back  his 
detachment,  and  so  ended  the  first  attempt  to  operate  upon 
the  city. 

It  is  hard  to  say  why  a  stronger  force,  with  a  fair 
allowance  of  cavalry,  was  not  sent  out  in  the  first  in- 
stance ;  or  why,  on  the  return  of  Swayne's  weak  detach- 
ment, it  was  not  reinforced  and  sent  out  against  the  enemy. 

was  awfully  respected),  and  the  pil-  were  driven  back  by  the  enemy.  Had 

lage  of  treasure  was  known  in  the  they  gone  as  directed,  they  would,  In 

adjacent  villages,  it  brought  next  day  the  opinion  of  almost  all,  have  been 

thousands  of  men  under  the  standard  cut  to  pieces,  as  the  whole  road  was 

of  the  rebels.  '* — [3/5.  Records.  ]  taken  possession  of  by  the  enemy,  an  d, 

*  "  So  great  had  become  the  ex-  by  some  misconception  of  the  order 

citement,  that,  by  noon,  the  road  be-  sent  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  no  party 

tween  the  cantonments  and  the  city  had  been  detached  to  co-operate  with 

was   hardly  passable."  —  [Unfinished  them." 

Report  of  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten:  %  It  would  seem  that  the  party, 

MS,  Records.]  instead  of  taking  the  shortest  and 

t  Captain  Johnson^ s  Journal:  MS,  safest  route  to  the  Lahore  gate,  took 

The  writer  says :  "  They  had  fortu-  the  longest  and  the  most  danger- 

nately  not  proceeded  far  before  they  ous. 


THREATENING  ASPECT  OF  AFFAIBS.  29 

There  was  daylight  enough  left  to  do  good  execution 
with  an  adequate  force,  adequately  commanded.  But  the 
evening  of  this  day,  like  that  of  the  preceding  one,  closed 
in  upon  an  inactive  and  dispirited  British  force,  and  an 
undisciplined  enemy  emboldened  by  impunity  and  flushed 
with  success. 

The  aspect  of  affairs  now  became  more  threatening. 
Before  noon,  on  the  preceding  day,  the  Envoy  and  his 
family  had  vacated  the  Residency,  and  sought  a  more 
secure  asylum  within  the  walls  of  the  cantonment.  Now 
preparations  were  being  made  to  place  those  cantonments 
in  a  state  of  defence.  This  was  no  easy  matter.  The 
works  were  of  "  frightful  extent;"  and  demanded  a  much 
larger  body  of  troops,  and  greater  number  of  guns,  than 
were  at  the  disposal  of  the  General,  to  defend  them  even 
against  the  ^^  contemptible  enemy"  that  was  now  collect- 
ing around  them.  It  was  not  long  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  outbreak,  before  Lieutenant  Eyre,  the 
ordnance  commissariat  officer,  had  placed  every  avail- 
able gun  in  position.  But  the  want  of  artillery  in  this 
conjuncture  was  soon  lamentably  apparent.  There  had, 
at  no  time,  been  a  sufficiency  of  this  important  arm ;  but 
one  portion  of  the  miserable  allowance  was  now  with 
Sale's  force^  another  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  the  wretched 
remnant  was  in  cantonments. 

It  was  impossible  now  any  longer  to  close  one's  eyes 
against  the  real  state  of  affairs.  They  were  growing 
rapidly  worse  and  worse.  The  Envoy  sate  down  to  his 
desk  and  wrote  importunate  letters  to  Captain  Mac- 
gregor,  urging  him  to  bring  back  .Sir  Robert  Sale's  force 
to  Caubul.  At  the  same  time  he  wrote  to  Candahar,  to 
arrest  the  march  of  the  troops  that  were  about  to  return 
to  India,  and  to  despatch  them  with  all  speed  to  his 
relief.     Nothing  came  of  these  mandates  but  disappoint- 


30  PKOQBISSS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

ment.     It  would  have  been  better  if  the  Caubul  force 
had  trusted  wholly  to  itself. 

The  next  day  was  one  of  more  appalling  disaster.  It 
brought  to  light  a  new  evil  that  threatened  destruction 
to  the  beleaguered  force.  The  commissariat  fort — the 
magazine  in  which  all  the  stores,  on  which  our  troops  de* 
pended  for  subsistence,  were  garnered  up-was  outside 
the  cantonment  walls.  It  was  situated  about  400  witesy^ 
from  the  south-west  bastion  of  the  cantonment.  On  the 
preceding  day,  the  detachment  in  charge  of  the  fort  had 
been  raised  to  a  subaltern's  guard  of  eighty  men.  It  was 
now  threatened  by  the  enemy.  Another  fort,  still  nearer 
cantonments,  known  as  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort,  was  al- 
ready in  possession  of  a  hostile  garrison  ;*  and  the  King's 
gardens,  between  which  and  the  cantonments  this  fort 
was  situated,  were  swarming  with  the  insurgents.  The 
communications  between  the  British  cantonments  and  the 
commissariat  fort  were  thus  intercepted  by  the  enemy ;  and 
the  position  of  the  slender  guard  posted  for  the  defence  of 
the  latter  was  therefore  one  of  imminent  peril.  The 
enemy  laid  siege  to  the  fort;  and  began  to  mine  beneath 
the  walls.  Surrounded  as  he  was  by  a  far  superior  force, 
and  seeing  no  possibility  of  repelling  the  assaults  of  the 
enemy,  Lieutenant  Warren,  who  commanded  the  guard, 
oflScially  reported  the  danger  of  his  position;  and  set  forth 
that,  unless  reinforced^  he  should  be  obliged  to  abandon 
his  post.  The  letter  was  conveyed  to  the  General,  who 
ordered  out  two  companies  of  the  44th  Regiment,  under 
Captains  Swayne  and  Robinson,  to  reinforce  the  party  at 
the  commissariat  fort,  or  enable  them  to  evacuate  it  in 
safety.f     They  had  not  proceeded  far,  when  the  enemy, 

*  General  Elphinstone  had,  on  the  declared  that  it  would  not  be  politic 

preceding  day,  expressed  his  desire  to  do  so. 

to  see  this  fort  garrisoned  bj  our  own  f  General  Elphinstone  speaks  of 

troops ;  but  Sir  William  Macnaghten  this  party  as  a  reinforcement.  He  says. 


FUBTHER  DISASTERS. 


31 


posted  in  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort  opened  upon  them  with 
deadly  execution.  The  galling  fire  of  the  concealed 
marksmen  checked  their  progress.  Captains  Swayne  and 
Robinson  were  shot  dead.  Other  officers  were  wounded* 
There  seemed  to  be  no  chance  of  success.  To  move  out- 
ward would  only  have  been  to  expose  the  detachment  to 
certain  destruction.  The  officer  upon  whom  the  command 
of  the  party  had  devolved,  determined,  therefore,  to  aban- 
don an  enterprise  from  which  nothing  but  further  disaster 
could  arise.  He  brought  back  his  party  to  cantonments ; 
and  so  another  failure  was  added  to  the  list. 

Another  was  soon  to  be  recorded  against  us.  In  the 
course  of  the  afternoon,  the  General  determined  to  try  the 
effect  of  sending  out  a  party,  consisting  mainly  of  cavalry, 
to  enable  Lieutenant  Warren  to  evacuate  the  commissariat 
fort.  But  this  party  suffered  more  severely  than  the  pre- 
ceding one.  From  the  loopholes  of  Mahomed  Sheriff's 
Fort — from  every  tree  in  the  Shah's  garden — from  what- 
ever cover  of  wood  or  masonry  was  to  be  found — the 
Afghan  marksmen  poured,  with  unerring  aim,  their  deadly 
fire  upon  our  advancing  troops.  The  unseen  enemy  was 
too  strong  for  our  slight  detachment.  The  troopers  of 
the  5th  Cavalry  fell  in  numbers  beneath  the  fire  of  the 
Afghan  matchlocks.  The  forward  movement  was  checked. 
The  party  retreated;  and  again  the  enemy  gathered  new 
courage  fix)m  the  contemplation  of  our  reverses. 

In  the  mean  while^  it  had  become  known  to  the  com- 
missariat officers  that  the  General  contemplated  the 
abandonment  of  the  fort,  in  which  not  only  our  grain,  but 


*'  On  the  4ih  iitftaiit  another  attempt  to 
throw  in  reinforcements  failed.  The 
troops  emplored  suffered  consider- 
abl/,  particufarlj  the  5th  Caralry.** 
Two  different  attempts  are  here 
mixed  up  together.  Captain  Johnson 
sa^s,  that  the  first  was  an  attempt  to 
remforce  Lieutenant  Warren;  but 


that  the  second,  on  which  the  5th 
Cavalry  were  employed,  was  an  at- 
tempt to  bring  off  the  commissariat 
Saard.  Lieutenant  Eyre  and  Lady 
ale  speak  of  both  movements  in  the 
light  of  efforts  made  to  enable  Lieute- 
nant Warren  to  abandon  his  position. 
It  is  certain  that  the  second  was. 


32  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

our  hospital  stores,  our  spirits,  wine,  beer,  &c.,  were 
garaered.  Dismayed  at  the  thought  of  a  sacrifice  that 
must  entail  destruction  on  the  entire  force,  Captain  Boyd, 
the  chief  commissariat  officer,  hastened  to  General  Elphin- 
stone's  quarters,  and  entreated  him  not  to  withdraw 
Lieutenant  Warren  from  the  fort,  but  to  reinforce  him  with 
all  possible  despatch.  The  General,  ever  ready  to  listen 
to  advice,  and  sometimes  to  take  it,  heard  all  that  was 
advanced  by  the  commissariat  officer,  readily  assented  to 
its  truth,  and  promised  to  send  out  a  reinforcement  to  the 
fort.  But  no  reinforcement  was  sent.  Night  was  closing 
in  upon  the  cantonment,  and  Captain  Boyd,  to  his  bitter 
disappointment,  perceived  that  no  preparations  were 
making  for  the  promised  movement  towards  the  fort. 
Asking  Captain  Johnson  to  accompany  him,  he  again  pro- 
ceeded to  the  General's  quarters,  where  the  two  officers, 
in  emphatic  language,  pointed  out  the  terrible  results  of 
the  sacrifice  of  our  supplies.  Again  the  General  listened 
— again  he  assented — and  again  he  would  have  promised 
all  that  was  required ;  but  other  officers  were  present,  who 
put  forth  other  opinions;  talked  of  the  danger  of  the  move- 
ment; urged  that  it  would  be  necessary,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, to  capture  Mahomed's  Sheriff's  Fort ;  and  so  the 
General  wavered.  But  at  this  juncture,  another  letter  from 
Lieutenant  Warren  was  brought  in.  It  represented  that 
his  position  had  become  more  insecure;  that  the  enemy 
were  mining  under  the  walls,  and  the  Sepoys  escaping 
over  them ;  and  that  if  reinforcements  were  not  speedily 
sent,  he  should  be  compelled  to  abandon  his  position. 

This  brought  the  General  round  again  to  the  opi- 
nion that  reinforcements  ought  to  be  sent ;  he  promised 
that,  at  two  a.m.,  a  detachment  should  be  under  arms  to 
take  possession  of  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort,  and  to 
strengthen  Warren's  position;  and  the  requisite  orders 
were  accordingly  issued.    But  later  counsels  prevailed. 


LOSS  OF  THE  COMMISSARIAT  FORT.  33 

The  march  of  the  detachment  was  postponed  to  the  follow- 
ing morning;  and,  before  it  moved,  Lieutenant  Warren 
and  his  party  had  abandoned  the  fort  and  returned  to  can- 
tonments, leaving  all  our  supplies  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  inspiring  them  with  fresh  confidence  and 
courage.  The  little  garrison  had  escaped  by  working  a 
hole  from  the  interior  of  the  fort  underneath  the  walls,  by 
the  aid  of  tools  which  had  been  sent  them  for  a  difTerent 
purpose  on  the  preceding  night.* 

Nor  was  this  our  only  loss.  The  commissariat  fort, 
in  which  the  supplies  for  Shah  Soojah's  force  were  stored, 
was  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city.  In  1840,  when  a  gene- 
ral rising  was  deemed  no  unlikely  occurrence,  Captain 
Johnson  laid  in  a  supply  of  17,000  maunds  of  ottah  for 
Shah  Soojah's  force,  and  had  erected  godowns  for  their 
reception  within  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  early  in  1841  the 
grain  was  all  laid  up  in  store.  The  King,  however,  sub- 
sequently exercised  the  royal  privilege  of  changing  his 
mind.  The  godowns  were  inconveniently  situated ;  and 
Captain  Johnson  was  ordered  to  remove  the  grain  from 
the  citadel,  and,  having  no  better  place  for  its  reception, 
to  convert  his  camel-sheds,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city, 
into  a  godown  fort.f     In  this  fort,  on  the  2nd  of  Novem- 


♦  "  Earlj  on  the  morning  of  the  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  it  was  all 

5th,  the  commissariat  fort  was  aban-  stored  in  May,  1841.  One  of  Sir  Wil- 

doned    by  its  garrison,  the  enemy  liam  Macnaghten's  first  acts,  after 

having  attempted  to  fire  the  gate  and  arrival  from  Jellalabad,  was  a  most 

escalade.    The  garrison  came  out  by  peremptory  Order  to  me  to  take  the 

a  hole  made  from  the  interior — tools  whole  of  my   godown    out^  of   the 

having  been  sent  overnight,  with  a  Balla  Hissar.     On  my  stating  that 

view  to  the  introduction  of  reinforce-  I  had  no  other  place  in  which  to 

ments  and  the  withdrawal  of  supplies  store  so  large  a  quantity,  I  was  told 

from  the  store." — [^Report  of  General  that  the  grain  was  on  no  considera- 

Elpkmstone.'i  tion  to  remain  in  the  citadel,  as  the 

f  "  In  September,  1840,  when  we  King  was  averse  to  it.     There  being 

were    in    expectation  of  a  general  no  other  place  to  store  it,  I  was 

rising    throughout    the    country,    I  ordered  to  convert  my  camel-sheds, 

laid  m  for  the  Shah's  force  17,000  on  the  outskirts  of  the  cit^,  into 

maunds  of  ottah.    I  got  permission  godowns." — {^Captain  Johnson* s  MS, 

from  the  King  to  erect  godowns  in  Journal.^ 

VOL.  n.  D 


84         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

ber,  there  were  about  8000  maunds  of  ottah.  Captain 
Mackenzie^  an  officer  of  high  character,  greatly  and  de- 
servedly esteemed  by  the  Envoy  and  all  the  officers  of  the 
force,  was  at  this  time  in  charge  of  the  fort.  On  the  morn- 
ing of  the  2nd  of  November  it  was  attacked  by  the  armed 
population  of  Deh- Afghan.  Throughout  the  whole  of  that 
day  Mackenzie  held  his  post  with  unwearying  constancy 
and  unshaken  courage.  Everything  was  against  the 
little  garrison.  Water  was  scarce  ;  ammunition  was  scarce. 
They  were  encumbered  with  baggage,  and  overwhelmed 
with  women  and  children.  Reinforcements  were  written 
for,  and  looked  for  in  vain.  Captain  Trevor,  who  occu- 
pied, with  his  family,  a  neighbouring  fort,  despatched  re* 
peated  letters  to  cantonments,  importuning  the  Envoy  to 
reinforce  these  isolated  posts.  But  in  vain  they  turned 
their  straining  eyes  towards  the  cantonment,  "  looking  for 
the  glittering  bayonets  through  the  trees."*  Not  a  com- 
pany came  to  their  relief.  Instead  of  assistance  they  re- 
ceived nothing  but  melancholy  tidings  of  disaster.  A 
demonstration  from  the  cantonment  would  have  saved 
them.  The  Kuzzilbashes  were  ready  to  declare  them- 
selves on  the  side  of  the  British.  Khan  Shereen  Khan 
was,  indeed,  at  Trevor's  house.  But  when  the  chiefs  saw 
that  not  an  eSort  was  made  by  the  British  commanders  to 
vindicate  our  authority,  or  to  save  the  lives  of  our  officers, 
they  prudently  held  aloof  and  refused  to  link  themselves 
with  a  declining  cause. 

On  the  3rd  of  November,  "  about  the  middle  of  the 
day,"  the  enemy  got  possession  of  Trevor's  house;  and 
it  soon  became  certain  that  Mackenzie,  with  all  his  gal- 
lantry and  all  his  laborious  zeal — working  day  and  night 
without  food  and  without  rest — conducting  the  defence 
with  as  much  judgment  as  spirit — could  not  much  longer 

•  Captain  Mackenzie's  narratire,    and  well- written  report  of  one  of  the 
m  Bi/re  s  Journal;  a  very  interesting    most  honourable  incidents  of  the  war. 


ABANDONMENT  OF  MACKENZIE'S  FORT.  35 

hold  his  post.  His  men  were  wearied  out — ^his  ammuni- 
tion was  exhausted — his  wounded  were  dying  for  want  of 
medical  aid.  He  had  defended  his  position  throughout 
two  days  of  toil,  suffering,  and  danger;  and  no  aid  had 
come  from  cantonments — none  was  likely  to  come.  So 
yielding  at  last  to  the  importunity  of  others,  he  moved 
out  of  the  fort,  and  fought  his  way,  by  night,  to  canton- 
ments. It  was  a  difficult  and  hazardous  march;  and, 
almost  by  a  mii'acle,  Mackenzie  escaped  to  recount  the 
incidents  of  those  memorable  days. 

The  abandonment  of  our  commissariat  stores  not  only 
threatened  the  British  force  with  instant  starvation,  but 
made  such  a  lamentable  exposure  of  our  imbecility,  that 
all  who  had  before  held  aloof,  thinking  that  the  British  na- 
tion would  arise  and  crush  the  insurgents,  now  gathered 
heart  and  openly  declared  themselves.  The  doubtful 
were  assured; — the  wavering  were  established.  There 
was  a  British  army,  looking  over  the  walls  of  their  can- 
tonment at  an  ill-armed  enemy — almost  a  rabble — gutting 
their  commissariat  fort.  There  were  the  spoliators, 
within  four  hundred  yards  of  our  position,  carrying  off 
our  supplies,  as  busily  as  a  sw£irm  of  ants.  "  The  godown 
fort,"  wrote  Captain  Johnson  in  his  journal,  *'  was  this 
day  something  similar  to  a  large  ants'  nest.  Ere  noon, 
thousands  and  thousands  had  assembled  from  far  and 
wide,  to  participate  in  the  booty  of  the  English  dogs, 
each  man  taking  away  with  him  as  much  as  he  could 
cany — and  to  this  we  were  all  eye-witnesses."  The 
troops  in  cantonments  were  indignant  at  the  imbecility 
of  their  leaders,  who  had  suffered  them  to  be  so  igno- 
miniously  stripped  of  the  very  means  of  subsistence  j  and 
clamoured  to  be  led  out  against  the  enemy,  who  were 
parading  their  spoils  under  the  very  walls  of  the  canton- 
ment. The  feeling  was  not  one  to  be  checked.  Lieu- 
tenant Eyre  went  to  the  quarters  of  the  General,  urged 

d2 


36         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

him  to  send  out  a  party  for  the  capture  of  Mahomed 
Sheriff's  Fort,  and  volunteered  to  keep  the  road  clear  for 
the  advance  of  the  storming  party.  After  some  deli- 
beration the  General  assented,  and  wrote  to  the  Envoy 
on  the  subject : 

November  5, 1841.    5  a.m. 

My  DEAR  Sir  William, 

After  due  consideration,  we  have  determined  on  attacking 
the  fort  this  morning,  with  fifty  men  of  the  44th,  and  200  Native 
Infantry.  We  will  first  try  to  breach  the  place,  and  shell  it  as 
well  as  we  can.  From  information  I  have  received  respecting  the 
interior  of  the  fort,  which  I  think  is  to  be  relied  on,  it  seems 
the  centre,  like  our  old  bazaar,  is  filled  with  buildings ;  therefore, 
if  we  succeed  in  blowing  open  the  gate,  we  should  only  be  ex- 
posed to  a  destructive  fire  from  the  buildings,  which,  from  the 
state  of  preparation  they  evince,  would  no  doubt  be  occupied  in 
force,  supported  from  the  garden.  Carrying  powder-bags  up 
under  fire  would  have  a  chance  of  failure.  Our  men  have  been  all 
night  in  the  works,  are  tired,  and  ill  fed;  but  we  must  hope  for 
the  best,  and  securing  our  commissariat  fort  with  the  stores. 

It  behoves  us  to  look  to  the  consequences  of  failure:  in  this 
case  I  know  not  how  we  are  to  subsist,  or,  from  want  of  provi- 
sions, to  retreat.  You  should,  therefore,  consider  what  chance 
there  is  of  making  terras,  if  we  are  driven  to  this  extremity. 

Shelton  must  then  be  withdrawn,  as  we  shall  not  be  able  to 

supply  him. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

W.  K.  E.* 

Already  had  the  General  begun  to  think  and  to  write 
of  "  making  terms"  with  the  enemy.  It  w^ill  be  seen  that 
he  anticipated  failure;  and  what  but  failure  was  likely  to 
result  from  an  expedition  undertaken  under  such  auspices? 
The  party  was  sent  out  under  Major  Swayne.  It  seems 
to  have  stood  still,  when  it  ought  to  have  rushed  forward. 
The  opportunity  was  lost;  and  the  General,  who  was 
watching  the  movement  from  the  gateway,  ordered  the 
detachment  to  be  withdrawn.     The  Sepoys  of  the  37th 

*  Unpublished  Correspondence  of  General  Elphinstone. 


RISINGS  IN  THE  KOHISTAN.  37 

regiment^  who  had  been  eager  to  advance  to  the  capture 
of  the  fort,  were  enraged  and  disappointed  at  being  held 
back ;  and  the  enemy,  more  confident  and  presumptuous 
than  before,  exulted  in  a  new  triumph. 

Whilst  afeirs  were  in  this  distressing  and  dispiriting 
state  at  Caubul,  our  outposts  were  exposed  to  imminent 
danger ;  and  it  was  soon  only  too  plain  that  the  insurrec- 
tion was  not  confined  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  capital. 
At  Kardurrah,  Lieutenant  Maule,  of  the  Bengal  Artillery, 
commanding  the  Kohistanee  regiment,  with  his  adjutant 
and  sergeant-major  had  been  cut  to  pieces,  at  the  outset 
of  the  insurrection,  by  the  men  of  his  own  corps ;  and 
now  intelligence  came  in  that  the  Goorkha  regiment, 
posted  at  Charekur  in  the  Kohistan,  where  Major  Pot- 
tinger  was  Resident,  was  threatened  with  annihilation. 
Captain  Codrington,  the  commandant,  and  other  officers 
had  been  killed;  and  as  water  was  failing  the  garrison, 
there  was  Uttle  chance  of  its  holding  out.  The  Envoy 
communicated  these  sad  tidings  to  the  General,  who 
wrote  in  reply: 

My  d£ab  Sib  William, 

This  is  most  distressing.  Can  nothing  be  done  by  the 
promise  of  a  large  reward — a  lakh  of  rupees  for  instance,  if 
necessary,  to  any  of  the  Kohistan  chiefs,  to  bring  them  ofi^ 
though  I  fear  the  three  days  have  expired;  but,  perhaps,  I  am 
proposing  what  is  impossible. 

Yours, 

W.  K.  E. 

This  was  written  on  the  6th  of  November.  That  day 
witnessed  our  first  success.  A  party,  under  Major 
Griffiths,  of  the  37th  Native  Infantry,  was  sent  out 
against  Mahomed  Sheriffs  Fort.  A  practicable  breach 
was  effected,  and  the  storming  party  entered  with  an  ir- 
resistible impetuosity,  worthy  of  British  troops.     Ensign 


38         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

Raban,  of  the  44th  Regiment,  was  shot  dead  on  the  crest 
of  the  breach.  The  garrison  escaped  to  the  hills,  where 
a  party  of  Anderson's  horse  dashed  at  them  in  gallant 
style,  and  drove  them  from  their  position.  The  rest  of 
the  day  was  spent  in  dubious  skirmishing.  All  arms 
were  employed  in  a  wild  desultory  manner.  Artillery, 
cavalry,  and  infantry  did  good  independent  service; 
but  they  did  not  support  each  other.  Nothing  great 
was  designed  or  attempted.  A  general  action  might 
have  been  brought  on ;  and,  properly  commanded  at  that 
time,  the  British  troops,  who  were  then  eager  to  meet 
the  enemy,  might  have  beaten  five  times  their  numbers 
in  the  field.  But  General  Elphinstone,  long  before  this, 
had  ceased  to  think  of  beating  the  enemy.  Everything 
seemed  possible  to  him  but  that. 

We  had  lost  our  commissariat  forts ;  but,  happily,  we 
had  not  lost  our  commissariat  officers.  As  soon  as  it  was 
perceived  that  our  stores  were  in  jeopardy.  Captain  Boyd 
and  Captain  Johnson  had  begun  to  exert  themselves,  with 
an  energy  as  praiseworthy  as  it  was  rare  in  that  con- 
juncture, to  collect  supplies  from  the  surrounding  villages. 
They  were  more  successful  than  under  such  circumstances 
could  have  been  anticipated.  The  villagers  sold  the 
grain,  which  they  had  laid  up  for  their  own  winter  sup- 
plies, at  no  very  exorbitant  rates,  and  the  horrors  of  im- 
mediate starvation  were  averted  from  the  beleaguered 
force.*  The  troops  were  put  upon  half-rations.  The 
ordinary  food  of  the  native  troops — the  ottah^  or  ground 
wheat — was  wanting,  for  the  water-mills  in  the  villages 
had  been  destroyed ;  but  the  unbroken  grain  was  served 
out  to  them  in  its  stead.f 

*  <<  For  the  last  four  days,*'  wrote  able  rate ;  and  the  irillaffers  sell  wil- 

Captain  Johnson,  in  his  journal,  on  linglj  from  the  stores  which  thej  had 

the  8ih  of  November,  **  I  have  been  laid  up  for  themselves  for  winter.** — 

busily  purchasing  grain  from  Deh  [MS,  RecordsJ\ 
Mem  ;  X  have  established  a  reason-        f  Captain  JohnsorCs  MS,  Journal, 


SCARCITY  OF  AMMUNITION.  39 

A  new  danger  was  now  to  be  discovered.  The  force 
bad  been  threatened  with  starvation;  but  now  supplies 
were  coming  in  from  the  surrounding  villages.  It  would 
have  been  impossible  to  hold  out  without  provisions.  It 
would  be  equally  impossible  to  hold  out  without  ammu* 
nition.  As  soon  as  the  one  danger  was  averted,  the  Ge- 
neral b^n  to  look  about  for  the  approach  of  the  other. 
On  the  6th  of  November,  he  again  wrote  to  Sir  William 
Macnaghten.  suggesting  the  expediency  of  making  terms, 
with  the  least  possible  delay : — ^'  We  have  temporarily," 
he  said,  '^  and  I  hope  permanently,  got  over  the  difficulty 
of  provisions.  Our  next  consideration  is  ammunition; 
a  very  serious  and  indeed  awful  one.  We  have  expended 
a  great  quantity ;  therefore  it  becomes  worthy  of  thought 
on  your  part,  how  desirable  it  is  that  our  operations 
should  not  be  protracted,  by  anything  in  treating  that 
might  tend  to  a  continuance  of  the  present  state  of  things. 
Do  not  suppose  from  this  I  wish  to  recommend  or  am 
advocating  humiliating  terms,  or  such  as  would  reflect 
disgrace  on  us ;  but  this  fact  of  ammunition  must  not  be 
lost  sight  of."  And  in  a  postscript  to  this  letter  are  these 
melancholy  words : — ^"  Our  case  is  not  yet  desperate ;  I 
do  not  mean  to  impress  that;  but  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  it  goes  very  fast,***  The  Envoy  needed  no 
better  proof  than  this  that  our  case,  if  not  desperate,  was 
"going  very  fast."  There  was  an  abundant  supply  of 
ammunition  in  store.  But  what  hope  was  there,  so  long 
as  the  troops  were  thus  commanded?  There  was  no 
hope  from  our  arms;  but  something  might  be  done  by 
oar  money.  If  the  enemy  could  not  be  beaten  off,  he 
might  be  bought  off.  The  Envoy,  therefore,  began  to 
appeal  to  the  cupidity  of  the  chiefs. 

The  agent  whom  he  employed  was  Mohun  Lai.     On 
the  first  outbreak  in  the  city,  the  Moonshee  had  narrowly 

*  Unpublisked  Corresprndence  of  General  Elphinstone. 


40  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

escaped  destruction  by  taking  refuge  under  the  skirts  of 
Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan.*  Since  that  time  he  had  re- 
sided in  Caubul,  under  the  protection  of  the  Kuzzilbash 
chief  Khan  Shereen  Khan,  and  had  kept  up  a  correspon- 
dence with  Sir  William  Macnaghten,  doing  the  Envoy's 
bidding,  as  he  said,  at  the  risk  of  his  life.  *  His  first  ex- 
periment was  made  upon  the  corruptibility  of  the  Ghil- 
zyes.  At  the  request  of  the  Envoy,  Mohun  Lai  opened 
negotiations  with  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe,  offering  them 
two  lakhs  of  rupees,  with  an  immediate  advance  of  a 
quarter  of  the  amount ;  but  before  the  contract  was  com- 
pleted, the  Envoy,  doubtful,  perhaps,  of  the  sincerity  of 
the  chiefs,  receded  from  the  negotiation.  The  Ghilzyes 
were  mortally  offended ;  but  the  Envoy  had  another  game 
in  hand.  On  the  7th  of  November  he  wrote  to  Mohun  Lai: 

Mt  dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  your  three  letters,  and  am  very  glad  that 
you  are  doing  such  excellent  service.  Enclosed  are  two  letters  for 
Khan  Shereen  Khan  and  Mahomed  Kumy e.  You  may  assure  them 
both,  that  if  they  perform  the  service  which  they  have  under- 
taken, the  former  shall  receive  one  lakh,  and  the  latter  50,000 
rupees,  besides  getting  the  present^  and  everything  else  they  re- 
quire. You  may  assure  them  that,  whatever  bluster  the  rebels 
may  make,  they  will  be  beaten  in  the  end.  I  hope  that  you  will 
encourage  Mohamed  Yar  Klan,  the  rival  of  Ameen-oollah ;  assure 
him  that  he  shall  receive  the  chiefship,  and  all  the  assistance  neces- 
sary to  enable  him  to  support  it.  You  may  give  promises  in  my 
name  to  the  extent  of  500,000  rupees  (five  lakhs). 

Yours,  faithfully, 

W.  H.  M.t 

Intelligence  had  by  this  time  reached  Caubul,  to  the 

*  Mohun  Lai  says :  "  I  had  a  very  years'  service)  was  plundered,  besides 
narrow  escape,  and  was  saved  by  the  murder  of  several  servants  be- 
taking a  shelter  under  the  garment  of  longing  to  Sir  Alexander  and  my- 
Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan  in  the  street,  self .— [XeMcr  to  Mr,  Colvin :  MS.] 
Everything  in  my  house  (which  I  had  t  UnpuUished  Correspondence  of 
saved  in  the  course  of  my  twelve  Sir  W,  H,  Macnaghten, 


ATTEMPTS  TO  BUY  THE  ENEMY.  41 

effect  that  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  the  second  son  of  Dost 
Mahomed,  was  coming  in  from  Toorkistan,  and  had  already 
advanced  as  far  as  Bameean.  Mohun  Lai  suggested  the 
expediency  of  despatching  an  emissary  to  meet  him  on  the 
way,  and  offer  the  Sirdar  a  handsome  allowance  to  league 
himself  with  our  party.     To  this  the  Envoy  replied: 

November  8,  1841. 

My  dear  Sib^ 

I  have  received  your  letters  of  this  date,  and  fully  approve 
of  your  having  raised  30,000  rupees  for  distribution  amongst  those 
disposed  to  assist  our  cause.  But  I  would  not  advance  more  than 
50,000  rupees  before  some  service  is  actually  rendered;  and  do  not 
place  any  reliance  on  the  story  about  Gundamuck.  They  are  too 
strong  to  be  resisted  by  any  force  that  the  rebels  could  bring 
against  th^m.  Mahomed  Akbar's  arrival  at  Bameean  is  likely 
enough;  there  can  be  little  use,  I  fear,  in  offering  him  a  separate 
remittance,  if  the  rebels  have  made  overtures  to  him  already. 

Yours, 

W.  H.  M. 
Tell  E^han  Shereen  Khan,  with  my  best  compliments,  that  he 
will  not  be  disappointed  if  he  does  us  quick  and  good  service.* 

Bat  all  this  money  was  spent  to  very  little  purpose. 
There  were  too  many  hungry  appetites  to  appease — too 
many  conflicting  interests  to  reconcile ;  it  was  altogether, 
by  this  time,  too  mighty  a  movement  to  be  put  down  by 
a  display  of  the  money-bags.  The  jingling  of  the  coin 
could  not  drown  the  voice  of  an  outraged  and  incensed 
people. 

I  wish  that  I  had  nothing  more  to  say  of  the  efforts 
made,  out  of  the  fair  field  of  open  battle,  to  destroy  the 
power  of  the  insurgent  chiefs.  There  is  a  darker  page 
of  history  yet  to  be  written.  This  Mohun  Lai  had  other 
work  entrusted  to  him  than  that  spoken  of  in  these  let- 
ters. He  was  not  directed  merely  to  appeal  to  the  cupi- 
dity of  the  chiefs,  by  offering  them  large  sums  of  money 

♦  UnpublUhed  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten, 


42         PHOGBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

to  exert  their  influence  in  our  favour.  He  was  directed, 
also,  to  offer  rewards  for  the  heads  of  the  principal  insur- 
gents. As  early  as  the  5th  of  November,  Lieutenant 
John  Conolly,  who  was  in  attendance  upon  Shah  Soojah, 
in  the  Ballar  Hissar^  wrote  thus  to  Mohun  Lai : 

Tell  the  Kuzzilbash  chiefs,  Sherin  Khan,  Naib  Sheriff,  in  fact, 
all  the  chiefs  of  Sheeah  persuasion,  to  join  against  the  rebels. 
You  can  promise  one  lakh  of  rupees  to  Khan  Shereen  on  the  con- 
dition of  his  killing  and  seizing  the  rebels  and  arming  all  the 
Sheeahs,  and  immediately  attacking  all  rebels.  This  is  the  time 
for  the  Sheeahs  to  do  good  service.  Explain  to  them  that  if  the 
Sconces  once  get  the  upper  hand  in  the  town,  they  will  imme- 
diately attack  and  plunder  their  part  of  the  town;  hold  out  pro- 
mises of  reward  and  money;  write  to  me  very  frequently.  Tell 
the  chiefs  who  are  well  disposed  to  send  respectable  agents  to  the 
Envoy.  Try  and  spread  "nifak"  among  the  rebels.  In  every- 
thing that  you  do  consult  me,  and  write  very  often.  Meer  Hyder 
Purja-Bashi  has  been  sent  to  Khan  Shereen,  and  will  see  you. 

And  in  a  postscript  to  this  letter  appeared  the  ominous 
words:  "I  promise  10,000  rupees  for  the  head  of  each 
of  the  principal  rebel  chiefs.* 

Mohun  Lai  received  this  letter,  and  being  ready  for 
any  kind  of  service  not  in  the  field,  began  to  cast  about 
in  his  mind  the  best  means  of  accomplishing  the  object 
spoken  of  in  Conolly's  postscript,  with  the  least  danger 
to  himself  and  the  greatest  benefit  to  his  employers.  It 
was  necessary,  however,  to  tread  cautiously  in  so  delicate 
a  matter.  The  Moonshee  was  not  yet  assured  of  the 
temper  of  the  Kuzzilbash  chief;  and  the  game  might  be 
played  away  by  one  precipitate  move.  So  he  resolved  to 
keep  the .  offer  of  the  head-money  in  abeyance  for  a  few 
days,  and  to  watch  the  course  of  events. 

*  I  set  these  things  down  here,  be-  pears,  in  a  remarkable  article,  on  the 

cause  they  belong,  in  chronological  *'  Outbreak  in  Caubul  and  its  Causes,'' 

order,  to  this  chapter.  The  discussion  published  in  the  Calcutta  Review.    I 

of  them  is  reserved  for  another.    The  wish  I  could  say  that  I  had  any  doubt 

letter,  of  which  I  have  no  copy,  ap-  of  its  authenticity. 


GENEBAL  ELPHINSTONE.  43 


CHAPTER  in. 

[November,  1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection — General  Elphinstone — His  Infirmities — Recall 
of  Brigadier  Shelton  to  Cantonments — Capture  of  the  Ricka-basbee  Fort 
— Intrigues  with  the  Afghan  Chiefs— The  Envoy^s  Correspondence  with 
Mohun  Lai. 

The  insurrection  had  now  been  raging  for  a  week.  The 
enemy  had  increased  in  numbers  and  in  daring.  The 
troops  in  the  British  cantonments  were  dispirited  and  dis- 
heartened. The  General  had  begun  to  talk  and  to  write 
about  negotiation.  The  Envoy  was  attempting  to  buy  off 
the  enemy.  Nothing  had  yet  been  done  to  avert  the 
disastrous  and  disgraceful  catastrophe  which  now  threa- 
tened to  crown  our  misfortunes.  It  was  plain  that  some- 
thing must  be  done.  Any  change  would  be  a  change  for 
the  better. 

The  officers  who  served  under  General  Elphinstone 
throughout  this  unhappy  crisis  have  invariably  spoken 
of  him  with  tenderness  and  respect.  He  was  an  honour- 
able gentleman — a  kind-hearted  man — and  he  had  once 
been  a  good  soldier.  His  personal  courage  has  never 
been  questioned.  Regardless  of  danger,  and  patient 
under  trial,  he  exposed  himself  without  reserve,  and 
bore  his  sufferings  without  complaining.  But  disease  had 
broken  down  his  physical  strength,  and  enfeebled  his  un- 


44  PBOGRESS  OF  THE  INSURKECTION. 

derstanding.  He  had  almost  lost  the  use  of  his  limbs. 
He  could  not  walk ;  he  could  hardly  ride.  The  gout  had 
crippled  him  in  a  manner  that  it  was  painful  to  con- 
template. You  could  not  see  him  engaged  in  the  most 
ordinary  concerns  of  peaceful  life  without  an  emotion  of 
lively  compassion.  He  was  fit  only  for  the  invalid  esta- 
blishment on  the  day  of  his  arrival  in  India.  It  was  a 
mockery  to  talk  of  his  commanding  a  division  of  the  army 
in  the  quietest  district  of  Hindostan.  But  he  was  selected 
by  Lord  Auckland,  against  the  advice  of  the  Commander- 
in-Chief,  and  the  remonstrances  of  the  Agra  governor,  to 
assume  the  command  of  that  division  of  the  army  which 
of  all  others  was  most  likely  to  be  actively  employed,  and 
which  demanded,  therefore,  the  greatest  amount  of  energy 
and  activity  in  its  commander.  Among  the  general  offi- 
cers of  the  Indian  army  were  many  able  and  energetic 
men,  with  active  limbs  and  clear  understandings.  There 
was  one — a  cripple,  whose  mental  vigour  much  suffering 
had  enfeebled ;  and  he  was  selected  by  the  Governor- 
General  to  command  the  army  in  Afghanistan. 

Ever  since  his  arrival  at  the  head-quarters  at  Caubul 
he  bad  been,  in  his  own  words,  ^^  unlucky  in  the  state 
of  his  health."  From  the  beginning  of  May  to  the  be- 
ginning of  October  he  had  been  suffering,  with  little 
intermission,  from  fever  and  rheumatic  gout.  Some- 
times he  had  been  confined  wholly  to  his  couch ;  at 
others  he  was  enabled  to  go  abroad  in  a  palanquin. 
During  one  or  two  brief  intervals  he  had  sufficiently 
recovered  his  strength  to  trust  himself  on  the  back  of 
a  horse.  He  was  in  the  enjoyment  of  one  of  these  in- 
tervals— ^but  expecting  every  day  to  relinquish  a  bur- 
den which  he  was  so  ill  able  to  bear* — when,  on  the  2nd 
of  November,   whilst  inspecting  the  Guards,  he  "had 

*  He  had  sent  in  a  medical  certi-    permission  to  return  to  Hindostan.  He 
ficate  some  time  before,  and  received    was  to  have  accompanied  the  Envoy. 


CHARACTER  OF  GENERAL  ELPHINSTONE.  45 

a  very  severe  fall — the  horse  falling  upon  him/^*  and  he 
was  compelled  to  return  to  his  quarters.  From  that  time, 
though  he  never  spared  himself,  it  was  painfully  obvious 
that  the  Caubul  army  was  without  a  chief.  The  General 
was  perplexed — bewildered.  He  was  utterly  without  re- 
sources of  his  own.  A  crisis  had  come  upon  him,  de- 
manding all  the  energies  of  a  robust  constitution  and  a 
vigorous  understanding;  and  it  had  found  him  with  a 
frame  almost  paralysed  by  disease,  and  a  mind  quite 
clouded  by  suffering.  He  had  little  knowledge  of  the 
political  condition  of  Afghanistan ;  of  the  feelings  of  the 
people ;  of  the  language  they  spoke,  or  the  country  they 
inhabited.  He  was  compelled,  therefore,  to  rely  upon  the 
information  of  others,  and  to  seek  the  advice  of  those 
with  whom  he  was  associated.  So  circumstanced,  the 
ablest  and  most  confident  general  would  have  been 
guided  by  the  counsels  of  the  British  Envoy.  But  Gene- 
ral £lphinstone  was  guided  by  every  man's  counsels — 
generally  by  the  last  speaker's— by  captains  and  subal- 
terns,  by  any  one  who  had  a  plan  to  propose  or  any  kind 
of  advice  to  offer.  He  was,  therefore,  in  a  constant  state 
of  oscillation ;  now  inclining  to  one  opinion,  now  to  an- 
other; now  determining  upon  a  course  of  action,  now 
abandoning  it;  the  resolutions  of  one  hour  giving  way 
before  the  doubts  of  its  successor,  until,  in  the  midst  of 
these  vacillations,  the  time  to  strike  passed  away  for  ever, 
and  the  loss  was  not  to  be  retrieved. 

In  such  a  conjuncture,  there  could  have  been  no  greater 
calamity  than  the  feeble  indecision  of  the  military  com- 
mander. Promptitude  of  action  was  the  one  thing  de- 
manded by  the  exigencies  of  the  occasion ;  but  instead  of 
promptitude  of  action,  there  was  nothing  but  hesitation 
and  incertitude — ^long  delays  and  small  doings,  worse  than 

*  Memorandum  fofind  among   ike    Elphinstone^  C,B,^  in  his  cum  hand' 
effects    of   the    late    Major- General    writing. 


46         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

nothing — paltry  demonstrations,  looking  as  though  they 
were  expressly  designed  as  revelations  either  of  lament- 
able weakness  or  folly  more  lamentable  still.  To  the 
Envoy  all  this  was  miserably  apparent.  It  was  apparent 
to  the  whole  garrison.  It  was  not  possible  altogether  to 
supersede  the  Greneral.  He  was  willing,  with  all  his  in- 
competency, to  serve  his  country,  and  there  was  no  autho- 
rity in  Afghanistan  to  remove  him  from  his  command. 
But  something,  it  was  thought,  might  be  done  by  asso- 
ciating with  him,  in  the  command  of  the  cantonment  force, 
an  officer  of  a  more  robust  frame  and  more  energetic 
character.  Brigadier  Shelton  was  known  to  be  an  active 
and  a  gallant  soldier.  Macnaghten  counselled  his  recall 
from  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  the  General  believing,  or  per- 
haps only  hoping,  that  he  would  find  a  willing  coadjutor 
in  the  Brigadier,  despatched  a  note  to  him  with  instruc- 
tions to  come  into  cantonments. 

Taking  with  him  only  a  regiment  of  the  Shah's  troops 
and  a  single  gun,  the  Brigadier  quitted  the  Balla  Hissar 
on  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  November,  and  made  his  way, 
without  any  interruption,  to  the  cantonment,  in  broad 
daylight.  The  garrison  welcomed  him  with  cordiality. 
He  came  amongst  them  almost  as  a  deliverer.  Great 
things  were  expected  from  him.  He  was  beloved  neither 
by  officers  nor  by  men ;  but  he  was  held  to  possess  some 
sturdy  qualities,  and  never  to  shrink  from  fighting.  Little 
or  nothing  was  known  of  his  aptitude  as  a  leader.  He 
had  seldom  or  never  been  placed  in  a  position  of  respon- 
sible command.  But  the  time  for  weighing  nice  questions 
of  generalship  had  long  ago  passed  away.  The  garrison 
were  content  to  look  for  a  commander  to  lead  them  against 
the  enemy,  with  sufficient  promptitude  and  in  sufficient 
numbers  to  protect  them  against  the  certainty  of  failure. 
But  a  week  of  almost  unbroken  disaster  had  dispirited 
and  enfeebled  them.     Everything  that  he  saw  and  heard 


DISUNION  OP  THE  MILITARY  COMMANDERS.  47 

was  of  a  nature  to  discourage  the  Brigadier.  Anxious 
faces  were  around  him,  and  desponding  words  saluted  his 
ears.  He  went  round  the  cantonments,  and  saw  at  once 
how  large  a  force  it  required  to  defend  such  extensive 
works,  and  how  small  a  body  of  troops  could  be  spared  for 
external  operations.  Everything,  indeed,  was  against  him. 
He  had  not  been  sent  for  until  a  series  of  disasters  had 
crippled  our  means  of  defence — emboldened  the  enemy, 
disheartened  the  garrison,  and  brought  the  grim  shadow 
of  starvation  close  to  the  cantonment  walls.* 

But  there  was  another  evil  soon  to  become  only  too 
painfully  apparent.  Brigadier  Shelton  had  been  sent  for 
to  co-operate  with  the  General;  but  it  was  manifest  that 
there  was  never  likely  to  be  any  co-operation  between 
them.  Each  has  left  upon  record  his  opinion  of  the  con- 
duct of  the  other.  The  General  says  that  the  Brigadier 
was  contumacious  and  insubordinate.  The  Brigadier  says 
that  he  was  thwarted  in  all  his  efforts  to  do  good  service 
— that  he  could  not  even  place  a  gun  in  position  without 
being  reminded  by  the  General  that  he  had  no  indepen- 
dent command.  Upon  whomsoever  the  greater  amount 
of  blame  may  rest,  the  result  was  sufficiently  deplorable. 

♦  "About  four  o'clock  on  the  them  of  frightful  extent — thetwo  sides 
momag  of  the  9th,*'  says  Brigadier  of  the  oblong,  including  the  two  mis- 
Shelton,  "  I  got  a  note  from  Elphin-  sioncompounds,about  1 400 yards cacli, 
itone  calling  me  into  cantonments,  the  two  ends  each  500,  with  a  ram- 
desiring  me  to  take  the  Shah's  6th  part  and  ditch  an  Afghan  could  run 
Infantry,  and  a  6-pounder  gun  with  over  with  the  facility  of  a  cat,  with 
me.  Ileft  the  BaUaHissar  between  many  other  serious  defects.  Themis- 
six  and  seren,  and  marched  in  broad  fortune  of  this  was  that  so  many  troops 
daylight  without  the  enemy  attempt-  were  necessary  for  the  actual  defence 
iog  to  dbpate  my  passage.  I  was  all  of  the  works,  that  only  a  few  could  be 
prepared  for  opposition  had  any  been  spared  for  external  operationsi  I  was 
made.  I  was  cordially  received,  but  put  in  orders  to  command  canton- 
could  read  anxiety  in  every  counte-  ments,  and  consequently,  in  course  of 
nance,  and  they  bad  then  only  three  my  inspections,  gave  such  orders  and 
days'  provisions.  I  was  sorry  to  find  instructions  as  appeared  to  me  ne* 
despondine  conversations  and  remarks  cessary.  This,  however,  Elphinstone 
too  generally  indulged,  and  was  more  soon  corrected,  by  reminding  me 
grieved  to  find  the  troops  were  dispi-  that  he  commanded,  not  I.'* — [Stote- 
nted.  Never  having  been  much  in  ment  of  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS.  ife- 
caotonments,  I  went  round  and  found  cords."] 


48         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

The  military  chiefs  never  acted  in  concert.*  Shelton 
was  a  man  of  a  hard  uncompromising  nature,  and  it  is 
probable  that  he  had  little  toleration  for  the  indecision  of 
the  General,  and  was  little  inclined  to  regard  with  tender- 
ness and  compassion  the  infirmities  of  the  poor  old  chief. 
He  did  what  he  was  commanded  to  do,  if  not  with  much 
military  skill,  at  all  events  with  an  unflinching  gallantry, 
to  which  the  General  himself  bore  willing  testimony.f 
But  from  the  absence  of  a  right  understanding  between 
them  a  fatality  attended  almost  every  enterprise.  Hesi- 
tation and  delay  at  the  outset — then  vacillation  and  con- 
tradiction— resolutions  taken  and  then  abandoned — orders 
issued  and  then  countermanded — so  irritated  the  Briga- 
dier, that  his  temper,  never  of  a  very  genial  cast,  was 
generally  in  a  somewhat  tempestuous  state  before  he 
took  the  field  at  the  head  of  his  men.  How  far  we 
may  rightly  attribute  to  this  the  want  of  success  which  at- 
tended the  Brigadier's  operations  can  only  now  be  conjec- 
tured; but  it  is  very  certain  that  in  all  of  them  the  daring 

*  "  On  the  Oth,"  says  General  El-  officer  more   disposed  to  do  everv- 

phinstone,in  the  memorandum  which  thing  for  the  public  service  [           J. 

I  have  before  quoted,  '*  not  finding  I  wish  I  could  say  the  same  of  Bri- 

myselfequal  to  the  duties,  particularly  gadier  Shelton, —he  appeared  to  be 

at  night,  when  I  could  not  go  about  actuated   by  an  ill   feeling  towards 

on  horseback,  I    recalled  Brigadier  me.    I  did  everything  in  my  power 

Shelton  from  the  Balla  Hissar,  but  I  to  remain  on  terms  with   him.      I 

regret  to  be  obliged  to  disclose  that  I  was  unlucky  also  in  not  understand- 

did  not  receive  from  him  that  cordial  ing  the  state  of  things,  and    being 

co-operation  and  advice  I  had  a  right  wholly  dependent  on  the  Envoy  and 

to  expect;  on  the  contrary,  his  man-  others   for  information.  —  IMS.  Re- 

ner  was  most  contumacious  ;  from  the  cordsJ] 

day  of  his  arrival  he  never  gave  me  f  In  a  public  letter  to  the  Secretary 

information  or  advice,  but  invariably  to  Government  written  by  General 

found  fault  with  all  that  was  done,  Elphinstone  from  Badeeabad,  on  Feb- 

and  canvassed    and    condemned  all  ruary  2drd,  1S42,  he  says :  **  I  beg  to 

orders  before  officers,  frequently  pre-  be  allowed  to  express  my  sense  of  the 

venting  and  delaying  carrying  them  gallant  manner  in  whicli  the  various 

into  effect.    This  and  many  other  in-  detachments  sent  out    were  led  by 

stances  of  want  of  assistance  I  can  Brigadier    Shelton,    and  of  the  in- 

corroborate  by  the  evidence  of  several  variably  noble  conduct  of  the  officers 

officers  still  living.     Had  I  been  so  on  these  occasions.**     I  am  not  aware 

fortunate  as  to  have  had  Sir  Robert  whether  this  letter  has  been  published. 

Sale,  than  whom   I  never  met  any  I  have  never  seen  it  in  print. 


SUMMONS  TO  sale's  BRIGADE.  49 

of  the  soldier  was  more  conspicuous  than  the  judgment 
of  the  commander. 

In  the  mean  while  the  Envoy  was  anxiously  looking  for 
the  return  of  Sale's  brigade  from  Gund  amuck.  Shortly 
after  the  arrival  of  Brigadier  Shelton  in  cantonments,  he 
despatched  another  letter  to  Captain  Macgregor,  urging 
him  to  send  back  the  troops  to  the  relief  of  our  be- 
leaguered position.  Only  a  fragment  of  this  letter  has 
been  preserved  j  but  it  sufficiently  indicates  the  Envoy's 
opinion  of  the  melancholy,  almost  desperate  state  to  which 
our  affairs  had  even  then  attained  : 

Gaubul)  November  9th,  1S41. 

Mt  deab  Macoreoob, 

I  have  written  to  you  several  letters,  urging  you  in  the 
strongest  manner  to  come  up  with  Sale's  brigade  to  our  relief, 
but  I  fear  you  may  not  have  received  them.  Our  situation  is 
rather  a  desperate  one  unless  you  arrive,  because  we  can  neither 
retreat  in  any  direction,  nor  leave  the  cantonments  to  go  into  the 
Balla  Hissar;  but  if  we  had  your  force  we  should  be  able  to  take 
the  city,  and  thus  preserve  both  the  cantonment  and  Balla  Hissar. 
The  enemy  is  a  contemptible  one.* 

From  the  return  of  Sale's  brigade  alone  did  the  Envoy 
look  for  any  permanent  change  in  the  condition  of  affairs 
at  Caubul.  But  from  that  quarter  no  assistance  could 
come.     The  force  was  moving  in  another  direction. 

But  whatever  might  be  the  chance  of  permanent  im- 
provement in  the  condition  of  affairs,  it  was  still  neces- 
sary to  do  something  for  the  moment.  On  the  morning 
of  the  10th  of  November,  the  enemy  mustered  in  great 
numbers — horse  and  foot — on  the  heights  commanding 
the  cantonment,  sending  up  shouts  of  insolent  defiance 

^  MS.  Records,  On  the  10th  of  No-  the  brigade    to   Caubul. —  [Captain 

▼ember,  Captain  Macgregor  received  Afacgregor" 8 Narrative: MS, Records,"] 

the  first  official  intelligence  of  the  This  was,  of  course,  a  previous  letter, 

outbreak,  10  a  letter  from  Sir  William  — copy  of  which  is  not  given  in  the 

Macnagliten,  urgfng  him  to  bring  back  collection  forwarded  to  gofemment. 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

and  &nng  feux  de  joie.  There  were  some  small  forts 
on  the  plain  below,  perilously  near  our  cantonment  walls, 
and  in  these  the  enemy  presently  posted  themselves  and 
grievously  harassed  our  soldiers  on  the  works.  One  of 
these,  known  as  the  Ricka-bashee  Fort,  situated  near  the 
north-east  angle  of  the  cantonment,  was  within  musket- 
shot  of  our  walls.  It  was  easy  to  pour  in  thence  a  galling 
fire  upon  the  troops  manning  our  works ;  and  the  artillery- 
men at  the  guns  were  shot  down  by  the  deadly  aim  of 
the  Afghan  marksmen,  concealed  in  the  ruins  of  some 
adjacent  houses.  This  was  not  to  be  endured.  It  is 
hard  to  believe  that,  whilst  his  men  were  being  shot  down 
before  his  eyes  by  hidden  marksmen,  the  military  chief 
could  have  needed  much  prompting  to  send  out  a  party 
for  the  capture  of  the  fort  that  so  commanded  our  posi- 
tion. But  it  was  only  on  the  urgent  representation  of 
the  Envoy  that  an  expedition  against  the  Ricka-bashee 
Fort  was  undertaken  at  last.  There  was  a  fine  manly 
spirit — there  were  some  good,  true  soldierly  qualities,  in 
Macnaghten ;  and  he  told  the  military  commander  that 
he  did  not  shrink  from  responsibility — that,  in  such  a  case 
as  this,  he  would  take  it  all  upon  himself,  but  that  at 
any  risk  the  fort  must  be  carried.  Reluctantly  the 
General  consented ;  and  a  force  under  Brigadier  Shelton, 
consisting  of  about  two  thousand  men  of  all  arms,  was 
ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness.*  The  force  assembled 
about  the  hour  of  noon.  The  Brigadier  was  making  his 
dispositions  for  the  attack,  when  it  again  occurred  to  the 
General  that  the  e^cpedition  was  a  dangerous  one  (as 
though  war  were  not  always  dangerous),  and  that  it  would 
be  more  prudent  to  abandon  it.  The  aide-de-camp  at  his 
elbow  asked  him  why,  if  such  were  his  opinions,  he  did 

•  Two  horse -artillery  gtins,  one  fkntry,  under   Major  Griffiths;    the 

mountain-train  gun,  Walker's  Horse,  6th  Regiment  of  Shah's  Force,  un- 

her  Majesty's  44th  Foot,  under  Co-  der  Captoin  Hopkins.— [i^yrc'a  Jour- 

lonel  Mackrell ;  the  37th  Native  In-  wa/.] 


ATTACK  ON  THE  RICKA-BASHEE  FOBT.  51 

not  countermand  it  at  once.  And  so  the  expedition  was 
countermanded ;  and  the  Brigadier  returned  ^'  disgusted 
with  such  vacillation."* 

The  troops  were  brought  back  within  the  cantonment 
walls;  and  the  Brigadier,  overflowing  with  indignation, 
laid  the  case  before  the  Envoy.  Macnaghten  was  as 
eager  as  Shelton  for  the  movement ;  and  the  scruples  of 
the  General  were  overruled.  But  time  had  now  been  lost. 
The  enemy's  position  had  been  strengthened.  The  spirit 
of  our  troops  had  been  damped — their  forwardness  had 
been  checked.  The  expedition  set  out  with  diminished 
chances  of  success ;  and  the  result  was  a  dubious  victory. 

The  Kicka-bashee  Fort  was  captured  on  that  10th  of 
November,  but  in  a  disastrous  and  calamitous  manner, 
which  made  the  victory  look  more  like  a  defeat.  It  was 
determined  to  blow  open  the  gate  with  powder-bags, 
and  Captain  Bellew,  the  Assistant  Quartermaster-Gene- 
ral, gallantly  volunteered  to  undertake  the  work  of  de- 
struction. But,  by  some  accident,  instead  of  blowing 
open  the  main  gate,  he  blew  open  a  small  wicket.  Two 
companies  of  European  and  four  companies  of  Native 
troops f  had  been  told  off  to  form  the  storming  party; 
and  Colonel  Mackrell,  of  the  44th,  was  ordered  to  conl- 
mand  it.  The  men,  gallantly  commanded,  advanced 
with  spirit  to  the  attack ;  but  they  could  with  difficulty 
make  their  way  through  the  narrow  aperture,  and  the 
enemy,  as  they  struggled  forward,  poured  upon  them  a 
hot  and  destructive  fire.     Colonel  Mackrell  and  Lieu- 

*  **  I  was  occupied/'  says  Brigadier  attack  it."  —  {Statement  of  Brigadier 

Shelton, '•in  telline  off  the  force  about  Shelton:  MS.  Records,']      Eyre  says 

10  A-M.,  when  I  heard  Elphinstone  that  the  force  assembled,  not  at  10, 

say  to  his  aide^e-camp,  « I  think  we  but  at  12  a.m.;  and  as  Brigadier  Shel- 

had  better  give  it  up.'    The  latter  ton's  statement  was  written  from  me- 

Fsplied,  *  Then  why  not  countermand  mory,  it  is  less  likely  to  be  correct  in 

it  at  once,' — which  was  done,  and  I  such  small  matters  as  these.  Ttie  point 

returned,  as  you  may  conceive,  dis-  is  of  little  consequence, 

gusted  with  such  vacillation.    About  t  H.M.'s  44th,  the  37th  N.I.,  and 

two  hours  after  he  again  consented  to  Shah  Soojah's  6th  Infantry. 

e2 


52  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

tenant  Bird*  forced  their  way,  with  a  few  soldiers,  into 
the  fort.  Captain  Westmacott  was  shot  down  outside 
the  aperture,  and  Captain  Macrae  sabred  in  the  en- 
trance.f  The  few  who  made  good  their  way  into  the 
interior  of  the  fort  struck  a  panic  into  the  garrison,  who, 
beUeving  that  the  whole  party  were  following  them,  fled 
in  dismay  out  of  the  opposite  gate.  But  the  storming 
party,  unhappily  at  this  time,  were  checked  by  a  charge 
of  A%han  horse.  The  cry  of  "  Cavalry  "J  seems  to 
have  paralysed  the  British  musketeers,  who  wavered, 
turned,  and  were  soon  in  disastrous  flight — Europeans 
and  Sepoys  together.  In  vain  their  officers  endeavoured 
to  urge  them  on  to  the  attack — in  vain  they  pleaded 
the  desperate  condition  of  those  who  had  already  en- 
tered, if  they  were  not  speedily  supported.  One  man — 
a  private  of  the  44th,  named  Stewart — alone  volunteered 
to  follow  them.  It  was  not  easy  to  rally  the  fugitives. 
Confusion  and  dismay  had  seized  them,  and  for  some 
time  they  were  deaf  to  every  appeal.  But  they  were  com- 
manded by  one  who  at  least  was  a  brave  soldier.  Brigadier 
Shelton  was  a  man  of  iron  nerves  and  dauntless  courage. 
Where  the  fire  was  the  hottest  he  stood  unshaken  by 
the  danger  that  assailed  him,  and  shamed  the  disordered 
crowd  of  men,  no  longer  soldiers.  The  example  of  the 
one-armed  veteran  did  more  than  his  exhortations.  The 
broken  bands  rallied,  re-formed,  and  advanced  to  the 
attack.  But  again  they  gave  way  to  the  Afghan  horse ; 
and  again  Shelton's  expostulations  and  example  brought 
the  waverers  back  to  their  duty.  The  heavy  guns 
from  the  cantonments  were  by  this  time  playing  upon 
the  Afghan  cavalry;  the  impetuosity  of  the  enemy  was 

*  Of  the  Shah*8  6tb  InfaDtry.  whose  muskets  and  bayonets  we  have 

f  Eyres  Journal  been  accustomed  to   consider  more 

j:  "  A  cry,"  says  Lieutenant  Eyre,  than  a  match  for  a  desultor}'  charge  of 

**  which  too  often  during  our  opera-  irregular  horsemen." 

tions  paralysed  the  arms   of  those 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  KICKA-BASUEE  FORT.  53 

thus  restrained,  and  Shelton  led  up  his  men  to  the  cap- 
ture of  the  fort. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  few  brave  men  who  had  made 
good  their  entrance  through  the  wicket  were  beset  by 
the  deadliest  peril.  Many  of  the  garrison,  discovering 
how  small  was  the  real  number  of  their  assailants,  had 
returned  with  new  courage  to  the  fort.  The  devoted 
Englishmen  had  endeavoured  to  secure  themselves  by 
shutting  the  gate  through  which  the  garrison  had  escaped, 
and  securing  the  chain  with  a  bayonet.  But  the  enemy 
had  removed  this  slender  obstacle,  and  rushed  in  upon 
the  little  storming  party.  Colonel  Mackrell  was  found 
fearfully  wounded  and  disfigured,  and  was  carried  into 
cantonments  to  die.  Lieutenant  Bird,  with  two  Sepoys 
of  the  37th  N.I.,  sought  refuge  in  a  stable,  which  they 
barricaded  and  defended  with  a  resolution  that  deserved 
and  secured  a  crown  of  success.  When  the  fort  was 
carried  by  the  British  troops  they  were  found,  with  ex- 
hausted ammunition,  but  alive  and  uninjured.  Thirty 
of  the  enemy  had  been  shot  down  by  the  gallant  three. 

On  the  fall  of  the  Ricka-bashee  Fort  some  small  adja- 
cent forts  were  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  and  a  quantity 
of  grain  fell  into  our  hands,  only  to  be  lost  again  for 
want  of  proper  measures  to  secure  it.  Before  the  day 
closed,  Shelton  had  threatened  the  enemy,  who  had 
collected  in  some  force  on  the  Seeah  Sungh  hills.  The 
Horse  Artillery  gims  opened  with  good  eflfect,  and  the 
enemy  retired  towards  the  city ;  but  no  attempt  seems 
to  have  been  made,  on  our  part,  to  bring  on  a  general 
action.  On  this  10th  of  November,  for  the  first  time, 
any  considerable  body  of  troops  was  brought  into  the 
field.  The  opportunity  of  making  a  decided  impression 
was  a  good  one ;  but  it  was  not  turned  to  good  account. 
The  whole  affair  was  mismanaged.  The  spirit  of  the 
troops  was  damped  at  the  outset  by  the  vacillation  of 


54         PBOGEESS  OP  THE  INSUBREOTION. 

the  Greneral.  A  grievous  error  was  committed  in  at- 
tempting, for  want  of  information  to  be  easily  obtained^ 
an  entrance  at  the  wrong  point,  into  the  Ricka-bashee 
Fort.  Then  the  force  sent  out  imder  Brigadier  Shelton 
was  lamentably  weak  in  the  moimted  branch,  although 
there  was  no  want  of  cavalry  in  cantonments.  Had  the 
infantry  been  supported  by  a  stronger  body  of  horse, 
they  would  have  had  more'confidence  in  themselves,  and 
suffered  less  severely  in  the  action.  A  strong  reserve, 
too,  should  have  been  held  in  readiness  for  employment 
in  the  event  of  the  party  meeting  with  any  check,  or 
requiring  any  support.  As  it  was,  when  the  Afghan 
horse  attacked  our  columns  and  threw  them  into  con- 
fusion, there  was  nothing  to  give  them  any  confidence 
but  the  gallantry  of  their  leaders. 

The  result,  however,  of  the  capture  of  the  forts, 
though  the  achievement  was  clouded  by  a  melancholy 
loss  of  life,  was  more  satisfactory  than  would  be  supposed 
from  such  a  recital  of  the  errors  that  attended  it.  The 
Envoy,  indeed,  subsequently  declared  that  it  averted  the 
necessity  of  a  disastrous  retreat.*  We  had  got  posses- 
sion of  some  positions  contiguous  to  the  cantonment,  the 
occupation  of  which  by  the  enemy  had  grievously  dis- 
tressed  our  force.  For  two  or  three  days  after  the  cap- 
ture the  A%hans  did  little  to  annoy  us.  The  Commis- 
sariat officers  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  add 
to  their  available  supplies  jf  and  whilst  they  were  en- 

•  (*  We  had  only  four  or  five  days*  by  the  attack,  on  the  10th  ult.,  of  a 
sopplies  for  the  cantonment,  llie  neighbouring  fort,  which  had  inter- 
Balm  Hissar  as  well  as  the  canton-  mediately  furnished  us  with  a  scanty 
metat  Was  in  a  state  of  siege.  We  supply  of  provisions,  but  which  sub- 
could  not  hope  for  provisions  from  sequently  espoused  the  cause  of  the 
thence,  nor  would  the  place  have  af-  rebels.'* — lUr^finished  Report  of  Sir 
forded  us  either  food  or  shelter,  and,  W.  H,  Macnaghten,  MS,  Records.'} 
in  the  opinion  of  the  military  autho-  f  *'  November  llth,  —  About  six 
rities,  to  return  thither  would  have  hundred  maunds  of  wheat,  found  in 
been  attended  with  ruin.  A  disas-  one  of  the  forts  yesterday,  captured 
trous  retreat  seemed  the  only  alter-  and  brought  into  cantonments.  No- 
native,  but  this  necessity  was  averted  vember  I2ih, — Busily  employed  pur- 


INTRIGUES  WITH  THE  CHIBFS.  55 

deavouring  to  buy  grain,  the  Envoy  was  doing  his  best 
to  buy  the  enemy.  The  negotiations  with  the  Ghil23re8, 
which  had  been  broken  off,  were  resumed ;  and  every 
possible  effort  was  made  to  win  over  the  chiefi  to  our 
cause,  or  to  sow  dissension  among  them.  In  all  these 
operations  he  employed  the  agency  of  Mohun  Lal»  The 
hasty  letters  written  to  this  individual  best  imfold  the 
nature  of  these  transactions.  On  the  11th  of  November 
he  thus  addressed  the  Moonshee:  "You  will  observe 
from  the  enclosed  letters  that  I  have  confirmed  the  pro- 
mises made  by  you  to  the  Ghilzye  rebels;  though  had 
you  known  of  our  successes  yesterday,  the  terms  might 
have  been  more  favorable  for  us.  Humza  Ehan  shotdd 
come  to  me  as  soon  as  possible,  and  I  will  then  talk  to 
him  about  the  case  of  Gool  Mahomed.  The  money 
could  not  be  paid  imtU  the  conditions  of  the  agreement 
are  fulfilled,  and  we  are  perfectly  certain  of  the  fidelity 
of  Hum^a  and  the  chiefs.  The  chiefs  should  go  at  once 
and  pay  their  respects  to  his  Majesty.  You  should  en- 
courage the  rival  of  Ameen-ooUdi  Ehan  by  all  possible 
means.  That  scoimdrel  and  Abdoollah  E[han  should  be 
executed,  if  we  could  catch  them."* 

And  again,  writing  two  days  afterwards,  he  said: 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  this  morning's  date, 
and  highly  approve  of  all  you  have  done.  Let  GiDlam 
Hussan  and  Abdool-Ruheem  Ehan  undertake  to  come 
to  the  Zoolfikar  Fort  this  morning,  and  Captain  Tre- 
vor will  be  ready  there  to  receive  them.  Captain 
Trevor  wiU  be  in  that  fort,  night  and  day,  for  some 
time,  to  receive  overtures  from  any  person;  and  parties 
coming  in  should  send  a  single  messenger  before  them. 
Ehan  Shereen  Ehan  is  quite  right   not  to  leave  the 

cfaasine  provisions.    The  fight  of  the  [Captain   Johnsons   Journal.     MS, 

10th   had  a  good   effect    in  giving  Records."] 

the    viUagera    some    confidence    in  *  Unpublished   Correspondence   of 

bringiDg   their    stores   for    Kde.**— *  Sir  W.  H,  Macnaghten. 


56  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

Chundawul  for  a  day  or  two.  Tell  Naib  Sheriff  he 
may  safely  go  security  to  the  Ghilzyes  for  the  pay- 
ment of  the  money.  When  I  see  Humza  Khan  I  will 
talk  to  him  about  the  best  plan  for  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  to 
wait  on  his  Majesty.  You  are  aware  that  I  would  give 
a  reward  of  10,000  rupees  for  the  apprehension  of 
Ameen-oollah  Khan  and  such  of  the  Douranee  rebel 
chiefs.  If  you  could  see  some  of  the  officers  of  the 
Hazirbash  corps  that  is  just  come  in  with  Mahomed 
Azeem  Elhan,  and  give  them  encouragement,  it  would 
be  very  desirable."* 

If  there  had  been  any  hope  of  rescuing  our  force  from 
destruction  by  honest  fighting  in  the  field,  the  Envoy 
would  not  have  resorted  to  such  shifts  as  are  indicated 
in  these  letters.  But  he  had  unhappily  discovered  that 
the  military  commanders  had  abandoned  all  hope  of 
beating  the  enemy,  and  were  thinking  of  making  their 
way  out  of  the  thicket  of  danger  that  encompassed  them 
by  a  path  less  honourable  and  less  secure.  Anxious 
above  all  things  to  escape  the  disgrace  of  an  open  capi- 
tulation, which  would  have  humiliated  us  in  the  eyes  of 
all  the  nations  of  the  East,  the  Envoy  exerted  all  his 
diplomatic  skill  to  create  disunion  among  our  principal 
enemies — to  buy  off  those  whose  cupidity  was  stronger 
than  their  hatred — and  to  offer  a  reward  for  the  seizure 
of  others. 

All  this  was  at  least  within  the  range  of  orthodox 
diplomacy.  But  in  the  mean  while  that  other,  darker 
agency,  of  which  I  reluctantly  spoke  at  the  close  of  my 
last  chapter,  was  being  brought  into  operation.  On  the 
11th  of  November,  John  Conolly  again  wrote  to  Mohun 
Lai :  "  Why  do  you  not  write  ?  What  has  become  of 
Meer  Hyder?  Is  he  doing  anything  with  Khan  Shereen? 

♦  UnpubUahed  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  H,  Macnaghten, 


HEAD-MONEY.  57 

You  never  told  me  whether  you  had  written  to  Naib 
Humza«  What  do  the  rebels  propose  doing  now  ?  Have 
you  not  made  any  arrangements  about  the  bodies  of 
the  murdered  officers?  Offer  2000  rupees  to  any  one 
who  will  take  them  to  cantonments,  or  1000  to  any  one 
who  will  bury  them.  Has  not  Sir  Alexander's  body 
been  found  ?  Give  my  salaam  to  the  Naib.  If  Khan 
Shereen  is  not  incUned  to  do  service,  try  other  Kuzzil- 
bash  chiefe  independently.  Exert  yourself.  Write  to 
me  oflen,  for  the  news  of  Kossids  is  not  to  be  depended 
on.  There  is  a  man  called  Hadjee  Ali,  who  might  be 
ioduced  by  a  bribe  to  try  and  bring  in  the  heads  of 
one  or  two  of  the  Mufsids.  Endeavour  to  let  him 
know  that  10,000  rupees  will  be  given  for  each  head, 
or  even  15,000  rupees.  I  have  sent  to  him  two  or 
three  times." 

Mohun  Lai,  having  by  this  time  disencumbered  him- 
self of  some  of  his  misgivings  on  the  score  of  his  own 
personal  safety,  seems  to  have  set  about  the  work  en- 
trusted to  him  with  a  zeal  that  must  have  satisfied  his 
employers.  Hadjee  Ali,  and  another  man  named  Aga 
Mahomed  Soudah,  were  the  agents  to  whom  he  first 
offered  the  price  of  the  blood  of  their  unhappy  coun- 
trymen. But  the  Moonshee,  perplexed  by  doubts  rather 
than  burdened  with  scruples,  did  not  see  very  clearly  at 
first  how  the  chiefs  were  to  be  taken  off;  so  he  wrote 
to  the  Envoy  that  "he  could  not  find  out  by  Lieu- 
tenant ConoUy's  notes  how  the  rebels  are  to  be  assassi- 
nated, but  the  men  now  employed  promise  to  go  into 
their  houses  and  cut  off  their  heads  when  they  may  be 
without  attendants."^ 

The  victims  said  to  have  been  first  marked  for  the 
assassin's  knife  were  Abdoollah  Khan  and  Meer  Musjedee. 

•  Correspondence  of  Mohun  ImI,  quoted  in  the  Calcutta  Review. 


58         PBOQBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

They  were  known  to  have  been  the  movers  of  the  attack 
on  Barnes's  house ;  and  were  regarded,  therefore,  as  the 
murderers  of  the  ofEicers  who  were  massacred  there  on 
the  morning  of  the  outbreak.  They  were  known,  too, 
as  the  boldest  and  most  unscrupulous  of  the  insurgent 
chiefe.  It  seemed,  therefore,  an  act  alike  of  retribution 
and  expediency  to  strike  them  down  in  the  full  flush 
of  success — ^in  the  hey-day  of  their  sanguinary  career. 
There  is  no  need  in  this  chapter  to  endeavour  to  pene- 
trate the  mist  of  painful  obscurity  that  envelopes  the 
disappearance  of  the  two  chiefs.  It  will  be  time  to 
discuss  the  subject  when  I  come  to  record  their  deaths. 


THE  ENEMT  ON  THE  HILLS.  59 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[Noveinbei^-1841 .] 

Actbn  on  the  Beh-meru  Hillfl — The  last  of  our  Successes — Looked-for 
Adyent  of  Salens  Brigade — Arrival  of  Pottinger  and  Hauehton — The 
Si^e  of  Charekur — Destruction  of  the  Goorkha  ReffimeDt— Withdrawal 
of  Sde  to  Jellalabad— Question  of  Concentration  in  tne  Balla  Hissar. 

On  the  13th  of  November  the  enemy  occupied,  in  great 
strength,  the  Beh-meru  hills.  They  had  planted  two 
guns  in  a  commanding  position,  and  were  cannonading 
the  British  cantonment.  It  was  at  once  apparent  to  the 
Envoy  that  to  leave  them  unmolested  to  fire  into  our 
works  would  be  miserably  to  confess  our  own  weakness, 
and  to  encourage  the  enemy  in  the  continuance  of  a  course 
of  aggression  which  might  end  in  the  loss  of  our  post. 
But  it  was  difficult  to  persuade  the  miUtary  authorities 
to  fiend  out  a  force  to  dislodge  them.  Captain  Lawrence 
was  despatched,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  General; 
but  the  message  he  bore  was  coldly  received,  and  he  re- 
turned discouraged  to  the  Envoy,  with  a  recommenda- 
tion that  he  should  prefer  his  request  in  person.  Mac- 
naghten  went.  But  the  miUtary  chiefs  were  in  no  mood 
to  listen  to  his  counsel.  The  pUant  General  would  soon 
have  yielded ;  but  the  more  dogmatic  and  self-confident 
Brigadier  was  ready  with  a  host  of  objections,  and  a 


60         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

great  array  of  difficulties,  to  overwhelm  the  arguments 
of  the  Envoy.  Macnaghten,  however,  was  peremptory. 
The  guns,  he  said,  must  be  taken  at  all  risks,  and  at  once, 
or  the  loss  of  cantonments  to-morrow  might  be  the  result 
of  our  supineness  to-day.  There  was  again  a  talk  of  re- 
sponsibility. The  Envoy  took  the  responsibility  on  him- 
self, and  a  strong  detachment,  with  two  guns,  under 
Brigadier  Shelton,*  was  ordered  out  for  service.  But 
much  time  had  been  lost  in  these  idle  discussions.  It 
was  nearly  four  o'clock  before  the  troops  were  ready  to 
take  the  field.  They  moved  out  in  three  columns,  and 
taking  diflferent  directions,  pushed  forward  with  a  spirit 
and  a  rapidity  worthy  of  British  troops,  to  the  foot  of 
the  hill.  One,  the  most  serviceable  of  the  two  guns  that 
had  been  sent  out  under  Lieutenant  Eyre,  unfortunately 
stuck  fast,  for  some  time,  in  a  canal.  But  the  advanced 
body  of  the  infantry,  under  the  GeneraPs  aide-de- 
camp. Major  Thain,  were  eager  to  move  forward  before 
the  guns,  thus  delayed,  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
the  enemy's  position.  Only  one  round  of  grape  had  been 
fired  when  they  closed  with  the  enemy.  It  would  have 
been  well  had  the  insurgents  been  compelled  to  listen 
more  to  that  argument  which  takes  no  denial ;  for  the 
musketry  fire  of  our  detachment,  though  poured  in  at  a 
distance  of  only  ten  yards,  scarcely  took  effect  upon  the 
insurgents.  The  men  took  no  aim — fired  wildly — any- 
where but  in  the  right  direction.  Emboldened  by  impu- 
nity, the  A%han  cavalry  charged  down  upon  the  British 
bayonets  with  irresistible  force.    No  dispositions  were 

*  It  consisted  of  two  squadrons  the  37th  Native  Infantry,  under  Ma- 
of  the  5th  Light  Cavalry,  under  jor  Griffiths ;  four  companies  of  the 
Colonel  Chambers ;  one  squadron  of  Shah's  6th  Infantry,  under  Captain 
Shah  Soojah's  2nd  Irregular  Horse,  Hopkins ;  one  horse  artillery  and 
under  Lieutenant  Le  Geyt ;  one  one  mountain-train  gun,  under  Lieu- 
troop  of  Skinner's  Horse,  under  tenant  Eyre,  escorted  by  a  company 
LieutenantWalker;  the  Body  Guard;  of  the  Shah's  6th  Regiment,  under 
six  companies  of  her  Majesty^s  44th,  Captain  Marshall. 
under  Major  Scott ;  six  companies  of 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  EKEMY'S  GUNS.  61 

made  to  receive  them.  For  a  while  all  was  panic  and 
confusion.  Friend  and  foe  were  mixed  up  together,  as 
the  column  gave  way,  and  the  horsemen  charged  through 
and  through  our  ranks  until  the  rout  was  complete.* 
It  was  only  a  temporary  check.  The  British  troops  re- 
treated down  the  slope ;  but  rallied,  re-formed  behind 
the  reserve  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and,  under  cover 
of  the  guns  which  Eyre  was  now  working  with  good 
effect,  advanced  again  to  the  attack.  Anderson's  Horse 
now  came  into  action,  and  making  a  gallant  charge, 
drove  the  enemy  up  the  ascent.  The  infantry  followed, 
and  carried  the  height,  whilst  the  enemy,  escaping 
along  the  ridge,  abandoned  their  guns  to  the  victors. 

Night  was  now  closing  in  upon  the  scene.  The  de- 
tachment had  been  sent  out  to  capture  the  enemy's  guns. 
The  guns  were  in  our  possession;  but  it  would  have 
been  the  mere  shadow  of  a  victory  if  they  had  not  been 
carried  off.  The  Envoy,  who  had  watched  the  struggle 
with  painM  anxiety,  despatched  a  message  of  earnest 
entreaty  that  no  effort  should  be  spared  "  to  complete 
the  triumph  of  the  day,"f  by  bringing  both  the  guns 
into  cantonments.  One  of  the  deserted  guns  was  easily 
removed  by  a  party  of  the  Shah's  6th  Infantry ;  but  some 
Afghan  marksmen  were  pouring  in  so  warm  a  fire  upon 
the  other  and  larger  piece,  that  the  British  soldier — all  his 
character  reversed — seeing  the  danger  and  not  the  honour 
of  the  exploit,  shrunk  from  the  perilous  service,  and  re- 
fused to  advance  for  the  capture  of  the  gun.^     It  was 

♦  "  My  ▼ery  heart,"  said  Lady  to  descend  with  him  to  drag  the  six- 
Sale,  "  felt  as  if  it  leapt  to  my  teetn  pounder  away,  but,  strange  to  say, 
when  I  saw  the  Afghans  ride  clean  nis  frequent  appeals  to  their  soldierly 
throng  them.  The  onset  was  fear-  feelings  were  made  in  yain ;  with  a 
fuL  They  looked  like  a  great  clus-  few  g^ant  exceptions,  they  remained 
tcr  of  bees,  but  we  beat  them  and  immoveable,  nor  could  the  Sepoys  be 
droye  them  up  again."  induced  to  lead  the  way  where  their 
t  Burets  Journal,  European  brethren  so  obstinately 
X  •*  Major  Scott,  of  her  Majesty's  hung  back."— [£yre'«  JoumaQ 
44th^  repeatedly  ralle<l  on  his  men 


62         PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 

nearly  dark.  The  further  detention  of  the  force  would 
have  been  attended  with  serious  risk.  Eyre,  therefore, 
spiked  the  gun,  which  it  seemed  impossible  to  carry  ofl^ 
and  then  secured  the  capture  of  the  other.  The  six- 
pounder  was  rolled  down  the  hill;  the  four-pounder  was 
carried  into  cantonments. 

It  was  eight  o'clock  before  Shelton's  force  returned  to 
cantonments.  The  enemy  intercepted  their  movements, 
and  threatened  the  cantonment,  but  the  attack  was  re- 
pulsed by  a  few  rounds  of  grape,  and  a  brisk  fire  fi'om 
Mackenzie's  jezailchees.  Many,  on  both  sides,  had 
fallen  during  the  action  of  the  afternoon.  Major  Thain 
and  Captain  Paton  were  severely  wounded.  All  night, 
firom  the  hill-side,  came  loud  lamentations — the  wailings 
of  the  relatives  of  the  A%hans  who  had  fallen  in  the  fight. 
Lights  were  flitting  about  in  every  direction ;  for  they 
were  burjdng  the  dead.  On  the  following  day  they  were 
busy  with  the  same  melancholy  work. 

This  affair  of  the  13th  of  November  was  set  down  as 
a  success;  and  it  was  wise  to  make  the  most  of  it.  It 
was  the  last  success  even  of  a  doubtftil  and  equivocal 
character  which  the  unhappy  force  was  destined  to 
achieve.  "Henceforward,"  wrote  one  who  has  chro- 
nicled with  no  common  fidelity  the  events  of  these 
miserable  months,*  "  it  becomes  my  weary  task  to  relate 
a  catalogue  of  errors,  disasters,  and  difiiculties,  which, 
following  close  upon  each  other,  disgusted  our  officers, 
disheartened  our  soldiers,  and  finally  sunk  us  all  into 
irretrievable  ruin,  as  though  Heaven  it$e]ifj  by  a  combi- 
nation of  evil  circumstances,  for  its  own  inscrutable  pur- 
poseei,  had  planned  our  downfal." 

For  some  days  the  enemy  remained  comparatively  in- 
active. Occasional  threatenings  kept  the  garrison  on 
the  alert;  but  little  was  done  to  change  the  posture  of 

*  Lieutenant  Eyre, 


LETTERS  TO  MACGREGOR.  63 

aflfairs.  The  Envoy,  still  looking  for  the  return  of  Sale's 
brigade,  continued  to  write  urgent  letters  to  Captain 
M^cgr^or.     On  the  12th,  he  had  written: 

Gaubul,  Noyember  12th,  1841. 

Mr  DEAB  Macgregob^ 

Ibraham  Khan  has  just  come  in  with  your  note  No.  8.  I 
liaye  written  to  you  four  times,  requesting  that  you  would  come 
up  with  Sale's  brigade  as  soon  as  possible.  We  are  still  in  a  very 
bad  way,  though  not  quite  so  badly  off  as  we  were  four  days  ago. 
Our  force  is  so  small  that  we  cannot  act  on  the  offensive,  and 
we  have  not  above  a  fortnight's  suppHes.  We  have  lost  a  great 
many  officers.  I  fear  the  Ghoorka  regiment  is  annihilated ;  and 
as  we  are  in  a  state  of  siege,  we  can  learn  nothing  of  what  is  going 
on  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  Khoda  Buksh,  Mohamed  Shah, 
and  some  other  Ghilzyes  are  here,  and  we  thrashed  them  yester- 
day. I  am  trying,  through  Humza,  to  enter  into  some  arrange* 
mento  with  the  Mufsida,  As  the  Ghilzyes  are  occupied  here,  I 
should  think  you  would  not  meet  with  much  opposition,  except, 
perhaps,  in  the  Khoord  Caubul  Pass. 

W.  H,  Macnaghten. 

Again,  on  the  14th,  he  wrote — and  it  is  plain  from 
this  letter  that  he  thought  the  action  of  the  preceding 
day  had  in  nowise  improved  their  condition  : 

November  14th,  1841. 

Mt  dear  Macgregor, 

I  have  just  received  your  note  of  the  lOth.  Dozens  of 
letters  have  been  written  from  this,  urging  your  immediate  return 
with  Sale's  brigade  to  Caubul;  and  if  you  have  not  started  by  the 
time  you  receive  this,  I  earnestly  beg  that  you  will  do  so  imme- 
diately. Our  situation  is  a  very  precarious  one;  but  with  your 
assistance  we  should  all  do  well,  and  you  must  render  it  to  us  if 
you  have  any  regard  for  our  Hves  or  for  the  honour  of  our  country. 
We  may  be  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  siege;  and  had  we  not  made 
two  desperate  sallies,  we  should  ere  now  have  been  annihilated. 
We  have  provisions  for  only  ten  days ;  but  when  you  arrive  we 
shall  be  able  to  command  the  resources  of  the  country.    In  our 


64  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

action  of  yesterday  Thain  and  Paton  were  wounded,  the  latter  so 
severely  that  his  arm  has  been  amputated.  I  have  still  some  hope 
of  the  Charekur  detachment,  but  a  faint  one.  I  have  no  news 
from  Ghuzni  or  Candahar.  In  the  interior  of  the  country  they 
seem  to  be  asjoffhee  as  at  the  capital.  Mehtur  Moosa  joined  the 
rebels  yesterday.  We  have  been  unmolested  to-day,  but  it  may 
be  only  the  luU  before  the  storm.  Humza  Khan  has  promised  to 
call  on  me  this  evening.  I  have  no  idea  that  he  will  do  so.  I 
intend  to  make  much  of  him.  I  have  written  to  you  several 
letters  of  late,  so  shall  say  no  more  for  the  present.  The  Ghilzye 
force  being  here,  I  should  conceive  you  will  experience  no  opposi- 
tion on  the  road. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

The  hopes  expressed  for  the  safety  of  the  Charekur 
detachment  were  dissipated  on  the  following  day.  On 
the  15th  of  November,  Major  Pottinger  and  Lieutenant 
Haughton  came  in  wounded  from  Charekur,  and  reported 
that  the  Goorkha  regiment  had  been  cut  to  pieces. 
They  had  held  out  for  some  time  with  noble  resolution 
— but  their  position  was  untenable  for  want  of  water — 
the  horrors  of  unappeasable  thirst  had  overcome  them 
— they  had  been  compelled  to  abandon  their  post — had 
attempted  to  make  good  their  retreat  to  Caubul — and 
had  perished  by  the  way. 

The  story  which  Pottinger  told  must  be  briefly  re- 
lated. Before  the  end  of  October  the  Kohistanees  and 
Nijrowees  were  in  open  revolt ;  and  on  the  1st  of  No- 
vember, Meer  Musjedee,  with  a  strong  insurgent  force, 
moved  across  the  plain  of  the  Barakab  and  took  up  a 
position  at  Akserai,  completely  cutting  off  the  commu- 
nication between  Charekur  and  Caubul.*  Pottinger 
and  Codrington  now  took  counsel  together.     The  former, 

*  ^*  This  step  they  ventured  on  in  plain,  in  no  place  twenty  miles  from 

consequence  of  our  want  of  cavalry,  our  own  post,  and  in  some  parts  of  the 

which    prevented   us   from   having  latter  half  approaching  within  eight 

patrols,   and    encouraged   them    to  miles." — [Major  Pottinger^s  BudeeO" 

march  above  forty  miles  across  a  level  had  Report :  SfS,  JlecordsJ] 


RISINGS  IN  THE  KOIHSTAN.  65 

as  Political  Agent  on  the  Toorkistan  frontier,  resided  in 
the  castie  of  Lughmanee,  about  two  miles  distant  from 
Charekur,  where  the  Goorkha  regiment  was  planted  in 
some  fortified  barracks,  the  defences  of  which  were  still 
in  course  of  construction.  Codrington,  who  commanded 
the  r^ment,  was,  at  the  dawn  of  November,  with  Pot- 
tinger  in  the  Lughmanee  castie.  Their  position  was  one 
of  great  difficulty.  They  sent  out  reconnoitring  par- 
ties to  obtain  intelligence  of  the  precise  position  of  the 
enemy;  but,  encumbered  as  they  were  with  women  and 
children,  and  almost  wholly  without  carriage,  it  seemed 
impossible  that  the  Goorkha  regiment  could  be  moved 
out  of  Charekur.  Pottinger  wrote  to  the  Envoy  for 
troops,  called  upon  all  the  friendly  chiefs  to  aid  him, 
and  began  to  strengthen  his  position.  But  it  was  soon 
apparent  that  no  help  could  come  from  Caubul,  and  that 
the  friends  on  whom  he  relied  were,  in  fact,  disguised 
enemies.  Many  Kohistanee  and  Nijrowee  chiefs  visited 
him  on  the  two  first  days  of  November.  Loud  in  their 
expressions  of  friendship,  they  declared  their  willingness 
to  co-operate  with  him  for  the  suppression  of  the  insur- 
rection ;  but  when  he  called  upon  them  to  attack  the 
castles  of  the  chiefs  who  had  gone  out  to  join  the  army 
of  Meer  Musjedee,  it  at  once  became  apparent  that  they 
lied.  The  suspicions  of  Pottinger  were  aroused.  The 
"  fiiends"  around  him  were  assembling  in  such  numbers 
as  to  form  an  army  of  their  own ;  and  Pottinger,  deter- 
mined as  he  was  to  betray  neither  suspicion  nor  alarm, 
could  not  help  feeling  that  a  sudden  attack  was  by  no 
means  an  improbable  event  to  proceed  out  of  all  these 
armed  gatherings. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3rd,  the  numbers  of  armed  men 
around  the  Residency  had  increased.  The  reconnoitring 
parties  had  not  returned.  The  chiefs  were  asking  for 
presents,  but  refiising  to  do  the  service  required  of  them. 

VOL.  II.  P 


66         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

Eveiything  seemed  enveloped  in  an  atmosphere  of  doubt 
and  suspicion ;  and  Pottinger,  as  he  received  the  chiefs, 
who  came  pressing  in  with  offers  of  friendship,  could  not 
help  feeling  that  a  struggle  was  at  hand. 

Before  noon,  he  received  sevqral  of  the  more  powerful 
chiefs  at  the  Residency,  and  at  noon  went  out  to  meet 
the  petty  Sirdars,  who  were  clustering  in  the  garden 
around  his  house.  With  characteristic  A%han  cupidity, 
they  assailed  him  with  questions  respecting  the  amount  of 
the  rewards  that  would  be  paid  for  their  services.  Pot- 
tinger entered  mto  some  explanations,  which  the  fore- 
most  of  the  party  seemed  disposed  to  consider  satisfac- 
tory; but,  expressing  some  doubts  as  to  whether  their 
clansmen  would  be  satisfied,  they  requested  that  the 
nature  of  the  overtures  might  be  made  known  to  those 
who  were  removed  from  the  circle  around  the  British 
Agent.  Lieutenant  Rattray,  the  Political  Assistant,  had 
just  joined  Pottinger  in  the  garden.  He  was  now  re- 
quested to  explain  the  matter  to  the  rest,  who  were 
standing  a  little  way  apart.  Accompanied  by  the  prin- 
cipal chiefs,  Rattray  proceeded  to  the  place  where  they 
were  assembled,  and,  after  some  conversation,  they  quitted 
the  garden,  and  repaired  to  "  an  adjoining  stubble-field, 
where  several  parties  of  armed  men  were  standing." 

It  was  not  long  before  Rattray  became  aware  that 
treachery  was  brewing.  He  turned  to  leave  the  field, 
and  was  immediately  shot  down.  Pottinger  was  still 
sitting  in  conversation  with  some  of  the  chiefs,  when  a 
man  attached  to  the  Hazerbash  regiment  ran  up,  and  by 
hints,  rather  than  by  intelligible  words,  apprised  him  of 
the  danger  that  surrounded  him.  The  sound  of  firing 
confirmed  the  ominous  intelligence.  The  chiefs  rose  and 
fled.  Pottinger  escaped  into  the  castle,  and  from  the 
terre-pleine  of  the  rampart  looked  down,  and  saw  Rat- 
tray lying  badly  wounded  on  the  ground,  and  "  the  recent 


INVESTMENT  OF  LUGHMANEE.  67 

tenderers  of  service  making  off  in  all  directions  with  the 
plunder  of  the  Hazerbash  camp."* 

Rattray  was  soon  despatched.  A  party  of  the  enemy, 
crossing  the  plain  and  seeing  the  wounded  officer  at  their 
mercy,  fired  their  pieces  into  his  head  and  body.  They 
then  invested  Pottinger's  position,  firing  upon  him  from 
the  shelter  of  the  numerous  water-courses  and  walls. 
But  assistance  was  now  at  hand.  Lieutenant  Haughton, 
the  adjutant  of  the  Goorkha  corps,  was  moving  down 
fix)m  Charekur.  As  soon  as  he  appeared  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  garden.  Captain  Codrington  made  a  sortie,  and 
united  himself  with  the  relieving  force.  The  enemy 
were  driven  out  of  the  garden  with  severe  loss.  Evening 
was  by  this  time  closing  in.  TTie  enemy  had  got  posses- 
sion of  the  Charekur  road,  and  before  any  measures  of 
future  defence  could  be  concerted  between  the  two 
officers,  Codrington  was  obliged,  after  leaving  some  de- 
tails with  Pottinger,  to  move  off  his  Goorkhas  to  his  own 
fortified  barracks.  On  the  following  day,  with  four  com- 
panies of  Goorkhas,  and  a  six-pounder  gun,  Codring- 
ton moved  down  from  Charekur,  to  relieve  Pottinger's 
guard,  and  to  supply  his  little  garrison  with  ammunition. 
Owing  mainly,  however,  to  the  impetuosity  of  a  company 
of  young  soldierSjf  the  colunm  met  with  a  check,  and 

•  Major  PoUinger^s  Badeeahad  Re-  from  the  main  body,  and  followed 

port,  them  up  with  a  boldness  which  oblipjed 

t  **  When  the  party  got  in  motion  Mr.  Salisbury  to  make  frequent  halts. 

the  enemy  retreated  on  all  sides.  One  In  consequence,  Mr.  Haughton  was 

▼ery  Iv^,  l>ody,  however,  remained  obliged  to  halt  the  convoy,  and  detach 

in  a  pontion  on  the  mountain  side,  the  greater  part  of  his  men,  to  extri- 

threat«iing  the  flank  of  the  column,  cate  the  compromised  company.  This 

Ensign  Si^sbory  was  detached  with  halt  encouraged  the  oUier  parties  of 

a  company  to    remove    this.     The  the  enemy,  who  had  retired,  and  they 

enemy  retreated  as  they  advanced,  closed  in  from  all  sides  in  most  for- 

•nd  the  Goorkhas  being  youns  sol-  midable  array  (apparently  not  less 

dien,  having  once  got  heate^  fol-  than  4000    men).     Air.  Haughton, 

lowed  with  great  eagerness,  despite  however,  maintained  his  ground  till 

the  frequentff -sounded   recall;  and  joined  by  Mr.  Salisbury,  when,  seeing 

on  their  finally  stopping,  the  enemy  the  hopelessness  of  making  good  his 

perceived  they  were  too  far  separated  way,  he  retreated    and  gained  the 

f2 


68  PBOGEESS  OP  THE  INSURBECTION. 

was  compelled  to  fall  back  on  Charekur.  Ensign  Salis- 
bury was  mortally  wounded,  and  many  men  of  the 
Goorkha  regiment  fell  on  the  retreat. 

Seeing  little  prospect  now  of  being  relieved,  and  find- 
ing his  ammunition  reduced  to  a  few  rounds  in  the 
pouches  of  his  men,  Pottinger  determined,  after  nightfall, 
to  attempt  a  retreat  on  Charekur.  Disguising  his  inten- 
tions by  collecting  grain  during  the  day,  as  for  a  pro- 
tracted defence,  he  eluded  the  vigilance  of  the  enemy, 
and  disencumbering  himself  of  his  Afghan  followers,  and 
all  whose  fidelity  there  was  any  reason  to  suspect,  he 
mustered  the  Hindostanees  outside  the  postern,  upon  the 
pretext  of  making  a  sortie  upon  the  enemy,  and  then 
marched  for  the  barracks.  Avoiding  the  main  road,  and 
skirting  the  edge  of  the  mountain,  the  little  party,  under 
cover  of  the  night,  made  good  its  retreat,  and  united 
itself  with  the  main  body  of  the  Goorkha  regiment  at 
Charekur.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  November  the  enemy 
assembled,  in  large  bodies,  around  the  fortified  barracks ; 
and,  after  attacking  the  outposts,  closely  invested  the 
place.   Codrington  commanded  the  regiment.   Pottinger, 

barracks  in  safety.    A  great  number  treasure,  contuning  10,000  rupees, 

of  men  fell  in  the  retreat,  as  they  were  and  about    sixty  Afghan    firelocks 

obliged  frequently  to  hdt,  formed  in  (confiscated  from  the  deserters  of  the 

close    order  to  resist   the  enemy's  Kohistan  corp),  all  my  office  records, 

cavalry,  which,  being  closdy  on  them,  Mr.  Rattray  s.  Dr.  Grant*s,  and  my 

was  only  kept  in  cneck  by  the  gal-  own  personal  property,  and  a  very 

lantry  of  Mr.  Haughton,  who,  with  large  number  of  horses  belonging  to 

a  few  men  and  the  gun,  remained  in  ourselves  and  the  horsemen  who  had 

the  rear,  and  covered  the  retreat  of  not  deserted.     The    Heratees    and 

the  disheartened  party.     Mr.  Salis-  seven  or  eight  Peshawerees  were  the 

bury  was  mortally  wounded,  and  the  only  A^hans  who  adhered  to  me. 

trail  of  the  field-^un  gave  way  at  the  All  the  Cauboolees  deserted,  and  one 

elevating-screw  just  as  they  reached  principal  cause  of  so  immediate  a 

support/' — [Pottinger' 8  Report:  MS.  termination  to  my  defence  may  be 

Becords,"]  traced  to  the  reduction  of  a  portion 

*  "In  the  castle  of  Luffhmanee,"  of  my  escort,  which  had  so  disgusted 

writes  Pottinger,  in  his  official  report,  the  men  who  remained,  that  they  de- 

*'we  abandoned  the  hostages  from  serted  as  soon  as  Mr.  Rattray  was 

the  Kohistan  chiefs,  two  boxes  of  killed." — [MS,  RecordsJ] 


INVESTMENT  OF  CHAREKUK.  69 

divesting  himself  of  his  political  character,  became  the 
artillery  officer  again,  and  took  charge  of  the  guns. 
Moving  out  with  a  field-piece  to  support  the  skir- 
mishers, he  was  wounded  by  a  musket-shot  in  the  leg. 
But  there  was  too  much  work  in  hand  for  one  of  his 
temper  to  think  much  of  such  an  accident  as  this.  The 
enemy  were  pressing  fiercely  on.  Codrington  and  his 
Groorkhas  were  confined  to  the  barracks  and  a  few  mud 
huts  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood.  They  stood 
their  ground  manfully  and  well.  But  the  hostile  mul- 
titude poured  Uke  a  torrent  upon  the  little  band  of 
devoted  men.*  The  Goorkhas  were  driven  from  the 
huts.  They  saw  their  gallant  commander  fall  mortally 
wounded;  but  they  returned  undaunted  to  the  attack. 
Haughton,  the  adjutant,  was  now  at  their  head.  He 
led  the  men  gallantly  to  the  charge,  and  drove  back  the 
enemy  beyond  the  gardens  they  had  occupied  in  the 
morning.  Again  and  again  the  Afghans  returned  to  the 
attack.  But  the  Uttle  body  of  Goorkhas,  with  heroic 
courage,  held  their  ground  till  night  put  an  end  to  the 
conflict. 

At  a  distance  of  some  three  hundred  yards  fi'om  the 
barracks  there  was  a  castle,  the  towers  of  which  so 
effectually  commanded  them,  that  it  was  necessary  to 
occupy  the  post  with  a  garrison  of  fifty  men.  But  it 
was  not  very  easy  to  retain  it.  The  enemy  increased 
greatly  in  numbers  on  the  6th ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  suc- 
cessful sorties  of  the  Goorkhas,  drove  back  their  out- 
posts, and  confined  them  within  the  narrow  Umits  of 
their  barracks.  On  the  following  day,  the  castle  gar- 
rison, betrayed  by  the  regimental  Moonshee,  were  in- 


*  Havildar  Mootee  Bam,  of  the  their  position  by  saying,  '*  there  were 

Goorkha  regiment,  who  ^ve  a  de-  whole  heegdhs  (acres)  of  gleaming 

tailed  account    of  the    defence    of  swords  moving  towards  us.*' 
Charekur,  described  this  attack  on 


70  PEOGRESS  OF  THE  INSUBRECTION. 

duced  to  surrender.  The  enemy  took  possession  of  the 
place,  and  from  its  commanding  towers  poured  in  a 
galling  fire  on  the  Groorkhas  in  the  barracks.  The  posi- 
tion of  the  little  garrison  was  now  becoming  more  and 
more  critical.  Cut  off  by  the  enemy,  water  had  become 
lamentably  scarce.  They  had  lost  half  their  oflScers  and 
a  large  number  of  their  comrades.  The  enemy  had  in- 
creased  in  number  and  in  fury,  and  completely  com- 
manded their  position.  To  shut  themselves  up  in  their 
barracks  was  to  die  of  thirst ;  to  attempt  to  fight  their 
way  out  was  to  be  cut  to  pieces. 

On  the  8th,  the  enemy  offered  them  t^rms.  The  con- 
dition was,  that  they  should  become  Mahomedans.  "  We 
came  to  this  country,"  said  Pottinger,  in  reply,  "  to  aid  a 
Mahomedan  sovereign  in  the  recovery  of  his  rights. 
We  are  therefore  within  the  pale  of  Islam,  and  exempt 
from  coercion  on  the  score  of  religion."  To  this  they 
replied,  that  the  Kling  himself  had  ordered  the  attack; 
and  asked  if  Pottinger  would  surrender  on  receiving  his 
Majesty's  orders.  "  I  can  do  nothing "  said  Pottinger, 
"^; without  a  written  order  fi:om  the  King."  And  with 
this  the  negotiations  ended. 

But  there  was  an  enemy  more  terrible  than  these  in- 
furiated crowds  of  Kohistanees  and  Nijrowees.  The 
garrison  were  suffering  agonies  of  thirst.*  On  the  10th, 
the  last  pool  of  water  was  drawn;  and  half  a  wine-glass 
of  the  precious  fltiid  served  out  to  each  fighting  man* 


*  **  Some  sheep  were  giyen  to  us  in  piercing  accents.     Our  muskets 

by  the  officers ;  we  found  relief  from  were  so  foul  from  incessant  use,  that 

sucking  the  raw  flesh,  and  some  of  the  balls  were  forced  down  with  diffi- 

ihe  men  placed  the  contents  of  the  culty,  although  separated  from  the 

stomach  of  the  sheep  in  cloths,  and,  paper  of  the  cartridge  which  usually 

wringing  them  very  hard,  obtained  wraps  them  round.     The  lips  of  the 

some  moisture  to  assuage  their  raging  men  became  swollen  and  bloody,  and 

thirst.    The  sick  and  wounded  now  their  tongues  clave  to  their  palates.^' 

increased  to  a  frightful  amount,  and  — {^Evidence  of  Mootee  Ram,  UaviU 

were  continually  screaming  for  water  dar,"] 


EVACUATION  OF  CHAliEKUli.  71 

On  the  11th  there  was  not  sufficient  to  serve  out  to  the 
whole  party.  At  night  they  stole  out  with  their  lotahs 
concealed  under  their  clothes,  lest  the  shining  metal 
should  betray  them,  to  snatch  a  few  drops  of  water  from 
a  neighbouring  spring.  But  the  enemy  discovered  the 
practice,  and  shot  down  the  wretched  men.  Parties 
were  then  sent  out  to  cover  the  water-carriers ;  but  the 
soldiers,  mad  with  the  tortures  of  thirst,  quitted  their 
ranks,  and  could  not  be  restrained  from  rushing  forward 
in  search  of  the  liquid  life  for  which  they  had  so  long 
been  languishing.  Every  new  effort  to  obtain  water, 
however  well  devised,  failed  from  the  same  cause.  The 
parties,  which  moved  out  as  disciplined  soldiers,  soon,  in 
the  madness  of  their  sufferings,  became  a  disorderly 
rabble — soon  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  who  shot 
them  down,  in  their  helplessness,  like  sheep. 

All  hope  was  now  at  an  end.  The  garrison  were  re- 
duced to  a  party  of  two  hundred  fighting  men.  They 
had  but  thirty  rounds  of  ammunition  for  each  musket  in 
store.  The  wretched  Goorkhas  were  literally  perishing 
with  intolerable  thirst.  Pottinger  and  Haughton  took 
counsel  together;  and  determined  to  make  a  desperate 
effort  to  save  the  remnant  of  their  little  force  by  a  rapid 
unencumbered  march  to  Caubul.  Accordingly,  on  the 
evening  of  the  13th  of  November,  the  Goorkhas  eva- 
cuated Charekur.  Pottinger  led  the  advance.  Haugh- 
ton had,  on  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  been  disabled  by 
a  sabre-cut  from  a  jemadar  of  artillery,  whilst  appre- 
hending a  party  of  deserters;  and  was  now  scarcely 
able  to  sit  his  horse.  Mr.  Grant,  a  medical  officer — 
not  the  first  medical  officer  who  has  played  the  part  of 
the  true  soldier  in  battle,  and  justified  the  claims  of  his 
profession  to  the  soldier's  honours  and  rewards — ^having 
spiked  all  the  guns  with  his  own  hands,  led  out  the  main 
body;  whilst  Ensign  Rose  brought  up  the  rear.  The 
order  of  march  was  soon  lost.     The  little  force  became 


72 


PHOGRESS  OF  THE  INSUREECTION. 


a  disorderly  rabble,  struggling  on  with  the  one  object 
of  allaying  at  the  first  pool  of  water  the  torments 
of  unendurable  thirst.  It  was  impossible  to  keep  them 
together — impossible  to  lead  them  in  safety  to  the 
capital.  Pottinger  and  Haughton  were  exhausted  by 
the  pain  of  their  wounds.  They  could  render  no  ser- 
vice to  their  men;  and  would  have  perished  had 
they  remained  behind.  So  they  determined  on  pushing 
on  to  Caubul.  A  single  Sepoy  of  the  Goorkha  corps, 
who  plodded  on  with  weary  feet  beside  the  horsemen, 
Pottinger's  English  writer,  and  the  regimental  bunt/ah^ 
were  their  only  companions.  The  route  was  unknown 
to  them,  and  they  had  no  guide;  but  they  struggled  on 
through  many  difficulties  and  much  danger,  and  at  last 
reached  the  neighbourhood  of  Caubul.  Here  the  peril 
thickened  around  them.  Descending  into  the  Caubul 
plain  behind  the  lake,  and  intending  to  cross  the  cul- 
tivated ground  to  cantonments,  at  the  back  of  the  Shah's 
garden,  at  Killa  Bolundee,  they  missed  the  turning,  and 
soon  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy's  sen- 
tinels. Fearing  to  attract  attention  by  turning  back, 
they  then  made  for  Deh-Afghan,  but  finding  the  place 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  and  being  closely  challenged  by 
the  sentries,  they  were  compelled  to  pass  into  the  city. 
Pursuing  the  lanes  and  bazaars  along  the  river  bank,  and 
narrowly  escaping  death  from  a  volley  fired  upon  them  by 
one  of  the  enemy's  picquets,  they  made  their  way  at  last 
to  cantonments.  The  regiment  in  the  mean  while  had 
perished.    Rose  and  Grant  were  slain  by  the  enemy,* 


^  ♦  Major  Pottinger  does  not  men- 
tion in  his  report  when  and  how 
these  officers  fell.  Lieutenant  Mel- 
ville, in  his  narrative,  says :  "  From 
all  that  can  be  gathered  from  the  re- 
ports brought  in,  it  appears  that  the 
devoted  corps  had  struggled  on  to 
Kardurrah,  gallantly  headed  by  En- 
sign Rose  and  Dr.  Grant,  where  it 


was  cut  to  pieces.  The  former  officer 
fell,  having  first  killed  four  of  the 
enemy  with  his  own  hand;  and  the 
latter,  although  he  contrived  to  es- 
cape from  the  murderous  hands  at 
Kardurrah,  yet  iust  as  he  had  arrived 
in  the  sight  of  the  haven  of  his  hopes, 
within  three  miles  of  cantonments,  was 
massacred  by  some  wood-cutters.** 


WITHDRAWAL  OF  S^VLE's  BRIGADE.  73 

and  scarcely  a  man  escaped  to  tell  how  his  comrades 
had  been  miserably  destroyed.* 

The  intelligence  brought  in  by  Pottinger  from  the 
Kohistan  was  not  of  a  nature  to  rouse  the  drooping 
spirits  of  the  Envoy.  Charekur  had  been  lost ;  the 
Goorkha  regiment  annihilated;  aAd  there  were  now 
large  bodies  of  Kohistanees  and  Nijrowees,  having  done 
their  bloody  work  at  home,  ready  to  join  the  insurgents 
at  the  capital.  He  had  been  looking,  too,  with  eager 
anxiety,  for  the  return  of  Sale's  brigade  from  Gandamuck, 
and  now  he  learnt,  to  his  bitter  disappointment,  that  it 
had  marched  for  Jellalabad.  Still  he  did  not  despair 
of  being  able  to  recall  it.  On  the  17th  of  November 
he  again  wrote  to  Captain  Macgregor  :f 

Caubul,  November  17th,  1841. 

Mr  DEAR  Macgregor, 

I  have  written  to  you  daily,  pointing  out  our  precarious 
state,  and  urging  you  to  return  here,  with  Sale's  brigade,  with  all 
pooible  expedition.  General  Elphinstone  has  done  the  same^  and 
we  now  learn,  to  our  dismay,  that  you  have  proceeded  to  Jellalabad. 
Our  situation  is  a  desperate  one  if  you  do  not  immediately  return 
to  our  relief^  and  I  beg  that  you  will  do  so  without  a  moment's 
delay.  We  have  now  been  besieged  for  fourteen  days,  and  with- 
out your  assistance  are  utterly  unable  to  carry  on  any  offensive 
operations.  Tou  may  easily  make  Caubul  in  eight  marches,  and, 
as  the  Ghilzyes  are  here,  you  would  not  have  many  enemies  to 
contend  with. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

In  the  course  of  the  night  he  received  a  letter  from 
Macgr^or,  which  satisfied  him  that  there  was  no  longer 
any  hope  of  receiving  aid  from  Sale's  brigade.  He  had 
b^un  to  think  by  this  time  of  the  provisions  of  the 

*  This  acconnt  of  the  defence  of  Ejre  seems  to  have  had  access  to 

Chirekur  and  the  destruction  of  the  it. 

Goorkha  corps,  is  taken  from  Major        t  Correspondence  of  Sir  W,  H.  Mac^ 

PottiDger*8  Badeeabad  report  (MS.J.  naghten:  MS,  Records. 


74  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

tripartite  treaty,  and  to  look  for  aid  from  the  Sikhs. 
On  the  Mowing  morning  he  again  wrote:* 

Caubul,  NoYember  18tb,  1841. 

My  DEAR  Macgregor, 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  13  th  instant.  The 
Cossid  gave  us  an  account  of  your  action  on  the  14th  instant; 
which,  if  he  speaks  truth,  must  have  been  a  very  successful  one. 
We  are  in  statu  quo.  Our  chief  want  is  supplies.  I  perceive 
now  that  you  could  not  well  have  joined  us.  I  hope  you  have 
written  to  Mackeson,  asking  him  for  aid  from  the  Sikhs  under  the 
treaty.  If  there  is  any  difficulty  about  the  Sikhs  getting  through 
the  pass,  Mackeson  should  offer  a  bribe  to  the  Khyberees  of  a 
lakh  of  rupees,  or  more,  to  send  them  safe  passage.  These  are  not 
times  to  stick  at  trifles.  The  Goorkha  regiment  has  been  annihi- 
lated, but  Pottinger  and  Haughton  are  here;  the  latter  has  lost 
his  hand.  I  believe  I  told  you  that  Paton  lost  his  arm  in  the 
action  we  had  near  the  cantonment  the  other  day.  It  is  raining 
here,  and  the  weather  is  very  cold;  but  I  am  not  sure  that  tliis  is 
not  as  bad  for  the  enemy  as  for  ourselves.  I  do  not  hear  anything 
from  Ghuzni  or  Candahar,  but  I  should  not  wonder  if  they  were 
in  the  same  mess  as  ourselves.  We  must  look  for  support  chiefly 
from  Peshawur,  Write  to  Mackeson  continually,  and  tell  him  to 
urge  government  to  send  as  many  troops  into  the  country  as 
speedily  as  possible.  John  Conolly  is  in  the  Balla  Hissar  with  his 
Majesty,  who,  as  you  may  imagine,  is  in  a  sad  taking  about  all 
the  Fussad. .  I  am  making  no  progress  in  my  negotiations  with 

the  rebels. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 
I  have  received  yours  of  the  16th. 

The  abandonment  of  all  hope  of  assistance  from  Sale's 

*  Correspondence  of  Sir  W,  H,  MaC'  and  instead  of  "We  must  look  for 
naghten:  MS,  Records.  A  version  of  support  chiefly  from  Peshawur/' Mao- 
this  letter  is  ^ven  in  the  published  nagnten  is  made  to  say,  *^  We  must 
papers ;  but  3iere  arc  some  curious  look  for  supplies  chiefly  from  Pesha- 
errors  in  the  official  text,  which  iUus-  wur.**  The  evils  of  such  carelessness 
trate,  in  a  very  forcible  manner,  the  as  this  have  received  a  remarkable 
value  of  these  public  documents  as  iUustration  in  Major  Hough's  Review 
guides  to  historical  truth.  The  pri-  of  the  Military  Operations  at  Cauhd, 
vate  letter,  in  spite  of  its  very  un-  in  which  are  some  pages  of  remark 
official  style,  is  turned  into  an  offi-  on  the  subject  of  Supplies  from 
cial  one,  commencing,  "  Sir." — The  Peshawur^  based  upon  this  identical 
words,  "  the  weather  is  very  cold,"  passage  in  the  mis-copicd  or  mis- 
are  printed  "  the  water  is  very  cold;"  printed  letter. 


LETTER  TO  GENERAL  ELPHIN8T0NE.         75 

brigade  had  now  given  a  new  complexion  to  the  aspect 
of  affairs.  The  military  authorities,  who  had  been  long 
ripe  for  capitulation,  now  pressed  the  Envoy  sorely  with 
their  "  distressM  accounts  of  the  state  of  the  troops  and 
cattle  from  want  of  provisions,"  and  of  the  "  hopeless- 
ness  of  further  resistance."*  But  Macnaghten,  though 
he  saw  the  necessity  of  weighing  well  the  dangers  that 
beset  the  force,  and  the  means  of  extricating  it  from  its 
perilous  position,  was  not  a  man  to  grasp  at  the  degra- 
dation of  surrender  whilst  yet  there  was  a  hope  of  res- 
cuing it  by  any  more  honourable  course.  The  time  had 
come,  however,  for  him  to  declare  fully  his  sentiments  to 
the  military  commander;  so,  on  the  18th  of  November, 
he  addressed  to  him  a  letter,  in  which  the  whole  ques- 
tion is  thus  reviewed  :f 

Caubu],  18th  No v^  1841. 

Mr  DEAR  General, 

The  intelligence  received  last  night  from  Captain  Mac- 
gregor  makes  it  necessary  that  we  should  now  take  our  future 
proceedings  into  consideration.  We  have  scarcely  a  hope  of  re- 
inforcement from  Sale's  brigade.  I  would  recommend  we  hold 
on  here  as  long  as  possible,  and  throughout  the  whole  winter,  if 
we  can  subsist  the  troops  by  any  means,  by  making  the  Mahome- 
dans  and  Christians  live  chiefly  on  flesh  and  other  contrivances. 
Here  we  have  the  essentials  of  wood  and  water  in  abundance,  and 
I  believe  our  position  is  impregnable. 

A  retreat  in  the  direction  of  Jellalabad  would  be  most  disas- 
trous, and  should  be  avoided,  except  in  the  last  extremity;  we 
shall  be  better  able  to  see,  eight  or  ten  days  hence,  whether  that 
extremity  must  be  resorted  to.  In  that  case,  wo  should  have  to 
sacrifice  the  valuable  property  of  government;  we  should  have  to 
sacrifice  his  Majesty,  who  would  not  come  away  without  his  family ; 
and  were  we  to  make  good  our  retreat  to  Jellalabad,  we  should 
find  no  shelter  for  our  troops  (the  cantonments  being  destroyed), 
and  perhaps  no  provisions.  I  fear,  too,  that  in  such  a  retreat  very 
few  of  our  camp  followers  would  survive.     I  have  frequently 

♦  MacnaglOetCs  Unfinished  Report  to  t  The  substance  of  this  letter  is 
GoverumaU :  M8.  Eecardt.  given  very  correctly  in  Eyre'a  io\xm«i. 


76         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

thought  of  negotiation,  or  rather  capitulation^  for  such  it  would  be, 
but  in  the  present  unsettled  state  of  affairs  there  is  no  authority 
possessing  sufficient  weight  to  protect  us  all  through  the  country; 
besides,  we  should  hardly  be  justified,  even  for  the  security  of 
our  persons  and  property,  to  abandon  even  one  position  in  the 
country.  Another  alternative  would  be  for  us  to  retire  to  the 
Balla  Hissar;  but  this,  I  also  fear,  would  be  a  disastrous  retreat, 
and  we  should  have  to  sacrifice  a  vast  deal  of  property.  We  pro- 
bably should  not  suceed  in  getting  in  our  heavy  guns,  and  ihey 
would  be  turned  with  effect  by  the  enemy  against  the  citadel. 
We  should  have  neither  food,  nor  firewood  to  cook  it;  for  these 
essentials  we  should  be  dependent  upon  sorties  into  the  city, 
in  which,  if  we  were  beaten,  we  should  of  course  be  ruined. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  think  it  best  to  hold  on  where  we  are  as 
long  as  possible,  in  the  hope  that  something  may  turn  up  in 
our  favour.  It  is  possible  that  we  may  receive  reinforcements 
from  Candahar.  Now  that  the  cold  weather  is  coming  on,  the 
enemy  will  disperse  to  their  houses  very  soon,  and  there  will  only 
be  left  the  rebel  chiefs  and  their  immediate  followers.  We  should 
not,  therefore,  be  molested  during  the  winter:  and  though  circum- 
stances make  it  likely  that  we  should  be  attacked  soon  if  we  are 
to  be  attacked  at  all,  a  victory  on  our  side  might  change  the 
whole  aspect  of  affairs. 

I  was  disposed  to  recommend  that  a  decisive  blow  should  be 
stmck  somewhere  to  retrieve  our  fortunes,  and  that  Mahomed 
Khan's  fort  should  be  captured.  But  I  have  since  had  reason  to 
believe  no  solid  advantage,  such  as  commanding  the  road  to  the 
Balla  Hissar,  would  result  therefrom ;  that  possibly  we  might  not 
be  able  to  hold  it;  and,  in  short,  that  the  benefit  of  the  measure 
would  not  counterbalance  the  risk  attending  it. 

In  eight  or  ten  days  more,  we  shall  be  better  able  to  judge 
whether  there  is  any  chance  of  an  improvement  in  our  position, 
and,  if  not,  it  will  remain  for  the  military  authorities  to  decide 
whether  it  would  be  more  prudent  to  attempt  a  retreat  to  Jella- 
labad,  or  to  retire  into  the  Balla  Hissar.  If  we  could  only  bring 
in  sufficient  provisions  for  the  winter,  I  would  on  no  account 
leave  the  cantonment.  Yours,  &c.  &c., 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

Many  and  anxious,  by  this  time,  had  been  the  discus- 
sions relative  to  the  abandonment  of  the  cantonment,  and 


CONCENTRATION  IN  THE  BALLA  HISSAR.  77 

the  concentration  of  the  Britbh  troops  in  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  measure  had  been  recommended  by  the  engineer, 
Sturt,  and  others,  very  soon  after  the  first  outbreak  of 
the  insurrection.  The  Envoy  had  favoured  it  at  an  earlier, 
as  he  did  at  a  later,  period  of  the  siege ;  but  he  seems  at 
this  time  to  have  been  more  than  usually  alive  to  the 
•difficulties  of  the  movement.  The  General  had  scarcely 
any  opinion  at  all  on  the  subject.  But  the  Brigadier 
was  resolutely  opposed  to  it.  His  arguments  were  not 
very  overwhelming — ^but  they  were  overwhelmingly  ad- 
vanced ;  and  he  seems  for  some  time  to  have  borne  down 
the  better  reason  of  all  who  supported  the  measure.  No 
one  in  the  whole  force  was  more  profoundly  impressed 
with  a  conviction  of  the  disadvantages  of  the  canton- 
ment as  a  military  position  than  Brigadier  Shelton  him- 
self. He  has  left  on  record,  in  emphatic  language,  his 
opinions  upon  this  point;  but  he  could  see  in  the  ex- 
treme insecurity  of  the  cantonment  an  argument  only 
for  a  discreditable  retreat.  He  could  not  see  that  if  the 
extent  of  the  cantonment-works  were  such  as  to  render 
their  defence  difficult,  and  external  operations  on  a  large 
scale  impossible,  there  was  in  this  circumstance  abim- 
dant  reason  for  the  removal  of  the  force  to  a  position 
cursed  with  none  of  these  annihilating  evils. 

In  the  Balla  Hissar  the  troops  would  have  been  free 
from  molestation.  They  would  not,  as  in  cantonments, 
have  been  harassed  and  dispirited  by  the  necessity  of 
manning  works  exposed  at  every  point  to  the  attacks  of 
the  enemy.  They  could  have  sallied  out  from  such  a 
position  in  large  bodies — have  attacked  the  city  and  the 
neighbouring  forts — have  obtained  supplies  from  the 
surrounding  country — and  held  their  own  till  the  coming 
spring.  But  against  all  this  it  was  alleged  that  the  re- 
moval of  the  force  from  the  cantonment  to  the  Balla 
Hissar  would  be  a  hazardous  operation — that  it  could 
not  be  accomplished  without  great  loss,  including,  in  all 


78  PBOGBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

probability,  the  entire  sacrifice  of  the  sick  and  wounded. 
That  the  movement  would  not  have  been  free  from 
danger  is  true.  What  movement  could  be  free  from 
danger,  at  such  a  time  ? — what  warlike  operations  ever 
are  free  from  danger?  But  that  it  would  have  neces- 
sarily involved  the  total  sacrifice  of  the  sick  and  wounded, 
is  only  to  be  assumed  upon  the  hypothesis,  that  the  curse 
which  had  so  long  brooded  over  us  would  still  have 
worked  for  our  own  undoing,  and  that,  therefore,  no 
precautions  would  have  been  taken  to  protect  them.* 

Other  arguments  against  the  movement  were  also 
adduced.  It  was  said  that  there  was  a  scarcity  of  fire- 
wood in  the  Balla  Hissar;  and  that  there  was  no  forage 
for  the  horses.  But  to  this  it  was  replied  that  there 
was  a  sufficiency  of  wood  for  purposes  of  cooking,  that 
more  might  be  obtained  by  sallies  into  the  city,  and  that 
the  improved  shelter  and  increased  comforts  of  the 
troops  in  the  Balla  Hissar  would,  under  the  most  unfavor- 
able circumstances,  compensate  for  the  want  of  firing. 
With  regard  to  the  forage,  it  was  replied,  that,  if  the 
horses  could  not  be  fed,  they  might  be  shot ;  and  that 
there  was  little  need  for  the  employment  of  cavalry  in 
such  a  position  as  the  Balla  Hissar. 

One  other  argument,  brought  forward  perhaps  to  give 
respectability  to  the  whole,  was  urged  by  Shelton  and 
his  supporters.  It  was  said  that  the  abandonment  of  can- 
tonments would  have  been  an  acknowledgment  of  defeat, 
and  a  triumph  to  our  enemies.  It  is  enough  to  say  of  this, 
that  it  was  urged  by  men  who  were  clamorous  for  an  aban- 
donment, not  of  one  position,  but  of  all  our  positions  in 


the  lick  would  be  difficult,  it  still  was  ing  suns  there  to  sweep  the  plains 

not  impossible ;  for  so  short  a  distance  on  the  cantonment  side,  the  enemj 

two  or  even  three  men  could  be  con-  could  have  done  little  to  impede  our 

veyed  in  one  doolie :  some  might  ma-  march  without  risking  a  battle  with 

nage  to  walk,  and  the  rest  could  be  our  whole  force  in  fair  field,  to  which 

mounted  on  yaboos,  or  camels,  at  the  they  were  generally  averse,  but  which 

top  of  their  loads."    He  says,  too,  would,  perhaps,  have  been  the  best 

that  **if  we  had  occupied  the  Seeah  mode  for  i<«  or  deciding  the  struggle.** 


OPPOSITION  OF  BRIGADIER  8HELT0N.  79 

A%hanistan,  and  a  precipitate  retreat  from  the  country. 
In  the  one  case  there  might  have  been  a  partial  triumph ; 
in  the  other  there  must  have  been  a  complete  one. 

And  so,  owing  mainly  to  the  pertinacity  of  Brigadier 
Shelton,  the  only  measure  which  could  have  saved  the 
British  force  from  destruction,  and  the  British  name 
from  degradation,  was  rejected  in  this  conjuncture. 
The  troops  remained  in  cantonments,  threatened  by  the 
enemy  and  disheartened  by  the  ominous  gloom  of  their 
own  officers,  only  to  sustain  another  and  more  crushing 
defeat;  and  then  to  sink  into  a  state  of  utter  inactivity 
and  prostration,  whilst  the  leaders  of  the  enemy  were 
being  brought  over  to  consent  to  terms  of  capitulation, 
humbling  indeed  to  the  pride  of  the  proudest  and  most 
saccessM  nation  of  the  world.* 

*  Some  interesting  particulars  of  When  I  had  nearly  reached  it  I  looked 
the  deaths  of  Lieutenant  Rattray  and  back,  and  saw  Mr.  R.  lying  down  on 
C^rtMn  Codrington  are  given  in  a  the  plain.  I  ran  again  towards  him, 
namtiTe  of  the  events  at  Charekur,  and  when  near  him,  he  called  me  and 
supplied  by  Major  Fottinger^s  Moon-  told  me  to  take  hold  of  him  and  help 
sbee.  It  appears  that  some  chiefs  him  into  the  fort.  Directly  I  took 
had  warned  tne  former  officer  that  if  hold  of  his  hand  about  fitly  Kohis- 
he  left  the  fort  he  would  be  killed  by  tanees  fired,  and  Mr.  B.  received  a 
the  people  outside ;  but  that  Rattray  ball  in  his  forehead.  I  then  ran  back 
had  replied,  ^  They  have  eaten  our  and  got  into  the  fort,  where  I  found 
salt,  and  could  not  be  guilty  of  such  Major  Fottinger  looking  towards  the 
an  act.**  The  Moonshee  tnen  goes  Konistanees,  and  firing  at  them." 
on  to  say :  '*  When  Mr.  Battray  came  The  touching  circumstances  of  Cap- 
near  them,  all  the  chiefs  paid  their  tain  Codrington*s  death  arc  thus  rc- 
respects  to  him,  saying,  ^Inshallahl  lated  :—'*  When  Captain  Codrington 
we  shall  go  to-morrow  and  fieht  with  saw  that  Major  Pottmger  was  wound- 
Meer  Musjedee.'  Mr.  R.  said,  *  Very  ed,  he  went  out  to  the  two  companies ; 
good!  If  vou  will  go,  I  shall  give  but  was  very  severelv  wounded  by  a 
your  people  presents  on  their  return ;  shot  in  the  back.    All  his  Sepoys  be- 

and  to-morrow  they  shall  receive  five    gan  to  cry  for  him Captain 

rupees  each  for  their  expenses,  and  I  Codrington  was    able  to  walk  into 

wiU  also  go  with  my  sowars.^  Mr.  R.  cantonments ;  but  fell  down  before  he 

then  turned  to  go  back  to  the  fort ;  reached  his  house,  and  asked  for  water. 

but  Jubbar  Khan  asked  him  to  look  We  carried  him  and  laid  him  on  the 

at  his  men,  to  which  he  agreed,  and  same  bed  as  Major  Fottinger,  whom 

turned  back  again.    When  he  had  he  asked  for  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and 

taken  about  six  or  seven  steps,  one  of  wrote  a  letter  to  his  wife,  whose  pic- 

the  Kohistanees  called  him  by  name,  ture  he  also  gave  to  Major  Fottinger. 

and  ran  at  him,  firing  his  gun  at  He  lingered  on  until  the  night  of  the 

Mr.  IL,  who  turned  and  ran  towards  7th,  when  he  died.     We  buried  him 

the  fort.  I,  the  Meerza,  and  the  Chu-  and    Lieutenant    Salisbury    in    one 

prassie,  all    ran    towards   the  fort,  grave.'* — [^MS.  Records,'] 


80         PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 


CHAPTER  V. 

[November,  1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection— State  of  Affairs  in  the  Balla  Hissar— Shah 
Soojah— The  Action  of  the  23rd  of  November— Defeat  of  the  British 
Troops — Negotiations  with  the  Enemy. 

Whilst  the  feebleness  of  the  military  commanders  in 
cantonments  had  been  playing  away  stake  after  stake, 
until  every  hope  of  redemption  was  past,  the  King,  shut 
up  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  had  been  watching  the  progress 
of  events  with  the  profoundest  anxiety  and  alarm.  His 
bearing  was  that  of  a  man  heartless  and  hopeless  under 
a  pressure  of  unanticipated  misfortunes;  but  prostrate 
and  imbecile  as  he  was  in  this  conjuncture,  he  could 
see  plainly  enough  the  prostration  and  imbecility  of  the 
British  chiefs.  When  the  commissariat  fort  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  insurgents,  the  great  calamity  rose  up  sud- 
denly before  the  inmates  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  From 
the  summit  of  the  palace  the  enemy  might  be  seen 
throwing  the  plunder  over  the  walls  of  the  fort,  to  be 
carried  off  by  their  companions  below.  There  was  a 
general  rush  upwards  to  this  commanding  position  to 
witness  the  humiliating  sight.  The  King  beheld  it  with 
deep  emotion,  and,  painftilly  agitated,  turned  to  the 
Wuzeer  and  said,  "  Surely  the  English  are  mad."* 

*  Lieutenant  Melville^s  Narrative, 


CONDITION  OF  THE  SHAH.  81 

Dejected  as  he  was  before,  this  crowning  calamity 
sunk  him  into  a  state  of  still  deeper  dejection.  Every 
report  of  the  designs  of  the  enemy,  however  incredible, 
filled  him  with  new  terror.  It  was  said  that  the  in- 
surgents were  running  a  mine  from  the  Shor  Bazaar 
under  the  very  walls  of  the  palace.  Dreading  an  im- 
mediate explosion,  he  quitted  his  apartments,  and  took 
up  his  residence  at  the  gate  of  the  Harem,  where,  seated 
at  a  window  commanding  an  extensive  view  of  the  can- 
tonments and  the  surrounding  country,  he  traced,  through 
a  telescope,  the  progress  of  the  exciting  events  passing 
below.  Day  after  day  he  sate  at  the  same  window, 
looking  down,  from  morning  to  evening  prayer,  upon  a 
scene  which  seldom  yielded  aught  to  comfort  or  reassure 
.  him.  Shah  Soojah  had  never  been  a  courageous  man ; 
but  he  had  always  been  a  very  proud  one.  That  now, 
enfeebled  and  desponding,  he  should  have  clung  to  any 
support,  turned  anywhere  for  assistance,  was  not  strange ; 
but  when  they  saw  the  pompous  and  arrogant  monarch 
now  80  humbled  and  obsequious,  laying  aside  all  the 
environments  of  royalty,  to  which  before  he  had  climg 
with  such  pitiful  tenacity,  the  English  officers  about 
him  felt  that  the  shock  must  have  been  great  indeed  so 
to  revolutionise  his  whole  nature.  He  made  even  the 
British  subalterns  sit  beside  him  on  chairs;  conversed 
fimiiliarly  with  them;  enquired  into  their  wants,  and 
condescended  to  supply  them.  "  If,**  said  one  who  had 
good  opportunities  of  narrowly  watching  the  behaviour 
of  the  King  at  this  time,  "  he  is  acting  a  part,  he  cer- 
tainly performs  it  admirably !" 

Other  reports  soon  came  in  from  the  city,  or  started  up 
in  the  Balla  Hissar  itself,  still  more  to  terrify  the  King. 
It  was  allied  that  the  Arabs  in  the  fort*  were  about  to 

*  LieotenaBt  Melvflle  says  they    inhabitants;  bat  I  believe  thb  to  be 
eompoeed  a  Tery  large  portion  of  the    an  error. 

VOL.  H.  O 


82         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

rise  up  in  a  body^  to  massacre  the  troops  and  to  give  the 
place  over  to  the  rebels.  The  King,  who  never  withheld 
his  beUef  from  any  story  however  improbable,  seized  the 
chief  of  the  Arab  tribe,  and  ordered  that  no  women 
or  children  should  be  suffered  to  leave  the  fort.  But 
women  and  children  of  all  kinds  were  now  clamouring 
for  egress.  Collecting  in  crowds  before  the  Wuzeer's 
house,  they  importuned  him,  with  loud  lamentations,  to 
suffer  them  to  depart.  The  Wuzeer  appealed  to  the 
King,  who,  strictly  prohibiting  the  egress  of  any  Arab 
&milies,  suffered  more  than  seven  hundred  other  women 
and  children  to  pass  out  of  the  fort.  The  English  officers 
thought,  that  if  all  the  Arabs  and  Afghans  had  been  re- 
moved from  the  fort,  and  all  the  provisions  secured  for 
the  use  of  the  fighting  men,  the  whole  force  might  have 
been  saved.* 

The  stores  in  the  Balla  Hissar  had  been  indented 
upon  for  the  use  of  the  cantonment  force,f  and  the 
available  supplies  having  been  thus  reduced,  the  troops 
were  put  upon  half-rations.  The  departure,  however, 
of  Brigadier  Shelton  and  his  escort  had  diminished  the 
number  of  the  fighting  men,  and  now,  under  Major 
Ewart,  they  consisted  of  little  more  than  the  54th  N.I., 
a  portion  of  the  Horse  Artillery  troop  under  Captain 
NicoU,  and  some  details  of  irregular  troops.    At  the 

*  Lieutenant  Melville  sayi :  *'  Had  But  no :  this  waf  not  his  Mijealy^ 

the  more  vigorous  and  energetic  inea«  game;  and  the  withering  hand   of 

sure  been  taken   of  turmng  everv  feebleness  which  seemed  at  this  period 

native  out  of  the  fort,  were  he  Arab  to  ffuide  and  govern  all  our  actions, 

or  Afghan,  the  salvation  of  the  whole  did  not  even  point  out  the  necessity 

force  might  have   been  the  result,  of  its  being  put  into  execution.  There 

Although  all  sorts  of  grain  and  other  would  have  been  no  oppression,  no 

supplies  were  hardly  procurable  in  tyranny  in  so  doine,  as  the  price  of 

the  shops  of  the  bazaar,  yet  it  was  every  grain  would  nave  been  puno« 

known  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  pri-  tualjy  paid,  and   the  Afghans  and , 

vate  dwelling-houses,  of  which  latter  Arabs  In  the  fort  having  friends  liyinff 

there  were  above  a  thousand  in  the  in  the  city  would  have  been  received 

fort,  had  each  of  them  a  four  or  six  by  them  with  open  arms.*' 
months'  supply  stored  in  their  granary.        f  To  no  great  extent,  I  believe. 


H0YXMBKT8  IN  THB  BALLA  HIS8AB.  83 

points  most  exposed  to  attack  the  components  of  the 
little  garrison  were  posted,  and^  kept  always  on  the  alert 
by  reports  of  some  threatened  movement  of  the  enemy, 
were  always  ready  to  give  them  a  warm  reception. 

The  BSair  of  the  ISth  of  November  struck  a  gleam  of 
hope  into  the  garrison  of  the  Balla  Hissar,  It  seemed  as 
though  new  courage  had  been  infused  into  the  canton* 
ment  force;  and,  as  though  to  second  the  invigorated 
efforts  of  their  comrades^  the  artiller}anen  in  the  citadel 
now  began  to  ply  their  batteries  with  increased  activity. 
They  shelled  the  city,  and  attempted  to  fire  it  with  car* 
cases;  but  the  houses  were  not  of  a  construction  to  be 
easily  ignited,  and  the  shelling  produced  little  effect. 
The  residence  of  Ameen-oollah  Ehan,  in  the  city,  was  to 
be  seen  from  the  batteries;  and  the  gunners,  knowing  the 
old  man  to  be  one  of  our  deadliest  enemies,  singled  it  out 
as  a  mark,  and  poured  their  iron  rain  upon  it.  But  the 
chief  removed  himself  and  his  family  to  another  house; 
and  the  only  loss  was  among  the  horses. 

A  crisis  was  now  at  hand  in  the  fate  of  the  cantonment 
force.  The  23rd  of  November  was  one  of  the  most  eventful 
and  the  most  disMtrous  in  the  history  of  the  insurrection. 
On  that  day  a  battle  was  fought,  which  ended  in  the 
disgraceful  and  calamitous  defeat  of  the  British  troops. 
The  enemy  had  been  for  some  time  making  their  ap- 
pearance on  the  Beh-meru  hill,  and  had  repeatedly 
descended  into  the  vUlage,  whence  the  British  commis- 
sariat officers  had  been  drawing  supplies  of  grain.*    Irri* 

•  «»Xhe  enemy  have  for  sometiine  three,  and  idzed  about  fifty  maimdi 

put  6aSlj  made  their  appearance  on  of  wheat,  as  also  a  few  of  my  camels 

the  Beh-mem  hills,  and  have  repeat-  and  yaboos.    I  am  diuly  up  long  be- 

edly  liaited  the  Tillage  of  Beh-meriL  fore  gunfire,  and  as  soon  as  there  is 

destroyed  the  houses,  and  plundered  sufficient  liffht  commence  purchasing) 

the  innahitants,  and  hare  expelled  as  it  is  omv  early  in  the  morning 

them  from  thdr  homes  on  account  of  that  the  villagers   can   venture  to 

Ihdtr  aid  to  OS,  in  brin|^  in  grain,  bring  thehr  stores  fbr  8ale.**-*[C(m(at« 

T«ro  days  affo,  they  surprised  some  JohntofiCs  Joumot:  MS*  Jiecordt.} 
of  my  peo|^  purchasing,  wounded 

a2 


84  PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 

tated  by  the  assistance  which  the  villagers  had  rendered 
us,  the  insurgents  had  destroyed  the  houses,  pillaged  the 
inhabitants,  and  attacked  our  commissariat  people  when 
getting  in  their  supplies.  This  was  not  to  be  endured* 
Again  the  Envoy  counselled  the  despatch  of  a  strong 
force  to  occupy  the  Beh-meru  hill,  and  to  dislodge  the 
enemy  from  a  position  in  which  they  were  able  to  work 
us  such  grievous  annoyance.  Again  the  Brigadier  ob-* 
jected.  Urging  that  the  troops  were  exhausted  and  dis- 
spirited  by  constant  harassing  duty  on  the  ramparts,  that 
they  had  been  living  upon  half-rations  of  parched  wheat, 
and  were  therefore  physically  as  well  as  morally  enfee- 
bled^ he  protested  against  a  movement  which  he  said 
would  have  the  effect  of  increasing  the  number  of 
wounded  and  sick,  without  leading  to  any  solid  advan- 
tage.* But  these  objections  were  overruled.  On  the 
22nd  a  weak  detachment  had  been  sent  out,  under  Major 
Swa3aie,  but  it  had  only  added  another  to  our  list  of 
failures.  It  was  plain  that  something  more  must  be 
done.  A  council  of  war  was  held  that  evening  at  the 
General's  quarters,  and  it  was  determined,  after  much 
earnest  discussion,  on  the  special  reconmiendation  of  the 
Envoy,  that  a  strong  force  should  be  sent  out  before 
daybreak  on  the  following  morning,  to  occupy  the  Beh- 
meru  hills.  Shelton  recommended  that  at  the  same  time 
an  attack  should  be  made  on  the  village.  It  was  urged 
that  the  enemy  would  abandon  the  village  as  soon  as 
our  troops  occupied  the  hill.  The  Brigadier  declared 
that  the  occupation  of  the  hill  would  only  make  the 
enemy  hold  the  village  with  greater  pertinacity.    Shel- 


«  u 


I  opposed  it,*' says  Shelton,  in  without  any  apparent  ultimate  ad« 

his  own  statement,  *^  in  the  then  dis-  Tantage,  with  tne  certainty  of  dimi- 

spirited  state  of  the  troops,  harassed,  nishing  our  strength,  and  mcreasing 

exhausted,  and  fatigued  from  constant  our  wounded,  already  too  numerous 

duty  on  the  ramparts,  night  and  day,  to  provide  cattle  for." — ^Statement  of 

and  on  half-rations  of  parched  wheat,  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS.  Records.'} 


ATTACK  ON  THE  BEH-MEBU  HILL.  85 

ton's  advice,  however,  was  overruled.  The  force  went 
out  before  daybreak,*  took  possession  of  the  hill,  and 
posted  themselves  on  the  north-eastern  extremity,  which 
overhung  the  village.  With  a  fatuity  only  to  be  ac- 
counted for  by  the  belief  that  the  curse  of  God  was 
upon  those  unhappy  people,  they  had  taken  out  a  single 
gun.  This  gun  was  now  placed  in  a  position  com- 
manding an  enclosure  of  the  village,  where  the  watch- 
fires  gave  out  their  bright  tokens  that  numbers  of  the 
enemy  were  assembled.  A  shower  of  grape  was  presently 
poured  in  upon  the  bivouac.  Starting  up  in  confusion, 
the  enemy  gave  back  a  fire  fix)m  their  jezaib,  but,  aban- 
doning the  open  space,  sought  the  shelter  of  the  houses 
and  towers,  and  there  exhausted  their  ammunition  in  a 
vain  attempt  to  respond  to  our  grape  and  musketry.  Day 
dawned,  and  it  was  plain  that  the  enemy  were  aban- 
doning the  village.f  A  few,  however,  still  remamed; 
and  it  was  determined  to  carry  the  village  by  assault. 
A  storming  party  was  told  off,  imder  Major  Swa3aie ; 
but  the  village  was  not  carried.  The  detachment  seems 
to  have  gone  down  only  to  be  fired  at,  and,  after  half  an 
hour  of  inactivity,  was  recalled  by  the  Brigadier. 

The  movement  of  the  British  troops,  even  in  the  dim 
twilight  of  the  early  morning,  had  been  observed  fix)m 
the  city ;  and  soon  large  bodies  of  the  enemy  were  mov- 
ing across  the  plain.  Horsemen  and  footmen  streamed 
out  in  thousands  to  give  the  Feringhees  battle.    The 

*  Hie  force  consisted  of  five  com-  geant  Mulhall ;  100  Sappers,  under 

ptnies  of  hex  Majesty's  44th,  under  Lieutenant  Laing,  of  the  27th  N.I. 
Uaptain  Le^ton ;  six  companies  of       f  Shelton  sa;^s  that  the  event  jus- 

the  Sih  NX,  under  Lieut. -Colonel  tified  his  anticipations.    But  it  ap- 

Olirer;  six  companies  of  the  37th  N.L,  pears  to  me   that   this   is    at  least 

under  Captain  Kershaw,  of  the  I  dth;  doubtful.     Our  occupation  of  the 

a  squadron  of  the  5th  Cavalry,  imder  hill  really  did  compel  the  great  body 

Gttrtain  Bott ;  a  squadron  of  Irre-  of  the  enemy  to  evacuate  the  village, 

ff^ir  Horse,  under  Lieutenant  Wal-  Eyre  says  that,  when  it  was  subse- 

ier;  100  men  of  Anderson's  Horse;  quently  attacked, there  were  certainly 

one  Horse  Artillery  gun,  under  Ser-  not  more  than  forty  men  left  in  it. 


86  PBOGBESS  OF  THB  INSUBBEOTIOlfr. 

horsemen  stretched  across  the  plain;  the  footmen  covered 
an  opposite  hill,  and  some  re-occupied  the  village. 

The  fire  firom  the  enemy's  hill,  which  was  separated 
&om  that  on  which  our  own  troops  were  posted  only  by 
a  narrow  gorge,  soon  became  hot  and  galling.  Leaving 
five  companies  at  the  extremity  of  the  hill,  immediately 
above  the  village,  Shelton  took  the  remainder  of  his 
force,  with  the  one  gun,  to  a  position  near  the  brow  of 
the  hill,  over  the  gorge,  where  the  enemy  were  assem^ 
bling  in  the  greatest  numbers.  Here  he  formed  his  in- 
£uitry  into  two  squares,  and  massed  his  cavalry  imme** 
diately  in  their  rear.  The  one  gun  was  nobly  worked, 
and  for  a  time,  with  terrible  effect,  told  upon  the  A%han 
multitudes,  who  had  only  a  matchlock  fire  to  give  back 
in  return.  But  thus  nobly  worked,  round  after  round 
poured  in  as  quickly  as  the  piece  could  be  loaded,  it 
soon  became  unserviceable.  The  vent  was  so  heated  by 
the  incessant  firing,  that  the  gunners  were  no  longer  able 
to  serve  it«  Ammunition,  too,  was  becoming  scarce. 
What  would  not  those  resolute  artillerymen  have  given 
for  another  gun?  The  firing  ceased;  and  the  British 
musketeers  were  then  left  to  do  their  work  alone.  Little 
could  they  do,  at  such  a  time,  against  the  far-reaching 
A%han  matchlocks.  The  enemy  poured  a  destructive 
fire  into  our  squares,  but  the  muskets  of  our  infantry 
Could  not  reach  the  assailants.  The  two  forces  were  at 
a  distance  fix>m  each  other,  which  gave  all  the  advan- 
tage to  the  Afghans,  who  shot  down  our  men  with 
ease,  and  laughed  at  the  musket-balls,  which  never 
reached  their  position. 

The  nature  of  the  country  was  altogether  unfavor^ 
able  to  the  British  troops.  Between  them  and  the  brow 
of  the  hill  there  was  some  rising  ground,  which  pre- 
vented Shelton  firom  seeing  the  movements  of  the  enemy 
6u  the  side  of  the  hilL    But  firom  the  cantonment  could 


ACTION  AT  BEH-MEBtT.  87 

be  seen  a  party  of  A^hans  crawling  from  the  gorge  up 
the  hill-side,  and  rushing  with  sudden  fury  upon  our 
infimtry  masses.  The  unexpected  attack  seems  to  have 
struck  a  panic  into  the  heart  of  our  troops,  who  turned 
and  fled  along  the  ridge  like  sheep.  Shelton,  who  ever 
in  the  midst  of  danger  stood  with  iron  courage  exposed 
to  the  thickest  fire  of  the  enemy,  vainly  called  upon  his 
men  to  chatge.  Not  a  man  brought  down  his  bayonet 
to  the  position  which  the  English  soldier  bums  to  assume 
when  he  sees  the  enemy  before  him.  The  Afghans  had 
planted  a  standard  upon  the  hill,  only  some  thirty  yards 
fit>m  the  British  squares ;  and  now  an  officer  proclaimed 
a  reward,  equal  in  the  eyes  of  the  common  Sepoy  to  a 
year's  pay,  to  any  one  who  would  advance  and  take  it. 
But  not  a  man  responded  to  the  appeal  A  great  fear 
was  upon  them  alL  The  officers  stood  up  hke  brave 
men ;  and  hurled  stones  at  the  advancing  enemy.*  But 
nothing  seemed  to  infuse  courage  into  our  panic-struck 
troops.  The  enemy,  emboldened  by  success,  advanced 
in  larger  numbers,  and  rushed  upon  our  single  gun. 
Our  cavalry,  called  upon  to  charge,  refused  to  follow  their 
officers.  The  artiller3maien  stood  to  their  gun ;  two  of 
them  fell  dead  beside  it;  a  third  was  deperately  wounded; 
a  fourth,  when  the  enemy  rushed  upon  it,  clung  to  the 
carriage  between  the  wheels,  and  miraculously  escaped 
destruction.  There,  too,  fell  Lieutenant  Laing,  than 
whom  there  was  not  a  braver  soul  in  the  field  on  that 
&tal  day,  waving  his  sword  over  the  gun,  cheering  the 
men  who  were  doing  their  duty,  and  calling  on  the  rest 
to  follow  their  example.  But  the  heroic  courage  of  the 
officers  was  thrown  away  upon  the  men.    The  gun  was 

*  The officen  who  80  distinguished    killed;    and    Captains    Mackeniie, 
themselyet  were  Captain  Miuuntosh    Troup,  and  Leighton. 
and  Lieutenant   Lung,   who  were 


88  PROGBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

lost,  and  our  disheartened  regiments  were  in  confused 
and  disastrous  flight. 

All,  however,  was  not  then  lost.  Shelton  ordered 
the  halt  to  be  sounded.  The  fljring  regiments  stopped 
and  re-formed;  then  turning  round,  faced  the  enemy 
with  a  shout,  and  seemed  ready  to  renew  the  conflict. 
But  the  Ghazees  now  shrunk  from  the  British  bayonets. 
They  were  few  in  numbers ;  and  they  saw,  too,  a  party 
of  Anderson's  Horse  coming  to  the  chaise.  Taking  the 
horses  and  limber  with  them,  they  abandoned  the  gun, 
and  fled. 

In  the  mean  while  the  enemy's  cavalry  on  the  plain 
had  been  thrown  into  confusion  by  the  fall  of  their 
leader — ^Abdoollah  Eian,  Achetzkye.  How  he  fell, 
or  at  what  moment,  is  not  precisely  known.*  It  was 
generally  believed  that  he  was  wounded  by  a  shot  from 
our  gun — ^but  there  was  a  whisper,  of  doubtful  credi- 
bility, to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  struck  down  by 
the  jezail  of  one  of  his  own  countr3rmen,  who  is  said  to 
have  claimed  a  reward  for  the  act.  Be  the  history  of 
his  fall  what  it  may,  it  discouraged  and  alarmed  the 
A%han  cavalry  on  the  plain.  Seeing  their  leader  car- 
ried from  the  field,  they  fled  in  confusion  towards  the 
city.  !^orant  of  the  cause  of  their  flight,  the  infan- 
try began  to  follow  them ;  and  the  excited  lookers-on 
in  cantonments  now  thought  the  day  was  ours.  Mao- 
naghten  and  Elphinstone  were  standing  together  on  the 
ramparts  watching  the  enemy  as  they  streamed  across 
the  plain.  The  opportunity  seemed  a  great  one.  To 
have  sent  out  of  cantonments  a  body  of  troops  to  pursue 
the  flying  enemy,  and  render  their  confusion  complete, 

♦  Ejrre  says  he  was  struck  by  a  Sale  places  his  fall  after  the  capture 
shrapnel  shot,  before  our  gun  was  of  the  ffun.  The  subject  is  discussed 
captured  for  the  first  time.    Lady    in  a  subsequent  page. 


THE  ACTION  CONTINUED.  89 

would  have  been  to  have  secured  a  victory.  The 
Envoy  urged  it  upon  the  Greneral;  but  the  Greneral  said 
it  was  a  wild  scheme,  and  weakly  negatived  the  worthy 
proposaL 

At  this  moment,  when  the  enemy  were  in  flight, 
and  our  gun  had  been  recaptured,  Shelton  might  have 
brought  back  his  force  with  credit  to  cantonments.  But 
the  opportunity  was  lost.  The  enemy  returned  to  the 
field,  recruited  by  new  hordes  whom  they  met  emerging 
from  the  dty ;  and  soon  the  swelling  multitude  poured 
itself  upon  our  battalions.  The  General  had  sent  out 
new  suppUes  of  ammunition,  with  another  limber  and 
horses  for  the  gun ;  and  it  was  soon  again  in  full  opera- 
tion, playing  with  murderous  effect  upon  the  masses  of 
the  enemy.  But  again  the  British  muskets  were  found 
no  match  for  the  Afghan  jezails.  There  were  truer  eyes 
and  steadier  hands,  too,  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy  than 
in  our  own;  and  now  with  imerring  aim  the  Afghan 
marksmen  mowed  down  our  men  like  grass.  The  artil- 
lerymen were  fidling  fast  at  their  gun;  and  Shelton, 
thinking  it  insecure,  withdrew  it  to  a  safer  position. 
Emboldened  by  this,  the  enemy  continued  the  attack 
with  increased  vigour;  and  again  the  British  troops 
began  to  cower  beneath  the  fire  of  their  assailants. 

For  now  was  seen  again  that  spectacle  which  had 
before  struck  terror  into  our  ranks  and  scattered  our 
fighting  men  like  sheep.  A  party  of  the  enemy,  headed 
1^  a  band  of  fiirious  Ghazees,  emerged  firom  the  gorge, 
and  crawling  up  the  hill  suddenly  burst  upon  our  waver- 
ing battalions.  The  British  troops  had  been  losing  heart 
b^ore  this;  and  now  it  needed  little  to  extinguish  the 
last  remaining  spark  of  courage  that  warmed  them.  At 
this  inauspicious  moment,  Shelton,  who  had  been  ever  in 
the  thickest  of  the  fire,  and  who  escaped  by  very  miracle 
the  balk  which  flew  about  the  one-armed  veteran,  and 


90  FBOGBESS  OF  THB  mSXTBBECTION. 

Struck  him  five  times  with  no  eflfect,*  fell  back  a  few 
paces  to  order  some  more  men  to  the  front  Seeing 
the  back  of  their  commander  turned  towards  the  enemy, 
our  front-rank  men  gave  way  ;f  and,  in  a  minute,  in&ntry 
and  cavahy  were  flying  precipitately  down  the  slope  g£ 
the  inll.  The  A%han  horse,  seiadng  the  opportunity, 
dashed  upon  our  retreating  force ;  and  presently  friend 
and  foe  were  mixed  up  in  inextricable  confusion.  The 
artillerymen  alone  were  true  to  themselves  and  their 
country.  Thinking  only  of  the  safety  of  their  guu,  they 
dashed  down  the  steep  descent  and  drove  into  the  very 
midst  of  the  A%han  horsemen.};  But  they  could  not 
resist  the  multitudes  that  closed  around  them ;  and  the 
gun,  so  nobly  served  and  so  nobly  protected,  fell  a 
second  time  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  rout  of  the  British  force  was  complete.§  In  one 
confused  mass  of  infantry  and  cavalry  —  of  European 
and  native  soldiers — they  fled  to  the  cantonment  walls. 
Elphinstone,  who  had  watched  the  conflict  from  the 
ramparts,  went  out,  infirm  as  he  was,  and  strove,  with 
all  the  energy  of  which,  in  his  enfeebled  state,  he  was 
master,  to  rally  the  fugitives.  But  they  had  lost  them- 
selves past  recovery ;  they  had  forgotten  that  they  were 
British  soldiers.  The  whole  force  was  now  at  the  mercy 
of  the  Afghans.  Had  they  swept  on,  the  cantonments 
must  have  fallen  before  them.     The  enemy  were  so 

*  "  I  stood  by  till  my  own  clotheii  %  "As  before,"  says  Captain  John- 
were  riddled,  havinjr  been  struck  hr  son,  "the  artillerymen  were  the  last 
no  less  than  five  baUs,  none  of  which  to  leave ;  and  it  was  a  fflorious  sight 
did  much  harm ;  one  spent  ball  hit  to  see  these  brave  men  dashing  down 
me  on  the  head  and  nearly  knocked  the  steep  descent  at  the  most  nirioui 
me  down ;  another  made  my  arm  a  rate,  in  the  midst  of  thousands  of  the 
little  stiff." — IBrigadierJSJieUon^s  Nar'  enemy's  cavalr/,  regardless  of  every- 
rative:  MS.  Recardt.^  thingbut  the  safety  of  their  gun." 

t  I  find  this  incident  related  in        §The  loss  upon  our  side  was  se- 

only  one  account  of  the  engagement;  vere.      Four   officers  fell — ^namdy, 

but,  as  that  one  is  Shelton^s  own,  I  Colonel  Oliver,  Captains  Macintosh 

have   not   hesitated   to   adopt  tiie  and  Walker,  and  Lieutenant  Lfung. 

story.  Six  others  were  wounded* 


niGHT  01*  THE  BBTTIBH  TBOOFS.  81 

mixed  up  with  our  men,  that  the  guns  on  the  ram* 
parts  ootdd  not  open  upon  them  without  destroying  our 
retreating  corps.  But  the  insurgents  made  no  effort  to 
follow  up  the  advantage  they  had  gained.  One  of  the 
leading  chiefi,  Osman  Khan,  suddenly  drew  off  his  men,* 
and,  in  a  short  time,  the  whole  force  had  withdrawn, 
with  shouts  of  exultation,  to  the  city.f 

^^  This,'*  Bays  Brigadier  Shelton,  in  his  narrative  of  the 
events,  in  which  he  bore  so  conspicuous  a  part,  ^'  con- 
duded  all  exterior  operations/'J  Nothing  more  was  to 
be  done  by  fighting.  A  general  gloom  hung  over  the 
cantonment*  The  most  sanguine  now  began  to  despond. 
The  troops  had  not  only  lost  all  heart — they  had  lost  all 
discipline.  The  link  which  bound  them  to  their  officers 
seemed  to  be  broken.  The  privations  to  which  they 
were  exposed  were  great.     Cold,  himger,  and  fatigue 

*  Lady  Sale  sajs :  '^  Osman  Elhan  but  only  threw  back  his  flanks  en 
was  heard  b^  cwr  Sepoys  to  order  his  potence,  Captiun  Evans,  of  the  44th, 
mm  not  to  nre  on  those  who  ran,  but  also  assured  him  that  there  were  no 
to  spare  them.  A  chief,  probably  the  squares.  Every  other  writer,  how- 
sime,  rode  round  Kershaw  three  times  ever,  makes  a  smiilar  assertion  rela- 
when  he  was  compelled  to  run  with  tive  to  the  squares  on  the  Beh-meru 
his  men ;  he  waved  his  sword  over  his  hill.  O^  the  atrocity  of  the  single 
head,  bat  never  attempted  to  kill  him;  gun  there  is  only  one  opinion.  With 
and  Captain  IVevor  says  his  life  was  regard  to  the  general  plan  of  opera- 
several  thnes  in  the  power  of  the  tions.  Lady  bale  says :  **  The  mis- 
enemy,  but  he  was  also  spared.'*  fortunes  of  the  day  are  mainly  attri- 

t  '*  They  seemed,**  says  Lieutenant  butable  to  Shelton^s  bad  generalship, 

Melville,  ^  astonished  at  their  own  In  tddng  up  so  unfavorable  a  posi- 

saccesa ;   and  after  mutilating  in  a  tion  after  his  fault  in  neglecting  to 

dreadful  manner  Uie  many  bodies  left  surprise    the   village    and    occupy, 

on  the  hill,  they  retired  with  exulting  which  was  the  ostensible  object  of 

dumta  to  liie  aty.**  the  force  going  out.**    But  I  have 

X  No  small  quantity  of  militarv  shown  that  it  was  not  Shelton*8  fault 

eriticiBm  has  been  lavished  upon  thu  that  the  village  was  not  surprised. 

unfortanate  action  of  the  23rd  of  A  simultaneous  attack  on  the  vil- 

Kovember.      £yre*s  criticisms    are  lage  and  on  the  hill  was  the  course 

well  known ;  and  their  soundness  has  recommended    by    the    Brigadier  ; 

been  acknowledged  hr  almost  every  but  he  was  overruled    in  council. 

sobeequent  writer.     Major  Hough,  He  went  into  action,  feeling  certain 

however,    sajs,    with    reference   to  that  the  plan  mapped  out  for  him 

Eyre's  assertion  that  Shelton  formed  was  a  wrong  one — and  the  battle 

hs  infantry  into  squares  on  the  Beh-  was  not  fought  the  better  for  the  feel- 

mem  hilL  that  the  Brigadier  assured  ing  that  he  had  been  thwarted  and 

hbn  that  n€f  formed  no  squares  at  all,  opposed. 


92         FBOGBESS  OF  THE  INSUBBECTION. 

pressed  upon  them ;  and  they  had  not  strength  to  bear 
up  against  such  a  burden  of  woe.  It  was  plain  that  no 
use  could  be  made  in  the  field  of  a  force  so  feeble  and 
dispirited.  The  time  for  action  had  passed.  And  so, 
when,  on  the  day  after  this  disastrous  afiair  on  the  Beh- 
meru  hill,  the  enemy  b^an  to  destroy  the  bridge  which 
General  Elphinstone,  a  short  time  before,  had  thrown  over 
the  Caubul  River,  the  military  chiefs  looked  idly  on, 
whilst  this  outrage  was  being  perpetrated  almost  within 
musket-shot  of  our  position. 

There  were  only  two  courses  now  open  to  the  doomed 
force ;  and  the  political  and  military  cliie&  began  again 
to  take  counsel  together.  The  question  of  concentration 
in  the  Balla  Hissar  was  first  revived  and  discussed  be- 
tween them.  John  ConoUy,  at  the  instance  of  the  King, 
wrote  urgently  to  Macnaghten,  recommending  the  mea- 
sure as  the  only  one  that  could  now  secure  the  safety 
and  the  honour  of  the  British  troops.  But  the  mili- 
tary authorities  had  set  their  faces  against  it,  and  the 
Envoy  yielded  his  assent  to  their  opinions  against  his 
own  better  judgment.  After  a  personal  interview,  on  the 
morning  of  the  24th  of  November,  at  which  the  subject 
had  been  discussed  between  them.  General  Elphinstone 
addressed  the  following  letter  to  the  Envoy,  seeking 
Macnaghten's  opinion  and  stating  his  own : 

24th  Nov.,  1841. 

My  deab  Sib  William, 

With  reference  to  our  conversation  this  morning,  I  request 
you  will  let  me  know  what  are  your  views  with  respect  to  moving 
into  the  Balla  Hissar  as  proposed  to  you,  admitting  the  possibility 
of  our  holding  out  there.  Our  getting  into  it  with  our  ammunition 
and  numerous  sick  and  wounded,  amounting  to  near  700,  would 
be  attended  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  if  not  be  altogether  im- 
possible. The  enemy,  no  doubt,  in  the  greatest  force  would 
oppose  us,  which  would  oblige  us  to  cover  the  operation  with  the 


FUTURE  MOVEMENTS  DISCUSSED.  93 

greatest  part  of  our  troops,  and  thereby  leave  the  cantonment 
without  sufficient  defence. 

I  am  ihe  more  confirmed  in  my  opinion  of  the  difficulty  of  the 
operation  from  the  harassed  and  dispirited  state  of  our  troops,  now 
so  much  reduced  in  numbers,  and  failure  would  tend  to  our  certain 
destruction.  With  our  means,  it  would  take  some  days  to  remove 
the  ammunition  and  stores,  during  which  the  enemy  would  be 
collecting  a  great  number  around  us;  our  wounded  would  be  in- 
creasedf  with  diminished  means  of  conveying  them. 

Would  the  Balla  Hissar  hold  us  with  our  followers,  even  after 
the  sacrifice  of  our  horses  and  cattle  ?  I  am  told  that  water  is 
already  selling  there  at  a  high  price,  even  with  the  present  small 
garrison.  We  have,  at  least,  barely  twenty  days'  supplies,  which, 
even  if  we  could  remove,  we  have  little  prospect  of  adding  to  at 
the  Balla  Hissar;  a  retreat  from  thence  would  be  worse  thanfiK)m 
our  present  position,  for,  after  abandoning  our  horses  and  means 
of  transport,  our  sick,  wounded,  and  stores,  would  have  to  be  left 
behind  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 

I  have  conferred  with  Briga^er  Shelton,  the  second  in  com- 
mand, and  he  concurs  with  me  in  the  above  opinion. 

Tours,  &c., 

W.  K.  Elphinstone.* 

To  this  letter  the  Envoy  replied: 

Mt  Deab  General, 

In  reply  to  your  note  just  received,  I  beg  to  state  my  opinion 
that  the  move  into  the  Balla  Hissar  would  be  attended  with  the 
greatest  difficulty,  and  I  do  not  see  what  advantage  could  accrue 
dierefrom,  although  the  disadvantages,  as  pointed  out  by  you^ 
are  apparent  in  the  event  of  our  ultimate  retreat.  As  to  the  mere 
question  of  room  for  our  troops  and  followers,  I  do  not  imagine 
that  we  should  feel  much  difficulty  on  that  account. 

Tours,  &c.  &c., 

W.  H.  MACNAGHTEN.f 

The  question  of  a  movement  into  the  Balla  Hissar 

•  Correspaiuknce  of  Qen,  E^hin*       f  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  iST. 
Utme :  MS.  Jlecords.  The  substance  of   Macnaghten :  MS.  Records. 
this  letter  is  given  in  £yre*8  journal* 


94  PBOQRESS  OF  THE  INSIJBHECTION, 

having  been  thus  disposed  of  for  the  present,  the  Envoy 
turned  his  thoughts  towards  that  other  course,  which 
had  been  so  long  pressed  upon  him  by  the  xniUtary  chief. 
Ho  b^an  U>  thl£  of  nogoSathg  wi4  tto  one^  But 
that  he  might  not,  save  in  the  last  extremity,  enter  upon 
a  line  of  conduct  against  which  the  manliness  of  hia 
nature  revolted,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  the  General, 
asking,  in  specific  terms,  whether  he  considered  it  po8» 
fiible  any  longer  to  maintain  his  position  in  the  country. 
To  this  letter  Elphinstone  replied: 

Caubul,  24th  Nov.,  1841. 

Sib, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 

letter  of  this  day's  date,  calling  for  my  opinion  as  to  whether,  in 
a  military  point  of  view,  it  is  feasible  any  longer  to  maintain  our 
position  in  this  country. 

Li  reply,  I  beg  to  state^  that  after  having  held  our  position 
here  for  upwards  of  three  weeks  in  a  state  of  siege,  from  the  want 
of  provisions  and  forage,  the  reduced  state  of  our  troops,  the  large 
number  of  wounded  and  sick,  the  difficulty  of  defending  the  ex- 
tensive and  iU-situated  cantonment  we  occupy,  the  near  approach 
of  winter,  our  communications  cut  off,  no  prospect  of  relief,  and 
the  whole  countiy  in  anhs  against  us,  I  am  of  opinion  that  it 
is  not  feasible  any  longer  to  maintain  our  position  in  this  country, 
and  that  you  ought  to  avail  yourself  of  the  ofi^  to  negotiate 
which  has  been  made  to  you. 

W.  K.  El«PHXN8TON»,* 

Upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter  the  Envoy  ceased  to 
hesitate.  The  enemy  had  made  pacific  overtures  to 
him,  and  he  now  believed  that  it  was  no  longer  his  duty 
to  refuse  to  listen  to  them.  So  he  sent  a  message  to  the 
insurgent  chiefs,  intimating  his  willingness  to  receive  a 
deputation  from  them,  and  to  discuss  the  preliminaries 
of  a  treaty.  The  invitation  was  accepted.  On  the  fol- 
lowing day.  Sultan  Mahomed  Ehan,    Barukzye,  and 

*  Corrtspondenct  of  Sir  W.  H,  Maenaghlen:  MS.  Records. 


COlOfENGEMENT  OF  NEG0TIATI0N8.  95 

Meerza  Ahmed  Ali,  Euzzilbash,  made  their  appearance 
at  the  bridge.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  unas* 
smning  than  the  ambassadorial  cortege.  The  deputies 
rode  sorry  horses,  and  were  attended  only  by  their 
groomB,  Captain  Lawrence  and  Captain  Trevor  were 
sent  out  to  meet  them.  The  conference  lasted  two  hours. 
Sultan  Mahomed  Khan,  whose  tone  was  insolent  and 
uncompromising,  demanded  terms  such  as  the  English 
officeTB  could  not  listen  to  without  disgrace.  The  depu* 
ties  then  asked  to  see  Macnaghten,  and  the  party  moved 
to  cantonments.  In  the  guard^room  at  one  of  the 
gateways  the  Envoy  received  the  Afghan  ambassadors. 
The  discussion  was  long  and  animated.  Sultan  Maho- 
med, still  arn^ant  and  offensive,  trode  down,  as  with  the 
heel  of  the  conqueror,  all  the  pretensions  of  his  oppo- 
n^ts;  and  declared  that,  as  the  Afghans  had  beaten  us 
in  battle,  they  had  a  right  to  dictate  terms  of  capitulation. 
He  demanded  that  the  British  should  surrender  at  dis- 
cretion, giving  themselves  up  with  all  their  arms,  am- 
munitioii,  and  treasure,  as  prisoners  of  war.  Macnaghten 
was  not  a  man  to  submit  to  this  dictation.  The  terms  were 
resolutely  rejected.  "  We  shall  meet,  then,"  said  Sultan 
Mahomed,  "  on  the  field  of  battle."  "  At  all  events," 
replied  Macnaghten,  "  we  shaU  meet  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment."  And  so  the  conference  was  brought  to  an  end." 

Then  the  Envoy  sent  them  in  writing  a  statement  of 
the  only  terms  on  which  he  was  prepared  to  treat.  "  I 
proposed  to  them,"  he  wrote,  "  the  only  terms  which,  in 
my  opinion,  could  be  accepted  with  honour;  but  the 
temper  of  the  rebels  may  best  he  understood  when  I 
mention  that  they  returned  me  a  letter  of  defiance  the 
next  morning,  to  the  effect  that  unless  I  consented  to 
surrender  our  arms  and  abandon  his  Majesty  to  his  fate, 
we  must  prepare  for  immediate  hostilities.  To  this  I 
repUed,  that  we  preferred  death  to  dishonour,  and  that 


96         PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 

it  would  remain  with  a  higher  power  to  decide  be- 
tween us."* 

Thus  ended  the  first  attempt  to  secure,  by  negotiation 
with  the  enemy,  the  safety  of  our  discom^ted  troops. 
Whilst  this  movement  was  m  progress  a  strange  sight 
might  have  been  seen  on  the  ramparts  of  the  British 
cantonment.  Over  those  low  walls,  misnamed  defences, 
the  European  soldiers  were  conversing  with  their  Afghan 
enemies.  The  A%hans,  armed  to  the  teeth,  came  clus- 
tering round  the  cantonments ;  many  of  our  soldiers 
went  out  unarmed  amongst  them,  and  were  to  be  seen 
familiarly  shaking  hands  with  those  whom  a  day  before 
they  had  met  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  A%hans  were 
giving  vegetables  f  to  the  men  of  the  44th  Regiment, 
and  declaring  that  everything  had  been  amicably  settled 
between  the  two  contending  hosts. 

*  Unfinished  Report  of  Sir  W,  H.  leayes  mklit  conceal  bottles  of  spirit, 

Macnaghten  to  the  Supreme  Oovem"  wherewitn  it  was  desired  to  intozi* 

ment—found  in  his  wrUing'desk  afier  cate  the  garrison  prcTious  to  an  at- 

Ms  death :  MS.  Records.  tack  on  cantonment ;  but  they  proyed 

t  Principally  cabbages.     It  was  on  examination  to  be  yery  Wmless 

apprehended  by  some  wat  the  broad  cabbages  after  all. 


ABBIVAL  OF  AKBAB  KHAN.  97 


CHAPTER  VI. 

[NoTember — December:  1841.] 

Fh)gre88  of  Negotiation — ^Arrival  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan — Hia  Charao 
ter— N^tiations  continued— Deaths  of  Meer  Moajedee  and  AbdooUah 
Khan^-fievival  of  N^otiationa— The  Draft  Treaty. 

A  NEW  actor  now  appeared  upon  the  stage.  The  advent 
of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  been  for  some  time  ex- 
pected. He  had  arrived  from  Toorkistan  early  in  October, 
and  was  known  to  have  been  hovering  about  Bameean,  and 
seemingly  watching  the  progress  of  events  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  Afghan  capital.  How  far  he  may  have 
sown  the  seeds  of  insurrection  among  the  Ghilzyes  is  not 
very  clearly  known,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  influence 
he  exercised  at  that  time  was  rather  of  a  passive  than  an 
active  kind.  That  his  presence  on  the  borders  of  A%han- 
istan  encouraged  his  countrymen  in  their  career  of  hosti- 
lity is  not  to  be  doubted ;  but  there  is  little  or  no  evi- 
dence to  connect  him  more  palpably  with  the  earlier 
movements  of  the  insurrectionary  war.  Whatever  may 
have  been  his  participation  in  the  events  of  October  and 
November,  his  appearance  at  the  capital  was  now  hailed 
by  the  insurgents  with  every  demonstration  of  delight. 
Salutes  were  fired  in  honour  of  his  arrival,  and  the  chiefs 
waited  upon  him  as  upon  one  henceforth  to  be  recognised 

VOL.  II.  H 


98  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

as  their  leader.  He  was  known  to  be  a  man  of  high, 
courage  and  energy;  he  had  approved  himself  a  good 
soldier  in  the  field ;  and  he  was  the  favourite  son  of  the 
old  Barukzye  ruler,  who  a  year  before  had  been  con- 
demned to  pine  away  the  remainder  of  his  life  a  captive 
in  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 

The  arrival  of  the  Sirdar  was  a  great  event.  Both 
parties  looked  upon  it  as  one  that  must  exercise  a  mighty 
influence  over  the  future  destinies  of  the  war.  The  in- 
surgents, wanting  a  leader,  saw  in  the  son  of  Dost  Ma- 
homed one  around  whom  they  could  rally,  with  confi- 
dence alike  in  his  sincerity  and  his  courage.  He  had 
the  wrongs  of  an  injured  family  to  redress.  He  had  a^ 
kingdom  to  regain.  He  had  been  an  outcast  and  a  fugi- 
tive during  two  years  of  suffering  and  danger,  because  it 
had  pleased  the  British  Government  to  invade  his  father's 
dominions  and  to  expel  the  de  facto  rulers  of  the  coun- 
try ;  and  now  he  saw  opening  out  before  him  a  prospect 
of  recovering  the  lost  supremacy  of  the  Barukzyes,  and 
restoring  his  exiled  father  to  the  Balla  Hissar.  All  the 
circumstances  of  his  past  life  and  his  present  position 
were  such  as  to  secure  his  loyalty  to  the  national  cause. 
His  inner  qualities,  no  less  than  his  outer  environments, 
were  of  a  class  to  rivet  his  hostility  to  the  British.  He 
was  a  man  of  an  eager,  impetuous  nature ;  susceptible  of 
good  and  of  bad  impulses,  but  seldom  otherwise  than 
earnest  and  impulsive.  His  education  had  been  n^- 
lected ;  in  his  youth  he  had  been  unrestrained,  and  now 
self-control — a  virtue  rarely  exercised  by  an  A%han — 
was  wholly  foreign  to  the  character  of  the  man.  He  was, 
indeed,  peculiarly  demonstrative,  and  sudden  in  his  de- 
monstrations, passing  rapidly  from  one  mood  to  another 
— ^blown  about  by  violent  gusts  of  feeling,  bitterly  repent- 
ing to-day  the  excesses  of  yesterday,  and  rushing  into 
new  excesses  to-morrow.     His  was  one  of  those  fiery 


CHABACTER  OF  AKBAR  KHAN.  99 

temperaments — those  bold,  dashing  characters — which, 
in  times  of  popular  commotion,  ever  place  their  possessor 
in  the  fix>nt  rank.  But  in  seasons  of  repose  he  was  one 
of  the  most  joyous  fuid  light-hearted  of  men ;  no  man 
loved  a  joke  better;  no  man  laughed  more  heartily,  or 
seemed  to  look  more  cheerftilly  on  the  sunny  side  of  life. 
They,  who  knew  him  before  the  British  trode  down  the 
Barukz3re8f  spoke  of  him  as  a  good-tempered^  well-mean* 
ing  young  man,  and  little  thought,  when  his  large  dark 
eyes  were  glowing  with  child-like  eagerness,  to  have  the 
full  dimensions  of  his  long  spear  introduced  into  his  por- 
trait; or  his  solid  frame  was  shaking  with  laughter  at 
some  joke  passed  upon  his  imcomely  Meerza^  that  he 
would  soon  become  the  chief  actor  in  one  of  the  bloodiest 
tragedies  that  has  ever  disgraced  the  history  of  the 
world. 

Whilst  the  A%hans,  with  noisy  demonstrations  of 
delight,  were  welcoming  the  appearance  of  Akbar  Ehan, 
the  British  were  slow  to  believe  that  his  advent  would 
deepen  the  embarrassments  of  their  position.    Early  in 
November,  Mohun  Lai  had  suggested  to  Macnaghten  the 
expediency  of  endeavouring  to  corrupt  the  Sirdar  before 
his  advance  upon  the  capital;  but  the  Envoy  had  re- 
ceived slightingly  the  proposal,  and  no  overtures  had 
been  made  to  the  son  of   Dost  Mahomed  before  his 
arrival  at  the  capital.    It  was  believed  that  there  was 
sufficient  security  for  his  forbearance  in  the  fact  that  his 
father  and  his  brothers  were  prisoners  in  our  hands ;  and 
in  the  game  of  negotiation,  which  was  now  to  be  carried 
on,  it  was  calculated  that  the  intervention  of  the  Sirdar 
would  &cilitate  rather  than  encumber  our  arrangements 
for  the  honourable  evacuation  of  Afghanistan,  and  our 
safe  return  to  the  provinces  wtich,  in  an  evil  hour,  we 
had  been  so  unhappily  tempted  to  quit. 
Akbar  Khan  appeared  at  Caubul ;  but  he  did  not  at 

h2 


100  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

once  assume  the  direction  of  affairs.  The  Newab  Ma- 
homed Zemaun  Khan,  a  cousin  of  the  late  Caubul  chie^ 
had  been  proclaimed  King  by  the  insurgents.  All  orders 
were  sent  forth  in  his  name;  and  the  "fatiha"  was  read 
for  him  in  the  mosques.  He  was  a  man  of  a  humane 
and  honourable  nature,  polished  manners,  and  affitble 
address.  His  nephew,  Osman  Khan,  who  is  described 
by  the  Envoy  as  "  the  most  moderate  and  sensible  man** 
of  the  insurgent  party,  was  now  employed  to  negotiate 
with  the  British  minister,  and  several  times  passed,  on 
this  errand,  between  the  cantonment  and  the  city.  But 
the  terms  stiU  dictated  by  the  enemy  were  such  as  Mao- 
naghten  could  not  honourably  accept.  Day  followed 
day ;  and  nothing  effectual  was  done  either  in  counsel  or 
on  the  field.  The  enemy  appeared  on  the  hills  com- 
manding cantonments  and  in  the  village  of  Beh-meru, 
now  deserted  and  destroyed ;  and  the  guns  in  the  British 
cantonments  were  playing  all  day  long  upon  these  points. 
But  such  distant  interchanges  produced  no  result;  and 
in  the  mean  while  our  provisions  were  rapidly  dwindling 
down.  Again  starvation  stared  the  garrison  in  the  face. 
With  laudable  zeal  and  activity  the  commissariat  officers 
exerted  themselves  to  obtain  grain  from  the  surrounding 
coimtry;  but  with  equal  zeal  and  activity  the  enemy 
were  striving  to  frustrate  their  efforts.  Akbar  Khan 
himself  had  not  been  many  days  at  Caubul  before  he 
began  to  see  that  to  defeat  our  commissariat  officers  was 
to  overcome  our  unhappy  force.  Threatening  death  to 
all  who  might  be  detected  in  supplying  our  troops  with 
any  description  of  food,  he  soon  baffled  the  best  efforts  of 
Boyd  and  Johnson,*  and  again  brought  the  question  of 
capitulation  to  a  simple  question  of  supplies. 

*  *|  Ut  December^  1841.— For  the  is  the  chief  of  the  Beh-meru  district. 

last  six  days  have  been  daily  up  be-  Notwithstanding  my  ofiera  of  the  mofli 

fore  gun-mre,  and  at  the  fort  of  Khoja  handsome  rewards  to  hhn,  I  cannot 

Mcer  Mahomed,  in  the  hope  of  pro-  now  prevail  upon  him  or  his  people 

curing  some  grain  from  them.    He  to  give  further  aid.     On  going  to  nit 


CONFIDENCE  OF  THE  ENVOY.  101 

But  Still  sanguine  and  confident,  whilst  the  clouds  were 
gathering  more  and  more  thickly  around  him,  Mac- 
naghten  saw  the  skies  brightening  over-head,  and  never 
doubted  that  before  long  the  storm  would  roll  itself 
away.  The  letters  which  he  wrote  at  this  time  present 
a  remarkable  contrast  to  those  written  by  General  El- 
phinstone.  Whilst  the  General  was  looking  around  him 
everywhere  for  whatever  could  be  made  to  swell  the 
mountain  of  difficulty  and  danger  that  he  kept  so  steadily 
before  him,  the  Envoy  was  constantly  arraying  in  the  fore- 
ground every  circumstance  that  could  in  any  way  con- 
tribute towards  the  chance  of  ultimate  success.  Whilst 
the  General  was  discovering  that  "  our  position  was 
becoming  more  and  more  critical,"  the  Envoy  was  per- 
ceiving that  "  our  prospects  were  brightening,"  and 
talking  about  "  defjdng  the  whole  of  Afghanistan."  On 
the  28th  of  November,  General  Elphinstone  wrote  thus 
to  Sir  William  Macnaghten : 

NoTember  28,  1841. 

My  dear  Sir  William, 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  the  persons  expected  last  night  did  not 
come  to  Captain  Trevor,   and  that  the  Hindoo  merchant  has 

fort  thifl  morning  (about  700  yards  that  he  was  glad  I  had  spoken  to  him 
north  of  cantonments^  I  found  merely  on  the  subject,  as  he  felt  convinced 
tiro  or  three  people  mside,  who  told  that,  although  we  might  possibly  con- 
me  that  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  tinue  to  go  on  from  hand  to  mouth 
jesterday  come  with  a  party  and  for  a  few  days  longer,  it  was  impos- 
destroyed  every  house  m  it,  and  sible  we  could  exist  throughout  the 
threatened  death  to  the  Khoja  (who  winter ;  *  but,^  said  he,  *  let  us  wait 
had  fled)  and  his  family  in  the  event  two  days  longer,  as  something  may 
of  his  giving  us  further  aid.  Reported  turn  up/  In  the  mean  time,  our 
this  to  the  Envoy,  and  told  Sir  cattle  nave  been  starving  for  some 
WHliam  of  our  having  but  eight  time  past ;  not  a  blade  of  grass,  nor  a 
days*  supply  in  store,  and  that  all  particle  of  bJioosaTi^  nor  grain  pro- 
hopes  of  procuring  more  were  at  an  curable.  The  barley  in  store  is  served 
end.  I  took  the  liberty  of  entreating  out  as  provisions  to  the  camp-fol- 
that  some  decision  might  be  come  to  lowers,  who  set  a  quarter  of  a  seer 
as  to  our  ultimate  fate ;  that  but  Oiree  (half  a  pound^  for  their  daily  food, 
days  more  remained  to  consider  of  it ;  Our  cattle  are  subsisted  on  the  twigs, 
as  in  the  event  of  our  retreat  to  Jel-  branches,  and  bark  of  trees — scarcely 
Udabad  being  determined  on,  we  must  an  animal  fit  to  carry  a  load.'' — 
carry  with  Msfive  out  of  the  eight  days'  [Cay tain  Johnson's  Journal ;  MS.  Re 
sttppliesnowinthegodown.  Hcrcplied  cords.'] 


102  PROGBESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

failed  with  his  promised  supply  of  gmn.  I  ako  heai  that  Ehoja 
"^eev  has  gone  away.  Is  this  the  case?  If  so,  our  position  is 
l)ecoming  more  critical  on  the  score  of  provisions.  What  effect 
do  you  think  the  death  of  Abdoollah  KhaQ,  if  true,  wiU  have  on 
our  prospects?  I  shall  send  into  the  Balla  Hissar  to-morrow 
morning  some  things  for  the  men,  and  ammunition;  but  our 
terrible  want  there  is  fuel.  Major  Ewart  reports  some  men  there 
to  have  died  of  cold,  from  which  they  are  suffering  much,  and 
how  that  is  to  be  remedied  I  don't  see,  as  the  trees  near  could 
afford,  if  obtained,  but  little  relief,  for  I  don't  recollect  many  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  which  I  hear  is  supplied  with 
trees  (firewood)  from  Tezeen.  In  short,  between  ourselves,  J  see 
nothing  we  can  do  but  by  negotiation,  if  such  be  offered,  and 
which  for  the  many  difficulties  we  are  surrounded  with,  I  hope 
may  be  the  case.  The  camp-followers  are  bringing  in  wood  from 
the  village.    There  is  nothing  else  to  be  had,  I  hear. 

Yours, 

W.  K.  E. 

Very  different  from  the  tone  of  this  desponding  letter 
was  the  spirit  which  at  this  time  animated  the  communi- 
cations of  the  Envoy  to  Mohun  Lai.  But  there  are 
other  points  besides  the  sanguine  temperament  of  Mac- 
naghten  which  these  letters  serve  to  illustrate: 

November  26,  1841.    4  p.m. 

My  p£ab  Sib, 

I  have  just  now  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  your  notes 
of  yesterday  and  this  morning.  Tell  our  friends  that  they  need  be 
under  no  alarm;  that  J.  should  be  in  a  hurry  to  trust  what  was 
firranged  by  Sultan  Mahomed  Khan  was  all  nonsense,  because  I 
know  that  he  is  not  a  man  to  keep  his  word  in  anything.  The 
intelligence  you  have  sent  me  is  very  encouraging,  and  I  hope  the 
nifac  among  the  rebels  will  increase.  Meer  Musjedee's  death  will 
probably  cause  the  dispersion  of  the  rebels  who  have  come  from 
Nijrow.  Humza  Khan  never  sent  any  relatives  of  the  Ghilzye 
chie^  to  me.  Yours, 

W.  H.  M. 

T^ll  everybody  that  I  have  no  faith  in  Sultan  Mahomed  Khan, 
and  that  I  only  wished  to  try  the  sincerity  of  his  employers. 


COBBESPONDENCE  WITH  MOHUN  LAL.  103 

November  29.    9  P,u, 
Mr  DEAB  SlB| 

I  enclose  you  a  note  from  Captain  Johnson.  We  are  well 
off  for  everjtliing  but  supplies,  and,  Inshalla,  we  shall  not  be 
badly  off  for  them.  If  you  can  get  any  person  to  undertake  to 
supply  the  grain,  it  should  be  put  down  in  the  ground  lately  occu- 
pied by  Mr.  Deane's  fort.  Pray  do  your  utmost  to  effect  this. 
•  *  *  •  The  enemy  appeared  to-day  in  considerable  numbers, 
but  they  did  nothing,  and  I  am  sure  they  will  never  venture  to 
attack  our  cantonment.  If  we  had  only  provisions,  which,  with 
due  exertions  ought  to  be  obtained,  we  should  be  able  to  defy  the 
whole  of  A%hanistan  for  any  period.  I  am  very  sorry  that  the 
deputation  from  Humza  did  not  make  their  appearance  last  night, 
and  I  am  anxiously  expecting  accounts  from  you  showing  why 
they  did  not  do  so.    *     *    *     *  « 

30th,  9  P.M. — Your  messenger  has  just  arrived.  I  do  not  like 
to  give  50,000  rupees  without  some  security.  Our  prospects  are, 
I  think,  brightening,  and  if  you  can  assist  us  in  the  way  of 
supplies,  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  *  •  •  •  i  would  give 
any  money  to  Humza  and  the  Ghilzyes  if  I  had  any  security 
that  they  would  be  our  friends,  give  us  supplies,  and  keep 
open  the  communications.  W.  H.  M. 

It  will  be  gathered  from  these  letters,  that,  before  the 
end  of  November,  Abdoollah  Khan  and  Meer  Musjedee 
had  both  been  removed,  by  death,  from  the  scene  of 
their  recent  triumphs.  General  Elphinstone  speaks  of 
the  death  of  the  former ;  Sir  William  Macnaghten  of  the 
death  of  the  latter.  In  the  action  of  the  23rd  of  No- 
vember, Abdoollah  Khan  had  been  carried  wounded 
from  the  field  of  battle;  but  whether  a  shrapnel  shot 
from  Sbelton's  one  gun,  or  a  ball  from  an  A%han  jezail, 
struck  down  the  truculent  chief,  is  a  point  of  history 
which  must  ever  remain,  as  now,  enveloped  in  obscurity 
and  doubt.  The  story  runs,  that  one  of  the  men  who  had 
been  set  upon  the  track  of  the  doomed  chiefs,  declared 
that  he  shot  down  his  victim  from  behind  a  wall ;  and 
promised  that  poison  should  complete  the  work  which 


104  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

the  bullet  had  but  partially  eflfected.  AbdooUah  Khan 
died  before  a  week  had  expired;*  and  it  is  said  that 
Abdool  Aziz  claimed  the  price  of  blood.  But  Mohun 
Lai  did  not  feel  assured  that  either  the  traitorous  bullet 
or  the  poison  of  the  claimant  had  done  the  work  of 
death ;  and  the  reward  was  refiised  on  the  plea  tbat  it 
had  been  oflfered  for  the  heads  of  the  chiefs,  and  the 
head  of  AbdooUah  Khan  had  not  been  brought  to  him. 

How  Meer  Musjedee  died  is  not  very  clearly  known.f 
His  disappearance  firom  the  scene  on  which  he  had 
acted  so  conspicuous  a  part,  was  sudden  and  unexpected. 
A  man  named  Mahomed  Oollah  swore  that  he  had  suf- 
focated the  chief  in  his  sleep,  and  claimed  the  reward 
of  his  service.  But  the  reward,  it  is  said,  was  refused 
upon  the  same  plea  as  was  urged  in  the  other  case.  The 
assassins,  disappointed  of  their  blood-money,  were  not 
likely  to  undertake  any  future  service  of  the  same  hazard- 
ous kind,  or  to  maintain  a  very  discreet  silence  about 
the  past.  If  they  were  employed  upon  such  service,  it 
is  strange  that  their  silence  was  not  secured  by  a  scru- 
pulous fulfilment  of  the  engagement  by  which  their  su- 
borners had  placed  their  own  credit  and  safety  in  their 
hands.  It  was  a  perilous  game,  indeed,  to  invite  dis- 
closures by  exciting  the  anger  and  hostility  of  the  agents 
employed  in  this  miserable  work. 

There  is  much  obscurity  still  enveloping  all  this  por- 
tion of  the  history  of  the  war  in  Afghanistan.    It  is  cer- 

*  It  was  generallj  belieyed  in  can-        f  It  was  believed  by  the  British 

tonments  thiat  he  had  died  from  the  that  he  had  been  poisoned.    Lady 

efiects  of  his  wounds.     Lady  Sale  Sale  says :  **  Meer  Musjedee  is  dead, 

sajrs :  *|  AbdooUah  Ehan*s  death  has,  Some  say    he  has  been  poisoned ; 

it  is  said,  created  some  confusion  in  others,  that  he  died  in  consequence  of 

the  city.   Whilst  still  living  a  report  the  wounds  received  last  year  in  the 

was  spread  of  his  decease;  and,  like  Kohistan.    A  number  of  this  chiefs 

Alexander,  he  mounted  his  horse  and  followers  have  gone  off  with  the  body 

showed  himself  to  his  followers ;  but  to  the  Kohistan,  there  to  attend  his 

the  exertion  was  too  great  for  him,  funeral  obsequies." 
sod  ho  shortly  afler  expired." 


DEATHS  OF  HEEB  MUSJEDEE  AND  ABDOOLLAH  KHAN.    105 

tain  that,  at  the  end  of  November,  Meer  Mugedee  and 
AbdooUah  Khan  died  under  circumstances  which  have 
been  iregarded,  and  not  unreasonably,  as  suspicious.  It 
is  scarcely  less  certain  that  Lieutenant  John  Conolly,  the 
cousin  and  assistant  of  the  Envoy,  instigated  Mohun  Lai 
to  offer  rwards  for  the  heads  of  certain  of  the  insur- 
gent chieis,  and  that  Meer  Mugedee  and  AbdooUah 
Khan  were  especially  marked  as  the  first  victims.  John 
Conolly  was  at  this  time  with  Shah  Soojah  in  the  Balla 
Hissar,  and  Mohun  Lai  was  in  the  house  of  the  Kuzzil- 
bash  chief.  The  Envoy  was  in  cantonments.  To  what 
extent  John  Conolly  acted  under  Macnaghten's  instruc- 
tions— whether  he  acted  on  his  own  authority,  or  was 
directed  by  Shah  Soojah,  is  not  very  clearly  known. 
That  Conolly  was  in  constant  communication  with  the 
Envoy  we  have  the  authority  of  the  latter  for  believing. 
"Throughout  the  rebellion,"  he  wrote,  in  his  oflScial 
report,  "  I  was  in  constant  communication  with  the 
Shah  through  my  assistant,  Lieutenant  J.  B.  Conolly, 
who  was  in  attendance  on  his  Majesty  in  the  Balla 
Hissar."  It  has  been  questioned,  therefore,  whether 
Conolly,  being  at  this  time  in  constant  communication 
with  the  Envoy,  was  Ukely,  in  a  matter  of  so  much  re- 
sponsibility, to  have  acted  without  instructions  from  his 
chief.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  Macnaghten's 
specific  declaration  in  the  following  letter  that  it  was 
never  his  object  to  encourage  the  assassination  of  the 
insurgents: 

December  1, 1841. 

Deab  Sib, 

I  am  sorry  to  find  from  your  letter  of  last  night  that 
you  should  have  supposed  it  was  ever  my  object  to  encourage 
assassination.  'Ihe  rebels  are  very  wicked  men^  but  we  must  not 
take  unlawful  means  to  destroy  them. 

Mohamed  Meerza  Khan  has  not  yet  come  near  me.     When 
he  does,  I  shall  be  glad  to  advance  him  6000  rupees  out  of  the 


106  PBOGBESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

50^000  whioh  ii  to  be  given  to  him  for  Ehidmut  (service). ...  I 
had  another  overture  this  morning  from  Zemaun  Khan's  party, 
offering  us  a  safe  retreat  to  Peshawur;  and  they  said  that  Ehazi 
Shereen  was  with  them — the  party  being  Jewan  Khan,  Jubbar 
Khan,  Oosman  Khan,  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Ameen-oollah 
Khan,  and  Khan  Shereen  Khan.  I  suspect,  from  the  insertion  of 
the  name  of  the  last  mentioned,  that  the  whole  thin||i8  a  £sibrica- 
tion.  Let  me  know  your  opinion  on  this  point.  I  replied  to  their 
overture  by  saying  that  I  would  not  now  do  anything  without  the 
consent  of  his  Majesty.    •    ♦    ♦  Yours,  &c.  &c., 

W.  H.  M* 

In  addition  to  this  written  declaration,  we  have  the 
statement  of  Captain  Skinner,  to  the  effect  that,  when 
at  a  subsequent  period  the  murder  of  Ameen-oollah  was 
suggested  to  him  by  Akbar  Khan,  the  Envoy  shrank 
with  abhorrence  and  disgust  from  the  proposal,  '^  assur- 
ing the  ambassadors  that,  as  a  British  frmctionary,  no- 
thing would  induce  him  to  pay  a  price  for  blood."f 

Against  the  specific  written  declaration  of  the  Envoy 
himself  that  it  was  iiever  his  object  to  encourage  assas- 
sination, coupled  with  the  evidence  of  Captain  Skinner, 
to  the  effect  that  he  revolted  at  the  very  suggestion,  there 
is  nothing  but  bare  presumption  to  be  opposed.  If  pre- 
sumption is  to  carry  weight  with  it,  in  so  grave  a  discus- 
sion as  this,  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  a  man  of  a 
nature  so  humane,  and  of  instincts  so  honourable,  would 
not  have  encouraged  or  sanctioned  the  foul  trade  of 
secret  murder,  and  peremptorily  denied  his  approval  of 
measures  which  he  had  himself  originated  or  supported. 
But,  if  he  had  been  utterly  destitute  both  of  humanity 
and  truth,  it  would  still  be  incredible  that,  having  en- 

♦    Unpublished   Correspondence    of  kenzie  to  Questions  put  by  General 

Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten.     Though  the  PoUock :    MS.    Records.      Captain 

portions  omitted  are  of  no  great  hjs<  Skinner  was  the  only  British  officer 

torical  importance,  I  have  given  the  who  attended   Macnaghten  at  this 

letter  entire  in  the  Appendix,  that  conference  on  the  2find  December, 

no  suspicion  might  attach  to  the  inte-  Captain  MadLenflie  says  that  he  had 

grity  of  the  document.  the  assurance  from  Captain  Skinner 

t  Answers  of  Captain  Colin  MaC'  himself. 


DEATHS  OF  MEEB  MUSJEDEE  AND  ABDOOLLAH  KHAN.    107 

couraged  the  assassination  of  the  chiefs,  he  should 
have  boldly  denied  it  to  the  veiy  man  whom,  directly 
or  indirectly,  he  had  employed  to  hire  the  assassins.* 

On  a  question  so  grave  and  solemn  as  this,  it  is  to  be 
lamented  that  the  judgment  of  the  historian,  after  all  con- 
flicting evidenoe  has  been  weighed  and  sifted,  should  be 
merely  of  an  inferential  character.  The  inference  is,  that 
whilst  not  wholly  ignorant  of  the  offers  of  head-money, 
which  John  Conolly,  living  with,  and  probably  acting 
under  the  directions  of  Shah  Soojah,  was  putting  forth, 
through  the  agency  of  Mohun  Lai,  the  Envoy  neither 
suggested,  nor  actively  encouraged,  these  ^  bloody  in- 
structions," on  which  such  severe  comments  have  been 
passed.  It  has  been  seen  that  he  was  prepared  to  offer 
rewards  in  the  name  of  the  King,  for  the  apprehension  of 
the  principal  rebels ;  and  in  the  heat  and  excitement  of 
active  warfare,  it  is  hardly  probable  that,  if  these  men  had 
been  apprehended,  their  offences  would  have  been  sub* 
jected  to  a  fair  and  impartial  judicial  inquiry.  Mac- 
naghten,  indeed,  stated  that  he  would  recommend  his 
Majesty  to  ^^  execute  them,"  Such  passive  complicity  as 
this,  when  all  the  circumstances  by  which  Macnaghten 
was  environed  are  fairly  estimated,  cannot  be  severely 
censured.  We  can  only  arrive  at  a  just  decision,  in  a 
case  of  80  unprecedented  a  character  as  this,  by  weighing 
well  all  the  difficulties  which  surrounded,  all  the  responsi- 
bilities that  wieghed  upon,  and  all  the  temptations  that 

*  The  charge  of  participation  in  is  no  evidence  before  the  public,  and  1 

these  difcreditable  traniactiona  is  put  have  been  unable  to  discover  any  in 

forth,  as  already  stated,  in  the  CtUcutta  the  course  of  my  researches,  to  show 

Review.    It  is,  of  course,  the  state-  that   Macnaghten  was  implicated  in 

nent  of  an  anonymous  writer.    But  the  transactions  to  which  those  letters 

anonyiDOUS  writers  are  not  alwavs  un-  refer.     On  the  other  band,  there  is, 

known  writers ;  and  the  article  is  sup-  as  I  have  shown,  such  evidence  to 

posed  to  have  emanated  from  one  to  acquit  him  of  all  complicity  in  these 

whom  peculiar  sources  of  information  proceedings,  as  can  only  be  set  aside 

were  open.    The  antecedent  position  on  the  presumption  that  the  Envoy 

of  the  supposed  writer  forbids  us  to  was  at  once  the  most  unscrupulous 

question  the  genuineness  of  the  letters  of  liars,  and  the  most  egregious  of 

attributed  to  John  Conolly ;  but  there  fools. 


108  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

beset  the  Envoy.  If  so  surrounded,  so  weighed  upon,  so 
beset,  he  did  not  actively  interfere  to  arrest  the  ques- 
tionable measures  of  others,  which  seemed  to  offer  some 
means  of  escape  from  the  perils  which  hemmed  in  the 
British  army — an  army  fearfully  sacrificed  by  the  feeble- 
ness of  the  military  chiefs — I  confess  that  I  cannot  see 
that  he  yielded  more  readily  to  temptation  than  other 
men  of  high  honour  would  have  done,  begirt  with  such 
fiery  trial. 

But  it  is  a  relief  to  turn  aside  from  the  consideration  of 
such  a  question,  even  to  the  record  of  the  imbecility  of  our 
military  leaders  and  the  sufferings  of  our  unhappy  troops. 
— On  the  Ist  of  December  there  were  supplies  for  eight 
days'  diminished  consumption  in  store.  The  camp-fol- 
lowers were  receiving  half  a  pound  of  barley  a  day. 
The  cattle  were  without  provender.  It  was  necessary 
to  keep  them  from  absolute  starvation  by  supplying 
them  with  the  twigs,  the  lighter  branches,  and  the  bark 
of  trees.  Some  small  quantities  of  wheat  were  taken 
from  the  troops  to  feed  the  cattle  used  in  the  guns.  In 
this  conjuncture,  Elphinstone,  who  met  every  difficulty 
more  than  half  way,  and  who  was  not  likely,  therefore, 
to  be  silent  at  such  a  time  as  this,  addressed  the  follow- 
ing letter  to  the  Envoy : 

1st  December. 

My  dear  Sir  William, 

We  have  already  arrived,  I  regret  to  say,  at  one  of  our 
difficulties.  Boosa  for  the  cattle  none  can  be  had,  and  we  have 
been  obliged  to-day  to  give  the  mountain-train  yaboos  some  wheat 
to  keep  them  alive.  I  hope,  therefore,  your  negotiation  may  pros- 
per, as  circumstances  are  becoming  extremely  critical;  little  has 
been  done  in  the  way  of  purchase  this  morning.  I  don't  wish  to 
croak,  but  think  it  right  that  you  should  be  kept  constantly  in- 
formed of  tlie  real  state  of  things. 

Yours, 

W.  K.E. 
Sixty-five  maunds  is  all  that  has  been  got  in  to-day;  twelve 

maundfl  yesterday. 


FAILURE  OF  PROVISIONS.  109 

On  the  same  day,  Captain  Johnson  impressed  upon 
the  Envoy  that  there  was  no  time  to  be  lost — that  if  a 
retreat  on  Jellalabad  were  to  be  determined  upon,  it 
should  be  determined  upon  at  once,  as  it  would  be 
necessary  to  take  provisions  for  five  days  with  the  re- 
treating force.  The  Envoy  assented  to  this;  but,  ever 
eager  to  clutch  at  any  hope,  however  slender,  of  defer- 
ring the  dreadful  day  of  surrender,  he  added,  "  Let  us 
wait  two  days  longer — something  may  turn  up." 

The  military  authorities  continued  to  press  upon  the 
Envoy,  with  oft-repeated  urgent  recommendations,  for  a 
speedy  conclusion  of  a  treaty  with  the  enemy,  enabling 
the  British  troops  in  safety  to  evacuate  the  country.  But 
still  the  Envoy  clung  to  the  hope  that  something  might 
be  evolved  in  our  favour ;  and  delayed,  in  spite  of  their 
importunities  from  day  to  day,  the  dreadful  hour  of  sur- 
render. On  the  5  th  of  December  the  General  wrote  the 
following  letter  to  the  Envoy : 

5th  December. 

Ht  dear  Sir  William, 

It  becomes  my  duty  to  inform  you  that  our  stock  of  pro- 
viaons  is  reduced  to  nine  days,  on  half-rations;  it  therefore  be- 
comes imperative  upon  us  to  consider  what  can  be  done.  We 
have,  for  the  last  few  days,  been  disappointed  in  our  expectation 
of  getting  any,  and  our  hopes  of  success  in  doing  this  seem  every 
day  less.  The  objections  to  retreat  on  the  Balla  Hissar  I  have 
already  stated;  our  wants  there  might  be  the  same,  with  the 
additional  one  of  fuel,  and  part  of  our  ordnance  for  protection. 
Betreat  without  terms  I  think  with  you  almost  impossible,  and 
that  few  would  reach  Jellalabad.  The  only  alternative  (as  there 
now  seems  little  chance  of  the  Ghilzyes  renewing  the  nego- 
tiation you  were  led  to  expect)  is  to  try  if  terms  can  be  made  in 
any  other  quarter,  if  we  do  not  hear  something  favorable  to- 
morrow. With  provisions  we  could  hold  out,  but  without  them 
I  do  not  see  what  can  be  done,  or  how  we  are  to  avert  starvation. 
It  is  true  the  responsibility  is  great,  and  may  fall  on  us;  but  are 
wc  justified  in  risking  the  safety  of  so  many  people  when  we  can 


110  PROGRESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

no  longer  do  Anything?  When  reduced  to  the  last  extremity 
(where  we  now  are  almost),  I  think  honourable  terms  better  for 
our  government  than  our  being  destroyed  here,  which,  without 
food,  is  inevitable.  All  this  I  write  in  confidence  for  your  own 
consideration,  that  you  may  think  what  is  best  to  be  done,  aa  t 
have  told  our  real  fdtuation. 

Yoursi  truly, 

W.  K.  E  • 

On  that  day  Macnaghten  sent  back  only  a  brief, 
emphatic  reply: 

My  dear  Oekeral, 

I  have  received  your  note  of  this  morning.  I  am  per- 
fectly aware  of  the  state  of  our  supplies;  but  as  we  have  nine  days* 
provision,  and  had  only  provisions  for  one  or  two  days  when  the 
siege  commenced,  I  conceive  that  wc  are  better  o£f  now  than  we 
were  a  month  ago.  Whenever  we  go,  we  could  not  carry  with 
us  more  than  two  or  three  days*  supplies,  and,  therefore,  it  does 
not  seem  necessary  to  come  to  an  immediate  decision.  But  I 
will  speak  to  you  on  the  subject  to-morrow,  and  will  omit  no 
favorable  opportunity  of  negotiating. 

W.  H.  M.t 

On  the  following  morning,  the  Envoy  wtote  more  cir- 
cumstantially to  the  General,  in  reply  to  the.  letter, 
urging  him  to  obtain  "  honourable  terms.''  He  was  not 
in  a  mood  to  think  of  terms  at  all.  His  voice  was  all 
for  a  movement  into  the  Balla  Hissar : 

(Private.)  Cantonments,  6th  Dec.,  l84l. 

Mt  d£ab  Oenebal, 

I  now  proceed  to  give  you  my  opinion  on  your  note  of 
yesterday.  There  are  three  courses  which  may  be  said  to  be  open 
to  us.  Firsts  a  retreat  on  Jellalabad,  without  terms.  Secondly^ 
a  retreat  to  India,  with  terms,  abandoning  our  position  in  this 
country.  And,  thirdly,  to  retire  into  the  Balla  Hissar.  The 
first  I  regard  as  impracticable;  and,  if  practicable,  the  adoption 

*  UnpublUhed  Correspondence    of       t  Unpublished    Correspondence   of 
OenertU  ElphmsUme.  Sir  W,  H.  Macnaghten. 


RECOMMENDATIONS  OP  THE  ENVOY.       Ill 

of  such  a  measure  would  cover  us  with  everlasting  infamy,  as  we 
could  not  take  the  King's  family  along  with  us,  and  his  Majesty 
would  not  Btir  without  them.  The  second  I  regard  as  nearly 
equally  impiacticable,  from  the  conflicting  interests  of  the  parties 
with  whom  we  should  have  to  treat.  This  cause  would,  I  think, 
lender  any  promised  protection  ineflectual^  and,  if  this  course 
could  be  safely  adopted,  the  consequences  would  be  terrific  as 
legardB  the  safety  of  our  Indian  Empire  and  our  interests  in 
Europe.  The  third  course  seems  to  me  (though  certainly  attended 
with  risk)  to  be  by  far  the  most  safe  and  honourable  which  we 
could  adopt  With  four  or  five  disposable  regiments  in  the  Balla 
Hissar,  it  would  be  strange  if  we  could  not  obtain  fuel  and  pro- 
mons;  we  should  be  in  a  position  to  overawe  the  city,  and  to 
encourage  the  Kuzzilbashes  and  our  other  well-wishers  to  come 
forward  to  our  support;  and  we  should  probably  find  in  the 
Balla  Hiflsar  provisions  for  a  fortnight  or  a  month.  I  would, 
therefore,  lose  no  time  in  sending  every  night,  by  all  possible 
oontrivances,  our  stores,  and  sick,  and  wounded.  Should  the 
report  of  the  advance  of  troops  from  Candahar  prove  correct 
(which  we  shall,  in  all  probabiUty,  hear  to-morrow),  all  our 
troubles  will  cease.  Should  we  have  reason  to  believe  it  un- 
founded, we  can  then  commence  destroying  our  powder  and 
superfluouB  stores.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  we  have  daily 
proofii  that  the  forces  of  our  enemies  are  diminishing;  and,  with 
the  blessing  of  Providence,  some  event  may  arise  from  their  mis- 
understandings to  relieve  us  from  our  present  perilous  position, 
even  without  the  accession  of  fresh  troops. 

Very  sincerely  yours, 

W.  H.  M.» 

Then  Macnaghten  visited  the  (xencral,  and  discussed 
with  him  long  and  earnestly  the  condition  of  the  garrison 
and  the  measures  to  be  taken  for  its  extrication  from  the 
perils  that  beset  it  If  terms  w^ere  not  to  be  accepted 
from  the  enemy,  it  was  necessary  either  to  obtain  pro- 
visions by  force  from  some  of  the  surrounding  villages, 
or  to  march  at  once  into  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  Envoy 
suggested  that  a  night  attack  might  be  made  upon  Deh- 

•  UtqnibUshed  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  H,  Macnaghten, 


112  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

Hadjee,  or  a  similar  enterprise  undertaken  against  Killa 
Bolundee ;  but  the  Greneral  had  no  taste  for  night  attacks 
or  enterprises  of  any  kind.  Macnaghten  went,  and  soon 
after  his  return  home  received  the  following  letter:* 

My  dear  Sir  William, 

Since  your  departure,  I  have  thought  overt  and  given 
my  utmost  attention  to,  every  part  of  the  subject  of  our  conversa- 
tion. The  first  proposition  was  a  night  expedition  against  the  Deh- 
Hadjee,  said  to  be  distant  about  three  coss,  part  of  the  road  through 
a  narrow  gorge,  through  which  I  now  hear  guns  could  not  go; 
and  I  am  also  told  that  parties  (of  cavalry)  have,  for  the  last  five 
or  six  days,  been  seen  going  in  that  direction:  no  doubt  for  the 
object  of  preventing  our  getting  supplies.  If  we  succeeded  in 
taking  the  fort  (if  only  one),  we  must  hold  it  (to  enable  us  to 
remove  any  quantity  of  grain  with  our  means)  for  some  time; 
during  which^  the  enemy,  hearing  of  our  attack,  would,  no  doubt, 
come  out  against  our  detachment;  and  from  Captain  Johnson's 
account,  it  is  difficult  to  find  grain.  Another  difficulty  is  our 
want  of  local  knowledge  (this  may,  perhaps,  be  obtained).  These 
are  the  objections  that  present  themselves  to  this  plan. 

With  respect  to  a  hke  enterprise  on  Killa  Bolundee,  that 
appears,  I  confess  (and  I  would  willingly  grasp  at  anything  to 
enable  us  to  hold  out),  to  be  more  difficult,  from  the  facility 
with  which  a  party  might  be  cut  oflf  by  a  sortie  from  the  city. 
The  other  alternative  is  the  Balla  Hissar;  from  thence  seems  the 
only  chance  we  have  of  getting  supplies;  and  as  you  now  think 
our  being  able  to  make  any  terms  is  impossible,  that  seems  the 
only  one  left.  Colonel  Chambers  has  been  with  me,  and  says  his 
horses  would  be  quite  unequal  to  a  forced  march  to  Jellalabad, 
and  that  many  of  those  of  Anderson's  regiment  are  unserviceable 
from  want  of  food.  Captain  Anderson  reported,  this  morning, 
one-half. 

After  leaving  cantonments,  terms,  I  should  suppose,  are  quite 
out  of  the  question;  our  quitting  would  be,   I   presume,   con- 

*  There  is  some  obscurity  with  re-  neral  were  again  in  consultation  two 

Bpect  to  the  date  of  this  letter,  but  I  days  afterwards  on  the  same  subject 

believe  I  am  right  in  stating  that  it  of  an  attack  upon  the  grain  villages,  it 

was  written  on  the  6th  of  December,  may  have  been  written  on  the  8th. 
As,  however,  the  Envoy  and  the  Gc- 


FURTHER  HUMILIATION.  113 

sideied  as  our  total  defeat;  and,  until  reinforced,  as  we  must 
sacrifice  nearly  all  our  cattle,  we  would  not  have  the  power  of 
moving,  for,  without  the  means  of  transport,  we  would  not  go. 

The  next  consideration  is,  whether  our  being  annihilated  here, 
or  entering  into  honourable  terms,  would  have  the  worst  effect 
for  our  government.  The  responsibility  is  great  for  you  and  I; 
and  (if  we  do  not  hear  of  the  force  from  Candahar  to-niorrow)  it 
only  remains  for  us  to  consider  whether  we  shall  incur  the  re- 
spondbility,  or  risk  the  loss  of  this  force;  for,  under  the  most 
fiivorablc  view  we  can  take,  the  risk  is  great.  Looking  practi- 
cally at  the  obstacles  we  have,  they  are  in  reality  very  difficult  to 
surmount. 

I  submit  all  this  for  your  consideration,  and  have  sent  Major 
Thain  with  this  to  you. 

Yours,  &c., 

W.  K.  E. 

We  must  not  think  of  treating,  after  any  attempt  either  to  re- 
treat, or  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  or  if  we  fail  in  any  attempt.  We 
are  now  comparatively  entire;  a  loss  or  failure  would  increase  our 
destitution,  and  the  terms  will,  of  course,  be  worse.  We  could 
not  expect  anything  else. 

The  General  knew  that  his  troops  were  not  to  be  trusted. 
The  Envoy  knew  this  equally  well }  but,  more  jealous  of 
the  honour  of  his  country,  more  hopeful  and  more  coura- 
geous, he  was  unwilling  to  fling  away  a  single  chance 
which  the  wheel  of  time  might  throw  up  in  his  favour. 
In  that  great  chapter  of  accidents,  however,  to  which  he 
80  bravely  turned,  were  written  down  only  further  disasters 
and  degradations.  On  the  5th  of  December,  the  enemy, 
in  open  day,  ^  burnt  the  bridge  which  the  English  had 
thrown  over  the  Caubul  River,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from 
cantonments.  On  the  day  after  the  calamitous  action  of 
the  23rd  of  November,  the  insurgents  had  begun  to  de- 
stroy it,  and  now  they  completed  the  work  of  destruction. 
They  burnt  it  exultingly  before  the  faces  of  our  troops, 
who  were  lining  the  ramparts  and  looking  idly  on,  as 
though  there  were  no  dishonour  in  endurance.  The  bridge 

VOL.  n.  I 


114  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

was  of  little  use  at  that  season  of  the  year,  for  the  stream 
was  fordable — ^but  it  was  a  burning  disgrace  to  the  mili- 
tary authorities,  that  with  5000  British  troops  at  their 
command,  and  with  the  ramparts  of  the  cantonments 
bristling  with  guns,  they  should  have  suffered  such  an 
insult  as  this  to  be  flung  in  their  face. 

The  following  day  was  one  also  of  humiliation.  Ma- 
homed Sheriff's  fort,  which  was  garrisoned  by  a  party 
of  European  and  Native  troops,  was  abandoned  on  the  6th 
of  December.  The  enemy,  a  day  or  two  before,  had 
endeavoured  to  blow  open  the  gate  with  powder-bags,  but 
had  not  succeeded  in  the  attempt.  They  might  have 
spared  themselves  the  trouble  of  the  effort  and  the  dis- 
credit of  the  failure.  On  the  6th  of  December,  a  very 
small  party  of  the  enemy,  unperceived  by  the  garrison, 
contrived  to  climb  up  the  walls  of  the  fort,  from  the  direc- 
tion of  the  King's  garden.  They  had  no  sooner  shown 
their  heads  at  the  window  of  the  room  where  our  men 
were  sitting,  than,  both  Europeans  and  natives,  panic- 
struck  and  bewildered,  escaped  over  the  opposite  wall, 
and,  abandoning  their  bedding,  arms,  and  ammunition,  fled 
into  cantonments.*  The  fort  was  soon  filled  with  the 
enemy.    Not  an  effort  was  made  to  recapture  it.f     The 

*  The  garrison  consisted  of  about  choose — all  cowards  alike.    After  he 

100  men,  40  bein^  Europeans,  under  was  deserted  by  the  men,  he  himself 

the  command  of  Lieutenant  Hawtrey,  threw  six  hand  grenades  before  be 

d7th  N.I.    Lady  Sale  says :  **  The    followed  them It  was  the 

Afghans  planted  their  crooked  sticks,  most  shameful  of  all  the  runaways 

which  served  them  for  scalinff  ladders ;  that  occurred/* 

got  up  one  by  one;  pulled  out  the  f  Lady  Sale  says  that  the  44th 

mud  (with  which  the   window  had  wished  to  wipe  out  the  stain  on  the 

been  blocked  up)  and  got  in.  A  child  name,  as  did  the  Sepoys  also  (the  37th 

with  a  stick   might  have  repulsed  N.I.).     Lieutenant  Uawtrey*s  com- 

them.  The  Europeans  had  their  belts  pany  volunteered  to  go  with  him  and 

and  accoutrements  off,  and  the  Se-  *'  take  it  without  the  assistance  of  any 

poys  the  same.     They  aU  ran  away  other  troops.**    The  General  sent  a 

as  fast  as  they  could  1    The  44th  say  message  to  the  engineer  officer  (Lieu- 

that  tiie  dTtn  ran  first,  and  as  they  tenant  Sturt)  asking  if  the  fort  was 

were  too  weak  they  went  too.   Haw-  practicable   and  tenable  —  that    is, 

trty  Mjs  there  WM  ^ot  a  pin  to  whether  our  men  could  take  it  and 


MATTEBS  AT  THEIB  WOBST.  115 

guns  on  the  ramparts  played  upon  it  all  day  long,  and 
before  evening  one  of  the  bastions  crumbled  to  pieces 
nnder  our  fire ;  but  the  British  troops  remained  inactive 
in  cantonments,  submitting  patiently  to  every  new  insult, 
88  though  disgrace,  now  become  habitual,  had  ceased  to 
be  a  burden  to  them. 

Another  blot  was,  at  the  same  time,  fixed  upon  the 
character  of  the  unhappy  troops.  The  44th  Queen's 
re^ment  had  supplied  the  details  of  the  guard  for  the 
protection  of  the  cantonment  bazaar.  They  were  now 
withdrawn  under  circumstances  little  calculated  to  raise 
the  reputation  of  the  corps  ;  and  some  companies  of  the 
37th  Native  Infantry  were  sent  to  relieve  them.  The 
following  letter  on  this  subject,  from  the  General  to  the 
Envoy,  supplies  a  painful  commentary  on  the  state  of  the 
troops  at  this  time  : 

Dec  7, 1841. 

Mt  bsab  Sib  William, 

Three  companies  of  the  37th  have  been  ordered  into  the 

bsittr  as  a  guard  for  it.     Shelton  wishes  a  support  of  the  44th 

OBtnde.     If  they  have  any  sense  of  shame  left,  they  must  do 

better,  and  their  oflEicers  must  exert  themselves.     8.  is  disposed  to 

attribute  the  blame  to  the  Sepoys — ^from  all  I  hear,  I  fear  imjustly ; 

but  this  raust  be  inquired  into  when  we  have  time.    I  fear  the 

enemy  will  not  to^lay  give  them  an  opportunity  of  retrieving 

their  name. 

W.  K.  E. 

And  now  matters  were  at  their  worst.  To  what  depths 
(^humiliation  our  unhappy  force  had  sunk,  and  with  what 
indignation  the  Envoy  regarded  a  state  of  things  which  he 
was  powerless  to  avert  or  to  remedy,  the  following  letter, 
written  about  this  time  to  Captain  Macgregor,  painfully 
declares: 

k)ld  it     8101^8  answer  is  worth    will  fiffht— tenable  if  thej  don*t  mn 
neordiiig — ^  Practicable  if  the  men    away. 

i2 


116  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

No  date. 

My  dear  Macgregor, 

I  have  received  your  notes  of  the  30th  ultimo  and  Ist  in- 
stant, and  1  am  delighted  at  the  good  news  they  contain.  I  wish 
I  could  repay  you  in  the  same  commodity,  but  I  regret  to  say  that 
everything  in  this  quarter  has  been  going  wrong.  Our  troops 
were  defeated  in  the  field  on  the  23rd;  our  bridge  has  been  burnt 
under  our  very  noses;  and  the  captured  fort  opposite  the  canton- 
ment has  been  recaptured  by  the  enemy  without  the  slightest 
efibrt  at  resistance  on  our  part.  In  short,  our  troops  are  behaving 
like  a  pack  of  despicable  cowards,  and  there  is  no  spirit  or  enter- 
prise left  amongst  us.  The  military  authorities  want  me  to  capi- 
tulate, but  this  I  am  anxious  to  put  off  to  the  last  moment  In 
the  mean  time,  we  shall  soon  have  to  come  to  some  decision,  as 
we  have  only  three  days'  provision  for  our  troops,  and  nothing 
for  our  cattle.  We  are  anxiously  looking  out  for  reinforcements 
from  Candahar.  We  have  rumours  of  their  approach^  but  nothing 
as  yet  authentic.  The  rascals  certainly  contrive  to  intercept  our 
communications  most  effectually.  Tell  Mackeson  that  I  have  got 
his  official  and  private  letters  of  the  20th  ultimo,  but  that  I  am 
not  in  spirits  to  write,  and  I  have  really  nothing  to  commimicate 
in  addition  to  what  I  have  above  written.  John  ConoUy  is  with 
His  Majesty  in  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  Sirkar  is  in  a  dreadful  funk. 
The  Laird  of  Pughman  is  almost  the  only  man  of  respectability 
who  has  stuck  by  him.  I  have  been  striving  in  vain  to  sow  nifak 
amongst  the  rebels,  and  it  is  perfectly  wonderful  how  they  hang 
together.  Congratulate  Mackeson  for  me  on  the  gallant  conduct 
of  his  namesake.  Inshalia !  his  Khidmut  will  be  moojra,  Gould 
you  forward  the  enclosed  to  Erskine  when  you  have  an  oppor- 
tunity? 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

On  the  momiDg  of  the  8th  there  were  but  four  days* 
pro^sion  in  store.  The  wretched  camp-followers  were 
living  upon  the  carcases  of  the  camels  which  had  been 
starved  to  death.  The  trees  in  cantonments  had  been 
stripped  of  all  their  bark  and  light  branches  to  supply 
provender  to  the  cattle,  and  were  now  all  bare  and  use- 
less. The  Commissariat  officers,  Boyd  and  Johnson,  vrrote 


STATE  OF  THE  COMMISSAKIAT.  117 

a  joint  letter  to  the  General,  stating  that,  after  much 
fruitless  exertion,  they  had  been  compelled  to  adopt  the 
opinion  that  provisions  were  no  longer  obtainable  by  pur- 
chase. But  before  this  letter  reached  him  the  General 
had  seen  Captain  Boyd,  and  had  written  to  the  Envoy 
declaring  his  opinion  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  hold 
out  longer : 

Dec.  8,  1841. 

Mt  deab  Sib  William, 

The  conimissary  has  just  reported  to  me,  that  on  examina- 
tion of  the  grain  he  has  in  store,  he  finds,  from  the  quantity  of 
dirt  mixed  with  it,  he  has  not  above  four  days'  supplies  left,  at 
most  Under  these  circumstances,  it  becomes  absolutely  necessary 
for  us  to  come  to  a  decision  as  to  our  future  measures^  as  I  do 
not  see  how  we  are  to  hold  out,  without  food  for  our  Sepoys,  be- 
yond that  time. 

Yours  truly, 

W.  K.  E. 

The  letter  of  the  Commissariat  officers  had  not  reached 
the  General  when  the  above  was  written.  It  ran  in  the 
following  words  :* 

Sib, 

In  conformity  with  instructions  received  through  you 
from  Major-General  Elphinstone,  commanding  in  Afghanistan, 
we  have  the  honour  to  report,  from  personal  knowledge  of  the 
country  to  the  north  or  north-cast  of  cantonments^  the  utter  impos- 
sibility of  obtaining,  either  by  force  or  otherwise,  the  smallest 
quantity  of  grain  or  forage  of  any  kind  within  a  distance  of 
from  three  to  four  miles;  and,  further,  that  within  this  space 
the  whole  of  the  forts,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  one  or  two, 
have  been  evacuated  by  the  inhabitants,  and  more  or  less  de- 
stroyed by  the  enemy. 

With  respect  to  that  portion  of  your  letter  having  reference  to 
drawing  two  or  three  days*  supplies  from  the  Balla  Hissar,  we 
b^  to  bring  to  the  Major-Generars  notice,  that  although  our 
troops  would,  it  is  true,  be  subsisted  for  so  many  days  longer, 

*  Unpublished  Correspondence. 


118  FBOGBESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

the  delay  of  moving  from  the  cantomnents  mu8t  prove  destructive 
to  our  cattle,  and  cripple  the  only  means  we  have  of  removing 
either  our  sick,  treasure,  or  military  stores^  as  the  animals  are 
even  now  in  so  weakly  a  state  as  to  have  scarcely  stamina  suffi- 
cient to  carry  a  load  any  distance^  and  many  are  utterly  incapable 
of  rising  with  a  load  firom  the  ground. 

J.  Boyd,  Commissary  General  (Bengal  Troops). 

H.  Johnson,  Commissary  General  (Shah's  Troops). 

A  copy  of  this  letter  was  forwarded  to  the  Envoy  with 
the  General's  letter  of  the  9th  of  December. 

Again  Macnaghten  and  Elphinstone  took  counsel  to- 
gether, and  again  they  parted  to  give  their  opinions 
the  shape  of  official  correspondence.  Returned  to  his 
quarters,  the  Envoy  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the 
General : 

8th  Dec.,  1841. 

Sib, 

With  reference  to  the  conversation  I  had  the  honour  to 
hold  with  you  this  morning,  I  have  to  request  that  you  will  be  so 
good  as  to  state,  for  my  information,  whether  or  no  I  am  right  in 
considering  it  as  your  opinion  that  any  further  attempt  to  hold 
out  against  the  enemy  would  merely  have  the  effect  of  sacrificing 
both  His  Majesty  and  ourselves,  and  that  the  only  alternative 
left  is  to  negotiate  for  our  safe  retreat  out  of  the  country  on  the 
most  favorable  terms  possible.  I  understood  you  to  say  to-day 
that  all  our  cattle  are  starving,  and  that  we  have  not  more  than 
three  days'  provision,  half-rations,  left  for  our  men,  whilst  the  dif- 
ficulties of  procuring  more  appear  to  you  to  be  insurmountable. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  we  hear  rumours  of  the  approach 
of  reinforcements  from  Gandahar,  though  nothing  in  an  authentic 
shape  has  yet  reached  us  on  this  subject. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

To  this  letter  General  Elphinstone  sent  back  an  an- 
swer, signed  also  by  the  three  senior  officers  under  his 
command — ^Brigadiers  Shelton  and  Anquetil,  and  Colonel 
Chambers,  who  were  that  morning  in  council  with  their 
chief: 


RECOMMENDATIONS  OF  THE  MILITARY  CHIEFS.       119 

Caubul,  8th  Dec,  1841. 

Sir, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  this  day's  date,  requesting  me  to  state,  for  your  infor- 
mation^ whether  or  not  it  be  my  opinion  that  any  further  attempt 
to  hold  out  against  the  enemy  would  merely  have  the  effect  of 
fluaificing  both  His  Majesty  and  ourselves,  and  that  the  only 
alternative  left  is  to  negotiate  for  our  safe  retreat  out  of  the  coun- 
try on  the  most  favourable  terms  possible. 

In  reply,  I  beg  to  state  that  my  opinion  is  that  the  present 
ntuation  of  the  troops  here  is  such,  from  the  want  of  provisions 
and  the  impracticability  of  procuring  more^  that  no  &me  ought  to 
be  lost  in  entering  into  negotiations  for  a  safe  retreat  from  the 
country. 

As  regards  the  troops  at  Candahar,  and  the  rumours  of  their 
approach  to  our  assistance,  I  should  be  sorry,  in  the  absence  of 
all  authentic  information,  to  risk  the  sacrifice  of  the  troops  here 
by  waiting  for  their  arrival,  when  we  are  ignorant  even  of  their 
having  commenced  their  march,  and  are  reduced  to  three  days' 
supply  of  provision  for  our  Sepoys  at  half-rations,  and  almost  en- 
tirely without  forage  for  our  horses  and  cattle. 

Our  number  of  sick  and  wounded  in  hospital  exceeds  600,  and 
our  means  for  their  transport  is  far  from  adequate,  owing  to  the 
death  by  starvation  of  so  many  of  our  camels;  from  the  same 
cause  also  we  shall  be  obliged  at  this  inclement  season  to  leave 
the  tents  and  bedding  behind  with  such  a  march  before  us. 

As  regards  the  King,  I  must  be  excused  entering  upon  that 
point  of  your  letter,  and  leave  its  consideration  to  your  better 
judgment  and  knowledge;  but  1  may  be  allowed  to  say  that  it 
Uttle  becomes  me,  as  commanding  the  British  troops  in  Afghan- 
istan, to  regard  the  necessity  of  negotiating  in  any  other  light 
than  as  concerns  their  honour  or  welfare,  both  of  which  I  should 
be  answerable  for  by  a  further  stay  here,  after  the  sudden  and 
imiverBal  rebellion  which  has  taken  place  throughout  the  domi- 
nions. 

The  whole  of  the  grain  and  forage  in  our  vicinity  is  ex- 
bausted,  and  the  defence  of  this  extensive  and  ill-situated  canton- 
ment will  not  admit  of  distant  expeditions  to  obtain  supplies  from 
the  strongly-fortified  dwellings  of  an  armed  and  hostile  popula- 
tion, our  present  numbers  being  insufficient  for  its  defence,  and 


120  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

obliging  the  whole  of  the  troops  to  be  almost  constantly  under 
arms. 

In  conclusion,  I  can  only  repeat  my  opinion  that  you  should 
lose  no  time  in  entering  into  negotiations. 

W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-Gen., 

Commanding  in  Afghanistan. 

I  concur  in  the  above  opinions. 

J.  Shelton,  Brigadier. 

In  a  military  point  of  view,  I  concur  in  the  above. 
^  W.  Anquetil,  Brigadier, 

Commanding  Shah  Soojah's  Forces. 
I  also  concur. 

R.  Chambers,  Lieut.-Col., 

Commanding  Cavalry. 

Still  shrinking  from  the  dreadful  thought  of  surrender^ 
Macnaghten,  soon  after  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  went 
over  to  the  General's  quarters,  and  wrung  from  him  a 
reluctant  promise  to  make  one  more  attempt  to  secure 
supplies  by  an  expedition  against  one  of  the  forts  or  vil- 
lages in  which  they  were  known  to  be  stored.  A  council 
of  war  was  held  that  evening  at  the  GeneraVs  quarters. 
The  Envoy  was  present  at  the  meeting.  The  Commis- 
sariat officers  were  also  in  attendance.  There  was  a  long 
and  stormy  discussion.  At  length  it  was  determined  that 
on  the  following  morning  a  detachment  of  infantry  and 
cavalry,  with  a  gun,  should  be  despatched,  accompanied 
by  Captain  Johnson,  to  the  village  of  Khoja  Rewash, 
some  four  miles  from  cantonments,  where  it  was  believed 
that  a  considerable  supply  of  grain  was  stored.  The 
village  was  to  be  surprised  before  daybreak.  The  inhabi- 
tants were  to  be  called  upon  to  sell  their  grain ;  and,  in 
the  event  of  their  acquiescence.  Captain  Johnson  was  to 
purchase  it;  but  in  the  event  of  their  refusal,  the  village 
was  to  be  carried  by  assault,  and  the  grain  taken  by  force. 
The  detachment  was  to  start  at  two  o'clock,  and,  that 
there  might  be  no  delay  in  the  departure  of  the  force. 


DESPONDENCY  OF  THE  GENERAL.         121 

every  preparation  was  to  be  made  before  that  hour,  and 
the  troops  under  arms  for  an  immediate  march. 

The  appointed  hour  arrived.  Captain  Johnson  was 
ready  to  accompany  the  detachment.  The  troops  were 
under  arms ;  but  no  preparations  had  been  made  for  their 
departure.  A  bridge  was  to  have  been  laid  down  for  the 
passage  of  the  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  covered  with 
straw,  that  no  noise  might  be  made  to  rouse  the  suspi- 
cions of  the  enemy ;  but  at  two  o'clock  no  orders  had  been 
issued,  and  it  was  evident  that  there  were  doubts  and 
embarrassments  to  impede  the  progress  of  the  expedition. 
Something  was  wrong,  and  it  became  known  at  last  that 
the  enterprise  was  discovered  to  be  a  dangerous  one. 
The  enemy  were  in  force  in  the  dilapidated  village  of 
Beh-meru,  and  so,  just  as  day  began  to  dawn,  the  enter- 
prise was  altogether  abandoned. 

In  the  course  of  the  day  intelligence  of  a  cheering  cha- 
racter was  received  from  Jellalabad.  Sale's  little  garrison 
had  sallied  out  and  gallantly  defeated  the  enemy.  It  was 
hoped  by  the  Envoy  and  a  few  others,  who  were  turning 
their  eyes  in  every  direction,  straining  to  catch  even  the 
faintest  ray  of  hope,  that  the  improved  aspect  of  affairs  at 
Jellalabad  would  induce  the  military  authorities  to  make 
Dew  efforts  to  maintain  their  position.  But  all  hope  of 
this  kind  was  soon  dissipated.  The  General,  fearfiil  of 
the  encouragement  of  such  expectations,  addressed  the 
following  letter  to  the  Envoy  : 

Caubul,  9th  Dec. 

Sir, 

With  reference  to  my  letter  of  yesterday's  date,  No.  215, 
I  beg  to  state  that  the  intelligence  received  this  day  from  Sir  R. 
Sale  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  after  the  most  mature  conside- 
ration, 80  improve  our  situation  as  to  alter  the  sentiments  I 
therein  expressed  as  to  the  necessity  of  a  treaty  being  entered 
into,  if  possible,  with  the  enemy;  but  I  look  upon  the  arrival  of 
this  account  of  the  success  obtained  over  the  rebels  on  the  1st 


122  PROGBESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

inst  as  most  opportune,  for  I  consider  it  cannot  but  prove  highly 
advantageous  in  our  negotiations.  I  beg  to  annex  a  copy  of  a 
letter  firom  the  two  officers  at  the  head  of  the  Commissariat  De- 
partment, by  which  you  will  see  our  destitute  state,  and  the  little 
hope  there  is  of  obtaining  further  supplies. 

W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-Gen. 

The  General  could  only  see  in  the  cheering  news  from 
Jellalabad  another  reason  for  entering  into  negotiations 
with  the  enemy. 

All  this  time  the  Envoy  had  been  anxiously  looking  for 
tidings  of  the  advance  of  the  force  under  Colonel  Mac- 
laren,  which  had  been  despatched  from  Candahar.  The 
communications  with  that  place  had  been  so  completely  cut 
off,  that  it  was  not  until  the  1 0th  of  December  that  Mac- 
naghten  received  intelligence  from  Colonel  Palmer,  who 
commanded  the  garrison  at  Ghuznee,  that  there  was  little 
prospect  of  Maclaren's  brigade  making  good  its  march  to 
Caubul.  The  inclemency  of  the  weather  and  the  loss  of 
baggage  cattle  had  been  so  great,  that  Maclaren,  strug- 
gling on  with  difficulty,  was  dreading  the  necessity  of 
a  retrograde  move.  The  Envoy  had  been  eager  to  hold 
out  80  long  as  the  least  hope  remained  of  receiving 
succour  from  the  westward.  That  hope  was  now  rapidly 
waning.  The  provisions  in  cantonments  were  almost 
wholly  exhausted.  On  the  morning  of  the  1 1th  there  was 
just  food  enough  for  the  day's  consumption  of  the  fighting 
men.  The  camp-followers  were  starving.  Food  was  not 
to  be  obtained  by  purchase,  for  the  villagers  would  not 
sell ;  food  was  not  to  be  obtained  by  fighting,  for  the  sol- 
diers would  not  fight.  Macnaghten  had  urged  the  nobler 
course,  until  repeated  disappointments  had  made  him 
despair  of  military  success.  There  was  now,  indeed,  no- 
thing left  him  but  to  negotiate  with  the  enemy,  or  to 
suffer  the  force  in  cantonments  to  perish  by  the  slow 
process  of  starvation  before  his  face.     He  had  suggested 


THE  DRAFT  TREATY.  123 

every  other  course  to  no  purpose.  He  had  resisted  the 
importunities  of  the  military  authorities,  clamouring  for 
surrender,  until  there  were  no  provisions  in  store  for  the 
morrow,  and  no  hope  of  replenishing  our  empty  granaries. 
He  could  not  now  any  longer  resist ;  so  he  drew  out  the 
rough  draft  of  a  treaty,  and  met  the  Afghan  chiefs  in  con- 
ference. 

The  meeting  took  place  at  the  distance  of  about  a  mile 
from  the  cantonments,  on  the  banks  of  the  Caubul  river. 
Captains  Lawrence,  Trevor,  and  Mackenzie  accompanied 
the  Envoy,  with  a  few  troopers  of  the  body-guard  as  an 
escort.  The  chiefs  of  all  the  principal  tribes  in  the  coun- 
try were  present.  Among  the  leading  men  assembled 
were  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Oosman  Khan,  Sultan  Ma- 
homed Khan,  Mahomed  Sheriff,  Mahomed  Shah  Khan, 
and  Khoda  Buksh  Khan,  Ghilzye.  The  first  salutations 
over,  the  Envoy  drew  forth  the  draft  treaty  he  had  pre- 
pared, and  read  in  Persian  the  following  articles,  with 
their  preamble,  to  the  assembled  chiefs  : 

Whereas  it  has  become  apparent  from  recent  events  that  the 

continuance  of  the  British  army  in  Afghanistan  for  the  support 

of  Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  is  displeasing  to  the  great  majority  of 

the  Afghan  nation;  and  whereas  the  British  Government  had  no 

other  object  in  sending  troops  to  this  country  than  the  integrity, 

happiness,  and  welfare  of  the  Afghans,  and,  therefore,  it  can  have 

no  wish  to  remain  when  that  object  is  defeated  by  its  presence; 

the  following  conditions  have  been   agreed  upon    between  Sir 

W.  H.  Macnaghten,  Bart.,  Envoy  and  Minister  at  the  Court  of 

Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  for  the  British  Government  on  the  one 

part,  and  by  Sirdar  [  ]  for  the  Afghan  nation  on  the  other 

part 

Ist.  The  British  troops  now  at  Caubul  will  repair  to  Peshawur 

with  all  practicable  expedition,  and  thence  return  to  India. 

2nd.  The  Sirdars  engage  that  the  British  troops  shall  be  un- 
molested in  their  journey,  shall  be  treated  with  all  honour,  and 
receive  all  possible  assistance  in  carriage  and  provisions. 

3rd.  The  troops  now  at  Jellalabad  shall  receive  orders  to  retire 


124  PKOGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

to  Peshawur  60  soon  as  the  envoy-and-minister  is  satisfied  that 
their  progress  will  be  uninterrupted. 

4th.  The  troops  now  at  Ghuznee  will  follow,  vid  Caubul,  to 
Peshawur^  as  soon  as  arrangements  can  be  made  for  their  journey 
in  safety. 

5th.  The  troops  now  at  Candahar,  or  elsewhere  within  the 
limits  of  Afghanistan,  will  return  to  India,  either  vid  Caubul 
or  the  Bolan  Pass,  as  soon  as  the  necessary  arrangements  can  be 
made,  and  the  season  admits  of  marching. 

6th,  The  stores  and  property  of  whatever  description  formerly 
belonging  to  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  will  be  restored. 

7th.  All  property  belonging  to  British  officers  which  may  be 
left  behind  in  Afghanistan  will  be  carefully  preserved  and  sent  to 
India,  as  opportunities  may  offer. 

8th.  Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  will  be  allowed  either  to  remain 
in  Afghanistan  on  a  suitable  provision  for  his  maintenance,  not 
being  under  one  lakh  of  rupees  per  annum,  or  to  accompany  the 
Bntish  troops  on  their  return  to  India. 

9th.  All  attention  and  respect  will  be  paid  to  such  of  the 
Shah's  family  as  may  be  unable  to  accompany  him,  and  they  shall 
be  permitted  to  occupy  their  present  place  of  residence  in  the 
Balla  Hissar  until  their  return  to  India,  should  the  Shah  resolve 
in  accompanying  the  British  troops. 

10th.  On  the  safe  arrival  of  the  British  troops  at  Peshawur, 
arrangements  will  be  immediately  made  for  the  return  to  Afghan- 
istan of  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  his  family,  and  all 
other  Afghans  detained  in  India. 

1 1th.  So  soon  as  the  Ameer  with  his  family  shall  reach  Pesha- 
wur, on  their  return  to  Caubul,  the  family  of  the  Shah  shall  be 
allowed  to  return  towards  India. 

12th.  For  the  due  fulfilment  of  the  above  conditions  four  re- 
spectable British  officers  will  be  left  in  Caubul  as  hostages,  and 
will  be  allowed  to  return^  to  India  on  the  arrival  of  the  Ameer 
and  his  family  at  Peshawur. 

13th.  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Sirdar  Mahomed  Oos- 
man  Khan,  and  such  other  chiefs  of  influence  as  may  be  so  dis- 
posed, will  accompany  the  British  troops  to  Peshawur. 

14th.  Notwithstanding  the  retirement  of  the  British  troops 
from  Afghanistan,  there  will  always  be  friendship  between  that 


THE  DRAFT  TREATY.  125 

nation  and  the  English,  so  much  so  that  the  Afghans  will  con- 
tract no  alliance  with  any  other  foreign  power  without  the  con- 
sent of  the  English,  for  whose  assistance  they  will  look  in  the 
hour  of  need. 

15th.  Should  it  hereafter  be  the  desire  of  the  Afghan  nation  and 
the  British  Government  to  consent  thereto,  a  British  Resident  at 
Caubul  may  be  appointed  to  keep  up  the  friendly  communication 
between  the  two  governments,  but  without  interfering  in  any 
way  with  the  internal  administration  of  Afghanistan. 

16th.  No  one  is  to  be  molested  on  account  of  any  part  he  may 
have  taken  in  the  late  contest;  and  any  person  desirous  of  going 
to  India  with  the  British  troops  shall  be  permitted  to  do  so. 

17th.  From  the  date  on  which  these  articles  are  agreed,  the 
Sirdars  above  named  undertake  that  the  British  troops  shall  be 
supplied  with  provisions  on  rendering  payment  for  the  same. 

18th.  All  British  of&cers  and  troops  who  may  be  unable,  from 
any  cause,  to  quit  Afghanistan  immediately,  shall  be  treated  with 
all  honour  and  respect,  and  receive  every  assistance  until  the  state 
of  the  season  and  of  their  preparations  admits  of  their  departure. 

When  the  Envoy  came  to  the  end  of  the  second  arti- 
cle, Akbar  Khan,  with  characteristic  impetuosity,  inter- 
rupted him,  saying  that  there  was  no  need  to  fiimish  our 
force  with  supplies,  as  there  was  no  impediment  to  their 
marching  on  the  morrow.  The  other  chiefs  rebuked  him 
for  this  interference.  The  remainder  of  the  treaty  was 
read  without  any  further  uncourteous  interruptions; 
and,  this  ebullition  over,  the  young  Barukzye  himself 
subsided  into  courtesy  and  repose.* 

The  conference  lasted  two  hours.  The  terms  of  the 
treaty  were  discussed  with  as  much  calmness  and  mode- 
ration as  could  have  been  expected,  and  its  main  stipu- 
lations were  agreed  to  by  the  assembled  chiefs.  It  was 
resolved  that  the  British  troops  should  evacuate  their 
cantonments   within   three   days,  and  that  the  chiefs 

*  It  18  said  that  Akbar  Khan  pro-  were  adverse  to  the  proceeding.  I  do 
posed  to  seize  the  Envoy  at  this  not  know  whether  this  story  rests 
meeting,  but  that  the    other  chiefs    upon  good  authority. 


126  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

should,  in  the  mean  while,  send  in  provisions  for  their 
use.  The  meeting  broke  up,  and  Captain  Trevor  ac- 
companied the  Khans  to  the  city,  "  as  a  hostage  for  the 
sincerity  of  the  Envoy." 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  write  anything  in  vindica- 
tion of  the  conduct  of  Macnaghten  with  respect  to  this 
early  treaty.  His  vindication  is  to  be  found  in  the  pre- 
ceding correspondence  with  the  military  chiefe.  But  a 
few  pregnant  sentences,  in  which  he  has  himself  recorded 
the  circumstances  under  which  he  was  at  last  induced 
to  throw  himself  upon  the  forbearance  of  the  enemy, 
ought  to  be  laid  before  the  reader^  embodying  as  they 
do  the  Envoy's  own  justification  of  his  conduct.  "  The 
whole  country,"  he  wrote  in  his  unfinished  report,  "  as 
far  as  we  could  learn,  had  risen  in  rebellion;  our  com- 
munications on  all  sides  were  cut  off;  almost  every  public 
officer,  whether  paid  by  ourselves  or  his  Majesty,  had 
declared  for  the  new  governor,  and  by  fiir  the  greater 
number  even  of  his  Majesty's  domestic  servants  had  de- 
serted him.  We  had  been  fighting  forty  days  against 
very  superior  numbers,  under  most  disadvantageous  cir- 
cumstances, with  a  deplorable  loss  of  valuable  lives,  and 
in  a  day  or  two  we  must  have  perished  fi:om  hunger,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  advanced  season  of  the  year  and  the 
extreme  cold,  from  the  effects  of  which  our  native  troops 
were  suffering  severely.  I  had  been  repeatedly  apprised 
by  the  military  authorities  that  nothing  could  be  done 
with  our  troops ;  and  I  regret  to  add  that  desertions  to 
the  enemy  were  becoming  of  frequent  occurrence  among 
our  troops.  The  terms  I  secured  were  the  best  obtain- 
able, and  the  destruction  of  fifteen  thousand  human  beings 
would  little  have  benefited  our  country,  whilst  our  go- 
vernment would  have  been  almost  compelled  to  avenge 
our  fate  at  whatever  cost  We  shall  part  with  the  Af- 
ghans as  friends,  and  I  feel  satisfied  that  any  govern- 


BRIGADIEB  SHELTOK's  DEFENCE.  127 

ment  which  may  be  established  hereafter  will  always 
be  disposed  to  cultivate  a  good  understandisg  with  us. 
A  retreat  without  terms  would  have  been  impracticable. 
It  is  true,  that  by  entering  into  terms,  we  are  prevented 
from  undertaking  the  conquest  of  the  entire  country — a 
measure  which,  from  my  knowledge  of  the  views  of  go- 
vernment, I  feel  convinced  would  never  be  resorted  to 
even  were  the  means  at  hand.  But  such  a  project,  in 
the  present  state  of  our  Indian  finances,  and  the  requisi- 
tions for  troops  in  various  quarters,  I  knew  could  not  be 
entertained."* 

1  wish  that  it  were  not  more  difficult  to  acquit  the 
miUtary  chiefi.  General  Elphinstone's  correspondence 
contains  what  he  conceived  to  be  a  justification  of  his 
conduct  in  urging  Macnaghten  to  capitulate.  Brigadier 
Shelton  has  left  upon  record  a  statement  of  which  it  is 
only  just  to  his  memory  that  it  should  have  the  fiill 
credit :  "  The  great  extent  of  cantonments,"  he  wrote 
in  the  narrative  drawn  up  by  him  at  Buddeeabad,  "  and 
defenceless  nature  of  the  ramparts  (an  officer  having 
actually  ridden  over  them),  effectually  compromised  our 
force,  by  the  necessity  to  watch  and  protect  every  foot  of 
the  works,  from  their  extreme  weakness,  and  the  conse- 
quent danger  of  sending  out  a  force  of  sufficient  strength 
to  ensure  victory,  against  a  numerous  enemy  flushed  with 
success,  while  our  troops  were  disheartened,  on  half- 
rations  of  parched  wheat,  and  harassed  and  worn  out 
from  constant  duty  on  the  ramparts,  whose  weakness  re- 
quired their  presence  night  and  day,  exposed  to  excessive 
cold  by  night,  with  little  covering  and  less  comfort.  The 
great  oversight  of  neglecting  to  bring  in  provisions  for  the 
winter  could  not  be  remedied.  The  impossibility  of  pro- 
curing them  by  force  in  a  country  studded  with  forts, 
every  one  of  which  required  a  regular  attack,  was  appa- 

•  UnfaMed  Report  of  Sir  W,  H,  Macnaghten :  MS,  Records. 


128  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

rent  to  all.  The  Ricka-bashee  Fort,  close  to  cantonments, 
cost  us  200  men.  What  must  distant  ones  not  have  cost 
us — sniped  the  whole  way  out  and  home  by  long  rifles 
out  of  range  of  our  fire,  through  snow,  with  the  thermo- 
meter at  zero?  There  was  nothing  under  such  circum- 
stances dishonourable  in  a  necessary  retreat,  which  might 
have  been  efiected  before  the  snow  fell,  and  whilst  there 
were  a  few  days'  provisions  in  store,  with  some  hope  of 
success.  Had  provisions  been  stored  in  cantonments  for 
the  winter,  the  troops  would  have  been  in  better  heart, 
and  resistance  made  until  timely  assistance  should  arrive. 
The  party  at  Jellalabad  was  more  favoured,  both  in  pro- 
visions and  a  more  congenial  climate.'' 

Posterity  will  not  accept  such  apologies  as  these. 
That  difficulties  and  dangers  of  no  common  kind  beset 
the  path  of  the  military  commanders  in  those  Caubul 
cantonments  is  not  to  be  gainsaid.  But  war  is  made  of 
difficulties  and  dangers.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  soldier  to 
live  in  the  midst  of  them.  Elphinstone  and  Shelton 
were  sent  to  Caubul  to  face  difficulties  and  dangers, 
not  to  turn  away  from  them.  The  existence  of  the 
evils  here  set  forth  in  such  formidable  array  is  not  ques- 
tioned or  doubted.  Some,  at  least,  of  them  were  the 
growth  of  our  own  weakness ;  for  difficidties  not  met 
with  energy  and  decision  are  wonderfully  reproductive. 
They  thicken  around  the  wavering  and  irresolute.  If, 
on  the  10th  of  December,  Elphinstone  and  Shelton,  after 
bravely  struggling,  throughout  six  long  peril-laden  weeks, 
against  the  difficulties  which  were  thronging  around 
them,  had  at  last  succumbed  to  their  pressure,  they 
would  have  been  entitled  to  the  respect,  no  less  than 
to  the  pity,  of  the  world.  But  it  was  not  so  much  that 
the  circumstances  were  strong,  as  that  the  men  were 
weak.  As  early  as  the  5th  of  November — three  days 
after  the  first  outbreak  of  the  insurrection — Elphinstone 


CONDUCT  OP  THE  MILITARY  CHIEFS.  129 

had  b^un  to  think  and  to  write  about  terms.  Shelton 
was  not  much  behind  him  in  his  recommendations  of 
the  same  ignoble  course.  They  were,  both  of  them, 
brave  men.  In  any  other  situation,  though  the  physical 
infirmities  of  the  one,  and  the  cankered  vanity,  the 
dogmatical  perverseness  of  the  other,  might  have,  in 
some  measure,  detracted  from  their  efficiency  as  military 
commanders,  I  believe  that  they  would  have  exhibited 
sufficient  constancy  and  courage  to  rescue  an  army 
fiom  utter  destruction,  and  the  British  name  from  inde- 
lible reproach.  But  in  the  Caubul  cantonments  they 
were  miserably  out  of  place.  They  seem  to  have  been 
sent  there,  by  superhuman  intervention,  to  work  out  the 
utter  ruin  and  prostration  of  an  unholy  policy  by  ordi- 
nary human  means. 

It  is  remarkable,  indeed,  that  the  chief  conduct  of  oiur 
military  operations,  in  this  critical  conjuncture,  should 
have  been  in  the  hands  of  two  men  so  utterly  unlike 
each  other,  and  yet  so  equal  in  their  incapacity  for  such 
command.  I  believe  it  to  be  no  exaggeration  to  affirm, 
that  there  were  not  in  India  two  men  of  the  same  high 
rank  equally  unfitted  by  circumstance  and  by  character 
for  the  command  of  the  Caubul  army.  The  one  had 
everything  to  learn ;  the  other  had  everything  to  unlearn. 
Elphinstone  knew  nothing  of  the  native  army.  Shelton 
was  violently  prejudiced  against  it.  Elphinstone,  in  a 
new  and  untried  position,  had  no  opinion  of  his  own, 
but  flung  himself  upon  the  judgment  of  any  one  with 
confidence  enough  to  form  and  express  one.  Shelton, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  proud  of  his  experience,  and 
obstinately  wedded  to  his  own  opinions.  Opposition 
irritated  and  enfeebled  him.  To  overrule  and  to  thwart* 
him  at  the  commencement  of  an  enterprise  entrusted 
to  his  charge  was  to  secure  its  ignominious  failure. 
Whether  by  accident  or  by  design,  he  generally  con- 

VOL.  II.  K 


130  PROGBESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

trived  to  demonstrate  the  soundness  of  his  own  judgment, 
by  being  disastrously  beaten  in  every  attempt  to  carry 
out  the  projects  forced  upon  him  by  the  preponderating 
counsels  of  others.  Had  Shelton  exercised  the  chief 
military  control,  though  he  might  have  committed  some 
errors,  he  would  probably  have  distinguished  himself 
more  than  in  the  secondary  position  which  he  was  com- 
pelled to  occupy.  On  him  was  thrown  the  burden  of  the 
executive  duties.  Whilst  others  overruled  his  opinions, 
he  was  made  responsible  for  the  success  of  enterprises 
against  which  he  protested,  and  with  which  he  was  the 
last  man  in  the  country  heartily  to  identify  himself  under 
circumstances  so  irritating  and  depressing.  It  would 
have  been  impossible,  indeed,  to  have  brought  together 
two  men  so  individually  disqualified  for  their  positions — 
so  ineflScient  in  themselves,  and  so  doubly  inefficient  in 
combination.  Each  made  the  other  worse.  The  only 
point  on  which  they  agreed  was,  imhappily,  the  one  on 
which  it  would  have  been  well  if  they  had  diflFered. 
They  agreed  in  urging  the  Envoy  to  capitulate.  There 
was  a  curse  upon  them  that  clouded  their  brains  and 
made  faint  their  hearts,  and  moved  them  to  seek  safety 
in  a  course  at  once  the  most  discreditable  and  the  most 
perilous  of  all  that  opened  out  before  them. 


PBEPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETBEAT.  131 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

[December,  1841.] 

Preparations  for  the  Retreat — Evacuation  of  the  Balla  Hissar — ^ProgrcM  of 
the  Neffotiationa—Continiied  Ddaj — ^Variations  of  the  Treatj — DeeLgns 
of  the  Envoy — Overtxires  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan — ^Death  of  Sir  Wil- 
liam Macnaghten — His  Character. 

And  now  began  preparations  for  the  retreat.  Orders 
were  despatched  to  the  Balla  Hissar  for  the  evacuation  of 
that  position  by  the  British  troops ;  and  it  was  said  that 
in  two  days  the  whole  force  would  be  moving  towards 
the  British  provinces.  Doubtful  of  our  good  faith,  the 
chiefe  withheld  the  promised  supplies ;  but  small  quanti- 
ties of  grain  were  procured  from  the  Balla  Hissar.  In  the 
mean  while,  though  our  commissariat  store-rooms  were 
empty,  our  military  magazines  were  full.*  There  was  a 
scramble  among  the  soldiers  for  new  arms  and  accoutre- 
ments ;  and  even  the  camp-followers,  to  whom  ammuni- 
tion was  served  out  by  orders  of  the  General,  came  in  for 
a  share  of  the  spoil. 

The  Balla  Hissar  was  evacuated  by  the  British  troops 
on  the  13th  of  December.    Akbar  Eian  had  pledged 

•  The    Greneral   had   announced  well  supplied  that  he  ordered  it  to  be 

(tt»te,  page  87),  as  early  as  the  6th  served  out  to  the  camp-followers, 

of  Korember,  that  his  ammunition  The  Balla  Hissar  had  in  the  mean 

was  faiHnff  lum;  but  on  the  Idth  while  been  liberally  funushed  from 

^  December  the  magazine  was  so  cantonments. 

k2 


132        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

himself  to  conduct  the  party  safely  to  cantonments. 
Grain  was  of  unspeakable  value  at  this  time ;  but  time 
was  valuable  too.  In  our  efforts  to  save  the  former  we 
lost  the  latter.  There  were  1600  maimds  of  wheat  to 
be  conveyed  to  cantonments,  and  the  packing  and  load- 
ing were  more  than  a  day's  work.  Great  as  had  been 
the  exertions  of  the  Commissariat  officer,  and  worthy  of 
all  praise.  Major  Ewart  was  compelled  to  break  in  upon 
his  labours,  and  move  off*  his  force,  before  the  baggage- 
cattle  were  ready  to  start  with  their  precious  loads.  It 
was  six  o'clock  in  mid- winter,  very  dark,  and  bitterly 
cold,  when  the  troops  began  to  march  slowly  out  of  the 
Balla  Hissar.  Akbar  Khan  and  his  followers  had  been 
for  some  time  in  readiness  to  escort  them  to  cantonments ; 
and  now  it  was  whispered  among  the  King's  people  that 
a  trap  had  been  laid  for  the  destruction  of  the  force,  and 
that  not  a  man  would  reach  his  destination.  Major 
Ewart  moved  out  his  men ;  and  the  party  had  scarcely 
cleared  the  gate  when  a  rush,  it  was  said,  was  made  by 
some  of  Akbar  Khan's  jezailchees  to  obtain  admittance 
to  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  gates  were  immediately  closed ; 
the  King's  troops  on  the  walls  opened  a  smart  fire  of 
musketry  on  friends  and  on  foes  alike.  Then  followed 
a  shower  of  grape,  striking  down  some  of  our  Sepoys, 
and  creating  no  little  dismay  and  confusion  in  our 
ranks. 

The  Seeah-Sungh  hills,  along  the  base  of  which  lay 
the  road  between  the  Balla  Hissar  and  the  cantonments, 
were  bristling  with  Ghilzye  banditti.  At  that  late  hour, 
Akbar  Khan  declared  that  it  would  be  almost  impossible 
to  restrain  them,  and  that  therefore,  if  the  British  force 
would  secure  its  safety,  it  must  abstain  from  prosecuting 
its  march  towards  cantonments  until  he  had  made  arrange- 
ments with  the  chiefs — in  fact,  that  it  must  halt  till  the 
morrow.     On  that  dark,  frosty  December  night  this  was. 


WITHDRAWAL  FROM  THE  BALLA  HI88AR.  133 

indeed,  a  discouraging  announcement.  The  troops  were 
halted  on  low  marshy  ground,  under  the  walls  of  the  fort. 
The  ground  was  white  with  the  hoar  frost.  The  air  was 
bitingly  cold.  They  would  have  lit  fires  and  clustered 
around  them,  but  there  was  no  fuel  in  their  reach.  They 
had  no  tents.  They  had  no  bedding.  They  had  no 
food.  They  were  every  minute  expecting  to  be  attacked 
by  the  enemy.  In  this  cheerless,  miserable  state  they 
could  do  nothing  but  stand,  or  walk  about,  looking  for 
the  rising  of  the  morning  star.*  The  night  was  a  long 
one,  but  it  came  to  a  close  at  last.  The  miseries  of  the 
darkness  were  now  to  be  succeeded  by  the  perils  of  the 
dawn.  They  were  only  about  six  hundred  strong,  and 
the  road  was  infested  by  thousands  of  the  enemy.  They 
had  nothing  on  which  to  depend  but  the  good  faith 
of  Akbar  Khan  and  their  own  steadiness  and  courage. 
Happily  the  former  did  not  fail  them.  Akbar  Khan  did 
not  play  the  traitor.  The  rear  guard  was  molested  by  a 
party  of  Afghans,  and  the  Sirdar  himself,  with  a  few  fol- 
lowers, galloped  into  the  midst  of  his  hostile  country- 
men, and  threatened  to  cut  down  all  who  dared  to  oppose 
the  progress  of  the  detachment.  About  ten  o'clock  the 
force  reached  cantonments  in  safety;  but  "thoroughly 
exhausted  with  hunger  and  fatigue."f 

It  has  been  stated,  that  when  on  the  evening  of  the  13th 
of  December  the  British  troops  moved  out  of  the  Balla 
Hissar,  an  attempt  was  made  by  some  of  the  followers  of 
Akbar  Khan  to  obtain  admittance.  It  has  been  said  that 
it  was  the  Sirdar's  object  to  seize  the  gate,  so  as  to  admit 
the  main  body  of  his  followers,  and  to  carry  the  place 
by  storm.  It  has  been  surmised,  also,  that  the  Sirdar 
delayed  the  march  of^J^ia^r  Ewart's  detachment,  hoping 

*  At  the  suggestion  of  Lieutenant  son,  who  had  been  ordered  by  the 

ConoUj  they  endeavoured  to  obtain  King  to  admit  no  one. 
r?-adnuttance  to  the  Balla  Hissar,        f  Narrative   of  Lieutenant    Md' 

but  were  fired  upon  by  the  garri-  ville. 


134       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

that  the  gates  of  the  Balla  Bossar  would  be  re-opened  to 
the  British  troops;  and  that  then,  under  cover  of  the 
night,  his  followers  might  force  an  entrance  into  the 
place.*  A  very  different  account  of  this  incident,  how- 
ever, has  been  left  on  record  by  the  Envoy  himself. 
"  On  the  13th  of  December,"  he  wrote,  "  it  was  agreed 
upon  that  our  troops  should  evacuate  the  Balla  Hissar, 
and  return  to  the  cantonment,  whilst  the  Barukzyes 
should  have  a  conference  with  his  Majesty,  with  a  view 
to  his  retaining  the  nominal  powers  of  sovereignty,  they, 
for  their  own  security,  placing  a  guard  of  their  own  in 
the  upper  citadel.  No  sooner,  however,  had  our  troops 
left  the  Balla  Hissar,  than  his  Majesty,  owing  to  some 
panic  or  misunderstanding,  ordered  the  gate  to  be  shut, 
and  the  proposed  conference  was  thereby  prevented.  So 
offended  were  the  Barukzyes,  that  they  determined  never 
to  offer  his  Majesty  the  same  terms  again.  In  explana- 
tion of  his  conduct,  his  Majesty  states  that  the  party 
whom  the  Barukzyes  desired  to  introduce  was  not  the 
party  which  -had  been  agreed  upon."f  This  was,  pro- 
bably, one  of  the  last  sentences  ever  penned  by  Sir 
William  Macnaghten.  It  closes  the  fragment  of  the  offi- 
cial report  found  in  his  writing-desk  after  his  death. 

The  treaty  read  by  the  Envoy  at  the  conference  on 
the  11th  of  December  contained  an  article  involving  the 
formal  abdication  of  Shah  Soojah.  The  restoration  of 
the  Barukzye  Sirdars  to  their  old  principaUties  was,  at 
that  time,  decreed  by  both  contracting  parties ;  but  the 
meeting  had  scarcely  broken  up,  when  some  of  the 
Douranee  chiefi,  jealous  of  the  power  of  the  Barukzyes, 
which  had  ever  been  put  forth  to  the  injury  and  depres- 
sion of  the  tribes,  recoiled  from  this  perilous  stipulation, 
and  began  to  think  of  the  retention  of  the  King,  at  all 

*  Eyre's  Journal.  +  MS,  Records, 


IBBESOLUTION  OF  THE  SHAH.  135 

events  as  a  puppet  and  a  name.*  On  the  following  day 
it  was  proposed  by  the  chiefs  that  Shah  Soojah  should 
remain  on  the  throne,  on  condition  of  his  intermarrying 
his  daughters  with  the  leading  Afghan  Sirdars,  and 
vesting  the  Wuzeership  in  the  family  of  the  Barukzyes. 
It  was  stipulated  also  that  the  King,  whose  love  of  pomp 
and  ceremony  was  one  of  his  besetting  infirmities,  and 
who  had  excited  the  indignation  of  many  of  the  chiefs 
by  his  haughty  bearing  towards  them,  should  dispense 
with  some  of  the  regal  formaUties  which  had  given  them 
80  great  offence.f  The  proposal,  sanctioned  by  the 
British  minister,  was  formally  made  to  the  Shah.  There 
was  the  loss  of  his  kingdom  on  the  one  side ;  there  was 
the  loss  of  some  regal  dignity  on  the  other.  The  King 
hesitated;  then  yielded  a  reluctant  assent;  and  a  few 
days  afterwards  withdrew  it  altogether.  His  pride  and 
his  fear  both  deterred  him  from  forming  such  an  alUance 
with  the  chiefe.  He  was  unwilling  so  to  sully  the  purity 
of  the  royal  blood ;  and  he  could  not  trust  to  the  good 
feith  of  the  Sirdars  after  the  departure  of  his  British 
allies.  And  so  the  treaty  with  the  Barukzye  chiefs 
reverted  to  its  original  shape,  and  the  Shah  determined 
to  return  to  the  British  provinces,  fi'om  which  he  had 
never  yet  emerged  without  plunging  into  new  disasters. 

The  stipulations  of  the  treaty  were  now  to  be  brought 
into  effect.  But  mutual  distrust  existed  between  the 
parties,  and  each  was  unwilling  to  give  the  other  any 
advantage  by  being  the  first  to  act  up  to  the  obligations 

*  Mohnn  Lai  8a3r8  that  this  was  asflured  him  to  take  hia  aide,  which, 

the  Envoy's  desi^.     "  This  agree-  in  fact,  was  the  object  of  the  Envoy." 

ment,"  he  wrote  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  — [MS.  Records,^ 
Cdvin,  "  which  the  Envoy  had  pru-        f  Mainly  "  the  offensive  practice 

dently  made    to  create    dissension,  of  keeping  the  chief  nobles  of  his 

disappointed  all  the  Douranee  rebels,  kingdom  waiting   for  hours  at  his 

4c,  who  were  alarmed  at  the  return  gate,  in  expectation  of  audience." — 

of  the  Dost.  They  immediately  began  lEyre^ 9  Journal.'] 
to  conmLonicate  with  the  Shah,  and 


136        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

that  it  imposed.  The  British  authorities  called  upon 
the  chiefs  to  send  in  the  provisions  which  they  had 
undertaken  to  provide ;  and  the  chiefs  called  upon  the 
British  authorities  to  demonstrate  the  sincerity  of  their 
promises  to  retire  from  A%hanistan,  by  giving  up  the 
different  forts  which  they  occupied  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  cantonments,  and  by  placing  hostages  in  their  hands. 
The  question  of  the  abandonment  of  the  forts  was  dis- 
cussed between  the  Envoy  and  the  Greneral.  On  the  16th 
of  DecembeB  the  latter  wrote : 

Dec.  16,  1841. 

My  DEAR  Sir  William, 

I  wish  you  would  write  me  an  official  letter,  with  your 
opinion  as  to  the  necessity  of  giving  up  the  forts,  in  furtherance 
of  your  negotiations.  I  think,  if  absolutely  necessary,  it  must  be 
dene.  Our  situation  cannot  be  made  worse,  but  I  think  they 
ought  to  take  them  one  at  a  time,  beginning  with  Zoolfikar's 
(the  grain  fort)  and  the  Ricka-Bashee,  they  sending  us  supplies. 
This  will  be  a  mutual  proof  of  confidence :  the  abandoning  of  these 
forts  if  they  are  not  sincere,  giving  up  these  cantonments  and  the 
possibility  of  retreat  from  them.  Of  course  the  hostages  will  be 
sent,  as  you  think  they  ought  to  be:  pray  name  them  in  your 
letter,  if  they  have  offered,  or  you  proposed  any. 

I  herewith  return  the  two  letters  from  Trevor  and  Captain 
Drummond. 

Yours  truly, 

W.  K.  £.♦ 

The  magazine  fort  is,  in  fact,  part  of  our  cantonments^  and 
ought  for  the  present  to  be  dispensed  with^  as  an  act  of  courtesy 
and  faith  to  us. 

Upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter  from  the  General,  the 
Envoy  addressed  to  him  the  required  official  communi- 
cation: 

December  16,  1841. 

Sib, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acquaint  you  that  I  have  received  a 
proposition  from  Mahomed  Oosman  Khan  and  Ameen-oollah 

♦  Unpunished  Correspondence, 


ABANDONMENT  OF  THE  FOBTS.  137 

Khan,  to  the  effect  that  we  should  give  up  to  them  certain  forts 
in  the  vicini^  of  the  cantonments,  with  a  view  to  convince  the 
population  of  the  sincerity  of  our  intention  to  leave  the  country; 
by  which  arrangement  also  they  stated  that  they  would  be  able  to 
supply  us  punctually  with  provisions. 

I  am  aware  of  the  objections  to  such  an  arrangementi  in  a 
military  point  of  view;  but  as  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  proposition 
has  emanated  from  a  suspicion  of  our  intentions,  rather  than  from 
any  sinister  motive  on  the  part  of  the  Afghan  chiefs,  I  would 
strongly  recommend  that  the  proposition  be  complied  with.  We 
are  clearly  completely  in  the  power  of  our  new  allies  as  regards 
the  article  of  provisions  ;  and  it  is  not  clear  to  me  what  other 
course  than  compliance  is  open  to  us.  By  this  course  we  show 
confidence,  and  have  at  least  the  chance  of  making  a  safe  and 
honourable  retreat  out  of  the  country:  whereas,  by  refusal,  we  may 
exasperate  those  with  whom  we  are  treating,  and  be  utterly  cut  off 
from  the  means  of  subsistence. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have  received  an  intimation  that 
no  frirther  supplies  will  be  sent  us,  until  the  proposition  of  the 
diiefr  be  complied  with;  and  I  request  that  you  will  inform  me 
whether  you  are  prepared  to  give  up  the  forts 

(The  new  Magazine  Fort, 
The  Musjeed, 
The  Fort  of  Zoolfikar, 
The  Fort  of  Eicka-Bashee) 
this  afternoon. 

The  chiefi  have  promised  that  thirty  men,  who  shall  be  under 
control,  are  to  occupy  each  of  the  places  to  be  delivered  up;  and 
I  hope  that  the  brother  of  Newab  Mahomed  Zemaun  IQian  will 
ledde  in  the  cantonment  as  a  hostage  until  our  departure. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c.,  <Sbc., 

W.  H.  M.* 

To  this  letter  the  Greneral  sent  back  the  following 
official  reply : 

Head-(2uarter8,  Canbul,  Dec.  16,  1841. 

Sib, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 

letter  of  this  day's  date;  in  reply  to  which  I  beg  to  say  that, 

*  Unpublished  Correspondence, 


138 


PREPARATIONS  POR  THE  RETREAT. 


firom  the  emergency  of  the  case,  as  therein  stated,  I  see  no  alter- 
native left  us  but  to  give  up  the  forts  mentioned  to  the  chiefi 
with  whom  you  are  treating;  and  I  shall  accordingly  give  orders 
for  their  being  vacated  and  delivered  over  to  the  persons  who 
may  be  authorised  to  receive  them^  immediately  on  your  inti- 
mating their  arrival. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

W.  K.  Elphinstonb,  Major-Gen., 
Commanding  in  Afghanistan. 


No  time  was  lost  in  carrying  this  arrangement  into 
effect.  Whatever  dilatoriness  may  have  been  displayed 
on  other  occasions,  there  was  no  want  of  alacrity  evinced 
when  anything  was  to  be  yielded  to  the  enemy.  Our 
garrisons  were  speedily  withdrawn  from  the  forts,  and 
the  victorious  insurgents  duly  placed  in  possession  of 
them.  By  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  Afghan 
conquerors  were  sitting  on  the  walls  of  these  ceded  forts, 
looking  into  the  British  cantonments,  and  joking  over 
our  discomfiture.*  A  brother  of  the  Newab  Zemaun 
Khan  was  sent  in  as  a  hostage  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy  ;f  and  a  small  supply  of  atta  was  furnished  to 
the  troops. 

Provisions,  however,  came  in  very  slowly;  and  car- 
riage was  not  sent  in  at  all.  There  was  a  mixed  crowd 
of  robbers  and  fanatics  swarming  between  the  city  and 
the  cantonments,  ever  on  the  alert  to  intercept  the 
supphes  that  were  sent  in  either  by  the  Sirdars  or  by 
private  speculators.     All  kinds  of  outrages  were  com- 


*  Shelton  was  opposed  to  the  ces- 
sion of  the  forts.  ^*  On  my  opinion 
bein|[  asked,"  he  sajrs,  ^*  I  pronounced 
it  injudicious,  ancl  it  was  declined ; 
but  about  two  days  afterwards  the 
order  was  ffiveny  and  I  was  directed 
to  give  up  wL"— [ifjS.  Records.} 

f  It  was  thought,  however,  that 
there  was  too  much  disunion  among 


the  Afghans,  at  this  time,  to  render 
the  hostage-giving  any  kind  of  se- 
curity— inasmuch  as  the  sacrifice  of  a 
hostage  might  have  pleased  more  than 
it  offended.  It  was  said  by  Sultan  Jan* 
of  the  hostage  now  in  our  camp,  ^^  Oh  I 
he  is  a  dog  of  a  man ;  what  should 
we  have  cared  if  you  had  killed 
him.** — [Lieut.  Melmlle^s  Narrative.} 


EFFOBTS  OF  THE  COMMISSARIAT.  139 

mitted,  in  the  very  face  of  our  guards,  and  under  the 
very  muzzles  of  our  guns ;  but  not  a  shot  was  fired  upon 
the  plunderers.  Our  enemies,  now  become  "our  new 
aUies,"  were  to  be  treated  with  all  possible  consideration. 
Nothing  was  to  be  done  to  interrupt  the  good  feeling 
which  was  now  said  to  have  been  established;  and  so, 
whilst  our  troops  were  starving,  the  military  authorities 
suffered  the  grain  so  eagerly  looked  for  by  the  wretched 
force  to  be  swept  away  from  them,  imder  the  very  walls 
of  cantonments,  by  a  miserable  rabble,  whom  a  few 
roimds  of  grape  would  have  scattered  like  a  flock  of 
sheep.* 

*  Captiun  Johnson's  journal  sup-  ghans,  without  the  most  urgent  ne- 
dies  the  best  information  extant  re-  cessitj,  for  fear  of  putting  a  stop  to 
UtiTe  to  the  measures  taken  through-  the  good  feeling  existing  on  their 
oat  the  si^e  to  supply  the  force  wiUi  part.    The  chiefs  have  been  applied 
prorisions.     Under  dates  Dec*  \21h  to,  to  use  their  influence  to  prevent 
mdXZikf  he  writes:  '^A  few  provi-  these  people  assembling    near    our 
sions  tent  into  cantonments  bj  the  cantonments.    Their  reply  is,   'We 
Sirdars.     A  lakh  of  rupees  advanced  cannot  do  so — they  are  not  under 
to  Mahomed  Akbar  for  the  purchase  our  control ;  but  if  they  misbehave 
of  camels — not  one   as  yet  forth-  themselves,  tire  upon  them.'   To-day, 
coming.   The  Seeah-Sungh  gateway,  I  was  at  the  Seeab-Simgh  gateway, 
throuni  which  all  supplies  come  in,  anxiously  looking  out  for  some  food 
is  dauy  infested  by  parties  of  Af-  for  my  public  cattle.    About  thirty 
sfaans  calling  themselves  Ghazeesj  or  loads  or  hoosah  came  to  within  six 
Dgfaten  for  religion.    They  are,  with-  paces  of  the  bridge,  and  where  the 
out   exception,  the  most  barefaced,  ffuard  was  standing.     The  officer  on 
impertinent    scoundrels   under   the  duty,  as  also  the  field-officer  of  the 
ran.    Armed  with  swords,  daggers,  week,   was    there.      The   wretched 
snd  matchlocks,  they  acknowle(%e  no  rabble  above  alluded  to  stopped  the 
diief^  but  act  independently — they  drivers  of  the  donkeys  and  abused 
ttont  and  insult  the  whole  of  us.  them,  beat  them  and  ordered  them 
Not  a  Sepoy  can  venture  twelve  paces  back,  and  threatened  them  with  more 
from  the  bridge  over  the  ditch  with-  ill-usage  in  the  event  of  their  return- 
oat  beixi^  plundered  of  what  he  has.  ing  to  sell  any  article  to  the  Fering- 
People  from  the  town,  bringing  in  hees.    This  was  reported  by  me  to 
Dwok  or  boosah  (bran),  are  often  plun-  the  Greneral,  and  there  it  ended.'*  ^ 
oered  and  beaten.      Although  our  And  again,  on  the  15th,  the  active 
cattle  and  men  are  starving,  no  mea-  Commissariat  officer  writes :  *' A  few 
sores  are  taken  by  our  military  au-  supplies  sent  into  cantonments,  and 
dnritiefl  to  check  all  this.    It  is  true,  people  still  bringing  in  private  spe- 
ov  ramparts  are  lined  with  our  sol-  culations ;  but  are  subjected  to  the 
(tiers,  and  plenty  of  cannon  at  each  same  ill-treatment  as  noticed  on  the 
Mon,  and  a  six-pounder   at  the  12th  and  13th.  Attah  and  barley  sell 
Mge  loaded  with  grape — but  to  from  1)  to  3  and  4  seers  the  rupee 
vhit  purpose  P    Our  men  arc  told,  (from  3lb.  to  61b.  and  Slb.for  2s.)  . .  . 
OQ  no  account;  to  fire  upon  the  Af«  To-day  a  flock  of  sheep  belonging  to 


140        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

This  was  a  season  of  perilous  procrastination.  Both 
parties  seemed  anxious  to  postpone  the  day  that  was  to 
witness  the  departure  of  the  British  force ;  and  each  was 
suspicious  of  the  good  faith  of  the  other.  The  chiefs 
withheld,  from  day  to  day,  the  provisions  and  the  car- 
riage-cattle, with  which  they  had  undertaken  to  facilitate 
our  escape  from  Afghanistan ;  and  Macnaghten,  hoping 
still  against  hope,  and  sanguine,  even  in  the  midst  of 
every  kind  of  discouragement,  still  thought  that  "  some- 
thing might  turn  up  "  to  avert  the  humiUation  of  an  en- 
forced withdrawal  from  the  country  which  we  had  en- 
tered with  so  much  pomp  and  parade.  It  was  still 
possible,  he  thought,  that  Maclaren's  brigade  might  make 
good  its  way  to  Caubul.  It  was  not  then  known  that  it 
had  retraced  its  steps  to  Candahar. 

Then  snow  began  to  fall.  On  the  18th  of  December, 
the  doomed  force  looked  out  upon  the  new  horror.  From 
morning  to  evening  prayer  it  fell  with  frightful  perse- 
verance, and  before  sunset  was  lying  many  inches  thick 
upon  the  ground.  Our  difficulties  had  now  fearfully  in- 
creased. Had  the  force  been  set  in  motion  a  few  days 
before  the  first  snow-fall,  and,  moving  lightly,  pushed  on 
by  forced  marches  through  the  passes,  it  might  have 
reached  Jellalabad  in  safety.  But  now  ever3rthing  was 
against  us.  The  elements  were  conspiring  for  our  de- 
struction. It  was  more  and  more  painfully  obvious,  every 
day,  that  the  curse  of  God  was  brooding  over  the  agents 
of  an  unrighteous  policy.  Whatever  may  have  been  the 
causes  of  that  week's  delay — whether  the  bad  faith  of 
the  chiefe,  the  irresolution  of  the  Shah,  or  the  reluctance 

cantonments  was  grazing  outside  of  drove  them  along  the  whole  face  of 

the  walls,  under  the  care  of  the  shep-  cantonment.     Report  made  to  the 

herd.    Two  men  attacked  him  close  Greneral,  whose  replj  was,    *•  Thej 

imder  where  our  sentries,  with  loaded  had  no  business  to  go  outside ;'  and 

muskets,  were  standing.    The  shep-  all  this  time  our  ^irrison  are  starv- 

herd  fled,  and  so  did  the  two  men  ins!^* — {^Captain  JohnsorCs  Journal z 

with  the  whole  flock  of  sheep,  and  IdS,  Records,'] 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  CHIEFS.  141 

of  the  British  Envoy,  it  cut  away  from  under  us  the 
last  hope  that  remained  of  rescuing  the  British  force 
from  the  annihilating  dangers  that  hemmed  it  in  on 
every  side. 

The  22nd  was  now  fixed  upon  as  the  day  for  the  de- 
parture of  the  British  troops.  On  the  19  th,  the  Envoy 
and  the  General  despatched  letters  to  Ghuznee,  Canda- 
har,  and  Jellalabad,  ordering  the  evacuation  of  those 
positions.  Money  was  given  freely  to  the  chiefs  for  cattle 
which  was  not  sent  in  for  our  use ;  and  it  was  believed 
that  Mahomed  Akbar  was  expecting  the  treasure  thus 
raised  on  the  instruments  of  our  destruction.  Every  day 
"  our  new  alhes"  became  more  insolent  and  defiant.  As 
our  difficulties  thickened,  their  demands  rose.  All  hope  of 
succours  from  Candahar  had  vanished  on  the  19th,  when 
intelligence  of  the  return  of  Maclaren's  brigade  was  re- 
ceived by  the  Envoy.  Macnaghten  had  clung  to  this 
chance,  with  desperate  tenacity,  to  the  last — and  now  he 
abandoned  all  hope  of  saving  the  reputation  of  his  coun- 
try by  beating  the  enemy  in  the  field. 

But  he  had  not  yet  abandoned  all  hope  of  saving  the 
reputation  of  his  country  by  playing  a  game  of  dexterous 
diplomacy,  such  as  could  only  have  been  played  against 
a  number  of  disunited  factions,  almost  as  hostile  to  each 
other  as  to  the  common  foe.  It  is  not  easy  to  group  into 
one  lucid  and  intelligible  whole  all  the  many  shifting 
schemes  and  devices  which  distracted  the  last  days  of  the 
Envoy's  career.  It  is  probable  that  at  this  time  he  could 
have  given  no  very  clear  account  of  the  game  which  he 
was  playing.  He  appears  to  have  turned  first  to  one 
party  and  then  to  another,  eagerly  grasping  at  every  new 
combination  that  seemed  to  promise  more  hopeful  results 
than  the  last.  His  mind  was  by  this  time  unhinged; — 
his  intellect  was  clouded ;  his  moral  perceptions  were 
deadened.  The  wonder  is,  not  that  he  was  pressed  down 
at  last  by  the  tremendous  burden  of  anxiety  which  had 


142    ,    PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

sate  upon  him  throughout  those  seven  long  weeks  of  un- 
paralleled su£fenng  and  disaster,  but  that  he  had  borne 
up  so  long  and  so  bravely  under  the  weight 

It  seems,  indeed,  that  Macnaghten,  at  this  time,  never 
knew,  firom  one  day  to  another,  with  whom  he  would 
eventually  conclude  a  treaty  for  the  extrication  of  the 
unhappy  force  from  the  perils  that  girt  it  around  as  with 
a  ring  of  fire.  He  was  throwing  about  money  in  all 
directions,  and  there  were  hungry  claimants,  pressing  on 
now  from  one  direction  now  from  another,  eager  to  turn 
the  sufferings  of  the  Feringhees  to  the  best  account,  and 
to  find  the  best  market  for  their  own  influence  and 
authority.  He  saw  no  honesty  and  sincerity  among  the 
chiefs ;  he  saw  that  they  were  all  contending  one  against 
the  other;  every  man  thinking  only  of  himself.  He 
knew  that  they  had  failed  in  their  engagements  to  him, 
and  he  doubted  whether  he  was  bound  by  the  obliga- 
tions which  he  had  contracted,  or  was  free  to  negotiate 
with  any  one  who  was  willing,  and  able,  to  offer  or  to 
accept  terms  less  degrading  in  themselves  and  less  likely 
to  be  violated.  It  was  his  general  design  to  keep  the 
different  factions  in  a  state  of  antagonism  with  each 
other,  and  to  chng  to  the  one  best  able  to  protect  us 
from  the  malice  of  the  rest.  But  he  could  not  determine, 
of  the  many  combinations  that  could  be  formed,  which 
was  the  best  calculated  to  evolve  a  state  of  things  most 
favorable  to  British  interests,  and  so  he  seems  to  have 
had  more  than  one  game  in  hand  at  the  same  time,  and 
hardly  to  have  known  which  was  to  be  played  out. 

Ostensibly  Macnaghten  was  at  this  time  in  treaty  with 
the  Barukzye  party.  But  he  was  offering  at  the  same 
time  large  sums  of  money  to  the  Ghilzyes  and  to  the 
KuzzUbashes  to  side  with  the  Shah  and  the  British ;  and 
if  they  had  declared  themselves  openly  on  our  side,  he 
might  have  thrown  over  the  Barukzye  alliance.  "  You 
can  tell  the  Ghilzyes  and  Khan  Shereen,"  he  wrote  on 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  GHILZYES.  143 

the  20th  of  December  to  Mohun  Lai,  "  that  after  they 
have  declared  for  his  Majesty  and  us,  and  sent  in  100 
kurwars  of  grain  to  cantonments,  I  shall  be  glad  to  give 
them  a  bond  for  five  lakhs  of  rupees ;  and  if  Naib  Sheriff 
is  satisfied  that  he  will  do  so,  he  should  advance  to  them 
as  much  money  as  he  can.  I  fear  for  Mahomed  Shah 
that  he  is  with  Akbar;  but  you  will  know  best.  You 
must  let  me  know  before  sunrise,  if  possible,  what  is 
likely  to  be  the  effect  of  this  proposal,  as  I  must  talk 
accordingly  to  the  Barukzyes,  who  have  shown  no  dis- 
position to  be  honest.  To  save  time,  you  may  tell  Khan 
Shereen  to  correspond  with  the  Shah,  if  there  is  a  chance 
of  success." 

On  the  following  day  he  wrote  again  to  Mohun  Lai, 
unfolding  his  views  more  distinctly  with  regard  to  the 
contemplated  alliance  with  the  Ghilzyes  and  the  Kuzzil- 
bashes: 

December  21,  4  p.m. 

Mr  DEAB  Sib, 

I  have  received  your  two  notes,  and  I  approve  of  all  that 
you  have  done.  In  conversing  with  anybody,  you  must  say  dis- 
tinctly that  I  am  ready  to  stand  by  my  engagement  with  the 
Barukzyes  and  other  chiefs  associated  with  them ;  but  that  if  any 
pordon  of  the  Afghans  wish  our  troops  to  remain  in  the  country, 
I  shall  think  myself  at  liberty  to  break  the  engagement  which  I 
Ikave  made  to  go  away,  which  engagement  was  made,  believing  it 
to  be  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Afghan  nation.  If 
the  Ghilzyes  and  Kuzzilbashes  wish  us  to  stay,  let  them  declare  so 
openly  in  the  course  of  to-morrow,  and  we  will  side  with  them. 
The  best  proof  of  their  wish  for  us  to  stay  is  to  send  us  a  large 
quantity  of  grain  this  night — 100  or  200  kurwars.  If  they  do 
this,  and  make  their  salaam  to  the  Shah  early  to-morrow,  giving 
liis  Majesty  to  understand  that  we  are  along  with  them,  I  will 
write  to  the  Barukzyes  and  tell  them  my  agreement  is  at  an  end; 
bat  if  they  (Ghilzyes  and  Kuzzilbashes)  are  not  prepared  to  go  all 
lengths  with  us,  nothing  should  be  said  about  the  matter,  because 
the  agreement  I  have  made  is  very  good  for  us. 

Yours, 


144       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

An  hour  afterwards  he  wrote  again  to  Mohun  Lai, 
repeating  all  this  in  still  more  decided  language,  and  de- 
claring that  if  grain  were  obtained  he  should  think  him- 
self "  at  liberty  to  break  his  agreement  of  going  away  on 
Friday,  because  that  agreement  was  made  under  the 
belief  that  all  the  A%han  people  wished  us  to  go  away." 
"Do  not  let  me  appear  in  this  matter,"  he  wrote,  in 
conclusion ;  "  say  that  I  am  ready  to  stand  by  my  en- 
gagement, but  that  I  leave  it  to  the  people  themselves." 
And  again,  after  the  lapse  of  another  hour,  he  wrote : 
"  If  any  grain  is  coming  in  to-night,  let  me  have  notice 
of  it  a  few  minutes  before.  Anything  that  may  be 
intended  in  our  favour  must  appear  before  noon  to- 
morrow." 

Far  better  than  any  explanations  that  I  could  offer  do 
these  letters  unfold  the  character  of  Macnaghten's  designs. 
The  days  on  which  they  were  written  saw  the  Envoy  in 
conference,  near  the  banks  of  the  canal,  with  Akbar 
Khan  and  a  few  chiefs  of  the  Barukzye  party.  As  time 
advanced,  the  Sirdars  rose  in  their  demands ;  and  every 
new  meeting  witnessed  the  dictation  of  fresh  terms. 
They  called  upon  us  to  deliver  up  to  them  all  our  mili- 
tary stores  and  ammunition,  and  to  surrender  the  mar- 
ried families  as  hostages  for  the  fulfilment,  on  our  part, 
of  the  conditions  of  the  treaty.  Then  they  demanded 
that  Brigadier  Shelton  should  be  given  over  to  them  as 
a  hostage ;  but  the  Brigadier  was  unwilling  to  accept  the 
duty,  and  the  proposal  was  declined.  The  hostages 
given  up  on  the  21st  of  December  were  Lieutenants 
J.  B.  Conolly,  the  Envoy's  relative  and  assistant,  and 
Lieutenant  Airey,  of  the  3rd  Buffs,  who  had  been  acting 
as  the  General's  aid-de-camp. 

On  the  following  day  the  commissary  of  ordnance, 
Lieutenant  E3nre,  was  "  ordered  to  conduct  an  officer  of 
the  Newab  Zeraaun  Khan  over  the  magazine,  that  he 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  GHILZYES.  145 

might  make  choice  of  such  stores  as  would  be  most 
acceptable  to  the  chiefs."*  At  the  same  time  the  Envoy 
sent  his  carriage  and  horses  as  a  present  to  Akbar  Khan. 
He  was  now  beginning  to  despair  of  deriving  any  real 
assistance  from  the  Ghilzyes,  who  were  slow  to  declare 
themselves  openly  on  our  side,  and  he  saw  plainly  how 
dangerous  it  was  to  appear  to  be  in  treaty  with  them 
and  the  Barukzyes  at  the  same  time.  Some  doubts, 
too,  of  the  honesty  of  the  course  he  was  pursuing  began 
to  obtrude  themselves  upon  him ;  and  he  wrote  accord- 
ingly to  Mohun  Lai,  requesting  him  to  instruct  the 
Ghilzyes  not  to  send  in  any  grain  until  further  advised 
upon  the  subject  : 

December  22,  1841. 

Mr  DEAi^  Sib, 

I  have  just  got  your  notes.  Pray  forbid  the  Ghilzyes  to 
biing  any  grain  to-night  until  I  talk  to  them.  I  cannot  say 
i?hether  they  are  prepared  to  do  any  service.  The  sending  grain 
to  us  just  now  would  do  more  harm  than  good  to  our  cause;  and 
it  would  lead  the  Barukzyes  to  suppose  that  I  am  intriguing  with 
a  view  of  breaking  my  agreement;  but  I  can  never  break  that 
agreement  so  long  as  all  the  Khawanen  wish  mc  to  stand  by  it. 
Pray  thank  our  fiiends,  nevertheless,  for  their  kind  attention  to  our 
interest.  I  wish  very  much  to  please  them,  and  am  sorry  my 
tieasury  is  so  empty.  Tours, 

W.  H.  M. 

December  22,  1841. 

Mr  DEAB  Sib, 

I  have  just  received  your  note,  and  send  7000  rupees  for 
Khan  Shereen  agreeably  to  your  suggestion.  He  is  a  good  friend 
of  ours,  but  pray  request  him  not  to  tell  anybody  that  I  have 
sent  the  money,  for  we  have  scarcely  any  left.  I  have  not  heard 
from  him  according  to  his  promise  of  yesterday,  but  I  suppose  that 
he  had  no  information  of  importance  to  send  me.  I  have  already 
written  to  you  begging  that  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  should  send  no 
grain  to-night.     They  should  first  openly  declare  themselves,  if 

•  Eyr^s  JournaL 
VOL.  n.  L 


146       PREPABATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

ihey  think  that  any  injury  is  likely  to  occur  to  themselves  by  our 
agreement  or  our  leaving  the  country.  If  they  do  not  do  so,  I 
must  stand  by  my  agreement,  whatever  may  be  the  consequences. 
Tou  must  imderstand  that  I  wish  to  be  considered  as  Sahib-i- 
rastee;  and  that  if  while  our  present  agreement  lasts  I  were  to 
receive  a  large  supply  of  grain  from  the  Ghilzyes,  suspicion  would 
be  raised  that  I  intend  to  break  my  engagement,  and  wish  to 
keep  the  troops  here^  in  spite  of  the  wishes  of  all  the  chiefs  to 
the  contrary.  It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  stop  here  for  a  few 
months  instead  of  having  to  travel  through  the  snow;  but  we 
must  not  consider  what  is  agreeable,  but  what  is  consistent  with 
our  faith.  I  am  led  to  expect  a  visit  to-night  from  N  [aib]  S[heriff  ] 
and  the  Ghilzye  chiefs.  Tours, 

W.  H.  M. 

It  was  on  the  evening  of  this  22nd  of  December,  when 
Macnaghten,  long  tossed  about  on  a  sea  of  dqubt  and 
distraction — perplexed  in  the  extreme  by  the  manifest 
bad  faith  and  the  ever-increasing  demands  of  the  chiefs — 
seeing  no  end  to  the  perilous  imcertainties  of  his  position, 
and  wearied  out  beyond  human  endurance  by  days  and 
nights  of  ceaseless  anxiety  and  bewilderment — was  in  a 
temper  to  grasp  at  any  new  thing  that  might  seem  to 
open  a  door  of  escape  from  the  embarrassments  which 
surrounded  him — that  Akbar  Khan  sent  in  Captain 
Skinner  from  the  city  with  a  new  string  of  proposals. 

The  Envoy  had  been  warned  of  the  danger  of  treating 
independently  with  the  young  Barukzye  Sirdar ;  he  had 
been  told  that  treachery  was  spreading  itself  around  him, 
and  that  he  would  be  enclosed  in  its  toils.*    But  he  had 

♦  Mohun    Lal*8    story,  as   given  sion  in  the  city  to  allow  us  to  remain 

in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Colvin,  is  worth  in  the  country,  see  us  safely  pass 

quotmff,  though  its  meaning  is  some-  down  to  Jellalabad,  or  act  as  tne  En- 

what  obscured  by  its  dubious  phrase-  voy  tells  him,  on  the  condition  that 

ology:— "Mahomed    Akbar,    being  Mahomed  Akbar  was  to  receive  four 

afraid  of  the  union  of  the  Douranees  lakhs  of  rupees  annually,  besides  the 

with    the    Shah,    induced    Surwar  reward    of  thirty   lakhs    from   the 

Khan  and  others,  by  the  hope  of  re-  British  Government,  and  made  the 

ward,  to  deceive  the  Envoy,  by  say-  Vizier  of  the  Suddozye  Kings  from 

ing  that  he  will  either  spread  dissen-  generation  to  generation.  As  soon  as 


AKBAR  khan's  PROPOSALS.  147 

now  become  desperate.  Anjrthing  was  better  than  the 
wearing  uncertainty  which  had  so  long  been  unhinging 
his  mind.  Akbar  Khan  sent  tempting  proposals;  and 
the  Envoy  flimg  himself  upon  the  snare.  He  knew  that 
there  was  danger,  but  he  had  become  regardless  of  it. 
Anything  was  better  than  the  life  he  had  so  long  been 
leading.    Even  death  itself  was  better  than  such  a  life. 

Captain  Skinner  came  into  cantonments,  accompanied 
by  Mahomed  Sadig  and  Surwar  Khan,  the  Lohanee  mer- 
chant.* The  English  officer  sate  down  to  dinner  with 
the  Envoy  whilst  the  two  Afghans  remained  in  another 
room.  A  gleam  of  hope  passed  over  Macnaghten's  care- 
worn face  when  Skinner  told  him,  in  a  light  jesting 
manner,  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  message  from  Akbar 
Khan  of  a  portentous  nature,  and  that  he  felt  as  one 
loaded  with  combustibles.f    But  the  message  was  not 

I  hetrd  this  by  the  Persian  cliief,  I  Envoy,  which  will  procure  him  all  the 

wrote  to  the  Enroj  that  Mahomed  power  and  monej  he  wishes.    I  wrote 

Akb«r    was    deceiving  us,    and  he  all  this  to  the  Envoy  on  the  very  mom- 

dkould  place  no  faith  m  anything  he  ing  of  his  murder,  begged  him  to  take 

itjrs.     I  also  particularly  informed  very  great  care  of  himself,  and  do  not 

him  that  he  may  give  money  to  any-  go  so  often  to  meet  Mahomed  Akbar 

body  he  likes  to  espouse  the  cause  of  out  of  the  cantonment,  as  he  is  the  man 

the  Shah  and  us,  out  never  to  the  that  nobody  can  trust  his  word  upon 

ckiefa,  as  it  will  not  induce  them  to  oath.     I  also  added  that  the  Dou- 

do  ns  aenrice  like  the  others,  but  will  ranees,  as  well  as  Amcen«oollah  (the 

iodte  and  prepare  them  against  us.  instigation  of  Akbar^,  being  jealous 

Unfortunately  he    was    assured   by  of  the  return  of  his  father,    have 

Surwar  Khan,  Naib  Ameer,  &c.,  of  taken  the  part  of  the  Shah,  and  will, 

their   favorable  service,  and  to  ad-  in  the  course  of  two  days,  wait  upon 

nnoe  lakhs  of  rupees.    He  was  also  his  Majesty,  ask  us  to  remain  here 

promptedbytheteindividualstogive  in  the  hope  of  receiving  the  money 

tlie  paper  of  the  above-mentioned  promised  them  by  me.'  — [^MS.  Rc' 

wreement  to  Mahomed  Akbar.    He  cords.'] 

mowed  it,  and  said  falsely  to  Ameen-  *  Mahomed  Sadig  was  a  first  cousin 

odlah  that  the  Envoy  has  promised  of  Akbar  Khan.     Surwar  Khan  had 

the  money  it  contains,  if  MsJiomed  been,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the 

Akbar  were  to  kill,  catch,  or  send  campaign,    extensively   engaged   in 

hhn  alive  to  the  Envoy.     Ameen-  supplying  the  army  with  camels.  He 

odlah  threw  himself  at  his  feet,  and  was  m   the   confidence   of   Sir    A. 

laid  he  is  doing  all  this  against  us  Bumes,  and  was  generally  esteemed 

merely  for  the  good  of  his  faUier,  and  a  friend  of  the  British, 

be  (AUar)  has  sense  to  know  it  per-  f  iMter  of  Captain   Colin   Mac- 

ferUy;  therefore  he  should  not  lose  kenzie    to    Lieutenant    Eyre:  Eyre^s 

thne  either  to  catch  or  murder  the  Journal 

l2 


148        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

then  delivered.  The  proposals  were  to  be  stated  by 
the  Afghan  delegates,  who  were  soon  closeted  with  the 
Envoy.  Skinner  alone  was  present  at  the  interview. 
Mahomed  Sadig  stated  the  proposals  that  had  been  made 
by  Akbar  Khan.  It  was  proposed  that  an  agreement 
should  be  entered  into  on  the  following  day,  to  the  effect 
that  Akbar  Khan  and  the  Ghilzyes  should  unite  them- 
selves with  the  British  troops,  which  were  to  be  drawn 
up  outside  of  cantonments,  and  at  a  given  signal  should 
assault  Mahmood  Khan's  fort  and  seize  the  person  of 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan.  Then  followed  a  startling  offer,  from 
which  the  Envoy  shrunk  back  with  abhorrence.  This  was 
the  offer  of  Ameen-ooUah's  head,  which,  for  a  sum  of 
money,  Mahomed  Sadig  declared  should  be  presented  to 
the  British  Envoy.  Macnaghten  at  once  rejected  the  offer. 
It  was  never,  he  said,  his  custom,  nor  that  of  his  country, 
to  pay  a  price  for  blood.  Then  Mahomed  Sadig  went  on 
to  state  the  proposals  of  the  Barukzye  Sirdar.  The  Eng- 
lish were  to  remain  in  Afghanistan  until  the  spring;  and 
then,  to  save  their  credit,  by  withdrawing,  as  though  of 
their  own  free  will.  Shah  Soojah  was  to  remain  in  the 
country  as  King,  and  Akbar  Khan  was  to  be  his  Wuzeer. 
As  a  reward  for  these  services,  Akbar  Khan  was  to  re- 
ceive an  annuity  of  four  lakhs  of  rupees  from  the  British 
Government,  and  a  bonus  of  thirty  lakhs ! 

Wild  as  were  these  proposals,  the  Envoy  caught 
eagerly  at  them.  He  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment.  He 
had,  from  first  to  last,  clung  to  the  hope  of  something 
being  evolved  out  of  the  chaos  of  difficulty,  that  would 
enable  him  to  retain  his  position  in  the  country,  at  all 
events  till  the  coming  spring;  and  now  there  suddenly 
welled  up  within  him  a  hope  that  he  had  obtained  the 
object  of  his  desires.  He  now  accepted  the  proposals ; 
and  signified  his  assent  in  a  Persian  paper  written  by  his 
own  hand.     With  this  the  A%han  delegates  returned  to 


LAST  MEETIKG  OF  THE  ENVOY  AND  THE  GENERAL.   149 

the  city  and  made  known  to  Akbar  Khan  the  success  of 
their  mission.  Captain  Skinner  returned  with  them. 

The  morning  of  the  23rd  of  December  found  Mac- 
naghten  restless  and  excited.  A  great  crisis  had  arrived. 
That  day  was  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  British  force,  and 
determine  the  question  of  the  loss  or  the  salvation  of  our 
national  honour.  It  is  probable  that  the  morning  brought 
with  it  some  doubts  and  misgivings ;  but  he  brushed  the 
obtrusive  thoughts  aside,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade 
himself  as  he  did  to  persuade  others,  that  there  was  no 
treachery  to  be  feared. 

Having  breakfasted,  he  sent  for  the  officers  of  his  staff — 
Lawrence,  Trevor,  and  Mackenzie — who  were  his  friends 
and  counsellors,  to  whom  on  all  occasions  but  this  he 
had  entrusted  his  designs — to  accompany  him  to  the  con- 
ference with  Akbar  Khan.  Mackenzie,  finding  him  alone, 
heard  from  him  now,  for  the  first  time,  the  history  of  this 
new  n^otiation,  and  at  once  exclaimed  that  it  was  a 
plot.  "A  plot!"  replied  the  Envoy,  hastily;  "let  me 
alone  for  that — trust  me  for  that !" 

He  had  braced  himself  up  with  desperate  courage  for 
the  conference  which  was  to  be  followed  by  such  great 
results;  and  now  he  sent  for  the  General  to  acquaint  him 
with  the  nature  of  the  proposals  and  to  request  his  aid 
to  carry  the  scheme  into  effect.  Startled  by  the  announce- 
ment, and  little  comprehending  all  the  depths  and  intri- 
cacies of  the  perilous  game  which  the  Envoy  had  now  in 
hand,  Elphinstone  asked  what  part  the  other  Barukzyes, 
who  had  been  foremost  in  the  previous  negotiations, 
were  to  take  in  those  now  on  foot,  and  was  told  in  reply 
that  they  were  " not  in  the  plot''  On  the  untutored 
ear  of  the  single-minded  veteran  this  significant  mono- 
^llable  smote  with  an  ominous  sound.  He  began  now 
to  understand  the  double  game  which  was  being  played 
by  the  Envoy  on  one  side,  and  the  young  Barukzye 


150       PBEFABATIOKS  FOB  THE  BETBEAT. 

Sirdar  on  the  other,  and  he  eagerly  asked  the  former  if 
he  did  not  apprehend  that  some  treachery  was  at  work. 
"  None  at  all,"  said  Macnaghten,  in  reply;  *^I  wish  you 
to  have  two  regiments  and  two  guns  got  ready,  as 
speedily  and  as  quietly  as  possible,  for  the  capture  of 
Mahmood  Khan's  fort ;  the  rest  you  may  leave  to  me," 
But  still  the  General  spoke  of  the  danger  of  such  machi- 
nations, and  uiged  him  to  pause  before  he  committed 
himself  irretrievably  to  so  perilous  a  course.  Elphin- 
stone  had  unfortunately  been  talking  about  danger  so 
incessantly  since  the  very  commencement  of  the  out- 
break, that  now,  when  he  uttered  only  words  of  com- 
mon sense  and  prudence,  the  warning  notes  fell  upon 
Macnaghten's  ears  Uke  the  old  imbecile  croakings  of 
timidity  and  irresolution  which  had  been  irritating  him 
for  so  many  weeks,  and  he  now  turned  away  with  im- 
patience, saying,  "  I  understand  these  things  better  than 
you."*  Elphinstone  went;  but,  in  spite  of  Macnaghten's 
confidence,  he  could  not  dispossess  himself  of  the  belief 
that  treachery  was  brewing,  and  that  the  Envoy  was 

*  "  On  the  morning  of  the  23rd,"  begged  to  know  if  there  were  no  fear 
says  General  Elphinstone,  "  I  re-  of  treachery  ?  The  Envoy's  r^ply 
ceived  a  note  from  the  Envoy,  saying  was,  *  None  whatever — I  am  certain 
that  he  hoped  he  had  made  an  ar-  the  thing  will  succeed.  What  I  want 
rangement  which  would  enable  us  to  you  to  do  is  to  have  two  regiments 
remain  in  the  country ;  and  that  he  and  guns  ^ot  quickly  ready,  and, 
would  shortly  acquaint  me  with  all  without  making  any  show,  to  be  pre- 
the  particulars.  I  soon  afterwards  pared  'the  moment  required  to  move 
received  a  message  from  him,  desir-  towards  Mahmood  Khan's  fort.*  I 
ing  to  see  me,  when  he  informed  me  further  discussed  with  him  the  dan- 
that  he  had  made  an  arrangement  ger  he  was  incurring ;  but  he  replied, 
with  Mahomed  Akbar,  by  which  Shah  *  Leave  it  all  to  me — I  understand 
Sooiah  would  remain  on  the  throne —  theie  things  better  than  you  do/  I 
Mahomed  Akbar  being  Wuzeer.  He  then  lefl  him,  and  he  shortly  afler- 
was  to  receive  a  large  sum  of  money,  wards  proceeded  with  his  suite  and  a 
and  Ameen-ooUah  was  to  be  delivered  few  of  nis  cavalry  escort  to  the  inter- 
to  us  a  prisoner.  I  then  asked  what  view.  Before  we  separated,  I  asked 
part  Newab  Zeman  Khan  and  Oos-  him  if  there  was  anytnlnff  else  I  could 
man  Khan  were  to  take  in  this  ?  To  do  ?  He  replied,  '  Nothing,  but  to 
which  I  received  answer  that  they  have  the  two  regiments  and  two 
were  not  in  the  plot.  I  replied  that  guns  in  readiness,  and  the  garrisoii 
I  did  not  like  the  word  'plot' —  to  be  on  the  alert;'  which  was  ao- 
that  it  was  an  ominous  one — and  I  cordingly  ordered.'* 


DEPARTURE  FOR  THE  CONFERENCE.  151 

rushing  upon  destruction.  So,  hoping  that  yet  some- 
thmg  might  be  done  to  arrest  him,  he  sate  down  and 
wrote  him  this  letter : 

Deoember  28. 

Mr  DEAR  Sir  William, 

I  have  reconsidered  the  subject  of  our  conveisation,  with 

respect  to  which  I  have  to  observe,  that  to  enable  us  really  to 

be  of  consequence  in  assisting  our  adherents,  the  magazine  and 

forts  ought  to  be  restored,  and  the  supplies,  for  at  least  three 

months,  laid  in  at  once;  it  would  not  do  to  depend  on  it  daily,  or 

even  monthly.    I  hope  there  is  no  fear  of  treachery;  the  sending 

two  guns  and  two  regiments  away  would  divide  our  force ;  and 

our  sole  dependence  is  the  union  of  our  force.    The  cantonment, 

I  find,  is  at  present  full  of  Afghans.    All  this  we  must  think  of, 

and  act  for  the  best.    What  guarantees  have  we  for  the  truth  of 

all  that  has  been  said  ?    I  only  mention  this  to  make  you  cautious 

as  to  sending  away  part  of  our  force.     Perhaps  it  is  unnecessary 

with  you,  who  know  these  people  so  well.     I  will  be  prepared  to 

turn  out,  if  necessary,  by  drawing  the  men  ready  to  man  the 

ramparts. 

W.  K.  E.* 

This  was  the  last  letter  ever  addressed  to  the  Envoy. 
It  never  reached  its  destination. 

About  the  hour  of  noon  the  little  party — Macnaghten, 
Lawrence,  Trevor,  Mackenzie,  and  a  few  horsemen — set 
out  on  their  ill-omened  expedition.  Shelton  had  been 
invited  to  accompany  them;  but  he  was  occupied  in 
getting  ready  the  two  regiments  and  the  guns,  and  was, 
therefore,  unable  to  attend  the  conference.f  The  troops, 
however,  were  not  ready  when  the  ambassadorial  caval- 
cade rode  out  of  the  Seeah-Sungh  gate,  and  the  Envoy, 
observing  the  backwardness  of  the  military  chiefe,  bitterly 

*  UnjMibU^ied  Correspondence,  it  out,  an  invitation  came  from  the 

t  **  On  the  morning  of  the  2drd,'*  Envoy  to  accompany  him  to  an  in- 

wrote  Shelton,  **  about  ten  o^clock,  I  terview    with   the    Sirdar.      Being 

got  an  order  to  have  two  corps  and  busy,  I  fortunately  could  not  go,  or 

some  guns  ready,  to  march  out  to  should   probably  have    sharea   the 

seiie,  as  I  understood,   the   Lo^ur  same  fate.** — IMS,  Records,^ 
chief.  While  thus  occupied  in  givmg 


4 


152        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

remarked  that  it  was  of  a  piece  with  all  their  arrange- 
ments since  the  commencement  of  the  outbreak.  He 
then  went  on  to  speak  of  the  enterprise  on  which  they 
were  engaged;  admitted  that  it  was  a  dangerous  one; 
said  that  he  was  playing  for  a  heavy  stake,  but  the  prize 
was  worth  the  risk  that  was  to  be  incurred.  ''  At  all 
events,"  he  said,  "  let  the  loss  be  what  it  may,  a  thou- 
sand deaths  were  preferable  to  the  life  I  have  of  late 
been  leading." 

They  passed  out  of  cantonments.  As  they  went, 
Macnaghten  remembered  that  a  beautiful  Arab  horse, 
which  Akbar  Khan  had  much  coveted,  and  which  the 
Envoy  had  purchased  from  its  owner,*  had  been  left 
behind.  Mackenzie  was  sent  back  for  it,  that  it  might 
now  be  presented  to  the  Sirdar.  Lawrence  was  told  to 
hold  himself  in  readiness  to  ride  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  to 
commimicate  with  the  King.  There  were  many  suspi- 
cious appearances,  which  excited  the  apprehensions  of  all 
but  the  Envoy.  Crowds  of  armed  A%hans  were  hover- 
ing about  the  cantonment,  and  clustering  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Mahmood  Khan's  fort.  Macnaghten  saw 
nothing  but  the  prospect  of  escaping  the  disgrace  of  a 
sudden  retreat  from  A%hanistan.  He  looked  neither  to 
the  right  nor  to  the  left.  He  had  a  great  object  in  view, 
and  he  kept  his  eyes  steadily  upon  it.  He  did  not  even, 
when  the  chiefs  met  him,  perceive  that  a  brother  of 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan  was  one  of  the  party. 

*  Captun    Grant,    the    adjutant-  but  detenuined  to  gratify  the  Sirdar, 

general  of  the  Caubul  force.     "It  Sir  William  sent  me  to  Captain  Grant 

seems,"  says  Captain  Mackenzie,  "that  to  prevail  upon  him  to  take  a  smaller 

Mahomed   Akbar    had  demanded  a  sum,  but  with  orders  that,  if  he  were 

fayourite  Arab  horse  belonsing  to  peremptory,  the  5000  rupees  should 

Ci^tain  Grant,    assistant  adjutant-  oe  given.    I  obtained  the  horse  for 

general  of  the  force.    To  avoid  the  3000  rupees,  and  Sir  William  ap- 

necessity  of  parting  with  the  animal,  peared  much  pleased  with  the  pros- 

Gaptain  Grant  had  fixed  his  price  at  pect  of  gratifying  Mahomed  iJcbar 

the  exorbitant  sum  of  5000  rupees,  bjr  the  present."— [Ca;)tam  Macken- 

Unwilling  to  give  so  large  a  price,  zie's  Narrative:  Eyre's  Journal.} 


THE  CONFERENCE.  153 

Near  the  banks  of  the  river,  midway  between  Mah- 
mood  Khan's  fort  and  the  bridge,  about  600  yards  from 
the  cantonment,  there  were  some  small  hillocks,  on  the 
further  slope  of  which,  where  the  snow  was  lying  less 
thickly  than  on  other  parts,  some  horse-cloths  were  now 
spread  by  one  of  Akbar  Khan's  servants.  The  English 
officers  and  the  A^han  Sirdars  had  exchanged  salu- 
tations and  conversed  for  a  httle  while  on  horseback. 
The  Arab  horse,  with  which  Mackenzie  had  returned, 
had  been  presented  to  Akbar  Khan,  who  received  it 
with  many  expressions  of  thanks,  and  spoke  also  with 
gratitude  of  the  gift  of  the  pistols  which  he  had  received 
on  the  preceding  day.*  It  was  now  proposed  that  they 
should  dismount.  The  whole  party  accordingly  repaired 
to  the  hill-side.  Macnaghten  stretched  himself  at  full 
length  on  the  bank;  Trevor  and  Mackenzie,  burdened 
with  presentiments  of  evil,  seated  themselves  beside  him. 
Lawrence  stood  behind  his  chief  until  urged  by  one  of 
the  Khans  to  seat  himself,  when  he  knelt  down  on  one 
knee,  in  the  attitude  of  a  man  ready  for  immediate  action. 
A  question  from  Akbar  Khan,  who  sate  beside  Mac- 
naghten, opened  the  business  of  the  conference.  He 
abruptly  asked  the  Envoy  if  he  were  ready  to  carry  out 
the  proposals  of  the  preceding  evening  ?  "  Why  not  ?" 
asked  Macnaghten.  The  Afghans  were  by  this  time 
gathering  around  in  numbers,  which  excited  both  the 
surprise  and  the  suspicion  of  Lawrence  and  Mackenzie, 
who  said,  that  if  the  conference  was  to  be  a  secret  one, 
the  intruders  ought  to  be  removed.  With  a  movement 
of  doubtful  sincerity  some  of  the  chiefs  then  lashed  out 
with  their  whips  at  the  closing  circle;  but  Akbar  Khan 

*  A  handsome  pair  of  double-bar-  expressed  bis  admiration  at  a  previ* 
rdled  pistols  belonging  to  Captain  ous  meeting,  and  which  had  accord- 
Lawrence,  of  which  Akbar  Khan  had    ingly  been  presented  to  him. 


164       PBEPARAT20W8  FOR  THE  BETREAT, 

gaid  that  their  presence  was  of  no  consequence,  as  they 
were  all  in  the  secret  with  him. 

Scarcely  were  the  words  uttered,  when  the  Envoy 
and  his  companions  were  violently  seized  from  behind. 
The  movement  was  sudden  and  surprising.  There  was 
a  scene  of  terrible  confusion,  which  no  one  can  distinctly 
describe.  The  officers  of  the  Envoy's  staff  were  dragged 
away,  and  compelled  each  to  mount  a  horse  ridden  by 
an  Afghan  chief.  Soon  were  they  running  the  gauntlet 
through  a  crowd  of  Ghazees,  who  struck  out  at  them 
as  they  passed.  Trevor  unfortunately  sUpped  from  his 
insecure  seat  behind  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  and  was  cut 
to  pieces  on  the  spot.  Lawrence  and  Mackenzie,  more 
fortunate,  reached  Mahmood  Khan's  fort  alive. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  Envoy  himself  was  struggling 
desperately  on  the  ground  with  Akbar  Khan.  The  look 
of  wondering  horror  that  sat  upon  his  upturned  face 
will  not  be  forgotten  by  those  who  saw  it  to  their  dying 
days.  The  only  words  he  was  heard  to  utter  were,  ''^Az 
harae  Khoda''  ("  For  God's  sake  ").  They  were,  per^ 
haps,  the  last  words  spoken  by  one  of  the  bravest  gentle- 
men  that  ever  fell  a  sacrifice  to  his  erring  faith  in 
others.  He  had  struggled  from  the  first  manfully  against 
his  doom,  and  now  these  last  manful  struggles  cost  the 
poor  chief  his  life.  Exasperated  past  all  control  by  the 
resistance  of  his  victim,  whom  he  designed  only  to  seize, 
Akbar  Khan  drew  a  pistol  from  his  girdle — one  of  those 
pistols  for  the  gift  of  which  only  a  little  while  before 
he  had  profusely  thanked  the  Envoy — and  shot  Mac- 
naghten  through  the  body.  Whether  the  wretched  man 
died  on  the  spot — or  whether  he  was  slain  by  the  in* 
furiated  Ghazees,  who  now  pressed  eagerly  forward,  is 
not  very  clearly  known — but  these  miserable  fanatics 
flung  themselves  upon  the  prostrate  body  of  the  English 
gentleman,  and  hacked  it  to  pieces  with  their  knives. 


DEATH  OF  THE  ENVOY.  165 

Thus  perished  William  Hay  Macnaghten— struck 
down  by  the  hand  of  the  favourite  son  of  Dost  Mahomed, 
Thus  perished  as  brave  a  gentleman  as  ever,  in  the  midst  of 
fiery  trial,  struggled  manfully  to  rescue  from  disgrace  the 
reputation  of  a  great  country.  Throughout  those  seven 
weeks  of  unparalleled  difficulty  and  danger  he  had  con* 
fi'onted  with  steadfast  courage  every  new  peril  and  per- 
plexity that  had  risen  up  before  him ;  and,  a  man  of  peace 
himself,  had  resisted  the  timid  counsels  of  the  warriors, 
and  striven  to  infuse,  by  the  manliness  of  his  example, 
some  strength  into  their  fainting  hearts.  Whatever  may 
be  the  judgment  of  posterity  on  other  phases  of  his  cha- 
racter, and  other  incidents  of  his  career,  the  historian 
will  ever  dwell  with  pride  upon  the  unfailing  courage 
and  constancy  of  the  man  who,  with  everything  to  dis- 
courage and  depress  him,  surrounded  by  all  enervating 
influences,  was  ever  eager  to  counsel  the  nobler  and 
the  manlier  course,  ever  ready  to  bear  the  burdens .  of 
responsibility,  and  face  the  assaults  of  danger.  There 
was  but  one  civilian  at  Caubul ;  and  he  was  the  truest 
soldier  in  the  camp. 

It  is  not  easy  to  estimate  correctly  the  character  of 
William  Macnaghten.  Of  the  moral  and  intellectual  at- 
tributes of  the  ill-fated  Envoy  very  conflicting  accounts 
have  been  rendered;  and  it  is  probable  that  in  all  these 
conflicting  accounts  some  leaven  of  truth  resides.  There 
are  few  men  whose  characters  are  not  made  up  of 
antagonistic  qualities;  and  Macnaghten  was  not  one  of 
the  few.  In  early  life  he  had  distinguished  himself  by 
the  extent  of  his  philological  acquirements ;  and  was  re- 
puted as  one  of  the  most  accomplished  Oriental  scholars  in 
the  presidencies  of  India.  With  a  deep  insight  into  the 
character  of  the  natives  of  the  East  was  blended  the 
kindliest  sympathy  and  toleration  towards  them.  In  the 
knowledge,  indeed,  of  the  native  languages,  the  institu- 


156        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

tions,  and  the  character  of  the  people  of  Hindostan,  he 
was  surpassed  by  none  of  the  many  accomplished  officers 
who  have  made  them  their  study.  His  long  connexion 
with  the  judicial  department  of  the  public  service  had 
afforded  him  opportunities,  which  his  temper  and  his 
taste  led  him  to  improve,  of  maturing  and  perfecting  this 
essential  branch  of  official  knowledge.  In  attention  to 
business  he  was  one  of  the  most  unwearying  of  men; 
his  pen  was  ever  in  his  hand ;  he  wrote  rapidly,  and  ex- 
pressed himself  on  most  subjects  with  clearness ;  he  was 
quick  in  his  apprehension  of  the  views  of  others,  and 
accommodated  himself  with  facility  to  shifting  circum- 
stances. But  at  this  point  there  are  many  who  believe 
that  they  cease  to  tread  upon  undebateable  ground.  It 
is  admitted  that  he  was  an  accompUshed  Oriental  scholar, 
a  good  judicial  officer,  an  apt  secretary,  and  a  kind- 
hearted  man ;  but  it  is  denied  that,  in  any  enlarged  ac- 
ceptation of  the  word,  he  is  entitled  to  be  called  a 
statesman. 

Sir  Alexander  Burnes  was  constantly  writing  to  his 
friends  in  India,  "  Macnaghten  is  an  excellent  man,  but 
quite  out  of  place  here^  Burnes  was  not  an  imprejudiced 
witness ;  and  he,  doubtless,  expressed  himself  in  language 
too  sweeping  and  unqualified.  But  there  are  many  who 
believe  with  Burnes,  that  Macnaghten  was  out  of  his 
place  in  Afghanistan.  It  is  hard  to  say  who  would  not 
have  been  more  or  less  out  of  place,  in  the  situation 
which  he  was  called  upon  suddenly  to  occupy.  The 
place,  indeed,  was  one  to  which  no  English  officer  ought 
to  have  been  called.  For  a  Calcutta  Secretary  to  be 
at  Caubul  at  all  was  necessarily  to  be  out  of  place.  If 
Macnaghten,  suddenly  transplanted  from  the  bureau  of 
an  Anglo-Indian  Governor  to  the  stirrup  of  an  A%han 
monarch,  is  chargeable  with  some  errors,  it  is,  perhaps, 
more  just,  as  it  is  more  gienerous,  to  wonder  not  that  those 


CHABACTEB  OP  SIR  WILLIAM  MACNAGHTEN.  157 

errors  were  so  numerous,  but  that  they  were  so  few.  To 
govern  such  a  people  as  the  Afghans  through  such  a 
King  as  Shah  Soojah,  was  an  experiment  in  which  an 
English  officer  might  fail  without  the  sacrifice  of  his  re- 
putation. When  we  come  to  think,  now,  of  what  was 
attempted,  we  cease  to  marvel  at  the  result.  The  marvel 
is,  that  utter  ruin  did  not  overtake  the  scheme  at  an  earlier 
date — ^that  the  day  of  reckoning  was  so  long  delayed. 
The  policy  itself  was  so  inherently  faulty  that  success 
was  an  unattainable  result. 

The  causes  of  the  failure  are  not  to  be  sought  in  the 
personal  character  of  the  Envoy.  That  character  may 
have  been  one  of  many  accidental  circumstances  which 
may  in  some  sort  have  helped  to  develop  it ;  but,  sooner 
or  later,  ruin  must  have  overtaken  the  scheme,  let  who 
might  be  the  agent  of  it.  In  this  view  of  the  case,  Mac- 
naghten  is  not  to  be  acquitted ;  but  it  is  on  Macnaghten 
the  Secretary,  not  on  Macnaghten  the  Envoy,  that  our 
censures  must  then  descend.  Macnaghten  the  Envoy, 
however,  was  not  free  from  human  infirmity.  Most  men 
have  an  imhappy  faculty  of  believing  what  they  wish  to 
be  true.  In  Macnaghten  this  propensity  was  unnaturally 
developed.  Grod  had  cursed  him  with  a  strong  delusion 
that  he  should  believe  a  lie.  He  believed  in  the  popu- 
larity of  Shah  Soojah  and  the  tranquillity  of  Afghan- 
istan. To  have  admitted  the  non-existence  of  either, 
would  have  been  to  have  admitted  the  failure  of  the 
policy  which  he  had  recommended,  and  with  which  he 
was,  in  no  small  measure,  personally  identified.  But 
Macnaghten  did  not  seek  to  deceive  others;  he  was  him- 
self deceived.  When  he  spoke  of  the  popularity  of 
Shah  Soojah,  he  believed  that  the  Shah  was  popular; 
when  he  reported  the  tranquillity  of  Afghanistan,  he 
believed  that  the  country  was  tranquil.  He  was  sincere, 
but  he  was  miserably  mistaken.      Everything  he  saw 


k 


158       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT, 

took  colour  in  his  eyes  from  the  hues  of  his  own  san- 
guine temperament.  From  the  day  when  on  entering 
Candahar  he  beheld  a  joyous  people  welcoming  their 
restored  monarch  with  feelings  almost  amounting  to 
adoration,  to  the  last  luckless  day  of  his  life,  when  he 
went  out  to  the  fatal  conference,  firmly  believing  in  the 
good  faith  and  good  feeling  of  his  Afghan  allies,  he  con* 
tinned  steadily  to  create  for  himself  all  kinds  of  favor- 
able omens  and  encouraging  symptoms,  and  lived  in  a 
state  of  blind  confidence  unparalleled  in  the  history  of 
human  infetuation.  To  this  self-deception  some  of  the 
finest  qualities  of  his  nature  largely  contributed.  The 
very  goodness  of  his  heart  and  generosity  of  his  dispo- 
sition  moved  him  to  regard  the  character  and  conduct 
of  others  with  a  favour  to  which  they  were  seldom 
entitled,  Macnaghten  was  too  noble-minded  to  be  sus- 
picious— ^but  he  erred  on  the  other  side;  he  wanted 
some  of  the  sterner  stuff  which  will  not  suffer  the  sound- 
ness of  the  judgment  to  be  weakened  by  the  generosity 
of  the  heart. 

When  not  blinded  by  his  partiality  for  any  pet 
projects  of  his  own,  he  was  by  no  means  wanting  in 
political  sagacity.  He  could  decide  justly,  as  he  could 
promptly,  on  points  of  detail  as  they  rose  up  one  by  one 
before  him;  but  as  soon  as  anything  occurred  to  cast 
discredit  upon  the  general  policy  of  the  Afghan  expe- 
dition,  by  indicating  the  germs  of  failure,  he  resolutely 
refused  to  see  what  others  saw,  and  censured  those 
others  for  seeing  it.  Hence  it  was  that  he  received 
coldly,  if  not  contemptuously,  those  elaborate  general 
reviews  of  the  condition  and  prospects  of  Afghanistan 
which  Bumes  and  Conolly  thrust  upon  him,  and  resented 
every  effort  that  was  made  by  RawUnson  and  others  to 
draw  his  attention  towards  the  unquiet  and  feverish 
symptoms,  which,  from  time  to  time,  developed  them- 


CHABACTEB  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  MACNAGHTEN.         159 

selves  in  different  parts  of  the  unsettled  country.  His 
oorrespondence  indicates  an  unwillingness,  rather  than  an 
inability,  to  take  any  large  and  comprehensive  views  of 
A^han  policy.  He  seems  to  have  shrunk  from  applying 
to  that  policy  the  test  of  any  great  principles ;  and  to 
have  addressed  himself  rather  to  the  palliation  of  ac- 
ddental  symptoms  than  to  the  eradication  of  those  con- 
stitutional diseases  which  were  eating  into  the  very  life 
of  the  government  which  he  directed. 

Of  Macnaghten's  humanity  I  have  never  entertained  a 
doubt.  But  it  is  a  proof  of  the  inconsistency  even  of  the 
kindest  and  most  amiable  characters,  that  the  Envoy, 
when  greatly  disquieted  and  perplexed  by  the  difficulties 
which  thickened  around  him,  and  irritated  by  the  opposi- 
tion, which  he  could  not  subdue,  sometimes  thought  of 
resorting  to  measures  repugnant  to  humanity,  for  the 
suppression  of  evils  which  baffled  all  the  more  lenient 
efforts  of  legitimate  diplomacy.  But  these  sterner  feelings 
soon  passed  away;  and  all  the  more  generous  sentiments 
of  his  nature  held  dominion  over  him  again.  He  re- 
gretted the  excesses — always  rather  those  of  word  than 
of  deed — into  which  he  had  been  momentarily  betrayed, 
and  was  as  merciful  towards  a  fallen  enemy  as  he  had 
been  eager  in  his  pursuit  of  a  triumphant  one.  Mac- 
naghten  was  anything  but  a  cautious  man;  his  first 
hasty  impulses  were  often  set  down  in  writing  with 
perilous  unreserve ;  and  it  would  be  unjust  to  record 
against  him,  as  his  positive  opinion,  everything  that  he 
set  down  suggestively  in  his  hasty  letters  to  his  nume- 
rous correspondents,  or  spoke  out  still  more  hastily  to 
his  friends. 

Posterity  may  yet  discuss  the  question,  whether,  in 
these  last  fatal  negotiations  with  Akbar  Khan,  Mac- 
naghten  acted  strictly  in  accordance  with  that  good 
fidth  which    is  the    nilo  of   English   statesmen,   and 


r: 


160       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

for  which  our  country,  in  spite  of  some  dubious  in- 
stances, is  still  honoured  by  all  the  nations  of  the 
East.  In  one  of  the  last  letters  ever  written  by  him, 
the  Envoy  said,  "  It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  stop 
here  for  a  few  months  instead  of  to  travel  through  the 
snow;  but  we  must  not  consider  what  is  agreeable, 
but  what  is  consistent  with  our  faith."  On  the  same 
day,  too — the  day  before  his  death — he  had  written,  "  I 
can  never  break  that  agreement  (with  the  Barukzyes) 
so  long  as  all  the  Khawanen  wish  me  to  stand  by 
it."  It  has  been  questioned  whether  the  negotiations  he 
was  then  carrying  on  with  the  Ghilzyes  and  Kuzzil- 
bashes  were  consistent  with  his  obligations  to  the 
Barukzye  Sirdars.  The  stipulations,  however,  on  the 
part  of  the  British  diplomatist,  in  this  case,  extended  no 
further  than  the  promise  of  certain  money  payments  in 
return  for  certain  specific  services,  and  Macnaghten  may 
have  considered  himself  justified  in  retaining  those  ser- 
vices conditionally  on  the  rupture  of  the  existing  cove- 
nant with  the  Barukzye  chiefs.  That  covenant,  in- 
deed, was  one  of  so  precarious  a  nature — it  was  sliding 
away  from  him  more  and  more  certainly  as  time  ad- 
vanced— there  was  so  little  prospect  of  its  obligations 
being  fulfilled,  that  it  seemed  necessary  to  have  some- 
thing to  fall  back  upon  in  the  event  of  the  open  annul- 
ment of  the  treaty,  the  obUgations  of  which  had  long 
been  practically  denied.  Up  to  the  evening  of  the  22nd 
of  December,  Macnaghten  had  been  willing  to  abide  by 
the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  with  the  confederate  chiefe ; 
but  there  were  such  manifest  symptoms  of  bad  faith  on 
the  part  of  the  chiefs  constantly  breaking  out,  that  it 
appeared  to  him  but  ordinary  prudence  to  prepare  him- 
self for  an  event  so  probable  as  an  open  rupture.  He 
was  ready  to  proceed,  in  mutual  good  faith,  to  the  ac- 
complishment of  the  original  treaty ;  and  so  long  as  the 


INTRIGUES  WITH  THE  CHIEFS.  IfJl 

cliiefs  adhered  to  their  engagements,  he  was  prepared  to 
evacuate  the  country,  but  he  believed  that  it  was  his 
duty  to  prepare  himself  also  for  a  rupture  with  the 
chiefs,  and  to  purchase  supplies  wherever  he  could  obtain 
them,  for  the  use  of  the  troops  in  the  event  of  their  re- 
taining their  position. 

But  the  compact  with  Akbar  Khan  was  altogether  of 
another  kind.  There  was  nothing  of  a  conditional  cha- 
racter about  it.  The  Envoy  had,  in  the  course  of  the 
day,  virtually  acknowledged  that  to  break  off  the  nego- 
tiations then  pending  with  the  chiefs  would  be  a  breach 
of  good  faith.  Nothing  had  occurred  between  the  hour 
in  which  he  wrote  this  to  Mohun  Lai  and  that  in  which 
he  received  the  overtures  of  Akbar  Khan,  to  absolve  him* 
fh)m  obligations  from  which  he  was  not  absolved  before. 
The  same  principle  of  diplomatic  integrity  which  he  had 
applied  to  the  case  of  the  Ghilzye  alliance  was  doubly 
applicable  to  this:  ''It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  stop 
here  for  a  few  months  instead  of  to  travel  through  the 
snow ;  but  we  must  not  consider  what  is  agreeable,  but 
what  is  consistent  with  our  faith."  If  we  read  Mac- 
naghten's  subsequent  conduct  by  the  light  of  these  high- 
principled  words,  it  must  in  truth  be  pronounced  that 
he  stands  self-condemned. 

In  estimating  the  character  of  these  transactions,  it 
should  always  be  borne  steadily  in  mind  that  the  A%han 
•  chiefs  had  from  the  first  violated  their  engagements  with 
the  British,  and  exacted  from  them  after-conditions  not 
named  in  the  treaty.  Their  want  of  faith,  indeed,  was 
80  palpable,  that  Macnaghten  would,  at  any  time,  have 
been  justified  in  declaring  that  the  treaty  was  annulled. 
It  is  plain,  that  whilst  they  were  violating  their  engage- 
ments he  was  under  no  obliMtion  to  adhere  to  the  con- 
ditions  of  the  violated  treaty.  But  it  appears  to  me  that 
this  matter  is  altogether  distinct  from  the  question  of  the 

VOL.  II.  M 


162        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

honesty  of  negotiating  with  one  party  whilst  negotiations 
are  pending  with  another.  There  would  have  been  no 
breach  of  faith  in  breaking  off  the  treaty  with  the  con- 
federate chiefs ;  but  it  was  a  breach  of  faith  to  enter  into 
any  new  engagements  until  that  treaty  was  broken  off.  It 
is  certain  that  up  to  the  time  of  his  receipt  of  the  fatal 
overtures  from  Akbar  Khan,  Macnaghten  considered  that 
he  was  bound  by  his  engagements  with  the  confederate 
chiefs.  He  might,  it  is  true,  have  declared  those  engage- 
ments at  an  end,  but  until  such  a  declaration  was  made, 
he  was  not  at  liberty  to  enter  secretly  into  any  new  nego- 
tiations practically  annulling  the  old. 

And  whatever  objections  may  lie  against  the  general 
^honesty  of  the  compact,  it  is  certain  that  they  apply  with 
double  force  to  that  portion  of  it  which  involved  the 
seizure  of  Ameen-ooUah  Khan.  It  is  not  to  be  justified 
by  any  reference  to  the  infamous  character  of  that  chief. 
Ameen-oollah  Khan  was  one  of  our  "  new  allies."  He 
had  been,  with  the  other  chiefs,  in  friendly  negotiation 
with  Macnaghten.  It  was  now  proposed,  during  a  sus- 
pension of  hostilities — whilst,  indeed,  we  were  in  friendly 
intercourse  with  the  Afghan  chiefs,  this  very  Ameen-oollah 
Khan  included — that  a  body  of  troops  should  be  got  ready 
as  quietly  as  possible  for  secret  service,  that  a  sudden 
attack  should  be  made  on  the  unsuspecting  garrison  of 
Mahmood  Khan's  fort,  and  that  one  of  our  allies — one  of 
the  chiefe  with  whom  the  Envoy  was  in  treaty — should 
be  violently  seized.  I  confess  that  I  cannot  see  anything 
to  justify  such  a  measure  as  this.  It  certainly  was  not  in  ^ 
tOoordAnce  with  that  good  faith,  the  observance  of  which 
Maianaghteo  had  declared  to  be  of  more  importance  than 
tbft  retention  of  our  position  in  the  country. 
•  But  although  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  justify  the 
either  on  the  plea  that  the  chiefs  had  not  observed 
engagements  into  which  they  had  entered,  or  that 


DEFENCE  OF  THE  ENVOY.  163 

Ameen-ooUah  Khan  was  an  infamous  wretch,  and  one  of 
the  arch-enemies  of  the  British,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  as 
little  the  duty  of  the  historian  severely  to  condemn  the 
actor  as  to  justify  the  act.*  It  is  one  of  those  cases  in 
which  the  exercise  of  charity  is  a  solemn  duty — one  of 
those  cases,  to  the  consideration  of  which  every  one 
should  bring  the  kindliest  resolution  to  weigh  well  the 
temptation  before  he  measures  the  offence.  There  are 
cases  to  which,  it  is  my  deliberate  conviction,  a  strict  ap- 
plication of  the  ordinary  rules  of  right  and  wrong  would 
be  a  grievous  injustice.  It  is  easy,  in  one's  closet,  to  sit 
in  judgment  upon  the  conduct  of  a  man  tempted  far  be- 
yond the  common  limits  of  human  temptation — envi- 
roned and  hemmed  in  by  difficulties  and  dangers — over- 
whelmed with  responsibility  which  there  is  no  one  to 
share — ^the  lives  of  sixteen  thousand  men  resting  on  his 
decision — the  honour  of  his  country  at  stake — with  a  per- 
fidious enemy  before  him,  a  decrepit  general  at  his  side, 
and  a  paralysed  army  at  his  back — driven  to  negotiate 
by  the  imbecility  of  his  companions,  and  then  thwarted 
m  his  negotiations  by  the  perfidy  of  his  ''  new  allies." 
But  if,  without  injustice  and  cruelty,  we  would  pass 
sentence  on  the  conduct  of  a  man  so  environed,  we 
must  ponder  well  all  these  environments,  and  consider 
what  must  have  been  the  effect  of  seven  wearing  weeks 
of  such  unparalleled  trial  even  on  the  strongest  mind,  and 
what  must  have  been  the  temptation  that  arrayed  itself 
before  him,  when  there  suddenly  gleamed  upon  him  a 
hope  of  saving  at  once  the  lives  of  his  companions  and  the 
credit  of  the  British  nation.  If,  when  that  great  tempta- 
tion burst  suddenly  upon  his  path,  and,  dazzled  by  its 
delusive  brilliancy,  he  saw  the  great  object  set  before  him, 

*  That  it  wiLf  not  actually  com-  as  though  the  loiiare  of  Ameen-ooUah 
nutted  18,  of  course,  nothing  to  the  Khan  luid  been  a  perpetrated  act  and 
poLat.    The  question  is  to  be  argued    not  a  baffled  intention. 

M  2 


164        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

but  did  not  see  the  slough  of  moral  turpitude  to  be  passed 
through  before  it  could  be  attained,  it  is  right  that  we 
should  remember  that  Macnaghten,  though  a  good  and  a 
brave  man,  was  hut  a  man  after  all,  and  that  human 
strength,  at  the  best,  is  but  weakness  to  resist  the  pres* 
sure  of  an  overwhelming  Providence. 

We  have  not  the  same  intelligible  guides  to  a  right 
estimate  of  the  conduct  of  Akbar  Khan,  If  we  regard 
the  assassination  of  the  British  Envoy  as  a  deliberate, 
predetermined  act,  it  can  only  be  said  of  it  that  it  stands 
recorded  as  one  of  the  basest,  foulest  miurders  that  ever 
stained  the  page  of  history.  But  it  does  not  appear 
that  the  murder  of  Macnaghten  was  premeditated  by  the 
Sirdar.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  result  of  one  of  those 
sudden  gusts  of  passion  which  were  among  the  distin- 
guishing features  of  the  young  Barukzye's  character,  and 
which  had  often  before  betrayed  him  into  excesses  laden 
with  the  pangs  of  after-repentance.  Th^lseizure  of  the 
Envoy  and  his  companions,  which  was  designed  by  the 
Sirdar,  was  an  act  of  deliberate  treachery,  iwhich  the 
chiefe  would  perhaps  endeavour  to  justify  by  declaring 
that  they  only  designed  to  do  towards  the  Envoy  as  the 
Envoy  had  declared  himself  willing  to  do  towards  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan.*  But  whilst  Macnaghten  had  only  con- 
sented to  a  proposal  made  to  him  by  others — whilst  he 
had  merely  yielded  to  temptation,  and  at  the  instance  of 
one  Afghan  chief  consented  to  the  betrayal  of  the  other — 
Akbar  Khan,  with  deliberate  subtlety  and  malice,  wove 
the  net  which  he  was  to  cast  over  the  deluded  Englishman, 
and  treacherously  enclosed  him  in  the  toils.     The  trap 

*  It  appears  to  have  been  Akbar  struggle,  a  cry  was  raised  that  the 
Khan*8  intention  to  have  seized  the  English  were  coming  out  of  canton- 
person  of  the  Envoy,  and  to  have  ments,  and  that  Akbar  Khan,  think- 
held  him  as  a  hostage,  to  secure  both  ing  that  he  might  still  be  baffled,  in  a 
the  evacuation  of  Afghanistan  and  sudden  gust  of  passion  drew  out  a 
the  restoration  of  Dost  Mahomed.  I  pistol  and  fired, 
have  been  informed  that,  dnrinir  the 


CONDUCT  OF  AKBAU  KUAN,  165 

was  cunningly  laid  and  craftily  baited ;  and  the  unhappy 
Envoy,  all  his  perceptions  blunted  by  the  long-continued 
overstraining  of  his  mind,  fell  readily  into  the  snare,  and 
went  insanely  to  his  undoing.  Like  Bumes,  he  had 
been  warned  of  the  treachery  that  encompassed  him ; 
and  like  his  ill-fated  colleague  he  had  disregarded  the 
warnings  that  might  have  saved  him.  The  brave  con- 
fidence of  Macnaghten  clung  to  him  to  the  last;  his 
sanguine  temperament,  at  one  time  so  dangerous  and 
disastrous,  at  another  so  uoblc  and  inspiriting — which 
more  than  anjrthing  else  had  sustained  the  character  of 
the  nation  throughout  the  sore  trials  which  it  had 
brought  upon  us — ^lured  him  at  last  to  his  death. 


166  THE  CAPITULATION. 


CHAPTER  Vni. 

[December,  1841— Januarj,  1842.] 

The  Capitulation— Supineness  of  the  Grarrison — Negotiations  resumed — 
Efforts  of  Major  Pottinger — ^Demands  of  the  Chiefs — The  Final  Treaty — 
Humiliation  of  the  Garrison — General  Remarks. 

It  is  recorded,  that  on  the  23rd  of  December,  1841,  the 
representative  of  the  British  Government  was  slain  at  a 
conference  with  the  Afghan  Sirdars,  within  sight  of  the 
British  cantonments  at  Caubul;  and  it  is  now  to  be 
added  to  the  record  that  this — the  foulest  indignity  that 
one  nation  can  put  upon  another,  the  murder  of  an 
ambassador  in  the  performance  of  his  ambassadorial 
duties — roused  not  the  dormant  energies  of  the  military 
chiefs,  or  awakened  them  to  a  sense  of  the  depths  of 
humiliation  in  which  they  were  plunging  their  unhappy 
country.  The  British  Envoy  was  killed,  in  broad  day, 
and  upon  the  open  plain,  but  not  a  gun  was  fired  from 
the  ramparts  of  the  cantonment ;  not  a  company  of  troops 
sallied  out  to  rescue  or  to  avenge.  The  body  of  the 
British  Minister  was  left  to  be  hacked  to  pieces,  and  his 
mangled  remains  were  paraded,  in  barbarous  triumph, 
about  the  streets  and  bazaars  of  the  city. 

The  miUtary  chiefs  assert  that  they  did  not  know, 
until  the  day  after  his  death,  that  Macnaghten  had  been 


STRANGE  CONFIDENCE  OF  THE  GENERAL.      167 

murdered.    Elphinstone  says  it  was  thought  by  himself 
and  others  that  the  Envoy  had  proceeded  to  the  city  for 
the  purpose  of  negotiating.*    But  there  were  those  in 
cantonments  who  had  seen  the  tumult  at  the  place  of 
conference,  and  who  knew  that  some  violence  had  been 
conmiitted.     One  officer  said  that  he  distiiictly  saw  the 
Envoy  fall — and  that  afterwards  he  could  see  the  Ghazees 
hacking  to  pieces  the  body  of  the  murdered  man.     If  the 
Creneral  did  not  tremble  for  the  safety  of  the  political 
chief,  he  was  the  only  man  in  the  garrison  who  en- 
couraged the  belief  that  the  lives  of  the  Envoy  and  his 
companions,  if  they  had  not  been  already  sacrificed,  were 
not  now  in  imminent  danger.      There  was  something 
very  remarkable,  if  not  suspicious,  in  the  unwonted  con- 
fidence of  the  General  at  this  time.    It  was  not  his  habit 
to  look  upon  the  bright  side  of  things,  or  to  take  any 
great  pains  to  encourage  and  reassure  the  troops  under 
his  command.     He  had,  on  almost  every  occasion,  taken 
the  most  desponding  view  of  affairs,  and  freely  expressed 
his  apprehension  of  dangers,  which  had  no  existence  save 
in  his  own  mind.     But  now  he  sent  round  his  Adjutant- 
General  to  the  troops  to  assure  them  of  the  Envoy's 
safety.     They  were  all  under  arms.     Captain  Grant  rode 
to  the  head  of  each  regiment,  and  by  Elphinstone's  orders 
told  them  that  the  conference  had  been  interrupted  by 
the  Ghazees — that  the  Envoy  and  his  companions  had 
been  removed  to  the  dty — but  that  they  would  return 
immediately  to  cantonments.     Some  who  heard  this  au- 
thoritative announcement  still  believed  that  they  would 

*  "  Some  time  after  I  had  given  By  myself  and  others  it  was  thought 
the  necessary  orders  (for  the  two  at  the  time  that  Sir  William  had  pro- 
regiments  and  the  guns),  Captain  ceeded  to  the  city  for  the  purpose  of 
Anderson  came  to  me  and  said,  negotiating.  I  was  also  told  that  a 
*They  have  seized  the  Envoy  ;*  and  few  shots  had  been  fired.  Thegarri- 
ODe  of  the  escort  at  the  same  time  son  was  got  ready  and  remained  under 
said,  *  They  have  seized  Uie  Lord  arms  all  day." — IStatemeni  of  General 
Sdub  and  taken  him  off  to  the  city.'  ElphinHtme.'] 


168  THE  CAPITULATION. 

never  hear  the  Envoy's  voice,  or  look  upon  his  living  face 
again.  The  whole  garrison  was  in  a  state  of  painful  ex- 
citement ;  and  when  the  shades  of  evening  fell  over  the 
cantonment,  and  still  no  certain  intelligence  of  the  fate  of 
Macnaghten  had  arrived,  not  an  officer  joined  the  mess- 
table  of  his  regiment,  or  sate  down  to  his  solitary  meal  - 
without  a  leaden  weight  of  gloom  and  despondency  at 
his  heart. 

The  day,  indeed,  had  been  one  of  intense  anxiety.  It 
had  been,  too,  a  busy  stirring  time  within  the  cantonment 
walls.  The  authorities  seem  to  have  been  stimulated 
into  something  of  activity  at  home,  though  they  could  not 
bring  themselves  to  do  anything  abroad.  They  got  up  a 
little  war  against  the  Afghans,  whom  business  or  curiosity 
had  brought  into  cantonments,  and  who  were  now  either 
eagerly  trafficking  or  idly  looking  about  them  in  the  square. 
All  the  men  of  rank  who  could  be  found  were  placed 
imder  arrest;  whilst  hundreds  of  less  note,  apprehending 
that  a  similar  fate  might  be  awaiting  them,  rushed  towards 
the  different  gates,  jostling  and  upsetting  each  other  on 
the  icy  ground,  and  creating  a  scene  of  indescribable  con- 
fusion in  their  efforts  to  escape.  A  lull  succeeded ;  but  as 
the  evening  advanced,  the  noise  and  confusion  in  the  city 
were  such  that  the  troops  were  again  turned  out  and  the 
cantonment  works  manned,*  in  expectation  of  coming 
dangers.  The  Ghazees  were  mustering,  in  the  beUef  that 
the  British  troops  would  attack  the  city  and  avenge  the 
murder  of  their  ambassador.  But  all  thought  of  doing 
had  long  ago  passed  away  from  the  minds  of  our  military 
chiefs.  They  had  settled  down  into  the  belief  that  now 
it  had  become  their  duty  only  to  suffer. 

With  the  morrow  came  a  confirmation  of  the  worst 

*  "At  nine  p.m.  a  great  disturbance  musketry,  caused  the  assembly  to  be 
was  heard  towards  the  city,  horrible  sounded  and  the  walls  again  manned.^* 
shouts  and  cries,  with  rattling    of    — [LieiUenant  Melville's  Narrative^] 


ALiUOK  POTTINGEK.  169 

fears  of  those  who  never  thought  to  see  the  Envoy  re- 
enter the  cantonment-gates.  They  waited  for  tidings  of 
him,  and  tidings  came  at  last.  Though  he  had  been  killed 
ahnost  within  musket-shot  of  our  ramparts,  nothing  had 
been  done  by  the  military  chiefs  to  solve  the  painful 
doubts  which  perplexed  them  throughout  that  disastrous 
23rd  of  December.  It  was  thought  that  if  they  only 
waited  long  enough  for  it,  some  certain  intelUgence  would 
come  at  last ;  and  it  came  at  last,  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
24th,  in  the  shape  of  a  letter  from  Captain  Lawrence,  and 
certain  overtures  from  the  confederate  chiefs,  seeking  a 
renewal  of  the  negotiations  on  the  basis  of  the  treaty 
initiated  by  the  deceased  Envoy. 

As  the  game  of  negotiation  was  now  to  be  commenced 
anew,  it  was  necessary  to  secure  the  services  of  a  new  ne- 
gotiator. There  was  a  man  then  in  cantonments  of  whom 
little  had  been  seen  or  heard  for  some  weeks,  and  of 
whom  the  chroniclers  and  journaHsts  of  the  insurrection 
hdd  up  to  this  time  made  little  or  no  mention,  in  con- 
nexion with  the  stirring  scenes  in  which  Macnaghten 
had  been  the  chief  actor,  but  to  whom  the  garrison  now 
turned  as  to  the  only  man  fitted  to  take  the  Envoy's 
place.  Ever  since  his  arrival  from  Charekur,  Major 
Pottinger  had  been  incapacitated  from  active  employ- 
ment by  the  wound  he  had  received  in  the  early  part  of 
November.  The  severity  of  his  sufferings  had  neces- 
sarily been  much  increased  by  the  hardships  of  his  perilous 
journey  from  Charekur  to  Caubul,  and  during  the 
greater  part  of  the  time  since  his  arrival  at  the  latter 
place  he  had  been  confined  to  his  bed.  But  he  was  now, 
in  the  difficult  conjuncture  that  had  arisen,  ready  to 
bring  all  the  manly  vigour  and  high  courage  which  had 
done  so  much  to  roll  back  from  the  gates  of  Herat  the 
tide  of  Persian  invasion,  to  the  new  duty  of  endeavour- 
ing to  rescue  his  country  from  the  degradation  in  which 


170  THE  CAPITULATION. 

it  had  been  sunk  by  the  faint  hearts  of  the  military 
chiefs. 

The  evening  of  the  24th  saw  Pottinger  in  council 
with  General  Elphinstone,  Brigadiers  Shelton  and  An- 
quetil,  and  Colonel  Chambers,  the  four  senior  officers  of 
the  garrison.  The  chiefe  had  sent  in  a  letter,  sealed  by 
Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  Akbar  Khan,  Araeen-oollah 
Khan,  Oosman  Khan,  and  others,  with  a  memorandum 
of  the  terms  on  which  they  were  prepared  to  grant  the 
army  a  safe  conduct  to  Peshawur.  This  was  now  trans- 
lated to  the  miUtary  officers,  who  agreed  upon  a  memo- 
randum  to  be  sent  back  in  reply.  On  the  following 
day  the  memorandum  was  sent  in  by  Ameer  Mahomed 
Khan,  who,  being  in  the  British  cantonments  on  the  day 
of  the  Envoy's  death,  had  been  seized  and  detained  as  a 
hostage.  It  was  a  rough  draft  of  the  treaty  proposed  by 
the  chiefs  with  the  assent  of  the  English  authorities; 
and  it  thus  appears  translated  from  the  original,  with  the 
subsequent  remarks  of  the  chiefs,  after  each  article,  be- 
lieved to  be  in  the  hand- writing  of  Akbar  ELhan  : 

BOUGH  DRAFT  OP  THE  TREATY  WITH  THE  ASSENT  OF  THE 

ENGLISH  AUTHORITIES. 

Article  1.  ''  There  shall  be  no  delay  in  the  departure  of  the 
English  army." 

Agreed  to.  They  will  march  twenty-four  hours  after  having 
received  a  thousand  carriage-cattle,  which  shall  be  either  camels 
or  yaboos. 

[Remark.  It  rests  with  them  (the  English) ;  let  them  pay  the 
hire  as  they  may  be  able.] 

Article  2.  "  Afghan  Sirdars  shall  accompany  the  army,  to  pre- 
vent  any  one  offering  opposition,  and  to  assist  in  procuring  sup- 
plies." 

It  is  very  advisable. 

[Remark,  Sirdar  Oosman  Khan  and  Shah  Dowlut  Khan.] 

Article  3.  "  The  Jellalabad  army  shall  march  from  Peshawiur 
before  the  Oaubul  force  starts." 


BOUGH  DRAFT  OF  THE  TREATY.  171 

It  is  agreed  to.  Do  you  name  some  person  who  shall  accom* 
panj  them. 

[^Remark,  Abdool  Ghuffoor  Khan.] 

Article  4.  "  The  Ghuznee  force,  having  made  their  prepara- 
tions, 8hall  speedily  march  to  Peshawur  by  Caubul." 

It  is  agreed  to.  Do  you  name  some  proper  person  to  accompany 
them. 

[Remark,  A  relation  of  the  Naib  or  of  Mehtur  Moossa.] 

Article  5.  "  TheCandahar  force,  and  all  other  British  troops  in 
A^hanistan,  shall  quickly  depart  for  Hindostan." 

It  is  agreed.    Let  proper  people  accompany  them. 

[Remark.  Newab  Jubbur  Klian.] 

Article  6.  "  The  whole  of  the  property  of  the  Ameer  (Dost 
Mahomed  Khan)  which  is  in  the  hands  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment, or  of  individual  officers,  shall  be  left  behind/' 

It  is  agreed  to.  Whatever  is  with  the  public  authorities  is 
known  to  you ;  whatever  is  with  private  officei*s  point  out  and 
take. 

Article  7.  "  Whatever  property  belonging  to  the  English  can- 
not be  carried  away  shall  be  taken  care  of  and  sent  by  the  first 
opportunity." 

It  is  agreed  to:  but  we  have  given  over  all  that  remains  to  the 
Newab. 

[Remark,  The  guns,  ordnance  stores,  and  muskets,  must  be 
given  to  me.] 

Article  8.  ''  In  case  Shah  Soojah  should  wish  to  remain  at 
Caubul,  we  will  give  him  yearly  a  subsistence  of  a  lakh  of 
rupees." 

It  is  agreed  to.  Do  wl^tever  you  think  advisable,  wishing  to 
show  your  friendship  for  us. 

Article  9.  **  In  case  the  family  of  Shah  Soojah  should  be  left 
behind,  from  want  of  carriage-cattle,  we  will  fix  the  place  now 
occupied  by  them  in  the  Balla  Hissar  for  their  dwelling-place, 
until  they  can  depart  for  Hindostan." 

It  is  agreed  to.  The  honour  of  the  King  is  the  honour  of  the 
Douranees;  and  it  is  becoming  in  you.* 

Article  10.  "  When  the  English  army  arrives  at  Peshawur, 
snangements  shall  be  made  for  the  march  of  Dost  Mahomed 

*  The  8th  and  9th  articles  are  Khan,  as  though,  on  consideration, 
scored  out  in  the  orginal  hy  Akbar    they  were  distasteful  to  him. 


172  THE  CAI'ITULATIOX. 

Khan,  and  all  other  Afghans,  with  all  their  property,  families,  and 
children." 

It  is  agreed  to.  They  shall  all  be  sent  to  you  with  honour  and 
in  safety. 

Article  11.  ''When  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  and  the 
others  arrive  safely  at  Peshawur,  then  the  family  of  the  Shah  shall 
be  at  liberty  to  depart;  that  departing  they  may  arrive  at  the 
place  fixed  upon." 

It  is  agreed  to. 

Article  12.  '^  Four  English  gentlemen  shall  remain  as  hostages 
in  Caubul  until  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  and  the  other 
Afghans  shall  have  arrived  at  Peshawur,  when  the  English 
gentlemen  shall  be  allowed  to  depart." 

It  is  agreed  to. 

[^Remark.  Let  there  be  six  hostages.] 

Article  13.  ''  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  and  Sirdar  Oos- 
man  Khan  shall  accompany  the  English  army  to  Peshawur,  and 
take  them  there  in  safety."* 

It  is  agreed  to. 

[Remcark.  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan.] 

Article  14.  "After  the  departure  of  the  English,  friendly  rela- 
tions shall  be  continued, — i.e.,  that  the  Afghan  Government,  with- 
out the  consent  and  advice  of  the  English  Government,  shall  not 
form  any  treaty  or  connexion  with  a  foreign  power;  and  should 
they  (the  Afghans)  ever  ask  assistance  against  foreign  invasion,  the 
English  Government  will  not  delay  in  sending  such  assistance." 

It  is  agreed  to^  as  far  as  we  are  concerned ;  but  in  this  matter 
the  Governor-General  of  India  alone  has  authority.  We  will  do 
our  best  to  bring  about  friendship  bet^^een  the  two  governments; 
and  by  the  blessing  of  the  Almighty  this  wish  will  be  obtained 
and  friendship  exist  for  the  future. 

Article  15.  *'  Any  one  who  may  have  assisted  Shah  Soojah  and 
the  English5  and  may  wish  to  accompany  them,  shall  be  allowed 
to  do  so.  We  will  not  hinder  them.  And  if  they  remain  here, 
no  one  will  call  them  to  account  for  what  they  have  done,  and  no 
one  shall  molest  them  under  any  pretence.  They  may  remain  in 
this  country  like  the  other  inhabitants."t 

*  This  article  is  scored  out  in  the  have  been  extended,  suggestively,  by 

original.  Fottinger,  but  disapproved  of  by  Ak- 

f  The  whole  of  this  article  also  is  bar  Khan, 
scored  out.     Its  provisions  seem  to 


ADDITIONS  TO  THE  TREATY.  173 

We  have  interpolated  a  few  words,  and  it  will  be  friendship  if 
you  comply  with  them. 

Article  16.  "Should  any  English  gentleman  unavoidably  be 
detained,  he  shall  be  treated  honourably  until  such  time  as  he  can 
depart." 

AETICLES  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  NEWLY  WBITTEN. 

Article  1.  "  Whatever  coin  there  may  be  in  the  public  treasury 
must  be  given  up." 

We  have  set  apart  two  lakhs  of  rupees  for  our  expenses  to 
Peshawur,  which  is  twenty-four  yaboos'  loads.  If  there  is  more 
than  this  in  the  public  treasury,  either  in  gold  mohurs,  ducats,  or 
rupees,  it  is  yours.  If  you  do  not  believe  this,  send  some  one  to 
note  and  inspect  the  loads  on  the  day  of  our  departure.  If  we 
have  said  truly,  give  us  a  blessing;  and  if  we  have  spoken  falsely, 
it  is  your  property,  take  it  away,  and  we  shall  be  convicted  of 
&]sehood. 

[^Remark.  Let  them  pay  the  hire  of  the  yaboos  and  camels.] 

Article  2.  "  With  reference  to  the  remark  that  was  made  that 
we  should  give  up  all  our  guns  but  six,  we  have  with  the  force 
one  and  a  half  companies  of  artillerymen.  You  have  fixed  six 
guns.  Half  of  a  company  would  remain  without  equipments.  Be 
good  enough  to  give  three  more  small  guns,  such  as  are  drawn 
by  mules,  for  the  other  half-company.  It  will  be  a  great  kind- 
ness." 

\^Remark.  They  cannot  be  given.] 

Article  3.  "  The  muskets  in  excess  of  those  inl  use'  with  the 
regiments  must  be  left  behind." 

This  is  agreed  to.  Whatever  muskets  are  in  addition  to  those 
in  use  with  the  regiments,  together  with  shot  and  powder  and 
other  ordnance  stores,  all  by  way  of  friendship  shall  be  the  pro- 
perty of  the  Newab. 

Article  4.  "  General  Sale,  together  with  his  wife  and  daughter, 
and  the  other  gentlemen  of  rank  who  are  married  and  have 
children,  until  the  arrival  of  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan 
and  the  other  Afghans  and  their  families,  and  Douranees  and 
Ghilzyes,  from  Hindostan,  shall  remain  as  guests  with  us;  that 
when  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  shall  have  arrived,  they 
also  shall  be  allowed  to  depart  with  honour  from  Afghanistan." 

General  Sale  is  with  the  army  in  Jellalabad,  the  departure  of 
which  is  fixed  to  take  place  previous  to  our  arrival;  and  t\^  fot  iVv^ 


174  THE  CAPITULATION. 

Other  two  or  three  gentlemen  who  are  married  and  present  her 
we  have  sent  a  man  to  them.  They,  having  seen  their  familie 
report  that  their  families  will  not  consent  to  this  proposal;  (addinj 
that  you  men  may  do  as  you  like — no  one  can  order  us.  Th 
proposal  is  contrary  to  all  order.  We  now  beg  you  to  be  goc 
enough  to  excuse  the  women  from  this  suffering,  and  we  agree  1 
give  as  many  gentlemen  as  you  may  wish  for.  In  friendshi] 
kindness  and  consideration  are  necessary,  not  overpowering  tl 
weak  with  sufferings.  Since,  for  a  long  time  past,  we  have  sho\« 
kindness  and  respect  to  all  Afghans  of  rank  and  consequence  wil 
whom  we  have  had  dealings,  you  should  consider  what  we  ha-^ 
done  for  them,  and  not  forget  kindness.  As  Shah  Soojah  wi 
father  of  a  family,  and  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  was  wil 
his  family,  and  no  one  gave  them  annoyance,  and  we  showc 
them  respect,  you  also  now  show  similar  kindness,  that  friendsh: 
may  be  increased. 

l^Remark.  Let  them  remain  with  their  families.  Let  the  fami! 
of  the  General  stop  in  Caubul,  until  he  himself  comes  from  Jell 
labad, — Sturt  with  his  family,  Boyd  with  his  family,  and  Ande 
son  with  his  family.] 

Eldred  Pottinger,  Pol.  Agent. 
W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-Gen.* 

To  this  the  chiefs  sent  back  the  following 

Agreement  of  Peace  that  has  been  determined  on  with  the  Frar 
English  gentlemen^  to  which  engagement ^  if  they  consent  and  a 
accordingly^  on  the  part  of  the  heads  and  leaders  ofAfghanistc 
henceforward  no  infractixms  will  occur  to  their  friendly  engag 
ments  : 

1st.  That  the  going  of  the  gentlemen  shall  be  speedy.  Inregai 
to  the  carriage-cattle,  let  them  send  money  that  they  may  be  pu 
chased  and  sent. 

2nd.  As  regards  the  going  of  the  Sirdars  with  the  Englii 
army  that  no  person  may  injure  it  on  the  way,  Sirdar  Mahom< 
Akbar  Khan  or  Sirdar  Mahomed  Oosman  Khan,  whichever  mi 
be  wished  by  the  English,  will  be  appointed  and  sent. 

3rd.  The  army  of  Jellalabad  shall  march  previous  to  the  arn 
of  Caubul,  and  proceed  to  Peshawur.   Sirdar  Abdool  Suffoor  Khj 

♦  MS,  Records. 


ANSWER  OF  THE  SIRDARS.  175 

having  been  appointed^  will  leave  this  and  proceed  that  he  may 
previously  accompany  them;  secondly,  the  road  of  Bhungush  has 
been  appointed. 

4th.  The  Ghuznee  force  having  got  quickly  ready  will  proceed 
by  the  road  of  Caubul  to  Peshawur.  A  relative  of  Naib  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan,  with  Mehtur  Moosa  Khan,  has  been  appointed  to 
accompany  it. 

5th.  The  army  of  Candahar  and  other  parts  of  Afghanistan, 
wherever  an  army  may  be,  will  quickly  depart  for  India.  Newab 
Abdool  Jubbar  Khan  has  been  appointed  to  carry  this  into  effect. 

6th.  Whatever  property  of  the  Ameer  may  be  with  the  English 
will  be  returned,  and  nothing  retained. 

7th.  Whatever  property  of  the  English  may  be  left  for  want  of 
carriage  will  become  the  property  of  the  Newab. 

8th.  If  the  family  of  Shah  Soojah,  on  account  of  want  of  car- 
riage, may  remain  here,  they  will  be  placed  in  the  house  of  Hadjee 
Khan. 

9th.  Whenever  the  English  army  may  arrive  at  Peshawur,  they 
will  make  arrangements  for  the  return  of  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed 
Khan,  the  Afghans  and  their  families,  that  are  in  India. 

10th.  That  the  English  gentlemen,  with  their  families,  will  be 
left  at  Caubul  as  hostages,  until  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan, 
with  the  rest  of  the  Afghans  and  their  families,  may  arrive  at 
Peshawur;  or,  secondly,  that  six  hostages  may  be  lelt. 

11th.  After  the  departure  of  the  English  there  shall  be  perfect 
friendship  between  the  two  states,  in  so  much  so  that  the  Govern- 
ment of  Afghanistan,  without  the  advice  and  approval  of  the 
British  Government,  shall  enter  into  no  connexion  or  correspond- 
ence with  any  other  power;  but  if,  in  its  defence,  it  may  require 
the  assistance  of  the  English,  they  will  not  delay  to  afford  it 
Should  the  British  Government  not  consent  to  this,  the  Afghans 
are  free  to  make  friends  with  any  one  they  like. 

12th.  If  any  gentleman  would  wish  to  remain  in  Caubul,  on 
account  of  his  private  affairs,  he  may  do  so,  and  will  be  treated 
with  justice  and  respect. 

13th.  Whatever  cash,  whether  gold  or  silver,  may  be  in  the 
treasury,  shall  be  paid  to  Newab  Zemaun  Khan.  A  trustworthy 
person  will  be  appointed,  who  will  issue  supplies  from  stage  to 
stage  as  far  as  Peshawur. 

14th.  With  regard  to  artillery,  six  guns  have  been  determined 


176  THE  CAPITULATION. 

on.  They  are  enough.  More  will  not  be  given.  Secondly,  the 
three  mule  guns  will  be  given. 

15th.  The  spare  arms  shall  be  given  to  Newab  Mahomed  Ze- 
maun  Khan. 

16th.  The  hostages  to  be  left  here^  and  these  persons  with  their 
families — General  Sale,  Captains  Sturt,  Boyd,  and  Anderson. 

17th.  Let  General  Sale  go  with  the  army  to  Jellalabad  and  his 
family  remain  here;  after  taking  the  army  to  Jellalabad,  let  him 
return  to  Caubul. 

18th.  If  any  of  the  Frank  gentlemen  have  taken  a  Mussulman 
wife,  she  shall  be  given  up. 

If  there  may  be  questions  about  any  article,  send  a  note  quickly 
by  the  bearer.* 

All  this  was  grievously  humiliating.  To  treat  upon 
such  terms  with  such  an  enemy — to  be  so  dictated 
to — so  overborne — so  insulted — was  a  sore  trial  to  the 
manly  spirit  of  Eldred  Pottinger ;  who  lifted  up  his  voice 
against  these  degrading  concessions,  but  ever  remon- 
strated in  vain.  On  that  Christmas-day,  which  was  not 
all  cheerless,  there  arrived  the  encouraging  intelligence 
that  reinforcements  were  on  their  way  from  India. 
Macgregor  and  Mackeson  wrote  from  Jellalabad  and 
Peshawur,  urging  Macnaghten  to  hold  out  to  the  last ; 
and  the  letters  were  now  opened  by  one  who  had  car- 
ried to  the  performance  of  Macnaghten's  duties  all  Mac- 
naghten's  constancy  and  courage.  Pottinger  stood  up 
manfully  in  council,  and  declared  that  it  now  became  the 
leaders  of  the  British  army  either  to  fling  themselves 
into  the  Balla  Hissar  or  to  fight  their  way  down  to  Jel- 
lalabad. But  the  military  chiefs  clung  to  the  old  idea 
of  capitulation,  and  determined  to  cast  themselves  on  the 
mercy  of  the  Afghan  Sirdars. 

It  is  right  that  Pottinger  should  tell  his  own  story — 
that  the  reasons  he  urged  for  the  adoption  of  the  nobler 

*  MS.  Records,  This  memoran-  marks  ^*  appended  to  the  preceding 
dum  seems  to  be  based  on  the  "  Re-    document. 


pottinger's  protests.  177 

course  should  be  well  understood :  "  On  that  day,"  he 
writes,  in  his  report  from  Budeeabad,  "  we  received  a 
tender  from  Mahomed  Oosman  Khan,  oflfering  to  escort 
the  army  to  Peshawur  for  the  sum  of  five  lakhs  of 
rupees,  as  had  been  offered  him  (he  said)  by  Sir  W. 
Macnaghten.  At  the  same  time,  letters  from  Captains 
Macgregor  and  Mackeson  were  received,  urging  Sir 
William  to  hold  out,  and  informing  us  of  the  reinforce- 
ments which  were  on  their  way  from  India.  The  in- 
formation from  the  city  showed  that  feuds  were  running 
high  there,  and  that  Shah  Soojah  appeared  to  be  getting 
up  a  respectable  party  for  himself.  When  I  informed 
General  Elphinstone  of  these  facts,  he  summoned  a  coun- 
cil of  war,  consisting  of  Brigadier  Shelton,  Brigadier 
Anquetil,  Lieut.-Colonel  Chambers,  Captain  Bellew,  and 
Captain  Grant.  At  the  Major-Generars  request  I  laid 
the  above-mentioned  facts,  and  the  enemy's  tenders,  be- 
fore these  officers,  and  also  my  own  opinion  that  we 
should  not  treat  with  the  enemy,  because— ;;/?r5%,  I  had 
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  were  deceiving 
us;  secondly^  I  considered  it^our  duty  to  hold  aloof  from 
all  measures  which  would  tie  the  hands  of  government 
as  to  its  ftiture  acts;  and  thirdly^  that  we  had  no  right 
to  sacrifice  so  large  a  sum  of  public  money  (amounting 
to  nineteen  lakhs)  to  purchase  our  own  safety — or  to 
order  other  commanding  officers  to  give  up  the  trusts 
confided  to  them — ^for  it  was  especially  laid  down  by 
writers  on  international  law,  that  a  general  had  no  au- 
thority to  make  any  treaty,  unless  he  were  able  to  en- 
force the  conditions,  and  that  he  could  not  treat  for  the 
future,  but  only  for  the  present.  The  council  of  war, 
however,  unanimously  decided  that  remaining  at  Caubul 
and  forcing  a  retreat  were  alike  impracticable,  and  that 
nothing  remained  for  us  but  endeavouring  to  release  the 
army,  by  agreeing  to  the  tenders  offered  by  the  enemy ; 

VOL.  n.  N 


178  THE  CAPITULATION. 

and  that  any  sum,  in  addition  to  what  had  akeady  been 
promised  by  Sir  William  Macnaghten,  if  it  tended  to 
secure  the  safety  of  the  army,  would  be  well  expended, 
and  that  our  right  to  negotiate  on  these  terms  was 
proved  by  Sir  William  Macnaghten  having  agreed  to 
them  before  his  assassination.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, as  the  Major-General  coincided  with  the  officers 
of  the  council,  and  refused  to  attempt  occupying  the 
Balla  Hissar ;  as  his  second  in  command,  who  had  been 
in  there,  declared  it  impracticable,  I  considered  it  my 
duty,  notwithstanding  my  repugnance  to  and  disapproval 
of  the  measure,  to  yield,  and  attempt  to  carry  on  a  nego- 
tiation. For  the  reasons  of  the  military  authorities,  I 
must  refer  you  to  themselves."* 

The  statement  of  the  chief  military  authority  is  to  the 
same  effect,  but  it  does  not  deal  largely  in  "  reasons."  The 
plan  recommended  by  Major  Pottinger  was  pronounced 
to  be  "impracticable."  "On  the  26th,"  says  General 
Elphinstone,  "Major  Pottinger  received  letters  from 
Captain  Macgregor  and  Captain  Mackeson,  addressed  to 
the  late  Envoy,  announcing  the  march  of  strong  rein- 
forcements from  India.  He  also  received  a  tender  from 
Mahomed  Oosman  Khan  to  escort  the  troops  to  Peshawur 
himself  for  five  lakhs  of  rupees.  Shortly  after,  the  Naib 
Ameer  Mahomed  Khan  came  into  cantonments  with  the 
verbal  agreement  to  the  amendments  proposed  to  the 
renewed  treaty,  and  brought  with  him  a  Cashmere 
merchant  and  several  Hindoo  Shroffs  to  negotiate  bills 
payable  to  the  several  chiefe,  on  the  verbal  promise  of 
the  late  Envoy,  amounting  to  about  14  lakhs  of  rupees. 
The  proposal  was  submitted  to  the  council  of  war  com- 
posed as  above.  Major  Pottinger  informed  the  council 
that  he  considered  any  treaty  with  the  chiefs  as  ex- 
^^^^ngly  doubtful,  and  that  he  thought  it  was  our  duty 

•  Report  of  Major  Eldred  Pottinger :  MS.  Records. 


DECISION  OF  THE  COUNCIL  OP  WAB.  179 

either  to  hold  out,  or  to  force  a  retreat  to  Jellalabad,  so 
as,  in  no  way,  to  bind  the  hands  of  our  government  by 
promising  to  evacuate  the  country,  or  to  waste  so  much 
public  money  to  save  our  own  lives  and  property  under 
such  doubtful  circumstances  of  faith  being  kept  with  us. 
The  council,  one  and  all,  were  of  opinion  that  Major 
Pottinger's  views  were  impracticable — that  we  could  not 
hold  out  for  want  of  provisions,  and  from  having  sur- 
rendered the  forts  commanding  cantonments;  and  that 
we  could  not  force  a  retreat  to  Jellalabad ;  also,  that  it 
was  better  to  pay  any  sum  of  money  than  sacrifice  the 
troops  then  at  Caubul.  It  was  consequently  determined, 
nem.  can.^  that  Major  Pottinger  should  enter  into  nego- 
tiations and  pay  the  money  to  the  different  chiefs,  which 
was  accordingly  done/'* 

*  l%elton*8  reasons  are  giren  else-  they  would  spare  us  the  dishonour 

where.  Pottinger  sajs,  in  another  let-  and  goyemment  the  loss  which  an^ 

ter,  that  it  was  mainly  the  Brigadier's  negotiation  must  entail.   In  a  council 

opiKwition  that  preyented  the  occu-  of  war  held  at  the  General's  house — 

pation  of  the  Balla  Hissar;— the  pas-  Shelton,  Anquetil,  Chambers,  Grant, 

sage  if  on  other  accounts  worth  quo-  and  Bellew  present,  eyerj  one  yoted 

tiDg :  **  There  are  many  points  that  to  the  contrary ;  so  seeing  I  could  do 

my  character  requires  me  to  explain,  nothing,  consented.     At  the  time  we 

psrticalarly  that  we  continued  our  had  but  two   courses  open  to  us, 

n^otiations  with  the  enemy  in  direct  which,   in  my  opinion,  promised  a 

opposition  to  my  adyice,  and  that  we  chance  of  saymg  our  honour  and  part 

were  preyented  from  going  into  the  of  the  army.    One  was  to  occupy  the 

Balla  Hissar   by  the    obstinacy  of  Balla  Hissar,  and  hold  it  till  spring. 

Brigadier  Shelton,  who  declared  the  By  this  we  should  haye  had  the  best 

mttempt  impracticable.  The  General,  chance  of  success.    The  other  was  to 

from  nil  Alness,  was  incapable  of  haye  abandoned  our  camp  and  bag- 

malring  np  his  mmd,  and  the  constant  gage  and  encumbrances,  and  forced 

■■serf ion  of  the  Impossibility  by  his  our  way  down.     This  was  perilous 

Mcond  in  commano,  outweighed  the  but  practicable.     Howeyer,^  I  could 

entreaties  of  the  Enyo^y  when  aliye  not  persuade  them  to  sacrifice  bag- 

(who  was  always  afraid  to  commit  gage ;  and  that  was  eyentually  one  of 

himsdf  in  military  matters),  and  of  the  chief  causes  of  our  disasters.  You 

mine  after ;   and  a  retreat  on  you  may  conceiye  my  anxiety  to  haye  this 

(Jpllalabad)  was  the  only  thing  they  properly  made  known  toeoyemment. 

woold  hear  of;  and,  notwithstanding  X  am  more  anxious  on  the  (jeneral*8 

tiiat  I  pointed  ont  the  yery  doubt-  account,  if  it  be  possible,  than  my 

Ibl  character  of  any  engagement  we  own,  for  the  noble  courage  and  resig- 

might  make  with  the  heads  of  the  in-  nation  with  which  he  bears  himself 

Borgentii,  the  probability  they  could  under  such  a  load  of  misfortune  and 

not  make  it  good;  and  begged  that  physical  suffering  (an  attack  of  rheu- 

n2 


180  THE  CAPITULATION. 

*'  As  soon  as  this  was  decided  upon,"  says  Pottinger, 
"  I  commenced  negotiating.  The  enemy's  first  demand 
(on  complying  with  which  they  promised  to  agree  to  the 
terms  we  oflfered  on  the  25th)  was  that  we  should  settle 
with  the  Hindoos  they  brought  forward  regarding  the 
payment  of  the  money  the  Envoy  had  promised,  t.e., 
which  the  council  of  war  had  decided  should  be  paid. 
*  *  *  I  would  willingly  have  avoided  the  payment  of 
such ;  but  the  enemy,  by  stopping  our  supplies,  obliged 
me  to  suffer  the  imposition,  as  the  military  authorities 
were  urgent  to  prevent  a  renewal  of  hostilities,  cost  what 
it  might.  These  sums  were  promised  in  the  name  of 
Sir  William  Macnaghten,  by  his  agent  (the  Naib  Ameer), 
to  the  diflferent  chiefs  to  bring  about  a  treaty  and  support 
it  when  formed.  Major-General  Elphinstone  recollected 
the  Envoy  having  informed  him  of  his  having  autho- 
rised the  agent  to  make  the  promises,  as  also  did  Captain 
Skinner."* 

Captain  Lawrence,  who  since  his  seizure  at  the  fatal 
conference,  had  resided  in  the  house  of  Akbar  Khan  in 
the  city,  was  sent  for  to  draw  the  bills,  and  on  the  27th 
of  December  came  into  cantonments.  Fourteen  lakhs 
of  rupees  were  then  signed  away.     Then  came  a  more 

matic  gout  in  the  joints  of  each  hand,  accompanj  us  and  supply  us  with 

and  a  shot   through    the  buttock)  provisions  on  the  road,    llie  refusal 

makes  a  man^s  heart  bleed  that  he  ofthe  Afghans  to  hire  their  cattle,  and 

should  have  been  fated  to  hold  such  a  sinister  reports,  fuUj  convinced  me 

command  when  so  incompetent  from  what  that  protection  would  be.    In- 

disease ;  and  seconded  so  badly,  that  deed,    many    friendly    towards    us 

the  second-in-command  would  never  frankly  forewarned  us  to  prepare  for 

give  advice  but  to  oppose  that  of  the  the  worst.  My  opinion  was  to  march 

other.'' — [Major  Pottinger  to  Captain  early    (by  loading  the  baggage  at 

JMacgregor :  MS.  Records.'^  moonrise),  at  5  A.M.,  and  when  once 

The  following  passage  is  the  only  out  of  cantonments  to  depend  on  our- 

one  in  Shelton^  statement  that  re-  selves,    and    never  to  hdt,  except 

lates    to    the    final   negotiations: —  merely  to  take    refreshments  for  a 

"  Soon  after  this  (the  death  of  the  couple  of  hours,  and  so  to  renew  the 

Envoy)    arrangements,    or     rather  march." — {^MS.  Records.'] 

agreements,  were  entered  into  for  our  ♦  Major  Pottinger*s  Budeeahad  Re- 

retreat,  and  for  a  protecting  force  to  port. 


SUBRENDER  OF  THE  GUNS.  181 

dreadful  concession.  The  enemy  demanded  our  guns. 
All  but  six' field-pieces,  which  were  to  be  suflfered  to 
accompany  the  retreating  force,  were  now  to  be  given 
up  to  the  triumphant  Afghans.  This  was  the  sorest 
trial  that  the  British  garrison  had  yet  been  called  upon  to 
encounter.  It  burnt  in  our  humiliation  as  with  a  brand  of 
iron.  The  troops  chafed  under  this  crowning  indignity; 
and  the  military  chiefs,  when  the  hour  of  surrender 
came,  shrunk  from  the  mortifying  necessity  of  giving  up 
to  a  barbarous  foe  those  muniments  of  war,  which  sol- 
diers of  all  nations  honour,  and  some  almost  idolise. 
But  they  could  not  bring  themselves  to  risk  a  renewal 
of  the  conflict  by  openly  refusing  to  accede  to  the 
demand.  So,  Pottinger  hoping,  perhaps,  that  something 
might  yet  arise  to  break  off  the  negotiations,  determined 
to  procrastinate.  He  began  by  giving  up  the  Shah's 
guns,  by  twos,  on  successive  days ;  but  if  this  alleviated 
the  pain  of  the  concession,  it  did  not  really  soflen  the 
disgrace. 

From  day  to  day,  guns,  waggons,  small  arms,  and 
ammunition  were  surrendered  to  the  enemy.  The 
hostages,  too,  were  given  up.  Lieutenants  ConoUy  and 
Airey  were  already  in  the  hands  of  the  Afghans.  Now 
Captains  Walsh  and  Drummond,  and  Lieutenant  War- 
burton  and  Webb,  were  sent  to  join  them  in  captivity.* 

*  On    these    additional   hostages  as  this.      Thej  will,  therefore,  be 

being  sent.  Captains    Skinner  and  found  in  the  appendix.    Both  the 

Minuenzie,  who  had  been  detuned  English  officers  owed  their  lives  to 

in  ibe  city,  were  released.    Captains  the  efforts  of  the  chiefs,  who  at  much 

Lftwrence  and  Mackenzie  have  ^ach  personal  risk  defended  them  against 

drmwn  up  a  narrative  of  the  circum-  the  furious  assaults  of  the  Ghazees, 

•tancea  attending  their  capture,  and  *'  I  must  do  Mahomed  Akbar  the  jus- 

their  detention  in  the  citj,  the  former  tice  to  say,''  writes  Captain  Macken- 

in  the  houae  of  Ameen-ooUah,  and  the  zie,  ''  that  finding  the  Ghazees  bent 

latter  in  that  of  Akbar  Khan.  These  on  my  slaughter,  even  af\er  I  had 

nairattves,  though  they  have  been  very  reached  his  stirrup,  he  drew  b  is  sword 

eztenaiyely  read  in  Eyre's  Journal,  and  laid  about  him  right  manfully,  for 

are  of  too  much  interest  and  import-  my  conductor  and  Meerza  Baoodeen 

•Doe  to  be  omitted  from  such  a  work  Khan  were  obliged  to  press  me  up 


182  THE  CAPITULATION. 

The  enemy  were  anxious  to  get  some  of  the 
families  into  their  hands ;  but  there  was  a  general  un- 
willingness on  the  part  of  the  officers  to  sufier  their  wives 
and  children  to  be  cast  upon  the  forbearance  of  an 
enemy  supposed  to  be  so  cruel,  so  treacherous,  and  so 
unscrupulous.  On  the  29th,  such  of  the  sick  and 
wounded  as  were  believed  to  be  unable  to  bear  the 
fatigues  of  the  march,  were  sent  into  the  city;  and  two 
medical  officers,  Drs.  Berwick  and  Campbell,  were  ap» 
pointed  to  take  charge  of  them. 

On  the  1st  of  January,  the  ratified  treaty  was  sent  iii| 
duly  bearing  the  seals  of  eighteen  of  the  A%han  Sirdara. 
It  appears  thus  in  its  English  dress : 

TRANSLATION  OF  A  TREATY  BETWEEN  THE  ENGLISH  AUTHO- 
RITIES AT  CAUBUL  AND  THE  AFGHAN  NOBLES.  (DATED  IN 
THE  MONTH  OF  ZE-VOL-KADH.) 

The  cause  of  writing  this  confidential  paper,  and  the  inleu* 
tion  of  forming  this  unparalleled  friendly  treaty,  is  thii:-«*That 
at  the  present  happy  moment,  to  put  away  strife  and  contention, 
and  avert  discord  and  enmity,  the  representatives  of  the  great 
English  nation — that  is,  the  high  of  rank  and  respected  Eldrecl 
Pottinger,  the  ambassador  and  agent  of  the  English  Govemment| 
and  General  Elphinstone,  the  commander  of  the  English  forces — 
have  concluded  a  comprehensive  treaty  containing  certain  arti- 
cles, which  they  have  confided  to  the  hands  of  the  Afghan 
nobility,  that  by  it  the  chain  of  friendship  may  be  strengthened. 
And  it  has  been  settled  that  the  Afghan  nobles  shall  give  a  simi- 
lar writing. 

An  engagement  is  now  made  by  his  Majesty  Newaub  Maho* 
med  Zemaun  Khan,  King  of  Afghanistan,  and  Naib  Ameen-ooUah 

affalnst  the  wall,  covering  me  with  gereed*  (^oull  seize  my  country,  will 

tneir  own  bodies,  and  protesting  that  70U?)**  The  conduct  of  Akbar  Khan 

no  blow  should  reach  me  but  through  and  other  chiefs  towards  Lawrence 

their  persons.   Pride,  however,  over-  and  Mackenzie  may  be  taken  as  a 

came  Mahomed    Akbar's    sense   of  presumptive  proof  tnat  the  murder  of 

courtesy,  when  he  thought  I  was  safe,  the  Envoy  was  not  designed.    His 

for  he  then  turned  round  to  me,  and  seizure,  however,  was    deliberately 

repeatedly  said,  in  a  tone  of  trium-  planned  between  Ameen-ooUah  and 

phant  derision,  *  Shuma  moolk-1-ma  Akbar  Khan. 


THE  FINAL  TREATY.  183 

Khan,  and  the  chief  nobles  of  AfghaniBtan,  whose  seals  are  affixed 
to  and  ornament  this  document  The  articles  of  the  treaty  are  as 
follow: — 

Article  1.  That  the  British  troops  shall  speedily  quit  the  terrl^ 
tories  of  Afghanistan  and  march  to  India,  and  shall  not  return; 
and  twenty-four  hours  after  receiving  the  carriage-cattle  the  army 
shall  start 

Article  2.  That  on  our  part  the  Sirdars,  Oosman  Khan  and 
Shoojah*ool-dowkh  Khan,  be  appointed  to  accompany  the  before- 
mentioned  army  to  the  boundaries  of  Afghanistan  and  convey  it 
to  the  boundary  of  the  Sikh  territory;  so  that  no  one  shall  offer 
molestation  on  the  road ;  and  that  carriage-cattle  and  provisions 
may  be  procured  for  it 

Article  S.  That  the  English  force  at  Jellalabad  shall  march  for 
Peshawur  before  the  Caubul  army  arrives,  and  shall  not  delay  on 
the  road. 

Article  4.  Having  brought  the  force  at  Ghuznee  in  safety  to 
Caubul,  under  the  protection  of  one  of  the  relations  of  Naib 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan,  we  will  eend  It  to  Peshawur  unmolested  under 
the  care  of  another  trustworthy  person. 

Article  5.  Since  according  to  agreement  the  troops  at  Candahar 
and  other  parts  of  Afghanistan  arc  to  start  quickly  for  India  and 
make  over  those  territories  to  our  agents,  we  on  our  part  appoint 
trustworthy  persons  who  may  provide  them  with  provisions  and 
protection,  and  preserve  them  from  molestation. 

Article  6.  All  goods  and  property,  and  stores  and  cattle,  be- 
longing to  Sirdar  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  which  may  be  in  the 
hands  of  the  English,  shall  be  given  up,  and  none  retained. 

Article  7.  Six  English  gentlemen,  who  remain  here  as  our 
guests;,  shall  be  treated  with  courtesy.  When  the  Ameer  Dost 
Mahomed  Khan  and  the  other  Afghans  shall  arrive  at  Peshawur, 
we  will  allow  the  above-mentioned  English  gentlemen  to  depart 
with  honour. 

Article  8.  After  the  departure  of  the  English  army  according 
to  the  treaty,  should  assistance  against  foreign  invasion  be  at  any 
time  demanded,  they  (the  English  Government)  shall  not  delay. 
Between  (the  Governments)  friendship  and  good- will  shall  exist ; 
and  we  will  not  make  a  treaty  with  any  but  the  above-mentioned 
English  Grovemment.    And  in  case  the  Governor-General  of 


184  THE  CAPITULATION. 

India  should  not  agree  to  this  proposal^  we  are  at  liberty  to  form 
an  alliance  with  any  other  power. 

Article  9.  Should  any  English  gentleman  be  unavoidably  de- 
tained in  Caubul,  we  will  treat  him  with  all  respect  and  consi- 
deration, and  on  his  departure  dismiss  him  with  honour. 

Article  10.  The  English  can  take  six  horse-artillery  guns  and 
three  mule  guns,  and  the  rest,  by  way  of  friendship,  shall  be 
left  for  our  use.  And  all  muskets  and  ordnance  stores  in  the 
magazine  shall,  as  a  token  of  iriendship,  be  made  over  to  our 
agents. 

Article  1 1 .  Such  English  soldiers  as  may  be  left  sick  or  wounded 
at  Caubul  shall  be  at  liberty  to  return  to  their  own  country  on 
their  recovery. 

This  is  the  treaty,  the  articles  of  which  have  been  entered  into 
between  the  nobles  of  the  Mahomedan  faith  and  the  distinguished 
gentlemen.  From  which  articles  we  will  not  depart.  Written 
in  the  month  of  Ze-vol-E[adh,  in  the  year  of  the  Mahomedan 
faith  1257. 

(Sealed) 

Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan.  Ejeeak  Mahomed  Khan. 

Meeb  Hajee  Khan.  Abdool  Ehalik  Khan. 

Sekundub  Khan.  Ameen-oollah  Khan. 

Dabweesh  Khan.  Meeb  Aslan  Khan. 

Allee  Khan  Sumud  Khan. 

Mahomed  Akbab  Khan.  Mahomed  Nasib  Khan. 

Mahomed  Oosman  Khan.  Abdoollah  Khan. 

Gholam  Ahmed  Khan.  Ghupfoob  Khan. 

Gholam  Mahomed  Khan.  Meeb  Alteb  Khan.     ^ 

Such  were  the  terms  of  the  treaty  under  which  the 
British  commanders  consented  to  evacuate  Afghanistan. 
There  is  nothing  more  painful  in  all  this  painful  history 
than  the  progress  of  the  negotiations  which  resulted  in 
the  accomplishment  of  this  treaty.  The  tone  of  the 
enemy  was  arrogant,  dictatorial,  and  insulting ;  whilst 
the  language  of  our  diplomatists  was  that  of  submission 
and  self-abasement.     It  is  so  rare  a  thing  for  English- 


ENDURANCE  OF  THE  GARRISON. 


185 


men  to  throw  themselves  upon  the  clemency  and  for- 
bearance of  an  insolent  foe,  that  when  we  see  our  officers 
imploring  the  Afghan  chiefs  "  not  to  overpower  the 
weak  with  suffering,"  we  contemplate  the  sad  picture  of 
our  humihation  with  as  much  astonishment  as  shame. 
The  disgrace  rests  on  the  military  commanders.  Pot- 
tinger,  had  he  not  been  overruled  in  council,  would 
have  snapped  asunder  the  treaty  before  the  faces  of  the 
chie&,  and  appealed  again  to  the  God  of  Battles. 

There  were  other  things,  too,  to  humble  us.  The  state 
of  affairs  in  cantonments  was  something  very  grievous 
to  contemplate.  The  Ghazees  hovering  round  the  walls 
were  insulting  our  people  at  their  very  gates,  and  beard- 
ing them  at  the  very  muzzles  of  their  guns.  Intercept- 
ing the  supplies  of  grain  which  the  commissariat  had 
purchased  with  so  much  difficulty,  they  drove  off  the 
cattle  and  ill-treated  their  attendants.  The  chiefs  de- 
clared that  they  had  no  power  to  prevent  these  outrages, 
and  told  the  British  authorities  that  they  should  order 
the  garrison  to  fire  upon  all  who  molested  them.  Officers 
and  men  alike  were  burning  to  chastise  the  wretches  who 
thus  insulted  their  misfortunes ;  but  they  were  not  suffered 
to  fire  a  shot.  The  Afghans  had  triumphed  over  us  so 
long  with  impunity  that  they  now  believed  the  Ferin- 
ghees  had  sunk  into  hopeless  cowardice,  and  had  become 
as  patient  of  injury  and  insult  as  a  herd  of  broken-spirited 
slaves.* 


♦  The foUowingextracte  from  Cap- 
tain Johnaon's  Journal  will  show 
better  than  anything  else  the  indig- 
nitiea  to  which  they  were  subjected : 
^December  28. — Very  busy,  buying 
camels  and  yaboos — the  pnce  of  the 
former  160  rupees  each.  The  Gha- 
zees still  infest  our  gates  and  insult 
OS  in  every  possible  way — stop  our 
supplies  coming  in  from  the  town,  and 
abuse  and  ill-treat  those  who  bring 


them.  No  notice  taken  by  our  mili- 
tary leader,  although  our  officers  and 
soldiers  are  bummg  for  revenge. 
Several  of  my  native  friends  from 
the  city  come  daily  to  see  me,  and  all 
agree,  without  one  dissenting  voice, 
that  we  have  brought  the  wnole  of 
our  misfortunes  upon  ourselves, 
through  the  apathy  and  imbecility 
displayed  at  the  commencement  of 
the  outbreak.    They  also  tell  me  that 


186  THE  CAPITULATION. 

All  this  was  very  hard  to  bear.  Other  trials,  too,  were 
upon  them.  AU  who  had  friends  in  the  city-^^^d  many 
of  our  officers  had  among  the  Caubulees  faithful  and  long« 
tried  friends—were  now  receiving  from  them  alarming 
intimations  of  the  dangers  that  threatened  them  on  the 
retreat.  It  was  no  secret,  indeed,  either  in  the  city  or  in 
cantonments,  that  the  promises  of  the  chie&  were  not  to 
be  depended  on,  and  that  treachery  was  brewing  for  the 
destruction  of  our  wretched  force.  Mohun  Lai  warned 
Pottinger  that  the  chiefs  were  not  to  be  believed,  and 
that  imless  their  sons  accompanied  the  army  as  hostages, 
it  would  be  attacked  upon  the  road.  To  this  Pottinger 
replied:  "The  chiefs  have  signed  the  treaty,  and  their 

our  safety  on  the  retreat  depends  the  plundered  grain  or  punish  the 
solely  on  ourselves — that  no  depend-  offenders.  How  we  must  be  despised 
enoe  is  to  be  placed  on  the  promises  by  our  miserable  foe !  Mahomed  Ze« 
of  any  of  the  chiefs,  and  more  espe-  maun  Khan  sent  in  word  that  some 
cially  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan.  Every  of  the  chiefs  will  be  in  attendance  to 
one  of  them  will  now,  that  they  are  escort  us  to  Jellalabad  to-morrow, 
in  a  measure  paid  before  hand,  do  his  In  the  evening  another  message  came 
utmost  to  destroy  us.  December  80.  that  we  must  halt  another  day. 
— ^A  body  of  Ghazees  made  a  rush  at  Every  day^s  delay  increases  our  dlffi- 
the  rear  gate  of  cantonments;  but  culties  on  the  road.  January '1^1S42» 
did  not  elect  an  entrance.  More  — New  Year's  Day  I  God  grant  that 
guns  and  ammunition  made  over  to  we  ma;^  never  see  such  another.  My 
tne  enemy,  or  what  are  called  our  kind  friends,  Naib  Shureef,  and  Elhan 
new  allies.  Precious  aliies^  who  are  and  All  Eeza  Khan  (both  Kuzzul* 
onljT  waiting  the  opportunity  to  an-  bashes),  sent  me  in  secretly  some  very 
nihilate  us  1  ....  December  excellent  cakes  to  carry  with  me  on 
31. — The  chiefs  say  they  cannot  con-  the  road,  as  we  shall  not  get  a  parti« 
trol  their  men,  and  that  if  their  cle  of  firewood  for  cooking  for  a  dis- 
people misbehave  themselves  at  our  tance  of  ninety  miles,  ere  we  can  get 
^tes,  or  around  our  walls,  we  must  into  a  milder  climate.  How  dreary  a 
nre  upon  them.  No  orders,  how-  prospect  we  have  before  us — having 
ever,  given  by  Greneral  Elphmstone  to  traverse  ninety  miles,  and  the 
to  punish  our  insulting  foe,  who  natu«  greater  part  of  this  distance  through 
rally  attribute  our  forbearance  to  snow  now  upwards  of  a  foot  deep, 
dastardly^  cowardice,  and  take  every  and  the  thermometer  at  night  below 
opportunity  of  taunting  us  with  it.  zero.  Some  negotiations  still  goina 
The  error  lies  with  our  leader,  not  on.  All  the  firewood  that  was  laid 
with  our  troops.  Several  camels  in  for  the  winter^s  consumption  ex- 
laden  with  gram  plundered  close  to  pended,  and  almost  every  tree  in  can- 
the  Seeah-Sung  gateway,  within  a  tonments  cut  down,  lliey  had  long 
few  paces  of  a  gun  loaded  with  grape,  ago  been  stripped  of  their  bark,  and 
and  a  large  fuard  of  Europeans  and  everything  eatable,  for  the  purpose  of 
Natives.    No  steps  taken  to  recover  feeding  our  starving  cattle.**— [MS.] 


THBEATENED  DANGERS.  187 

sons  accompany  us.  As  for  attacking  us  on  the  road,  we 
are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  him  we  trust."*  Again, 
Mohun  Lai  wrote  that  the  troops  would  be  attacked  as 
soon  as  they  quitted  cantonments;  but  it  was  too  late  now 
to  recede.  Other  warning  notes  of  still  more  ominous 
import  were  sounded  at  this  time.  MooUah  Ahmed  Ehan 
told  Captain  Johnson  that  Akbar  Khan  had  sworn  that 
he  would  obtain  possession  of  the  English  ladies  as  a 
pledge  for  the  safe  return  of  his  own  wives  and  family; 
and  annihilate  every  soldier  of  the  British  army,  with 
the  exception  of  one  man,  who  should  reach  Jellalabad 
to  tell  the  story  of  the  massacre  of  all  his  comrades.f 

But  to  those  who  pondered  well  the  dangers  that 
threatened  the  retreating  force  in  the  gloomy  defiles  be- 
tween Caubul  and  Jellalabad,  there  was  something  more 
terrible  still  than  the  vindictive  treachery  of  the  A%han 
tribes.  Ever  since  the  18th  of  December,  snow  had  been 
&lling  heavily  at  intervals — sometimes  from  morning  to 
evening-r— with  terrible  perseverance.  It  was  now  lying 
more  than  ankle-deep  upon  the  groimd.  Already  had 
the  Sepoys  and  the  camp-followers  begun  to  faint  under 
the  cruel  sufferings  of  a  frosty  winter,  fearfully  aggra- 
vated by  the  exhaustion  of  all  the  firewood  in  their 
reach.  The  trees  in  cantonments  had  already  been  cut 
down  and  consumed.  What  was  once  a  flourishing 
grove  or  orchard  (for  they  were  mainly  fruit-trees)  had 
now  become  a  desert.  But  the  sufferings  which  these 
wretched  men,  transplanted  from  the  torrid  plains  of 
Hindostan,  were  now  enduring  in  the  Caubul  cantonment, 
seemed  but  faintly  to  foreshadow  the  misery  of  a  long 
march  through  the  dreadful  snow.  Even  to  the  hardy 
people  of  the  north  such  a  march,  it  was  known,  must 
be  a  sore  trial;  but  to  the  weak  and  effeminate  strangers 

♦  Letter  of  Mohun  Lai  to  Mr.  Col"        t  Captain  JohmorCs  Journal:  MS. 
nn:  MS*  Records,  Records. 


188  THE  CAPITULATION. 

from  the  plains  of  Hindostan,  who  had  followed  our 
fortunes  into  those  dreary  regions,  it  seemed  to  threaten 
nothing  short  of  absolute  extermination. 

Those  few  first  days  of  January  were  days  of  painful 
doubt  and  anxiety.*  Every  preparation  for  the  march 
had  been  made  by  the  garrison.  For  some  time  our 
oflBicers  had  been  gathering  together  and  securing  such 
property  as  they  could  take  with  them,  and  destroying 
what  they  were  compelled  to  abandon.  Every  night, 
since  the  commencement  of  the  new  year,  they  had  re- 
tired to  rest,  believing  that  the  army  would  commence 
its  march  on  the  following  morning;  but  the  movement 
was  delayed  day  after  day,  because  the  chiefs  had  not 
completed  their  promised  arrangements  for  the  safe  con- 
duct of  the  force.  At  last,  on  the  evening  of  the  5th  of 
January,  the  engineer-officer  received  instructions  actu- 
ally to  commence  the  work,  which  he  had  been  so  long 
in  readiness  to  accomplish.  He  was  ordered  to  cut  an 
opening  through  the  rampart-walls  of  the  cantonment  to 
admit  the  egress  of  the  troops,  more  rapidly  and  less 
confusedly,  than  they  could  pass  out  through  4;he  gates. 
The  chiefe  had  not  sent  the  promised  safeguard;  but, 
contrary  to  the  advice  of  Major  Pottinger,f  the  military 
authorities  determined  to  march  out  of  their  entrench- 
ments.    And  so,  on  the  following  morning,  the  British 

*  The  letters  written  at  this  time  out  money,  without  provisions,  with- 
from  Caubul  were  full  of  gloomy  out  wood."  At  the  same  time.  Lieu- 
foreboding.  On  the  4th  of  January,  tenant  Sturt  wrote :  *'  The  day  in  the 
Captain  Lawrence  wrote:  '*  The  end  will  be  the  King^s.  If  we  march 
troops  march  to-morrow ;  treachery  we  shall  fiffht  but  once ;  the  result  is 
is  feared.  We  look  to  Jellalabad  for  in  the  hands  of  God.'* — [3f5.  Corre- 
assistance.    We  have  no  money  and  spondence.'} 

no  friends.**    Lady  Sale  wrote  not  f  **  On  the  6th  of  January,  the 

more  hopefully,  describing  the  treaty  military  authorities  refused  to  wait 

as  a  disgraceful  one :  "  Guns,  ammu-  for  the  safeguard ;  and  notwithstand- 

nition,  money,  and  all  the  forts  have  ing    my    advice    to    the    contrary, 

been  given  up ;  and  likewise  six  hos-  marched  out  of  our  entrenchments.** 

tages.     All  the  sick  have  been  sent  — [Major  Pottinger's  Budeeabad  ife- 

to  the  city — to  the  new  King.    We  port:  mS,  Records,'] 
are  to  depart  without  a  guard,  with- 


CAUSES  OF  OUR  DEFEAT.  189 

force,  beaten  and  disgraced,  commenced  its  ill-fated  re- 
treat towards  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 

I  have  commented  upon  the  various  incidents  of  the 
Caubul  insurrection  as  they  have  arisen,  one  by  one,  to 
claim  the  attention  of  the  reader;  and  little  now  remains 
to  be  said  in  explanation  of  the  causes  which  conduced 
to  the  calamitous  and  disgraceful  defeat  of  a  British 
army  by  an  undisciplined  and  disimited  enemy,  who 
had  no  artillery  to  bring  into  the  field.  Whatever  more 
remote  causes  of  this  lamentable  failure  may  be  found 
elsewhere,  it  is  impossible  to  conceal  or  to  disguise  the 
one  galling  fact,  that  the  British  army  at  Caubul  was 
disastrously  beaten  because  it  was  commanded  by  an 
incapable  chief.  Whether  that  chief  would  have  beaten 
the  enemy  if  the  military  arrangements  for  which  he 
was  not  responsible  had  been  better  ordered — if  the  site 
of  the  cantonments  had  been  more  judiciously  chosen, 
and  its  defences  more  effectively  constructed,  if  all  our 
magazines  and  godowns  had  been  well  located  and  well 
protected, — ^may  still  be  an  open  question ;  but  it  appears 
to  me  that  there  is  no  question  as  to  whether  a  com- 
manding oflBicer  of  the  right  stamp  would  have  triumphed 
over  these  diflSculties,  and  beaten  the  enemy  in  spite  of 
them.  The  Caubul  cantonments  were  very  badly  situ- 
ated, and  very  ill-constructed  for  purposes  of  defence ; 
but  if  our  troops  had  been  commanded  by  an  officer 
with  a  robust  frame,  strong  nerves,  a  clear  understand- 
ing, and  a  proper  knowledge  of  his  business,  as  the  chief 
of  a  mixed  army  of  British  and  Hindostanee  troops,  they 
would  have  crushed  the  insurrection  in  a  few  hours,  and 
demonstrated  the  irresistible  power  of  British  valour  and 
British  discipline. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  British  army  was  not  beaten 
out  of  Caubul,  but  that  it  was  starved  out  of  Caubul. 
This  is  a  belief  that  I  would  willingly  encourage,  if  I 


190  TOE  CAPITULATION. 

could  only  bring  my  judgment  to  embrace  it.  But  the 
fact  is,  that  the  army  was  driven  out  of  Caubul  for  want 
of  supplies,  only  because  the  troops  would  not  fight,  or 
were  not  suffered  to  fight,  to  obtain  them.  The  Com- 
missariat officers  would  have  fed  the  troops,  if  the  mili- 
tary authorities  had  not  shamefiiUy  sacrificed  their  sup- 
plies,— ^if  they  had  not  ignominiously  lost  what  was 
already  in  store ;  and  ignominiously  refiised  to  make  an 
effort  to  obtain  fresh  supplies  from  the  surrounding 
coimtry.  The  troops,  indeed,  fought  neither  to  keep 
their  food  when  they  had  it,  nor  to  procure  food  when 
they  had  none.  There  was  an  alacrity  only  in  losing. 
The  imbecility  which  sacrificed  the  Bengal  Commissariat 
Fort,  on  the  5th  of  November,  and  the  miserable  aban- 
donment of  the  expedition  to  Khoja  Rewash,  on  the 
9th  of  December,  are  equally  apt  illustrations  of  the 

truth,  that,  if  the  army  was  starved  out  of  Caubul,  it 
was  only  because  it  courted  starvation. 

This  is  a  very  humiliating  confession,  but  it  is  impos- 
sible, without  a  sacrifice  of  truth  for  the  sake  of  ad- 
ministering to  our  national  vanity,  to  avoid  the  mortify- 
ing conclusion  that  the  Caubul  army  wanted  food,  only 
because  it  wanted  vigour  and  energy  to  obtain  it.  If 
General  Elphinstone  had  thrown  half  as  much  heart 
into  his  work  as  Captain  Johnson  threw  into  his,  the 
army  would  not  have  been  starved  out  of  Caubul. 
There  is  nothing  sadder  than  the  spectacle  of  a  fine 
army  sacrificed  by  the  imbecility  of  an  incapable  general, 
and  nothing  more  painful  than  to  write  of  it.  But  such 
humiliating  revelations  are  not  without  their  uses. 
They  operate  in  the  way  of  warning.  Never  again, 
after  this  fi:ightful  illustration  of  the  evils  of  a  vicious 
system  of  routine,  will  the  lives  of  sixteen  thousand 
men,  and  the  honour  of  a  great  nation,  be  placed  in  the 
hands  of  a  senile  commander,  crippled  by  disease  and 
enfeebled  by  suffering.     It  was  General  Elphinstone's 


THE  MILITARY  CHIEFS.  191 

miflfbrtune  that  he  was  sent  to  Caubul.  It  was  Lord 
Auckland's  fault  that  he  sent  him  there.  Greneral 
Elphinstone  knew  that  he  was  incapable  of  performing 
worthily  the  duties  of  such  a  command,  and  he  took 
the  earliest  opportunity  of  applying  for  relief  firom  a 
burden  of  responsibility  which  he  was  not  able  to  bear. 
Lord  Auckland  knew  that  he  was  incapable,  for  the 
attention  of  the  Governor-General  was  strongly  called 
to  the  fact ;  but  he  sent  the  infirm  old  General  to  Caubul, 
in  spite  of  the  representations  that  were  made  to  him 
by  men  less  jealous  of  the  integrity  of  the  roster  than 
of  the  honour  of  their  country.  The  British  army  was 
beaten  at  Caubul,  because  it  was  commanded  by  General 
Elphinstone ;  and  it  was  commanded  by  (Jeneral  Elphin- 
stone, because  Lord  Auckland  decreed  that  it  should 
be  so. 

(Jeneral  Elphinstone  has  left  upon  record  a  declaration 
of  his  belief  that  if  he  had  been  more  worthily  sup- 
ported he  would  not  have  been  beaten  at  Caubul.  So 
long  as  he  held  the  chief  command  in  his  own  hands, 
he — and  he  alone — ^was  responsible  for  all  the  operations 
of  the  army.  He  never  relinquished  the  command. 
Though  he  did  not  take  the  field  in  person,  every  order 
emanated  from  him.  To  him  the  Envoy  addressed 
himself ;  with  him  the  Envoy  took  counsel.  It  is  pos- 
sible that  if  the  second-in-command  had  been  an  officer 
of  a  different  stamp,  the  army  would  not  have  been  so 
disastrously  and  ignominiously  beaten ;  but  this  admission 
does  not  affect  the  question  of  responsibility.  Brigadier 
Shelton,  throughout  the  siege,  held  a  subordinate  situa- 
tion. He  was  immediately  imder  Elphinstone's  orders; 
and  though  he  may  be  chargeable  with  certain  indi- 
vidual miscarriages — with  certain  errors  in  the  executive 
management  of  details — he  is  not  chargeable  with  the 
great  comprehensive    failure  which    has   plunged  his 


192  THE  CAPITULATION. 

country  into  such  a  sea  of  disgrace.  Of  Shelton's  faults 
I  have  not  been  unmindful ;  but  when  I  have  admitted 
all  his  perverseness,  his  arrogance,  his  contumacy,  and 
expressed  my  belief  that  there  was  not  another  man  in 
the  British  army  so  unfitted  by  nature  for  the  post  he 
occupied  under  such  a  General,  the  admission  amounts 
to  little  more  than  this :  that  Brigadier  Shelton  was  not 
the  man  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  General  Elphinstone. 
It  is  only  because  General  Elphinstone  was  so  incapable 
himself  that  we  come  to  canvass  at  all  the  merits  of  his 
second-in-command.  History  does  not  trouble  itself 
much  about  seconds-in-command  when  the  chiefs  are  fit 
for  their  posts. 

Unquestionably  Elphinstone  was  not  well  supported. 
Macnaghten,  in  emphatic  language,  described  the  troops 
as  "  a  pack  of  despicable  cowards."  On  more  than  one 
occasion  they  forgot  that  they  were  British  troops,  and 
turned  their  backs  upon  the  enemy.  They  did  not  fight 
as  they  would  have  fought  if  they  had  been  well  com- 
manded. The  commander  had  less  reason  to  complain 
of  his  troops  than  the  troops  had  to  complain  of  their 
commander.  It  was  the  faint-heartedness  of  the  com- 
mander at  the  outset  of  the  insurrection  that  dispirited 
and  unnerved  the  troops.  If  Elphinstone,  on  the  2nd  of 
November,  had  struck  a  vigorous  blow  at  the  then  inci- 
pient rebellion,  and  proved  himself,  by  his  energy  and 
resolution,  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  the  troops,  they 
would  have  had  confidence  in  him  and  in  themselves. 
But  they  were  held  in  restraint  by  the  backwardness  of 
their  leader ;  the  fro  ward  feeling  that  then  inspired  them 
was  crushed  and  deadened.  There  was  nothing  to  en- 
courage and  to  animate  them,  but  everything  to  dis- 
hearten and  depress.  They  saw  that  the  enemy  were 
sujQfered  to  triumph  over  and  insult  them — that  the 
worst  indignities  were  unresented,  the  vilest  outrages 


DETERIORATION  OF  THE  TROOPS.         193 

unpunished.  Thus  abased,  they  soon  lost  their  self- 
respect,  and  forgot  what  was  due  to  their  colours  and 
their  country. 

Brigadier  Shelton  has  attributed  to  physical  causes 
the  deterioration  of  the  troops ;  but  it  is  rather  to  moral 
than  to  physical  causes  that  that  deterioration  is  to  be 
ftscribed.  The  troops  would  have  borne  up  against  con- 
tinued harassing  duty  in  cantonments — against  cold, 
hunger,  and  fatigue ;  they  would  have  kept  up  a  brave 
heart  under  the  sorest  physical  trials,  if  there  had  been 
no  moral  influences  to  sicken  and  to  chill.  They  bore, 
indeed,  their  outward  sufferings  without  complaining. 
Cold,  hunger,  and  fatigue  they  could  endure  without  a 
murmur ;  but  the  supineness  of  those  who  suffered  them 
to  be  robbed  and  insulted  under  the  very  shadow  of 
their  guns  filled  them  with  burning  indignation,  which, 
in  time,  was  succeeded  by  a  reaction  of  sullen  despon- 
dency. They  felt  that  they  were  sacrificed  to  the  imbe- 
cility of  their  commander;  and,  in  time,  under  the  sure 
process  of  moral  deterioration,  they  became  in  all  re- 
spects worthy  of  their  chief. 

Examples  of  individual  heroism  were  not  wanting. 
Wherever  Englishmen  congregate,  there  are  surely  to  be 
found  brave  hearts  and  resolute  spirits  amongst  them. 
There  were  many  in  that  Caubul  garrison  who  bore 
themselves  throughout  the  perilous  season  of  their  be- 
leaguerment  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the  chivalry  of  the 
empire.  When  the  retreating  force  commenced  its  mise- 
rable march  towards  the  British  provinces,  it  left  behind 
it  the  remains  of  many  brave  men  who  had  fallen  nobly 
•on  the  field  of  battle ;  and  many  brave  men  were  now 
bracing  themselves  up  in  the  desperate  resolution  to  sell 
their  lives  dearly  to  the  enemy,  if  treachery  were  at 
work  for  their  destruction..  But  they  who  had  been 
most  eager  to  counsel  a  vigorous  course  of  action,  and 

VOL.  XL  O 


194  THE  CAPITULATION. 

who  had  felt  most  deeply  the  humiliation  into  which 
the  feebleness  of  their  chief  had  sunk  them,  were  mostly 
officers  of  the  lower  grades ;  and  though  the  opinions  of 
captains  and  subalterns  were  sought,  and  offered  when 
not  sought,  in  a  manner  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of 
British  warfare,  they  had  no  power  to  direct  the  current 
of  events  or  to  avert  the  evils  which  they  clearly  foresaw. 
Even  Pottinger,  with  all  the  influence  of  recognised 
official  position,  and  the  prestige  of  an  heroic  character, 
could  only  lift  up  his  voice  in  remonstrance  against  the 
sacrifice  of  national  honour  involved  in  the  humiliating 
treaty  with  the  Afghan  Sirdars.  The  mihtary  chiefe 
were  fixed  in  their  determination  to  abandon  A%han- 
istan,  and  to  leave  Shah  Soojah  to  his  fate. 


sale's  brigade.  195 


BOOK  VI. 

[1841—1842.] 


CHAPTER  I. 

[November,  1841— January,  1842.] 

Sale^  Brigade — ^Evacuation  of  Gundamuck — Skirmishes  with  the  Enemy — 
Occupation  of  Jellalabad — State  of  the  Defences— SuccessM  Sallies — 
The  Fortifications  repaired — Disastrous  Tidings  from  Caubul — Summons 
to  Surrender — ^Arrival  of  Dr.  Brydon. 

Whilst  Elphinstone  was  flinging  himself  into  the  snares 
of  the  enemy  at  Caubul,  Sale  was  holding  out  manfully 
at  Jellalabad.  Whether  the  latter  ought  not  to  have 
returned  to  Caubul,  or,  if  such  a  movement  were  impossi- 
ble, to  have  stood  his  groimd  at  Gundamuck,  is  a  question 
which  military  critics  wiU  long  continue  to  discuss.  That 
the  appearance  of  this  brigade  at  Caubul  would  have 
changed  the  aspect  of  aflfairs  at  that  place,  and  in  all  pro- 
bability rescued  Elphinstone's  unhappy  force  from  de- 
struction, and  the  national  character  from  disgrace,  there 
seems  no  reason  to  doubt.  But  it  was  the  opinion  of 
General  Sale  that  his  brigade  could  not  reach  Caubul. 
"  My  retracing  my  steps  on  that  city,'*  he  says,  "  was,  in 
a  military  sense,  impracticable^  since  the  first  inevitable 

o2 


196 


SALE  S  BRIGADE. 


sacrifice  would  have  been  of  the  lives  of  300  sick  and 
wounded,  whom  I  could  not  have  left  in  depot  with  the 
treasonable  irregulars  at  Gundamuck,  whilst  my  cattle 
was  unequal  to  the  transport  of  my  camp-equipage,  and 
my  ammunition  insufficient  for  protracted  operations.  In 
the  position  which  I  occupied,  I  could  not  absolutely 
command  a  day's  provisions,  or  even  water,  and  should 
have  been  hemmed  in  on  every  side  by  hostile  tribes, 
amounting  to  thirty  or  forty  thousand  men,  p§irt  of  whom 
might  have  seized  Jellalabad,  and  reduced  it  to  ashes ; 
or,  holding  it,  have  left  me  no  alternative  but  a  disastrous 
retreat  to  Peshawur.  I  therefore  came  to  the  resolution 
of  anticipating  any  movement  of  this  kind,  and,  by  pos- 
sessing myself  of  Jellalabad,  establishing  a  point  on 
which  the  force  at  Caubul  might  retire  if  haraly  pressed, 
and  restoring  a  link  in  the  chain  of  communication  with 
our  provinces." 

This  was  written  five  months  after  the  brigade  had 
abandoned  its  position  at  Gundamuck.  It  does  not, 
however,  differ  much  from  the  statement  of  reasons  sent 
to  General  Elphinstone  only  as  many  days  afterwards.* 
But  the  fact  is,  that  those  few  days  had  given  a  very  dif- 


♦  In  this  letter,  written  from  Jella- 
labad (Nov.  15),  General  Sale  says : 
"  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  jrour  letter  of  the  9th  instant^  re- 
quuring  the  force  under  my  command 
to  move  again  upon  Caubul.  In  re- 
phr,  I  beg  to  represent  that  the  whole 
of  my  camp-equipage  has  been  de- 
stroyed ;  that  the  wounded  and  sick 
have  increased  to  upwards  of  300; 
that  there  is  no  longer  a  single  depot 
of  provisions  on  the  route ;  and  tnat 
the  carriage  of  the  force  is  not  suffi- 
cient to  bring  on  one  day's  rations 
with  it.  I  have,  at  the  same  time, 
positive  information  that  the  whole 
country  is  in  arms,  and  ready  to 
oppose  us  in  the  defiles  between  this 
city  and  Caubul,  whilst  my  ammuni- 


tion is  insufficient  for  more  than  two 
such  contests  as  I  should  assuredly 
have  to  sustain  for  six  days  at  least. 
With  my  present  means  1  could  not 
force  the  passes  of  either  Jugdulluck 
or  Koord  Caubul,  and  even  if  the 
debris  of  mv  brigade  did  reach  Cau- 
bul, I  am  given  to  understand  that  I 
should  find  the  troops  now  garrison- 
ing it  without  the  means  or  subsist- 
ence. Under  these  circumstances,  a 
regard  for  the  honour  and  interests 
of  our  government  compels  me  to 
adhere  to  my  plan  already  formed,  of 
putting  this  place  into  a  state  of 
defence,  and  holding  it,  if  possible, 
until  the  Caubul  ibrce  falls  back 
upon  me,  or  succours  arrive  from 
Peshawur  or  India.** 


SUBMISSION  OF  THE  CHIEFS.  197 

ferent  complexion  to  the  aspect  of  afiairs.  It  was  on  the 
10th  of  November  that  Captain  Macgregor,  who  for  days 
had  been  perplexed  by  alarming  rumours  of  native  origin, 
received  the  first  authentic  intelligence  of  the  outbreak  at 
Caubul,  coupled  with  an  urgent  requisition  from  the 
Envoy  to  bring  back  Sale's  brigade.  Some,  at  least,  of 
the  military  objections  urged  against  the  movement  by 
the  General  had  not  then  begun  to  exist.  The  irregulars 
were  not  then  known  to  be  treasonable.  The  surround- 
ing country  was  not  then  known  to  be  hostile.  Food  was 
believed  to  be  procurable.  The  brigade  was  at  this  time 
halted  in  the  valley  of  Gundamuck.  There  was  no  more 
fertile  spot  than  this  between  Caubul  and  Jellalabad. 
Orchards  and  vineyards,  green  fields  and  rippling  streams, 
refreshed  the  eyes  and  gladdened  the  hearts  of  men  who, 
for  many  weary  days,  had  been  toiling  through  arid 
defiles,  under  the  shadow  of  dreary  walls  of  rock.  Here 
the  brigade  had  encamped  itself  on  the  30th  of  October, 
and  looked  forward  to  a  brief  season  of  repose. 

Everything,  indeed,  at  this  time  wore  a  most  encou- 
raging, aspect.  Provisions  were  freely  coming  into  camp, 
and  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  were  making  their  submission. 
"  On  the  31st,"  says  Captain  Macgregor,  in  his  narra- 
tive of  these  events,  "  Burkutt  Khan  paid  me  a  visit, 
and  brought  with  him  two  of  the  rebel  chiefs,  Sadad 
Meer  and  Sir  Biland  Khan ;  they  had  returned  to  their 
allegiance,  and  delivered  over  to  me  sixteen  camel  loads 
of  property  (not  very  valuable)  which  had  been  plun- 
dered from  some  Reh waree  merchants ;  this  property  I 
made  over  to  their  owners.  Aghur  Khan  Sahuk,  a 
Ghilzye  chief  of  considerable  influence,  and  Attah  Ma- 
homed Khan  Sahuk,  joined  me  at  Gundamuck,  and 
established  their  Thanahs  for  the  protection  of  the 
Caubul  road  within  their  respective  boundaries  from 
Seh  Baba  to  near  Jugdulluck.    Burkutt  Khan  had  re- 


198  sale's  brigade. 

posted  his  Thanahs  at  Jugdulluck,  and  at  this  time  there 
seemed  to  be  a  great  promise  of  the  Ghilzye  country 
being  shortly  tranquillised."  * 

There  was  one  exception,  however,  to  the  general 
amity  which  the  chiefe  seemed  now  inclined  to  offer  to 
Macgregor.  "  On  the  3rd  of  November,"  writes  that 
officer,  "  1  was  informed  that  Meer  Afzool  Khan  Urz- 
Begee  had  fled  from  Caubul,  and  had  joined  the  rebels, 
and  was  then  at  Ghanni,  endeavouring  to  excite  the 
Khogrannees  and  Ghannees  to  rebel  against  us.  Meer 
Afeool  had  a  fort  and  extensive  lands  at  Mama  Kheil, 
about  two  miles  distant  from  our  encampment  at  Gun- 
damuck,  from  which  he  had  removed  his  family  and 
portable  property,  and  might  chupao  our  camels  when 
at  graze,  stop  our  supplies,  and  molest  us  in  many 
ways  with  impunity.  I  had  information  that  the  party 
which  was  intended  to  garrison  the  fort  had  not  yet 
reached  it;  and  by  our  moving  at  once  on  it,  we 
should  meet  with  less  resistance  at  that  time,  than 
would  be  offered  a  few  days  subsequently ;  on  the  other 
hand,  if  the  British  troops  took  possession  of  this  fort, 
our  position  at  Gundamuck  would  be  greatly  strength- 
ened; I  therefore  requested  Major-General  Sir  Robert 
Sale  to  capture  the  fort  in  question.  The  troops  marched 
against  it  on  the  6th,  found  it  had  been  evacuated,  a 
party  of  Ferris's  Jezailchees  and  fifty  of  Dowson's 
Hazarbash,  xmder  Captain  Grerrard,  having  been  left  in 
occupation  of  it.  The  troops  returned  to  Gundamuck 
the  following  day.  A  quantity  of  grain,  which  had 
been  left  in  the  fort  by  the  enemy  and  had  been  stored 
outside^  fell  into  our  possession."  f 

Up  to  the  day,  indeed,  on  which  Macgregor  received 
the  pressing  solicitations  of  the  Envoy  to  bring  back 

'  ♦  CaptamMaegregor'sBeport:  MS,        t  Iteport   of  Captain  Macgregor: 
BmOfd$.  MS,  Records. 

ik-. 


THE  MARCH  TO  JELLALABAD.  199 

Sale's  brigade  to  Caubul,  circumstances,  since  the  arrival 
of  the  force  at  Gundamuck,  had  been  all  in  its  favour. 
When,  therefore,  Macnaghten's  letter  was  received,  and 
they  took  counsel  together  as  to  the  course  it  then 
became  them  to  pursue,  some  at  least  of  those  strong 
reasons  against  the  movement  on  Caubul,  which  Sale  set 
forth  in  his  official  letters,  had  not  yet  been  forced  into 
being,  A  council  of  war  was  held,  and  the  members  of 
it  were  divided  in  opinion ;  but  the  majority  pronounced 
against  the  movement  for  the  rescue  of  Elphinstone's 
force.  It  was  determined  that  the  brigade  should  throw 
itself  into  Jellalabad.  There  was  a  middle  course  open 
to  them — the  retention  of  their  position  at  Gundamuck ; 
but  it  seems  to  have  found  no  favour  in  their  eyes. 
Had  Sale's  force  remained  in  the  valley  of  Gundamuck, 
it  might  have  saved  Elphinstone's  army  from  annihilation 
on  its  fatal  January  retreat.  As  long  as  it  was  encamped 
there,  the  tendency  of  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  was  towards 
the  establishment  of  friendly  relations  with  the  British, 
but  no  sooner  had  we  determined  to  abandon  our 
position,  than  the  whole  country  broke  out  into  hostility, 
and  the  passes  were  sealed.^ 

On  the  11th  of  November  the  brigade  commenced  its 
march  towards  Jellalabad.  Sale  had  wisely  determined 
to  move  with  as  little  encumbrance  of  baggage  as  pos- 
sible. He  was  partly,  indeed,  compelled  to  this  by  the 
depredations  of  the  tribes  who  had  swept  off  the  bulk  of 
his  cattle  whilst  the  animals  were  grazing  on  the  plain. 
The  injury  inflicted  upon  us  by  their  predatory  adroit- 
ness  was  of  a  very  doubtful  character.    The  taste  for 

^lthBMheeasaid(CalcuitaEevieWt  but  the  letters  from  the  EnTOj  to 

ToL  zIt.)  that  the  instructions  sent  Macgregor  were  couched  in  unquali- 

to  Sale  were  of  such  a  character  as  fied  and  unconditional  language,  and 

to  throw  a  large  amount  of  respon-  the  official  letter  from  Eiphinstone 

•SfaOity  upon  Turn;   and  that  Sale  ordered  Sale  to  return  **a<  a^  mAv.^ 
ahrajf  shnuik  f^om  responsibility, — 


200  sale's  brigade. 

baggage  is  ordinarily  so  strong  that  little  short  of  abso- 
lute necessity  compels  its  abandonment.  Sale  was  forced 
to  move  lightly  out  of  Gundamuck,  and  he  found  the 
advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  usual  impediments  before 
he  had  been  long  on  the  march. 

To  leave,  however,  any  property  at  Gundamuck  was 
virtually  to  sacrifice  it.  To  the  care  of  the  Shah's  irre- 
gulars posted  in  the  cantonment  all  that  could  not  be  car- 
ried away  was  now  consigned.  As  soon  as  Sale's  brigade 
had  commenced  its  march  to  Jellalabad  the  cantonment 
was  attacked.  True  to  their  character,  the  Janbaz, 
who  seem  to  have  been  raised  for  the  express  purpose 
of  going  over  to  the  enemy,  did  it  with  their  wonted 
address.  The  property  left  at  Gundamuck  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Afghans;  the  cantonment  was  burnt  to  the 
ground;  and  all  the  surrounding  country  rose  against  us 
in  open  revolt. 

Without  any  serious  opposition,  the  march  to  Jella- 
labad was  accbmpUshed.  On  the  morning  of  the  12  th, 
however,  soon  after  the  brigade  got  under  arms  in  the 
grey  twilight,  the  tribes  were  seen  clustering  on  the 
steep  hills  on  either  side,  and  soon  poured  themselves 
down  on  the  rear-guard,  vainly  striving  to  sweep  off  the 
baggage.  A  running  skirmish,  which  lasted  for  some 
miles,  and  brought  out  the  fine  qualities  of  our  troops, 
their  admirable  discipline  and  steadiness  under  fire,  the 
gallantry  of  their  bearing,  and  the  rapidity  of  their 
movements,  ended  in  the  complete  dispersion  of  the 
depredators,  and  secured  the  safety  of  the  remainder  of 
their  march.  Clever  were  the  manoeuvres  by  which  on 
that  day  Dennie  drew  the  enemy  into  his  toils,  and 
heavy  the  retribution  which  descended  upon  them. 
Placing  his  cavalry  in  ambush,  he  brought  up  his  in- 
fantry to  the  attack,  ordered  them  to  advance  firing, 
and  then  wheeled  them  about,  as  though  in  panic  flight. 


OCCUPATION  OF  JELLALABAD.  201 

The  stratagem  succeeded  to  admiration.  The  enemy, 
after  a  brief  pause  of  wonderment,  believed  they  had 
accomplished  a  great  victory,  sent  up  a  wild  shout,  and 
then  rushed  in  pursuit  of  the  flying  Feringhees.  They 
were  soon  in  the  clear  open  space  to  which  Dennie  had 
designed  to  lure  them.  The  cavalry,  whom  they  had 
laughed  at  on  the  hills,  able  now  to  operate  freely, 
dashed  at  them  with  sudden  fury.  The  slaughter  was 
tremendous;  the  rout  was  complete.  It  was  said  of  the 
British  horsemen  that  day  that  "  their  right  arms  were 
wearied  with  the  blows  which  they  struck;  and  the 
quantity  of  dead  that  might  be  seen  scattered  over  the 
fece  of  the  valley  proved  that  they  had  not  struck  at 
random."* 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  of  November  Sale's  bri- 
gade took  possession  of  Jellalabad.  The  movement  took 
the  A%han8  by  surprise.  They  had  believed  that  the 
Feringhees  were  making  the  best  of  their  way  to  the 
provinces  of  Hindostan;  and  now  their  entrance  into  the 
city  struck  a  panic  into  the  hearts  of  the  inhabitants.  As 
the  regiments  marched  in,  the  citizens  fled  out  in  dismay. 
Everything  was  abandoned  to  the  British  troops.  There 
was  no  need  to  fire  a  shot  or  to  draw  a  sabre.  Sale's 
brigade  had  now  become  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad.f 

Scarcely,  however,  had  Sale  made  himself  master  of 
the  place  before  it  was  surrounded  by  yelling  crowds, 
who  threatened  death  to  the  infidels  if  they  did  not  at 
once  abandon  the  town.  The  utmost  caution  was  now 
necessary.  The  place,  though  surrounded  by  fortifica- 
tions, was  absolutely  without  any  real  defences ;  and  the 

*  *'  SaJ£s  Brigade  in  Afghanistan,'"  who  ruled  the  Jellalabad  dbtrict  in 

By  the  Eev,  G.  R.  Gleig^  Chaplain  to  the  name  of  Shah  Soojah.    Abdool 

ike  Forces.  Rahman  continued  for  some  time  to 

t  The  place,  at  the  request  of  Cap-  reside  in  the  town    under  Captain 

tain  Macsregor,  was  officially  given  Macgregor's  protection.  —  [^Captain 

over  to  the  British  garrison  by  the  Macgregorslleport:  MS,  Records,'} 
nominal  Governor,  Abdool  Rahman, 


202  SALENS  BRIGADE. 

troops  within  its  dilapidated  walls  and  its  filled'*up 
ditches,  were  almost  as  much  exposed  as  in  the  open 
country.  The  extent  of  the  works  was  very  great,  and 
it  was  quite  impossible  to  man  them.  But  guards  were 
posted  at  all  the  gates ;  and  a  strong  piquet  planted  in  a 
central  position,  and  ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness  to 
send  supports  to  any  point  from  which  the  sound  of 
firing  might  proceed.*  These  arrangements  made,  the 
remainder  of  the  troops  were  suffered  to  lie  down  to 
rest  by  companies,  with  their  officers  beside  them,  whilst 
Sale  summoned  the  commanders  of  regiments  and  detach- 
ments to  a  council  of  war. 

The  question  to  be  determined  was  this.  There  was 
the  extensive,  ill-defended  city  of  Jellalabad ;  and  in  the 
midst  of  it  was  the  Balla  Hissar  or  citadel,  surrounded 
by  a  wall,  sufficiently  extensive  to  enclose  the  brigade 
without  inconvenience,  but  yet  not  so  extensive  as  to 
exhaust  our  means  of  defence.  It  was  now  debated 
whether  it  would  be  more  expedient  to  abandon  the 
town  and  concentrate  our  troops  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  or 
to  hold  possession  of  the  former.  Weighty  and  very  ap- 
parent were  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  occupation 
of  the  citadel ;  and  for  a  time  the  council  seemed  inclined 
towards  the  adoption  of  that  securer  course;  but  to 
Dennie  and  others  it  was  clear,  that  the  abandonment  of 
the  city  would  be  a  virtual  acknowledgment  of  weakness, 
find  that  it  would  have  a  far  better  political  effect,  as  it 
would  a  more  becoming  military  appearance,  to  hold  the 
city  itself,  than  to  be  cooped  up  within  the  walls  of  the 
citadel.  And  so  it  was  at  last  determined  that  the  city 
should  be  held,  and  the  enemy  resolutely  defied. 

But  to  hold  the  city  it  was  necessary  that  the  defences 
should  be  repaired.  Well  might  Sale  look  with  dismay  at 
their  condition,  and  almost  regard  it  as  a  wild  hope  ever 

*  "  Sale's  Brigade  in  Afghanistan,'*    By  the  Rev,  G,  R,  Gleig, 


STATE  OF  THE  DEFENCES.  203 

to  look  for  the  completion  of  the  work  that  he  had  marked 
out  for  his  little  garrison.  "  I  found  the  walls  of  Jellala- 
bad,"  he  said,  "in  a  state  which  might  have  justified 
despair  as  to  the  possibility  of  defending  them.  The 
enceinte  was  far  too  extensive  for  my  small  force,  embrac- 
ing a  circumference  of  upwards  of  2300  yards.  Its  tracing 
was  vicious  in  the  extreme ;  it  had  no  parapet  excepting 
for  a  few  hundred  yards,  which,  there,  was  not  more  than 
two  feet  high  earth;  and  rubbish  had  accumulated  to 
such  an  extent  about  the  ramparts,  that  there  were  roads 
in  various  directions  across  and  over  them  into  the 
country.  There  was  a  space  of  400  yards  together,  on 
which  none  of  the  garrison  could  show  themselves  ex- 
cepting at  one  spot :  the  population  within  was  disaffected, 
and  the  whole  enceinte  was  surrounded  by  ruined  forts, 
walls,  mosques,  tombs,  and  gardens,  from  which  a  fire  could 
be  opened  upon  the  defenders  at  twenty  and  thirty  yards.''* 
The  first  thing  now  to  be  done  was  to  appoint  a  com- 
mittee of  officers  to  examine  and  report  upon  the  works 
of  the  place.  On  the  13th  of  November,  Captain  Broad- 
foot,  who  commanded  the  corps  of  sappers,  with  some 
other  officers,  went  round  the  dilapidated  works.  Broad- 
foot  alone  succeeded  in  making  the  circuit  of  them, 
"  Large  gaps  cut  off  the  communication,  or  insecure  footing 
compelled  the  officers  to  descend  among  the  adjoining 
enclosures,  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  find  the  way ; 
whilst  on  the  south  side  the  rampart  was  so  embedded  in 
houses  and  surrounded  by  them,  that  its  course  could 
only  be  traced  by  laboriously  threading  the  lanes  of  the 
native  town.  On  the  north  side  the  wall  rose  to  a  very 
great  height  towards  the  town^  but  sloped  down  to  the 
exterior  in  a  heap  of  ruins  almost  everywhere  accessible  j 
while  at  the  foot  were  houses  and  gardens  so  strongly 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  that  during  the  night  of  the  13th 

*  General  Sale  to  Secretary  to  Government^  April  16,  1842. 


204  sale's  brigade. 

of  November  our  troops  were  unable  to  maintain  their 
posts ;  and  with  the  exception  of  the  gateway,  a  line  of 
four  hundred  yards  on  the  northern  face  was  without  a 
man  on  the  works.  Had  the  enemy  then  attacked  us, 
we  must  have  been  reduced  to  a  street  combat/'* 

Broadfoot,  now  appointed  garrison  engineer,  set  about 
the  work  entrusted  to  him  with  all  the  energy  and  zeal 
for  which  his  character  was  distinguished.  His  little 
corps  of  sappers  had  brought  with  them  their  pickaxes, 
shovels,  and  other  working  tools  from  Caubul ;  and  were 
now  ready  to  ply  them  with  the  heartiest  good-will. 
There  was  not  a  soldier  in  garrison,  European  or 
Native,  who  was  not  eager  to  join  in  the  work.  Wood 
was  to  be  collected ;  and  iron  was  to  be  collected ;  for 
there  were  no  available  supplies  of  either.  But  from 
the  ruins  of  old  houses  in  the  cantonment  and  in  the 
town  the  former  was  extracted  in  sufficient  quantity, 
and  the  neighbouring  country  supplied  the  latter.f 
Every  difficulty  was  overcome  as  it  arose.  Impossibili- 
ties did  not  grow  in  Jellalabad. 

But  before  our  soldiers  could  carry  on  their  work  in 
safety  upon  the  ramparts,  it  was  necessary  to  give  the 
enemy,  who  assembled  in  great  force  beyond  the  walls  of 
the  city,  a  taste  of  our  military  strength.  The  morning 
of  the  16th  of  November  was  an  exciting,  and  it  proved 
to  be  a  glorious  one.  On  the  preceding  evening  it  had 
been  determined  that  Colonel  Monteith,  of  the  35  th 
Bengal  Infantry,  a  true  soldier  and  a  good  officer,  should 
take  out  eleven  hundred  men,  at  daybreak,  and  give 
battle  to  the  molesting  A%hans.  As  soon  as  the  early 
dawn  would  suflfer  him  to  take  a  survey  of  surrounding 
objects,  Monteith  ascended  to  the  flat  house-top  of  one 

♦  Captain    BroadfooCs   Report  —  smelted,  and  requiring  ten  times  as 

Jellalabad,  Apnl  \6y  I S42,  much  labour  and  time  as  English 

t  **The    iron,"     says    Broadfoot,  iron." 
**  was  good  in  quality,  but  imperfectly 


STATE  OF  THE  DEFENCES.  203 

to  look  for  the  completion  of  the  work  that  he  had  marked 
out  for  his  little  garrison.  "  I  found  the  walls  of  Jellala- 
bad,"  he  said,  "in  a  state  which  might  have  justified 
despair  as  to  the  possibility  of  defending  them.  The 
enceinte  was  far  too  extensive  for  my  small  force,  embrac- 
ing a  circumference  of  upwards  of  2300  yards.  Its  tracing 
was  vicious  in  the  extreme ;  it  had  no  parapet  excepting 
for  a  few  hundred  yards,  which,  there,  was  not  more  than 
two  feet  high  earth;  and  rubbish  had  accumulated  to 
such  an  extent  about  the  ramparts,  that  there  were  roads 
in  various  directions  across  and  over  them  into  the 
country.  There  was  a  space  of  400  yards  together,  on 
which  none  of  the  garrison  could  show  themselves  ex- 
cepting at  one  spot :  the  population  within  was  disaffected, 
and  the  whole  enceinte  w^as  surrounded  by  ruined  forts, 
walls,  mosques,  tombs,  and  gardens,  from  which  a  fire  could 
be  opened  upon  the  defenders  at  twenty  and  thirty  yards."* 
The  first  thing  now  to  be  done  was  to  appoint  a  com- 
mittee of  officers  to  examine  and  report  upon  the  works 
of  the  place.  On  the  13th  of  November,  Captain  Broad- 
foot,  who  commanded  the  corps  of  sappers,  with  some 
other  officers,  went  round  the  dilapidated  works.  Broad- 
foot  alone  succeeded  in  making  the  circuit  of  them. 
"  Large  gaps  cut  off  the  communication,  or  insecure  footing 
compelled  the  officers  to  descend  among  the  adjoining 
enclosures,  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  find  the  way ; 
whilst  on  the  south  side  the  rampart  was  so  embedded  in 
houses  and  surrounded  by  them,  that  its  course  could 
only  be  traced  by  laboriously  threading  the  lanes  of  the 
native  town.  On  the  north  side  the  wall  rose  to  a  very 
great  height  towards  the  town^  but  sloped  down  to  the 
exterior  in  a  heap  of  ruins  almost  everywhere  accessible ; 
while  at  the  foot  were  houses  and  gardens  so  strongly 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  that  during  the  night  of  the  13th 

*  General  Sale  to  Secretary  to  Government,  April  16,  1842. 


206  sale's  brigade. 

foot  was  toiling  all  day  long  to  repair  the  decayed  ram- 
parts and  clear  out  the  ditches,  which,  ditches  no  longer, 
had  been  filled  up  to  the  consistency  of  thoroughfares. 
Abbott,  who  had  been  appointed  commissary  of  ordnance 
was  getting  his  guns  into  position,  and  making  up  his 
ammunition  as  best  he  could  from  the  materials  to  be 
found  in  the  neighbourhood.  Macgregor,  with  his 
wonted  activity,  was  playing  the  part  of  the  Conmiis. 
sariat  officer — and  plajdng  it  well — ^bringing  all  his  poli- 
tical influence,  which  was  great,  to  bear  upon  the  im- 
portant business  of  the  collection  of  supplies.  And  so 
successful  were  his  exertions — so  successful  were  the 
efforts  of  the  foraging  parties,  which  went  out  from  time 
to  time  in  search  of  grain,  sheep,  firewood,  and  other 
essentials — that  in  a  little  while  a  month's  provisions 
were  in  store.  It  is  true  that  the  men  were  on  half- 
rations;  but  they  did  not  work  the  worse  for  that.  It 
was  never  said  at  Jellalabad  that  the  soldiery  were 
unequal  to  their  accustomed  duties  because  they  had  not 
their  accustomed  supplies  of  food.  The  gallant  men  who 
composed  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad,  took  their  half- 
rations  cheerfully,  and  cheerfully  did  double  work.* 

Not  again,  until  the  1st  of  December,  was  the  mettle 
of  Sale's  brigade  tried  in  the  open  field.  For  some  days 
before,  the  enemy  had  been  hovering  about  and  threaten- 
ing the  garrison,  who,  chary  of  their  ammunition,  which 
was  running  scarce,  gave  back  nothing  in  reply  to  the 
desultory  fire  of  the  Afghans.  But  on  the  1st  of  De- 
cember they  appeared  in  such  formidable  array,  and 
grew  so  bold  and  menacing— closing  in  nearly  and  more 

♦  Cheerfully,  too,  worked  the  Eu-  health  and  strength  and  elasticity, 
ropeans  without  their  accustomed  and  preserved  a  regidarity  of  disci- 
drams.  There  were  no  ardent  li-  pline  unknown  to  even  the  13th, 
quors  in  Jellalabad ;  and  the  conse-  when  the  fire-water  was  served  out 
quence  was,  that  the  men  enjoyed,  to  them, 
even  on  half-rations,  an  amount  of 


SECOND  DEFEAT  OF  THE  ENEMY.         207 

nearly  about  the  walls,  until  the  workmen  on  the  ram- 
parts could  not  safely  perform  their  accustomed  duties — 
that  Sale  could  no  longer  refrain  from  sending  out  his 
fighting  men  against  them.  Monteith,  an  officer  of  the 
Company's  service,  had  led  the  attack  on  the  14th  of  No- 
vember. Now,  the  direction  of  the  sortie  was  entrusted 
to  an  officer  of  the  Queen's  army,  who  had  already,  on 
more  than  one  occasion,  shown  his  capacity  for  com- 
mand. Dennie  led  out  the  garrison  this  time ;  and  gal- 
lantly they  moved  to  the  attack.  It  was  mid-day  when 
they  sallied  out  with  a  cheer,  and  fell  upon  their  be- 
si^ers.  It  were  scarcely  truth  to  say  that  a  battle  was 
fought  on  that  1st  of  December.  The  affair  began  and 
ended  with  the  rout  of  the  Afghans.  Two  guns  of 
Abbott's  battery  were  unlimbered,  and  with  murderous 
execution  poured  in  their  thick  showers  of  grape  upon 
the  discomfited  mass.  They,  who  had  of  late  been  so 
bold  and  defiant,  now  fled  in  wild  confusion,  but  could 
not  escape  the  sabres  of  our  cavalry,  who  charged  them 
home,  and  drove  them  across  the  plain  into  the  river, 
whilst  our  infantry  pursued  them  up  the  hill-sides,  and 
fell  upon  them  with  their  gleaming  bayonets.  And  so, 
without  the  loss  of  a  single  man,  Dennie  dispersed  the 
investing  force  j  and  not  a  trace  of  it  was^  to  be  seen  on 
the  morrow  except  the  dead  bodies  on  the  plain. 

And  now,  with  little  or  no  interruption,  the  labours  of 
the  garrison  proceeded,  and  the  works  began  to  assume 
an  appearance  of  effective  defence.  In  fine  health,  in 
good  working  condition,  and  in  an  admirable  state  of 
discipline,  European  and  Native  troops  alike  laboured 
with  axe  and  shovel,  and  soon  saw  the  mud- walls  rising 
around  them.  Had  they  thought  only  of  themselves, 
they  would  have  toiled  on,  in  high  spirits  as  in  high 
hesdth.  But  the  worst  rumours  were  coming  in  from 
Caubul.    It  was  plain  that  their  fellow-soldiers  at  the 


208  sale's  brigade. 

capital  were  not  achieving  like  honourable  success.  It 
was  believed,  too,  that  Sale  and  Macgregor  knew  more 
than  they  were  willing  to  reveal.  Men  asked  each 
other  fearful  questions ;  but  beyond  the  leading  outline 
of  events,  nothing  was  known  that  could  be  shaped  into 
intelligible  replies. 

How  it  happened  that  such  an  army  as  that  com- 
manded by  General  Elphinstone  had  been  so  disastrously 
and  disgracefully  beaten  in  the  field  by  an  enemy  of  such 
calibre  as  these  undisciplined  Afghans,  was  a  terrible 
mystery  to  the  brave  men  who  had  been  scattering  their 
besiegers  like  sheep.  They  heard  something  of  the  want 
of  provisions  that  had  reduced  the  force  to  this  melan- 
choly strait ;  but  when  Sale's  brigade  sate  down  in  Jella- 
labad  it  had  only  two  days'  provisions.  They  heard, 
too,  that  the  extent  and  the  weakness  of  the  Caubul  can- 
tonments had  paralysed  the  efforts  of  the  garrison ;  but 
there,  at  Jellalabad,  they  had  found  their  defences  in  a 
state  of  absolute  ruin.  It  seemed  to  them  easy  to  obtain 
provisions,  and  to  build  up  their  defences.  At  all  events, 
they  had  done  both ;  and  the  troops  at  Caubul  were  of 
three  or  four  times  their  strength. 

Half  of  the  month  of  December  had  worn  away,  when 
a  whisper  went  round  the  garrison  that  the  Caubul  force 
had  capitulated.  With  mingled  feelings  of  incredulity 
and  indignation  the  humiliating  intelligence  was  received. 
Sale  and  Macgregor  knew  only  too  well  how  Elphinstone 
and  Shelton  had  been  throwing  away  chance  after  chance 
of  rescuing  their  miserable  troops  from  destruction.  But 
it  was  not  wise  to  damp  the  spirits  of  their  own  gallant 
and  successful  garrison  by  any  revelations  of  the  unhappy 
manner  in  which  their  old  comrades  had  been  sacrificed 
at  Caubul.  When,  therefore,  on  the  17th  of  December, 
it  was  known  that  some  disastrous  intelligence  had  been 
received  from  the  capital,  it  was  slowly  believed  that  the 


EVIL  TIDINGS  FROM  CAUBUL.  209 

main  body  of  the  British  army  in  Afghanistan  had  thrown 
itself  on  the  mercy  of  a  barbarous  foe. 

But  soon  other  intelligence  of  a  grievous  and  afflicting 
character  was  conveyed  to  the  garrison.  At  first  it  ap- 
peared only  in  the  shape  of  a  native  rumour,  which, 
though  it  seemed  to  swell  into  bulk  and  significance, 
was  believed,  with  something  perhaps  of  self-decep- 
tion, by  Macgregor,  to  be  only  a  shadowy  figment  that 
he  ought  at  once  to  dismiss  from  his  mind.  It  was 
rumoured  that  the  British  Envoy  at  Caubul  had  been 
murdered  at  a  conference  by  Akbar  Khan;  but  Mac- 
gregor argued,  when  communicating,  on  the  30th  of 
December,  this  report  to  the  authorities  below,  that  it 
was  not  likely  Macnaghten  would  have  gone  unattended 
to  a  conference  with  the  chiefs,  or  that  Akbar  Khan, 
whose  father  and  family  were  in  the  hands  of  the  British, 
would  commit  an  act  of  such  outrageous  folly  as  to  mur- 
der the  representative  of  the  British  Government.  But 
Macgregor's  incredulity  was  soon  dispersed.  After  three 
days  of  doubt,  authentic  tidings  came  in  firom  Caubul  to 
disquiet  the  hearts  of  the  British  chiefs  at  Jellalabad. 
On  the  second  day  of  the  new  year,  a  letter  was  received 
firom  Major  Pottinger,  full  of  the  most  painful  and  dis- 
heartening intelligence.  It  announced  the  murder  of 
Macnaghten.  It  announced  that  the  Caubul  force  was 
about  immediately  to  abandon  its  position,  and  to  fall 
back  upon  Jellalabad,  with  every  prospect  of  being 
attacked  by  a  faithless  and  infuriated  enemy  upon  the 
way.  Into  a  few  sentences  of  terrible  significance  was 
crowded  the  record  of  these  melancholy  events.  The 
letter  was  written  on  Christmas-day: 

Caubul,  December  25,  1841. 

My  dear  Macgregor, 

We  have  had  a  sad  Comedy  of  Errors,  or  rather  tragedy 
here.     Macnaghten  was  called  out  to  a  conference  and  murdered, 
VOL.  II.  P 


210  sale's  brigade. 

We  have  interchanged  terms  on  the  ground  ho  was  treating  on 
for  leaving  the  country;  but  things  are  not  finally  settled.  How- 
ever, we  are  to  fall  back  on  Jellalabad  to-morrow  or  next  day. 
In  the  present  disturbed  state  of  the  country  we  may  expect  oppo- 
sition on  the  road,  and  we  are  likely  to  suffer  much  from  the  cold 
and  hunger,  as  we  expect  to  have  no  carriage  for  tents  and,  super* 
fluitiedk  I  have  taken  charge  of  the  Mission.  Mackenzie,  Law- 
rence, and  ConoUy  are  all  seized*  The  first  two  I  fear  for.  The 
latter  is  quite  safe.    The  cantonment  is  now  attacked. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

Eldbed  Pottinger. 

With  deep  emotion  the  officers  now  discussed  the 
dangers  of  this  fearful  retreat  through  the  snow,  and  the 
too  probable  treachery  of  the  chiefs;  and  there  were 
those  among  them  who  predicted  that  Elphinstone's 
army  would  be  cut  to  pieces  by  the  enemy,  or  destroyed 
by  the  snow  almost  to  a  man.  All  this  was  very  dis- 
couraging; but  the  Jellalabad  garrison  were  not  in  a 
temper  to  be  easily  cast  down.  On  they  went  from 
day  to  day,  working  cheerfully  at  the  defences — never 
fearing  for  themselves,  and,  in  spite  of  the  evil  prophe- 
cies of  a  few  amongst  them,  hoping  the  best  for  their 
miserable  comrades. 

So  passed  the  first  week  of  January.  To  Sale  and 
Macgregor  they  were  days  of  intense  anxiety.  Eagerly 
as  they  looked  for  cheering  intelligence  from  Caubul, 
nothing  came  to  refresh  them  with  new  hopes.  On  the 
8th  of  January,  another  letter  from  Pottinger,  dated 
the  28th  of  December,  was  received  by  Macgregor. 
It  was  written  in  French,  as  there  were  men  in  the 
enemy's  camp  who  could  read  and  interpret  English  ;* 

•  I  append  the  letter  itself,  as  well  Fentour  du  cantonnement  ajant  ^te 

as  one,  also  in  French,  written  two  rendus  aux  chefs,  selon  le  traite  que 

days    afterwards    to    Mackeson    at  le  feu  Envoy^  et  Ministre  avoit  com- 

Peshawur :  mene^.      Nous  nous  trouvons  dans 

"  Cabool,  28""'  D^c,  1841.  la  necessity  de  renouveler  les  negocia- 

"  MoN  CHEE  Maccsregor,  tious  dcpuis  qu*il  a  ^e  tu6.      Le 

"  Notre  situation  devient  peril-  manque  de  vivres,    desquels   ils  ne 

leuse  de  plus  en  plus ;    les  forts  i\  nous  restent  que  pour  [huit  jours,  et 


THE  EVACUATION  ORDER.  211 

and  it  announced  that  the  position  of  the  British  force 
at  Caubul  was  becoming  more  and  more  perilous — that 
the  treaty  commenced  by  the  late  Envoy  was  still  being 
negotiated — that  some  delays  had  been  occasioned  by 
the  dilSGiculty,  real  or  pretended,  of  providing  carriage 
and  provisions  to  enable  the  troops  to  commence  their 
march;  and  that  it  was  not  improbable  that,  in  spite  of 
the  promises  of  the  chiefs,  the  British  column  would  be 
compelled  to  fight  its  way  down  to  Jellalabad.  In  con- 
clusion, Pottinger  spoke  of  instructions  for  the  evacua- 
tion of  Jellalabad  that  had  been  despatched  by  Mac- 
naghten,  but  urged  Macgregor  to  stand  fast  until  the 
receipt  of  further  orders  from  Caubul. 

On  the  following  day  those  instructions  arrived.     A 

des  mojens  de  transport  pour  nos  du  part  du  gouvemement  de  quitter 

malades  et  blesses,  qu'ils  nous  ont  Afghanistan,  et  de  donner  liostages 

Sromis  de  jour  en  jour,  font  autant  pour  que  le  Dost  sojait  mis  en  li- 

e  raisons  de  plus  pour  que  nous  bert^,  aussi  que  pour  pr^liminaires  il 

faisons  traite,  s*d  est  possible.    Mais  avait  rendu  le  BaUa  Hissar  et  les 

aussi  leurs  promesses  meritent  si  peu  forts  qui  dominent  les  cantonnements. 

de  foi,  que  peut-dtre  nous   serons  Ces  acts  et   le  manque  des  vivres 

oblige  de  battre  de  retraite  sur  Jel-  faisaient  les  cantonnements  untena- 

lalabad ;  sur  tout,  qu*ils  exigent  que  ble,  et  les  quatre  officiers  militaires 

nous    marchons    par    le    route    de  sup6rieurs  disaient  quUl  fallait  r^- 

Bungeish — demande    que    nous    ne  sumer  le  traits  au  lieu  de  forcer  une 

pouTons  pas  agr^r.  marche  retrograde    sur    Jellalabad. 

**  Pour  ces  causes  alors,  si  vous  Nous    avons   aujourd'hui    finis    les 

avez    re9u  Tordre  de  marcher    du  termes  du  traits,   et  nous  esp^rons 

feu  Envoy^  et  Ministre,  il  ne  faut  partir  d*ici  demain  ou  apr^s  demain. 

pas  le  faire  ^  present,  mais  attendre  De  leur  promesses  je  m*en  doute, 

jusqu'au   temps   que    vous    recevez  malgr^  que  les  ordres  ont  ^te  exp6- 

nouvelle  ordre  d'ici,  quand  le  traits  di^s  pour  que  nos  troupes  quittent 

de  paix  sera  fait.  Candahar  et  Ghizny.     D  faut  que 

"  Votre  ami,  vous  tenez  ouvert  le  Khyber,  et  que 

"  Eldred  Pottinqbb."  vous  soyez  pret  nous  aider  le  pas- 
sage ;  car  si  nous  ne  sommes  pas  pro- 

**  Cantonnements  k  Cabool,  t^g^s,  il  nous  serait  impossible  faire 

30"*  de  D^cembre,  1841.  hiUte  en  route  pour  que  les  troupes 

"  MoN  CHEB  Mackesox,  ««  refraichissen^  sans   Wile  j'ai 

"J'ai  eu  le  plaisir  de  recevoir  peur  qu  ils  soient  desorganis^s. 

votre  lettre  du  12"«  au  feu  Envoy^.  «^5\"^*'« 

Xotre  situation  ici  est  des  plus  dan-  ^^^P^^  UorrLvytp. 

gereuses.     L'Envoy^  ^tait  tu6  k  une  "  Aprfes  aujourd'hui  j'^crirai  mon 

conf(grence,  qui  avait  lieu  hors  d'ici,  nom  en  lettres  Grecques.     Lorsque 

le  23  de  ce  mois.    Quand  je  prenais  le  Cossid  vous  remettra  cette  lettre 

charge  je  trouvais  qu'il  avait  engage  vous  lui  donnerez  trois  cent  rupees." 

p2 


212  sale's  brigade. 

few  horsemen  appeared  under  the  walls  of  Jellalabad, 
one  of  whom  was  the  bearer  of  a  letter  from  the  English 
authorities  at  Caubul,  addressed  to  Captain  Macgregor. 
It  contained  instructions  for  the  evacuation  of  Jellalabad, 
couched  in  the  following  words : 

Caubul,  December  29,  1841. 

It  having  been  found  necessary  to  conclude  an  agree- 
ment, founded  on  that  of  the  late  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten,  for  the 
evacuation  of  Afghanistan  by  our  troops,  we  have  the  honour  to 
request  that  you  will  intimate  to  the  officer  commanding  at 
Jellalabad,  our  wish  that  the  troops  now  at  that  place  should  re- 
turn to  India,  commencing  their  march  immediately  after  the 
receipt  of  this  letter,  leaving  all  guns,  the  property  of  Dost 
Mahomed  Khan,  with  the  new  Governor,  as  also  such  stores  and 
baggage  as  there  may  not  be  the  means  of  carrying  away,  and  the 
provisions  in  store  for  our  use  on  arriving  at  Jellalabad. 

Abdool  Ghuffoor  Khan,  who  is  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  will 
render  you  all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  He  has  been  appointed 
Governor  of  Jellalabad  on  the  part  of  the  existing  government. 
We  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Eldbed  Pottinger,  in  charge  of  Caubul  Mission. 
W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-General. 

Macgregor  laid  the  letter  before  Sale,  and  a  council  of 
war  was  held.  It  does  not  seem  that  there  were  many 
doubts  and  misgivings  to  agitate  and  perplex  the  brave 
men,  who  then  asked  each  other  whether  they  should 
cast  further  discredit  on  their  country,  by  abandoning 
their  post  and  flinging  themselves  into  the  snares  of  the 
enemy.  It  seemed  to  them  that  a  bait  had  been  laid  to 
lure  them  to  destruction.  Macgregor  knew  that  Akbar 
Khan  had  issued  a  proclamation  to  the  chiefs  of  the 
surrounding  country,  calling  upon  them,  as  followers  of 
the  true  faith,  to  rise  and  slay  the  Feringhees  on  the 
road ;  his  voice  was  all  for  the  retention  of  their  post, 
and  the  military  chiefs  were  of  the  same  temper.  Little 
time  elapsed,  therefore,  before  the  following  letter  was 
written  to  Mnjoi'  Pottinger  and  Genenal  Elphinstone: 


REFUSAL  TO  SUURENDER.  213 

Jellalabad,  January  9,  1842. 

We  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  the  29th  ultimo,  which  you  therein  state  was  to  be 
delivered  to  us  by  Abdool  Ghuflfoor  Khan,  appointed  Governor  of 
this  place  by  the  existing  powers  at  Caubul.  That  communica- 
tion was  not  delivered  to  us  by  him,  but  by  a  messenger  of  his, 
and  though  dated  29th  of  December,  1841,  has  only  this  moment 
reached  us.  I  have,  at  the  same  time,  positive  information  that 
Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  has  sent  a  proclamation  to  all  the  chiefs  in 
the  neighbourhood,  urging  them  to  raise  their  followers  for  the 
purpose  of  intercepting  and  destroying  the  forces  now  at  Jellala- 
bad.  Under  these  circumstances  we  have  deemed  it  our  duty  to 
await  a  further  communication  from  you,  which  we  desire  may 
point  out  the  security  which  may  be  given  for  our  safe  march  to 
Peshawur. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

R.  Sale,  Major-General. 

G.  H.  Macgregor,  Political  Agent. 

It  is  right  that  Macgregor  and  Sale  should  be  suffered 
to  state  in  their  own  words  the  motives  which  impelled 
them  to  adopt  this  worthy  resolution.  "  The  conduct," 
says  Captain  Macgregor,  "  of  Major-General  Sir  R.  Sale 
and  myself,  in  having  declined,  under  the  circumstances, 
to  deliver  up  Jellalabad  to  Abdool  Ghuffoor  Khan,  Ba- 
rukzye,  in  conformity  with  the  instructions  contained 
in  the  letter  to  my  address  of  the  29th  of  December, 
signed  by  Major  Pottinger  and  General  Elphinstone,  has 
alread)'  been  approved  by  government ;  but  perhaps  it 
may  be  proper  here  to  relate  a  few  of  the  causes  which 
led  to  such  a  resolution.  When  the  British  authorities 
at  Caubul  had  decided  upon  capitulating,  and  the  terms 
of  capitulation  were  in  the  course  of  negotiation,  my  spies 
informed  me  that  letters  had  been  received  from  Ma- 
homed Akbar  Khan,  and  the  Ghilzye  chiefs,  desiring  the 
different  tribes  on  the  road  to  assemble  to  attack  the 
British  army,  which   was  shortly  to  leave  Caubul  for 


214  SAIiB's  BRIGADE. 

India.     This  information  was  confirmed  by  the  letter 

from  Burkutt  Khan An  intercepted  letter 

from  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  which  reached  us  at  the 
same  time,  will  serve  to  show  the  spirit  with  which  he 
regarded  ns;  therefore  I  felt  convinced  that  treachery 
was  intended  by  the  Afghan  chiefs,  in  which  case  our 
retaining  possession  of  the  fortress  of  Jellalabad  became 
of  incalculable  advantage  to  the  retreating  force ;  and  if 
it  succeeded  in  reaching  Jellalabad,  strengthened  as  it 
would  be  by  the  garrison,  we  might  yet  have  upheld 
our  authority  in  Ningrahar,  until  an  opportunity  would 
have  been  afforded  to  the  British  Government  to  rein- 
force us,  so  as  to  commence  operations  for  the  recapture 
of  Caubul.  The  troops  left  Caubul  on  the  6th  of 
January;  and  not  until  the  9th  did  we  receive  the  letter 
in  question.  Their  fate  had  been  sealed  ere  that  period; 
and  had  the  requisition  been  complied  with,  govern- 
ment would  most  undoubtedly  have  had  to  lament  the 
destruction  of  the  Jellalabad  garrison  as  well  as  that  of 
the  Caubul  force,  the  wishes  of  the  enemy  evidently 
being  to  inveigle  us  into  their  power,  and  then  to  do 
their  worst  towards  us.  Moreover,  to  have  evacuated 
Jellalabad  would  have  doubtless  increased  a  hundred- 
fold the  diflSculties  of  re-establishing  the  British  autho- 
rity in  this  country,  in  the  event  of  government  deter- 
mining 80  to  do.  Our  national  honour,  and  the  safety 
of  our  Indian  dominions,  seemed  to  render  this  latter 
course  of  paramount  necessity."* 

"  As  regards  my  own  line  of  conduct,"  writes  General 
Sale,  ''  in  this  diflScult  crisis,  I  am  of  opinion,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  all  instructions  from  India,  that  I  am  at  liberty 
to  choose  between  the  alternatives  of  being  bound  or  not 
by  the  convention,  which  was  forced  from  our  Envoy  and 
military  commander  with  the  knives  at  their  throats, 

*  Captain  Macgregor's  Report :  MS,  Records, 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  DEFENCE.  215 

according  as  I  may  see  either  one  course  or  the  other  to 
be  most  conducive  to  British  interests.  It  does  not  abso- 
lutely impose  any  obligation  on  my  force,  which  is  no 
party  to  it;  and  under  the  consideration  of  its  having 
been  extorted  by  force,  unless  it  should  be  ratified  by 
the  Governor-General  in  Council.  If,  therefore,  I  see  a 
prospect  of  being  reinforced  from  Peshawur  within  the 
period  for  which  my  provisions  and  ammunition  will  last, 
I  propose  to  hold  this  place  on  the  part  of  government, 
until  I  receive  its  orders  to  the  contrary.  If,  however, 
any  untoward  incidents  should  preclude  the  prospect  of 
Brigadier  Wild's  crossing  the  Khybur,  I  should  esteem 
it  wiser  and  better  to  retire  upon  Peshawur,  with  the 
debris  of  the  force  at  Caubul,  on  its  reaching  me,  than 
to  remain  here ;  but  in  no  event  would  I  retire  unsup- 
ported by  other  troops  to  Peshawur,  unless  absolutely 
compelled  to  do  so  by  the  failure  of  food  and  ammuni- 
tion. I  feel  assured  that  the  rebels  at  Caubul  dare  not 
proceed  to  extremities  with  the  force  there,  so  long  as 
they  know  me  to  be  strong  here;  and  that  I  should 
therefore  be  compromising  them  by  evacuatipg  this  place, 
until  they  have  been  permitted  to  retire  upon  it."* 

A  season  of  painful  anxiety  and  suspense  followed  the 
receipt  of  the  letter  from  Pottinger  and  Elphinstone. 
But  it  was  not  without  its  alleviations.  Money  had  be- 
come scarce  at  Jellalabad.  The  cupidity  of  the  Afghans 
had  seldom  been  proof  against  English  money ;  and  now 
to  lack  the  means  of  appealing  to  it  was  to  lose  one  of 
our  principal  means  of  defence.  It  was,  therefore,  with 
no  common  delight  that  the  garrison  now  welcomed  the 
arrival  of  a  sum  of  money  which  Mackeson,  eyer  strenuous 
in  his  activity,  had  sent  on  from  Peshawur,  through  the 
agency  of  Tora-baz  Khan,  the  loyal  chief  of  Lalpoora. 

*  General  Sak  to  Sir  J.  NichoUs,  JeOalahad^  January  11,  1842:  MS,  Re- 
cords. 


216  sale's  brigade. 

The  defences  of  the  place,  too,  were  rising  under  Broad- 
foot's  hands,  and  "  by  the  middle  of  January,  the  com- 
mencement of  the  rainy  season,  a  parapet,  nowhere  less 
than  six  feet  high,  with  a  banquette  as  wide  as  the 
nature  of  the  rampart  allowed,  was  completed  entirely 
iiound  the  place.  The  gates  were  repaired  and 
strengthened  by  buttresses.  Two  of  them  were  re- 
trenched, and  a  ditch  carried  round  the  north-west  angle, 
whilst  some  of  the  most  dangerous  ravines  were  laid  open 
to  our  force,  and  roads  were  opened  into  the  low  ground 
on  the  north  side."*  There  was  little,  indeed,  at  this 
time,  except  a  scarcity  of  ammunition,  to  render  the 
garrison  apprehensive  on  their  own  accounts;  but  every 
day  made  them  more  and  more  anxious  concerning  the 
fate  of  their  countrymen,  who  by  this  time  had  left 
Caubul  on  their  perilous  retreat  through  the  snowy 
passes.  A  letter  from  Captain  Lawrence,  dated  on  the 
4th  instant,f  announced  that  the  force  was  to  march  in  a 
day  or  two  with  every  expectation  of  being  attacked 

*  Captain  Broad/oofs  Report.  send  intelligence  of  these  matters  to 

t  Caubul,  January  4th,  1842.  government  and  Rawlinson,  that  the 

My  dear  Macoregor,  J*"®*"  ""^y  be  aware  of  the  state  of 

Pottinger  being  busy,  1  write  to  affairs,  and  not  do  anything  hurriedly, 

tell  you  of  the  Envoy  being  murdered,  ^^  you  understand  faith  has  been  kept 

and  Trevor,  on  the  23rd.     We  have  and  are  obliged  to  leave  Jellalabad, 

been  obliged  to  conclude  the  treaty,  you  had  belter  not  pass  the  Khybur 

and  it  is  settled  we  march  to-morrow.  ^>U  ^®  come,  as  it  is  feared  our  troops 

Whether  we  are  attacked  on  the  road  ^^^^  ^^  so  disorganised  as  to  require 

depends  upon  their  good  faith.      I  your  aid  through  that  pass.     If  you 

beHeve  we  do  not  run  very  much  risk  <^ould   take   supplies   for  us   to   the 

as  far  as  Jugdulluck,  except  from  the  "outh  of  the  Khybur,  it  would  be 

weather,  which  is  very  severe  here;  very  desirable.  We  are  all  well.    Lady 

and   we  are  obliged  to  march   very  M(acnaghten)  ditto,  though  still  much 

lightly,  and  may  expect  to  lose  many  afflicted.     Keep  your  scouts  on  the 

men.     Orders  have  been  sent  to  you  ""oad,  and  give  us  as  much  intelligence 

to    evacuate   Jellalabad  before    our  as  you  can.    You  must  chiefly  depend 

arrival:    if,  however,  the    treaty  is  on  yourself  for  news  of  us,  as  all  our 

broken  by  our  being  attacked,  you  Afghans  have  deserted  us.     We  have 

will  consider  the  orders  cancelled,  and  "o   money  in  our  treasury;   so  tell 

you  will  use  every  exertion  to  aid  us.  Mackeson  to  have  some  ready  for  us. 

We  have  received  your  letter  of  the  impossible. 

24th,  but  our  word  cannot  be  broken.  Yours,  &c.,  &c., 

Pottinger  wishes  you,  if  possible,  to  ^»  ^"^^  ^*  Lawrence, 


ARRIVAL  OF  DR.  BRYDON.  217 

upon  the  road.     Nothing  could  Sale's  brigade  do  in  this 
emergency,  but  patiently  abide  the  result. 

At  last,  on  the  13th  of  January,  when  the  garrison 
were  busy  on  the  works,  toiling  with  axe  and  shovel, 
with  their  arms  piled  and  their  accoutrements  laid  out 
close  at  hand,  a  sentry,  on  the  ramparts,  looking  out  to- 
wards the  Caubul  road,  saw  a  solitary  white-faced  horse- 
man struggling  on  towards  the  fort.  The  word  was 
passed ;  the  tidings  spread.  Presently  the  ramparts  were 
lined  with  oflScers,  looking  out,  with  throbbing  hearts, 
through  unsteady  telescopes,  or  with  straining  eyes 
tracing  the  road.  Slowly  and  painfully,  as  though  horse 
and  rider  both  were  in  an  extremity  of  mortal  weak- 
ness, the  solitary  mounted  man  came  reeling,  tottering 
on.  They  saw  that  he  was  an  Englishman.  On  a 
wretched,  weary  pony,  clinging,  as  one  sick  or  wounded, 
to  its  neck,  he  sate  or  rather  leant  forward;  and  there 
were  those  who,  as  they  watched  his  progress,  thought 
that  he  could  never  reach,  unaided,  the  walls  of 
Jellalabad. 

A  shudder  ran  through  the  garrison.  That  solitary 
horseman  looked  like  the  messenger  of  death.  Few 
doubted  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  intelligence  that  would 
fill  their  souls  with  horror  and  dismay.  Their  worst 
forebodings  seemed  confirmed.  There  was  the  one  man 
who  was  to  tell  the  story  of  the  massacre  of  a  great 
army.*  A  party  of  cavalry  were  sent  out  to  succour 
him.  They  brought  him  in  wounded,  exhausted,  half- 
dead.  The  messenger  was  Dr.  Brydon,  and  he  now  re- 
ported his  belief  that  he  was  the  sole  survivor  of  an 
army  of  some  sixteen  thousand  men. 

*  It  is  said  that  Colonel  Dennie  says  Mr.  Gleig,  *^  sounded  like  the 
predicted  that  not  a  soul  would  es-  response  of  an  oracle  when  he  ex- 
cape  except  one  man,  and  that  he  claimed,  'Did  I  not  say  so— here 
would  come  to  tell  that  the  rest  were  comes  the  messenger.'" — iSale's  Bri" 
destroyed.    "  The  voice  of  Dennie,"  gade  in  Afghanvftan,'] 


318  THE  BETBEAT  FROM  OAUBUL. 


CHAPTER  n. 

[January,  1842.] 

The  Retreat  from  Caubul — Departure  of  the  Army — Attack  on  the  Rear- 
Guard —  The  First  Day's  March — Encampment  at  Begramee— The 
Passage  of  the  Koord-Gaubul  Pass — Teaeen — Jugdulluck — Sufibrings  of 
the  Force— Negotiations  with  Akbar  Khan — JAa^sacr^  at  Gundamudc — 
Escape  of  Dr.  Brydon. 

TffB  story  told  by  Dr.  Brydon  was  one  of  which  history 
has  few  parallels.  A  British  army,  consisting  of  more 
than  four  thousand  fighting  men  and  twelve  thousand 
camp-followers,  had,  aa  he  conftisedly  related,  disappeared 
in  a  few  days.  Some  had  perished  in  the  snow ;  others 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  knives  and  the  jezails  of 
the  enemy;  and  a  few  had  been  carried  into  captivity, 
perhaps  to  perish  even  more  miserably  than  the  unhappy 
comrades  who  had  died  in  the  deep  passes  of  Koord- 
Caubul,  Tezeen,  and  Jugdulluck. 

In  the  struggle  between  life  and  death  which  then 
threatened  to  stifle  the  evidence  of  poor  Brydon,  he  told 
but  imperfectly  what  he  knew ;  and  but  imperfectly  did 
he  know  the  whole  dire  history  of  that  calamitous  retreat. 
It  was  long  before  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad  had  more 
than  a  dim  perception  of  the  events  which  ended  in  the 
annihilation  of  the  Caubul  force.  No  one  man  could 
speak  of  more  than  certain  scenes  of  the  great  tragedy ; 


EVACUATION  OF  CANTONMENTS.         219 

what  had  happened  before,  behind,  around  him,  he  could 
only  conjecture.  But  there  were  other  survivors  than 
the  solitary  man  who  was  brought,  wounded  and  feeble, 
into  Jellalabad  on  that  January  morning;  and  enough 
is  now  on  record  to  enable  the  historian  to  group  into 
one  intelligible  whole  all  the  crowded  circumstances  of 
that  lamentable  retreat. 

On  the  6th  of  January,  1842,  the  army  commanded 
by  General  Elphinstone,  which,  for  sixty-five  days,  had 
been  enduring  such  humiliation  as  never  before  had  been 
borne  by  a  British  force,  prepared  to  consummate  the 
work  of  self-abasement  by  abandoning  its  position,  and 
leaving  the  trophies  of  war  in  the  hands  of  an  insolent 
enemy,  A  breach  had  been  cut,  on  the  preceding  day, 
by  the  Engineer  Sturt,  through  the  low  ramparts  of  the 
cantonments,  the  earth  of  which  bridged  over  the  ditch ; 
and  now  through  this  opening,  and  through  the  rear 
gate,  the  baggage  filed  out  into  the  open  plain,  and  the 
troops  prepared  to  follow  it.  It  was  a  clear,  bright, 
frosty  morning.  The  cold  was  intense.  The  snow  was 
lying  deep  on  the  ground.  Shelton  had  recommended 
that  the  baggage  should  be  loaded  by  moon-rise ;  but  it 
was  not  before  eight  o'clock  that  it  was  ready  to  move. 
About  half-past  nine  the  advanced-guard*  moved  out  of 
cantonments.  The  English  ladies  and  the  children  were 
with  it ;  for  it  was  supposed  to  be  the  place  of  lafety, 
if  safety  could  be  found  amidst  the  certain  hojror? 
of  this  perilous  retreat. 

*  *(  The  advaneed-gu^d  eonsiated  Shah's  6th  Begimeiit,   two  horae- 

of  the  44tb  Queen's,  4th  Irregular  artillery  sixopounder  guBS.  The  reaF- 

Horse,  and  Skinner  sHorse,  two  horse-  ffuard  was   composed  of  the  54th 

artillerv  six-pounder  guns,  sappers  Native  Infantry,  fithCavahrj,  and  two 

and  miners' mountain^train,  and  the  six-pounder  horse-artillery  guns.  The 

late  Envoy's  escort.    The  main  body  force  consisted  of  about  4500  fighting 

included  the  5th  and  d7th  Native  men,  and  12,000  Mowers.**-HtXa«9 

Infantry;    the  latter    in  charge  of  Sale's  Journal'] 
treasure;    Anderson's    Horse,     the 


220  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

It  had  been  agreed  that  the  chiefs  should  furnish  a 
strong  Afghan  escort  to  protect  our  retiring  troops  from 
the  furious  zeal  of  th?  Ghazees,  and  the  uncontrollable 
cupidity  of  those  Afghan  bandits  who  had  all  along 
looked  upon  the  revolution  only  as  an  opportunity  for 
much  plunder.  But  the  army  commenced  its  march 
without  an  escort;  and  the  Newab  Zemaun  Khan,  whose 
good  faith  and  true  nobility  of  character  are  beyond 
suspicion,  despatched  a  letter  to  Pottinger,  warning  him 
of  the  danger  of  leaving  cantonments  without  any  such 
provision  for  their  safety.*  But  it  was  too  late  now  to 
stand  stilL  The  Mission  premises  had  already  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  and  could  not  be  regained 
without  an  engagement,  which  at  such  a  time  it  would 
have  been  folly  to  risk.  Pottinger  instructed  ConoUy, 
who  remained  as  one  of  our  hostages  with  Zemaun 
Khan,  to  explain  all  this  to  the  Newab.  The  good  old 
man  admitted  the  cogency  of  Pottinger  s  arguments,  and 
promised  to  do  his  best  to  protect  the  retreating  force. 
He  fulfilled  his  promise  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability ;  but 
he  lacked  the  power  to  restrain  the  people  from  per- 
petrating the  outrages  of  which  long  impunity  had 
habituated  them  to  the  commission,  and  made  them 
regard  themselves  as  the  privileged  instruments  of 
chartered  violence  and  rapine. 

*  "  About  eleven  o'clock,  when  from  the  Newab,  agreeing  to  our 
about  half  of  the  column  had  moved  movement,  and  promising  that  he 
off,  I  received  a  letter  from  Newab  would  protect  us  as  far  as  ne  could ; 
Zemaun  Khan,  remonstrating  against  and  it  is  my  duty  to  state  that  he  did 
our  march.  But  as  the  enemy  had  so  to  the  utmost  of  his  power ;  but 
been  enabled  to  seize  the  enclosures  the  quantity  of  baggage  delayed  the 
of  the  late  Envoy's  house  and  offices,  march  of  the  rear-guard,  which  was 
owing  to  the  early  withdrawal  of  our  obliged  to  retreat  with  severe  loss, 
guards,  we  could  not  consent  without  abandoning  two  guns  and  much  bag- 
commencing  an  action  for  the  re-  gage,  notwithstanding  it  did  not 
covery  of  part  of  our  works.     I  re-  reach  the  bivouac  at  Besramee  till 

Presented  this  to  the  Newab,  and  two   the  next    morning." — [Jlfq/or 

egged  Mr.  ConoUy  to  explain  our  Pottinger's  Budeeahad  Iteport :  MS^ 

situation.      In   consequence,    about  Records.'] 
one  P.M.  I  received   another  letter 


PASSAGE  OF  THE  RIVER.  221 

The  good  intentions  of  the  Newab  are  not  to  be  de- 
nied ;  but  the  true  policy  of  the  British,  on  that  January 
morning,  was  to  wait  for  nothing,  however  advantage- 
ous in  itself,  but  to  push  on  with  the  utmost  possible 
despatch.*  But  everything  seemed  to  favour  delay. 
The  passage  of  the  Caubul  river  was  to  be  accomplished 
by  means  of  a  temporary  bridge  constnicted  of  gun- 
waggons,  though  the  river  was  fordable  at  many  places, 
and  might  have  been  ridden  or  waded  through  without 
detriment  to  those  who  had  been  struggling  through  the 
deep  snow.  On  this  service,  Sturt,  active  in  spite  of  his 
wounds,  was  employed  from  an  early  hour;  but  it  seems 
that  the  despatch  of  the  gun-waggons  was  delayed,  for 
some  unexplained  reason,  and  it  was  not  until  the  hour 
of  noon  that  the  bridge  was  ready  for  the  passage  of 
the  troops.  Shelton  had  endeavoured  to  expedite  the 
movement  ;f  but  had  met  with  his  usual  success.  He 
went  to  the  General's  quarters — found  him  at  breakfast; 
and  returned  with  nothing  but  a  rebuke. 

Had  the  whole  of  Elphinstone's  army  crossed  the 
Caubul  river  before  noon,  and  pushed  on  with  all  pos- 
sible  despatch   to  Koord-Caubul,  it  might  have  been 

*  "  Before  leaving  Caubul,  it  was  retreat  till  they  were  published  the 

generally  believed  to  be  the  General's  evening  before.     The  order  was  for 

intention  to  proceed,  the  first  day  to  the  baggage  to  assemble  at  eight  a.m. 

Koord-Caubul,  and   the    second  to  At  that  hour  I  went  to  Elnhinstone's 

Tezeen,  which  could  easily  have  been  quarters,  to  beg  he  would  let  the 

accomplished,  had  proper  arrange-  carriages  of  the  gun- waggons  go  out 

ments  for  leaving  cantonments  been  that  were  to  form  a  foot-bridge  for 

made    beforehand,   as   the    distance  the  infantry  over  the  Caubul  river, 

from  Caubul  to  Tezeen  is  only  thirty  about  300  yards  from  cantonments, 

miles.     Had  this  been  effected,  how  and  got  offended  for  my  trouble.  He 

different  would  have  been  the  fate  of  was  just  sitting  down  to  breakfast, 

the  Caubul  army.     We  should  only  They  did  not  go  out  till  between  nine 

have  been  one  night  and  one  day  and  and  ten,  and  having  to  be  dragged 

a  half  in  the  snow,  and  should  have  through  a  canal  caused  further  delay, 

escaped  our  enemy,   who,   the  first  so  that  the  bridge  was  not  completed 

day,  were  not  ready  to  follow  us." —  for  the   advanced-guard  to  pass  till 

[CapL  JohnsorCs  Journal.']  past  twelve."— iStoteJnen/  of  Brigadier 

t  Brigadier  Shelton  says  :  "  I  knew  Shelton :  MS."] 
nothing^  of  the  arrangements  lor  the 


222  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

saved.  But  the  delays  which  arose  on  that  dreadful 
morning  sealed  the  fate  of  the  unhappy  force.  The  day 
was  well-nigh  lost.  It  was  a  day  of  suffering  and  con- 
fusion-— presaging  worse  suffering  and  confusion  to  come. 
The  advanced-guard  under  Brigadier  Anquetil  moved 
out  with  some  order  and  steadiness— but  in  a  little  while 
the  rush  of  camp-followers  destroyed  all  semblance  of 
military  array.  They  mixed  themselves  up  with  the 
soldiers  —  a  vast  overwhelming  assemblage  of  ten  or 
twelve  thousand  men.  Not  a  mile  of  the  distance  had 
been  accomplished  before  it  was  seen  how  heavily  this 
curse  of  camp-followers  sate  upon  the  doomed  army.  It 
was  vain  to  attempt  to  manage  this  mighty  mass  of  law- 
less and  suffering  humanity.  On  they  went,  struggling 
through  the  snow— making  scant  progress  in  their  con- 
fusion and  bewilderment — scarcely  knowing  whether 
they  were  escaping,  or  whether  they  were  rushing  on  to 
death. 

The  main  body  under  Brigadier  Shelton,  with  its 
immense  strings  of  baggage-laden  cattle,  was  moving 
out  of  cantonments  during  the  greater  part  of  the  day. 
The  rear-guard  manned  the  cantonment  -  walls,  and 
looked  down  upon  a  scene  of  uproar  and  confusion  be- 
yond the  imagination  to  conceive.  The  enemy,  as  the 
day  advanced,  began  to  be  busy  at  their  work  of  plun- 
der. Dashing  in  among  the  baggage,  they  cut  down  the 
helpless  camp-followers,  and  carried  off  whatever  they 
could  seize.  The  snow  was  soon  plashed  with  blood. 
From  the  opening  in  the  ramparts  to  the  bridge  across 
the  river  streamed  one  great  tide  of  soldiers  and  camp- 
followers,  camels  and  ponies;  and  at  the  bridge  there 
was  an  enormous  mass  of  struggling  life,  from  which 
arose  shouts,  and  yells,  and  oaths — an  indescribable  up- 
roar of  discordant  sounds ;  the  bello wings  of  the  camels, 
the  curses  of  the  camel-drivers,  the  lamentations  of  the 


BURNING  OF  THE  MISSION-HOUSE.  223 

Hindostanees,  the  shrieks  of  women,  and  the  cries  of 
children ;  and  the  savage  yells  of  the  Ghazees  rising  in 
barbarous  triumph  above  them  all. 

So  tedious  was  the  exode  of  the  force,  such  were  the 
embarrassments  that  beset  its  progress,  that  when  the 
shadows  of  evening  began  to  descend  upon  this  melan- 
choly scene,  the  rear-guard  was  still  on  the  walls.     At 
six  o'clock  they  marched  out  of  cantonments,  and,  moved 
by  one  common  thirst  of  plunder,  the  Afghans  poured 
themselves  upon  the  abandoned  homes  of  the  English, 
and,  when  they  could  not  gratify  their  cupidity,  began 
to  gratify  their  revenge.     The  Feringhees  had  lefl  little 
behind  them.     They  had  destroyed  almost  everything 
which   they  could   not  carry  away,   except  the  guns, 
which  the  General  had  deemed  it  expedient  to  leave  in 
good  condition  for  the  use  of  his  "  new  allies."*     But  at 
all  events  there  were  buildings  standing  there — build- 
ings erected  by  the  English  for  their  own  purposes — 
insolent  monuments  of  the  Feringhee  invasion.     The 
work  of  the  incendiary  commenced.   The  Mission-house, 
the  General's  quarters,  and  other  public  buildings,  were 
soon  in  a  blaze ;  and  the  British  army,  now  scattered  over 
the  whole  line  of  country  between  Caubul  and  Begramee, 
some  already  at  the  halting-ground  and  others  only  now 
starting  on  their  dreary  march,  looked  out  through  the 
frosty  night  at  the  great  conflagration,  which  lit  up  the 

•  Eyre  says  that  "  the  General  had  character.    As  an  honourable  Eng- 

oflen  been  urged  to  destroy  these  lish  gentleman,  having  covenanted  to 

guns  rather  than  suffer  them  to  fall  give  up  his  guns,  he  considered  him- 

mto  the  enemy's  hands ;  but  he  con-  self  bound  to  deliver  them  over  in 

sidered  that  it  would  be  a  breach  of  the  state  in  which  they  were  at  the 

the  treaty  to  do  so/'    We  cannot  re-  time  the  covenant  was  made.    The 

strain  a  smile  at  Elphinstone's  sim-  enemy  do  not  seem  to  have  appre- 

pHcity ;   but  at  the  same  time,  the  ciatea  Elphinstone's  generosity,  for 

circumstance  noted  affords  rather  a  they  burnt  the  carriages  of  the  guns 

pleasant  indication  of  the  GeneraVs  as  soon  as  our  troops  evacuated  the 

Qonesty  of  purpose  and  singleness  of  cantonments. 


224  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

incumbent  sky  like  a  stormy  sunset,  and  for  miles  around 
reddened  the  great  coverlid  of  snow. 

Not  until  two  hours  after  midnight  did  the  rear-guard 
reach  its  encamping-ground,  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
river,  near  Begramee.  They  had  been  under  arms  since 
eight  o'clock  in  the  morning.  They  had  been  savagely 
attacked  on  leaving  cantonments,  and  had  left  fifty  of 
their  numbers  dead  or  dying  in  the  snow,  and  two  of 
their  guns  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.*  They  had  now 
only  accomplished  five  or  six  miles  of  their  fearful 
journey;  but  they  had  seen  enough  to  fill  them  with 
horrible  forebodings  of  the  fate  that  was  in  store  for 
them.  The  road  was  strewn  with  dying  wretches, 
smitten  by  the  unendurable  cold.  The  miserable  people 
of  Hindostan — the  weaker  women  and  young  children 
— had  already  begun  to  lay  themselves  down  to  die 
in  the  dreadful  snow.  Even  the  Sepoys  were  sinking 
down  on  the  line  of  march,  and  quietly  awaiting  death. 

The  night  was  one  of  suffering  and  horror.  The  snow 
lay  deep  on  the  ground.  There  was  no  order — no 
method  in  anything  that  was  done.  The  different  regi- 
ments encamped  anywhere.  Soldiers  and  camp-followers 
were  huddled  together  in  one  inextricable  mass  of  suffer- 
ing humanity..  Horses,  camels,  and  baggage-ponies  were 
mixed  up  confusedly  with  them.  Nothing  had  been  done 
to  render  more  endurable  the  rigour  of  the  northern 
winter.f   The  weary  wretches  lay  down  to  sleep — some 

^  Lieut.   Hivrdyman,  of  the  5  th  rolled  round  the  soldier^s  feet  and 

Cavalry,  was  here  shot  through  the  ankles  after  the  Afghan  fashion,  as  a 

heart.  better  protection  against  snow  than 

f  A  writer  in  the  Calcutta  Review  the  mere  hard  leather  shoes.     This 

says :  "  Major  Pottinger  told  us  that  he  repeatedly  urged,  but  in  vain,  and 

when  the  retreat  was  decided  on,  and  within  a  few  hours  the  frost  did  its 

no  attention  was  paid  to  his,  Law-  work.      Major  Pottinger    said  that 

reuce's,  and  Conolly's  advice  to  con-  there  was  not  an  Afghan  around  them 

centrate  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  he  urged  who  had  not  his  legs  swathed  in  rags 

tlie  o(Hc(TS  to  have  all  the  old  horse-  as  soon  as  the  snow  began  to  fall.^^ 
clothing,    &c.,  cut    into    strips   and 


DISORGANISATION  OF  THE  FORCE.  225 

never  rose  again ;  others  awoke  to  find  themselves  crip- 
pled for  life  by  the  biting  fi:ost. 

The  morning  dawned,  and  without  any  orders,  with- 
out an  attempt  to  restrain  them,  the  camp-followers  and 
ba^age  struggled  on  ahead,  and  many  of  the  Sepoys 
went  on  with  them.  Discipline  was  fast  disappearing. 
The  regiments  were  dwindling  down  to  the  merest 
skeletons.  It  was  no  longer  a  retreating  army;  it  was 
a  rabble  in  chaotic  flight.  The  enemy  were  pressing  on 
our  rear;  seizing  our  baggage;  capturing  our  guns;* 
cutting  up  all  in  their  way.  Our  soldiers  weary,  feeble, 
and  frost-bitten,  could  make  no  stand  against  the  fierce 
charges  of  the  Afghan  horsemen.  It  seemed  that  the 
whole  rear-guard  would  speedily  be  cut  off.  All  thoughts 
of  effectual  resistance  were  at  an  end.  There  was  no- 
thing now  to  be  hoped  for  but  fi:om  the  forbearance  of 
the  Afghan  chiefs. 

The  New.ab  Zemaun  Khan  had  ever  been  true  to  us — 
ever  in  the  midst  of  the  wild  excitement  of  the  Caubul 
outbreak,  and  in  the  flush  of  national  triumph,  he  had 
been  serene, generous,  and  forbearing;  had  borne  himself 
as  a  worthy  enemy;  had  been  betrayed  into  no  excesses; 
but  had  endeavoured  to  vindicate  the  rights  of  the 
Afghans  without  inflicting  upon  the  Feringhees  the 
misery  and  humiliation  which  others  contemplated  with 
irrepressible  delight.  He  had  exerted  himself  on  the 
preceding  day  to  control  the  fierce  passions  of  his 
countrymen,  and  now  he  wrote  to  Major  Pottinger,  ex- 
horting him  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  retreating  army, 
and  promising  to  send  supplies  of  food  and  firewood,  and 
to  disperse  the  fanatic  bands  which  were  hovering  so 

*  The  mountain-train  guns  here  ceeded  in  spiking  the  guns,  but  being 

fell  into  the  enemy's  hands,  in  spite  poorly    supported  by  the  infantry, 

of  the  gallantry  of  Lieutenant  Green,  ne  could  not  recapture  them.     Two 

who  was  in  charge,  and  the  artillery-  horse-artillery  guns  were  abandoned 

men  under  his  command.  Green  sue-  soon  afterwards. 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

destructively  on  our  flanks.  Pottinger  went  to  the  Gre- 
neral;  and  the  Greneral  consented  to  the  halt,*  Shelton, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  eager  for  an  advance.  He 
believed  that  their  only  chance  of  safety  lay  in  a  rapid 
forward  movement,  shaking  off  the  ba^age  and  camp- 
followers  as  they  went.  In  this  conviction,  he  hurried 
forward  to  Elphinstone,  and  implored  him  to  proceed-f 
But  the  General  was  not  to  be  moved ;  and  the  doomed 
army  halted  at  Boot-Ehak. 

Here  Akbar  Khan  appeared  upon  the  scene.  With 
a  body  of  some  600  horsemen  he  rode  up,  and  Pottinger 
saw  him  in  the  distance.  Believing  that  he  was  a  Sirdar 
of  note,  the  political  chief  despatched  Captain  Skinner, 
with  a  flag  of  truce,  to  communicate  with  him.  Skinner 
brought  back  a  friendly  message.  The  Sirdar,  he  said, 
had  reproached  the  British  authorities  for  their  hasty 
movement  on  the  preceding  morning;  but  added  that 
he  had  come  out  to  protect  them  from  the  attacks  of 
the  Ghazees.  His  instructions  were  to  demand  other 
hostages,  as  security  for  the  evacuation  of  Jellalabad; 
and  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  force,  supplying  it  in 
the  interval  with  everything  it  required,  until  such  time 

•"About  mid-day  I  received  a  \Major Poitinger^sBudeedbad Bepcri: 
letter  from  Newab  Zemaun  Khan  and  MS.  Records,} 
Naib  Ameen-oollah,  requesting  us  to  t  '*I  bad  lust  formed  up  a  corps 
bait  till  tbe^  dispersed  the  fanatics,  near  Boot-Khak  to  resist  atnreatened 
and  promismg  us  supplies  of  pro-  attack,  and  was  moving  on  again, 
visions  and  fiiwood  if  we  did  so.  I  when  I  beard  the  General  bad  or- 
communicated  this  to  General  Elphin-  dereda  halt.  I  immediately  hurried 
stone,  with  the  information  that  the  forward  and  entreated  him  to  con- 
defile  in  front  was  strongly  occupied,  tinue  the  march,  having  only  come 
The  General  having  taken  this  into  three  miles,  and  assured  him  a  halt 
consideration,  the  utter  conflision  on  the  snow,  without  tents  or  food, 
which  prevailed,  the  exhausted  state  would  destroy  the  troops ;  but  be  was 
of  the  Sepoys,  who  had  been  under  immoveable,  talked  of  the  Sirdars* 
arms  in  deep  snow  from  daylight  of  promises,  and  sending  a  letter  to  Cau- 
the  6tb  (with  scarcely  any  rest,  and  bul  to  know  why  they  had  not  sent 
neither  food  norwateratthe  bivouac),  us  a  safe^ard.  Here  was  another 
joined  with  the  pressure  on  the  rear-  day  entirely  lost,  and  the  enemy  col- 
guard,  he  determined  to  halt  till  lecting  in  numbers.*' — ^Statement  oj 
night  and  then  pursue  bis  march."—  Briy(uiier  Shelton :  MS,  Iiccords.'} 


THE  HALT  AT  BOOT-KHAK.  227 

as  intelligence  of  the  retirement  of  Sale's  force  should  be 
received.  *^  It  was  too  late  to  send  a  reply,"  wrote  Pot- 
tinger,  in  his  report  of  these  proceedings,  "  and  nothing 
was  determined — ^but  some  persons  persuaded  the  Gene- 
ral to  abandon  his  intention  of  marching  by  night."  And 
so  the  doomed  force,  whilst  the  enemy  were  mustering 
to  block  up  the  passes  in  advance,  spent  another  night 
of  inactivity  and  suffering  in  the  cruel  snow. 

It  was  at  the  entrance  of  the  Koord-Caubul  Pass  that 
the  force,  now  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  of  January 
having  in  two  days  accomplished  a  distance  of  only  ten 
miles,*  halted  on  some  high  ground.  The  confiision 
far  exceeded  that  of  the  preceding  night.  The  great 
congeries  of  men,  women,  and  children,  horses,  ponies, 
and  camels,  there  wallowing  in  the  snow,  no  words  can 
adequately  describe.  Many  lay  down  only  to  find  a 
winding-sheet  in  the  snow.  There  was  no  shelter — ^no 
firewood — no  food.  The  Sepoys  burnt  their  caps- and 
accoutrements  to  obtain  a  little  temporary  warmth.  One 
oflScerf  narrates  how  he  and  eleven  others  "crowded 
round  the  hot  ashes  of  a  pistol-case,  and  with  some  bottles 
of  wine  still  remaining,  tried  to  keep  off  the  effect  of  the 
cold.  They  then  all  huddled  together  and  lay  down  on 
the  ground  to  sleep." 

The  sun  rose  upon  many  stiffened  corpses;  and  a 
scene  of  still  greater  confusion  than  had  marked  the 
dawn  of  the  preceding  morning  now  heralded  the 
march  of  the  force.  Doubt  and  uncertainty  regarding 
the  intentions  of  their  chiefs  brooded  over  the  officers 
of  the  force;  but  few  of  the  soldiers  now  remembered 
their  chiefe,  and  the  camp-followers  were  wholly  regard- 
less of  their  intentions.  One  paramount  desire  to  escape 
death  held  possession  of  that  wretched  multitude;  and  a 

*  Eyre's  Narraiive,  t  Lieutettdttt  Melville. 

q2 


228  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL, 

crowd  of  soldiers  and  camp-followers,  at  an  early  hour, 
began  to  push  on  confusedly  to  the  front.  Whilst  some 
efforts  were  being  made  to  restrain  them,  Akbar  Khan 
was  in  communication  with  the  officers  of  the  British 
Mission,  Skinner  again  went  out  to  meet  the  Sirdar.  It 
was  proposed  that  the  army  should  either  halt  on  their 
present  ground  at  Boot-Khak,  or  make  their  way  to 
Tezeen,  there  to  await  intelligence  of  the  evacuation  of 
Jellalabad.  Four  hostages  were  demanded  as  security 
for  Sale's  retreat;  and  Brigadier  Shelton  and  Captain 
Lawrence  were  named  as  two  of  them.  But  Shelton  had 
always  resolutely  refused  to  give  himself  up  to  the 
enemy,  and  Elphinstone  was  unwilling  to  order  him. 
Pottinger,  therefore,  volunteered  to  take  his  place,*  and 
Brigadier  Anquetil  consented,  if  a  general  officer  were 
peremptorily  demanded,  to  accompany  the  political  chief. 

Pottinger  rode  to  the  rear,  where  Akbar  Khan  sent  a 
party  of  horsemen  to  conduct  him  to  his  presence.  Wel- 
coming the  young  English  officer  with  a  respectful  kindli- 
ness of  manner,  the  Sirdar  declared  himself  willing  to 
receive  three  hostages — ^Major  Pottinger,  Captain  Law- 
rence, and  any  other  officer  whom  the  former  might 
select.  Pottinger  named  Colin  Mackenzie,  than  whom 
there  was  not  in  all  the  army  a  braver  or  a  better 
soUder,f  and  those  three  officers  placed  themselves  in 
the  hands  of  Akbar  Khan. 

The  force  was  now  again  in  motion.  It  was  agreed 
that  they  should  push  on  to  Tezeen,  there  to  await 

*  "I  volunteered  to  go  in  his  place,  services  in  the  disorganised  state  of 
thinking  that  such  a  mark  of  confi-  the  force  could  scarcdv  be  dispensed 
dence  would  induce  the  chief  not  with." — [Major  Pottinger's  ^iport: 
only  to  spare  that  officer  (Shelton^,  MS.  Records,\ 
but  also  Captain  Lawrence  (whose  f  The  Jezailchees  whom  he  corn- 
presence^  was  requisite  in  charge  of  manded  had  been  bv  l^is  time  nearlv 
the  ^fission,  as  mj  wound  rendered  annihilated,  and  **  hb  services  with 
me  incapable  of  exertion),  and  pro-  tiiem,  therefore,"  said  Pottinger, 
bably    some    other     officers    whose  "  could  be  of  little  further  use." 


THE  KOORD-CAUBUL  PASS.  229 

certain  tidings  of  the  evacuation  of  Jellalabad.  Be- 
tween Boot-Khak  and  Tezeen  lies  the  stupendous  pass 
of  Koord-Caubul.  For  a  distance  of  five  miles  it  runs 
between  precipitous  mountain-ranges,  so  narrow  and 
80  shut  in  on  either  side  that  the  wintry  sun  rarely 
penetrates  its  gloomy  recesses.*  Into  the  jaws  of  this 
terrible  defile  the  disorganised  force  now  struggled 
in  fearful  confiision.  In  vain  did  Akbar  Khan  issue 
his  orders;  in  vain  did  his  principal  adherents  exert 
themselves  to  control  the  hordes  of  fanatic  Ghilzyes, 
who  poured  upon  our  struggling  rabble  a  deadly  fire 
fix>m  their  jezails.f  Nothing  could  restrain  the  fierce 
impetuosity  of  our  cruel  assailants.  Pent  in  between 
the  incumbent  walls  of  the  narrow  pass,  now  splashing 
through  the  mountain  torrent,  now  floundering  through 
the  snow  which  filled  the  hollows,  or  was  banked  up 
beside  the  stream,  the  wretched  fugitives  fell  an  easy 
prey  to  the  Ghilzye  marksmen,  who  shot  them  down 
firom  the  hill-sides.  It  was  not  a  time  to  think  of  saving 
anything  but  human  life.  Baggage,  ammunition,  public 
and  private  property,  were  abandoned;!  and  the  Sepoys 

♦  "  Down  the  centre,"  says  Eyre,  which  our  escort  had  considerable 
"  dashed  a  mountain  torrent,  whose  difficulty  in  preserving  our  lives, 
impetuous  course  the  frost  in  vain  Abdool  Ghyas  Khan  being  obliged 
attempted  to  arrest,  though  it  sue-  to  call  in  Sooltan  Ahmed  Khan  to 
ceeded  in  lining  the  edges  with  thick  aid  him,  we  after  dark  reached  Koord- 
layers  of  ice,  over  which  the  snow  Caubul,  having  on  the  way  picked  up 
lay  consolidated  in  slippery  masses,  a  child  of  Captain  Boyd*s,  an  Euro- 
anordingno  very  easy  footing  for  our  pean  women  of  her  Majesty's  13th, 
jaded  animals.  This  stream  we  had  and  a  private  of  her  Majesty's  44th, 
to  cross  and  recross  eight-and- twenty  whose  lives  had  been  saved  by  Ma- 
times."  homed  Akbar  Khan." — [Afq/or  Pot' 

t  Pottinger  says,  that  "  notwith-  tinger's  Report :  MS,  Records."] 
standing  me  repeated  and  urgent  I  *'  On  leaving  Caubul,"  says  Cap- 
orders  of  Mahomed  Akbar  KJian,  the  tain  Johnson,  **  each  Sepoy  had  40 
fanatics  attacked  our  column,  where-  rounds  of  ammunition  in  pouch,  and 
on  the  chief  lefl  us  in  charge  of  his  about  60  camel  loads  per  regiment, 
cousin,  Abdool  Ghyas  Khan,  and  pro-  with  100  spare  loads.  We  have  not 
ceeded,  to  try  if  his  presence  would  re-  at  present  (January  8),  for  the  whole 
strain  the  Afghans.  Afler  some  time,  force,  three  camel  loads  in  box,  and 
we  also  moved  on,  and  afler  a  slow  numbers  of  the  Sepoys  have  not  a 
and  tedious  march  amidst  miserable  single  cartridge  in  pouch." 
scenes  of  cruelty  and  plunder,  through 


230  THE  EETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

suflfered  their  very  firelocks  to  be  taken  out  of  their 
hands. 

The  massacre  was  fearfiil  in  this  Eoord-Caubul  Pass. 
Three  thousand  men  are  said  to  have  fallen  under  the 
fire  of  the  enemy,  or  to  have  dropped  down  paralysed 
and  exhausted,  to  be  slaughtered  by  the  Afghan  knives.* 
And  amidst  these  fearfiil  scenes  of  carnage,  through  a 
shower  of  matchlock  balls,  rode  English  ladies  on  horse- 
back, or  in  camel-panniers,  sometimes  vainly  endeavour- 
ing to  keep  their  children  beneath  their  eyes,  and  losing 
them  in  the  confiision  and  bewilderment  of  the  deso- 
lating march. 

That  night  the  force  again  halted  in  the  snow,  now 
deepened  by  a  heavy  fall,  which,  as  the  army  neared 
the  high  table-land  of  Koord-Caubul,  had  increased  the 
bitterness  of  the  marcLf  The  night  was,  like  its  pre- 
decessors, one  of  intense  suffering,  spent  by  the  perish- 
ing  troops  without  shelter,  without  firewood,  and  without 
food.  At  early  mom  there  was  another  rush  of  camp- 
followers  and  undisciplined  Sepoys  to  the  front ;  but  the 
march  of  the  troops,  which  had  been  ordered  at  ten 
o'clock,  was  countermanded  by  the  General.  Akbar 
Khan  ^as  then  offering  to  supjJy  the  force  with  provi- 
sions,  and  to  do  his  best  for  its  future  protection.    At 

*  Many  officers  perished  in  the  noblest  and  the  manliest  course.  He 
Koord-Caubul  Pass.  Among  these  died  on  the  9th  inst.,  attended  by 
was  Captain  Faton,  the  assistant  his  wife  and  mother-in-law ;  the 
adjutant-general,  who  had  lost  an  daughter  and  wife  of  Sir  Robert  Sale, 
arm  in  action  at  Caubul.  Here,  too,  f  JBjre  says :  "  On  the  force  reach- 
fell  mortally  wounded.  Lieutenant  ing  Koord-Uaubul,  snow  began  to 
Sturt  of  the  engineers,  a  very  fine  faU  and  continued  till  morning.*'— 
young  officer,  who,  though  severely  [^MUitary  Operations^  "psLge  210.]  Qe- 
wounded  at  the  commencement  of  neral  Elphmstone  says :  *'  Ere  we 
the  outbreak,  stabbed  in  the  face  at  reached  the  bivouac  snow  fell  and 
the  door  of  Shah  Sooiah's  presence-  continued  during  the  night."  Bri- 
chamberj  had  exertea  himself  with  gadier  Shelton  says,  on  the  other 
overflowing  zeal  and  unfailing  acti*  hand,  ^^  On  approaching  Koord-Cau- 
vity,  whenever  his  services,  as  the  bul  it  began  to  snow,  but  fortu- 
only  engineer  at  Caubul,  were  re-  nately  cleaned  up  about  dusk.'*  Such 
quired ;  and  whose  voice,  when  others  discrepancies  as  these  may  well  ex- 
counsclled  unworthy  concessions,  had  cuse  the  historian,  if  he  be  guilty  of 
ever  been  lifted  up  in  favour  of  the  any  slight  errors  of  detaiL 


THE  HALT  AT  KOOKD-CAUBUL.  231 

his  suggestion  a  halt  was  ordered  by  Elphinstone ;  and 
the  perishing  troops  sate  down  in  the  snow,  which  an- 
other march  would  have  cleared,  for  a  day  of  painful  un- 
certainty.  The  whole  force  was  against  the  delay. 
Shelton  went  to  the  General  to  remonstrate  against  it. 
In  vain  he  urged  that  such  a  measure  would  cause  the 
total  destruction  of  the  column.  The  General  was  not 
to  be  moved  from  his  purpose.*  The  day  was  one  of 
idleness  and  desertion.  The  Native  troops,  led  by  Shah 
Soojah's  cavalry,  began  to  bethink  themselves  of  escaping 
from  the  horrors  of  the  retreat  by  going  over  to  the 
enemy.  The  General  had  paraded  the  ruins  of  the  dif- 
ferent regiments  to  repel  an  anticipated  attack ;  and  now 
Captain  Grant,  the  adjutant-general,  accompanied  by 
the  Tezeen  chief,  Khoda  Bux  Khan,  rode  to  the  head  of 
these  skeleton  corps,  now  numbering  scarcely  more  than 
a  hundred  men  in  each,  and  explained  to  them  that 
Akbar  Khan  had  declared  his  intention  to  kill  all,  who 
deserted  to  him,  on  the  spot.f  But  the  contagion  was 
then  fast  spreading ;  and  nothing  could  check  the  pro- 

*  *^  I  went  to  E.  and  told  him  such  was  immediately  seized  and  as  in- 

a  measure  would  cause  the  total  dc-  stantly  shot.**    The  same  accurate 

struction  of  the  whole  force ;  but  he  writer  thus  describes  the  state  of  the 

was  not  to  be  moved,  replying  that  the  force  at  this  time: — "We  have  no 

Sirdar  had  sent  to  him  to  say,  if  he  means  of  canying  on  the  sick.    All 

would  stop  there,  that  he  (the  Sirdar)  our  dooley-bearers  deserted  the  first 

would  send  him  provisions,  which,  as  day,  or  were  murdered.    The  whole 

I  foretold,  never  came." — ^Statement  of  our  camels  and  yaboos  have  been 

of  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS,  Records.'^  either  seized  by  the  enemy  or  by 

t  Captain  Johnson   says,   in   his  our  camp-followers ;  and  even  were 

JoumaC  "  A  message  was  sent  to  thev  fortncoming,  we  have  not  men  to 

Mahomed  Akbar  regarding  the  deser-  look  afler  them :  the  greatest  confu- 

tion  of  our  troops,  and  a  hope  ex-  sion  prevailed  all  day,  and  anxiety 

pressed  that  he  would  not  encourage  and  suspense  for  our  ultimate  fate 

It.     He  sent  back  one  of  his  chiefs  intense.      Every    man    among    us 

(the  Tezeen  chief,  Khoda  Bux  Khan)  thought  that  ere  many  hours  luould 

to  explain  that  any  of  our  men  de-  pass  he  was  doomed  to  die  either  by 

serting  from  us  and  going  over  to  cold,  hunger,  or  the  swords  of  our 

him  would  be  shot.     Our  ^w  troops  enemies ;  for,  if  attacked,  although 

had  already  been  paraded  to  repel  we  might  for  a  short  time  hold  out, 

the  supposed  attack,  which,  however,  nothing   could  eventually   save  us. 

did  not  take  place.    At  the  time  of  .  .  .  My  eyes  had  become  so  inflamed 

doing  so,  a  Mission  chuprassie  was  from  the  reflection  of  the  snow,  that 

observed  in  the  act  of  deserting.    He  I  was  nearly  blind,  and  the  pain  in- 


232 


THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 


gress  of  the  disease.  The  Shah's  2nd  Cavaky  had  gone 
over  nearly  to  a  man. 

In  the  mean  while  Major  Pottinger,  who  had  passed 
the  night  in  a  neighbouring  castle,  was  in  consultation 
with  Akbar  Ehan,  and  Captain  Skinner  was  acting  as 
the  vehicle  of  communication  between  them  and  the 
head-quarters  of  the  army.  A  new,  and,  at  the  first 
sound,  startling  proposition  was  now  made  by  the 
Sirdar.  He  proposed  that  all  the  English  ladies  with 
the  force  should  be  placed  under  his  charge,  that  he 
might  convey  them  safely  to  Peshawur.  Remembering 
that  the  families  of  the  Sirdar  himself  were  prisoners  in 
the  hands  of  the  British,  and  believing  that  he  was 
sincere  in  his  desire  to  save  the  ladies  and  children  from 
the  destruction  that  awaited  them  on  the  line  of  march, 
Pottinger  sanctioned  the  proposal;  and  Skinner  was 
despatched  to  the  head-quarters  of  the  force  to  obtain 
the  General's  consent.  "  Desirous  to  remove  the  ladies 
and  children,  after  the  horrors  they  had  already  wit- 
nessed, from  the  further  dangers  of  our  camp,  and  hoping 
that,  as  from  the  very  commencement  of  the  negotiations 
the  Sirdar  had  shown  the  greatest  anxiety  to  have  the 
married  people  as  hostages,  this  mark  of  trust  might 
elicit  a  corresponding  feeling  in  him,"*  Elphinstone 
complied  with  the  request.  A  party  of  Afghan  horse 
were  in  readiness  to  conduct  them  to  the  presence  of  the 
Sirdar;  and  so  Lady  Macnaghten,  Lady  Sale,  and  the 
other  widows  and  wives  of  the  Caubul  force,  became  the 
"guests"  of  the  son  of  Dost  Mahomed  Khan. 

They  did  not  go  alone.    The  married  men  went  with 


tense.  Several  officers  were  more 
or  less  affected — one  or  two  quite 
blind."  The  portion  of  Captain 
Johnson's  Journal  which  relates  to 
the  retreat  has  been  published  in  the 
Asiatic  Journal,  The  preceding  por- 
tion, relating  to  the  outbreak,  from 
which  I  have  so  largely  quoted  in 


Book  v.,  and  that  relating  to  the 
captivity,  which  I  shall  have  occasion 
suDsequenUy  to  quote,  have  never 
been  made  public.  It  should  be 
added,  however,  that  Lady  Sale  had 
access  to  these  Journals,  and  has  used 
them  freely  without  acknowledgment. 
*  Statement  of  General  Elphinstone, 


SUBRENDER  OF  THE  MARRIED  OFFICERS,  233 

them.  The  propriety  of  this  step  has  been  questioned. 
It  has  been  even  said  that  they  were  not  demanded  at  all 
by  Akbar  Khan,  but  that  they  threw  themselves  spon- 
taneously upon  the  mercy  of  the  chief.  It  is  right, 
therefore,  that  so  grave  a  question  should  not  be  slurred 
over.  There  were  three  unprejudiced  witnesses,  whose 
statements,  on  such  a  point,  would  be  worthy  of  accep- 
tation, as  the  statements  of  honourable  and  unprejudiced 
men,  familiar  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 
Major  Pottinger,  Captain  Skinner,  and  General  Elphin- 
stone  knew  all  these  circumstances,  and  had  no  reason 
to  misrepresent  them.  Major  Pottinger  says  that,  "  on 
Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  offering  to  take  charge 
of  the  ladies  and  protect  them  to  Peshawur,  I  consi- 
dered it  advisable  to  recommend  that  they  should  come 
over,  as  the  Sirdar's  famHy  being  in  o^r  hands  was 
a  sufficient  guarantee  for  their  good  treatment,  and  it 
was  evident  that  our  own  people  were  too  diminished 
to  protect  them.  Captain  Skinner  accordingly  went  over 
and  mentioned  the  offer  to  General  Elphinstone,  who 
approved  of  it,  and  sent  over  the  ladies,  children,  and 
married  officers."  Captain  Skinner  has  left  upon  record 
no  narrative  of  these  proceedings.  But  General  Elphin- 
stone has  distinctly  stated  that  Captain  Skinner  was 
sent  to  him  with  a  proposal  "  that  the  married  people 
and  their  famiUes  should  be  made  over  to  him,  pro- 
mising honourable  treatment  to  the  ladies."  Whatever 
may  have  been  the  proposition,  as  it  originally  emanated 
fix>m  the  Sirdar,  there  is  no  room  to  doubt  that  Gene- 
ral Elphinstone  shaped  it  into  a  recommendation  that 
the  husbands  should  accompany  their  wives,  and  that 
the  former  went  over  to  Akbar  Khan  with  the  entire 
sanction  of  their  military  chief.* 

♦The  party   consisted   of  Lady    and  one  child;  Mrs.  Trevor  and  seven 
Macnaghten,  Lady  Sale,  Mrs.  Sturt    children ;    Cnptain  Boyd,  wife  and 


234  THE  BETREAT  FBOM  CAUBUL. 

That  the  safety  of  the  women  and  children  was  secured 
by  their  removal  from  General  Elphinstone's  disorganised 
camp  to  the  custody  of  Akbar  Ehan,  is  now  a  fact  which 
stands  out  distinctly  in  the  broad  light  of  historical 
truth.  But  writing  now  after  the  event,  it  becomes  one 
to  consider  rather  the  wisdom  of  the  experiment  than 
the  success  of  the  result.  I  believe  that  Pottinger  and 
Elphinstone  judged  wisely.  There  was  a  choice  of  evils, 
and  it  appears  to  me  that  they  chose  the  least  The 
women  and  the  children  could  not  long  have  survived 
the  horrors  of  that  perilous  march.  They  had  hitherto 
escaped,  almost  by  a  miracle,  the  assaults  of  the  cruel 
climatQ  and  the  inexorable  foe.  They  were  insufficiently 
dad.  They  had  no  servants  to  attend  upon  them.  They 
had  scarcely  tasted  food  since  they  left  Caubul.  They 
had  no  shelter  during  the  frosty  night-season.  Some 
had  just  become,  or  were  about  soon  to  become,  mothers ; 
and  yet  they  had  been  compelled  to  ride  in  jolting 
camel-panniers,  or  on  the  backs  of  stumbling  baggage- 
ponies.  It  was  plain  that  Akbar  Elian  had  no  power 
to  restrain  the  tribes  who  were  butchering  our  helpless 
people.  The  army  was  fast  melting  away.  It  was 
doubtful  whether  a  man  would  reach  Jellalabad  in 
safety.  To  have  left  the  women  and  children  to  pur- 
sue their  march  would  have  been  to  have  left  them  to 
inevitable  destruction.  Akbar  Khan  might  be  a  man 
of  violent  and  ferocious  temper,  and  no  very  scrupulous 
good  faith;  but  because  he  had  slain  the  Envoy  in  a 
gust  of  passion,  it  did  not  necessarily  follow  that  he 

child;  Captain  Anderson,  wife  and  wounded  and  unserviceable,    went 

child ;  Lieutenant  Waller,  wife  and  with  them.    Eyre  says  that  it  was 

child;    Lieutenant   Eyre,  wife  and  the  intention  of  the  General  that  all 

child ;  Mr.  Ryley,  wife  and  child ;  the  wounded  officers  should  go ;  but 

Mrs.  Mainwaring   and  child;    Ser-  that  there  was  not  time  to  make 

geant   Wade  and  family.    Captain  known  his  intentions. 
Troup  and  Lieutenant  Mein,  being 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  MARCH.  235 

would  betray  the  widow  of  liis  victim  and  the  other 
English  ladies  who  were  now  to  be  entrusted  to  his 
safe  keeping.  Moreover,  if  no  sentiments  of  honour 
and  no  feelings  of  compassion  were  within  him,  he  might 
still  be  swayed  by  motives  of  self-interest;  and  it  was 
not  forgotten  that  his  father,  his  brothers,  and  the  ladies 
of  his  family  were  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  the  British 
Grovemment,  in  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 

The  married  officers  and  their  families  went  over  to 
the  Sirdar;  and  on  the  following  morning  (the  10th  of 
January)  the  remnant  of  the  doomed  force  resumed  its 
march  towards  Jellalabad.  There  was  the  same  mi- 
serable confusion  as  on  the  preceding  morning.  Soldiers 
and  camp-followers  rushed  promiscuously  to  the  front. 
The  Native  regiments  were  fast  melting  into  nothing. 
Throwing  down  their  arms  and  crowding  in  among  the 
mass  of  camp-followers,  the  Sepoys  were  rapidly  swelling 
the  disorganised  rabble  in  front.  Their  hands  were 
frost-bitten;  they  could  not  pull  a  trigger;  they  were 
paralysed,  panic-struck ;  they  rushed  forward  in  aimless 
desperation,  scarcely  knowing  what  they  did  or  where 
they  went ;  whilst  the  Afghans,  watching  the  cruel  op- 
portunity, came  down,  with  their  long  knives,  amidst 
their  imresisting  victims,  and  slaughtered  them  like 
sheep.  "  A  narrow  gorge  between  the  precipitous  spurs 
of  two  hills"  was  the  appointed  shambles.  There  the 
dead  and  the  dying  soon  choked  up  the  defile.  There 
was  not  now  a  single  Sepoy  left.  Every  particle  of  bag- 
gage was  gone.  About  fifty  horse-artillerymen,  with  one 
howitzer-gun ;  some  250*  men  of  the  44th ;  and  150 
cavalry  troopers,  now  constituted  the  entire  force.  Of 
the  16,000  men — soldiers  and  camp-followers — who  had 
left  Caubul,  not  more  than  a  quarter  survived. 

*  Eyre  says  "seventy  files."     I    authority — they  were  men  of  hii 
give  the  above  n\imber  on  Shelton*s    own  corps,  and  he  was  with  them. 


236 


THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 


Still  hovering  on  the  flanks  of  our  retreating  force, 
Akbar  Khan,  attended  by  a  party  of  horsemen,  watched 
the  butchery  that  was  going  on  below;  and  when  El- 
phinstone  sent  Skinner  to  remonstrate  with  him,  de- 
clared that  he  was  powerless  to  restrain  the  savage 
impetuosity  of  the  Ghilzyes,  whom  even  their  own  im- 
mediate chiefs  could  not  control.  But  he  had  a  proposal 
to  make.  Those  were  not  times  when  any  very  nice 
regard  for  the  national  honour  prompted  the  rejection  of 
even  humiliating  terms  oflfered  by  our  Afghan  enemies ; 
but  when  the  Sirdar  proposed  that  the  remnant  of  the 
British  army  should  lay  down  their  arms,  and  place 
themselves  entirely  under  his  protection,  Elphinstone 
at  once  refused  his  consent.  The  march  was  therefore 
resumed.  The  wreck  of  the  British  force  made  its  des- 
perate way  down  the  steep  descents  of  the  Haft-Kotul, 
into  a  narrow  defile,  strewn  with  the  ghastly  remains  of 
the  camp-followers  and  soldiers,  who  had  pushed  on  in 
advance  of  the  column.  As  they  passed  down  the  de- 
file,  the  enemy  opened  a  destructive  fire  on  their  rear. 
The  rear  was  then  commanded  by  Shelton.  With  a 
handM  of  Europeans  he  repulsed  their  attacks,  ^^  though 
obliged  to  nurse  their  ammunition  by  a  watchful  check 
on  its  expenditure."  "  Nobly  and  heroically,"  says  Shel- 
ton, in  his  rapid  narrative  of  the  march,  "these  fine 
fellows  stood  by  me."*  The  gallantry  of  these  few  men 
was,  for  a  time,  the  salvation  of  the  whole. 

After  another  attempt  at  negotiation,  resulting  only  in 
the  same  demand  for  the  disarming  of  the  remnant  of  the 
force,f  it  was  determined,  at  Shelton's  suggestion,  that  a 


♦  MS.  Records.  Eyre  says :  "  Bri- 
gadier Shelton  commanded  the  rear 
with  a  few  Europeans ;  and  but  for  hb 
persevering  energy  and  unflinching 
fortitude  in  repeuin^  the  assailants, 
it  is  probable  the  whole  would  have 
been  sacrificed." 


f  '^About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  afler 
our  arrival,  the  Sirdar  and  his  party 
came  into  the  valley,  and  proceeded 
to  a  fort  higher  up,  belonging  to 
Ghool  Mahomed  Knan.  A  signal 
was  made  for  some  of  his  horsemen 
to  approach  us.     Two  came ;    and 


THE  MARCH  TO  JUGDULLUCK. 


237 


desperate  eflfort  should  be  made  to  reach  Jugdulluck  by 
a  rapid  night-march.  Enfeebled  by  starvation,  the  troops 
were  little  able  to  struggle  forward,  on  their  perilous 
march,  over  a  diJficult  country,  and  in  the  face  of  an 
active  enemy.  But  despair  had  given  them  strength; 
and  when  the  order  was  given,  having  spiked  their  last 
remaining  gun,  they  moved  off  lightly  and  quietly  in  the 
hope  of  shaking  off,  under  cover  of  the  night,  the  curse 
of  camp-followers,  which  had  sate  upon  them  with  such 
destructive  tenacity  from  the  first.  But  no  sooner  had 
the  soldiers  begun  to  move,  than  the  camp-followers 
started  up  to  accompany  them;  and  throughout  that 
fearM  night-maxch  clustered  around  the  few  good  fight- 
ing  men  and  paralysed  the  movements  of  the  force. 

It  was  a  bright,  frosty  night.  The  snow  was  lying  only 
partially  on  the  ground.  For  some  miles  they  proceeded 
unmolested.  But  when,  at  Seh-Baba,  the  enemy  again 
opened  a  fire  upon  their  rear,  the  camp-followers  rushed 
to  the  front;  and  when  firing  was  heard  ahead  of  the 
column,  again  fell  back  on  the  rear.  Thus  surging  back- 
wards and  forwards — the  ebb  and  flow  of  a  great  tide  of 
people — these  miserable  camp-followers,  in  the  wildness 
of  their  fear,  overwhelmed  the  handful  of  soldiers  who 
were  still  able  and  willing  to  show  a  front  to  the  enemy, 
blocked  up  the  road,  and  presented  to  the  eyes  of  the 
Afghan  marksmen  a  dark  mass  of  humanity,  which  could 
not  escape  their  fire  even  under  cover  of  the  night. 

Soon  after  daybreak  the  advance  reached  Kutter- 


Captain  Skinner,  by  the  General's 
desire,  accompanied  them  to  Ma- 
homed Akbar,  to  devise  some  means 
of  saving  our  now  smaU  party  from 
destruction.  All  was  the  intensest 
anxiety  till  Skinner's  return  at  dusk, 
when  he  brought  back  the  same  mes- 
sage as  at  KJiubbur-i-Jubbar  regard- 
ing the  disarming  of  the  Europeans. 


Again  this  was  not  acceded  to.  The 
Greneral  decided,  weak  and  famished 
as  the  troops  were,  and  as  there  was 
no  prospect  of  provisions  being  had 
at  Tezeen,  on  again  marching  at  seven 
P.M.,  and  proceedinff,  if  possible, 
through  the  JugduUuck  Pass,  by 
eight  or  nine  the  next  morning." — 
{Captain  Johnson* s  JoumaLI 


238  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

Sung.  They  were  still  ten  miles  from  Jugdulluck. 
Halting  only  till  the  rear-guard  had  come  up,  they  pushed 
on  with  an  energy,  which  at  the  commencement  of  the 
retreat  might  have  saved  the  force  from  destruction. 
But  it  was  now  too  late.  The  enemy  were  crowning 
the  heights ;  there  was  no  possibility  of  escape.  Shelton, 
with  a  few  brave  men  of  the  rear-guard,  faced  the  over- 
whelming crowd  of  Afghans  with  a  determined  courage 
worthy  of  British  soldiers ;  and  fought  his  way  to  Jug- 
dulludk.  Almost  every  inch  of  ground  was  contested. 
Gallantly  did  this  little  band  hold  the  enemy  in  check. 
Keeping  the  fierce  crowd  from  closing  in  upon  the 
column,  but  suffering  terribly  imder  the  fire  of  their 
jezails,  they  made  their  way  at  last  to  the  ground  where 
the  advance  had  halted,  behind  some  ruined  walls  on  a 
height  by  the  road-side.  Their  comrades  received  them 
with  a  cheer.  The  cheer  came  from  a  party  of  officers, 
who  had  extended  themselves  in  line  on  the  height  to 
show  an  imposing  front  to  their  assailants.*  The  enemy 
seemed  to  increase  in  number  and  in  daring.  They  had 
followed  the  rear-guard  to  Jugdulluck,  and  they  now 
took  possession  of  the  heights  commanding  the  position 
of  their  victims. 

The  hot  fire  of  the  enemy's  jezails  drove  the  survivors 
of  the  Caubul  army  to  seek  safety  behind  the  ruined 
walls,  near  which  they  had  posted  themselves.  With- 
drawn from  the  excitement  of  the  actual  conflict,  these 
wretched  men  now  began  to  suffer  in  all  their  unen- 
durable extremes  the  agonies  of  hunger  and  thirst.  They 
scooped  up  the  snow  in  their  hands  and  greedily  de- 
voured it.    But  it  only  increased  their  torments.    There 

*  *'  As  scarcely  anj  Europeans  of  when  my  friend.  Captain  Grant,  who 

the  advance  now  remained,  and  the  was  next   to  me,  received  a   ball 

enemv  were  increasing,  the  General  through  his  cheek,  which  broke  his 

callea  several  of  the  officers  (about  jaw.    I  lifted  him  off  hb  horse,  and 

twenty  of  us)  to  form  line  and  show  seated  him  on  the  ground." — ICapt. 

a  front.    We  had  scarcely  done  so,  Johnson's  Journal^ 


STAND  AT  JUGDULLUCK*  239 

was  a  stream  of  pure  water  near  at  hand,  but  they  could 
not  approach  it  without  being  struck  down  by  the  fire 
of  the  enemy.  Behind  the  walls  they  had  a  brief  respite ; 
and  they  tried  to  snatch  a  hasty  meal.  The  ever  active 
Commissariat  officer,  Johnson,  found  among  the  camp- 
followers  three  bullocks,  which  were  instantly  killed  and 
served  out  to  the  famishing  European  soldiers,  who  de- 
voured, with  savage  voracity,  the  raw  and  reeking 
flesh.* 

The  respite  was  but  of  brief  duration.  A  party  of 
horsemen  was  observed  near  at  hand,  and  one  of  the 
number,  having  approached  our  people,  said  that  the 
chief  who  commanded  them  was  Akbar  Khan.  Skinner, 
who  had  acted  throughout  as  the  negotiator,  now  went 
to  remonstrate  with  the  Sirdar  against  the  continued 
attacks  of  his  countrymen.  He  had  scarcely  set  out, 
when  the  firing  was  resumed.  The  men  had  lain  down  in 
the  snow,  to  snatch  a  little  brief  repose  after  a  long  vigil 
of  thirty  hours ;  when  the  enemy  poured  in  volley  after 
volley  upon  their  resting-place,  and  compelled  them,  in 
wild  conftision — soldiers  and  camp-followers  again  hud- 
dled together — to  quit  the  enclosure  in  which  they  had 
bivouacked.  Individual  acts  of  heroism  were  not  wanting 
at  this  time  to  give  something  of  dignity  even  to  this 
melancholy  retreat.  A  handful  of  the  44th  Regiment 
here  made  a  gallant  rush  at  the  enemy  and  cleared  all 

•  "  On  the  arrival  of  the  rear-  down  without  a  certainty  of  bemg 
guard,  which  was  followed  up  by  the  massacred.  For  about  half  an  hour 
enemy,  the  latter  took  possession  of  we  had  a  respite  from  the  fire  of  the 
the  heights  close  to  our  position.  For  enemy,  who  were  watching  our  pro- 
security  we  went  within  the  ruined  ceedings.  I  was  desired  by  the  Gre- 
walls ;  our  men  almost  maddened  neral  to  see  if  any  bullocks  or  camels 
with  hunger  and  thirst.  Some  snow  were  procurable  among  the  camp- 
was  on  the  ground,  which  we  greedily  followers.  I  luckily  found^  three  of 
devoured ;  but  instead  of  quenching  the  former,  which  were  instantly 
it  increased  our  thirst.  A  stream  of  killed,  served  out  to  the  Europeans, 
clear  pure  water  was  running  at  the  and  as  instantly  devoured,  although 
foot  of  and  within  150  paces  of  our  raw  and  still  recking  with  blood." — 
position;  but  no  man  could  venture  ICaptain  Johnson's  JoumaLI 


240  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

the  ground  before  them,  Bygrave,  the  paymaster  of  the 
Caubul  army,  was  at  their  head.  Thinking  that  our 
whole  force  would  follow  them,  the  A%hans  fled  in 
dismay.  But  the  little  party  was  soon  recalled  to  the 
main  body,  which  again  retired  behind  the  ruined  walls ; 
and  again  the  enemy  returned  to  pour  upon  them  the 
destructive  fire  of  their  terrible  jezails .• 

All  night  long  and  throughout  the  next  day  the  force 
halted  at  Jugdulluck.  In  the  mean  while  Akbar  Khan 
was  in  communication  with  the  British  chiefs.  Skinner 
had  returned  with  a  message  from  the  Sirdar,  inviting 
the  General,  Brigadier  Shelton,  and  Captain  Johnson  to 
a  conference.  They  went;  and  were  received  with  every 
possible  demonstration  of  kindness  and  hospitality.  A 
cloth  was  spread  on  the  ground.  Food  was  placed 
before  them,  and  draughts  of  tea  satisfied  their  thirst. 
The  meal  completed,  the  A%han  chiefe  and  the  English 
officers  sate  round  a  blazing  fire  and  conversed.  Captain 
Johnson  was  the  spokesman  on  the  part  of  the  latter ; 

*  "  A  few  horsemen  being  observed  (It  was  here  General  Elphinstone  was 
near  at  hand,  a  signal  was  made  for  wounded.)  All  was  at  once  instant 
one  of  them  to  approach.  He  did  so,  confusion.  Tiiere  was  a  general  rush 
and  was  questioned  as  to  what  chief  outside  the  walls  ;  men  and  cattle  all 
was  present.  He  replied, '  Mahomed  huddled  together,  each  urgently  striv- 
Akbar  Khan.'  A  message  was  sent  ing  to  screen  himself  from  the  murder- 
to  the  Sirdar  by  the  General  as  to  ous  fire  of  the  enemy.  At  this  time 
why  we  were  again  molested.  A  reply  about  twenty  gallant  soldiers  of  the 
was  brought  back  that  the  chief  wished  44th  Queen's  made  a  simultaneous 
to  converse  with  Skinner,  who  accom-  rush  down  the  hill  to  drive  the  enemy 
panied  the  messenger.  This  was  at  off  the  heights.  In  this  they  were 
about  half-past  three  p.m.  We  had  most  successful ;  for  the  latter,  in  the 
nowfondlyhoped  that  further  massacre  supposition  that  they  would  be  fol- 
would  be  stopped.  Scarcely,  however,  lowed  by  others,  had  taken  flight  ere 
had  Skinner  taken  his  departure,  and  our  soldiers  had  reached  their  position, 
we,  who  had  now  been  marching  for  In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  as  our 
the  last  thirty  hours,  liad  lain  ourselves  small  party  would  not  admit  of  any 
down  i  n  the  snow,  completely  worn  division,  the  before-mentioned  soldiers 
outbycoId,fatigue,hunger,  and  thirst,  were  withdrawn.  We  again  entered 
than  our  persevering  foe,  not  yet  within  our  broken  walls,  and  again, 
glutted  with  the  blood  of  the  thou-  instantly,  was  our  foe  in  its  former 
sands  that  had  fallen,  suddenly  com-  position,  dealing  death  amongst  us.^' — 
menced  firing  volley  after  volley  into  iCaptain  Johnson's  Journal'] 
the  enclosure  where  wc  were  resting. 


RETENTION  OF  HOSTAGES.  241 

for  he  understood  the  language  employed.  Through  him 
the  wishes  of  the  General  were  now  conveyed  to  Akbar 
Khan.  The  Sirdar  promised  to  send  provisions  and 
water  to  the  famishing  troops,*  but  insisted  on  retaining 
the  General,  Shelton,  and  Johnson,  as  hostages  for  the 
evacuation  of  Jellalabad.  Elphinstone  earnestly  entreated 
permission  to  return  to  his  troops — urged  that,  as  com- 
manding officer  of  the  force,  his  desertion  would  appear 
dishonourable  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen,  and  pro- 
mised, on  returning  to  camp,  to  send  Brigadier  Anquetil 
in  his  place.  But  the  Sirdar  was  inexorable ;  and  so 
General  Elphinstone,  Brigadier  Shelton,  and  Captain 
Johnson  remained  as  hostages  in  the  hands  of  Akbar 
Khan.  That  night,  under  a  tent  provided  for  them  by 
the  Sirdar,  they  laid  themselves  down  in  their  cloaks, 
and  enjoyed  such  sleep  as  they  only  can  know  who  have 
spent  such  nights  of  horror  as  closed  upon  the  sufferers 
in  this  miserable  retreat. 

Next  morning  the  conference  was  resumed.  The 
English  officers  earnestly  implored  the  Sirdar  to  save  the 
renmant  of  the  unhappy  force ;  and  he  promised  to  exert 
all  the  authority  he  possessed  to  restrain  the  tribes  from 
their  unholy  work  of  massacre  and  plunder.  But  the 
petty  chiefs  of  the  country  between  Jugdulluck  and  Jel- 
lalabad came  flocking  in ;  and  it  seemed  impossible  to 
control  the  savage  impulses  of  hatred  and  vindictiveness 
which  broke  out  even  in  the  presence  of  the  English 
officers,  and  seemed  to  shut  out  all  hope  for  the  future.f 


*  « 


Subsequently/'    says    Captain  were  most  bitter  in  their  expressions 

Johnson,  **  we  had  the  extreme  mor-  of  hatred  against  us ;   and  declared 

tification  to  learn  that  not  one  par-  that  nothing  would  satisfy  them  and 

tide  of  food  or  water  had  been  tasted  their  men  but  our  extermmation,  and 

by  the  troops  from  their  arrival  to  money  they  would  not  receive.     The 

their  departure  from  Jugdulluck.**  Sirdar,  as  far  as   words  went,  tried 

t  '*  At  about  nine  a.m.  the  chiefs  of  all  in  his  power  to  conciliate  them, 

the  pass  and  of  the  country  towards  and  when  other  arguments  failed,  put 

Soorkhab  arrived,  when  we  all  sat  them  in  mind  of  his  father  and  the 

down  to  discuss  matters.    The  chiefs  whole  of  his  family  being  in  the  power 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

They  had  trampled  down  every  feeling  of  mercy  and 
compassion.  Even  avarice  had  ceased  to  be  a  moving 
principle;  offers  of  money  were  disregarded,  and  they 
loudly  declared  that  they  wanted  only  the  blood  of  the 
Feringhees.  In  vain  Akbar  Khan  tried  to  dissuade 
them  firom  their  horrid  purpose — in  vain  he  urged  that 
his  father  and  his  family  were  prisoners  in  the  hands  of 
the  British  Government ;  in  vain  the  offer  of  large  sums 
of  money  for  a  safe  conduct  to  Jellalabad  was  made  to 
these  unrelenting  chiefi-  Johnson,  who  understood  the 
language  well,  heard  them  conversing  in  Persian ;  and  it 
was  plain  that  they  revelled  in  the  thought  of  cutting 
the  throats  of  the  Feringhees  even  more  than  of  growing 
rich  on  their  plunder.  They  were  not  to  be  conciliated. 
Akbar  Klian  made  an  effort  to  pacify  them,  and  they 
said  in  reply  that  they  had  recommended  his  father  to 
kill  Bumes,  lest  he  should  return  and  bring  an  army 
with  him.* 

of  the  British  Government  at  Lood-  Ghilzyes  with  their  respective  chiefs 
hianah,  and  that  vengeance  would  be  continued  to  pour  in  from  the  sur- 
taken  by  the  latter  in  the  event  of  rounding  country  to  make  their 
mercy  not  being  shown  to  us.  Ma-  salaam  to  Mahomed  Akbar ;  to  par- 
homed  Shah  Khan  offered  them  60,000  ticipate  in  the  plunder  of  our  un- 
rupees  on  condition  of  our  not  being  fortunate  people  ;  and  to  revel  in 
molested.  After  some  time  they  took  the  delights  of  massacring  the  Euro- 
their  departure,  to  consult  with  their  peans.  From  their  expressions  of 
followers ;  and  Mahomed  Sliah  Khan  liatred  towards  the  whole  race  of 
mentioned  to  me  that  he  feared  the  us  Twhilst  conversing  in  Persian, 
chiefs  would  not,  without  some  great  whicn  they  frequently  did,  until  from 
inducement,  resist  the  temptation  of  a  hint  of  the  Sirdar  they  began  to 
plunder  and  murder  that  now  offered  talk  in  Pushtoo,  which  I  did  not 
itself,  and  wound  up  by  asking  if  we  understand),  they  appeared  to  antici- 
would  give  them  two  lakhs  of  rupees  pate  much  more  delight  in  cutting 
on  condition  of  being  allowed  a  free  our  throats  than  even  in  the  expected 
passage.  I  mentioned  this  to  General  booty.  The  Sirdar,  to  all  appearance, 
£Iphinstone,obtained  his  consent,  and  but  possibly  only  as  a  blind  to  his 
made  known  the  same  to  Mahomed  real  feelings>  whilst  sitting  with  me 
Shah,  wlio  went  away  and  promised  endeavoured  as  much  as  possible  to 
to  return  quickly.  The  General  conciliate  them.  The  reply  in  two 
again  begged  of  the  Sirdar  to  permit  instances  was,  '  When  Bumes  came 
him  to  return  to  his  troops;  but  into  this  country  was  not  your  father 
without  avail." — ^Captain  Johnson's  entreated  by  us  to  kill  him ;  or  he 
Journal']  would  go  back  to  Hindostan,  and  on 
*  **  Until  twelve  o  clock  crowds  of  some  future  day  return  with  an  army 


MALICE  OF  THE  GHILZYE  CHIEFS.  243 

If  there  was  any  hope  at  this  time  it  lay  in  an  appeal 
to  the  cupidity  of  the  chiefs,  but  their  hatred  seemed  to 
overlay  their  avarice.  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,*  however, 
had  undertaken  to  work  upon  their  known  love  of  money, 
and  asked  whether  the  British  were  prepared  to  pay 
two  lakhs  of  rupees  for  safe  conduct  to  Jellalabad.  The 
Greneral  had  assented  to  this,  and  Mahomed  Shah  Khan 
had  undertaken  the  office  of  mediator ;  but  it  was  long 
before  he  could  bring  about  any  satisfactory  arrangement. 
At  length,  as  the  shades  of  evening  were  thickening 
around  them,  he  brought  intelligence  to  the  eflfect  that 
everything  had  been  peaceably  settled,  and  that  the 
remnant  of  the  British  army  would  be  allowed  to  proceed 
unmolested  to  Jellalabad.f 

But  scarcely  had  he  announced  this  consoling  intelli- 
gence, when  the  sound  of  firing  was  heard  to  issue  fi:om 

and  take  our  country  from  us.    He  Ghilzjes  not  acceding  to  our  terms, 

would  not  listen  to  our  advice,  and  he  would  himself,  with  his  party  of 

what  is  the  consequence  ?     Let  us,  horsemen,  proceed  at  dusk  to  the  foot 

DOW  that  we  liave  the  opportunity,  of  the  hill,  wliere  our  troops  were 

take  advantage  of  it  and  Kill  these  bivouacked ;  and  previous  orders  hav- 

infidel    dogs.'  '* — \_Captain    JohnsotCs  ing  been  given  by  the  commanding- 

JoumdL']  officer  tliat  they  should  be  held  ready, 

*  Maliomed  Sliah  Khan  was  father-  he  would  bring  away  in  safety  every 

in-law  of  Akbar  Khan.  European,  by    desiring  each  of  his 

t  "  I  must  not,"  says  Captain  John-  horsemen  to  take  up  a  man  behind 
son,  **  omit  to  mention  that  Maliomed  him  ;  that  the  Ghilzyes  would  not  fire 
Akbar  Klian  told  me  in  the  morning,  on  the  Europeans  for  fear  of  hit- 
after  Mahomed  Sliah  Khan  had  gone  ting  him  or  his  men  :  but  that  he  could 
to  consult  witii  the  chiefs  of  the  pass,  not  allow  a  single  Hindostanee  to 
that  the  latter  were  dogs,  and  no  faith  follow,  as  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
to  be  placed  in  them  ;  and  begged  protect  2000  people  (our  computed 
that  I  would  send  for  three  or  four  of  number).  I  mentioned  thb  to  the 
my  most  intimate  friends,  that  their  General ;  but  it  was  deemed  im- 
lives  might  be  saved  in  the  event  of  practicable,  as,  from  past  experience, 
treachery  to  the  troops.  My  reply  we  had  seen  how  impossible  it  was  to 
was  that  I  would  gladly  do  so,  could  separate  the  non-combatants  from  the 
my  request  be  acceded  to ;  but  that  fighting  men.  Four  or  five  times 
the  commanding-officer  would  never  during  the  day  we  beard  the  report 
consent,  and  that  the  feelings  of  mv  of  musketry,  which  appeared  in  the 
friends  would  also  be  opposed  to  such  direction  of  our  troops,  but  were 
a  proceeding  at  a  time  of  so  imminent  always  told  on  making  inquiry  that  all 
peril  to  their  comrades.  The  Sirdar  fighting  had  ceased."* — [Certain  John^ 
also  proposed  that  in  the  event  of  the  ton's  /ouraa^] 

b2 


244  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

the  direction  in  which  the  British  troops  were  bivou- 
acked. By  the  order  of  the  General,  Captain  Johnson  had 
written  to  Brigadier  Anquetil,  upon  whom  now  as,  senior 
officer,  the  command  of  the  troops  had  devolved,  direct- 
ing him  to  have  the  troops  in  readiness  to  march  at  eight 
o'clock  on  the  following  morning.  But  the  letter  had  not 
been  despatched  when  the  firing  was  heard,  and  it  be- 
came evident  that  the  British  troops  were  again  on  the 
move.*  It  was  about  eight  o'clock,  on  the  evening  of 
the  12th,  that  the  few  remaining  men — now  reduced  to 
about  a  hundred  and  twenty  of  the  44th,  and  twenty- 
five  artillerymen — prepared  to  resume  their  perilous 
march.  The  curse  of  camp-followers  clung  to  them 
stiU.  The  teeming  rabble  again  came  huddling  against 
the  fighting  men ;  and  the  Afghans,  taking  advantage  of 
the  confusion  stole  in,  knife  in  hand,  amongst  them, 
destroying  all  the  unarmed  men  in  their  way,  and 
glutting  themselves  with  plunder. 

They  did  not,  this  time,  escape.  The  soldiers  turned 
and  bayoneted  the  plunderers;  and  fought  their  way 
bravely  on.  But  there  was  a  terrible  fate  awaiting  them 
as  they  advanced.  The  Jugdulluck  Pass  was  before 
them.  The  road  ascends  between  the  steep  walls  of  this 
dark  precipitous  defile,  and  our  wretched  men  struggled 
onward,  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  till  on  nearing 
the  summit  they  came  suddenly  upon  a  barricade,  and 

* '^  BytheGenerarsdesirel  wrotea  by  the  Ghilzyes.     We  were  all  in 

note  to  brigadier  Anquetil,  requesting  consternation.      At  first  the  Sirdar 

him  to  have  tiie  troops  in  readiness  to  suggested,  and  the  General  concurred 

march  at  eight  o'clock.     I  had  com-  in  the  same,  that  he  and  we  should 

menced  a  letter  to  General  Sale  to  follow  them.  In  two  or  three  minutes, 

evacuate  Jellalabad  (tliis  was  part  of  however,  the  former  changed  his  mind ; 

the  terms).    Suddenly,  and  before  my  and  said    he  feared    our  doing   so 

note  to  the  Brigadier  had  gone  oflT,  a  would,  instead  of  benefiting,  greatly 

great  deal  of  musket  firing  was  heard  injure  the  party,   by  bringing  after 

aown  the  valley  and  in  the  direction  them  the  whole  liorde  of  Ghilzyes  that 

of  the  troops  ;    and   a    report  was  were  then  assembled  in  the  valley." — 

brought  in  that  the  Europeans  were  [^Captain  Johnsons  Journal.^ 
moving  off  through  the  pass,  followed 


THE  JUGDULLUCK  PASS.  245 

were  thrown  back  in  surprise  and  dismay.  The  enemy 
had  blocked  up  the  mouth  of  the  pass.  Barriers,  made 
of  bushes  and  the  branches  of  trees,  opposed  the  progress 
of  the  column,  and  threw  the  whole  into  inextricable 
confusion.  The  camp-followers  crowded  upon  the  sol- 
diers, who,  in  spite  of  the  overwhelming  superiority  of 
the  enemy,  fought  with  a  desperate  valour  worthy  of  a 
better  fate.  The  Afghans  had  been  lying  in  wait  for  the 
miserable  remnant  of  the  British  army,  and  were  now 
busy  with  their  cruel  knives  and  their  unerring  jezails. 
The  massacre  was  something  terrible  to  contemplate. 
OflScers,  soldiers,  and  camp-followers  were  stricken  down 
at  the  foot  of  the  barricade.  A  few,  strong  in  the 
energy  of  desperation,  managed  to  struggle  through  it. 
But  from  that  time  all  hope  was  at  an  end.  There 
had  ceased  to  be  a  British  army. 

In  this  terrible  Jugdulluck  Pass  many  brave  officers 
fell  with  their  swords  in  their  hands.  Up  to  this  time 
death  had  not  been  very  busy  among  the  commissioned 
ranks  of  our  ill-fated  army.  The  number  of  officers  that 
survived,  when  the  column  left  Jugdulluck,  was  large 
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  soldiers  who  remained 
to  follow  them.  Though  they  had  ever  been  in  the 
midst  of  danger,  and  had  been  especially  marked  by  the 
A%han  jezailchees,  they  had  hitherto  escaped  with  an 
impunity  which  had  not  been  the  lot  of  the  common 
soldiers.  This  is  to  be  attributed  partly  to  external  and 
partly  to  internal  advantages.  They  had  enjoyed  no 
better  covering  and  no  better  food  than  their  comrades; 
but  they  had  ridden  good  horses;  and  though,  out- 
wardly, means  of  keeping  off  the  cruel  cold  had  not 
been  enjoyed  by  them  less  scantily  than  by  the  Euro- 
pean soldiers,  they  had  brought  to  their  aid  all  the 
advantages  of  superior  mental  resources.  They  had 
been  more  cautious  and  more  provident,  and  had  been 


246  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

gready  upheld  by  the  knowledge  of  the  responsibility 
which  in  such  a  fearM  conjuncture  devolved  upon 
them.  There  is  a  sustaining  power,  under  severe  phy- 
sical  trial,  in  the  sense  of  moral  responsibiUty ;  the  feel- 
ing that  others  are  dependent  upon  one's  exertions  has 
a  bracing  and  invigorating  effect ;  and  whatever  excites 
mental  activity  is  favorable  to  physical  endurance. 
Many,  in  the  course  of  that  terrible  retreat  from  Caubul, 
had  perished  under  the  influence  of  mental  despon- 
dency; many  had  been  destroyed  by  their  own  incau- 
tion.  The  officers  had  fallen  only  under  the  fire  of  the 
enemy.  Thousands  of  the  soldiers  and  camp-followers 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  cruel  cold. 

But  here,  at  this  fearful  JugduUuck  barrier,  death 
struck  at  the  officers  of  the  wretched  force.  Twelve 
of  the  best  and  bravest  here  found  their  last  resting- 
place.*  Here  fell  Brigadier  Anquetil,  upon  whom,  after 
the  departure  of  Elphinstone  and  Shdton,  had  devolved 
the  command  of  the  column.  He  had  been  the  chief 
of  Shah  Soojah's  force;  was  held  in  esteem  as  a  good 
officer ;  but  during  almost  the  entire  period  of  the  siege 
had  been  incapacitated  by  sickness  from  taking  a  promi- 
nent part  in  the  military  operations  which  had  ended 
in  so  much  disaster  and  di^ace.  Here,  too,  fell  Major 
Thain,  who  had  gone  out  to  India  as  the  friend  and 
aide-de-camp  of  General  Elphinstone,  and  in  that  capa- 
city had  followed  his  chief  to  Caubul;  but  throughout 
the  time  of  their  beleaguerment,  and  all  through  the 
retreat,  had  been  forward  in  the  hour  of  active  danger, 
and  had  gallantly  served  as  a  regimental  officer  when- 
ever one  was  wanted  to  lead  a  charge.     Here,  too,  fell 

♦  Brigadier  Anquetil ;  Col.  Cham-  Quartermaster    Halahan ;     Surgeon 

hers,  Captain  Blair,  Captain  Bott,  and  Harcourt  (H.M.'s  44tli)  ;  Lieutenant 

Lieut.  Bazett (5th  Cavalry);  Captain  Steer  (37th N.L);  Captain  Marshall^ 

Nicholl  (Horse   Artillery) ;    Major  Shah's  force. 
Thain,    A.D.C. ;    Captain    Dodgm ; 


NICHOLL  AND  HIS  TBOOP.  247 

Colonel  Chambers,  who  had  commanded  the  cavalry  at 
Caubul,  and  who  now,  with  other  officers  of  his  regi- 
ment, perished  in  the  attempt  to  clear  the  destroying  bar- 
riers.   And  here,  too,  fell  Captain  Nicholl,  of  the  Horse 
Artillery,  who  with  his  men,  all  through  the  dangers 
of  the  investment  and  the  horrors  of  the  retreat,  had 
borne  themselves  as  gallantly  as  the  best  of  English  sol- 
diers in  any  place  and  at  any  time.   Ever  in  the  midst  of 
danger,  now  charging  on  horse  and  now  on  foot,  were 
those  few  resolute  artillerymen.    With  mingled  admira- 
tion and  awe  the  enemy  marked  the  desperate  courage 
of  the  "  red  men,"  and  shrunk  from  a  close  conflict  with 
what  seemed  to  be  superhuman  strength  and  endiu'ance. 
There  is  not  much  in  the  events  of  the  outbreak  at 
Caubul  and  the  retreat  to  Jellalabad  to  be  looked  back 
upon  with  national  pride ;  but  the  monumental  colunm, 
on  which  is  inscribed  the  names  of  the  brave  men  of 
NichoU's  troops,  who  then  fell  in  action  with  the  enemy, 
only  displays  the  language  of  simple,  unostentatious  truth 
when  it  records  that,  on  "  occasions  of  unprecedented 
trial,  officers  and  men  upheld,  in  the  most  noble  manner, 
the  character  of  the  regiment  to  which  they  belonged ;" 
and  years  hence,  when  it  has  become  a  mere  tradition 
that  Dum-Dum  was  once  the  head-quarters  station  of 
that  distinguished  corps,  the  young  artilleryman,  stand- 
ing in  the  shadow  of  the  column,  will  read  how  NichoU's 
troop,  the  oldest  in  the  regiment,  was  annihilated  in  the 
fearful  passes  of  Afghanistan,  will  dwell  on  the  heroic 
conduct  which  preceded  their  fall,  and  glow  with  pride 
at  the  recollection  that  those  brave  men  were  a  portion 
of  the   regiment  which  now   bears  his  name  on  its 
rolls. 

At  this  JugduUuck  barrier  it  may  be  said  that  the 
Caubul  force  ceased  to  be.  A  few  officers  and  a  few 
men  cleared  the  barricade  j  and  struggled  on  towards 


248  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

Gundamuck.  About  daybreak  they  reached  that  place ; 
and  the  sun  rose  upon  a  party  of  some  twenty  officers 
and  forty-five  European  soldiers.  The  enemy  were 
mustering  around  them.  "  Every  hut  had  poured  forth 
its  inhabitants  to  murder  and  to  plunder."*  There  were 
not  more  than  two  rounds  of  ammunition  remaining 
in  the  pouches  of  our  men.  But  they  had  not  lost  all 
heart.  "  Their  numbers  were  as  one  to  a  hundred — ^most 
of  them  already  wounded,"t  l>ut  they  were  resolute  not 
to  lay  down  their  arms  whilst  a  spark  of  life  remained. 
A  messenger  came  from  the  chief  of  the  district  with 
overtures  to  the  senior  officer  present.  Major  Griffiths, 
of  the  37th  Native  Infantry,  was  then  the  chief  of  that 
little  band;  but  whilst  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  Sirdar, 
the  enemy  mustering  around  them  called  upon  them  to 
give  up  their  arms.  The  refusal  of  the  brave  men,  fol- 
lowed by  a  violent  attempt  to  disarm  them,  brought  on 
a  hand-to-hand  contest.  The  infuriated  mob  over- 
whelmed the  little  party  of  Englishmen,  and  cut  them 
up  almost  to  a  man.  Captain  Souter,  of  the  44th  Regi- 
ment, who  had  wrapped  the  regimental  colour  round  his 
waist,  and  a  few  privates,  were  taken  prisoners.  The 
rest  were  all  massacred  at  Gundamuck.J 

A  few,  however,  had  pushed  on  fi:om  Soorkhab, 
which  lies  between  JugduUuck  and  Gundamuck,  in 
advance  of  the  column.  One  by  one  they  fell  by  the 
way,  until  the  number  was  reduced  to  six.     Captains 

♦  Captain  Johnson's  Journal,  Primrose,  of  H.M.*s  44th ;  Lieutenant 
f  Ibid,  Horsburgh  and  Dr.  Metcalfe,  of  the 
X  The  o&cers  known  to  have  5th  N.I. ;  Captain  Reid  and  Lieu- 
perished  at  Gundamuck  were  Cap-  tenant  Hawtry,  of  the  37th  N.I. ; 
tain  Grant,  Assistant  -  Adjutant-  Lieutenants  Weaver,  Morrison,  and 
General,  who  had  been  severely  Cunningham,  of  the  d4thN.L;  Lieu- 
wounded  at  Jugdulluck;  Lieutenant  tenant  Hobhouse,  of  H.M/s  ISth ; 
Stewart,  Horse  Artillery ;  Captain  Captain  Hay,  Lieutenant  Green  (Ar- 
Hamilton,  5th  Cavalry ;  Captain  Col-  tillery);  and  Lieutenant  Macartney, 
lins.  Lieutenants  Hog^,  Cumberland,  of  the  Shah*s  service, 
and  Swinton,  and  Assistant-Surgeon 


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  FORCE.  249 

Bellew,  CoUyer,  and  Hopkins,  Lieutenant  Bird,  and  Drs. 
Harpur  and  Brydon,  reached  Futtehabad  alive.  They 
were  then  only  sixteen  miles  from  Jellalabad.  A 
prospect  of  salvation  opened  out  before  them  all;  but 
only  one  was  suffered  to  escape.  Some  peasants  in  the 
vicinity  of  Futtehabad  came  out,  spoke  to  the  fugitives, 
and  offered  them  bread  to  eat.  They  thought  that  a 
little  food  would  strenghten  them  to  toil  on  to  the  end 
of  their  painful  journey;  and  the  agonies  of  hunger  were 
hard  to  endure.  But  again  was  there  death  in  delay. 
Whilst  our  officers  tarried  for  a  few  minutes  to  satisfy 
the  cravings  of  nature,  some  of  the  armed  inhabitants  of 
the  place  sallied  out  and  attacked  them.  Bellew  and 
Bird  were  cut  down.  The  others  rode  off;  but  were 
pursued  and  overtaken;  and  three  of  the  remaining 
number  were  slain.  Dr.  Brydon  alone  escaped  to  Jella- 
labad. Wounded,  and  worn  out  by  famine  and  fatigue, 
he  had  struggled  onward,  borne  by  a  jaded  pony,  till 
the  walls  of  the  fort  appeared  in  sight;  and  a  party 
came  out  to  succour  him. 

So  perished  the  last  remnant  of  a  force  which  had  left 
Caubul  numbering  4,500  fighting  men  and  12,000  camp- 
followers.  The  frost  and  the  snow  had  destroyed  more 
than  the  jezails  and  the  knives  of  the  Afghans.  It  was 
not  a  human  enemy  alone  with  which  those  miserable 
men  had  to  contend.  It  was  theirs  to  war  against  a 
climate  more  perilous  in  its  hostility  than  the  inexorable 
foe.  But  neither  the  cruel  cold  nor  the  malignant  Afghans 
would  have  consigned  the  British  army  to  destruction,  if 
the  curse  which  had  so  long  brooded  over  the  councils  of 
our  military  chiefs,  and  turned  everything  into  folly  and 
imbecility,  had  not  followed  them  on  their  exode  from  the 
Caubul  cantonments,  and  crowned  the  catalogue  of  disaster 
and  disgrace.  It  is  probable  that,  if  greater  energy  had 
been  exhibited  at  the  commencement  of  the  retreat — if 


250  THE  RETBEAT  FROM  CAUBUIi. 

nothing  had  been  thought  of  but  the  best  means  of  ac- 
complishing the  march  through  the  snow  with  the  utmost 
possible  rapidity — a  large  portion  of  the  force  would  have 
been  saved.  But  the  delays  which  were  suffered  to  arise 
at  the  commencement  of  the  retreat  sealed  the  fate  of 
the  army.  They  threw  the  game  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  We  waited,  indeed,  whilst  the  gates  were  being 
closed  upon  us,  and  then  there  was  no  outlet  of  escape. 
Whilst  our  wretched  people  were  halting  and  perishing 
in  the  snow,  the  enemy  were  gathering  in  advance  of 
them  and  lining  the  passes,  intent  on  their  destruction. 
The  events  of  that  miserable  week  in  January  afforded  a 
fitting  climax  to  the  series  of  disasters  which  had  darkened 
the  two  preceding  months.  There  is  nothing,  indeed, 
more  remarkable  in  the  history  of  the  world  than  the 
awful  completeness — the  sublime  unity — of  this  Caubul 
tragedy. 

It  would  be  unprofitable  to  enter  into  an  inquiry  regard- 
ing all  the  minute  details  of  misdirection  and  mismanage- 
ment, making  up  the  great  sum  of  human  folly,  which 
was  the  permitted  means  of  our  overthrow.  In  the  pages 
of  a  heathen  writer  over  such  a  story  as  this  would  be 
cast  the  shadow  of  a  tremendous  Nemesis.  The  Christian 
historian  uses  other  words,  but  the  same  prevailing  idea 
runs,  like  a  great  river,  through  his  narrative;  and  the 
reader  recognises  the  one  great  truth,  that  the  wisdom 
of  our  statesmen  is  but  foolishness,  and  the  might  of  our 
armies  is  but  weakness,  when  the  curse  of  God  is  sitting 
heavily  upon  an  unholy  cause.  "  For  the  Lord  God  of 
recompenses  shall  surely  requite.*' 


EFJFOBTS  AT  RETRIEVAL.  251 


CHAPTER  m. 

[1841—1842.] 

Efforts  at  Retrieval — Close  of  Lord  Auckland's  Administration — Embar- 
rassments of  his  Position — Opinions  of  Sir  Jasper  Kicolls — ^Efforts  of 
Mr.  Georffe  Clerk — Despatch  of  the  First  Brigade — ^Appointment  of  Gre- 
neral  Poltock — ^Despatch  of  the  Second  Bri^de — Expected  Arrival  of 
Lord  EUenborough — Further  Embarrassments. 

At  this  time  the  Govemor-Greneral  and  his  family 
were  resident  at  Calcutta.  The  period  of  Lord  Auck- 
land's tenure  of  the  vice-regal  office  was  drawing  to  a 
dose.  He  was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  his  successor. 
It  had  seemed  to  him,  as  the  heavy  periodical  rains 
began  slowly  to  give  place  to  the  cool  weather  of  the 
early  winter,  that  there  was  nothing  to  overshadow 
the  closing  scenes  of  his  administration,  and  to  vex  his 
spirit  with  misgivings  and  regrets  during  the  monotonous 
months  of  the  homeward  voyage.  The  three  first 
weeks  of  October  brought  him  only  cheering  intelligence 
finom  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus.  The  Envoy  con- 
tinued to  report,  with  confidence,  the  increasing  tran- 
quillity of  Afghanistan.  The  Douranee  insurrection 
seemed  to  have  been  suppressed,  and  there  was  nothing 
sturing  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Caubul  to  create 
anxiety  and  alarm.* 

*  On  the  22nd  of  October,  Lord  also  been  completely  put  down  with- 
Ancklandwrote  to  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  out  more  fighting.  Griffin's  affair 
that  Macgregor's  expedition  had  seems  to  have  expelled  their  pug- 
ended  prosperously.  "  The  Doura-  nacious  propensities." —  [3/5.  Corre" 
nee  msorrection/'  he  added,   "  has  spotwknce,'] 


i 


252  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

But  November  set  in  gloomy  and  threatening.  The 
clouds  were  gathering  in  the  distance.  It  now  seemed 
to  Lord  Auckland  that  his  administration  was  doomed 
to  close  in  storm  and  convulsion.  Intelligence  of  the 
Ghilzye  outbreak  arrived.  It  was  plain  that  the  passes 
were  sealed,  for  there  were  no  tidings  from  Caubul. 
There  might  be  rebelUon  and  disaster  at  the  capital ; 
our  communications  were  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy; 
and  all  that  was  known  at  Calcutta  was  that  Sale's 
brigade  had  been  fighting  its  way  downwards,  and  had 
lost  many  men  and  some  officers  in  skirmishes  with  the 
Ghilzye  tribes,  which  had  seemingly  been  productive  of 
no  important  results.  There  was  something  in  all  this 
very  perplexing  and  embarrassing.  Painful  doubts  and 
apprehensions  began  to  disturb  the  mind  of  the  Gover- 
nor-General. It  seemed  to  be  the  beginning  of  the 
end. 

Never  was  authentic  inteUigence  from  Caubul  looked 
for  with  so  much  eager  anxiety  as  throughout  the  month 
of  November.  When  tidings  came  at  last — only  too 
faithful  in  their  details  of  disaster — they  came  in  a 
dubious,  unauthoritative  shape,  and,  for  a  time,  were  re- 
ceived with  incredulity.  At  the  end  of  the  third  week 
of  November,  letters  from  Meerut,  Kurnaul,  and  other 
stations  in  the  upper  provinces  of  Hindostan,  announced 
that  reports  had  crossed  the  frontier  to  the  eflfect  that 
there  had  been  a  general  rising  at  Caubul,  that  the  city 
had  been  fired,  and  that  Sir  Alexander  Bumes  had  been 
killed.  Letters  to  this  effect  reached  the  offices  of  the 
public  journals,  but  no  intelligence  had  been  received  at 
Government  House,  and  a  hope  was  expressed  in  official 
quarters  that  the  stories  in  circulation  were  exaggerated 
native  rumours.  But,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  the 
same  stories  were  repeated  in  letters  from  Mr.  Geoige 
Clerk|  the    Governor-General's  agent  on    the    north- 


FIRST  TIDINGS  OF  DISASTER.  253 

western  frontier,  and  from  Captain  Mackeson  at  Pesha- 
wur;  and  the  intelligence  came  coupled  with  urgent  re- 
quisitions for  the  despatch  of  reinforcements  to  Afghan- 
istan. Though  no  authentic  tidings  had  been  received 
from  Caubul,  the  advices  from  our  political  fimctionaries, 
on  the  intermediate  line  of  country,  were  of  a  character 
not  to  be  questioned ;  and  Lord  Auckland,  who  a 
day  or  two  before  had  received  letters  from  Sir  Wil- 
liam Macnaghten,  assuring  him  that  the  disturbances 
were  at  an  end,  awoke  to  the  startling  truth  that  all 
Caubul  was  in  a  blaze,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  Sud- 
dozye  Princes  and  their  foreign  supporters  threatened 
by  a  general  outburst  of  national  indignation.  Af- 
ghanistan— serene  and  prosperous  Afghanistan — with 
its  popular  government  and  its  grateful  people,  was  in 
arms  against  its  deliverers.  Suddenly  the  tranquillity 
of  that  doomed  country,  boasted  of  in  Caubul  and 
credited  in  Calcutta,  was  found  to  be  a  great  delusion. 
Across  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  land  the 
history  of  that  gigantic  lie  was  written  in  characters  of 
blood.  It  was  now  too  deplorably  manifest  that,  al- 
though a  British  army  had  crossed  the  Indus  and  can- 
toned itself  at  Caubul  and  Candahar,  the  Afghans  were 
Afghans  still — still  a  nation  of  fierce  Mahomedans,  of 
hardy  warriors,  of  independent  mountaineers;  still  a 
people  not  to  be  dragooned  into  peace,  or  awed  into 
submission,  by  a  scattering  of  foreign  bayonets  and  the 
pageantry  ofa  puppet  king. 

The  blow  fell  heavily  upon  Lord  Auckland.  An  ami- 
able gentleman  and  a  well-intentioned  statesman  he  had 
made  for  himself  many  friends;  and,  perhaps,  there  was 
not  in  all  Calcutta  at  that  time,  even  amongst  the  most 
strenuous  opponents  of  the  policy  which  had  resulted 
in  so  much  misery  and  disgrace,  one  who  did  not  now 
grieve  for  the  sufierings  of  him  whose  errors  had  been  so 


254  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

severely  visited.  Had  it  fallen  at  any  other  time  it  would 
not  have  been  so  acutely  felt.  But  it  came  upon  him  at 
the  close  of  his  reign,  when  he  could  do  nothing  to  restore 
the  brilUancy  of  his  tarnished  reputation.  He  had  ex- 
pected to  embark  for  England  a  happy  man  and  a  suc- 
cessful ruler.  He  had,  as  he  thought,  conquered  and 
tranquillised  A%hanistan.  For  the  former  exploit  he  had 
been  created  an  earl;  and  the  latter  would  have  entitled 
him  to  the  honour.  It  is  true  that  he  had  drained  the 
treasury  of  India ;  but  he  belived  that  he  was  about  to 
hand  over  no  embryo  war  to  his  successor,  and  that, 
therefore,  the  treasury  would  soon  replenish  itself  The 
prospect  was  sufficiently  cheering,  and  he  was  eager  to 
depart  j  but  the  old  year  wore  to  a  close,  and  found  Lord 
Auckland  pacing,  with  a  troubled  countenance,  the  spa- 
cious apartments  of  Government  House — found  him  the 
most  luckless  of  rulers  and  the  most  miserable  of  men. 

Never  was  statesman  so  cast  down — never  was  states- 
man so  perplexed  and  bewildered.  The  month  of  De- 
cember was  one  of  painful  anxiety — of  boding  fear — 
of  embarrassing  uncertainty.  There  was  no  official 
information  from  Caubul.  The  private  accounts  received 
from  Jellalabad  and  Peshawur,  always  brief,  often  vague 
and  conflicting,  excited  the  worst  apprehensions  without 
dispelling  much  of  the  public  ignorance.  In  this  con- 
juncture, government  were  helpless.  The  Caubul  force, 
cut  off  from  all  support,  could  by  no  possibiUty  be 
rescued.  The  utmost  vigour  and  determination — ^the 
highest  wisdom  and  sagacity — could  avail  nothing  at 
such  a  time.  The  scales  had  fallen  from  the  eyes  of  the 
Governor-General  only  to  show  him  the  utter  hopeless- 
ness of  the  case.  In  this  terrible  emergency  he  seems  to 
have  perceived,  for  the  first  time,  the  madness  of  posting 
a  detached  force  in  a  foreign  country,  hundreds  of  miles 
fi'om  our  own  frontier,  cut  off  from  all  support  by  rugged 


LORD  Auckland's  embarrassments.  255 

mountains  and  impenetrable  defiles.  Before  a  single 
brigade  could  be  pushed  on  to  the  relief  of  the  beleaguered 
force  the  whole  army  might  be  annihilated.  Clearly 
Lord  Auckland  now  beheld  the  inherent  viciousness  of 
the  original  policy  of  the  war,  and,  in  sorrow  and 
humiliation,  began  to  bethink  himself  of  the  propriety 
of  abandoning  it. 

What  Lord  Auckland  now  wrote  publicly  on  this 
subject  is  on  record;  what  he  wrote  privately  is  known 
to  a  few.  That  the  Grovernor-General,  in  this  terrible 
conjuncture,  succumbed  to  the  blow  which  had  fallen 
upon  him — that  his  energies  did  not  rise  with  the 
occasion,  but  that  the  feebleness  of  paralysis  was  con- 
spicuous in  all  that  he  did,  has  often  been  asserted  and 
never  confidently  denied.  But  it  may  be  doubted 
whether  his  feelings  or  his  conduct  at  this  time  have 
ever  been  fairly  judged  or  clearly  understood.  The 
truth  is,  that  he  had  originally  committed  himself  to  a 
course  of  policy  which  never  had  his  cordial  approbation, 
and  his  after-efforts  to  uphold  which  he  inwardly  re- 
garded as  so  many  attempts  to  make  the  worse  appear  the 
better  reason.  It  is  plain  that  very  soon  after  the  occupa- 
tion of  Caubul  had  for  a  time  brought  the  Afghan 
campaign  to  a  close,  the  Grovemor-General  began  to 
entertain  very  painful  doubts  and  misgivings;  and  that, 
although  he  by  no  means  anticipated  the  sudden  and 
disastrous  fall  of  the  whole  edifice  he  had  raised,  he  had, 
long  before  the  close  of  1841,  repented  of  his  own  infir- 
mity of  purpose,  in  giving  way  to  the  counsels  of  others ; 
and  began  to  doubt  whether  we  had  succeeded  in  the 
great  object  of  the  war — ^the  establishment  of  such  a 
friendly  power  in  Afghanistan  as  would  secure  us  against 
western  aggression.  He  must  have  seen,  too — for  he 
was,  in  the  main,  a  just  and  an  honest  man — that  the 
poUcy,  which  he  had  sanctioned,  cradled  in  injustice  as 


256  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

it  was,  was  continually  perpetuating  injustice;  and  lie 
must  have  heard  the  wrongs  of  the  Afghan  chiefs  and  the 
Afghan  nation  eternally  crying  out  to  him  for  redress. 
Macnaghten  complained  that  Lord  Auckland  and  Mr. 
Colvin  were  too  ready  to  believe  all  the  stories  of  the  un- 
popularity of  the  government  and  discontent  of  the  chiefs 
and  the  people,  which  reached  them  through  obscure 
channels  of  information ;  though  those  channels  of  in- 
formation were  the  local  newspapers,  whose  informants 
were  generally  officers  of  rank  and  character.  But  in 
spite  of  the  Envoy's  assurances  and  denials.  Lord  Auck- 
land had  begun  to  suspect  that  there  was  something 
rotten  at  the  core  of  our  Afghan  policy;  and  something 
pre-eminently  defective  in  the  administrative  conduct  of 
those  to  whom  its  working  out  had  been  entrusted.  He 
did  not,  in  the  autumn  of  1841,  believe  that  any  sudden 
and  overwhelming  storm  would  cloud  the  last  days  of  his 
Indian  government;  but  he  had  begun  to  encourage  the 
belief  that  he  had  made  a  fatal  mistake,  and  that,  sooner 
or  later,  the  real  character  of  his  Afghan  policy  would 
be  revealed  to  the  world. 

But  there  was  something  more  than  his  own  doubts 
and  misgivings  to  be  considered.  Lord  Auckland  knew 
that  the  connexion  he  had  established  in  Afghanistan  was 
distasteful  in  the  extreme  to  the  East  India  Company. 
He  knew  that  the  Court  of  Directors  were  desirous  that 
he  should  avail  himself  of  the  earliest  possible  oppor- 
tunity of  severing  that  connexion  for  ever.  On  the  31st 
of  December,  1840,  the  Court  of  Directors  had  written 
out  to  the  Supreme  Government:  "We  pronounce  our 
'  decided  opinion  that  for  many  years  to  come  the  restored 
monarchy  will  have  need  of  a  British  force  in  order  to 
maintain  peace  in  its  own  territory,  and  prevent  aggres- 
sion from  without.  We  must  add,  that  to  attempt  to  ac- 
complish this  by  a  small  force,  or  by  the  mere  influence 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  257 

of  British  Residents,  will,  in  our  opinion,  be  most  unwise 
and  frivolous,  and  that  we  should  prefer  the  entire  aban- 
donment of  the  country,  and  a  frank  confession  of  com- 
plete failure,  to  any  such  policy.  Even  financial  consi- 
derations justify  this  view,  inasmuch  as  a  strong  and 
adequate  military  establishment,  costly  as  it  must  be,  will 
hardly  entail  so  much  expense  upon  you  as  those  re- 
peated revolts  and  disorders  which  must  arise  in  an  ill- 
governed,  half-subdued  country;  and  which  will  compel 
you  to  make  great  and  sudden  efforts  to  maintain  your 
character  and  recover  predominance.  To  whatever  quar- 
ter we  direct  our  attention,  we  behold  the  restored  mo- 
narchy menaced  by  dangers,  which  cannot  possibly  be 
encountered  by  the  military  means  at  the  disposal  of  the 
minister  at  the  court  of  Shah  Soojah ;  and  we  again  desire 
you  seriously  to  consider  which  of  the  two  alternatives 
(a  speedy  retreat  from  Afghanistan  or  a  considerable 
increase  of  the  military  force  in  that  country)  you  may 
feel  it  your  duty  to  adopt.  We  are  convinced  that  you 
have  no  middle  course  to  pursue  with  safety  or  with 
honour."*  And  six  months  afterwards  the  court  again 
wrote  (June  2,  1841):  "The  surrender  of  Dost  Maho- 
med does  not  alter  the  views  contained  in  our  late  letters ; 
and  we  hope  that  advantage  will  be  taken  of  it  to  settle 
affairs  in  Afghanistan  according  to  those  views. "f 

Such,  as  Lord  Auckland  knew  them  to  be,  were  the 
views  of  the  East  India  Company.  There  was  very  good 
reason  for  all  this.  The  necessity  of  sustaining  Shah 
Soojah  on  the  throne  of  Caubul  had  drained  the  financial 
resources  of  the  Company  to  the  dregs,  and  was  entailing 
upon  them  liabilities  which,  if  not  speedily  retrenched, 
they  might  have  found  it  impossible  to  discharge.  The 
injustice  of  the  occupation  of  Afghanistan  was  not  con- 
fined to  the  people  of  that  country.     A  grievous  injus- 

♦  MS.  Records.  t  /^'^. 

VOL.  II.  S 


258  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

tice  was  being  inflicted  upon  the  people  of  Hindostan. 
No  man  knew  this  better,  or  deplored  it  more  deeply, 
than  Lord  Auckland  himself.  The  opinions  of  the  East 
India  Company  had,  at  all  events,  been  clearly  expressed, 
and  Lord  Auckland,  not  taking  into  consideration  the 
fact  that  peculiar  circumstances  might  warrant,  or  even 
dictate,  a  departure  from  the  general  policy  inculcated  by 
the  Court,  deemed  that  the  opportunity  had  now  arrived 
for  our  withdrawal  from  the  difficulties  and  embarrass- 
ments which  had  beset  our  unfortunate  career  in  Af- 
ghanistan. 

And  when  he  turned  his  thoughts  from  Leadenhall* 
street  to  Downing-street,  it  appeared  to  him  that  there 
were  still  weightier  reasons  for  the  abandonment  of  our 
ill-omened  connexion  with  the  countries  beyond  the 
Indus.  The  Whigs  had  sent  him  to  India;  the  Con- 
servatives were  now  in  office.  At  the  end  of  August 
the  Melbourne  ministry  had  resigned ;  and  Peel  was  now 
at  the  head  of  the  cabinet.  It  was  known  that  the  Con- 
servative party  either  were,  or  made  a  show  of  being, 
radically  opposed  to  the  Afghan  policy  of  the  government 
which  they  had  displaced.  It  was  natural,  therefore, 
that  Lord  Auckland,  who  was  now  awaiting  the  arrival 
of  his  successor,  should  have  shrunk  from  committing 
him  to  any  extensive  measures  for  the  recovery  of  our 
position  in  Afghanistan,  which,  in  all  probability,  he 
would  not  be  disposed  to  carry  out.  Whatever  amount 
of  energy  the  old  ruler  might  now  throw  into  the  work 
before  him,  it  was  certain  that  he  would  only  be  able  to 
commence  what  he  must  leave  to  his  successor  to  com- 
plete. To  have  handed  over  to  the  new  Governor- 
General  the  outline  of  a  political  scheme,  just  sufficiently 
worked  out  in  its  details  to  render  its  abandonment 
impossible,  would  have  been  to  embarrass  and  hamper 
him  at  the  outset  of  his  career  in  a  manner  that  would 


VIEWS  OP  LORD  AUCKLAND.  259 

have  perplexed  the  new  ruler  in  the  extreme,  and 
jeopardised  the  interests  of  the  empire.  He  believed 
that  the  policy  of  the  Conservatives  was  nearly  identical 
with  that  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  that  they 
would  eagerly  take  advantage  of  the  present  crisis  to 
sever  our  connexion  with  the  countries  beyond  the 
Indus,  and  to  declare  the  failure  of  the  original  scheme 
propounded  in  the  Simlah  manifesto  of  1 838. 

It  is  right  that  Lord  Auckland  should  have  ample 
credit  for  suffering  these  important  considerations  to 
exercise  their  due  influence  over  his  counsels.  It  is  right, 
too,  that  it  should  be  clearly  recognised  how  great  was  the 
moral  courage  it  demanded,  either  practically  to  declare 
by  himself,  or  to  leave  to  others  to  declare,  the  utter 
failure  of  a  great  political  scheme  for  which  he  was  re- 
sponsible to  his  country,  and  with  which,  from  generation 
to  generation,  his  name  will  be  indissolubly  associated  in 
the  page  of  history.  But  when  all  this  has  been  said, 
there  still  remains  to  be  recorded  the  humiliating  fact  that 
a  great  crisis  suddenly  arose,  and  Lord  Auckland  was  not 
equal  to  it.  He  had  begun  himself  to  doubt  the  justice 
and  expediency  of  the  policy  of  1838.  He  knew  that  the 
£ast  India  Company  were  desirous  that  he  should  not 
persevere  in  a  course  which  had  brought  them  to  the 
verge  of  bankruptcy,  and  was  inflicting  grievous  injuries 
upon  the  people  of  Hindostan.  He  knew  that  the  Tory 
government  heartily  disapproved  of  the  occupation  of  Af- 
ghanistan, and  had  only  been  waiting  for  an  opportunity 
to  reverse  the  policy  of  the  WTiigs;  and  he  believed, 
therefore,  that  it  was  his  duty  to  direct  all  his  efforts  to 
the  one  object  of  withdrawing  our  beleaguered  garrisons  in 
safety  to  Hindostan.  But  he  seems,  in  the  bewilderment 
and  perplexity  which  followed  the  stunning  blow  that 
had  descended  so  suddenly  upon  him,  to  have  forgotten 
that  there  are  in  the  lives  of  nations,  as  of  men,  great  and 

s2 


260  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

imminent  conjunctures,  which  not  only  sanction,  but 
demand,  a  departure  from  ordinary  rules  of  conduct  and 
principles  of  statesmanship.  Such  a  conjuncture  had  now 
arisen ;  and,  important  as  were  all  the  considerations  re- 
capitulated above,  they  should  have  given  place  in  his 
mind  to  the  one  paramount  desire  of  demonstrating  to  all 
the  nations  of  the  East  the  invincibility  of  British  arms. 
Neither  the  wishes  of  the  East  India  Company  nor  the 
opinions  of  the  Conservative  government  had  been  de- 
clared in  the  face  of  a  great  disaster.  The  withdrawal  of 
the  British  army  from  Afghanistan  might,  and  I  believe 
would,  have  been  a  measure  of  sound  policy;  but  only 
if  the  time  and  manner  of  withdrawal  had  been  well 
chosen.  It  could  never  have  been  sound  policy  to  with- 
draw under  the  pressure  of  an  overwhelming  defeat.  To 
retire  from  Afghanistan  was  one  thing;  to  be  driven 
out  of  it  was  another.  A  frank  avowal  of  error,  calmly 
and  deliberately  enunciated,  under  no  pressure  of  im- 
mediate danger  or  insurmountable  difficulty,  would  have 
denoted  only  conscious  strength.  It  would  have  been  the 
dignified  self-negation  of  a  powerful  state  daring  to  be 
just  to  others  and  true  to  itself.  But  to  abandon  the 
country,  precipitately  and  confusedly,  under  the  pressure 
of  disaster  and  defeat,  would  have  been  a  miserable  con- 
fession of  weakness  that  might  have  shaken  to  its  very 
foundation  the  British  Empire  in  the  East. 

And  such  a  confession  of  weakness  Lord  Auckland 
was  inclined  to  make.  He  seemed  to  reel  and  stagger 
under  the  blow — to  be  paralysed  and  enfeebled  by  the 
disasters  that  had  overtaken  him.  His  correspondence 
at  this  time  betokened  such  painful  prostration,  that  some 
to  whom  he  wrote  destroyed,  in  pity,  all  traces  of  these 
humiliating  revelations.  It  was  vaguely  rumoured,  too, 
how,  in  bitterness  of  spirit,  he  spent  long  hours  pacing 
by  day  the  spacious   verandahs  of  Government  House; 


PROSTKATION  OF  LORD  AUCKLAND.  261 

or,  by  night,  cooling  his  fevered  brow  on  the  grass-plots 
in  front  of  it,  accompanied  by  some  member  of  his  house- 
hold endeared  to  him  by  ties  of  blood.  The  curse  brooded 
over  him,  as  it  was  brooding  over  Elphinstone  and  Mac- 
naghten,  darkening  his  vision,  clouding  his  judgment, 
prostrating  his  energies — turning  everything  to  feebleness 
and  folly.  New  tidings  of  disaster — misfortune  treading 
on  the  heels  of  misfortune — came  flooding  in  from  beyond 
the  Indus;  and  the  chief  ruler  of  the  land,  with  a  great 
army  at  his  call,  thought  only  of  extrication  and  retreat — 
thought  of  bringing  back,  instead  of  pushing  forward,  our 
troops;  of  abandoning,  instead  of  regaining,  our  position. 
Fascinated,  as  it  were,  by  the  great  calamity,  his  eyes 
were  rivetted  on  the  little  line  of  country  between  Caubul 
and  Peshawur;  and  he  did  not  see^  in  his  eagerness  to 
rescue  small  detachments  from  danger,  and  to  escape  the 
immediate  recurrence  of  new  disasters  in  Afghanistan, 
that  the  question  now  to  be  solved  was  one  of  far  greater 
scope  and  significance — that  it  was  not  so  much  whether 
Afghanistan  were  to  be  occupied,  as  whether  India  were 
to  be  retained.  But  there  were  old  and  experienced  poli- 
ticians, well  acquainted  with  the  temper  of  the  chiefs  and 
the  people  of  India  and  the  countries  beyond,  who  believed 
that  any  manifestation  of  weakness,  in  this  conjuncture, 
would  have  endangered  the  security  of  our  position  in 
India;  and  that,  therefore,  cost  what  it  might,  a  blow 
must  be  struck  for  the  recovery  of  our  military  supre- 
macy in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus. 

But  from  the  very  first  Lord  Auckland  began  to 
despond,  and  steadfastly  set  his  face  against  any  mea- 
sures of  military  re-establishment.  When,  on  the  26th 
of  November,  he  received  from  Mr.  Clerk  and  Captain 
Mackeson  intelligence  which  confirmed  the  newspaper 
accounts  received  two  days  before,  and  read  the  pressing 
requisitions  of  those  oflScers  for  the  despatch  of  more 


262  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

troops  to  the  frontier,  he  wrote  to  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,  who  was  then  journeying  through  the  Upper  Pro- 
vinces of  India :  "  It  is  not  clear  to  me  how  the  march 
of  a  brigade  can  by  possibility  have  any  influence  upon 
the  events  which  it  is  supposed  may  be  passing  at  Cau- 
bul.  .  .  .  They  may  be  at  Jellalabad  in  February,  and 
could  not  march  onwards  to  Caubul  before  April.  .  •  • 
It  may  be  well,  perhaps,  that  two  or  three  regiments 
should  be  assembled  at  Peshawur.  .  .  I  wish  the  requisi- 
tion had  been  made  with  less  trepidation.'^  Again,  on  the 
1st  of  December,  he  wrote  to  the  same  oflSicer:  "  It  seems 
to  me  that  we  are  not  to  think  of  marching  fresh  armies 
for  the  re-conquest  of  that  which  we  are  likely  to  lose.  .  . 
The  difficulty  will  not  be  one  of  fighting  and  gaining 
victories,  but  of  supplies,  of  movements,  and  of  carriage. 
.  .  .  The  troops  in  Afghanistan  are  sufficiently  nume- 
rous. They  would  but  be  encumbered  by  greater  num- 
bers, and  reinforcements  could  not  arrive  before  the  crisis 
will  have  passed.  If  the  end  is  to  be  disastrous,  they 
would  but  increase  the  extent  of  the  disaster."  On  the 
following  day  he  again  wrote  to  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  set- 
ting forth  the  views  of  government,  to  the  effect — "  1st. 
That  we  should  not  fit  out  large  armaments  for  re-conquest 
— such  an  enterprise  would  be  beyond  our  means.  2nd. 
That  even  for  succours  the  season  is  unfavourable  and 
impracticable,  and  months  must  pass  before  it  could  be 
attempted.  3rdly.  That  if  aid  can  be  given,  the  officer 
in  command  should  not  be  prohibited  firom  seizing  the 
opportunity  of  affording  it.  I  fear,"  added  the  Gover- 
nor-General in  this  letter,  "  that  safety  to  the  force  at 
Caubul  can  only  come  from  itself"  On  the  5th  he  wrote 
to  the  same  correspondent,  that  '^  we  should  stand  fast 
and  gather  strength  at  Peshawur" — on  the  Sutlej,  and  on 
the  Indus.  "  Our  power,"  he  said,  "  of  giving  succour 
is  extremely  limited,  and  if  it  come  at  all,  it  can  only 
come  tardily.  .  .  .  We  must  look  on  an  advance  from 


LORD  Auckland's  correspondence.  263 

Jellalabad  for  some  months  as  utterly  out  of  the  question. 
An  advance  even  to  Jellalabad  could  only  be  to  give 
security  to  Sale,  and  with  the  aid  of  the  Sikhs,  one 
brigade,  with  artillery,  should  be  sufficient.  If  all  should 
be  lost  at  Caubul  we  will  not  encounter  new  hazards  for 
re-conquest."*  On  the  9th  of  December  he  wrote,  still 
more  emphatically:  "  The  present  state  of  affairs,  whether 
its  issue  be  fortunate  or  disastrous,  is  more  likely  to  lead 
within  a  few  months  to  the  withdrawal  of  troops  to  our 
frontiers  than  to  the  employment  of  larger  means  beyond 
it."  A  week  afterwards  he  wrote,  still  to  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief: "  We  must  know  more  before  we  can 
decide  anything,  or  lay  down  any  large  scheme  of 
measures.  .  .  .  There  are  already  more  regiments  be- 
yond the  frontier  than  we  can  feed  or  easily  pay.  .  .  . 
You  know  I  would  not  be  too  profuse  in  sending  strength 
forward."!  What  Lord  Auckland's  intentions  were  at 
this  time  may  be  gathered  from  these  letters.  He 
thought  only  of  saving  all  that  could  be  saved;  and  of 
escaping  out  of  Afghanistan  with  the  least  possible  delay. 
The  Commander-in-Chief  to  whom  these  letters  were 
addressed  was,  as  has  been  said,  at  this  time  on  his 
way  through  the  Upper  Provinces  of  India.  Sir  Jasper 
NicoUs  had  been  consistently  opposed  to  the  entire 
scheme  of  A%han  invasion,  and  had  with  rare  prescience 
and  sagacity  foretold  the  disastrous  downfal  of  a  policy 
based  upon  a  foundation  of  such  complicated  error.  He 
had  spent  his  life  in  the  camp ;  but  his  public  minutes,  as 
well  as  his  private  letters  and  journals,  written  through- 
out the  years  1840-41,  indicate  a  larger  amount  of 
political  sagacity  than  we  find  displayed  in  the  expressed 

*  About  the  same  time  Lord  Auck-  to  be  looked  to.    It  will  be  for  ^ou 

land  wrote  to  Sir  W.  Macnaghten :  and  for  this  goyemment  to  consider 

^^  I  would  have  jou  share  in  the  feel-  in  what  manner  all  that  belongs  to 

ing  which  is  growing  strongly  upon  India  may  be  most  immediately  and 

me  that  the  maintenance  of  the  posi-  most  honourably  withdrawn  from  the 

tion,  which  we  have  attempted  to  es-  coimtry." — IMS.  Correspondence.'] 

tablish  in  Afghanistan,  is  no  longer  f  mS,  Correspoiuleace* 


264  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

opinions  of  his  oflScial  cotemporaries,  to  whom  statesman- 
ship was  the  profession  and  practice  of  their  lives.     He 
had  all  along  protested  against  the  withdrawal  of  our 
troops  from  their  legitimate  uses  in  the  British  Provinces, 
and  urged  that  it  was  necessary  either  so  to  increase  the 
Indian  army  as  to  enable  the  government  to  keep  up 
an  adequate  force  in   Afghanistan  without  weakening 
the  defences  of  Hindostan,  or  to  withdraw  the  British 
troops  altogether  from  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus. 
It  was   now   his   opinion — an   opinion   in   which  the 
Grovemor-General  participated — that,  inasmuch  as  the 
Indian  army,  largely  indented  upon  as  it  was  for  service 
beyond    the    frontier,  was     greatly    below    the    right 
athletic  strength,  it  would  be  impossible  to  pour  strong 
reinforcements    into    Afghanistan    without    weakening 
the  British  Provinces  in  such  a  manner  as  to  provoke 
both  external  aggression  and  internal  revolt.    But  su- 
pineness,  in  such  a  conjimcture,   was  more   likely  to 
have  provoked  aggression  than  activity,  although  the 
latter  might  have   denuded  India  of  some  of  its  best 
troops.     Macnaghten  told  Runjeet  Singh,  in  the  summer 
of  1838,  that  the  military  resources  of  the  British-Indian 
Government  were  such  that  200,000  soldiers  might  at 
any  time  be  brought  into  the  field  to  resist  simultaneous 
aggression  from  all  the  four   sides   of  India;*   and  al- 
though this  may  have  been  only  an  approximation  to 
the  sober  truth,  it  is  certain  that,  if  the  despatch  of  a 
couple  of  brigades  to  Jellalabad,  and  subsequently  to 
Caubul,  would  have  jeopardised  the  security  of  India, 
the  military  resources  of  the  government  must  have  been 
in  a  very  depressed  state.     When  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs, 
meeting  the  flood  of  intelligence  from  beyond  the  Indus, 
as  he  advanced  through  the  Upper  Provinces  of  India, 
recorded,  in  letters  to  the  Governor-General,  his  belief 
that  it  would  be  unwise  to  prosecute  another  war  in 

*  Ante,  voL  /.,  page  314. 


ROBERTSON  AND  CLERK,  266 

support  of  the  Suddozye  provinces,*  he  expressed  only 
the  sound  opinion  of  a  sagacious  politician.  But  he 
seems  to  have  forgotten  that  there  was  something  more 
than  the  restoration  of  the  Suddozye  dynasty  to  be  ac- 
complished— there  was  the  restoration  of  the  military 
supremacy  of  Great  Britain  in  Central  Asia  to  be 
achieved ;  and  whatever  may  have  been  the  scruples  of 
the  statesman,  in  such  a  crisis  as  this,  the  soldier  ought 
not  to  have  hesitated  for  a  moment. 

But  whilst  such  were  the  opinions  of  the  Governor- 
General  and  the  Commander-in-Chief,  there  were  other 
functionaries  nearer  to  the  scene  of  action  at  the  time, 
whose  feelings  prompted,  and  whose  judgment  dictated, 
a  more  energetic  course  of  procedure.  Among  these  were 
Mr.  Robertson,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  North- 
western Provinces,  and  Mr.  George  Clerk,  the  Governor- 
General's  Agent  on  the  North- Western  Frontier.  Both 
of  these  able  and  experienced  officers  recognised  the 
paramount  necessity  of  pushing  on  troops  to  Peshawur 
with  the  utmost  possible  despatch.  On  the  latter  de- 
volved, in  the  first  instance,  the  responsibility  of  moving 
forward  the  regiments  which  were  in  readiness  to  proceed 
for  the  periodical  relief  of  the  troops  in  Afghanistan,! 

♦  On  the  27th  of  November  he  so  dissimilar  both  to  our  Sepoys  and 
wrote  to  Lord  Auckland  from  Myn-  ourselves,  at  an  expense  so  decidedlv 
poorie  :  "  If  it  be  decided  that  we  are  ruinous."     And  on  the  30th,  in  still 
to  support  Shah   Soojah   under   all  more  emphatic  language,    he  said: 
circumstances  and  difficulties,  I  must  "  My  opinion  regarding  a  renewal  of 
entreat  your  Lordship^s  early  atten-  our  efforts  to  support  Shah  Soojah 
tion  to  the  means  of  effecting  this  on   his  throne,    and  to  establish   a 
object,  which  may  be  a  more  arduous  permanent  influence  in  Afghanistan, 
undertaking  than  the  occupation  of  is  without  change  or  modification, 
the  country  in  1839."    And  again,  in  That  we  have  no  base  of  operations 
the  same  letter :  **  There  is  a  dark,  has  been  always  clear ;  but  now,  were 
perhaps  a  random  hint,  in  one  of  these  we  to  march  a  reinforcement  on  the 
letters  that  the  rebellion  is  instigated  best  horses,  we  could  not  be  sure  of 
by  the  royaJ  family  at  CaubuL     If  carrying  the  Khybur  Pass,   and  if 
so,  I  would  advise  the  early  abandon-  snow  has  fallen,  the  road  to  Caubul 
men  t  of  them,  their  country,  and  their  would  still  be  closed." — {^MS.  Cor- 
cause."  On  the  28th  he  again  wrote :  respondence  of  Sir  J.  iVtco/fi.] 
"  I    really    would    not    advise    our        f  1^^  53rd  and  64th  Native  In- 
forcing  either  him  or  ourselves  upon  fantry. 
a  nation  so  distant,  and  in  all  respects 


266  EFFORTS  AT  BETBIEVAL. 

as  well  as  a  regiment  which  was  in  orders  for  Sindh.* 
On  the  16th  of  November,  he  addressed  letters  to 
Colonel  Wild,  the  commanding  oflScer  at  Ferozepore, 
and  Colonel  Rich,  who  commanded  at  Loodhianah, 
urging  them  to  send  on  to  Peshawur,  as  speedily  as 
possible,  the  regiments  named  in  the  margin.f  In 
compliance  with  these  requisitions,  the  64th  Regiment 
crossed  the  Sutlej  on  the  18th  of  November,  and  the 
60th  on  the  20th  of  November.  The  53rd,  which  was 
accompanied  by  the  30th  Regiment,  J  crossed  the  river 
on  the  26th. 

Having  expedited  the  movement  of  these  regiments, 
Mr.  Clerk  began  to  make  preparations  for  the  despatch 
of  another  brigade  to  Peshawur,  and  addressed  General 
Boyd,  who  at  that  time  commanded  the  Sirhind  di- 
vision,  on  the  subject.  At  the  same  time,  he  addressed 
urgent  letters  to  the  Court  of  Lahore,  apprising  them 
of  the  intended  march  of  the  regiments  through  the 
Punjaub — calling  on  them  to  supply  boats  for  the 
passage  of  the  river — and  suggesting  to  the  Maharajah 
that  he  should  "  cause  the  immediate  march  of  his  son, 
Koonwur  Pertab  Singh,  on  Peshawur,  with  5000  of 
their  best  troops  from  the  neighbouring  district  of 
Chuch  Huzara."  Captain  Mackeson  had  before  applied 
to  the  Sikh  authorities  at  Peshawur  for  6000  men  to 
march  on  Jellalabad;  but  had  been  told  by  General 
Avitabile  that  he  had  few  troops  at  Peshawur,  and 

*  The  60th  Native  Infantry.  ments,  and  to  warn  the  Light  In- 

f  Two  days^before,  Captam  (now  fantry  Battalion   and  some    details 

Sir  Henry)  Lawrence,  Assistant  to  of  the    10th    Cavalry,    for    service 

Mr.  Clerk,  whose  later  career  has  beyond  the  frontier.  —  ICapt,  Laiv 

justified  the  high  expectations  which  rence  to  Mr.  George  Clerk:  Nov.  14, 

were    formed    of    him    daring   his  1841.  MS.  Records.'] 

connexion  with  the  North- Western  t  ^*  Clerk  sent  forward  the  30th, 

Agency,  on  his  way  out  after  a  dacoity  which  was  Wildes  regiment,  in  order 

party,   met  the  mtelligence  of  the  that    the  colonel  might  take  com- 

Caubul  outbreak,  and  immediately  mand  of  the  brigade.  General  Boyd 

after  forwarding  it  on  to  Mr.  Clerk  having  thrown  out  a  hint  that  he  was 

went  to  Colonel  Wild,  to  urge  him  a  more  efficient  officer  than  the  colo- 

to  push  on  the  60th  and  64th  Regi-  nels  of  the  other  regiments. 


MOVEMENT  OF  THE  FIRST  BRIGADE.  267 

that  he  required  them  all  for  the  protection  of  the 
Sikh  territory. 

Lord  Auckland,  however,  was  strongly  of  opinion 
that  the  second  brigade,  which  was  to  comprise  her 
Majesty's  9th  Foot,  the  10th  Light  (Native)  Cavahy, 
and  a  troop  of  Horse  Artillery,  ought  not  to  be  moved 
forward.  "We  do  not  now,"  wrote  the  Governor-General 
in  Council,  on  the  3rd  of  December,  "desire  to  send  a 
second  brigade  in  advance,  for  we  do  not  conceive  it 
to  be  called  for,  for  the  objects  of  support  and  assistance 
which  we  contemplate ;  and  we  think  it  inexpedient  to 
despatch  any  greater  number  of  troops  than  be  abso- 
lutely  necessary  from  our  own  provinces."  And  two 
days  afterwards  he  wrote  privately  to  the  Commander- 
in-Chief:  "  I  heartily  hope  that  the  second  brigade  may 
not  have  been  sent."  He  could  not,  he  added,  "  see  of 
what  service  it  could  be  at  present.  One  brigade,  with 
the  artillery  which  you  purpose  sending,  should  be 
sufficient  to  force  the  Khybur  Pass;  and  ten  brigades 
could  not ,  at  this  season  of  the  year,  force  the  passes  to 
Caubul." 

But  the  "one  brigade  with  artillery"  never  went  to 
Peshawur.  The  Native  Infantry  crossed  the  Punjaub 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier  Wild.  Some  artillery- 
men went  with  them  ;*  but  there  were  no  artillery,  for 
there  were  no  guns.  It  was  expected,  however,  that 
the  Sikhs  would  supply  the  ordnance  which  the  British 
had  left  out  of  the  account.  "  You  have  not  at  present 
any  guns,"  wrote  the  Head-Quarters'  Staff  to  Brigadier 
Wild,  "  but  you  have  artillerymen,  sappers  and  miners, 
and  officers  of  both  corps.  His  Excellency  is  not  aware 
of  any  difficulty  likely  to  prevent  your  being  accom- 
modated by  the  Sikh  Governor-General,  Avitabile,  with 
four  or  six  pieces;  and  you  will  solicit  such  aid,  when 

*  These  artillerTmen  were  on  their    company  then  in  the  couiitry,  serving 
way  to  Afghanistan  to  relieve  the    with  Abbott's  battery. 


268  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

necessary,  through  Captain  Mackeson."  But  when  Bri- 
gadier Wild  reached  Peshawur,  a  day  or  two  before  the 
close  of  the  year,  he  found  that  difficulties  had  arisen 
to  prevent  the  preparation  of  the  expected  Sikh  guns 
for  service.  The  artillerymen  were  disinclined  to  hand 
them  over  to  the  British ;  and  though  great  doubts  were 
entertained  as  to  whether  they  were  in  reality  worth 
anything,  it  was  hard  to  compass  a  loan  of  the  suspected 
pieces.  And  so  Brigadier  Wild,  urged  as  he  was  from 
all  quarters  to  push  on  to  Jellalabad,  with  the  provi- 
sions, treasure,  and  ammunition  he  was  to  escort  thither, 
sate  down  quietly  at  Peshawur,  whilst  Captains  Mackeson 
and  Lawrence  were  endeavouring  to  overcome  the  coy- 
ness of  the  Sikh  artillerymen;  and  began  to  apprehend 
that  his  march  would  be  delayed  until  some  field-pieces 
were  sent  him  from  India. 

His  suspense,  however,  was  of  no  very  long  duration. 
On  the  3rd  of  January,  four  rickety  guns  were  handed 
over  to  the  British  officers;  but  not  without  a  show  of 
resistance  on  the  part  of  the  Sikh  artillerymen.  On  the 
following  day  one  of  the  limbers  went  to  pieces  under 
trial ;  and  then  it  had  to  be  replaced.  Other  difficulties, 
too,  met  Wild  at  Peshawur.  His  camel  men  were  play- 
ing the  old  game  of  desertion.  The  Afreedi  Maliks  had 
not  yet  been  bribed  into  submission  by  Mackeson ;  and  the 
loyalty  of  our  Sikh  allies  was  so  doubtful,  that  they  were 
just  as  likely,  on  Wild's  brigade  entering  the  Khybur, 
to  attack  him  in  rear  as  to  keep  the  pass  open  for  him. 
All  these  elements  of  delay  were  greatly  to  be  lamented. 
There  was  a  forward  feeling  among  the  Sepoys  which 
might  have  been  checked.  They  were  eager  to  advance 
when  they  reached  Peshawur ;  and  their  enthusiasm  was 
little  likely  to  be  increased  by  days  of  inactivity  in  a 
sickly  camp,  exposed  to  the  contaminating  influences 
of  the  Sikh  soldiery,  who,  always  dreading  the  deep 
passes  of  the  Khybur,  now  purposely  exaggerated  its 


FURTHER  REINFORCEMENTS.  269 

terrors,  and  endeavoured  by  other  means  to  raise  their 
fears,  to  excite  their  prejudices,  and  to  shake  their 
fidelity  to  the  government  which  they  served. 

In  the  mean  while  active  preparations  for  the  despatch 
of  further  reinforcements  to  Peshawur  were  going  on  in 
the  North- Western  Provinces  of  India.  Lord  Auckland 
could  not  readily  bring  himself  to  recognise  the  expe- 
diency of  sending  forward  a  second  brigade;  but  Mr. 
Clerk  had  taken  the  initiative,  and  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral was  unwilling  to  disturb  any  arrangements  which 
already  were  being  brought  into  effect.  The  9th 
Foot  had  been  ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness,  and 
another  regiment,  the  26th  Native  Infantry,  was  to  be 
sent  with  it,  accompanied  by  some  irregular  horse,  and  a 
scanty  supply  of  artillery.*  The  Commander-in-Chief 
was  "  not  prepared"  for  this  demand,  and  the  Governor- 
General  in  Council  thought  it  "undesirable"  to  send  more 
troops  in  advance.  But  it  was  obvious  to  the  authorities 
on  the  north-western  frontier  that  the  state  of  affairs  in 
Afghanistan  was  becoming  every  day  more  critical ;  and 
that  it  was  expedient  to  concentrate  the  utmost  available 
strength  on  the  frontier  of  Afghanistan.  Towards  the 
end  of  the  year,  the  Governor-General  having  expressed 
a  strong  opinion  regarding  the  necessity  of  attaching 
some  regular  horse  to  the  brigade,  the  10th  Cavalry  were 
ordered  to  proceed  under  Brigadier  M^Caskill  (of  the 
9th  Foot),  who,  as  senior  officer,  took  command  of  the 
force ;  and  on  the  4th  of  January  the  brigade,  con- 
sisting of  3034  fighting  men,  crossed  the  Sutlej  on  its 
way  to  Peshawur. 

To  command  the  body  of  troops  now  assembling  for 
service  beyond  the  frontier,  it  became  necessary  to  select 
an  officer  of  good  military  repute  and  unquestionable 
energy   and  activity,  combined  with  a  cool  judgment 

*  Two  nine-pounders  and  a  howitzer. 


270  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

and  a  sound  discretion.  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  had,  in  the 
month  of  November,  when  the  despatch  of  a  Queen's 
regiment  to  Peshawur  was  first  contemplated,  pointed 
to  Sir  Edmund  Williams,  as  a  general  officer  well  fitted 
for  such  command.*  But  to  the  Governor-General  it 
appeared  expedient  to  place  an  experienced  officer  of 
the  Company's  service  at  the  head  of  aflfairs,  and  Sir 
Edmund  Williams  was  a  general  of  the  royal  army, 
who  had  served  but  two  years  in  India  at  the  time  of 
the  Caubul  outbreak,  and  who  knew  as  little  of  the 
Sepoy  army  as  he  did  of  the  politics  of  Afghanistan. 
Lord  Auckland  had  made  his  election.  In  Major-G^ 
neral  Lumley,  the  adjutant-general  of  the  army,  he 
thought  that  he  saw  all  the  qualifications  which  it  be- 
hoved the  commander  of  such  an  army  to  possess. 
But  there  was  one  thing  that  Lumley  wanted ;  he 
wanted  physical  health  and  strength.  When  the  Go- 
vernor-General sent  up  the  nomination  to  head-quarters, 
the  Commander-in-Chief  at  once  replied  that  Lumley 
could  not  take  the  command ;  and  again  NicoUs  recom- 
mended the  appointment  of  Sir  Edmund  Williams. 
Indeed,  he  had  determined  on  sending  for  that  officer  to 
his  camp,  and  arming  him  at  once  with  instnictions  ;f  but 

♦  On  the  20tih  of  November  the  a  hale,  strong  man — moreover,  was 

Commander-in-Chief  wrote  to  Lord  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  a  Light  In- 

Auckland :  **  I  purpose  that  H.M.*8  fantry  battalion  of  Portuguese  in  the 

9th  should  proceed  with  the  second  Peninsular  war." — [MjS.    Correspond 

army.     This  corps  is  900  and  up*  dence.'] 

wards    strong,    including    sergeants        f  On  the  15th  of  December,  Sir 

and  drummers.  The  Buns  are  some-  Jasper  Nicolls  wrote  to  Lord  Auck- 

what  nearer,  but  they  have    been  land :  "  I  very  much  regret  that  the 

nineteen  and  a  half  years  out  of  Eng-  state   of  Maior-General    Lumley's 

land,  and  should  be  moved  towards  health  entirely  forbids  the  hope  of 

Calcutta  for  early  embarkation,  es-  his  being  able  to  undertake  the  com- 

pecially  as  the  49th  and  55  th  are  so  mand  of  the   troops  advancing    to 

far  out  of  reach.     The  Buffs  have  Peshawur.     If,  therefore,  the  force 

now  nearly  200  men  in  hospital.  The  is  raised  to  six  regiments,   I  shall 

right  to  join,  which  the  Court's  order  order  the  Major-Greneral  Sir  Edmund 

gives  to  Major-General  Sir  Edmund  Williams  to  join  my  camp  by  dawk, 

William8,may  be  especially  dispensed  and  push  him  forward,  as  soon  as  I 

with  by  your  Lordship,  should  you  shall  nave  furnished  him  with  instruc- 

not  choose  to  give  him  the  command,  tions,   and  armed  him  with  all   the 

Sir  Edmund  is  in  very  good  health,  information  and    advice    which  the 


GENERAL  LUMLET.  271 

subsequent  letters  from  Calcutta  made  it  only  too  plain 
that  the  appointment  would  be  extremely  distasteful  to 
the  Supreme  Government;  and  so  the  intention  was 
abandoned.*  General  Lumley  was  at  head-quarters. 
The  Commander-in-Chief  sent  for  him  to  his  tent, 
placed  in  his  hand  a  letter  his  Excellency  had  just  re- 
ceived from  the  Governor-General  relative  to  Lumley's 
employment  beyond  the  frontier,  and  called  upon  him 
for  his  final  decision.  The  General  was  willing  to  cross 
the  Indus ;  but,  doubtfiil  of  his  physical  ability  to  under- 
take so  onerous  a  duty,  placed  the  decision  of  the  ques- 
tion in  the  hands  of  his  medical  advisers,  who  at  once 
declared  that  he  was  totally  unequal  to  meet  "  the  re- 
quired exertion  and  exposure"  demanded  by  such  a 
Lipaign-t 

known  state   of  afifurs  at  his  de-  .  .   .   The   Gorernor-General  gaTt 

Eartore  may  seem  to    require.**  —  such  an  unwilling  and  discouragpng 
Papers  relating  to  Military  Opera-  reply  to  my  second  communication, 
tions  in  Afghanistan,'^  that  I  clearly  saw  the  whole  onus  of 
*  In  jour  Lordship*s  letter  of  the  the  appointment  and  its  consequences 
8th,  you  have,  I  think,  given  a  pre-  would  be  mine.** — [5tr  J,  NteolUto 
ferencc  to  Greneral  Nott,  wherefore  Lord  Fitzroy  Somerset:  September  2, 
Sir  £.   Williams  need  not  be  dis-  1842.     MS,  Correspondence. "] 
turbed.    To  send  him  to  Cawnpore        f  **  In  obedience  to  your  Lordship's 
merely  to  force  his  way  to  Jellalabad  wishes,  that  Major-General  Lumley 
and  Cfaubul,  and  then  return,  giying  should  be  placed  in  command  of  the 
oyer  the  command  to  a  junior  officer,  force  assembling  at  Feshawur,  I  re- 
would,  I  think,  be  unfau*.    As  to  his  quested  his  attendance  at  my  tent, 
holding  the  chief  command,  it  is  a  and  placed  the  despatch  now  acknow- 
matter  of  no  moment  to  me.    The  lodged  (Governor- General  in  Council 
officer  to  command,  if  your  Lordship  to  Sir  J,  Nicolls:  December  15, 1841) 
could  find  such  a  man,  should  be  also  in  his  hands.    The  General  is  stiU 
the    Envoy — a  Malcolm,  Close,    or  very    weak,    though    improved    in    < 
Ochterlony.** — [^Sir  Jasper  Nicolls  to  health ;  he  is  willing  to  proceed,  but 
Lord  Auckland:  December  19,  1841.  requested  that  his  medical  adviser 
MS,    Correspondence,  ]      "  Twice  I  should  be  consulted  as  to  his  ability 
laid  before  the  Grovemor-Gencral  the  to  undertake  such  a  service.    Assis- 
name  of  Major- General  Sir  Edmund  tant-Surgeon  Turner  decidedly  as- 
Williams,  and  as  a  Light  Infantry  sured  me  that  his   state  of  health 
officer  he  was  deemed  most  qualified  to  would  by  no  means  admit  of  the  re* 
meet  an   enemy  in  a  mountainous  quired  exertion    and  exposure.'*  — 
country;  he  was  active,  zealous,  and  [Sir  J,  NicoUs  to  Government:    D«-* 
in  perfect  health.    In  the  command  cem^er  24,  1841.    Papers  relating  to 
of  a  division  he  had  shown  a  clear  Military  Operations  in  Afghanistan,^ 
judgment,  and  given  me  satisfaction. 


272  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  then  at  once  determined 
to  nominate  another  Company's  officer  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  troops  proceeding  to  Peshawur.  His 
choice  fell  upon  General  George  Pollock,  who  then 
commanded  the  garrison  of  Agra. — Receiving  his  mili- 
tary education  at  the  Woolwich  Academy,  he  had  en- 
tered the  Indian  army  as  a  lieutenant  of  artillery  in  the 
year  1803 — when  Lake  and  Wellesley  were  in  the  field, 
and  all  India  was  watching,  with  eager  expectancy,  the 
movements  of  the  grand  armies  which,  by  victory  after 
victory,  were  breaking  down  the  power  of  the  Mah- 
rattas.  At  the  storm  and  capture  of  Dieg,  in  1803, 
young  Pollock  was  present ;  and  in  1806,  during  the 
gallant  but  unsuccessful  attempts  of  the  British  army 
to  carry  Bhurtpore  by  assault,  he  was  busy  in  the 
trenches.  At  the  close  of  the  same  year  he  was  selected 
by  Lord  Lake  to  command  the  artillery  with  the  de- 
tachment under  Colonel  Ball,  sent  in  pursuit  of  Hol- 
kar.  From  this  time  he  held  diflferent  regimental  staff 
appointments  up  to  the  year  1817,  when,  in  command 
of  the  artillery  with  General  Wood's  force,  he  took  part 
in  the  stirring  scenes  of  the  'Nepaul  war.  In  1818 
he  was  appointed  Brigade-Major;  and  subsequently,  on 
the  creation  of  that  appointment,  held  the  Assistant- 
Adjutant  -  Generalship  of  Artillery  up  to  the  year 
1824,  when,  having  attained  the  rank  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel,  he  volunteered  to  join  the  army  which  was 
assembling  for  the  prosecution  of  the  Burmese  war, 
and  was  nominated  by  Sir  Edward  Paget  to  command 
the  Bengal  Artillery  attached  to  the  force  under  Sir 
Archibald  Campbell,  proceeding  to  Rangoon.  For  his 
services  during  the  war  he  received  the  decoration  of 
the  Companionship  of  the  Bath.  From  this  time, 
except  during  an  interval  of  some  three  years  spent 
in   England  for   the   recovery  of  his  health,  he  held 


GENERAL  POLLOCK.  273 

different  regimental  and  brigade  commands,  until,  at 
the  close  of  1841,  being  then  Major-Greneral,  in  com- 
mand of  the  garrison  of  Agra,  he  was  selected  by 
Sir  Jasper  Nicolls  to  take  command  of  the  troops 
proceeding  to  Peshawur,  and  ordered  at  once  to  pro- 
ceed to  the  frontier  by  dawk. 

The  appointment  of  Greneral  Pollock  gave  the 
greatest  satisfaction  to  the  Supreme  Government,  and 
not  even  a  murmur  of  disapprobation  arose  from  the 
general  body  of  the  army.  The  nomination  of  this 
old  and  distinguished  Company's  officer  was  believed 
to  be  free  from  the  corruption  of  aristocratic  influence 
and  the  taint  of  personal  favouritism.  It  was  believed, 
that  in  this  case  at  least,  the  selection  had  been  made 
solely  on  the  ground  of  individual  merit.  And  the 
merit  which  was  thus  rewarded  was  of  the  most 
modest  and  unostentatious  character.  There  was  not, 
perhaps,  in  the  whole  Indian  army  a  man  of  more 
unassuming  manners  and  a  more  retiring  disposition : 
there  was  not  one  less  likely  to  have  sought  notoriety 
for  its  own  sake,  or  to  have  put  himself  forward  in  an 
effort  to  obtain  it.  Pollock's  merits  did  not  lie  upon 
the  surface.  He  was  not  what  is  called  a  "  dash- 
ing officer;"  he  shrunk  from  anything  like  personal 
display,  and  never  appealed  to  the  vulgar  weaknesses 
of  an  unreflecting  community.  But  beneath  a  most 
unassuming  exterior  there  lay  a  fund  of  good  sense, 
of  innate  sagacity,  of  quiet  firmness  and  collectedness. 
He  was  equable  and  temperate.  He  was  thoroughly 
conscientious.  If  he  was  looked  upon  by  the  Indian 
Government  as  a  ^afe  man,  it  was  not  merely  be- 
cause he  always  exercised  a  calm  and  dispassionate 
judgment,  but  because  he  was  actuated  in  all  that  he 
did  by  the  purest  motives,  and  sustained  by  the 
highest  principles.     He  was  essentially  an  honest  man. 

VOL.  II.  T 


274  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

There  was  a  directness  of  purpose  about  him  which 
won  the  confidence  of  all  with  whom  he  was  as- 
sociated. They  saw  that  his  one  paramount  desire 
was  a  desire  to  do  his  duty  to  his  country  by  con- 
sulting, in  every  way,  the  welfare  and  the  honour 
of  the  troops  under  his  command ;  and  they  knew 
that  they  would  never  be  sacrificed,  either  on  the 
one  hand  by  the  rash  ambition,  or  on  the  other  by 
the  feebleness  and  indecision,  of  their  leader-  The 
force  now  to  be  despatched  to  the  frontier  of  Afghan- 
istan required  the  superintendence  and  control  of  an 
officer  equally  coed  and  firm — temperate  and  decided 
— and,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  range  of  the  Indian 
army,  the  government  could  not  have  found  one  in 
whom  these  qualities  were  more  eminently  combined 
than  in  the  character  of  General  Pollock. 

Hastening  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  his  men. 
Pollock  left  Agra,  and  proceeded  by  dawk  to  the 
fix>ntier.  The  second  brigade  was  then  making  its 
way  through  the  Punjaub,  under  General  M'Caskill; 
and  the  authorities  in  the  North- Western  Provinces 
were  exerting  themselves  to  push  on  further  reinforce- 
ments to  Peshawur. 

On  the  22nd  of  January,  the  Commander-in-Chief  and 
Mr-  George  Clerk  met  at  Thanesur,  some  two  marches 
distant  from  Kurnaul.  They  had  jreceived  the  melan- 
choly tidings  of  the  destruction  of  the  Caubul  force ;  and 
they  took  counsel  together  regarding  the  measures  to  be 
pursued  in  consequence  of  this  gigantic  calamity.  Very 
different  were  the  views  of  these  two  functionaries.  To 
Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  it  appeared  that  the  destruction  of  the 
Caubul  force  afforded  no  reason  for  the  advance  of 
further  reinforcements;  but  rather  seemed  to  indicate 
the  expediency  of  a  retrograde  movement  on  the  part  of 
all  the  remaining  troops  beyond  the  Indus.     It  was  his 


NICOLLS  AND  CLERK.  275 

opinion — an  opinion  to  some  extent  shared  by  the 
Supreme  Grovemment — that  the  retention  of  Jellalabad 
being  no  longer  necessary,  to  support  the  Caubul  army, 
or  to  assist  its  retreat,  the  withdrawal  of  the  garrison 
to  Peshawur  had  become  primarily  expedient ;  and  that, 
as  the  re-conquest  and  re-occupation  of  Afghanistan  were 
not  under  any  circumstances  to  be  recommended,  it  was 
desirable  that,  after  the  safety  of  Sale's  brigade  had  been 
secured,  the  whole  force  should  return  to  Hindostan. 
But  Mr.  Clerk  was  all  for  a  forward  movement.  He  ar- 
gued that  the  safety  and  the  honour  of  the  British  nation 
demanded  that  we  should  hold  our  own  at  Jellalabad, 
until  the  garrison,  reinforced  by  fresh  troops  from  the 
provinces  of  India,  could  march  upon  Caubul,  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  Candahar  force  moving  from  the  westward, 
chastise  the  enemy  on  the  theatre  of  their  recent  suc- 
cesses, and  then  withdraw  altogether  from  Afghanistan 
"  with  dignity  and  undiminished  honour."*  It  was  gall 
and  wormwood  to  George  Clerk  to  think  for  a  moment 
of  leaving  the  Afghans,  flushed  with  success,  to  revel  in 
the  humihation  of  the  British  Government,  and  to  boast 
of  the  destruction  of  a  British  army.  Emphatically  he 
dwelt  on  the  disgrace  of  inactivity  in  such  a  crisis ;  and 
emphatically  he  dwelt  upon  the  danger.  Coolly  and 
quietly,  as  one  whose  ordinary  serenity  was  not  to  be  dis- 
turbed by  any  accidental  convulsions,  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls 
set  forth  in  reply  that  the  return  of  so  many  regiments 
to  the  provinces,  and  the  vast  reduction  of  expenditure 
that  would  attend  it,  would  place  the  government  in 
such  a  position  of  strength  as  would  enable  it  summarily 
to  chastise  any  neighbouring  state  that  might  presume 
upon  our  recent  misfortunes  to  show  a  hostile  front 
against  us.  The  demand  for  more  troops  he  would  have 
resisted  altogether ;  but  the  urgency  of  G^oi^e  Clerk  was 

*  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  to  Government:  January  24(ft,  1842. 

T  2 


276  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

not  to  be  withstood,  and  two  more  regiments — the  6th 
and  55th  Native  Infantry — were  ordered  to  hold  them- 
selves in  readiness  to  proceed  to  Peshawur.  But  when 
Clerk  asked  for  a  detachment  of  British  dragoons,  NicoUs 
peremptorily  resisted  the  demand,  and  referred  the  ques- 
tion to  the  Supreme  Government.*  Before  the  reference 
reached  Calcutta,  Lord  Auckland  had  received  intelli- 
gence of  the  massacre  of  Elphinstone's  army;  and  he 
wrote  back  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  that  it  was 
essentially  necessary  that  a  commanding  force  should 
assemble  at  Peshawur — that  it  was  particularly  important 
that  the  force  should  be  effective  in  cavalry  and  artillery, 
and  that  at  all  events  two  squadrons  of  European 
dragoons  should  be  pushed  on  to  Peshawur.f    The  1st 

♦  "  We  have  had  a  long  conversa-  to."—  [Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  to  Govern^ 
tion  upon  the  affairs  of  Afghanistan,  ment:  January  23r(f.]  ^^  Thanesur^ 
including  the  statement  of  Assistant-  January  23rd. — ^Mr.  C.  joined  us  on 
Surgeon  Brydon ;  and  Mr.  Clerk  has,  the  ground.  He  is  anxiously  in 
by  various  and  repeated  arguments,  favour  of  our  sending  forward  more 
endeavoured  to  convince  me  of  the  ne-  troops,  in  view,  I  believe,  to  our 
cessity  of  detaching  another  reinforce-  undertaking  the  re-conquest  of  Cau- 
ment  to  Peshawur,  in  order  to  support  bul.  To  this  I  decidedly  object.  We 
Jellalabad.  My  instructions  and  my  have  neither  funds  nor  men  avail- 
opinion  (expressed  in  my  letter  of  able,  without  in  the  latter  instance 
yesterday)  being  widely  different,  I  leaving  India  so  bare  as  to  risk  its 
have  demurred  giving  my  consent  to  safety."  —  [Private  Journal  of  Sir 
the  proposal ;  but  as  your  Lordship  Jasper  Nicolls.  MS.  Records.'] 
was  not  aware,  on  the  date  of  your  f  "  We  regard  it  as  absolutely 
last  orders  of  the  6th  of  January,  of  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  our 
the  murder  of  Sir  Wm.  Macnaghten,  interests  at  this  crisis  that  a  com- 
and  probable  fate  of  our  troops,  I  manding  force  of  all  arms  should  be 
have  ordered  the  6th  and  55th  Kegi-  concentrated  at  or  near  Peshawur, 
ments  of  Native  Infantry  from  Kur-  in  order  to  curb  the  violence  of  excite- 
naul  to  Ferozepore,  which  will  enable  ment  which  may  be  expected  in  that 
me  to  detach  two  corps  to  Peshawur,  quarter,  and  to  protect  the  Sikh 
should  not  your  Lordship  in  Councirs  territory  from  aggression.  It  is  par- 
views  and  orders  have  been  altered  ticularly  important  that  this  force 
or  modified  by  that  event,  and  your  should  be  effective  in  cavalry  and 
resolution  be  made  known  to  me.  light  artillery,  and  we  are  disposed 
Being  fully  aware  of  the  confidence  strongly  to  adhere  to  our  recom- 
enjoyed  by  Mr.  Clerk,  I  have  taken  mendation  that  two  squadrons  of 
this  preparatory  step ;  but  when  he  European  dragoons  should  be  em- 
advised  the  addition  of  some  portion  ployed  on  the  service." — [Governor^ 
of  her  Majesty's  3rd  Dragoons,  I  felt  General  in  Council  to  Sir  Jasper 
myself  unable  to  fjive  him  any  hope  NicoUs:  February  2wc/,  1842.] 
of  such  a  requisition  being  attended 


THE  ANGLO-INDIAN  COMMUNITY.  277 

Regiment  of  Native  Cavalry  and  a  troop  of  Horse- 
Artillery  were  subsequently  added  to  the  third  brigade. 

In  the  mean  while  increasing  care  and  anxiety  were 
brooding  over  Government  House.  Gloomily  the  new 
year  dawned  upon  its  inmates.  And  there  was  not  in 
that  great  palaced  city,  or  in  any  one  of  the  smaller 
stations  and  cantonments  of  India,  an  Englishman  whose 
heart  did  not  beat,  and  whose  hand  did  not  tremble 
with  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  the  Caubul  force,  when  he 
opened  the  letters  or  papers  which  brought  him  intel- 
ligence from  beyond  the  frontier.  No  one,  who  dwelt 
in  any  part  of  India  during  the  early  months  of  1842, 
will  ever  forget  the  anxious  faces  and  thick  voices  with 
which  tidings  were  sought ;  questions  and  opinions  inter- 
changed; hopes  and  fears  expressed;  rumours  sifted; 
probabilities  weighed ;  and  how,  as  the  tragedy  deepened 
in  solemn  interest,  even  the  most  timid  and  desponding 
felt  that  the  ascertained  reality  far  exceeded  in  misery 
and  horror  all  that  their  excited  imaginations  had 
darkly  foretold.  There  was  a  weight  in  the  social 
atmosphere,  as  of  dense  superincumbent  thunder-clouds. 
The  festivities  of  the  cold  season  were  arrested;  gaiety 
and  hospitality  were  not.  There  were  few  families  in 
the  country  which  did  not  sicken  with  apprehension  for 
the  fate  of  some  beloved  relative  or  friend,  whilst  uncon- 
nected men,  in  whom  the  national  overlaid  the  personal 
feeling,  in  this  conjuncture,  sighed  over  the  tarnished 
reputation  of  their  country,  and  burned  to  avenge  the 
insults  that  had  been  heaped  upon  it. 

It  would  be  pleasant  to  record  that,  in  this  great 
and  melancholy  crisis,  the  public  looked  up  with  confi- 
dence and  assurance  to  the  statesman  upon  whom  was 
now  thrown  the  responsibility  of  extricating  from  the 
quickset  of  danger  and  difficulty  that  environed  them, 
the  imperilled  aflfairs  of  the  British   Indian  Empire. 


278  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

But  history  can  give  currency  to  no  such  fiction.  As 
time  advanced  it  became  more  and  more  painfully  evi- 
dent that  Lord  Auckland  was  reeling  and  staggering  be- 
neath the  blow  that  had  descended  upon  him.  He 
appeared  to  be  unable  to  decide  upon  any  consistent 
plan  of  action.  At  one  time  he  seems  to  have  contem- 
plated the  withdrawal  of  the  Jellalabad  garrison  to 
Peshawur,  leaving  it  to  fight  its  own  way  through  the 
pass ;  at  another,  he  seems  to  have  been  fiiUy  impressed 
with  the  necessity  of  retaining  the  former  post,  if  only 
for  the  protection  of  the  Caubul  force;  then  he  talked 
of  concentrating  a  large  army  at  Peshawur,  and  almost 
immediately  afterwards  began  to  think  that  it  would  be 
more  expedient  to  have  our  advanced  post  at  Ferozepore. 
There  was  only  one  point  on  which  he  seems  clearly  to 
have  made  up  his  mind.  He  was  resolute  not  to 
recommend  a  forward  movement  for  the  re-occupation 
of  Caubul.  He  believed  that  any  such  attempt  would 
be  attended  with  disaster  and  disgrace;  and  he  con- 
sidered that  it  became  him,  on  the  eve  of  departure, 
as  he  was,  not  to  embarrass  his  successor  by  inextri- 
cably pledging  the  government  to  measures  which  the 
new  Viceroy  might  consider  "  rash,  impolitic,  and 
ruinous."* 

*  Lord  Auckland's  private  letters  explicable  as  they  are  appalling,** 
to  tbe  Commander-in-Chief  exhibit  and  declaring  that  ne  ^'was  prepared 
better  than  anything  else  the  alter-  for  eYerythmg  but  for  such  mis- 
nations  in  the  GrOYemor-€reneral*8  direction  and  misconduct  as  seem  to 
opinions.  On  the  3rd  of  January  he  have  taken  place,"  he  proceeded  to 
wrote :  "  It  is  melancholy  to  think  say,  "  I  can  make  no  further  sugses- 
how  mighty  interests  may  be  com-  tions  to  you  until  I  know  more;  out 
promised  by  such  errors  as  seem  to  you  may  shortly  have  to  consider 
have  been  committed.  Our  officers  what  instructions  should  be  given  to 
are  very  wild  in  their  requisitions.  €reneral  Sale,  and  as  to  whether  it 
We  have  given  all  that  we  can  pru-  may  not  be  better  that  he  should 
dently  give  —  perhaps  even  more ;  fight  down,  than  that  Brigadier 
and  the  chance  of  operations  must  Wild  or  General  Pollock  snould 
be  measured  by  those  means.*'— On  fight  up,  the  pass.  This  must  greatly 
the  5th  of  January,  after  describing  depend  on  the  manner  in  whicn  mat- 
the  tidings  from   Caubul  as  ^'  in-  ters  may  end  at  Caubul.*'— On  the 


LORD  Auckland's  cobbespondence.  279 

On  the  30th  of  January  the  worst  fears  of  govern- 
ment were  confirmed.    An  express  arrived  from  Mr, 

2l8t  of  the  same  month,  he  wrote,  his  opinion  that  Jellalabad  should  be 
that  he  ^^  still  adhered  to  his  opinion,  held  so  long  as  there  was  a  chance  of 
that  it  would  be  madness  witn  such  assisting  the  escape  of  fugitives :  **  I 
force  and  means  of  carriage,  as  we  apprehend,''  he  aaded,  *^  Uiat  its  eva- 
could  easily  collect,  to  attempt  a  cuation  will,  in  a  very  short  time, 
fresh  advance  upon  Caubul ;  and  that  become  absolutely  necessary ;  if  so, 
such  a  movement  would  only  have  the  movement  should  not  be  long  de- 
been  justified,  if  we  had  been  led  to  laved/'  He  expressed  a  doubt,  too, 
it  by  objects  of  rescue.  It  would  be  whether,  with  the  "  force  that  we  can 
my  wish,  if  it  could  be  done  with  employ,  the  pass  (Khybur)  can  be  so 
safety,  that  Jellalabad  should  be  re-  occupied  as  to  secure  through  it  a 
tained  for  some  weeks,  and  until  the  safe  passage  of  detachments  and 
fate  of  the  British  troops  in  other  convoys.  A  descent  through  the  Jug- 
parts  of  Afghanistan  should  be  ascer-  dulluck  Passes  to  Caubul  is  beyond 
tained/' — On  the  26th  he  wrote:  our  present  power.  It  would  re- 
*'  I  agree  with  you  that,  at  least  so  quire  vast  exertions  and  months  of 
long  as  the  fate  of  the  force  at  preparation,  and  in  the  end  would  be 
Caubul  is  uncertain,  the  post  at  Jel-  an  enterprise  of  no  light  danger.  I 
lalabad  must  be  maintained.  I  think  almost  conceive  that  it  would  be  an 
it  will  be  absolutely  necessary,  under  impossible  enterprise  with  any  means 
any  circumstances,  to  maintain  for  a  that  we  could  bring  to  bear  upon  it, 
time  a  strong  force  in  Peshawur —  unless  some  party  should  separate 
also  at  Quettah  and  Sukkur.  If  our  from  the  present  combination,  and 
retirement  carry  with  it  a  general  then  with  what  confidence  should 
appearance  of  defeat  and  of  flight,  we  render  it?  I  have  therefore,  in 
it  will  bring  on  Peshawur  and  the  dissent  from  many  for  whom  I  have 
Punjaub— on  Beloochistan  and  Sindh  the  highest  respect,  earnestly  wished 
— a  tide  of  aggression  and  disaster  that  the  force  at  Jellalabad  could  be 
which  it  may  be  difficult  to  stem,  safely  and  creditably  withdrawn  to 

and  against  the  chance  of  which  we  Peshawur I  would  not 

must  endeavour  to  guard." — On  the  have  it  hastily  retire  beyond  Pesha- 

28th,  growing  still  more  convinced  wur,  or  any  healthy  spot  near  it.     .     . 

of  the  expediency  of  doing  something  The  post  should  be  as  forward  as  it 

for  the  recovery  of  our  lost  honour,  safely  can    be ;   and    my   successor 

he  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  could  then  pursue  the  line  of  policy 

speaking  first  with  reference  to  the  which  he  may  think  best.    I  would 

refusal  of  Sale  and   Macgregor  to  not  have  the  government  inextricably 

evacuate  Jellalabad :   *'  We  approve  pledged  to  measures  which  my  suo* 

of  the  determination  taken  at  Jel-  cesser  may  regard  as  rash,  impolitic, 

lalabad  not  to  withdraw  the  troops  and  ruinous."    But  he  soon  came  to 

as  directed.      Far  from  withdrawal  modify  these  opinions  in  favour  of  a 

under   such    circumstances,    I    am  forward  position;  and  later  on  the 

anxious  to  learn  that  Brigadier  Wild  same  day  wrote  that  the  disafiection 

has  found  it  safe  to  advance  to  Jel-  of  the  Sikhs  might  cause  him  to  alter 

lalabad Whatever  hap*  his  views  with  regard  to  Peshawur : 

pens  beyond  the  passes,  we  should  "I  am  coining  fast  to  the  opinion," 

be  strong  for  a  time  in  Peshawur.  he  said,  '^  that  our    furthest  point 

.     .     .    For  the  present,  at   least,  of  support  in  advance  must  be  Feroze- 

Jellalabad  should  be  firmly  held ; —  pore,  and  that  we  must  bear  the  dis- 

Greneral  Elphinstone  was  not  in  a  grace  and  disadvantage  of  retiring  to 

condition  to  make  stipulations,  ex-  this  frontier  with  as  little  of  loss  as 

cept  for  his  own  troops  at  Caubul." —  may  now  be  ensured."— [if5.  Cor- 

On  the  3rd  of  February  he  expressed  respondence,'] 


280  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

Clerk,  setting  forth,  on  the  authority  of  letters  received 
from  Macgregor  at  Jellalabad,  that  the  Caubul  force  had 
been  utterly  destroyed.  Some  vague  rumours  of  this 
crowning  disaster  ha'd  obtained  currency  in  Calcutta  a 
day  or  two  before;  and  now  the  terrible  apprehensions 
of  the  public  were  found  to  have  been  only  the  presages 
of  actual  truth.  The  immediate  eflfect  of  this  astound- 
ing intelligence  upon  the  conduct  of  government  was  to 
rouse  the  Governor-Greneral  into  something  like  a  tem- 
porary demonstration  of  vigour.  He  issued  a  proclama- 
tion declaring  that  he  considered  the  calamity  that  had 
overtaken  the  British  arms  only  "  as  a  new  occasion  for 
displaying  the  stability  and  vigour  of  the  British  power, 
and  the  admirable  spirit  and  valour  of  the  British-In- 
dian army."*  But  it  was  little  more  than  a  spasm  of 
energy.  The  ink  with  which  this  notification  was  writ- 
ten was  hardly  dry  before  the  Governor-General  in 

*  *'  Fort  William,  Jan.  31,  1842.  **  The  ample  military  means  at  the 

"  Intelligence  having  been  received  disposal  of  the  British  Government 

which  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that,  will  be  strenuously  applied  to  these 

after  the  British  force  at  Caubul  had  objects,  so   as  at  once  to  support 

maintained  its  position  against  over-  external    operations,    and  to  cause 

powering  numbers  of  insurgents  for  efficient  protection  for  its  subjects 

more  than  six  weeks,  the  officer  com-  and  allies. 

manding  had  judged  it  necessary,  in  *'  A  faithless  enemy,  stained  bj 
consequence  of  a  failure  of  provisions,  the  foul  crime  of  assassination,  has, 
to  agree  to  a  convention  of  the  enemy,  through  a  failure  of  supplies  followed 
and  to  retire,  in  reliance  on  the  faith  by  consummate  treachery,  been  able 
of  that  convention,  towards  Jellala-  to  overcome  a  body  of  British  troops, 
bad,  when  the  troops,  exposed  to  the  in  a  country  removed,  by  distance 
worst  rigours  of  cold  and  privation,  and  difficulties  of  season,  from  the 
in  the  mountain  defiles,  and  harassed  possibility  of  succour.  But  the  Go- 
by treacherous  attacks,  suffered  ex-  vemor-Greneral  in  Council,  while  he 
treme  disasters — the  Govemor-Gre-  most  deeply  laments  the  loss  of  the 
neral  in  Council  deems  it  proper  to  brave  officers  and  men,  regards  this 
notify  that  the  most  active  measures  partial  reverse  only  as  a  new  occa- 
have  been  adopted,  and  will  be  sion  for  displaying  the  stability  and 
steadfastly  persecuted,  for  expediting  vieour  of  the  British  power,  and  the 
powerful  reinforcements  to  the  An  a£nirable  spirit  and  valour  of  the 
ghan  frontier,  and  for  assisting  such  British-Indian  army, 
operations  as  may  be  required  in  that  ^^  By  order  of  the  Right  Honour- 
quarter,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  able  the  Gt>vemor-Greneral  of  India 
honour  and  interests  of  the  British  in  Council. 
Government.  "T.  H.  Maddock.'* 


RETROGRADE  TENDENCIES.  281 

Council  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  that  Jellala- 
bad  was  not  a  place  which  he  desired  to  be  kept  at  all 
hazards,  and  after  succour  should  have  been  given  to  Sir 
R.  Sale's  brigade  then,  and  relief  should  have  been  given 
to  parties  arriving  from  Caubul,  the  Grovemor-General 
in  Council  would  wish  General  Pollock,  rather  than 
run  extreme  risks  in  that  position,  to  arrange  for  the 
withdrawal  of  it,  and  the  assembling  of  his  force  at  or 
near  Peshawur.* 

As  time  advanced,  the  retrograde  tendencies  of  Lord 
Auckland's  determination  became  more  and  more  ap- 
parent.  On  the  10th  of  February,  the  Governor-General 
in  Council  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  instruct- 
ing him  to  inform  General  Pollock  that,  "  as  the  main 
inducement  for  the  maintenance  of  a  post  at  JeUalabad 
— namely,  that  of  being  a  point  of  support  to  any  of  our 
troops  escaping  from  Caubul — ^having  now  unhappily 
passed  away,  it  is  the  object  of  the  government  that  he 
should,  unless  any  unforeseen  contingency  should  give  a 
decidedly  favorable  turn  to  affairs,  confine  himself  to 
measures  for  withdrawing  the  JeUalabad  garrison  in 
safety  to  Peshawur,  and  there  for  the  present,  hold- 
ing together  all  the  troops  under  his  orders  in  a  secure 
position,  removed  from  collision  with  the  Sikh  forces  or 
subjects."  And  on  the  same  day,  Mr.  Maddock,  the 
chief  secretary,  under  instructions  from  the  Supreme 
Government,  wrote  to  Mr.  Clerk  that  "it  would  be 
highly  desirable  that  when  JeUalabad  was  no  longer 
held  by  us,  our  detachments,  which  have  been  moved 
forward  in  support  to  meet  a  present  emergency,  should 
be  brought  gradually  back  to  their  cantonments,  in 
order  that  any  ulterior  operations  that  may  be  deter- 
mined upon  for  another  advance  beyond  the  Indus  (and 

•  Supreme  Government  to  Sir  Jcuper  NicoUs :  January  SI,  1842. — IPub^ 
Ushed  Papers,'] 


282  EFFORTS  AT  BETBIEVAL. 

that  towards  the  Ehybur  and  Jellalabad  is  probably  not 
the  one  to  which  preference  would  be  given)  may  be 
undertaken  after  full  preparation,  with  a  complete  equip- 
ment, and  in  fresh  and  well-organised  strength."* 

Lord  Auckland  had  been  startled  by  the  astounding 
intelligence  of  the  massacre  of  Elphinstone's  army  into 
an  ebullition  of  energy  by  no  means  in  accordance  with 
the  previous  tenor  of  the  measures  which  he  had 
initiated,  and  not  more  in  accordance  with  those  which 
were  about  to  emanate  from  him.  After  the  first 
paroxysm  of  horror  and  indignation  was  over,  he  began 
again  to  settle  down  quietly  in  the  conviction  that  it 
was  best  to  do  as  little  as  possible  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Indus,  lest  worse  misfortunes  should  descend  upon 
us,  and  the  attempt  to  recover  our  lost  reputation 
should  result  only  in  further  disgrace. 

By  this  time  the  doubts  of  those  who  had  speculated 
on  the  subject  of  the  succession  to  the  Governor-General- 
ship had  been  set  at  rest  by  the  arrival  of  the  Overland 
Mail.  The  despatches  received  in  December  announced 
that  the  choice  of  the  home  ministry  had  fallen  upon  one 
of  their  own  body ;  and  that  the  East  India  Company 
had  ratified  the  choice.  Lord  EUenborough,  who  had 
before  filled  and  was  now  filling  the  office  of  President 
of  the  Board  of  Control,  had  been  appointed  Viceroy  of 
India.  The  question  of  the  succession  had  been  can- 
vassed with  more  than  common  eagerness,  and  its  solu- 
tion looked  forward  to  with  unusual  interest.  When 
the  intelligence  at  last  arrived  it  took  the  majority  by 

*  Papers  relcUing  to  Military  OperC"  position  so  perilous  as  to  make  me 

tions  in  Afghanistan.     Lord  Auck-  regard  its  possible  fate  with  extreme 

land^s  private  letters  were  still  more  anxiety."     Two  days  afterwards  he 

decided  on  these  points.     '^  I  should  wrote  to   the   same  correspondent : 

be  glad,"  he  wrote  to  Sir   Jasper  "  I  have  from  the  beginning  believed 

NicoUs   on   the    10th  of  February,  a  second  conquest  of  Caubul  with  our 

^i  to  hear  that  Sir  R.  Sale  has  been  present  means  to  be  absolutely  im- 

able  to  withdraw  hb  brigade  from  a  possible.** — [MS.  Carreqwndence,'} 


LORD  ELLEKBOBOUGH.  283 

surprise.  The  probability  of  the  appointment  of  Lord 
EUenborough  had  not  been  entertained.  Sir  James 
Graham,  Lord  Heytesbury,  Lord  Lichfield — ^nay,  even 
Lord  Lyndhurst,  had  been  named;  but  speculation  had 
not  busied  itself  with  the  name  of  Lord  EUenborough. 

But  the  intelligence,  though  unexpected,  was  not  un- 
welcome. It  was,  indeed,  received  with  universal 
satisfaction.  The  Press,  with  one  accord,  spoke  of  the 
appointment  with  approbation  ;  and  the  Public  con- 
firmed the  verdict  of  the  Press.  All  parties  were  alike 
sanguine — all  prepared  to  look  for  good  in  the  new 
Governor-General.  There  is  not  a  commimity  on  the 
face  of  the  earth  less  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  faction, 
than  the  community  of  British  India.  To  support,  or 
to  oppose  the  measures  of  a  Governor,  simply  because 
he  is  a  Whig  or  a  Tory,  is  an  excess  of  active  prejudice 
wholly  imknown  in  India.  There  are  no  political  par- 
ties, and  there  is  no  party  Press  to  play  out  such  a  game 
as  this.  Public  men  are  judged,  not  by  what  they 
belong  to,  but  by  what  belongs  to  them — and  thus 
was  Lord  EUenborough  judged.  Whig  and  Tory  alike 
haUed  the  appointment :  for  the  new  Governor- General 
was  held  in  some  degree  of  estimation  as  one  who  had 
made  India  his  study,  and  cherished  a  laudable  interest 
in  its  welfare.  He  was  beUeved  to  be  possessed  of  more 
than  average  talent ;  assiduous  in  his  attention  to  busi- 
ness; and  rather  an  able  man  of  detail  than  a  states- 
man of  very  briUiant  promise.  They,  who  thought  most 
about  the  matter,  anticipated  that  he  would  make  a 
good,  steady,  peace-go vernor ;  that  he  would  apply  him- 
self devotedly  to  the  task  of  improving  the  internal  ad- 
ministration of  the  country;  and  by  a  steady  and  con- 
sistent course  of  policy  soon  disengage  the  country  from 
the  pressure  of  financial  embarrassment  which  had  long 
sate  so  heavily  upon  it.   They  knew  Uttle  and  cared  less 


284  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

about  the  personal  eccentricities  which  in  England  had 
been  imputed  to  him.  Neither  the  Press  nor  the  Public 
concerned  itself  about  these  manifestations  of  the  outer 
man.  They  thought  of  the  newly-appointed  Governor- 
General  as  an  able  and  laborious  man  of  business,  with 
a  more  than  common  knowledge  of  the  history  of  India 
and  the  details  of  its  administration.  They  knew  that 
not  only  had  his  occupancy,  for  many  years,  of  the  chief 
seat  at  the  India  Board,  rendered  him  famiUar  with  the 
workings  of  the  Indian  Government ;  but  that,  on  every 
occasion,  when  Indian  affairs  had  been  discussed  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  in  power  or  out  of  power,  he  had  taken 
a  prominent  part  in  the  debates.  In  1833,  when  the 
provisions  of  the  existing  charter  were  under  the  con- 
sideration of  Parliament,  he  had  distinguished  himself 
as  one  of  the  ablest,  but  most  moderate  opponents  of 
certain  of  its  clauses,  contending  in  favour  of  the  dimi- 
nution  of  the  powers  of  Indian  Governors  by  the  impo- 
sition of  the  wholesome  control  of  Council;  and  ear- 
nestly protesting  against  the  perilous  evil  of  leaving  too 
much  to  the  unbridled  passions  or  the  erratic  caprice  of 
a  single  man.  In  later  days,  he  had  denounced  the 
war  in  Afghanistan,  in  fitting  terras  of  severe  censure; 
and  all  things  combined  to  render  the  Indian  public 
hopeful  of  a  good,  steady,  .peaceful  administration. 
Conservative  exchanged  congratulations  with  Liberal 
on  the  cheering  prospects,  now  opening  out  before  them, 
of  many  years  of  peaceful  government  and  financial  pros- 
perity. Lord  EUcnborough  was  believed  to  be  a  mode- 
rate statesman — somewhat  too  liberal  for  the  Tories  of 
the  ministerial  camp,  but  not  for  the  modified  conser- 
vatism of  India,  where  every  man  is  more  or  less  a 
Reformer — and  as  a  moderate  statesman  all  men  were 
prepared  to  welcome  him. 

In  October,  1841,  he  was  elected  to  fill  the  office  of 


LORD  ELLENBOROUGH.  285 

Governor-General ;  and  on  the  4th  of  the  following 
month,  he  attended  the  usual  complimentary  dinner, 
given  on  such  occasions  by  the  Court  of  Directors. 
The  report  of  that  dinner,  which  reached  India  simul- 
taneously with  the  intelligence  of  Lord  Ellen  borough's 
appointment,  had  a  natural  tendency  to  increase  the 
confidence,  engendered  by  his  Lordship's  previous  his- 
tory, in  the  judgment  and  moderation  of  the  new  Go- 
vernor-General. On  returning  thanks,  after  his  health 
had  been  drunk.  Lord  EUenborough,  at  that  farewell 
dinner,  on  the  4th  of  November,  1841,  made  a  most 
emphatic  declaration  of  his  intentions  to  govern  India 
upon  peace  principles ;  he  abjured  all  thoughts  of  a  war- 
like, aggressive  policy;  and  declared  his  settled  deter- 
mination, on  assuming  the  reins  of  government,  to  direct 
all  the  energies  of  his  mind  towards  the  due  cultivation 
of  the  arts  of  peace;  to  emulate  the  magnificent  bene- 
volence of  the  Mahomedan  conquerors;  to  elevate 
and  improve  the  condition  of  the  generous  and  mighty 
people  of  India.  He  spoke,  it  is  true,  in  ignorance  of 
the  terrible  disasters  which  soon  afterwards  cast  a  pall 
over  the  land;  but  there  was  in  the  speech  so  clear 
and  explicit  an  exposition  of  what  were  supposed  to  be 
fixed  principles,  that  the  Public  could  not  but  rejoice 
over  a  declaration  which  promised  so  much  eventual 
benefit  to  the  people  of  the  soil.  They  looked  forward 
to  the  advent  of  the  new  Governor-General  as  to  that 
of  a  man  who,  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  consistent 
with  the  dignity  of  our  position,  would  sever  at  a  blow 
our  ill-fated  connexion  with  Afghanistan,  and  devote 
the  remaining  years  of  his  administration  to  the  practi- 
cal development  of  those  high  principles  which  he  had 
so  enthusiastically  professed.* 

It  is   probable  that  the  nomination  of  Lord  EUen- 

•  Calcutta  Review, 


286  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

borough  increased  the  embarrassments  of  Lord  Auckland, 
and  strengthened  him  in  his  resolution  to  suspend,  as 
far  as  possible,  all  retributive  measures  until  the  arrival 
of  his  successor.  There  was  no  public  man  in  England 
whose  opinions,  regarding  the  justice  and  policy  of  the 
war  in  Afghanistan,  had  been  more  emphatically  ex- 
pressed than  those  of  the  Governor-General  elect.  Lord 
Auckland  knew  that  he  was  to  be  succeeded  by  a  states- 
man who  had  pronounced  the  war  to  be  a  blunder  and 
a  crime ;  and  there  was  a  strong  conviction  within  him 
that  Lord  EUenborough  would  be  eager  to  withdraw 
every  British  soldier  from  A%hanistan,  and  to  sever  at 
once  a  connexion  which  had  been  attended  with  so  much 
disaster  and  disgrace.  As  the  responsible  author  of  the 
war,  this  demanded  from  him  no  small  amount  of  moral 
courage.  It  was,  indeed,  to  court  a  reversal  of  the 
policy  which  he  had  originated,  and  to  place  the  power 
of  a  sweeping  practical  condemnation  in  the  hands  of  a 
political  rival.  If  the  conduct  of  Lord  Auckland,  at  this 
time,  were  wanting  in  energy  and  decision,  it  was  by  no 
means  wanting  in  honesty.  He  saw  that  he  had  com- 
mitted a  blunder  of  enormous  magnitude,  and  he  left  it 
to  a  statesman  of  a  rival  party,  and  an  opposite  faith,  to 
pronounce  sentence  upon  it. 

But  it  was  not  permitted  to  Lord  Auckland  so  to 
suspend  the  progress  of  events,  as  to  enable  him  to  hand 
over  to  his  successor  only  the  chart  of  a  virgin  cam- 
paign, to  be  accepted  or  rejected  by  the  new  ruler,  as 
might  seem  fit  to  him,  on  taking  up  the  reins  of  office. 
It  was  decreed  that  his  administration  should  set  amidst 
the  clouds  of  continued  disaster.  There  was  nothing 
but  failure  to  be  written  down  in  the  concluding  chapter 
of  his  unfortunate  reign.  Scarcely  had  he  risen  up  from 
the  prostration  that  followed  the  first  stunning  effects 
of  the  dire  intelligence  of  the  massacre  in  the  Caubul 


FAILURE  OF  WILD'S  BRIGADE.  287 

passes,  when  there  came  from  Peshawur  tidings  that 
the  brigade  under  Colonel  Wild  had  been  disastrously 
beaten  in  the  Khybur  Pass.  The  first  scene  of  the  new, 
like  the  last  of  the  old  campaign,  was  a  great  calamity; 
and  Lord  Auckland,  now  more  than  ever  dispirited  and 
dejected,  earnestly  longed  for  the  day  when  it  would  be 
vouchsafed  to  him  to  close  his  portfolio,  and  to  turn  his 
back  for  ever  upon  a  country  where  sloughs  of  difficulty 
and  thickets  of  danger  seemed  to  cover  the  whole 
expanse.* 

♦  It  should  have  been  observed,  allies  generally.''    And  on  the  29th 

•with  reference  to  the  statement  {paye.  he  wrote  to  the  Lieutenant-Governor 

264)  of  the  unwillingness  of  Sir  Jas-  of    the    North- Western    Provinces 

per  Nicolls  to  strip  India  of  troops  (Mr.  Robertson):   "I  really  do  not 

for  the  prosecution  of  a  new  campaign  see  how  our  muster-roll  is  to  stand 

beyond  the  Indus,  that  Mr.  George  this  draining  of  more  troops— and 

Clerk  at  that  time  entertained  very  probably  many   more,  west — whilst 

similar  opinions  regarding  the  danger  reinforcements  are   also  proceeding 

of   sending   more    regiments    away  eastward.       Undoubtedly    the    re- 

from  the  North- Western  Provinces,  mainder  will  be  inadequate  to  the  due 

**  Whatever  may  take  place,"  he  wrote  maintenance  of  our  high  supremacy 

to  Lord  Auckland  on  the  25th  of  No-  in   India.''  —  [MS.  Correspondence?] 

vember,  "  in  regard  to  Caubul,  and  in  There  was,  unquestionably,  a  choice 

whatever  degree  our  troops  there  may  of  evils  at  this  time.     But  Sir  Jasper 

be  reinforced,  we  should  not  weaken  Nicolls  and  Mr.  George  Clerk  differed 

this  frontier.    Any  reduction  of  our  in  opinion  as  to  which  was  the  greater 

military  strength  causes  some  pre-  of  tne  two. 
sumption  or  audacity  in  our  native 


288  THE  HALT  AT  PE8HAWUB. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[January — April:  1842.] 

The  Halt  at  Peahawur— Position  of  Briffadier  Wild— Hia  Difficulties- 
Conduct  of  the  Sikhs — Attempt  on  Ali-Musiid — Failure  of  the  Brigade — 
Arrival  of  General  Pollock — ^State  of  the  Force — Affairs  at  Jellalabad— 
Correspondence  between  Sale  and  Pollock. 

The  position  of  Brigadier  Wild  at  Pesliawur  was 
not  one  to  infuse  into  a  military  commander  any  very 
overflowing  feelings  of  hope  and  exultation.  He  was 
called  upon  to  encounter  formidable  difficulties  with 
slender  means.  Everything,  indeed,  was  against  him. 
He  had  four  Native  infantry  regiments,  containing  a 
large  number  of  young  soldiers.  They  had  been  ex- 
posed for  some  time  to  the  deteriorating  contact  of  the 
mutinous  Sikh  soldiery,  who  had  done  their  best  to 
fill  our  Sepoys  with  that  horror  of  the  Khybur  to 
which  they  had  always  abandoned  themselves.  The 
only  cavalry  with  the  brigade  was  a  troop  of  irregular 
horse.  The  only  guns  were  four  pieces  of  Sikh  artil- 
lery, which  had  a  bad  habit  of  knocking  their  carriages 
to  pieces  whenever  they  were  tried.  There  was  a 
scarcity  of  ammunition.  Carriage  was  beginning  to  fail 
altogether.     It  was  believed  that  the  camels  had  been 


DIFFICULTIES  OF  BRIGADIER  WILD.  289 

hired  at  Ferozepore  to  proceed  as  far  as  Jellalabad ;  but 
now  the  owners  declared  that  they  had  entered  into  no 
such  contract,  and  resolutely  refused  to  proceed  further 
than  Peshawur.     The  most  dispiriting  intelligence  was 
coming  in  from  Afghanistan.    Every  day  seemed  to  add 
some  darker  tints  to  the  picture  of  our  discomfiture,  and 
to  bring  out  in  more  prominent  colours  the  triumphant 
successes  of  the  A%hans.     Sale  and  Macgregor  were 
writing  from  Jellalabad  to  urge  the  immediate  advance 
of  the  brigade ;  and  General  Avitabile  was  endeavour- 
ing, on  the  other  hand,  to  persuade  the  Brigadier  that 
it  would  be  dangerous  to  enter  the  pass  with  the  force 
which  he  then  commanded.*    The  co-operation  of  the 
Sikh  soldiery,  in  spite  of  Avitabile's  exertions,  seemed 
every  day  to  become  a  fainter  probability.   They  peremp- 
torily refused  at  one  time  to  proceed  to  Jumrood,  from 
which  point  it  was  intended  that  the  operations  should 
commence,  and  declared  that  they  would  return  to  La- 
hore.  Then  threatening  to  kill  Avitabile  himself  if  he  in- 
terfered with  them,  they  intercepted  one  of  the  guns  which 
were  moving  forward  for  our  use,  and  carried  it  back  to 
their  lines.     It  was  obvious,  indeed,  that  they  desired 
our  discomfiture  more  than  our  success ;  and,  in  spite  of 
the  declared  wishes  of  their  Sovereign,  whose  sincerity 
at  this  time  is  not  to  be  questioned,!  and  the  efforts  of 

♦  It  was,  moreover,  of  great  im-  bile  and  to  RaeeKisbenChund,  calling 
portance  to  accelerate  the  movement,  upon  them  to  aid  the  British  by  every 
because  it  was  believed  that  any  day  means  in  their  power.  "  You  are  a 
might  witness  the  appearance  of  the  general  of  the  Khalsa  Government,** 
Barukzye  horsemen  on  the  road  he  wrote  to  the  former,  "  and  noted 
between  Peshawur  and  Jellalabad.  for  the  confidence  placed  in  you. 
"Time  is  most  precious  tons,**  wrote  This  is  the  time  to  serve  the  two 
Mackeson  to  Clerk ;  "  a  few  days  allied  powers ;  and  you  will,  there- 
more  may  see  a  party  of  the  Baruk-  fore,  imreservedly  devote  your  atten- 
zye  troops  in  the  plains  of  Ningrahar,  tion  to  discharge  your  trust,  so  as  to 
and  then  thousands  will  be  required  please  the  two  friendly  governments, 
where  hundreds  would  now  do  the  and  to  earn  such  a  name  that  the 
work."  services  performed  shall  be  known  in 

t  Shere  Singh  despatched  urgent  London.  *    To  the  latter  he  wrote» 

purwannahs  both  to  General  Avita-  "  Orders  have  been  issued  to  Koon- 

VOL.  II.  U 


290  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUB. 

the  local  governor,  did  everything  that  they  could  do,  to 
render  the  latter  the  more  probable  contingency  of  the 
two.  The  negotiations  with  the  Afreedi  chie&  were  not 
going  on  prosperously,  and  there  was  every  prospect  of 
heavy  opposition  in  the  pass.  Under  such  circiunstances. 
Brigadier  Wild  could  only  write  that  he  was  prepared 
to  move  forward  whenever  it  was  expedient  to  do  so, 
but  that  he  could  not  answer  for  the  consequences  of 
a  precipitate  advance. 

It  was  not,  however,  permitted  him  to  remain  long 
in  doubt  and  inactivity.  The  fortress  of  Ali-Musjid  lies 
some  five  miles  within  the  entrance  of  the  Khybur 
Pass,  and  about  twenty-five  firom  Peshawur.  It  con- 
sists of  two  small  forts,  connected  by  a  wall  of  little 
strength,  and  stands  upon  the  summit  of  an  isolated 
oblong  rock,  commanded  on  the  southern  and  western 
sides  by  two  lofty  hills.  It  has  always  been  regarded 
as  the  key  to  the  Khybur  Pass;  and  it  was  obvious, 
now  that  it  was  lying  between  the  two  positions  of 
Sale  and  Wild,  it  was  of  immense  importance  that  it 
should  be  held  by  British  troops  or  their  allies.  It  had 
recently  been  garrisoned  by  a  small  detachment  of  a  local 

wur  Pertab  Chund  to  inarch  to  Pe-  frontier  post.    It  was  fortupate  that, 

shawTir,  and  the  zeal  of  the  Durbar  before  the  arrival  of  this  punoannah^ 

will  at   once  make  itself  manifest  the  commandants  of  the  auxiliary 

to^  Mr.  Clerk  (as  the  sun  suddenly  Mussulman  troops  had  left  the  room, 

shinii^  forth  from  beneath  a  cloud)  having  previousljf  engaged  to  march 

when  he  is  informed  of  all  by  the  let-  as  far  as  Ali-Musjid  in  support  of  our 

ters  of  Captain  Mackeson.** — [MS.Be'  troops,  and  to  move  on  affain  with 

cords.l  WhenMaokeson received  from  General  Pollock*s  brigadfit' — [ilfoc- 

George  Clerk  a  copy  of  the  purwan-  heaan  to  Clerk:  January^  1842.   MS. 

nah  to  Avitabile  he  was  in  conference  BecordsJ]    The  passages  referred  to 

at   that  officer's  quarters  witJi  the  in  the  purwannah  might  bear  this 

Sikh  general,  Mehtab  Siiu[h,  and  the  construction,  but  it  is  doubtful  whe- 

commandants  of  all  the  Sikh  batta-  ther  this  was  their  intent.     George 

lionsp    **I  read  out  this  purwannah,**  Clerk,  in  a  marginal  note  to  Macke- 

says  Mackesoni  ^*  but  was  somewhat  son's  letter,  says :  ^*  The  purwannah 

ccnfounded  to  fi^d  at  its  conclusion  did  not  limit  it ;  but  directed  them  to 

that  the  Durbar  limited  the  opera*  move  on  to  Futtehgurh  and  act  in 

^pOM  of  Geawal  Avitabile  an4  the  concert  and  by  Captain  Mackeson's 

Sikh  troops  to  Fattehgorii— their  own  advice."— [3/A  Jlecords,'] 


THE  MABCH  TO  ALI^MUSJID.  291 

corps,  composed  of  men  of  the  Eusofeye  tribe — some  of 
whom,  under  Mr.  Mackeson,*  had  been  true  to  their 
employers,  and,  gallantly  commanded,  gallantly  resisted 
the  attacks  of  the  Afreedi  clan.  But  there  was  now 
every  chance  of  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
Nothing  appeared  to  be  of  so  much  primary  importance 
as  the  occupation  of  this  post.  It  was  resolved,  therefore, 
that  one-half  of  the  brigade  should  be  pushed  forward, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  seize  and  garrison  Ali-Musjid. 

Accordingly,  on  the  15th  of  January,  Colonel  Moseley, 
with  the  53rd  and  64th  Sepoy  regiments,  prepared  to 
commence  the  march  to  Ali-Muqid.  They  started  under 
cover  of  the  night,  and  reached  their  destination  soon 
after  daybreak.  They  met  with  little  opposition  on  the 
way ;  but  soon  after  their  arrival  imder  the  rock  of  Ali* 
'  Musjid,  Captain  Mackeson,  who  had  accompanied  the 
force,  discovered  to  his  dismay  that,  instead  of  850 
supply-bullocks,  for  the  advance  of  which  he  had  made 
suitable  arrangements,  only  fifty  or  sixty  now  were 
straggling  in  with  the  rear-guard.  The  remainder,  by 
some  mismanagement  or  miscomprehension  of  orders, 
had  been  left  behind.  Thus  had  the  two  raiments 
which,  had  the  cattle  come  on  to  Ali-Musjid,  might 
have  held  that  place  in  security  for  a  month,  shut  them- 
selves up  in  an  isolated  fortress  without  provisions ;  and 
the  plans  which  had  been  so  anxiously  debated  by  our 
political  oflBcers  at  Peshawur,  utterly  firustrated  by  an 
oversight  of  the  most  disastrous  character,  of  which  it 
is  diflScult  to  determine  on  whom  we  are  to  fibs  the 

blame.f 

*  A  cousin  of  Captain,  now  Colonel  tlian  hb  defenoe  of  AK*Mu8Jid.  Mr. 

Mackeson.     Holding  no  recognised  Mackeson  had  been  long  disabled  by 

place    in  the  armies  either  of  the  extreme   lioknesfl,  but  wag  carried 

Crown  or  the  Company,  his  senricea  about  in  a  litter  to  soperinteod  the 

were    neither  fairly  estimated   nor  defence. 

adequately  rewarded.  Buttherewere        fSeeMa€he8(mt^€fov€rnmmi:JaM. 

few  more  gallant  episodes  in  the  war  27, 1S4S^.    FMiiked  papefM* 

u2 


292  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

The  only  hope  of  extrication  from  this  dilemma,  with- 
out disaster  and  discredit,  lay  in  the  advance  of  the  two 
other  regiments,  with  the  Sikh  guns  and  the  Sikh 
auxiliaries.  But  day  after  day  passed,  and  Mackeson 
and  Moseley  gained  no  certain  intelligence  of  the  move- 
ments of  their  comrades.  They  were  more  than  once 
under  arms  to  support  the  coming  reinforcements;  but 
the  reinforcements  never  appeared  in  sight.  Wild,  with 
the  two  regiments,  had  made  an  eflFort  to  throw  supplies 
into  Ali-Musjid,  but  had  been  disastrously  beaten  in 
the  attempt. 

Wild  was  to  have  moved  forward  with  the  Sikh 
auxiliaries  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  of  January,  but 
on  the  preceding  evening,  at  eleven  o'clock,  the  Sikh 
•troops  mutinied  to  a  man,  and  refused  to  enter  the 
pass.  They  were  at  this  time  with  the  British  at  * 
Jumrood.  But  when  Wild  prepared  to  advance,  they 
turned  their  &ces  in  an  opposite  direction,  and  marched 
back  upou  Peshawur.*  General  Avitabile  sent  orders 
to  his  oflScers  to  close  the  city  gates  against  the  mutinous 
regiments ;  and  then  shut  himself  up  in  the  fort. 

At  seven  o'clock,  the  80th  and  60th  regiments  with  the 
Sikh  guns  commenced  their  march  to  Ali-Musjid.  The 
enemy  appeared  at  the  entrance  of  the  pass  and  met  the 
advancing  column  with  a  fire  from  their  jezails.  The 
Sepoys  at  the  head  of  the  column  wavered,  stood  still, 
crowded  upon  each  other,  fired  anywhere,  aimless  and 

•  "  The  Nujeebs  struck  their  tents  expect  from  his   miscreant    troops, 

when  we  did,  and  moved  back  to  His  own    intentions  are    kind  and 

Peshawur,  and  the  Sikhs  made  no  de-  friendly  to  our  government  and  our- 

monstration,  though  twice  we  wrote  selves.  *    The  nusconduct  of  Uie  Sikh 

to    Greneral    Avitabile    during    the  troops  was  rendered  more  atrocious, 

niffht;  and  just   before  da;^light  I  and    our    own    mortification    more 

told  him  they  were  not  moving,  and  bitter,    by  the    circumstance    that 

^ain  at  sunrise."— [Cap totn  &  M.  Mackeson    had     advanced    a    lakh 

LawrencetoMr.  Clerk :l9th  January y  and  a  half  of  rupees  to  the    Sikh 

1842.]    Lawrence  adds:  "I  impute  authorities,  for  the  payment  of  the 

no  blame  to  General  Avitabile  for  men  whose   services  we    hoped    to 

the  man  not  telling  us  what  we  might  retain. 


wild's  disaster.  293 

without  effect.  The  officers  moved  forward,  but  the 
raiments  did  not  follow  them.  In  vain  the  Brigadier 
and  his  staff  called  upon  them  to  advance ;  they  only 
huddled  together  in  concision  and  dismay.  The  Sikh 
guns,  when  brought  into  action,  broke  down  one  after 
the  other ;  and  the  Sepoys  lost  all  heart.  Lawrence 
exerted  himself  manfully  to  save  the  guns ;  but  he  could 
not  induce  the  men  to  make  an  effort  to  carry  them 
off;  and  one  of  the  heavy  pieces  was  finally  abandoned.* 
There  was  nothing  to  be  done  after  this  but  to  fall  back. 
The  Brigadier  himself  was  wounded  in  the  face;  seve- 
ral of  oux  officers  were  injured;  one  killed-f  The  loss 
among  the  Sepoys  was  severe.  It  was  plain  that  they 
would  not  advance;  so  the  column  fell  back  on  Jum- 
rood,  and  Ali-Musjid  was  not  relieved. 

How  this  disaster  happened  it  is  not  easy  to  explain. 
Exaggerated  native  reports  of  the  immense  hordes  of 
Khyburees,  who  were  assembling  in  the  pass,  had  been 
in .  circulation ;  and  the  regiments  seem  to  have  com- 
menced  their  march,  anticipating  such  formidable  oppo- 
sition  as  they  were  never  doomed  to  encounter.  The 
ominous  intelligence  from  Caubul  had  alarmed  them. 
The  lies  spread  abroad  by  the  Sikhs  had  probably 
alarmed  them  still  more.  The  opposition  was  not 
strenuous.!     Had  the  regiments  been  in  good  heart, 

*  "We  have  been  disgracefully  t  "  I  confess,"  wrote  Captain  Law- 
beaten  back,"  wrote  Captain  Law-  rence  to  Mr.  Clerk,  "that  I  never 
rence  to  Mr.  Clerk.  "  Both  our  large  heard  any  very  heavy  fire,  or  saw  the 
gans  broke  down ;  one  was  on  an  enemy  in  any  numbers.  I  was  not 
dephant,  but  was  taken  down  to  put  with  the  advance,  and  therefore  may 
together  when  the  other  failed,  out  be  mistaken ;  but  was  afterwards 
its  carriage  breaking  too,  the  Sepoys  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the  ad- 
lost  all  heart,  and  I  grieve  to  say  that  vanced  gun  for  an  hour  or  more,  and 
I  could  not  ^  men  to  bring  one  off,  could  see  into  the  pass,  but  observed 
though  I  tried  for  an  hour,  and  at  no  breast-work,  and  but  very  few  of 
last,  finding  we  were  only  expending  the  enemy ;  certainly  not  above  a 
ammunition,  we  left  it  in  their  hands,  thousand,  and  not  hdf  that  number 
but  it  was  broken  completely  down  of  fire-arms." — [^MS,  RecordsJ] 
and  spiked." — [J/5.  Records.} 


294  THE  HALT  AT  FESHAWUB. 

they  would  not  have  been  beaten  back  But  there  was 
anything  but  a  strong  forward  feeling  among  them  when 
they  commenced  their  march.  The  defection  of  the 
Sikhs  had  damped  their  ardour,  and  the  breaking  down 
of  the  guns  now  seemed  to  complete  what  the  mis- 
conduct of  our  allies  had  commenced.  The  first  attacks 
of  the  enemy  threw  the  Sepoys  at  the  head  of  the 
column  into  confusion;  and  all  hope  of  success  was  at 
an  end  before  a  battle  had  been  fought. 

The  two  regiments  that  occupied  Ali-Musjid  might 
have  held  that  post  for  any  length  of  time  against  the 
Ehyburees.  But  they  had  a  lamentable  scarcity  of 
provisions.  The  water,  too,  seemed  to  poison  them. 
The  troops  were  put  upon  half-rations,  but  in  a  few 
days  these  supplies  were  nearly  exhausted.  Without 
bedding  and  without  tents,  kept  ever  on  the  alert,  under 
a  severe  climate,  the  health  of  the  Sepoys  was  giving 
way.  They  were  crowding  into  hospital.  There  seemed 
to  be  no  prospect  of  relief;  so,  on  the  23rd  of  January, 
Colonel  Moseley  determined  to  evacuate  the  fortress  of 
Ali-Musjid,  and  to  cut  his  way  back  to  Jumrood. 

To  Mackeson,  who  saw  clearly  the  poUtical  evils  that 
must  result  from  the  surrender  of  so  important  a  posi- 
tion, this  was  a  heavy  blow.  Anything  seemed  better 
than  the  total  abandonment  of  such  a  post.  A  small 
party  of  resolute  men  might  hold  it;  for  a  small  party 
might  be  fed.  There  were  at  least  two  men  in  the  gar- 
rison eager  for  the  proud  distinction  of  holding,  in  an 
imminent  conjuncture,  a  dangerous  isolated  post  against 
a  multitudinous  enemy.  Captain  Burt,  of  the  64th 
Native  Infantry,  volunteered  to  remain  with  a  party  of 
regular  troops;  but  the  Sepoys  would  not  volunteer.  Cap- 
taiu  ThomaTof  the  same  corp8-the  staff  officer  of  the 
detachment — a  man  of  a  bold  and  fearless  nature,  and  of 
large  acquirements — stepped  forward  and  volunteered  to 


moseley's  return  to  jumrood.  295 

hold  the  fortress  with  150  men  of  the  old  Eusofssye 
ganisoiu  The  offer  Vras  accepted;  arwingements  were 
made  for  the  defence  j  but  the  fidelity  of  the  Euaofzyes, 
which  had  been  long  failing,  now  broke  down  idto- 
gether.  They  refused  to  occupy  the  dangerous  post 
after  the  departure  of  the  Sepoy  regiments ;  and  so,  on 
the  24th,  the  entire  force  moved  out  of  Ali-Musjid,  and 
suffered  it  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Afreedis. 

"  The  regiments  are  safe  through — thank  God !"  was 
the  emphatic  announcement  which  Captain  Lawrence, 
on  the  24th  of  January,  forwarded  by  express  to  Mr. 
Gteorge  Clerk.  It  had  been  a  time  of  intense  and  pain^ 
ful  excitement.  The  communications  between  the  two 
detachments  were  cut  off,  and  anxious  aa  they  were  to 
act  in  concert  with  each  other,  they  had,  up  to  the 
evening  of  the  22nd,  failed  to  ascertain  the  intentions  of 
each  other,  and  to  effect  a  combined  movement.*  On 
the  28rd,  the  two  regiments  which  Wild  had  com- 
manded, now,  owing  to  the  Brigadier's  wound,  under 
the  charge  of  Colonel  TuUoch,  with  the  two  serviceabk 
Sikh  guns,  went  forward  to  line  the  pass,  and  cover  the 
march  of  Moseley's  regiments ;  but  no  sound  of  an  ad- 
vancing column  was  heard,  and  about  mid-day  they 
returned  to  camp.  On  the  following  morning  they 
moved  out  again.  Moseley  had  quitted  Ali-Musjid,  and 
was  making  the  best  of  his  way  to  Jumrood.  The  Khy- 
burees  mustered  strong;  but  the  Sepoy  corps  in  both 
detachments  did  their  duty  well,  and  the  r^ments 
made  good  their  passage.  Captain  Wilson,  of  the  64th, 
was  killed  at  the  head  of  his  men ;  and  Captain  Lock, 
of  the  60th,  fell  also  with  his  sWord  in  his  hand. 
There  was  some  loss  of  baggage  on  the  retteat — some 
of  the  sick  and  wounded  were  abandoned;  and  the 
general  conduct  of  the  affair  is  not  to  be  dwelt  upon 

*  The  two  detachmentv  met  at  the  mouth  of  the  pass. 


296  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

with  pride  or  pleasure.  But  when  the  four  regiments 
were  once  more  assembled  together  at  Jumrood,  in 
spite  of  the  disasters  of  the  week,  a  general  feeling  of 
relief  was  experienced ;  and  our  officers  congratulated 
one  another,  thankful  that  it  was  "  no  worse." 

Nothing  was  to  be  done  now  but  to  wait  patiently 
for  the  arrival  of  Greneral  Pollock  and  the  reinforce- 
ments which  were  marching  up  through  the  Punjaub. 
It  was  obvious  that,  without  cavalry  and  without 
guns,  every  eflfort  to  relieve  Jellalabad  must  be  a  dis- 
astrous failure.  The  want  of  guns  was  now  severely 
commented  upon.  Everybody  had  something  to  say 
about  the  remissness  of  those  in  high  places,  who  had 
suflfered  the  advanced  brigade  sent  for  the  relief  of  our 
beleaguered  troops  to  appear  at  the  mouth  of  the  Khy- 
bur  Pass  without  a  single  piece  of  British  artillery. 
Brigadier  Wild  lamented  the  want  of  artillery :  Colonel 
Moseley  lamented  the  want  of  artillery :  Captain  Macke- 
son  lamented  the  want  of  artillery.  All  were  certain 
that  the  first  effort  at  retrieval  would  not  have  been  a 
new  calamity  and  a  new  disgrace  if  a  proper  comple- 
ment of  British  guns  had  been  sent  on  with  the  Sepoy 
regiments.  The  omission  was  a  great  one;  but  it  ap- 
pears to  have  been  more  the  result  of  circumstances 
than  of  any  culpable  negligence  on  the  part  of  the 
military  authorities.  The  four  Sepoy  regiments,  forming 
Wild's  brigade,  were  sent  forward  by  Mr.  George  Clerk, 
on  a  requisition  from  Captain  Mackeson.  Mackeson 
wrote  for  the  immediate  despatch  of  the  troops  which, 
before  the  outbreak  at  Caubul,  had  been  warned  for  the 
ordinary  relief.  The  regiments  under  orders  for  Af- 
ghanistan were  therefore  hurried  forward,  and  another 
regiment,  which  was  on  the  frontier,  ordered  to  march 
with  them.  Expedition  rather  than  efficiency  was  then 
sought;  and  to  have  got  artillery  ready  for  service  would 


WiVNT  OF  ARTILLERY.  297 

have  delayed  the  despatch  of  the  infantry  corps.  Cap- 
tain Lawrence,  himself  an  artillery  officer,  saw  the 
expediency  of  despatching  artillery  to  Peshawur,  and 
did  not  omit  to  throw  out  suggestions  regarding  the 
preparation  of  this  important  arm ;  but  Mr.  George 
Clerk,  who  was  Captain  Lawrence's  official  chief,  and 
subject  only  to  whose  confirmation  that  officer  had  any 
authority  to  call  for  the  despatch  of  troops,  did  not 
follow  up  the  intimation  of  his  subordinate.  "  Your 
Excellency  will  have  observed,"  wrote  Mr.  Clerk  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief,*  ''  that  I  have  limited  the  requisi- 
tions, which  I  have  presumed  to  make  upon  the  com- 
manding officers  of  Loodhianah  and  Ferozepore,  to  the 
three  infantry  regiments  which  were  already  preparing 
to  march  to  Afghanistan.  I  consider  that  this  is  what 
Captain  Mackeson  means  in  his  urgent  request  for  the 
despatch  of  the  brigade  warned  for  the  Caubul  relief. 
I  therefore  have  not  followed  up  the  intimation  made 
by  Captain  Lawrence  to  the  commanding  officer  at 
Ferozepore  regarding  artillery  and  cavalry,  by  request- 
ing that  a  detachment  of  either  should  move  for- 
ward."! 
It  appears,   therefore,    that  Captain    Mackeson,    at 

Peshawur,  limited  his  requisitions  to  the  troops  actually 
under  orders  to  proceed,  in  ordinary  routine,  to  A%han- 

*  Mr.    G,    Clerk    to  Sir    Jasper    nel  Wild^  for  the  despatch  of  wrtil- 


tencUng  such  compilations,  there  are  says  that  he  was  about  to  call  upon 
two  errors  in  these  few  lines.  Mr.  Colonel  Wild,  and  may  orally  have 
Clerk  is  made  to  say  that  he  had  broached  the  subject  of  the  guns ; 
called  upon  **  the  commanding  officer  but  in  his  official  letter,  written  on 
of  Lahore  and  Ferozepore"  to  send  the  same  day  (November  14),  there 
forward  the  regiments.  is  no  mention  of  artilleryi  alUiouffh 
t  It  is  not  very  clear,  however,  he  suggests  the  expediency  of  send- 
that  Captain  Lawrence  actually  made  in?  forward  the  lOtn  Cavalry  without 
any  written  requisition  to  the  com-  de(ay. 
manding  officer  at  Ferozepore  (Colo- 


298  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

istan — that  Captftin  Lawrence,  at  Feroi^epote^  suggested 
the  expediency  of  sending  forward  some  guns,  if  they 
could  be  got  ready ;  and  that  Mr.  Clerk,  at  Locdhianah, 
declined  to  endorse  the  suggestion,  and  left  it  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief  to  decide  whether  any  artillery 
should  be  sent  forward  with  the  Sepoy  regiments. 

But  the  power  of  decision  was  not  in  the  hands  of 
the  Commander-in-Chief.  The  odium  of  having  sent 
forward  four  Native  infantry  regiments,  without  cavalry 
and  without  guns,  has  been  cast  upon  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls. 
But  the  truth  is,  that  the  regiments  had  crossed  the 
Sutlej  before  he  knew  that  they  had  been  ordered  for- 
ward. He  was  moving  upwards  towards  the  frontier 
when  inteUigence  of  the  outbreak  in  Afghanistan,  and 
the  consequent  measures  of  Mr.  Clerk,  met  him  as  he 
advanced.  On  the  18th  and  20th  of  November  the 
two  first  regiments  crossed  the  Sutlej;  and  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief received  the  notification  of  the  demand 
for  these  regiments  not  before  the  22nd.  On  the  26th 
of  November  the  two  other  regiments  crossed  the 
Sutlej ;  and  the  Commander-in-Chief  did  not  receive  in- 
telligence of  their  despatch  before  the  3rd  of  December. 

Thus  far  it  is  plain  that  no  discredit  attaches  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  or  to  any  other  authority,  for  not 
having  sent  forward  any  guns  with  Wild's  brigade.  But 
the  question  yet  remains  to  be  asked  why  guns  were 
not  sent  after  it.  Though  Mr.  Clerk,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, anxious  not  to  delay  the  advance  of  the  infantry 
r^ments,  made  no  requisition  for  artillery,  he  directed 
General  Boyd's  attention  to  the  subject  soon  after  the 
despatch  of  those  corps,  and  suggested  that  one  of 
Wild's  regiments  should  halt  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Sutlej,  whilst  the  guns  were  proceeding  to  join  it.*    As 

♦  "  Though  I  have  not  yet  heard    frontier,  I  would  beg  leave  to  recom- 
that  any  artillery  is  ordered  up  to  the    mend,  in  anticipation  of  the  speedy 


THE  ABTILLEBT  QUBSTIOK.  299 

there  was  no  available  artillety  at  Ferozepore,  it  was 
proposed  that  Captain  Aleitander's  troop  of  Horse  Artil- 
lery should  move  at  once  from  Loodhianah  to  the 
former  station  on  its  way  across  the  frontier }  but  on 
hearing  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  had  ordered  some 
details  of  a  foot  artillery  battery  to  be  warned  for 
service,  Mr.  Clerk  withdrew  his  requisition  for  the 
movement  of  the  troop  beyond  the  frontier,  but  still 
suggested  that  it  should  be  pushed  on  to  Ferozepore. 
This  was  on  the  2nd  of  December  *  On  the  4th,  having 
heard  that  some  delay  must  attend  the  despatch  of  the 
details  warned  by  orders  of  the  Commander-in-Chief,  Mr. 
Clerk  wrote  a  letter  to  Captain  Alexander,  requesting 
him,  as  the  means  of  more  rapid  movement  were  at  his 
command,  to  push  on  across  the  Sutlej  with  all  possible 
expedition.t    But  a  few  days  afterwards  he  received  a 

arrival  of  reinforcements  so  necessary  the  British  fVontier  on  my  r6C|uisitioD, 

on  the  Sutlei,  that  artillery  should  though  I  do  not  propose,  in  conse- 

move  forward  from  hence.     I  shall  quence  of  this  information^  to  reouest 

transmit  a  copy  of  this  letter  to  Lieu-  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rich  to  recall  the 

tenant-Colonel  Wild,  in  case  he  may  order  for  the  intended  march  hence  of 

think  proper  to  halt  one  of  the  regi-  that  troop  to-morrow  in  progress  to 

ments  under  his  command,  until  tne  Ferozepore.** — [^Mr,  George  Clerk  to 

arrival  of  such  artillery  as  you  consider  Major^Oeneral    Boyd :     Loodhianah 

can  best  be  spared  from  Loodhianah  December  2m2|  1841.  MS*  Records.^* 

or  Ferozepore ;   but  the  latter  is,  I  f  "  Having  heard  that  it  is  possible 

believe,  for  want  of  horses,  incapable  the  guns  which  his  Excellency  the 

of  moving ;  and  this  leaves  an  insuf-  Commander-in-Chief  has  directed  to 

flciency  for  the  due  protection  of  this  move  across  the  frontier  may  not  be 

border,  during  an  unsettled  state  of  ready  to  move  so  immediately  as  the 

parties  at  Lahore."  —  [Mr.    George  passage  across  the  Sutlej  of  your  troop 

Clerk  to  Major-General  Boyd:  Novem^  may  be  effected,  I  deem  it  to  be  ad- 

her  27M,  1841.    MS,  Records.']  visable,  adverting  to  the  emersency  of 

♦  •*  Having  had;  the  honour  to  re-  the  occasion,  to  recommend  that  jroa 

ceive  from   tlie  acting  Adjutant-Ge-  nevertheless  proceed  on,  in  antiapa- 

neral  a  statement  of  the  reinforce-  tion  of  the  sanction  of  his  Excellency 

ments  which  his  Excellency  the  Com-  to  your  doing  so,  by  orders  of  the 

roander-in-Chief  has  ordered  to  be  Major-General  commanding  the  divi- 

put  in  motion  for  the  purposing  of  sion  issued  at  my  request,  provided 

forcing  the  Khybur,  I  beg  leave  to  that  you  can  do  so  without  crippling 

state  to  you  that  I  would  not  now  the  means  of  marching  requisite  for 

wish  that  the  3rd  troop,  2nd  Brigade  the  artillery,  which  his  Excellency 

of  Horse  Artillery,  should  move  from  has  directed  to  be  put  in  motion  for 


300  THE  HALT  AT  PBSHAWUK. 

letter  from  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  prohibiting  the  despatch 
of  the  Horse  Artillery;  and  he  accordingly  apprised 
Captain  Alexander  that  the  request  made  to  him  on  the 
4th  of  December  for  the  advance,  of  the  troop  was 
withdrawn.*  And  so,  instead  of  a  troop  of  Horse 
Artillery  beii^  sent  to  overtake  Wild's  brigade,  which 
reached  Peshawur  at  the  end  of  December,  half  of  a 
foot  artillery  battery  was  warned  to  proceed  with 
M'Caskill's  brigade,  which  did  not  arrive  before  the  be- 
ginning of  February.  In  the  interval,  Wild  had  beeil 
disastrously  beaten  in  the  Khybur  Pass,  and  AlirMusjid 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Afreedis. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  of  this  first 
fjBulure,  and  to  whomsoever  its  responsibility  may  attach, 
it  is  certain  that  its  results  were  of  a  very  dispiriting 
and  deteriorating  character.  The  regiments  remained 
inactive  in  the  vicinity  of  Peshawur ;  and  the  usual 
consequences  of  inactivity,  under  such  circumstances 
were  soon  painfully  appar^it  in  the  camp  of  Brigadier 
Wild.  The  Sepoys  fell  sick;  crowded  into  hospital; 
seemed  to  have  lost  all  heart,  and,  without  any  of  the 
audacity  of  open  mutiny,  broke  out  into  language  only 
a  little  way  removed  from  it.  Exposed  to  the  alarm- 
ing hints  and  the  alluring  temptations  of  the  mutinous 
Sikh  soldiery,  some  began  to  desert  their  colours,  whilst 
others  openly  declared  that  nothing  would  induce  them 

the  frontier,  and  which  should  follow  lery  as  a  reinforcement  to  proceed 

as  expeditiously  as  possible.**— [3fr.  to  Afghanistan,  I  have  apprised  Cap- 

George  Clerk  to  Captain  Alexander^  tain  Alexander,  commanding  the  Srd 

commanding  Srd  troop^   2nd  Brigade  troop,  2nd  brigade,  now  on  its  way 

of  Horse    Artillery:   Dec.  4,    1841.  to    Ferozepore,  and    Major   Hoish, 

MS,  Records.']  commanding  that  station,  that  they 

*  "  I  do  myself  the  honour  to  in-  are  to  consider  the  request  made  by 

form  your  Excellency  that,  in  conse-  me,  for  the  advance  of  that  troop,  to 

quence  of  my  receipt  of  your  Excel-  be  withdrawn.*' — ^Mr.  George  Clerk 

lencjr's  letter  of  the  2nd  instant,  pro-  to  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs:  Dec,  7, 1841.] 
bibiting  the  advance  of  horse  artil- 


ARRIVAL  OF  GENERAL  POLLOCK.  301 

again  to  face  the  horrors  of  the  Khybur  Pass.  As 
Greneral  Pollock  advanced  through  the  Punjaub,  the 
worst  reports  continued  to  meet  him  from  Peshawur. 
Not  only  was  he  informed  that  the  Sepoys  of  Wild's 
brigade  were  enfeebled  by  disease  and  paralysed  by  ter- 
ror ;  but  that  even  the  ojBScers  of  the  force  were  using, 
in  an  unguarded  and  imworthy  manner,  the  language  of 
disheartenment  and  alarm.* 

On  the  5th  of  February,  Greneral  Pollock  reached 
Peshawur;  and  found  that  the  stories,  which  had  met 
him  on  the  road,  had  by  no  means  exaggerated  the 
condition  of  the  troops  under  Brigadier  Wild.  There 
were  then  1000  men  in  hospital ;  and  the  number  was 
alarmingly  increasing.  In  a  few  days  it  had  increased 
to  1800;  so  that  even  with  the  new  brigade,  which 
marched  in  a  day  or  two  after  the  General's  arrival, 
he  had,  exclusive  of  cavalry,  scarcely  more  troops  fit  for 
service  than  Wild  had  commanded  a  month  before. 

An  immediate  advance  on  Jellalabad  was  not,  under 
such  circumstances,  to  be  contemplated  for  a  moment. 
Greneral  Pollock  had  much  to  do  before  he  could  think 
of  forcing  the  Khybur  Pass  and  relieving  Jellalabad. 
The  duties  of  a  General  are  not  limited  to  operations  in 
the  field.  When  Pollock  reached  Peshawur  he  found 
that  the  least  diflSicult  part  of  the  labour  before  him  was 
the  subjugation  of  the  Afreedi  tribes.     "Any  precipi- 

*  On  the  29th  of  January,  Sir  in  a  Terj  forcible  manner,  and  sham- 
Jasper  Nicolls  wrote  to  General  Pol-  ing  them  out  of  such  very  unbe- 
lock  :  ^^  My  dear  General, — In  some  coming,  unmilitary,  and  dangerous 
late  letters  Captain  Lawrence  has  conduct.  Their  duty  is  obedience — 
expressed  himself  in  a  very  decided  prompt  and  energetic  obedience — 
manner  touching  the  disheartened  such  as  executes  without  expression 
and  unguarded  language  held  by  of  doubt.  If  more  has  been  said  than 
officers  ^longing  to  the  corps  which  the  case  seemed  to  require,  take  no 
were  beaten  back  in  the  Khybur  Pass  notice  of  this  further  than  to  warn 
on  the  19th  instant.  God  forbid  that  Captain  L.,  if  you  think  proper  to  do 
they  should  feel  any  panic,  or  even  so. — Always  yours  faithniUy, 
alarm ;  but  if  you  observe  it,  I  rely  "  J.  Nicolls.** 
on  your  addressing  yourself  to  them  [M5.  Correspondence."] 


302  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

tancy,"  wrote  the  Commauder-iu-Chief  some  time  after- 
wards, "  on  the  part  of  a  general  officer  panting  for  fame 
might  have  had  the  worst  effect."*  To  have  advanced 
on  Jellalabad  in  that  month  of  February  would  have 
been  to  precipitate  a  strangling  failure.  Instead  of 
flinging  himself  headlong  into  the  pass,  Pollock  made 
his  way  to  the  hospitals.  On  the  day  after  his  arrival 
he  visited  the  sick  of  the  different  regiments,  inquired 
into  their  wants,  conversed  with  their  medical  attend- 
ants, endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  causes  of  the  pre- 
valent sickness,  and  encouraged  by  every  means  at  his 
command,  by  animating  words  and  assuring  promises, 

the  dispirited  and  desponding  invalids. 

Nor  was  there  less  to  do  out  of  the  hospitals.  The 
morale  of  the  troops  was  in  the  lowest  possible  state. 
It  seemed,  indeed,  as  though  all  their  soldierly  qualities 
were  at  the  last  gasp.  The  disaffection  of  the  Sepoys 
broke  out  openly,  and  four  out  of  the  five  regiments 
refused  to  advance.  Nightly  meetings  of  delegates  from 
the  different  regiments  of  Wild's  brigade  were  held  in 
camp;  and  the  26th  Regiment  of  Native  Infantry,  which 
had  come  up  with  M'Caskill's  brigade,  was  soon  brought 
into  the  confederacy.  In  less  than  forty-eight  hours 
after  the  arrival  of  that  corps,  active  emissaries  from  the 
disaffected  regiments  were  busy  among  the  men,  not 
only  working  upon  their  fears,  but  appealing  to  their 
religious  feelings.f    The  taint  seems  to  have  reached 

*  Sir  Jcuper  NicoUs  to  Lord  HiU:  alarm,  and  in  all  ways  encoura^Ins 

Simlakf  Septerkber  ^nd^  1842. — [AfjS.  and  screening  their  desertion,  wnich 

CorrespondenceJ]      In     this     letter,  was  considerable.    It  was  well  that  a 

which  will  be  found  entire  in  the  cautious,  cool  officer  of  the  Company's 

Appendix,  the  Commander-in-Chief  army  should  have  to  deal  with  them 

says :  **  WhenMaJor-Grentn^  Pollock  in  such  a  temper  363  miles  fVom  our 

arrived  at  Peshawur  he  found  1800  frontier.     Oeneral  Pollock  managed 

men  of  the  four  re|[iments  in  hospital ;  them  extremely  well.** 

the  Sepoys  dedarmff  that  they  would  f  An  intelligent  and  trustworthy 

not  yt&in  advance  through  the  Khy-  officer  of  the  26th  Native  Infantry, 

bur  rasa ;  the  Sikh  troops  spreading  whose  letter  is  now  before  me,  writes : 


NECESSITY  OP  THE  HALT,  308 

even  to  some  of  the  officers  of  Wild's  brigade,  who  did 
not  hesitate  openly  to  express  at  the  mess-table  the 
strongest  opinions  against  a  seoond  attempt  to  force  the 
Khybur,  or  to  declare  their  belief  that  very  few  would 
ever  return  to  Peshawur.  One  officer  publicly  asserted 
that  it  would  be  better  to  sacrifice  Sale's  brigade  than 
to  risk  the  loss  of  12,000  men  on  the  march  to 
Jellalabad;  and  another  said  that,  if  an  advance  were 
ordered,  he  would  do  his  best  to  dissuadQ  every  Sepoy  of 
his  corps  from  again  entering  the  pass.* 

To  instil  new  courage  and  confidence  into  the  wa- 
verers  was  no  easy  task;  but  coolly  and  sagaciously,  as 
one  who  understood  the  causes  of  their  disheartenment, 
and  could  make  some  allowances  for  their  misconduct, 
Pollock  addressed  himself  to  the  work  of  reanimating 
and  reassuring  them.  He  made  them  feel  that  they  had 
been  placed  under  the  care  of  one  who  was  mindful  of 
their  welfare  and  jealous  of  their  honour — one  who 
overlooked  nothing  that  contributed  to  the  health  and 
comfort  of  his  men,  and  who  would  never  call  upon 
them  to  make  sacrifices  which  he  himself  was  not  pre- 
pared  to  make.  There  was,  in  all  that  he  did,  such  an 
union  of  kindness  and  firmness — he  was  so  mild,  so  con- 
siderate, and  yet  so  decided— that  the  Sepoys  came  in 
time  to  regard  him  with   that  childlike  faith  which, 

**  In  less  than  forty-eiffht  boura  Mler  tlon  wa^  several  times  communicated 
our  (the  9th  Foot  and  26th  Native  to  me  oy  old  Sepoys  and  non-com- 
Infantry)  arrival,  active  emissaries,  missioneid  officers,  and  the  fact  of 
particularly  from  the  53rd  and  60th  the  attempts  made  to  reduce  the  mep 
Kegiments,  were  in  our  camp,  using  from  their  allegiance  is  too  well 
every  effort  to  induce  our  men  to  k^own  to  the  officers  of  the  26th  to 
desert,  and  to  refuse  to  enter  the  admit  of  a  moment's  doubt." — [JfS. 
Khybur ;  and  had  actually  gone  the  Correspondence.'] 
length  of  sending  Brahmins  with  the  •  MS,  Correspondence,  I  need  not 
Gunga  Jul  to  swear  them  in  not  to  say  that  these  statements  would  not 
advance ;  and  did  not  desist  until  be  made  except  upon  the  testimony 
orders  were  eiven  to  seize  the  first  of  officers  who  heard  the  speeches  to 
man  caught  m  the  lines  under  sus-  which  I  have  referred, 
picious  circumstances.  This  informa- 


304  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

under  prosperous  circumstances,  is  one  of  their  most 
noticeable  characteristics ;  and  when  the  hour  of  trial 
came  they  were  not  found  wanting. 

AU  through  the  months   of  February  and  March, 
Pollock  and  his  regiments  remained  inactive  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Peshawur.     Mortifjdng  as  it  was  to 
the  General  to  be  compelled  to  halt  so  long  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Khybur  Pass,  no   other  course  was 
open  to  him,  at  the  time,  that  did  not  threaten  renewed 
disaster.      Pollock's    position   wiEis,   doubtless,    painful, 
but  it  was  not  perplexing.    His  duty  in  this  conjunc- 
ture was  plain.    The  eyes  of  all  India  were  turned  upon 
him.     The  safety  of  the  gallant  garrison  of  Jellalabad 
was  to  be  secured  by  his  advance.     Sale  and  Macgregor 
were  writing  urgent  letters,  calling  upon  him  to  push  on 
without  delay;  but  it  was  still  his  duty  to  halt.     The 
Sepoys  were  gradually  recovering  both  their  health  and 
their  spirits.     But  reinforcements  were  coming  across 
the  Punjaub,  with  British  dragoons  and  horse  artillery 
among  them ;  and  nothing  did  more  to  animate  and  re- 
assure those,  who  had  been  discouraged  by  previous 
failure,  than  the  knowledge  that  when  they  readvanced 
they  would  be  supported  by  fresh  troops  strong  in  every 
branch,  and  numbering  among  them  a  good  proportion  of 
stout  European  soldiers.    Had  the  advance  been  ordered 
before  the  arrival  of  these  reinforcements,  it  is  at  least  a 
probable  contingency  that  some  of  the  Native  raiments 
would  have  stood  fast,  and,  by  open  mutiny  almost  in 
the  face  of  the  enemy,  have  heaped  up  before  us  a 
mountain  of  difficulty,  such    as   no  prudence  and  no 
energy  on  the  part  of  a  commander  could  ever  suffice  to 
overcome. 

Still  it  required  much  firmness  to  resist  the  pressing 
appeals  made  to  Pollock  by  his  comrades  at  the  other 
end  of  the  Khybur  Pass.     He  had  not  been  many  days 


EXIGENCIES  OF  THE  JELLALABAD  GARRISON.         305 

at  Peshawur  before  he  received  the  following  commu- 
nication from  General  Sale,  setting  forth  the  exigencies 
of  the  Jellalabad  garrison,  and  urging  him  to  advance 
to  their  relief.  The  letter,  written  partly  in  English 
and  partly  in  French,  is  at  once  curious  and  important: 

Jellalabad,  February  14th,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

Captain  Macgregor's  cossids  yesterday  brought  me  the 
information  of  your  arrival  at  Peshawur,  and  of  full  military 
and  political  powers  in  Afghanistan  being  vested  in  you.  I  lose 
no  time  in  sending  such  a  view  of  the  state  of  this  garrison  as 
may  enable  you  to  form  your  own  opinion  on  the  necessity  ot 
moving  to  its  relief  Nous  avons  des  provisionnemens  pour  les 
soldats  Britanniques  pour  soixante-dix  jours,  pour  les  Sipahis  et 
les  autres  natifs  demi-provisionnemens  pour  le  m^me  temps,  et 
pour  les  chevaux  de  la  cavalerie  et  Partillerie  de  large  pour  vingt- 
cinq  jours.  Autant  que  nous  pouvons  renvoyer  nos  parties  pour 
la  fourrage,  nous  ne  manquerons  cela  pour  la  cavalerie,  raais  nous 
serons  enti^rement  prive  de  cette  ressource  apr^  le  premier  jour 
d'investissement.  A  present  nous  n'avons  de  fourrage  que  pour 
trente  jours  pour  tons  les  animaux.  Les  chevaux  d'artillerie  et 
les  yaboos  des  sapeurs  sont  de  ce  pays  et  mangent  seulement 
boozeut  kurlise.  Nous  manquons  beaucoup  aussi  des  munitions 
de  guerre,  plomb,  &c. 

When  our  animals  can  no  longer  be  sustained  by  com  or 
forage  only,  we  must  of  course  destroy  them.  The  hospitals  are 
ill  suppUed  with  medicines,  and  much  sickness  may  be  appre- 
hended when  the  weather  grows  hot.  At  present  the  health  of 
the  garrison  is  excellent.  We  have  no  prospect  of  adding  to  our 
resources  above  detailed  even  if  we  had  money,  which  we  have 
not.  The  country  possesses  abundance  of  supplies,  of  which  the 
presence  of  a  force  would  give  us  command. 

Mahomed  Akbar  is  at  Cherbyl,  in  the  Lughman  district,  and 
threatens  an  attack;  and  we  may,  in  about  fifteen  days,  though  I 
think  not  sooner,  be  invested  by  a  large  force  from  Caubul,  with 
a  considerable  artillery. 

Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  General, 

Yours  very  truly, 

Rt.  Sale,  M.-G. 

VOL.  II.  X 


306  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUE. 

P.S. — I  shall  view  la  perte  of  my  cavaby,  should  such  occur, 
with  much  sorrow,  as  from  their  successes  against  the  enemy  they 
have  acquired  a  ooniidence  in  themselves  and  contempt  for  their 
enemies,  which  feeling  is  equally  participated  in  by  the  rest  of 
the  troops.  As  I  cannot  now  get  an  opportunity  to  send  you  a 
return,  I  give  a  memorandum: — Cavalry,  efiective,  deux  cents 
quarante-un;  malade,  vingt-un.  Artillerie,  effective,  un  cent 
soizante-onze;  malade,  quarante-onze.  Sapeurs,  effective,  trois 
cents  quatre;  malade,  quarante-cinq.  Infanterie  Britannique, 
effective,  sept  cents  dix-neuf;  malade,  trente.  Sipahis,  ef^tive, 
huit  cents  trente-huit;  malade,  quarante-huit. 

February  16, — Hier  Mahomed  Akbar  a  pass^  la  riviere,  et  a 

pris  position  sur  ce  cdt^  pr^  de  dix  milles  de  cette  ville.     On  dit 

qu'il  a  des  soldats  de  tons  armes  et  quatre  pieces  de  canon.     On 

pent  voir  son  camp  d'ici. 

R.  Sale* 

February  16. — I  have  received  this  morning  yours  of  the  9th 
instant.  S'ils  n'envoyent  pas  des  canons  de  sifege  de  Caubul,/?eMN 
itre  je  puis  maintenir  ma  position  dans  cette  viUe  pour  le  temps 
que  vous  avez  6crit;  mais  si  une  force  avec  les  pieces  (que  nous 
avons  perdu)  arriveront  ici,  ce  sera  impossible,  et  avant  cette 
epoque  nos  chevaux  moureront  de  faim.  II  sera  bien  difiBcile  et 
incertain  de  vous  donner  avis  de  mon  intention  de  retirer,  parce 
qu'^  ce  moment  Mahomed  Akbar  est  pr^s  avec  une  force  de  deux 
milles  hommes  (qui  s'augmente  jour  par  jour),  et  si  present 
ses  patrouilles  et  videttes  parcourent  tout  le  pays. 

Rt.  Sale,  M.-G.» 

A  few  days  afterwards  Sale  again  wrote  to  urge 
Pollock's  advance.  A  great  calamity  had  befallen  the 
Jellalabad  garrison.  On  the  morning  of  the  19th  of 
February  the  men  were  busied  with  their  accustomed 

*  MS,  Records,    It  will,  doubtless,  ploy  capable  of  translating  English, 

occur  to  the  reader  that  in  this  letter  dvlI  Sale,  in  this  letter,  seems  to  nave 

Sale  adopted  the  French  disguise  to  blurted  out,  in  the  plainest  English, 

yery  little  purpose.    The  object  of  all  that  it  was  most  expedient  to  oon- 

corresponding  in  this  hybrid  language  ceal.     He  was  too  old  a  soldier  to  be 

was  to  prevent  the  meaning  of  the  very  clever  in  such  devices ;  and  he 

letters  from  transpiring  in  the  event  had  been  too  long  fighting  the  battles 

of  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  of  his  country  in  India  to  write  very 

enemy,  who  had  people  in  their  em-  unexceptionable  French. 


THE  EARTHQUAKE  AT  JELLALABAD.  307 

labour.  With  their  arms  piled  within  reach,  they  were 
plying  axe  and  shovel,  toiling  with  their  wonted  cheer- 
fulness and  activity  at  the  defences,  which  they  had 
begun  to  look  upon  with  the  satisfied  air  of  men 
who  had  long  seen  their  work  growing  under  their 
hands,  and  now  recognised  the  near  approach  of  its 
completion.  They  had  worked,  indeed,  to  good  pur- 
pose. Very  different  were  the  fortifications  of  Jella- 
labad  fi:om  what  they  had  been  when  Sale  entered  the 
place  in  November.*  They  were  now  real,  not  nomi- 
nal defences.  The  unremitting  toil  of  nearly  three 
months  had  not  been  without  its  visible  and  appre- 
ciable results.  It  seemed,  too,  as  though  the  work  were 
about  to  be  completed  just  at  the  time  when  the  defences 
were  most  needed.  Akbar  Khan  was  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Jellalabad,  and  every  day  Sale  expected  that 
he  would  have  to  meet  the  flower  of  the  Barukzye  horse 
on  the  plain.  But  on  this  19th  of  February,  when 
the  garrison  were  flushed  with  joy  at  the  thought  of  the 
near  completion  of  their  work,  a  fearful  visitation  of 
Providence,  suddenly  and  astoundingly,  turned  all  their 
labour  to  very  nothingness.  There  was  an  awful  and 
mysterious  sound,  as  of  thunder  beneath  their  feet;  then 
the  earth  shook ;  the  houses  of  the  town  trembled  and 
fell ;  the  ramparts  of  the  fort  seemed  to  reel  and  totter, 
and  presently  came  down  with  a  crash.f     On  the  first 

*  The  work  of  the  Jellalabad  garrif  parapets  to  six  or  seven  feet  high, 

son  was  not  confined  to  the  strength-  repairing  and  widening  the  ramparts, 

ening  of  their  own  defences.    The  extending  the  bastions^  retrenching 

destruction  of  all  the  adjoining  cover  three  of  the  gates,  covering  the  fourth 

for  the  enemv  was  no  small  part  of  with  an  outwork,  and  excavatinff  a 

their  labour.  With  reference  to  these  ditch  ten  feet  in  depth  and  twelve 

works,  General  Sale  sajs,  in  his  offi-  feet  in  width  round  tne  whole  of  the 

cial  report :  ^^  Grenerally  I  may  state  walls.     The  place  was  thus  secure 

that  they  consisted  in  the  destruction  against  the  attacks  of  any  Asiatio 

of  an  immense  quantity  of  cover  for  army  not  provided  with  siege  artiU 

the  enemy,  extendinff  to  the  demo^  lerv.*' 

lition  of  forts  and  old  walls,  filling  f  "  But  it  pleased  Providence,  on 

up  ravines  and  destroying  jB^ardens^  the  19tli  of  t^ebmary,  to  remove  in  aa 

and  cutting  down  groves,  raising  the  instant  this  ground  of  confidence.    A 

x2 


308  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

sound  of  the  threatened  convulsion  the  men  had  instinc- 
tively rushed  to  their  arms,  and  the  greater  number 
had  escaped  the  coming  ruin ;  but  it  is  still  among  those 
reeollections  of  the  defence  which  are  dwelt  upon  by 
the  "  illustrious  garrison"  in  the  liveliest  spirit  of  jocu- 
larity, how  the  field-oflScer  of  the  day — a  gallant  and 
good  soldier — but  one  who  had  more  regard  for  external 
proprieties  than  was  generally  appreciated  in  those  days, 
was  buried  beneath  a  heap  of  rubbish,  and  how  he  was 
extricated  from  his  perilous  position  by  some  men  of  the 
13th,  under  circumstances  which  even  now  they  enjoy 
in  the  retrospect  with  a  relish  which  years  have  not  im- 
paired. 

Sale  and  Macgregor  were  both  writing  to  Pollock 
when  the  earthquake  threw  down  the  walls  of  Jellala- 
bad,  and  in  a  minute  wrought  more  irreparable  mischief 
than  a  bombarding  army  could  have  done  in  a  month. 
Sale,  still  writing  in  French,  reported  the  state  of  the 
garrison;  whilst  Macgregor  described  the  incidents  of 
the  fearful  visitation  which  had  just  descended  upon 
them: 

Jellalabad,  February  19th,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

*        *        *         A  Pegard  ii  mon  pouvoir  de  maintenir 
ma  position  ici,  j'ai  ddjk  vous  donne  avis  de  tous  mes  moyens  et 

tremendous  earthcjuake  shook  down  1842.]     "On  the  19th  of  February, 

all  our  parapets,  built  up  with  so  much  an  earthquake,  which  nearly  destroy- 

labour,  injured  several  of  our  bas-  ed  the  town,  threw  down  the  greater 

tions,  cast   to  the  ground  all  our  part  of  the  parapets,  the  Caubul  gate 

guard-houses,  demolished  a  third  of  with  two  adjoining  bastions,  and  a 

the  town,  made  a  considerable  breach  part  of  the  new  bastion  which  flanked 

in  the  rampart  of  a  curtain  m  the  it.    Three  other  bastions  were  also 

Peshawur  face,  and  reduced  the  Cau-  nearly  destroyed,  whilst  several  large 

bal  gate  to  a  shapeless  mass  of  ruins,  breaches  were  made  in  the  curtam, 

It  savours  of  romance,  but  is  a  sober  and  the  Peshawur  side,  eighty  feet 

&ct,  that  the  city  was  thrown  into  long,  was  quite  practicable,  the  ditch 

ilarm,  within  the  space  of  little  more  being  filled,  and  the  descent  easy. 

thsn  one  month,  bv  the  repetition  of  Thus  in  one  moment  the  labours  of 

fbn  one  hundred  shocks  or  this  terri-  three  months  were  in  a  great  measure 

fio  pbenomenon  of  nature.*" — IRmort  destroyed.'' — [Report  of  CapL  Broad-^ 

QfUenenl  Sale:  JeUalabad,  April  16,  foot^  Uarrigon  Engineer.] 


THE  EARTHQUAKE  AT  JELLALABAD.  309 

resource.  Je  n'ai  pas  rien  de  craindre  de  la  force  k  present  avec 
Akbar  Khan,  m£me  si  il  est  joint  par  tous  les  colors  de  Ningraher; 
mais  je  veux  bien  que  vous  vous  comprenez  que  nos  parapets  ne 
sont  pas  assez  forts  pour  resister  les  bouts  de  canon^  et  il  est  sujet 
de  doubte  si  nous  pouvons  resister  une  siege  pour  peu  de  temps  si 
I'enemi  envoy ent  des  pieces  de  siege  de  Cabul;  et  en  aucune  cas 
les  chevaux  de  la  cavalerie  et  de  Tartill^rie  comme  les  yaboos  et  les 
chameaux  apres  vingt-cinq  jours  periront.  Cette  epoque  le  rendre 
impossible  pour  nous  a  vous  ajouter  dans  aucun  plan  de  retraite 
que  vousvoudrais;  et  de  plus  il  sera  impossible  communiquer  avec 
vous  au  moment  que  je  me  trouverais  au  point  d'etre  ecrasse 
(overwhelmed)  par  une  force  irresistible.  En  perdant  las  yaboos 
et  les  chameaux,  que  sont  absoluement  necessaire  pour  les  travaux 
de  la  fortification,  je  perd  aussi  tous  mes  moyens  de  transporter 
mes  malades  et  les  munitions  de  guerre,  sans  laquelle  il  ne  faut  pas 
contemple  une  retraite.  J'ai  extreme  ....  Soixante-huite 
chameaux  et  cinq*  trente  neuf  yaboos.  Ces  circonstances  me  semble 
de  demander  que  votre  avance  a  notre  secours  sera  prompt — the 
only  means  of  securing  the  avowed  object  of  government,  £.«., 
the  relief  of  the  troops  who  have  so  long  defended  Jellakbad. 
After  writing  the  above,  the  dreadful  earthquake  of  this  day  a 
fidt  tomber  deux  bastions,  et  plusieurs  autres  sont  culles — une 
breche  de  cote  de  Peshawur  dans  les  murs  et  beaucoup  des  maisons 
(cas^mees)  aussi.  Sans  doute  Tenemi  prend  avantage  de  cet  ca- 
lamite.  Nous  travaillons  sans  cesse  de  reparer  le  dedommage. 
Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  General,  yours,  very  truly, 

R.  Sale,  M.-GenrLf 

*  So  worded  in  the  original.  howerer,  attached  to  me  from  the 

t  MS,  Records. — I  give  the  post-  period  of  my  force  leaving  Gaubul, 

script  to  this  letter  in  a  note,  though  and  I  have  received  from  nim  very 

of  no  historical  importance,  as  I  can-  valuable    assistance    in    every    way 

not  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  quot-  throughout  our  operations,  as  I  have 

ing  a  tribute  to  the  worth  of  one  whom  already  intimatedin  public  despatches. 

I  am  proud  to  recognise  as  a  fellow-  I  trust  you  will  pardon  my  undertaking 

labourer  in  the  field  of  Afghan  his-  to  say,  that  if  you  would  be  pleased 

tory :    "  P.S. — Understanding   from  to  re-appoint  hmi  to  the  same  situa- 

the  drd  para,  of  the  letter  from  the  tion  under  yourself,  I  feel  persuaded 

Adjutant-Gen.  that  the  authority  of  that  his  local  experience  would  render 

Major-Gren.  Elphinstone  has  ceased,  him  most  useful  to  you.    In  the  mean 

I  venture  to  mention  to  you  that  time  I  have  nominated  him  Per.  Intr. 

Captain  Havelock,  13th  L.I.,  was  ap-  to  myself,  subject  to  confirmation,  as 

pomtedin  general  orders  Persian  In-  I  cannot,  under  present  circumstances, 

terpreter  to  the  jSI .  General  so  long  as  dispense  with  hb  services.     Be  good 

he  continued  to  command  in  Afi^han-  enough  to  make  this  known  also  to 

istan.    He  was  by  his  permission,  H.  £.  the  C.  in  C.^' 


810  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

JeUalabad,  February  19th,  1842. 

Mt  deab  Genebal, 

*  *  *  Since  I  commenced  writing  to  you,  we  have  been 
visited  by  a  very  severe  earthquake^  which  has  in  a  great  mea- 
sure demolished  two  or  three  of  our  bastions,  and  nearly  the  whole 
of  the  parapet  of  the  ramparts,  to  raise  which  cost  the  troops 
more  than  a  couple  of  months  of  hard  labour.  A  number  of 
houses  in  the  town  have  been  thrown  down  by  the  shock,  and 
the  small  court-yard  attached  to  the  house  in  which  the  General 
and  myself  reside,  is  filled  with  the  rubbish  of  a  number  of  out- 
oflSces  which  fell  crashing  at  our  feet,  we  having  sought  the 
centre  of  the  yard  as  a  place  of  safety.  It  was  with  difficulty  we 
could  preserve  our  footing,  so  great  was  the  undulating  motion 
of  the  ground  we  stood  upon.  Our  dwelling-house  seemed  to 
heave  to  and  fro  as  if  it  would  topple  on  us.  I  have  not  heard 
of  more  than  two  or  three  persons  who  have  been  killed  by  the 
falling  houses  or  walls.  Colonel  Monteith  was  buried  up  to  the 
neck;  but  he  has  not,  I  believe,  sustained  any  serious  injury.  K 
this  town  had  been  seriously  bombarded  for  a  month,  I  dotft 
think  it  could  have  suffered  more  than  at  present.  God  grant 
that  we  may  not  have  to  witness  anything  so  fearful  again.  I 
feel  still  giddy,  although  the  earthquake  took  place  a  couple 
of  hours  ago.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  on  the  enemy  discovering 
the  damage  which  our  defences  have  sustained,  they  will  be 
encouraged  to  attack  us. 

Gold  mohurs  and  bootkees  would .  be  of  use  to  us,  but  I  fear 
that  Mackeson  would  find  it  impracticable  to  send  them  to  us  in 
safety. 

Captain  Bygrave  is  alive  and  with  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan. 
Captain  Souter,  44th  Regiment,  is  also  there.  He  saved  the 
Queen's  colour  of  his  regiment  by  rolling  it  round  his  waist,  and 
he  writes  that  a  shot  struck  him  there,  and  the  colour  saved 
his  life.  Believe  me,  very  truly  yours, 

G.  H.  Macgbegob. 

But,  in  nowise  disheartened  by  this  calamity,  the 
Jellalabad  garrison  again  took  the  spade  and  the  pic» 
axe  into  their  hands,  and  toiled  to  repair  the  mischief. 
"  No  time,''  says  Captain  Broadfoot,  "  was  lost.  The 
shocks  had  scarcely  ceased  when  the  whole  garrison 
was  told  off  into  working  parties,  and  before  night  the 


THE  MISCHIEF  BEPAIBED.  811 

breaches  were  scarped,  the  rubbish  below  cleared 
away,  and  the  ditches  before  them  dug  out,  whilst 
the  great  one  on  the  Peshawur  side  was  surrounded  by 
a  good  gabion  parapet.  A  parapet  was  erected  on  the 
remains  of  the  north-west  bastion,  with  an  embrasure 
allowing  the  guns  to  flank  the  approach  of  the  ruined 
Caubul  gate;  the  parapet  of  the  new  bastion  was  re- 
stored, so  as  to  give  a  flanking  fire  to  the  north-west 
bastion,  whilst  the  ruined  gate  was  rendered  inaccessible 
by  a  trench  in  front  of  it,  and  in  every  bastion  round 
the  place  a  temporary  parapet  was  raised.  From  the 
following  day  all  the  troops  off  duty  were  continually  at 
work,  and  such  was  their  energy  and  perseverance,  that 
by  the  end  of  the  month  the  parapets  were  entirely 
restored,  or  the  curtain  filled  in  where  restoration  was 
impracticable,  and  every  battery  re-established.  The 
breaches  have  been  built  up,  with  the  rampart  doubled 
in  thickness,  and  the  whole  of  the  gates  retrenched." 
— Such,  indeed,  was  the  extraordinary  vigour  thrown 
into  the  work  of  restoration — such  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  re-establishment  of  the  defences  was  completed, 
that  the  enemy,  seeing  soon  afterwards  no  traces  of  the 
great  earthquake-shock  of  the  19th  of  February,  de- 
clared that  the  phenomenon  must  have  been  the  result 
of  English  witchcraft,  for  that  Jellalabad  was  the  only 
place  that  had  escaped. 

If  Akbar  Khan,  who  at  this  time  was  within  a  few 
miles  of  Sale's  position,  knew  the  extent  to  which  the 
defences  of  Jellalabad  had  been  weakened,  he  com- 
mitted a  strange  oversight  in  not  taking  advantage  of 
such  a  casualty.  The  garrison  felt  assured  that  the 
Barukzyes  would  not  throw  away  such  a  chance;  and 
they  made  up  their  minds  resolutely  for  the  encounter. 
Intelligence  had  just  been  received  of  the  publication 
of  the  government  manifesto  of  the  31st  of  January; 
and  this  spasmodic  burst  of  energy  and  indignation,  wel- 


312  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

corned  as  an  indication  of  the  intention  of  the  Supreme 
Government  to  wipe  out  at  all  hazards  the  stains  that 
had  been  fixed  upon  the  national  honour,  fortified  and 
reassured  the  heroes  of  Jellalabad,  who  had  been  griev- 
ing over  the  apparent  feebleness  and  apathy  of  the 
official  magnates  at  Calcutta.* 

They  had  felt,  with  some  acuteness  of  mortification, 
the  neglect  to  which  they  had  seemingly  been  subjected  ;f 
but  all  personal  feeling  was  soon  drowned  in  an  over- 
whelming sense  of  what  was  due  to  their  insulted 
country.  Now,  therefore,  that  Lord  Auckland  had 
declared  that  he  regarded  the  disasters  that  had  be- 
fallen us  merely  as  so  many  new  opportunities  of  de- 
monstrating the  military  power  of  the  British  Empire 
in  the  East,  the  hearts  of  the  brave  men,  who  had  been 
so  long  defying  the  enemy  that  had  destroyed  Elphin- 
stone's  army,  again  began  to  leap  up  with  hope  and 
exultation;  and  as  they  saw  their  defences  rising  again, 
almost  as  it  were  by  supernatural  agency,  before  their 
eyes,  they  began  rather  to  regret  the  caution  of  the 
Barukzye  chief  which  seemed  to  restrain  him  fi:om 
venturing  under  the  walls  of  Jellalabad. 

There  seems,  indeed,  to  have  been  in  the  Afghan 

*  *'  The  officers  of  the  garrisoiif"  selves  and  advantage  to  the  state, 
wrote  Macgregor  to  Pollock  on  the  General  Sale  intends  to  publish  in 
21  St  of  February,  **came  upon  ra-  to-day *s  garrison  orders  the  pro- 
tions  to-day.  They  are  willing  to  clamation  of  the  Indian  Government, 
brave  all  difficulties  and  dangers,  now  a  copy  of  which  you  kindly  sent  to 
that  they  feel  certain  that  govern-  me  by  Torabaz^s  Sowars." — [^MS. 
ment  wdl  resent  the  insult  offered  Correspondence.'] 
to  our  national  honour  by  these  t  The  rescue  of  the  Jellalabad 
rascally  Afghans."  And  a^ain,  on  garrison  had  in  reality  been  the 
the  same  day,  writing  to  the  same  primary — indeed,  the  sole  acknow- 
correspondent,  he  said:  "I  am  glad  ledged  reason  of  the  movement  in 
to  find  that  government  intend  to  advance ;  but  the  Supreme  Govern- 
uphold  the  national  honour  by  re-  ment,  whilst  by  no  means  unmindful 
sentin;^;  the  insults  which  have  been  of  the  claims  of  the  Jellalabad  gar- 
offered  to  it  by  the  rascally  Afghans ;  rison,  long  omitted  to  communicate 
and  I  feel  assured  that  this  garrison  with  Sale  or  Macgregor— to  convey 
will  continue  to  perform  the  part  t.o  them  directly  any  instructions  for 
which  has  devolved  upon  tnem  their  guidance,  or  any  expressions  of 
at  this  crisis  with  credit  to  them-  approbation  of  their  conduct. 


INDKCISION  OF  AKBAK  KHAN.  313 

camp  a  strange  shrinking  from  anything  like  a  hand- 
to-hand  encounter  with  the  intrepid  soldiers  of  Sale's 
brigade.  The  reluctance  of  Akbar  Khan  to  near  the 
walls  of  Jellalabad  is  a  painful  commentary  upon  the 
arrogance  and  audacity  of  the  Afghans,  who  a  few 
weeks  before  had  been  bearding  Elphinstone  and  Shel- 
ton  under  the  shadow  of  the  Caubul  cantonments.  Ak- 
bar Khan  now  seemed  resolute  to  risk  nothing  by  any 
dashing  movement,  that  might  decide,  at  once,  the  fate 
of  the  Jellalabad  garrison.  Instead  of  assaulting  the 
place  he  blockaded  it. 

He  seemed  to  trust  to  the  efficacy  of  a  close  invest- 
ment ;  and  so  moved  in  his  troops  nearer  and  nearer  to 
our  walls,  hoping  to  effect  that  by  starvation  which  he 
could  not  effect  by  hard  fighting  in  the  field.  And  so, 
for  some  time,  he  continued,  drawing  in  more  and  more 
closely — harassing  our  foraging  parties,  and  occasionally 
coming  into  contact  with  the  horsemen  who  were  sent  out 
to  protect  the  grass-cutters.  Not,  however,  before  the 
11th  of  March  was  there  any  skirmishing  worthy  of  re- 
cord. Then  it  was  reported  that  the  enemy  were  about 
to  mine  the  place.  Sungahs  had  been  thrown  up  on  the 
night  of  the  10th,  and  the  enemy  were  firing  briskly 
from  behind  them.  It  was  plain  that  some  mischief  was 
brewing;  so  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  Sale,  keeping 
his  artillery  at  the  guns  on  the  ramparts,  sent  out  a 
strong  party  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  with  two  hundred 
of  Broadfoot's  sappers.  Dennie  commanded  the  sortie. 
As  they  streamed  out  of  the  Peshawur  gate  of  the  city, 
Akbar  Khan  seemed  inclined  to  give  them  battle.  But 
ever  as  the  enemy  advanced  the  hot  fire  from  our  guns 
drove  them  back.  They  could  not  advance  upon  our 
works,  nor  protect  the  sungahs  which  our  skirmishers 
were  rapidly  destroying.  It  was  soon  ascertained  that 
the  story  of  the  mine  was  a  mere  fable;  ammunition  was 


314  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

too  scarce  to  be  expended  on  any  but  necessary  service ; 
80  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done.  Dennie  sounded 
the  recall.  The  British  troops  began  to  fall  back  upon 
their  works;  and  then  the  enemy,  emboldened  by  the 
retrograde  movement,  fell  upon  our  retiring  column; 
and  though,  no  sooner  had  our  people  halted  and  re« 
formed,  than  the  Afghans  turned  and  fled,  they  wrought 
us  some  mischief,  for  they  wounded  Broadfoot;  and  those 
were  days  when  an  accident  to  the  garrison  engineer  was, 
indeed,  a  grievous  calamity.  Not  a  man,  however,  of 
Sale's  brigade  was  killed.  The  carnage  was  all  among 
the  enemy. 

The  remainder  of  the  month  passed  quietly  away — 
but  the  anxieties  of  the  garrison  were  steadily  increasing. 
Provisions  had  become  scarce ;  ammunition  was  scarce ; 
fodder  for  the  horses  was  not  to  be  obtained.  It  was 
obviously  the  design  of  the  enemy  to  reduce  the  garrison 
by  a  strict  blockade.  It  would  be  diflSicult  to  exa^erate 
the  eagerness  with  which,  imder  such  circumstances, 
they  looked  for  the  arrival  of  succours  from  Peshawur. 
Excellent  as  were  Pollock's  reasons  for  not  proceed- 
ing to  the  relief  of  Jellalabad  until  his  force  was 
strengthened  by  the  arrival  of  the  European  regiments  on 
their  way  to  Peshawur,  it  is  easy  to  understand,  and  im- 
possible to  condemn,  the  eagerness  with  which  Sale  and 
Macgregor  continued  to  exhort  him  to  advance  for  their 
succour.  The  correspondence,  brief  but  emphatic, 
which  passed  between  the  two  Grenerals  at  this  time, 
better  than  anything  else  unfolds  the  real  nature  of 
their  respective  positions.  On  the  8th  of  March  Sale 
despatched  this  letter  to  Pollock : 

Jellalabad,  March  8th,  1842,  9  f.m. 

My  DEAR  General^ 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a  few  hours  ago  yours  of 
the  26th  ultimo.     I  must  confess  that  its  contents  have  deeply 


ANXIETIES  OF  THE  JELI-ALABAD  GARRISOK.         315 

disappointed  me,  since  I  gather  firom  it  that  it  is  not  your  inten- 
tion to  advance  to  my  succour  until  you  shall  have  been  rein- 
forced by  the  brigade  which  you  expect  to  reach  Feshawur  on 
the  22nd  instant.  Now,  independently  of  other  considerations, 
Macgregor  will^  inform  you  that  he  yesterday  got  a  Dus1>-i-Khat 
from  the  Shah's  Durbar  at  Caubul,  demanding  categorically  our 
evacuation  of  this  place.  He  referred  the  King  and  his  councilloni 
to  you^  and  their  next  measure  will  probably  be  to  march  an 
overwhelming  force  against  us,  aided  by  our  captured  iron  nine* 
pounders.  I  have  reiterated  in  several  letters  tiie  fact  that  mea 
mains  ne  sont  pas  assez  forts  pour  resister  tel  artillerie,  and  there- 
fore  desire  to  make  you  once  more  fully  aware  of  the  risk,  if  not 
certainty,  of  our  being  overpowered  if  your  advance  to  our  sup- 
port is  not  sufficiently  prompt  to  anticipate  this  movement  of  our 
enemies.  The  responsibility,  therefore,  of  such  a  result,  wUl  now 
rest  entirely  upon  you,  and  not  on  me.  Money  is  not  now  of  the 
slightest  use  to  me,  Mahomed  Akbar  having  established  a  most 
rigid  blockade,  which  effectually  prevents  all  supplies  from  reach- 
ing us.  Our  foraging  parties  are  also  daily  attacked. 
Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  Qeneralj  yours  sincerely, 

ROBEKT  SjJjB,  M.-G. 

P.S. — As  I  remark  that  your  letter  does  not  contain  any  distinct 
avowal  of  an  intention  of  advancing  even  when  your  reinforce- 
ments reach  you,  I  shall  be  obliged^  for  the  sake  of  this  garrisoii, 
if  you  will  specifically  inform  me  when  it  is  probable  I  may  cal- 
culate on  its  being  relieved.* 

At  the  same  time  Macgregor  despatched  another 
letter  of  a  similar  tendency,  and  to  this  letter  Pollock 
replied : 

March  13th,  1843. 

My  dear  Macgregor, 

I  will  write  you  a  very  short  note  with  reference  to  yours 
and  Sale's  of  the  8th.  It  must  no  doubt  appear  to  you  and  Sale 
most  extraordinary  that,  with  the  force  I  have  here,  I  do  not  at 
once  move  on.  God  knows  it  has  been  my  anxious  wish  to  do 
so,  but  I  have  been  helpless.    I  came  on  ahead  to  Peshawur  to 

•  MS.  Correspondence, 


316  THE  HALT  AT  TESHAWUK. 

arrange  for  an  advance,  but  was  saluted  with  a  report  of  1900 
sick,  and  a  bad  feeling  among  the  Sepoys.  I  visited  the  hospi- 
tals, and  endeavoured  to  encourage  by  talking  to  them,  but  they 
had  no  heart.  I  hoped  that  when  the  time  came  they  would  go. 
This,  however,  I  could  not  write  to  you  or  Sale  in  t«Af,  either  in 
English  or  French.  On  the  1st  instant  the  feeling  on  the  part  of 
the  Sepoys  broke  out;  and  I  had  the  mortification  of  knowing 
that  the  Hindoos,  of  four  out  of  five  native  corps,  refused  to  ad- 
vance. I  immediately  took  measures  to  sift  the  evil,  and  gradu- 
ally a  reaction  has  taken  place,  in  the  belief  that  I  will  wait  for 
reinforcements.  This  has  caused  me  the  utmost  anxiety  on  your 
account.  Your  situation  is  never  out  of  my  thoughts;  but  having 
told  you  what  I  have,  you  and  Sale  will  at  once  see  that  necessity 
alone  has  kept  me  here. 

I  have  sent  five  expresses  to  hurry  on  the  first  division  of  the 
next  brigade.  It  consists  of  the  3rd  Dragoons,  a  troop  of  Horse 
Artillery,  1st  Light  Cavalry,  the  33rd  N.L,  and  two  companies 
of  the  6th  N.I.,  all  fresh  and  without  a  taint.  I  really  beUeve  that 
if  I  were  to  attempt  to  move  on  now  without  the  reinforcement, 
the  four  regiments  implicated  would,  as  far  as  the  Hindoos  are 
concerned,  stand  fast.  Pray,  therefore,  tell  me,  without  the  least 
reserve,  the  latest  day  you  can  hold  out.  If  I  could,  I  would  tell 
you  the  day  when  I  expect  reinforcements,  but  I  cannot.  I  may, 
however,  I  believe  with  safety  say,  that  they  will  arrive  by  the 
end  of  this  month. 

The  case,  therefore,  now  stands  thus: — Whether  I  am  to  at- 
tempt with  my  present  materials  to  advance,  and  to  risk  the 
appearance  of  dissection  or  cowardice,  which  in  such  a  case  could 
not  again  be  got  over,  or  wait  the  arrival  of  a  reinforcement, 
which  will  make  all  sure.  This  is  the  real  state  of  the  case.  If 
I  attempted  now,  it  might  risk  you  altogether;  but  if  you  can 
hold  out,  the  reinforcements  would  make  your  relief  as  certain  as 
any  earthly  thing  can  be. 

Our  only  object  in  going  to  Jellalabad  is  to  relieve  you  and 
bring  you  back  with  us  to  this;  but  it  is  necessary  that  this  should 
be  kept  a  profound  secret. 

I  am,  &c.  &c. 

George  Pollock.* 

•  This  letter  is  given  in  the  published  papers. 


CAUSES  OF  DELAY.  317 

To  this  Sale  replied : 

Jellalabad,  2drd  March,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

Yesterday  arrived  yours  of  the  12th  Instant,  addressed 
jointly  to  Captain  Macgregor  and  myself.  I  have  only,  in  reply 
thereto,  to  say  that  in  my  last  I  informed  you  definitively  that  I 
would,  by  God's  blessing,  hold  this  place  to  the  31st  instant,  by 
which  time  you  acquainted  me  that  you  could  arrive  at  Jallalabad 
with  the  dragoons.  You  now  state  to  me  your  expectation 
that  they  will  only  reach  your  present  encampment  by  that  date. 
Our  European  soldiers  are  now  on  two-thirds  of  their  rations  of 
salt  meat,  and  this  the  commissariat  supply ;  on  the  4th  proximo 
that  part  of  the  force  will  then  be  without  meat,  notwithstanding 
every  arrangement  to  lessen  the  consumption.  I  have  this  day 
directed  all  the  camels  to  be  destroyed,  with  the  view  of  pre- 
serving the  boosa  for  the  horses  of  the  cavalry  and  artillery  ; 
and  these  valuable  animals  cannot  receive  any  rations  of  grain 
whatever  after  the  1st  proximo,  but  must  be  subsisted  entirely  on 
boosa  and  grass,  if  the  latter  can  be  procured. 

Believe  me  to  be,  yours  sincerely, 

R.  Sale.* 

Pollock  had  expected  the  dragoons  would  reach 
Peshawur  by  the  20th  of  March;  but  on  the  27th  they 
had  not  arrived ;  and  the  General  wrote  to  Jellalabad, 
explaining  the  causes  of  delay,  but  still  hoping  that  he 
would  be  able  to  commence  his  march  ofi  the  last  day  of 
the  month.  "  There  appears,"  he  wrote,  "  to  be  nothing 
but  accidents  to  impede  the  advance  of  the  dragoons. 
They  were  five  days  crossing  the  Ravee.  I  have  sent 
out  300  camels  to  help  them  in ;  and  I  hope  nothing 
will  prevent  my  moving  on  the  31st.  God  knows  I  am 
most  anxious  to  move  on,  for  I  know  that  delay  will 
subject  us  to  be  exposed  to  very  hot  weather.  But 
my  situation  has  been  most  embarrassing.  Any  attempt 
at  a  forward  movement  in  the  early  part  of  this  month 
I  do  not  think  would  have  succeeded,  for  at  one  time 

♦  MS.  Correspcmdenre. 


318  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

• 

the  Hindoos  did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  they  would  not 
go  forward.  I  hope  the  horror  they  had  has  some- 
what subsided ;  but  without  more  white  faces  I  question 
even  now  if  they  would  go.  Since  the  1st  we  have  been 
doing  all  to  recover  a  proper  tone;  but  you  may  suppose 
what  my  feelings  have  been,  wishing  to  relieve  you,  and 
knowing  that  my  men  would  not  go.  However  desirable 
it  is  that  I  should  be  joined  by  the  31st  Regiment,  your 
late  letters  compel  me  to  move,  and  I  hope,  therefore, 
to  be  with  you  by  about  the  7th.  I  cannot  say  the  day 
exactly,  because  I  want  to  take  Ali-Musjid.  When  that 
is  taken,  your  situation  may,  perhaps,  become  better."* 
The  dragoons  reached  Pollock's  camp  on  the  30th,  and 
on  the  following  day  he  began  to  move  forward. 

*  General  PoUock  to  General  Sale:  from  Ferozepore  to  Peshawur  the 

March  27^A,  1842.    MS.  Correspond  Durbar  had  appointed  him,  had  men- 

dence.    Pollock  did  not  exaggerate  tioned  that  our  Sepojs  in  that  brigade 

the  backwardness  of  the  Native  re-  did  not  like  going  to  the  westward, 

giments,  or  the  importance  of  asso-  and  were  sometimes  grouped  eight 

ciating  with  them  a  larger  body  of  or  ten  together,  expressing  their  dis- 

Europeans.      Even  the   new   corps  satisfaction ;  but  that  on  the  other 

which  were  moving  up  from  the  pro-  hand  the  Europeans  (her  Majesty's 

vinces,  and  which  the  General  be-  31st  and   artillery)  were  much  de- 

lieved  to  be  "  without  a  taint,"  were  lighted  at  the  prospect  of  fighting  with 

openly  expressing  their  disinclination  the  Afghans.    The  Maharajah  added, 

to  advance.     Shere  Singh  mentioned  *•  If  you  could  send  two  or  three 

this    to    Mr.    Clerk.     "  Yesterday,  more  European  corps,    they  would 

early,**  wrote  the  latter,  ^*  the  Maha-  penetrate  tne  Khybur  or  anywhere 

rajan.  Rajah  Dhyan  Singh,  and  my-  else  so  successfully  against  the  Af- 

self  being  together  for  a  short  time,  ghans,  that  the  Hindoos,   who  are 

2uite  unattended,  they  told  me  that  now  alarmed,  would,  after  one  action, 

Commandant  Cheyt  Singh,  who  had  all  take  heart  again.' " — [Mr,  Clerk  to 

come  into  Lahore  for  a  day  from  Co-  Government:  Laliore,  March  1  dth,  1 843. 

lonel  Bolton's  camp,  to  escort  which  MS,  Records.} 


THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR.         319 


CHAPTER  V. 

[April,  1842.] 

The  Forcing  of  the  Khybur  Pass— State  of  the  Sikh  TroopB— Mr.  Clerk  at 
the  Court  of  Lahore — Views  of  the  Lahore  Durbar — Efforts  of  Shere 
Singh — Astemblage  of  the  Army  at  Jtimrood — ^Advanoe  to  Ali-Musjid — 
Affairs  at  Jellalabad — Defeat  of  Akbar  Khan — Junction  of  Pollock  and 
Sale. 

•t 

Whatever  embarrassments  may  have  lain  in  the  way  of 
General  Pollock  during  these  months  of  February  and 
March,  and  compelled  him,  eager  as  he  was  to  advance 
to  the  relief  of  Jellalabad,  to  remain  inactive  at  Pesha- 
wur,  it  is  certain  that  they  were  greatly  increased  by  the 
reluctance  of  our  Sikh  allies  to  face  the  passes  of  the 
Khybur.  The  conduct  of  the  Nujeeb  battalions,  which 
had  mutinied  on  the  very  eve  of  Wild's  movement  into 
the  pass,  left  no  room  to  hope  for  any  eflfectual  co- 
operation from  that  source.  All  the  eflforta  of  Captain 
Lawrence  to  obtain  any  assistance  from  the  Sikh  troops 
at  Peshawur,  through  General  Mehtab  Singh,*  had  failed ; 

*  Shere  Singh  was  at  this  time  a  the    Ehalsa  will  be   vexed   at  any 

confirmed  drunkard,  and  he  thought  Mahomedan  exultation }    and  Shere 

more  of  potations  than  of  politics.  Singh  will  congratulate    himself  on 

When  the  first  intelligence  of  our  the  prospect  this  may  open  to  him  of 

Caubul  disasters  reached  him,  Mr.  drawing  closer  his  relations  with  us 

Clerk  wrote  I  "The  eflfect  which  these  as  a  means  of  procuring  good  cham- 

events  in  Caubul  will  have  on  Lahore,  pagne." — [il/r.  Clerk  to  Mr,  Bobert^ 

will,  I  imagine,  be  as  follows.     The  son:  Nov.  29, 1841.  MS,  Records.'] 
Hajahs  will  inwardly  rejoice  thereat; 


320  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

and  Lawrence  was  of  opinion  that  the  General's  conduct, 
in  admitting  the  Afreedis  into  his  camp,  had  established 
such  a  clear  case  of  hostility,  that  he  and  his  traitorous 
followers  ought  to  be  dismissed  with  disgrace.  But  now 
that  Rajah  Gholab  Singh,  accompanied  by  the  Crown 
Prince  of  Lahore,  was  advancing  with  his  regiments 
to  Peshawur,  ,as  those  regiments  were  composed  of  a 
different  class  of  men,  and  the  influence  of  the  Rajah 
over  these  hill-levies  was  great,  it  was  hoped,  that  on  his 
junction  with  General  Pollock's  camp,  a  new  order  of 
things  would  be  established.  But  it  soon  became  pain- 
fully evident  to  the  General  that  very  little  cordial  co- 
operation was  to  be  looked  for  from  the  Jummoo  Rajah 
and  his  troops. 

When,  early  in  February,  Pollock,  on  his  way  to 
Peshawur,  reached  the  Attock,  he  found  the  left  bank 
of  the  river  occupied  by  the  Sikh  troops  under  Gholab 
Singh,  whilst  the  Nujeeb  battalions,  which  had  dis- 
graced themselves  a  few  weeks  before,  were  posted  on 
the  opposite  side.*  Captain  Lawrence,  who  had  left 
Peshawur  to  expedite  the  Rajah's  movements,  was  then 
in  the  Sikh  camp;  and  M'CaskiU's  brigade  was  a  few 
marches  in  the  rear.  There  appeared  every  likelihood, 
therefore,  of  a  collision  that  would  impede  the  progress 
of  the  British  troops ;  but  the  exertions  of  Pollock  and 

*  Their  design  was  to  arrest  the  coming  np  and  near  at  hand,  should 

progress  of  Gholab  Singh's  force ;  and  he  be  found  making  of  the  high  road 

some  of  our  officers  thought  tliat  the  an  unseemly  and  uncertain  neld  of 

Rajah  ought  to  have  attacked  them,  battle  for  the  coercion  of  mutinous 

But  Mr.  Clerk  was  of  opinion  that  battalions,  so  1  conceive  that  he  may 

his  forbearance   was  a  proof  of  his  very  naturally  feel  disinclined  hastily 

friendship  towards  us.     *'  In  the  same  to  pledge  himself  to  take  as  far  as 

manner,"  he  wrote,  "  that  the  reluct-  Jellalabad,or  into  any  arduous  service, 

ance  of  Rajah  Gholab  Sing  to  have  re-  troops  which  for  fourteen  months  past 

course  to  measures  of  open  hostility  have  generally  assumed  a  tone  of  de- 

towards    the   Mussulman   battalions,  fiance  of  the  control  of  their  appointed 

when  arrayed  against  him  across  the  oflBcers." — [Mr.  George  Clerk  to  Go-' 

Attock,   was,    I   believe,  in  a  great  vemment :  February  13,  1842.     MS. 

measure  caused  by  his  apprehension  Records."] 
of  embarmssing   the  British  brigade 


CONDUCT  OF  GHOLAB  SINGH.  321 

Lawrence  were  crowned  with  success;  and  the  Sikh 
force  moved  oflF  before  M'Caskill's  brigade  arrived  on 
the  banks  of  the  river.  On  the  14th,  Gholab  Singh 
and  the  Prince  reached  Peshawur.  On  the  20th,  Pol- 
lock held  a  conference  with  the  Rajah — Lawrence  and 
Mackeson  being  present  —  and  a  day  or  two  after- 
wards, forwarding  an  abstract  of  the  conversation  that 
had  taken  place  between  them,  wrote  to  the  Supreme 
Government :  "  I  confess  that  I  have  no  expectation  of 
any  assistance  from  the  Sikh  troops." 

On  the  conduct  of  Gholab  Singh  at  tbis  time,  some 
suspicion  has  been  cast.  It  has  been  said  that  he  not 
only  instigated,  through  the  agency  of  an  influential  mes- 
senger, the  Nujeeb  battalions  to  rebel,  but  carried  on  a 
friendly  correspondence  with  our  Afghan  enemies  at 
Caubul.  That  there  was  no  hearty  co-operation,  is  true; 
but  hearty  co-operation  was  not  to  be  expected.  Gholab 
Singh  had  other  work  on  hand  at  that  time;  and,  whilst 
he  was  playing  and  losing  a  great  game  in  Thibet,  it 
would  have  been  strange,  indeed,  if  he  had  thrown  his 
heart  into  the  work  which  he  was  called  upon  to  perform 
for  others  at  the  mouth  of  the  Khybur  Pass.  He  had  no 
confidence  in  his  troops.  He  had  no  inducement  to  exert 
himself.*  The  latter  obstacle,  it  was  thought,  might  be 
removed;  and  Lawrence  and  Mackeson  were  of  opinion 
that  it  would  be  well  to  bribe  him  into  activity  by  the 

♦  Gholab  Singh  was  employed  in  the  government,  "and  the  apprehension 

Hazareh  country  in  operations  against  that  in  his  absence  his  lately  victorious 

Poyndah    Khan    and   a  rebel    force  troops  will  lose  ground  in  the  Hazareh 

when   he  was  summoned  to  proceed  country,  Rajah  Gholab  Singh  evinces 

to  Peshawur.     At  this  time,  too,  the  little  ardour  to  co-operate  with  the 

Jummoo  Rajah  had  an  army  in  Ladakh  Sikh  troops  at  Peshawur.     It  is  also 

and  Thibet  engaged  in  active  warfare  probable    that   the   Jummoo    Rajah 

with  the  Chinese,  and  it  was  sustaining  would  rather  contemplate  the  difficul- 

serious  reverses  at  the  time  that  Gho-  ties  of  the  British  Government  in  that 

lab  Singh  was  called  upon  to  aid  the  quarter,  than  be  instrumental  in  re^ 

British    Government.      "What  with  moving  them,**— [Mr.  CUrk  to  Govern" 

this  reverse  on  the  eastern  frontier  of  ment:  January  20,  1842.] 
his  possessions,*'  wrote  Mr.  Clerk  to 

VOL.  II.  Y 


322  THE  FORCING  OF  THB  KHYBUR. 

offer  of  Jellalabad,  to  be  held  by  him  independently  of 
the  Sikh  ruler;  but  Mr.  Clerk  was  of  opinion  that   such 
a  measure   would  be   neither   politic  nor  honest.*     It 
would,  indeed,  at  that  time,  have  been  an  injustice  done 
by  the  British  Government  against  both  the  other  parties 
to  the  Tripartite  treaty.     It  would  have  injuriously  af- 
fected both  Shah  Soojah  and  Shere  Singh;  and  would 
have  involved  the  Jummoo  Rajah  in  diflSculties  and  per- 
plexities  from  which  he  would  have  found  it  difficult  to 
extricate  himself.      Indeed,  Captain    Mackeson   himself 
very  soon  came  to  the  opinion  that,  if  we  desired  to  bribe 
Gholab  Singh  into  co-operation  by  promises  of  territorial 
aggrandisement,  it  was  necessary  that  we  should  lay  our 
finger  on  some  other  part  of  the  map  than  that  which  re- 
presented Jellalabad ;  and  he  asked  whether  Shikarpoor, 

*  On  the   10th  of  February  Mr.  quite  reasonable,  or  the  almost  indefi- 
Clerk    wrote     to    the    Government  nite  extent  of  proposed  reward  judi- 
Secretar}' :  "  There  seems   to    liave  cious,  or  the  direct  negotiation  with 
been   no  good  reason  for  the  delay  the JummooRajahsfortheir immediate 
of  Rajah  Gholab   Singh   in   crossing  aggrandisement  honourable.     .     .     . 
the  Attock,  unless  he  really  feared  a  It  would  not  be  compatible  with  the 
collision  with  the  Nujeeb  battalions,  friendship  long  subsisting  between  the 
encamped  on  the  other  side.     But  for  British  Grovernment  and  the  Lahore 
the  Rajah's  apparent  reluctance  im-  Government,  now  to  assign  suddenly 
mediately  to  undertake  to  co-operate  and  directly  to  the  Jummoo  Rajahs  any 
in   the  Khybur  Pass,  there  may  be  territories  as  a  compensation  for  ser- 
better  grounds.    These  may  be  either  vices  demanded  of  the  Sikh  Durbar, 
an  apprehension  of  his  inability  to  This  would  be  precipitating  the  de- 
oppose  the  enemy  there ;  or,  as  sup-  dine  of  a  power  which   it  may  be 
posed  by  Captain  Lawrence,  a  want  soon  expedient  to  prop,  both  against 
of  incentive  to   exertion  —  or  both  Afghans  and  Jummooees.*' — [MS.Re- 
these  causes  may  retard  his  move-  cordsJ]  But  though  Mr.  Clerk  thought, 
ments.     In  regard  to  the  former,  the  at  this  time,  that  it  would  not  be 
presence  of  the  large  body  of  British  honourable  openly  to  treat  with  the 
troops  assemblingat  Peshawur  will  Jummoo  Rajahs  for  the  transfer  of 
encourage  him.     With  respect  to  the  Jellalabad,  he  was  not  unwilling  to 
latter,  I  should  be  glad  to  be  provided  place  it  permanently  in  their  hands 
with  the  instructions  of  government."  by  a  stroke  of  finesse,    I  confess  that 
— r3f5.  Records.'\  I  cannot  see  very  distinctly  how  the 
Writing  again,  on  the  ISth  of  Feb-  course  suggested  by  Mr.  Clerk  is  so 
ruary,  he  says :  "  In  regard  to  the  much  more  ••  honourable,**  and  "  com- 
means  of  inducing  zealous  co-opera-  patible  with   friendship,**    than   tliat 
tion  on  the  part  of  the  Sikh  troops,  I  suggested  by  Captains  Mackeson  and 
do  not  think  that  the  expectations  of  Lawrence. 
Captains  Mackeson  and  Lawrence  are 


COKDUCT  OF  8HBBE  SINGH.  323 

which  Runjeet  Singh  had  coveted,  and  which  the  Tri- 
partite treaty  had  snatched  from  him,  "would  not  do 
better."* 

In  the  mean  while,  it  appeared  to  Mr.  Clerk  that  his 
presence  at  the  Court  of  the  Sikh  ruler,  would  have  the 
effect  of  cementing  the  alliance  between  the  two  states, 
and  enable  him  the  better  to  obtain  from  the  Lahore 
Grovemment  the  military  assistance  that  was  so  greatly 
needed.  He  had  never  doubted  the  good  faith  of  the 
Maharajah  himself.  Whatever  selfish  motives  he  may 
have  attributed  to  him,  it  was  not  to  be  doubted  that  at 
this  time  his  feeling  and  his  conduct  alike  were  those  of  a 
friend.  Clerk  declared  that  no  native  state  had  ever 
taken  such  great  pains  to  accelerate  the  movement  of  our 
troops  by  preventing  plunder,  supplying  boats  at  the 
ferries,  and  furnishing  food  for  the  use  of  our  army.  He 
had  given  us  the  best  aid  and  the  best  advice,  and  in 
the  opinion  of  the  British  agent  was  willing  to  act  up 
to  the  spirit  of  the  Tripartite  treaty.  He  was,  indeed, 
the  only  man  in  the  Punjaub  who  really  desired  our 
success. 

On  the  2nd  of  March,  Clerk,  arrived  at  Umritsur, 
resolute  to  "get  what  he  could  out  of  the  Sikhs."f 
Early  on  the  following  morning  he  waited  on  Shere 
Singh.  The  first  visit  was  a  visit  of  condolence  on  the 
deaths  of  Kurruck  Singh  and  his  son.     The  attendance 

*  **  Lawrence  is  making  out  a  digest  and,  if  to  my  mind  that  is  ao^thiog 
of  our  conversation  with  the  Rajah  like  substantial  co-operation  in  ad^ 
yesterday.  I  should  say  that  not  yancing  or  even  securing  support  in 
even  with  Sultan  Mahomed  Khan  the  rear,  to  accept  it  for  General  Pol- 
would  the  Sikhs  hold  Jellalabad  with  lock  if  he  will  use  it,  and  officially  to 
any  advantage  to  themselves.  If  we  recommend  to  him  that,  if  it  proves 
would  bribe  them  with  offers  of  terri-  serviceable,  he  should,  contrary  to  the 
tory,  it  must  be  in  some  other  direc-  orders  of  government,  continue  to 
tion.  Would  Shikarpoor  do  better?"  maintain  Jellalabad,  whilst  awaiting 
— IMackesonto  Clerk:  Feb,  2\,lS4t2,  further  orders  from  government  on 
MS.  Records,'\  the  subject."  —  iMr.  Clerk  to  Mr. 

f  *'My  course,  I  think,  is  clear —  Eobertson:  Umritsur j  March  ^  1842.] 
to  get  what  I  can  out  of  the  Sikhs^ 

y  2 


324  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

at  the  Durbar  was  small.  No  troops  were  in  waiting 
beyond  a  single  wing  of  a  battalion  drawn  up  to  salute 
the  arrival  and  departure  of  the  British  Mission,  The 
Court  were  in  mourning  of  white.  Everything  about  the 
Durbar  was  quiet  and  subdued.  It  was  a  meeting  of 
condolence  on  both  sides.  Clerk's  expressions  of  regret 
were  reciprocated  by  those  which  the  Sikh  ruler  freely 
uttered  with  reference  to  the  death  of  Sir  William  Mac- 
naghten.  Dhyan  Singh  and  the  Fakir  Azizoodeen  were 
both  loud  in  their  praises  of  the  envoy ;  and  expressed 
a  lively  hope  that  the  treacherous  Afghans  would  be 
duly  punished  for  their  offences.  After  other  compli- 
mentary interchanges,  the  Mission  departed;  and  on  the 
following  morning  proceeded  to  pay  a  visit  of  congratu- 
lation to  the  new  ruler.  The  Court  now  wore  a  different 
aspect.  Along  the  garden-walks  stretched  walls  of 
crimson  broad-cloth,  and  lines  of  armed  Goorcherrahs,  in 
new  appointments,  glittered  along  the  paths.  Every- 
thing was  bright  and  joyous.  The  courtiers  shone  in 
splendid  apparel.  The  Maharajah  himself  was  bright 
with  jewels,  of  which  the  Koh-i-noor  was  the  lustrous 
chief.  The  young  Rajah  Heera  Singh,  old  Runjeet's 
minion,  radiant  with  emeralds  and  pearls,  sate  beside 
Shere  Singh,  whilst  his  father,  the  minister,  stood  be- 
hind the  regal  chair.  The  officers  of  the  British  Mission 
sate  on  a  row  of  chairs  opposite;  and  the  old  Fakir 
Azizoodeen  was  seated  on  the  floor  beside  the  chair  of 
the  British  chief.  The  conversation  was  of  a  general 
and  complimentary  character.  The  Khelat  of  accession 
was  presented  to  the  new  ruler;  the  fidelity  of  the  Sikh 
Government  and  the  character  of  its  administration  were 
belauded ;  and  then  the  Mission  took  its  departure. 

On  the  5th,  Clerk,  having  intimated  his  desire  to  wait 
on  the  Maharajah,  to  discuss  matters  of  business,  was  in- 
vited to  attend  at  his  own  time.    He  went  in  the  after- 


CLERK  AT  THE  SIKH  DURBAB.  325 

noon;  and  at  once  solicited  the  honour  of  a  private 
audience.  Heera  Singh  was  sitting  beside  him,  and  other 
courtiers  were  in  attendance.  A  motion  of  the  hand 
dismissed  them  all ;  and  Clerk  was  invited  to  seat  him- 
self in  Heera  Singh's  chair.  But  the  British  minister,  not 
wishing  that  the  conversation  should  be  carried  on  with- 
out any  witnesses,  suggested  the  recall  of  Dhyan  Singh 
and  the  Fakir,  who,  with  Heera  Singh  and  one  or  two 
others,  were  present  at  the  interview.  Clerk  had  a 
difficult  game  to  play  at  this  time.  He  had  to  obtain 
the  most  effectual  co-operation  of  the  Sikh  Government 
that  could  be  elicited  in  this  hour  of  trial;  and  yet  he 
was  unwilling  to  lay  bare  to  the  Sikh  Durbar  the  real 
designs  of  his  own  government.  He  had  been  directed 
to  disclose  those  designs  to  the  Sikhs — to  intimate  that 
it  was  the  intention  of  the  British  government,  after 
rescuing  the  Jellalabad  garrison,  to  withdraw  the  army 
to  the  British  frontier;  but  inwardly  indignant  at  the 
feebleness  of  the  policy  which  was  favoured  at  Cal- 
cutta, he  shrunk  from  avowing  these  intentions  of  with- 
drawal, and  endeavoured  rather  to  eli^jit  the  views  of 
the  Lahore  Cabinet  than  to  expose  the  designs  of  his 
own.  But  Shere  Singh  was  not  inclined  to  be  less 
cautious  than  the  British  envoy.  When  Clerk  asked 
what  he  intended  to  do  to  rescue  Sale's  garrison  from 
destruction,  the  Maharajah  replied  that  the  Sikhs  were 
very  desirous  to  aid  the  British  Government,  but  that 
the  matter  called  for  consideration.  Bristling  up  at  the 
coolness  of  this  reply.  Clerk  said  that  the  whole  ques- 
tion of  the  alliance  between  the  two  states  might  call 
for  future  consideration,  but  that  the  present  moment, 
when  the  safety  of  a  beleaguered  garrison  was  at  stake, 
was  no  time  for  consideration.  Qualifying  then  his  for- 
mer remark,  the  Sikh  ruler  said  that  he  meant  only  that 
the  mode  of  procedure  called  for  consideration,  and  he 


326  TBE  FORCING  OF  THE  EHTBUR. 

began  to  talk  about  the  advantage  of  erecting  sungahs 
and  crowning  the  heights  of  the  Khybur  Pass* — to  all 
of  which  Clerk  readily  assented.  Then  Dhyan  Singh, 
who  all  this  time  had  been  sitting  silent,  with  a  dejected 
air  and  drooping  head,  now  looked  up,  and  with  a 
cheerful  countenance  began  to  take  part  in  the  conver- 
sation. He  had  before  seemed  to  think  that  the  pur- 
port of  the  discussion  was  to  consign  his  brother,  Gholab 
Singh,  to  inevitable  destruction;  but  he  now  said  that 
he  was  certain  the  troops  under  the  command  of  that 
chief  would  willingly  co-operate  with  the  British ;  but 
that  "  an  iron  lock  required  an  iron  key."  He  then 
abruptly  asked  why  more  British  troops  were  not  sent?f 
— and  the  Fakir  Azizoodeen  whispered  the  same  ques- 
tion. Clerk  could  have  blurted  out  an  answer  to  this 
— but  it  was  one  which  would  have  opened  the  eyes 
of  the  Sikh  Durbar,  more  than  it  was  desirable  to  open 
them,  to  the  true  nature  of  British  policy  at  this  time, 
and  the  true  character  of  our  rulers.  He,  therefore, 
answered  in  general  terms  that  the  British  Government 
were  collecting  troops;  but  that,  nevertheless,  the  co- 
operation of  the  Sikh  Government  was  much  desired; 
and,  whilst  he  added  that  an  intimation  would  be  sent 
to  General  Pollock  regarding  the  manner  in  which  the 
Durbar  recommended  the  war  in  the  Khybur  to  be 
carried  on,  Shere  Singh  promised  to  send  the  desired 
instructions  to  Gholab  Singh;  and  so  the  conference 
ended. 

True  to  his  word,  the  Maharajah  at  once  despatched 
instructions  to  Gholab  Singh  to  co-operate  heartily  and 
steadily  with  General  Pollock  and  Captain  Mackeson; 
and  it  is  believed  that  at  the  same  time  Dhyan  Singh 

*  This  was  merely  an  echo  of  what    the  minister  said,  to  beat  all  Afghan- 

adij 


Gholab  Singh  had  been  recommend-    istan  on  the  plains,  but  it  was  admei^ 
inff  by  letter  to  the  Maharajah.  ent  thing  to  convey  suppli 

t  There  were  mor«  than  enough,    the  defiles  of  the  &hjbur. 


KISGIVINGS  07  SH£RB  SINQH.  827 

wrote  privately  to  his  brother  in  a  similar  strain  of 
exhortation  and  encouragement.  But  it  was  plain  to 
Mr.  Clerk  that  both  the  Sovereign  and  his  minister  re- 
garded, with  feelings  of  painful  anxiety,  the  necessity  of 
avoiding  an  open  rupture  with  the  British  Government 
by  aiding  in  the  perilous  work  that  lay  before  the  troops 
posted  at  Peshawur.  Mr.  Clerk  remained  at  the  Maha- 
rajah's  Court,  which  had  removed  itself  from  Umritsur 
to  Lahore,  and  exerted  himself  to  keep  up  the  fidelity  of 
our  ally  to  the  right  point  of  effective  co-operation.  But 
as  time  advanced,  Shere  Singh  became  more  and  more 
uneasy  and  apprehensive.  It  appeared  to  him  that  a 
failure  in  the  Khybur  Pass  would  bring  down  such  a 
weight  of  unpopularity  upon  him  that  his  very  throne 
would  be  jeopardised  by  the  disaster.  One  day — it  was 
the  4th  of  April — holding  Durbar  in  the  Huzooree- 
Bagh,  Shere  Singh  appeared  ill  at  ease.  Having  con- 
versed a  little  while  on  general  topics,  but  with  an  ab- 
stracted air,  he  ordered  the  intelligence  forwarded  to 
him  by  the  Peshawur  news-writers  to  be  read  to  the 
British  envoy ;  then  took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him 
to  another  seat  in  the  garden.  Alone  with  the  English 
gentleman,  the  Sikh  ruler  opened  out  his  heart  to  him. 
He  was  concerned,  he  said,  to  learn  that  the  British  au- 
thorities at  Peshawur  were  making  no  progress  in  their 
negotiations  for  the  purchase  of  a  safe  passage  through 
the  Khybur,  and  were  disinclined  to  accept  the  offers  of 
the  old  Barukzye  Governor  of  Peshawur,  Sultan  Ma- 
homed, who  had  declared  his  willingness  to  "divide, 
scatter,  and  make  terms  with "  our  enemies.  He  appre- 
hended that  there  would  be  much  fighting  and  much 
slaughter;  and  it  was  only  too  probable  that  the  Sikh 
troops  at  Peshawur,  seeing  clearly  the  danger  of  the 
movement,  and  not  by  any  means  understanding  the 
advantages  that  would  accrue  to  them  from  it,  would 


328  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

refuse  to  enter  the  pass.  Or  if  they  entered  it,  it  was 
probable  that  they  would  suffer  severely  at  the  hands  of 
the  Afghans — and  in  either  case,  as  he  had  been  con- 
tinually writing  to  Peshawur  to  impress  upon  the  oflScers 
there  the  necessity  of  effective  co-operation  with  the 
British,  the  odium  would  descend  upon  him,  and  perhaps 
cost  him  his  throne.  It  was  easier  to  listen  to  all  this 
than  to  reply  to  it.  Clerk  saw  as  plainly  as  the  Maha- 
rajah himself,  that  as  the  Sikh  troops  had  always 
evinced  an  insuperable  repugnance  to  enter  the  Khybur 
Pass,  even  when  the  glory  of  the  Khalsa  was  to  be 
advanced  by  the  movement,  and  the  dominions  of 
the  Lahore  Government  to  be  extended,  it  was  hardly 
reasonable  to  expect  them  to  show  greater  alacrity  in 
the  advancement  of  the  objects  of  another  nation  whom 
they  cordially  detested,  and  whose  disasters  they  re- 
garded with  secret  delight.* 

But  whilst  Shere  Singh  was  thus  expressing  his  mis- 
givings at  Lahore,  and  the  British  agent  was  inwardly 
acknowledging  the  reasonable  character  of  the  Maha- 
rajah's doubts,  the  Sikh  troops  at  Peshawur  were 
settling  down  into  a  state  of  quiet  obedience,  and 
making  up  their  minds  to  penetrate  the  Khybur  Pass. 
The  letters  despatched  by  Shere  Singh  and  his  minister 
to  Avitabile  and  Gholab  Singh  had  not  been  without 
their  effect.     A  confidential  friend  and  adviser  of  the 


•  "  The  aversion  which  the  Sikhs  support  of  its  ally,  whilst  deprived 

have  to  penetrate  the  Khybur  is  not  by  the  circumstances  of  the  alliance 

more  inconvenient  to  the  British  Go-  of  all   latitude  of  securing  parties 

vernment  than  it  is  alarming  to  the  among  the  Afghans,  such  as  it  would 

Maharajah  ;    for    their    resentment  create  and  turn  to  advantage  in  aid 

against  the  government,  which  has  of  its  encroachments,  if  acting  on  its 

imposed  upon  them  the  arduous  duty,  own   account,  it  may  be  raising  a 

will  be  enhanced,  should  they  suffer  homet^s  nest  which  may  involve  the 

from  the  swords  of  the  Afghans.  Nor  Khalsa  in  long  wars  for  the  preserva- 

can  any  thinking  person  in  this  Dur-  tion  of  its  territories  on  the  Indus." 

bar  fail  to  apprehend  that  by  pro-  — IMr,  George  Clerk  to  Government: 

eeeding  to    invade    Afghanbtan  in  Lciiore^  April  5, 1842.  MS,  Records,'] 


IMPROVED  TEMPER  OF  THE  SIKHS.  329 

Sikh  ruler  —  Boodh  Singh — had  arrived  at  Peshawur, 
charged  with  messages  from  the  King  and  the  minister, 
which  were  supposed  to  have  had  an  effect  upon  the 
Jummoo  Rajah,  sudden  and  great.  Lawrence,  too,  had 
been  busy  in  the  Sikh  camp,  and  little  anticipating  the 
circumstances  under  which  it  was  decreed  that  they 
should  one  day  meet  in  that  lovely  province  of  the  old 
Douranee  Empire  over  which  the  Jummoo  Rajah  now 
exercises  undisputed  dominion,  had  been  holding  long 
conferences  with  Gholab  Singh.  The  good  tact,  good 
temper,  and  quiet  firmness  of  General  Pollock,  had  been 
exercised  with  the  best  results,  and  the  arrival  of 
further  reinforcements  of  European  troops  had  done 
much  to  give  new  confidence  to  the  Khalsa.  And  so  it 
happened,  that  when  General  Pollock  prepared  to  enter 
the  Kiybur  Pass,  the  Sikh  troops  had  resolved  not  to 
suffer  their  faces  to  be  blackened  before  all  India ;  and 
really,  when  the  hour  for  exertion  came,  did  more  for 
the  honour  of  their  own  arms  and  the  suppof t  of  the 
British  Government  than  the  most  sanguine  of  our 
officers  had  ventured  to  expect. 

The  dragoons  and  the  horse  artillery  reached  Pesha- 
wur on  the  29th  of  March,  and  Pollock  at  once  made 
his  preparations  to  enter  the  Khybur  Pass.  On  the 
3l8t  he  pitched  his  camp  at  Jumrood,  in  the  expecta- 
tion of  advancing  on  the  following  morning;  but  new 
elements  of  delay  arose.  The  camel  -  drivers  were  de- 
serting. Gholab  Singh  had  not  moved  up  his  camp. 
And,  above  all,  the  rain  was  descending  in  floods.  It 
would  have  dispirited  the  troops  to  have  moved  them 
forward  at  such  a  time,  and  rendered  more  diflicult  the 
advance  of  the  baggage.  Pollock  had  done  his  best  to 
diminish  to  the  least  possible  amount  the  number  of 
carriage- cattle  that  were  to  move  with  him  into  the 
Khybur  Pass.     But  an  Indian  commander  has  no  more 


830  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

difficult  duty  than  this.  Under  no  circumstances  is  the 
general  addition  to  much  baggage  very  easily  overcome. 
Men  are  not  readily  persuaded  to  leave  their  comforts 
behind  them.  A  fine  soldierly  appeal  was  issued  to  the 
army;*  and  men  of  all  ranks  felt  that  it  came  from  an 
officer  who  was  not  less  ready  to  make  sacrifices  himself 
than  to  call  upon  others  to  make  them.f  Circumstances, 
too,  at  this  time,  tended  to  reduce  the  amount  of  the 
baggage.  The  camel-drivers  had  deserted  in  such  num- 
bers, that  there  was  not  even  sufficient  carriage  for  the 
ammunition.  The  33rd  Regiment,  which  had  just 
arrived  at  Peshawur,  could  not  come  up  to  the  encamp- 
ing-ground  for  want  of  cattle ;  and  another  day's  hjdt 
was  the  result  of  the  delay.  J     In  the  mean  while,  the 

*  Afler  alluding  to  the  defence  of  never  be  called  upon  by  him  to  make 

Jellalabad,  and  the  probability  that  useless  sacrifices,  or  to  undergo  un- 

the  Peshawur  force  would  immedi-  necessary  hardships.      Arrangements 

ately  advance  to  its  relief.  General  will  be  made  for  placing  such  baggage 

Pollock  said  :  *'  Success  in  relieving  as  may  be  left  behind,  in  perfect  secu- 

these  troops  will  raise  for  this  force  rity  at  Peshawur." 
the  admiration  and  gratitude  of  all        f  He  had  reduced  his  own  ba^- 

India,  and  the  Major^General  com-  gage-cattle  to  one  camel  and  two 

manding  feels   assured   that  officers  mules. 

and  men   will  cheerfully  make  any        I  **  My  detention  here  has  been 

sacrifices  to  attain  so  noble  an  object,  most  annoying.    We  have  had  heavy 

He  therefore  now  calls    upon    the  rain,  and  the   Sikhs  begged  that  I 

Brigadiers  to  assemble  the  command-  would  wait  till  to-morrow.     I  have 

ing  officers  under  iheir  orders,  and  consented  to  this,  because  the  troops 

determine  on  the  least  quantity  of  of  both  powers   advancing  simulta- 

baggage  and  the  smallest  number  of  neously  u>r  the  same  purpose  ought 

camp-followers  with  which  their  regi-  to  produce  a  good  effect.     I  should 

ments  can  advance.    The  success  of  have  been  better  pleased  had  Ma- 

this  enterprise  will   greatly  depend  homed  Akbar  not  sent  the  last  rein- 

upon  the  quantity  of  baggage  taken,  forcement— save  the  guns,  which  I 

as  from  the  nature  of  the  country  be-  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  give  a  good 

tween  Peshawur  and  Jellalabad,  the  account  of.  The  pluck  of  the  Sepoyi 

line  most  consistent  with  safety  must  is  doubtful ;  but  I  nope  when  we  carry 

be  as  little  encumbered  as  possible,  the  mouth  of  the  pass,  they  will  £eei 

The     Major-  General     commanding  confidence.     The  9th  are  most  anxi- 

trusts  that  the  confidence  he  feels  in  ous    to  be   let  loose,  and  —  please 

the  troops  will  be  repaid  by  their  con-  God !  by  to-morrow,  we  shall  be  well 

fidence  in  him.    Tlie  soldiers    may  into  the  pass  ...  I  still  much  r^ 

rest  assured  that  his  thoughts  are  con-  gret  that  I  have  not  the  31st;  but 

stantly  engaged  in  ensuring  their  pro-  after  Sir  Robert  Sale's  letter  received 

visions  and  securing  their  comforts,  some  time  back,  I  consider  that  he 

and  they  may  be  convinced  they  will  has  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  wait 


PBELIMIKART  0BDBB8.  331 

Sepoys  were  deserting  fix)m  Wild's  brigade;  and  no 
satisfactory  progress  was  making  in  the  negotiations 
which  Mackeson  had  been  canying  on  for  the  purchase 
of  a  free  passage  through  the  Khybur  from  the  Afreedi 
Maliks.*  But  there  was  one  advantage  in  the  delay. 
It  gave  time  for  the  Sikh  troops  to  prepare  themselves, 
aaer  their  own  fashion,  to  co-operate  with  our  army,  and 
General  Pollock  felt  that  whatever  might  be  the  amount 
of  active  assistance  to  be  derived  from  the  efforts  of 
our  allies,  a  combined  movement  would  have  a  good 
moral  effect. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  April,  General 
Pollock  struck  his  camp,  and  began  to  move  upon  Ali- 
Musjid. 

Before  leaving  their  encamping-ground  at  Kawulsur, 
and  marching  to  Jumrood,  the  order  of  march  had  been 
laid  down,  and  had  been  well  studied  by  commanding 
officers.  Brigadier  Wild  was  to  command  the  advance 
guard,  and  General  M'Caskill  the  rear.  At  the  head 
of  the  column  were  to  march  the  grenadier  company 
of  the  9th  Queen's  Regiment,  one  company  of  the  26th 
Native  Infantry,  three  companies  of  the  30th  Native 

longer,  although  I  am  quite  sure  that  move  all  hostile  Afreedis  from  the 
the  addition  of  900  Europeans  would  pass,  as  far  as  Ali-Musjid,  and  then 
have  operated  very  favorably  for  the  we  were  to  repel  an/  troops  of  Ma- 
prisoners.  I,  however,  hope  that  you  homed  Akbar  Khan  sent  to  oppose 
will  be  able,,  throueh  the  Ghilzjes,  to  us.** — ICaptuin  Mackeson  to  General 
pave  the  way  for  tneir  release  when  Pollock :  April  2,  1842.  MS.  Re- 
we  reach  you  "--[General  Pollock  to  cords."]  Mackeson  adds:  •*  Yesterday 
Captain  Macgregor :  Jumrood^  April  3,  the  Afreedis  in  our  pay  proposed  to 
1 842.  MS.  Correspondence.']  seize  on  the  mouth  of  the  pass ; . but  as 
*  The  negotiations,  indeed,  failed  the  Sikhs  were  not  ready  to  move  on, 
altogether.  The  chiefs  had  given  and  they  promised  to  be  ready  on  the 
hostages,  and  were  to  have  received  following  day,  the  movement  was 
50,000  rupees,  for  the  safe  conduct  postponed.  To-day  the  Afreedia  of 
of  the  force  from  Jumrood  to  Dhaka  our  party  have  pleaded  that  Maho- 
— one  moiety  to  be  paid  in  advance,  med  Akbar*s  troops  have  come  down 
and  the  other  on  the  army  reaching  to  the  mouth  of  the  pass,  and  that 
the  latter  place.  "  They  were  to  they  can  no  longer  perform  their 
clear  the  pass  for  us  to  Dhaka,  and  agreement.  They  offer  to  return  the 
make  arrangements  for  guarding  it  money  that  has  been  given  to  them.** 
afterwards.    They    engaged  to    re-  —  [Afo.  Records."] 


332  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

iDfantry,  and  two  companies  of  the  33rd  Native  Infantry, 
under  Major  Barnewell,  of  the  9th.  Then  were  to  fol- 
low the  Sappers  and  Miners,  nine  pieces  of  artillery,* 
and  two  squadrons  of  the  3rd  Dragoons.  After  these, 
the  camels,  laden  with  all  the  treasure  of  the  force  and 
a  large  portion  of  the  ammunition,  were  to  move  on,  fol- 
lowed by  a  squadron  of  the  1st  Native  Cavalry.  Then 
the  Commissariat  stores,  protected  by  two  companies  of 
the  53rd  Native  Infantry,  were  to  advance,  and  a 
squadron  of  the  1  st  Cavalry  were  to  follow.  Then  the 
baggage  and  camp-followers,  covered  by  a  Ressalah  of 
Irregular  Horse,  and  a  squadron  of  the  1st  Native 
Cavalry,  were  to  move  forward,  with  a  further  supply  of 
ammunition,  and  litters,  and  camel-panniers  for  the  sick. 

The  rear-guard  was  to  consist  of  three  foot-artillery 
guns — the  10th  Light  Cavalry — two  Ressalahs  of  Irre- 
gular Horse — two  squadrons  of  the  3rd  Dragoons — two 
horse-artillery  guns  —  three  companies  of  the  60th 
Native  Infantry;  one  company  of  the  6th  Native  In- 
fantry; and  one  company  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot. 

These  details  formed  the  centre  column  which  was 
to  make  its  way  through  the  pass.  Two  other  columns, 
composed  entirely  of  infantry,  were  told  off  into  parties, 
and  instructed  to  crown  the  heights  on  either  side  of  the 
pass.  Two  companies  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot,  four 
companies  of  the  26th  Native  Infantry,  with  400  jezail- 
chees,  were  placed  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Taylor,  of  the  9th  Foot;  seven  companies  of  the  30th 
Native  Infantry,  under  Major  Payne;  three  companies 
of  the  60th  Native  Infantry,  under  Captain  Riddle;  four 
companies  of  the  64th  Native  Infantry,  under  Major 
Anderson,  with  some  details  of  Broadfoot's  sappers,  and 
a  company  and  a  half  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot;  the 

♦  Four  horse-artillery  guns,  two  guns  of  the  mountain-train,  and  three 
foot-artillery  guns. 


THE  CROWNING  COLUMNS.  333 

party  being  commanded  by  Major  Davis,  of  the  9th, 
made  up  the  right  crowning  column. 

The  left  crowning  column  was  to  consist  of  two  com- 
panies of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot,  four  companies  of  the 
26th  Native  Infantry,  and  200  jezailchees,  under  Major 
Huish,  of  the  26th  Native  Infantry;  seven  companies  of 
the  53rd  Native  Infantry,  under  Major  Hoggan,  of  that 
corps;  three  companies  of  the  60th  Native  Infantry, 
under  Captain  Napleton,  of  that  regiment;  and  four  and 
a  half  companies  of  the  64th  Native  Infantry,  and  one 
and  a  half  companies  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot,  under 
Colonel  Moseley,  of  the  64  th.  With  these  last  were  to 
go  some  auxiliaries,  supplied  by  Torabaz  Khan,  the 
loyal  chief  of  Lalpoorah.  The  flanking  parties  were  to 
advance  in  successive  detachments  of  two  companies,  at 
intervals  of  500  yards. 

After  the  order  of  the  march  was  thus  described,  the 
following  rules  were  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  com- 
manding officers: 

2.  A  bugler  or  trumpeter  to  be  attached  to  each  commanding- 
officer  of  a  party  or  detachment  of  the  several  columns. 

3.  Whenever  an  obstacle  presents  itself,  or  accident  occurs,  of 
a  nature  to  impede  the  march  of  any  part  of  either  of  the  columns, 
and  occasions  a  break  in  its  continuity,  the  officer  in  command 
nearest  to  the  spot  will  order  the  halt  to  be  sounded,  which  will 
be  immediately  repeated  by  the  other  buglers,  and  the  whole  will 
halt  till  the  removal  of  the  difficulty  enables  the  columns  to  pro- 
ceed in  their  established  order,  when  the  signal  to  advance  will 
be  given. 

4.  The  baggage-master  will  superintend  the  placing  of  the 
baggage,  &c.,  in  the  order  prescribed,  and  the  Major-General 
commanding  requests  that  commanding  officers  will  use  their  best 
exertions  to  facilitate  this  important  object.  The  quarter-master 
of  each  corps  will  see  that  the  baggage  of  his  regiment  is  placed 
in  its  proper  position  in  the  column,  and  an  officer  from  each  is  to 
be  appointed  to  the  duty. 

5.  No  private  guards  are  to  be  allowed.    The  parties  of  cavalry 


884         THE  FORCING  OP  THB  KETBUR. 

and  infantry,  allotted  at  intervals  in  the  line  of  march,  are  to  be 
the  only  troops  attending  it 

6.  The  officers  entrusted  with  the  command  of  the  parties 
which  are  to  flank  the  rear-guard  on  the  heights,  must  give  their 
most  vigilant  attention  to  the  important  duty  of  preventing  their 
men  from  hurrying  in  advance  of  it;  its  rear  must  never  be  left 
exposed  to  fire  from  the  heights. 

7.  The  troops  to  be  told  off  on  their  regimental  parades,  as 
above  detailed,  and  marched  at  the  appointed  hour  to  their  re* 
spective  posts. 

8.  The  folrce  will  march  to  Jumrood  to-morrow  morning,  in  the 
order  above  prescribed.  The  general  to  beat  at  four,  and  the 
assembly  at  five  o'clock. 

9.  The  baggage  and  camp-followers  of  each  corps  are  to  be 
kept  with  their  respective  regiments  till  notice  is  given  by  the 
baggage-master  that  they  are  required  to  take  their  places  in  the 
column.* 

These  orders  had  been  issued  before  the  force  marched 
to  Jumrood.  On  the  4th  of  April,  whilst  the  troops 
were  encamped  at  that  place,  Pollock  issued  further  and 
more  specific  orders  to  regulate  the  movements  of  the 
following  morning: 

Gamp  Jumrood,  4t}i  April,  1842. 
The  force  to  be  under  arms  to-morrow  morning  at  half-past 
three  o'clock,  ready  to  move  forward,  at  which  time  all  the  trea- 
sure, ammunition,  baggage,  &c.,  will  be  moved  to  the  low  ground 
to  the  right  front  of  the  hills  now  occupied  by  picquets.  No  fires 
are  to  be  lighted  on  any  account;  no  drums  to  beat,  or  bugles  to 
be  sounded.  The  six  companies  of  the  60th  Regiment,  and 
six  companies  of  the  33rd  Regiment,  will  remain  with  the 
baggage  in  the  vicinity  of  the  treasure  and  ammunition.  The 
parties  for  crowning  the  heights,  under  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Taylor  and  Major  Anderson,  will  move  forward  to 
the  hill  on  the  right  of  the  pass.  The  parties  for  the  same  duty, 
under  the  command  of  Major  Huish  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Moseley,  will  in  like  manner  move  forward  to  the  hill  on  the  left. 

*  MS>  Records, 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  MABCH.         835 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Taylor's  party  will  be  accompanied  by  the 
Irregulars  who  lately  garrisoned  Ali-Musjid. 

Captain  Ferris's  jezailchees  will  accompany  the  left  advancing 
party. 

When  the  heights  have  been  crowned  on  both  hills,  four  com- 
panies of  the  9th  Foot,  the  eight  companies  of  the  26th,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Taylor  and  Major  Huish,  also  the  jezailcliees, 
under  Captain  Ferris,  will  descend  the  hills  to  be  in  readiness  to 
enter  the  pass. 

Six  horse-artillery  guns,  four  from  the  foot-artillery,  with  the 
two  mountain  guns,  will  be  drawn  up  in  battery  opposite  the 
pass. 

The  advance  guard,  seven  companies  of  the  30th,  and  seven 
companies  of  the  53rd,  will  accompany  the  guns. 

The  whole  of  the  cavalry  will  be  so  placed  by  Brigadier  White, 
that  any  attempt  at  an  attack  from  the  low  hills  on  the  right  may 
be  frustrated.  When  the  baggage,  &c.,  is  directed  to  advance,  the 
same  order  of  march  will  be  preserved  as  was  formerly  prescribed, 
with  the  following  alteration:  Six  companies  of  the  60th  N.I.  will 
be  together  on  the  right,  and  six  companies  of  the  33rd,  now  ar- 
rived, will  follow  the  53rd  N.I.  When  the  rear  of  the  column  is 
entering  the  pass,  the  two  rear  companies  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Moseley's  and  Major  Anderson's  parties  should  descend  the  hills. 

G.  PoNSONBY,  Capt.,  A.  A.  General.* 

That  evening  the  General  went  round  to  all  his  com- 
manding officers  to  ascertain  that  they  thoroughly  imder- 
stood  the  orders  that  had  been  issued  for  their  guidance ; 
and  to  learn  from  them  what  was  the  temper  of  their 
men.  There  did  not  seem  to  be  much  cause  for  inquie- 
tude on  this  score.  The  morale  of  the  Sepoys  had 
greatly  improved. 

At  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  April 
the  army  commenced  its  march.  It  moved  oflf  in  the 
dim  twilight,  without  beat  of  drum  or  sound  of  bugle. 
Quietly  the  crowning  columns  prepared  to  ascend.  The 
heights  on  either  side  were  covered  with  the  enemy,  but 

♦  MS.  Records. 


336         THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

SO  little  was  the  mode  of  attack,  which  the  British  Greneral 
had  determined  upon,  expected  by  the  enemy,  that  it 
was  not  until  our  flankers  had  achieved  a  considerable 
ascent  that  the  Khyburees  were  aware  of  their  advance. 
Then,  as  the  morning  dawned,  the  position  of  the  two 
forces  were  clearly  revealed  to  each  other;  and  the 
struggle  commenced. 

Across  the  mouth  of  the  pass  the  enemy  had  thrown 
up  a  formidable  barrier.  It  was  made  of  mud,  and  huge 
stones,  and  heavy  branches  of  trees.  The  Khyburees 
had  not  wanted  time  to  mature  their  defensive  operations; 
and  they  had  thrown  up  a  barricade  of  considerable 
strength.  It  was  not  a  work  upon  which  our  guns  could 
play  witli  any  good  efiect ;  but  it  was  a  small  matter  ef- 
fectually to  destroy  the  barrier  when  once  our  light  infantry 
had  swept  the  hills.  And  that  work  was  soon  going  on 
gallantly  and  successfully  on  both  sides,  whilst  the  centre 
column,  drawn  up  in  battle  array,  was  waiting  the  issue 
of  the  contest.  Nothing  could  have  proved  better  than 
the  arrangements  of  the  General;  and  no  General  could 
have  wished  his  plan  of  attack  to  be  carried  out  with 
better  effect.  On  the  left,  the  crowning  column  was  soon 
in  vigorous  and  successful  action.  On  the  right,  the 
precipitous  nature  of  the  ground  was  such  that  it  seemed 
to  defy  the  eager  activity  of  Taylor  and  his  men.  But 
he  stole  round  the  base  of  the  mountain  unseen,  and 
found  a  more  practicable  ascent  than  that  which  he  had 
first  tried.  Then  on  both  sides  the  British  infantry  were 
soon  hotly  engaged  with  the  mountaineers,  clambering 
up  the  precipitous  peaks,  and  pouring  down  a  hot  and 
destructive  fire  upon  the  surprised  and  disconcerted 
Khyburees.  They  had  not  expected  that  our  disciplined 
troops,  who  had,  as  it  were,  been  looking  at  the  Khybur 
for  some  months,  would  be  more  than  a  match  for  them 
upon  their  native  hills.     But  so  it  was.     Our  British 


THE  PASS  ENTERED.  337 

infantry  were  beating  them  in  every  direction,  and 
everywhere  the  white  dresses  of  the  Khyburees  were 
seen  flying  across  the  hills.  The  Duke  of  Wellington 
had  said,  some  time  before,  that  he  "  had  never  heard 
that  our  troops  were  not  equal,  as  well  in  their  personal 
activity  as  by  their  arms,  to  contend  with  and  overcome 
any  natives  of  hills  whatever."*  And  now  our  British 
infantry  and  our  Bengal  Sepoys  were  showing  how  well 
able  they  were  to  meet  the  Khyburees  on  their  native 
hills.  The  mountain-rangers^  whom  Macnaghten  wished 
to  raise,  because  Sale's  brigade  had  been  harassed  by 
the  Ghilzyes,  could  not  have  clambered  over  the  hills 
with  greater  activity  than  our  British  troops,  and  would 
not  have  been  half  as  steady  or  half  as  faithftd. 

It  was  now  time  for  Pollock  to  advance.  The  centre 
column  did  not  attempt  to  move  forward  until  the 
flankers  had  fought  their  way  to  the  rear  of  the  mouth 
of  the  pass.  But  when  he  had  fairly  turned  the  enemy's 
position,  he  began  to  destroy  the  barrier,  and  prepared 
to  advance  into  the  pass.  The  enemy  had  assembled  in 
large  numbers  at  the  mouth,  but  finding  themselves  out- 
flanked— finding  that  they  had  to  deal  with  different  men 
and  a  different  system  from  that  which  they  had  seen  a 
few  months  before,  they  gradually  withdrew,  and,  with- 
out opposition,  Pollock  now  cleared  his  way  through 
the  barricade,  and  pushed  into  the  pass  with  his  long 
string  of  baggage.  The  difficulties  of  the  remainder  of 
the  march  were  now  mainly  occasioned  by  the  great 
extent  of  this  convoy.  Pollock  was  conveying  both 
ammunition  and  provisions  to  Sale's  garrison ;  and  there 
were  many  more  beasts  of  burden,  therefore,  than  were 
used  by  his  own  force.  But  skilfiilly  was  the  march 
conducted.    Encumbered  as  he  was,  the  Greneral  was 

*  See  Appendix,  toL  i. 
VOL.  n.  Z 


388 


THE  FOBCINQ  OF  THE  KHTBUB. 


compelled  to  move  slowly  forward.  The  march  to  Ali- 
Muajid  occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  day.  The 
heat  was  intense.  The  troops  suffered  greatly  from 
thirst.  But  they  all  did  their  duty  well.  Whatever 
doubts  may  have  lingered  to  the  last  in  Pollock's  mind, 
were  now  wholly  dispersed;  and  when  he  reached  Ali- 
Musjid  in  safety,  and  had  time  to  think  over  the  events 
of  the  day,  nothing  refreshed  him  more  than  the  thought 
that  the  Sepoys  had  fairly  won  back  the  reputation  they 
had  lately  lost.* 

The  enemy  had  evacuated  Ali-Musjid  in  the  morning; 
and  now  Feixis's  jezaHchees  were  sent  in  to  garrison  the 
place.  A  part  of  Pollock's  force,  with  the  head- 
quarters, bivouacked  near  the  fortress.  The  night  was 
bitterly  cold;  but  the  command  of  the  heights  was 
maintained,  and  the  men,  both  Europeans  and  Natives, 
who  had  been  under  arms  since  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  did  not  utter  a  complaint.  They  appeared  to 
feel  that  they  had  done  a  great  work;  but  that  the 
utmost  vigilance  was  necessary  to  secure  the  advantage 
they  had  gained.  The  enemy  were  still  hovering  about, 
and  all  night  long  firing  upon  our  people.  It  was 
necessary  to  be  on  the  alert. 

It  was  a  great  thing  to  have  accomplished  such  a 
march  with  so  little  loss  of  life,  and  no  loss  of  baggage. 
Avitabile  said  that  Pollock  and  his  force  were  going  to 
certain  destruction.  Had  he  moved  precipitately  with 
his  main  column  into  the  pass,  he  would  probably  have 


•  "The  Seyoys  behaved  nobly," 
wrote  Greneral  bollock,  on  the  day 
after  the  action.    "  They  merely  re- 

2 aired  a  trial  in  which  they  should 
nd  that  they  were  not  sacrificed. 
There  were,  nowever,  many  deser- 
tions before  we  advanced.  STow  they 
are  in  the  highest  spirits,  and  have 
a  thorough  contempt  for  the  enemy. 
This  18  a  great  pomt  gained.    Yoa 


are  aware  that  Mahomed  Akbar  sent 
a  party,  about  800,  with  one  or  two 
ffons,  to  oppose  us;  but  they  thought 
better  of  it,  and  abandoned  the  rort 
of  Ali-Musjid  this  morning.  I  have 
accordingly  taken  possession.  The 
Sikhs  are  encamped  near  us,  and  are 
much  more  respectful  and  civil  since 
our  operations  of  yesterday.'* — [^MS, 
Correspondence.'] 


AFFEABANCE  OF  THE  6IKH8.  889 

« 

been  driven  back  with  great  slaughter;  but  the  precau^ 
tion  he  took  in  crowning  the  heights  and  turning  the 
enemy's  position,  secured  him,  though  not  without  some 
fighting  the  whole  way,  a  safe  passage.  The  enemy  are 
said  to  have  lost  about  300  men  killed,  and  600  or 
800  wounded. 

The  Sikh  troops  moved  up  by  another  pass  to  Ali- 
Musjid.  Pollock,  still  doubtful  of  their  fidelity,  and  not 
desiring  to  have  them  too  near  his  own  troops,  suggested, 
that  when  he  pushed  forward  by  the  Shadee-Ba^aree 
Pass,  they  should  take  the  other,  known  as  the  Jubogee/ 
Pollock  had  entered  into  a  covenant  with  Gholab  Singh 
for  the  occupation  of  the  pass  by  the  Sikh  troops  until 
the  5th  of  Jime.  It  was  necessary  that  he  should  keep 
open  his  communications  with  the  rear;  and  the  Sikhs 
undertook  to  do  it.  But  when  Pollock  marched  to 
Jellalabad,  they  began  to  bargain  with  certain  A£reedi 
chiefs,  hostile  to  our  interests,  to  keep  open  the  pass  for 
the  stipulated  time,  for  a  certain  sum  of  money,  thus 
making  known  to  the  tribes  the  time  for  which  they 
had  covenanted  to  hold  it-f  Early  in  May  the  Sikhs 
suddenly  quitted  their  position  at  Ali-Musjid  and  re- 
turned to  Jumrood,  seizing  some  of  our  baggage«cattle 

*  Follock  saw  nothing  of  the  Sikhfl  pass  the^  have  engaged  to  protect  fbr 

till  the  afternoon  of  the  6th.    They  a  period  of  two  monuis.    The  parties 

doubted  his  success,  and  held  dis-  they  ^reed  to  pa;jr  were  AbdmBah- 

creetly  back  until  ihey  found  that  man  Khan,  Kooki  Eheil,  Mahomed 

he  had  made  good  his  way  to  AH-  Jalim  Sipa,  and  Alia  Dad  Malik,  Din 

Musjid.  Eheil,  son  of  Khan  Bahadur,  all  of 

f  •«  I  have  been  given  to  under*  whom  were  at  that  time  hostile  to  us, 

stand  that,  on  the  advance  of  our  although  Abdul  Bahman  Khan  has 

army  to  Jellalabad,  the  SiUi  autho-  since  come  over.    There  could  have 

rities  atPeshawur,  witJbout  indmating  been  no  objection  to  the  Sikhs  enter- 

their  intentions  to  Captain  Lawrence,  ins  into  an  arrangement  with  the 

and  without  reference  to  any  engage-  An'eedis ;  but  it  should  hftvt  been 

ments  between  the  Afreedis  and  our-  done  in  communication  with  Uflu  and 

selves,    entered   into   arrangements  without  imparting  to  the  Afreedis  the 

with  the  Afreedis  to  purchase,  for  the  term  for  which  the  Sikhs  were  bound 

sum  of  6000  rupees  or  4000  rupees,  to  hold  the  pass."— [If  acifcewm  to  Pbl- 

the  security  of  that  portion  of  the  look:  May  6, 1842.    MS.  Records.^ 

z2 


340  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

on  the  way,  throwing  their  loads  on  the  ground,  and 
emplojdng  the  animals  to  carry  their  baggage.* 

In  the  mean  while,  Pollock  had  reached  JeUalabad. 
"  We  found  the  fort  strong,"  he  wrote  to  a  friend ;  "  the 
garrison  healthy;  and,  except  for  wine  and  beer,  better 
off  than  we  are.  They  were,  of  course,  delighted  to  see 
U8»  We  gave  three  cheers  as  we  passed  the  colours; 
and  the  band  of  each  regiment  played  as  it  came  up.  It 
was  a  sight  worth  seeing.  All  appeared  happy ."f  It 
was,  indeed,  a  happy  meeting.  Sale's  little  garrison  had 
been  shut  up  for  five  months  in  JeUalabad.  They  had 
long  been  surroimded  with  perils,  lessened  only  by  their 
own  daring.  They  had  looked  in  vain  for  succours, 
until  they  had  become  so  familiar  with  danger  that  they 
had  begun  to  feel  secure  in  the  midst  of  it.  But  they 
were  weary  of  their  isolation,  and  were  eager  to  see 
their  countrymen  again.  Welcome,  therefore,  was  the 
arrival  of  Pollock's  force ;  and  happy  the  day  on  which 
it  appeared  with  streaming  colours  and  gay  music.  But 
the  prospects  of  the  garrison  had  brightened;  and  if 


*  "  I  regret  to  have  to  report  that  being  made  of  the  offenders 

the  Sikh    regiments  posted  at  Ali-  I  repeatedly  returned  to  the  subject, 

Musjid,  yesterday  left  their  post,  and  declaring  the  necessity  of  punishing 

returned  to  Jumrood;  on  their  way  the  offenders,    whom,  I  said,   there 

throwing  the  loads  off*  some  of  our  could  be  uq  difficulty  in  recognbing, 

mules  and  bullocks  that  they  met,  and  as  they  were  there  for  hours  in  the 

employing  the  animals  to  carry  their  heart  of  the  town,  and  had  been  seen 

own  baggage.    My  letter  to  Koonwur  by  General  Avitabile  himself,  as  well 

Pertab  Singh,  and  his  answer,  are  as  by  Captains  Lane  and  Johnstone, 

herewith  enclosed.   You  will  observe  and  by  many  of  the  Commissariat 

that  the  whole  Sikh  reeiment    was  agents.    It  was  not  denied  that  the 

actually  recalled   by  order,  without  men  could    be    recognised ;    but  I 

notice  being  given  to  me,  or  without  much  fear  that  no  punishment  will 

their  being  relieved,  although  four  be  inflicted  on  them.  ^ — ILawrence  to 

regiments  were  within  a  mile  of  them."  Pollock :  May  8, 1849.  MS,  Records,! 
—iCaptain  Lawrence  to  Mr.  Clerk:        t  Mr.  Gleig  says  that  the    band 

May  9,  1849.    MS.  Records.']  of  the  13th  went  out  to  play  them 

**  I   waited  on   Koonwur  Pertab  in ;    and   that   the   relieving   force 

Singh  yesterday.     I  spoke  strongly  marched  the  two  or  three  last  miles 

on  the  outrage  of  the  morning,  and  to  the  tune,  **  Oh,  but  yeVebeen  lang 

on  the  necessity  of  a  severe  example  o'  coming.** 


SOBTIE  OF  THE  6ABBIS0N.  341 

Pollock  had  to  speak  of  his  victories,  Sale,  too,  had  his 
to  narrate. 

Pollock,  before  he  entered  the  pass,  had  received  in- 
telligence of  the  gallant  sortie  made  by  the  garrison 
on  the  1st  of  April,  when  they  swept  away  from  the 
covering  parties  of  the  enemy  a  flock  of  500  sheep  and 
goats,  which  had  secured  them  a  further  ten  days*  supply 
of  meat*  Writing  of  this  to  Greneral  Pollock,  Mac- 
gregor  had  said :  "  Our  troops  of  all  arms  are  in  the 
highest  pluck,  and  they  seem  never  so  happy  as  when 
fighting  with  the  enemy.  I  verily  believe  we  could 
capture  Mahomed  Akbar's  camp,  even  with  our  pre* 
sent  means,  were  it  our  game  to  incur  the  risk  of  an 
attempt  of  the  kind,"f  This  was  lightly  spoken;  a  mere 
outburst  of  the  abundant  animal  spirits  of  the  writer; 
but  Pollock  was  scarcely  on  the  other  side  of  Ali-Mus- 
jid,  when  he  received  tidings  which  made  it  clear  to 
him  that  now  the  light  word  had  become  a  grave  fact, 
and  the  capture  of  Mahomed  Akbar's  camp  had  been 
actually  accomplished. 

And  now  that  they  had  reached  Jellalabad,  every 
one  in  Pollock's  camp  was  eager  for  details  of  this 
great  victory.  It  was,  indeed,  a  dashing  exploit.  On 
the  5th  of  April,  Macgregor's  spies  brought  in  tidings 
from  Akbar  Khan's  camp  that  Pollock  had  been  beaten 
back,  with  great  slaughter,  in  the  Khybur  Pass.  On 
the  morning  of  the  6th,  the  Sirdar's  guns  broke  out  into 

*  Mr.  Gleig  says :  *<  On  the  2nd,  comrades  of  the  Idth.     No  wonder 

Sir  Robert  Sale  proceeded  to  distri-  that  between  these  two  corps  there 

bute  the  captured  sheep  among  the  should  ha?e  sprung  up  a  romantk; 

corps  and  departments  composing  his  friendship,  which,  though  the  aoci- 

garrison.  The  d5th  declined  to  accept  dents  of  service  have  parted  them, 

the  boon.    They  sent  a  deputation  to  probably  for  ever,  neither  is  likel;jr  to 

the  General,  which   respectfully  ac-  forget,  at  all  events  as  a  tradition, 

quainted  him  that  animal  food  was  while  they  keep  their  places  respec* 

less  necessary  for  them  than  for  Euro*  tively  in  the  armies  of  tne  Queen  and 

peans,  and  besought  him  to  ^ive  their  of  the  East  India  Company.*' 
portion  of  the  booty  to  theur  gallant       f  M&  Correspondence. 


342  THE  VOBCING  OF  THE  EHTBUB. 

a  royal  salute,  in  honour  of  the  supposed  victory. 
Other  reports  then  came  welling  in  to  Jellalabad.  It 
was  said  that  there  was  another  revolution  at  Caubul, 
and  that  the  Sirdar  was  about  to  break  up  his  camp 
and  hasten  to  the  capital.  In  either  case,  it  seemed 
that  the  time  had  come  to  strike  a  blow  at  Akbar 
Khan's  army;  so  a  council  of  war  was  held,  and  the 
question  gravely  debated.  It  is  said  that  councils  of 
war  "  never  fight.'*  But  the  council  which  now  assem- 
bled to  determine  whether  the  Sirdar's  camp  should  be 
attacked  on  the  foUowing  morning,  decided  the  ques- 
tion  in  the  affirmative.  They  looked  at  it  in  all  its  bear- 
ings, and  then  determined  that  at  daybreak  they  would 
go  out  and  fight,  "  in  the  hope  of  relieving  the  place 
irom  blockade,  and  facilitating  Pollock's  advance  to 
their  succour." 

Sale  issued  directions  for  the  formation  of*  three  co- 
lumns of  infantry,  the  centre  consisting  of  her  Majesty's 
18th  Light  Infantry,  mustering  500  bayonets,  under 
Colonel  Dennie ;  the  left  one,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Monteith,  C.B. ;  and  the  right,  composed  of  one  company 
of  the  13th  Light  Infantry  and  one  of  the  85th  Native 
Infwitry,  and  the  detachment  of  Sappers,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Orr  (the  severity  of  Captain  Broadfoot's  wound 
still  rendering  him  non-effective),  the  whole  amounting 
to  860  men,  commanded  by  Captain  Havelock,  of  her  Ma- 
jesty's 13  th  Light  Infantry.  These  were  to  be  supported 
by  the  fire  of  the  guns  of  No.  6,  Light  Field  Battery, 
under  Captain  Abbott,  to  which  Captain  Backhouse,  of 
Shah  Soojah's  Artillery,  was  attached,  and  by  the  whole 
of  my  small  cavalry  force  under  Captain  Oldfield  and 
Lieutenant  Mayne.*  Such  were  the  components  of  the 
little  force  that  was  to  attack  the  camp  of  the  Sirdar. 

At  daybreak  they  moved  out  of  the  fort.    Akbar 

*  General  Sale's  PubUc  Degpatch. 


DEATH  OF  COLONEL  DENNIS.  348 

Khan  was  ready  to  receive  them.  He  had  drawn  out 
his  troops  before  the  camp,  with  his  right  resting  on  a 
fort,  and  his  left  on  the  Caubnl  river,  fife  had  not  less 
than  6000  men.  Havelock  commenced  the  fight  by  an 
attack  on  the  enemy's  left;  whilst  Dennie,  with  the 
centre  column,  moved  against  a  fort  which  was  vigo- 
rously defended  by  the  enemy.  Gallantly,  at  the  head 
of  his  men,  advanced  Dennie  to  the  attack — a  brave 
and  chivalrous  soldier  ever  in  the  advance — ^but  an  Af- 
ghan marksman  covered  him  with  his  piece,  and  the 
ball  passed  through  Dennie's  body.*  A  better  soldier 
never  fell  on  the  field  of  battle.f  The  victory  was 
dearly  purchased  by  the  death  of  such  a  man.  And 
yet  it  was  a  brilliant  one.  Sale  gave  his  orders  for  a 
general  attack  on  the  Sirdar's  camp;  and  his  orders 
were  carried  into  efiect  with  an  impetuosity  and  success 
worthy  of  the  defenders  of  Jellalabad.  In  the  forcible 
language  of  Sale's  despatch,  on  which  I  cannot  improva 


*  Mr.  Gleig  gives  the  followioff  battle  in  his  ears,  hoping,  bnt  not 

account   of  Dennie*8  end :    **  With  living  to  be  assured,  that  it  woolflend 

undaunted  resolution  the  Idtb  rushed  triumphantly." 
at  the  fort,  Colonel   Dennie  nobly        f  I  rejoice  In  the  opportunity  Ihiis 

leading ;   and  finding    the   aperture  afforded  me  of  laying  on  Dennie's 

sufficiently  large  to  admit  of  it,  they  grave  my  humble  tribute  of  praise; 

rushed  through  the  outer  wall — only  the    more    so,  that,  when  living,  I 

to    find   themselves    exposed    to   a  incurred  his  anger  by  the  freedom  of 

murderous  fire  from  the  untouched  my  remarks  on  some  moot  points 

defences  of  the  inner  keep.      Here  connected  with  his  military  career, 

Dennie  receivedjust  as  he  approached  Dennie*s  services  were  not  duly  re- 

the  breach,  his  mortal  wound.   A  ball  cognised  or  adequately  rewarded.  Ke 

entered  the  side,  passing  throueh  the  was  a  man  of  strong  feeding,  and  hit 

sword-belt ;  and  he  bent  forward  upon  expressed  himself  strop  j;ly ;  and  some 

his  horse.     Lieutenant  and  Adjutant  friends,  not  wisely  regard  Ail  of  Us 

(now  Captain)  Wood  instantly  rode  memory,  published,  tinder  his  name, 

up  to  him,  and  expressed  a  hope  that  some  hasty  letters,  more  than  one  ti 

the  hurt  was  not  serious.     But  it  was  the  dashes  or  asterisks  in  which  point 

more  than  serious ;  it  was  fatal.     A  to  the  writer  of  these  volumes.    I  do 

couple    of    orderlies,    by    Captain  not  now  mind  saying  that  I  think  it 

Wood's  direction,  turned  his  horse's  very  probable  that  I  was  wrong.   But 

head   homewards,  and  leading  it  by  Dennie  was  equally  wrong  when  )ie 

the  bridle,  endeavoured  to  guide  him  attributed  what  I  wrote  to  feelhugp  of 

to  the  town.     But  he  never  reached  personal  animosity, 
it  alive.     He  died  with  the  sound  of 


344         THB  FOBCING  OF  THE  KHTBUB. 

"  The  artillery  advanced  at  the  gallop,  and  directed  a 
heavy  fire  upon  the  A%han  centre,  whilst  two  of  the 
columns  of  infantry  penetrated  the  line  near  the  same 
point,  and  the  third  forced  back  its  left  from  its  support 
on  the  river,  into  the  stream  of  which  some  of  his  horse 
and  foot  were  driven.     The  A%hans  made  repeated 
attempts  to  check  our  advance  by  a  smart  fire  of  mus- 
ketryj    by  throwing  forward  heavy  bodies  of   horse, 
which  twice  threatened  the  detachments  of  foot  under 
Captain  Havelock,  and  by  opening  upon  us  three  guns 
from  a  battery  screened  by  a  garden  wall,  and  said  to 
have  been  served  under  the  personal  superintendence  of 
the  Sirdar.    But  in  a  short  time  they  were  dislodged 
from  every  point  of  their  position,  their  cannon  taken, 
and  their  camp  involved  in  a  general  conflagration.    The 
battle  was  over — and  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  in  the 
direction  of  Lughman  by   about   7    a.m.      We    have 
made  ourselves  masters  of  two  cavalry  standards,  recap- 
tured four  guns  lost  by  the  Caubul  and  Gundamuck 
forces,  the  restoration  of  which,  to  our  government,  is 
matter  of  much  honest  exultation  among  our  troops, 
seized  and  destroyed  a  great  quantity  of  material  and 
ordnance  stores,  and  burnt  the  whole  of  the  enemy's 
tents.     In  short,  the  defeat  of  Mahomed  Akbar  in  open 
field,  by  the  troops  whom  he  had  boasted  of  blockading, 
has  been  complete,  and  signal."    The  enemy's  loss  was 
severe.     "  The  field  of  battle  was  strewed  with   the 
bodies  of  men  and  horses,  and  the  richness  of  the  trap- 
pings of  some  of  the  latter  seemed  to  attest  that  persons 
of  distinction  had  been  among  the  casualties."    The  loss 
on  our  side  was  small.     Eight  privates  of  the  13th 
Native  Infantry,  and  two  of  the  35th  Native  Infantry, 
were  killed.    Three  officers  and  about  fifty  men  were 
wounded. 


THE  ^^  ILLUSTRIOUS  GABRISON.''  845 

Great  was  the  joy  which  the  intelligence  of  the 
victories  of  Pollock  and  Sale  diflfused  throughout  all 
India;  and  in  no  one  breast  did  so  much  of  gladness 
bubble  up  as  in  that  of  Lord  Ellenborough.  He  wrote, 
that  although  it  was  his  misfortune  not  to  be  a  soldier 
by  profession,  he  knew  how  to  appreciate  soldierly  qua- 
hties  and  soldierly  acts.  It  was  then  that,  being  at 
Benares  at  the  time,  he  issued  that  well-known  notifica- 
tion which  conferred  on  Sale's  brigade  the  honourable 
title  by  which  it  has  since  been  so  well-known — the 
title  of  the  "  Illustrious  Garrison :" 

Secret  Department,  Benares,  2l8t  April. 

The  Governor-General  feels  assured  that  every  subject  of  the 
British  Government  will  peruse'  with  the  deepest  interest  and 
satisfaction  the  report  he  now  communicates  of  the  entire  defeat 
of  the  Afghan  troops,  under  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  by  the 
garrison  of  Jellalabad. 

That  illustrious  garrison,  which,  by  its  constancy  in  enduring 
privation,  and  by  its  valour  in  action,  has  already  obtained  for 
itself  the  sympathy  and  respect  of  every  true  soldier,  has  now, 
gallying  forth  from  its  walls,  under  the  command  of  its  gallant 
leader,  Major-General  Sir  Robert  Sale,  thoroughly  beaten  in 
open  field  an  enemy  of  more  than  three  times  its  numbers,  taken 
the  standards  of  their  boasted  cavaby,  destroyed  their  camp,  and 
recaptured  four  guns,  which,  under  circumstances  which  can 
never  again  occur,  had  during  the  last  winter  fallen  into  their 
hands. 

The  Governor-General  cordially  congratulates  the  army  upon 
the  return  of  victory  to  its  ranks.  He  is  convinced  that  there,  as 
in  all  former  times,  it  will  be  found,  while,  as  at  Jellalabad,  the 
European  and  Native  troops  mutually  supporting  each  other,  and 
evincing  equal  discipline  and  valour,  are  led  into  action  by  officers 
in  whom  they  justly  confide. 

The  Governor-General  directs  that  the  substance  of  this  noti- 
fication, and  of  Major-General  Sir  Robert  Sale's  report,  be  care- 
fully made  known  to  all  troops,  and  that  a  salute  of  twenty-one 
guns  be  fired  at  every  principal  station  of  the  army. 


846  THB  FORCING  OF  THS  EHTBlTB. 

The  "  Illustrious  Garrison^  had  now  become  history. 
Sale  ceased  to  command  at  Jellalabad ;  and  soon  letters 
jBx>m  Lord  Ellenborough  set  aside  the  political  functions 
of  Macgregor.  In  Pollock  and  Nott,  on  either  side  of 
Afghanistan,  had  been  vested  supreme  political  autho- 
rity ;  and  Macgregor  soon  took  his  place  beside  the 
Greneral,  simply  as  his  aide-de-camp.  By  Pollock's  side, 
too,  holding  the  oflGice  of  his  military  secretary,  was 
Shakespear,  who  had  done  such  good  service  in  libe- 
rt^ting  the  Russian  slaves  at  Khiva;  who  had  won  his 
spurs  by  this  Central- Asian  exploit,  and  returned  to 
India  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear.  Pollock  knew  the 
worth  of  these  men,  and  turned  their  experience  to 
account.  But  the  reign  of  the  **  Politicals"  was  at  an 
end.  Lord  Ellenborough  had  determined  to  dethrone 
them. 

The  Grovemor-General  knew  his  men.  He  did  well 
in  trusting  Pollock  and  Nott.  But  after  the  melancholy 
illustration  of  the  trustworthin^s  of  military  oflGicers  of 
high  rank  displayed  in  the  conduct  of  aflFairs  at  Caubul, 
the  time  hardly  seemed  a  happy  one  for  opening  out  the 
question  of  political  and  military  responsibilities,  and 
their  relative  effects  upon  the  interests  of  the  state.  It 
is  right,  however,  now  that  it  has  been  stated  how  the 
whole  system,  which  exercised  so  great  an  influence  over 
events  in  A%hanistan,  was  abolished  by  the  Governor- 
General,  that  something  should  be  said  upon  the  ge- 
neral character  of  the  diplomatic  functionaries  employed 
on  the  great  field  of  Central  Asia. 

There  is  no  single  controversial  topic  which  has 
eliminated  so  many  sparks  of  bad  feeling — so  much  per- 
sonality, so  much  bitter  invective,  and  I  fear  it  must  be 
added,  so  much  reckless  mendacity,  as  this  question  of 
political  agency.  At  one  time  a  "Political"  was,  by 
many  writers,  considered  fair  game.      To   hunt  him 


THE  POLITICAL  AGENTS.  847 

down  with  all  conceivable  calumny  and  vituperation, 
was  regarded  as  a  laudable  achievement.  Every  one 
had  a  stone  to  throw  at  him — every  one  howled  at  him 
with  execration,  or  shouted  at  him  in  derision.  Tem- 
perate men  on  this  topic,  became  intemperate ;  charitable 
men,  uncharitable ;  sagacity  ceased  to  be  sagacious ;  dis- 
crimination ceased  to  discriminate.  All  alike  lifted  up 
their  voices  to  swell  the  chorus  of  popular  indignation. 

The  Caubul  outburst,  with  its  attendant  horrors,  filled 
this  cup  of  bitter  feeling  to  the  brim.  It  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  embody,  in  a  page  of  mere  description,  the  popu- 
lar notion  of  an  Afghan  "  Political."  He  was  believed 
to^be  a  very  conceited,  a  very  arrogant,  a  very  ignorant, 
and  a  very  unfeeling  personage;  a  pretender,  who,  on 
the  strength  of  a  little  smattering  of  Persian  and  some 
iuterest,  perhaps  petticoat  interest,  in  high  places,  had 
obtained  an  appointment,  the  duties  of  which  he  was 
not  capable  of  performing,  and  the  trust  involved  in 
which  he  was  well-nigh  certain  to  abuse.  He  was 
looked  upon  as  a  creature  whose  blunders  were  as 
mischievous  as  his  pretensions  were  ridiculous;  one, 
whose  ideas  of  diplomacy  were  limited  to  the  culti- 
vation of  a  moustache  and  the  faculty  of  sitting  cross- 
legged  on  the  ground ;  who  talked  largely  about  Durbar, 
rode  out  with  a  number  of  Sowars  at  his  heels;  and 
was  always  on  the  point  of  putting  salt  upon  the  tail  of 
some  fugitive  chief,  and  never  achieving  it  after  all.  But 
this  was  only  the  more  favorable  aspect  of  the  picture. 
There  was  another  and  a  darker  side.  He  was  some- 
times represented  as  a  roaring  lion,  going  about  seeking 
whom  he  should  devour;  unveiling  Afghan  ladies  and 
pulling  A%han  gentlemen  by  the  beard ;  inviting  chiefs 
to  a  conference  and  then  betrajing  them;  blowing 
Sirdars  fix)m  guns;  conniving  at  wholesale  massacre; 
bribing  brothers  to  betray  brothers,  fathers  their  sons ; 


348         THE  FOBCmO  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

keeping  fierce  dogs  to  hound  them  at  innocent  country- 
men ;  desecrating  mosques,  insulting  MooUahs,  trampling 
on  the  Koran — in  a  word,  committing  every  conceivable 
outrage  that  cruelty  and  lust  could  devise.  There  was 
no  amount  of  baseness,  indeed,  of  which  these  men  were 
not  supposed  to  be  capable ;  no  licentiousness  to  which 
they  were  not  addicted ;  no  crimes  which  they  did  not 
commit.  This  was  the  popular  notion  of  an  "  Afghan 
Political,"  It  was  constantly  illustrated  in  oral  conversa- 
tion and  in  the  local  literature  of  the  day.  Men  talked 
and  wrote  upon  the  subject  as  though  the  question — ^if 
ever  question  there  were — had  long  ago  been  settled  by 
conunon  consent ;  and  it  was  not  until  the  war  had  been 
brought  to  a  close,  that  a  doubt  was  raised  respecting 
the  validity  of  the  charges  so  generally  brought  against 
the  Ishmaels  of  diplomacy  in  the  East. 

Very  much  of  this  is  now  mere  exploded  slander. 
I  cannot  say  that  the  political  officers,  who  distinguished 
themselves  throughout  the  Afghanistan  campaign,  have 
lived  down  the  calumny  of  which  they  were  the  victims. 
Very  few  of  the  niunber  survive.  But  a  reaction,  in 
public  opinion,  has  commenced ;  and  there  is  discernible 
a  growing  disposition  to  do  justice,  at  least  to  the 
memories  of  the  dead.  Men  speak  and  write  more  tem- 
perately on  the  subject.  Exaggeration  no  longer  over- 
strides  all  our  utterances  on  this  topic ;  and,  in  some  cases, 
full  justice  has  been  done  to  the  noble  qualities  of  head 
and  heart  which  have  adorned,  perhaps  do  adorn  men 
amongst  us,  under  the  great  "  Political"  reproach. 

It  would  serve  no  good  purpose  to  run  fi'om  one 
extreme  into  the  other.  It  is  the  evil  of  sudden  reac- 
tions of  popular  feeling,  that  men  escape  fi'om  one  error 
only  to  be  precipitated  into  another  of  an  opposite 
class.  The  system  of  political  agency  is  not  one  of 
unmixed  good ;  nor  are  political  agents  exempt  from  the 


THE  POLITICAL  AGENTS.  349 

common  frailties  of  humanity.  Many  mistakes  were  im- 
questionably  committed ;  sometimes  a  stronger  word  might 
without  exaggeration  have  been  applied  to  the  things 
that  were  done  in  Afghanistan  by  our  diplomatic  agents. 
Diplomacy  is,  at  all  times,  a  dangerous  game.  It  has 
seldom,  if  ever,  been  played  in  any  part  of  the  world, 
without  some  loss  of  purity,  some  departure  from  in- 
tegrity. In  Europe,  the  diplomatist  treads  a  tortuous 
path.  Guile  is  met  with  guile.  Fraud  is  often  counter- 
acted by  fraud.  Minister  overreaches  minister.  One  state 
jockeys  another.  And,  in  the  affairs  of  nations,  arts  are 
resorted  to  which,  in  the  concerns  of  private  life,  would 
stamp  the  wily  plotter  with  infamy  not  to  be  escaped. 
But,  in  the  East,  in  the  midst  of  the  worst  contagion, 
tempted  on  every  side,  stimulated  by  the  fear  of  failure, 
irritated  by  the  duplicity  of  others,  far  greater  is  the 
difficulty  of  preserving  intact  the  diplomatic  integrity 
which  is  exposed  to  so  many  corrupting  influences.  I  am 
not  asserting  the  propriety  of  fighting  all  men  with  their 
own  weapons.  I  have  no  faith  whatever  in  the  worldly 
wisdom,  apart  from  all  considerations  of  right  and  wrong, 
of  playing  off*  wile  against  wile — meeting  treachery  with 
treachery — lie  with  lie.  Such  tactics  may  succeed  for  a 
season ;  but,  in  the  long  run,  truth  and  honesty  will  be 
found  the  most  effective  weapons.  All  I  desire  to  plead 
in  behalf  of  our  Oriental  diplomatists  is  the  extraordinary 
temptations  to  which  they  have  been  exposed.  Many 
of  them  were  necessarily  without  experience  in  the  diffi- 
cult game;  and,  therefore,  apprehensive  of  failure — 
little  confident  in  themselves,  when  called  upon  to  en- 
counter, perhaps  for  the  first  time,  the  deep  duplicity  of 
Eastern  intrigue.  Fearful  of  being  drawn  into  a  snare, 
and  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  responsibilities 
resting  upon  them,  they  have  sometimes,  in  their  eager* 


850  THE  FOBOING  OF  THE  KHTBUB. 

ness  to  bring  negotiations  to  a  successful  issue,  departed 
from  that  strict  line  of  integrity,  which  we  could  wish  our 
countrymen  ever  to  maintain.  This  much  at  least  must 
be  admitted — ^but  who  has  ever  gained  a  reputation  as  a 
skilfiil  diplomatist  without  some  deviation  from  the 
straight  path  of  open  and  truthfrd  manliness  of  con- 
duct? 

Among  the  bitterest  assailants  of  the  political  sys- 
tem was  Greneral  Nott.  In  the  summer  of  1841,  he 
wrote: 

When  we  arrived  here,  the  natives  had  an  idea  that  an  English- 
man's wordy  once  given,  was  sacred,  never  to  be  broken.  That 
beautiful  charm  is  gone,  and  every  pledge  and  every  guarantee 
trampled  under  foot.  The  day  of  retribution  and  deep  revenge  wiU 
come.  Come,  did  X  say? — it  is  in  some  measure  here — already 
the  sword  is  sharpened,  and  the  wild  Afghan  song  echoes  upon 
the  mountains  and  in  the  villages — the  forerunner  of  massacre  and 
blood.  I  like  these  people,  and  would  trust  myself  alone  in  their 
wildest  mountains.  When  I  was  in  Ghilzye,  they  soon  found  out 
who  protected  them  from  plunder  and  oppression,  and  who  did 
not.  My  tent  was  always  crowded  with  these  people,  begging  to 
do  something — asking  what  I  wanted — that  they  were  ready  to 
do  whatever  I  ordered  them;  yet  not  a  man  could  be  prevwled 
upon  to  go  near  the  Prince  or  the  political  agent;  and  when  a 
few  workpeople  were  required  for  a  public  purpose,  not  one  could 
be  had.  A  chief  came  to  my  tent  and  boldly  said:  "  After  the 
cruel  treatment  we  experienced  before  you  arrived  here,  how  can 
it  be  expected  that  the  people  will  assist  in  building  barracks? 
You  have  been  just  to  us;  say  what  you  want  for  your  own  comfort, 
and  we  will  fly  to  perform  it."  If  a  man  is  too  stupid  or  too  lazy 
to  drill  his  company,  he  often  turns  sycophant,  cringes  to  the  heads 
of  departments,  and  is  often  made  a  Political,  and  of  course  puts 
the  government  to  an  enormous  expense,  and  disgraces  the  cha- 
racter of  his  country;  this  has  been  the  scene  before  my  eyes 
many  times  since  I  left  Hindostan.  The  troops  I  sent  out  to-day 
will  put  the  government  to  a  great  expense,  and  the  poor  officers 
and  men  will  have  the  thermometer  at  one  hundred  and  eight 


THE  POLITICAL  AGENTS.  851 

degrees  in  their  tents^  and,  if  exposed  to  the  sun^  one  hundred  and 
twenty  and  one  hundred  and  thirty  degrees,  and  all  because  a 
fooUsh  Political  destroyed  a  small  village  containing  twenty-three 
inhabitants.  And  why,  think  you  ?  Because  he  thought — 
thought^  mind  you — he  thought  that  they  looked  insultingly  at 
him,  as  he  passed  with  his  two  hundred  cavalry  as  an  escort  I 
Had  I  been  on  the  spot,  he  would  have  had  eight  troopers  for  his 
protection;  he  would  have  then  been  civil  to  the  inhabitants,  or 
perhaps  not  crueL  Fancy  a  young  Political,  with  two  hundred 
troopers  at  his  heels — why,  I  am  in  the  habit  of  riding  eight  or 
ten  miles  into  the  country,  often  without  a  single  orderly,  or  even 
my  syce  [groom] ;  I  enter  their  gardens  and  their  villages,  and 
meet  with  nothing  but  civility.  Again,  I  say,  that  I  am  ashamed 
of  my  countrymen,  and  I  prefer  the  much-abused  Beluchi.  This 
very  morning,  on  the  march,  I  heard  two  Englishmen,  calling 
themselves  honourable  men  and  gentlemen,  declaring  that  they 
thought  every  native  of  the  country  should  have  his  throat  cut ! 
And  why?  Because  these  poor,  wretched  people  sometimes  shoot 
our  people  in  defence  of  their  wives^  children^  and  property."* 

That  there  was  some  mismanagement  in  Western  Af- 
ganistan  I  have  shown.  But  I  protest  against  the  bit- 
terness poured  out  upon  the  general  body  of  diplomatic 
employes  in  Afghanistan — the  taunting  insinuation  that 
being  incapable  of  making  good  soldiers  they  became 
parasites  and  "  Politicals."  "  If  a  man  is  too  stupid  or 
too  lazy  to  drill  his  company,"  wrote  General  Nott,  "  he 
often  turns  sycophant,  cringes  to  the  heads  of  depart- 
ments, and  is  made  a  '  Political,'  and  of  course  puts  the 
government  to  an  enormous  expense,  and  disgraces  the 
character  of  his  country."  Nothing  was  ever  more  un- 
like the  truth.  The  Afghan  "  Politicals"  were  among  the 
best  soldiers  in  the  country.  Many  of  them,  as  Todd, 
Rawlinson,  Nicolson,  &c.,  were  practised  drill-instructors 
— had  shown  an  especial  fitness  for  this  particular  duty 
in  disciplining  foreign  troops  or  raw  levies.     And  no 

*  Correspondence  of  General  Nott^  quoted  in  the  Quarterly  Review* 


352  THE  FOBCING  OF  THE  EHYBUIU 

one,  who  takes  account  of  the  most  honourable  inci- 
dents of  the  Afghan  War,  will  overlook  the  military 
services  rendered  by  Pottinger,  Macgregor,  H.  M.  Law- 
rence,  Mackeson,  Broadfoot,  Outram,  and  others,  who 
are  known  to  us  as  Political  Agents.  There  are  no  finer 
soldiers  in  the  Indian  Army  than  many  of  those  who 
distinguished  themselves  during  the  war  in  A%han- 
istan,  under  the  unpopular  designation  of  "  Politicals."* 

*  Author,  in  the  Calcutta  Review, 


THE  LAST  DAYS  OP  SHAH  SOOJAH.  353 


BOOK  VII. 

[1842.] 


CHAPTER  I. 

[January — April:  1842.] 

The  Last  Days  of  Shah  Soojah— State  of  Parties  at  Caubul—Condltion  of 
the  Hostages— the  Newab  Zemaun  Elhan— Letters  of  Shah  Soojah — 
His  Death — Question  of  his  Fidelity — ^His  Character  and  Conduct  con- 
sidered. 

It  is  time  that  I  should  pause  in  the  narration  of  the 
retributory  measures  of  the  British-Indian  Government, 
to  dwell,  for  a  little  space,  upon  the  events  at  Caubul 
which  succeeded  the  departure  of  Elphinstone's  army.  It 
had  been  rumoured  throughout  India — and  the  rumour 
had  created  no  little  astonishment  in  the  minds  of  those 
who  had  beUeved  that  the  Caubul  insurrection  was  a 
movement  against  the  Feringhees  and  their  Bang — that 
ever  since  the  departure  of  the  former  Shah  Soojah  had 
continued  to  occupy  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  had  been  re- 
cognised as  the  supreme  authority  by  the  very  men  who 
had  recently  been  in  arms  against  him.  And  the  rumour 
was  a  perfect  echo  of  the  truth.  Ever  since  the  depar- 
ture of  the  British  army  Shah  Soojah  had  reigned  at 
Caubul. 

He  had  reigned  at  Caubul,  but  he  had  not  ruled.  His 
power  was  merely  nominal.     The  chiefs  wanted  a  pup- 

voL.  n.  2  a 


354  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

pet;  and  in  the  unhappy  Shah  they  found  the  only  one 
who  was  ever  Ukely  to  stand  between  them  and  the 
vengeance  of  the  British  nation.  Day  after  day  they 
made  their  salaam  to  him  in  the  Balla  Hissar;  but  so 
imperfect  even  was  their  outward  recognition  of  his  regal 
dignity,  that  money  was  still  coined  in  the  name  of  the 
Newab  Zemaun  Khan.  The  Newab,  who  had  been 
raised  to  the  sovereignty  by  the  voice  of  the  chiefs  soon 
after  the  first  outbreak  of  the  insurrection,  had  cheerfully 
resigned  the  honour  that  had  been  thrust  upon  him,  and 
accepted  the  office  of  Wuzeer.  Ameen-oollah  Khan  was 
appointed  Naib,  or  deputy.  For  a  little  time  there  was 
some  outward  show  of  harmony ;  but  there  was  no  real 
union  between  the  King  and  the  chiefs.  The  Barukzyes 
spoke  scornftdly  of  the  King ;  and  the  King  could  not  re- 
frain from  expressing  his  mistrust  of  the  whole  tribe  of 
Barukzyes.  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  openly  swearing  alle- 
giance to  both,  seems  to  have  held  the  balance  between 
the  two  opposing  factions,  and  was  in  reality  the  most 
influential  man  in  the  state.  He  had  amassed,  by  fraud 
and  violence,  lai^e  sums  of  money,  which  the  other  chiefe, 
straitened  as  they  were  by  an  empty  treasury,  and  unable 
to  carry  out  any  great  national  measure,  would  fain  have 
made  him  disgorge.  From  the  Shah  himself  they  con- 
trived to  extort  some  three  or  four  lakhs  of  rupees ;  but 
when  Akbar  Khan  wrote  pressing  letters  to  Caubul  for 
guns  and  ammunition,  that  he  might  lay  siege  to  Jellala- 
bad,  no  one  would  move  without  pay,  and  money  was 
not  forthcoming  for  the  purpose. 

All  parties  were  jealous  of  each  other ;  and  especially 
jealous  of  the  rising  power  of  Akbar  Khan.  The  young 
Barukzye  was  in  Lughman ;  and  the  elder  chiefs  at  Cau- 
bul, even  if  they  had  possessed  the  money  to  enable 
them  to  answer  these  emergent  indents  upon  their 
military  resources,  would  have  been  httle  inclined  to 


STATE  OF  PARTIES  IN  CAUBUL.  355 

send  him  the  reinforcements  and  munitions  for  which 
he  was  continually  writing.  They  talked  about  raising 
an  army  of  their  own,  and  opposing  the  retributory 
march  of  the  British  through  the  Khybur  Pass ;  but  the 
want  of  money  presented  an  insuperable  obstacle  to 
any  miUtary  movement  on  a  scale  that  would  aflford  a 
prospect  of  success.  The  Shah  himself  talked  openly  in 
Durbar  about  standing  forward  as  defender  of  the  faith, 
and  declaring  a  religious  war  against  the  Kaffirs ;  but  he 
privately  assured  Conolly  that  he  was  heart  and  soul 
with  the  British,  and  he  wrote  long  letters  to  the 
Governor-General,  Clerk,  Macgregor,  and  others,  de- 
claring his  inviolable  fidelity,  and  eagerly  clamouring 
for  money.* 

♦  The   letters   of  John    Conolly  ....  This  momW  the  Newab,  at- 

written  at  this  time  afford  a  suf-  tended  by  Ameen-odlah  and  all  the 

ficiently  clear  insight  into  the  state  chiefs,  went  to  pay  their  respects  to 

of  parties  at  Caubul.    On  the  17th  the  King  in  the  Balla  Hissar.    The 

of  January  he  wrote  to  Macj^egor :  King  has  paid  two  lakhs  of  rupees 

*^  The  accounts  of  our  most  ill-fated  already,  and  has  promised  one  more 

force  become  more  distressing  every  in  ten  days.    The  Newab  is  Minister 

day.   Hundreds  of  Sepoys,  wounded,  — Ameen-oollah,Naib;  and  oaths  and 

frostbitten,  starving,  and  naked,  come  protestations  have  been  taken  on  the 

into  the  city.  The  Oosbegs  buy  many,  Koran  ^at  they  are  to  be  friends  to 

and  some  find  their  way  to  us,  and  each  other,  and  supporters  of  the  true 

are  relieved  in  the  hospital,  which  faith.    The  Newao  abuses  the  King 

is  now  crowded  to  excess ;  and  the  most  loudly  and  openly.    The  King 

poor  wretches  are  dying  off  fast.  That  does  the  same  with  the  whole  family 

villain,  Ameen-oollah,    is   evidently  of  the    Bamkzyes.      Ameeti-oollali 

anxious  that  the  sick  should  die,  for  Khan  has  sworn  eternal  faith  to  the 

he  will  not  assist  them  in  any  way,  cause  of  his  Majesty — bares  his  head 

nor  attend  in  the  least  to  our  repeated  and  swears   most   solemn  oaths  in 

requests  for  assistance.    The  Newab  the  Musjlds  to  uphold  the  Newab's 

is  so  completely  in  the  hands  of  the  dignity  against  the  King  and  all  the 

Naib  that  he  cannot  afford  us  any  royal  family.     His  Majesty  has  sent 

relief.  The  Afghans  are  very  sanguine  me  several  messages,  saying  that  he 

in  the  expectation  of  assistance  and  submits  to  the  extortion  of  uie  three 

co-operation  of  the  Sikhs,  and  talk  in  lakhs  because  he  is  not  strong  enough 

court  of  Sultan    Mahomed  having  to  oppose  the    demand;    but  that, 

received  instructions  from  the  Durbar  Inshaltah!  when  he  has  received  the 

to  do  our  force  as  much  injury  as  salaam  of  the  chiefs,  he  will  gjdn 

possible,  and  that  Shere  Singh  has  an  power  duly,  and  be  able,  should  our 

understanding  with  them  to  prevent  troops  come  on,  to  plajr  his  own  game 

our  force  re-entering  the  country,  with  advantage  to  himself  and  our- 

You  must  be  aware  whether  there  selves.    I  believe  that  he  is  heart  and 

is  any  foundation  for  these  reports,  soul  in  our  interest;  and  it  appears 

2  a2 


356  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

in  the  mean  while  the  English  hostages  remained 
Under  the  protection  of  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan. 
Nothing  could  exceed  the  kindness  of  the  good  old  man. 
Faithful  among  the  faithless,  he  was  resolute  to  defend 
the  Christian  strangers  at  all  risks ;  and  never,  when  the 
popular  clamour  ran  highest,  and  other  men  of  note  were 
thirsting  for  the  blood  of  the  captives,  did  he  waver  for 
an  instant  in  his  determination  to  shield  the  helpless 
Feringhees  from  the  malice  of  his  remorseless  country- 
men. He  was  a  Barukzye  chief — a  near  relative  of 
Dost  Mahomed  Khan;  and  there  was  not  among  the 
Sirdars  of  all  the  tribes  one  in  whom  the  spirit  of 
nationality  glowed  more  strongly  and  more  purely. 
But  whilst  the  independence  of  his  country  was  as  dear 
to  him  as  to  any  of  his  brethren,  he  did  not  burn  with 
that  fierce  hatred  against  the  English  which  broke  out 
in  other  places,  nor  did  he  ever,  in  the  advancement  of 
the  most  cherished  objects  of  his  heart,  stain  his 
patriotism  with  those  foul  crimes  from  which  elsewhere 
there  was  little  shrinking.  Regarding  with  abhorrence 
the  conduct  of  those  who  had  betrayed  our  unhappy 

contrary  to  all   reason  to  suppose  Tengeance  so  much,  that  they  will 

otherwise.      The    measures    which  strain  every  nerve  to  oppose  us,  and 

obliged    the    Newab    to    resign  his  maybe  his  Majesty  will  feel  that  his 

throne  are,  I  believe — 1st.  The  dread  safest  plan  is  to  join  his  coimtrymen 

of  our  vengeance,  which  the  people  against  us.     He  said  at  the  Durbar 

think  the  King  can  in  some  way  avert,  this  morning  that  he  was  glad  that 

if  a  force  is  sent  strong  enough  to  affairs  had  taken  such  a  turn,  and 

shut  out  all  hope  of  opposition.    2nd.  that  he  was  now  able  to  call  himself 

The  dread  of  Akbar  s  rising  power,  defender  of  the  faith.      This  much 

3rd.  The  suspicions  of  the  fidelity  of  could  not  have  been  avoided  under 

their  own   party,  who    had    shown  the  circumstances We  are 

symptoms  of  disaffection,  and  some  amused  all  day  long  by  abuse  and 

of  whom  had  openly  espoused  the  scurrilous  verses  about  the  Kaffirs, 

cause  of  his  Majesty.     Such  a  condi-  Books  are  being  sold  by  the  weight, 

tion  cannot,  I  should  think,  last  long  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  get  hold 

between  such  Yorks  and  Lancasters.  of  the    chddren — most    exorbitant 

There  is  one  thing  very  certain,  that  prices  are  demanded.     The  Newab 

unless  a  very  large  force  is  sent  up,  promises,  but  has  not  the  power  to 

which  will  preclude  all  hope  of  oppo-  fulfil.     Salutes  are  being  fired,  and 

sition,  every  man  in  the  country  will  there  is  a  general  rejoicing  in  honour 

rise  against  us ;  and  the  people  in  the  of   the   coalition    between   the   two 

vicinity  of  Caubul  have  so  compro-  Kings.     Artillerymen  are  being  sent 

mised  themselves,   and    dread    our  to  Akbar."— [3/6'.  Correspondence.'] 


CONDUCT  OF  THE  NEWAB.  357 

people,  he  himself  did  all  that,  single-handed,  he  could 
do,  to  atone  for  the  cruelty  of  his  countrymen ;  and  no 
father  could  have  treated  his  children  more  kindly  than 
the  good  Newab  cherished  and  protected  the  English 
hostages  who  found  a  sanctuary  in  his  house  * 

But  it  was  necessary,  whilst  the  excitement  ran  so 
high  at  Caubul,  and  there  was  a  prospect  of  violent 
contention  among  the  chiefs,  to  do  something  more  than 
this.  Ameen-oollah  Khan  never  slackened  in  his  exer- 
tions to  obtain  possession  of  the  persons  of  the  hostages. 
Having  tried   every  kind  of  stratagem,  and  failed  to 

•  On  the  24th  of  January,  John  pore  treasury,  and  was  produced  on 
Conolly  wrote:  "The  King  holds  the  application  of  iodyne  to  the  paper. 
Durbar  regularly,  at  which  all  the  On  the  same  day  Lieutenant  Conolly 
chiefs  attend.  He  pretends  to  have  wrote  to  Mr.  Clerk :  "  The  King  is 
shaken  off  all  connexion  with  our  obliged  to  talk  of  sending  troops  to 
government,  but  secretly  sends  me  oppose  us  at  the  Khybur;  but  he  de- 
messages,  professing  all  sincerity  and  clares  secretly  to  me  his  sincerity  for 
attachment.  There  is  much  talk  of  the  British  Grovemment.  The  chiefs 
a  large  force  bein^  sent  to  oppose  the  talk  of  collecting  an  army,  but  the 

army  which  is  said  to  be  advancing  sinews  of  war  are  wanting 

from  Hindostan ;  but  money  is  want-  Thanks  to  the  Newab,  we  are  safe ; 
ing;  the  religious  feeling  against  us  but  it  has  more  than  once  been  pro- 
continues  very  strong,  and  the  chiefs  posed  that  we  should  be  killed.  .  .  . 
have  compromised  themselves  so  Since  our  troops  left  this,  the  King 
much,  that  they  will  rise  to  a  man,  has  been  recognised  by  the  Newab 
unless  an  overpowering  force  is  sent,  and  the  rebel  chiefs  on  the  payment 
The  Newab^s  kindness  is  beyond  de-  of  three  lakhs  of  rupees  to  the  Newab 
scription,  and  he  professes,  and  I  be-  and  Ameen-oollah  Khan.  The  for- 
lieve  sincerely  feels,  great  anxiety  to  mer  is  Vizier ;  the  latter  deputy, 
secure  the  friendship  of  our  govern-  The  Newab  is  most  anxious  to  serve 
ment.  He  is  most  deeply  distressed  our  government.  He  has  not  been 
at  the  treacherous  conduct  of  the  in  any  way  concerned  in  the  trea- 
chiefs.  We  are  quite  ignorant  of  cherous  conduct  to  our  troops.  His 
the  intentions  of  government.  Mo-  kindness  and  attention  to  us  is  great, 
hamed  Akbar  is  continually  writing  and  he  is  sincerely  anxious  to  estar 
for  guns  and  ammunition;  but  not  blish  a  friendship  with  the  British 
a  man  can  be  induced  to  march  Grovemment — bemg  afraid  of  the 
without  pay,  and  every  one  is  jea-  King  and  Mohamed  Akbar,  and  dis- 
lous  of  Akbar  Khan's  rising  power,  gusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  chiefs. 
The  Barukzye  faction  of  his  party  who  deceived  him  with  oaths  and 
view  each  other  with  great  suspicion,  protestations.  Great  excitement  pre- 
Ameen-ooUah  is  the  go-between,  vails  in  the  town ;  the  feeling  against 
Akbar  Khan  is  procuring  all  the  us  continues  very  strong,  and  every 
money  he  can  by  extortion  from  man  will  oppose  our  re-entering  the 
Sourkars  and  others." — [MS.  Corre-  country,  unless  a  force  is  sent  which 
spondence."]  This  was  interlined  in-  will  preclude  all  hope  of  successful 
visibly  on  the  advice  of  a  bill  drawn  opposition." — [MS,  Correspondence,'] 
by  Major  Pottinger  on  the  Feroze- 


358  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

gecure  them  by  firaud,  he  would  have  resorted  to  open 
violence.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  oppose  force 
to  force;  so  the  Newab  raised  an  army  of  his  own. 
His  pecuniary  resources  were  limited;  but  he  did  not 
hesitate  to  spend  his  little  stores  freely  in  entertaining 
followers.  Mainly  for  the  protection  of  the  English 
gentlemen  he  raised  a  body  of  1000  footmen,  whom  he 
armed  with  English  bayonets;  another  body  of  1000 
horse,  and  some  Jezailchees — in  all,  about  3000  men. 
The  English  guns,  too,  were  in  his  possession,  and  he 
refiised  to  yield  them  up  to  the  Shah.* 

*  On  the  Iflth  of  February  Conollj  some  of  the  Gaubul  chiefs.  Yon  will 
wrote  to  Maogregor :  '^  Since  mj  perceive  among  his  partisan!  the 
former  notes,  the  latest  of  which  was  chief  conspirators  in  tne  late  rebel- 
dated  the  lOtb,  affaire  have  assumed  lion,  Ameen-oollah,  Abdool  Salam, 
a  Tcry  different  a^>ect.  Naib  Ameen*  and  Sekundur,— -men  who  have  no* 
oollah,  having  ffiven  up  the  guns  en*  thing  to  hope  for  at  our  hands.  I 
trusted  to  his  cnai]|e,  nas  i^aken  the  presume  the  first  demand  made  by 
confidence  of  the  Barukzye  party  in  our  government  will  be  the  persons 
his  (the  Naib^s)  sincerity,  and  ex-  of  these  chiefs,  who  planned  and  were 
posed  the  Kine*s  ultimate  designs  of  most  conspicuous  in  the  late  revolu- 
making  himsdf  strong  and  inde-  tion ;  and  if  the  information  I  have 
pendent  of,  if  not  inimical  to,  the  alluded  to  be  correct,  his  Majesty 
Newab*s  clique.  Yesterday  the  Naib  may  object  to  give  up  the  chiefik 
called  on  the  Newab,  on  the  part  of  But  these  are  matters  for  future  con- 
his  Majesty,  to  send  his  guns  to  the  sideration ;  and  should  his  Majesty 
Balla  Hissar.  His  demand  was  di-  be  disinclined  to  use  his  utmost  en- 
reetly  refused ;  and  the  Newab  de-  deavours  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
dared  his  determination  of  not  i^ain  wishes  of  government,  such  unwil- 
attending  the  Durbar  until  his  Ma-  lingness  must,  of  course,  be  regarded 

i'esty  gave  pi'ooft  of  confidence  and  as  hostility.    It  is  generally  bdieved 

lonesty.     This  morning  FuzU^^i-Al-  and  asserted  throughout  the  town 

mud,  son  of  Kasee  Hussun,  brought  that  his  M^esty  instigated  the  late 

an  order  fl'om  his  Majesty  that  I  rebellion.    I  have  never  been  able  to 

should  wait  upon  him ;  but  I  declined  prove  the  accusation,  though  I  can- 

the  honour  in  this  instance,  as  I  had  not  but  think  that  his  Majesty  waa, 

done  before,  feeling  that  no  good  directly  or  indirectly,  the  cause  of  the 

could  come  from  an  interview,  ig^  revolution.    When  you  know  the  in- 

norant  as  I  am  of  the  intentions  of  tentions  of  government,  you  will  be 

government  and  of  your  wishes,  and  able  to  see  your  way  more  clearly, 

aving  been,  moreover,  frequently  I  would,  however,  suggest  that  his 

warned  against  moving  out  of  our  Majesty  be    made    to    understand, 

present  residence.     I  gathered  from  either  from  yourself  or  through  me, 

the  Easee^s  son  that  his  Majesty  was  that  he  must  either  meet  our  wishes 

forming  a  party  in  opposition  to  the  or  go  his  own  road.    Things  are  so 

Barukzye  faction,  the  principal  cha-  very  unsettled  here  just  now  ihat 

racters  being  Ameen-ooUah,  the  Po-  the  most  learned  cannot  foretel  the 

pulaye,  many  of  the  Kuzailbash,  and  events  of  the  morrow.     All  eyes  are 


STATE  OF  PARTIES.                                    359 

The  King  regarded  his  proceedings  with  mistrust. 
There  was  no  sort  of  cordiality  between  them.     The 

turned  upon  you.  The  evacuation  There  is  a  report  that  Palmer  has 
of  Jellalabad  will  have  the  worst  broken  up  the  treaty,  and  is  again 
possible  effect.  Every  one  here  has  besieged  in  the  BaJUa  Hissar.  He 
turned  soldier,  and  the  people  are  in  writes  for  orders,  which  kindly  send 
a  high  state  of  excitement,  and  hun-  with  all  expedition.  For  God  s  sake 
gering  after  pay,  which  is  not  forth-  beware  of  Mahomed  Akbar." 
coming.  Our  host  has  assembled  In  a  letter  of  March  5  the  same 
a  regiment  of  1000  bayonets,  1000  writer  says:  **  Futteh  Jung  (Shah 
horsemen,  some  Jezailchees,  and  a  Soojah*8  son)  has  gone  out  yesterday 
park  of  twelve  guns,  the  ammunition  to  join  Akbar.  'Diings  are  very  un- 
for  which,  by  the  Meerza^s  return  settled  here  still,  and  the  Rohistanees 
yesterday,  amounted  to  about  thirty  are  fighting  amongst  themselves, 
shot,  and  no  cartridges.  There  must  The  Newab  is  still  treating  us  with 
be  some  serious  disturbance  ere  long,  the  greatest  kindness.  He  has  en- 
We  are  very  anxious  about  the  sick,  listed  about  3000  men,  principally 
which  we  fear  will  be  sacrificed  in  for  our  protection,  and  is  determined 
any  popular  tumult.  For  ourselves,  to  fight  rather  than  give  us  up.  The 
we  must  trust  to  Providence ;  should  Naib  here  has  been  trying  to  get  us, 
things  come  to  the  worst,  we  shall  and  has  a  strong  party  of  Sepoys  en« 
try  and  escape  to  your  stronghold. —  listed  also.  The  Newab  asked  me 
P.S.  We  have  just  heard  that  a  yesterday  if,  when  his  money  is  out, 
change  of  ministry  has  been  proposed  we  shall  be  able  to  aaaist  him,  as  he 
by  his  Majesty,  and  likely  to  be  ef-  only  has  sufficient  ready  cash  to  pay 
fected,  Oosman  Khan  to  be  acting  his  men  for  one  montn  and  a  half 
premier,  and  the  Newab  to  be  a  morQ.  Can  you  authorise  me  to 
sleeping  partner.  make  him  an  advance  when  his  money 
**  15th,  P.M.,  10  o^clock. — To-day  fails  ?  for,  as  I  said  before,  his  enter- 
there  has  been  a  noisy  debate  be-  taining  troops  is  almost  entirely  oil 
tween  the  Newab  and  Ameen-oollab,  our  account.  He  would  be  safe 
the  former  abusing  the  latter  in  enough  were  we  not  his  guests.  In 
rather  round  terms.  The  Naib  left  the  mean  time  he  has  bought  ammuni- 
the  room  in  a  huff,  and  things  are  as  tion  and  got  his  guns  ready  in  case 
unsettled  as  can  be.      The  Newab  of  an  attack.'* 

says  he  won*t  give  up  his  guns,  or  And  in  another  letter  of  the  same 

go  to  the  Durbar:  and  insists  upon  date:  ^^The  bearer  will  be  able  to 

his  Majesty  pur-  tell  you  all  the  news.    I  have  written 

suing  the  non-interference  system  to  to  you  several  times,  but  have  received 
which  be  is  bound  by  the  terms  of  no  acknowledgment  of  my  letters, 
his  treaty.  There  is  nothing  but  Ni-  Always  try  solution  of  iodyne  on  my 
fag :  everybody  suspects  his  neigh-  notes.  .  .  .  We  are  very  kindlj 
hour ;  everythmg  is  in  capital  trim  treated  by  the  Newab,  but  close  pn- 
for  us  If  our  army  advances  :  I  only  soners.  Ameen-oollah  has  tried  strata- 
wait  your  authority  to  spend  a  little  gem  and  threats  to  get  us  out  of  the 
money,  and  above  all  a  guarantee  to  NewaVs  hands,  with  a  view  of  screw- 
our  host  of  a  handsome  provision  if  ing  us ;  but,  thanks  to  the  Newab,  we 
he  sides  with  us,  or  stands  neutral —  are  as  yet  safe,  though  our  situation 
for  he  is  a  most  worthy  and  honest  is  an  unpleasant  one.  The  King  it 
old  gentleman,  and  had  no  hand  in  sitting  in  the  Balla  Hissar ;  but  hit 
the  late  melancholy  occurrences,  authority  is  only  nominal,  all  power 
Ghoolam  Mahomed  Khan  has  also  being  in  the  hands  of  Ameen-ooUah. 
kept  aloof  from  the  late  rebellion.  Prince  Futteh  Jung  has  started  with 


360  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

old  Suddozye  and  Barukzye  strife  seemed  about  to  be 
renewed  with  all  its  pristine  vigour.  At  last  the  Shah, 
about  the  middle  of  the  month  of  March,  corrupted  the 
commandant  of  the  Newab's  army,  who  went  over 
with  all  his  followers  to  the  Balla  Hissar.  This  event, 
which  threatened  entirely  to  change  the  state  of  parties 
at  the  capital,  threw  all  Caubul  into  a  ferment.  The 
shops  were  closed ;  the  people  began  to  arm  themselves. 
The  Newab  demanded  the  restoration  of  his  troops;  but 
the  King  only  yielded  a  conditional  assent.  He  appears 
at  this  time  to  have  been  entirely  in  the  hands  of 
Araeen-oollah  Khan ;  and  he  replied,  that  if  the  hostages 
were  sent  to  the  house  of  the  Logur  chief,  the  recreant 
commandant  should  be  sent  there  at  the  same  time. 
The  Newab,  however,  resolutely  refused  to  give  up 
the  English  gentlemen.  The  proposal  seems  to  have 
strengthened  Conolly^s  suspicions  of  the  fidelity  of  Shah 
Soojah.     It  nearly  cost  the  hostages  their  lives.* 

a  few  horsemen  towards  Jellalabad,    Fortunately  for  us  the  Newab  re- 
and  will  probably  halt  for  some  days  fused  to  give  us  up.    This  proposi- 
at  Bootkak.    The  King  sends  me  oc-  tion  was  made  through  jealousy  of 
casionally    messages  professing  sin-  the  Newab,   and  with  the  view  to 
cerity  for  the  British  Government ;  conciliate  Ameen-oollah,  by  whom  it 
but  he  does  not,  in  his  present  circum-  had  been  represented  to  his  Majesty 
stances,  do  anything  which  would  lead  that  we  were    supplying  our    host 
his  subjects  to  suspect  his  attachment  with  money,  &c.    Aineen-oollah  had 
to  us,  or  the  whole  population  would  been  for  many  days  trying  to  get  pos- 
rise  up  against  him." — [Af5.  Corre'  session  of  our  persons  with  a  view  to 
spondence!}  try  and  extort  money  from  us.     His 
*  A  letter  to  Greneral  Pollock,  writ-  IVfajesty's  proposition  nearly  cost  us 
ten   on  the    18th  of  March,    says:  our  lives.    .    .     .    Since  the  deser- 
"  Affairs  here  are  as  unsettled  as  they  tion  of  the  commandant  the   whole 
can  possibly  be.     The    day    before  city  has  been  in  an   uproar.     The 
yesterday   the    commandant    of  the  shops  are  all  closed,  and  every  man 
Newab's  regiment   was    bribed    by  has    armed    himself.      The    feeling 
his  Majesty  to  desert  to  the  Balla  against  us  is  reawakened.    The  gates 
Hissar  with  all  his    soldiers.     The  of  the  Balla  Hissar  are    half  shut; 
Newab   demanded  their  restoration,  and  each  chief  has  collected  his  fol- 
but  was  refused.     Yesterday,  after  lowers.     Three  or  four  thousand  men 
much  dispute,   his    Majesty  sent   a  have  flocked  round  our  host.     The 
message  to  our  host,  saying  that  the  Barukzye's  and    Suddozye*s  party- 
commandant    should     be     sent    to  spirit  bids  fair  to  be  renewed  with  all 
Ameen-ooUah's  house  if  we  were  de-  its  rancour.    .     .     .     The  King  has, 
livered  over  to  the  same  authority,  however,  now  but  few  friends,  and  his 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH*  361 

It  now  seemed  that  Caubul  was  about  to  become  the 
theatre  of  internecine  strife.  The  gates  of  the  Balla 
Hissar  were  half  closed,  and  the  Shah  never  ventured 
beyond  them.  The  chiefs  were  all  mustering  retainers. 
The  King  was  endeavouring  to  cast  suspicion  on  the 
nationality  of  the  Newab ;  and  the  Newab's  party  were 
doubting  the  fidelity  of  the  King.  The  Populzye  leaders 
of  the  insurrection  clustered  round  the  monarch,  but 
he  had  neither  popularity  nor  power.  Money  he  had ; 
but  making  an  outward  show  of  poverty,  he  reso- 
lutely refused  to  produce  it ;  and  the  people  began  to 
abuse  him  for  his  parsimony.  In  this  conjuncture  he 
continued  to  write  to  the  British  authorities,  declaring 
that  he  could  do  anything  for  them  if  they  ..would  only 
send  him  money ;  but  the  British  authorities  were  deaf 
to  his  entreaties,  and  only  sent  him  advice. 

Containing  the  King's  version  of  the  causes  and  cir- 
cumstances  of  our  disasters  at  Caubul,  and  throwing 
some  light  upon  his  own  character  and  conduct,  the 
letters  of  Shah  Soojah  are  suflBciently  curious  and  in- 
teresting to  induce  me  to  insert  a  few  of  them  in  this 
place : 

FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR. 
(Beceived  January  2l8i,  1842.) 

Let  it  be  known  to  Captain  Macgregor:  you  are  aware  of 
all  that  has  occurred  here.  Notwithstanding  all  I  said  regarding 
the  treachery  of  these  men,  they  (the  British)  did  not  understand, 
but  were  guided  by  the  advice  of  my  enemies — that  is,  the  Ba- 
rukzyes — until  arrived  at  this  pitch.  The  clans  of  the  Barukzyes 
had  this  object,  that  suspicion  and  ill-will  should  exist  between 
the  British  and  me.  To  the  British  they  said,  that  I  had  insti- 
gated the  rebellion ;  and  to  the  Mahomedans  they  said,  that  I  and 

parsimony  is  as  a  proverb ;  and  bis  unless  some  accommodation  is  made 

suspected  connexion  witb  us  adds  to  witb  bis  Majesty,   the  Bolla  Hissar 

his  unpopularity.    •     .     .     TheNaib  will  in  all  probability  be   the  first 

has  written  for  the  Kohistanees  to  point  of  attack.     It  will  be  a  popular 

accompany  him  on  a  crusade,  and  cause,  as  there  are  hopes  of  plunder." 


362  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

the  Feringhees  were  one,  until  they  made  me  generally  unpopular. 
Well;  such  was  fated !  It  has  caused  me  much  grief  and  regret. 
God  grant  this  wish  of  my  heart,  that  the  fate  of  Sir  William 
Macnaghten  and  Mr.  Trevor  and  the  other  gentlemen  may  befal 
my  enemies !  I  frequently  desired  them,  on  the  first  outbreak 
of  the  rebellion,  to  bring  everything  into  the  Balla  Hissar,  which 
is  a  place  of  strength.  They  did  not  listen  to  ray  advice.  I 
then  begged  them  to  endeavour  to  gain  time — that  when  I  could 
arrange  matters  with  these  men  (Afghans)  all  would  be  well. 
During  the  time  that  I  was  besieged,  I  expended  all  that  I  had 
collected  with  so  much  labour,  until  I  brought  every  one  of  influ- 
ence over  to  my  side  by  payment  Please  God  they  may  remain 
faithful  to  me ! 

No  one  but  myself  could  manage  these  people  (Afghans)  and 
carry  on  the  government.  My  sincerity  and  friendship  to  the 
East  India  Company  was  formerly  well  known :  at  present  it  is  as 
evident  to  all  the  world  as  the  light  of  day.  If  I  had  only  some 
treasure,  that  during  the  two  or  three  remaining  months  of  winter 
I  might  strengthen  myself,  please  God  there  is  no  one  in  this 
country  who  could  displace  me,  and,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
everything  would  be  arranged  according  to  my  desire.  The  men 
here  are  not  to  be  won  without  money.  God  grant  this  wish  of 
my  heart !  Before  this  I  spent  four  lakhs  of  rupees  in  this  afiair, 
and  I  also  gave  two  lakhs  more;  I  have  nothing  else  left.  If 
some  money  could  be  received  that  I  might  win  over  these  men, 
please  God  everything  could  be  arranged  according  to  my  desire. 
It  is  to  be  hoped,  as  you  will  see,  that  in  a  few  months  I  could 
collect  horse  and  foot  so  that  no  one  could  stir.  God  grant  this 
wish  of  my  heart  I 

The  bearer  of  this  will  verbally  inform  you  of  all  other  cir- 
cumstances. It  is  advisable  that  you  should  send  this  paper  to 
Peshawur,  or  even  to  the  Governor-General.  And  send  me  an 
answer  to  this  speedily.  Whenever  you  hear  of  the  arrival  of  this 
paper  at  Peshawur,  be  good  enough  to  let  me  know,  that  I  may 
feel  sure  of  its  having  passed  out  of  this  country ;  because  the  evil- 
disposed  are  spreading  reports  that  I  am  united  to  the  Feringhees. 
Until  I  have  gained  my  proper  footing,  it  is  necessary  that,  for 
some  time,  money  should  be  sent  to  enable  me  to  manage  matters. 
When  I  have  succeeded  in  establishing  my  power,  I  shall  not  re- 
quire assistance  from  any  one.     Everything  will  be  easy.     Don't 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  363 

let  the  men  of  this  country  know  these  things.  Afterwards, 
whatever  may  be  desirable  for  my  good  and  for  yours,  Gt)d  will 
grant.  And  God  grant  this  wish  of  my  heart  1  The  bearer  will 
tell  you  how  matters  stand.  Whenever  money  has  been  received 
and  I  have  reinstated  myself,  I  shall  have  these  people  so  much 
under  my  control,  that  if  I  order  it  they  will  carry  the  shoes  of 
the  Sahibs  on  their  own  heads.* 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO 
THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL  OF  INDIA. 

( Without  datej  brought  on  the  2nd  of  February,  by  a  mestenger  fifteen  daytfrom 

Cauhul,) 

Be  it  known  to  my  friend  that  I  am  King,  and  know  the 
people  well.  It  is  right  to  treat  people  according  to  their  deserts; 
some  by  kindness,  others  by  severity. 

Some  evil-disposed  persons,  from  fear  of  me,  took  refuge  with 
Sir  W.  Macnaghten  and  Sir  A.  Bumes^  and  I  could  say  nothing 
to  them :  they  stirred  up  strife. 

During  the  last  two  or  three  years  I  considered  the  Sahibs,  and 
especially  the  Envoy,  whom  I  valued  more  than  my  life,  as  my 
equals;  without  their  pleasure  I  did  nothing. 

It  was  God's  will  I  should  sec  what  I  would  have  wished  not 
to  have  seen.     May  no  other  have  such  experiences. 

Could  it  have  been  my  wish  to  see  my  enemies  and  their 
families  in  the  place  of  my  friends? 

Once  or  twice  I  wrote  to  you  to  send  a  person  to  inquire  and 
inform  you  of  the  state  of  things  in  this  country;  but  it  was  not 
done. 

For  two  or  three  years  I  consoled  the  people,  who  told  me  if 
I  was  not  King,  they  should  understand  it  was  the  Feringhee; 
and  they  (the  former)  told  me  that  when  I  came  they  expelled 
Dost  Mahomed,  but  that  I  had  disappointed  them;  that  now 
their  women  left  them,  their  country  was  lost;  and,  although  at 
first  they  received  pay,  even  that  was  stopped.  I  could  not  con- 
sole the  people,  but  I  spoke  of  them  to  the  Envoy,  and  told  him 
that,  sooner  or  later,  there  would  be  a  disturbance ;  but  he  listened 
not  to  me.  I  told  him  they  were  deceiving  him ;  but  he  believed 
me  not,  and  desired  me  to  be  at  ease,  for  that  he  would  settle  the 
country  with  two  Pultuns  (regiments). 

•  MS.  Records. 


364  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

He  further  told  me  to  confine  and  expel  some  evil-disposed 
persons.  I  did  so;  but  they  got  access  to  Nizam-oo-dowlah,  and 
through  him  to  the  Envoy,  who  asked  me  to  release  them.  I  did 
so.     Now  I  am  distressed  by  those  very  people. 

When  the  Envoy  was  going  away  I  asked  him  to  take  me 
with  him;  for  that  I  was  in  an  extremity;  I  told  him  of  what 
was  going  on,  and  was  not  listened  to.  I  told  him  that  com- 
plaints were  daily  made  to  me  of  Afghan  women  being  taken 
to  Bumes's  Moonshee,  and  of  their  drinking  wine  at  his  house, 
and  of  women  being  taken  to  the  Chaonee  (cantonments)  on 
horseback,  and  of  my  having  myself  witnessed  it.  When  people 
complained  to  me  of  such  things,  I  asked  who  did  so,  that  I 
might  inquire;  and  told  them  not  to  defame  the  Sahibs.  I  first 
comforted  and  then  reproved  them ;  and  said,  if  any  person  uses 
violence  to  your  women,  tell  me,  and  inquiry  shall  be  made. 

The  people  have  often  before  acted  as  they  have  now ;  they  con- 
fined my  brother  Mahmood  in  the  Balla  Hissar;  the  conspirators 
then  were  Mooktear-oo-dowlah  and  Ahmed  Khan,  Noorzye,  &c. 
They  pretended  it  was  a  quarrel  between  the  Sheeahs  and  Soonees; 
but  it  proved  a  great  matter,  and  they  saw  that  without  me  they 
could  not  settle  matters.  I  was  then  among  the  Kakurs,  The 
Khans  sent  for  me,  and  all  obeyed  me. 

In  the  present  instance  people  said,  **  There  are  crores  of  rupees 
in  the  Chaonee ;  let  us  strengthen  Islam."  Such  are  the  people. 
Three  or  four  dogs  are  gone  (dead);  as  many  remain. 

Nizam-oo-dowlah  was  a  dog  and  ruined  all.  I  begged  the 
Envoy  not  to  ruin  the  people.  Nizam-oo-dowlah  said  to  the 
Douranees,  the  King  and  Envoy  will  destroy  you.  I  will  help 
you,  but  Captain  Trevor  will  not  let  me.  The  people  were  thus 
stirred  up.  I  was  annoyed,  but  could  not  help  myself;  now, 
please  God  and  by  the  help  of  friends,  much  may  be  done. 

All  were  against  me  on  account  of  you.  They  sent  to  me  to 
separate  myself  from  you,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  faith  to  be  King 
myself  (some  Sahibs  were  then  in  the  Balla  Hissar).  I  did  not 
give  a  reply  at  the  time,  but  sent  word  to  the  Envoy,  who  told 
me  to  turn  them  away.  I  did  so,  saying  I  owed  everything  to 
the  Sahibs.     They  told  me  I  would  repent. 

For  some  days  there  was  fighting  near  the  Chaonee  and  Balla 
Hissar  and  Balla  Boorj ;  at  which  time  I  sent  word  to  the  Envoy 
to  come  with  all  his  baggage  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  the 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  365 

troops  could  hold  out  for  a  year  or  two,  telling  him  that  three  or 
four  thousand  of  the  inhabitants  might  be  turned  out,  and  guns 
and  stores  brought.  After  much  debate,  no  answer  was  given.  I 
said,   "  Very  good  1     Please  yourselves." 

Some  days  after  I  sent  to  the  Chaonee,  and  warned  them  not  to 
abandon  it;  that  I  knew  the  designs  of  the  enemy,  who  intended 
to  attack  them;  and  by  expending  five  or  six  lakhs  of  rupees  I 
endeavoured  to  bring  the  people  from  the  common  enemy  towards 
myself;  but  they  told  me  to  separate  myself  from  you.  On  this 
account  three  or  four  Barukzyes  separated  themselves  from  me; 
but  though  I  could  not  trust  people,  1  managed  matters  by  first 
paying  three  or  four  lakhs,  and  afterwards  two  or  three,  which 
they  asked  of  me,  thinking  I  would  refuse,  and  they  would  have 
an  excuse  for  separating  from  me;  but  I  gave  all  I  had,  and  now 
am  moneyless.  If,  however,  I  had  money,  I  could  openly  do 
much;  but  nothing  is  to  be  done  without  money  (they  are  dogs). 
If  I  had  money  I  could  raise  troops,  and  many  of  my  old 
(Hindostanee)  ones  who  returned  naked  are  anxious  to  serve  me; 
but  I  have  no  money.  In  heart  I  am  yours,  though  all  the  world 
are  separated  from  me. 

Nizam-oo-dowlah  knew  a  night  before  it  occurred  what  was  to 
happen,  but  did  not  tell  me  or  the  Envoy  that  we  might  pre- 
vent it. 

The  conspirators  told  the  people  that  I  was  with  them ;  and 
when  the  Prince  went  out  with  the  troops,  they  (the  traitors) 
said,  **  They  are  with  us." 

I  sent  Mahomed  Slierreef  to  settle  matters,  but  he  was  not 
attended  to ;  and  he,  as  well  as  many  of  my  troops,  was  killed, 
which  event  opened  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  Caubul;  so  the  con- 
spirators, to  implicate  the  people,  attacked  Sir  A.  Bumes. 

If  my  counsel  is  taken  much  may  yet  be  done;  or,  if  not,  I  will 
go  to  Mecca.  Here  the  people  are  confirmed  traitors,  or  I  could 
easily  settle  the  whole  country,  and  Persia  and  Khorassan. 

What  was  fated  has  happened.  I  have  not  seen  it  in  my  sleep, 
but  have  actually  witnessed  it.  May  God  remove  the  sorrow, 
that  my  enemies  and  their  families  should  be  in  the  place  of  my 
friends.  Is  there  any  in  the  world  who  gave  their  enemies  the 
means  to  kill  them?  The  dog  Akbar  came  as  a  beggar  from 
Toorkistan.  His  enmity  to  the  Sahib-Log  and  myself  was  ap- 
parent; but  laklis  of  rupees  were  given  him  to  escort  the  troops 


366  THE  LAST  DATS  OF  SHAH  800 JAH. 

in  their  retreat;  and  what  was  the  consequenoe?  In  the  midat 
of  the  discussions  I  sent  several  times  to  the  Envoy,  and  asked 
him  why  he  nourished  his  enemy;  but  I  was  not  attended  to. 

All  Mussulmans  turned  from  me  on  account  of  you;  and 
for  three  months,  for  your  sake,  I  experienced  trouble  and 
distress^  and  then  the  Envoy  agreed  to  give  the  country  to 
Mahomed  Akbar,  and  to  allow  me  a  lakh  of  rupees  a  year,  or 
four  lakhs  in  Hindostan;  but  I  knew  and  said,  that  as  soon  as 
they  left  the  Chaonee  they  would  be  destroyed;  and  so  it  has 
proved. 

Between  us  there  were  no  difierences,  and  there  will  not  be. 

When  I  saw  how  things  were  going,  I  expended  money  to 
draw  the  people  from  Mahomed  Akbar;  but  now  I  can  do  nothing. 
I  sent  news  to  Macgregor^  and  to  Ghuznee,  and  to  Candahar. 

The  load  is  unsafe,  so  I  cannot  write  aright.*^ 


FBOM  SHAH  800JAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR  (WRITTEN  IN 
SECRET  BY  HIS  MAJESTY'S  OWN  HAND). 

(Received  February  6t^.) 

Let  it  be  known  to  Captain  Macgregor  what  misfortunes 
have  befallen  me !  Everjrthing  occurs  contrary  to  expectation. 
I  wrote,  that  after  labouring  from  earliest  morning  to  nightfall, 
I  had  by  a  thousand  schemes  satisfied  these  men  and  made  them 
swear  fidelity.  One  came  and  another  went;  but  all  saying, 
"  Be  not  united  to  the  Feringhees."  This  is  what  the  Barukzyes 
are  spreading  among  the  people.  I  said  in  reply  to  them,  "  You 
yourselves  have  said  that  they  (the  Feringhees)  have  done  nothing 
for  the  Sirkar,  and  have  not  fulfilled  their  promises  ;  then  how 
should  the  Sirkar  be  well  disposed  towards  them?  During  the 
time  that  I  was  with  them  I  felt  that  my  name  sufiered,  and  I  felt 
this  disgrace — that  it  was  known  to  all  the  world.  1  continued 
with  them  until  the  time  when  Sir  William  Macnaghten  purposely 
told  me  to  cast  them  (the  Feringhees)  off*.!  I  then  dismissed 
them,  and  you  yourselves  informed  me  that  they  (the  Feringhees) 
had  come  to  an  imderstanding  with  Mahomed  Akbar.  How 
then  could  I  still  preserve  any  understanding  with  them?    Rest 

*  MS.  Records. 

t  Alluding  ^to  his  Majesty's  dismissing  the  troops  at  Sir  William  Mac- 
naghten's  request  from  the  Balla  Hissar. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  367 

perfectly  satisfied.  At  present  I  have  no  understanding  with  the 
Feringhees."  At  length,  by  every  means  in  my  power,  I  paci- 
fied them.  These  men  at  present,  whether  Barukzyes  or  other 
Afghans  or  Parsewans,  are  all  obedient  to  me.  Without  my 
orders  they  do  nothing.  However,  I  place  no  trust  in  them.  God 
grant  that  I  may  obtain  the  wish  of  my  heart !  I  have  no  other 
desire.  I  cannot  think  that  you  are  possessed  of  a  proper  sense  of 
honour,  since  Dost  Mahomed  and  his  family  remain  there  with 
honour.  Should  Akbar  fall  into  my  power,  if  I  am  a  Mussulman 
or  a  man,  what  treatment  he  shall  receive  I  Dost  Mahomed  and  his 
wives  and  children,  in  revenge  for  the  Sahibs  who  have  fallen  in 
this  country,  should  be  seen  wandering  in  destitution  through  the 
bazaars  and  streets,  that  it  should  be  known  to  all  the  world. 
What  has  been  your  treatment  of  that  dog  (Dost  Mahomed)  ? 
So  much  wealth !  And  what  return  have  you  received  &om  this 
£uthless  wretch  (Mahomed  Akbar)  ?  May  God  accomplish  thia 
desire  of  my  heart !  It  is  now  some  days  since  they  (the  Afghans) 
have  requested  me  to  send  Shumshoodeen  Khan  to  Ghuznee. 
Until  to-day  I  have  delayed.  I  have  also  made  delays  in  the 
direction  of  the  Khybur.  At  length  I  am  helpless,  and  if  I  do 
not  consent  I  shall  be  suspected.  And  from  KJiybur  intelligence 
has  come  that  200  men  have  been  killed,  and  two  loads  of  treasure 
and  two  guns  abandoned  to  the  enemy,  and  that  Mackeson  Sahib 
is  shut  up  in  Ali-Musjid  requiring  succour.  If  this  is  true,  what 
management !  How  often  have  I  said  that  if  I  possessed  money 
I  might  collect  some  thousands  of  troops  of  my  own !  I  should 
not  require  assistance  from  any  one.  I  could  do  anything  I  liked. 
But  I  have  nothing  whatever.  At  this  moment  there  is  only 
remaining  two  or  three  thousand  ducats.  These  men,  who  are 
my  own  servants,  have  remained  with  me ;  but,  poor  wretches, 
how  many  months  are  they  in  arrears'!  The  other  Afghans  I 
have  ordered  to  be  mustered  daily  in  my  presence.  Such  as  I  may 
select  I  shall  continue  in  service.  I  never  have  had  and  never 
can  have  any  interest  separate  from  yours.  Alas !  that  you  should 
not  have  known  my  worth !  I  will  delay  the  despatch  of  the  men 
some  days  longer.  I  shall  be  suspected.  If  I  could  know  the 
truth  I  would  arrange  accordingly.  If  you  think  that  this  affair 
will  succeed,  and  that  an  army  will  come,  let  me  know  the  truth; 
and  if  it  is  unUkely,  write  to  me  that  I  may  make  such  arrange- 
ments as  shall  fully  satisfy  you  that  not  a  cat  belonging  to  you 


368  THE  LAST  DAYS  OP  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

shall  be  injured.  The  retreat  of  the  Caubul  Pass  was  quite  a 
different  bSbit.  All  were  then  our  mortal  enemies.  If  I  had 
money  I  should  not  require  assistance  from  any  one.  Since  I 
have  no  money,  if  the  Lord  (Auckland)  does  not  think  it  advi- 
sable to  send  it,  I  must  go  somewhere  else.  There  is  not  another 
person  but  myself  who  could  manage  this  a&ir.  I  know  these 
men  well ;  and  I  have  not  seen  a  man  who  could  do  anything 
without  my  permission.  Write  these  circumstances  to  the  Go- 
vernor-General, and  tear  up  this  paper.  What  misfortunes  have 
befallen!  Write  explicitly,  that  arrangements  may  be  made 
accordingly.  They  (the  Afghans)  have  made  many  petitions 
regarding  Candahar,  that  an  order  may  be  sent  to  the  prince.  It 
has  been  written  and  sent,  carefully  worded,  to  the  best  of  my 
ability. 

About  this  affair  of  Mackeson,  I  cannot  understand  what 
management  this  is.  If  it  is  true,  you  are  destroying  yourselves. 
I  don't  know  whether  there  is  an  understanding  between  you  and 
Shore  Singh  that  your  troops  should  have  a  free  passage  (through 
the  Punjaub).  I  wrote  to  Shere  Singh  that  it  was  a  religious  war, 
that  he  might  understand.  Tear  up  this  paper;  and  remove  from 
about  your  person  the  men  of  this  country* 


FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR. 

(Received  February  Sth.) 

Let  it  be  known  to  Captain  Macgregor,  I  have  no  certain 
intelligence  about  affairs.  I  don't  know  what  perverseness  is  tliis, 
that  up  to  the  present  time  you  will  not  appreciate  my  worth,  nor 
understand  your  own  position  or  interests.  You  do  not  correctly 
explain  things  to  me ;  and  if  there  is  a  prospect  of  your  being 
supported  from  the  rear,  and  you  have,  or  are  likely  to  have,  a 
good  understanding  with  Shere  Singh,  so  that  an  army  may  come, 
then  I  would  act  here  as  such  a  state  of  circumstances  would 
render  expedient;  but  if  there  be  no  prospect  of  this,  and  you 
determine  on  any  other  course,  I  will  then  take  such  measures  as 
may  be  desirable.  May  God  grant  the  wish  of  my  heart !  I  have 
prayed  God  to  grant  this  prayer.  God  is  omnipotent.  Write  to 
the  Govern  or- General.     I  am  not  happy  in  this  country ;  but  if 

*  MS,  Records. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  369 

my  friends  desire  it,  I  cannot  oppose  myself  to  their  wishes.  The 
settlement  of  that  country  can  be  satisfactorily  managed;  but  the 
country  could  never  have  been  settled  in  the  manner  in  which 
you  were  making  arrangements.* 


FBOM  H.  M.  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGBEQOR. 

Let  it  be  known  to  Mr.  Macgregor,  to  the  General,  and 
to  the  other  gentlemen,  that  which  I  did  not  wish  to  see,  and 
which  never  entered  into  my  imagination,  it  has  been  my  lot  to 
see.  What  I  have  already  suffered,  and  am  sufiering,  is  known 
only  to  God. 

Although  I  frequently  remonstrated,  they  paid  no  attention 
to  my  words.  These  men  have  made  fraud  and  deceit  their 
trade During  the  time  they  were  committing  these  ex- 
cesses, and  would  not  come  in  for  some  days,  they  continued 
plimdering  the  shops  and  exciting  disturbances  in  the  city;  and 
in  this  business  all  the  Sirdars  were  concerned,  and  on  this 
account  the  lower  orders  became  like  hungry  dogs:  but  God 
shamed  them  for  they  got  nothing.  What  has  happened  was 
fated,  and  was  owing  to  our  own  neglect.  However  much  I 
said,  "Gome  up  above;  the  fort  is  strong;  for  one  year  no  one 
can  be  brought  within  it;  with  my  servants,  and  from  500 
to  1000  others,  the  fort  would  be  strong  ;  and  2000  or  3000 
others,  with  guns,  sallying  out  might  collect  grain" — [it  was  in 
vain.]  However,  it  has  passed — such  was  our  fate.  I  sent  mes- 
sages to  cantonments,  begging  them  not  to  defer  their  coming 
from  to-day  to  to-morrow,  from  to-morrow  to  next  day — that, 
please  God,  all  would  be  right. 

I  had  collected  five  or  six  lakhs  of  rupees  in  gold  mohurs, 
knowing  that  these  people,  except  for  money,  would  not  act 
honestly,  even  with  God.  I  spent  three  or  four  lakhs  of  rupees 
amongst  them.  Every  tribe  made  oath,  wrote  on  the  Koran, 
and  sealed;  but  they  still  said,  "  The  king  and  the  Feringhees  are 
one.'*  However,  I  have  managed  to  bring  them  thus  far,  and 
given  two  lakhs  more.  It  is  a  pity  that  I  have  no  more  money- 
If  I  had  any  more,  and  could  raise  2000  or  3000  sowars,  and 
2000  foot-soldiers  of  my  own,  I  would  defy  any  one  to  stir.     The 

*  MS.  Records, 

VOL.  II.  2  B 


370  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

foot-soldiers,  too,  who  returned  from  the  army,  I  collected — ^300 
or  400 — that  they  might  be  with  my  regiment.  Oh !  that  God 
had  never  let  me  see  this  day !  Although,  if  money  reaches  me^ 
God  will  prosper  everything.  To  give  money  to  an  enemy  to 
collect  troops,  and  to  come  and  kill  you — did  ever  any  one  so 
trust  an  enemy?  Even  now  have  nothing  to  say  to  that  dog.* 
This,  too,  I  have  said  to  you,  even  as  I  warned  you  before.  I  am 
night  and  day  absorbed  in  this  one  thought;  it  has  occurred  to  my 
mind  that  it  would  be  better  if  the  few  ladies  and  gentlemen 
should  be  brought  here,  in  order  that  they  might  be  released  from 
the  hands  of  that  dog.  This  entered  my  mind,  and  I  consulted 
with  the  Sirdars,  and  brought  them  to  agree;  before  this,  I  had 
sent  a  paper  to  this  effect  to  that  dog.  It  struck  me  that  that  dog 
would  not  release  and  send  them  here.  I  then  decided  that  it 
would  be  judicious  that  Jubbar  Khan  should  be  sent.  I  hope 
that  he  will  bring  them  to  this  place  in  safety.  By  the  blessing 
of  God,  my  mind  will  be  at  ease.  No  one  vnll  have  power  to  say 
anything  to  them ;  they  will  remain  in  safety.  If  this  is  approved 
of  by  you,  I  will  take  this  course;  but  inform  me  if  you  do  not 
approve  of  it,  and  can  suggest  anything  else,  that  it  may  be 

arranged.    Now,  men  of  all  ranks  are  flocking  to  me I  have 

asked  of  God — if  some  money  could  be  obtained  all  would  go 
well,  by  God's  assistance.  *  *  *  At  present,  my  subjects  make 
petition  to  me  to  send  money,  and  one  of  the  princes  with  guns 
and  an  army  to  Candahar.  *  *  *  I  had  sent  for  Mr.  ConoUy, 
and  other  gentlemen,  to  consult  with  them,  as  they  had  them- 
selves asked  the  Sirdar  to  send  for  them ;  but  some  one  said  to 
them,  **  If  you  go  to  the  king  he  vnll  kill  you."  It  was  their 
(the  Sirdars)  intention  that  the  king  should  kill  them.  They  had 
sent  me  word  secretly  beforehand.  I  replied,  that  if  the  world 
was  upset,  and  every  one  my  enemy,  I  would  not  do  so.  They 
then  said,  that  it  was  really  true  what  Jubbar  Khan  and  Oosman 
KJian  had  said — that  the  king  was  not  separate  from  the  Fering- 
hees.  If  he  is,  they  said,  give  these  (English  gentlemen)  to  the 
king,  that  he  may  kill  them.  I  heard  this,  and  gave  them  answer. 
They  understood  their  position,  and  repented  of  the  step  they 
had  taken.  Since  this  occurrence  they  come  and  go;  and  I  have 
re-assured  them.     They  now  swear  and  protest  that  they  will  do 

♦  Mahomed  Akhar. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  371 

nothing  whatever  without  my  wishes.    If  you  think  it  can  be 
done,  God  will  shame  my  enemies* 


FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR. 
(  Written  in  secret  by  the  Shah  himself.    Received  at  JeBalabad  on  the  7th  of  March,) 

This  is  the  state  of  affairs — that  night  and  day  I  am  disturbed 
about  you.  God  help  us !  I  did  not  wish  to  see  such  a  day  as 
this.  All  day  I  am  thinking  of  this.  The  evil-disposed  Maho- 
med Akbar,  from  the  day  he  went  to  Lughman,  has  managed 
matters  by  the  means  of  the  money  which  was  given  to  him. 
From  that  quarter  letters  arrived  hero  (Caubul),  and  money  was 
given  to  men  who  went  to  join  him :  at  length  it  was  put  a  stop 
to,  some  men  were  even  stripped  (on  their  way  to  join)  in  Boot- 
khajc.  At  last,  people  went  under  the  plea  of  Gazza  (religious 
war);  by  these  means  only  a  few  now  go.  It  is  nearly  one  month 
that  I  have  delayed  (sending  troops  to  Jellalabad):  no  accounts 
have  been  received  (from  you).  I  have  made  myself  unpopular 
with  all  Mahomedans  on  yoiir  account,  and  you  have  not  compre- 
hended it.  This  is  an  affair  affecting  life.  Up  to  this  time  nothing 
is  known  (of  your  intentions).  I  know  not  upon  what  misfortunes 
I  have  fallen ;  and  these  men  are  displeased  with  me,  (saying)  **  It 
is  not  the  Shah's  wish  that  we  should  go  to  Jellalabad ;  he  wishes 
to  destroy  the  true  faith.*'  God  help  us !  There  is  no  saying 
when  those  men  (British  troops)  will  arrive.  If  things  are  thus 
managed,  what  may  be  expected  in  Hindoostan? 

I  am  altogether  devoted  to  you — may  God  protect  me !  If 
they  (British  troops)  arrive  within  the  next  ten  or  fifteen  days,  it 
is  well;  but  if  not,  what  ought  to  be  done?  Whatever  you  think 
advisable,  write  to  me  plainly,  that  it  may  be  well  understood 
and  arrangements  made.  I  am  always  thinking  how  lean  ob« 
tain  possession  of  those  gentlemen  and  ladies,  that  they  may  be  in 
safety,  and  that  this  villain  (Mahomed  Akbar)  may  not  injure 
them. 

1  sent  a  message  to  Mahomed  Shah  (Ghilzye)  that,  if  any 
injury  happened  to  them  (the  English  prisoners),  I  would  revenge 
it  on  him  and  his  family,  and  root  out  his  race,  and  that  I  would 

"^  MS.  Records. 

2b2 


372  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

seize  liira.  God  will  prosper  this  matter,  though  it  is  very 
difficult  and  complicated. 

These  rascals  (Afghans)  make  numerous  oaths,  and  in  their 
hearts  there  is  villany.     May  God  put  them  to  shame ! 

The  true  state  of  the  case  is  this;  if  you  think  it  will  succeed, 
and  that  they  (British  troops)  will  arrive,  the  sooner  the  better. 
This  is  not  a  matter  to  be  trifled  with. 

Shumshoodeen  Khan,  who  went  to  Ghuznee,  I  ordered  not 
to  press  the  garrison  hard  until  I  had  completed  an  engagement 
with  you. 

I  have  forgotten  my  own  sorrows,  and  am  grieving  for  yours. 
Neither  day  nor  night  can  I  rest,  nor  think  of  anything  else. 

If  I  came  myself  (to  Jellalabad),  I  could  arrange  the  affidr 
as  I  wished.  It  has  two  advantages  and  one  objection.  I  am  puz- 
zled. God  deliver  me !  All  that  has  happened  has  been  caused 
by  want  of  forethought.     Now  may  God  give  me  assistance ! 

I  always  said  to  Sir  William  Macnaghten  that  this  afiair 
would  end  badly. 

Tlic  day  that  he  made  arrangements  for  leaving  (Caubul  for 
Bombay)  I  was  ready  to  precede  him*,  saying  that  I  did  not  like 
the  appearance  of  things  here.  He  did  not  listen  to  me.  The 
bearer  will  inform  you  of  other  particulars.  What  can  I  do? 
These  men  are  the  greatest  curse  in  the  world.  If  I  had  any 
money  I  could  collect  my  army — ^then  "  could  it  be  in  the  power 
of  any  one  to  injure  even  a  dog  that  belonged  to  you?"* 


FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  MR.  GEORGE  CLERK. 
(Received  on  the  25th  March  at  Lahore,) 

Be  it  known  to  my  friend  that  I  am  King,  and  know  the 
people  well;  had  everyone  been  treated  according  to  his  deserts,  a 
good  foundation  would  have  been  secured  in  the  country. 

It  is  known  to  all  the  world  how  1  have  behaved  to  Sir  W.  Mac- 
naghten and  the  rest  of  the  Sahiban  during  the  last  three  years. 
I  have  considered  all  of  them  as  dear  to  me  as  my  life,  and 
especially  Sir  William  Macnaghten,  who  was  still  dearer  to  me. 
It  was  God's  will  that  I  should  see  what  I  would  have  wished  to 

•  MS,  Records. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  373 

have  avoided  in  a  dream ;  may  no  other  have  such  experience. 
I  wish  to  God  to  see  my  enemies  and  their  families  in  the  place 
of  my  friends,  and  no  other  wish  would  then  remain  in  my  heart. 
What  shall  I  inform  you  of?  Whatever  has  happened  is  owing 
to  our  own  carelessness.  Once  or  twice  I  wrote  to  you  to  send 
a  person  to  inquire  and  inform  you  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  this 
country,  but  it  was  not  done.  I  consulted  the  people,  and  they 
told  me,  that  had  I  not  been  concerned,  the  "  Feringhees  "  would 
have  seen  the  state  of  things;  that  when  I  came  they  expelled 
Dost  Mahomed,  anticipating  every  happiness  under  their  old 
master;  that  had  it  been  the  cause  of  the  "Feringhees,"  would 
anybody  have  dared  to  enter  this  country?  or  would  such  a 
day  as  this,  exhibiting  the  loss  of  their  honour,  country,  and  their 
pay,  have  happened  to  them  ?  They  further  observed  that  they 
were  liable  to  be  killed  or  apprehended  by  the  British,  and  given 
up  by  the  King  without  any  investigation;  not  ever  to  sanction 
their  requests  for  the  increase  of  five  rupees  to  their  pay — the  King 
had  no  authority.  I  again  consulted  them,  told  the  Envoy  of  it; 
and  frequently  I  sent  for  the  Envoy  in  the  garden,  and  brought 
the  subject  to  his  notice  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Lawrence,  who 
generally  accompanied  him ;  acquainted  him  of  the  rascality  of  the 
people,  who  would  at  last  create  some  disturbance.  But  I  was 
not  listened  to,  and  the  information  of  their  treacherous  character, 
and  the  advice  not  to  place  confidence  in  them,  was  of  no  avail. 
I  was  therefore  quite  disgusted  with  these  people,  and  proposed 
to  return  with  the  Envoy,  seeing  the  state  of  the  feelings  of  the 
people,  and  a  disregard  to  my  suggestions  by  him.  I  told  him 
that  complaints  were  daily  made  to  me  of  Afghan  women  being 
taken  to  Bumes's  Moonshee;  of  their  drinking  wine  at  his  house; 
of  women  being  taken  to  the  cantonments  on  horseback,  and  of 
my  having  witnessed  it,  and  observing  how  likely  it  was  to  create 
a  disturbance;  but  all  was  in  vain.  1  reproached  the  people  for 
their  own  shamclessness,  desired  them  to  take  care  of  these 
women,  and  not  to  defame  the  Sahibs;  and  said  that  if  any  person 
used  violence  towards  them,  to  tell  me,  and  inquiry  should  be 
made. 

A  Nizam-oo-doulah  was  appointed  who  corrupted  the  minds  of 
the  people.  I  told  the  Envoy  that  he  was  impressing  on  the 
minds  of  the  Douranees,  that  the  King  and  the  Envoy  were 
destroying  them,  and  that  he  had  saved  them.     I  was  anxious  to 


874        THE  LAST  DATS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

Bee  some  stipend  fixed  for  them,  but  that  Trevor  would  not 
consent  to  it,  and  he  thus  disappointed  the  people.  All  this  pro- 
duced no  effect,  until  the  insurrection  broke  out,  and  the  insur- 
gents told  every  one  that  the  King  was  concerned  in  it.  I  sent 
Shah-zadah  Futteh  Jung  with  a  few  guns  and  troops  to  the  town; 
the  insurgents  reported  he  was  coming  to  assist  them,  and  on  his 
approach  a  skirmish  took  place,  in  which  Mahomed  Sherreef 
Khan,  who  was  sent  to  restrain  the  people,  received  a  wound 
and  was  killed.  It  then  became  apparent  that  an  insurrection 
had  taken  place;  300  more  were  killed  and  wounded  up  to  the 
evening  of  that  day ;  the  Shah-zadah  narrowly  escaped  by  the 
preservation  of  God.  The  insurgents  then  thought  of  another 
expedient  to  defame  all  the  people.  They  went  round  Sir  A. 
Bumes's  house,  and  did  what  was  written  in  his  lot.  These 
people  have  often  before  acted  as  they  have  now ;  they  confined 
my  brother,  Shah  Mahmood,  in  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  con- 
spirators were  then  Mooktear-oo-dowlah  and  Ahmed  Khan,  &c., 
and  they  pretended  it  was  a  quarrel  between  the  Sheeahs  and 
the  Sconces;  they  saw  that  I  alone  could  settle  matters.  I  was 
then  among  the  Kakurs;  the  Khans  sent  for  me,  and  on  my 
arrival  at  Caubul  they  all  obeyed  me  and  returned  to  their 
respective  avocations.  In  the  present  instance  people  said  there 
were  orores  of  rupees  to  be  obtained  and  lakhs  to  be  shared,  while 
the  Mussulmanee  cause  could  be  strengthened,  and  the  wishes  of 
God  come  to  pass.  A  few  insurgents  have  been  removed  from 
the  way,  and  the  remainder  will  be  removed  by  God.  I  am  quite 
displeased  and  annoyed  at  these  people,  from  whom  every  wicked 
act  may  be  expected ;  but  through  the  kindness  of  my  friends  it 
does  not  appear  difficult  to  me  to  settle  this  country,  or  even 
to  conquer  Persia  and  Teheran.  All  were  against  me  on 
accotmt  of  you;  requested  me  to  separate  from  you,  as  being 
inconsistent  with  my  feelings  of  religion.  I  wrote  to  the  Envoy, 
and  he  told  me  to  give  them  a  straightforward  reply,  which 
I  did,  sajring  I  owed  everything  to  the  Sahibs;  but  they  told  me 
I  should  repent.  I  told  them  their  lives  and  property  were  bound 
to  the  British,  and  they  returned  disappointed;  but  the  same 
night  they  attacked  the  cantonment  and  the  Balla  Hissar,  but 
to  no  purpose;  they  continued  their  attacks  without  intermission 
for  some  days,  and  I  wrote  to  the  Envoy  to  come  with  all  his 
baggage  and  troops  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  they  could  hold 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  375 

out  for  a  year  or  two  (even  if  no  assistance  arrived),  and  that  I 
would  detach  parties  to  furnish  supplies  to  avoid  any  scarcity. 
This  I  urged  several  times,  but  finding  he  was  opposed  to  my 
views,  I  abided  by  his  opinion.     The  insurrection  was,  however, 
discontinued,  and  the  Envoy  informed  me  that  he  had  entered 
into  a  convention  with  the  insurgents;   that  M&homed  Akbar 
should   be   the  ruler   of  this  country,  that   the   British    should 
retire  to  Hindostan,  and  that  if  I  accompanied  them  it  would  be 
better,  otherwise  I  should  be  consigned  to  the  proposed  ruler,  and 
receive  a  lakh  of  rupees  per  year.     I  was  annoyed  at  this  treaty, 
and  anticipated  some  treachery  when  the  Sahiban  and  the  gxms 
left  the  Balla  Hissar  for  cantonments ;  but  it  was  diverted  in  a 
very  brave  manner  by  my  orderly  troops.     I  asked  how  a  treaty 
could  be  entered  into  with  the  enemy  without  the  sanction  of 
one  who  had  linked  his  fate  with  the  British;  but  in  vain.     After 
the  troops  had  entered  the  cantonment,  I  cautioned  them  not  to 
stir  out,  but  to  pass  their  days  there,  knowing  the  plundering 
habits  of  the  people.     I  was  watching  for  the  least  intermission 
to  bring  the  people  round,  and  accomplished  the  business  as  for- 
merly.    I  therefore  spent  five  or  nx  lakhs  in  rupees  and  ducats, 
and  acceded  to  every  wish  of  the  people;  and  after  working  night 
and  day  I  reclaimed  them  by  presents.     They  promised  to  obey 
me,  and  to  behave  inimically  to  the  disloyal;  against  every  exer- 
tion of  the  Barukzyes  to  persuade  the  people  of  my  attachment 
to  the  British.     On  the  contrary,  the  Envoy  entrusted  lakhs  of 
rupees,  artillery,  and  other  things  to  the  enemy,  and  thus  in- 
creased their  power  with  his  own  hands,  without  in  the  least 
listening  to  me,  until  what  was  predestined  came  to  pass.     May 
no  one  again  see  such  a  day ;  and  the  desire  I  have  is,  that  I  may 
in  this  world  be  able  to  retaliate  with  my  own  hands.     On  their 
coming  out  of  the  cantonment  the  enemy  began  to  plunder,  and 
discontinued  their  treachery  on   the   payment  of  two  lakhs  of 
rupees  more.     Ameen-ooUah  having  already  been  gained  over,  I 
delayed  the  payment  of  the  sum  for  a  time,  and  the  insurgents 
then  began  to  reproach  him,  and  were  going  to  drag  him  away 
from  me,  when  I  was  forced  to  pay  them  money.     These  people 
are  such  avaricious  dogs  for  worldly  riches,  that  had  I  possessed 
some  lakhs  of  rupees  now,  I  could  have  arranged  every  matter, 
and  quelled  the  rebellion.     I  am  entertaining  all  the  **  Tillungas" 
and  Sowars  that  return  in  distress  with  the  loss  of  their  property, 
although  I  am  quite  disgusted  and  disheartened  with  these  people, 


376  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

and  would  have  gone  to  Mecca,  had  there  been  no  impediment. 
The  management  of  this  country  and  people  is  easily  accom- 
plished. The  arrangements  of  other  foreign  affairs,  such  as  those 
of  Persia,  Teheran,  and  Khorassan,  are  also  simple,  but  they 
cannot  be  effected  only  by  the  way  I  point  out.  Whatever  was 
destined  in  this  case  has  come  to  pass.  I  never  wished  to  see 
such  a  day.  May  God  fulfil  all  my  hopes.  The  news  of  my  wel- 
fare is  being  sent  to  Candahar  and  Ghuznee,  and  to  Captain 
Macgregor  at  Jellalabad,  and  you  ought  to  remain  satisfied.  If 
you  send  us  assistance  to  uphold  the  case,  the  better;  otherwise 
there  are  other  ways  that  may  be  followed  agreeable  to  the  advice 
of  friends.  There  is  nothing  wanting;  you  can  do  as  you  like, 
and  no  one  can  stir  without  orders.     The  road  is  very  unsafe. 

On  a  slip  of  paper  which  the  Cossid  carried,  separately 
concealed,  was  written  this  postscript : 

Be  it  known  to  my  friend  that  the  road  is  very  unsafe;  this 
paper  is  sent  to  you  (my  friends),  and  it  must  be  speedily  trans- 
mitted and  replied  to,  in  order  that  he  may  act  accordingly. 
Whatever  has  passed  is  known  to  God  only;  such  as  was  never 
expected  to  be  seen,  even  in  a  dream,  has  actually  taken  place. 
If  I  could  manage  to  see  you,  everything  would  be  right,  and  no 
wish  remain  ungratified.  The  bearer  will  give  you  every  informa- 
tion.    The  sign  is,  **  We  have  met  before  the  grape,  *  Tatties.'  "* 

These  letters  produced  little  more  than  general  as- 
surances from  the  British  authorities  that  an  army  was 
on  its  way  to  Caubul.  The  letters  that  Macgregor  wrote 
to  the  Shah  were  very  brief,  and  intended  to  convey  as 
little  meaning  as  possible.  One  or  two  specimens  will 
suffice : 

CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR  TO  HIS  MAJESTY  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

Your  Majesty's  letter  was  received  by  me  on  the  21st  of 
January,  and  I  feel  much  honoured.  The  fact  is,  that  what  has 
occurred  was  fated.  It  is  true  that  they  (the  British)  made  a 
mistake  in  not  following  your  Majesty's  advice. 

Please  God,  you  may  rest  at  ease  regarding  affairs  here.  In 
this  quarter  there  is  no  enemy  except  Mahomed  Akbar^  who  is  at 

♦  MS,  Records, 


LETTERS  OF  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR.  377 

Lughman,  and  is  the  foe  both  of  your  Majesty  and  the  British 
Government.  The  rabble  of  Ghilzyes  who  were  with  him  have 
carried  away  to  their  homes  what  they  were  able  to  steal.  With 
the  exception  of  200  or  300  Barukzyes  there  is  no  one  else  with 
him.  And  please  God,  if  he  comes,  he  will  meet  with  a  warm 
reception. 

A  copy  of  your  Majesty's  letter  was  immediately  forwarded  to 
Peshawur,  requesting  that  it  might  be  sent  with  all  possible  haste 
to  the  Governor-General,  and  that  an  answer  might  be  received, 
which  may  be  soon  expected.  Rest  at  ease,  that  while  I  breathe 
I  will  not  fail  to  assist  your  Majesty  to  the  utmost  of  my  ability. 
The  army  with  the  artillery  may  be  considered  to  have  arrived 
near  this;  indeed,  they  will  bo  here  as  soon  as  the  distance  can  be 
crossed. 

FROM  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR  TO  HIS  MAJESTY  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

March  9th. 

Your  Majesty's  letter,  which  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  a  trusts 
worthy  person,  has  been  received.  Please  God,  if  you  can  only 
cause  delay  for  one  month,  whatever  may  be  your  wish  can  be 
arranged.  Rest  at  ease,  since  the  army  under  General  Pollock, 
together  with  the  Sikh  force,  has  arrived  at  Peshawur,  and  may 
be  considered  as  having  arrived  near  this.  Whatever  the  bearer 
of  this  may  say  is  worthy  of  belief.* 

But  the  difficulties  of  the  Shah  were  now  drawing  to 
a  close ;  his  days  were  numbered.  Whilst  he  was  await- 
ing the  receipt  of  answers  to  these  letters,  the  excitement 
in  Caubul  was  increasing — the  division  among  the  chiefs 
was  becoming  more  and  more  irreconcilable.  Horribly 
perplexed  and  bewildered,  anxious  at  once  to  appear  in 
the  eyes  of  his  countrymen  true  to  the  national  cause,  and 
to  retain  the  good-will  of  the  English  by  some  show  of 
fidelity  to  them,  he  fell  into  every  kind  of  inconsistency, 
was  suspected  by  both  parties,  and  either  way  was 
rushing  on  destruction.  At  last  the  chiefs  called  upon 
him  to  prove  his  sincerity  by  placing  himself  at  the  head 

*  MS.JUcords* 


378  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

of  all  the  available  troops,  and  marching  down  upon 
Jellalabad.  The  Shah  yielded  a  reluctant  consent ;  and, 
on  the  29th  of  March  sent  round  his  criers  to  proclaim 
that  he  was  about  to  march  southward  on  the  31st;  that 
the  chiefs  were  to  accompany  him,  and  to  send  out  their 
tents  on  the  preceding  day.  The  summons  was  scantily 
obeyed.  The  Kuzzilbash  chief  declared  that  as  neither 
the  King  nor  the  minister  had  supplied  him  with  money, 
he  could  not  move.  The  King  said  that  he  had  no 
confidence  in  the  chiefs,  and  that,  therefore,  he  would 
not  go,  but  that  Ameen-ooUah  might  go  for  him.  And 
so  the  expedition  was  postponed.  In  the  mean  while, 
Akbar  Khan  was  writing  urgent  letters  to  Caubul  cla- 
mouring for  reinforcements,  and  urging  that  it  was 
wretched  policy  to  be  eternally  at  variance  with  one 
another — quarrelling  for  money  and  quarrellmg  for  rank 
— instead  of  making  common  cause  against  the  hated 
Feringhees.* 

After  a  pause  of  a  few  days  the  Eling  again  consented 
to  march.  His  suspicion  of  the  Barukyzes,  however,  was 
not  easily  to  be  allayed.  Nor  was  it  wholly  without  rea- 
son. Even  impartial  lookers-on  prophesied  that  if  he 
left  Caubul  he  would  either  be  murdered  or  blinded  by 

*  On  the  2nd  of  April  Mohun  Lai  will  force  their  march  through  Khai bur, 

wrote  from  Caubul:  *'  A  letter  has  though  he  has  sent  Sultan  Jan  with 

been   received   by  Mahomed  Akbar  a  few  hundred  men  to  reinforce  the 

Khan,  which  was  carried  by  Ameen-  people  of  Khaibur;  but  if  the  Eng^ 

oollah  Khan  and  read  by  the  Shah,  fish  enter  and  pass  the  Kliaibur  once, 

It  also  passed  under  my  sight  through  no  one  shall  be  able  to  oppose  them, 

the  kindness  of  the  Persian  chiefs.    It  Therefore  <he  chiefs,  as  well  as  the 

contained  that  Mahomed  Akbar  has  Shah,  at  Caubul,  should  not  quarrel 

been  always  writing  to  send  the  troops  for  the  distribution  of  the  money  and 

to  assist  him  against  Jellalabad,  but  ranks,  but  exert  themselves  to  come 

nobody  has  heard  him.     Now  he  has  down  immediately  to  Jellalabad  and 

been  informed  by  his  trusty  men  at  reduce  it  before  the  English  should 

Peshawur  that  five  battalions  of  the  pass  Khaibur;  otherwise  he  (Akbar) 

English  have  reached  Hussna  Abdal,  is  risking  and  ending  his  life  for  the 

and  when   they  join   the    forces  at  faith  of  Mahomed,  and  will  continue 

Peshawur  they,  in  company  with  the  to  exert  himself  as  long  as  he  lives." 

battalions  of  the  Najeebs  of  the  Sikhs,  — [Af5.  Correspondence.} 


DEATH  OF  SHAH  0OOJAH.  379 

the  Barukyzes.*  Aware  of  these  suspicions,  the  Newab 
sent  his  wife  to  Shah  Soojah  with  a  sealed  Koran,  assur- 
ing the  King  with  a  solemn  oath  that  the  Barukyzes  and 
other  chiefs  would  be  true  to  him.  Fortified  by  this 
assurance,  the  Shah  moved  out  of  the  Balla  Hissar  on 
the  4th  of  April,  but  before  nightfall  returned  to  the 
palace,  determined  on  the  following  morning  to  review 
his  troops  and  then  to  start  for  Jellalabad.  Rising  early 
on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  he  arrayed  himself  in  royal  ap- 
parel, and,  accompanied  by  a  small  party  of  Hindostanees, 
proceeded  under  a  salute,  in  a  chair  of  state,  towards  his 
camp,  which  had  been  pitched  at  Seeah-Sungh.  But 
Soojah-ool-dowlah,  the  son  of  the  Newab,  had  gone  out 
before  him,  and  placed  in  ambush  a  party  of  Jezailchees. 
As  the  Shah  and  his  followers  were  making  their  way 
towards  the  regal  tent  the  marksmen  fired  upon  them. 
The  volley  took  murderous  effect.  Several  of  the  bearers 
and  of  the  escort  were  struck  down ;  and  the  King  him- 
self killed  on  the  spot.  A  ball  had  entered  his  brain. 
Soojah-ool-dowlah  then  rode  up;  and  as  he  contemp- 
lated his  bloody  work,  the  body  of  the  unhappy  King, 
vain  and  pompous  as  he  was  to  the  very  last,  wafi 
stripped  of  all  the  jewels  about  it — ^the  jewelled  dagger, 
the  jewelled  girdle,  the  jewelled  head-dress;  and  it  was 
then  cast  into  a  ditch. 

The  news  of  the  King's  murder  spread  like  wildfire. 
Great  was  the  consternation.  Futteh  Jung,  the  second 
son  of  the  Shah,  on  receiving  the  sad  tidings  of  his 
father's  death,  made  with  all  speed  towards  the  Balla 
Hissar;  but  the  gates  were  guarded;  so  he  turned  back 
and  sought  refuge  in  the  fort  of  Mahomed  Khan,  Bayat. 
That  night  however,  Mahomed  Khan,  in  concert  with 

*  **  The  Shah,  I  am  told,  has  made  he  will  either  be  murdered  or  made 

up  his  mind  again  to  proceed  in  person  blind  by  the  Barukzyes.'' — [^Letter  of 

to  Jellalabad;  but  1  scarcely  believe  Mohun  Lai:  MS,  Correspondence.'] 
that  he  will  ever  march,  and  if  he  does 


380  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

Ameen-ooUah,  who  held  the  Balla  Hissar,  restored  the 
Prince  to  the  palace ;  and  they  agreed  to  proclaim  him 
King.  The  body  of  Shah  Soojah  was  recovered,  and  for 
some  days  it  lay  in  state.  The  royal  family  declared 
that  until  sentence  had  been  passed  upon  the  mur- 
derer it  should  not  be  buried.  The  MooUahs  were  as- 
sembled to  expound  the  punishment  due  to  so  atrocious 
an  offender;  and  they  pronounced,  on  the  authority 
of  their  religious  books,  that  the  murderer  of  the  King 
should  be  stoned  to  death.  But  Ameen-ooUah  Khan 
interposed.  He  said  that  it  was  not  a  time  to  carry  out 
such  a  sentence ;  all  parties  were  bound  to  league  them- 
selves together  to  fight  against  the  Feringhees;  and 
intestine  animosities  ought  therefore  to  be  forgot. 

To  no  one  were  the  circumstances  of  the  Shah's  death 
a  source  of  deeper  horror  and  regret  than  to  the  good 
old  Newab,  the  father  of  the  murderer.  He  is  said  to 
have  sworn  an  oath  never  again  to  see  his  son  beneath 
his  roof,  or  to  suffer  him  to  be  named  in  his  presence.* 
Various  circumstances  have  been  assigned  as  the  proxi- 
mate causes  of  the  murder  of  the  unfortunate  Shah.  It 
was  said  that  he  had  drawn  down  upon  himself  the 
increased  animosity  of  the  Barukzyes,  by  appointing  to 
the  command  of  the  army  a  son  of  Ameen-oollah  Khan. 
Akbar  Khan,  too,  had  recently  been  wounded  by  an 
accidental  shot  from  a  Pesh-Khidmut,  or  attendant, 
which  was  said  to  have  been  designed  to  take  the  life  of 
the  Sirdar;  and  it  had  been  rumoured  that  Shah  Soojah 
had  bribed  the  man  to  make  the  murderous  attempt. 
That  the  Newab  Zemaun  Khan  was  not  implicated  in 

*  *^  I  ought  to  have  mentioned,  in  the  atrocious  murder  by  his  son  of 

justice  to  that  kind-hearted  and  really  the  late  unfortunate  Kong,  that  he 

good  man,  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  swore  never  again  to  see  him  inside 

whose  character  is  esteemed  bj  all  his  house,  and  that  henceforth  his 

who    know    him,   whether  Afghan,  name  should  never  be  mentioned  in 

Hindostanee,  or  European,  that  he  his  presence.'*  —  [^Captain  JohnsorCs 

was  so  much  horrified  on  hearing  of  l^arrative  of  his  Captivity:  MS^I 


FIDELITY  OF  THE  SHAH.  381 

the  foul  transaction,  all  men  are  willing  to  believe;  but 
it  was  intended  to  strengthen  the  party  of  which  he  was 
then  the  acknowledged  chief  It  was  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  great  strife  which  for  forty  years  had  been 
raging  between  Shah  Soojah  and  the  Barukzye  Sirdars. 
Indeed,  it  would  have  been  little  in  accordance  with 
the  general  tenor  of  Afghan  history  if  this  unfortunate 
Prince  had  not  died  a  violent  death.  After  so  eventftil 
a  life,  it  would  have  been  strange  indeed  if  he  had  sunk 
to  rest  peaceably  on  his  bed. 

Among  the  obscurer  points  of  Afghan  history,  there 
is  not  one  more  obscure  than  that  which  involves  the 
question  of  the  fidelity  of  Shah  Soojah.  That  doubts 
were  cast  upon  his  sincerity  has  been  already  shown. 
Conscious  of  this,  he  entered  upon  a  defence  of  his 
conduct  in  a  series  of  letters  to  the  British  authorities 
which  I  have  now  given  to  the  world.  Written  hastily, 
and  under  the  influence  of  strong  excitement,  they 
carry  very  little  conviction  with  them.  The  main  object 
of  these  letters  appears  to  have  been  the  extraction  of 
money  from  the  British  treasury.  The  Shah  continued 
to  assert,  that  having  no  money  he  had  no  power,  but 
that  if  money  were  sent  to  him  he  would  be  able  to  do 
great  things  for  his  late  allies.  Death  makes  many  re- 
velations. The  death  of  Shah  Soojah  revealed  the 
mendacity  and  the  avarice  of  the  man.  Some  twenty 
lakhs  of  rupees,  besides  jewels  of  large  value,  were 
found  to  have  been  in  his  possession  when  he  died.* 

This   disagreeable  circumstance,  though  by  no  means 

*  Mohun  Lai,  in  a  letter  to  Cap-  treasury  hoarded  up  with  great  puns 

tain    MackesoD,    Caubul,   April  10,  bj  his  father,  the  King.    He  spends 

1842,    says  :   *'  Prince  Futteh  Jung  a  good  deal  of  it,  to  employ  the  peo- 

was  taken  prisoner  in   the   fort  of  pie  and  make  his  party  strong.  .  .^ . 

Mahomed  Khan,  Bayat,  and  at  even  It  is  estimated  to  be  twenty  lakhs  in 

released  by  force  of  Ameen-oollah  cash  and  a  considerable  quantity  of 

and  the  Populzyes.     As  soon  as  he  jewels." — [J/5.  Corresponaeiice.'] 
reached  the   palace  he   opened  the 


382  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

conclusive  against  the  general  fidelity  of  the  Shah,  cer- 
tainly will  not  predispose  the  inquirer  to  take  an  unduly 
favorable  view  of  his  conduct. 

It  must,  however,  be  always  kept  steadily  in  view, 
that  the  circumstances  of  Shah  Soojah's  position  were 
such  as  to  surround  him  with  an  atmosphere  of  doubt 
and  suspicion.  That  the  chiefs  made  use  of  the  King's 
name  at  the  outset  of  the  insurrection,  and  produced  an  in- 
flammatory document  said  to  bear  the  royal  seal,  is  one  of 
the  most  notorious  facts  in  the  entire  history  of  the  war. 
The  seal  was  genuine,  but  the  document  was  a  suppo- 
sititious one.  Nothing  is  more  common,  in  times  of 
popular  excitement,  than  for  the  Afghans  to  endeavour 
to  injure  one  another  by  giving  currency  to  forged  in- 
struments. It  is  to  the  last  degree  improbable  that,  at 
this  time.  Shah  Soojah  would  have  committed  himself 
by  putting  his  seal  to  any  documents  which  might  have 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  his  European  allies,  and  laid  bare 
the  blackness  of  his  treachery.  But  that  he  would  have 
been  glad  to  have  cast  off  the  Feringhee  alliance  and  to 
have  ruled  without  the  restraint  of  our  superintendence 
and  interference,  is  not  to  be  questioned.  He  may, 
therefore,  have  regarded  with  inward  satisfaction  the 
progress  of  the  insurrectionary  movement,  and  rejoiced 
in  its  ultimate  success ;  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  more  than  a  passive  instrument  in  the  hands  of 
others.  It  was  obviously  his  policy  to  appear  all  things 
to  all  people.  He  could  not  venture  to  take  any  de- 
cided course.  He  never  in  the  prime  of  life  had  been 
conspicuous  for  manliness  of  character;  and  now,  in 
his  old  age,  he  was  more  than  ever  a  waverer  and  a 
waiter  upon  fortune.  Perhaps,  I  should  not  err  if  I 
were  to  say  that  he  was  true  neither  to  his  own  country- 
men nor  to  his  British  allies.  He  was  prepared  to  side 
with  either  the  one  or  the  other,  according  to  the  direc- 


DESIGNS  OF  THE  SHAH.  383 

tion  in  whichi  the  tide  of  success  might  be  seen  to  flow. 
He  had  no  affection  for  the  English;  but  he  dearly 
loved  English  money.  He  knew  the  value  of  British 
aid;  but  he  would  fain  have  had  it  from  a  distance. 
From  the  very  first  he  had  disliked  the  obtrusive 
manner  in  which  it  had  been  forced  upon  him.  He 
wanted  the  prestige  of  British  support  without  the  en- 
cumbrance of  British  control.  To  retain  our  friendship, 
and  yet  to  rid  himself  of  our  presence,  was  unquestion- 
ably the  desire  of  the  Shah ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether 
his  desire  would  ever  have  shaped  itself  into  any  overt 
acts  of  hostility  against  the  government  which  had  re- 
stored him  to  the  throne  of  his  fathers.  He  was  not 
capable  of  gratitude,  even  if  there  had  been  anything  to 
call  it  forth;*  but  he  had  sufficient  sagacity  to  know 
that  his  political  existence  was  dependent  upon  the  will 
of  the  British  Government.  And  he  was  cautious  not  to 
do  anything  to  provoke  its  vengeance.  The  chiefs  be- 
lieved at  the  commencement  of  the  November  outbreak, 
that  though  the  insurrection  would  soon  be  crushed, 
such  a  manifestation  of  popular  feeling  would  in  all  pro- 
bability cause  the  British  authorities  to  tremble  for  the 
safety  of  their  position,  and  induce  them  to  evacuate  the 
country  in  the  ensuing  spring.  Encouraging  a  similar  be- 
liefi  Shah  Soojah  may  have  regarded  with  inward  satisfac- 
tion the  outbreak  of  the  revolution.  But  he  was  surprised 
and  alarmed  by  the  rapidity  of  its  progress;  and  was 
wholly  unprepared  for  the  sanguinary  termination  of  his 
connexion  with  his  Christian  allies.  That  he  was  in  a 
state  of  painful  depression  and  prostration  throughout 
the  entire  period  of  the  insurrection  is  not  to  be  ques- 

*  I    utterly    repudiate    the    cant  we  had  carried  him  back  to  Caubnl, 

which  fixes  the  stigma  of  ingratitude  and  kept  him  there,  not  for  his  pui^ 

on  the  character  of  Shah  Soojah.  No  poses  but  for  our  own. 
one  knew  better  than  the  Shah  that 


384  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

tioned;  and  it  is  scarcely  less  certain  that  he  never 
wholly  recovered  from  the  terror  which  then  bewildered 
him.  The  irruption  culminated  somewhat  too  violently 
for  a  man  of  Shah  Soojah's  temperament;  and  when  he 
foimd  what  a  convulsion  had  been  raised  around  him, 
he  shrunk  back  in  dismay.  On  either  side  dangers  and 
diflSculties  started  up  in  his  path.  He  strove  to  save 
himself  by  doing  little,  and  being  to  all  outward  seem- 
ing the  friend  both  of  the  A%han  insurgents  and  their 
European  foes.  Duplicity  is  never  long  successful. 
Doubted  by  both  parties,  the  King  became  an  object  of 
general  contempt.  He  trimmed  between  the  two  con- 
tending hosts,  and  escaped  the  rocks  on  neither  side  of 
the  vessel. 

On  such  a  question  as  this,  it  is  right  that  the 
opinions  of  the  leading  political  officers,  who  were  best 
acquainted  with  the  character  and  the  conduct  of  the 
Shah,  and  had  the  best  opportunities  of  investigating 
the  circumstances  of  the  Caubul  insurrection,  should  be 
summarily  recorded.  "  To  my  mind,"  wrote  Captain 
Mackeson  to  Mr.  Clerk,  "  there  has  ever  appeared  but 
little  doubt  that  his  Majesty  Shah  Soojah  was,  in  the 
commencement,  the  instigator  of  the  Caubul  insurrec- 
tion. Had  the  first  blow  struck  by  the  rebels  been 
effectual,  his  Majesty  might,  perhaps,  have  thrown  off 
the  mask  earlier;  but  our  troops  in  cantonments  held 
their  position  though  surrounded  by  foes  without  num- 
ber, whilst  those  in  the  Balla  Hissar  held  his  Majesty 
in  check.  Nay,  the  chances  were  at  one  time  so  much 
in  favour  of  our  success,  that  his  Majesty  discarded  his 
own  instruments,  refusing  all  their  solicitations  to  place 
himself  at  their  head.  To  such  an  extent  did  he  carry 
his  reluctant  adherence  to  us,  that  at  length  the  rebels, 
in  their  turn,  were  obliged  to  seek  for  a  leader  among 


OPINIONS  OF  MACGREGOR  AND  RAWUNSON.  385 

the  Barukzyes.  His  Majesty  then  husbanded  his  own  re- 
sources, allowing  the  Barukzyes  and  our  people  to  fight 
out  the  battle.  Sir  William  Macnaghten  would  not  have 
treated  with  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  he  not  been 
convinced  of  the  treachery  towards  us  of  Shah  Soojah"* 

Captain  Macgregor*s  opinion  coincides,  but  with  some 
amount  of  qualification,  with  that  of  the  last  witness.  "  I 
agree  with  you "  (Mackeson),  he  wrote,  "  in  thinking 
that  the  Shah  was  more  or  less  implicated  in  the  insur- 
rection; but  when  he  saw  that  it  took  such  a  serious 
turn,  I  really  believe  that  he  repented — even  so  soon  as 
he  heard  of  Burnes's  assassination,  and  of  the  massacre  of 
the  other  officers  in  the  city.  His  Majesty  pressed  Sir 
William  to  remove  all  the  British  troops  into  the  Balla 
Hissar,  which  in  itself  looked  like  a  friendly  feeling 
towards  us."t 

The  opinion  of  Major  Rawlinson  sets  in  an  opposite 
direction.  It  throws  a  side-light  from  Candahar  on 
the  conduct  of  the  Shah  at  this  time.  "  From  every- 
thing I  can  learn,  I  should  say  that  the  Shah  was  cer- 
tainly well  inclined  to  us ;  and  if  assured  of  our 
again  placing  confidence  in  him,  would  cordially  sup- 
port our  advance.  He  has  certainly  done  as  little  as 
he  could,  keeping  up  appearances  with  the  Mussulman 
party,  to  complicate  our  position  at  this  place,  and  I 
learn  that  for  some  time  past  the  prevalent  opinion  in 
the  Douranee  camp  has  been  that  the  Shah  desired  our 
success.''^ 

*  MS.  Correspondence,  of  an  anny  from  Caiibul.    He  knows 

t  Macgregor  was  of  opinion  that  that  whilst  Dost  Mahomed  is  in  our 

afterthedepartnreof  the  British  from  possession  we  can  make  use  of  him 

Caubul,  the  conduct  of  tlie  Shah  in-  as  a  powerful  weapon  against  his  Ma- 

dicated  a  friendly  feeling  towards  us.  jesty,  and  this  is  the  great  hold  we 

**  The  Shah  is,  1  believe,  acting  in  a  have  upon  his    friendship." — IMS, 

friendly  manner  towards  us,"  he  wrote  Correspondence,"] 
to  General  Pollock,  "and  will,  if  he        J  MS,  Correspondence. 
has  the  power,  prevent  the  march 

VOL.  ir.  2  C 


386  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

But  of  all  the  officers  connected  with  the  British 
Mission,  John  ConoUy  was  the  one  who  enjoyed  the 
best  opportunities  of  arriving  at  a  correct  estimate  of  the 
conduct  of  the  Shah.  During  the  insurrection  he  was 
in  attendance  on  the  King  at  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  he 
was  at  Caubul  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  Conolly's 
opinions  are  on  record.  He  seems  at  one  time  to  have 
entertained  the  strongest  possible  conviction  that  the 
Shah  was  true  to  his  British  allies.  "I  believe,"  he 
wrote  on  the  17th  of  January,  "that  he  is  heart  and 
soul  in  our  interest;  and  it  is  contrary  to  all  reason  to 
suppose  otherwise."  But  by  the  15th  of  February  his 
belief  in  the  fidelity  of  the  Shah  seems  to  have  been 
shaken;  for  he  wrote  to  Macgregor:  "It  is  generally 
believed  and  asserted  throughout  the  town  that  his 
Majesty  instigated  the  late  rebellion.  I  have  never  been 
able  to  prove  the  accusation,  though  I  cannot  but  think 
that  he  was,  directly  or  indirectly,  the  cause  of  the 
revolution."  A  month  afterwards,  writing  still  more 
distinctly  to  General  Pollock,  he  cast  further  doubts  on 
the  fidelity  of  the  Shah.  "  I  would  suggest,"  he  said, 
"  that  some  direct  understanding  be  come  to  with 
his  Majesty.  It  is  generally  believed  that  he  caused 
the  late  rebellion;  and  his  conduct  lately  has  been 
strange,  to  say  the  least  of  it.  He  tried  to  raise 
a  popular  tumult  against  us,  hoping  thereby  to  ruin 
the  Newab.  He  did  not  interest  himself  in  any  way 
about  our  sick  when  their  wretched,  helpless  con- 
dition was  formally  represented  to  him  in  a  petition 
from  me — added  to  the  circumstance  alluded  to  of  his 
telling  our  host  to  send  us  to  Ameen-oolah,  who  is 
our  most  bitter  enemy.  He  is,  moreover,  surroimded 
by  the  Populzye  leaders  of  the  late  insurrection,  whose 
persons,  I  presume,  our  government  will  demand.  I 
have  not  received  a  letter  from  him  for  a  month ;  but 


CHARACTER  OP  SHAH  SOOJAH.  387 

the  fear  of  being  suspected  of  being  in  communication 
with  us  may  be  the  cause  of  his  disregard  of  us."  And 
again,  at  the  end  of  the  month,  writing  to  Major 
Rawlinson,  he  said :  "  The  King  is  generally  abused  and 
reported  as  the  instigator  of  tlie  late  rebellion.  He  has 
proved  himself,  I  think,  unworthy  of  our  friendship.  If 
we  are  not  able  to  prove  his  villany,  his  cunning  will, 
no  doubt,  prompt  him  to  side  with  us  on  the  near 
approach  of  our  troops,  for  he  is  well  aware  that  his 
subjects  would  seize  him  if  he  ventured  out  of  the  Balla 
Hissar.  He  is,  as  the  Afghans  say,  like  grain  between 
two  mill-stones."* 

Many  more  passages  might  be  cited  from  the  corre- 
spondence of  our  political  officers  to  show  the  opinions 
entertained  at  this  time  by  those  most  competent  to  de- 
termine the  question  of  the  Shah^s  fidelity.  But,  after  all, 
the  question  remains  an  open  one.  The  future  historian 
may  still  lose  himself  in  a  sea  of  conjecture.  From  the 
facts  before  us,  and  from  all  that  is  known  of  the  cha- 
racter of  Shah  Soojah,  the  inference  is,  as  I  have  said, 
that  the  King  was  faithful  neither  to  his  own  countrymen 
nor  to  his  British  allies.  He  was  at  best  a  poor  creature. 
He  had  few  good  qualities.  But  it  should  in  justice  be 
remembered,  that  he  was  surrounded  by  circumstances 
against  which  an  abler  and  a  better  man  might  have 
struggled  in  vain.  He  had  long  been  greatly  perplexed 
and  embarrassed  by  the  anomalies  of  his  position.  He 
was  tired  of  playing  the  part  of  the  puppet ;  and  had 
begun  to  long  for  an  opportunity  either  of  becoming 
King  indeed,  or  of  throwing  down  the  trappings  and  the 
cares  of  royalty,  and  ending  his  days  in  the  calm  security 
of  his  old  asylum  at  Loodhianah.  He  used  to  say  that 
Macnaghten  did  all  the  good  that  was  done  in  Afghan- 
istan— and  all  the  evil    too }   for  that  he  himself  did 

*  MS,  Correspondence, 

2c2 


388  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

nothing.  Unpopular  measures  of  which  he  was  not  the 
author  were  executed  in  his  name;  he  was  compelled 
outwardly  to  sanction  much  of  which  he  inwardly  dis- 
approved ;  he  saw  dangers  thickening  around  him  with- 
out the  power  of  averting  them,  and  painfully  felt  that 
he  had  always  been  a  cypher,  and  had  now  become  a 
hissing  and  a  reproach. 

Under  the  directorship  which  we  had  forced  upon  him. 
Shah  Soojah  was  not  happy.  He  was  altogether  a  dis- 
appointed man.  He  did  not  find  the  sweets  of  restored 
dominion  what  he  expected  them  to  be.  He  was  an 
isolated  being.  The  sympathies  neither  of  the  Afghans 
nor  the  English  were  with  him.  All  men  suspected  him. 
None  loved  him.  When,  therefore,  he  talked  about 
leaving  Caubul  he  was  probably  not  insincere;  but  he 
may  have  thought  sometimes  that  if  the  English  would 
leave  Caubul  he  might  enjoy  his  sovereignty  more.  If 
to  have  desired  to  rid  himself  of  an  incubus,  which  sate 
so  heavily  upon  him,  was  to  be  faithless  to  the  British, 
Shah  Soojah  was  unquestionably  faithless ;  but  this  is  a 
kind  of  infidelity  so  common  to  humanity  of  all  ranks 
and  in  all  places,  that  to  record  it  against  the  Shah  is 
only  to  say  that  he  was  a  man. 

But  as  regards  the  actions  of  the  King,  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served that  Shah  Soojah  was  not  a  man  of  action.  His 
early  life  had  been  one  rather  of  strenuous  passiveness 
than  of  genuine  activity.  He  had  always  been  courting 
suflering — having  much  done  to  him,  and  for  him,  rather 
than  doing  much  for  himself.  Since  the  British  had 
taken  him  in  hand  he  had  actually  done  nothing.  When 
the  insurrection  burst  over  Caubul,  he  sate  down  and 
waited.  After  the  departure  of  the  British  he  sate  down 
and  waited.  He  was  afi-aid  of  both  parties;  and  unwilling 
to  declare  himself  openly  until  he  could  clearly  see  how 
the  contest  would  end.    He  had  not  strength  of  mind  suffi- 


CUAKACTER  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  389 

cient  to  keep  him  faithful  to  any  one.  He  was  not  even 
true  to  himself.  The  question  is  less  a  question  of  fact 
than  of  character.  The  solution  of  the  difficulty  is  to  be 
found  in  the  idiosyncracy  of  the  man.  He  had  led  a 
very  eventful  life  ;  but  the  vicissitudes  of  his  career  had 
not  strengthened  his  character.  Anything  decided,  ac- 
tive, or  energetic,  was  not  to  be  expected  from  him. 
The  infirmity  of  age  was  now  superadded  to  the  infirmity 
of  purpose  which  had  characterised  his  greener  manhood ; 
and  if  he  had  taken  any  decided  part  in  the  great  contest 
which  followed  the  outburst  of  the  Caubul  insurrection, 
it  would  have  been  an  inconsistency  at  variance  with  the 
whole  tenor  of  his  past  life.  As  it  w^as,  the  conduct  of 
the  man  in  this  crisis  was  in  keeping  with  all  that  was 
known  of  his  character  and  his  antecedents.  Shah 
Soojah  was  not  a  hero;  and  he  did  not  play  a  heroic 
part.  The  British  Government  had  picked  him  out  of 
the  dust  of  Loodhianah,  simply  as  a  matter  of  conve- 
nience to  themselves ;  and  they  had  no  reason  to  com- 
plain that,  in  a  great  and  imminent  conjuncture,  he 
thought  less  of  their  convenience  than  his  own.  He 
proved  himself  at  the  last  to  be  very  much  what  we 
had  helped  to  make  him.  We  could  not  expect  him  to  be 
an  active  workman,  when  we  had  so  long  used  him  as  a 
tool. 


390  AEFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 


CHAPTER  U. 

[November,  1841— April,  1842.] 

Aff^rs  at  Candahar — Evil  Tidings  from  Caubtd— Maclaren^s  Brigade — 
Spread  of  the  Insurrection — ^Arrival  of  Atta  Mahmed — Flight  of  Bufdur 
Jang — Attack  on  the  Douranee  Camp — Continued  Hostilities— Attack 
upon  the  City — Action  in  the  Valley  of  the  Urghundab — Fall  of  Ghuznee 
— Defence  of  Khelat'i-Ghilzye — Movements  of  England's  Brigade. 

The  attention  of  the  reader  ought  now  no  longer  to  be 
withheld  from  that  part  of  the  country  where  General 
Nott  and  Major  Rawlinson  were  gallantly  and  success- 
fully holding  out  agamst  the  insurgent  Douranees,  and 
maintaining  the  character  of  the  British  nation  before 
the  tribes  of  Western  Afghanistan.  At  the  beginning  of 
November,  wrote  Rawlinson,  in  a  summary  of  events, 
drawn  up  with  such  masterly  distinctness  and  compre- 
hensiveness, that  the  historian  has  little  to  do,  in  this 
place,  but  to  submit  himself  to  its  guidance,*  '•  affairs 
wore  a  more  tranquil  and  promising  appearance  in  the 
Candahar  province  than  I  had  ever  witnessed  since  my 
assumption  of  the  charge  of  the  agency.  Akram  Khan, 
the  leader  of  the  Derawat  rebellion,  captured  by  Lieu- 

*  Major  Rawlinson  to  Government :  ter,  written  by  Major  Rawlinson  to 

March  6,  1842.    This  important  de-  Mr.  Colvin,  on  the  13th  of  December, 

spatch  was  published  by  Lord  Ellen-  I  am  indebted  for  the  information 

borough  in  the  Government  Gazette,  contained  in  the  earlier  portion  of 

and   subsequently  appeared  in  the  this  chapter. 
Blue  Book.    To  an  unpublishedUet- 


MASSACBE  OF  WOODBURN's  DETACHMENT.  391 

tenant  ConoUy,  had  been  executed  at  this  place  by  his 
Majesty's  orders.    Eight  of  the  most  influential  of  his 
colleagues  had  been  sent  by  me,  according  to  the  orders 
of  the  Envoy,  under  the  charge  of  Lieutenant  Crawford, 
to  Caubul;  that  officer  having  my  written  instructions 
to  destroy  his  prisoners  in  the  event  of  an  attempt  at 
rescue.     The  Hazareh  and  the  Belooch  tribes  had  been 
effectually  conciliated ;  the  Douranees  of  the  northern 
and  western  districts  had  been  humbled  and  overawed." 
The  troops  then  at  Candahar  consisted  of  her  Majesty's 
40th  Regiment ;  the  2nd,  16th,  38th,  40th,  and  43rd 
Regiments  of  Bengal  Native  Infantry;  Captain  Blood's 
battery  (Bombay  Artillery) ;  the  Shah's  Horse  Artillery, 
under  Captain  Anderson ;  some  regiments  of  the  Shah's 
infantry,    and    some  detachments  of  Irregular  Horse 
(Shah's  and  Skinner's),  the  weakness  of  the  force  lying 
in  this  arm.     The  tranquillity  of  the  country  seemed  to 
authorise  the  diminution  of  this  force,  and  a  brigade, 
comprising  the  16th,  42nd,  and  43rd  Regiments  of  Ben- 
gal Native  Infantry,  was  about  to  proceed,  under  Colonel 
Maclaren,  to  the  provinces  of  Hindostan.     On  the  7th 
of  November  it  commenced  its  march ;  but  on  the  even- 
ing of  that  day  some  startling  intelligence  was  brought 
into  Candahar.     A  detachment  of  130  men  under  Cap- 
tain Woodburn — that  officer  who,  in  the  month  of  July, 
had  so  distinguished  himself  on  the  banks  of  the  Hel- 
mund,  in  action  with  the  Douranee  rebels  under  Akh- 
tar  Khan — was  proceeding  from  Candahar  to  Caubul, 
when,  on  the  2nd  of  November,  after  they  had  passed 
Ghuznee,  they  were  attacked  by  swarms  of  A%hans, 
through  whom,  with  consummate  gallantry  and  skill, 
Woodburn  fought  his  way  to  the  little  fort  of  Syedabad. 
The  place   was   occupied  by   a  man  supposed  to  be 
friendly  to  us  ;*  and  the  English  officer,  surrounded  as 

*  lie  was  connected  with  our  postal  establishment. 


392  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

he  was  by  the  enemy,  gladly  accepted  his  oflfer  of  pro- 
tection. But  there  was  no  safety  within  the  fort.  For 
a  day  and  a  night  he  held  his  position  against  a  be- 
sieging enemy,  and  nobly  he  defended  himself.  But  his 
ammunition  fell  short;  and  then  there  came  tidings  of 
the  success  of  the  insurgents  at  Caubul.  On  this,  the 
chief  admitted  parties  of  the  enemy  into  the  towers  of 
his  own  Harem,  which  overlooked  the  court-yard  in 
which  the  Sepoys  were  quartered.  Then  the  massacre 
commenced.  Many  of  the  Sepoys  were  killed  on  the  spot. 
Others  threw  themselves  over  the  walls,  and  were  shot 
down  outside  the  fort.  Woodburn  himself,  with  a  few 
of  his  men,  took  post  in  a  tower  of  their  own  court,  and 
for  some  hours  they  gallantly  defended  themselves.  But 
they  fell  at  last.  The  enemy  burnt  them  out;  and  mas- 
sacred them  almost  to  a  man. 

On  receipt  of  this  intelligence  Rawlinson  at  once  re- 
commended the  General  to  halt  Maclaren's  brigade.  It 
was  accordingly  brought  back  to  Candahar.  It  was 
plain  that  some  mischief  was  brewing  in  the  country 
to  the  North.  A  week  of  doubt  and  anxiety  passed ;  and 
then  letters  came  from  Macnaghten  and  Elphinstone, 
announcing  that  Caubul  was  in  a  state  of  insurrec- 
tion, and  ordering  Maclaren's  brigade  to  be  despatched 
at  once  to  the  capital.  These  letters  came  on  with 
endorsements  from  Colonel  Palmer  at  Ghuznee,  and 
Major  Leech  at  Khelat-i-Ghilzye,  which  showed  that  in 
the  intervening  country  there  were  signs  of  the  coming 
storm.*     On  the  17th  of  November,  accompanied  by  a 

*  The  letter  to  Greneral  Nott  was  commanding  in  Afghanistan,   to  re- 
worded as  follows  :  quest  tl'.at  you  will  immediately  direct 
,,  .    .         ^            - .         ^  the  whole  of  the  troops  under  orders 
Assistant  Quarter-Master-Gene-  to  return  to  Hindostan  from  Canda- 
ral  8  JJffice,   Head  Quarters,  her  to  march  upon  Caubul  instead  of 
Caubul,  Novembers,  1841.  Shikarpore,  excepting  any  that  shall 
"Sir, — I  have  the  honour,  by  di-  have  got  beyond  the  Khojuck  Pass, 
rection  of  Major-General  Elphinstone,  and  that  you  will  instruct  the  officers 


TBEACHEBY  OF  THE  JANBAZ.  393 

troop  of  horse  artillery,  the  three  regiments  commenced 
their  march  to  the  northward. 

Anticipating  that  some  evil  might  arise  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Prince,  Sufder  Jung,  in  the  province,  after 
his  supercession  by  his  elder  and  better  disposed  bro- 
ther, Rawlinson  had  invited  him  to  come  in  from  Ze- 
mindawer,  and  he  now  suggested  the  expediency  of 
his  proceeding  to  Caubul,  with  Captain  Hart's  Janbaz 

who  may  command  to  use  the  utmost  "  Caubul,  Nov.  3,  1842. 

practicable  expedition.    You  are  re-        "  My  deak  Rawlinson, — We  have 

quested  to  attach  a  troop  of  his  Ma-  a  very  serious  insurrection  in  the  city 

jesty  the  Shah's  Horse  Artillery  to  just  now,  and  from  the  elements  of 

the  above  force,  and  likewise  half  the  which  it  is  composed,  I  apprehend 

first  regiment  of  cavalry.  much  disturbance  in  the  surrounding 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be.  Sir,  your  country  for  some  time  to  come.     It 

most  obedient  servant,  would  be  only  prudent,  therefore,  that 

'<  J.  Paton,  Capt.  A.  Q.  M.  G.  the  16tb,  42nd,  and  4drd,  with  a  troop 

"  To  Major-General  Nott,  ^^  Horse  Artillery  and  some  cavalry. 

Commanding  at  Candahar."  should  come  here  immediately.     Ge- 

^, .    ,  ,        /,  .  ne)ral  Nott  will  be  written  to  officially 

This  letter  was  sent,  under  a  flying  in  this  respect.    We  have  been  shelf- 

seal,    through    Colonel    Palmer,    at  jng  the  city  all  day,  but  apparently 

Ghuznee,  and  Major  Leech,  at  Khe-  ^uh  little  effect.     I  hope  there  will 

lat-i-Ghizye— Palmer  sent  it  on  with  be  no  difficulty  about  supplies.    Your 

this    endorsement  :    "  The    country  writing  to  Leech  will  obviate  this, 

getting  more    disturbed    every  day.  Qq  second  thoughts  I  shall  forward 

iiurnett  came  in  yesterday  after  being  this  letter  under  a  flying  seal  through 

attacked  on  the  road.     He  was  pur-  Palmer  and  Leech.     Unless  you  send 

sued,  when  he  fortunately  fell  m  with  up  this  reinforcement  there  will  be  a 

some  horsemen  I  had  sent  after  the  probability  of  our  supplies  being  cut 

fifty-two  camels  from  Candahar,  which  Qff^ 
have  been  taken  off.     No  tidings  of        '  ..  w.  H.  Macnaghten." 

Crawford.**     Leech  wrote  : —  »  ,.  ^  /.  ^^  r*««*«:«   i  «„.«««-  * 

A  line  from  Captain   Lawrence  to 

"  Khelat,  Nov.  12,  1841.  Colonel  Palmer  requested  him  to  send 

"  The  whole  of  the  Ghilzye  pri-  qj,  ^he  letter  express  through  Leech. 

soners  escaped  from  Caubul,  and  the  j^^ch  forwarded  it  with  a  few  words 

family   of    Husan    Khan  from    this  to  Rawlinson,  saying.  »'  What  think 

neighbourhood.     Khaker   Khan  and  you  of  a  Prince  and  some  treasure 

Munsoor  Khan   in   custody,  and  all  ^ith  the  brigade?     Please  reinforce 

the  other  families  expected  by  this  this  post  (Khelat-i-Ghilzye)  by  160, 

evening  to  be  safe  at  this  place. or  if  possible,  200  men-infantry." 

What  are  we  to  say  to  the  appearance  Another  endorsement  stated,  "  There 

en  route  to  Candahar  at  this  crisis  of  ^^e  nearly  100  maunds  of  atta  here, 

Saifadeen,  nephew  of  Atta  Mahomed  belonging  to  the  Bengal  commissariat 

Khan.     He  was  here  on  the  evening  disposable  for  the  brigade  proceeding 

of  the  8th."  towards  Caubul.   We  have  six  months 

Macnaghten*8  letter  was  addressed  supply  for  the  garrison. 

to  Rawlinson,  and  it  ran  in  the  fol-  "  H.  Milne.** 

lowing  words ;—  —  [AfjS.  Records.'] 


394  AFFAIRS  AT  CAKDAHAB. 

regiment,  which  was  to  follow  in  the  rear  of  Mac- 
laren's  brigade.  The  Prince  yielded  to  the  suggestion, 
and  went.  The  fidelity  of  the  Afghan  horse  was  doubt- 
ful, and  Rawlinson  was  glad  to  rid  himself  of  the  pre- 
sence both  of  a  discontented  Prince  and  a  body  of 
treacherous  A%han  horsemen — soldiers  raised,  mounted, 
armed,  equipped  and  disciplined  by  Shah  Soojah  and 
his  British  supporters,  seemingly  for  the  one  sole  pur- 
pose of  drawing  their  swords  against  the  very  power  to 
which  they  owed  their  military  existence. 

All  through  the  month  of  November  Candahar  re- 
mained tranquil.  But  it  was  obvious  that  the  course  of 
insurrection  was  setting  towards  the  West  Tidings  came 
in  from  the  country  about  Ghuznee,  which  showed  that 
the  road  to  the  capital  was  infested  by  the  insurgents. 
Lieutenant  Crawford,  who  was  escorting  the  Douranee 
prisoners  to  Caubul  had  been  attacked  by  overwhelm- 
ing numbers  near  Ghuznee;  and  had  suffered  his  pri- 
soners to  escape ;  or  rather,  had  lost  them  with  all 
his  baggage,  and  a  considerable  number  of  his  horses 
and  men.*    Soon  afterwards  Guddoo  Khan,  an  Afghan 

*  It  does  not  appear  that  the  con-  alive,  and  I  had  only  to  decide  on 
duct  of  Lieutenant  Crawford  was,  in  putting  them  to  death  or  setting  them 
any  way,  open  to  censure.  He  was  the  at  liberty.  My  instructions  would 
bearer,  as  has  been  shown,  of  written  have  justified  ray  pursuing  the  former 
instructions,  authorising  him  to  de-  course,  but  the  poor  wretches  had 
stroy  the  prisoners  if  they  attempted  clearly  made  no  attempt  to  escape ; 
to  escape,  but  there  seems  to  have  they  were  in  no  way  answerable  for 
been  no  connivance  between  them  the  attack  made  on  my  party,  as  was 
and  the  party  who  attacked  the  escort,  evident  from  one  of  their  number 
Crawford  himself  says,  in  a  narrative  falling  by  the  sword  of  our  adversa- 
which  he  drew  up,  and  which  was  ries;  and  I  conceived  then,  and  do 
subsequently  published  in  a  Bombay  now  conceive,  that  in  letting  these 
paper  :  ^^  One  prisoner  was  cut  down  men  go  with  their  lives^  I  was  not  only 
by  a  horseman  of  the  enemy  (plainly  acting  according  to  the  strict  letter  of 
showing  there  was  no  collusion  be-  my  instructions,  but  that  justice  and 
tween  them),  two  others  rolled  over  humanity  required  I  should  not  slay 
in  a  ditch,  where,  with  their  horse  a  them  in  cold  blood.  Had  I  put  them 
top  of  them,  and  their  legs  chained  to  death,  then  Shumshoodeen  or  Ma- 
under his  belly,  I  left  them  ;  indeed,  homed  Akbar  would  have  been  equally 
I  now  found  it  was  impossible  I  could  justified  in  taking  our  lives  (the  lives 
ever  get  my  charge  into  Ghuznee  of  all  their  prisoners)  on  the  advance 


BETURN  OF  MACLAREN^S  BRIGADE.  395 

officer  in  the  service  of  the  Shah  and  his  British  sup- 
porters, who  had  accompanied  Crawford's  detachment—. 
a  man  of  unimpeachable  integrity  and  unquestionable 
gallantry  and  good  conduct — ^was  on  his  return  from 
Ghuznee  to  Candahar  "  overpowered  by  numbers  and 
slain,  with  seventeen  of  his  best  men,  losing  at  t\e  same 
time  forty-five  horses,  and  all  the  arms  and  baggage  of 
the  Bessaleh."  These  incidents  seemed  to  portend  the 
near  approach  of  the  thunder-douds  that  were  break- 
ing over  Caubul.  Candahar  was  as  yet  only  beneath 
the  skirts  of  the  storm. 

On  the  8th  of  December  Maclaren's  brigade  returned 
to  Candahar.  How  it  happened  that  these  regiments 
had  failed  to  make  good  their  march  to  Caubul  is  not 
to  be  satisfactorily  explained.  It  is  still  stated  by  officers 
who  accompanied  the  detachment,  that  the  difficulties  of 
the  march  have  been  greatly  exaggerated;  and  that,  at 
all  events,  they  might  have  been  overcome.  Nott  sent 
the  brigade  with  a  reluctance  which  he  took  no  care 
to  conceal.  It  was  his  wish  to  retain  the  three  regi- 
ments at  Candahar ;  and  he  was  not  a  man  to  shrink  from 
the  utterance  of  his  feelings  on  such  a  subject  as  this. 
"  Remember,"  he  said  to  Maclaren  and  his  staff,  when 
they  presented  themselves  at  the  General's  quarters  to 
take  leave  of  their  old  commandant,  "  the  despatch  of 
this  brigade  to  Caubul  is  not  my  doing.  I  am  com- 
pelled to  defer  to  superior  authority;  but  in  my  own 
private  opinion  I  am  sending  you  all  to  destruction." 
The  brigade  marched ;  but,  starting  under  such  auspiceSi 
there  was  little  likelihood  of  its  reaching  its  destination. 
There  were  few  officers  in  the  force  who  did  not  know 
that,  on  the  first  colourable  pretext,  it  would  be  turned 
back. 

of  Pollock  and  Nott  on  Caubul.    I  had   acted  perfectly  right."     These 

may  add  that  the  Court  of  Inquiry,  escaped  prisoners,   however,   subse- 

which  I  called  for,  after  investigation  quently  became  the  most  active  of 

all  the  circumstances,  decided  that  I  our  enemies. 


396  ^VFiTMHS  AT  CANDAHAK. 

A  pretext  very  soon  presented  itself.  Two  marches 
beyond  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  there  was  a  light  fall  of  snow. 
On  the  following  day  there  was  more  snow,  and  some  of 
the  commissariat  donkeys  died  upon  the  road.  On  the 
next,  Maclaren  halted  the  brigade,  and  ordered  a  com- 
mittee jto  assemble  and  report  upon  the  state  of  the  com- 
missariat cattle,  with  reference  to  their  fitness  for  the 
continuance  of  the  march  to  Caubul.  The  committee 
assembled;  registered  the  number  of  deaths  among  the 
carriage-cattle  during  the  two  preceding  days ;  and  re- 
ported that  as  winter  had  now  set  in,  and  as  the  loss  of 
cattle  would  increase  every  march  that  was  made  to  the 
northward,  it  would  be  impracticable  for  the  force  to 
reach  Caubul  at  all  in  an  efficient  state.  On  this,  about 
the  end  of  November,  Maclaren  ordered  the  brigade  to 
retrace  its  steps. 

But  the  snow  had  now  ceased.  The  little  that  had 
fallen  soon  melted  away,  and  for  weeks  not  another  flake 
fell  throughout  the  entire  country.  The  weather  was  re- 
markably fine  and  open ;  and  there  is  not  a  doubt  that  the 
brigade  might  easily  have  made  good  its  way  to  Caubul. 
But  it  does  not  appear  ever  to  have  been  seriously  in- 
tended that  the  force  should  reach  its  destination.  Mac- 
claren  and  his  officers  knew  well  that  the  return  of  the 
brigade  to  Candahar  would  be  welcome  to  General  Nott, 
and  that  there  was  not  likely  to  be  a  very  close  inquiry 
into  the  circumstances  attending  the  retrograde  move- 
ment. There  was  in  reality  little  more  than  a  show  of 
proceeding  to  the  relief  of  Caubul.  The  regiments  were 
wanted  at  Candahar  ;  and  to  Candahar  they  returned. 
How  far  their  arrival  might  have  helped  to  save  Elphin- 
stone's  force  from  destruction  can  only  be  conjectured; 
but  it  is  right  to  admit  the  belief,  that  if  Nott  had  known 
to  what  straits  the  Caubul  army  would  soon  be  reduced, 
he  would  not  have  uttered  a  word  to  encourage  the  re- 
turn of  the  relieving  brigade  to  Candahar. 


POLICY  OF  MAJOR  RAWL.INSON.  397 

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  of  the  failure, 
soon  after  the  retrograde  movement  of  Maclaren*s  bri- 
gade became  known,  unmistakeable  signs  of  inquietude 
were  discernible  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar. 
Mahomed  Atta  Khan  had  been  detached  by  the  Cau- 
bul  party  to  raise  an  insurrection  in  that  province.  No 
sooner  had  the  chief  reached  the  frontier  than  such 
unequivocal  symptoms  of  popular  excitement  began  to 
manifest  themselves  that  Major  Rawlinson  at  once  per- 
ceived the  necessity  of  adopting  active  measures  for  the 
suppression  of  disorder  and  the  maintenance  of  the  tran- 
quillity of  the  surrounding  country.  His  efforts  in  the 
first  instance  were  directed  to  the  avoidance  of  any  ac- 
tual collision  with  the  people,  and  the  preservation  of 
outward  smoothness  and  regularity  in  the  administration 
of  affairs.  With  this  primal  object,  he  withdrew  from 
the  outlying  districts  all  the  detached  troops,  and  con- 
centrated them  at  Candahar.  A  single  party  of  Janbaz, 
protected  by  the  Hazarehs  from  the  possibility  of  at- 
tack, were  left  in  Tezeen,  whilst  all  the  other  troops, 
Hindostanee  and  Afghan,  were  posted  in  and  around 
the  city  of  Candahar.  But  this  was  not  enough.  The 
safety  of  our  military  position  might  be  provided  for;  but 
it  was  not  sufficient  to  feel  confident  of  our  ability  to 
overcome  any  enemy  that  might  venture  to  attack  us. 
It  was  obviously  expedient  to  strike  rather  at  the  root 
than  at  the  branches ;  to  prevent  the  growth  of  rebellion 
rather  than  to  beat  it  down  full-grown.  At  all  events, 
it  was  politic  to  secure  such  a  division  of  parties  as 
would  annihilate  even  the  possibility  of  a  powerful 
coalition  against  us.  Relying  upon  the  general  unpopu- 
larity of  the  Barukzyes  with  the  Douranee  tribes,  whom 
the  Sirdars  had  so  long  and  so  severely  oppressed,  Major 
Rawlinson  exerted  himself  to  get  up  a  Douranee  move- 
ment in  our  favour.  He  bound  the  chiefs,  by  all  the 
most  solemn  oaths  that  Mahomedanism  affords,  to  stand 


398  AFFAIRS  AT  CAKDAHAB. 

firm  in  their  allegiance  to  Shah  Soojah  and  the  Shaza- 
dah  Timour.  The  priesthood  ratified  the  bond;  and 
the  families  of  the  Douranee  chiefs  were  placed  as  host- 
ages for  their  fideUty  in  the  hands  of  the  British  officers. 
The  chiefe  themselves,  with  Prince  Timour's  eldest  son 
at  their  head,  and  accompanied  by  Meerza  Ahmed, 
the  Revenue-manager  of  Candahar,  a  man  of  consider- 
able talents  and  unsuspected  fidelity,  to  whom  Major 
Rawlinson  had  entrusted  a  lakh  of  rupees  for  the 
management  of  the  movement,  were  despatched  to  the 
eastern  frontier  to  raise  the  tribes  against  the  Baruk- 
zyes  and  their  Ghilzye  allies.  In  the  mean  while  the 
British,  at  Candahar,  remained  apparently  unconcerned 
spectators  of  the  contest,  which,  it  was  hoped,  would 
resolve  itself  into  a  question  of  Suddozye  or  Barukzye 
supremacy  in  the  Douranee  Empire. 

The  ol^ects  contemplated  by  Major  Rawlinson  were, 
however,  only  partially  attained.  He  succeeded  in  gain- 
ing time,  and  in  removing  the  Douranee  chiefs  from  the 
neighbourhood  of  our  camp.  "  The  Douranees  quitted 
Candahar  in  the  middle  of  December,  delayed  for  a  con- 
siderable time  the  advance  of  Mahomed  Atta  Khan,  and 
prevented  to  the  utmost  of  their  power  the  spread  of 
religious  fanaticism  among  their  tribes."  But  the  good 
faith  so  apparent  at  the  outset  was  destined  soon  to  be 
overclouded.  As  long  as  the  Douranees  believed  that 
to  carry  out  the  wishes  of  the  British  was  really  to  fight 
the  battle  of  the  Suddozyes,  they  were  true  to  our 
cause ;  but  they  soon  began  to  give  credit  to  the  report 
that  Shah  Soojah  himself  was  in  the  ranks  of  our 
enemies,  and  then  they  fell  away  from  us.  Even  Meerza 
Ahmed,  in  whom  so  much  confidence  had  been  reposed, 
turned  his  fine  talents  against  us,  and  became  the  main- 
spring of  a  hostile  Douranee  movement. 

But  they  did  not  at  once  declare  themselves.  For 
a  while  the  Douranees  quietly  watched  the  progress  of 


POLICY  OP  MAJOR  RAWLINSON.  399 

ajffairs.  Those  events  as  they  developed  themselves, 
seemed  more  and  more  favourable  to  the  spread  of  in- 
surrection in  western  Afghanistan.  As  the  old  year 
wore  to  a  close,  it  seemed  that  our  difficulties  were 
thickening,  and  the  new  year  came  in  with  a  crowd  of 
fresh  embarrassments.  Sufder  Jung  had  returned  to 
Candahar.  On  the  retrogression  of  Maclaren's  brigade 
he  had  declared  that  he  could  not  trust  the  Janbaz  to 
escort  him  to  Caubul,  and  again  set  his  face  towards  the 
south.  The  presence  of  these  traitorous  horsemen  at 
Candahar  had  always  been  a  source  of  considerable 
anxiety  to  Major  Rawlinson.  The  1st  Regiment  of 
Afghan  horse  had  been  in  Zemindawer;  and  when  the 
political  agent  recalled  the  other  troops  from  that  part 
of  the  country,  it  was  his  intention  that  the  Janbaz 
should  remain  at  Ghirisk.  Their  enmity  to  the  sur- 
rounding tribes  was  so  well  known  that  there  was  less 
chance  of  their  uniting  with  the  rebels  in  that  part  of 
the  country  than  in  any  other.  Owing,  however,  to 
the  miscarriage  of  a  letter,  Rawhnson's  intentions  were 
defeated.  The  Janbaz  returned  to  Candahar  with  the 
other  details  of  the  Zemindawer  detachment,  on  the  9th 
of  December.  But  Rawlinson  was  determined  to  re- 
move them.  He  suspected  their  treachery ;  but  sooner 
than  he  anticipated,  they  threw  oflF  all  disguise,  and 
openly  arrayed  themselves  against  us. 

Before  daybreak  on  the  27  th  of  December  the  men  of 
the  Janbaz  regiments  were  to  have  commenced  their 
march  to  Ghirisk.  There  were  250  men  of  the  1st 
Regiment  under  Lieutenant  Golding,  and  150  of  the  2nd 
imder  Lieutenant  Wilson.  Lieutenant  Pattinson  was  to 
accompany  them  in  political  charge.  The  object  of  the 
movement  was  two-fold — to  escort  treasure  and  ammu- 
nition to  Ghirisk,  and  to  remove  from  Candahar  a  body 
of  men  whose  fidelity  was  more  than  suspected.     Two 


400  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

hours  after  midnight  the  party  was  to  have  moved  and 
made  a  double  march,  for  the  purpose  of  clearing  the 
villages  on  the  Urghundab,  which  had  been  greatly 
excited  during  the  few  preceding  days.  Golding  was 
ready  at  the  appointed  hourj  but,  through  some  miscon- 
ception of  orders,  Wilson's  men  were  not  prepared  to 
march.  So  the  movement  was  countermanded.  Golding 
and  Pattinson,  therefore,  returned  to  the  tent  of  the 
former,  and  laid  themselves  down  again  to  sleep.  The 
1st  Janbaz  regiment  had  been  drawn  up  ready  for  the 
march  with  their  cattle  loaded,  and  the  postponement 
of  the  movement  now  took  them  by  surprise.  They  had 
laid  a  plot  to  mutiny  and  desert  upon  the  march,  and 
they  believed  that  the  conspiracy  had  been  detected. 
After  waiting  for  half  an  hour,  drawn  up  in  the  chill  air 
of  early  morning,  they  determined  at  once  to  throw  off 
the  mask;  so  they  streamed  into  Golding's  tent  with 
their  drawn  swords,  and  attacked  the  two  officers  in 
their  beds.  When  they  thought  that  their  bloody  work 
was  complete,  they  rushed  confusedly  out  of  the  tent, 
mounted  their  horses,  and  fled.  The  treasure  was 
plundered,  and  some  horses  belonging  to  Golding  and 
Pattinson  were  carried  off;  but  nothing  else  was  touched 
by  the  assassins.  Pattinson  was  stunned  by  a  blow  on 
the  head,  but  recovering  his  senses,  he  made  his  way  out 
of  the  tent,  wounded  as  he  was  in  seven  places,  mounted 
a  horse  which  his  Meerza  had  saddled  on  the  spot,  and 
effected  his  escape.*  Golding  was  less  fortunate.  He 
rushed  out  of  his  tent,  and  fled  on  foot  towards  the 
cantonments;  but  the  Janbaz  followed  and  cut  him 
down  when  within  a  short  distance  of  our  camp.f 

A  party  of  the  Shah's  horse  under  Captain  Leeson, 
and  a  detachment  of  Captain  Wilson's  Janbaz,  who  had 

*  He  died,  after  mucb  suffering,  in  March. 
t  Major  liatdinsan^s  MS.  Journal. 


MUTINY  OF  THE  JANBAZ.  401 

remained  true  to  us  in  the  face  of  strong  temptation, 
were  sent  out  against  the  mutineers.  The  detachment 
came  up  with  the  rebels  about  twelve  miles  from  Can- 
dahar.  •  There  was  a  brief,  but  sturdy  conflict.  The 
mutineers  charged  in  a  body,  but  were  gallantly  met  by 
Leeson's  men ;  and  after  a  hand-to-hand  struggle,  were 
broken  and  dispersed.*  Thirty  of  their  number  were 
killed  by  our  cavalry,  who  followed  up  their  advantage ; 
many  more  were  wounded,  and  the  remainder  fled  in 
confusion  to  the  camp  of  Atta  Mahomed. 

Two  days  after  the  defection  of  the  Janbaz,  Prince 
Sufder  Jung  fled  from  Candahar  and  joined  the  camp 
of  Atta  Mahomed.  The  Sirdar  had  fixed  his  head- 
quarters at  Dehli,  about  forty  miles  from  Candahar; 
and  there,  early  in  January,  Rawlinson  was  eager 
to  attack  him.  The  political  agent  saw  clearly  the 
expediency  of  crushing  the  insurrection  in  the  bud. 
Every  day  was  adding  to  the  importance  of  the  move- 
ment, and  swelling  the  number  of  the  insurgents.  Some 
of  the  tribes  were  standing  aloof,  unwilling  to  declare 
themselves  against  us,  yet  in  hourly  expectation  of  being 
compelled  to  secure  their  own  safety  by  ranging  them- 
selves under  the  banners  of  the  Prince.  But  the  Gene- 
ral was  unwilling  to  divide  his  force ;  and  refused  to 
send   a  brigade   to  Dehh.    Whilst    Rawlinson   urged 

*  **  The  mutineers  moved  down  to  Our  men  charsed  at  the  same  time  in 
the  Barukzye  villages  in  apparent  line,  and  the  flanks  swept  round  the 
expectation  of  being  joined  by  the  Janbaz  horse,  who  were  probably  not 
Ooloos,  but  wherever  they  went  above  150  strong — numoers  having 
they  received  neither  support  nor  left  the  rebel  standard  before  reach- 
encouragement,  notwithstanding  that  ins  Chuplanee.  For  about  five 
they  gave  out  our  troops  were  on  the  mmutes  a  splendid  fight  took  place, 
march  to  destroy  the  I)ouranee  vil-  hand-to-hand,  when  the  Janbaz 
lages.  The  Janbaz  at  last  took  up  a  broke  and  fled,  pursued  by  our 
position  at  Chuplanee,  a  village  about  cavalry.  Of  the  enemy,  about  thirty 
twelve  miles  on,  where  our  cavalry  were  killed  and  fifty  wounded  in  the 
came  up  with  them ;  Captain  Leeson  flight  and  pursuit.  Our  loss  was 
had  to  file  his  men  across  a  difficult  trifling."  —  [  Major  Bawlinsons  MS, 
canal,  and  had  only  just  formed  line  Journal.^ 
when  the  enemy  charged  in  a  body. 

VOL.  II.  2  D 


402  AiTAIBS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

strong  political  considerations  in  favour  of  promptitude 
of  action,  Nott,  with  equal  firmness,  took  his  stand  upon 
military  grounds,  and  argued  that  it  would  be  inex*- 
pedient,  at  such  a  season  of  the  year,  to  send  a  portion  of 
his  force  a  distance  of  forty  miles  £rom  Candahar  to 
beat  up  the  quarters  of  a  fugitive  Prince.  "  Sufder 
Jung,''  wrote  Sawlinson,  ^^  has  fixed  his  abode  at  Dehli, 
and  has  declared  himself  the  leader  of  an  insurrection, 
aiming  at  our  expulsion  fi:om  the  country.  Up  to  the 
present  time  no  very  considerable  number  of  men  have 
joined  his  standard,  and  the  only  chiefs  in  attendance 
of  any  note,  are  those  who  have  accompanied  Maho- 
med Atta  Khan  fi:om  Caubul,  tc^ether  with  the  Ghil- 
zye  leaders,  Sumud  Khan,  Meer  Alim  Khan,  and  the 
Gooroo.  It  would  thus  be  an  easy  matter  by  the  de- 
tachment of  a  brigade  to  Dehli  to  break  up  the  insurgent 
force,  and  whether  the  rebels  fought  or  fled,  the  con- 
sequences would  be  almost  of  equal  benefit  with  regard 
to  the  restoration  of  tranquillity.  But  I  anticipate  a 
very  serious  aggravation  of  affairs  if  we  allow  the 
Prince  to  remain  unmolested  for  any  length  of  time  at 
Dehli,  or  to  move  fix>m  that  place  in  the  direction  of 
Candahar  with  the  avowed  purpose  of  attacking  us. 
Our  inactivity  would  not  fail  to  be  ascribed  by  the  great 
body  of  the  Ooloos  to  an  inability  to  act  on  the  offen- 
sive, and  an  impression  of  this  sort  having  once  gained 
ground,  the  natural  consequences,  in  the  present  highly 
excited  state  of  religious  feeling,  would  be  a  general  rise 
of  the  population  against  us."* 

Reason  and  experience  were  both  on  the  side  of  this 
argument,  and  Rawlinson  stated  the  case  clearly  and 
well.  But  Nott  took  a  soldier's  view  of  the  question. 
He  argued,  that  to  send  out  a  brigade  at  such  a  season 

•  Major  Rawlinson    to  Major"  General  Notti  January  7th,  1842.    MS. 
Correspondence, 


ARGUMENTS  OF  GENERAL  NOTT.  403 

of  the  year,  so  far  from  its  supports,  would  be  to  destroy 
his  men  in  the  field,  and  to  expose  the  city  to  the  attacks 
of  the  enemy.  "  I  conceive,"  he  wrote  in  reply  to  Raw- 
linson's  letter,  "  that  the  whole  country  is  in  a  state  of 
rebellion,  and  that  nothing  but  the  speedy  concentration 
of  the  troops  at  this  place  has  saved  the  different  de- 
tachments from  being  destroyed  in  detail,  and  the  city  of 
Candahar  from  being  besieged.  .  .  .  Because  this 
young  Prince  is  said  to  have  assembled  1000  or  1600 
followers  at  a  distance  of  forty  miles  from  Candahar,  it 
would,  indeed,  be  truly  absurd  were  I,  in  the  very  depth 
of  winter,  to  send  a  detachment  wandering  about  the 
country  in  search  of  the  rebel  fugitive,  destroying  my 
men  amidst  frost  and  snow,  killing  the  few  carriage-cattle 
we  have  left,  and  thus  be  totally  disabled  at  the  proper 
season  from  moving  ten  miles  in  any  direction  from  the 
city,  or  even  have  the  means  of  falling  back,  should  that 
unfortunately  ever  become  necessary."* 

The  movements  of  the  rebel  army  soon  settled  the 
question  between  them.  No  attempt  having  been  made 
to  dislodge  the  insurgent  chiefs,  they  quietly  moved  down 
the  valley  of  the  Urghundab,  and  on  the  12th  of  Janu- 
ary took  post  on  the  river,  about  five  miles  to  the  west 
of  the  city  of  Candahar. 

General  Nott  lost  no  time  in  moving  out  to  attack 
them.  Taking  with  him  five  and  a  half  regiments  of 
infantry,  the  Shah's  1st  Cavalry,  a  party  of  Skinner's 
Horse,  and  sixteen  guns,f  a  formidable  body  of  troops^ 

*  General  Nott  to  Major  EawUu'  mere  oeremonj,  and  that  under  pre- 

son:  January  8,  1842.      MS,  Cor^  sent  circumstances,  and  at  a  distance 

respondence.     There  is  a  character-  of  2000  miles  from  the  seat  of  the 

istic  passage  in  this  letter  which  b  Supreme  GrOYemmeat,  I  throw  re* 

worthy  of  quotation.     ^^I  have  no  sponsibilitj  to  the  win^  and  tell  Ton 

right  to  interfere  with  the  affairs  of  that,  in  my  opinion,  you  have  not  had 

the  government  of  this  coimtry,  and  for  some  time  past,  nor  have  yom  ni 

I  never  do — but  in  reference  to  that  present,  one  particle  of  political  in- 

part  of  your  note  where  }rou  speak  of  fluence  in  thb  country." 

political  influence,  I  will  candidly  f  Her  Majesty's  40th  Regiment ; 

tell  you  that  these  are  not  times  for  the  2nd,  16tb,  38th,  and  a  wing  of  the 

2d2 


404  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

weak  only  in  the  mounted  branch — he  made  a  four 
hours'  march  over  a  few  miles  of  country,  and  came 
upon  the  enemy,*  posted  near  the  fortified  village  of 
Killa-chuk,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Uighundab.  The 
British  troops  crossed  the  river,  and  at  once  advanced  in 
column  of  battalions,  flanked  by  the  artillery  and  cavalry, 
to  the  attack.  The  action  was  of  brief  duration.  At 
the  end  of  twenty  minutes,  during  which  our  guns  and 
musketry,  telling  with  deadly  effect  upon  the  heavy 
masses  of  the  enemy,  were  answered  by  a  wild  and  in- 
effective fire  from  their  ranks,  the  rebel  army  was  in 
confusion  and  flight.  The  Ghilzyes  fled  in  one  direction ; 
the  Janbaz  in  another;  the  people  from  the  villagesf 
hastened  to  their  own  homes.  Atta  Mahomed  attempted 
to  make  a  stand ;  but  our  troops  moved  forward — carried 
the  village  by  storm — and  slaughtered  every  man,  wo- 
man, and  child,  within  its  walls.  The  British  line 
was  then  re-formed,  and  Atta  Mahomed  prepared  to 
meet  a  second  attack.  But  the  cavalry,  with  two  horse- 
artillery  guns,  were  now  slipped  upon  the  enemy,  who 

42nd  Native  Infantry;   the  Shah's  historian  ought  to  speak  with  less 

6th  Infantry;  Anderson's  two  troops  confidence  than  the  *'*'  number  of  the 

of  Horse  Artillery  (Shah's) ;  Bipod's  enemy."   There  is  nothing  more  diffi- 

Battery  QSombay  Artillery) ;    Lee-  cult  to  determine  than  the  fact ;  and 

son's  and  Maldane's  Horse.  nothing  more  likely  to  draw  upon  him 

*  The  number  of  the  enemy  has  a  large  amount  of  acrimonious  criti- 

been  variously  stated  at  all  sorts  of  cism,  than  his  manner  of  stating  it. 

amounts,  from  5000  to  20,000.    Ge-  As  a  general  proposition,  I  think  it 

neral  Nott,  in  his  official  despatch  may  be  laid  down  that  military  com- 

addressed  to  the  Military  Secretary,  manders    seldom    under  -  state    the 

says :  "  After  a  march  of  four  hours  number   of  the    enemy   they    have 

over  a  very  difficult  country,  I  came  beaten. 

in  sight  of  the  rebel  army,  from  fifteen  t  "  Two  canals  in  advance  of  the 

to  twenty  thousand  men,  drawn  up  in  village  were  lined  by  matchlock  men 

a  strong  position  on  the  right  bank  — ^the    horse  crowded  the  slope  of 

of  the  Urghundab."    Major  Rawlin-  the  tuppa  upon  which  Killa-chuk  is 

son  says :  "  From  what  I  myself  saw,  built,  and  occupied  the  entire  space 

as  well  as  from  information  I  have  intervening  between  that  village  and 

received  from  parties  in  the  enemy's  Kohuck,  the  hillocks  adjoining  which 

camp,  I  should  estimate  their  enture  latter  place  were  covered  by  large 

force  at  5000— 3000  of  which  accom-  masses  of  footmen    collected    from 

panied  the  chiefs  from  Sir-a-bund,  t^e  neighbouring  villages  to  witness 

whilst  the  other  2000  joined  from  rather  than  to  participate  in  the  com- 

the  Aiekozye  villages."— [3/5.  Jottr-  bat." — [Afq/w  Rawlinson's MS,  JouT' 

naL']    There  is  nothing  of  which  the  nal'] 


DEFEAT  OF  ATTA  MAHOMED.  405 

broke  and  fled  in  dismay ;  and  the  humiliation  of  Atta 
Mahomed  and  his  princely  ally  was  complete.* 

The  Douranee  chiefs  now  began  to  throw  off  the 
mask.  They  moved  down  to  the  assistance  of  the  rebel 
army,  but  the  battle  had  been  fought  before  they  could 
arrive  upon  the  field,  and  they  only  came  up  in  time  to 
see  their  countrymen  in  panic  flight.f  Sufder  Jung,  Atta 
Mahomed,  and  the  other  rebel  chiefs  found  an  honour- 
able refuge  in  the  Douranee  camp ;  and  from  that  time, 
they  who  had  left  Candahar  as  our  friends,  presented  a 
front  of  open  hostility  to  our  authority.  J 

Meerza  Ahmed  was  the  head-piece  of  the  Douranee 
party.    Nott  had  pronounced  him  a  traitor.§    Rawlinson 

*  Major  Rawlinson,  in  his  despatch  cused  the  Prince  of  treachery.    They 

of  the  6th  of  March,  describes  this  talked,  indeed,  of  seizing  him ;  upon 

affair  as  a  "  brief  skirmish.**    General  which  the  boy,  with  his  immediate 

Nott  has  described  the  action  in  a  followers,  galloped  off  the  field.**— 

few  pregnant  sentences.    ACTaphic  [Major  RawlinsorCs  MS,    JourruiL] 

account  of  it  is  to  be  found  m  Cap-  Tej  Mahomed  would  have  come  in ; 

tain    Neiirs    Recollections   of  Four  but  an  inopportune  shower  of  grape 

Years'  Service  in  the  East,     Captain  from  Blood^s  battery  kept  him  at  a 

Neill  was  present  as  Adjutant  of  her  discreet  distance. 
Majesty's  40th  Regiment.   He  speaks        t  ^^^  Douranee  chiefs  were  irri- 

of  the  affair  as  the  "  Battle  of  Urg-  tated    against  Atta    Mahomed    for 

hundab*'  —  "the  first  success  af^  precipitating  the   conflict  with  the 

our  recent  disasters  at  Caubul,"  as  it  British.     They  had  been  anxious  to 

was.   He  adds :  "  The  victory  having  stand  aloof  until  the  issue  of  the 

been  obtained  over  a  force  so  im-  Caubul  contest  could  be  more  clearly 

mensely  superior  to  that  which  was  seen  by  them.    They  were  unwilling 

opposed  'to  it  by  the  British,  most  to  commit  themselves  at  so  early  a 

effectually  damped  the  spirit  of  our  staj^e. 

enemies  in  that  part  of  the  country.**        $  On  the  8th  of  January  the  Grene- 

As  Nott*s  force  had  sixteen  guns,  it  ral  wrote  to  Rawlinson:  **  I  am  sorry 

can  hardly  be  said  that  the  enemy*s  that  I  have  not  the  same  confidence 

force  was  immensely  superior.  in  Meerza  Ahmed  which  you  appear 

t  The  Prince  seems  to  have  been  to  have.    The  force  under  this  man 

inclined  to  desert  to  the  British  in  has  been  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 

the  course  of  the  action.    He  and  Tej  Candahar  for  the  last  month.     Why 

Mahomed  (the  Sirdar  of  the  recreant  this  has  been  permitted  I  know  not. 

Janbaz,  who  had  been  forced  to  ac-  He  has  a  very  considerable  body  of 

company  the  mutineers  afler  their  at-  men  with  him,  both  horse  and  foot ; 

tack  on  theirBritish  officers)  had  been  and  my  information  tells  me  that 

in  consultation  in  the  morning  about  they  are  increasing  daily  and  hourly, 

goin^  over  to  the  British  camp.   The  ....     You  ouzhi  to  be  the  b€»t 

chie»  had  some  suspicion  of  this,  and  judge  of  this  man  s  fidelity ;  but  I 

*''  when  they  saw  Tej  Mahomed  de-  believe  him  to  be  a  traitor ;  and  I 

tach  himself,  they  imm^iately  ac-  should  not  be  surprised  to  hear  of  hia 


406  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

had  now  ceased  to  believe  in  his  fidelity ;  but  he  had 
never  ceased  to  respect  his  talents.  He  knew  him  to  be 
an  A%han  of  rare  ability,  and  he  believed  that  the  saga- 
city of  the  Meerza  would  not  suffer  him  to  doubt  the 
difference  between  the  power  of  his  countrymen  and  that 
of  the  British  Grovemment.  But  the  Meerza  had  sounded 
the  depth  of  the  difficulties  which  surrounded  us  with 
no  little  accuracy,  and  had  estimated  aright ,  the  nature 
of  the  crisis.  He  saw  in  the  distance  our  compulsory 
abandonment  of  Afghanistan,  and  doubted  the  wisdom 
of  leaguing  himself  with  a  declining  cause. 

From  the  20th  of  January  to  the  last  day  of  February 
the  Douranees  remained  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Candahar.  Nothing  but  the  genius  of  Meerzft  Ahmed 
could  have  kept  together,  throughout  so  long  a  season 
of  comparative  inactivity,  all  the  discordant  elements  of 
that  Douranee  force.  The  winter  had  set  in  with  its 
snowy  accessories.  Nott  was  unwilling  to  expose  his 
troops  to  the  severities  of  the  winter  season ;  and  the 
enemy  seemed  equally  disinclined  for  war  whilst  the 
snow  was  on  the  ground.  But  during  this  period  of 
suspended  hostilities  very  different  were  the  occupations 
of  the  two  contending  forces— very  different  the  feelings 
with  which  they  contemplated  the  renewal  of  the  strug- 
gle. The  attitude  of  the  British  at  this  time  denoted  a 
consciousness  of  strength.  There  was  no  despondency 
— there  was  no  excitement.  Our  officers  and  men,  hav- 
ing nothing  to  do  in  the  field,  fell  back  again  into  the 
ordinary  routine  of  cantonment  Ufe,  as  though  the  coim- 
try  had  never  been  convulsed  or  disturbed.     They  rode 

beingjoined  by  his  expected  confede-  Jamtary  8(A,  1842.  MS,  Carrespon" 
rates,  and  before  twenty-four  hours  dence,"]  The  position  of  Meerza  Ah- 
marchin^  off  and  forcing  the  young  med,  and  the  near  prospect  of  his  de- 
Prince  Sekunder  to  accompany  him.  fection,  were  among  the  reasons  urged 
Tet  he  is  on  the  watch,  and  will  play  by  the  General  in  support  of  his  re- 
his  game  according  to  circumstances.  fiisal  to  quit  the  near  neighbourhood 
^[^General  Nott  to  Major  Rawlinson:  of  Candahar. 


ARBANGEMENTS  OF  MEEBZA  AHMED.  407 

steeple-chases ;  they  played  at  rackets ;  they  pelted  one 
another  with  snow-balls.  The  dreadful  snow  which 
had  destroyed  the  Caubul  army  was  only  a  plaything  in 
the  hands  of  their  brethren  at  Candahar.*  The  enemy, 
on  the  other  hand,  were  kept  continually  in  a  state  of 
restless  and  absorbing  activity.  Meerza  Ahmed  saw  the 
danger  of  suffering  the  Douranee  chiefs,  disunited  and 
jealous  of  each  other  as  they  were,  to  dwell  too  in- 
tently upon  the  embarrassments  of  their  own  positions. 
He  gave  their  thoughts  an  outward  direction;  and, 
by  skilful  management,  kept  them  both  fix)m  risking  pre- 
maturely a  general  engagement  with  the  British,  and 
fix>m  breaking  out  into  internal  dissensions.f  "  Meerza 
Ahmed  alone,"  says  Major  RawHnson,  in  the  able  de- 
spatch I  have  already  quoted,  "  could  have  so  long  pre- 
served union  among  the  discordant  elements  of  which 
this  camp  was  composed ;  he  alone  could  have  managed, 
•  by  the  most  careful  revenue  arrangements,  to  have  sup- 
ported the  concourse  which  was  assembled  round  the 
standard  of  Sufder  Jung ;  he  alone,  perhaps,  could  have 
prevented  the  Douranees  from  risking  an  action  in 
which  they  were  sure  to  be  defeated;  his  measures 
throughout  have  been  most  skilful  and  well  sustained. 
The  chiefs  were,  in  the  first  place,  sent  to  recruit  in  the 
different  districts  where  their  influence  chiefly  prevailed; 
revenue  was  raised  in  the  iisual  form  for  the  support  of 
the  troops  in  anticipation  of  the  coming  harvest,  the 
ryots  receiving  an  acquittance  from  Meerza  Ahmed  in 
case  the  management  should  continue  in  his  hands,  and 

*  NeiWs  Recollections,    There  was,  between  the  Janbaz  and  Fopnb^ea 

however,  comparatively  little  snow  rejjardingWkocwa/Sndly.  Sufder  Jtn» 

at  Candahar ;  and  it  seldom  lies  there  feU  out  with  Meerza  Ahmed,  ana 

long  upon  the  groimd.  abused   him   for  not    spending  his 

t  He    was    not,  however,    com-  money  ireely  on  the  Grnazees;  and 

eetely  successful.     It  would  have  drdly.  The   Janbai  have  repdarif 

sen  a  miracle  if  he  had  been.    "J*e5-  cleaned  out  an  Ishakzye  Khail  ia 

ruary  4. — There  have  been  several  another  dilute  about  suppliea."— 

squabbles   in  the  Douranee   camp  [Major  MawUn»(m*8  MS.  Jowmal.'] 
already:  Istly.  A  quarrdi  took  place 


408  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

being  assured  that  if  our  power  prevailed  we  were  too 
just  to  subject  the  cultivators  to  a  double  exaction; 
statements  of  the  Shah's  connivance  in  the  Caubul 
revolution  were  industriously  circulated;  incessant  at- 
tempts were  made  to  tamper  with  our  Hindostanee 
troops  (not  altogether  without  success),  and  letters  were 
designedly  thrown  into  our  hands  to  render  us  suspi- 
cious of  such  chiefs  as  adhered  to  us,  whilst  the  most 
stringent  measures  were  adopted  to  deter  the  villagers 
around  the  city  from  bringing  supplies  into  Candahar. 
Such  was  the  line  of  policy  pursued  by  Meerza  Ahmed 
from  the  20th  of  January  to  the  20th  of  February.  In 
this  interim  General  Nott  had  laid  in  five  months'  sup- 
plies for  the  troops ;  he  had  repaired  the  fortifications  to 
a  certain  extent;  and  intending  on  the  12th  of  February 
to  march  out  and  attack  the  enemy,  he  had  concurred 
in  the  advisability  of  disarming  the  population  pre- 
paratory to  the  movement  of  our  troops.*  Severe 
weather,  however,  rendered  a  march  impracticable  at 
the  time  he  meditated ;  and  before  it  became  sufficiently 
mild  to  enable  him  to  take  the  field,  the  tactics  of  the 
enemy  had  undergone  a  total  alteration  in  consequence 
of  advices  from  Caubul." 

But  there  were  many  circumstances  at  this  time  to 
create  uneasiness  in  the  minds  of  those  to  whom  was  en- 
trusted the  direction  of  aflfairs  at  Candahar.  The  garrison 
was  not  threatened  with  a  scarcity  of  provisions;  but 
fodder  for  the  cattle  was  very  scarce.  The  horses  were 
becoming  unserviceable  from  lack  of  nourishment;  the 
sheep  were  so  miserably  lean  as  to  be  scarcely  worth 
killing  for  food.    It  was  intensely  cold ;  and  fuel  was  so 

♦  Major  Rawlinson,  preparatory  to  to  be  our  intention  to  expel  them, 

the  commencement  ofthe  work  of  dis-  When  it  was  found  that  they  were 

arming,  took  a  census  of  the  inhabi-  only  to  be  disarmed,  they  recovered 

tants    of  the    city,    which   greatly  their   serenity,  and   submitted  very 

idarmed  the  people,  as  it  was  believed  patiently  to  the  ordeal. 


STATE  OF  THE  CANDAHAB  GARRISON.  409 

scarce,  that  the  hixury  of  a  winter  fire  was  denied  even 
to  the  sick.  The  hospitals  had  their  inmates ;  but  there 
were  no  medicines.  And  above  all,  money  was  be- 
coming so  scarce,  that  the  most  serious  apprehensions 
were  entertained  by  Major  Rawlinson,  who  knew  that 
there  was  no  weapon  of  war  so  serviceable  as  the 
money-bag  in  such  a  country  as  A%hanistan.*  Under 
such  circumstances,  it  may  readily  be  supposed  how 
anxiously  the  arrival  of  a  convoy  from  the  southward 
was  looked  for,  and  how  necessary  it  seemed  that  the 
communications  with  Sindh  should  be  opened  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  secure  the  arrival  of  treasure  and  sup- 
plies. 

But  whilst  the  hopes  of  the  garrison  were  directed 
towards  the  country  to  the  southward,  their  thoughts, 
with  fear  and  trembling,  turned  themselves  towards  the 
North.  On  the  21st  of  February  a  messenger  arrived  at 
Candahar,  bringing  a  letter  from  General  Elphinstone 
and  Major  Pottinger,  ordering  the  evacuation  of  Can- 
dahar and  Khelat-i-Ghilzye.f    The  original  had  been 

*  "  February  1 1 . — I  am  becoming  CTacuate  Candahar  and  Ehdat-i- 
seriously  alarmed  about  money.  A  Ghilzye,  in  pursuance  of  the  agree- 
lakh  is  the  utmost  that  I  shall  be  able  ment  entered  into  at  Caubul  for  the 
to  raise  from  the  Candahar  merchants,  return  of  our  troops  to  India.  This 
and  with  the  most  rigid  economy  this  letter  appears  to  be  genuine,  but  I 
will  hardly  last  us  to  the  end  of  March  cannot  consider  it  in  any  way  binding 
— the  ^odowns  at  the  same  time  being  on  us ;  and  for  the  reasons  stated  in 
opened  to  supply  the  troops,  n  my  letter  to  Greneral  Nottofthelst 
seems,  therefore,  absolutely  indis-  instant,  I  still  conceive  that  we  are 
pensablc  that  the  road  should  be  best  consulting  the  interesta  of  Re- 
opened from  the  south,  either  by  vemment  in  maintaining  our  position 
Outram  or  ourselves."  —  [^Major  pending  the  receipt  of  further  in- 
RawlinsorCs  MS.  JoumaL]  structions  from  Calcutta The 

f  ^^  February  21.  —  Two  Cossids  question  regarding  Shah  Soojah  is 
reached  me  to-day  from  Leech,  one  very  perplexing.  He  is  certainly 
with  letters  of  the  13th  and  15th,  nominally  at  the  head  of  the  govem- 
the  other  with  letters  of  the  17th.  ment,  and  we  can  no  longer  be  sup- 
Enclosed  was  a  copy  of  a  letter  ad-  posed  to  be  here  in  support  of  hia 
dressed  to  me  by  Major-General  authority.  Still,  however,  a  month 
Elphinstone  and  Major  Pottinser,  re-  sooner  or  later  in  retiring  can  make 
questing  me  to  intimate  to  major-  little  difference,  and  it  seems  tome 
GeneralNott  their  wish  that  h^woiUd  indispensable  that  some  definite  ar» 


410  AFPAIBS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

written  nearly  two  months  before ;  and  that  which  now 
reached  Major  Rawlinson  was  a  copy  forwarded  by  Leech 
firom  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  *  There  was  no  doubt  in  Raw- 
liiison's  mind  about  the  genuine  character  of  the  docu- 
ment ;  but  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  recognise  for  a 
moment  the  obligations  which  it  was  intended  to  im- 
pose upon  him.  He  could  not,  however,  help  perceiving 
that  the  turn  which  political  aflGairs  had  taken  in  Caubul 
placed  him  in  a  strange  and  anomalous  position.  Shah 
Soojah  was  now  the  recognised  sovereign  of  Afghanis- 
tan, ruling  by  the  consent  and  with  the  aid  of  the  Baruk- 
zye  chiefe ;  and  it  could  ho  longer  be  said  that  the  pre- 
sence of  the  British  troops  was  necessary  to  the  support 
of  the  Suddozye  Kings.  The  Douranee  chiefs  saw  this  as 
plainly  as  Rawlinson;  and  they  did  not  fail  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  circumstance.  They  now  endeavoured 
to  reason  the  British  out  of  Candahar  when  they  found 
it  difficult  to  expel  them;  and  Rawlinson  and  Nott 
found  it  less  easy  to  rebut  their  arguments  than  to  repel 
theit  assaults. 

On  the  23rd  of  February,  Rawlinson  received  a  packet 
of  letters  from  the  Douranee  camp,  the  contents  of  which 
supplied  much  food  for  earnest  reflection.    Sufder  Jung 

rangementSi  approved  of  bj  govern-  within  your  iurisdictioQ,8hotildretum 
ment^  should  be  entered  into  for  the  to  India  at  the  earliest  convenient  sea- 
future  administratitm  of  the  province  son.  Kewab  Jubbar  Khan,  who  is  the 
before  we  withdraw  our  troops.**-*  bearer  of  this  letter,  will  render  jou 
IMajor  RawUnsofCs  MS.  JournaL]  all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  He 
*  It  ran  thus :  *'  Catibid,  25th  De*  has  been  appointed  Governor  of  Can- 
ceniber^  1841. — Sib, — It  having  been  dahar  on  the  part  of  the  oTig^^|r 
found  necessary  to  conclude  an  ar-  government, 
rangement,  founded  on  that  of  the  "  E.  Pottinoeb. 
late  Sir  W.  H.  Macna^hten,  for  the  "  W.  E.  Ejlphikstone,  M.-G. 
evacuation  of  Afghanistan  by  our  ''P.S. — K  you  require  two  or  three 
troops,  we  have  the  honour  to  request  days  to  make  your  preparations,  you 
that  you  will  intimate  to  the  officer  must  not  remain  in  the  city,  but  pro- 
commanding  at  Candahar  our  wish  ceed  to  your  cantonment.  Whatever 
that  the  troops  now  at  that  place  and  you  are  obliged  to  leave  behind,  you 
at  Ehelat-i-Ghilzye,  togetner  with  will  make  over  to  the  Newab  Jubba^* 
the  Brit'ish  authorities   and  troops  Khan.*' 


LETTERS  FROM  THE  DOURANEB  CHIEFS.  411 

and  the  Douranee  chiefs  wrote  to  the  British  agent,  set- 
ting forth  that,  as  it  had  always  been  declared  that  the 
British  merely  occupied  the  country  in  support  of  Shah 
Soojah,  and  as  the  Shah  was  now  recognised  by  the 
chiefe  and  the  people,  and  had  no  longer  any  need  of 
our  support,  it  was  incumbent  upon  us  to  withdraw  from 
the  country.  If,  it  was  added,  the  British  would  now 
consent  to  retire  from  Candahar,  an  unmolested  passage 
to  Quettah  would  be  guaranteed  to  them;  but  that,  if 
they  insisted  on  maintaining  their  position,  they  must 
expect  that  the  fate  of  the  Caubul  army  would  be  theirs. 
Meerza  Ahmed,  in  a  private  letter  to  Rawlinson,  be- 
sought him  to  retire  before  the  whole  Douranee  nation 
rose  against  the  British.  But  perhaps  the  most  impor- 
tant of  the  letters  brought  in  that  morning,  was  one  from 
Shah  Soojah  to  Prince  Timour,  to  the  following  effect: 
"  You  must  understand  that  the  disturbances  which  you 
have,  no  doubt,  heard  of  at  Caubul,  have  been  a  contest 
between  the  followers  of  Islam  and  the  unbelievers. 
Now  that  the  affair  is  decided,  all  the  Afghans  have 
tendered  their  allegiance  to  me,  and  recognised  me  as 
King.  It  is  necessary  that  you  should  keep  me  duly  in- 
formed of  all  proceedings  in  your  government ;  and  rest 
assured  of  my  favour  and  affection.**  When  Rawlinson 
took  this  letter  to  the  Shah-zadah  Timour,  the  Prince  at 
once  declared  it  to  be  a  forgery ;  but  the  British  officer 
knew  how  to  decypher  stranger  characters  than  those 
of  a  Persian  Dust-Khut^  and  to  decide  upon  the  authen- 
ticity of  far  more  perplexing  scriptures  than  this.  Raw- 
linson's  practised  eye  saw  at  once  that  the  document 
was  a  genuine  one. 

The  letter  from  the  chiefe  demanded  an  answer  j  and 
Rawlinson  now  took  counsel  with  the  General.  The 
hour  for  decision  had  arrived.  It  became  them  to  look 
their  position  boldly  in  the  face,  and  to  shape  their 


412  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

course  for  the  future.  Nott  was  not  a  man  to  listen 
patiently  to  the  language  of  insolent  dictation  from  the 
A%han  chiefs.  He  had  already  made  up  his  mind  to 
maintain  his  position  at  all  risks,  pending  the  receipt  of 
instructions  from  government  issued  subsequently  to  the 
receipt  by  government  of  intelligence  of  the  Envoy's 
murder.*  Rawlinson  was  of  the  same  opinion.  So  he 
drew  up  a  letter  to  the  Douranee  chiefs,  setting  forth 
that,  as  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  Shah 
Soojah  was  acting  under  compulsion,  and  that  he  in 
reality,  in  spite  of  existing  appearances,  desired  the  sup- 
port of  the  British,  it  would  not  become  the  latter  to 
withdraw  from  Afghanistan  before  entering  into  a  final 
explanation  with  the  King.  He  drew  the  attention  of 
the  chiefs  to  the  difierence  of  our  positions  at  Caubul 
and  Candahar — said  that  any  attempt  to  expel  us  by 
force  must  inevitably  fail — and  recommended  the  Dou- 
ranees  to  refrain  from  engaging  in  unprofitable  hos- 
tility. But  he  added,  that  the  British  had  no  desire  to 
conquer  the  country  for  themselves — that  the  Candahar 
army  was  only  waiting  for  instructions  from  govern- 
ment— and  he  believed  it  was  the  desire  of  that  govern- 
ment to  restore  to  Shah  Soojah  the  uncontrolled  exercise 
of  his  authority,  and  to  be  guided  by  the  provisions  of  a 
new  treaty  which  would  probably  be  negotiated  be- 
tween the  two  states.f  On  the  following  day, J  the 
despatch  of  the  letter  having  been  delayed  by  the 
difficulty  of  finding  a  trustworthy  messenger,  Rawlinson 

*  "  I  have  onlj  to  repeat,"  wrote  vernment.   The  letter  signed  *  Eldred 

Greneral  Nott,  on  the  23rd  of  Febru-  Pottmger'  and  *  W.  K.  Elpbinstone ' 

aiT,  in  reply  to  Major  Rawlinson*8  may,  or  may  not,  be  a  forgery.    I 

official  letter  on  the  subject  of  the  conceive  that  these  officers  were  not 

evacuation  orders  received  from  Cau-  free  agents  at  Caubul ;  and  therefore 

bul,   "that  I  will   not    treat   with  their   letter  or  order  can  have  no 

any  person  whatever  for  the  retire-  weight  with  me." — [MS.  Correspon- 

ment  of  the  British  troops  from  Af-  dence,'] 

^hanistan,  until  I  shall  have  received  f  Major  RatvUnson^s  MS.  Journal 

instructions  from  the  Supreme  Go-  %  February  28. 


MEASURES  OP  RAWLINSON  AND  NOTT.       413 

added  a  postscript,  setting  forth  that  intelligence  had 
since  been  received,  which  clearly  demonstrated  that 
the  Shah  was  little  more  than  a  prisoner  in  the  hands 
of  the  Barukzyes;  and  he  added,  that  forces  were  on 
their  way  from  India  to  avenge  the  murder  of  the 
Envoy. 

The  activity  of  Rawlinson,  at  this  time,  was  unceasing. 
He  exerted  himself,  and  often  with  good  success,  to  de- 
tach different  tribes  from  the  rebel  cause ;  and  was  con- 
tinually corresponding  both  with  the  chiefs  in  the  Dou- 
ranee  camp  and  in  the  neighbouring  villages.  It  was 
his  policy  to  draw  off  the  Barukzyes  from  the  Douranee 
confederacy,  and  to  stimulate  the  Douranees  against  the 
Barukzyes,  by  declaring  that  the  Shah  was  a  mere  in- 
strument in  the  hands  of  the  latter.  It  was  debated, 
indeed,  whether  the  Douranees  could  not  be  induced  to 
move  off  to  Caubul  for  the  rescue  of  the  King.* 

But,  in  spite  of  these  and  other  favorable  indications, 
it  appeared,  both  to  the  military  and  political  cnief  at 
Candahar,  that  it  was  necessary  now  to  strike  some 
vigorous  blow  for  the  suppression  of  the  insurr^tiqp  BXtA 
the  maintenance  of  our  own  security.  So  Nott  deter- 
mined to  attack  the  enemy;  and  Rawlinson,  aft4r  many 
misgivings,  to  expel  the  Afghans  from  the  city.  ^  This 
movement    he    had  been    painfully  contemplating  all 

*  "  I  have  been  for  some  days  post  must,  I  should  think,  expire  of  an 
in  communication  with  the  Barukzye  atrophy.  .  .  .  Timour  suggests 
tribe,  and  have,  I  believe,  succeeded  that  he  should  endeavour  to  eet  the 
in  detaching  them  from  the  Douranee  Douranee  chiefs  to  march  on  Caubul, 
confederacy.  They  had  deserted  their  in  order  to  release  the  Shah  from  the 
villages  and  gone  off  to  the  desert ;  Barukzyes,  feigning  that  he  has  re- 
but, on  a  promise  of  protection,  have  ceived  his  father^s  instructions  to  this 
now  returned,  and  bound  themselves  effect;  and  I  see  no  objection  to  such 
to  admit  none  of  the  enemy  b  horse  an  attempt  being  made.  ^  I  also  hear 
within  their  borders.  The  Alekozyes  that  the  Caubul  Janbaz  insist  on  pro- 
of the  Urghundab  also  propose  to  ceeding  to  the  north,  and  that  Meerza 
enter  into  the  same  engagements ;  and  Ahmed  has  the  greatest  difficulty  in 
if  we  can  fairly  detach  these  two  restraining  them.** — {_Major  Eawlin' 
powerful  tribes,  the  Douranee  cause  soris  MS.  JourtiaLI 


414  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

through  the  month  of  February;  and  now,  at  the  be- 
ginning of  March,  he  believed  that  he  could  no  longer 
postpone,  with  safety,  the  accomplishment  of  this  harsh, 
but  necessary,  measure  of  defence.*  All  doubts  regard- 
ing the  wishes  of  the  Indian  Government  had  been,  by 
this  time,  set  at  rest  by  the  receipt  of  a  copy  of  a  letter, 
addressed  by  the  Supreme  Government  to  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief on  the  28th  of  January,  in  which  letter 
the  continued  occupation  of  Candahar  was  spoken  of  as 
an  event  which  the  British-Indian  Government  believed 
would  be  conducive  to  the  interests  of  the  state ;  and  it 
aJSbrded  no  small  pleasure  to  Nott  and  Rawlinson  to  find 
how  completely  they  had  anticipated  the  wishes  of  the 
Governor-General  and  his  Council. 

On  the  3rd  of  March,  Rawlinson  began  to  clear  the 
city  of  its  A%han  inhabitants.f  Inspecting  the  census  he 
had  made,  and  selecting  a  few  who  were  to  be  permitted 

•  *^  March  1. — The  General  now  to  be  concealed.  I  almost  fear  that 
has  made  up  his  mind  to  take  the  affairs  are  approaching  that  state 
field ;  and,  uter  considering  the  case  when,  for  our  iumiediate  safety,  we 
fullj,  I  have  determined  that  the  shall  be  obliged  to  incur  the  odium 
Afghans  must  be  turned  out  of  the  of  expelling  the  Moollahs  and  Af- 
city.  It  is  not  as  if  the  present  affair  ghans  from  the  city.  It  is  not  that 
were  a  mere  transient  disturbance,  these  people  can  do  us  any  serious 
We  are  engaged  in  a  regular  national  injury  within  the  city ;  but  the  pro- 
war,  and  Outram  does  not  anticipate  babihty  of  an  insurrection  inside  the 
that  we  shall  be  able  to  take  the  tield  walls  simultaneously  with  the  dis- 
in  sufficient  force  to  put  down  all  op-  turbances  outside,  gives  confidence 
position  before  next  winter.  Vve  to  Meerza  Ahmed^s  party  and  dis- 
must,  therefore,  look  forward  to  a  pirits  our  Parsewan  adherents.  It  is 
protracted  struggle  at  Candahar  all  to  be  considered,  howeyer,  that  if  we 
through  the  summer ;  and  the  security  expel  the  Afghans  and  retain  the 
of  the  city  appears  to  me,  under  such  Farsewans,  we  shall  embitter  the. 
circumstances,  indispensable.'*— [ilfo-  national  feeling  i^ainst  us  with  the 
jor  RawlinsovLS  MS,  Journal,']  rumour  of  sectarian  animosity,  and 

f  A  week  before,  a  strong  conyic-  shall,  moreover,  sacrifice  the  Sheeah 
tion  of  the  necessity  of  the  measure  party  in  the  event  of  our  retirement, 
had  forced  itself  upon  his  mind.  But  The  moat  obvious  necessity  of  self- 
he  was  only  too  willing  to  postpone  preservation  could  alone,  I  think, 
the  execution  of  it.  On  the  22nd  of  warrant  such  a  course,  and  I  cannot 
February  he  wrote :  '*  The  Moollahs  doubt  but  that  it  is  my  duty  to 
are  now  again  stirring  themselves,  temporise  as  long  as  prudence  will 
'and  I  have  very  good  pounds  for  admit.''  —  [^Major  Rawlinson^s  MS. 
supposing  a  large  quantity  of  arms  Journal,'] 


RENEWAL  OF  HOSTILITIES.  416 

to  remain — peaceful  citizens,  as  merchapts,  followers  of 
useful  trades,  and  a  few  members  of  the  priesthood,  he 
expelled  the  remainder  of  the  Afghan  inhabitants — in 
all,  about  1000  famiUes.  No  resistance  was  oflFered. 
The  work  was  not  completed  before  the  close  of  the  6th. 
The  municipal  authorities  performed  their  duties  so  re* 
missly,  that  it  was  necessary  to  tell  off  an  officer  and 
a  party  of  Sepoys  to  each  district,  to  see  that  the  clear- 
ance was  more  effectually  performed.  Some  5000  or 
6000  people  were  driven  out  of  the  city.  Every  exer- 
tion was  made  to  render  the  measure  as  little  oppres- 
sive as  possible ;  but  the  expulsion  of  so  many  citizens 
from  their  homes  could  not  be  altogether  free  from 
cruelty  and  injustice.* 

The  city  having  thus  been  cleared  of  all  its  suspected 
inhabitants,  Nott,  on  the  7th  of  March,  took  the  field, 
with  the  main  body  of  his  troops.  The  40th  Queen's — 
the  16th,  38th,  42nd,  and  43rd  regiments  of  Native 
Infantry — a  wing  of  one  of  the  Shah's  regiments — 
all  the  cavalry  in  the  force,  and  sixteen  guns,  went 
out  against  the  enemy.  The  2nd  regiment  of  Native 
Infantry,  with  two  regiments  and  a  wing  of  the  Shah's 
foot,  remained  behind  for  the  protection  of  the  city. 
All  the  gates  of  the  city,  but  the  Herat  and  a  part  of 
the  Shikarpoor  gate,  were  blocked  up,  and  Candahar 
was  believed  to  be  secure  against  the  assaults  of  the 
whole  Douranee  force. 

As  Nott  advanced,  the  enemy,  who  had  been  hovering 
about  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar,  retired  before 
him.     He  crossed  the  Turnuk  and  advanced  upon  the 

m 

*  "  No  doubt  much  property  has  ing  of  the  Hindoos  and  merchants 
been  sacrificed  in  carrying  the  mea-  who  have  remained,  and  the  grain  is 
sure  into  effect ;  but  we  have  done  to  be  all  taken  charge  of  by  the  corn- 
all  in  our  power  to  alleviate  the  evil,  missariat,  receipts  in  money  being 
Valuable  property,  which  the  people  granted  by  us  to  the  owners."— 
were  unable  to  take  away  with  them,  iMajor  RawlinsorCs  MS.  Journal,'] 
has  been  transferred  to  tne  safe  keep- 


416  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

Urghundab  in  pursuit  of  them;  but  they  shrank  from 
meeting  our  bayonets ;  and  it  was  long  before  they  even 
ventured  to  come  within  reach  of  our  guns.  The  artil- 
lery then  told  with  such  good  effect  on  the  dense  masses 
of  the  enemy,  that  they  were  more  than  ever  disinclined 
to  approach  us.  On  the  9th,  however,  there  seemed 
some  prospect  of  a  general  action.  The  enemy's  foot- 
men were  posted  on  a  range  of  hills,  and,  as  our  column 
advanced,  they  saluted  us  with  a  volley  from  their 
matchlocks.  The  light  companies  of  the  40th  Queen's 
and  16th  Native  Infantry,  under  Captain  F.  White,  of 
the  former  regiment,  were  sent  forward  to  storm  the  hills 
on  the  right ;  and  the  grenadiers  of  the  40th,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Wakefield,  performed  the  jsame  good  service  on 
the  ascents  to  the  left.  The  hills  were  soon  cleared;  and 
the  enemy's  cavalry  were  then  seen  drawn  up  in  front 
of  our  columns.  Their  line  extended  across  the  plain ; 
their  right  resting  upon  a  range  of  high  ground,  and 
their  left  on  a  ruined  fort,  built  on  a  high  scarped 
mound.*  Hoping  to  draw  them  within  his  reach,  the 
Greneral  now  kept  his  guns  quiet.  But  they  were  not 
inclined  to  meet  us  in  the  figld.  They  were  planning 
another  game. 

Whether  it  had  been  the  original  design  of  the 
Douranee  chiefs  to  draw  Nott's  army  out  of  Candahar, 
and  to  strip  the  city  of  its  defences ;  or  whether,  despair- 
ing of  success  against  such  a  body  of  troops  as  the 
General  had  taken  out  with  him,  was  not  at  first  very 
apparent.f  But  it  subsequently  became  known  to  the 
British  authorities  that  the  stratagem  was  planned  by  the 

*  Captain  NeilVs  Recollections  of  the  town,  was  all  preconcerted  by 

Service  in  the  East,  Meerza  Ahmed ;    and  on  the  night 

+  "  The  plan  of  enticing  the  Gene-  of  the    attack  every  chief  in    the 

rol  to  Telookham,  delaying  him  there  country    was    present    except    the 

by  keeping  a  body  of  horse  in  his  Noorzyes-"— [3/q/or  liawlinson's  MS, 

Ticinity,  and  then  doubling  back  on  Journal,^ 


STRATAGEM  OF  THE  DOURANEES.         417 

subtle  understanding  of  Meerza  Ahmed.  The  enemy, 
after  the  skirmish  of  the  9th  instant,  retired  before  our 
advancing  battalions,  and,  industriously  spreading  a  re- 
port that  they  purposed  to  attack  Nott's  camp  during 
the  night,  recrossed  the  river  and  doubled  back  upon 
Candahar.  Up  to  this  time  the  city  had  remained  per- 
fectly quiet ;  and  the  minds  of  the  British  authorities  had 
not  been  disturbed  by  any  thoughts  of  coming  danger. 
But  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  it  was  seen  that  a 
number  of  Afghan  footmen  had  come  down  during  the 
preceding  night  and  taken  possession  of  old  Candahar. 
Rawlinson  at  once  despatched  three  messengers  to  Nott's 
camp,  to  inform  him  that  the  enemy  had  doubled  back 
in  his  rear,  and  that  it  was  apparently  their  inten- 
tion to  attack  the  city.  His  suspicions  were  soon  con- 
firmed. His  scouts  brought  in  intelligence  to  the  eflfect 
that  the  Douranee  army  was  to  concentrate  during  the 
day,  before  Candahar,  and  to  attack  it  in  the  course  of 
the  night.  All  day  long  the  numbers  of  the  enemy  con- 
tinued to  increase,  and  at  sunset  Sufder  Jung  and 
Meerza  Ahmed  arrived  and  posted  themselves  in  the 
cantonments.  Night  came  on  with  pitchy  darkness;  and 
the  garrison  could  not  trace  the  movements  of  the 
enemy.  They  had  no  blue  lights — no  fire-balls — no 
means  of  casting  a  light  beyond  the  defences  of  the  city. 
The  Ghazees  were  swarming  close  to  the  walls;  and  at 
eight  o'clock  they  commenced  the  attack.  They  had 
heaped  up  some  faggots  at  the  Herat  gate;  and  now 
they  fired  the  pile.  They  had  poured  oil  on  the  brush- 
Avood,  and  now  it  blazed  up  with  sudden  fury.*     The 

*  The  gate  had  been  closed  for  the  for  no  one ;  upon  which  he  yowled 

night.      Lieutenant  Cooke  was  on  out  a  malediction,  and  tossing  the 

guard,  and  was  endeavouring  to  trace  brushwood  on  the  ground,  said  he 

the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  the  would  leave  it  there  for  the  night, 

distance,  when  a  villager  drove  his  and  take  it  into  the  town  in   the 

donkey,  loaded  with  brushwood,  over  morning.     The  villager,  having  re- 

the  bridge  and  demanded  admission,  crossed  the  bridge  with  his  donkey, 

He  was  told  the  gate  would  be  opened  dived  among  the  rumed  huts  opposite 

VOL.  n.  2  E 


418  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

gate  itself  ignited  as  readily  as  tinder,  and  the  flames 
now  lit  up  the  mass  of  white  turbans,  the  gleaming 
arms,  and  the  coloured  standards,  which  had  before 
been  only  seen,  in  scattered  glimpses,  by  the  momentary 
light  of  the  kindled  match  of  the  A%han  jezails.* 

Desperate  was  the  attack  of  the  Ghazees,  and  steady 
the  resistance  of  the  garrison.  A  gun  upon  the  bas- 
tion poured  in  its  deadly  shower  of  grape  among  the 
besiegers ;  and  the  guard  kept  up  a  heavy  fire  from  the 
ramparts.  But  the  Ghazees  pressed  on  with  desperate 
resolution.  The  success  of  their  first  movement  had 
given  them  confidence  and  courage ;  and  now  they  were 
tearing  down  the  blazing  planks  with  intrepid  hands, 
fearless  of  the  red-hot  bars  and  hinges  of  the  falling 
gate.  Many  of  them,  intoxicated  with  bang,  were  send- 
ing up  the  fearful  yell  of  the  Afghan  fanatic,  and  rush- 
ing upon  death  with  the  eagerness  of  the  martyr. 
Others  were  calling  upon  Prince  Timour  to  come  out 
and  win  Paradise  by  aiding  the  cause  of  the  true 
believers.  At  one  time  it  seemed  that  victory  would 
declare  itself  on  the  side  of  the  infuriated  multitude 
that  was  surging  round  the  city  walls.  But  there 
were  men  within  the  city  as  resolute,  and  far  more 
steady  and  collected  in  their  resolution,  than  the  excited 
crowds  beyond  it,  who  were  hungering  after  our  de- 
struction. Major  Lane  commanded  the  garrison.  Raw- 
linson  was  there  to  counsel  and  to  aid  him.  They 
brought  down  the  gun  from  the  bastion  and  planted 
it  in  the  gateway.  They  brought  another  from  the 
citadel  to  its  support.  They  strengthened  the  point  of 
attack  with  fresh  bodies  of  infantry,  and  called  out  all 
the  water-carriers  to  endeavour  to  extinguish  the  flames. 

the  Herat  gate,  and  was  out  of  shot  *  See  the  letter-press  to  Lieut, 
in  a  moment.  At  the  same  instant  Rattray*8  admirable  drawings  of  the 
flames  burst  forth  from  the  brush-  Scenery  and  Costumes  of  Afghan- 
wood,  and  the  gate  was  fired.  istan. 


FAILURE  OF  THE  ASSAULT.  419 

But  more  serviceable  even  than  these  movements  was 
one  which  opposed  a  solid  obstacle  to  the  entrance  of 
the  besieging  multitude.  They  brought  down  from  the 
Commissariat  godowns  a  number  of  grain-bags,  and 
piled  them  up  at  the  burning  gate.  About  nine,  o'clock 
the  gate  fell  outwards,  and  then  a  party  of  Ghazees 
climbed  the  lofty  barricade  of  grain-bags  as  men  weary 
of  their  lives.  Many  fell  dead  or  desperately  wounded 
beneath  the  heavy  fire  of  our  musketry.  Spirited  was 
the  attack — spirited  the  defence.  The  fate  of  Canda- 
har  seemed  to  tremble  in  the  balance.  For  three  more 
hours  the  Ghazees  renewed,  at  intervals,  the  assault 
upon  the  gateway ;  but  they  could  not  make  good  their 
entrance  to  the  city;  and  at  midnight  they  drew  off  in 
despair. 

Whilst  this  desperate  struggle  was  going  on  at  the 
Herat  gate  of  the  city,  attempts  had  been  made  upon 
the  Shikarpoor  and  Caubul  gates.  But  the  enemy  could 
not  fire  the  brushwood  they  had  collected.  The  garri- 
son were  too  prompt  and  alert.  It  appears  that  Meerza 
Ahmed,  confident  of  the  success  of  the  attack  upon  the 
Herat  gate,  had  arranged  that  a  given  signal  should  an- 
nounce this  success,  and  that  then  he  should  proceed  ta 
the  assault  of  the  Eedgah  gate  leading  to  the  citadel. 
But  when  at  midnight  the  attack  was  finally  repulsed,  a 
council  of  war  was  held.  Baffled  in  their  attempts  on 
the  city,  the  angry  fanatics  levelled  the  most  violent 
reproaches  against  Meerza  Ahmed,  and  were  with  dif- 
ficulty restrained  from  laying  violent  hands  on  the  man, 
who,  they  declared,  had  betrayed  them  into  an  attempt 
which  had  sacrificed  the  lives  of  hundreds  of  true  be- 
lievers, and  ended  only  in  failure  and  disgrace.  It  is 
said  that  the  Ghazees  lost  six  hundred  men  in  the  at- 
tempt. They  were  busy  until  day-break  in  carrying  off 
the  dead. 

2e2 


420  AFFAIKS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  during  that  night  of 
the  10th  of  March,  Candahar  was  in  imminent  danger. 
Had  the  city  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  at  this 
time,  it  is  doubtful  whether  Nott's  force,  on  its  return, 
would  have  succeeded  in  recapturing  it.  The  troops  had 
gone  out  without  tents,  and  were  insufficiently  supplied 
with   ammunition.      Everything,    indeed,   was   against 
them;  and  even  if  the  courage  and  constancy  of  the 
force  had  prevailed  at  last,  success  could  have  been 
achieved  only  after  an  immense  sacrifice  of  life.    That 
the  General  was  out-manoeuvred,  is  plain.    But  it  may 
be  doubled  whether  he  is  fairly  chargeable  with  the 
amount  of  indiscretion  which  has  been  imputed  to  him. 
It  has  been  said  that  he  left  the  city  unprotected.     But 
as  he  was  to  have  engaged  the  enemy  himself  in  the 
open  country,  and  all  sources  of  internal  danger  had 
been  removed  by  the  expulsion  of  the  Afghans  and  the 
disarming  of  the  other  inhabitants,  it  was  confidently 
believed  that  the  troops  left  in  the  city  were  more  than 
sufficient  for  its  defence.     It  must,  however,  be  acknow- 
ledged that  Nott  was  lamentably  ignorant  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy,  who  doubled   back  in  his  rear 
without  raising  a  suspicion  of  their  designs  in  the  British 
camp.     But  this  is  no   new  thing  in  Indian  warfare. 
To  be  ignorant  of  the  intentions  of  the  enemy  is  the 
rule,  not  the  exception,  of  Indian  generalship.     Our  in- 
telligence-department  is  always  so  miserably  defective, 
that  we  lose  the  enemy  often  as  suddenly  as  we  find 
him,   and   are  either  running   ourselves   unexpectedly 
upon  him,  or  suffering  him  to  slip  out  of  our  hands. 

Greneral  Nott  re-entered  Candahar  on  the  12th  of 
March.  The  repulse  which  the  insurgents  had  received 
at  the  city  gate  gave  a  heavy  blow  to  their  cause.  It 
brought  disunion  into  the  Douranee  camp,  and  made 
the  Ghazees  denounce  the  chiefs  who  had  plunged  them 


STATE  OF  THE  DOUUANEE  CAMP.  421 

into  disaster,  and  resolve  to  forswear  the  perilous  trade  of 
fanaticism  which  brought  so  much  suffering  upon  them. 
The  ryots,  who  had  joined  the  standard  of  the  true 
believers,  now  returned  in  numbers  to  their  peacefiil 
avocations;  and  Major  Rawlinson  exerted  himself  to 
the  utmost  to  reassure  the  public  mind,  and  restore 
peace  and  prosperity  to  the  surrounding  villages.*  As 
the  month  advanced  there  were  many  encouraging  signs 
of  the  approaching  dissolution  of  the  Douranee  camp. 
Some  of  its  components  were  already  talking  of  moving 
off  to  Caubul ;  and  it  was  said  that  Meerza  Ahmed  had 
sent  his  family  to  the  capital  preparatory  to  a  retreat  in 
that  direction  himself 

But  there  is  never  anything  sustained  and  consistent 
in  Afghan  politics.  The  appearances  of  to-day  differ 
from  the  appearances  of  yesterday,  and  are  again  suc- 
ceeded by  different  symptoms  to-morrow.  The  Dou- 
ranee chiefs  at  one  time  seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of 
a  general  disruption ;  and  then,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few 
days,  they  met  in  council,  and  cooling  down  under  a 
shower  of  mutual  reproaches,  swore  solemn  oaths  to  be 
true  to  each  other,  and  to  league  themselves  together  for 
another  attack  upon  the  Feringhees.  At  the  end  of  the 
third  week  of  March  they  were  again  upon  the  move. 
Upon  the  24th,  they  were  within  a  short  distance  of 
Killa-chuk,  where  Nott  had  attacked  them  before.  On 
this  day  the  Parsewan  Janbaz  attempted  to  renew  cer- 
tain negotiations  which  they  had  initiated  a  few  days 
before;  but  which  had  been  coldly  received.  They 
offered  to  quit  the  Douranee  camp  and  to  move  off  to 
Caubul,  if  a  month's  pay  were  given  them  to  defray 

*  The  Ghazees  had  so  damaged  people  of  the  Urghundab  were  in- 

the  canal  banks,  thut  the  irrigation  duced  to  labour  at  their  repair,  and 

was  destroyed,  and  there  was  every  in  a  short  time   the  waters  began 

prospect  of  a  failure  of  the  crops ;  again  to  flow  in    their  accustomed 

but  through  Rawlinson's  auency  the  course. 


422  AFFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

their  expenses  on  the  march.  But  Nott  indignantly 
rejected  the  proposal.  "  I  will  never  give  them,"  he 
wrote  to  Rawlinson,  "  one  rupee;  and  if  I  can  ever  get 
near  them  I  will  destroy  them  to  a  man.  It  is  my 
wish  that  no  communications  shall  be  held  with  them. 
They  have  murdered  our  people,  and  plundered  the 
country."  * 

On  the  following  day,  our  troops  again  encountered 
the  enemy  in  the  field.  A  brigade  under  Colonel  Wy- 
mer  had  been  sent  out,  partly  to  clear  the  country  on 
the  Candahar  side  of  the  Urghundab  from  the  Douranee 
horse,  who  were  threatening  our  position,  and  partly  to 
relieve  the  garrison,  which  was  straitened  for  forage,  by 
sending  out  the  camels  to  graze  in  the  open  country. 
Wymer  took  with  him  three  regiments  of  infantry,  a 
troop  of  horse  artillery,  and  a  party  of  some  four  hun- 
dred mounted  men.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Baba- 
Wallee  the  Douranee  horse  crossed  the  river — 3000 
strong — to  attack  him.  Having  sent  a  messenger  to 
Candahar  to  inform  the  General  of  his  position,  Wymer 
prepared  to  defend  himself.  He  had  to  guard  his  cattle 
as  well  as  to  fight  the  enemy ;  and  the  former  necessity 
greatly  crippled  his  movements.  Weak,  as  the  Candahar 
detachments  always  were,  in  the  mounted  branch,  he 
found  himself  at  a  disadvantage  opposed  to  the  large 
bodies  of  the  enemy's  horse,  who  now  appeared  in  his 
front.  Our  Hindostanee  cavalry  were  driven  in  by  the 
Douranees  under  Saloo  Khan,  who  gallantly  charged 
our  squares.f    But  the  fire  of  our  guns  and  the  volleys 

*  General  Nott  to  Major  Rawlinson :  nephew,  fell,  and  in  another  part  of 

March  25^  IS42.  MS.  Correspondence,  the  field,   Hubeeb-oollah,  Akhond- 

t  "  In    the   charge  of  the  horse  zadeh,  and  Mahomed  Raheen,  Noor- 

undcr  Saloo  Khan,  when  after  driving  zye,  were  wounded.     The  total  loss 

back  our  cavalry  they  were  stopped  of  the  enemv  in  killed  and  wounded 

by  the  fire  of  the  guns  and  the  light  I  estimate,  from  all  I  could  learn  on 

company  of  the  38Ui,  which  had  been  the  field  and  from  the  villagers,  at 

thrown   out  in  advance,  Yar  Maho-  about  150.    We  had  a  few  men  killed 

med  of  Dehrawat,  who  was  Saloons  and  some  forty  wounded.    Amongst 


ENGAGEMENT  WITH  THE  DOUBANEES.       423 

of  our  musketry  soon  checked  the  audacity  of  the 
Afghan  horsemen;  and  the  affair  became  one  of  distant 
skirmishes.  But,  in  the  mean  while/ the  roar  of  our 
artillery  had  been  distinctly  heard  at  Candahar,  and 
Nott  had  moved  out  to  the  support  of  Wymer's 
brigade.  The  Douranees  were  still  surrounding  our 
camp,  when  the  General,  with  the  reinforcing  brigade, 
entered  the  valley.  What  the  men  who  followed  Nott 
then  saw,  is  described  as  "  a  beautiful  spectacle,"  which 
will  not  readily  be  forgotten.*  The  bright  afternoon 
sim  shed  its  slant  rays  upon  the  sabres  of  the  enemy, 
and  lit  them  up  Uke  a  biuTiing  forest.  Our  infantry 
were  drawn  up  in  a  hollow  square  covering  a  crowd 
of  camels ;  the  horse-artillery  guns,  which  had  done 
such  good  service  before,  were  playing  gloriously,  under 
Turner's  direction,  upon  the  dense  bodies  of  the  enemy's 
horse,  whom  their  heavy  fire  kept  at  a  cautious  distance. 
"And  just  as  Greneral  Nott,"  adds  an  eye-witness,f 
"  with  the  reinforcements  came  in  sight,  Lieutenant 
Chamberlaine,  of  the  Bengal  service,  an  oflGicer  in  the 
Shah's  cavalry,  who  at  the  head  of  a  small  party  had 
charged  the  enemy,  was  driven  back,  and,  emerging  from 
a  cloud  of  dust,  formed  in  rear  of  the  infantry,  with  the 
loss  of  a  few  men  killed,  himself  and  many  of  his  party 
wounded — but  not  without  having  given  very  satisfax> 
tory  proofs  of  his  power  as  a  swordsman,  albeit  his 
treacherous  weapon  had  broken  in  his  hand."    As  our 

the  latter  are  two  cayalry  officers,  before  they  quitted  the  yicinitj  of 

Chamberlaine,  and  Travers  of  the  2nd.  Candahar,   and  had  not  reinforce- 

The  Douranee  horse  came  on  more  ments  gone  out,  they  would  have  sus- 

boldly  on  this  occasion  than  they  had  tained,  I  doubt  not,  a  much  heavier 

ever  been  seen  to  do  before.     Some  loss,  by  making  repeated  charses  on 

of  the  38th  Sepoys,  indeed,  received  different  parts  of  the  camp  during 

sabre-cuts  from  our  horsemen ;  but  the  afternoon." — {^Major  RawUnson^t 

they  cannot  stand  our    artillery  or  MS.  Journal,'] 

musketry   fire.     They   had  been  so  *  Captain  NeilTs  Recollections  of 

taunted  with   cowardice,   that   they  Service. 

resolved  to  have  one  conflict  with  us  t  Captun  Neill. 


424  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

reinforcing  regiments  approached,  the  enemy  retired; 
and  our  cavalry  were  quite  useless.*  The  Douranee 
camp  had  been  left  standing,  and  Nott,  though  the  day 
was  far  advanced,  was  eager  to  cross  the  river  and 
attack  it;  but  the  guns  could  not  be  brought  down  to 
the  bank  without  great  labour,  and  the  fords  were  well- 
nigh  impracticable.  So  Nott  determined  to  withdraw 
the  brigade  to  Candahar  for  the  night,  leaving  Wymer 
in  position,  and  to  return  on  the  following  morning  to 
disperse  the  Douranee  horse. 

On  the  morning  of  the  26th  Nott  went  out  again, 
with  the  brigade  that  had  accompanied  him  on  the  pre- 
ceding day,  to  the  banks  of  the  Urghundab;  but  the 
enemy  had  struck  their  camp  during  the  night;  and  as 
soon  as  day  broke,  the  Douranee  horse  had  moved  off 
and  dispersed  themselves  in  different  bodies.  So  the 
General  returned  to  Candahar ;  and  Colonel  Wymer  re- 
UKiined  in  the  valley  to  graze  his  cattle,  unmolested  and 
secure.  Rawlinson  remained  in  the  valley  throughout 
the  day,  "  visiting  the  different  villages,  conversing  with 
the  MooUahs  and  head-men,  and  endeavouring  to  restore 
confidence.  Imprecations  against  the  Ghazees  were 
general  in  every  village,  and  the  damage  which  had 
been  caused  by  their  depredations  was  evidently  very 
great."f 

The  result  of  this  affair  was  a  growth  of  fresh  dis- 
union in  the  Douranee  camp.  The  chiefs  accused  each 
other  of  cowardice,  and  all  assailed  Meerza  Ahmed  with 
measureless  abuse.     But  tidings  were  now  coming  in, 

♦  "  A  few  squadrons  of  dragoons,"  followers,  I  also  found,  had  committed 

wrote     Rawlinson    in    his    journal,  extensive  ravages;  and  when  I  en- 

"  would  have  swept  the  Douranee  deavoured  to   persuade   the  people 

horse  from  the  field ;  as  it  was,  they  that  our  troops  were  there  for  their 

were  permitted  to  re-cross  the  river  protection,  they  uniformly  answered 

almost  unmolested."  that  they  knew  not  whether  they  had 

f  Major  Rwdinsons  MS.  Journal,  most  to  fear  from  their  friends  or 

Rawlinson  adds :  '^  Our  own  camp-  their  enemies.*' 


EVIL  TIDINGS  FROM  GHUZNEE.  425 

both  from  the  uorth  and  the  south,  which  went  some 
way  to  comfort  and  reassure  them.  It  was  currently 
reported  in  their  camp  that  Ghuznee  had  capitulated. 
This  intelligence  had  been  received  some  days  before 
by  the  British  oflBicers  at  Candahar,  and  had  not  been 
disbeheved.  On  the  31st  of  March,  a  letter  from  Major 
Leech,  at  Kelat-i-Ghilzye,  was  received  by  Nott  at  Can- 
dahar,  and  though  it  announced  the  fall  of  Ghuznee 
only  on  native  authority,  it  seemed  to  divest  the  fact 
entirely  of  all  atmosphere  of  doubt.  It  appeared,  from 
the  statements  that  reached  Candahar,  that  Ghuznee 
had  been  invested  by  an  overwhelming  force,  and  that, 
after  holding  out  for  some  weeks,  the  garrison  had  been 
reduced  more  by  a  want  of  water  than  by  the  attacks 
of  the  enemy.  It  was  reported,  that  before  the  arrival 
of  orders  from  Caubul  for  the  evacuation  of  the  place, 
the  town  of  Ghuznee  had  been  taken  by  the  surround- 
ing tribes — "  that  the  Hindoos  of  the  Bazaar  were  all 
killed,  fighting  on  our  side — that  Palmer,  during  the  two 
months  he  was  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  paid  a  daily  sum 
for  his  provisions,  water,  and  wood — that  Shumshoo- 
deen  was  the  bearer  oi  orders  from  the  British  at 
Oaubul  to  give  up  the  fortress — that  the  failure  of  water 
was  the  reason  that  made  him  agree  to  vacate  the  upper 
citadel  on  the  8th  instant — that  the  mass  of  Ghazees 
did  not  respect  the  treaty  formed,  with  a  guarantee 
given  to  Palmer  by  Shumshoodeen,  but  attacked  our 
garrison,  and  they  only  400  strong,  on  their  leaving 
the  citadel,  killing  100  and  losing  many  themselves — 
that  Palmer  now  wanted  a  guarantee  for  the  safety  of 
the  officers,  and  that  this  being  given,  they  surrendered 
themselves  with  two  or  three  European  females."*  At 
the  same  time,  Leech  reported  that  he  was  in  possession 
of  a  letter,  bearing  the  seal  of  Shumshoodeen  Khan, 

*   Major  Leech  to  General  Noll :  Khelat-i-GhUzye,  March  9,  1842.    MS, 


426  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

and  addressed  to  the  Shamalzye  chiefs,  exhorting  them 
to  asseipble  and  march  on  Khelat-i-Ghilzye,  and  holding 
out  to  them  hopes  of  honour  and  wealth  to  be  conferred 
upon  them  by  the  King  and  Ameen-ooUah  Khan,  if 
they  succeeded  in  capturing  the  place;  and  promising 
himself,  upon  the  breaking  up  of  the  snow,  to  march 
down  upon  it  *'  with  fort-destroying  guns  and  an  army 
crowned  with  victory." 

The  tidings  of  the  fall  of  Ghuznee  were  most  ca- 
lamitously true.  The  fortress,  which  the  English  had 
taken  with  so  much  difficulty,  and  the  capture  of  which 
had  been  proclaimed  with  so  much  pomp,  was  now  in 
the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  slight  outline  of  the 
melancholy  events  which  had  ended  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  garrison  and  the  captivity  of  the  sur- 
viving officers,  which  Leech  had  sent  jfrom  Khelat-i- 
Ghilzye,  was  substantially  correct.  The  enemy  appeared 
before  Ghuznee  on  the  20th  of  November.  On  the 
same  day  snow  began  to  fall.  Maclaren's  brigade 
was  then  advancing  from  Candahar,  and  the  enemy, 
expecting  its  appearance  in  their  neighbourhood,  drew 
off  their  investing  force;  but  they  soon  re-appeared 
again.  Maclaren's  retirement  gave  them  new  heart; 
and  on  the  7th  of  December  they  collected  again,  in 
increased  numbers,  around  the  walls.  The  garrison  were 
now  completely  enlaced.  The  city  was  in  their  possession, 
but  they  could  not  stir  beyond  it.  Soon,  however,  they 
lost  even  that.  The  inhabitants  undermined  the  walls, 
and  admitted  the  enemy  from  without.  On  the  16th  of 
December,  through  the  subterranean  aperture  which 
the  townspeople  had  made,  the  enemy  streamed  in  by 
thousands.  The  city  was  now  no  longer  tenable.  The 
garrison  shut  themselves  up  in  the  citadel. 

The  winter  now  set  in  with  appalling  severity.  The 
Sepoys,  kept  constantly  on  the  alert,  sunk  beneath  the 


THE  GHUZNEE  GARRISON.  427 

paralysing  cold.  Bravely  as  they  tried  to  bear  up 
against  it,  the  trial  was  beyond  their  physical  papacity 
to  endure.  The  deep  snow  was  lying  on  the  ground; 
it  was  often  falling  heavily  when  the  Sepoys  were  on 
their  cold  night-watch.  The  mercury  in  the  thermo- 
meter had  fallen  many  degrees  below  zero.  Men,  who 
had  spent  all  their  lives  on  the  burning  plains  of  Hin- 
dostan,  and  drunk  their  tepid  water  out  of  vessels 
scorched  by  the  fierce  rays  of  the  Indian  sun,  were  now 
compelled  to  break  the  ice  in  the  wells  before  they 
could  allay  their  thirst.  Fuel  was  so  scarce,  that  a 
single  seer*  of  wood  was  all  that  each  man  received  in 
the  day  to  cook  his  dinner  and  keep  off  the  assaults 
of  the  mysterious  enemy  that  was  destroying  them. 
They  were  on  half-rations;  and  the  scanty  provisions 
that  were  served  out  to  them  were  of  such  a  quality 
that  only  severe  hunger  could  reconcile  them  to  it. 
Numbers  of  them  were  carried  into  hospital  miserably 
frost-bitten.  The  northern  climate  was  doing  its  work. 
The  Afghans,  in  the  mean  while,  in  possession  of  the 
city,  continued  to  harass  the  garrison  in  the  citadel,  by 
firing  upon  them  whenever  they  showed  their  heads 
above  the  walls.  This  continued  till  the  middle  of  the 
month  of  January,  when,  it  appears,  that  some  suspen- 
sion of  hostilities  supervened.  It  was  believed  that  the 
English  at  Caubul  had  entered  into  a  treaty  with  the 
Afghan  Sirdars ;  and  that  Shumshoodeen  Khan  would 
shortly  arrive  with  orders  from  the  existing  government  to 
assume  possession  of  the  place.  Weeks,  however,  passed 
away,  and  the  new  governor  did  not  make  his  appear- 
ance.f  About  the  middle  of  February  he  arrived,  and  * 
summoned  Palmer  to  surrender.  Unwilling  to  submit 
to  the   humiliating   demand,  and  yet  hopeless   of  the 

*  Two  pounds. 

t  Shah  Soojah  claimed  credit  for  having  delayed  his  march. 


428  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

efficacy  of  resistance,  the  English  officer  contrived  to 
amuse  the  Sirdar  until  the  beginning  of  March.  Then 
the  patience  of  Shumshoodeen  Khan  and  the  other 
chiefs  was  exhausted;  and  they  swore  that  they  would 
re-commence  hostilities  with  unsparing  ferocity  if  the 
citadel  were  not  instantly  surrendered.  So,  on  the 
6th  of  March,  Palmer  and  his  men  marched  out  of  the 
citadel.  The  enemy  had  solemnly  sworn  to  conduct 
them  in  safety  to  Peshawur,  with  their  colours,  arms, 
and  baggage,  and  fifty  rounds  of  ammunition  in  the 
pouches  of  each  of  our  fighting  men.* 

But  it  soon  became  only  too  miserably  apparent  that 
the  enemy  had  sworn  falsely  to  protect  Palmer  and  his 
men.  The  British  troops  had  scarcely  taken  up  their 
abode  in  the  quarter  of  the  town  which  had  been  as- 
signed to  them,  when  the  Afghan  chiefs  threw  off  the 
mask.  On  the  day  after  their  departure  from  the  citadel, 
when  the  Sepoys  were  cooking  their  dinner,  the  Ghazees 
rushed  with  sudden  fury  on  their  lines.  Three  days  of 
terror  followed.  House  after  house  in  which  the  English 
officers  and  their  suffering  Hindostanee  followers  endea- 
voured manfully  to  defend  themselves,  was  attacked  by 
the  infuriated  enemy.  Fire,  famine,  and  slaughter  were 
all  working  together  to  destroy  our  unhappy  men.  At 
last,  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  the  survivors  were 
huddled  together  in  two  houses  which  had  been  assigned 
to  the  head-quarters  of  the  force — soldiers  and  camp- 
followers,  men,  women,  and  children,  crammed  to  suffo- 
cation in  every  room,  all  hourly  expecting  death.  The 
enemy  were  swarming  around.  The  citadel  guns,  which 
had  been  useless  in   our  hands,  but  were  now  most 

*  Palmer  reported  that  want  of  mound.   Among  the  officers  of  Nott*8 

water  had  driven  him  to  surrender ;  army  the  loss  of  Ghuznee  was  con- 

but  it  is  believed  that  he  might  have  sidcred  even  less  creditable  than  the 

retained  possession  of  the  great  well  loss  of  Caubul. 
by  running  a  covered  way  down  the 


SURRENDER  OF  THE  GARRISON.  429 

effective  in  those  of  the  eneniy,  were  sending  their 
round-shot  "crashing  through  and  through  the  walls."* 
Hour  after  hour,  and  still  the  enemy  seemed  to  pause, 
as  though  unwilling  to  shorten,  by  a  last  annihilating 
attack,  the  sufferings  of  their  victims.f  But  Shumshoo- 
deen  Khan  had  begun  to  relent.  He  was  in  council 
with  the  other  Sirdars ;  and  it  was  determined  that 
the  wretched  men,  who  were  now  so  wholly  at  their 
mercy,  should  be  admitted  to  terms.  The  Ghazees 
were  still  crying  aloud  for  their  blood.  But  the 
chiefs  assured  the  officers  of  their  safety,  if  they  would 
lay  down  their  arms  and  place  themselves  in  their 
hands.  The  Sepoys  had  by  this  time  thrown  off  all 
authority,  and  determined  to  make  their  own  way  to 
Peshawur.J     So  the  British  officers,  under  a  solemn 

*  If  there  had  been  any  one  in  of  the  enemy ;  I  destroyed  my  watch, 

Ghuznee  acquainted  with  the  use  and  and  flung  it,  and  what  money  I  had, 

practice  of   artillery,    the   garrison  over  the  wall  of  the  ditch;  I  also 

misht  have  held  out  till  AprU.  burnt  my  poor  wife^s  miniature,  first 

f  '*  On  the  morning  of  the  10th  cramming  the  gold  frame  of  it  into 
Poett  and  Davis  were  obliged  to  re-  a  musket,  being  determined  that  one 
tire  from  their  posts,  and  the  survi-  of  the  Ghazees  should  have  his  belly- 
vors  here  now  assembled  in  the  two  ful  of  gold  ere  I  died.  Hour  after 
houses  held  by  Colonel  Palmer  and  hour  passed  on,  and  still  we  sate  ex- 
the  head-quarters  of  the  corps.  You  pecting  everv  minute  to  hear  the 
cannot  picture  to  yourself  tne  scene  shout  of  the  final  attack ;  but  it  came 
these  two  houses  presented;  every  not.  From  our  loopholes  we  saw 
room  was  crammed  not  only  with  the  enemy  swarming  all  around  us — 
Sepoys,  but  camp-followers,  men,  in  every  lane  and  house,  and  on  the 
women,  and  children,  and  it  is  asto-  hill  of  the  citadel — the  place  was 
nishing  the  slaughter  among  them  black  with  their  masses ;  and  as  they 
was  not  greater,  seeing  that  the  guns  themselves  afterwards  told  us,  there 
of  the  citadel  sent  round-shot  crash-  were  not  less  than  ten  thousand  men 
ing  through  and  through  the  walls,  thirsting  for  our  blood." — [Zieute- 
I  saw  hiffh-castc  men  groping  in  the  nant  Crawford's  Narrative,'] 
mud,  endeavouring  to  discover  pieces  t  Lieutenant  Crawford  says  :— 
of  unmelted  ice,  that  by  sucking  them  '*  During  the  three  preceding  days* 
they  might  relieve  the  thirst  that  fighting,  Shumshoodeen  had  repeat- 
tormented  them.  Certainly,  when  edly  offered  us  terms ;  but  they  were 
that  morning  dawned,  I  thought  it  such  as  we  could  not  accede  to,  in« 
was  the  last  I  should  see  on  this  earth,  asmuch  as  they  commenced  by  de- 
and  so  did  we  all,  and  proceeded  to  siring  we  would  surrender  ourselves 
make  a  few  little  arrangements  ere  to  him  and  abandon  the  S^Mys  to 
the  final  attack  on  us  took  place,  the  fury  of  the  Ghazees.  The  Se- 
The  regimental  colours  were  burned,  poys,  it  appears,  had  held  a  consul- 
to  prevent  their  falling  into  the  hands  tation  among  themselyes,  and  believ- 


430  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

oath  from  the  chiefs  that  they  should  be  honourably 
treated  and  conducted  in  safety  to  Caubul,  laid  down 
their  arms,  and  trusted  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Afghan 
Sirdars.*  The  Sepoys,  in  the  mean  while,  were  endea- 
vouring to  prosecute  their  insane  scheme  of  escaping 
across  the  open  country  to  Peshawur.  Snow  began  to 
fall  heavily.  They  wandered  about  the  fields  helpless 
and  bewildered.  Many  of  them  were  cut  down  or  made 
prisoners  by  the  enemy ;  and  to  all  who  survived,  officers 
and  men  alike,  a  time  of  suffering  now  commenced,  all 
the  circumstances  of  which  are  burnt  into  the  memories 
of  men  as  with  a  brand  of  iron. 

In  the  mean  while,  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  was  gallantly 
holding  out  against  the  enemy.  Situated  between 
Ghuznee  and  Candahar,  about  eighty  miles  from  the 
latter  city,  this  isolated  fortress  stands  upon  a  barren 
eminence,  exposed  to  the  wintry  winds  and  driving 
dust-storms  —  one  of  the  dreariest  and  bleakest  spots 
in  all  the  country  of  Afghanistan.  It  had  been  origi- 
nally garrisoned  by  the  Shah's  3rd  infantry  regiment,  a 
party  of  forty  European  artillerymen,  and  some  sappers 
and  miners;  but  Maclaren's  brigade,  on  its  return  to- 
wards Candahar,  had  dropped  some  250  Sepoys  of  the 
43rd  Regiment  at  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  to  strengthen  the 
garrison;  and  now,  commanded  by  Captain  Craigie,  of 
the  Shah's  service,  this  Uttle  party  prepared  to  resist  the 
assaults  of  the  investing  enemy  and  the  cruel  cold.  For 
months   the   cold   was  far  more  irresistible   than   the 

ing  the^  had  no  chance  of  their  lives,        *  It  is  pleasant  to  record  any  act 

determined  on  forcing  their  way  out  of  individual  heroism.    **  Nicholson, 

of  the  town  and  endeavour  to  get  to  then  quite  a  stripling,  when  the  enemy 

Peshawur.    When  we  first  heard  of  entered  Ghuznee,  drove  them  thrice 

this  mad  design  and  s{)oke  to  the  back  beyond  the  walls  at  the  point  of 

men  about  it,  they  denied  it ;  but,  the  bayonet  before  he  would  listen 

on  the  10th,  two  Native  officers  came  to  the  order  given  him  to  make  his 

forward  and  told  us  thev  had  made  company  lay  down  their  arms.     He 

up  their  minds  to  go  off  tnat  night —  at  length  obeyed,  gave  up  his  sword 

that  if  we  chose  to  accompany  them  with  bitter  tears,  and  accompanied 

they  would  be  exceedingly  glad,  but,  his  comrades  to  an  almost  hopeless 

if  otherwise,  they  would  go  alone.  **  imprisonment. " —  \_Ra(tray.  ] 


STATE  OP  KHELAT-I-GHILZYE.  431 

enemy.  In  that  bleak,  exposed  situation,  the  icey  winds 
were  continually  blowing  from  the  north.  "  The  lower 
the  temperature  sunk,  the  higher  blew  the  north  wind." 
The  barracks  were  unfinished ;  there  were  neither  doors 
nor  windows  to  keep  out  the  chilling  blasts ;  and  there 
was  a  scanty  supply  of  firewood  in  store.  How  the 
Hindostanee  soldiers  bore  up  against  it,  it  is  difficult  to 
say,  for  the  European  officers  declare  that  they  "  never 
experienced  a  winter  so  continuously  cold."  There  was 
an  abimdance  of  grain  in  store ;  but  all  the  surrounding 
country  was  against  them,  and  the  wheat  could  not  be 
ground.  After  more  than  two  months  of  ineffectual 
labour  they  at  last  constructed  serviceable  hand-mills. 
The  Europeans  often  lived  for  days  together  upon 
bread  and  water ;  but  not  a  murmur  arose.  The  winter 
passed  wearily  away.  The  enemy  were  inactive.  But 
with  spring  came  a  renewal  of  active  work  on  either 
side.  The  garrison  were  labouring  to  strengthen  their 
defences,  and  the  enemy,  as  the  year  advanced,  began  to 
draw  more  closely  round  the  fortress,  their  numbers 
and  their  boldness  increasing  together.  After  a  time, 
they  began  to  dig  trenches  round  the  place,  and,  covered 
by  the  loopholed  parapets,  to  keep  up  a  hot  fire  upon 
the  garrison,  which  it  was  impossible  to  return  with 
good  effect.  But  Craigie  and  his  men  had  no  thought 
of  surrender.  They  held  out,  cheerfully  and  imcom- 
plainingly,  thankful  if  they  could  get  a  shot  at  the 
enemy  when  the  parties  in  the  trenches  were  being 
relieved. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  the  garrisons  of  Ghuznee 
and  Kelat-i-Ghilzye  when  disastrous  intelligence  from 
the  southward  reached  Nott  and  Rawlinson  at  Canda- 
har.  They  had  been,  for  some  time,  looking  forward 
with  the  greatest  anxiety  to  the  arrival  of  a  convoy 
from  Sindh,  which  was  to  throw  treasure,  ammunition, 
hospital  stores,  and  other  necessaries  into  the  garrison, 


432 


AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 


and  increase  the  number  of  their  available  troops.  Bri- 
gadier England,  who  commanded  the  Sindh  field  force, 
was  at  Dadur  towards  the  close  of  February,  and  there 
he  received  instructions  to  move  on  through  the  Bolan 
Pass,  to  assemble  a  strong  body  of  troops  at  Quettah, 
and  thence  to  push  his  succours  through  the  Kojuck 
with  all  expedient  despatch.  Major  Outram  was  then 
in  Sindh,  earnest  amongst  the  earnest  to  retrieve  our 
lost  position  in  Afghanistan,  and  active  amongst  the 
active  to  carry  out  the  work  of  throwing  troops  into 
the  country  which  had  witnessed  our  abasement.*  "All 
my  endeavours  in  this  quarter,"  he  wrote  on  the  15  th 
of  March,  "  have  been  to  urge  forward  movements,  and 
at  last  I  have  managed  to  send  up  every  disposable 
man.  Brigadier  England  marched  from  Dadur  on  the 
7th  (of  March),  and  must  be  at  Quettah  by  this  time. 
The  remainder  of  his  troops  intended  for  service  above 
will  march  about  the  23rd  or  24th,  so  that  he  will 
have  assembled  at  Quettah  by  the  end  of  the  month 
(including  the  garrison)  one  troop  of  European  Horse 
Artillery,  six  guns ;  half  a  company  of  Bombay  European 


*  How  strongly  Outram  felt  on 
the  subject  of  tbe  withdrawal  policy 
may  be  gathered  from  the  following 
passage  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Richmond 
bhakespear :  ^*  As  this  is  not  a  time 
to  mince  matters,  no  sooner  did  I  see 
the  orders  of  government  to  General 
Pollock  to  withdraw  the  Jellalabad 
garrison,  and  to  retire  to  India  under 
an^  circumstances  (except  the  Sikhs 
rismg  against  us,  which,  by-the-by, 
that  measure  would  have  brougnt 
about  most  probably),  than  I  wrote, 
in  the  most  earnest  manner  I  was 
capable  of,  pointing  out  that  our  bit- 
terest foe  could  not  have  devised 
a  more  injurious  measure,  whether 
viewed  politically  or  in  a  military 
light ;  but  expressing  my  trust  that 
Mr.  Clerk  would  act  on  the  respon- 
sibility vested  in  him  to  prevent  so 
ruinous  a  step.  My  mind  is  now  set 
at  rest  by  Cfeneraf  Pollock's  deter- 


mination, now  gleaned  from  your  let- 
ters. I  honour  the  General,  there- 
fore; and  should  he  be  allowed  to 
carry  out  his  views,  we  shall  have 
mainly  to  thank  him,  not  only  for 
retrieving  our  honour  in  Afghanistan, 
but  for  saving  India  to  us,  the  loss 
of  which  would  iiltimately  result 
from  disgracefully  succumbing  to  the 

Afghans  now Nothing  is 

easier  than  to  retrieve  our  honour 
in  Afghanistan  previously  to  Hnally 
withdrawing,  should  the  government 
so  determine  ;  and  I  pray  God,  Lord 
Ellenborough  may  at  once  see  the 
damnable  consequences  of  shirking 
the  undertaking,  and  order  accord- 
ingly ;  otherwise  the  disaster  of  Cau- 
bul  will  be  but  the  commencement  of 
our  misfortunes.*'—  [Major  Outram  to 
Sir  Jtichmond  ^hakespear :  March  15, 
1842.     MS.  Correspondence.^ 


MOVEMENTS  OF  ENGLAND'S  BRIGADE.  433 

Artillery ;  Major  Sotheby's  company  of  Bengal  Euro- 
pean Artillery ;  her  Majesty's  41st  Foot;  three  regiments 
of  Native  Infantry  and  a  flank  battalion  of  the  same ; 
two  squadrons  of  Native  Regular  Cavalry,  and  200 
Poonah  Horse.  Of  the  above,  two  regiments  of  Native 
Infantry  and  half  a  company  of  artillery  will  be  re- 
quired to  garrison  Quettah.  All  the  remainder  will  be 
available  to  reinforce  General  Nott,  and  will  march  on 
Candahar  with  that  view  in  the  first  week  of  April,  I 
trust,  with  everything  that  is  required  by  the  Candahar 
garrison,  namely,  twenty  lakhs  of  treasure,  ammunition, 
and  medicines.  I  hope,  however,  that  Brigadier  Eng- 
land will,  in  the  mean  while,  push  on  a  detachment  with 
a  portion  of  these  supplies  to  meet  a  brigade  at  the 
Kojuck,  which  General  Nott  talks  of  sending  out  to 
receive  what  can  be  afforded."* 

On  the  16  th  of  March,  Brigadier  England  arrived  at 
Quettah.  On  the  following  day,  he  wrote  to  Lieutenant 
Hammersley,  the  political  agent  at  that  place:  "The 
22nd  is  at  length  fixed  as  the  day  of  my  departure  from 
hence,  and  in  truth  I  do  not  see  how  it  could  advan- 
tageously be  hastened,  owing  to  the  numerous  demands 
made  on  my  small  means.  I  propose,  unless  other  in- 
tervening events  should  change  such  purpose,  to  move 
as  far  as  Hykulzye  on  the  24th,  and  there  await  intel- 
ligence from  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Kojuck  Pass. 
This  you  must  manage  for  me.  I  could  move  at  once  to 
Killa- Abdoollah ;  but  it  seems  to  me  advisable  to  try 
the  influence  of  our  presence  in  the  Pisheen  valley,  in 
the  matter  of  supplies  and  camels.  The  amount  of  trea- 
sure I  take  to  Candahar  will  not  exceed  four  lakhs,  and 
about  one-third  of  a  lakh  of  musket  ammunition;  we 
have  not  carriage  or  protection  for  more  at  a  time."    On 

*  Major  Outram  to  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear:  March  15,  1842.    MS.  Cor- 
respondence. 

VOL.  II.  2  F 


434  AJFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

the  following  day  he  wrote  again  to  Lieutenant  Ham* 
mersley,  stating  that  he  was  determined  to  halt  in  the 
Pisheen  valley,  imless  General  Nott  had  actually  sect 
two  or  three  regiments  to  the  Kojuck  to  meet  the  trea- 
sure; and  Hammersley,  when  he  forwarded  a  copy  of 
this  letter  to  Outram,  wrote  that  there  were  officers  in 
England's  brigade  who  openly  prophesied  that  the  de- 
tachment would  be  sacrificed  between  Quettah  and  the 
Kojuck  Pass.* 

On  the  26th  of  March,  the  Brigadier  moved  forward 
on  the  Pisheen  valley,  taking  with  him  five  companies  of 
her  Majesty's  41st  Regiment,  six  companies  of  Bombay 
Native  Infantry,  a  troop  of  the  3rd  Bombay  Cavalry,  fifty 
men  of  the  Poonah  Horse,  and  four  Horse- Artillery  guns. 
Early  on  the  28th  he  "arrived  at  the  entrance  of  a  defile 
which  leads  to  the  village  of  Hykulzye,"  at  which  place  he 
"  had  intended  to  await  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  now 
in  progress  to  this  place  through  the  Bolan  Pass."f  It 
was  plain  that  General  Nott  had  no  intention  to  send 
any  troops  to  the  southward  to  co-operate  with  England's 
detachment ;  J  and  it  soon  became  apparent  that  the  latter 

*  *'There  are  some  officers  in  camp  was  liable  at  anytime  to  be  called 

who  think  that  Brigadier  England*8  upon    to   proceed  to   the   relief  of 

detachment  will  be  sacrificed  between  Khelat-i-G^ilzye.  Rawlinson  pointed 

this  and  the  Kojuck;  but  with  such  out  the  immense  evils  attending  a 

fine  examples  as  those  set  by  Wood-  total  deprivation  of  treasure,  and  said 

bum  on  tne  Helmund,  Anaerson  at  that  even  the  compulsory  abandon- 

Tazee,  and  Wymer  at  Assyab,  surely  ment  of  Candahar  might  follow  the 

there  ought  to  be  no  doubt  of  success  failure  of  General  England  to  effect 

between  this  and  the  Kojuck,  when  the  passage  of  the  Kojuck.    Nott^ 

no  natural  obstacles  to  signify  inter-  however,    was  obdurate.      The  de- 

vene."  —  ^Lieutenant  Hammersley  to  tachment  was  not  sent.      Wymer*s 

Major  Outram:  March  18,  1842.  MS,  brigade,  however,  was  then   out  to 

Corresponde7ice.'\  the  southward  of  Candahar,  and  it 

t  Major-General  England  to  Go-  was  believed  that  the  object  of  the 

vemment :  April  2^   1842.    Published  movement  was  to  support  the  party 

Papers.  advancing  through  the  Kojuck.  Nott 

I  Nott  had  resolutely  refused  to  withdrew  the  brigade  to  Candahar, 

send  any  troops  to  meet  England*8  and    an   impression   gained  ground 

detachment,  though  earnestly  pressed  among  the  enemy  that  we  had  en- 

by  Rawlinson  to  do  so.    The  General  deavoured  to  open  our  communica- 

urged  that  he  could  not  afibrd  to  tions  with  the  troops  below,  but  had 

send  troops  to  the  Kojuck,  whilst  he  drawn  back  in  despair. 


THE  REPULSE  AT  HYKULZYE.  435 

would  have  done  well  to  have  retained  his  position  at 
Quettah  until  reinforced  by  the  troops  moving  up  from 
the  southward.  England  found  himself  near  the  village 
of  Hykulzye,  knowing  nothing  about  the  country,  and 
nothing  about  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  Colonel 
Stacy  accompanied  the  force  as  its  political  director. 
He  had,  some  days  before,  informed  the  Greneral  that  he 
might  expect  to  meet  the  enemy  at  Hykulzye ;  but  as 
they  approached  that  place  no  intelligence  of  their  posi- 
tion was  to  be  obtained,  and  not  before  England  was 
close  upon  them  had  he  any  knowledge  that  they  were 
in  his  front.  Mahomed  Sadig  had  come  down  deter- 
mined to  dispute  our  progress,  and  was  now  posted, 
with  his  troops,  behind  some  swngahs  on  the  Hykulzye 
heights. 

England  halted  the  column,  and  rode  forward  with 
his  staff  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy's  position.  After  the 
lapse  of  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  returned,  and  the 
force  was  ordered  to  advance.  The  horse-artiUery  guns 
were  now  opened  on  the  hills  to  the  left,  whilst  Major 
Aptfaorp,  with  the  light  battalion,  was  instructed  to  storm 
the  hills  to  the  right.  Leslie's  battery  played  with  good 
effect,  throwing  its  shrapnel  among  the  enemy;  but  the 
infantry  column  was  disastrously  beaten  back.  The 
enemy  rose  up  suddenly  from  behind  their  sungahs  and 
poured  in  such  a  destructive  fire  upon  our  columns  that 
the  light  companies  fell  back.  Captain  May,  of  the  41st, 
was  shot  dead.  Major  Apthorp,*  who  commanded  the 
light  companies,  was  carried,  desperately  wounded,  to  the 
rear.  A  sabre-cut  had  laid  open  his  skull,  and  another 
had  nearly  severed  his  right  arm.     Of  a  party  of  less 

*  Of  the  20th  Bombay  Native  In-  to  Oatram,  a  few  days  before  the  bri- 
fantry.  He  was  greatly  esteemed  as  sade  left  Qaettah,  **  and  it  is  to  be 
a  gallant  and  coed  soldier.  **  They  hoped  that  he  will  inspire  the  crest- 
have  a  fine  fellow  at  the  head  of  the  fallen  wiUi  a  little  ardour.** — \JdS, 
light  battalion,*'  wrote  Hammersley  Corretpondence,'] 

2f2 


436  CANDAHAR  AFFAIRS. 

than  500  men  nearly  a  hundred  were  killed  or  wounded. 
The  enemy  fought  with  uncommon  gallantry,  and  many 
of  them  were  bayoneted  or  shot  on  the  hill.  Among 
them  were  five  or  six  of  their  chiefs.  Mahomed  Sadig 
himself,  who  had  been  behind  the  defences,  but  had 
quitted  them  on  the  advance  of  our  light  battalion, 
and  joined  the  horsemen  on  the  hill,  received  a  bayonet- 
wound  on  the  shoulder. 

Our  men,  after  their  repulse,  soon  rallied,  and  were 
eager  again  to  be  led  to  the  attack.  But  England  had 
determined  to  retreat.  Colonel  Stacy  volunteered  to  lead 
a  party  of  a  himdred  men  up  the  hill  and  carry  the  de- 
fences ;  but  the  gallant  offer  was  declined.*  Three  times 
he  pressed  it  upon  the  Greneral,  but  with  no  effect.  It 
was  believed  by  the  latter  that  the  Hykulzye  defences 
could  be  carried  only  by  a  strong  brigade,  and  one,  too, 
equipped  with  mortars.  So  he  wrote  to  General  Nott, 
urging  him  to  send  a  force  so  equipped  to  meet  him; 
and  in  the  mean  while  fell  back  upon  Quettah.f  And 
there  he  began  to  entrench  himself,  as  though  he  were 
about  to  be  besieged  by  an  overwhelming  force. 

No  satisfactory  reasons  have  yet  been  assigned  for  this 

*  *'  General  England  and  his  staff  and  very  bold,  but  our  men  burned 

were  dismounted,  and   standing  in  with  rage  at  seeing  their  comraden 

conversation  not  far  from  where  the  cut  up  before  their  eyes.    I  think  I 

light  companies  had  rallied.    I  joined  pressed  my  offer  three  times,  the  last 

them.     It  was  useless  to  stand  and  time  volunteering  to  lead  with  eighty 

lament  over  what  could  not  be  re-  men ;  but  the  General  felt  he  had 

called.     A  retreat  was  determined  too  few,  and  that  the  stake  was  too 

upon.     I  observed  to  the  General  CTcat." — [Colonel  Stacy* s Narrative  of 

that  the  day  might  be  retrieved,  and  Services  in  Beloochistan  and  Afghanis-' 

offered  to  lead  into  the  entrenched  tan  in  the  Fear«  1840,  1841,  1842.] 
position  with  a  hundred  men   pro-        f  It  appears  to  have  been  Eng- 

perly  supported ;   and  I  am  confi-  land*8  intention,  afler  the  disaster  on 

dent  that  I  should  have  succeeded,  the  28th,  to  have  commenced  his  re- 

The  men  were  in  courage,  and  anxi-  treat  on  the  same  evening ;  but  Colo- 

ous  to  recover  the  bodies  of  their  nel  Stacy  persuaded  him  not  to  move 

comrades.    The  Greneral  replied,  he  until  the  following  morning.     On  the 

had  not  men.    I  proposed  that  the  29th  he  struck  his  camp  and  marched 

lefl  hill  should  be  attacked  first,  as  to   Hykerzye,  halted  at  Eooch-lag 

it  conmianded  the  smaller  one.    The  on  the  30th,  and  on  the  31st  reacheS 

enemy  were  certainly  in   strength,  Quettah. 


CAUSES  OF  THE  FAILURE.  437 

unhappy  miscarriage.  But  excuses  have  ibeen  urged  in 
abundance.  It  was  alleged  that  the  defences  at  Hykulzye 
were  impracticable — that  they  had  been  two  months  in 
course  of  erection — that  the  Greneral  had  received  no 
plan  of  them  from  the  political  authorities — that  he 
was  not,  in  fact,  aware  of  their  existence — that  he  had 
been  deceived  by  &lse  accounts  of  the  number  of  the 
enemy — that  strong  reinforcements  had  come  down 
from  Candahar — and  that  the  Sepoys  did  not  support 
the  European  soldiers  at  Hykulyze.  But  upon  a  care- 
ful examination  of  all  these  charges  and  assertions,  it 
does  not  appear  that  one  can  be  maintained. 

The  defences  at  Hykulzye  were  not  formidable,  Gre- 
neral England  had  not  seen  them  at  this  time.  Lieu- 
tenant Evans,  of  the  41st,  did  see  them;  and  he  said 
that  there  were  "no  breastworks,  but  merely  a  four- 
foot  ditch  filled  with  brushwood."  The  elevations  were 
nothing  more  than  those  heaps  of  earth  and  stone 
known  as  sungahs^  which  may  be,  and  often  are,  thrown 
up  in  a  few  hours.  The  best  information  that  Ham- 
mersley  could  obtain  went  to  show  that  these  defences 
were  thrown  up  by  Mahomed  Sadig  when  General 
England's  force  had  reached  Kooch-lag — not  before. 
When  the  brigade  advanced  from  Quettah  a  month 
afterwards,  the  Hykulzye  defences  were  found  to  be  so 
formidable  that  some  of  the  officers  rode  over  them,  not 
knowing  where  they  were. 

The  strength  of  the  enemy  at  Hykulzye  seems  to 
have  been  exaggerated  very  much  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  strength  of  the  defences.  General  England  wrote 
to  Hammersley  on  the  28th  of  March,  after  his  unsuc- 
cessful engagement,  that  the  enemy  were  "  a  hundred  to 
one  stronger  than  any  one  expected."*  Hammersley  and 

*  Hammersley  complained  that  the    factory,  that  if  it  iiad  not  been  for 
General's  letter  was  so  very  unsatis-    some  private  letters,  he  would  have 


438  AEFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

Stacy  had  both  told  the  General  that  he  might  expect 
Mahomed  Sadig  to  make  a  stand  at  Hykulzye.  The 
former  officer  had  computed  the  strength  of  the  enemy 
at  1000  foot  and  300  horse;  and  his  subsequent  in- 
quiries went  to  show  that  he  had  rather  overstated  than 
understated  the  number  actually  engaged.  England's 
own  officers  estimated  the  strength  of  the  enemy  at  fix)m 
1000  to  1300  men;  and  native  testimony  went  to  show 
that  they  had  overstated  the  number  of  horsemen  in  the 
field.  The  strong  reinforcements  which  were  said  to 
have  come  down  from  Candahar  before  the  28th  of 
March  were  purely  fabulous.  There  had  been  some 
talk  of  such  a  movement,  but  not  until  after  the  aflfair 
with  Colonel  Wymer's  brigade  on  the  25  th  of  March, 
Then  it  was  debated  among  the  chiefs  whether  a  party 
should  not  be  sent  down  to  the  Kojuck  to  intercept  the 
convoy  advancing  from  the  southward.    An  invitation 

been  left  in  ignorance  of  the  real  commanding  our  line  of  route  this 

nature  ofthe  events  that  had  occurred,  side  of  Hykulzye,  I  shall  fall  back 

The  original  letter,  now  before  me,  is  to  Hykerzye  to-morrow,  my  presence 

worth  quoting.      £ngland  seems  to  here  being  now  of  no  use,  and  inviting 

have  been  so  unwilling  to  state  dis-  their  insults ;  and  it  is  probable  that 

tinctly  that  he  had  been  defeated,  that  as  the  position  at  Hykerzye  is  not  a 

even  when  writing  officially  to  Ge-  good  one,  having  much  broken  ground 

neral  Nott  on   the   1st  instant,   he  in  its  rear,  that  I  shall  further  fall 

shrunk  from  a  plain  statement  of  tlie  back  on  Cutchlak.     I  have  had  so 

circumstances  of  the  case  ;   so  that  many  men  killed  and  wounded  by  the 

Nott,   writing  to  him  on  the  18th,  enemy,  that  my  baggage  is  increased 

could  only  say :  *^  I  have  been  favoured  whilst  my  means  of  defending  it  is 

with  your  letter  ofthe  1st  instant,  &c.  lessened.  If  Colonel  Marshall,  through 

...  I  have  also  heard  of  the  affair  your  information,  thinks  the  Cutchlak 

you  had  mth  the  enemy  on  the  28ih  rass  occupied,  he  may  make  such  ef- 

nlt**    The  letter  to  Nott  is,  however,  forts  as  his  numbers  will  enable  him 

less  obscure  than  the  letter  to  Ham-  to  keep  it  open  and  communicate  with 

mersley,  which  runs  thus  :  us ;  and  as  the  enemy  is  a  hundred  to 

one  stronger  than  any  one  imagined,  I 
"  Camp,  three  miles  south  of  must  wait  for  the  reinforcements  till 
Hykulzye,  2  p.m.  i  try  them  again.    Meanwhile,  the 
"  My  dear  Hammehslby,— I  wish  fortification  of  Quettah  must  be  pro- 
you  would  acquaint  Colonel  Marshall,  ceeded  with  vigorously.    Show  this 
that  as  the  insurgent  force  has  been  to  Colonel  Marshall  and  Major  Wad- 
much  reinforced  from  Candahar,  and  dington. 

have  so  strongly  protected  themselves  •♦  Sincerely  yours  (in  haste), 

with  breastworks,  &c.,  on  the  ground  «  R.  England." 


THE  ENEMY  AT  HYKULZYE.  439 

from  Mahomed  Sadig  had  arrived  in  their  camp,  and  it 
had  come  at  an  opportune  season.  Greatly  depressed 
by  the  failure  of  their  efforts  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Candahar,  the  Douranee  chiefs  were  abnost  on  the  point 
of  breaking  up  their  camp^  when  intelligence  of  the  fall 
of  Ghuznee  came  to  revive  their  spirits.  They  were 
then  at  Dehla.  There  the  tidings  of  the  advance  of 
England's  convoy  reached  them,  and  there  they  received 
an  invitation  from  Mahomed  Sadig  to  send  troops  to 
reinforce  him.  Expecting  that  their  own  camp  would 
be  strengthened  by  the  arrival  of  Shumshoodeen  Khan, 
they  beUeved  that  they  might  safely  detach  a  party  to 
the  southward.  Accordingly,  Saloo  Khan  and  some 
other  chiefe*  set  out  towards  the  Kojuck.  But  they 
had  hardly  commenced  their  march  when  England  was 
driven  back  at  Hykiilzye.  The  chiefs  fell  out  on  the 
road,  and  Saloo  Khan  alone  made  his  way  to  the 
southern  passes — but  not  a  man  even  of  his  party  had 
joined  Mahomed  Sadig  on  that  disastrous  28th  of 
March,  when  England  sought  to  justify  his  failure  by 
a  reference  to  the  reinforcements  from  Candahar. 

Only  one  more  point  remains  to  be  mentioned  in 
connexion  with  a  subject  which  the  chronicler  of 
these  events  is  but  too  anxious  to  dismiss.  General 
England  insinuated  that  he  had  no  reliance  upon  his 
Sepoy  troops.  He  is  said  to  have  remarked,  that  al- 
though when  his  troops  and  those  of  General  Nott  were 
united  they  would  have  15,000  men  under  their  com- 
mand, they  could  not  oppose  a  whole  nation  with  two 

^  **  April  l.^The  Douranees  hay-  rukzye),  &c.,  have  gone  off  by  the 

iDg  received   positive  accounU  from  desert  to  the  Kojuck  Pass.  The  body 

Mahomed  Sadig  of  the  advance  of  of  horse  with  the  chie&  is  about  1000 ; 

Brigadier  England  with  treasure,  have  but  they  expect  to  raise  some  4000 

resolved  to  make  an  effort  to  intercept  or  5000  of  the  Noorzye,  Atchekzye, 

it«   Saloo  Khan  accordingly,  with  Ma-  Barukzye,  and  Populzye  Ooloos  to 

homed  Azim  (Noorzye),  Fyz  Tullub,  assist  in  holding  the  pass.^— [Jfajbr 

Uubeeboollah,  Sooltan  Mahomed  (Ba-  Itawlinton*$  MS,  JawmaL'] 


440  ATFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

weak  regiments.*  He  thought  that  her  Majesty's  two 
regiments,  the  40th  and  41st,  were  the  only  two  corps 
that  could  be  reUed  upon.  Nott  told  a  different  story. 
"  My  Sepoys  are  behaving  nobly,"  was  his  constant 
report.  I  can  find  no  mention  of  any  backwardness  on 
the  part  of  the  Sepoys,  in  any  of  the  letters  written  by 
the  officers  of  either  service  after  the  affair  at  Hykulzye ; 
and  I  beUeve,  that  if  Colonel  Stacy  had  been  suffered 
to  storm  the  works  after  the  first  repulse,  a  large  number 
of  Sepoys  would  have  volunteered  to  follow  him. 

When  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  come  to  be 
considered,  it  appears  that  a  disaster  of  a  very  dis- 
couraging  character  was  sustained  by  the  adoption  of  a 
course  which  had  no  object  of  importance  commen- 
surate with  the  risk  that  was  incurred.  General  Eng- 
land had  no  intention  of  advancing  upon  Candahar. 
He  ought,  therefore,  to  have  remained  at  Quettah.  The 
advance  into  the  Pisheen  valley  was  a  grave  error.  It 
was  plainly  England's  duty,  at  this  time,  either  to  have 
cleared  the  pass  with  the  treasure  and  stores  which 
were  so  much  needed  by  the  Candahar  garrison,  or  to 
have  waited  patiently  for  his  reinforcements  at  Quettah. 
To  advance  fix)m  that  place,  and  then  to  fall  back  upon 
it,  was  to  do  that  which  Nott  said,  in  anticipation,  would 
be  more  injurious  to  the  position  of  the  Candahar  force 
than  20,000  of  the  enemy  in  the  field.f    Major  Outram 

*  "  You  will  understand  the  in-  "  This  I  deeply  regret ;    firstly,  be- 

sinuation,"  wrote  one  of  the  most  cause  I  cannot  send  a  force  to  the 

chivalrous  of  the  many  chivalrous  southern  side  of  the  pass ;  secondly, 

officers  who  served  beyond  the  In-  I  require  a  large  supply  of  ammuni- 

dus.     "  If  he  is  ever  heard  to  libel  tion,  which  I  l^ve  for  two  years  been 

our  Sepoys  in  that  manner,  surely  it  endeavouring  to   get,    but  without 

willbe  noticed  by  our  officers.*' — [^MS.  success ;  thirdly,  four  lakhs  of  rupees 

Correspondence,']  will  be  of  little  use  here — the  troops 

f  After  adverting  to  the  reported  and  establishments  are  going  on  for 
intention  of  England  to  leave  Quet-  four  months  in  arrears  ;  fourthly, 
tah  with  a  small  supply  of  money  and  your  moving  into  Pisheen  with  a  con- 
ammunition,  but  not  to  push  through  voy,  known  by  the  whole  country  to 
the  Kojuck,  Nott  goes  on  to  say :  be  intended  for  Candahar,  and  then 


NOTT's  letters  to  ENGLAND.  441 

also  strongly  advised  General  England  to  await  at 
Quettah  the  arrival  of  tlie  reinforcements  from  below — 
but  England  would  go  on  to  be  beaten.* 

To  Nott,  this  failure  was  mortifying  in  the  extreme. 
He  was  in  no  mood  to  brook  delays  and  excuses.  The 
disaster  at  Hykulzye  was  sufficiently  annoying  to  him; 
but  the  seeming  unwillingness  of  General  England  to  re- 
deem his  character  by  a  vigorous  movement  in  advance, 
irritated  him  still  more.  He  had  been  for  some  time 
complaining  bitterly  of  the  neglect  to  which  he  and  his 
force  had  been  subjected  by  the  authorities  below.  "  I 
know  not  the  intentions  of  government  regarding  this 
country/'  he  wrote  to  General  England;  "  but  this  I 
know  and  feel — that  it  is  now  from  four  to  five  months 
since  the  outbreak  at  Caubul,  and  in  all  that  time  no 
aid  whatever  has  been  given  to  me.  I  have  continually 
called  for  cavalry,  for  ammunition,  treasure,  stores,  and 
medicines  for  the  sick.  I  have  called  loudly,  but  I  have 
called  in  vain.  Had  the  least  aid  been  sent — even  a  rai- 
ment of  cavalry — I  could  have  tranquillised  or  subdued 
the  country.  I  have  been  tied  to  this  important  city, 
when  a  few  additional  troops  for  its  garrison  would  have 
set  me  free ;  and  I  now  would  have  moved  on  Ghuznee 
and  Caubul.  All  I  have  now  to  do  is  to  uphold  the 
honour  of  my  country  in  the  best  manner  I  can  without 
the  assistance  above  alluded  to,  and  in  ignorance  of  the 

halting  or  retiring  to  Quettah,  will  merslej,  in  letters  I  addressed  to 

have  the  very  worst  effects  through-  them  both  so  long  ago  as  the  lOth 

out  Afghanistan,  and  will  be  more  ultimo  (March),  to  await  at  Quettah 

injurious  to  my  present  position  than  the  junction  of  the  remainder  of  his 

20,000  of  the  enemy  in  the  field.     I  brigade,  unless  very  urgent  circum- 

sincerely  hope    that   you  have  not  stances  should  require  nis  more  im- 

moved,  or  that  you  have  determined  mediate  advance  to  meet  an  advance 

to  push  across  the  Kojuck  with  all  from  Candahar.    The  latter,  so  fiur 

the  force  you  can  muster." — [^General  from  being  the  case.  General  Nott 

NoU  to   General  Enqland :  April  2,  requested  might  not  be  attempted." 

1842.    MS,  liecordsJ]  — \^Major  Outram  to  Captain  Durand : 

♦  "  I  strongly  advised  Brisadier  April  3,  1842.    MS.  Correspondence.'] 

England,  through  Lieutenant  Ham-  t. 


442  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAB. 


intentions  of  government."  In  this  frame  of  mind,  his 
patience  well-nigh  exhausted,  his  temper  never  of  the 
most  genial  cast,  now  more  than  ever  overdouded,  he 
received  intelligence,  first  of  England's  defeat,  and  then 
of  his  reluctance  to  move  forward.  England  himself 
announced  the  latter,  if  not  in  so  many  plain  words,  in 
language  equally  mimistakeable.  After  setting  forth  all 
the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  a  forward  movement,  he 
concluded,  on  the  10th  of  April,  a  letter  to  Nott  by 
saying :  "  Whenever  it  so  happens  that  you  retire  bodily 
in  this  direction,  and  that  I  am  informed  of  it,  I  feel 
assured  that  I  shall  be  able  to  make  an  advantageous 
diversion  in  your  favour."f 

This  was  too  much  for  Nott.  Determined  at  once  to 
settle  the  question  of  England's  advance,  he  sate  down 
and  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  General.  There  is 
so  fine  a  soldierly  flavour  about  it,  that  I  am  unwilling 
to  omit  a  word: 

Candahar,  April  18,  1842. 

Sib, 

I  have  been  favoured  with  your  letters  of  the  let  and  10th 
instant.  I  have  also  heard  of  the  affair  you  had  with  the  enemy 
on  the  28th  ultimo,  and  deeply  regret  the  result.  I  have  atten- 
tively perused  the  government  despatch  of  the  15th  ultimo  for- 
warded through  you.  I  have  looked  at  our  position  in  Afghan- 
istan in  every  point  of  view  that  my  judgment,  aided  by  three 
years'  experience  of  its  people,  will  admit  of.  I  now  deliberately 
note  what  I  consider  to  be  necessary  to  carry  out  the  intention  of 
the  Supreme  Government  and  to  assert  and  uphold  the  honour  of 
our  country.  Even  should  the  government  ultimately  determine 
on  withdrawing  the  British  troops  from  the  right  of  the  Indus, 
it  would  be  impossible  to  retire  the  troops  below  the  passes  before 
October.  The  troops  at  Candahar  are  four  months  in  arrears,  and 
we  have  not  one  rupee  in  the  treasury.  In  the  event  of  much 
field  service  we  should  run  short  of  musket  ammunition,  and  we 

•  General  Nott  to  General  England :        f  General  England  to  General  Nott : 
April  2,  1842.     MS,  Records.  April  10,  1842.    MS.  Records. 


NOTT's  letters  to  ENGLAND,  443 

are  without  medicine  for  the  sick  and  wounded.  I  think  it  ab- 
solutely necessary  that  a  strong  brigade  of  2500  men  should  be 
immediately  pushed  from  Quettah  to  Candahar  with  the  supplies 
noted  in  the  foregoing  paragraph.  I  therefore  have  to  acquaint 
you  that  I  will  direct  a  brigade  of  three  regiments  of  infantry,  a 
troop  of  horse  artillery,  with  a  body  of  cavalry,  to  march  from 
Candahar  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  instant.  This  force  will 
certainly  be  at  Ghummun,  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Kojuck,  on 
the  morning  of  the  1st  of  May,  and  possibly  on  the  30th  of  this 
month.  I  shall,  therefore,  fully  rely  on  your  marching  a  brigade 
from  Quettah  so  that  it  may  reach  the  southern  dde  of  {he  pass 
on  the  above-mentioned  date.  I  believe  there  can  be  no  difficulty 
whatever  in  accomplishing  this,  nor  of  crossing  the  Kojuck  with- 
out loss,  provided  the  heights  are  properly  crowned  on  either  side. 
I  have  crossed  it  three  times  in  command  of  troops,  and  I  know 
that  what  I  now  state  is  correct.  There  can  be  no  danger  in 
passing  through  Fisheen  provided  a  careful  and  well-ordered 
march  is  preserved,  and  patroles  and  flanking  parties  of  horse  are 
thrown  well  out.  The  people  of  this  country  cannot  withstand 
our  troops  in  the  open  field.  I  am  well  aware  that  war  cannot 
be  made  without  loss,  but  yet,  perhaps,  the  British  troops  can 
oppose  Asiatic  armies  without  defeat;  and  I  feel  and  know  that 
British  officers  should  never  despair  of  punishing  the  atrocious 
and  treacherous  conduct  of  a  brutal  enemy.  You  say  you  are  not 
aware  if  I  know  the  localities  of  Quettah.  I  know  them  well;  and 
I  hope  I  shall  be  excused  when  I  express  my  surprise  that  the 
authorities  at  Quettah  should  for  a  moment  have  thought  of 
throwing  up  breastworks  and  entrenching  that  straggling  and 
wretched  cantonment,  when  the  town  and  its  citadel  is  so  well 
calculated  for  every  purpose  which  can  render  a  post  at  all  desirable 
in  Shawl,  and  I  am  quite  certain  may  be  well  defended  by  500 
men.  Did  I  command  at  Quettah,  I  would  relinquish  the  canton- 
ment-^it  is  usless:  Quettah  is  not  a  place  for  a  large  body  of 
troops.  I  feel  obliged  to  you  for  pointing  out  the  many  difficulties 
attending  our  position,  but  you  are  aware  that  it  is  our  first  and 
only  duty  to  overcome  difficulties  when  the  national  honour  and 
military  reputation  is  so  deeply  concerned — nothing  can  be  ac- 
complished without  effort  and  perseverance.  In  the  last  para, 
of  your  letter  of  the  10th  instant,  I  have  only  to  observe  that  I 
have  not  yet  contemplated  falling  back.     Without  money  I  can 


444  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAUAB. 

neither  pay  the  long  arrears  due  to  the  troops^  nor  procure  carriage 
for  field  operations.  I  deeply  regret  this  state  of  things,  which 
ought  to  have  been  attended  to  months  ago.  Had  this  been 
done,  I  should  now  have  been  on  my  march  to  Ghuznee.  I  shall 
folly  rely  on  your  brigade  being  at  Ae  Kojuck  on  the  Ist  of  May 
or  before.  This  letter  I  request  may  be  forwarded  to  Major 
Outram. 

W.  NoTT,  Major-GeneraL 

To  Major-General  Englaod,  commanding 
S.  F.  Force. 

P.S. — You  will  of  course  perceive  that  I  intend  your  brigade 
should  join  and  accompany  the  detachment  sent  from  this  to  Can- 
dahar.    I  have  no  cattle  for  treasure  or  stores. 

It  was  impossible  to  resist  the  urgency  of  this  appeal. 
The  orders  from  Candahar  were  not  to  be  misunder- 
stood. They  were  clear  as  the  notes  of  a  trumpet,  and 
ought  to  have  been  as  spirit-stirring.  England's  brigade 
now  began  to  prepare  for  a  forward  movement.  So  little, 
however,  had  it  been  anticipated  that  the  force  would 
ever  leave  Quettah,  that  the  officers  of  the  brigade  had 
been  buying  houses  and  settling  down  for  cantonment 
life.*  But  on  the  26th  of  April  England  broke  ground; 
and  on  the  28th — precisely  a  month  after  the  date  of 
his  disastrous  failure — was  again  before  Hykulzye.  The 
enemy,  emboldened  by  their  previous  success,  were 
posted  on  the  ground  they  had  occupied  before;  but 
they  soon  found  that  they  had  not  estimated  aright  the 
character  of  British  troops,  and  that  what  they  had  re- 
garded as  a  proof  of  their  own  superiority  in  the  field, 
was  an  accident  not  likely  to  be  repeated.  The  British 
troops  were  told  off  into  three  parties — one,  under  Major 
Simmons,  to  storm  the  hills  to  the  left ;  another,  under 
Captain  Woodburn,  to  attack  the  hill  on  the  right, 
where  the  disaster  of  the  previous  month  had  occurred ; 
and  a  third,  under  Major  Browne,  was  kept  in  reserve. 

*  Colonel  Stacy's  Narrative, 


ACTION  AT  HYKULZYE.  445 

When  they  had  taken  up  their  position,  the  guns  of 
Leslie's  battery  opened  with  good  effect  on  the  enemy; 
and  then  the  infantry  advanced  with  a  loud  "  hurrah" 
to  the  attack.  They  are  said  to  have  moved  forward 
"  as  steady  as  on  parade."*  The  coolness  and  courage 
of  the  infantry  soon  completed  what  the  admirable 
practice  of  the  guns  had  commenced.  The  enemy 
turned  and  fled.  Delamaine's  cavalry  were  then  slipped 
in  pursuit;  and  there  was  an  end  of  the  defence  of 
Hykulzye. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  England's  brigade  entered 
the  defile  leading  to  the  Kojuck  Pass.  Here,  for  some 
unaccountable  reason,  the  General  halted  the  column, 
dismounted  from  his  horse,  called  for  a  chair,  and  sate 
himself  down.  In  vain  Colonel  Stacy  implored  him  to 
move  on.  In  vain  he  urged  that  the  Candahar  troops 
were  entering  the  pass  from  the  other  side,  and  that  all 
the  glory  of  the  enterprise  would  be  theirs.  In  vain 
Major  Waddington,  the  engineer,  pressed  the  same  ad- 
vice on  the  General.  The  Bombay  force  was  locked-up 
at  the  entrance  to  the  pass,  whilst  Wymer,  with  the 
Bengal  regiments,  was  gallantly  crowning  the  Kojuck, 
and  reporting  everything  clear  for  the  advance  of  the 
Quettah ,  brigade.  The  Sepoys  of  those  three  noble 
regiments — the  2nd,  the  16th,  and  38th,  who  would 
have  followed  Wymer  wherever  he  pleased  to  lead  them 
— were  now  climbing  the  precipitous  ascents,  disencum- 
bered of  whatever  might  clog  their  movements,f  and 

♦  Colonel  Stacy*$  Narrative.  therefore,  been  discarded,  and  the 

f  *'  These  fine  fellows  had  been  men  were  in  their  doties.    As  the/ 

led  forward  by  Colonel  Wymer,  at  showed  on  every   accessible  point, 

daybreak,  to  occupy  the  heights  com-  they  were  the  admiration  of  ail.    I 

manding  the  pass  from  Chummemo  can  easily  imagine  how  painful  it 

to  the  western  side,  to  secure  General  must  have  been  to  the  Bombay  r^« 

England's  party  a  safe  passage.    I  ments  to  find  the  Candahar  troops  in 

have  never  seen  our  Sepoys  to  such  full  possession  of  the  pass  before  they 

advantage.    It    was    impossible  to  were  allowed  to  enter  it"— [Cotone/ 

climb  the  precipitous  hills  in  panta-  Staq/'$  Narrative,"] 
loons;  this  part  of  their  dress  had. 


446  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

every  accessible  height  was  bristling  with  the  bayonets 
of  the  Candahar  force.  The  Bombay  troops  were  bit- 
terly  disappointed;  but  they  cordiaUy  fraternised  with 
their  new  comrades,  and,  if  they  felt  any  pangs  of  envy, 
they  were  too  forbearing  to  express  them. 

It  was  with  no  common  anxiety  that  Nott  now 
awaited  the  return  of  his  regiments.  He  had  sent  them 
reluctantly  to  the  Kojuck,  and  was  eager  to  commence 
operations  m  another  direction— to  march  upon  Ghuz- 
nee,  and  then  onward  to  meet  Pollock  at  the  capital. 
In  the  letters  which  he  addressed  at  this  time  to  his 
brother  General  at  Jellalabad,  his  feelings  found  vent 
They  are  eminently  characteristic: 

Candahar,  April  29th,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

My  last  news  from  your  side  was  of  the  oth  instant.  I 
regret  I  am  not  on  my  way  to  Ghuznee — I  am  tied  to  this  place. 
My  troops  have  had  no  pay  since  December,  1841.  I  am  in  want 
of  almost  everything.  I  have  not  carriage  even  for  three  regi- 
ments, and  I  have  not  a  rupee  to  buy  or  to  hire  cattle.  For  five 
months  I  have  been  calling  for  aid  from  Sindh — none  whatever 
has  been  sent.  At  last  Major-General  England  moved  with 
money  and  stores,,  but  received  a  check  in  Pisheen,  and  then 
retired  to  Shawl !  I  have  now  been  obliged  to  send  the  best 
part  of  my  force  to  the  Kojuck  Pass,  in  hopes  of  getting  the  trea- 
sure and  stores  I  have  so  long  been  expecting,  and  without  which 
my  small  force  is  paralysed.  It  is  dreadful  to  think  of  all  this. 
I  ought  to  have  been  on  my  way  to  extend  my  hand  to  you  from 
Ghuznee,  instead  of  which  I  am  obliged  to  make  a  movement  on 
the  Kojuck.  I  have  felt  the  want  of  cavalry.  I  have  the  Shah's 
first  regiment,  but  I  have  never  been  able  to  get  them  to  charge. 
My  Sepoys  have  behaved  nobly,  and  have  Ucked  the  Afghans  in 
every  aflair,  even  when  five  times  their  number.  The  moment 
my  brigade  returns  from  the  Kojuck  I  move  on  Kelat-i-Ghilzye 
and  Ghuznee,  in  hopes  of  saving  some  of  our  oflScers  and  men 
at  the  latter  place.  Instead  of  sending  me  cavalry,  money,  &c., 
the  authority  in  Sindh  coolly  says,  **  When  you  retire  bodily  I 


nott's  letters  to  pollock.       447 

hope  to  render  you  some  assistance."     I  believe  I  shall  go  mad  I 
I  have  much  to  say,  but  am  confined  to  a  slip  of  paper* 

Yours  sincerely,  W.  Nott* 


Candahar,  May  6ih,  1842. 

Mt  deab  Gekebal^ 

I  have  this  day  received  your  letter  of  the  14th  ultimo. 
I  had  before  heard  of  your  progress  up  to  the  6th  of  April:  this 
is  the  only  note  I  have  received  from  you.  I  enclose  a  copy  of 
my  note  of  the  29th  of  last  month,  which  was  sent  vid  Eelat-i- 
Ghilzye,  and  by  which  you  will  perceive  how  much  I  have  been 
disappointed,  and  the  state  of  the  force  under  my  command. 
It  drove  me  almost  mad  to  be  forced  to  send  the  best  part  of 
my  force  to  the  Eojuck  Pass  instead  of  marching  towards  Caubul; 
but  I  had  not  a  rupee  to  pay  the  long  arrears  of  the  troops,  or 
to  purchase  cattle.  The  people  of  ihb  country  unfortunately 
have  an  idea  that  we  are  to  retire  whether  we  are  successful  or 
not^  and  therefore  they  will  part  with  nothing;  and,  as  far  as 
cattle  are  concerned,  we  are  nearly  helpless.  God  knows  why 
such  delay  has  occurred  in  sending  me  money  and  stores.  This 
is  dreadful.  I  shall  move  towards  Caubul  the  moment  I  can  get 
carriage.  General  England's  retrograde  movement  has  been  a 
sad  disappointment  to  me. 

Yours  sincerely,  W.  NoTT.f 

P.S. — England  has  now,  with  the  aid  of  my  brigade,  crossed 
the  pass.  He  brings  with  him  two  twelve-pounder  howitzers; 
but  for  these  I  should  not  have  a  single  howitzer  at  command. 
Mortars  I  have  none.  I  expect  the  troops  here  on  the  10th. 
The  Ghazehs  still  keep  head  within  a  few  miles  of  us,  not  in 
great  strength:  the  nucleus,  however,  exists.  I  have  directed 
all  camels  within  reach  to  be  procured  on  any  terms:  want  of 
money  alone  prevented  me  doing  thia  earlier.  The  force  I  shall 
take  from  this  must  depend  upon  the  available  cattle.  I  trust  it 
may  amount  to  5000  men.  Rely  on  my  making  every  effort  to 
communicate  with  you;  but  from  past  experience  I  must  regard 
this  as  extremely  doubtful,  and  that  we  must  not  depend  on 
mutual  intelligence  enabling  us  to  make  combined  movements. 
No  opportunity  shall  be  lost;  but  if  all  attempts  at  correspondence 
fail,  I  will  still  hope  that,  as  we  have  one  object  at  heart,  the 

*  MS,  Correspondence.  f  MS,  Correspondence. 


448  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

similarity  of  our  operations  may  in  some  measure  supply  the 
want  of  a  concerted  plan. 

Without  any  opposition  the  two  united  brigades  now 
marched  on  to  Candahar,  and  entered  the  city  on  the 
10th  of  May.  The  enemy  had  broken  up  and  dispersed. 
Saloo  Khan,  who  had  come  down  to  the  assistance  of 
Mahomed  Sadig,  had  fallen  out  with  that  chief.  He 
had  never  thrown  his  heart  into  the  cause,  and  was,  in- 
deed, at  any  time,  to  be  purchased  by  British  gold. 
Rawlinson  thought  that  a  little  money  would  be  well 
expended  on  the  purchase  of  his  allegiance,  but  Nott 
objected  to  the  measure.*  In  the  mean  while,  how- 
ever, Stacy  had  been  exerting  himself  with  good  success 
below  the  Kojuck  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  this  man 
in  the  important  work  of  keeping  open  the  communi- 
cation between  Quettah  and  Candahar;  and  when  he 
reached  the  latter  place,  he  was  able  to  report  that 
Saloo  Khan  had  promised  all  that  was  required  of  him ; 
and  that  Atta-oollah  Khan,  the  brother  of  the  chief,  was 
now  accompanying  him  for  the  purpose  of  concluding 
the  necessary  arrangements.f 

♦  "  I  have  only,"  wrote  Nott,  "  to  RawUnson:  April  9, 1842.     MS,  Cor* 

repeat  mj  sentiments— namelj,  that  respondenceJ] 
I  will  not  sanction  a  rupee  being        f  See  Colonel  Stacy* s  Narrative,  and 

S'ven  from  the  British  treasury  to  his  correspondence  with  Major  Raw- 
ese  people.  I  have  for  three  ^ears  linson.  Ilawlinson,  however,  doubted 
viewed  with  deep  regret  the  ruinous  whether  the  negotiations  with  Saloo 
svstem  of  giving  awaj  laree  sums  to  Khan  would  have  a  favorable  result : 
the  chiefs  and  Sirdars  of  Afghanistan,  "Had  a  long  conference,**  he  wrote 
which  I  sincerely  believe  has  brought  on  the  10th  of  May,  "  with  Atta-ool- 
upon  us  all  our  present  difficulties  in  lab  Klian,  who  has  come  in  to  treat 
this  country.  I  have  offered  toguaran-  for  his  brother,  Saloo ;  and  the  latter, 
tee  the  personal  safety  of  Saloo  Khan  if  his  agent  is  to  be  believed,  certainly 
if  he  returns  to  his  allegiance  by  a  cer-  desires  to  espouse  our  cause.  Know- 
tain  day.  Kthere  are  any  other  chiefs  ing,  however,  as  I  do,  Saloo*s  ambition 
who  can  make  it  appear  that  they  are  and  avarice,  I  question  very  much 
worthy  of  the  indulgence  of  my  gua-  whether  we  shall  come  to  any  satis- 
rantee  for  their  personal  safety,  I  will  factory  arrangement  with  him.  We 
take  their  wishes  into  consideration ;  merely  require  Saloo  Khan  s  co-ope- 
but  I  will  make  them  no  other  pro-  ration,  in  order-  to  facilitate  the  re- 
mises. This  does  not  apply  to  Ma-  establishment  of  our  dawk  communi- 
homed  Atta  or  to  Meerza  Ahmed,  as  cation ;  but  the  Khan  talks  of  rank, 
I  will  not  receive  these  two  men  on  power,  and  pay,  as  the  return  he  has 
any  terms,  without  the  order  of  hiffher  a  right  to  expect  for  joining  us,  and 
authority." — ^General  Nott  to  major  is  not  likely  to  be  satisfied  with  any 


STATE  OF  THE  DOURANBE  CAMP.  449 

In  the  mean  while,  the  Douranee  chiefe,  though  dis- 
united, were  not  inactive.  It  was  hard  to  determine 
with  any  distinctness  what  were  their  designs  at  this 
time — so  contradictory  were  the  accounts  which  reached 
our  camp,  and  so  inconsistent  the  movements  of  the 
enemy.  But  it  seemed  that  our  diflGiculties  were  very 
sensibly  diminishing.  As  the  spring  advanced,  the 
general  aspect  of  affairs  was  brighter  and  more  en- 
couraging than  it  had  been  since  the  first  outbreak  of 
the  revolution.  The  chiefs  were  scattered  about  in  all 
directions — some  wounded  and  dying — others  eager  to 
make  terms  with  the  British.  Meerza  Ahmed  and 
Sufder  Jung  were  contemplating  a  withdrawal  across 
the  frontier  to  Laush  and  Jowayn.  The  latter  was 
corresponding  with  the  British  agent,  and  expressing  his 
desire  to  return  to  our  camp.  The  Caubul  Janbaz  had 
deserted  in  disgust.  The  principal  men  of  the  surround- 
ing villages  were  sending  messages  into  our  camp,  offer- 
ing to  withdraw  all  their  people  from  the  rebel  standard 
if  we  would  guarantee  them  against  the  depredations  of 
our  troops.  The  trade  of  the  Qhazee  was  plainly  at  a 
discount.  And  whilst  the  elements  of  decay  were  thus 
discernible  within,  there  were  external  influences  at 
work  to  weaken  the  rebel  cause.  Glad  tidings  arrived 
from  the  eastward.  General  Pollock  had  advanced 
upon  Jellalabad ;  had  relieved  the  garrison  of  that 
place ;  and  had,  it  was  said,  determined  to  march  upon 
the  capital.  A  royal  salute  was  fired  at  Candahar ;  and 
as  the  tidings  of  our  successes  spread  through  the 
country  the  spirits  of  the  insurgents  became  more  and 
more  depressed. 

moderate  measure  of  conciliation." —  Islam  "  wrote  Rawlinson  in  his  Joiir- 

(Major    Rawlinson's  MS,    Journal)  nal,  '*  has  plunged  him  into  personal 

Saloo  Khan,  however,  in  the  sequel  difficulties.     He  has  beeu  twice  at- 

rendered  good  service  and  proved  his  tacked  by  Mahomed  Sadig  and  Meer 

fidelity  in  the  face  of  strenuous  on-  Afzul,   and   has  been  wounded,  to- 

position  from  some  of  the  other  chiera:  gether    with    his    brother    and   his 

'*  His   falling  off  from  the  cause  of  nephew." 

VOL.  II.  2  G 


450  AEFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

Still  it  was  obvious  that  whilst  Meerza  Ahmed  and 
Atta  Mahomed  continued  to  flit  about  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Candahar,  there  was  no  prospect  of  permanent 
tranquillity.  Lesser  chiefs  might  tender  their  submis- 
sion, but  whilst  these,  the  main-springs  of  the  great 
insurrectionary  movement,  were  employing  their  talents 
and  exercising  their  influence  in  hostility  against  us,  there 
was  little  chance  of  any  effective  movement  for  the  sup- 
pression of  rebellion  m  Western  Afghanistan.  Armed 
with  authority  from  the  Shah  himself,  granted  prior 
to  the  great  outbreak,  Meerza  Ahmed  was  raising  re- 
venue in  the  name  of  the  local  government,  and  expend- 
ing the  money  thus  collected  on  the  maintenance  of  the 
war.  It  appeared  expedient,  therefore,  to  Nott,  to  cause 
a  proclamation  to  be  issued,  cautioning  the  inhabitants 
against  paying  revenue  to  the  Meerza.  This  was  a 
measure  of  unquestionable  propriety  ;  but  Nott  was 
disposed  to  go  far  beyond  it.  He  was  eager  to  offer  a 
reward  to  any  one  who  would  bring  in  either  Meerza 
Ahmed  or  Atta  Mahomed  to  his  camp ;  and  on  the  7th 
of  April  he  wrote  to  Rawlinson  on  the  subject:  "  I  wish 
a  proclamation  to  be  immediately  issued,  prohibiting 
any  person  paying  revenue  to  Meerza  Ahmed  or  to 
Sufder  Jung,  and  making  them  to  understand,  that 
whatever  sums  they  pay  to  these  chiefs  will  be  their 
own  loss,  as  the  regular  revenue  due  to  his  Majesty 
the  Shah  will  be  exacted  jfrom  them  by  the  authorities 
of  Candahar.  I  will  thank  you  in  the  proclamation  to 
offer  a  reward  of  5000  rupees  to  any  person  who  will 
bring  in  either  Meerza  Ahmed  or  Mahomed  Atta.  The 
sooner  this  is  done  the  better.  Let  me  see  the  draft  of 
the  proclamation  before  it  is  issued."* 

Startled  at  this  bold  and  questionable  proposition, 
Rawlinson,  having  asked  in  the  first  place  whether  the 
proclamation  was  to  be  issued  in  the  Greneral's  own 

♦  MS,  Correspondence, 


CORRESPONDENCE  OF  RAWUNSON  AND  NOTT.        451 

name,  or  in  that  of  Prince  Timour,  and  having  sug- 
gested that  on  a  question  of  such  importance  as  that  of 
the  raising  of  revenue  the  wishes  of  the  Prince  should 
be  previously  ascertained,  went  on  to  speak  in  his  letter, 
of  the  proposed  rewards.  "  Is  the  reward  of  5000 
rupees,"  he  asked,  "  also  offered  to  any  one  bringing  in 
Mahomed  Atta  or  Meerza  Ahmed,  to  apply  to  these 
people  dead  or  alive,  or  is  it  merely  to  be  given  in  the 
event  of  any  of  the  A^hans  bringing  them  in  as 
prisoners  ?  I  do  not  think  the  Prince  would  have  any 
objection  to  issue  the  proclamation  about  revenue,  and 
to  signify  to  all  his  subjects  that  he  has  appointed 
Meerza  Wulee  Mahomed  Ehan  to  the  management  of 
this  department,  notwithstanding  he  is  aware  that  papers 
of  an  exactly  opposite  tenor,  issued  by  his  father,  are  in 
Meerza  Ahmed's  hands;  but  I  greatly  doubt  his  aqui- 
escing  in  the  subject  of  the  reward,  as,  whatever  may  be 
the  secret  feelings  of  Mahomedans  regarding  betrayal  or 
assassination,  it  is  altogether  repugnant  to  their  habits  to 
avow  such  objects  in  a  public  proclamation."* 

To  this  Nott  replied  that,  as  a  matter  of  course,  he 
intended  the  proclamation  regarding  the  revenue  to 
be  issued  in  the  name  of  the  Prince.  "  In  regard,"  he 
added,  "  to  the  reward  for  the  apprehension  of  Meerza 
Ahmed,  that  is  a  different  thing;  and  if  the  Prince  will 
not  consent  to  include  it  in  the  proclamation  regarding 
the  revenue,  where  it  ought  to  appear,  I  will  issue  a 
separate  proclamation.  Meerza  Ahmed  has  murdered 
my  camp-followers  and  Sepoys  in  the  most  cruel  and 
atrocious  manner,  and  it  is  my  duty,  merely  as  com- 
mander of  the  force,  to  offer  a  reward  to  any  person 
who  will  bring  him  in.  Mahomed  Atta  has,  like  a 
monster,  murdered  our  officers  in  their  houses,  and  cut 
to  pieces  our  unarmed  and  inoffensive  camp-followers. 
I  will  show  no  mercy  to  these  men.    My  note  said 

*  MS.  CorretpoMkHa, 

2q2 


452  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

nothing  about '  dead  or  alive/  and  I  thought  clearly  in- 
dicated bringing  them  in  prisoners.  Why  you  make  use 
of  the  word  *  assassination '  I  know  not  —  but  I  do 
know  that  it  ought  not  to  be  used  by  Englishmen  in 
any  public  document,  and  therefore  it  could  never  enter 
into  my  mind  when  speaking  of  a  proclamation.  Meerza 
Ahmed  is  collecting  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  revenue, 
to  enable  him  to  raise  men  to  attack  the  force  under  my 
command.     Such  plunder  ought  to  be  put  a  stop  to."  * 

Then  Rawlinson  answered,  that  he  regretted  that  the 
unguarded  use  of  the  ugly  word  "  assassination,"  which 
he  only  intended  to   convey  the   meaning  which  the 
Prince  might   put   upon    a   general   offer    of   reward 
for  the  persons  of  the  proscribed  chiefs,  should  have 
given  any  offence  to  the  General ;  but  that  he  trusted 
Nott  would  excuse  him  if  he  made  a  few  remarks  upon 
the  subject  of  the  proposed  proclamation.     "  We  are 
accused,  and  perhaps  suspected,"  he  wrote,  "  of  having 
lately  suborned  people  to  attempt  the  life  of  Mahomed 
Akbar  Khan ;  and  Captain  Nicolson  is  known  to  have 
offered  a  high  reward  on  one  occasion  for  the  head  of 
the  Gooroo;  and  it  would  be  very  difficult,  therefore,  it 
appears  to  me,  in  our  present  proclamation,  to  get  the 
A%hans  to  appreciate  the  difference  between  the  offer  of 
a  reward  for  the  betrayal  of  Meerza  Ahmed  and  Ma- 
homed Atta  into  our  hands,  to  be   executed  by  the 
Prince  (as  every  one  must  know  they  would  be)  on 
their  arrival  at   Candahar,   and  for    anticipating  this 
sentence  by  taking  their  lives  on  the  spot,  wherever  a 
man  might  be  found  bold  enough  to  attempt  the  deed. 
Now,  if  any  misunderstanding  on  this  subject  existed,  and 
we  were  believed  by  our  proclamation  to  be  aiming  at 
the  lives  rather  than  at  the  liberty  of  Meerza  Ahmed 
and  Mahomed  Atta,  it  would  be  only  natural  for  them 
to  retaliate,  and,  aided  by  religious  enthusiasm,  and  with 

♦  MS.  Correspondence. 


THE  PROPOSED  PBOCLAMATION.         453 

the  voice  of  the  country  in  their  favour,  they  would  be 
&r  more  likely,  I  think,  to  succeed  in  bribing  Ghazees 
to  kill  our  officers,  than  we  would  be  in  tempting  any 
of  the  Afghans  to  seize  the  persons  of  the  proscribed 
individuals  and  hand  them  over  to  us  for  execution.    I 
cannot  help  thinking  also,  that  even  supposing  the  pro- 
clamation to  be  expressly  stated  and  understood  to  aim 
only  at  the  liberty  of  the  two  heads  of  the  Candahar 
rebellion,  still  it  would   operate  rather  to  our   detri- 
ment than  our  advantage,  and  would  tend  greatly  to  in- 
crease the  inveteracy  of  our  present  contest  with  the 
A%hans.    It  would,  probably,  be  met  by  the  kidnapping 
of  our  own  officers  at  this  place,  and  I  suspect  it  would 
be  fraught  with  danger  to  our  unfortunate  countrymen 
in  confinement  at  Lughman,  at  Caubul,  and  at  Ghuznee. 
Should  you  still,  however,  desire  to  make  the  attempt  to 
obtain  possession  of  the  persons  of  Meerza  Ahmed  and 
Mahomed  Atta,  I  shall  be  happy  to  render  literally  into 
Persian  any  draft  of  a  proclamation  which  you  will  send 
me,  and  to  give  the  proclamation  all  possible  publicity." 
The    arguments  of  Rawlinson  prevailed.     But  soon 
another  source  of  inquietude    arose.     The  ex-chief  of 
Candahar,  Eohun-dil-Ehan,  appeared  to  be  again  turn- 
ing his  thoughts  towards  the  government  of  his  old 
principality.*    He   had,  ever  since  his  expulsion  [from 


*  **  Letters  are  said  to  have  been  GovenimeDt,  nothing  is  more  likely 

received  from  the  ex-  Sirdars  announc-  than  that  they  should  make  an  attempt 

ing  their  intended  journey  to  this  to  recover  Candahar;  and  I  should 

place,  according  to  Meerza  Ahmed's  greatly  dread  their  appearance  on  this 

invitation  which  was  sent  to  them  in  frontier,  for  we  are  enabled  to  keep 

January  last.     Mahomed  Reza  Khan  up  the  form,  and  something  of  the 

of  Seistan  is  also  said  to  have  promised  power  of  a  local  government,  almost 

to  assist  them  with  100  camels,  and  solely  from  the  adherence  to  us  of  the 

to  send  horsemen  to  escort  them  to  old  Barukzye  retainers — people  on 

this  frontier.     This  news  appears  to  whose  fidelity  we  could  not  possibly 

be  vraiseniblahle  in  the  extreme.    If  depend  if  the  Sirdars  took  the  field 

the  ex-Sirdars   can  get  away  from  against  us.** — [Major  Rawlinson* $  MS, 

Shuhur-i-Babek,  either  with  or  with-  Journal:  AprxL  4,  1842.] 
out  the  connivance  of  the  Persian 


454  AFFAIBS  AT  GANDAUAB. 

A%hanistan,  been  quietly  domiciliated  at  Shuhur-i- 
Babek,  in  the  Persian  territories^  between  Shiraz  and 
Eirman;  but  now  it  appeared  that  he  had  sent  an 
agent  into  Seistan  to  communicate  with  his  Candahar 
adherents;  and  was  otherwise  intriguing  for  the  re« 
covery  of  the  dominion  he  had  lost.  Not  without 
some  difficulty  had  Bawlinson  throughout  this  season 
of  convulsion  contrived  to  maintain  a  recognised  sys- 
tem of  government^  in  the  name  of  Shah  Soojah. 
The  internal  administration  of  the  country  had  never 
been  suspended;  but  it  was  only  through  the  agency 
of  some  of  the  old  Barukzye  functionaries  that  the 
British  political  chief  had  succeeded,  in  the  midst  of 
such  disturbing  influences,  in  carrying  on  the  govern- 
ment of  Western  Afghanistan.  But  there  was  little 
hope  of  his  continuing  to  exercise  this  influence  if  the 
old  Barukzye  Sirdars  again  appeared  on  the  stage. 
Already  had  Eohun-dil-Ehan  sent  letters  to  Meerza 
Ahmed  appointing  him  his  Wakeel  in  all  matters  of 
revenue.  It  was  even  reported  at  one  time  that  the 
ex-Sirdars  were  only  a  few  marches  from  Candahar.* 
These  anxieties,  however,  were  but  short-lived.  After- 
intelligence  from  Persia  encouraged  the  belief  that  the 
Persian  Government  would  restrain  the  ex-Sirdars  from 
crossing  the  frontier.f  But  other  sources  of  inquietude 
and  annoyance  soon  came  to  take  their  place.  The 
heaviest  blow  of  all  was  now  about  to  descend  upon 
them.     It  came  from  the  Supreme  Grovemment  itself. 

*  **  A  messenger  from  Shah  Per-  AprU    S,     1842.      MS.    Corrupm' 

sund  Khan  of  Laush  reports  tliat  two  dmnc^^ 

ofthe  horsemen  sent  down  to  Kohun-       t  Kohun-dil-Khan  did  not  make 

dil-Khan  in  January  by  Meerza  Ah-  his  appearance  in  person  in  tiie  Can- 

med,  returned  lately   and  ga?e  out  dahar  territory  till  the  beginning  of 

that  they  were  onl^  a  few  days  in  1849,  when  we  had  announced  to  the 

advance  of  the    Sirdars,   who   had  Persian  GrOTemment  that  we   had 

left    Shuhur-i-Babek    secretly,    and  withdrawn   behind  the  SuUej,  and 

were   coming  here  vid   Seistan."  —  were  indifferent  as  to  what  became 

[ilfajot*  RawUnson  to  Oeneral  NoU:  of  the  Sirdars  or  their  country. 


THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD.  455 


CHAPTER  IIL 

[April— June:  1842.] 

The  Halt  at  Jellalabad — Positions  of  Pollock  and  Nott — Lord  EUenborongh 
— Opening  Measures  of  his  Administration — Departure  for  Allahabad—* 
His  Indecision — The  Withdrawal  Orders — Their  Effects— The  "  Missing 
Letter'* — Negotiations  for  the  Release  of  the  Prisoners. 

Pollock  and  Nott  were  now  eager  to  advance.    On 
both  sides  of  Afghanistan  a  junction  had  been  effected 
which  enabled  the  two  generals  to  maintain  a  bold  front 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  to  over-awe  the  surrounding 
country,   and  to   inspire   with    new  hopes    and  new 
courage  the  hearts  of  those  whom  the  failures  of  Wild 
and  England  had  filled  with  despondency  and  alarm. 
The  English  in  India  never  doubted  that  the  conduct  of 
operations  in  Afghanistan  was  now  in  the  hands  of  men 
equal  to  the  duty  which  had  been  entrusted  to   them. 
They  had  full  confidence  in  Pollock  and  Nott.    There 
were  now  two  fine  forces  of  all  arms,  European  and 
Native,  in  good  health  and  good  spirits,  eager  to  advance 
on  Caubul,  and  sure  to  carry  victory  before  them.    It 
seemed  that  the  tide  had  now  begun  to  turn  in  our 
favour.     As  the  hot  weather  came  on,  the  spirits  of  the 
Anglo-Indian  community  rose  with  the  mercury  in  the 
thermometer;   everybody  said   that  we  had  seen   the 
worst ;  and  everybody  looked  for  the  speedy  lustration 


456  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

of  the  national  honour  which  had  been  so  hideously 
defiled. 

But  as  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the  generals 
and  their  armies  rose,  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the 
man  upon  whom  had  now  devolved  the  great  duty  of 
shaping  the  counsels  of  the  generals,  and  directing  the 
movements  of  the  armies,  began  rapidly  to  decline.  On 
the  28th  of  February,  Lord  EUenborough  had  landed  at 
Calcutta  and  taken  the  oaths  of  office.  The  guns  on 
the  saluting  battery  of  Fort  William  roared  forth  their 
welcome  to  the  new  Governor-General,  and  drowned 
the  voices  of  those  who  were  assembling  in  the  Town- 
Hall  to  do  honour  to  the  departing  ruler.  The  first 
intelligence  of  the  disasters  that  had  overtaken  our  arms 
in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus,  had  been  telegraphed 
to  him  from  Fort  St.  George,  when  standing  on  the 
deck  of  the  Cambrian  in  the  Madras  Roads,  he  looked 
out  upon  the  white  surf,  the  low  beach,  and  the  dazzling 
houses  of  the  southern  presidency.  He  arrived,  there- 
fore, at  the  seat  of  the  Supreme  Government  with  little 
to  learn  beyond  the  measures  which  his  predecessor  had 
sanctioned  for  the  extrication  of  the  emperiled  affairs 
of  the  British-Indian  Empire  from  the  thicket  of  diffi- 
culty that  surrounded  them. 

What  those  measures  were  it  is  imnecessary  to  re- 
peat. In  the  last  letter  written  by  Lord  Auckland's 
administration  to  the  secret  committee — ^it  bears  date 
February  19,  1842— the  Govemor-General  in  Council 
said:  "  Since  we  have  heard  of  the  misfortimes  in  the 
Khybur  Pass,  and  have  been  convinced  that  the  diffi- 
culties  at  present  opposed  to  us  and  in  the  actual  state 
of  our  preparations  we  could  not  expect,  at  least  in  this 
year,  to  maintain  a  position  in  the  Jellalabad  districts 
for  any  effective  purpose,  we  have  made  our  directions 
in  regard  to  withdrawal  from  Jellalabad  clear  and  posi- 


LORD  ELLENBOROUGH.  457 

live,  and  we  shall  rejoice  to  learn  that  Major-General 
Pollock  will  have  anticipated  these  more  express  orders 
by  confining  his  efforts  to  the  same  objects."  And  on 
the  24th  of  the  same  month — in  one  of  the  last  public 
documents  of  any  importance  written  imder  the  instruc- 
tion of  Lord  Auckland — a  letter  to  General  Pollock, 
that  officer  is  distinctly  informed  that  "  the  great  pre- 
sent object  of  your  proceedings  at  Peshawur  is,  beyond 
the  safe  withdrawal  of  the  force  at  Jellalabad,  that  of 
watching  events,  of  keeping  up  such  communications  as 
may  be  admissible  with  the  several  parties  who  may 
acquire  power  in  the  northern  portion  of  Afghanistan, 
of  committing  yourself  permanently  with  none  of  these 
parties,  but  also  of  declaring  positively  against  none  of 
them,  while  you  are  collecting  the  most  accurate  infor- 
mation of  their  relative  strength  and  purposes  for  report 
to  the  government,  and  pursuing  the  measures  which 
you  may  find  in  the  powers  for  procuring  the  safe  re- 
turn of  our  troops  and  people  detained  beyond  the 
Khybur  Pass."*  These  were  the  parting  instructions  of 
the  old  Governor-General.  Lord  EUenborough  found 
matters  in  this  state  when  he  assumed  the  reins  of  office ; 
and  every  one  was  now  eager  to  ascertain  what  mea- 
sures the  new  ruler  would  adopt. 

The  first  public  document  of  any  importance  to  which 
he  attache^,  his  name  was  a  letter  to  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  It  was  a  letter  firom  the  Governor-General  in 
Council,  dated  the  15th  of  March.  It  is  a  calm  and 
able  review  of  all  the  circumstances  attending  our  posi- 
tion beyond  the  Indus,  and  is  as  firee  firom  feebleness 
and  indecision  on  the  one  side,  as  it  is  firom  haste  and 
intemperance  on  the  other.  Lord  EUenborough  at  once 
decided  that  the  conduct  of  Shah  Soojah  was,  at  least, 

*  Mr.  Maddock  to  General  Pollock:  February  24, 1842.    Published Piq)ers. 


458 


THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 


suspicious,*  and  that  the  British  Government  were  no 
longer  compelled  ^^  to  peril  its  armies,  and  with  its  armies 
the  Indian  Empire,"  in  support  of  the  tripartite  treaty. 
Therefore,  he  said,  "  Whatever  course  we  may  hereafter 
take  must  rest  solely  upon  military  considerations,  and 
hence,  in  the  first  instance,  regard  to  the  safety  of  the 
detached  bodies  of  our  troops  at  Jellalabad,  at  Ghuznee, 
at  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  and  Candahar;  to  the  security  of 
our  troops,  now  in  the  field,  from  all  unnecessary  risk ; 
and  finally,  to  the  re-establishment  of  our  military  re- 
putation by  the  infliction  of  some  signal  and  decisive 
blow  upon  the  A%hans,  which  may  make  it  appear  to 
them,  and  to  our  own  subjects  and  to  our  allies,  that  we 
have  the  power  of  inflicting  punishment  upon  those  who 
commit  atrocities  and  violate  their  faith,  and  that  we 
withdraw  ultimately  firom  A%hani8tan,  not  fix)m  any 
deficiency  of  means  to  maintain  our  position,  but  because 
we  are  satisfied  that  the  Eang  we  have  set  up  has  not,  as 
we  were  erroneously  led  to  imagine,  the  support  of  the 
nation  over  which  he  has  been  placed."  Here,  in  a  few 
sentences,  was  mapped  out  the  policy  recommended  by 
such  men  as  Mr.  Robertson  and  Mr.  Clerk,  the  policy 
which  Pollock  and  Nott  were  eager  to  reduce  to  action, 
and  which,  with  few  exceptions,  the  entire  community 
of  British-India  were  clamorously  expressing  their  de- 
sire to  see  brought  into  vigorous  effect. 

This  letter  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  was  written  in 
Calcutta;  and  it  bears  the  signatures  of  the  different 
members  of  the   Supreme  Council  of  India — of  Mr. 


*  "The  information  received  with 
respect  to  the  conduct  of  Shah  Soojah 
during  the  late  transactions  is  nece»- 
sarily  imperfect,  and,  moreover,  of  a 
somewhat  contradictory  character. 
It  is  not  probable  that  the  insurrec- 
tion against  our  troops  should  have 
originated  with  him.    It  is  most  pro« 


bable,  and  it  is  almost  proved,  that 
he  has  adopted  it,  and,  powerless  in 
himself,  is  prepared  to  side  with 
either  party,  by  which  he  may  hope 
to  be  maintained  upon  his  precarious 
throne." — [Crovemor-Generalin  Coun- 
cil to  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs:  March  15, 
1642.     PMished  Papen.'] 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  LORD  ELLENBOROUGH.      459 

Wilberforce  Bird,  of  Greneral  Casment,  and  Mr.  H.  T. 
Prinsep.  Nothing  like  it  was  ever  written  afterwards. 
On  the  6th  of  April  Lord  Ellenborough  left  Calcutta. 
It  seemed  desirable  that  he  should  be  nearer  the  fiontier 
— ^nearer  the  Commander-in-Chie£  The  movement,  at 
all  events,  indicated  an  intention  to  act  with  prompti- 
tude and  energy.  Already  had  the  new  Grovemor- 
Greneral  startled  the  sober,  slow-going  functionaries  of 
Calcutta  by  his  restless,  and,  as  they  thought,  obtrusive 
activity.  He  seemed  resolved  to  see  everything  for 
lum«lf-to  do  everyUu.g  fer  him^lf.  ASTve-y. 
thing  had  been  done  wrongly  by  others;  and  now  he 
was  going  to  do  it  rightly  himself.  All  this  created  a 
great  convulsion  in  the  government  offices;  but  out  of 
doors,  and  especially  in  military  circles,  men  said  that 
the  new  Grovemor-Greneral  was  a  statesman  of  the  right 
stamp — ^bold,  vigorous,  decided,  thoroughly  in  earnest, 
no  fearer  of  responsibility — quick  to  conceive,  prompt 
to  execute — just  the  man  to  meet  with  bold  compre- 
hensive measures  such  a  crisis  as  had  now  arisen.  A 
few  sober-minded  men  of  the  old  school  shook  their 
heads,  and  faltered  out  expressions  of  alarm  lest  the 
vigour  of  the  new  Grovemor-Greneral  should  swell  into 
extravagance,  and  enei^gy  get  the  better  of  discretion. 
But  no  one  ever  doubted  that  the  leading  ideas  in  the 
Grovemor-Greneral's  mind  were  the  chastisement  of  the 
offending  A^hans  and  the  lustration  of  our  national 
honour. 

After  a  day  or  two  spent  at  Barrackpore,  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  put  himself  in  his  palanquin  and  proceeded  to 
Allahabad.  Halting  at  Benares,  he  addressed  the  Secret 
Committee  on  the  21st  of  April.  Much  stirring  intelli- 
gence had  met  him  as  he  advanced.  Grood  and  evil 
were  blended  together  in  the  tidings  that  reached  him 
between  Calcutta  and  Benares.     Pollock  had  entered 


460  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

the  KhybuT  Pass  and  forced  his  way  to  Ali-Musjid. 
Sale  had  defeated  Akbar  Ehan  in  a  general  action 
on  the  plains  of  Jellalabad.  But  England  had  been 
beaten  back  at  Hykulzye,  and  withdrawn  his  brigade  to 
Quettah.  AU  these  things  the  Grovemor-General  now 
reported  to  the  Secret  Committee,  in  a  despatch  which 
can  by  no  means  be  regarded  as  a  model  of  historical 
truth.  Writing  again  on  the  following  day  to  the  home 
authorities,  he  stated  that  he  had  "  by  no  means  altered 
his  deliberate  opinion  that  it  is  expedient  to  withdraw 
the  troops  under  Major-General  Pollock  and  those  under 
Major-General  Nott,  at  the  earliest  practicable  period, 
into  positions  wherein  they  may  have  certain  and  easy 
communication  with  India,"  He  had  already  written 
to  General  Nott,  instructing  him  to  take  immediate  mea- 
sures to  withdraw  the  garrison  of  Khelat-i-GhUzye  and 
evacuate  Candahar.  "  Tou  will  evacuate,"  wrote  the 
Chief  Secretary,  "  the  city  of  Candahar.  .  .  .  Tou  will 
proceed  to  take  up  a  position  at  Quettah,  until  the 
season  may  enable  you  to  retire  upon  Sukkur.  The 
object  of  the  above-directed  measure  is  to  withdraw 
all  our  forces  to  Sukkur  at  the  earliest  period  at  which 
the  season  and  other  circumstances  may  permit  you  to 
take  up  a  new  position  there.  The  manner  of  effecting 
this  now  necessary  object  is,  however,  left  to  your  dis- 
cretion.*'*  And  so  the  Governor-General,  who  in  Cal- 
cutta had  determined  to  "re-establish  our  military  repu- 
tation by  the  infliction  of  some  signal  and  decisive  blow 
upon  the  Afghans,"  could  now  hardly  write  a  sentence 
suggestive  of  anything  else  but  withdrawal  and  eva- 
cuation. 

How  it  happened  that,  within  the  space  of  Uttle  more 
than  a  month,  so  great  a  change  had  come  over  the 

*  Mr.  Maddock  to  General  Nott:  April  19, 1842.    Published  Papers. 


WITHDRAWAL  ORDERS.  461 

counsels  of  the  Governor-General,  it  would  be  difficult 
to  determine,  if  he  himself  had  not  furnished  the  neces- 
sary explanation.  "  The  severe  check,"  he  wrote  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  "  experienced  by  Brigadier  Eng- 
land's small  corps  on  the  28th  ultimo — an  event  disas- 
trous as  it  was  unexpected — and  of  which  we  have  not 
yet  information  to  enable  us  to  calculate  all  the  results 
— has  a  tendency  so  to  cripple  the  before  limited  means 
of  movement  and  of  action  which  were  possessed  by 
General  Nott,  as  to  render  it  expedient  to  take  imme- 
diate measures  for  the  ultimate  safety  of  that  officer's 
corps,  by  withdrawing  it,  at  the  earliest  practicable 
period,  from  its  advanced  position  into  nearer  commu- 
nication with  India." 

On  this  same  19th  of  April  the  Governor-General 
addressed  another  letter  to  the  Commander-in-Chief, 
relating  to  the  position  of  General  Pollock.  "  The  only 
question,"  wrote  the  Chief  Secretary,  "  will  be,  in  which 
position  will  Major -General  Pollock's  force  remain 
during  the  hot  months,  with  most  security  to  itself,  and 
with  the  least  pressure  upon  the  health  of  the  troops? 
its  ultimate  retirement  within  the  Indus  being  a  point 
determined  upon,  because  the  reasons  for  our  first  cross- 
ing the  Indus  have  ceased  to  exist."  The  Commander- 
in-Chief  was  then  directed  to  issue  his  own  instructions 
to  General  Pollock ;  and  another  letter  was  immediately 
afterwards  addressed  to  him  (tfie  third  despatched  to 
Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  on  this  prolific  19th  of  April),  in 
which,  after  speaking  of  the  withdrawal  orders  ad- 
dressed to  Pollock  and  Nott,  the  Governor-General 
goes  on  to  say:  "It  will,  however,  likewise  be  for  con- 
sideration whether  our  troops,  having  been  redeemed 
from  the  state  of  peril  in  which  they  have  been  placed 
in  Afghanistan,  and  it  may  be  still  hoped  not  without 


462  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

the  infliction  of  some  severe  blow  upon  the  Afghan 
army,  it  would  be  justifiable  again  to  push  them  for- 
ward for  no  other  object  than  that  of  revenging  our  losses, 
and  of  re-esfablishing,  in  all  its  original  brilliancy,  our 
military  character." 

It  was  Lord  Ellenborough's  often-declared  opinion 
that  "  India  was  won  by  the  sword,  and  must  be  main- 
tained by  the  sword."  In  his  despatch  of  the  15th  of 
March  he  had  written :  "  In  war,  reputation  is  strength." 
And  yet  we  now  find  him  questioning  the  expediency 
of  imdertaking  operations  beyond  the  Indus  with  "  no 
other  object  than  that  of  re-establishing  our  military 
character."  If  we  hold  India  by  the  sword,  and  repu- 
tation is  strength,  a  statesman  need  hardly  look  for  any 
object  beyond  the  establishment  of  that  reputation, 
which  is  the  strength  by  which  alone  our  empire  in 
India  is  maintained. 

But  England's  miscarriage  at  Hykulzye  had  not  only 
driven  all  the  forward  feeling  out  of  Lord  Ellenborough, 
but  had  blunted  his  logical  acumen  and  deadened  all  his 
feelings  of  compassion.  He  seems  to  have  forgotten  that 
at  this  time  there  was  a  party  of  English  prisoners  in  the 
hands  of  the  Afghans — that  the  generals  who  had  com- 
manded our  army  at  Caubul — the  widow  of  the  mur- 
dered Envoy — the  brave-hearted  wife  of  the  commander 
of  the  illustrious  garrison  of  Jellalabad — the  man  who 
had  rescued  Herat  from  the  grasp  of  the  Persian,  and 
done  the  only  thing  that  had  yet  been  done  to  roll  back 
from  the  gates  of  India  the  tide  of  Western  invasion — 
with  many  more  brave  officers  and  tender  women,  were 
captives  in  the  rude  fortresses  of  the  Afghan  Sirdars. 
The  Governor-General  seems  to  have  forgotten  that 
there  were  prisoners  to  be  rescued ;  and  he  doubted  the 
expediency  of  undertaking  operations  merely  for  the 


INSTRUCTIONS  OP  THE  COMMANDBtl-IN-CHIEF,       463 

re-establishment  of  our  military  reputation — although 
upon  that  reputation,  in  his  own  opinion,  our  tenure  of 
India  depended. 

The  request  conveyed  to  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  in  the 
government  letter  of  the  1 9th  of  April  met  with  prompt 
compliance;  and  on  the  29th,  the  Commander-in-Chief, 
who  was  then  at  Simlah,  instructed  General  Pollock  to 
withdraw  every  British  soldier  from  Jellalabad  to  Pe- 
shawur.  "  The  only  circumstances,"  he  added,  "  which 
can  authorise  delay  in  obeying  this  order,  are:  1st.  That 
you  may  have  brought  a  negotiation  for  the  release  of 
the  prisoners  lately  confined  at  Budeeabad  to  such  a 
point  that  you  might  risk  its  happy  accomplishment  by 
withdrawing.  2ndly.  That  you  may  have  attached  a 
Ughtly  equipped  force  to  rescue  them.  3rdly.  That  the 
enemy  at  Caubul  may  be  moving  a  force  to  attack  you. 
In  this  improbable  case  should  any  respectable  number 
of  troops  have  descended  into  the  plain  below  Jugdul- 
luck  with  that  intent,  it  would  be  most  advisable  to 
inflict  such  a  blow  upon  them  as  to  make  them  long 
remember  your  parting  effort."  Of  these  instructions 
the  Grovemor-General  "  entirely  approved ;"  and  on  the 
6th  of  May  he  wrote  to  Greneral  Pollock,  sajring:  "  They 
are  in  accordance  with  the  general  principles  laid  down 
by  his  Lordship  for  your  guidance,  and  you  will  execute 
them  to  the  best  of  your  ability,  having  regard  always 
to  the  health  of  your  troops  and  to  the  efficiency  of 
your  army." 

In  the  interval,  however,  between  the  19th  of  April 
and  the  6th  of  May,  the  Governor-General  having  some- 
what shaken  off  the  imeasy  sensation  which  the  disaster 
at  Hykulzye  seems  to  have  engendered  in  his  mind,  and 
having  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  phantoms 
which  had  so  intimidated  him  had  not  struck  terror  into 
the  brave  heart  of  General  Pollock,  had  written  to  the 


464  t6e  halt  at  jellalabad. 

General,  anticipating  the  possibility  of  his  having  ad- 
vanced upon  Caubul. 

"  The  aspect  of  affairs  in  Upper  Afghanistan,"  he  wrote 
on  the  28th  of  April,  "  appears  to  be  such,  according  to 
the  last  advices  received  by  the  Governor-General,  that 
his  Lordship  cannot  but  contemplate  the  possibility  of 
your  having  been  led,  by  the  absence  of  serious  opposi- 
tion  on  the  part  of  any  army  in  the  field,  by  the  divi- 
sions amongst  the  A%han  chiefs,  and  by  the  natural 
desire  you  must,  in  common  with  every  true  soldier, 
have  of  displaying  again  the  British   flag  in  triumph 
upon  the  scene  of  our  late  disasters,  to  advance  upon  and 
occupy  the  city  of  Caubul.     If  that  event  should  have 
occurred,  you  will  imderstand  that  it  will  in  no  respect 
vary  the  view  which  the  Govemor-G^neral  previously 
took  of  the  policy  now  to  be  pursued.     The  Governor- 
General  will  adhere  to  the  opinion,  that  the  only  safe 
course  is  that  of  withdrawing  the  army  under  your  com- 
mand, at  the  earliest  practicable  period,  into  positions 
within  the  Khybur  Pass,  where  it  may  possess  easy  and 
certain  communications  with  India."     Why  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  should  have  entertained  a  belief  even  of  the 
possibility  of  Pollock  advancing  upon  Caubul,  in  the 
face  of  positive  instructions  to  the  contrary  and  a  known 
deficiency  of  carriage,  it  is  not  easy  to  conjecture.     Pro- 
bably, Lord  EUenborough  himself  could  not  have  ex- 
plained the  source  of  this  extraordinary  buoyancy  of 
expectation,  for  six  days  afterwards  he  declared  that  he 
had  been  led  to  expect  "  that  you  (Pollock)  will  have 
already  decided  upon  withdrawing  your  troops  within 
the  Khybur  Pass,  into  a  position  wherein  you  may  have 
easy  and  certain  communication  with  India,  if  considera- 
tions, having  regard  to  the  health  of  the  army,  should 
not  have  induced  you  to  defer  that  movement."     The 
idea  of  the  advance  upon  Caubul  seems  only  to  have 


THE  '^  MISSING  LETTER."  '  465 

been  a  temporary  apprehension  arising  out  of  a  not 
erroneous  estimate  of  the  military  aspirations  of  Ge- 
neral Pollock ;  and  it  very  soon  passed  away.  But  it 
had  one  important  result.  It  called  forth  from  the 
General  the  following  soldierly  letter : 

TO  T.  H.  HADDOCK,  ESQ.,  SECRETARY  TO  GOVERNMENT, 

&c. 

Jellalabad,  May  13, 1842. 

Sib, 

I  had  the  honour  to  forward  with  my  letter  No.  32,  dated 

1 2th  instant,  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief. I  have  now  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  re- 
ceipt of  your  letter,  dated  28th  ultimo,  which  adverts  to  the  pre- 
sent aspect  of  affairs  in  Afghanistan,  and  the  probabiUty  of  my 
having  advanced  towards  Caubul;  stating  also,  that  in*  such  an 
event,  the  views  of  the  Governor-General  as  to  the  withdrawal  of 
the  troops  will  not  be  altered;  and  further,  that  whatever  measures 
I  may  adopt  I  must  have  especial  regard  to  the  health  of  the  troops. 
I  trust  that  I  am  not  wrong  in  considering  this  letter  as  leaving 
to  me  discretionary  powers,  and,  coming  as  it  does  from  the 
supreme  power  in  India,  I  venture  to  delay,  for  some  days,  acting 
up  to  the  instructions  communicated  in  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chiefs letter,  dated  29th  ult. 

I  regret  much  that  a  want  of  carriage- cattle  has  detained  rae 
here;  if  it  had  not  been  so,  I  should  now  be  several  marches  in 
advance,  and  I  am  quite  certain  that  such  a  move  would  have 
been  highly  beneficial.  Affairs  at  Caubul  are,  at  the  present 
moment,  in  a  very  unsettled  state;  but  a  few  days  must  decide  in 
favour  of  one  of  the  parties.  Mahomed  Akbar  is  at  Caubul, 
exerting  all  his  influence  to  overpower  the  Prince.  He  is  without 
means;  and  if  he  cannot  within  a  very  short  period  obtain  the 
ascendancy,  he  must  give  up  the  contest,  in  which  case  I  have  ho 
doubt  I  shall  hear  from  him  again.  With  regard  to  our  with- 
drawal at  the  present  moment,  I  fear  that  it  would  have  the  very 
worst  efifect — it  would  be  construed  into  a  defeat,  and  our  charac- 
ter as  a  powerful  nation  would  be  entirely  lost  in  this  part  of  the 
world. 

It  is  true  that  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad  has  been  saved,  which 
it  would  not  have  been,  had  a  force  not  been  sent  to  its  relief. 
But  the  relief  of  that  garrison  is  only  one  object;  there  still  re- 

VOL.  II.  2  H 


466  •      THE  HALT  AT  JKLLALABAD. 

main  others  which  wc  cannot  disreorard — I  allude  to  the  release 

o 

of  the  prisoners.  I  expect  about  nineteen  Europeans  from  Budee- 
^bad  in  a  few  days.  The  letters  which  have  passed  about  other 
prisoners  have  already  been  forwarded  for  the  information  of  his 
Lordship.  If,  while  these  communications  were  in  progress,  I 
were  to  retire,  it  would  be  supposed  that  a  panic  had  seized  us.  I 
therefore  think  that  our  remaining  in  this  vicinity  (or  perhaps  a 
few  marches  in  advance)  is  essential  to  uphold  the  character  of 
the  British  nation;  and  in  like  manner  General  Nott  might  hold 
bis  post;  at  all  events  till  a  more  favorable  season. 

I  have  no  reason,  yet,  to  complain  that  the  troops  are  more 
unhealthy  than  they  were  at  Agra.  If  I  am  to  march  to  Pesha- 
wur,  the  climate  is  certainly  not  preferable ;  and  here  I  can  in  one 
or  two  marches  find  a  better  climate,  and  I  should  be  able  to  dictate 
better  terms  than  I  could  at  Peshawur. 

I  cannot  imagine  any  force  being  sent  from  Caubul  which  I 
could  not  successfully  oppose.  But  the  advance  on  Caubul  would 
require  that  General  Nott  should  act  in  concert  and  advance  also. 
I  therefore  cannot  help  regretting  that  he  should  be  directed  to 
retire,  which,  without  some  demonstration  of  our  power,  he  will 
find  some  diflSculty  in  doing.  I  have  less  hesitation  in  thus 
expressing  my  opinion,  because  I  could  not,  under  any  circum- 
stances, move  in  less  than  eighteen  or  twenty  days;  and  your 
reply  might  reach  me  by  express  in  about  twenty-two  days.  The 
difference  in  point  of  time  is  not  very  material,  but  the  importance 
of  the  subject  is  sufficient  to  justify  the  delay  of  a  few  days.  In 
the  mean  time,  I  shall  endeavour  to  procure  carriage-cattle  as  fast 
as  I  can,  to  move  either  forward  or  backward,  as  I  may  be 
directed;  or,  if  left  to  my  discretion,  as  I  may  think  judicious. 
Under  any  circumstances,  I  should  not  advocate  the  delay  of  the 
troops  either  at  Candahar  or  on  this  side  beyond  the  month  of 
November;  and  in  this  arrangement  advertence  must  be  had  to 
the  safety  of  the  Khybur,  which  I  consider  the  Sikhs  would 
gladly  hold  if  they  were  allowed  to  take  possession  of  Jellalabad. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

George  Pollock,  Major-Gen.* 

Unwilling  to  return  to  the  provinces  without  striking 
a  signal  blow  at  the  Afghans,  and  doing  something  great 

.  *  This  is  not  only  a  remarkable    its  misadventures.    Its  outer  history 
letter  in  itself.    It  is  remarkable  for    is  somewhat  curious.    It  never  founcL 


pollock's  reluctance  to  withdraw.  467 

to  re-establish  the  military  reputation  of  Great  Britain 
in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus,  Pollock  grasped 
eagerly  at  the  faintest  indication  of  willingness  on  the 
part  of  the  Governor-General  to  place  any  discretionary 
power  in  his  hands ;  and  expressed  his  eagerness  to  tra- 
verse, with  a  victorious  army,  the  scene  of  our  recent 
humiliation.  If  he  had  had  carriage  he  would  have  ad- 
vanced at  once;  but  the  want  of  cattle  paralysed  the 
movements  of  the  force,  and  kept  Pollock  inactive  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jellalabad.  In  one  respect  this  want 
was  a  gain  and  an  advantage.  Mindful  both  of  the 
honour  of  his  country  and  of  the  safety  of  his  captive 
country-men  and  country-women,  Pollock  adroitly  turned 
the  scarcity  of  carriage  to  good  account,  by  declaring 

its  way  into  the  published  volume  whether  the  original  letter  miscarried 
of  correspondence,  and  its  existence  altogether  on  its  way  to  Lord  Ellen- 
was  only  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  borough,  or  whether  it  miscarried 
of  a  reference  to  it  in  another  letter,  only  on  its  way  to  the  office.  There 
It  was  at  last  brought  to  li^ht  by  the  is  an  equal  obscurity  about  the 
inquiries  in  Parliament  of  Lord  Lans-  history  of  l^e  duplicate  which  was 
downe  and  Lord  Palmerston.  It  was  **  received  and  acknowledged  on  the 
to  be  found  nowhere  in  England;  11th  of  July.*'  It  might  be  inferred 
but  a  copy  was  at  last  elicited  from  from  this  that  it  was  received  on  the 
India.  The  Governor-General  then  11th  of  July  and  acknowledged  on 
declared  that  **  the  original  despatch  the  same  day.  But  it  happens  that 
of  the  13th  of  May  never  reached  the  dupUoate  was  despatcned  on  the 
the  office,  and  must  have  been  lost  in  30th  of  May — and  ought  surely  to 
transit.  The  duplicate  was  received  have  come  not  among  the  Juij,  but 
and  acknowledged  on  the  llth  of  among  the  June  papers.  In  tms  letp 
July.  It  is  uie  practice  of  the  ter  ofthe  llth  of  July  the  Secretary 
Secretary's  office  to  keep  the  unre-  says :  ^*  I  am  directed  to  state  that  the 
ported  papers  on  all  important  sub-  original  letter  has  never  reached  me, 
jects  for  each  month  together,  and  to  and  that  the  duplicate  7uu  only  latdy 
forward  copies  of  them  to  the  Secret  been  received  and  laid  before  uie  Gro- 
Committee  by  the  monthly  Overland  vemor-Gkneral,  whose  previous  in- 
Mail.  The  despatch  in  question  was  structions  to  you  appeared  to  render 
inadvertently  put  up  in  its  proper  any  special  reply  to  this  communicft- 
place  in  the  May  bundle  of  reported  tion  imnecessary." — |j  MS.  Reeords,"} 
papers,  instead  of  being  left  for  a  In  the  face  of  so  distmct  a  denial  as 
time,  as  it  should  have  been,  among  this,  little  can  be  said,  except  that  in 
the  unreported  papers  of  July,  a  letter  fi^m  Pollock  of  May  201^1, 
Hence,  when  the  July  papers  were  which  was  duly  acknowledged,  re- 
copied  for  transmission  to  the  Secret  ference  is  made  to  the  letter  of  the 
Committee,  thb  despatch  was  omit-  13th.  If  that  letter  had  not  been  re* 
ted.''  Nothing  less  explanatory  than  ceived,  some  allusion  certainly  ou^t 
this  was  ever  offered  m  the  way  of  to  have  been  made  by  government  to 
explanation.      It  does   not  appear  its  non-receipt 

2h2 


468  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

that  he  had  not  the  means  of  retiring  to  Peshawur. 
Thus  gaining  time  for  something  to  be  written  down  in 
the  chapter  of  accidents,  he  continued  to  maintain  his 
advanced  position,  and  exerted  himself  to  secure  by 
negotiation  the  release  of  the  prisoners  from  the  hands 
of  Akbar  Khan.* 

In  the  mean  while,  the  announcement  of  the  Go- 
vernor^General's  determination  to  withdraw  the  troops 
from  their  advanced  positions  had  reached  Candahar. 
Nott  had  always  consistently  declared  that  he  would 
not  yield  an  inch  of  ground  without  the  instructions  of 
the  Supreme  Grovemment,  but  that,  fortified  by  such  in- 
structions, he  was  prepared  to  move  either  in  one  direc- 
tion or  the  other — ^to  abandon  all  the  posts  in  Western 
Afghanistan,  or  to  march  victoriously  on  the  capital. 
He  had  his  own  opinions  on  the  subject  of  withdrawal; 
but  the  obedience  of  the  soldier  was  paramount  over  all 
his  words  and  actions;  and  when  he  received  the  in- 
structions of  which  mention  has  been  made,  he  wrote  to 
the  Chief  Secretary  on  the  17th  of  May:  "These  mea- 
sures shall  be  carried  into  effect,  and  the  directions  of 
his  Lordship  accomplished  in  the  best  manner  circum-* 
stances  will  admit  of"  And  again  he  wrote  on  the  21st 
to  the  same  functionary :  ^'  I  shall  not  lose  a  moment 
in  making  all  necessary  arrangements  for  carrying  into 

*  There  was  no  scarcitj  of  provi-  I  did  my  utmost  to  protect  tliem  from 

flions  at  Jellalabad  at  this  time.   But,  plunder,  and  in  most  cases  succeeded ; 

to  secure  a  continued  supply,  Pollock  and  the  consequence  is  that  we,  in  a 

was  sensible  of  the  necessity  of  en-  measure,  command  the  resources  of 

couraging  a  belief  throughout  the  the  country/*    And  on  the  11th  of 

country  that  the  intentions  of  the  the  same  month,  writin^again  to  Mr. 

British  Government  inclined  towards  Clerk,  he  said :  **  While  1  remain  here 

a  forward  movement.    "  We  are  all  I  can  command  supplies,  and  I  have 

quiet  here,*'  he  wrote  on  the  6th  of  no  doubt  that  I  shall  be  able  to  do  so 

May  to  Mr.  Clerk,  "  gr^  coming  in  as  long  as  the  natives  suppose  that 

in  abundance ;  at  least,  in  as  great  we  intend  remaining  in  the  country ; 

quantities  as  we  could  expect  after  but  if  they  thought  otherwise,  our 

toe  dreadful  alarm  into  which  this  supplies  would  be  stopped.*' — {^MS, 

force  seems  to  have  put  the  whole  Correspondence,'] 
country.  Every  village  was  deserted. 


THE  WITHDRAWAL  ORDER  AT  CANDAHAR.  469 

eflfect  the  orders  I  have  received,  without  turning  to  the 
right  or  to  the  left,  by  the  idle  propositions  and  wild 
speculations  daily  and  hourly  heaped  upon  nie  from  all 
parts  of  Afghanistan  and  Sindh,  by  persons  who  are,  or 
fancy  themselves  to  be,  representatives  of  government 
West  of  the  Indus.  I  know  that  it  is  my  duty  and  their 
duty  implicitly  and  zealously  to  carry  into  effect  every 
order  received,  without  inquiring  into  the  reasons  for 
the  measures  adopted,  whatever  our  own  opinions  or 
wishes  may  be,  and  without  troubling  government 
with  unnecessary  references."*  But  it  was  plain  that 
he  read  the  orders  of  the  Supreme  Government  not 
without  acute  mortification.  He  yielded  in  effect 
a  prompt  assent;  but  in  spirit  it  was  a  grudging  one. 
The  orders  for  the  evacuation  of  Candahar  took  Nott 
and  Rawlinson  by  surprise,  and  filled  them  with  as 
much  pain  as  astonishment.  What  was  really  felt  by 
the  Candahar  authorities  is  not  to  be  learnt  firom  the 
published  papers ;  but  in  a  letter  written  by  Rawlinson 
to  Outram  on  the  18th  of  May,  not  only  are  the  real 
feelings  of  the  military  and  political  chiefs  clearly  re- 
vealed, but  the  probable  effects  of  the  evacuation 
of  Candahar  sketched  out,  with  a  free  hand,  by  the 
latter : 

Candahar,  May  18th,  1842. 

The  peremptory  order  to  retire  has  come  upon  us  like  a 
thunder-clap.  No  one  at  Candahar  is  aware  of  such  an  order 
having  been  received  except  the  General  and  myself,  and  we 
must  preserve  a  profound  secrecy  as  long  as  possible.  The 
withdrawal  of  the  garrison  from  Kelat-i-Ghilzye  and  the  de- 
struction of  the  fortifications  at  that  place  must,  I  fancy  how- 
ever, expose  our  pohcy,  and  our  situation  will  then  be  one  of 
considerable  embarrassment. 

General  Nott  intends,  I  believe,  to  order  all  the  carriage  at 
Quettah  to  be  sent  on  to  Candahar.    A  regiment  is  to  escort  the 

^  Publislied  Correspondence  relating  to  MUUary  Operations  in  Afghanistan. 


470  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

camels  laden  with  grain  to  Killah  Abdoolah,  where  the  troops 
will  remain  in  charge  of  the  depot,  and  from  whence  a  regiment 
or  two  regiments  detached  from  this  will  bring  on  the  camels 
empty  to  Gandahar.  It  must  be  our  object  to  collect  carriage, 
on  the  pretext  of  an  advance  on  Gaubul;  but  how  long  the 
secret  can  be  kept  it  is  impossible  to  say.  When  our  intended 
retirement  is  once  known,  we  must  eicpect  to  have  the  whole 
country  up  in  arms,  and  to  obtain  no  cattle  except  such  as  we 
can  violently  lay  hands  on. 

If  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  we  must  abandon  all  baggage 
and  stores,  and  be  content  to  march  with  sufficient  food  to  convey 
us  to  Quettah,  for  which  I  believe  the  carriage  now  available 
will  suffice. 

It  will  be  quite  impo^ible  to  destroy  the  works  of  Candahar, 
as  directed  in  the  government  letter;  the  worst  that  can  be  done 
is  to  blow  up  the  gateways.  I  have  hardly  yet  had  time  to 
reflect  fully  upon  the  effects,  immediate  and  prospective,  of  our 
abrupt  departure.  There  is  no  man  at  present  on  whom  I  can 
cast  my  eyes  in  all  Candahar  as  likely  to  succeed  to  power, 
Sufdor  Jung  will  be  a  mere  puppet  of  course,  and  will  be  liable 
to  deposition  at  any  moment.  Should  the  Barukzyes  triumph 
at  Caubul,  and  should  we  no  longer  oppose  the  return  of 
Kohundil,  he  will  be  the  most  likely  chief  to  succeed;  but  the 
natural  consequence  of  his  return,  and  of  our  determined  non- 
interference with  the  affair  in  this  quarter,  will  be  of  course  to 
render  Persian  influence  paramount  at  Herat  and  Candahar;  and 
with  the  prospect  of  a  Russian  fleet  at  Astrabad  and  a  Persian  army 
at  Mervo.  it^  by  no  means  impossible  that  the  designs  whii 
threatened  us  in  1838  may  at  last  be  directly  accomplished. 

Strong  measures  of  intimidation,  both  against  Russia  and 
Persia,  will  be  our  best  protection. 

I  enclose  you  an  extract  from  my  last  letter  from  Sir  J. 
McNeill,  in  case  the  copy  formerly  sent  through  Hammersley 
should  not  have  reached  you.  Saloo  Khan  appears  at  last  to 
have  fairly  adopted  our  cause,  and  I  hope,  therefore,  for  a  time 
at  any  rate,  that  our  communications  will  be  less  subject  to 
interruption.  Yours,  &c., 

H.  C.  Rawlinson.* 

*  MS.  Correspondence,  In  his  jour-  order  to  retire  came  upon  us  like  a 
nal,  too,    Rawlinson  wrote :    ^^  The    thunderbolt.  We  had  not,  from  Lord 


THB  RELIEF  OF  KHELAT-I-GHILZTE.  471 

But  however  great  may  have  been  the  mortification 
which  Nott  and  Rawlinson  were  now  condemned  to 
experience,  the  orders  of  the  Supreme  Government 
were  so  explicit,  that  the  Greneral  believed  it  to  be  his 
duty  at  once  to  begin  to  carry  them  into  effect.  A 
brigade  had  already  been  equipped  for  the  relief  of 
Khelat-i-Ghilzye  and  the  rescue  of  the  Ghuznee  pri- 
soners. It  was  now  despatched,  on  the  19th  of  May, 
to  bring  off  the  garrison,  and  to  destroy  the  works  of 
the  former  place.  Colonel  Wymer  commanded  the 
force.  It  consisted  of  those  three  noble  Sepoy  regi- 
ments with  which  he  had  before  done  such  good  ser- 
vice;* her  Majesty's  40th  Regiment,  Leslie's  troop  of 
Horse  Artillery,  four  guns  of  Blood's  battery,  the 
Bombay  cavalry  details,  and  the  Shah's  1st  Regiment 
of  Horse.  Some  troopers  of  Haldane's  cavalry,  some 
details  of  Bengal  artillery,  and  of  the  Madras  sappers, 
completed  the  components  of  the  force. 

Thus,  in  the  later  weeks  of  May,  Pollock  was  hold- 
ing his  post  at  Jellalabad,  eager  to  receive  authority  to 
march  upon  Caubul,  and  rejoicing  in  the  pretext  of  a 
scarcity  of  carriage  for  delaying  the  withdrawal  of  his 
force;  Nott,  eager,  too,  for  a  forward  movement,  but 
unable  to  perceive  in  the  instructions  of  government 
the  least  indication  of  an  intention  to  place  any  discre- 
tionary power  in  his  hands,  was  taking  measures  to  se- 
cure, with  all  promptitude,  the  accomplishment  of  their 
wishes ;  and  the  Governor-General,  from  Allahabad,  was 
writing  strong  letters  to  the  Generals,  impressing  upon 
them  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a  discreet  silence 
regarding  the  intentions  of  government  and  the  future 
movements  of  the  troops. 

Ellenborough^s  former  letter,  thoucht  has  only  had  to  consider  the  best 

such  a  measure  possible  until  CauDul  way  of  carrying  the  order  into  effect.*' 

should  be  retaken.     As  there  is  no  —iMS,  Journal^  > 

discretionary  power,  however,  vested  ♦  The  2nd,  16th,  and  38th. 
in  General  I^ott  by  the  late  letter,  he 


472  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

There  was  nothing,  in  truth,  more  desirable  than  this. 
The  intentions  of  the  Grovemor-Greneral  were  of  such  a 
character  as  to  render  these  revelations,  in  the  existing 
state  of  things,  dangerous,  if  not  fatal,  to  the  interests  of 
Great  Britain  in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus.  But 
oflScial  secrets  are  not  easily  kept  in  a  country  where  so 
many  copies  of  every  public  letter  are  forwarded  to 
diflferent  authorities,  in  distant  parts  of  the  country; 
where  so  many  clerks  are  employed  to  copy,  and  so 
many  staflf-officers  allowed  to  read  them.  Before  the 
end  of  May,  it  was  known  not  only  in  Greneral  Pollock's 
camp,  but  in  all  the  cantonments  of  India,  that  the 
armies  were  to  be  withdrawn.  The  secret  had  welled 
out  from  the  bureau  of  the  Commander-in-Chief;  and 
bets  were  made  at  the  mess-tables  of  Jellalabad  regard- 
ing the  probable  date  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops. 
No  man  knew  better  than  Pollock  the  danger  of  such 
revelations,*  and  he  did  his  best  to  counteract  the  evil 
tendency  of  the  reports  which  were  now  the  common 
gossip  of  his  camp,  and  were  soon  likely  to  be  current 
in  all  the  Afghan  bazaars.  ''  I  have  taken  steps,"  he 
wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  "  to  prevent  any 
great  mischief  resulting,  by  ordering  the  deputy-quarter- 
master-general  a  few  miles  in  advance,  to  mark  out  a 
new  encamping-ground ;  and  I  shall  have  such  inquiries 
made  among  the  natives  about  bringing  supplies  there, 
that  will  make  them  believe  that  I  shall  move  for- 
ward." 


*  ^*  In  a  late  letter  to  govern-  cease  to  come  in ;  we  should  be  in 
ment,**  he  wrote  to  the  Commander-  difficulty  about  forage ;  all  who  are 
in-Chief  on  the  24th  of  May,  **  you  now  friendly  would  be  ready  to  op- 
will  have  seen  how  anxious  I  was  pose  us ;  and  if  I  had  not  time  to 
that  any  proposed  movement  towards  secure  the  pass,  the  consequences 
Peshawur  should  be  communicated  might  be  serious  indeed."  —  [Pit6- 
to  no  one  from  whom  it  could  be  lisked  Papers  relating  to  Military 
withheld.  The  moment  such  a  thin^  Operations  in  AfghanistanJ] 
is  known,  it  is  probable  supplies  wiS 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  THE  SUPREME  GOVERNMENT.    473 

And  Pollock  still  hoped  that  something  might  arise 
to  wring  from  the  Governor-General  an  order  to  march 
upon  the  Afghan  capital.  But  the  letters  he  received 
from  Lord  Ellenborough  and  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  were 
calculated  not  only  to  discourage  but  to  embarrass  him. 
There  was  no  possibility  of  misunderstanding  the  wishes 
of  the  Commander-in-Chief;  but  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral,  whilst  imperatively  directing  the  speediest  possible 
withdrawal  of  Pollock's  army,  was  every  now  and  then 
throwing  out  a  hint  that  a  forward  movement  for  the 
chastisement  of  the  A%hans  would  not  be  ungrateful  to 
him.  And  whilst  the  Governor-General  was  obviouslv 
intending  to  place  some  discretionary  power  in  the  Ge- 
neral's hands,  the  Commander-in-Chief  was  writing  to 
assure  him  that  the  orders  of  the  Supreme  Government 
all  tended  towards  an  immediate  and  unconditional 
withdrawal. 

The  letter  of  the  13th  of  May  elicited  no  answer; 
but  a  letter  written  a  week  afterwards,*  in  which  Pol- 
lock pointed  out  the  evils  and  diflSculties  of  an  imme- 
diate withdrawal  to  Peshawur,  found  the  Governor- 
General  in  one  of  his  more  forward  and  chivalrous 
moods.  Pollock,  in  this  letter  of  the  20th  of  May,  had 
said :  "  I  shall  be  glad  if  any  letter  from  government 
may  authorise  my  remaining  till  October  or  November;" 
and  now,  on  the  1st  of  June,  the  Governor-General, 
through  the  Chief  Secretary,  replied:  "  It  would  be  de- 
sirable, undoubtedly,  that  before  finally  quitting  Af- 
ghanistan,  you  should  have  an  opportunity  of  striking 
a  blow  at  the  enemy;  and  since  circumstances  seem  to 
compel  you  to  remain  there  till  October,  the  Govemor- 

•  In  this  letter  of  the  20th  of  May,  before  I  shall  be  able  to  move."    If 

Pollock  says:  "  I  have  already,  in  my  that  letter  of  the  13th  had  not  been 

letter  dated  the  Idth  inst.,  entered  received  and  read,  surely  this  allusion 

on  the  subject   (of  withdrawing  to  to  it  would  have  called  forth  a  re- 

Peshawur),  and  must  receive  a  reply  mark  to  that  effect. 


474  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

General  earnestly  hopes  that  you  may  be  enabled  to 
draw  the  enemy  into  a  position  in  which  you  may  strike 
such  a  blow  effectually."  And  again,  in  the  same  letter: 
"  It  will  be  for  your  consideration  whether  your  large 
army,  one  half  of  which  would  beat,  in  open  field, 
everything  that  could  be  brought  against  it  in  Af- 
ghanistan, should  remain  entirely  inactive  during  the 
period  which  must  now  apparently  elapse  before  it  can 
finally  retire.  Although  you  may  not  have,  or  soon  be 
able  to  procure,  the  means  of  moving  your  whole  army, 
you  may  possibly  be  able  to  move  a  part  of  it  rapidly 
against  some  portion  of  the  enemy's  force  incautiously 
exposed,  and  of  giving  it  a  severe  blow/'  This  was, 
at  all  events,  something  gained.  And  the  gain  was  a 
sudden  one.  Only  three  days  before,  the  Govemor- 
G^neral,  in  a  letter  to  Pollock,  had  resented  the  pre- 
sumption of  Mr.  Clerk  in  drawing  from  a  former  letter 
an  inference  in  favour  of  the  continued  occupation  of 
Jellalabad,  in  the  event  of  negotiations  being  on  foot 
for  the  release  of  the  prisoners,  and  had  expressed  a 
strong  opinion  that  no  negotiations  had  yet  been  entered 
upon  of  a  nature  to  impede  the  backward  movement 
of  the  force.  The  letter  of  the  1st  of  June  was,  there- 
fore, doubly  welcome.  Pollock  had  now  received  a 
constructive  permission  to  remain  at  Jellalabad  until 
October  ;*  and,  as  every  effort  was  to  be  made  in  the  in- 
terval to  collect  carriage-cattle  in  the  provinces  of  Hin- 
dostan,  ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  his  withdrawal 
from  A%hani8tan,  he  determined  to  lose  no  opportunity 
of  turning  those  means  of  withdrawal  to  the  best  possible 

*  It  was  outwardly   only  an   ac-  consequence  of   the    very   defectiye 

knowledgment  of  the  General's  in-  state  of  the  means  of  movement  pos- 

ability  to  retire  at  an  earlier  period-^  sessed  by  Major-General  Pollock,  it 

but  there  was  more  meaning  in  it  appears  to  be  out  of  his  power  to 

than  this,  for  on  tlie  same  day  the  retire  from  Jellalabad  until  October, 

Chief  Secretary  wrote  to  Nott :    **  I  when    his    retirement    will   certainly 

am  directed  to  inform  you  that,  in  take  place." — [Puplished  Papers.'] 


OVERTUBES  FROM  AKBAR  KHAN.         475 

account.  If  there  were  carriage  to  enable  him  to  fall 
back  upon  Peshawur,  there  would  be  carriage  to  enable 
him  to  advance  upon  Caubul,  for  the  mistake  of  hiring 
cattle,  with  local  limitations  affixed  to  the  engagements, 
was  not  to  be  perpetuated.  So  General  Pollock  looked 
forward  with  confidence  to  the  coming  autumn,  as  to  a 
time  when  a  vigorous  and  decisive  blow  might  be 
struck  at  the  nation  which  had  humbled  the  pride  and 
defiled  the  honour  of  the  conquerors  of  Hindostan. 

Patiently,'  therefore,  biding  his  time,  Pollock  turned 
the  halt  at  Jellalabad  to  the  best  possible  accoimt,  by 
endeavouring  to  obtain  by  negotiation  the  ransom  of  the 
British  prisoners.  What  those  negotiations  were,  and 
what  was  their  result,  should  be  stated  in  this  place.  It 
was  on  the  evening  of  the  26th  of  April  that  some  excite- 
ment was  created  in  Pollock's  camp  at  Jellalabad,  by  ru- 
mours, presently  confirmed,  of  the  arrival  of  Captain  Colin 
Mackenzie,  one  of  the  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  Akbar 
Khan,  with  a  letter  firom  Major  Pottinger,  and  overtures 
from  the  Sirdar.  Pottinger's  letter  briefly  shadowed 
forth  the  terms  on  which  Akbar  Khan  and  his  Ghilzye 
confederates  were  prepared  to  release  the  prisoners — but 
the  language  employed  was  rather  that  of  inquiry  than 
dictation.  "  The  Sirdar,"  wrote  Pottinger,  "  wishes  to 
know,  in  the  first  place,  if  we  will  consent  to  withdraw 
the  greater  part  of  our  troops,  and  leave  an  agent  with 
a  small  body  of  men  to  act  with  whomever  the  con- 
federates may  elect  as  chief,  in  which  case  they  propose 
to  be  guided  by  the  wishes  of  the  two  factions  in  Cau- 
bul,  and  wish  us  to  release  Dost  Mahomed  Khan.  /Se- 
condly ; — They  propose,  that  if  the  British  Government 
have  determined  on  subjecting  the  country  and  con- 
tinuing the  war,  that  the  prisoners  at  present  in  Afghan- 
istan shall  be  exchanged  for  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  his 
family  and  attendants,  and  that  the  issue  be  dependent 


476  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

on  the  sword.  Thirdly  ; — ^In  the  event  of  neither  of  these 
propositions  being  approved  of,  they  wish  to  know  what 
terms  will  be  granted  to  themselves  individually ;  whe- 
ther we,  in  the  event  of  their  submission,  will  confine 
them,  send  them  to  India,  take  hostages  fi:om  them, 
reduce  their  pay,  or,  in  short,  what  they  have  to  expect 
fi:om  our  clemency."* 

To  this  General  Pollock  repUed,  that  "  kindness  and 
good  treatment  of  our  prisoners  would  meet  with  due 
consideration  at  the  hands  of  the  British  Government, 
and  the  release  of  them  much  more  so;  that  if  money 
were  a  consideration,  he  was  prepared  to  pay  into  the 
hands  of  any  one  the  Sirdar  might  depute  to  receive  it 
the  sum  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  whenever  the  prisoners 
might  be  delivered  into  his  hands ;"  and  that  Mahomed 
Shah  Khan  and  his  brothers  would  be  ''  suflfered  to 
enjoy  the  advantages  arising  firom  their  hereditary  do- 
minions.^'f 

With  this  letter  Mackenzie  left  Jellalabad  on  the 
evening  of  the  28th  of  April.  He  had  been  instructed 
by  the  Sirdar  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  from  General 

*  Major  Pottinger  to  General  Polr  as  their  enemy,  and  the  whole  multi- 
hek:  Tezeen^  Api-U^O^  1S42.  Pub-  tude  will  be  opposed  to  me.  Under 
Ushed  Papers.  Together  with  this  these  circumstances  I  beg  you  to  re- 
letter  from  Pottinger  came  a  paper  fleet,  tliat  not  having  come  to  an 
from  Akbar  Khan  himself.  It  was  understanding  with  you,  and  having 
without  seal  and  signature,  for  the  made  enemies  of  them,  how  can  I 
Sirdar  was  fearful  of  compromising  exist  ?  ....  1  prefer  your 
himself  with  his  countrymen,  and  the  friendship  to  the  throne  of  Caubul, 
document  might  have  fallen  into  because,  if  I  was  to  go  to  Caubul  now, 
their  hands.  After  some  allusions  to  the  men  of  Caubul  would  push  me  for- 
the  painful  past,  and  a  declaration  ward,  and  then  it  would  be  difficult  to 
that  he  was  unable  to  restrain  the  release  my  guests  and  to  be  on  friendly 
disorganised  mob  of  Afghans  from  terms  with  you.  On  this  account  I 
attacking  the  English  army,  the  Sir-  have  written  to  show  my  friendship 
dar  went  on  to  say :  *Mf  I  allow  the  for  your  government.  Please  God 
English,  who  are  my  guests,  to  depart  my  services  shall  exceed  the  injuries 
according  to  your  suggestion  ;  or  ac-  I  have  done  you.*' 
cording  to  Pottinger  Sahib*s  advice,  f  General  Pollock  to  Major  Pot" 
if  I  allow  the  English  ladies  to  depart  tinger:  Jellalabad^  April  26,  1842. 
before  the  gentlemen,  in  eitlier  case  PMished  Papers. 
all  Mahomedans  will  look  upou  me 


PROPOSALS  OF  THE  SIRDAR.  477 

Pollock  whether  there  was  any  chance  of  the  British 
Government  admitting  him  to  terms,  on  his  own  ac- 
count, if  he  would  detach  himself  from  the  national 
cause,  and  exert  his  influence  to  advance  our  interests 
in  A%hanistan.  But  upon  this  Pollock  could  express 
no  definite  opinion.  "  His  position,"  wrote  the  General 
to  the  Supreme  Government,  "is  evidently  difierent  from 
the  others.  That  he  was  the  murderer  of  the  Envoy 
there  cannot  be  a  question,  and  he  evidently  feels  his 
guilt  to  be  an  insuperable  bar  to  any  terms  from  us ; 
but  he  also  feels  that  he  has  possession  of  the  persons  of 
our  countrjmien,  and  that  circumstance  seems  to  hold 
out  to  him  a  hope  that  his  proffers  of  submission  will 
meet  with  a  favorable  reception."* 

The  reply  of  General  Pollock  to  the  overtures  of 
Akbar  Khan  disappointed  the  Sirdar;  and  Captain 
Mackenzie  was  again  despatched  to  Jellalabad.  This 
time  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  string  of  proposals  far  more 
extravagant  than  those  which  had  been  conveyed  by 
him  on  his  first  mission.  The  requests  of  the  Barukzye 
chief,  as  set  forth  in  Pottinger's  letter  to  the  General, 
were — 

Istly.  That  a  written  promise  of  amnesty  be  given  to  himself^ 
Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  and  the  latter's  family,  for  all  past  acts  up 
to  the  date  of  delivery.  2ndly.  That  neither  he  nor  any  of  the 
above-mentioned  family  shall  be  sent  out  of  the  Caubul  and 
Jellalabad  districts  against  their  wishes.  3rdly.  That  they  may 
not  be  obliged  to  pay  their  respects  to  you  in  our  camp  till  they 
be  assured  against  any  danger.    4thly.  If  we  merely  intend  to 

♦  General  Pollock  to  Government :  it  would  be  difficult  so  to  bring  bim 

JeUalabadt  April  28,  1842.     In  reply  to  trial  as  to  protect  the  government 

to  this  letter,    the   Chief  Secretary  from  a  colourable  cliarge  of  violently 

wrote  :  "  It  is  not  consistent  with  the  prosecuting   an    unworthy   revenge ; 

honour  of  the  British  Government  to  but  no  more  than  this  can  be  done, 

enter  into  any  terms  for  the  making  and  this  only  if  he  should  promptly 

of  a  provision  for  so  great  a  criminal*  do  all  he  can  to  repair  the  crimes  he 

We  might  engage  to  spare  his  life  if  has  committed.**— [PuWWked  P/ipcr*.] 
he  were  to  fall  into  our  nands,  because 


478  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

revenge  ourselves  on  the  enemy,  and  then  leave  the  country,  he 
trusts  its  government  will  be  conferred  on  him.  5thly.  He  wants 
a  jaghire  to  support  his  family,  and  he  names  two  lakhs  as 
adequate.  6thly.  He  wants  eight  lakhs  of  rupees  as  a  present  to 
start  him  with.  (His  great  fear,  as  it  is  of  all  Afghans,  is  of  being 
removed  from  this  country.)  He  also  asks  for  his  own  women, 
who  are  in  his  father's  harem-serai.  They  have  asked  for  the 
money,  if  it  is  paid,  to  be  given  to  Sir-Bolimd  Khan,  who  will 
remain  as  a  hostage  till  the  prisoners  are  delivered,  or  that  you 
pay  it  to  Hindoos,  who  can  empower  their  agents  in  Caubul  to 
pay  it  on  deUvery  of  the  prisoners.* 

To  these  proposals  Pollock  replied  : 

With  regard  to  the  first,  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that, 
whenever  we  agree  to  any  terms,  amnesty  for  the  past  will  result. 

The  second  request,  about  residing  at  Caubul  and  Jellalabad,  is 
out  of  place  now;  it  must  depend  upon  contingencies,  and  be  dis- 
cussed only  after  other  and  more  important  points  have  been 
agreed  upon. 

With  reference  to  the  third  request,  the  Sirdar  Mahomed 
Akbar  may  be  assured  that  I  would  guarantee  his  personal  safety 
whenever  he  may  visit  my  camp;  but  his  doing  so  would  require 
some  preliminary  arrangement,  unless  he  voluntarily  claims  our 
protection,  in  which  case  I  could  immediately  arrange  for  his 
safety,  and  appeal  to  the  government  on  his  behalf. 

The  fourth  request  refers  to  matters  entirely  depending  on 
future  results,  and  which  are  known  to  God  alone.  It  would 
therefore  be  vain  to  speculate  on  them  at  this  stage  of  our  nego- 
tiation. 

With  regard  to  the  fifth  and  sixth  requests,  I  have  already  told 
you  that  I  suppose  the  Sirdar  rests  his  claim  to  any  present  on 
his  delivering  up  the  prisoners,  which,  as  I  have  before  stated, 
will  be  the  best  evidence  of  good  faith,  and  a  sincere  wish  for 

♦  Major  Pottinger  to  General  Pol-  it  is  paid,  to  be  given  to  Sir-Bolund 

lock:  May  8,  1842.     I  have  quoted  Khan "  — is  printed,    "  They    have 

from  the  original  in  Pottinger^s  hand-  asked  for  the  money,  &c.,  to  be  given 

writing.  But  the  letter  is  given  among  to  Jiis  Colund  Khan.**     It  may  puzzle 

the  published  papers,  with  the  usual  the  future  historian  to  discover  who 

official  emendations.  Thus  the  passage,  ''his  Colund  Khan*'  may  have  been. 
**  They  have  asked  for  the  money,  if 


pollock's  reply.  479 

favorable  terms  with  the  British  Government.  I  have  accord- 
ingly already  mentioned  the  sum  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees.  The 
Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  must  recollect  that  he  is  desirous  of  ob- 
taining the  females  of  his  own  family.  The  British  Government 
will  not  require  any  money  to  be  paid  on  their  account;  and  I 
hereby  guarantee  that,  on  all  the  prisoners  being  delivered  over  to 
me,  I  will  write  to  India  for  the  women  of  the  Sirdar  Mahomed 
Akbar,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  my  request  will  be  complied 
with. 

As  to  the  payment  of  the  money  for  the  prisoners  now  with,  or 
in  the  power  of  Mahomed  Akbar^  it  shall  be  made  to  any  person 
the  Sirdar  may  appoint  to  receive  it,  or  it  shall  be  paid  to 
Hindoos  who  can  give  bills  on  Caubul.  The  good  faith  and 
honour  of  the  British  nation  is  not  doubted,  and  I  therefore 
hereby  pledge  myself  to  pay  the  two  lakhs  of  rupees  on  account 
of  government  whenever  the  prisoners  are  made  over  to  me.* 

Mackenzie  took  his  departure  with  these  replies. 
There  was  stirring  work,  at  this  time,  for  Akbar  Khan 
at  Caubul;  and  the  negotiations  had  no  result.    But  the 

*  General  Pollock  to  Major  Pot'  you  should  have  considered  it  to  be 

finger:   JeUaJabad,   May    10,   1842.  necessary,   under  any  circumstances, 

Published  Papers.  Lord  Ellenborough  to  have  had  any  communication  what- 

was  unwilling  that  any  money  should  ever  of  a  diplomatic  nature  with  Moi- 

be  paid  for  the  release  of  the  captives ;  homed  Akbar  Khan,  in  whom  it  must 

but  was  inclined  to  exchange  Dost  be  impossible  for  any  one  to  place  any 

Mahomed    and    his    family  for    the  trust.  — {Published  Papers.^     Akbar 

prisoners  in  the  hands  of  the  Sirdar.  Rhan,  at  this  time,  seems  almost  to 

"  Undoubtedly,"  he  wrote,  "  on  the  have  considered  the  release  of  his 

26th   of    April,    you  remained    au-  father  and  family  as  hopeless;  and 

thorised,  by  the  instructions  of  the  Pollock  did  not  think   he  was  au- 

24th  of  February,  to  give  money  on  thorised  to  propose  an  exchange  of 

the  public  account  for  the  release  of  prisoners ;  for  although,  on  the  24th 

individual  prisoners ;  and  if,  previously  of  February,  Lord  Auckland  suggested 

to  the  receipt  of  my  letter  of  the  25th  that  he  "  might  speak  of  the  release 

of  April,  you  should  have  concluded  of  Dost  Mahomed  as  an  event  which 

a  negotiation  for  the  release  of  any  might  not  be  altogether  impossible," 

individual  prisoners  on  that  condi-  he  did  not  know  how  far  such  a  mea^ 

tion,   the   Governor- General    would  sure  might  be  sanctioned  by   Lord 

feel  himself  under  the  necessity  of  Ellenborough.  Moreover,  Pollock  be- 

sanctioning  any  payment  of  money  to  lieved  that  the   exchange   had  only 

which  you   may  have  then  pledged  been  authorised  in  the  event  of  his 

yourself.     After  the  receipt  of  that  being  able  to  treat  for  the  release  of 

letter,  you  will,  of  course,  in  any  future  the  whole  of  the  British  prisoners; 

negotiation,  have  adhered  to  the  in-  and  they  were  not  all  in  the  hands  of 

structions  contained  in  it.     It  cannot  Akbar  Khan, 
but  be  a  subject  of  much  regret  that 


480  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

visits  of  the  British  officer  to  Jellalabad  had  not  been 
without  their  uses.  Mackenzie  had  been  the  bearer  of 
much  information  of  the  deepest  interest,  and  had  placed 
many  valuable  documents  in  the  hands  of  General  Pol- 
lock. The  General  had  laid  before  him  a  string  of 
questions  relative  to  the  causes  and  progress  of  the  in- 
surrection at  Caubul,  the  answers  to  which,  in  the 
existing  state  of  information  even  in  the  best-informed 
quarters,  threw  a  flood  of  light  upon  many  dark  points 
of  recent  history.  And  whilst  in  official  places  many 
important  revelations  were  made,  all  through  the  general 
camp  there  transpired,  in  time,  from  the  same  source, 
much  that  was  eagerly  sought,  eagerly  discussed  when 
found,  and  eagerly  transmitted  to  every  cantonment  ia 
India,  where  the  fate  of  the  captives  in  the  hands  of 
Akbar  Khan  was  a  matter  of  the  liveliest  concernment, 
and  a  source  of  the  most  painful  alarm.* 

*  The  questions  were— 1st.  "  What  breach  of  faith?    4th.  What  were  the 

were  the  terms  negotiated  by  Sir  W.  manner  and  causes  of  Sir  W.  Mac- 

Macnaghten  with  the  rebels  ?    2nd.  naghten's  murder  ?"     I  have  found 

What  alteration  was  made  by  Major  the  information  conveyed  in  Captain 

Pottinger?     drd.  What  does  Major  Mackenzie's  answers  of  some  use  in 

Pottlnger  alhide  to  when  he  talks  of  the  course  of  my  narrative. 


THE  CAPTIYITT.  481 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[January— April :  1842.] 

The  Captivity—Surrender  of  the  Married  Families — Their  Journey  to 
Tezeen— Proceed  to  Tugree — Interviews  between  Fottinser  and  Akbar 
Khan— Removal  to  Budeeabad — ^Prison  Life — Removal  to  Zanda— Death 
of  General  Elphinstone. 

Few  were  the  letters  which  Mackenzie  brought  from  his 
fellow-captives  to  their  friends  at  Jellalabad.  There 
may  have  been  state  reasons  for  the  secrecy  which  en- 
veloped his  movements ;  but  to  all  parties  the  disappoint- 
ment was  great.  Every  one  at  Jellalabad  was  eaget  for 
intelligence  regarding  the  incidents  which  had  befallen 
the  little  band  of  prisoners,  and  for  particulars  of  all  the 
daily  environments  of  their  captive  state.  All  through 
the  camp  ran  eager  inquiries;  and  little  by  little  the 
much-coveted  information  began  to  radiate  from  the 
General's  tent,  and  to  diffuse  itself  in  more  remote 
quarters.  What  was  then  told  in  mere  outline  may 
here  be  given  more  in  detail. 

It  was  on  the  9  th  of  January  that  the  married 
families  were  made  over  to  the  protection  of  Mahomed 
Akbar  Khan.  The  following  day  was  spent  by  them  in 
a  small  fort,  where  they  found  Pottinger,  Lawrence,  and 
Mackenzie,  who  had  been   surrendered  a?  hostages  at 

VOL.  II.  2  I 


482  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

Boot-Elhak.  Rude  as  was  the  accommodation,  and 
imtempting  as  was  the  fare,  that  were  here  offered 
them,  after  the  miseries  and  privations  of  the  retreat 
through  the  snowy  passes,  the  "  small  dark  hovels"  in 
which  they  were  crowded  together  were  a  very  palace, 
and  the  "greasy  palao"  in  which  they  dipped  their 
fingers  was  regal  fare.  They  slept  that  night  on  the 
bare  ground — but  there  was  a  roof  between  them  and 
the  open  sky;  and  they  thought  little  of  the  smoke, 
which  almost  suflFocated  them,  whilst  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  reviving  warmth  of  a  wood  fire.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  through  scenes  of  unex- 
ampled horror,  the  party  of  captives  were  conducted  to 
the  Tezeen  fort.  The  road  was  strewn  with  the  stark 
bodies  of  the  mangled  dead.  Here  and  there  little 
groups  of  wretched  camp-followers,  starving,  fix)st- 
bitten,  many  of  them  in  a  state  of  gibbering  idiotcy 
were  to  be  seen  cowering  in  the  snow ;  or  solitary  men, 
perhaps  wounded  and  naked,  were  creeping  out  of  their 
hiding-places,  in  an  extremity  of  mortal  suffering  and 
fear.  The  sickening  smell  of  death  rose  firom  the  bloody 
corpses  through  which  our  English  ladies  guided  their 
horses,  striving  not  to  tread  upon  the  bodies,f  or  in 
their  camel-panniers  jolted  and  stumbled  over  the  ob- 
structing carrion.  Happy  were  they  all,  when,  about 
the  hour  of  evening  prayer,  that  dreadful  journey  was 
at  an  end,  and  the  fort  of  Tezeen  appeared  in  sight. 
There  they  were  hospitably  received — and  there  an- 

*  On  that  day  Akbar  Khan  sought  the  deed  which  he  so  much  regretted 

an  interview  with  Lad^  Macnaghten.  mieht  be  undone. 
Painful  ai  such  a  meeting  must  have        f  *^  The  sight  was  dreadful ;   the 

been,  the  bereaved  widow  was  not  in  smell  of  the  blood  sickening ;  and  the 

a  position  to  refuse  to  see  her  bus-  corpses  lay  so  thick  it  was  mipossible 

band^s  murderer.      He  spoke  very  to  look  from  them,  as  it  required 

kindly  to  her ;  and  as  she  sate  in  care  to  guide  my  horse  so  as  not  to 

flQent  sorrow  before  him,  declared  tread    upon    the   bodies."  —  \,Lady 

that  he  would  give  his  ri^t  arm  that  Sale'*  Joumal.'] 


ARRIVAL  AT  JUGDULLUCK.  483 

Other  captive  was  added  to  their  number.  Lieutenant 
Melville,  of  the  64th  Native  Infantry,  who  had  been 
wounded  on  the  retreat,  and  whose  wounds  had  been 
bound  up  by  the  hand  of  Akbar  Khan  himself,  was 
waiting  their  arrival  in  the  fort  * 

On  the  following  day  they  were  carried  to  Seh-Babaj 
and  the  same  dreadful  scenes  of  carnage  sickened  them 
as  they  went  along.  On  the  march  another  prisoner,  and 
a  welcome  one,  was  added  to  the  party— one  whom  the 
sick  and  wounded  had  much  wanted — a  medical  officer, 
Dr.  Macgrath.f  On  the  18th,  partly  over  remote 
mountain  paths,  so  precipitous  that  the  camels  could 
scarcely  keep  their  footing,  and  partly  along  the  bloody 
track  of  our  slaughtered  army,  the  captive  band  were 
escorted  to  JugduUuck.  Here  three  ragged  tents  had 
been  pitched  for  their  reception.  Here  they  found  Gene- 
ral Elphinstone,  Brigadier  Shelton,  and  Captain  John- 
son, who  had  been  claimed  as  hostages  by  Akbar  Khan; 
and  here  they  learnt  that  all  the  soldiers  and  camp- 
followers  who  had  left  Caubul,  with  the  exception  of 
this  little  handful  of  prisoners,  had,  in  all  probability, 
been  annihilated  on  the  march4 

*  *^  The  column  passed  on,  and  I  mounted  me  behind  a  follower,  and 

had  not  been  there  five  minutes  ere  having  put  a  turban  on  my  head,  and 

a  horseman  rode  up,  who  had  accom-  given  me  a  posteen,  made  me  proceed 

panied  Captain  Skmner  from  his  in-  by  his  side.  — [^Lieut,  MelviUe  s  Nar^ 

terview  with  the  Sirdar,  and  offered  rative,'] 

me  a  *  nan*  (a  native  loaf)  for  a  ru«  f  **  Mr.Macgrath  had  several  nar- 

pee.  This  I  wanted  not ;  but  I  bought  row  escapes  ;  and  when  surrounded 

and  gave  it  to  a  poor  European  strug-  bj  Ghilzye  footmen  with  their  long 

gling  on,    I  then  offered  the  man  knives  drawn,  owed  his  life  in  a  great 

seven  rupees  (being  all  I  had)  if  he  measure  to  an  Afghan  horseman,  who 

would  mount  me  before  him,  and  recognised  him  as  having  shown  some 

take  me  to  the  Sirdar.      Thb  he  litUe  kindness  to  some  of  his  sick 

a^eed  to  do,  and  placing  me  before  friends  at  Caubul.**  —  [Lady  Sale's 

hmi    on  his  saddle,  he  proceeded.  JoumaL'] 

About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  rear  of  X  "  ^very  attention,"  says  Captain 

the  baj^gage  we  met  the  Sirdar  and  Johnson,  in  his  journal,  ^*  which  cir- 

his  followers,  who  received  me  most  cumstances  admitted  oi^  had   been 

kindly.   He  laid  me  down  on  a  bank,  paid  to  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  ; 

and  with  his  own  hands  dressed  my  nor  had  they  met  with  too  ftligbtest 

wounds,  by  placing  on  them  burnt  annoyance  on  the  road." 
lint  to  stanch  the  blood.     He  then 

2i2 


484  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

Next  morning  they  resumed  their  journey — the  Gene- 
ral, the  Brigadier,  and  Captain  Johnson,  accompanied 
by  Akbar  E^han,  bringing  up  the  rear.  A  more  ru^ed 
and  difficult  road  had  seldom  been  travelled  over.  The 
ascents  and  descents  were  seemingly  impracticable ;  it 
made  the  travellers  giddy  to  look  at  them.  The  road 
was  "  one  continuation  of  rocks  and  stones,  over  which 
the  camels  with  the  greatest  difficulty  scrambled"  with 
their  burdens.*  At  night  they  bivouacked  on  the  banks 
of  the  Punshuhur  river.  There  were  no  tents,  no  shel- 
ter of  any  kind  for  the  ladies.  So  they  rolled  themselves 
up  in  their  warmest  garments,  laid  their  heads  upon 
their  saddles,  and  composed  themselves,  as  best  they 
could,  to  sleep. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  15th  of  January  they 
crossed  the  deep  and  rapid  fords  of  the  Punshuhur  river. 

*  Captain  JohnsorCs  Journal.  The  of  our  Afghan  attendants  told  us  to 
writer  adds:  *^  At  the  conunencement  accompany  him  inside  a  miserable 
of  the  defile,  and  for  some  consider-  cow-shed,  which  on  our  first  entrance 
able  distance,  passed  two  or  three  was  so  blackened  with  the  dense 
hundreds  of  our  poor  miserable  Hin-  smoke  from  a  good  blazing  fire  in  the 
dostanees,  who  had  escaped  up  this  centre  of  the  hut,  that  we  could  see 
unfrequented  road  from  the  massacre  none  of  the  objects  around  us,  until 
of  the  12th.  They  had  not  a  ra^  to  we  had  stretched  ourselves  at  length 
cover  them,  and  were  aU  more  or  less  on  the  fioor,  and  consequently  out  of 
frost-bitten,  wounded,  or  starving,  the  influence  of  the  smoke,  when  we 
The  poor  wretches  were  huddled  to-  perceived  our  companions  to  be  three 
^ther  in  thirties  and  forties,  so  as  to  or  four  half-starved  Hindostanees, 
impart  to  each  other  a  little  animal  who  had  accompanied  our  party, 
heat,  as  other  warmth  was  denied  Our  attendant  wished  to  eject  them ; 
them  by  the  barren,  inhospitable  wil-  but  we  too  truly  sympathised  with 
derness  around  them.  We  after-  their  sufferings  to  permit  such  an  act 
wards  learnt  that  scarcely  one  of  of  tyrannjr.  We  shortly  afterwards 
these  poor  wretches  escaped  from  the  got  an  invitation  from  Mahomed 
defile  in  which  they  had  taken  shcl-  Akbar  to  join  him  and  his  party  to 
ter ;  and  that,  driven  to  the  extremes  dinner  inside  the  fort.  The  room 
of  hunger,  some  of  them  had,  for  a  of  our  reception  was  not  much  better 
few  short  hours,  sustained  life  by  than  that  we  had  left.  We  had,  how- 
feeding  on  their  dead  comrades.  The  ever,  a  capital  dinner,  some  cups  of 
wind  was  blowing  bitterly  cold  at  our  good  tea,  and  a  luxurious  rest  for  the 
bivouac.  No  shelter  of  any  kind  night,  the  room  having  been  heated 
for  the  ladies  of  our  party  dunng  the  with  a  good  blazing  fire  and  lots  of 
whole  ni^ht.  Happiness  is  compara-  smoke,  with  no  outlet  for  either,  ex- 
tive ;  and  tnily  fortunate  did  General  cept  the  door  and  a  small  hole  in  the 
Elphinstone,  brigadier  Shelton,  and  roof." — \MSJ\ 
myself  consider  ourselves  when  one 


HALT  AT  TUGREE.  486 

The  passage  was  not  accomplished  without  difficulty 
and  danger;  but  the  active  kindness  of  the  Afghan 
Sirdars  availed  to  escort  the  party  over  in  safety.*  A 
bitterly  cold  wind  was  blowing  as  they  passed ;  and  a 
few  followers  and  cattle  were  lost.  Proceeding  then  in 
a  north-easterly  direction,  they  made  their  way  over  a 
barren,  inhospitable  country,  where  neither  grass  nor 
water  was  to  be  seen,  into  the  fertile  valley  of  Lugh- 
man;  and  halted  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Tugree  fort. 
The  following  day  was  the  Sabbath.  A  day's  halt  had 
been  determined  upon ;  and  it  fell,  by  a  happy  accident, 
on  the  Christian's  day  of  rest.  A  Bible  and  Prayer-book 
had  been  "  picked  up  on  the  field  at  Boot-Khak ;"  and 
the  service  of  the  Church  of  England  was  read  to  the 
little  band  of  prisoners.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  with 
what  deep  emotion  they  must  have  joined  in  the  prayer 
beseeching  the  Almighty  to  have  mercy  "  upon  all  pri- 
soners and  captives." 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  they  were  again  upon 
the  move.f    Tugree  is  only  thirty  miles  distant  from 

*  Captain    Johnson   says   in   his  well  up  the  stream.    The  Afghans 

journal, ''  Both  Mahomed  Akbar  and  made  great  exertions  to  save  both 

his  chiefs  were  most    attentive    in  men  and  animals  struggling  in  the 

escorting  over  in  safety  the  ladies  water." — [^Lady  Sale's  Journal,'^ 
and    their    children    and    wounded        +  "  Jan.  17,  1842. — Early  m  the 

Europeans."    There  is  other  testi-  morning  we  were,  to  our  surprise,  told 

mony  to  the  same  effect :  "  Many  of  to  prepare  for  a  march  higher  up  the 

the  ladies,  being  mounted  on  ponies,  valley,  and  further  removed    from 

were  obliged  to  dismount  and  ride  Jellalabad,  from  which  place  Tugree 

astride  on  the  chargers  of  their  Af-  is  about  thirty  miles  distant.    All  our 

ghan  acquaintance,  to  avoid  getting  hopes,  which  we  had  entertained  hi- 

wet.    Nothing  could  exceed  the  po-  therto  of  being  escorted  to  Jellalabad, 

lltencss  and  attention  of  Mahomed  are  now  blighted,  and  we  see  plainly 

Akbar  on  this  occasion,  who  mani-  that  we  are  nothing  more  nor  less  than 

fested  the  greatest  anxiety  until  all  prisoners,  until  such  time  as  General 

had  crossed  over  in  safety." — [^Eyre's  Sale   shall  evacuate  Jellalabad,  or 

Rough  Notes  of  Imprisonment  in  Af*  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  be  permitted 

ghanistan.'j      "  The  chiefs  gave  us  by  our  government  to  return  to  the 

every  assistance.    Mahomed  Akbar  country.     Started  at  nine,  and  ar- 

Khan  carried  Mrs.  Waller  over  be-  rived  at  Budeeabad,  almost  at  the  top 

hind  him  on  his  own  horse.     One  of  the  valley,  and  close  to  the  first 

rode  by  me  to  keep  my  horse*s  head  range  of  hills  towards  Kafiristan.    It 


486 


THE  CAPTIVITY. 


Jellalabad ;  and  up  to  this  time  a  faint  hope  had  been 
encouraged  by  the  captives  that  they  were  to  be  escorted 
to  that  place.  But  now  an  order  came  for  them  "  to 
prepare  for  a  march  higher  up  the  valley,"  and  in  a 
different  direction.  It  was  now  found  that  their  desti- 
nation was  the  fort  of  Budeeabad.  This  was  to  be  their 
resting-place.  It  had  been  recently  erected;  and  was 
the  property  of  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  the  father-in-law 
of  the  Sirdar.  Five  rooms,  composing  two  sides  of  an 
inner  square,  or  citadel,  were  allotted -to  the  British 
prisoners.  The  buildings  were  "  intended  for  the  chief 
and  his  favourite  wife,"*  and  it  may  therefore  be  pre- 
sumed that  they  afforded  the  best  accommodation  in  the 
place.  The  party  consisted  of  nine  ladies,  twenty  gen- 
tlemen, and  fourteen  children.  Seventeen  European  sol- 
diers, two  European  women  and  a  child,  were  located  in 
another  part  of  the  fort. 

On  that  night  of  the  17th  of  January  Pottinger  and 
Akbar  Khan  were  in  close  and  earnest  conversation. 
The  Sirdar  entered  on  the  subject  of  his  father's  release ; 
and  asked  the  English  officer  if  he  would  guarantee  an 
interchange  of  prisoners  and  the  evacuation  of  Jellala- 
bad. Pottinger  could  only  answer  that  he  was  a 
prisoner  and  powerless;  and  could  give  no  promises 
with  any  certainty  of  their  being  performed.  But  he 
undertook  to  write  to  Macgregor  on  the  subject ;  and  to 
urge  him  to  lay  the  wishes  of  the  Sirdar  before  the 
Supreme  Grovemment.f    It  appeared  to  Pottinger  that 


belongs  to  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  is 
nearly  new,  and  has  a  deep  ditch  and 
/ausse-hraie  all  round  it.  Our  abode 
consists  of  five  rooms  on  two  sides 
of  a  small  square.  This  space  is 
to  accommodate  nine  ladies,  twenty 
gentlemen,  and  fourteen  children, 
and  in  the  Tei-Khana  are  seven- 
teen European  soldiers  and  three 
European  women — all  prisoners.** — 


[Captain  Johnson's  Narrative  of  his 
Captivity.    MS.'] 
*  Lady  Salens  JoumaL 

J  "Last  night,  Mahomed  Akbar 
I  had  a  long  conversation.  He 
was  very  anxious  for  the  release  of 
his  father,  and  made  many  promises 
in  his  name  if  we  would  release  him. 
I  pointed  out  that  at  least  two  months 
must  elapse  before  we  could  in  any 


PRISON-LIFE.  487 

no  more  expedient  course  could  be  adopted  than  that 
involving  a  general  interchange  of  prisoners  and  the 
restoration  of  the  country  to  Dost  Mahomed  Khan. 

Ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  southward 
for  the  reduction  of  Jellalabad,  Akbar  Khan  took  his 
departure  on  the  following  day;  and  the  captives  b^an 
to  settle  down  into  the  monotony  of  prison-life.  In 
this  place  they  continued  to  reside  for  nearly  three 
months.  The  incidents  of  captivity,  during  this  period, 
were  not  many,  or  very  memorable.  Here  for  the  first 
time,  after  the  lapse  of  a  fortnight,  they  were  able  to 
change  their  clothes.*  Clean  linen  was  very  scarce; 
and  the  nice  sensibilities  of  delicate  English  ladies  were 
outraged  by  the  appearance  of  nauseous  vermin.  The 
food  that  was  served  out  to  them  was  not  of  the  most 
luxurious  description.  It  consisted  of  rice,  mutton,  and 
thick  cakes  of  unleavened  dough,  prepared  by  the  Af- 
ghan cooks  in  a  manner  little  relished  by  English 
palates.f  Captain  Lawrence  acted  as  the  steward  of 
the  captive  party,  and  divided  the  supplies,  whether 
they  were  the  daily  food  of  the  prisoners,  or  parcels 

way  have  the  instructions  of  goyern-  prejudicial  to  its  interests  to  release 

ment  regarding  the  release  of  the  the  Dost  and  family.** — {^Major  Pot» 

Ameer.    I  can  see  no  objection  to  linger  to  Major  Macgr^or :  Lughmari^ 

the  release  of  the  Ameer,  unless  go-  January  18,  1842.    MS,  Correspond' 

vemment  intends  making  an  example  ence.J 

of  the  city  of  Caubul.     Our  release  *  January  19. — Changedmy  clothes 

and  that  of  the  hostages  at  Caubul  for  the  first  time  since  leaying  Cau- 

appears  to  depend  upon  his  release,  bul,  January  6,  and  was  fortunate 

His  family*s  release  recjuires  that  of  enouffh  to  have  a  clean  shirt.     My 

the  women  here.    I  wish  for  these  feet  had  become  so  swollen  that  X 

last  something  could  be  done ;  but  I  could  not   again  put  on  my  boots 

fear  not.    You  must  use  your  influ-  when  once  pulled  off.    My  eyes  still 

ence.     They  tcU   me  we   shall  be  very  sore  from  the  effects  of  the  snow 

forwarded  to  Peshawur  if  you  eyacu-  on  the  march." — [Captain  Johnson*8 

ate  Jellalabad;  and  the  Sirdar  hem  Narrative  of  his  Captivity.    MS."] 

me  that  I  write  you  on  the  sub-  t  Subsequently  the  materials  were 

ject.     I  haye  explained  that  I  haye  seryed    out   to    the    prisoners    and 

no  authority  now,  and  said  that  I  dressed  by  their  own  Hindostanee 

cannot  promise  anything  of  the  sort,  seryants. 
I  hope  goyemment  will  see  nothing 


488  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

of  clothes,  money,*  and  other  equally  acceptable  pre- 
sents sent  them  either  by  their  A%han  captors  or  their 
friends  at  Jellalabad. 

There  was  nothing  very  painful  in  their  captivity. 
They  were  not  suffered  to  wander  far  from  their  prison- 
house  ;  but  within  its  walls  they  found  both  occupation 
and  amusement,  and  the  time  passed  at  Budeeabad  is  not 
now,  in  the  retrospect,  the  saddest  of  their  lives.  They 
had  among  them  a  few  books  ;  some  had  been  brought 
for  sale  by  natives  of  the  country,  who  had  picked  them 
up  on  the  road  traversed  by  the  army  on  its  retreat ; 
others  had  been  forwarded  by  friends  at  Jellalabad. 
Now  and  then  a  stray  newspaper  came  in  from  that 
place.  It  is  hard  to  say  how  greedily  its  contents  were 
devoured,  and  how  eagerly  they  were  discussed.  Some- 
times letters  were  received  from  below  ;  there  was 
a  good  deal  of  cypher-correspondence  between  the 
prisoners  and  Sale's  garrison,f  and  many  long  letters 
were  written  to  friends  in  India  or  in  England,  to  be 
despatched  when  opportunity  might  offer.  Then  there 
;were  amongst  them  two  or  three  packs  of  old  playing  . 
cards — dirty  and  limp,  but  not  the  less  serviceable  for 
these  conventional  defects.  Some  rude  backgammon  and 
drafts  boards  had  been  constructed  for  prison  service ; 
and  there  was  quite  enough   elasticity  of  spirits  left 


♦  "  January  29. — The  Sirdar  and  tary  or  political  news  in  the  ordinary 

Sooltan  Jan  came  to  gee  us.  Made  a  fonn  ot  epistolary  correspondence, 

bet  with  the  latter  of  1000  rupees  So  the  officers  at  Jellalabad  hit  upon 

that  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  the  ex-  the  expedient  of  dotting  off  letters  in 

Ameer,  will  be  released  by  the  dOth  old  newspapers,  so  as  to  form  words 

of  January,  and  will  return  to  Af-  and  sentences — "  an  easy   mode  of 

ghanistan.     The  former  gave  1000  carrying  on  secret  correspondence  not 

rupees  to  be  distributed  among  us  likely  to  be  detected  by  an  Asiatic." 

for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  sugar  These  dotted  letters  communicated  to 

and  other  little  luxuries.    My  share  the  prisoners  the  tiding  of  Wild's 

18  fifty  rupees  ;  which  sum  is  very  repulse  in  the  Khybur  rass — the  de- 

accep table,  as  I  have  not  had  a  pice  spatch  of  General  Pollock  to  Pesha- 

about  me  since  leaving  Caubul." —  wur — and  the  arrival  of  Dr.  Brydon 

[^Captain  Johnson's  Narrative.   A/5.]  at  Jellalabad* 

t  It  was  dangerous  to  send  mili-  ^ 


PRISON- LIFE. 


489 


among  the  captives  to  render  them  not  disinclined  for 
more  active  and  boisterous  sports.  They  played  at 
*'  hop-skotch ;"  they  played  at  "  blind-man's  bnflf."  A 
favourite  game  among  them  was  the  latter  ;  and  when 
some  ten  or  fifteen  healthy  and  cheerful  little  boys  and 
girls  joined  in  the  sport,  the  mirth  ran  fast  and  furious. 
A  Christmas  party  in  old  England  seldom  sees  madder 
gambols  than  these — seldom  has  the  heart's  laughter  risen 
more  freely  from  a  band  of  merrier  children  than  those 
who  romped  with  their  elders  in  prison  at  Budeeabad. 

The  Sabbaths  were  alway  kept  holy.  Every  Sunday 
saw  the  little  party  of  Christian  prisoners  assembled  for 
the  worship  of  their  God.  Sometimes  in  the  open  air, 
sometimes  in  tents,  in  huts,  or  any  other  place  avail- 
able for  the  purpose,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  the  Church 
Service  was  read  to  as  devout  a  band  of  worshippers  as 
ever  assembled  to  render  thanks  to  the  Almighty  and  to 
implore  the  continuance  of  His  mercies.  Nor  were  these 
observances  lost  upon  their  guards.  Wild  and  savage  as 
were  their  keepers,  they  seemed  to  respect  the  Chris- 
tian's day  of  rest.  There  was  more  decorum  in  their 
demeanour,  more  courtesy  in  their  manner,  than  on  the 
working-days  of  the  week.  An  atmosphere  of  peace 
and  rest  seemed  to  envelop  them  on  that  sacred  day. 

On  the  23rd  of  January,  Akbar  Khan,  accompanied 
by  Sooltan  Jan,  returned  to  Budeeabad.  The  object  of 
his  visit  was  to  induce  Pottinger  to  write  to  Macgregor 
at  Jellalabad,  stating  the  terms  on  which  the  Sirdar  was 
willing  to  treat  with  the  British  for  the  release  of  the 
prisoners.     The  letter  was  duly  written;*  but  Pottinger 


♦  It  ran  in  the  following  words: 
"  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  has 
been  with  us  to-day ;  and  from  what 
I  can  learn,  it  seems  that  Shah 
Soojah  has  entirely  thrown  us  over- 
board, and  is  about  to  proceed  to 
open  war  with  us ;  and  the  following 


appears  to  be  the  grounds  on  which 
he  wishes  to  treat.  The  a^eement 
he  wishes  us  to  enter  into  is,  that  if 
Shah  Soojah,  or  any  of  Shah  Soojah^s 
sons  in  enmity  to  the  English  may 
send  an  army  to  attack  Jellalabad,  it 
will  thus  become  evident  that  the 


490 


THE  CAPTIVITY. 


repeated  that  he  had  no  hope  of  the  surrender  of  Jel- 
lalabad;  and  added,  that  he  advised  the  Sirdar  not  to 
attack  it  lest  a  war  should  be  commenced  of  which  it 
was  difficult  to  see  the  end.  Pottinger  believed  that 
the  Sirdar  was  sincere  in  his  expressions  of  a  desire  to 
establish  friendly  relations  with  the  British.  "  But,"  he 
added,  "  he  has  been  brought  up  in  the  midst  of  trea- 
chery, and  does  not  know  how  to  trust ;  and  I  regret 
that  our  own  conduct  in  this  country  has  put  our 
government's  faith  on  a  par  with  themselves.  Our  de- 
feat, though  sufficiently  galling  to  a  soldier,  really  loses 
its  sting  when  the  taunts  of  our  broken  promises,  which 
we  know  to  be  true,  are  thrown  in  our  teeth  by  men 
who  know  the  truth  only  by  name.''* 


King  is  the  enemj  of  the  English ; 
and  the  English  will  treat  him  as 
such  —  and  then  Sirdar  Mahomed 
Akbar  Khan  will  be  considered  the 
friend  of  the  English,  who  will  act 
according  to  his  wishes  with  respect 
to  this  country,  and  will  release  the 
Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  with  all 
his  family,  and  send  them  to  this 
country  with  all  honour  and  respect, 
and  will  restore  him  to  his  govern- 
ment, in  the  same  manner  as  they 
took  it  from  him  to  give  it  to  Shah 
Soojah;  but  will  leave  to  the  Ameer 
and  Sirdar  Mahomed  Khan  the  full 
control  of  the  people  and  govern- 
ment ;  and  if  any  enemy  attack  the 
government  thus  established,  the 
British  Government  will  aid  it  with 
either  money  or  an  army,  and  the 
friends  of  the  one  government  will  be 
the  friends  of  the  other.  The  agree- 
ment which  the  Sirdar  will  enter  into 
is  this,  that  he  will  hereafter  be  the 
friend  of  the  English ;  but  that  at 
present,  to  prevent  himself  being 
abused  by  his  people,  he  must  pro- 
ceed to  close  the  Khybur  Pass  against 
the  approach  of  the  English  army ; 
but  he  will  not  attempt  to  attack 
Jellalabad  before  the  arrival  of  Shah 
Soojah's   son   and   army;  and   after 


their  arrival  he  will  use  every  endea- 
vour to  secretly  aid  the  garrison 
until  the  arrival  of  his  father  and 
family.'* — [^Afajor  Pottinger  to  Major 
Macgregor :  Budeeabad,  January  23, 

1842.     MS,  Correspondence.^ 

*  Major  Pottinger  to  Major  Mac- 
gregor: Bitdeeabad,  January  30, 1842. 
MS,  Correspondence.  From  Major 
Pottineer's  letters  written  about  this 
time,  his  real  opinion  of  the  conduct 
of  Akbar  Khan  can  only  be  ex- 
tracted by  ascertaining  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  different 
letters  were  written — some  of  them 
having  been  written  at  the  request  of 
the  Sirdar  himself.  There  are  two 
letters  of  January  23,  one  of  an  offi- 
cial tendency,quoted  above — the  other 
of  a  more  private  and  more  genuine 
character,  in  which  the  writer  says : 
"  He"  (Akbar  Khan)  "  sent  out  the 
day  before  yesterday  a  Persian  letter 
for  me  to  send  to  you  in  English ;  I 
wrote  a  letter  telling  you  the  mean- 
ing, which  he  sent  back  to-day,  and 
requesting  me  to  give  him  an  exact 
copy  of  his  own.  I  have  done  so  it 
is  true  ;  but  I  fancy  his  humanity  was 
only  a  sham,  and  every  sinew  was 
strained  to  destroy  our  poor  fellows. 
He  has,  however,  treated  us  personally 


THE  EARTHQUAKE  AT  BUDEEABAD.        491 

About  the  middle  of  the  month  of  February  the 

captive  party  was  increased  by  the  arrival  of  Major 
Griffiths  and  Captain  Souter;  and  a  few  days  after- 
wards, the  same  terrific  earthquake  which  had  shaken 
down  the  ramparts  of  Jellalabad  made  the  walls  of  their 
prison-house  reel  and  totter,  and  levelled  a  portion  of 
the  fort  with  the  dust.*  For  many  days  lesser  shocks 
of  earthquake  Icept  the  people  in  a  continued  state  of 
alarm.  The  prisoners  slept  in  the  open  court-yard, 
which  was  filled  with  their  beds ;  and  all  kinds  of  rude 
awnings  were  thrown  up  to  secure  a  little  privacy.  The 
cold  was  intense,  and  the  heavy  dews  saturated  the 
bedding  like  rain.  No  lives  were  sacrificed  within  the 
fort  by  this  great  convulsion  of  nature ;  but  narrow  was 

well,  and  very  much  so.*' — [MS,  Cor-  a  dense  cloud  of  dust,  which,  for  five 

respondence.']       "  The    despatch    of  or  six  seconds,  prevented  our  seeing 

these  private  letters  was  discovered  the  amount  of  injury  done.      The 

by  the   Sirdar,  who  is  said  to  have  walls  of  the  wood  cellar  fell  in.    The 

disarmed  all  the  prisoners  in  conse-  earth  around  us  was  giving  way ;  and 

quence  of  this  discovery." — [^Eyre."]  we  were  afraid  to  move  to  the  right 

*  ^^  February  \9. — At  about  eleven  or  left,  as  it  would  bring  us  within 

we  were  visited  by  the  most  fearful  range  of  the  walls  which  were  falling 

earthquake  within    the  memory   of  on  both  sides  of  us.     The  shock  haa 

any  man  in  this  country.     The  day  now    expended    itself.       The    dust 

was  beautifully   clear,   and  nothing  cleared  away.      And  we  then  saw 

indicated   the   approach  of   such   a  that  our  out-houses  and  the  roof  of 

visitation.     Most  of  us  were  inside  one  of  our  sleeping-rooms  tumbled 

our  rooms,  when  we  heard  a  heavy  in.      The  upper  parts  of  the  walls 

rumbling  noise,  as  of  thousands  of  were  down,  and  those  portions  which 

heavy  carriages.      This  was  imme-  still  remained  were    either  thrown 

diately   succeeded  by   a  heaving  of  out  of  their  perpendicular  or  had 

the  earth,  which  caused  a  rocking  of  large  rents  in  them.     God  grant  we 

the  walls,  and  made  us  all  rush  out  may  never  again  experience  such  a 

into  the  court-yard,  which  we  had  no  visitation.      On  the  shock  ceasing, 

sooner  entered  than  the  shock,  which  we  went  outside  the  fort,  and  frieht- 

had  ceased  for  an  instant,  again  came  ful  was  the  devastation.    The  whole 

on   with    a    hundred-fold  violence,  valley  was  one  cloud  of  dust.  Almost 

The  high  massive  walls,  by  which  eveir  part  had  been  either  wholly  or 

we  were  surrounded,  heaved  to  and  partially  destroyed — and  great  was 

fro  most  fearfully,  whilst  we,  for  se-  the  loss  of  life.     Even  mountains  did 

curity,  huddled  together  as  closely  as  not  escape ;    and  fearful  were   the 

we  possibly  could  in  the  centre  of  crashes  of  huge  rocks,  as  they  were 

the  square,  where  there  was  a  deep  precipitated  with  awful  violence  to 

wood  cellar.     All  of  a  sudden  there  the  plains  below.     We  had  shocks  at 

was  a  frightful  crash  around  us ;  and  least  a  dozen  times  during  the  day — 

the  earth  heaved  up  and  down  to  but  none  of  so  alarming  a  nature'as 

such  a  degree  that  we  could  scarcely  the  first." — [^Captain  Johnson's  NaV" 

stand.     The  crash  was  succeeded  by  rative  of  his  Captivity.   MS.\ 


492  THE  C-tVPTIVITY. 

the  escape  both  of  Lady  Sale  and  General  Elphinstone. 
The  former  was  on  the  house-top  when  the  shock  com- 
menced; and  had  scarcely  time  to  secure  a  footing  on  a 
safer  spot  when  the  roof  fell  in  with  a  crash.  The  poor 
old  Greneral  was  bed-ridden.  His  sufferings  had  been 
every  day  increasing.  He  had  been  wounded  on  the 
retreat.  His  constitutional  infirmities  had  been  a^ra- 
vated  both  by  the  external  hardships  to  which  he  had 
been  subjected,  and  the  corroding  anxieties  which  had 
preyed  upon  his  mind.  It  was  plain  to  all  that  his  end 
was  approaching.  But  he  bore  his  accumulated  suffer- 
ings with  heroic  fortitude ;  and  the  warmest  sympathies 
of  his  fellow-captives  were  with  him.  Unable  to  bestir 
himself,  when  the  walls  of  the  fort  were  shaken  by 
the  earthquake,  he  was  for  a  little  time  in  imminent 
peril ;  but  a  soldier  of  the  44th,  named  Moore,  who  had 
acted  as  the  General's  personal  attendant,  rushed  into 

the  room  and  carried  off  the  attenuated  old  man  in  his 
arms.     "  The  poor  General,"  says  Eyre,  who  records 

this  incident,  "  was  greatly  beloved  by  the  soldiery,  of 
whom  there  were  few  who  would  not  have  acted  in  a 
similar  manner  to  save  his  life." 

The  month  of  March  passed  quietly  over  the  heads  of 
the  captives.  There  was  little  to  mark  the  monotony 
of  prison-life.  Good  and  bad  tidings  came  in  by  turns. 
All  sorts  of  rumours  were  in  circulation,  and  all  were 
volubly  discussed.  About  the  middle  of  the  month,  the 
Nazir,  or  steward,  in  charge  of  the  prisoners,  announced 
that  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  was  willing  to  release  them 
all  for  two  lakhs  of  rupees.  The  proposition  was  made 
to  Captain  Johnson,  who  convened  a  meeting  of  the 
gentlemen.  The  offer  was  a  tempting  one,  and  it  might 
have  been  accepted;  but  Pottinger  protested  against  it. 
He  was  unwilling  to  aid  the  enemy  with  money  with- 
out the  express  sanction  of  his  government.  So  the 
Question  was  referred  to  Captain  Macgregor — and  in  the 


THE  SIRDAR  WOUNDED.  493 

mean  while  the  perils  which  beset  their  position  began 
to  thicken  around  them,*  Akbar  Khan  about  this  time 
was  wounded  by  the  accidental  discharge  of  a  match- 
lock in  the  hands  of  one  of  his  attendants ;  and  it  was 
generally  believed  throughout  the  country  that  Mac- 
gregor  had  bribed  the  man  to  assassinate  the  Sirdar. 
Had  the  wound  proved  mortal,  there  was  at  least  a  pos- 
sibility of  all  the  prisoners  being  massacred  in  revenge.f 
April  came; J  and  at  the  end  of  the  first  week  ar- 
rived the  glorious  tidings  of  Sale's  victory  over  Akbar 
ELhan  on  the  plain  of  Jellalabad.     Somewhat  confusedly 

*  March, — In  this  month  nothing  suspected  even  now — and  all  we  can 

of  any  consequence  occurred,  ex-  say  will  not  convince  the  people  to 

cept  that  up  to  the  20th  instant  not  the  contrary  —  that  Maogregor  did 

a  day  even  passed  without  one  or  offer  a  reward  for  the  assassination 

more  shocks  of  earthquake.    About  of  the  Sirdar.** — [Captain  JohnsofCt 

the  18th  I  received  a  message  from  Narrative  of  TUm  Captivity,    MS.  Re* 

the  Nazir  in  charge  of  us  that  Ma-  cordsj^ 

homed  Shah  Khan  would  release  the  %  The  1st  of  April  was  not  forgot- 

whole  of  us  for  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  ten.    It  is  a  curious  proof  of  the  ir- 

Made  this  known  to  the  gentlemen,  repressible  love  of  practical  joking 

Had  a  meeting,  at  which  most  of  us,  which  clings  to  our  countrymen  in 

or  in  fact  all,  agreed,  with  exception  all  places  and  in  all  situations,  that 

of  Major  Pottinser — ^who  was  averse  the  prisoners  in  Afghanistan,  on  the 

to  our  aiding  and  abetting  the  enemy  Ist  of  April,  turned  their  misfortunes 

with  money   for  our  ransom — that  into  food  for  a  joke.   Captain  Johnson 

Macgregor  should  be  written  to,  in  says:  ^^  April  1,1842.  Was  awakened 

order   to    ascertain    if  government    early  by  M telling  me  a  letter  had 

would  authorise  the  payment  of  the  been  received  by  L from  Mac- 
sum.  I  wrote  to  Burn,  asking  him  gregor  at  Jellalabad,  informing  him 
to  make  known  to  Macgregor  the  that  our  ransom  had  been  effected  for 
offer  that  had  been  made  to  me.  Re-  three  and  a  half  lakhs  of  rupees,  and 
ceivcd  for  reply  that  we  might  re-  that  we  were  to  start  in  five  or  six 
main  satisfied  government  would  not  days.  Was  up  in  an  instant — off"  to 
begrudge  any  sum  for  our  ransom.  L ;  and  heard  the  story  con- 
Nothing  further  has,  however,  been  firmed  by  him.  The  report  spread 
done." — [Captain  Johnson's  Naira-  through  the  whole  fort,  among  our 
live.    MS."]  servants  as  well  as  the  Europeans,  in 

f  ^*  About  the  middle  of  this  month  less  than  a  minute.    All  was  intense 

Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  while  mount-  delight;  when,  on  its  being  a  little 

inghishorse,  was  wounded  in  the  arm  sobered  down,  to  my  horror,  I  was 

by  a  musket-ball  by  one  of  his  own  told  that  the  story  was  all  fudge.    I 

servants,  who  was  immediately  seized  was  half  mad  with  rage  at  being  made 

and  burnt  alive.    It  is  ten  thousand  such  an  April  fool  of,  on  a  subject 

pities  the  man  had  not  taken  a  surer  which,  of  all  others  in  our  situation, 

aim,  although,  on  the  report  reaching  should  have  been  the  last  for  any  of 

us,  we  were  told  that  all  our  lives  our  party  to  have  expended  his  wit 

would  have  been   sacrificed   if  the  upon.'* — [Captain  Johnson's  Narrative 

Sirdar  had  been  killed.     And  it  is  o/his  Captioity,  MS."] 


494  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

was  the  story  told  at  first.  It  was  said  that  the  Sirdar 
had  been  killed  in  the  action ;  and  that  Mahomed  Shah 
Khan  had  also  fallen.  It  was  a  day  of  intense  ex- 
citement— of  painful  speculation  and  suspense.  Some 
thought  that  Sale  would  push  on  to  their  rescue — 
others,  that  the  Sirdar,  if  alive,  would  condemn  them  to 
death  in  revenge  for  his  discomfiture;  or  that,  if  he  had 
fallen,  they  would  be  massacred  by  their  guards.*  An- 
other day — and  another  of  doubt  and  anxiety  followed. 
The  captives  watched,  with  deep  and  fearful  interest, 
the  deportment  of  their  keepers,  who  were  seen  grouping 
together  and  conversing  in  low  mysterious  whispers. 
"  A  fnghtfiil  stillness  appeared  to  prevail/'  f  Then 
came  terrible  rumours  to  the  eflFect  that  the  captives  were 

*  "  Aj^  7.— Whilst  sitting  with  t  ''April  9.— The  whole  of  this  day 
the  Nazir  who  has  charge  of  us,  at  and  yesterday  passed  in  the  greatest 
about  half-past  one,  a  man  came  in  suspense.  Reports  reached  us  to-day 
great  haste  and  whispered  something  that  the  Sirdar  and  Mahomed  Sban 
in  his  car.  Without  sa3ring  a  word.  Khan  had  arrived  at  the  fort  of  the 
he  instantly  armed  himself  ca/)-a-pt«,  latter,  about  two  miles  distant  from 
and  went  out  of  the  fort.  All  was  us.  The  rout  of  the  Afghan  army 
surmise.  In  two  or  three  hours  a  appears  to  have  been  perfect,  and 
report  reached  us  of  the  total  defeat  we  hear  that  they  have  lost  all  their 
of  Mahomed  AkbarKhan*8  army  this  guns,  camp- equipage,  and  private 
morning  at  Jellalabad.  Some  said  property.  All  our  guard  appear  very 
the  Sirdar  was  killed — odiers,  [that  mysterious  —  group  together  —  and 
Mahomed  Shah  Khan  had  shared  the  talk  in  whispers.  The  mhabitants  of 
same  fate — whilst  a  third  party  gave  the  fort  have  removed  their  pro- 
out  that  they  had  both  fled  with  the  perty  and  lefl  their  homes.  Towards 
greatest  precipitation  towards  Cau-  the  afternoon,  several  of  our  guard, 
bul.  Of  the  authenticity  of  the  ru-  with  whom  we  had  been  in  the  habit 
moured  defeat  no  one  doubted.  Now  of  conversing,  and  who  had  always 
began  surmises  as  to  the  result  of  been  kind  to  us,  on  our  asking  them 
General  Sale's  victory  to  ourselves,  what  would  become  of  us,  would 
Would  he  push  on  to  our  release  ?  shake  their  heads  and  say,  *  You  are 
Fondly  did  we  hope  sol  Or  would  in  the  hands  of  Grod.'  A  frightful 
the  Sirdarjand  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  stillness  appeared  to  prevail.  By 
if  alive,  avenge  themselves  in  our  degrees  we  began  to  hear  fearful 
blood  for  the  ruin  of  all  their  hopes  rumours  that  we  were  all  to  be  mas- 
at  Jellalabad  ?  Or,  should  they  both  sacred  at  sunset.  Whether  these 
be  killed,  might  not  our  guard,  who  first  originated  in  the  imaginations 
were  devotemy  attached  to  Mahomed  of  some  of  our  party,  or  in  those  of 
Shah  Khan,  butcher  us  in  revenge  the  Afghans,  I  cannot  say  —  but 
for  his  death?  We  were  perfectly  knowing  the  revengeful  temper  of 
defenceless.  All  our  swords  and  pis-  those  in  whose  hands  we  were,  no- 
tols  had  long  been  taken  away  from  thing  appeared  to  us  more  probable ; 
tis.  Our  suspense  was  great.** — [Cap-  and  our  anxiety  and  suspense  in- 
tam  Johnson's  Narrative,    MS,]  creased  as  the  day  wore  on.     At 


ARRIVAL  OF  MAHOMED  SHAH  KHAN.  495 

to  be  massacred  at  sunset.  They  had  been  disarmed; 
they  had  neither  swords  nor  pistols — no  means  of  resist- 
ance were  within  their  reach.  They  could  only  sub- 
mit to  be  slaughtered  like  sheep  in  the  shambles.  But 
at  simset  their  fears  were  dissipated.  Mahomed  Shah 
Khan  arrived  with  a  large  party  of  followers.  He  went 
among  the  prisoners  with  frank  cordiality — civilly  shook 
hands  with  them  all — and  then  sate  down  and  entered 
into  conversation  with  them.  It  was  necessary,  he  said, 
that  they  should  be  removed  from  Budeeabad;  and 
that  they  should  commence  their  march  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  Not  a  hint  feU  from  him  regarding  their 
future  destination,  and  none  were  inclined  to  question 
him.  He  slept  that  night  in  the  fort ;  and  the  prisoners 
began  to  make  preparations  &t  the  morrow's  march. 
This  was  no  difficult  matter.  ^  All  my  worldly  goods/' 
wrote  Captain  Johnson,  '^  might  be  stowed  away  in  a 
towel." 

Morning  dawned ;  and  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  busied 
himself  in  the  work  of  plunder.*  There  was  still  some 
valuable  property  clinging  to  the  unhappy  captives. 
They  who  had  nothing  else  had  good  horses.  Lady 
Macnaghten  had  jewels  and  rich  shawls.  The  Ghilzye 
chief  helped  himself  freely.     Then,  utterly  ignorant  of 

about  sunset  a  report  was  brought  in  giving  us  any  hint  as  to  our  desti* 
that  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  was  on  his  nation ;  nor  had  any  of  us  inclina- 
way  to  yisit  us.  Even  this  was  a  re-  tion  to  ask  queitions  of  him.  Hit 
lief  to  us,  as  we  knew  that  what  would  will  is  law  to  us.  After  sitting  for 
happen  to  us  must  take  place  shortly,  some  time  he  wished  us  *'  Good  even- 
In  about  ten  minutes  he  arrived  with  ing,*  and  withdrew.  He  slept  in  the 
a  large  party  of  his  followers.  On  fort  that  night,  and  we  were  busy 
coming  up  to  ua,  our  alarms  were  at  making  preparations  for  the  mor- 
an  end  as  regarded  our  lives,  as  he  row^s  march.  These,  however,  were 
rej^arded  us  civilly,  and  shook  hands  shortly  at  an  end.  All  my  worldly 
with  the  whole  of  us.  We  all  sate  goods  and  chattels  might  be  stowed 
down  together.  He  entered  slightly  away  in  a  towel  or  a  handkerchief." 
into  the  defeat  of  the  day  before  — ICaptain  Johnson's  Narrative  of  Ma 
yesterday,  and  told  us  that  we  must  Captivity.  MS."] 
De  in  readiness  to  leave  Budeeabad  *  '^  April  lOih, — Up  at  daylight ; 
in  the  morning,  without,    howeyer,  had  a  cup  of  tea  and  was  ready  for 


496  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

the  direction  in  which  they  were  to  proceed,  the  anxious 
captives  started  for  their  new  prison-house.  Four 
camels,  with  litters,  were  assigned  to  the  ladies  and  such 
of  the  gentlemen  as  sickness  prevented  from  mounting 
the  ponies  which  had  been  parcelled  out  amongst  them. 
A  guard  of  fifty  Afghans,  horse  and  foot,  escorted  the 
little  band  of  prisoners  on  their  mysterious  march.  The 
European  soldiers  were  left  behind. 

They  had  not  proceeded  many  miles,  when  two  or 
three  horsemen  galloped  up,  and  the  party  of  captives 
were  suddenly  ordered  to  halt.  Tidings  had  come,  it 
was  said,  to  the  eflfect  that  Pollock  had  been  beaten 
back  in  the  Khybur  Pass,  with  the  loss  of  his  guns,  his 
treasure,  and  half  his  force.  Confident  of  the  truth  of 
this  atrocious  story,  the  Afghans  of  the  guard  broke  out 
into  loud  exultation,  and  the  English  officers,  reluctant 
as  they  were  to  beUeve  it,  were  overborne  at  last  by  the 
confidence  of  their  escort  and  compelled  to  credit  the 
distressing  news.  False  as  was  the  report,  it  was  not 
ineflfective.  The  prisoners  were  carried  back  to  Budeea- 
bad.  With  heavy  hearts  and  sad  countenances  they 
returned  to  their  old  prison-house,  thinking  of  the  new 

the  march.  Took  out  my  saddle  to  manded  her,  without  sending  anj 
put  on  mj  horse;  found  that  some  previous  message,  to  open  her  boxes, 
rascal  had  stolen  my  stirmps.  This  These  were  all  very  soon  ransacked ; 
was  soon  rectified  by  a  piece  of  rope,  and  shawls  and  jewels  to  the  amount 
As  I  was  about  saddling  my  horse,  of  near  two  lakhs  of  rupees  were 
which  was  a  good  Hissar-stud  animal,  taken  possession  of  by  this  chief  of 
Mahomed  Shah  E^an  sent  a  man  to  freebooters — politely  telling  her  lady- 
tell  me  that  this  was  to  be  his  pro-  ship  that  she  might  retain  one  or  two 
perty,  and  that  he  would  furnish  me  shawls  and  any  particular  jewel  for 
with  some  other  beast,  as  none  of  us  which  she  mi^ht  nave  more  value  than 
were  to  be  permitted  to  ride  horses  another,  ^lany  of  the  little  things 
for  fear  of  making  our  escape.  .  .  .  were  also  taken  possession  of  by  a 
In  the  mean  time,  Mahomed  Shah  young  whelp — the  worthy  son  of  so 
Khan,  having  heard  that  Lady  Mac-  worthy  a  sire.  Remonstrance  was 
naghten  was  possessed  of  a  great  useless.  About  9  a.m.  we  started; 
number  of  magnificent  shawls  and  but  still  without  the  slightest  know- 
valuable  jewels,  which  she  had  been  ledge  of  where  we  were  going." — 
so  lucky  as  to  have  saved  up  to  this  [Captain  Johnson's  Narrative  of  his 
time,   went    inside   and    coolly    de-  Captivity,    MS.'] 


MISERIES  OF  THE  MARCH.  497 

disasters  which  had  overtaken  their  unhappy  country. 
But  their  hearts  were  soon  reanimated,  and  their  faces 
soon  brightened  up,  by  the  news  which  greeted  them 
at  Budeeabad.  Pollock  had  not  been  beaten  back ;  but 
had  forced  the  Khybur  Pass,  and  was  marching  tri- 
umphantly upon  Jellalabad.  Again,  therefore,  the  cap- 
tive party  were  ordered  to  resume  their  interrupted 
march  ;  and  on  the  following  morning  again  they 
started. 

Proceeding  for  about  ten  miles,  **  through  a  bleak  and 
barren  country,"  they  came  upon  a  patch  of  cultivated 
ground— which  smiled  up  in  the  faces  of  the  prisoners 
like  an  oasis  in  the  desert.*  Crossing  the  river,  they 
overtook  Akbar  Khan,  sitting  in  a  palanquin,  his  arm 
in  a  sling,  looking  pale,  haggard,  and  dejected,  as  one 
whose  fortunes  were  not  on  the  ascendant.  They 
saluted  the  Sirdar,  passed  on,  and  halted  at  a  short  dis- 
tance from  him.  The  bivouac  was  a  comfortless  one. 
Strictly  guarded  and  insufficiently  sheltered,  they  passed 
the  night  in  dreary  discomfort.  Rain  fell,  and  under 
the  scanty  tents  there  was  not  room  for  the  bedding  of 
the  captives.  The  next  day  was  one  of  equal  misery — 
there  was  scarcely  any  food  either  for  man  or  beast. 
On  the  morning  of  the  13th  a  distressing  rumour  was 
current  among  them.  It  was  said  that  the  married 
families  were  to  be  carried  oflf  in  one  direction,  and  the 
other  captives  in  another.  The  scarcity  w%6  so  great — 
it  was  so  difficult  to  subsist  them  all  on  one  spot — that 
it  was  necessary  to  divide  the  party.  This  was  not  to 
be  submitted  to  without  an  effi3rt  to  obtain  the  recision 
of  the  obnoxious  order.  Lawrence  went  to  the  Sirdar, 
and  implored  him  to  suflfer  them  all  to  remain  together 
and  to  share  the  same  fate.  The  Sirdar  relented ;  and 
they  all  resumed  their  march  together. 

*  Captain  Johnson's  Narratm,   MS. 
VOL.  n.  2  K 


498  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

Their  route  lay  over  barren  hills  and  through  narrow 
stony  valleys.  Every  now  and  then  little  patches  of 
cultivation  sparkled  up  in  the  arid  waste.  Th«^  was 
little  or  no  food  to  be  obtained.  A  few  almonds  and 
raisins,  or  other  dried  fruits,  sufficed  to  appease  the 
hunger  of  the  captives,  whilst  their  horses  were  reduced 
to  skeletons.*  The  heat  was  intense.  The  burning 
sun  scorched  the  faces  of  the  European  travellers,  and 
peeled  oflf  the  white  skin.  The  journey  was  a  long  and 
painful  one,  up  a  steep  ascent  almost  along  the  whole 
line  of  march.  The  prisoners  knew  not  whither  they 
were  going;  and  it  seemed  that  Akbar  Khan  did  not 
know  where  to  take  them.  Some  of  the  captives  were 
suflFering  severely.  The  bad  roads  and  the  vicissitudes 
of  the  climate,  for  heavy  rains  followed  the  parching 
sun,  tried  them  as  in  a  fiimace.  Greneral  Elphinstone 
was  dying.  Lady  Macnaghten  and  Lady  Sale  were 
sick.  When  Akbar  Khan  was  made  aware  of  the  latter 
fact,  he  took  compassion  on  the  English  ladies.  He  was 
still  weak,  and  suflFering  from  the  eflFects  of  his  wound; 
but  he  gave  up  the  palanquin,  or  litter  in  which  he  had 
been  carried,  for  their  use ;  and  rode  on  horseback  to 
the  end  of  the  march. 

This  was  on  the  19th  of  April.  On  the  evening  of 
that  day  the  prisoners  reached  Tezeen,  and  were  con- 
ducted to  a  fort  belonging  to  a  petty  Ghilzye  chief,  in 
which  were  |dl  the  wives  and  women  of  Mahomed  Shah 
Khan.  There  they  remained,  poorly  acconmiodated  and 
scantily  fed,  until  the  22nd,  when,  with  the  exception  of 
Greneral  Elphinstone  and  two  or  three  other  invalids, 

*  **  I  fell  in  on  the  line  of  march/'  times  a  piece  of  bread,  and  at  others 

writes  Captain  Johnson,  **  with  some  some  almonds  and  rabins ;  and  all, 

Afghan  or  other  who  knew  me  in  without  exception,  that  I  come  acroes 

former  days  at  Caubul,  or  who  were  are  civil  ana  courteous,  and  seem 

in  public  employ  under  me,  who  were  really  to  sympathise  with  our  mb- 

very  liberal  m  offering  to  me  some-  fortunes."— [ikCSw  Narrative.^ 


DEATH  OF  GENERAL  ELFHINSTONE.        499 

they  were  all  carried  oflf  in  the  direction  of  the  hills,  up 
a  gradual  ascent  of  many  thousands  of  feet,  to  a  place 
called  Zanda.  There  they  halted  for  some  weeks,  and 
in  the  mean  while  Captain  Mackenzie  was  despatched  to 
Pollock's  camp  at  Jellalabad ;  and  Greneral  Elphinstone 
died. 

By  his  fellow-captives  his  dissolution  had  long  been 
anticipated,  and  was  now  hardly  deplored.  Death 
brought  him  a  merciful  release  from  an  accumulation  of 
mortal  sufferings.  Incessant  pain  of  body  and  anguish 
of  mind  had  long  been  his  portion.  He  felt  acutely  the 
humiliating  position  into  which  it  had  pleased  Provi- 
dence to  cast  him,  and  neither  hoped  nor  wished  to  live 
to  face  his  countrymen  in  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 
They  who  watched  beside  the  poor  old  man,  during  the 
painful  close  of  his  life,  bear  testimony,  in  touching 
language,  to  the  Christian  fortitude  with  which  he 
bore  his  sufferings,  and  the  Christian  charity  with 
which  he  spoke  of  others,  under  all  the  burdens 
which  pressed  upon  him.*  The  hardships  to  which 
he  had  been  subjected  on  the  march  from  one 
prison-house  to  another  had,  perhaps,  accelerated  the 
crisis  which  was  hanging  over  him;  but  he  had  long 
been  passing  away  to  his  rest,  and  they,  who  loved  him 
most,  scarcely  desired  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the 
maladies  which  were  so  surely  destroying  him.  He 
lefl  on  record  a  statement  of  all  the  drcumsrtances  of  our 
disasters — a  statement  which  I  have  freely  quoted  in  a 

*  "  It  is  due  no  less  to  the  memory  who  witnessed  his  prolonged  snffer- 

of  the  dead  than  to  the  large  cirde  of  ings  and  his  dying  struggles,  and  who 

living  friends  and  relatives,  who,  I  regarded  him  as  the  victim  less  of 

feel    assured,    will  mourn  his  loss,  his  own  faults  than  of  the  errors  of 

that  I  should  record  him  to  the  very  others,  and  the  unfathomable  designs 


ed  a  measure  of  Christian  benevolence,  the  means  are  always  adapted  to  the 

patience,  and  hi^h-souled  fortitude,  end.** — ^Eyre.]    See  also  Tottinger'f 

which  gained  hun  the    affectionate  evidence;  quoted, an/e,  pages  179-180, 

regard  and  affectionate  esteem  of  aU  note. 

2k2 


500  THE  CAPTrVTTY. 

preceding  part  of  my  narrative — but  evea  with  this 
statement  in  his  hand,  he  could  not  have  faced  his 
countrymen  without  bringing  down  upon  himself  a 
verdict  of  condemnation.  After  all  that  has  been 
written  of  his  deficiencies  at  Caubul,  it  may  seem  a 
startling  inconsistency  to  say  that  he  was  a  brave  and 
high-minded  gentleman.  He  was  so  esteemed  before,  in 
an  evil  hour  for  his  own  and  his  country's  reputation, 
he  was  ordered  to  carry  his  infirmities  across  the  Indus ; 
and  in  spite  of  all  the  humiliating  circumstances  of  our 
discomfiture  at  Caubul,  posterity  may  so  esteem  him. 
Not  upon  him,  but  upon  those  who  are  responsible  for 
his  appointment  to  high  military  conmiand  at  such  a 
time  and  in  such  a  place — firstly,  upon  those  who  sent 
him  to  India ;  secondly,  and  chiefly,  upon  those  who  sent 
him  to  Afghanistan — must  we  fix  the  shame  of  this 
great  miscarriage.  When  he  consented  to  leave  the 
quiet  enjoyment  of  an  honoured  old  age  at  home  to 
carry  his  good  fame  and  his  broken  constitution  to  a 
distant  Indian  Presidency,  he  committed  a  fatal  error, 
for  which  he  made  terrible  atonement.  But  thero  are 
few  who  will  not  pity  rather  than  condemn  the  man, 
who  found  himself  suddenly,  with  all  his  weakness  upon 
him,  in  a  sea  of  difficulty  which  demanded  almost  super- 
human strength  to  bufiet  through  it.  In  these  pages  he 
has  appeared  only  as  the  military  leader — as  one  who, 
in  the  hour  of  danger,  was  tried  and  found  wanting. 
His  fine  social  qualities  cannot  be  accepted  as  a  set-oflf 
to  his  military  deficiencies.  It  is  not  to  be  pleaded  in 
answer  to  the  charge  of  having  sacrificed  an  army  at 
Caubul,  that  he  was  an  agreeable  gentleman  in  private 
life,  that  he  was  always  ready  with  an  anecdote  and 
told  it  well,  and  that  it  was  very  hard  not  to  love  him. 
But  now  that  it  has  been  recorded  how  the  soldier  be- 
came the  captive,  and  how  the  captive  passed  away  to 


GENERAL  ELPHINSTONE.  501 

his  rest,  these  things  may  be  set  down  with  a  kindly 
hand  upon  the  last  page  which  bears  his  name ;  and  it 
may  be  permitted  to  us,  for  a  little  space,  to  forget  the 
deficiencies  of  the  soldier  whilst  we  sympathise  with 
the  sufferings  of  the  man.* 

*  Greneral  Elplun8tone*s  remains  deputed  one  of  their  number  to  learn 
were  sent  by  Akbar  Khan,  for  inters  the  truth.  The  Sirdar  is  much 
ment,  to  Jellalabad.  The  General's  grieved  at  the  accident,  and  now 
faithAil  servant,  Moore,  accompanied  sends  a  party,  with  private  Moore, 
the  body.  ^*  I  have  the  honour  to  the  General's  servant,  to  replace  the 
inform  you,"  wrote  Pottinger  to  Pol-  corpse  and  forward  it  on.  The  Sir- 
lock,  on  the  26th  of  April,  *^  that  dar  at  present  is  unable  to  release 
Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  yesterday  the  two  servants  from  the  hostility  of 
despatched  to  you  the  body  of  the  the  intermediate  clans ;  but  he  pro- 
late Major-General  Elphinstone.  It  mises  to  do  so  as  soon  as  a  person 
was,  however,  intercepted  by  a  part^  may  arrive  sufficiently  powerful  to 
of  the  Ghilzyes,  under  the  supposi-  protect  them." — {^Major  Pottinger  to 
tion  that  the  Prince  in  Gaubul  had  General  Pollock :  Castle  of  A/zool 
sent  it,  the  party  made  prisoners,  and  Khan,  Tezeen,  April  26, 1842.  MS. 
the  European  servant,  who  had  been  Becords."]  The  GeneraPs  remains  sub- 
allowed  to  accompany  it,  wounded,  sequently  reached  Jellalabad,  and 
The  savages,  however,  on  hearing  that  were  interred  with  military  honours. 
Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  sent  it, 


502  STODDABT  AISD  CGNOLLT. 


CHAPTER  V. 

[December:  1841— Jane:  1842.] 

• 

Stoddart  and  Conolly— Intelligence  of  the  Caubnl  Outbreak — ^Arrest  of  the 
English  Officers — ^Their  sufferings  in  Prison — Conolly's  Letters  and 
Journals — Death  of  the  Prisoners. 

There  is  a  painful  episode  in  this  epic  of  the  Afghan 
war,  which  perhaps  can  be  introduced  in  no  place 
more  fitly  than  in  this.  Whilst  the  prisoners,  who 
surrendered  themselves  on  the  march  between  Caubul 
and  Jellalabad,  were  suffering  such  hardships  only  as 
were  inseparable  from  their  position  in  a  rude  and 
inhospitable  country,  and  the  hostages  at  Caubul  were 
under  the  protection  of  a  benevolent  and  high-minded 
Afghan  nobleman,  two  enlightened  and  chivalrous  British 
officers  were  enduring  imparalleled  sufferings  in  the  dun- 
geons of  an  Oosbeg  tjrrant,  far  beyond  the  snowy  moim- 
tains  of  the  Hindoo-Koosh.  Colonel  Stoddart  and  Cap- 
tain ConoUy  were  being  devoured  by  vermin  in  a  cheer- 
less prison  in  the  city  of  Bokhara. 

It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  month  of  December,  1841, 
that  intelligence  reached  Bokhara  to  the  effect  that  all 
Caubul  and  the  surrounding  country  had  risen  against 
Shah  Soojah  and  his  Feringhee  allies, 'that  Sir  Alex- 


IMFRISONMBMT  OF  THE  ENGLISH  0FFICEB8.  508 

ander  Bumes  had  been  killed,  and  the  British  troops 
beaten  in  battle.  A  few  days  before,  an  answer  had 
been  received  to  a  letter  addressed  by  the  Ameer  to  the 
Queen  of  England.  The  answer  was  written  by  the 
Foreign  SecrSaxy,  and  it  referred  the  King  to  the  Go- 
vemment  of  India.  This  indignity— for  so  he  regarded 
it — ^was  still  rankling  in  his  mind,  when  tidings  of  the 
Caubul  outbreak  reached  Bokhara.  The  Ameer  now 
sent  for  the  English  officers — asked  them  many  ques* 
tions — said  that  he  would  release  Colonel  Stoddaft  but 
detain  Captain  Conolly;  and  finally,  after  pondering  the 
matter  for  a  few  days,  condemned  them  both  to  im- 
prisonment in  the  house  of  the  Topshee-Bashee,  or  chief 
artilleryman  of  Bokhara.* 

Here  their  condition  became  every  day  more  deplor- 
able. They  were  not  allowed  a  change  of  raiment,  and 
the  clothes  rotted  on  their  backs.  Nauseous  vermin 
preyed  upon  their  bodies,  and  they  tore  the  irritated 
flesh  with  their  nails.  They  were  not  denied  either  a 
sufficiency  of  food  or  firing ;  but  water  leaked  through 
the  roof  of  the  miserable  room  in  which  they  were  con^ 
fined.  Cold  and  fever  racked  them  grievously;  but  they 
comforted  one  another  with  Christian  consolation,  and 
they  prayed  together  to  the  Christian's  God. 

In  this  wretched  prison-house,  though  strictly  guarded, 


*  ^  The  Ameer  was  very  much  guppoBing  he  (the  Ameer)  was  wili- 

enraged  at  finding  that  the  Queen  ing  to  release  him.    The  Colonel  sud 

had  not  answered  his  letter ;  but  had  he  could  go  either  bj  Russia  or  Persia, 

referred  Colonel  Stoddart  to  the  In-  The  Ameer  said  he  would  release  him 

dian  Government,  for  all  matters  con-  in  seven  or  eight  days,  and  keep  Cap- 

nected  with  Bokhara.     About  five  tain  Conolly.    A  few  days  aflerwards 

dajs  after  this,  intelligence  was  re-  the  English  gentlemen  were  sent  for 

ceived  that  Sir  Alexander  Bumes  to  the  palace  and  confined.** — [5^a/e- 

had  been  murdered  at  Caubul,    On  ment  of  Shah  Mahomed^  Populzye^  one 

the  receipt  of  Uiis  intelligence  a  ser-  of  Captain  ConoUtfs  attendants,  MS. 

vant  of  uie  Ameer  was  sent  to  call  jRecordsJ]   This  part  of  the  statement 

the  two  gentlemen  to  his  presence,  is  entirely  confirmed  by  that  of  Saleh 

The  Ameer  asked  Colonel  Stoddart  Mahomed,  Akhondzadeh,  as  taken  by 

which  road  he  could  now  take,  even  Colonel  SheiL 


504  8T0DDABT  AND  CONOLLT. 

they  were  not  so  closely  watched  that  Conolly  could  not 
contrive  to  spend  many  an  hour  chronicling,  in  small 
characters  upon  Russian  paper,  all  the  incidents  of 
captive  life,  and  drawing  up,  for  the  information  of  his 
government,  elaborate  memoranda  on  the  politics  of 
Central  Asia.  In  spite  of  all  difficulties  of  transmission, 
many  of  these  notes  and  memoranda  found  their  way 
from  Bokhara  to  Caubul;  and,  surviving  all  the  chances 
of  destruction  to  which  the  convulsed  state  of  A%han- 
istan  necessarily  exposed  them,  were  conveyed  in  safety 
to  the  British  camp,  and  are  now  l3ring  before  me.*  In 
no  way  could  the  suflferings  which  the  Bokhara  captives 
endured  be  set  forth  so  truthfully  as  in  extracts  from 
such  of  ConoUy's  letters  and  journals  as  have  fortunately 
been  preserved. 

The  English  officers  must  have  been  thrown  into 
prison  about  the  17  th  of  December.  At  the  end  of 
that  month,  or  on  the  first  day  of  the  new  year,  Allah- 
dad  Khan,  the  Caubul  envoy,  was  brought  in  to  share 
their  captivity.f  "  The  Topshee-Bashee,  on  leaving  Al- 
lahdad  Khan  with  us,"  wrote  Conolly  in  his  journal, 
"  made  over  to  me  a  superfluous  posteenX  belonging  to 
my  friend,  which  enabled  me  to  throw  aside  the  stink- 
ing garment  given  by  the  Meer  [  ]§;  this  and  his 
allowing  AUahdad  Khan  to  keep  the  rest  of  his  clothes, 
looked  as  if  the  Ameer  had  somewhat  relented,  as  the 
Topshee-Bashee  would  not  have  dared  to  show  us  so 
much  kindness  without  leave."    But  these  hopes  were 

*  Some  of  these  papers,  written  in  the  same  apartment  with  Stoddart 

closely  on  every  side,  had  been  cut  and  ConoUj,  but  was  subsequently 

into  tnree  pieces,  and  apparently  sent  remoyed  to  other  quarters.    Tne  ser- 

by  as  many  messengers.  yants  of  the  latter  officer  were  also 

t  AUahdad  Khan,  the  Afghan  en-  thrown  into  prison — some  of  them 

yoy,  who  accompanied  Captain  Co-  into  the  well,  or  lo^-house,  in  which 

nolly,  had  been  permitted  to  take  his  Stoddart  had  been  mcarcerated. 

departure    from   Bokhara,  but  was  X  -^  Afghan  oyer-coat. 

afterwards  brought  back  and  con-  §  Obscure  in  MS. 
finedf    He  remamed  for  some  days 


GLEAMS  OF  HOPE.  505 

delusive.    The  Ameer  had  not  relented.    Day  after  day 
passed,  and  their  sufferings  increased. 

All  through  the  month  of  January  little  change  took 
place  in  the  condition  of  the  captives.  On  the  last  day 
of  the  month,  wrote  ConoUy,  "a  Mehnim  came  to 
desire  that  we  would  minutely  describe  the  city  and 
castle  of  Caubul,  and  also  give  an  account  of  Heraut. 
AUahdad  Khan  drew  a  plan  of  the  first  place ;  Stoddart 
was  named  as  the  one  who  best  knew  the  second ;  but 
the  Mehrum  did  not  take  his  account  of  it.  We  next 
day  learnt  that  he  had  been  sent  to  tlie  Akhond- 
zadeh,*  who  had  drawn  a  large  plan  of  his  native  city." 
As  February  wore  on,  other  encouraging  signs  of  the 
Ameer's  desire  to  treat  the  prisoners  with  greater  kind- 
ness presented  themselves.  On  the  9th  of  February 
another  gleam  of  hope  burst  in  upon  them.  The  inci- 
dent is  thus  touchingly  described  in  ConoUy's  journal: 

February  9  [1842], — Moolla  Nasir  came  to  ask  if  we  had 
seen  the  Peacock  throne  of  India.  As  every  lettered  Asiatic 
should  know  that  Nadir  Shah  carried  that  throne  away  to  Persia, 
and  Moolla  Nasir's  manner  was  pointedly  kind^  we  judged  that 
the  question  he  had  been  sent  to  ask  was  a  pretence,  and  that  the 
Ameer  desired  an  opening  for  a  return  to  proper  treatment  of  us. 
Stoddart,  therefore,  gave  him  this,  by  speaking  of  his  position 
here  as  British  agent,  and  expressing  regret  that  he  had  not  been 
able  to  relieve  the  Huzrut's  mind  from  the  doubts  which  he 
seemed  to  entertain  of  the  English  Government's  friendship.  We 
showed  the  sad  state  of  our  clothes  (Stoddart  had  been  obUged  to 
put  aside  his  shirt  in  consequence  of  the  roofs  having  leaked 
over  him  the  night  before),  and  expressed  hope  that  the  Ameer 
would  soon  improve  our  condition;  but  we  both  spoke  cheer- 
fully, that  the  King  might  not  think  we  entertained  resentment 
for  his  treatment  of  us.t 

*  Saleh  Mahomed,  the  Akhond-  which  are  confirmed  in  many  parti- 
zadeh,  made  a  similar  statement  to  culars  by  the  accounts  of  otoer  wit- 
Colonel  Sheil.    I  see  no  reason  to  nesses. 
doubt  the  statements  of  this  man,  f  Arikur  Conolhfs  MS.  Journal 


506  STODDABT  AND  CONOLLY. 

A  Susfidan  Mission  was  th^i  at  Bokhara,  under  the 
charge  of  Colonel  Bontenoff,  who  seems  to  have  been  in 
higher  favour  than  the  English  gentlemen ;  and  to  have 
greatly  pitied  their  condition.*  On  the  16th  of  February 
the  prisoners  despatched  a  letter  to  them,  by  the  hancb 
of  one  of  their  dependents,  known  as  Long  Joseph,  whose 
exploits  are  thus  recorded: 

February  15. — ^This  day  Long  Joseph  gallantly  darted  into  our 
room,  and  carried  off  a  note  which  we  had  written  for  Colonel 
Bontenoff,  to  inform  him  of  our  situation. 

February  16. — Long  Joseph  having  won  a  servant  of  theTopshee- 
Bashee'Sy  conveyed  to  us  a  note  from  the  gaoler,  and  sent  it  to 
him;  Stoddart  writing  to  government  through  Sir  J.  McNeill. 

'  All  the  symptoms  of  a  favorable  change  in  the  state  of 
the  Ameer's  feelings  proved  delusive.  Day  after  day  passed, 
and  the  prisoners  still  remained  in  the  same  imhappy 
condition;  at  last,  at  the  end  of  February,  ConoUy  wrote: 

We  hoped  from  Moolla  Nasir's  visit,  and  that  of  the  page,  who 
brought  my  thermometer,  that  the  Ameer  was  relenting,  but 
nothing  has  since  occurred  to  favour  this  idea;  on  the  contrary^ 
the  chief  would  appear  to  find  pleasure  in  his  servant's  accounts 
of  our  discomfort,  which  may  be  imagined  from  the  fact  that  we 
have  now  been  seventy-one  days  and  nights  without  means  of 
changing  or  washing  our  linen,  which  is  hanging  in  filthy  tatters 
from  our  persons.  The  Topshee-Bashee,  who  looks  in  upon  us 
every  seven  or  eight  days,  replies  to  our  entreaties  for  an  im- 
provement in  this  respect,  that  our  state  must  be  well  known  to 
the  Huzruty  whose  mind  retains  thought  of  the  greatest  and  least 
matters^  and  that  nothing  can  be  said  to  his  Majesty  about  us  till  he 
opens  the  subject.  The  Topshee-Bashee  has,  I  believe,  been  as 
kind  to  us  as  he  has  dared  to  be.  We  have  had  quite  enough  firing 
and  food  throughout  the  cold  season  we  have  passed  in  his  housei 

*  Colonel    Stoddart    had    inter-  time  from  the  Russian  Government 

changed  visits  with  them  before  Co-  who  came  twice  to  see  the  English 

noUy  s  arrival.   Shah  Mahomed  savs :  gentlemen,  who  also  visited  him."— • 

*^  Tnere  was  an  ambassador  at  this  \MS.  EecordsJ] 


conoixy's  lettebs  to  his  bbotheb.  507 

and  continue,  thank  God  I  in  good  health.  We  sometimes  think, 
from  the  Ameer's  keeping  back  Said's  and  the  Akhondzadeh's 
packets,  that  he  must  have  zeceived  the  Grovemor-Generars  com- 
munication, and  that  he  is  acting  big  in  irritation  at  not  having 
been  answered  from  the  English  throne ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  form 
certain  conclusions  from  his  conduct,  for  it  is  very  often  influenced 
by  caprice,  which  is  not  very  far  from  madness.  We  hope  that 
aU  is  well  in  Afghanistan,  and  that,  soon  as  the  Hindoo-Koosh 
roads  become  open,  the  Ameer  will  receive  some  commimi- 
cation  which  will  induce  him  to  properly  treat  or  dismiss  us. 
We  beg  that  government  will  convey  its  sentiments  to  the 
Ameer  in  Persian,  as  he  will  not  take  our  word  for  what  is 
written  in  English  any  longer  than  it  suits  him,  and  also  that  no 
allusion  may  be  made  to  the  above  details,  for  if  the  King  knew 
that  we  were  able  to  send  intelligence  he  might  treat  us  worse,, 
and  perhaps  kill  everybody  about  us.  The  Russians  propose  to  go 
about  No-roz.  We  kept  Oolonel  BontenofT  informed  of  our  pro* 
ceedings  up  to  the  date  of  our  seizure,  and  if  he  should  reach 
Europe  ere  our  release  he  may  be  able  to  enlarge  this  abstract, 
which  is  necessarily  very  imperfect. 

In  the  second  week  of  March,  Conolly's  sufferings 
broke  out  openly  in  the  shape  of  cold  and  fever.  En- 
feebled and  irritated  by  disease,  he  then  began  to  de- 
spond. It  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  in  the  toils  of 
death;  and  in  a  high  state  of  excitement,  after  many 
sleepless  nights,  he  wrote  to  his  brother,  John  ConoUy, 
then  also  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  a  Mussulman  enemy, 
the  following  touching  letter  : 

From  our  FriBon  in  the  Bokhara  Citadel* 
11th  March,  1842. 

My  deab  John, 

This  will  probahly  be  my  last  note  hence,  so  I  dedicate  it 
to  you,  who  now,  alas!  stand  next  to  me.  We  both  dedicate 
everything  we  feel  warmest  to  William,  whom  may  God  bless  in 
all  belonging  to  him,  for  his  long  and  untiring  brotherly  affection 
to  us  all !  Send  my  best  love  to  Henry  and  to  all  our  dear 
sisters. 

This  is  the  eighty-third  day  that  we  have  been  denied  the 
means  of  getting  a  change  of  linen  from  the  rags  and  vermin 


508  STODDABT  AND  CONOLLY. 

that  cover  us;  and  yesterday,  when  we  begged  for  an  amend- 
ment in  this  respect,  the  Topshee-Bashee,  who  had  before  come 
occasionally  as  our  host  to  speak  encouragingly,  set  his  face  like 
a  flint  to  our  request,  showing  that  he  was  merely  a  vane  to  the 
withering  wind  of  his  heartless  master,  and  could  not  help  us 
thus,  so  that  we  need  not  ask  him  to  do  so.  This,  at  first, 
astonished  and  defeated  us;  we  had  viewed  the  Ameer's  conduct 
as  perhaps  dictated  by  mad  caprice;  but  now,  looking  back  upon 
the  whole,  we  saw  instead  that  it  had  been  just  the  deliberate 
malice  of  a  demon,  questioning  and  raising  our  hopes,  and  ascer- 
taining our  condition,  only  to  see  how  our  hearts  were  going  on 
in  the  process  of  breaking.  I  did  not  think  to  shed  one  warm 
tear  among  such  cold-blooded  men,  but  yesterday  evening,  as  I 
looked  upon  Stoddart's  half-naked  and  nail-lacerated  body,  con- 
ceiving that  I  was  the  special  object  of  the  king's  hatred  because 
of  my  having  come  to  him  after  visiting  Kbiva  and  Kokund, 
and  told  him  that  the  British  Government  was  too  great  to  stir 
up  secret  enmity  against  any  of  its  enemies,  I  wept  on  entreat- 
ing one  of  our  keepers,  the  gunner's  brother,  to  have  conveyed 
to  the  chief  my  humble  request  that  he  would  direct  his  anger 
upon  me,  and  not  further  destroy  by  it  my  poor  brother  Stoddart, 
who  had  suffered  so  much  and  so  meekly  here  for  three  years. 
My  earnest  words  were  answered  by  a  "  Don't  cry  and  distress 
yourself;"  he  also  could  do  nothing.  So  we  turned  and  kissed 
each  other,  and  prayed  together,  and  then  said,  in  the  words  of 
the  Kokunders,  "  Mybiah  !"*  Let  him  do  as  he  likes !  he  is  a 
demon,  but  God  is  stronger  than  the  devil  himself,  and  can  cer- 
tainly release  us  &om  the  hands  of  this  fiend,  whose  heart  he  has 
perhaps  hardened  to  work  out  great  ends  by  it;  and  we  have 
risen  again  from  bed  with  hearts  comforted,  as  if  an  angel  had 
spoken  to  them,  resolved,  please  God,  to  wear  our  English 
honesty  and  dignity  to  the  last,  within  all  the  filth  and  misery 
that  this  monster  may  try  to  degrade  us  with. 

We  hope  that,  though  the  Ameer  should  now  dismiss  us  with 
gold  clothing,  the  British  and  Afghan  Governments  will  treat 
him  as  an  enemy;  and  this  out  of  no  feeling  of  revenge.  He 
treacherously  caused  Stoddart  to  invite  me  here  on  his  own 
Imayut-Nameh;  and  after  Stoddart  had  given  him  a  translation 
of  a  letter  from  Lord  Palmerston,  containing  nothing  but  friendly 

^  Obscure  in  MS. 


conolly's  letters  to  ms  brother.  509 

assurances,  which  he  could  have  verified,  with  our  entire  consent^ 
at  the  Russian  embassy,  he  pent  us  both  up  here,  because  we 
would  not  pay  him  as  a  kidnapper  for  our  release,  to  die  by  slow 
rot,  if  it  should  appear  that  he  might  venture  at  last  to  put  us 
altogether  out  of  the  way.  We  hope  and  pray  that  God  may 
forgive  him  his  sins  in  the  next  world ;  but  we  also  trust  that 
some  human  power  will  soon  put  him  down  from  his  oppressive 
throne  at  this  capital,  whence  emanates  the  law  by  which  the 
IQiivans  harry  and  desolate  the  roads  and  homes  of  the  Persians. 
He  wishes  every  soul  to  crouch  before  him,  and  not  breathe  God's 
air  freely  without  his  leave,  nor  dare  to  be  happy  or  at  ease.  For 
instance  (and  wc  are  at  the  fountain-head  of  police  report),  a 
poor  wretch,  confined  without  food  for  three  days  and  nights  in 
the  Bug  House,  an  infernal  hole  used  for  severe  imprisonment, 
said  incautiously,  on  being  taken  out,  that  he  was  alive  and  welL 
'^  He  is,  is  he?"  said  the  Ameer,  on  the  report ;  ''  then  put  him 
in  for  three  dajrs  and  nights  more."  Again,  the  other  night 
fifty-six  grooms  assembled  at  a  house  outside  the  city,  to  make 
merry  on  pilau  and  tea,  with  money  liberally  given  by  one  of  the 
Oosbeg  men,  Rahman  Kool  Tohsaba,  to  his  head-groom,  who 
acted  as  master  of  the  feast:  they  were  convicted  of  having  got 
together,  so  all  that  the  police-master  could  seize  received  seventy- 
five  blows  each  on  the  back  with  a  heavy  thorn-stick ;  and  be- 
cause one  man  uncomplainingly  bore  his  punishment,  which  was 
inflicted  on  all  before  the  King,  he  had  him  hoisted  for  seventy- 
five  more,  saying,  **  He  must  have  been  struck  softly.'^  '*  But  what 
was  the  crime  in  this  innocent  meeting  of  poor  grooms?"  we  asked 
our  gaolers.  "  Who  knows? — he  is  a  king,  and  gave  the  order." 
The  master  of  the  entertainment  stood  with  his  dagger  against 
some  thirty  policemen,  till  he  was  felled  by  a  stone  thrown  at  his 
head,  to  let  all  who  could  escape ;  for  this  heavier  ofience  he  was 
condemned  to  be  thrown  from  a  part  of  the  citadel  wall,  which 
gives  a  culprit  a  chance  of  escape  with  only  the  fracture  of  a 
limb,  because  it  has  a  slope:  he  threatened  to  pull  down  with  him 
any  who  should  approach  the  brink  to  throw  him  off,  and,  leap- 
ing boldly  down,  came  to  the  ground  with  whole  bones,  and 
lives,  let  us  hope,  for  many  a  happy  meeting  yet  with  his  friends 
in  this  now  oppressed  city.  This  is  how  the  Ameer  would  treat 
such  ambassadors  as  he  dares  insult,  who  do  not  bend  reverently 
enough  before  him ;  but  the  days  for  such  despotism  are  passing 


510  STODDABT  AND  CONOLLY. 

quick,  and  hd  must  himflelf  be  made  to  go  down  before  ihe  strong 
spirit  of  Western  civilisation.  Stoddart  has  asked  me  to  put  on 
paper  my  notions  as  to  the  measures  that  should  now  be  adopted 
for  the  settlement  and  independent  happiness  of  the  Central 
Asian  states; — here  they  are,  briefly  and  freely;  those  of  a  man 
bom  and  bred,  thank  Gbdl  in  Protestant  England,  who  has 
seen  Bussia,  Persia,  and  A%hanistan,  and  all  the  three  Oosb^ 
States. 

Turn  out  the  horrible  Wuzeer  Tar  Mahomed  Ehan,  who  has 
sold  12,000  men,  women,  and  children,  since  he  obliged  the  Per- 
sians to  retire  from  Herat,  and  buy  out  Kamran's  femily  from 
that  principality.  Eamran  himself  forfeited  all  his  kingly  right 
here  by  his  letter  to  the  Ehan  Huzrut  of  Khiva,  which  ihe  latter 
chief  gave  me  in  return  for  my  frank  commimication  to  him,  and 
which  I  sent  to  Sir  William  Macnaghten.  Thus  will  be  gained 
the  only  point  from  which  the  Afghcm  nation  can  lend  its  weight 
to  the  preservation  of  peace  and  the  advancement  of  civilisation 
in  Toorkistan,  protect  its  weakest  subjects  horn  being  stolen  or 
sold  away,  and  properly  guard  its  own  and  India's  firontier.  Next, 
let  Pottinger  come  in  attendance  upon  Shah  Soojah's  heir-appa- 
rent, Shah-zadah  Timour,  with  a  few  thousand  select  Afghan 
horsemen  of  both  the  tribes,  half  Douranee  and  half  Ghilzye,  to 
blow  down  the  gate  of  the  citadel,  which  imjustly  imprisoned  us, 
against  the  rights  of  all  nations,  except  those  the  Oosbegs  profess. 
The  Ameer  scomfrilly  says  that  the  Afghans  and  English  are  one 
people ;  let  him  feel  that  they  really  are  so  in  a  good  cause.  I 
really  do  believe  that  if  Shah-zadah  Timour  were  to  return,  after 
such  a  proceeding,  to  assume  the  actual  exercise  of  government  at 
his  father's  capital,  taking  back  with  him  all  real  Afghans  now 
enslaved  in  Toorkistan,  whose  orthodoxy,  according  to  the 
Soonees,  is  unquestionable,  and  who  might  easily  be  collected  for 
a  friendly  oflering,  the  Afghans  would  so  thoroughly  like  him  and 
understand  us,  that  every  English  and  Indian  soldier  might  be 
withdrawn  to  Hindostan. 

Let  the  Shah-i-Shah  of  Persia  at  the  same  time  write  these  few 
words  to  the  Court  of  the  faithful  at  Bokhara,  sending  copies  of 
his  letter  by  friendly  and  high  ambassadors  to  Khiva  and  Kokund : 
'*  I  want  all  my  enslaved  subjects  who  are  not  willing  to  remain 
in  Bokhara,  and  I  am  now  coming,  in  reliance  upon  the  only  God 
of  justice,  to  free  them,  and  to  destroy  the  law  of  thy  Mooftehed, 


conolly's  lettebs  to  his  bbotheil  511 

by  which  people  who  pray  towards  the  same  Kebia  are  sold  aa 
cattle."  Let  Mahomed  Shah  lithograph  this,  and  send  a  copy  to 
be  stuck  up  at  every  mosque  where  his  authority  or  influence  can 
reach,  in  Persia,  Afghanistan,  and  Tartary.  This  writing  will 
tell  the  Ameer  that  his  kingdom  has  been  weighed  and  found 
wanting ;  it  will  do  much  to  soften  and  liberalise  Mahomedan 
feeling  wherever  it  is  read ;  and  if  the  Persian  nation  are  informed 
that  it  comes  to  them  recommended  by  English  sjrmpathy,  they 
will  dismiss  all  irritation  of  mind  that  was  caused  by  our  checking 
their  military  career  at  Herat. 

I  feel  confident  that  this  great  and  most  necessary  measure  of 
Persian  emancipation  may  be  eSected  at  once  without  shedding 
one  drop  of  blood.  I  never  uttered  a  word  of  hostility  against  the 
Ameer,  either  at  Khiva  or  Kokund ;  but  now  I  am  authorised  to 
show  how  I  thought  the  rulers  of  these  states,  who  both  hate  him, 
may  be  made  to  end  or  lessen  their  own  foolish  enmity  ^by  his 
removing  from  between  them.  Let  the  Shah  of  Persia  send  a 
firman  to  Syud  Mahomed  Zahed,  Kurruck  Eojeh  at  Kokund, 
whom  he  knows,  saying — "Tell  the  Khan  Huzrut,  of  Kokund, 
who  I  am  happy  to  find  does  not  deal  in  my  people,  that  I  am 
about  to  liberate  all  those  oppressed  men  and  women  who  are 
unwillingly  detained  as  slaves  in  Bokhara.  I  don't  want  that 
country;  and  if  you  will  send  Lushker  Begglerbiggee,  or  Maho- 
med Shereff  Atalik,  with  the  Kokund  army  about  the  same  time 
to  Samarcand,  my  prime  minister  ishall  me^e  it  over  to  him  by 
treaty,  as  the  capital  of  Mawarulneh.  I  shall  give  up  Merve  to 
the  Khan  Huzrut  of  Khiva  to  be  made  the  capital  of  Kharasm, 
on  condition  of  his  doing  all  he  can  to  restore  and  content  my 
unfortunate  people,  whom  his  tribes  have  carried  off  during  my 
wars  in  other  directions." 

The  best  Oosbeg  troops  are  mere  rubbish  as  opponents  to  Persian 
regulars  and  cannon,  and  they  all  know  it.  Allah  Keuli  Khan  iisT 
the  best  and  most  sensible  man  in  his  country,  and  he  will  remain 
quiet  while  Mahomed  Shah  comes  against  Bokhara,  if  Shakespear 
can  be  empowered  to  tell  him  that  this  is  a  reform  which  must  be 
effected,  and  which  Persia  is  determined  now  to  effect,  with  the 
commerce  of  England  and  Bussia.  Shakespear  can  mediate  be- 
tween the  Khan  Huzrut  and  Mohamed  Shah  for  the  gentle 
emancipation  of  those  who  may  wish  to  return  home  in  the  next 
four  or  five  years,  or  to  settle  in  the  fine  waste  land  of  Merve; 


512  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

and  perhaps  Mahomed  Shah  may  give  to  AUah  Koull  Khan  the 
very  large  colony  of  [  ]*,  now  settled  here,  who  really  yet 

long  for  the  home  of  their  fathers:  this^  and  my  securing  to  the 
Eokan  frontier  up  the  Oxus  to  Balkh,  perhaps  leaving  the  khan 
of  it  his  easy  tiibutary,  would  make  him  agree  to  all  that  the 
Afghans  need  for  the  formation  of  their  frontier  from  Persian 
Ehorassan  to  the  Oxus. 

England  and  Russia  may  then  agree  about  immutable  frontiers 
for  Persia,  Afghanistan,  Mawarulneh,  and  Eharasm,  in  the  spirit 
which  becomes  two  of  the  first  European  nations  in  the  year  1842 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  God  incarnate  of  all  peace  and  wisdom.  May 
this  pure  and  peaceable  religion  be  soon  extended  all  over  the 
world ! 

Abthub  Conolly. 

March  12th. 

I  beg  that  fifty  tillas  may  be  given  to  Jooma  Bai,  the  servant 
who  will  convey  this  to  Long  Joseph.  (Let  the  utmost  caution 
be  used  always  in  mentioning  their  names  while  this  Ameer  lives 
or  reigns.)  As  for  Long  Joseph,  I  don't  know  what  reward  to 
propose  for  him.  He  has  risked  his  life  for  us  in  the  most  gallant 
manner,  as  few  men  would,  except  for  a  brother,  and  he  is  a  noble 
fellow.  I  feel  sure  that  government  will  forgive  me  for  not  being 
able  to  make  an  account  of  my  stewardship  during  my  Toorkish 
mission,  and  that  it  will  use  every  exertion  to  get  free  and  to 
reward  all  who  have  suffered  with  me,  but  remained  alive. 

Allahdad  Khan  had  some  400  tillas  in  cash  when  he  was  brought 
back,  besides  his  baggage  and  horses.  Akhondzadeh  Saleh 
Mohamed  has  served  too  well  to  make  it  necessary  for  me  to  re- 
commend him.  I  trust  that  God  has  preserved  his  life.  Stoddart 
and  I  will  comfort  each  other  in  every  way  till  we  die,  when  may 
our  brotherhood  be  renewed  in  heaven  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour !  Send  this  assurance  to  all  our  firiends,  and  do  you,  my 
dear  John,  stand  in  this  faith.  It  is  the  only  thing  that  can  enable 
a  man  to  bear  up  against  the  trials  of  this  life,  and  lead  him  to  the 
noblest  state  of  existence  in  the  next.  Farewell — farewell  I  I 
shall  send  this  to  be  forwarded,  if  news  reaches  Stoddart's  faithful 
man  Ibraheem  of  our  death,  through  Jooma  Bai  and  Long  JosepK-f 

*  Obscure  in  MS.  f  MS»  Correspondence  of  A.  Conolly. 


conolly's  journal.  513 

On  the  22nd  of  March,  Conolly  again  wrote,  full  of 
affectionate  solicitude  for  the  sufferings  of  his  friends, 
but  little  mindful  of  his  own: 

After  sending  a  page  with  my  thermometer  on  the  15th  ult. 
(February),  to  ask  how  much  cold  it  indicated,  as  detailed  in  my 
last  letter,  the  Ameer  took  no  notice  of  us  till  the  13th  of  this 
month,  when  he  sent  the  gold  chronometer  which  I  had  given 
him,  to  show  that  its  chain  was  broken^  and  to  ask  if  we  could 
repair  it;  a  pretence,  the  Topshee-Bashee  said,  to  ascertain  what 
state  we  were  in.     We  had  both  become  ill,  a  few  days  before, 
from  a  sudden  cold  change  of  weather,  and  the  discomfort  of 
filthy  clothing;  and  I,  who  had  given  in  most  to  the  sickness, 
owing  to  anxiety  of  mind  regarding  the  many  persons  whom  I  had 
been  the  means  of  bringing  into  the  Ameer's  tyrannous  hands, 
was  lying  weak  in  bed  with  fever  when  the  last  page  came. 
The  Topshee-Bashee,  who  for  some  time  spoke  encouragingly 
about  changing  our  clothes,  had  by  this  time  caused  us  plainly  to 
understand  that  he  neither  dared  himself  to  amend  our  position 
in  this  respect,  nor  even  to  represent  it  to  the  Ameer.     He  now 
tried  to  save  us  by  telling  the  page  that  I  had  been  confined  to 
my  bed  eight  days,  and  by  remarking  upon  the  wretched  state  of 
our  apparel  after  eighty-five  days  and  nights'  wear.     I  sliowed  the 
Mchrum  that  Stoddart  had  been  obliged  to  cast  away  all  his 
under-clothing,  and  was  suffering  much  from  cold  on  the  chest. 
I  experienced  hope  that  the  Ameer  would  take  some  pity  upon  us, 
and  especially  upon  such  of  my  late  travelling  companions  and 
people  as  might  be  suffering  under  his  displeasure.   The  page  said 
that  he  would  make  a  representation  if  the  Huzrut  questioned  him; 
and  he  afterwards  told  the  Topshee-Bashee  that,  on  the  Ameer's 
doing  so,  he  had  stated  that  the  King's  last-come  slave,  Kan-Ali 
(Conolly),  had  been  very  ill  for  eight  or  nine  days;  to  which  the 
Huzrut  had  replied,  **  May  he  not  die  (or,  I  suppose,  he  won't 
die)  for  the  three  or  four  days  that  remain  till  his  going."    We 
thought  from  this  that  the  Ameer  proposed  to  send  us  away  with 
the  Russians,  who  were  said  to  be  preparing  to  depart  after  the 
No-roz.     Nothing  else  has  since  transpired  regarding  ourselves; 
but  through  the  indefatigable  Long  Joseph  we  have  learnt  the 
following  items  of  intelligence  about  our  friends.* 

*  The  men  formerly  in  Dr.  Ger-    ago,  whom  I  had  ransomed  at  Khifa 
rBrd*s  service,  enslaved  fifteen  years    by  order  of  Government. 

VOL.  II.  2  L 


514  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

On  the  13th  inst.,  Ibraheem  wrote:  *'  With  regard  to  Caubul  be 
quite  at  ease;  30,000  people  (rebels?)  have  been  slaughtered 
there."  AUahdad  Khan,  the  Akhonzadah,  EusoiF  Khan  (Au- 
gustin),  the  Jemadar,  Meer  Akhor,  with  Bolund  Khan,  Kurreen 
Khan,  and  Gool  Mahomed,  had  been  released;  for  which  we  sin- 
cerely thanked  God.  Their  sufferings,  poor  fellows,  in  that  hor- 
rible dungeon,  must  have  been  great.     .     .     . 

On  the  23rd,  we  were  made  further  happy  by  the  verbal  intel- 
ligence of  Long  Joseph  that  Allahdad  Khan  and  the  rest  of  our 
people  had  been  released. 

On  the  24th,  he  again  recorded  that  a  ray  of  hope 
had  broken  into  his  dreary  dungeon : 

24th. — ^This  forenoon,  the  Topshee-Bashee  coming  to  see  us, 
said,  with  a  cheerful  manner,  **  *  Sewonchee' — Reward  me  for  glad 
tidings.  I  represented  your  great  want  of  clothes,  and  proposed  to 
buy  shirts  and  trousers  for  you  from  the  bazaar,  but  the  Huzrut 
said,  *  They  don't  wear  bazaar  clothes;  in  three  or  four  days  I'll 
give  them  dresses  of  honour  and  dismiss  them.'  And  the  Huzrut 
asked  Meerza  Juneid  which  road  would  be  the  best  one  for  you  to 
travel  by,  saying,  *  They  cannot  now  go  in  that  direction'  (apparently 
meaning  Caubul).  Meerza  Juneid  replied,  that  the  route  by  Persia 
would  now  be  the  best.  After  which  the  Ameer  spoke  graciously 
about  you.  He  said  that  Kau-AU  was  a  well-informed  person, 
that  the  Meerza  represented  that  he  had  conversed  very  little 
with  Kan-Ali,  but  that  Stoddart,  of  whom  he  had  seen  much, 
was  a  man  instructed  upon  all  matters."  We  doubted  the  Topshee- 
Bashee's  having  dared  to  make  a  representation  of  himself  regard- 
ing us.  And  the  old  guardian  mentioned  afterwards  that  Meerza 
Juneid  had  come  to  his  brother's  office.  Probably  desiring  to 
know  whether  I  was  better  or  worse  in  health  since  the  13th,  the 
Ameer  sent  Meerza  Juneid,  in  his  capacity  of  physician,  to  make 
inquiries  in  this  matter. 

A  few  days  afterwards,  remembering  how  he  had 
written,  under  the  excitement,  almost  the  delirium  of 
fever,  a  desponding  letter  to  John  ConoUy,  he  wrote 
more  cheerfully  to  his  brother,  begging  him,  if  the 
letter  reached  its  destination,  not  to  be  dispirited  by 


LETTER  TO  JOHN  CONOLLY.  515 

it,  for  that  both  he  and  Stoddart  were  now  in  good 
health : 

Bokhara  Citadel,  28th  March,  1842. 

My  dear  John, 

We  have  been  comforted  by  intelligence  that  the  Ameer 
has  released  AUahdad  Khan  and  all  my  people  from  the  gaol 

into  -which  he  so  unjustly  and  cruelly  confined  them 

The  Ameer  has  lately  been  talking,  we  hear,  of  sending  us  away, 
and  though  we  do  not  set  much  store  by  his  words,  we  think  it 
possible  he  may  give  us  to  the  Russian  Mission,  who  are  about  to 

depart I  wrote  you  a  longish  letter  on  the  11th  of 

this  month,  when  I  was  in  a  high  state  of  excitement,  from  fever 
and  several  nights  of  sleepless  anxiety.  The  burden  of  it  was  an 
entreaty  to  the  last  effect  regarding  my  poor  people,  and  a  hope 
that  the  British  Government  would  seize  the  opportunity  which 
the  Ameer's  faithlessness  had  given  them  to  come  forward  with 
Persia  to  put  him  down,  and  give  his  country  to  Kharasm  and 
Kokund,  on  condition  of  the  entire  suppression  of  the  Persian  and 
Afghan  slave  trade  in  Toorkistan.  K  that  paper  (which  I  shall 
endeavour  to  recover)  should  reach  you,  compress  its  words  into 
this  purport  and  destroy  it,  reserving  my  last  good  wishes  for  the 
friends  to  whom  I  addressed  them,  thinking  that  I  might  not  Hve 
much  longer.  I  am  now,  thank  God,  almost  well  in  health  again, 
and  the  news  regarding  our  people  has  set  my  mind  at  rest.  Stod- 
dart, also,  who  was  suffering  awhile  from  severe  cold,  is,  I  rejoice 
to  say,  convalescent.  We  are  both  in  a  very  imcomfortable  state, 
as  you  may  imagine,  having  been  ninety-nine  days  and  nights 
without  a  change  of  clothes ;  but  we  are  together.  Stoddart  is 
such  a  friend  as  a  man  would  desire  to  have  in  adversity,  and  our 
searchers  having  missed  the  Uttle  Prayer-book  which  George 
Macgregor  gave  us,  (tell  him)  we  are  able  to  read  and  pray,  as  well 
as  to  converse  together.  God  bless  you,  my  dear  John.  Send 
my  love  to  everybody,  and  beUeve  me. 

Yours,  ever  most  affectionately, 

Arthur  Conolly.* 

To  J.  B.  Conolly,  Esq.,  Caubul. 

*   MS.  CorretpondeHce,  —  Arthur  produced  upon  them  by  his  letter  of 

ConoUy  was  painfully  anxious  to  re-  the  11th  of  March.    Again  he  wrote 

move  from  the  minds  of  his  friends  in  his  journal-letter  :^  "  I  take  this 

the  impression  which  might  have  been  opportunity  of  explaining  that  my 

2l2 


516  STODDAKT  AND  CONOLLY. 

The  passages  omitted  from  this  letter  relate  almost 
entirely  to  the  services  and  the  pay  of  Conolly's  attend- 
ants. There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  his  letters 
and  journals,  written  at  this  time,  than  his  tender  regard 
for  others,  and  his  forgetfulness  of  self.  Not  only  did 
he  grieve  for  the  sufferings  of  his  friend,  and  endeavour, 
by  putting  him  forward  as  the  real  representative  of  the 
British  Government,  to  obtain  Stoddart's  release,  or  at 
least  a  mitigation  of  the  severity  of  his  confinement,  but 
he  exhibited  the  tenderest  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of 
all  the  servants  who  had  accompanied  him  to  Bokhara, 
and  in  the  midst  of  his  own  affliction,  even  on  the  bed 
of  sickness  and  in  the  near  prospect  of  death,  thought  of 
nothing  more  earnestly  than  the  ftiture  welfare  of  Jiis 
poor  dependents.*  On  the  5th  of  April  he  wrote  in  his 
journal  : 

April  5. — When  I  came  here,  Stoddart  did  his  utmost  to  put 
me  forward ;  but  now,  as  long  as  the  Ameer  detains  him,  I  shall 

letter  of  the  1 1th  of  March  was  writ-  When  I  got  better  I  drew  up  for 
ten  when  I  was  very  ill  with  fever.  Stoddart  the  memorandum  which  he 
Thinking  that  he  might  forcibly  be  had  asked  for,  and  which  he  now  de- 
sent  away  from  me  on  the  departure  cides  on  forwarding.  It  is  written  in 
of  the  Kussians  (as  they  brought  a  a  more  calm  and  less  indignant 'tone 
request  for  his  dismissal),  or  that  we  than  the  letter  aforesaid,  but  allow- 
might  be  otherwise  separated,  Stod-  ance  must  be  made  for  the  brevity 
dart  had  begged  me  to  give  him  a  and  freedom  of  the  propositions,  for 
memorandum  of  my  opinions  regarding  we  were  so  liable  to  be  interrupted 
the  policy  to  be  pursued  towards  these  and  discovered,  that  I  could  only  pen 
states  ;  and  I  wrote  off  a  hasty  sum-  my  opinions  by  snatches,  and  paper  is 
mary  of  these  notions,  which  were  a  scarce  article  with  us."—  [Arthur 
running  in  my  head^  with  many  ConoUi/t  MS,  Journal,] 
things  that  I  was  anxious  to  say  *  General  Pollock  exerted  himself 
about  my  unfortunate  servants,  and  to  obtain  an  adjustment  of  the  claims 
to  my  friends,  when  under  excite-  of  Captain  Conolly's  servants ;  and 
ment,  which  must  have  made  my  he  succeeded.  The  letter  which  was 
expressions  very  wild  and  incohe-  written  in  reply  to  Pollock's  appli- 
rent.  I  hoped  that  the  paper  con-  cation  shows  in  what  light  Lord  Ellen- 
taining  them  remained  in  the  hands  borough  regarded  Conolly's  mission : 
of  Long  Joseph ;  but  he,  misunder-  "  With  reference,"  wrote  the  Chief 
standing  our  instructions,  instead  of  Secretary,  *'  to  your  letter  of  the  2drd 
keeping  it,  gave  it  to  £usofee-i-  ultimo,  on  the  subject  of  the  remu- 
Roomee  (Augustin),  who,  apparently,  neration  applied  for,  on  behalf  of  tlie 
went  off  at  once  with  it  to  Caubul.  servants  attached  to  the  mission  of 


conolly's  journal.  '        517 

refer  to  him  as  the  accredited  British  agent,  every  communication 
on  business  that  the  Ameer  may  make  to  me,  whether  we  should 
be  together  or  separated.  He  well  knows  all  the  people  here^  and 
the  dignity  of  our  government  is  safe  in  his  hands. 

We  have  heard  that  the  Russians  are  about  to  depart,  and  that 
they  are  to  take  their  enslaved  people  with  them;  but  we  cannot 
get  at  the  truth  of  the  statement.  Report  also  says  that  the 
Ameer  will  march  with  his  army  seven  or  eight  days  hence. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  he  is  preparing  for  an  early  move;  but 
though  Takkind  and  Kokund  are  named  as  his  points  of  attack, 
it  is  not  certain  that  he  will  go  eastward.  This  is  the  107th  day 
of  our  confinement,  without  change  of  clothes;  but  the  weather 
having  become  warmer,  we  can  «do  without  the  garments  that 
most  harboured  the  vermin  that  we  found  so  distressing,  and  we 
are  both  now,  thank  God !  quite  well.  We  trust  that  our  friends 
wil^be  informed  of  our  well-being.  We  have  desired  all  our 
servants,  except  Ibraheem  (who  remains  behind  to  keep  up  corre- 
spondence), to  return  to  their  homes  as  soon  as  their  strength 
enables  them  to  travel,  begging  them  to  make  their  way  anyhow, 
and  to  rest  assured  that"  everything  due  will  be  made  up  to  them 

on  their  reaching  Caubul AUahdad  Khan  behaved  very 

firmly  in  refusing  to  allow  that  he  was  the  servant  of  a  Feringhee 
servant,  as  the  Ameer  wished  him  to  do,  and  did  justice  both  to 
the  dignity  of  his  royal  master  and  to  the  policy  of  the  British 
Government  in  Afghanistan.     I  beg  that  his  conduct  may  be 

Lieutenant  A.  Conolly  to  Kokund,  to  consider  their  position  favorably. 

I  am  directed  to  inform  you  that  the  HisLordship,  therefore,  authorises  the 

Governor-General  has  no  knowledge  disbursement  of  the  sums  stated  in 

of  Lieutenant  A.  Conolly*s  mission  to  the  papers  attached  to  vour  letter, 

Kokund  having  been  authorised.    On  under  reply  to  be  due  to  these  several 

the  contrary,  his  Lordship  was   in-  persons;  but  the  sums  so  paid  on 

formed,  by  the  late  President  of  the  account  of  wages  accruing  to  these 

Board  of  Control,  that  Lieutenant  several  persons,  after  they  left  Khiva 

A.  Conolly  was  expressly  instructed  (after  deducting  therefrom  the  amount 

by  him  not  to  go  to  Kokund ;  and,  in  of  wages  which  would  have  become  due 

all  probabilitv,  he  owes  all  his  mis-  during  a  direct  march  to  Caubul)  will 

fortunes  to  his  direct  transgression  of  be  made  a  charge  aeainst  Lieutenant 

that  instruction.    The  servants  enter-  A.  Conolly,  who  will  be  required  to 

tained  by  him,  however,  are  not  re-  refund  the  amount,  as  well  as  all  ^ums 

sponsible  for  the  indiscretion  of  their  which  may  have  been  drawn  on  ac- 

master.    They  were  in  the  service  of  count  of  such  an  unauthorised  exten- 

an  officer  apparently  employed  on  a  sion  of  his  mission."— [Afr.  Maddock 

public    mission   by   liis   government,  to  General  Poliock :   Simlah,  Nov.  9| 

and  the  Governor-General  is  prepared  1842.    MS,  BecortU,] 


518  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

mentioned  to  Shah  Soojah,  and  I  trust  that  all  his  losses  will  be 
made  up  to  him;  but  if  the  preparation  of  the  account  is  left  to 
him,  he  will  make  it  a  very  large  one,  and  part  of  the  settlement 
may  perhaps  be  deferred  till  it  is  decided  whether  or  no  the 
Ameer  is  to  be  called  upon  for  repayment. 

When  our  last  packet  was  despatched  we  deemed  it  not  im- 
possible, from  the  Ameer's  expressions,  which  had  been  reported 
to  us,  that  his  Majesty  designed  to  send  us  away  with  the  Russian 
Mission.  Our  keepers  rather  inclined  to  the  idea  that  Huzrut 
would  dismiss  us  about  the  same  time  by  the  route  of  Persia;  and 
the  Topshee-Bashee's  old  brother  talked  seriously  about  perform- 
ing a  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  city  of  Meshid  in  our  company. 

These  hopes  were  most  delusive.  As  time  advanced, 
the  prospects  of  restoration  to  liberty  became  more  and 
more  remote.  About  the  middle  of  the  month  of  -ATpril 
the  Russian  Mission  took  its  departure ;  and  the  Ameer 
set  out  from  Bokhara  at  the  head  of  a  grand  military 
expedition  against  the  state  of  Kokund.  On  the  13th 
of  April,  Conolly  wrote  in  his  journal: 

April  13. — We  heard  that  the  Russians  had  been  dismissed 
with  presents  of  honour,  that  the  Khodiyar  Beg  Karawool 
Beggee^  ranking  as  captain  or  commander  of  100,  had  been 
attached  to  Colonel  Boutenoff  as  the  Ameer's  envoy  to  St. 
Petersburgh,  and  that  the  Huzrut  had  promised  to  promote  him 
to  the  grade  of  Tok-Suba,  commander  of  1000,  pri^dleged  to 
bear  a  cow-tail  banner,  on  his  return  after  the  performance  of 
good  service.  The  Ameer's  own  arrangements  were  said  to  be 
completed,  and  the  direction  of  it  certainly  to  the  eastward.  An 
envoy  from  Kokund,  who  arrived  two  days  ago,  was  not  re- 
ceived, but  was  told  to  go  about  his  own  business  wherever  he 
listed.  Our  informant  mentioned  at  the  same  time  that  the  last 
envoy  from  Khiva  had  been  dismissed  a  fortnight  before  with  ex- 
traordinary honour,  all  his  servants  getting  dresses.  We  now 
also  learned  that  the  heir  of  the  Koondooz  chief  had  sent  an 
envoy  to  the  Ameer,  who  had  ordered  one  of  his  officers,  a  Khojeh, 
styled  Salam  Aghassi,  to  accompany  that  agent  to  Koondooz  on 
his  return.     It  was  thought,  wc  were  told,  that  the  Khojeh  of 


conolly's  journal.  519 

Balkh  would  endeavour  to  take  Koondooz  on  Meer  Morad*s  deaths 
and  the  heir  may,  in  this  apprehension,  have  been  alert  to  put  him* 
self  under  the  Ameer's  protection.  This  morning  the  Ameer 
showed  the  Topshee-Bashee  an  especial  mark  of  favour  by 
sending  him  a  loaf  of  refined  sugar  from  the  palace  ;  towards 
evening  his  Majesty  rode  four  miles  to  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  and 
on  his  return  at  night  had  the  Topshee-Bashee  up  to  give  him 
some  orders. 

The  narrative  then  proceeds  : 

Early    next   morning  (the   14th)  the  Ameer   marched    out 
to  the  sound  of  his  palace  kettle-drums  and    trumpets,  leaving 
us  in  the  filthy   clothes  which  .we    had   worn   for   115   days 
and  nights.      We  said    to   the    Gunner's    old  brother,   when 
he  mentioned  the  Ameer's  having  departed,  "  Then  the  Meshid 
caravan  apparently  stands  fast."     **No,"  was  his  reply;  "please 
God  it  will  go  soon.    I  asked  the  Topshee-Bashee  last  night 
if  nothing  had  been  settled  about  you,  and  he  repHed,  *  When 
the   Russians   get  out  a  march  or   so,    the   Dustan  Kanchee 
will  make  a  petition  about  them,  and  they  will  be  dismissed.' " 
The  old    man    also    remarked,    probably    from   what    he   had 
heard  his  brother  say,   that  the  Ameer  had  expressed  himself 
to  the  effect  that  he  knew  the  Russian  Elchee  was  led  to  get  us 
in  order  to  make  a  boast  of  having  procured  our  release,  which 
made  it  seem  as  though  Colonel  Boutenoff*  had  been  endeavouring 
to  obtain  our  dismissal.    Our  old  keeper  persisted  for  some  days 
in  assuring  us  of  his  belief  that  our  immediate  dismissal  was  de-* 
signed,  and  on  the  18th  said  that  he  was  going  down  into  the 
city  to  seek  out  my  Dewan  Bcggee,  Eusoff  Khan  (Augustin),  to 
set  his  mind  at  ease  about  us;  he  returned,  saying  that  he  had 
been  referred  from  place  to  place  without  finding  Eusoff*  Khan,  or 
any  of  our  people,  but  that  one  Meer  Hyder  and  another  shop- 
keeper of  his  acquaintance  had  assured  him  that  they  were  all  in 
the  town,  and  that  four  or  five  of  them  were  in  the  habit  of  coming 
occasionally  at  night  to  a  certain  quarter  to  hear  books  read.     We 
had  thought  the  Gunners  might  have  received  orders  to  collect 
some  of  our  people  in  order  to  our  respectable  dismissal;  but 
knowing  that  all  our  men,  except  Ibraheem,  had  left  Bokhara,  we 
concluded    that  the   Topehee-Bashee  had  made  use  of  his  old 
brother  to  deceive  us,  in  order  to  keep  us  hopeful  and  quiet  for 


620  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

another  period,  as  he  said  nothing  about  changing  bur  clothes, 
and  kept  himself  quite  aloof  from  us,  which  he  would  hardly 
have  done  had  he  believed  what  he  reported  in  the  Ameer's 
name. 

Just  before  the  Ameer's  departure,  we  heard  that  a  British 
Elchee  had  arrived  at  Merve  on  his  way  hither.  We  could  get  no 
further  accounts  of  the  said  Elchee,  but  judged  that  it  might  be 

Shakespear  on  his  way  to  Khiva [MS.  defaced] 

From  the  4th  to  the  7th  of  May  the  palace  drums 

and  trumpets  were  continually  sounding  for  intelligence  that 
Kokund  had  been  taken  after  a  faint  endeavour  at  resistance 
under  the  famed  Kokund  general,  Guda  Bai;  that  the  latter  had 
been  taken  prisoner,  and  that  the  rebellious  town  had  been  given 
up  to  plunder,  &c. 

Then  follows  much  of  Bokhara  politics,  the  manu- 
script being  greatly  defaced — and  after  this,  some  passages 
of  personal  narrative,  the  chronicle  of  which  extends  up 
to  the  24th  of  May — the  latest  date  under  which  I  have 
been  able  to  discover  anything  in  the  hand- writing  of 
Arthur  ConoUy  : 

We  had  expressed  to  our  old  guardian  a  wish  to  get  some 
money  from  Meshed,  with  which  to  reward  him  for  his  kindness, 
(and  to  get)  him  privately  to  buy  (us)  a  few  necessaries  in  the 
event  of  our  further  detention,  and,  liking  the  idea,  he,  on  the  19th 
instant  (May),  brought  secretly  to  see  us  his  son-in-law  Budub, 
employed  as  a  caravan-bashee  between  Bokhara  and  the  Holy 
City,  who  agreed  to  act  as  agent  in  the  business  after  another 
week.     Enquiring  the  news  from  Budub,  we  heard  that  Kamran 
was  said  to  be  confined  in  Herat  by  Yar  Mahomed  Khan — that 
the  English  remained  as  before  at  Candahar  and  Caubul — and 
that  four  Elchees,  English,  Russian,  Persian,  and  Turkish,  had 
gone  together  to  Khiva,  each  displaying  his  national  flag,  and 
told  the  Khan  Huzrut  that  he  had  the  choice  of  quietly  giving 
up  plundering  and  slave-dealing,  or  of    meeting  the   Shah  of 
Persia,  who  had  assembled  a  large  army  for  the  redress  of  his 

people. 

****** 

Our  old  friend  now  informed  us,  on  the  authority  of  his  Afghan 


conolly's  journal.  521 

acquaintance,  Meer  Hyder,  that  all  our  people  had  left  Bokhara 
on  hearing  that  they  had  been  inquired  about.  •  .  .  Possibly 
the  Ameer  really  did  mean  to  send  us  away  at  the  time  of  his 
marcliing,  but  deferred  to  do  so  on  hearing  that  we  had  no  servants 
left  here,  or  from  one  of  his  incalculable  caprices.  I  had  noted,  in 
a  detailed  report  of  our  proceedings  after  leaving  Kokund,  which 
when  we  were  seized  I  was  waiting  the  Ameer's  permission  to 
despatch  by  a  courier  to  Caubul,  an  expression  which  the  Naib 
heard  his  Majesty  had  uttered  in  his  camp  after  my  arrival,  to  the 
effect  that  he  would  give  the  English  a  few  rubs  more,  and  then 
be  friends  with  them  again.  Though  we  were  not  sure  that  the 
Ameer  had  so  spoken,  the  plan  seems  one  likely  to  be  entertained 
by  an  ignorant  and  weak  man,  anxious  to  give  an  imposing 
impression  of  his  greatness  and  confidence;  and  to  it  I  partly 
attributed  the  ungraciousness  of  my  public  reception  in  camp, 
though  I  was  the  Naib's  honoured  guest;  the  failure  of  the 
Huzrut  to  recover  the  horses  and  the  property  of  my  servants 
which  had  been  plundered  at  his  outposts,  when  bringing  letters 
to  him,  and  the  hauteur  with  which,  at  the  first  joint  reception  of 
Stoddart  and  myself  here,  he  caused  it  to  be  signified  to  us  that 
as  in  old  times  there  had  been  friendship  between  the  Mussulmans 
and  infidels,  there  existed  no  objection  to  the  establishment  of 
friendly  relations  between  the  states  of  Bokhara  and  England; 
but  that  the  Huzrut  desired  to  know  whether  we  (the  English) 
had  been]  travellers  over  all  Toorkistan  to  spy  the  land  with  a 
view  to  take  it,  as  we  had  taken  Caubul,  or  for  other  purposes; 
and  wished  all  our  designs  to  be  unveiled,  in  order  that  if  they 
were  friendly  they  might  become  apparent,  and  that  if  hostile, 
they  might  still  be  known.  The  Government  of  India,  knowing 
what  communications  it  has  sent  to  Bokhara,  will  be  able  to 
judge  the  Ameer*s  conduct  better  than  we  are. 

On  the  19th  (May)  the  Topshee-Bashee  paid  us  a  visit  of  a  few 
moments,  after  keeping  away  for  two  months.  He  mentioned  that 
a  man  with  a  name  like  Noor  Mohumnud  had  come  three  or 
four  days  before  from  Persia,  bringing  a  load  of  things  for  Stod- 
dart, of  which  the  Dustan  Kanchee  had  forwarded  a  list  to  the 
Ameer — probably  the  articles  which  should  have  accompanied 
Lord  Palmerston's  letter.  The  Huzrut,  the  Topshee-Bashee 
said,  would  doubtless,  on  his  return,  be  gracious  to  us,  and  give 
us  fine  robes  of  honour,  and  treat  us  even  better  than  before. 


522  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

About  sunset  on  the  23rd,  as  Stoddart  and  myself  were  pacing 
up  and  down  a  small  court  of  twenty  feet  long,  which  encloses 
our  prison,  one  of  the  citadel  doorkeepers  came  and  desired  us 
both  to  sit  down  in  a  comer;  we  complied,  wondering  what 
would  follow,  and  presently  saw  heads  peering  at  us  from  the 
adjoining  roofs^  when  we  understood  that  the  Ameer's  heir,  a 
youth  of  seventeen,  had  taken  this  way  of  getting  a  sight  of  the 
Feringhee  Elchees.  We  must  have  given  him  but  a  poor  impres- 
sion in  the  remains  of  our  clothes,  and  with  heads  and  beards 
imcombed  for  more  than  five  months. 

On  the  23rd,  Jooma  Bai  was  accosted  by  a  man  named  Makh- 
zoom,  known  to  Stoddart,  who  gave  him  a  token,  and  a  note 
written  in  such  bad  grammar  as  scarcely  to  be  understood,  in 
which  he  said  one  Juleb  arrived  lately  from  Khiva,  mentioned 
that  he  saw  Pottinger  Sahib  there,  and  another  person  named 
Moosa  having  come,  bringing  a  letter  from  Pottinger  Sahib,  who, 
he  says,  is  at  Khiva,  with  the  Elchee  of  Mahomed  Shah. 

Authentic  history  here  terminates.  Beyond  this  all  is 
doubt  and  conjecture.  On  the  28th  of  May,  Stoddart 
despatched  an  official  letter  to  the  Indian  Government,* 
which  was  forwarded  with  ConoUy's  journals;  and  at 
this  point  we  lose  altogether  the  track  of  the  footprints 
which  the  Bokhara  captives  have  left  on  the  great 
desert  of  time.  That  they  perished  miserably  is  cer- 
tain. "  No  change  has  taken  place  in  our  treatment/' 
wrote  Stoddart — it  is  the  last  sentence  penned  in  the 
Bokhara  prison  which  seems  to  have  reached  its  des- 

*  An  abstract  of  this  letter  was  now  probably  march  against  E^iva, 
forwarded  by  another  route,  and  it  which,  unless  saved  by  some  demon- 
reached  John  Conolly  at  Caubul  on  stration  from  Persia  or  Afghanistan, 
the  4th  of  July.  In  this  letter,  must  fall  in  August  or  September, 
Stoddart  reports  the  success  of  the  after  a  short  campaign.'*  Withrefer- 
Ameer  at  Kokimd.  "  The  Ameer,"  ence  to  the  efforts  of  the  Russian 
he  wrote,  ^^  entered  Kokund  on  the  Mission,  he  says :  ^*  The  Russian  Mis- 
11th  of  May,  and  gave  it  up  to  sion  left  this  towards  the  end  of 
pillage — destroyed  its  rulers — un-  April.  I  feel  convinced  that  Colonel 
peopled  its  capital,  and  is  now  on  his  Boutenoff's  kind  desire  to  procure 
return,  having  distributed  the  dif-  our  release  failed  solely  in  cons^ 
ferent  governments  among  his  own  quence  of  the  unreasonableness  of 
Bokharan  chiefs.  He  is  become  mas-  the  Ameer." — [3/5.  Correspondence.'] 
ter  of  immense  treasure,  and  will 


EXECUTION  OF  THE  PRI80NEBS.  523 

tination — ^'  though  hopes,  so  long  proved  to  be  deceit- 
ful, are  held  out  to  us  on  the  return  of  the  chief."  But 
the  Ameer,  glutted  with  conquest,  returned  from  the 
Kokund  expedition,  and  ordered  them  out  to  death. 
They  died  by  the  hands  of  the  public  executioner.  But 
the  precise  period  of  their  death  is  not  with  certainty 
to  be  ascertained. 

There  is  but  scanty  evidence  to  enable  us  to  deter- 
mine the  point.  That  which  is  most  credible  is  the 
evidence  of  one  Saleh  Mahomed,  a  youth  whom  Major 
Todd  despatched  from  Herat  to  join  Captain  ConoUy's 
suite.  His  story  is,  that  in  the  month  of  June,  1842, 
Stoddart  and  ConoUy  were  executed  by  order  of  the 
Ameer;  that  he  derived  his  information  from  one  of  the 
executioners;  and  that  he  saw  their  graves.  On  the 
17th  of  June,  it  is  related,  they  were  taken  out  of  their 
prison,  and,  in  the  presence  of  an  assembled  multitude, 
led  into  a  small  square.  Their  hands  were  bound  toge- 
ther before  them.  Their  graves  were  dug  before  their 
eyes.  Stoddart  was  first  marked  for  death.  He  cried 
aloud  against  the  tyranny  of  the  Ameer ;  and  his  head 
was  cut  off  with  a  knife.  ConoUy  was  then  offered  his 
life,  on  condition  that  he  would  adopt  the  Mussulman 
faith.  But  he  indignantly  rejected  the  proposal.  "  Stod- 
dart," he  said,  '*  became  a  Mussulman,  and  yet  you  kill 
him :  I  am  prepared  to  die."  And  then  Arthur  ConoUy, 
full  of  faith  in  the  merits  of  his  Redeemer,  stretched 
forth  his  neck,  and  died.* 

*  General    Pollock    officially    re^  vant)  that  his  uncle,  whom  he  left 

ported  Captain  Conolly's  death,  from  here  sick,  saying  he  was  a  great  tra- 

Caubul,  in  a  letter  dated  September  veller  and  had  visited  Kokund,  was 

30 ;  but  he  added :   "  The  only  au-  taken  very  ill,  and  though  we  gave 

thority  for  the  death  of  this  very  in-  him  medicine  and  did  all  in  our  power, 

telligent  officer  is  conveyed  in  a  Per-  it  was  of  no  avail.    It  was  the  will  of 

sian  letter  from  a  native  of  Caubul^  God  that  he  should  die.'    Moostafah 

who  writes  from  Bokhara  to  MooUah  and  Moollah  Ahmed  Khan  are  both 

Ahmed  Khan,  of  this  city,  saying,  of  opinion  that  Captain  A.  ConoUy  is 

*  Tell  Moostafah  (Captain  A.  C/s  sei^  the  person  alluded  to,  and  as  the 


524  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

There  is  nothing  more  painful  than  this  in  all  the 
history  of  the  Central- Asian  war.  It  would  be  unjust 
to  encourage  a  belief  in  the  reader's  mind  that  efforts 
ivere  not  made  to  compass  the  liberation  of  Colonel 
Stoddart.  From  the  time  when  Major  Pottinger  first 
received  at  Herat  intimation  of  his  friend's  captivity, 
and  wrote  to  the  Ameer  a  protest  against  the  outrage  he 
had  committed,  to  a  date  long  subsequent  to  the  deaths 
of  Stoddart  and  ConoUy,  continual  efforts  were  made, 
both  from  the  side  of  India  and  of  England,  to  accom- 
plish this  great  object.  Todd  did  all  that  he  could  do 
from  Herat;  Abbott  and  Shakespear  did  all  that  they 
could  do  from  Khiva ;  Macnaghten  did  all  that  he  could 
do  fi:om  Caubul ;  Lord  Auckland  did  all  that  he  could  do 
from  Calcutta.  From  London,  Lord  Palmerston  directed 
our  ambassadors  at  St.  Petersburgh  and  Constantinople 
to  obtain  the  agency  of  the  Courts  at  which  they  were 
resident;  and  both  the  Sultan  and  Count  Nesselrode 
wrote  urgent  letters  to  Bokhara  in  behalf  of  the  British 
prisoners.*  But  when  all  this  is  related,  it  still  appears 
that  more  regard  might  have  been  shown  for  Stoddart's 
position,  and  that  if  there  had  been  greater  promptitude 

letter  proceeds  to  say  that  the  effects  story,  and  struck  Stoddart*s  name  out 
of  the  deceased  are  at  Bokhara,aDd  can  of  the  army  list,  from  the  17th  of  June, 
be  sent  when  required  ;  and  as  Moos-  1842.  I  believe  tliis  really  to  have 
tafah  had  no  uncle,  to  whom  could  been  the  date  of  their  deaths.  Major 
the  description  apply  ?  I  fear  there  Rawlinson,  on  the  morning  of  the 
can  be  no  reason  to  doubt  the  death  16th  of  September,  1842,  met  one  of 
of  the  above-named  officer.  Colonel  Stoddart*s  servants  near  Caubul,  and 
Stoddart  is,  from  native  report,  said  to  the  man,  whom  he  knew,  informed 
be  alive,  and  still  in  confinement." —  him  that  he  had  come  direct  from 
[^MS,  Becords.^  Bokhara,  having  started  immediately 
This  is  mere  conjecture;  and  by  no  after  the  execution  of  his  master. — 
means  tallies  with  the  more  credible  IMS,  Notes."]  The  reader  may  con- 
account  of  the  execution  of  the  two  suit  the  works  of  Captain  Grover  and 
prisoners.    On  the  8rd  of  November,  Dr.  Wolff. 

1842,  the  Supreme  Government  as-  *  See  the  Edinburgh  Review^  J^y^ 

sumed  that  Conolly  was  still  alive.  1845,  for  an  account  of  these  efforts. 

[See  letter  from  Mr.  Maddock  quoted  The  paper  derives  additional   value 

mnte,  page  518,  note.]     But  the  home  from  the  assignment  of  its  authorship 

authorities  adopted  Saleh  Mahomed's  to  Sir  John  M*NeilL 


NEGLECT  OF  COLONEL  STODDART.         525 

in  answering  the  references  made  by  him  to  the  home  au- 
thorities, he  might  have  taken  advantage  of  a  favorable 
change  in  the  feelings  of  the  Ameer,  and  of  his  own  cir- 
cumstances, to  take  his  departure  from  Bokhara.  Certain 
it  is  that  Stoddart  felt  acutely  the  culpable  indiflference 
to  his  fate  displayed  by  the  British- Government.  As  far 
back  as  the  July  of  the  preceding  year  he  had  written: 

News  from  me  you  will  not  expect,  nor  have  I  the  least  word 
of  interest  to  oflfer  you,  except  that  1  am  waiting  the  replies  of 
government,  before  I  am  finally  released  and  take  my  departure. 
Nothing  can  be  more  slack  than  the  time  and  means  taken  to 
provide  me  with  those  replies,  and  my  disgust  perfectly  negatives 
any  attempt  to  write  a  commonly  agreeable  note.  My  last  news 
from  Caubul,  dated  June  6,  says  that  poor  Todd  is  there  await- 
ing, if  possible,  a  mitigation  of  his  sentence.  ConoUy  is  not  yet 
here  from  Kokan,  nor  have  my  messengers  to  him  yet  returned. 
They  conveyed  the  orders  from  Caubul,  and  an  invitation  from 
the  Ameer,  to  return  bv  this  route.* 

*  Colonel  Stoddart  to  Major  Ratr/tn-  present  aspect  of  affairs  it  does  not 

son:  BokTuir a,  July  7,  IQAl.  MS.  Cor^  seem  necessary  to  continue  the  re- 

respondence.    It  may  be  gathered  from  striction  which  had  at  first  been  im- 

this  letter  that  Stoddart  had  no  inten-  posed,  his  Lordship  in  Council  autho- 

tion  of  awaiting  Conolly's  arrival  at  rises  you  to  permit  Captain  Conolly 

Bokhara;  and  that  Conolly  proceeded  to  proceed  from  Khiva  to  Kokund,  if 

thither   under  orders  from   Caubul,  he  should  think  it  expedient,  and  if 

and  an  invitation  from  the  Ameer,  he  finds  that  he  can  do  so  without 

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  con-  exciting  serious  distrust  and  jealousy 

trot,  in  some  measure,  the  flood  of  at  the  former  place.     In  his  personal 

sympathy  which  sets  in  so  strongly  intercourse  with  the  Khan  of  Kokund, 

towards  Arthur  Conolly,  by  asserting  he  will  be  guided  by  the  instructions 

that  he  was  not  authorised  to  pro-  which  have  been  issued,  prescribing 

cced    even  as  far  as   Kokund,  and  the  purport  of  his  written  communi- 

that  he  therefore  brought  his  mis-  cations.  Captain  Conolly  may,  in  such 

fortunes  down  upon  his  own  head,  a  journey,  find  increased  means  of 

But  I  have  before  me  the  strongest  using  an  useful  influence  at  Bokhara 

proof  that  Conolly  was  authorised  by  for  the  release  of  Colonel  Stoddart ; 

the  Supreme  Government  to  proceed  and  his  Lordship  in  Council  need  not 

to  Kokund,  and  to  use  liis  best  en-  add,  that  he  would  wish  every  such 

deavours  to  obtain  the  liberation  of  means  to  be  employed  with  the  ut- 

Colonel  Stoddart.      In  a  letter,  an  roost  earnestness  and  diligence  for 

official  copy  of  which  is  now  before  that  purpose." — [Mr,  Maddock  to  Sir 

me,  the  Cnief  Secretary  writes  to  the  TT.  Macnaghten:  jD^c.  28,  1840.  MS, 

Envoy  and   Minister :   "  As  in  the  Records."] 


626  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

On  the  28th  of  February,  1842,  he  wrote  again,  as  a 
kind  of  endorsement  to  one  of  ConoUy's  letters : 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  GOVERNMENT  IN  INDIA. 

Sib, 

The  Governor-General  in  Council  will  be  informed  by 
the  accompanying  abstract  how  far  my  position  here  [and  that  of 
Captain  ConoUi/]  has  been  sacrificed. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  obedient,  humble  servant, 

Charles  Stoddart. 

The  words  within  brackets  were  erased — most  pro- 
bably by  ConoUy.* 

But  Stoddart,  though  he  may  have  resented  the  in- 
justice of  sacrificing  him  to  no  purpose,  was  ready  to 
become  a  sacrifice  if,  by  so  being,  he  could  promote  the 
interests  of  his  country.  "  I  beg  sincerely,"  he  wrote  on 
the  5th  of  April,  "  that  no  one  will  regret  any  sacrifice 
of  me,  for  it  is  nothing  at  all.  It  may  yet  not  be  requi- 
site —but  if  it  be,  I  regard  the  probable  result,  from  the 
action  of  government  in  doing  justice  to  others,  and 
bringing  all  these  countries  to  reasonable  conduct,  as 
fully  compensating  a  much  greater  sacrifice  than  that  of 
so  humble  an  individual  as  I  am."f  If  anything  could 
increase  the  sorrow  with  which  we  contemplate  the  fate 
of  this  brave  man,  it  would  be  the  perusal  of  such  noble 
sentences  as  these. 

It  was  under  a  high  and  chivalrous  sense  of  duty  to 
his  government  that  Colonel  Stoddart  continued  to  face 
the  dangers  of  his  position  at  Bokhara,  after  he  might 
have  escaped  from  them ;  and  it  was  under  an  equally 

*  Two  other  notes  were  written  by  hear,'*  wrote  Stoddart.      "  Keep  all 

the  prisonerson  the  back  of  this  paper:  friends  informed  of  my  health,  and 

one  to  Miss  Stoddart  at  Norwicn,  and  don*t  let  them  be  disturbed  by  ru- 

the  other  to  John  Conolly  at  Caubul.  mours,*'  wrote  Conolly. 

"  Don't  believe  all  you  hear  or  may  f  MS.  Correspondence. 


LETTER  TO  THE  KHAN  OF  BOKHARA.       527 

Strong  sense  of  duty  that  Captain  ConoUy  made  his  way 
to  the  inhospitable  city.  To  describe  them  officially  as 
*4nnocent  travellers,"  was  clearly  a  misapplication  of 
language ;  and  yet,  when  on  the  famous  1st  of  October, 
1842,  Lord  Ellenborough  addressed  the  following  letter 
to  the  Ameer  of  Bokhara,  he  so  described  them  both : 

Simlah.  October  Ist,  1842. 

A.O. 

The  Queen  of  England,  my  royal  mistress^  has  sanctioned 

my  coming  to  India,  to  conduct  its  government,  dnd  direct  its 
armies. 

On  my  arrival  I  found  that  great  disasters  had  befallen  those 
armies,  and  much  injury  had  been  inflicted  on  my  countrymen 
and  the  people  of  India  by  the  treacherous  Afghans,  under  Ma- 
homed Akbar  Khan. 

In  forty  days  from  the  time  when  I  directed  the  British  armies, 
reinforced  from  India,  to  move  forward,  three  great  victories  have 
been  gained  over  the  Afghans ;  the  city  and  citadel  of  Ghuznee 
have  been  destroved,  and  now  the  Balk  Hissar  of  Caubul  is  in 
my  power. 

Thus,  by  God's  aid,  have  I  afflicted  with  merited  punishment 
the  murderers  of  their  own  king  and  of  a  British  minister.  In 
this  I  have  avenged  the  cause  of  all  sovereigns  and  of  all  nations. 

The  wife  and  family  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  are  prisoners, 
and  my  soldiers  are  now  conducting  them  to  the  sea. 

Thus  are  the  wicked  punished,  even  in  their  wives  and  fami- 
lies. 

I  hear  that  you,  too,  have  gained  great  successes,  at  which  I 
rejoice,  if  you  had  just  ground  of  complaint  against  your  enemy. 

It  is  in  the  midst  of  successes  that  clemency  most  becomes  the 
conqueror,  and  gives  to  him  an  extent  of  permanent  fame  which 
often  does  not  attend  on  victory. 

I  was  informed,  when  I  reached  India,  that  you  detained  in 
confinement  two  Englishmen,  supposing  them  to  have  entertained 
designs  against  you.  This  must  have  been  your  reason,  for  no 
prince  detains  an  innocent  traveller. 

I  am  informed  that  they  are  innocent  travellers.  As  individuals 
they  could  not  entertain  designs  against  you ;  and  I  know  they 


528  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY- 

were  not  employed  by  their  government  in  such  designs,  for  their 
government  is  friendly  to  you. 

Send  them  away  towards  Persia.  It  will  redound  to  your 
honour.  They  shall  never  return  to  give  you  offence,  but  be  sent 
back  to  their  own  country. 

Do  this  as  you  wish  to  have  my  friendship. 

Ellenbobough.* 

So  ^manifest  a'repudiation''of  the  official  character  of 
these  two  officer^  was  not  right ;  and  it  has  been  said,  by 
one  whose  zeal  and  enthusiasm  overlaid  his  judgment 
and  discretion,  but  who  is  still  entitled  to  honourable 
mention  for  his  generous  exertions  in  a  hopeless  cause,f 
that  this  very  letter,  in  all  likelihood,  caused  the  execu- 
tion of  the  prisoners.  To  describe  them  as  travellers 
was,  it  is  said,  to  proclaim  them  as  spies.  But  the  letter, 
however  dangerous  in  itself,  was  at  least  harmless  in  its 
results.  Before  it  was  even  written,  the  "  innocent  tra- 
vellers" had  gone  to  a  land  where  the  tyranny  of  princes 
could  not  reach  them — where  the  wicked  cease  from 
troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest.  J 

♦  MS.  Correspondence,  damp  and  attrition.    The  perusal  of 

t  Captain  Grover.  the  article  in  the  Edinburgh  Review, 

X  The  extracts  from  Captain  Co-  mentioned  in  a  former  note,  enables 

nolly's  letters  and  journals  in  this  me  to  supply  the  hiatus  at  pa"re  504, 

chapter  are  all  made  from  the  ori-  the  party  there  spoken  of  being  the 

ginals,  and  have,  in  some  places,  been  Meer  Shub,  or  Master  of  the  Police, 

deciphered  witli  much  difficulty,  the  At  page  507,  the  name  of  the  Kus- 

manuscript,  written  in  very  minute  sian  colonel,  Boutenoff,  or  BouteneiflT, 

characters,  being  greatly  defaced  by  is  incorrectly  printed  BontenoflT. 


AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL.  529 


CHAPTER  VI. 

[April- July:  1842.] 

Affairs  at  Caubul— Elevation  of  Futteh  Junff— Opposition  of  the  Barnkzyes 
— Arrival  of  Akbar  Khan— His  Policy — Attack  on  the  Balla  Hissar— Jts 
Capture— Conduct  of  Akbar  Khan — Barukzje  Strife — Defeat  of  Zemaun 
Khan — Situation  of  the  Hostages  and  Prisoners. 

On  the  death  of  Shah  Soojah  there  commenced  in 
Caubul  a  civil  war.  The  whole  city  was  thrown  into 
convulsion.  Futteh  Jung,  the  second  son  of  the  mur- 
dered Shah,  was  proclaimed  King.  He  was  a  man  of 
weak  understanding  and  infamous  character;  but  he 
was  believed  to  be  friendly  to  the  British  Government, 
and  he  both  hated  and  feared  the  Barukzyes.  In  him- 
self a  mere  cypher,  he  could  have  done  nothing  to  resist 
the  encroachments  of  that  powerful  tribe ;  but  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  threw  all  the  weight  of  his  influence  into 
the  scales  in  favour  of  the  Prince,  and  for  some  time 
they  seemed  equally  balanced.  The  Naib  cared  nothing 
for  the  Prince ;  but  he  scented  the  royal  treasures,  and 
where  the  money  lay  the  thickest,  there  was  sure  to  be 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan. 

In  such  troublous  times  as  he  had  now  fallen  upon, 
the  Prince  had  little  taste  for  royalty.  He  remembered 
the  fate  of  his  father;  and  shrunk  from  the  perilous  ex- 
citement in  which  he  was  now  about  to  be  plunged. 

VOL.  II.  2  M 


530  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL, 

Weak,  too,  as  he  was,  he  had  sagacity  enough  to  per- 
ceive that  British  power  was  again  on  the  ascendant, 
and  that  whatever  might  be  the  result  of  the  internecine 
strife  which  was  now  convulsing  the  capital,  the  supre- 
macy of  the  British  would  be  speedily  re-established. 
It  was  expedient,  therefore,  he  thought,  to  exert  himself 
to  the  utmost,  to  obtain  the  favorable  consideration  of 
his  old  Feringhee  allies ;  so  he  despatched  the  following 
letter  to  Captain  Macgregor  at  Jellalabad,  pleading  both 
for  himself  and  the  memory  of  his  murdered  father : 

High  ik  Place, 

The  astounding  event  of  the  Shah's  murder  wiU  be  known 
to  you.  These  treacherous  tyrants,  how  tyrannical  has  been  their 
act !  If  the  Shah  had  not  been  united  to  the  intereste  of  the 
English,  and  had  not  attended  and  acted  according  to  their  ad- 
vice, why  should  he  have  met  with  such  an  end,  and  why  was 
be  with  them  until  the  last^  save  that  he  hoped  for  their  co- 
operation? They  placed  that  ungrateful  man,  the  Nizam-oo- 
dowlah  (Oosman  Khan),  in  power,  and,  by  their  acting  according 
to  his  advice,  matters  came  to  such  a  pass.  The  Shah  was  aware 
of  the  treachery  and  disaffection  of  these  persons,  and  how  much 
soever  he  warned  the  English  of  this,  it  was  of  no  use.  It  was 
because  the  Shah  looked  upon  himself  and  the  English  as  one, 
and  attended  to  their  pleasure,  that  the  revolution  took  place; 
but  this  is  known  to  you.  The  people,  high  and  low,  having  sealed 
the  Koran,  sent  their  deputies  with  it  to  the  Shah,  stating  that, 
if  the  Shah  would  forsake*  the  English  and  ally  himself  to  Islam, 
they  would  acknowledge  him  as  their  King.  The  Shah  replied: 
*^They  and  I  are  one;  I  am  not  separated  from  them."  These 
bastards  united  and  proclaimed  the  Shah  an  infidel.  The  Shah 
told  the  English  to  leave  the  cantonments  and  enter  the  Balla 
Hissar.  The  English  did  not  consent  to  this.  The  Shah  then 
endeavoured  to  conciliate  the  rebels,  and  night  and  day  took 
oaths  with  them,  with  the  view  of  carrying  out  the  plans  of  the 
English.  After  the  English  left  the  cantonments,  the  people 
tendered  to  the  Shah  their  submission,  and  endeavoured  to  per- 
suade the  King  to  attack  Jellalabad.    The  Shah,  by  a  thousand 


LETTER  OP  FUTTEH  JUNG.  581 

devices^  managed  for  two  and  a  half  months  to  put  them  off,  in 
order  that  the  British  reinforcements  might  reach  you.  All  the 
money  that  the  Shah  possessed  he  gave  to  the  people.  The  people 
gave  out  that  as  the  Shah  would  not  go  to  Jellalabad,  it  was  evi- 
dent that  he  was  friendly  to  the  (British)  infidels;  he  and  they 
were  one.  The  Shah  felt  embarrassed.  He  said  to  his  confidential 
servants :  "  If  I  go  to  Jellalabad,  lakhs  of  people  would  collect,  and 
I  should  be  unable  to  control  them,  and  if  by  this  time  the  British 
reinforcements  had  not  arrived,  it  would  be  bad  for  the  cause." 
The  King,  not  knowing  that  the  reinforcements  had  arrived, 
agreed  to  leave  the  city,  but  determined  not  to  reach  Jellalabad 
for  twenty  days — 500,000  registered  troops — ^and  if  be  saw  that  it 
was  to  their  advantage,  he  would  join  the  British,  On  the  22nd 
Suffur  (5th  of  April),  the  Shah's  murder  took  place;  on  the  23rd 
Suffur,  the  Populzye  nobles,  and  Ameen-ooUah  Khan,  Loghuree, 
placed  me  on  the  throne.  Even  as  the  Shah  was  the  friend  and 
well-wisher  of  the  English,  so  am  I  the  friend  and  well-wisher  of 
the  English.  On  account  of  this  friendship  the  King  sacrificed 
his  life  and  property.  Had  be  accepted  the  friendship  of  the 
Mussulmans,  the  Shah  would  neither  have  been  proclaimed  an 
infidel,  nor  have  thus  met  with  his  death  from  the  hands  of  the 
Barukzyes.  I  am  not  pleased  at  having  been  placed  on  the 
throne  by  these  people.  If  God  places  me  on  the  throne,  and  if 
this  country  is  again  in  the  possession  of  the  British,  and  they 
support  me  on  the  throne  and  in  getting  my  revenge  from  these 
tyrants  who  killed  the  Shah,  then  I  shall  be  pleased.  The  Shah 
sacrificed  his  life  and  property  on  account  of  the  English,  and 
now  it  is  for  them  to  uphold  the  reputation  of  his  family.  If  in 
a  few  days  your  army  does  not  arrive  at  Caubul,  they  will  carry 
off  the  Shah's  family.  Write  speedily,  and  tell  me  what  I  am  to 
do,  and  what  the  family  of  the  Shah  is  to  do.  It  is  necessary  that 
the  British  should  arrive  soon.  The  death  of  the  Shah  has  caused 
disunion  among  the  chiefs.  It  is  necessary  that  your  army,  with 
a  large  army  of  the  Sikhs  (Gt>d  willing),  diould  advance.  When 
I  was  first  placed  on  the  throne,  the  people  were  considering  the 
death  of  the  Barukzyes,  but  on  hearing  that  your  army  had  arrived 
at  Jellalabad,  and  that  Mahomed  Akbar  had  been  defeated,  the 
people  agreed  to  sxispend  hostilities  among  us,  and  endeavoured 
to  induce  me  to  attack  Jellalabad.     Up  to  the  present  time  this 

2m2 


532  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

is  what  they  are  striving  to  effect,  but  I  tell  them,  that  if  they 
will  in  the  first  place  avenge  the  Shah's  death,  then  Til  go  to 
Jellalabad.  But  I  am  powerless,  and  shall  anxiously  expect  a 
letter  from  you.  Tell  me  how  to  act.  To  defeat  this  people  is 
at  present  very  easy,  for  preat  is  their  disunion.  Start  soon  for 
Caubul.* 

The  Prince  had  been  proclaimed  King  by  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  and  the  Populyzes ;  but  the  Barukzyes  re- 
fused to  recognise  him.  Again  they  set  up  the  Newab 
Zemaun  Khan,  and  openly  defied  the  Suddozye  power. 
Soon  the  two  contending  parties  broke  out  into  open 
hostilities.  Ameen-ooUah  Kian  and  his  puppet  were 
the  first  to  draw  the  sword.  On  the  1st  of  May  there 
was  fighting  from  house  to  house — the  whole  city  was 
in  commotion.  On  the  following  day,  success  began  to 
declare  itself  on  the  side  of  the  Barukzyes.  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  made  a  false  move,  and  disastrously  over- 
reached himself.  Believing  that  the  act  would  dis- 
hearten the  Barukzyes,  he  seized  the  person  of  Meer 
Hadjee,  the  chief  Moollah.  But  very  different  was  the 
real  from  the  anticipated  effect  of  this  outrage.  Nearly 
all  the  townspeople,  before  neutral,  rose  to  avenge  this 
insult  offered  to  their  High  Priest.  The  Kohistanees 
joined  them.  The  Hadjee  was  released.  But  popular 
indignation  ran  high  against  Ameen-oollah  Khan.  His 
house  was  burnt.  His  property  was  plundered.  His  ser- 
vants were  seized.  Compelled  to  seek  safety  in  flight, 
he  flung  himself  into  the  Balla  Hissar. 

T  he  Prince  made  a  show  of  welcoming  him,  but 
secretly  declared  that  he  would  willingly  surrender  him 
and  his  Populzye  associates  to  the  British,  if  Pollock 
would  advance  upon  Caubul — that  one  of  his  main 
objects,  indeed,  in  opening  the  gates  to  them  was  to  have 

•  MS.  Records. 


PROGRESS  OF  CIVIL  WAR,  633 

the  rebels  more  securely  in  his  power.*  The  Naib  knew 
that  his  position  was  a  dangerous  one,  and  declared  that 
he  would  throw  himself  on  the  mercy  of  the  British  and 
take  his  chance  of  being  hanged.  There  was  a  more 
unrelenting  enemy  beyond  the  walls  of  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  Barukzyes  were  eager  to  destroy  him. 

The  contest  now  raged  furiously.  The  guns  of  the 
Balla  Hissar  were  opened  upon  the  city.  Multitudes  of 
the  townspeople  fled  in  dismay.  There  were  5000  men 
in  the  citadel;  there  was  no  lack  of  provisions.  The 
money  was  all  in  the  hands  of  the  Prince ;  and  he  dis- 
bursed it  freely  to  his  adherents.  But  the  Barukzyes 
were  miserably  poor.  They  could  only  raise  money  by 
the  sale  of  jewels  and  the  exaction  of  fines ;  and  the 
Kohistanees  and  others  who  flocked  to  their  standard 
envied  the  fortunate  followers  of  the  more  opulent 
Prince.f 

It  was  not  likely  that  Akbar  Khan  would  regard 
with  imconcem  these  proceedings  at  the  capital.  He 
was  awaiting  the  return  of  Captain  Mackenzie  from 
Jellalabad,  when  intelligence  of  the  disturbed  state  of 
affairs  at  Caubul  was  brought  to  him.  Determining  first, 
however,  to  learn  the  result  of  the  mission  to  General 
Pollock's  camp,  he  resolved  to  set  out  for  the  scene  of 

*  On  the  5th  of  May,  Mohun  Lai  English  Government  on  the  throne) 

wrote :  "  The  Prince  (JFutteh  Jung)  till  the  arrival  of  General  Pollock, 

is  very,  very  anxious  that  the  Grene-  Secondly,  he  may  keep  them  quietly 

ral  should  march  to  Caubul ;  he  ap-  in  his  possession,  and  catch  them  as 

pears  now  involved  in  difficulties,  and  rebels,  when  you  approach.** — IMS. 

undoubtedly  is  friendlyto  our  govern-  Records/] 

ment.    He  says  he  would  not  allow        f  *^  The  Prince,*'  said  Mohun  Lai, 

Ameen-oollah  and  the  Populzye  rebels  "is  of  course  very  liberal  to  those 

to  come  into  the  palace,  the  evening  that  espouse   his    cause,  while  the 

they  were  obliged  to  leave  the  city,  Barukzyes  pay  verylittle  by  selling 

but  by  allowing  them  to  come  in,  he  jewels  and  finery.    The  Kohistanees 

entertained  two  objects.    Firstly,  to  or  disciples  of  Meer  Hadjee  are  to- 

cmploy  their  services  against  the  ene-  wards  tne  Barukzyes;  but  they  groan 

mies  of  both  states  (the  Barukzyes,  to  receive  money  lesser  than  those 

who  murdered  the  Envoy  and  also  who  are  with  the  rrince.*' — IMS.Re^ 

his  father,  the  King,  placed  by  the  cords."} 


584  AFFAIRS  AT  OAUBUL. 

Strife,  and  to  take  one  or  two  of  the  English  officers  with 
him.  Mackenzie  returned  on  the  3rd  of  May,  and  was 
immediately  despatched  by  the  Sirdar  on  a  second  mis- 
sion to  Jellalabad,  whilst  Akbar  Ehan,  taking  Pottinger 
and  Troup  with  him,  set  out  on  the  following  day  for 
the  capital. 

Arrived  at  Caubul,  he  played  his  game  with  some 
address.  Sedulously  giving  currency  to  the  intelligence 
that  he  had  been  in  treaty  with  General  Pollock,  who 
was  said  to  have  recognised  his  authority,  he  enhanced 
his  own  importance  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen,  and 
sowed  disappointment  among  the  adherents  of  the  royal 
party.  Many  who  had  before  been  neutral,  now,  be- 
lieving that  the  British  were  on  amicable  terms  with 
the  Sirdar,  openly  espoused  his  cause.  Khan  Shereen 
Ehan  and  the  Euzzilbashes  had  hitherto  remained  in- 
active ;  but  feeling  the  importance  of  their  coadjutancy, 
Akbar  Khan  made  strenuous  efforts  to  obtain  it,  and 
gained  at  last  a  promise  of  support  *  From  day  to  day 
there  was  continual  strife  and  much  fightmg.  The 
advantage  was  for  the  most  part  on  the  side  of  the 
Barukzyes.  The  Prince  had  thrown  up  some  outworks 
round  the  Balla  Hissar;  but  partly  owing  to  the  weak- 
ness and  partly  to  the  treachery  of  the  guards,  they  had 
been  carried  by  the  enemy .f    Pottinger  witnessed  some 

*  "  Khan  Shereen  Khan,*'  wrote  son  to  Khan  Shereen  Khan,  and  per- 

Mohun  Lai,  on  the  9thof  Maj,  '^  came  suaded  him,  after  a  long  talk,  to  side 

last  night  to  me  and  said,  that  the  with  him  to  oppose  the  Prince  towards 

Barukzyes  press  upon  him  to  sidewith  Bence  Hissar.    When  Mahomed  Ze- 

them  to  oppose  the  Prince ;  and  if  he  maun  Khan  heard  this  he  got  jealous, 

does  agree  ne  is  sure  he  will  be  ruined,  and  sent  a  message  to  Khan  Shereen 

He  says  he  is  going  to  send  his  wives  Khan,  if  he  did  no  go  himself  or  send 

to  some  of  the  country  forts,  and  then  his  son  to  assist  Soojah-ool-Dowlah, 

either  go  into  the  Balla  Hissar  or  wait  as  the  Newab  had  requested  him,  he 

u]>on  you  at  Jellalabad ;  and  then  he  had  better  not  go,  with  Mahomed 

thinks  that  the  whole  of  the  Persians  Akbar  too.    The  latter  at  last  suc- 

will  foUow  him.'* — And  again,  on  May  ceeded.*' — [_MS.  Records.'] 

10th :  ^'  Yesterday,  about  noon,  ...  f  '*  When  Mahomed  Akbar,**  wrote 

Mahomed  Akbar  ithan  came  in  per-  Mohun  Lai,  **  appeared  in  the  field 


f 
SITUATION  OF  TfiB  FBINCE.  535 

of  these  engagements,  and  wrote  of  them  as  most  con- 
temptible affairs. 

It  soon  became  only  too  probable  that  the  Balla 
Hissar  itself  would  fall  before  the  Barukzyes.  The 
energy  and  vigour  of  Akbar  Khan  and  his  confederates 
greatly  exceeded  that  of  the  wretched  Prince  and  his 
few  intelrested  supporters.  Fearful  of  this,  Futteh  Jung 
continued  to  write  pressing  letters  to  the  British  autho- 
rities at  Jellalabad,  urging  them  to  push  on  to  his  relief, 
and  Mohun  Lai  gave  cogency  to  the  request  by  setting 
forth  the  probability  of  the  Balla  Hissar  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  Barukzyes,  and  the  strength  which  that 
party  would  derive,  not  only  from  the  occupation  of 
such  a  commanding  position,  but  from  the  possession 
of  the  royal  treasures.  Like  his  father,  however,  the 
Prince  continued  to  declare  that  his  money  was  failing, 
and  to  request  the  British  to  supply  him  with  fiinds 
to  carry  on  the  war.  But  more  than  all  he  clamoured 
for  the  advance  of  the  British  army.  On  the  11th  of 
May  he  wrote  to  Captain  Macgregor : 

The  reason  of  the  present  contest  is  this.  I  wished  to  excite 
a  dispute  between  the  Barukzyes  and  the  other  wicked  men^ 
with  a  view  that  they  should  have  no  leisure  even  to  touch  their 
own  heads,  and  thus  the  English  army  may  reach  here  un- 
molested. To  effect  this  cause,  whatever  gold  and  silver  I  had 
has  been  paid  to  the  people,  with  the  object  of  securing  the 
interests  of  the  British.*  Now  I  have  very  little  cash  remain- 
ing in  the  treasury — enough  only  to  support  me  for  some  ten  or 

opposite  the  first  or  distant  fort,  Ab-  fly  to  the  Balla  Hissar.    Mahomed 

dm  Salem  became  traitor,  and  waited  Akbar's  people  followed  the  fiieitives 

on  Mahomed  Akbar,  who  gave  him  a  to  the  very  gates  of  the  Balla  Hissar, 

horse  and  desired  him  to  go  to  his  and  possessed  the  ^un  of  the  Prince. 

Tillage.    Upon  this  the  people  of  the  Mahomed  Akbar  nad  taken  Major 

Prince,  who  were  stationed  in  the  Pottinjzer  also  with  him  to  the  fight.** 

forts  between  tlie  fort  of  Abdul  Sa-  —IMS,  Records,^ 

lem  and  Balla  EUssar,  became  dis-  *  **In  conseqttenceof  esiablishinff 

heartened  and  cowardly,  obliged  to  the  British  harmony.*' — IMohunLafi 

desert  the  forts  wiUiout  fighting,  and  TraiuUUion.'] 


S36  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

fifteen  days  more.  After  that  period,  without  assistance  from  tho 
British,  I  shall  be  reduced  to  the  greatest  difficulty.  The  men 
of  the  world  are  the  disciples  and  worshippers  of  money.  If  you 
will  not  raise  the  victorious  standard  of  the  British  troops  quickly, 
or  do  not  send  me  reinforcements  within  a  few  days,  all  the  people 
will  desert  me  on  account  of  not  having  money,  and  the  Barukzyes 
will  then  have  the  upper-hand  over  me. 

If  the  Barukzyes  establish  their  power,  serious  evil  is  to  be 
apprehended;  and  the  household  of  the  British  ally  (Shah  Soojah) 
will  be  destroyed.  After  this  there  will  be  nothing  in  store  for 
us  but  repentance  and  disgrace.  It  is  as  clear  to  all  people  as  the 
sun,  that  I  am  soliciting  the  assistance  of  the  friends  and  nations 
of  my  late  father.  In  delaying  this  object  many  dangers  may 
arise,  and  much  harm  may  befall  the  needy.  In  such  a  crisis  as 
this^  all  objects  will  be  easily  gained;  and  the  afiairs  whicli  are 
now  reduced  to  a  state  of  disorder  will,  without  much  difficulty, 
be  brought  into  order  again. 

If  you  are  delaying  your  march  on  account  of  supplies  of 
grain,  you  need  not  care  for  this.  If  it  pleases  God  that  I  should 
recover  my  authority,  there  will  be  thousands  of  "  Khurwars" 
(measures  often  maunds)  of  grain,  as  well  as  plenty  of  fodder  for 
the  horses. 

I  have  heard  that  the  Bombay  forces  have  reached  Candahar, 
and  also  marched  thence  to  this  quarter.  It  would  be  highly 
desirable,  if  the  victorious  army  of  Calcutta  should  possess  this 
country  before  the  arrival  of  the  Bombay  forces,  that  it  should 
show  the  world  that  your  arras  alone  have  gained  the  victory. 
Although  the  army  of  both  sides  belongs  to  the  same  govern- 
ment, I  write  thus  because  I  wish  you  well.* 

On  the  day  after  this  letter  was  written,  three  holy 
men  presented  themselves  before  the  Prince,  with  over- 
tures of  peace  from  the  Sirdar.  They  set  forth  that 
whatever  oaths  Futteh  Jung  might  desire  the  Baruk- 
zye  chief  to  swear  to  him,  would  be  solemnly  sworn 
on  the  Koran.  "Of what  avail  are  oaths,"  asked  the 
Prince;  and  sending  for  several  Korans  from  another 
apartment,  showed  the  Syuds  how  they  were  covered 

♦  MS,  Records. 


ATTEMPTS  AT  NEGOTIATION.  537 

with  the  seals  of  the  Barukzye,  the  Douranee,  the 
Caubullee,  the  Persian,  and  the  Kohistanee  chiefs. 
"  This,"  added  the  Prince,  "  is  God's  holy  book,  in 
which  all  the  faithful  believe.  Look  at  these  seals  and 
the  oaths  of  fidelity  written  upon  the  margin,  declaring 
that  the  enemies  of  the  royal  family  are  the  enemies  of 
Mahomed — and  yet  the  Barukiyes  have  murdered  the 
King,  my  father.  If  there  be  any  other  Koran  sent 
from  Heaven,  let  the  Barukzyes  swear  solemnly  upon 
it — this  has  been  tried  too  often,  and  too  often  found 
wanting."  The  Syuds  were  then  dismissed.  Nothing 
was  done  towards  a  satisfactory  arrangement.  So  Ma- 
homed Shah  Khan  was  sent  to  conduct  the  negotiations 
with  the  Suddozye  Prince. 

What  were  the  proposals  made  to  the  Prince,  and  in 
what  light  he  regarded  them,  may  be  gathered  from 
the  letter  which,  on  the  following  day,  he  addressed  to 
Captain  Macgregor: 

The  circumstances  of  this  quarter  are  as  follows.  Since  the 
arrival  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  the  Barukzyes  at  the  head  of 
the  Ghilzyes,  Caubullees^  and  the  Kohistanees,  attacked  the 
trenches  I  had  built  out  at  a  distance.  Some  of  them  were  taken 
by  the  enemy  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  my  guards,  and 
others  in  consequence  of  the  treachery  of  my  people.  All  the 
trenches  round  the  Balla  Hissar  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  we  are  now  in  a  perfect  siege.  Yesterday,  Mahomed 
Shah  Khan,  Ghilzye,  came  to  treat  with  Ameen-ooUah  Khan  into 
the  Balla  Hissar,  and  the  result  of  their  negotiation,  after  solemn 
oaths,  was  as  follows: — ^That  I  should  be  acknowledged  as  King 
— Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  as  Minister  of  State — and  that  Ameen* 
oollah  Khan  should  hold  the  situation  of  Deputy  (**  Naib  ")  under 
the  minister.  After  this,  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  was  brought  to  my 
presence,  and  I  was  obliged  to  give  him  a  "  Khelat;"  but  agreeably 
to  the  advice  of  my  well-wishers,  I  deferred  giving  my  acquiescence 
to  the  result  of  their  negotiation  for  two  or  three  days  to  come. 

They  have  made  four  proposals  to  me, — Firstly,  that  I  should 
allow  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  to  be  my  minister,  and  Ameen- 


538  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

oollah  Khan  his  deputy.  They  are  then  both  to  raise  an  army 
and  to  go  and  fight  wil^  the  English  forces  coming  up  to  CaubuL 
Secondly,  they  will  stand  neutral,  if  I  like;  but  I  must  prepare  to 
go  and  oppose  the  British  troops.  Thirdly,  if  I  am  powerful,  I 
must  get  ready  to  wage  war  with  the  Barukzyes.  Fourthly, 
that  I  should  take  the  whole  family  of  the  late  King,  and  go 
wherever  I  Uke  to  go  with  them. 

It  appears  that  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  on  account  of  our  weak- 
ness, has  consented  to  their  proposals,  and  has  therefore  gone  out 
of  the  Balla  Hissar  to  have  a  conference  with  Mahomed  Akbar 
Khan«  These  proposals  have  perplexed  me  greatly,  and  I  am  lost 
in  speculation.  If  I  were  to  appoint  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  my 
minister,  he  would  raise  a  force  to  oppose  the  English,  and  I  should 
be  forced  to  give  up  my  artillery  to  him,  which  will  be  a  danger- 
ous business.  In  case  of  my  refusal,  the  family  of  the  late  martyr 
(King)  will  be  outraged. 

My  anxiety  for  your  departure  from  Jellalabad  for  Oaubul 
appears  thoroughly  useless.  It  is  now  forty  days  since  your 
victorious  army  has  passed  up  through  Khybur,  and  you  have  not 
yet  left  Jellalabad.  I  endeavoured  to  excite  a  dispute  among  the 
rebels,  with  the  view  that  the  English  army  should  reach  here 
without  opposition.  Although  I  have  successively  sent  letters 
through  Mohun  Lai,  asking  you  to  advance  immediately  to  this 
side,  but  no  symptoms  of  the  kind  have  yet  appeared.  In  such 
delay  dangerous  evils  are  to  be  apprehended. 

It  is  a  long  time  that  I  have  deputed  and  entrusted  Meerza 
Ameen-oollah  with  my  verbal  messages  to  you;  but  no  answer 
has  yet  reached  me  about  it.  You  should  quickly  reply  to  my 
letters,  as  well  as  the  messages  I  have  sent  you  by  him,  and  also 
let  me  know  the  day  of  your  march,  as  I  am  now  in  much  per- 
plexity. If  there  be  any  hope  of  your  immediate  advance,  I  will 
undergo  every  hardship  to  defend  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  engage 
the  rebels  in  fight.  In  case  of  any  more  delay  the  object  will  be 
lost,  and  an  easy  end  will  be  obtained  with  the  utmost  difficulty 
hereafter.     What  can  I  write  you  more  than  this?* 

Feeling  himself  utterly  powerless  to  resist  the  de- 
mands of  the  Barukzyes,  for  all  his  principal  supporters 
were  deserting  him,  the  Prince  now  placed  himself  in 

*  MS*  Records. 


FBOGBESS  OF  SEGOTIATIONS.  589 

the  hands  of  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  who  went  out  to  a 

conference  with  Mahomed  Shah  Ehan,  which  mutual 

distrust  nearly  strangled  in  the  womb^  and  consented  to 
the  first  of  these  propositions-*    Futf  eh  Jung  was  to  be 

*  With  reference  to  these  negotia-  the  Prince  without  hii  permission. 
tioDS,  Mohun  Lai  writes,  on  the  ISth  Having  said  this,  he  ordered  tlie  giins 
of  May :  **  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  to  open  upon  the  palace*  Upon  this 
came  out  and  stopped  near  the  tomb,  Maliomed  Akbar  sent  word  to  the 
at  a  distance  from  the  gate  of  the  eunners,  that  if  they  fired  any  more 
Balla  Hissar,  called  Shah  Shahdeed.  their  ears  should  be  cut  ofll  He  also 
He  sent  a  message  to  Ameen-oollah  begsed  the  Newab  not  to  do  anything 
that  he  wanted  to  speak,  and  begged  of  the  kind  until  he  received  his  final 
he  would  Come  out  to  meet  him.  advice.  Ameen-oollah  has  now  gone 
To  this  an  answer  was  sent,  that  if  to  the  camp  of  Mahomed  Akbar,  who 
Mahomed  Shah  would  come  close  to  received  him  with  much  cordiality, 
the  gate,  Ameen-oollah  would  receive  .  •  .  <  The  Prince  has  sent  me  a  mes- 
him  there.  Mahomed  Shah,  appre-  sage  that  he  agreed  to  the  first  pro- 
hending  treachery,  declined  going  too  posal  on  being  deserted  by  all  his 
near  the  gate ;  and  upon  this  Ameen-  people.  If  he  had  not  done  so, 
oollah  sent  bis  son  as  a  hostage  for  Ameen-oollah  Khan  would  have 
the  safety  of  Mahomed  Shah  ;  but  he  seized  him  and  given  Akbar  Khan 
did  not  retain  the  hostage,  but  ad-  possession  of  the  Balla  Hissar  ;  but  he 
vanced  with  a  few  men  to  meet  says,  that  when  Akbar  asks  for  money 
Ameen-oollah.  They  sate  and  had  a  from  him  to  pay  and  raise  the  forces 
secret  conference,  which  lasted  some  against  us,  he  will  put  off  the  pay- 
time  ;   after  which,  Mahomed  Shah  ment  from  day  to  day,  saying  that  he 

Khan  went  to  Mahomed  Akbar.  After    has  no  money He  has  sent  out 

two  hours  he  returned  to  Ameen-  all  the  Populzyes,  saying  that  he  does 
oollah,  who  conducted  him  to  the  not  trust  any  one.  He  has  now  the 
presence  of  Futteh  Jung  in  the  Balla  protection  only  of  a  few  Arabs  of  tlie 
Hissar.  He  said  to  the  Prince,  that  fialla  Hissar  and  1500  Indians,  lie 
Mahomed  Akbar  begged  him  not  to  has  no  courage — otherwise  no  one 
raise  disputes  amongst  the  Mussul-  could  take  the  Balla  Hissar.  Ma- 
mans  at  a  time  when  all  the  followers  homed  Akbar  has  acknowledged  tlie 
of  Mahomed  ought  to  unite  against  supremacy  of  the  Prince  only  because 
the  infidels.  If  he  were  a  friend  of  he  is  cunning ;  and  his  object  is  to 
the  Mussulman  cause  he  should  em-  arrest  the  internal  disputes  for  the 
brace  one  or  other  of  four  proposi-  present,  get  hold  of  the  Prince,  and 
tions.  (The  terms  stated  agree  with  possess  himself  of  his  money,  guns, 
those  in  the  Shah-zadah's  letter.)  &c.,  under  the  mask  of  friendship ;  and 
Agreeably  to  the  advice  of  Ameen*  if  unsuccessful  in  this  design,  he  will 
oollah,  the  Prince  was  obliged  to  give  undoubtedly  get  the  money  and  all 
his  consent  to  the  first  proposal.  On  the  military  stores  to  fight  with  us, 
this  he  gave  a  very  handsome  Khelat  which  is  his  fervent  desire.  Ameen- 
to  Mahomed  Shah  Elhan,  who  re-  oollah  went  over  to  Akbar,  because  he 
turned  to  Mahomed  Akbar.  This  found  that  all  the  Douranees  and  his 
morning  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  followers  were  traitors,  and  had  gone 
hearing  of  the  negotiations,  asked  over  to  the  Barukzyes,  notwithstand- 
who  was  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  that  ing  they  got  from  him  thousands  of 
he  should  enter  into  agreements  with  gold  mohurs.  He  thought,  that  having 


540  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

the  nominal  occupant  of  the  throne.  Akbar  Elhan  was 
to  be  minister;  and  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  his  Naib,  or 
deputy.  It  was  the  object  of  the  Sirdar  to  arrest  the 
internal  dissensions  which  were  so  weakening  the  great 
national  and  rehgious  cause,  to  obtain  possession  of  all 
the  available  money  and  munitions,  and  then  to  carry 
on  the  war  with  new  vigour  against  the  infidels. 

But  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan  was  the  recognised  chief 
of  the  Barukzye  party ;  and  he  now  asked  on  what  autho- 
rity the  Sirdar  ventured  without  his  sanction  to  make 
peace  with  the  Suddozyes.  There  appeared  to  be  every 
chance  of  an  open  rupture  between  them ;  and  scarcely 
had  Akbar  Khan  concluded  his  negotiations  with  the 
Prince,  then  the  Newab  made  a  hostile  demonstration, 
attacked  the  Balla  Hissar,  but  was  beaten  back  with 
much  slaughter.  It  was,  however,  currently  reported 
that  a  secret  understanding  existed  between  the  two 
Barukzye  chiefs,  whose  common  object  it  was  to  obtain 
possession  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  Two  or  three  days  after- 
wards they  were,  outwardly,  again  united.  An  attempt 
had  been  made  to  lure  the  Prince  to  an  interview  with 
Akbar  Khan  beyond  the  walls  of  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  Arabs  in  the  garrison,  who  remained  true  to  the 
royal  family,  dissuaded  the  Prince  from  exposing  him- 
self to  the  treachery  of  the  Sirdar;  mutual  distrust  soon 

made  liimself  the  eDemv  of  the  British  him,  some  in  fear,  and  others  with  the 

and  of  the  Barukzyes,  he  would  make  hope  that  we  shall  be  driven  out  by 

peace  with  Akbar,  and  so  shelter  him-  him,  and   that  he  will  become   the 

self  under  the  wings  of  the  Sirdar,  master  of  the  country.      Mahomed 

The  people  say  that  me  Barukzyes  will  Zemaun  Khan  is  deserted  by  a  great 

seize   Ameen-oollah ;  but  others  say  many  people,  and  Mahomed  Akbar 

that  Akbar  is  too  wise  to  allow  this  joined  by  them.     There  is  a  dispute 

step  to  be  taken,  as  he  will  find  the  expected  between  him  and  Mahomed 

Naib  serviceable  in  the  present  crisis.  Akbar,  who  says   that  the   English 

....  Mahomed  Akbar  intends  to  will  not  march  for  Caubul  from  Jella* 

get   Captain  Conolly,  &c.,  into  his  labad  for  two  months  to  come." — 

{)ossession.     Since  Akbar  Khan  came  [3/5.  Records,'] 
lere,  all  the  chiefs  have  gone  over  to 


THE  BALLA  HISSAB  UND^BMINED.  541 

engendered  a  rupture  between  them;  and  it  was  plain, 
that  if  some  arrangement  could  not  be  promptly  made 
between  the  Prince  and  the  Barukzyes,  through  the 
agency  of  the  Kuzzilbash  chief,  the  Balla  Hissar,  the 
treasure,  and  the  guns,  would  speedily  fall  into  the  hands 
of  Akbar  Khan  and  his  confederates. 

The  Barukzyes  now  laid  siege,  with  redoubled  vigour, 
to  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  Prince  was  well-nigh  de- 
serted.* He  called  upon  Oosman  Khan,  Shah  Soojah's 
old  minister,  to  aid  him,  but  upon  some  frivolous  pre- 
text he  declined  to  league  himself  with  so  perilous  a 
cause.  It  was  assiduously  given  out  that  the  Prince 
was  holding  the  Balla  Hissar  only  for  the  Feringhees ; 
and,  as  the  national  feeling  became  stronger  and  stronger 
against  him,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  strength  of  the 
place  itself,  he  would  hardly  have  been  able  to  hold 
it  for  a  day  against  the  Barukzyes.  But  the  fortress 
held  out,  in  spite  of  the  weakness  of  the  Prince  and 
the  garrison;  and  so  at  last  the  Barukzyes  began  to 
undermine  the  works.  "  Last  night,"  wrote  Futteh 
Jung  to  General  Pollock,  at  the  beginning  of  June, 
"  they  made  an  assault ;  now  they  have  made  mines 
in  every  direction.  My  affairs  are  in  a  very  critical 
state.  ...  If  you  do  not  come  quickly,  the  Balla 
Hissar  and  the  throne  will  be  lost,  and  you  will  be 
a  sufferer.     At  this  time  I  am  at  my  last  gasp.     More- 

*  According,  however,  to  our  Eng-  arrived  at  the  Balla  Hissar  in  dls- 

lish  notions,  the  contest  was  verj  far  guise,  and  that  on  hearing  this  the 

from  a  vigorous  one.     John  Conolly  Barukzyes  withdrew  their  outposts  to 

wrote  from  Caubul :  "  The  contend-  a  considerable  distance."    In  another 

ing  parties  continue  to  amuse  them-  letter    (May  26)    he    says :    "  The 

selves  with  firing  long  shots  with  their  Prince  holds  out  still  in  the  citadel, 

guns  and  jezails,  and  the  Balla  Boorj  The  Barukzyes  have  been  battering 

IS  attacked— that  is,  fired  at  for  three  at  the  Upper  Boorj,  and  firing  into 

or  four  hours  b^  one  or  two  thousand  the  Balla  Hissar.    According  to  our 

men    every  third  night  or  so.** —  ideas,  their  efforts  have  been  almost 

{^MS.  Correspondence,^    Conolly  says,  harmless ;  but  the  garrison,  I  fear, 

in  the  same  letter  :   '^  There  is  an  have  become  alarmed,  and  would  be 

anecdote  here,  that  three  Feringhees  glad  to  see  relief. " — IMS,  Records,} 


642  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

over,  there  is  nothing  in  the  magazine.*    Now  is  the 
crieis/'f 

On  the  7th  of  June  the  Balla  Hissar  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Barukzyes.  On  the  preceding  day,  after 
an  ineffectual  attempt  at  negotiation,  Akbar  E^han  had 
issued  orders  for  the  springing  of  the  mine.  But  it  had 
not  been  carried  sufficiently  far  to  damage  the  works4 
The  explosion  killed  a  large  number  of  the  besiegers ; 
whilst  the  storming  party  was  driven  back  by  the  gar- 
rison with  considerable  loss.  The  troops  of  the  Shah- 
zadah  are  said  to  have  **  behaved  very  nobly,  and  like 
heroes,  to  have  defeated  the  assault."  Mohun  Lai  re- 
ported, but  with  some  exaggeration,  that  not  less  than 
1000  of  the  followers  of  Akbar  Khan  fell  upon  this 
day. 

But  the  elation  of  the  garrison  was  but  short-lived. 
On  the  following  day  the  Barukzyes  brought  up  some 
heavy  ordnance  and  began  to  cannonade  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  defenders  then  lost  heart.  The  Hindostanee  and 
Arab  fighting  men,  who  composed  the  bulk  of  the 
Prince's  followers,  began  to  tremble  for  the  safety  of 
their  families,  and  to  call  upon  Futteh  Jung  to  enter 
into  some  accommodation  with  their  assailants.  Thus 
deserted  by  his  garrison,  who  declared  that  they  would 
open  the  gates  to  the  enemy  if  the  Prince  did  not  sub- 

*  The    Prince    had   no    powder,  time,  contain  the  same  urgent  exhor- 

Mohun  Lai,  however,  contrived  to  tations  to  advance,  as  the  only  means 

Erocure  some  fud  to  convey  it  to  the  of  saving  the  Balla  Hissar  and  the 

(alia  Hissar,  through  the  agency  of  prisoners, 

the  Kuzzilbash  chien.  t  '^^  ^^^^  ^^    altogether    the 

t  On  the  5th  of  June,  Mohan  Lai  merest  bug-bear.    It  frightened  the 

wrote  to  Sir  R.  Shakespear,  Pollock's  Prince  and  the  garrison  j  but  Mohun 

military  secretary :  "  If  you  will  not  Lai  assured  the  former  that  it  could 

march  immediately,  or  in  four  days,  not  by  any  possibility  do  him  any 

to  Gundamuck,  you  will  lose  all  your  harm,  as  it  had  not  been  properly 

prisoners,  and  the    Barukzyes  will  dug,  nor  run  sufficiently  far  under 

possess  the  riches  of  the  late  Shah,  the  works  to  damage  them,  even  if 

as  well  as  the  Balla  Hissar  and  the  the  strength  of  the  masonry  were  not 

artillery.'*  —  [Af5.  RecordsJ]    John  such  as  to  bid  defiance  to  the  at- 

Conolly's  letters,  written  about  this  tempt. 


THE  81RDAB  AlffD  THE  PRINCE.  543 

mit,  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  abandon  the  defence, 
and  to  suffer  the  Barukzyes  to  enter  the  Balla  Hissar. 

With  many  professions  of  fidelity  and  demonstrations 
of  respect,  Akbar  Khan  presented  himself  before  the 
Prince,  declared  that  he  had  the  prosperity  of  the  royal 
family  at  heart,  and  that  he  himself  was  merely  the 
servant  of  the  Suddozyes.  Futteh  Jung  offered  him 
money;  but  he  declined  it  —  offered  him  a  dress  of 
honour,  but  he  meekly  refused  to  wear  it.  He  wanted 
nothing,  he  said,  but  the  prosperity  of  the  Prince,  and 
he  could  not  wear  the  dress  of  honour  until  he  had 
adjusted  all  his  differences  with  Mahomed  Zemaun 
Ehan.  But  these  differences  were  not  very  easily  to  be 
adjusted.  The  Newab  was  imwilUng  to  recognise  the 
sovereignty  of  Futteh  Jung ;  and  was  jealous  of  the 
rising  power  of  the  Sirdar.  Meeting  after  meeting  was 
held,  and  many  attempts  were  made  to  reconcile  the 
conflicting  interests  of  the  two  Barukzye  leaders.  It 
was  lu'ged,  on  the  one  side,  that  if  Futteh  Jung  were 
acknowledged  as  the  nominal  ruler  of  Afghanistan,  all 
his  wealth  would  be  in  the  power  of  the  chiefs,  and  that 
the  war  might  then  be  waged  against  the  infidels  with 
every  chance  of  success.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
was  asked  by  the  friends  of  Zemaun  Khan — and  Meer 
Hadjee,  the  High  Priest,  adopted  the  same  views — since 
during  the  lifetime  of  Shah  Soojah  the  Newab  had  been 
chosen  King  by  the  chiefs  and  accepted  by  the  nation, 
why  should  they  now  revert  to  the  old  Suddozye 
sovereignty,  which  the  country  had  so  emphatically 
repudiated  ?* 

•  Correspondence    of  Mohun  Lai.  known  to  Tou,"  he  wrote  to  Greneral 

MS.  Records.     Futteh   Jung   con-  Pollock,  **  that  Mahomed  Akbar  has 

tinued  to  write  to  the  British  autho*  made  peace,  with  the  view  to  derive 

rities  that  he  had  little  or  no  money ;  wealth  from  me :  but  I  know  that  I 

and  that  if  the  British  did  not  ad-  have  none.    If  I  could  sell  everv- 

vance,    the  royal  family  would  be  thing  that  I  possess,  I  should  not  be 

ruined  and  disgraced.    **  It  is  well  able  to  raise  a  lakh  of  rupees.*' 


544  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

As  time  advanced,  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a 
reconciliation  between  the  two  parties  seemed  to  thicken. 
The  Newab  declared  that  he  was  Bang — ^that  Akbar 
Khan  might  hold  the  office  of  Commander-in-Chief  of 
the  Afghan  army,  but  that  Oosman  Khan  was  to  be 
the  Wuzeer  *  In  the  mean  while,  the  Sirdar  was 
gaining  over  the  Kohistanee  chiefs,  and  preparing  him- 
self for  the  inevitable  conflict.  But  the  Kuzzilbashes 
now  refused  to  league  themselves  with  Akbar  Khan, 
and  talked  of  joining  the  British  on  their  advance. 
There  was  no  prospect  of  a  reconciliation  of  the  dif- 
ferences between  the  two  Barukzye  chiefs.  The  old 
Newab  bitterly  deplored  the  strife  which  seemed  likely 
soon  to  plimge  the  city  again  into  the  miseries  of  war, 
and  openly  prayed  that  God  might  send  General  Pol- 
lock quickly,  so  that  he  and  Akbar  m^ht  fly  from 
Caubul  before  they  had  caused  bloodshed  among  the 
people  by  the  violent  arbitrement  of  their  disputes. 

Equally  did  Akbar  Khan  claim  credit  for  his  for- 
bearance.    On  the  21st  of  June,  after  many  fruitless 

*  The  Newab  had  little  money;  but  here  are  no  men  to  purchase 
but  the  most  valuable  jewels  of  Shah  them/* — [375.  RecordsJ]  Akbar  Khan 
Soojah  were  in  his  possession.  The  had  contrived  to  extract  a  consider- 
Shah  was  wont  to  carry  them  about  able  sum  of  money  from  the  Prince, 
with  him  in  a  bag;  and  he  had  them  On  the  17th  of  June,  Mohun  Lai  re- 
in his  possession  at  the  time  of  his  ported  that  the  Sirdar  had  received  a 
murder.  **  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,"  lakh  and  a  half  of  rupees  from  the 
wrote  Mohun  Lai  to  Sir  Richmond  royal  treasury.  On  the  18th,  John 
Shakespear,  **has  got  hold  of  the  Conolly  wrote  that  the  Sirdar  had 
most  valuable  jewels  of  the  late  King,  drawn  two  lakhs,  adding :  "  He  has 
who,  report  said,  had  them  thrown  taken  an  inventory  of  all  the  pro- 
into  a  ditch  when  Soojah-ood-Dow-  perty  and  treasure  in  the  citadel ; 
lah  murdered  him.  This  was  seen  and  has  his  own  men  there.'*  "It  will 
by  an  Afghan  at  a  distance,  who  afler  be  a  great  consolation  to  us  all,*^  he 
some  days  went  to  the  place  and  took  wrote  in  conclusion,  "  if  you  will  tell 
out  the  small  bag  of  jewels,  which  us  that  no  negotiations  beyond  the 
he,  being  ignorant  of  their  worth,  sold  ransom  of  the  prisoners  will  ever  be 
them  for  600  rupees.  This  was  re-  entered  into  with  Akbar.  He  is  cer- 
ported  to  the  Kewab,  who  imprisoned  tainly  the  most  uncompromising  vil- 
the  bidders  and  got  all  the  jewels  lain  that  ever  lived.*'— [Ltetif.  ConoZ/y 
from  them.  The  bankers  say  that  to  Capt.  Mdcgregor :  Caubul^  JunelS, 
they  are  worth  50  lakhs  of  rupees,  1842.    MS,  Recorda.'] 


DEFEAT  OP  THE  NEWAB.  645 

attempts  at  an  amicable  adjustment  of  affairs,  the  two 
factions  came  into  open  collision.  A  battle  was  fought; 
and,  "  after  an  insignificant  fight  of  two  or  three  hours' 
duration,"  the  Newab  was  defeated.  He  and  his  sons 
were  taken.  His  house  was  plundered.  '  The  leading 
chiefs  of  his  party  were  seized  and  subjected  to  every 
conceivable  insult.  The  victory,  indeed,  was  complete ; 
but  it  was  mainly  achieved  by  the  money  which  had 
been  pillaged  firom  the  treasury  of  the  Prince.  Some  of 
the  most  influential  men  of  the  Newab's  party  were 
bribed  over  to  desert  him;  and  he  found,  when  it  was 
too  late,  that  he  was  betrayed.* 

*  "The  reason  of  the  overthrow  mand.  All  the  tribes  and  leaders  of  the 

of  the  Newab  is  the  disaffection  of  DouraneeSgGbilzyes,aDdKuzzilba8hes 

some  of  the  most  influential  men  of  and  Kakulees  and  Kohistanees,  have 

his  partv — the  chief  one  being  Oos-  submitted  to  me,  and  I  have  placed 

man  Khan,  who  was  bought  over  on  the  throne  the  King,  high  in  power, 

with  1000  gold  mohurs.  The  Pultans  majestic  as  Alexander,  ambitious  as 

also  went  over,  and  our  host  (Meer  Kai-Khusro,  Shah-zadah  Futteh  Jung, 

Hadjee)  was  bribed  with  4000  gold  son  of  the  late  King,  and  caused  the 

mohurs,  and    during    the  fight  his  Khutha  to  be  read  and  coin  to  be 

brother,  Mahomed  Dost,  took  an  ac-  struck  in  his  name,  redoubted  as  that  of 

tive  part  against  the  Newab.    Poor  Faridoon.    Newab  Mahomed  Zemaun 

old     Zemaiin     Khan    was    a   dupe  Khan,  having  in  some  respects  opposed 

throughout    to    Hotshur's    (Akbar  himself  to  my  views  and  interfered 

Khan^)  perfidy,  and  a  victim  to  mis-  with  me,  at  length  came  to  an  open 

placed  confidence.' ' — {^Lieutenant  John  rupture,  and  commenced  hostilities 

Conolly  to  Captain  Macgregor:  Caubul,  against  me.      After    several  of  mv 

June  23,  1842.     MS.  Records,']  people  had  been  killed  and  wounded, 

Akbar  Khan*s  own  account  of  the  then,  and  not  till  then,  I,  of  necessity, 

affair,  and  of  his  subsequent  treatment  gave  the  order  to  them  to  retaliate, 

of  Zemaun  Khan,  is  on  record  in  the  In  two  hours  the  engagement  was  at 

following   letter  to  the  Shinwarree  an  end  ;  and  all  order  being  destroyed 

chiefs:  **  Up  to  the  day  of  writing  among  the  troops  of  the  Newab,  they 

this,  the  17th  of  Jamadi-ul-aroal  (26th  were  dispersed.     His  guns  and  maga- 

July),  all  is  well  here  with  me.    As  it  zines,  stores    and  horses,  and   regi- 

was  an  object  of  paramount  import-  ments  and  jezailchees,  and  other  ap* 

ance  that  in  the  contest  with  the  race  pendages  of  power   which    he  had 

of  misguided  infidels  the  whole  of  the  newly  prepared,  all  fell  into  my  pos- 

numbers  of  the  true  faith  should  be  session.     As  the  Newab  was  a  part 

united  together,  and  the  attainment  and  parcel  of  myself— not  wishing  to 

and  perfecting  of  this  object  appeared  reduce  him  to  a  stale  of  poverty  and 

indispensable,  therefore  did  the  whole  want — l,on  the^sameday,  restored  to 

ofihedevotedfollowersofthetruefnith  him  all  his  horses:  the  rest   of  his 

consent  tochoose  me  as  their  head,  and  property  I  kept  possession  of.    Since 

to  place  themselves  under  my  com-  then,  all  the  leaders  of  the  different 

VOL.  II.  2  N 


546  AIT'AIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

The  Prince  was  throned  on  the  29th  of  June.  But 
he  exercised  no  regal  power.  The  Sirdar,  who  con- 
ferred upon  him  the  title  of  sovereign  mainly  to  conciliate 
the,  Populzyes,  began  rapidly  to  strip  him  of  his  wealth, 
and  to  reduce  him  to  a  mere  pageant  and  a  name.*  After 
possessing  himself  of  all  the  tangible  property  upon  which 
he  could  lay  his  hands,  he  called  in  all  the  secretaries 
and  managers  of  the  royal  household,  and  compelled 

tribes  have  acknowledged  my  au-  while  it  behoves  you,  in  anticipation 
thority,  and  I  firmly  trust  that  all  my  of  the  arriral  of  the  exalted  standards, 
future  undertakings  will  in  like  man-  the  emblems  of  victory,  to  spare  no 
ner  be  crowned  with  success,  and  that  exertions  to  stir  up  the  strife  of  re- 
the  object  nearest  the  hearts  of  me  ligion,  and  send  me  constantly  news 
and  you,  and  all  the  race  of  Islam —  of  your  welfare,  and  of  the  move- 
viz.,  the  extermination,  root  and  ments  of  the  vile  infidels,  that  accord- 
branch,  of  the  detested  race  of  infidels,  ing  to  your  information  I  may  take 
may  be  without  difficulty  accom-  measures  to  counteract  them.  Putteh 
plished.  Set  your  mind  perfectly  at  Mahomed,  the  son  of  Saadat  Khan,  is 
rest  on  this  subject,  and  do  not  enter-  here,  and  will  shortly  leave  me  to  join 
tain  any  misgivings,  and  gird  up  your  you  with  the  Ghazees." — [^MS,  i2e- 
loins  for  action,  and  be  ready  with  the  cords.^ 

fear-inspiring  and  punishment-inflict-  *  "  The  Prince  was  seated  on  the 
ing  Ghazees,  and  use  your  utmost  throne  on  the  29th.  Akbar  consti* 
exertions  and  efibrts  to  close  the  tuted  himself  prime  minister  of  all 
Khybur  road  and  intercept  their  Afghans.  The  Hindostanee  depen- 
dawk  communications,  that  their  mes-  dents  on  the  Prince  had  been  pre- 
sengers  may  not  pass  to  and  fro,  and  viously  removed  from  the  Balla 
that  no  grain  may  reach  them  from  Hissar,  and  none  but  his  immediate 
any  quarter;  for  this  is  the  real  way  attendants  were  allowed  to  remain — 
to  defeat  this  misguided  and  detested  the  garrison  being  composed  of  Ak* 
race, — this  is  the  real  battle  of  martyr-  bar*s  own  soldiers.  The  remnant  of 
dom  which  you  must  fight:  therefore  the  royal  jewels,  treasure,  and  pro- 
consider  this  injunction  as  of  the  very  perty,  even  to  a  few  silver  cooking 
first  importance.  In  a  short  time,  by  utensils,  had  been  also  made  over  to 
the  favour  of  God  the  Almighty,  and  Akbar.  It  was  Akbar*s  intention  to 
the  assistance  of  the  founders  of  our  have  deposed  the  Prince  ;  and  several 
religion,  this  humble  servant  of  God,  meetings  were  convened  to  discuss 
with  a  terror-inspiring  army  from  this  the  question.  The  resolution  to 
country,  and  an  artillery  thundering  crown  the  Prince  was  sudden,  and 
and  flashing  fire,  and  with  jezailchees  suggested  by  an  idea  that  the  PopuU 
threatening  like  Mars,  and  with  ar-  zyes  who  had  connected  themselves 
tillerymen  like  Saturn,  and  Ghazees,  with  Timour  at  Candahar  might  be 
who  march  hand-in-hand  with  victory,  induced  to  recognise  the  present  ar- 
will  set  out  for  your  direction :  and  if  rangements  in  a  preference  to  a  Sud- 
it  be  the  will  of  God,  will  soon  clear  dozye  King  under  British  auspices.** — 
the  surface  of  that  country,  sweeping  lUeut.  J.B,  CcnoUy  to  Sir  Richmond 
from  it  the  rubbish  from  the  bodies  of  Shakespear :  Jtdy  1,  1S42.  MS,  Re* 
the  enemies  of  our  religion.    Mean-  cords.'} 


SITUATION  OF  THE  HOSTAGES.  547 

them  to  give  an  account  of  their  stewardship.  He  had 
taken  up  his  residence  in  the  Balla  Hissar ;  was  digging 
a  ditch  around  the  place ;  and  laying  in  military  stores. 
He  then  b^an  to  endeavour  to  compass  the  possession 
of  all  the  hostages  and  captives,  and  to  secure  them 
against  the  chance  of  rescue  by  confining  them  in  the 
Balla  ELissar. 

The  situation  of  the  English  gentlemen  at  Caubul, 
who  had  resided  so  securely  under  the  protection  of  the 
good  Newab,  now  became  more  critical.*  On  the  death 
of  Shah  Soojah  the  Caubullees  had  called  upon  Zemaun 
Khan  to  deliver  them  up  to  Meer  Hadjee,  the  High 
Priest.  The  Newab  had  long  resisted  the  demand.  But 
the  clamour  of  the  people  had  drowned  his  prayers. 
His  tears  and  intercessions  were  fruitless.  At  last  he 
surrendered  them  to  the  Hadjee,  imploring  him  to  treat 

*  All  the  circumstances  attending  at  the  conference  by  telling  them  that 
their  surrender  ought  to  be  related,  their  chief  and  his  own  sister  and  re- 
The  incident  is  thus  feelingly  chro-  lations  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Bri- 
nicled  by  Captain  Johnson  :  "  Two  tish  Government,  and  that  vengeance 
days  after  the  death  of  Shah  Soojah,  would  assuredly  be  dealt  upon  them 
the  people  of  Caubul  demanded  that  if  the  English  gentlemen  sustained  the 
our  nostaees,  who  had  been  lefl  under  slightest  injury.  On  this,  a  grey- 
charge  of  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  bearded  old  gentleman  told  him  and 
should  be  given  up  to  the  care  of  the  the  rest  that  they  might  make  tlieir 
son  of  the  late  High  Priest,  Meer  Had-  minds  perfectly  easy  as  regarded  the 
jee.  The  former  noble-hearted  gen-  Afghan  prisoners  in  India,  as  it  was 
tleman,  than  whom  no  father  could  contrary  to  the  uses  of  Enelishmen  to 
have  behaved  more  tenderly  to  his  hurt  a  hair  of  tiie  heads  of  their  cap- 
children,  begged  and  entreated  with  tives.  The  clamour  of  the  people 
tears  that  the  separation  should  not  prevailed  over  all  that  the  Newab 
take  place — adding  that  he  was  willing  could  urge,  and  with  many  a  bitter 
to  give  up  his  own  family  to  the  popu-  feeling  did  thb  amiable  man  make 
lar  will,  but  not  the  English  gentle-  over  the  hosUges  to  Meer  Hadjee, 
men  who  had  been  entrusted  to  his  with  prayers  and  entreaties  to  the  lat- 
care,and  who  werehis  honoured  guests  ter  that  he  would  behave  kindly  to 
— that  he  would,  if  the  people  so  them  ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  sent 
willed  it,  make  over  to  them  his  own  with  them  to  the  latter's  house  all  the 
son,  with  his  sword  round  his  neck,  females  of  his  family,  as  the  surest 
and  his  turban  for  a  winding-sheet,  to  means  of  their  protection  ;  for  how- 
be  dealt  with  according  to  their  plea-  ever  excited  a  Mussulman  population 
sure ;  but  that  force  alone  should  de-  may  be,  it  is  seldom  or  ever  that  they 
prive  him  of  the  society  of  his  friends,  violate  a  harem."  — [Cop tow /o^ 
When  all  entreaties  failed,  he  hoped  s(nC$  MS.  Journal} 
to  work  upon  the  feelings  of  the  party 

2n2 


548  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

them  with  kindness,  and  sending  at  the  same  time  the 
ladies  of  his  family  to  the  priest's  house  that  they  might, 
in  some  sort,  be  a  protection  to  the  British  captives. 
Under  the  guardianship  of  Meer  Hadjee,  Conolly  and  his 
associates  remained  until  the  beginning  of  July.  By 
this  time  Akbar  Khan  was  dominant  in  Caubul.  He 
had  determined  to  gain  possession  of  the  persons  of  the 
whole  of  the  English  hostages  and  prisoners  in  Afghan- 
istan,  and  he  now  began  to  importune  Meer  Hadjee  to 
send  them  to  the  Balla  Hissar.  Day  after  day  he  went, 
on  this  errand,  to  the  High  Priest's  house ;  but  for  some 
time  his  importunities  were  fruitless  *  At  last,  he  tried 
the  effect  of  money.  The  avarice  of  Meer  Hadjee  was 
notorious.  Akbar  Khan  had  bought  him  over  to  his 
cause;  and  now  he  bethought  himself  of  buying  the 
prisoners.  He  did  not  bid  high  for  them.  It  appears 
that  Akbar  Khan  offered  4000  rupees  for  the  persons  of 
the  hostages,  and  that  the  offer  was  accepted. 

*  The  letters  of  Moliun  Lai,  writ-  prisoners,  if  Akbar  may  intend  to 
ten  at  this  time,  show  the  efforts  that  send  them  to  any  quarter.  He  sent 
were  made  to  obtain  possession  of  the  me  answer,  as  long  as  he  and  Meer 
hostages,  and  the  amount  of  resist-  Hadjee  live,  our  prisoners  shall  not 
ance  offered :  **  Mahomed  Akbar  is  be  removed." — iMohun  Lai  to  Sir  R, 
going  every  day  to  Meer  Hadjee,  that  Shakespear  :  June  30,  1842.  MS, 
he  should  give  up  Lieutenant  Conolly,  Records,]  "Mahomed  Akbar  sent 
&c.,  and  not  oppose  him,  when  he  may  the  scoundrel  Meerza  Imaum  Vourdee 
send  the  prisoners  to  Toorkistan.  If  to  Meer  Hadjee,  with  the  message 
^ou  have  never  written  to  Meer  Had-  that  the  Balla  Hissar  is  safer  than  the 
jee,  write  to  him  now,  and  say  that  city  for  the  residence  of  Lieutenant 
he  is  chief  priest  of  Caubiil,  &c.,  and  Conolly,  &c. ;  and  he  therefore  hopes 
it  is  therefore  expected  that  he  will  Meer  Hadjee  will  send  them  to  Inm. 
keep  all  our  prisoners  by  him/* —  Meer  Hadjee  agreed  to  the  proposal, 
[^Mohun  Lai  to  Sir  Richmond  Shakes^  and  sent  the  officers  into  the  Balla  His- 
pear :  June  26, 1842.  MS.  Records.^  sar  with  the  view  that  Akbar  should 
*'  Gholam  Mahomed  Khan,Mooktean,  not  suspect  tliat  the  reports  of  his  stop- 
has  sent  me  a  message  through  his  son,  ping  the  prisoners  is  true,  and  thus  to 
Tej  Mahomed,  that  he  advised  Meer  oppose  him  for  few  officers,  he  may 
Hadjee  not  to  give  Lieut. Conolly,  &c.,  hazard  the  chance  of  securing  the 
to  Akbar ;  and  he  hopes  that  I  have  whole  of  them  before  the  time  is 
approved  of  his  services.  I  replied,  arrived  to  perform  his  service  on  be- 
that  lie  will  be  rewarded  and  made  tlie  half  of  the  prisoners."— [AfoAun  Lai 
minister  of  the  country,  if  he  keeps  to  Sir  R  Shahespear:  July  8,  1842. 
his  word,  and,  being  assisted  by  Meer  MS,  Records,"]  Mohun  Lai  says  no- 
Hadjee,  prevents  (he  removal  of  our  thing  about  the  money. 


SURRENDER  OF  THE  HOSTAGES.  549 

The  hostages  were  now  conveyed  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
where  they  remained  under  the  immediate  custody  of 
Akbar  Khan.  Mohun  Lai,  who  had  been  rendering 
good  service  to  the  British  Government,  by  keeping  the 
authorities  at  Jellalabad  continually  supplied  with  in- 
formation relative  to  the  events  which  were  passing  at 
Caubul,  was  seized  by  the  Sirdar  and  tortured.  The 
Moonshee  had  been  residing  in  the  house  of  the  Kuz- 
zilbash  chief,  Khan  Shereen  Khan;  but  now,  early  in 
July,  Akbar  Khan,  having  first  seized  the  person  of  the 
host,  contrived  to  obtain  possession  of  the  guest;  and 
immediately  began  to  extort  money  firom  him  by  the 
cruel  agency  of  physical  torture.  It  was  not  until  Gene- 
ral Pollock  wrote  an  urgent  letter  to  Akbar  Khan,  that 
the  unhappy  Moonshee  was  relieved  from  this  terrible 
persecution.* 

In  the  mean  while,  the  British  prisoners,  who  had  been 
in  custody  at  Budeeabad,  were  in  a  fort  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Caubul.  When  last  I  spoke  of  them  they 
were  halting  in  the  valley  of  Zandah,  where  they  were 
detained  for  about  the  space  of  a  month.  On  the  22nd 
of  May  they  received  orders  to  march  on  the  following 
day  for  Caubul.     The  road  lay  along  the  track  of  the 

*  Mohun  Lai's  own  account  of  his  destroyed.  .  .  All  my  feet  is  wounded 

sufFerings  is  worth  quoting :  **  I  have  by  bastinadoing.** —  [Mohun    Lai  to 

the  honour  to  address  you,  for  the  in-  Sir  K  Shakespear:  July  14,  1842. 

formation  of  Major-General  Pollock,  MS.  Records,']     "  I  suffer  very  much. 

C.B.,  that  Akbar  Khan,  on  the  night  Sometimes  I  am  pinioned  and  a  heavy 

of  the  11th  inst.  (July),  put  me  in  stone  is  placed  on  my  back,  whilst  the 

charge  of  Moollah  Said,  Atchekzve,  red  pepper  is  burnt  before  my  nose 

in  whose  house  1  was  forced  to  lay  and    eyes.      Sometimes    I    am   bas- 

down,  and  a  couch  placed  over  me,  on  tinadoed.     In  short,   1  suffer  every 

which  the  people  jumped,  and  are  conceivable  agony.     lie  wants  30,000 

beating  me    with    sticks  in   a    very  rupees,  out  of  which  he  has  hitherto 

unmerciful    manner.     Akbar    wants  got  12,000, after  using  me  very  rudely. 

30,000  rupees  from  me — says,  other-  The  remainder,   if  not  paid  in    the 

wise,  that  lie  will  pull  out  my  eyes,  course  often  days,  he  says  he  will  pull 

All  my  body  has  been  severely  beaten,  out  my  eyes,  and  burn  my  body  with 

I  cannot  promise  anything  without  a  hot  iron.'* — [Mohun  Lai  to  Sir  jR. 

government's  order,  but   see  myself  Shakespear:  July  17.  MS,  Records,] 


550  CONDITION  OP  THE  PRISONEES. 

slaughtered  army,  and  the  putrid  corpses  sickened  the 
captives  as  they  went.  About  three  miles  from  Caubul, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Loghur  river,  is  the  fort  of  Ali  Ma- 
homed, a  chief  of  Euzzilbash  connexions.  Here  they 
were  lodged  in  the  apartments  recently  occupied  by  the 
ladies  of  the  chiefs  family* — the  best  and  most  commo- 
dious quarters  which  the  prisoners  had  yet  enjoyed. 

In  Ali  Mahomed's  fort  the  prisoners  led  a  life  of 
comparative  freedom.  They  had  a  spacious  garden  in 
which  to  exercise  themselves.  They  had  the  use  alike 
of  the  walks  and  of  the  fruits.  They  were  suffered  to 
bathe  in  the  river.  They  were  permitted  to  visit,  and 
to  receive  visits  from,  their  friends  in  the  Balla  Hissar. 
Many  of  them  had  the  means  of  borrowing  money  from 
the  Caubullees ;  and  were  able  to  purchase  many 
luxuries  which  they  had  not  enjoyed  at  Budeeabad. 
Letters  and  papers  from  Jellalabad,  from  the  provinces 
of  India,  and  from  old  England,  were  brought  to  them 
without  interruption.  They  had  much  to  think  about 
and  much  to  discuss.  Intelligence  from  Jellalabad  and 
intelligence  from  Caubul  came,  in  some  shape,  every 
day.  Life  was  but  little  wearisome;  there  was  abun- 
dant occupation  for  the  mind,  and  abundant  exercise  for 
the  body.  And  if  it  had  not  been  that  many  of  the  party 
fell  sick,  and  that  ever  and  anon  there  reached  them 
rumours  of  the  intentions  of  Akbar  Elhan  to  carry  them 
off  to  Toorkistan,  they  would  have  enjoyed  as  much 
happiness  as  prison-life  can  possibly  yield. 

*  They  were  turned  out  of  the  for  the  night,  and  then  urged  that 

fort,  indeed,  to  make  room  for  the  the  fort  would  suit  them  better  than 

prisoners,  to  the  infinite  annoyance  any  other  place  in  the  neighbourhood, 

of  the  unhappy  cliief,  who  made  every  It  was  altogether  a  most  unfortunate 

possible    excuse    for    not    receiving  occurrence  for  Alt  Mahomed,  as,  sub- 

them,  but  was  overruled  by  Akbar  sequently,  on  the  advance  of  the  Bri- 

Khan,  who  obtained  admittance  for  tish,  the  fort  was  levelled  with  the 

them,  in  the  first  instance,  on  the  plea  ground,  and  the  garden  destroyed, 
that  he  only  required  accommodation 


THE  AJDVAVCE  VBOH  J2LLALABAD.  551 


BOOK  VIII. 
[June — December:  1842.] 


CHAPTER  I. 

[June— September:  1842.] 

The  Advanoe  from  Jellalabad— Instructions  of  Lord  Ellenborongh— The 
Question  of  Besponsibilitj — Employment  of  the  Troops  at  JelMabad— 
Oi>eration8  in  the  Shinwarree  Valley— Negotiations  for  the  Release  of  the 
Prisoners — ^The  Advance— Mammoo  Ehail— Jugdulluck— Tezeen — Occu- 
pation of  Caubul. 

The  summer  months  passed  away,  and  still  left  General 
Pollock  at  Jellalabad  and  Greneral  Nott  at  Candahar. 
Whether  it  were  the  intention  of  the  Governor-General 
that  they  should  advance  upon  Caubul,  or  fall  back  at 
once  upon  Peshawur  and  Quettah,  was  a  problem  of 
very  difficult  solution.  Such  data  as  were  afforded 
them  by  the  letters  of  Lord  EUenborough  and  his  secre- 
taries sufficed  only  to  plunge  them  into  a  state  of  still 
deeper  bewilderment  and  mystification.  Every  fresh 
letter  seemed  to  render  the  obscurity  more  obscure. 
The  Governor-GeneraFs  instructions  to  Pollock  and 
Nott  at  this  time  resembled  nothing  so  much  as  those 
given  to  children  in  the  "  game  of  contraries" — to  hold 
fast  when  they  are  ordered  to  let  go,  and  to  let  go  when 


552'  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

they  are  ordered  to  hold  fast.  Lord  EUenborough  was, 
in  eflfect,  perpetually  telling  the  generals  that  when  he 
suggested  to  them  to  go  forward  it  was  their  business  to 
come  back. 

It  is  probable  that  Lord  EUenborough  himself  had 
no  very  clear  perception,  at  this  time,  of  the  course 
which  he  purposed  to  pursue.  He  had  made  up  his 
mind,  he  said,  to  save  India  in  spite  of  every  man  in  it 
who  ought  to  give  him  support;*  but  it  seemed  to  be 
his  idea  to  save  India  rather  by  withdrawing  all  our 
troops  within  the  Sutlej,  than  by  striking  a  decisive 
blow  for  the  re-establishment  of  our  military  supremacy 
in  A%hanistan.  It  was  his  opinion  that  the  danger 
of  our  position  at  that  time  arose  from  the  absence  of 
so  large  a  body  of  troops  from  the  provinces  of  Hin- 
dostan;  and  that  we  might  better  afford  to  leave  our 
external  injuries  unredressed,  than  weaken  our  means 
of  defence  in  India  itself  for  the  purpose  of  redressing 
them.  •  Viewing  the  matter  in  this  light,  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  thought  less  of  redeeming  the  military  cha- 
racter of  the  British  nation  than  of  bringing  back  the 
troops  to  Hindostan ;  and  he  would  have  brought  them 
back  without  an  effort  at  such  redemption,  if  the  almost 
universal  voice,  not  only  of  the  chief  civil  and  military 
oflBcers,  but  of  the  Anglo-Indian  community  at  large, 

*  "  I  attach  mnch  weight,*'  wrote  India,  too  far  off  to  return  quickly  at 
Lord  Ellenborouffh  at  the  end  of  any  season,  unable  from  the  season 
May,  "  to  what  Major  Sleeman  says  to  return  now,  without  adeauate 
of  tne  disposition  of  theMahomedans;  supplies  of  food  or  carriage.  Tnis  is 
but  I  am  surprised  that  it  has  not  the  danger  which  all  the  great  states- 
occurred  to  hmi  and  to  others,  that  men  in  India  would  perpetuate  if  they 
whatever  may  be  the  disposition  of  could,  and  while  they  maintain  it, 
the  Mahomedans,  it  is  the  absence,  destro;^  the  confidence  of  the  Sepoy 
not  the  presence  of  our  troops,  of  and  ruin  our  finances.  J/IsaveUus 
whom  more  than  three-fourths  are  country,  I  shall  save  it  in  spite  of  every 
Hindoos,  that  alone  can  lead  the.Ma-  man  in  it  who  ought  to  give  me  support, 
homedans  to  act  against  us.  The  but  I  will  save  it  in  spite  of  them  alL** 
danger  is  in  the  position  of  the  army,  — [Jtf  5.  Correspondence,^ 
almost  without  communication  with 


PUBLIC  OPINION  IN  INDIA.  553 

had  not  been  lifted  up  against  so  inglorious  and  de- 
grading a  concession.  The  opinions  and  desires  of  Pol- 
lock and  Nott — of  Robertson  and  Clerk — of  Rawlinson, 
Outram,  Macgregor,  Mackeson,  and  others,  who  were 
eager  for  a  forward  movement,  and  little  inclined  to 
conceal  their  genuine  sentiments  under  a  doak  of  offi- 
cial reserve — how  little  soever  Lord  Ellenborough  may 
have  been  disposed  outwardly  to  acknowledge  their  in- 
fluence— were  not  without  their  effect.  Public  opinion 
he  professed  to  despise.  The  judgments  of  the  Press  he 
pretended  to  hold  in  such  absolute  contempt,  that  he 
lived  in  habitual  ignorance  of  all  that  emanated  from  it; 
but  it  is  believed  that  this  disregard  of  public  opinion 
was  rather  a  profession  than  a  fact,  and  that  Lord 
Ellenborough  was  shaken  in  his  determination  to  bring 
back  the  armies  to  the  provinces  by  the  clamour  that, 
from  one  end  of  India  to  the  other,  was  raised  against 
the  obnoxious  measure  of  withdrawal.  He  had  by  this 
time,  too,  received  information  from  England  that  an 
inglorious  retirement  from  the  scene  of  our  late  hunai- 
liation,  and  the  abandonment  of  all  the  brave  men,  ten- 
der women,  and  innocent  children,  in  the  hands  of  the 
Afghans,  would  be  viewed  with  no  satisfaction  either 
by  his  old  ministerial  colleagues,  or  by  the  people  of 
Great  Britain.  Many  powerful  external  influences, 
therefore,  roused  him  to  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  doing 
something  in  advance ;  but  the  "  withdrawal  policy " 
was  emphatically  his  own,  and  he  was  resolute  to  pre- 
serve the  shadow  of  it  if  he  could  not  maintain  the 
substance. 

In  this  conjuncture,  he  betook  himself  to  an  expedient 
unparalleled,  perhaps,  in  the  pohtical  history  of  the 
world.  He  instigated  Pollock  and  Nott  to  advance,  but 
insisted  that  they  should  regard  the  forward  movement 
solely  in  the  light  of  a  retirement  from  Afghanistan. 


554  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

No  change  had  come  over  the  views  of  Lord  Ellen- 
borough,  but  a  change  had  come  over  the  meaning  of 
certain  words  of  the  English  language.  The  Grovemor- 
Greneral  had  resolutely  maintained  that  the  true  policy 
of  the  English  Government  was  to  bring  back  our 
armies  to  the  provinces  of  India,  and  that  nothing 
would  justify  him  in  pushing  them  forward  merely  for 
the  re-establishment  of  our  military  reputation.  But  he 
found  it  necessary  to  jdeld  to  the  pressure  from  without^ 
and  to  push  the  armies  of  Pollock  and  Nott  further  into 
the  heart  of  the  Afghan  dominions.  To  preserve  his 
own  consistency,  and  at  the  same  time  to  protect  himself 
against  the  measureless  indignation  of  the  communities 
both  of  India  and  of  England,  was  an  effort  of  genius 
beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  statesmen.  But  it  was 
not  beyond  the  grasp  of  Lord  Ellenborough.  How 
long  he  may  have  been  engaged  on  the  solution  of  the 
difficulty  before  him  History  cannot  determine.  But 
on  the  4th  of  July  it  was  finally  accomplished.  On 
that  day  Lord  Ellenborough,  who  had  entirely  dis- 
carded the  official  mediation  of  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,*  despatched  two  letters  to  General  Pollock  and 

*  It  was  not  until  the  27th  of  Au-  cannot  be  moved  as  you  will  is  no 

gust  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  was  army  at  all.    lie  will  thus  have  an 

informed,  by  a  letter  from  General  unhealthy,  difficult  pass  behind  him 

Pollock,  of  the  instructions  sent  to  for  four  or  five  months,  and  possibly 

General   Nott  on  the  4th  of  July,  involve  us  in  another  campaign.  These 

How  entirely  the  Governor-General  changes  are  dreadful.    I  wish  that  I 

had  set  aside  the  authority  of  the  had  nothing  to  do  with  them.** 

Commander-in-Chief,  and  what  Sir  "  June  30. — ^The  Secret  Committee 

Jasper  Nicolls  thought  both  of  Lord  review  the  proceedings  of  government, 

£llenborough*s  conduct  and  of  the  from  December  to  February  last,  not 

advance  on  Caubul,  may  be  gathered  with  asperity,  but  with  decided  disap- 

from  the  following  extracts  from  his  probation  of  the  uncertain  policy  of 

journal :  that  time,  and  the  contradictory  reso- 

**June  6.  —  To  my  astonishment,  lutions  and  orders  which  were  then 

Lord  E.,  in  consequence  of  General  passed.     This  is  very  well  deserved, 

Pollock's  complaints  of  want  of  car-  for  it  was  then,  in  November  or  De- 

riage,  has  consented  to  his  remain-  cember,  that  government  ought  to 

ing  beyond  the  Khybur  till  October,  have  decided  to  leave  the  country  or 

though  he  quotes  the  Duke  of  Wei-  to  resume  our  full  control  over  it.** 

lington's  dictum,  that  an  army  which  "  August  8. — The  wants  of  General 


CATTLE  FOR  THE  FOBGE.  555 

two  to  Greneral  Nott.  In  these  letters  he  set  forth 
that  his  opinions  had  undergone  no  change  since  he  had 
declared  the  withdrawal  of  the  British  armies  to  the 
provinces  to  be  the  primal  object  of  government ;  but  he 
suggested  that  perhaps  General  Nott  might  feel  dis- 
posed to  retire  from  Candahar  to  the  provinces  of  India 
by  the  route  of  Ghuznee,  Caubul,  and  Jellalabad;*  and 
that  perhaps  General  Pollock  might  feel  disposed  to 
assist  the  retreat  of  the  Candahar  force  by  moving  for- 
ward upon  Caubul. 

It  has  been  seen,  that  on  the  1st  of  June  Lord  El- 
lenborough  had  granted  General  Pollock  a  constructive 
permission  to  remain  at  Jellalabad  until  the  month  of 
October;  and  that  General  Pollock  had  determined  to 
turn  this  permission  to  the  best  accountf    The  mind  of 

Pollock*8  army  are  put  down  at  6)  effect  it  ?   Is  he  to  encamp  at  Gunda- 

lakhs  per  mensem,  and  we  are  just  muck  till  Nott*s  attack  on  Ghuznee 

going  to  send  20  to  clear  him  off--the  (if  that  take  place)  ?    It  is  curious 

last,  I  believe  and  hope,  which  we  that  I  should  have  to  ask  myself  these 

shall  send  to  be  buried  in  the  Punjab  questions ;  but  so  it  is.     I  am  wholly 

and  Afghanistan.    Twenty-one  lakhs  ignorant  of  the  intended  movements 

he  had  before.^'  of  either.    Lord  Ellenborough  means 

"  August  15.  —  General  Nott  has  to  surprise  friend  and  foe  equally.*' 

fixed  on  the  2nd  of  this  month  for  **  August  27. — To-day  I  find,  b v  a 

leaving  Candahar,  and  in  two  divisions  despatch  from  General  Pollock,  that 

— the  Bombay  troops  by  Quettah  and  General  Nott  has  decided  on  retum- 

Sukicur — the  Bengal  column  by  Dehra  ing  to  the  provinces,  via  Ghuznee  and 

Ismael  Khan.    This  is  quite  new  to  Caubul.    Lord  £.,  by  letter  dated  4th 

me,  and  may  be  either  ordered  by  the  of  July,  gave  him  a  choice  as  to  the 

General  or  suggested  by  Lord  £."  line  by  which  to  withdraw,  and  he  has 

"  August  20. — This  order  as  to  retir-  chosen  this — certainly  the  noblest  and 

ing  by  Dehra  Ismael  Khan  appears  the  the  worthiest;  but  whether  it  will 

e&ct  of  impulse.    Its  neglect  of  me  I  release  our  prisoners  and  add  to  our 

forgive,  though  a  manifest  slieht ;  but  fame,  I  cannot  venture  to  predict. 

I  do  not  find  that  he  has  ordered  the  Lord  £.'8  want  of  decent  attention  to 

necessary  supplies  to  be  collected  for  my  position  is    inexcusable.** — ^Sir 

the  retreat  through  the  Sikh  territory,  Jasper  NicoWt  MS,  Journal]^ 

which  is,  in  parts  near  that  place,  *  Some  readers,  not  having  maps 

almost  a  desert."  before  them,  will  ^  better  understand 

'*  August  24. — The  9rd  Dragoons,  the  nature  of  this  retirement  if  I 

and  another  troop  of  horse  artillery,  liken  it  to  the  case  of  a  man  wishing 

are  about  to  join  Sir  R.  Sale  at  Put-  to  retire  from  Reigate  to  London, 

tehabad.    Can  the  General  be  now  and  taking  Dover  and  Canterbury  in 

organising  an  advance  on   Caubul?  his  way. 

Is  ne  cQmmaDded  to  do  so?    Can  he  f  See  anU^  page  474. 


656 


THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 


the  statesman  was  running  on  retirement;  the  mind  of 
the  soldier  on  advance.  The  great  obstacle  either  to 
retirement  or  to  advance  had  been  the  scarcity  of  car- 
riage. But  in  the  early  summer  months  every  exer- 
tion had  been  made  by  the  authorities  in  Upper  India 
to  procure  carriage  for  the  use  of  the  armies  in  Afghan- 
istan. Lord  Ellenborough  had  exerted  himself  to  obtain 
cattle;  Mr.  Robertson,  the  able  and  energetic  Lieu- 
tenant-Govemoi^  of  the  North- Western  Provinces,  had 
exerted  himself  to  obtain  cattle.*  The  Governor-Gene- 
ral threw  his  heart  into  the  work,  because  he  was  eager 
to  bring  back  the  armies  to  Hindostan ;  the  Lieutenant- 
Governor  threw  his  heart  into  the  work,  because  he 
was  eager  to  push  them  on  to  Caubul.  So  it  happened, 
that  before  the  end  of  June^  there  was  a  sufficiency  of 
cattle  at  General  Pollock's  disposal  to  enable  him  to  do 
something;  and  he  reported  to  government  that  his 
means  of  movement  were  such  that  he  was  able  to  make 
a  demonstration  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jellalabad. 
Upon  this,  Lord  Ellenborough  wrote  to  him  on  the  4th 
of  July  that  he  was  rejoiced  to  hear  the  General  was 
able  to  do  something;  but  that  he  (the  General)  must, 
on  no  account,  think  that  any  change  had  come  over  the 
opinions  of  government,  which  still  inclined  resolutely 
towards  the  withdrawal  of  the  army  at  the  earliest 
moment  consistent  with  the  health  and  efficiency  of  the 
troops.f 


♦  The  senrices  rendered  by  Mr. 
Robertson  to  his  country,  at  this  time, 
have  never  been  adequately  acknow- 
ledged, except  by  General  Pollock 
himself,  who  never  lost  an  oppor- 
tunity of  expressing  his  gratitude  for 
the  assistance  he  had  derived  from 
the  exertions  of  the  Lieutenant-Gover- 
nor of  the  North- Western  Provinces. 
Mr.  Robertson,  aware  of  the  difficulty 
of  collecting  camels  in  sufficient  num- 
ber for  the  purposes  of  the  army, 


ordered  letters  to  be  addressed  to  the 
principal  collectors  in  Upper  India, 
calling  upon  them  to  purchase  as 
many  pomes  and  mules  as  thev  could 
^et  together  in  their  several  districts. 
Ajid  it  was  in  no  small  measure  owing 
to  these  exertions  that  Pollock  was  at 
leujgth  enabled  to  advance. 

T  "  It  has  given  great  satisfaction 
to  the  Governor-General  to  learn, 
from  your  letter  of  the  1 4th  ult.,  that 
you  have  sufficient  means  of  move- 


mSTBUCTIONS  TO  THE  GBNBAAM.        657 

On  this  same  4th  of  July  the  Governor-General  wrote 
twice  to  General  Nott — once  through  his  secretary  and 
once  with  his  own  hand.  He  sent  the  General  a  copy 
of  his  instructions  to  Pollock,  impressing  upon  him 
that  all  his  views  were  in  favour  of  a  prompt  with- 
drawal; and  he  addressed  to  him  a  long  inconclusive 
letter,  instructing  him  to  withdraw  from  Afghanistan, 
but  telling  him,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  line  of  with- 
drawal was  to  be  left  to  his  own  choice.  He  might 
retire  by  going  backward,  by  Quettah  and  Sukkur,  or 
he  might  retire  by  going  forward,  by  Ghuznee,  Caubul, 
and  Jellalabad.  But  whichever  line  he  might  take,  he 
was  never  to  lose  sight  for  a  moment  of  the  fact  that 
Lord  Ellenborough  had  decreed  that  he  should  retire, 
and  that  retire  he  must.* 

It  was  fortunate  for  Lord  Ellenborough  and  for  the 
country  that  he  had  to  deal  at  this  time  with  men  who 
thought  more  of  the  honour  of  Great  Britain  than  of 
their  own  safety ;  and  who  did  not  shrink  from  respon- 
sibility, if,  by  incurring  it,  they  had  a  reasonable,  chance 

mcnt  to  be  enabled  to  act  on  the  siig-  that  the  measure,  commanded  by  con- 
gestions contained  in  my  letter  of  the  siderations  of  political  and  military 
Ist  ultimo  (June).  You  will  not  prudence,  is  to  bring  back  the  armies 
haye  mistaken  the  object  of  that  now  in  Afghanistan  at  the  earliest 
letter,  which  was  merely  to  suggest  period  at  which  their  retirement  can 
that,  as  far  as  your  means  of  moye-  oe  effected  consistently  with  the 
ment  allowed,  you  should  make  your  health  and  efficiency  of  the  troops, 
strength  felt  by  the  enemy  during  the  into  positions  wherem  they  may  haye 
period  of  your  necessary  detention  in  easy  and  certain  communications  with 
the  y alley  of  the  Caubul  riyer.  No  India ;  and  to  this  extent  the  instruc- 
change  has  from  the  first  taken  place  tions  you  haye  receiyed  remain  un- 
in  the  Goyernor-General*8  views  of  altered.  But  the  improved  position 
the  expediency  of  withdrawing  your  of  your  army,  with  sufficient  means 
army  at  the  earliest  period  consistent  of  carriage  for  as  lar^  a  force  as  it  is 
with  the  health  and  efficiency  of  the  necessary  to  move  in  Afghanistan, 
troops,  that  is,  as  is  now  understood,  induces  me  now  to  leave  to  your  op- 
in  the  beginning  of  October." — ^Mr.  tion  the  line  by  which  you  shall  witn- 
Maddock  to  General  Pollock:  July  4,  draw  your  troops  from  that  country." 
1842.     Published  PapersJi  — [^r.  Maddock   to   General  Nott: 

♦  "  Nothing  has  occurred  to  in-  JvSy  4,  1842.     Published  Papers,^ 
duce  me  to  change  my  first  opinion, 


558  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

of  conferring  great  and  lasting  benefits  upon  the  govern- 
ment which  they  served,  and  the  nation  which  they 
represented.  But  Lord  Ellenborough's  instructions  to 
the  Generals  were  so  worded — ^whether  by  accident  or 
by  design  I  do  not  presume  to  determine — as  to  cast 
upon  them  all  the  onus  of  failure,  and  to  confer  upon 
the  Govemor-Greneral,  or  at  least  to  divide  with  him,  all 
the  honour  of  success.  One  thing  at  least  is  certain,  the 
letter  of  the  4th  of  July,  addressed  to  General  Nott,  and 
signed  by  the  Chief  Secretary,  ought  not  to  have  been 
written.  It  is  either  from  first  to  last  a  masterpiece  of 
Jesuitical  cunning,  or  it  indicates  a  feebleness  of  will — 
an  infirmity  of  purpose — discreditable  to  the  character 
of  a  statesman  entrusted  with  the  welfare  and  the  ho- 
nour of  one  of  the  greatest  empires  in  the  world.* 

*  It  is  right  that  the  most  im-  communications  from  the   time   of 

portant  passages    of  this  letter  to  your  leaving  Candahar.    Dependent 

Greneral  Nott  should  be  here  quoted,  entirely  upon  the  courage  of  your 

**  But  the  improved  position,   wrote  army,  and  upon  your  own  ability  in 

Lord  Ellenborough,  after  cautioning  directing  it,  I  should  not  have  any 

him  (see  ante^  page  557,  note)  against  doubt  as  to  the  success  of  the  opera* 

believing  any  change  had  come  over  tions ;  but  whether  you  will  be  able 

the  Govemor-Greneral's  opinions  *'  of  to  obtain  provisions  for  your  troops 

your  army,  with  sufficient  means  of  during  the  whole  month,  and  forage 

carriage  for  as  large  as  it  is  necessary  for  your  animals,  may  be  a  matter  of 

to  move  in  Afghanistan,  induces  me  reasonable  doubt.  Yet  upon  this  your 

now  to  leave  to  your  option  the  line  success  will  turn.  You  must  remember 

by  which  you  shall  withdraw  your  that  it  was  not  the  superior  courage  of 

troops  to  that  country.    I  must  de-  the  Afghans,  but  want  and  the  inde- 

sire,  however,  that  in  forming  your  mency  of  the  season,  which  led  to  Uie 

decision  upon  this  most  important  destruction  of  the  army  at  Caubul ; 

question,  you  will  attend  to  the  fol-  and  you  would  feel  as  I  do,  that  the 

lowing  considerations : — In  the  direc-  loss  of  another  army,  from  whiUever 

tion  of  Quettah  and  Sukkur  there  is  cause  it  might  arise,  might  be  fatal 

no  enemy  to  oppose  you ;  at  each  to  our  government  in  Hdia.     I  do 

place,  occupied  by  detachments,  you  not  undervalue  the  fud  which  our 

will  find  provisions,  and  probably  as  government  in  India  would  receive 

you  descend    the   passes    you   will  from   the    successful  execution   by 

have  increased   means  of  carriage ;  your  army  of  a  march  through  Ghuz- 

the  operation  is  one  admitting  of  no  nee  and  Caubul  over  the  scene  of 

doubt  as  to  its  success.    If  you  de-  our  late  disasters.    I  know  aU  the 

terminc  upon  moving  upon  Ghuznee,  effect  it  would  have  upon  the  minds 

Caubul,  and  Jellalabad,  you  will  re-  of  our  soldiers,  of  our  allies,  of  oar 

quire  further  transport  of  provisions  enemies  in  Asia,  and  of  our  coun- 

— a  much  larger  amount  of^ carriage;  trymen  and  all  forei^   nations  in 

and  you  will  be  practically  without  Europe.      It  is  an  object   of  just 


BESPONSIBILITT  OV  THE  ADVANCE.  559 

But,  whatever  may  have  been  the  amount  of  respon- 
sibility cast  upon  the  two  Generals,  neither  Pollock  nor 
Nott  shrunk  from  it.  They  cheerfully  took  up  the 
burden  and  placed  it  on  their  own  shoulders.*  They 
had  obtained  now  all  that  they  wanted.  They  had  no 
doubt  of  the  ability  of  their  troops  to  carry  everything 
before  them.  Cattle  had  been  supplied,  or  were  being 
supplied,  sufficient  for  all  their  movements.  It  was  only 
necessary  that  they  should  act  in  concert  with  each 
other — that  they  should  so  combine  their  operations  as 
to  reach  the  capital  at  the  same  time,  and  strike  the  last 
blow  together.  But  it  was  no  easy  thing  in  those  days 
to  carry  on  a  correspondence  between  Jellalabad  and 
Candahar;  and  it  was  long  before  Pollock  received  an 
answer  to  his  letters.  Five  messengers  were  despatched 
in  succession  to  Nott's  camp  ;f  but  it  was  not  before  the 
middle  of  August  that  Pollock  could  assure  himself  of 
his  brother-general's  intentions  to  advance  upon  Caubul 
at  all.| 

ambition  which  no  one  more  than  A  few  harmless  lines  were  written  in 

mjself  would  rejoice  to  see  effected ;  ink ;  and  much  important  matter  in 

but  I  see  that  failure  in  the  attempt  rice-water,  to  be  brought  out  by  the 

is  certain  and  irretrievable  ruin ;  and  application  of  iodine.     The  employ- 

I  would  endeavour  to  inspire  you  ment  of  Akbar  Khan  himself,  as  the 

with  the  necessary  caution,  and  make  medium  of  communication  between 

you  feel  that,  great  as  are  the  objects  the  two  Grenerals,  who  were  contem- 

to  be  attained  by  success,  the  risk  is  plating  his  destruction,  is  not  one  of 

great  also.*^ — iLord  Ellenhorough  to  the  least  amusing  incidents  of  the 

General  Nott:   July  4,  1842.     I'ldf-  war. 

Ushed  Papers.']  t  Pollock   was    afraid  that  Nott 

♦  "  If  I  have  not,"  wrote  Pollock,  would  have  commenced  his  retreat 

"  lived  long  enough  to  judge  of  the  before  the  receipt  of  the  despatch  of 

propriety  of  an  act  for  whicn  I  alone  July  4.     "  My  movement  will    of 

am  responsible,  the  sooner  I  resign  course  depend,"  he  wrote  in  a  con- 

the  command  as  unfit  the  better.    I  fidential  letter  to  Mr.  Robertson  on 

assure  you  that  I  feel  the  full  bene-  the  1 0th  of  August,  "  on  General 

fit  of  being  unshackled  and  allowed  Nott^s  ability  to  meet  me.     Our  late 

to  judge  for  myself." — [3/5.   Corrc"  accounts  from  that  quarter  are  not 

spondence,]  favorable.     They  say  that  General 

t  A  letter,  too,  was  sent  by  Captain  Nott  is  bent  on  retirmg,  and  I  very 

Troup  to  Akbar  Khan  with  a  reouest  much  fear  that  he  will  have  made 

that  ne  would  forward  it  to  Nott.  several  marches  to  the  rear  before 


560  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

In  the  mean  while,  neither  General  had  been  wholly 
inactive.  At  Jellalabad,  Pollock  had  been  making  a 
demonstration  against  some  hostile  tribes,  and  carrying 
on  negotiations  for  the  release  of  the  British  prisoners. 
The  Governor-General  had  several  times,  in  rather  ob- 
scure language,  suggested  to  Pollock  that  it  might  be 
desirable  to  strike  a  blow  at  some  one  somewhere  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jellalabad ;  and  now  the  General  sent 
out  Monteith  into  the  Shinwarree  valley  to  read  a  lesson 
to  the  tribes  who  had  possessed  themselves  of  the  pro- 
perty plundered  from  our  army,  and  who  held  in  their 
hands  one  of  our  captured  guns.  These  things  were  to 
be  now  demanded  from  the  tribes,  or  to  be  wrested  from 
them  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.  In  the  middle  of  June, 
Monteith  descended  into  the  valley,  with  a  brigade  of 
European  and  Native  troops,  and  a  sufficiency  of  guns 
for  his  purpose.  The  troops,  so  long  held  in  restraint, 
were  now  all  fire  and  impetuosity.  The  first  sight,  in 
the  village  of  Ali-Boghan,  of  some  property  that  had 
belonged  to  our  slaughtered  army,  maddened  them  past 
control.*  They  began  at  once  to  fire  the  houses  and  to 
plunder  the  inhabitants.  But  Monteith  and  Macgregor 
interfered  for  their  protection.     The  plundered  property 

the  government  despateh  can  reach  nals,  that  some  women  had  been  vio- 

him I  ought  by  this  lated  by  our  soldiery.    "  But,"  says 

time  to    have  heard    from  General  Captain  Macgregor,    "I  made  toe 

Nott,  in  reply  to  my  letter  by  the  strictest  inquiry  into  the  matter,  both 

first  of  the  five  messengers.    If  he  is  from  the  Afghan  chiefs  who  were  with 

not  coming  on,  my  negotiations  for  me,  and  from  the  inhabitants  of  the 

the  prisoners  will  be  a  very  simple  village,  but  could  not  trace  in  the 

afiair ;   but  it  must  ever  be  a  sub*  slightest  degree  any  just  foundation 

ject   of  regret   that   he   should    so  for  the  report  in  question.  Had  there 

hastily  retire,  and  at  such  a  time,  been  any,  it  would  doubtless  have 

while  he  commands  an  army  in  every  formed  a  subject  of  great  grieyance 

respect  efficient^  and  amounting  to  to  the  people,  who  are  so  very  jealous 

about    15,000   men.'* — IMS,    Corre'  of  the  honour  of  their  women.'* — 

sjwndence.']  [_Captain  Macgregor  s  Report   on  the 

•  It  was  reported  in  camp,  and  sub-  Operations  in  the  Shinwarree  districts, 

sequcntly  set  forth  in  the  local  jour-  MS,  Eecords,'] 


monteith's  operations.  661 

was  restored.    Even  the  money  that  had  been  taken 
was  made  over  again  to  the  inhabitants. 

The  report  of  the  violence  that  had  been  committed 
at  Ali-Boghan  spread  like  wild-fire  through  the  valley. 
The  people  believed  that  the  British  troops  were  about 
to  fire  all  the  villages ;  so  they  began  at  once  to  remove 
their  property,  and  to  fly  in  every  direction  fipom  their 
homes.  Macgregor  exerted  himself  to  restore  confidence 
among  them,  by  explaining  the  real  designs  of  his 
government;  and  the  people  began  to  return  to  their 
dwellings.  But,  although  indiscriminate  plunder  and 
destruction  were  not  the  objects  of  the  expedition,  the 
brigade  had  been  sent  out  to  do  certain  work,  and  it 
soon  became  evident  that  it  could  not  be  done  without 
inflicting  some  injury  upon  the  people.  The  captured 
gun  and  the  plundered  property  were  to  be  recovered. 
It  was  known  that  two  of  the  principal  chiefs  of  a  place 
called  Goolai  were  in  possession  of  a  portion  of  the 
treasure  that  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  our  enemies. 
It  was  known,  too,  that  the  captured  gun  was  at  Deh- 
Surruk.  It  was  determined,  therefore,  that  the  brigade 
should  move  against  these  two  places. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th  of  June,  Monteith  moved 
upon  Goolai.  "  It  presented  all  the  appearance  of  a 
flourishing  little  settlement.  Several  of  the  forts  were 
extensive  and  in  good  repair.  They  were  shaded  by 
clusters  of  mulberry  and  willow  trees.  Flowing  water 
passed  close  to  the  forts,  and  served  to  irrigate  the 
neighbouring  fields  of  cotton,  rice,  and  jewaree.  The 
summer  harvest  had  just  been  collected,  and  was 
stocked  outside  the  fort  in  its  unwinnowed  state.  The 
inhabitants  had  evidently  only  time  to  escape  with  their 
portable  property  before  the  troops  reached  Goolai.  In 
fact,  our  visit  was  most  timely.     Three  or  four  days' 

VOL.  II.  2  o 


562  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

delay  would  have   enabled  them   to  carry  off  their 
grain."* 

Monteith  pitched  his  camp  on  some  rising  ground 
near  the  village,  and  demanded  the  restitution  of  the 
plundered  treasure.  On  the  following  day  evasive 
answers  were  received ;  there  was  no  prospect  of  obtain- 
ing, by  peacefiil  negotiation,  the  concession  that  was 
demanded  from  the  chiefs.  So  the  work  of  destruction 
commenced.  Their  forts  and  houses  were  destroyed. 
Their  walls  were  blown  up.  Their  beautiful  trees  were 
ringed  and  left  to  perish.f  The  retribution  was  com- 
plete* 

The  work  of  destruction  went  on  for  some  days.  In 
the  mean  while  the  captured  gun  had  been  given  up, 

^  Captain  Macgregor's  Bqwrt.  MS.  io  the  shade  of  their  trees.    They  are 

Btcords,  to  be  seen  under  them  in  groups, 

f  There  was  no  need  to  cut  them  during  the  summer,  all'  day  long, 
down.  It  was  sufficient  to  cut  deep  talking,  reading,  weaving,  and  sleep- 
rings  through  the  bark  to  the  heart  of  ing.  Even  women  and  children 
the  tree ;  for  they  seldom  survived  seek  the  shade  of  their  trees.  The 
the  operation.  There  is  something  in  Afghan  mountaineer  is  not  tangible 
this  so  repugnant  to  our  civilised  and  to  us  in  any  other  way.  He  removes 
Christian  ideas  of  ri^teous  retribu-*  his  herds,  nocks,  and  property  to  the 
tion,  that  it  is  only  iust  that  I  should  hills  on  the  shortest  notice ;  and  flies 
give  in  this  place  the  explanation  of  before  our  troops  to  places  where  he 
an  act,  perpetrated,  indeed,  upon  is  inaccessible  to  them.  The  Goolai 
other  occasions,  in  the  words  of  an  people,  moreover,  were  deserving  of 
officer  equally  gallant  and  humane,  no  mercy.  The  amount  of  treasure 
''All  the  injury,"  said  Captain  Mac-  they  had  plundered  (viz.,  18,000  or 
sregor,  *'  that  we  could  do  to  their  20,000  rupees)  was  considerable. 
fi>rt8  and  houses  could,  with  facility,  They  had  been  very  pertinacious  in 
in  a  short  time  be  repaired  by  them,  attacking  Captain  Ferns* cantonment; 
From  their  proximity  to  the  hills,  and  equally  so,  subsequentlv,  our 
they  could  always  obtain  timber  in  troops  at  Jellalabad.  Therefore  the 
abundance ;  and  where  water  is  plenti-  Brigadier  determined  at  once  to  com- 
ful  they  could  rebuild  easily  the  has-  mence  the  work  of  destruction,  de« 
tions  we  mi^t  blow  up ;  and  there-  sired  that  neither  fort,  house,  tree^ 
fore  a  greater  degree  of  punishment  grain,  nor  boosa  should  be  spared  to 
than  tills  seemed  to  be  necessary,  and  them.  This  assuredly  was  the  beet 
was  completely  within  our  power,  if  plan  for  preventing  the  necessity  of 
we  destroyed  their  trees — a  measure  harsh  measures  in  future.  Working 
which  seems  barbarous  to  a  civilised  parties  from  the  brigade  were  aocord- 
mind ;  but  in  no  other  way  can  the  ingly  appointed  for  this  purpose." — 
Afghans  be  made  to  feel  equally  the  {^Captain  Macgregor^s  Report,  MS, 
weight  of  otir  power,  for  they  delight  Records,'] 


THE  AFFAIB  AT  MAZKFNA.  563 

md  the  people  of  Deh-Surruk  were  willing  to  restore 
the  treasure  which  they  had  taken ;  but  could  not  easily 
recover  it  from  the  real  possessors.  However,  after  some 
difficulty,  upwards  of  10,000  rupees,  besides  other  pro- 
perty, were  recovered  from  the  Shinwarrees.  A  large 
quantity  of  grain,  timber,  boosa,  and  other  requisites 
was  appropriated  at  Goolai;  and  it  was  supposed  that 
the  dedared  objects  of  the  expedition  had  now  been 
fully  accomplished. 

But  the  Shinwarrees  had  not  been  thoroughly  co- 
erced. Th^y  had  always  been  a  refractory  people — 
unwilling  to  pay  revenue  either  to  Barukzye  chief  or 
Suddozye  Prince.  It  was  thought  advisable,  therefore, 
to  read  th^m  a  lesson.  So  Monteith  made  a  progress 
through  the  valley,  applied  the  fire-brand  to  their  forts, 
and  shot  them  down  in  their  places  of  refuge.  "  At  one 
time  the  interiore  of  five-and-thirty  forts  were  in  a  blaze 
along  the  valley/'*  At  a  place  named  Mazeena  the 
tribes  made  some  show  of  resistance;  but  the  steady 
gallantry  of  her  Majesty's  Slst  Regiment  and  of  their 
Sepoy  comrades  was  not  to  be  withstood;  the  shells 
from  Abbot's  howitzers  were  irresistible ;  and  so  Monteith 
effectually  beat  down  the  opposition  of  the  Shinwarrees. 
This  was  on  the  26th  of  July.  On  the  8rd  of  August 
the  brigade  returned  to  Jellalabad.  From  the  17th  of 
June  to  this  date,  "  both  men  and  cattle  had  entirely 
subsisted  on  the  resources  of  the  country."  "  The 
cattle  especially,"  added  Cap^jiin  Macgregor,  concluding 
his  report,  "  will  be  found  to  have  greatly  improved  in 
condition  while  employed  on  this  service.  Indeed,  in 
whatever  way  it  may  be  viewed,  it  will  be  found  that 
the  expedition  has  beea  highly  beneficial  to  British 
interests." 

Whilst  Monteith  was  carrying  on  these  operations  in 

*  Report  of  Brigadier  Monteith :  July  27, 1843.    PubHthed  Papert. 

2o2 


564  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

the  Shinwarree  valley,  Pollock  was  carrying  on  n^o- 
tiations  for  the  release  of  the  British  prisoners.  On  the 
10th  of  July,  Captain  Troup,  accompanied  by  a  native 
gentleman,  named  Hadjee  Buktear,  had  been  despatched 
to  General  Pollock's  camp;  but  had  brought  back  no 
satisfactory  intelligence  to  encourage  and  animate  the 
Sirdar.*  The  fact  is,  that  Pollock  had  by  this  time 
begun  to  see  his  way  to  Caubul.  Lord  EUenborough 
and  Mr.  Robertson  had  exerted  themselves  most  suc- 
cessfully to  supply  him  with  carriage.  He  was  eager 
to  plant  the  British  standard  on  the  Balla  Hissar,  and 
was  unwilling  to  hamper  himself  with  any  negotiations 
which  might  impede  or  delay  his  advance.  It  was 
thought  by  some  in  Pollock's  camp  that  the  Sirdar  was 
not  sincere  in  his  overtures,  and  that  his  real  object  was 
to  gain  time.  But  Pollock  was  equally  anxious  to  gain 
time.  The  emissaries  were  not  dismissed  in  a  hurry; 
and  when  they  returned  at  last  to  Caubul  they  carried 
back  only  a  verbal  message,  and  that  message  contained 
a  demand  for  all  the  guns  and  trophies  in  the  possession 
of  the  enemy.f  It  was  expected  that  another  reference 
would  be  made  to  Jellalabad ;  and  that  in  the  mean 

*  *^  It  is  impossible/'  wrote  General  too  bigoted  to  his  own  party,  whereas 

Pollock,  "  to  guess  how  this  mission  Hadjee  Buktear  Khan  was  considered 

may  succeed,  because,  in  dealing  with  neutral.    He  is  a  Candahar  man — 

Afghans,  you  deal  with  treachery  and  has  been  at  Bombay  and  others  of 

deceit;   but  appearances  are  as  fair  our  settlements,  and   is   better    ao- 

as  they  can  be  for  the  release  of  the  quainted  with  the  European  diarac- 

prisoners.     Captain  Troup  says  that  ter  than   the    other.*' —  [JeUalabad, 

if  it  had  depended  on  Mahomed  Ak*  July  15.     MS.  Correspondence,'] 
bar  alone,  some  of  the  ladies  would        +  "  Captain  Troup,"  wrote  General 

have  been  sent  with  him ;  but  Ma-  Pollock,  *'  is  still  here.     I  am  glad 

homed  Shah  appears  to  be  a  bitter  that,  in  proposing  terms,  I  insisted  on 

enemy  of  ours — much  more  so  than  I  having  the  guns,  for  I  think  there  b 

had  reason  to  suppose.      The  man  almost  a  certainty  of  an  objection 

who  has  come  with  Captain  Troup  being  made  to  that,  in  which  case,  of 

was  selected  in  opposition  to  the  wish  course,  I  can  back  out.     .     .     .     On 

of  Mahomed  Akbar,  who  wished  to  this  occasion  I  have  written  nothing.'* 

send  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  a  brother  — [Jellalabad,  July  18.    MS.  Corre- 

of  Mahomed  Shah.     Dost  Mahomed  spondence.] 
was  objected  to  by  the  chiefs  as  being 


B£L£AS£  OF  THE  PRISONERS.  565 

while  Pollock  would  be  supplied  with  the  means  of 
rescuing  the  prisoners  more  majestically  than  by  such 
negotiations.  He  had  received  so  many  assurances  from 
influential  men  at  the  capital  that  the  Caubullees  would 
not  suffer  Akbar  Khan  to  carry  off  the  prisoners  to 
Toorkistan,  that  he  believed  the  advance  of  his  army 
would  tend  more  surely  to  their  release  than  any  diplo- 
matic measure  which  he  could  possibly  adopt. 

But  Akbar  Khan  held  a  different  opinion.  When 
Troup  returned  to  Caubul,  the  Sirdar  summoned  him 
and  Pottinger  to  an  interview,  declared  that  he  was  not 
satisfied  with  Pollock's  verbal  message,  and  candidly 
asked  their  advice.  Pottinger  replied,  that  the  best 
advice  he  could  offer  was,  that  Akbar  Khan  should  im- 
mediately send  down  the  whole  of  the  prisoners  to  Pol- 
lock's camp  at  Jellalabad,  as  a  proof  of  his  sincerity  and 
good  feeUng.  If  there  were  any  delay,  he  added,  the 
negotiations  would  be  broken  off,  and  the  army  would 
advance.  To  this  the  Sirdar  replied,  that  without  a 
written  promise  from  General  Pollock  to  withdraw  his 
troops  from  Afghanistan  the  prisoners  would  not  be  sent 
to  his  camp;  and  that  they  might  at  once  banish  the 
thought  of  a  forcible  release  of  the  prisoners  on  the  ad- 
vance of  the  British  army,  for  that  as  soon  as  intelli- 
gence should  reach  him  of  our  troops  having  arrived  at 
Charbagh,  he  would  send  them  all  off  to  Toorkistan — 
scattering  them  about  by  twos  and  threes  among  the 
different  chiefs — and  come  down  himself  with  his  fight- 
ing men  to  dispute  the  progress  of  the  advancing 
army. 

To  Pollock,  this  appeared  a  mere  idle  threat.  He 
still  clung  to  the  belief  that  there  was  a  party  in  Caubul 
able  and  willing*  to  prevent  the  departure  of  the  pri- 

*  "I  have  reason  to  belieye  that    which  has  determined  not  to  allow 
there  lA  a  strong  party  at  Caubul    the  removal  of  our  prisoners ;  and  I 


566  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLAI^ABAD. 

soncrs;  and  when  Troup,  accompanied  by  Lawrence, 
came  down  again  to  Jellalabad,  he  found  the  Greneral 
still  less  inclined  than  before  to  promise  to  withdraw  his 
army.  He  had,  indeed,  already  moved  a  brigade  for- 
ward to  Futtehabad — two  marches  in  advance  of  his 
old  position ;  and  all  that  he  could  now  promise  was, 
that  he  would  not  advance  beyond  that  point  before  the 
expiration  of  a  certain  number  of  days.*  The  negotia-^ 
tions  had,  by  this  time,  become  the  merest  sham.  It 
was  obvious  that  Pollock  could  not  proceed  with  them 
to  a  successful  issue  without  encumbering  himself  with 
conditions  which  would  have  hung  as  a  mill-stone 
round  the  neck  of  a  military  commander,  eager  to  drive 
his  battalions  into  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  country. 
The  Governor-General  wrote  to  him  that  "  all  military 
operations  must  proceed,  as  if  no  negotiations  were  on 
foot ;"  but  Akbar  Khan  had  rendered  this  impossible,  by 
demanding,  as  a  condition  of  the  delivery  of  the  pri- 
soners, that  all  the  British  troops  should  withdraw  from 
Afghanistan.! 

also  belieye  that  the  Wullee  of  Koo-  directly  the  prisoners  arrived.  To 
loom  has  written  refnsing  to  receive  this  I  objectea.  I  was  then  reqnested 
Mahomed  Akbar  if  accompanied  by  to  state  any  date^ — but  this  I  also  de- 
the  prisoners." — {^General  PoUock  to  clined."  —  [General  Pollock  to  Mr, 
Government']  Robertson:  August  10,  1842.  MS, 
*  *^  I  don't  know  how  my  last  Correspondence,]  Sale  commanded 
message  will  be  received  at  Caubul.  Uie  advanced  bngade  at  Futtehabad. 
Mahomed  Akbar  will  be  annoyed.  '*  I  have  my  camp  in  two  lines,*'  he 
My  address  is  to  Futteh  Jung;  and  wrote  a  few  days  afterwards  to  Pol- 
since  I  have  sent  the  reply  I  have  lock,  **  the  cavalry  facing  the  river, 
moved  up  the  brigade.  I  told  Cap-  and  rear  to  the  water— tiie  fipont 
tain  Troup  that  I  should  not  move  of  our  encampment  an  open  stony 
up  the  bn^de  beyond  Futtehabad  plain — a  good  place  for  a  ^ht.  The 
for  a  certam  number  of  days,  in  the  left  of  our  Une  rests  on  a  small  hill 
expectation  of  hearing  further  from  that  commands  a  view  all  round.*' 
Caubul,  and  that  I  expect  the  ladies  -^[MS.  CorrespondenceJ] 
will  be  sent.  The  negotiation  is  f  The  Governor-General,  how- 
carried  on  in  the  name  of  Futteh  ever,  seems  to  have  considered  it  not 
Jung,  but  Akbar  Khan  is  the  main-  wholly  improbable  that  the  oontem- 
spring.  The  chief,  and  almost  the  plated  military  movement  upon  Cau- 
only  point  he  seemed  to  care  about  bul  would  be  suspended  by  the  fii 
was,  that  I  should  sign  a  declara-  vorable  conclusion  of  the  negotia- 
tion that  I  would  leave  the  country  tions  with  the  enemy ;  and  actuallj 


NECESSITY  OF  CO-OPERATION.  567 

Weary  of  these  protracted  negotiations,  Pollock  was 
now  eager  to  advance  upon  Caubul.  He  was  only 
waiting  the  arrival  of  specific  information  from  Canda- 
har  relative  to  the  movements  of  his  brother-generaL 
*^  As  I  have  offered  to  meet  him,'*  he  wrote  to  a  friend 
in  high  place,  "  he  will  find  some  diflSiculty  in  resisting 
the  glorious  temptation ;  but  if  he  does  resist,  he  is  not 
the  man  I  take  him  for."*  The  glorious  temptation  was 
not  resisted.  The  two  Generals  were  worthy  of  each 
other.  Nott  had  determined  to  retire  to  India  by  Ghuz- 
nee,  Caubul,  and  Jellalabad ;  and  in  the  middle  of  the 
month  of  August,  a  messenger,  long  expected  and  most 
welcome,  brought  the  cheering  intelligence  into  Pollock's 
camp.f 

On  the  20th  of  August,  Pollock  began  to  move  from 
Jellalabad.  On  that  day  the  advanced  guard  under  the 
General  himself  reached  Sultanpore,  on  its  way  to 
Gundamuck.  At  the  latter  place  he  intended  to  as- 
seitible  the  whole  of  the  troops  which  he  had  selected 
to  accompany  him  to  the  capitalj — in  all,  about  8000 

authorised  Pollock  to  exercise  his  the  27th  of  July.    It  comprised  but 

discretion  in  ordering  Nott  to  retire  a  few  lines  : — 

by  Quettah,  eren  though  the  march  '*Candahar,  July  27, 1842. 

upon  Ghuznee  and  Caubul  had  been  "  My  deab  Gkhebai^, — You  will 

conmienced. — [Lord  EUenborough  to  have  received  a  copy  of  a  letter  firom 

General  Pollock:   July  29,    1842.1  the  Groyemor-Grenerd  under  date 

Subseauently  the  Goyemor-Genenu  the  4th  instant,  to  my  address,  giyine 

seemea  to  awaken  to  a  sense  of  the  me  the  option  of  retiring  a  |^rt  m 

extraordinary  character  of  this  sug-  my  force  to  India  vid  Caubul  and 

gestion,    for   he   wrote   to    Grene-  Jellalabad.     I  have  determined  to 

ral  PoUock  to  say  that  he  **  could  take  that  route,  and  will  write  to  you 

hardly  ima^e  the  exbtence  of circum-  fully  on  the  subject  as  soon  as  I 

stances  which  could  justify  the  diyer-  have  arranged  for  carriage  and  sup- 

sion  of  Major-Genwral  ISott's  army  plies. — Yours  truly,   wT  Nott."— ^ 

irom  the  route  of  Ghuznee  and  of  Cau-  iMS.  Correspondence.'] 

bul,  when  his  intention  of  marching  %  The  force  consisted  of  the  3rd 

by  that  route  shall  haye  been  once  Dragoons;  the  1st  Natiye  Cayalry; 

clearly  indicated.'*  —  [Lord    Ellen'  a  squadron  of  the  5th  and  of  the 

borough  to  General  Pollock:  August  10th   ditto,  with  the  head-quarters; 

26, 1842.]  600    Sowars  of  the    3rd  Lrr^ular 

•  MS.  Correspondence,  Cayalry;   her  Majesty's  31st  fieffi- 

f  Nott's  letter  was  despatched  on  ment ;  the  d3rd  R^pnent  of  Native 


568  THE  ADTASCE  FBOM  JEU.AI1ABAD. 

men.  On  the  23rd,  Pollock,  with  the  advance,  reached 
Gundamuck.  About  two  miles  from  tliat  place  lies  the 
village  of  Mammoo  Khail.  Two  hostile  chiefs  with  a 
strong  body  of  the  Ooloos  were  occupying  this  position.* 
Pollock  at  once  determined  to  dislodge  them  ;  and 
ordered  up  from  Sale's  camp  in  the  rear  Broadfoot's 
sappers  and  a  squadron  of  dragoons.  On  the  following 
morning  the  brigade  advanced,  and  the  enemy  b^an 
to  retire.  Then,  dividing  his  infantry  into  two  columns, 
with  a  wing  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot  at  the  head  of 
each,  Pollock  entered  the  village.  The  enemy  had 
abandoned  their  positions  there,  and  at  another  village, 
called  Koochlee  Ehail;  but  they  rallied  and  returned  to 
occupy  a  range  of  heights  within  musket-shot  of  the 
latter  place,  and  &om  these  commanding  eminences  they 
kept  up,  for  some  time,  a  hot  fire  from  their  jezails. 
But  Colonel  Taylor  attacked  them  on  one  side;  Broad- 
foot,  with  his  sappers,  on  the  other.f  The  heights  were 
carried.  The  forts  and  villages  were  taken,  and  the 
enemy  dispersed.  The  chiefs  fled  to  Caubul  with  a 
few  followers.     Mammoo  £hail   and  Koochlee  Kbtul 

Lifanlv;;  the  whole  of  Sir  Robert  PoOodi:  Augiut  14,  IS42.  MS.' 
Stde'e  and  of  Colonel  TuUocL's  bri'  "  From  what  I  can  learD,  the  Kc> 
gaiJea;  with  scvcutcen  K}>ii>>  acorn-    gnnees  arc  assembling  and  are  j 


Gu 
■^  the 

^B  i 

^^K        be, 


panT  of  Sappern  and  Minera,  and  a  venting  mpplics  from   Deing  brouKhi 

regtment  of  Bildars  (Pioneers)  under  into  our  camp.     Mammoo  Khail  ap- 

Mr.  Mackcson.     A  email  force  waa  pear*  to  be  tlicir  head-quortera.     I 

left  (chicQj  for  want  of  carriage^  at  allowed  to  remun  unmoleBted,  thei 

Gundaraudi,  and  tlie  restremaioed  maj    become    troublesome.       If   ii 

■-  garrison  at  Jellalabad.  suited  your  views  to  move  forwart 

■  The  enemy  bad  been  collecting  lo   Gundamuck,   we  should  then,    ! 

there  for  socnc  days;  and  Sale,  who  think,  command  the  resources  of  thi 

was   encamned   at   Futtehabad,   re-  Talley."— [Geiteroi   Sale    to    Genera 

ceived    intelli^ncc   of  their  move-  Pollock:  August  16,  1842.      AfS.l 

ments,  which  lie   forwarded  to  the  t  In  this   aflair  we  lost  seTen  mt 

General.     "I  deairedBroadfoot,"  ha  killed,    and    about    fifty     wounded 

wrote,  "  to  send  in  a  man  to  Shake-  Among  the  latter  were  four  officen 

who  Hiud  he   had  come  from  M^or  Huish  (26lh  Native  Infaittrr 

loo  Ehail,  and  that  the  Uri-  Captain  Edwards  (9th   Foot),   Cap 

twee  was  coUtcU.ig  fighting  men,  tain  Tait  (Irregular  Cavalry),  Ensii 

pad  sending  awttj.  their  women  and  Eobertson  (37tb  Native  lafkntrvl 

duUwn,"— [Generoi  Sate  to  Gaentl  -^"^yj- 


ORDERS  FOR  THE  ADVANCE.  569 

were  destroyed  by  fire ;   and  the  fruit-trees  were  cut 
down.* 

Having  accomplished  this,  Pollock  returned  to  Gun- 
damuck.  The  attack  on  Mammoo  Khail,  which  is  not 
on  the  road  to  Caubul,  was  a  diversion  rendered  neceS' 
sary  by  the  appearance  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction. 
But  the  General  had  yet  to  assemble  his  entire  force, 
to  assure  himself  of  the  sufficiency  of  his  supplies,  and 
to  make  all  the  necessary  arrangements  for  his  advance 
upon  the  capital.  The  delight  with  which  the  an- 
nouncement of  the  intended  advance  upon  Caubul  had 
been  received  throughout  the  general  camp  is  not  to  be 
described.  The  question  of  advance  or  withdrawal  had 
been  for  months  eagerly  discussed.  Every  symptom  had 
been  watched  with  the  closest  interest — every  report 
had  been  canvassed  with  wondering  curiosity.  Acting 
under  instructions  from  the  Supreme  Government,  Pol- 
lock had  kept  all  his  intended  movements  a  close  secret. 
It  was  not,  indeed,  imtil  the  middle  of  August  that  even 
Sir  Robert  Sale  knew  that  the  force  would  advance 
upon  Caubul ;  and  then  he  was  so  wild  with  excitement 
that  he  could  scarcely  write  a  note  to  the  General  to 
express  his  unbounded  delightf 

*  With  regard  to  the  destruction  return  of  the  whole  of  the  troops,  it 
committed  at  Mammoo  Khail,  it  is  was  necessary,  for  their  security,  to 
right  that  General  Pollock's  own  ac-  take  advantage  of  the  gardens  stir- 
count  should  be  given.  "  At  Mam-  rounded  by  walls,  and  the  men  were 
moo  Khail,  I  know  most  positively  accordingly  encam{>ed  there.  The 
that  no  Afghan  was  killea  except  destruction  of  the  vines  was  a  neces- 
in  fair  fighting.  The  families  had,  I  sary  consequence,  as  any  one  must 
believe,  gone  the  day  before  the  place  know  who  has  seen  how  grapes  were 
was  taken.  I  cannot  say  when,  or  cultivated  in  Afghanistan.  There 
by  whom,  the  adjoining  houses  were  were  very  few  trees  cut  down,  but 
set  fire  to.  I  passed  through  with  the  bark  of  a  number  of  them  was 
the  right  column  in  pursuit  of  the  taken  for  about  two  or  three  inches.*' 
enemy,  and  did  not  return  till  the  — ^General  PoUock  to  the  Adjutant" 
afternoon,  when  I  had  determined  to  General:  Dinapore,  April  18,  1843. 
encamp  there.  On  my  return  I  MS.  Records.']  See  Appendix  at  the 
found  Brigadier  Tulloch  with  his  end  of  the  volume  for  the  letter 
column    (uie   left)    occupying    the  entire. 

eardens.      The    fort    and   adhacent  t  "Hurrah I"  he  wrote;  "this  is 

houses  were  still  burning.    On  the  good  news.   AU  here  ore  prepared  to 


570  THE  ADVASCB  FEOM  JELIALABAD. 

There  were  now  no  longer  any  doubts  regarding  the 
forward  movement  of  the  force.  Officers  and  men  were 
eager  to  push  on  to  Caubul;  and  willing  to  advance 
lightlj  equipped,  leaving  behind  them  all  the  baggage 
that  "was  not  absolutely  necessary  to  their  efficiency. 
The  13th  Light  Infantry,  ever  ready  to  set  an  example 
to  their  comrades,  sent  back  a  considerable  portion  of 
their  ba^age  to  Jellalabad,  and  prepared  to  march  with 
bnly  a  single  change  of  linen.  The  officers  of  the  regi- 
ment were  content  to  congr^ate,  three  or  four  blether, 
in  small  hill  tents;  and  Broadfoot,  at  all  times  a  pattern 
of  chivalrous  zeal,  offered  to  take  on  his  sappers  without 
any  tents  at  all.* 

Full  of  hops  and  courage  the  troops  moved  up,  by 
brigades,  to  Gundamuck.  Making  all  his  arrangements 
for  the  march,  and  waiting  intelligence  from  Nott,f 
Pollock  remained  at  that  place  until  the  7th  of  Septem- 
ber. Supplies  were  pouring  freely  into  camp.  The 
rich  orchards  and  fruit-gardens  of  the  surrounding 
country  yielded  their  luscious  produce;  and  our  officers 
were  writing  to  their  friends  that  they  were  "  luxu- 
riating quietly  on  the  most  deUcious  fruits  and  supplies 
of  all  kind."  The  neighbouring  chiefe  were  coming  in 
and  making  submission  to  the  Enghsh  General  It  was 
pliun  that  already  the  tidings  of  our  advance  were 
tfriking  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  chiefs  and  people 
of  A&hanistan . 

meet  jour  wishes  to  mircli  aa  light  *  General  Sale  to  GenenU  Pt^loeki 
M  posaiblf.  I  (.alee  no  cimage  from  Aug.  18,  1S42.  MS.  Correwpondeaee, 
the  CommUsailul ;  and  our  officen  f  Pollock  had  receiTed  no  later 
are  doubling  up  fotr  in  a  «nuU  hill  Intelligence  from  Kott'a  camp  than 
Unt,  and  aru  gi'iidiii^  all  to  the  rear  that  contained  in  the  brief  letter  of 
that  the;  cau  diqiciLM  with.  .  .  .  JulyS?,  though  he  had  despatched  ten 
I  am  n  eiciicdifmi  IcamcarcewnU."  messengers  to  the  westward.  It  wai 
—IGeneriU  .Sale  to  OeneriU  Pollock:  not  until  midnight  of  the  6th — 7th  of 
'^"^     ' ~-      TS.     September  that  Uttera  from  Nott'a 

camp  were  recuTed  bj  Pollock  «t 

GmidaDiuGk. 


FLIGHT  01*  FTfTTEH  JUNO.  671 

It  was  on  the  1st  day  of  September,  when  Pollock 
was  awaiting  at  Gundamuck  the  assembling  of  his  bri- 
gades, that  an  Afghan,  of  forlorn  aspect,  in  soiled  and 
tattered  clothes,  rode  upon  a  wretched  pony^  flttend^d 
by  three  followers,  into  the  British  camp.  Two  officer^ 
of  the  general  staff.  Burn  and  Majme,  met  the  stranget 
as  he  approached,  and  recognised  him.  They  knew  him 
to  be  Futteh  Jung.  They  knew  him  to  be  the  man 
who,  a  day  or  two  before,  had  borne  the  title  of  King  of 
Caubul.  The  fugitive  was  kindly  received  and  con- 
ducted to  the  General's  tent.  A  salute  was  fired  in  his 
honour.  Accommodation  was  provided  for  him  in  the 
British  camp,  and  'everything  that  could  conduce  to  his 
comfort  was  freely  granted  to  the  unfortunate  Prince. 

For  some  time,  Futteh  Jung  had  been  a  wretched 
puppet  at  the  Caubul  Court.  He  had  been  but  a  King 
of  straw.  The  merest  shadow  of  royalty  had  been 
suffered  to  cling  to  him.  Akbar  Khan,  fot  his  own  uses, 
held  the  imbecile  Prince  firmly  in  his  hands ;  and  every 
day  tightened  his  grasp.  He  stripped  him  of  all  his 
power;  he  stripped  him  of  all  his  wealth.  He  threat- 
ened— he  overawed  him.  He  compelled  him  to  attach 
his  seal,  or  his  signature,*  to  papers  resigning  all  autho- 
rity into  the  hands  of  the  Wuzeer,  and  signifying  his 
assent  to  everything  that  might  be  originated  or  sanc- 
tioned   by   him.f      Deeming    that    the    unscrupulous 

*  To  many  of  liis  letters  ^to  Grene*  to  confirm,  and  no  alteration  shall  be 

ral  FoUock,  Futteh  Jung  signed  his  made.**    And  agun  :  "  The  arran^ 

name  in  English  characters.  ments^  which  have  been  made  with 

t  Akbar  Khan  compelled  the  t^rince  Captain  Troup  and  Ha^jee  Buktear 

to  write  to  Pollock :  '*  I  have  given  have  been  all  approved  of  hj  me.    I 

to  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  the  full  have  delegatea  all  powers  over  mj 

and  entire  management  of  all  mj  country  and  wealth  to  the  Wuzeer, 

property  and  affairs  of  every  descrip-  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Barokzye  !** 

lion,  and  have  resigned  to  him  in  But  the  Prince  took  the  first  opporr 

perpetuity  full  power  to  judge  and  tunity  to  write  privately  to  the  G^ne" 

settle  all    questions  on  all  points,  ral :  *^  My  friend,  it  will  have  been 

Whatever  arrangement  he  may  make  evident  to  you  that  in  this  matter  t 

with  the  English  Grovemment  X  agree  have  been  compelled  to  act  thus.    I 


572  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

tjrranny  of  Akbar  Khan  would  soon  manifest  itself  in 
the  murder  of  the  whole  royal  family,  the  Prince 
directed  his  thoughts  towards  the  expediency  of  flight, 
and  determined  to  claim  the  hospitality  of  the  British 
Creneral.  But  Akbar  Ehan  suspected  his  intentions, 
and  flung  him  into  close^confinement  in  the  Balla  His- 
sar.  Cutting  a  hole  through  the  roof  of  his  prison,  he 
effected  his  escape,  and  fled  to  the  quarters  of  the  Kuz- 
zilbashes,  where  he  remained  for  some  days  concealed. 
It  was  reported  that,  he  had  been  murdered.  But  he 
was  now  fixed  in  his  resolution  to  seek  the  protection  of 
the  British  Government ;  and  was  soon  upon  his  way  to 
Jellalabad.  With  some  difficulty,  often  fired  upon  as  he 
went,  he  made  his  way  through  the  passes ;  and  at  last, 
on  the  1st  of  September,  rode  into  Pollock's  camp. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  of  September,  General 
Pollock,  with  the  first  division  of  his  army,  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Sir  Robert  Sale,  moved  fix)m 
Gundamuck,*  in  progress  to  the  capital.  The  second 
division,  under  General  M'Caskill,  marched  on  the  fol- 

did  not  even  know  that  Captain  prevent  the  treachery  of  one  man 
Troup  and  Hadjee  Buktear  had  from  causing  dissension  between  the 
been  sent,  and  I  had  not  the  slightest  two  ffovcrnments,  and  that  thej  are 
knowledge  of  the  proposals  made  bj  unaUe  to  show  their  good-will  to  us 
them.  Uaptain  Troup  is  well- aware  by  releasing  our  prisoners."  To  this, 
of  this,  since  we  had  never  met,  nor  on  the  Ist  of  August,  Futteh  Jung 
had  any  of  my  confidential  people  replied:  "You  express  surprise  at 
been  employed  between  us.'* — [Fu^-  my  many  well-wishers  not  being  able 
teh  Jung  to  General  Pollock:  Transla-  to  find  a  remedy  for  one  evil-dis- 
tion,  JuZy21, 1842.  MS,  RecordsJ^  posed  person,  xou  write  :  'If  this 
The  letter  was  evidently  written  in  a  could  beefiected,  a  great  object  would 
state  of  painful  alarm.  It  concludes  be  obtained.*  Eminent  in  rank ! 
with  the  words  :  "  You  must  be  very  You  write  truly.  But  in  a  religious 
careful  not  to  let  it  be  known  that  1  war,  a  father  cannot  trust  his  son — a 
have  written  to  you ;  since,  should  son,  his  father.** 
these  villains  hear  ofit,  they  would  put  *  A  squadron  of  the  5th  Light 
me  and  my  family  to  death.**  In  replj  Cavalry ;  a  squadron,  and  the  head- 
to  this  letter  Pollock  expressed  nis  Quarters  of  the  10th  Light  Cavalry; 
surprise  that,  "  notwithstanding  his  the  lefl  wings  of  the  33rd  and  60th 
Majesty*s  friendship,  the  good-will  of  N.I.,  with  two  guns  of  the  3rd  troop 
the  chiefs,  and  the  unanimity  of  the  2nd  brigade  of  Horse  Artillery,  were 
people  at  Caubul,  still  they  cannot  Icfl  at  Gundamuck. 


JUGDULLUCK.  573 

lowing  day.  A  party  of  the  Sikh  contingent,  under 
Captain  Lawrence,  accompanied  this  division.  The 
regiments  had  been  sent  up  to  Jellalabad  in  June,  and 
had  been  encamped  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
They  were  the  old  Mussulman  corps  who  had  behaved 
so  infamously  on  the  other  side  of  the  Khybur,  but  who 
now  had  been  talked  over  by  Gholab  Singh  into  some- 
thing like  propriety  of  demeanour.*  They  behaved  at 
least  as  well  as  the  British  General  expected,  and  when 
Lawrence  sought  permission  for  a  party  of  500  men, 
horse  and  foot,  to  accompany,  under  his  directions,  Pol- 
lock's army  to  Caubul,  the  General  was  but  little  in- 
clined to  refuse  the  request.  So  a  party  of  800  horse 
and  200  foot  marched,  under  Lawrence,  with  M'CaskiU's 
division ;  and  the  remainder  occupied  positions  at  Neem- 
lah  and  Gundamuck. 

On  the  8th  of  September,  as  the  first  division  of  Pol- 
lock's army  approached  the  hills  which  commanded  the 
road  through  the  JugduUuck  Pass,  he  found  that  their 
summits  were  occupied  by  the  enemy.  Large  bodies  of 
Ghilzyes,  under  different  chieftains,  each  with  a  dis- 
tinguishing standard,  were  clustering  on  the  heights. 
"  The  hills  they  occupied  formed  an  amphitheatre  in- 
clining towards  the  left  of  the  road,  on  which  the  troops 
were  halted  whilst  the  guns  opened,  and  the  enemy  were 
thus  enabled  on  this  point  to  fire  into  the  column,  a 
deep  ravine  preventing  any  contact  with  them."f  The 
practice  of  the  guns  was  excellent;  but  the  Ghilzye 
warriors  stood  their  ground.  The  shells  fi'om  our 
howitzers  burst  amongst  them ;  but  still  they  held  their 
posts.     Still  they  poured  in  a  hot  fire  firom  their  jezails. 

*  They,  however,  diverted  them*  his  tent.    The  poor  old  man,  in  an 

selves  with  a  little  internal  mutiny—  extremity  of  terror,  soaght  refuge 

rising  up  against  the  Sikh  general,  under  Pollock's  skirts. 

Gholab  Singh  Fovmdea,  and  burning  t  General  FoUoclC$  Report, 


574  THE  ADVANCE  F]ROM  JELLALABAD. 

So  Pollock  sent  his  infantry  to  the  attack ;  and  gallantly 
they  ascended  the  heights.  On  one  side,  Broadfoot, 
ever  in  advance,  led  up  his  little  band  of  sappers.  On 
the  other,  Taylor,  with  the  9th  Foot,  ascended  the  hilla, 
where  the  enemy,  horse  and  foot,  were  posted  behind  a 
ruined  fort.  In  the  centre,  Wilkinson,  with  the  13th, 
pushed  up  the  ascent  towards  the  key  of  the  enemy's 
position.  All  went  forward  with  impetuous  gallantry; 
and  as  they  clomb  the  hill-sides  and  seized  the  Ghilzye 
standards,  up  went  an  animated  and  enthusiastic  cheer 
from  the  British  stormers,  Jt  was  plain  that  their  heart 
was  in  the  work,  and  that  nothing  could  turn  them 
back.  The  flower  of  the  Ghilzye  tribes  were  there, 
under  many  of  their  most  renowned  chieftains,  and  they 
looked  down  upon  the  scene  of  their  recent  sanguinary 
triumphs.  But  they  had  now  to  deal  with  other  men, 
under  other  leaders.  The  loud  clear  cry  of  the  British 
infantry  struck  a  panic  into  their  souls.  They  turned 
and  fled  before  our  bayonets.  Then  galloped  Lockyer 
with  his  dragoons  after  the  enemy's  horse;  but  the  na- 
ture  of  the  ground  was  against  him,  and  they  escaped 
the  annihilation  which  otherwise  would  have  been  their 
fate. 

But  the  battle  was  not  yet  over.  A  considerable 
body  of  the  enemy  had  betaken  themselves  for  safety  to 
an  apparently  inaccessible  height.  On  the  summit  of  a 
mountain  they  planted  their  standards,  and  seemed  to 
look  down  with  defiance  upon  our  troops.  But  Pollock 
was  resolute  not  to  leave,  on  that  day,  his  work  incom>» 
pletc.  He  believed  that  where  the  enemy  could  post 
themselves  his  infantry  could  attack  them.  So,  imder 
cover  of  Abbot's  and  Backhouse's  guns,  Broadfoot  and 
Wilkinson  again  led  up  their  men,  and  stormed  that 
precipitous  height.     "  Seldom  have  soldiers  had  a  more 


THE  VICTORY  OF  JUGDULLUCK.  675 

arduous  task  to  perform,  and  never  was  an  undertakiag 
of  the  kind  surpassed  in  execution."*  The  Ghilzyes 
looked  down  upon  them  with  astonishment  and  dismay* 
They  saw  at  once  the  temper  of  our  men,  and  they 
shrunk  from  the  encounter.  Our  stormers  pushed  on, 
and  the  Ghilzye  standards  were  lowered.  The  enemy 
fled  in  confusion;  and  left  the  stronghold,  from  which 
they  had  looked  down  in  the  insolence  of  mistaken 
security,  to  be  occupied  by  British  troops. 

The  victory  was  complete.  It  was  mainly  achieved, 
under  Pollock's  able  directions,  by  the  brave  men  of 
the  old  Jellalabad  garrison.  Sale  himself,  who  was 
never  far  off  when  there  was  likely  to  be  hard  fighting, 
led  up  the  heights  in  front  of  hi^  old  regiment,  and  was 
wounded  in  the  afeay.  The  loss  upon  our  side  was 
trifling.  Nothing  could  have  told  more  plainly  than 
such  a  victory  as  this  how  little  formidable  iu  reality 
were  the  best  Ghilzye  fighting  men  in  their  most  in- 
accessible strongholds,  when  opposed  to  British  infantry 
under  the  eye  of  a  capable  commander.  The  Ghikye 
butchers  were  now  seen  flying  like  sheep  before  the 
comrades  of  the  men  whom  a  few  months  before  they 
had  slaughtered  in  these  very  shambles  at  JugduUuck. 

The  first  division  alone  of  Pollock's  army  was  eu" 
gaged  with  the  enemy  at  JugduUuck.f  The  second 
division  passed  on,  much  molested  by  the  enemy,  and 
often  compelled  to  fight  its  way  against  large  bodies  of 
Ghilzye  footmen.  On  the  11th  of  September  they  joined 
the  advance  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tezeen.  The 
exertions  of  a  forced  march  had  fatigued  M'Caskill's 
cattle;  so  Pollock  determined  to  devote  the  12th  to  a 
halt.    Before  the  day  had  closed  it  was  evident  that 

*  Oenercd  PoUocVm  Report,  ^  Narratiye  of  the  late  Victoriouf 

f  For  aa  account  of  the  operations  Campaign  in  Afghanistan,  under  Ge* 

of  the  second  division  of  roUock's  neral  Pollock.'* 

armj,  see  Lieutenant    Greenwood's 


/ 


576  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

the  enemy  were  close  at  hand,  and  that  we  were  on  the 
eve  of  a  great  struggle.  Akbar  Khan  had  been  true  to 
his  word.  He  had  despatched  the  bulk  of  the  English 
prisoners  to  the  Hindoo-Koosh,  and  was  now  preparing 
to  meet  our  army.  On  the  6th  of  September  he  had 
moved  his  camp  to  Begramee — distant  some  six  miles 
from  the  Balla  Hissar — and  there  sent  for  Captain 
Troup.*  The  English  oflGicer  repaired  to  the  camp  of 
the  Sirdar,  who  summoned  a  meeting  of  the  principal 
chiefs.  The  Newab  Zemaun  Khan,  Jubbar  Khan, 
Ameen-oollah  Khan,  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  and  other 
chief  people  of  the  empire  attended  the  council.  Troup 
was  not  permitted  to  be  present  at  the  conference ;  but 
he  soon  learnt  its  result.  He  was  required  immediately 
to  proceed  to  Gundamuck  on  a  mission  to  Pollock's 
camp.  The  chiefs  had  determined  to  endeavour  to 
conciliate  the  British  General.  They  were  willing  to 
agree  to  any  terms  he  might  please  to  dictate,  if  he 
would  only  consent  to  stay  the  advance  of  his  army 
upon  the  capital. 

Troup  declared  his  willingness  to  proceed  on  the  mis- 
^  sion.  But  he  had  no  hope,  he  said,  of  its  success.  The 
time  for  negotiation  had  passed.  Nothing  could  now 
stay  the  progress  of  Pollock's  army  but  the  entire 
destruction  of  the  force.  But  so  urgently  did  the  Sirdar 
press  his  request  on  the  British  oflScer,  that  Troup  could 
not  refuse  his  assent  to  the  proposal.  He  made  his  pre- 
parations for  the  journey,  and  then  returned  to  the 
Afghan  camp.  There,  in  the  presence  of  Akbar  Khan 
and  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  he  again  set  forth  the  use- 

*  Captains  Troup  and  Bygrave,  force,  where  Captain  and  Mrs.  An- 
when  the  other  prisoners  were  sent  to  derson  and  Mrs.  Trevor,  with  their 
Bameean,  had  been  taken  by  Akbar  children,  had  been  lefl,  on  account  of 
Khan  to  the  Balla  Hissar — but  had  sickness,  under  charge  of  Dr.  Camp- 
subsequently  been  permitted  to  re-  bell, 
move  themselves  to  All  Mahomed*8 


MOVEMENTS  OF  AKBAR  KHAN.         577 

lessness  of  the  mission,  and  prevailed  with  them  to 
forego  it.* 

There  was  nothing  now  left  for  the  Sirdar  but  to  ap* 
peal  to  the  God  of  battles,  and  bring  all  the  force  that 
he  could  muster  to  oppose  the  progress  of  Pollock's 
army  through  the  passes.  He  now  moved  down  to 
Boodkhak,  and  from  that  place  summoned  Troup  and 
Bygrave  to  his  camp.  It  appeared  to  him  that  the 
English  oflSicers  might  render  him  essential  service  in  the 
negotiation  of  terms,  if  the  tide  of  victory  turned  against 
him.  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  they  entered  his 
camp  at  Boodkhak.  That  evening  he  summoned  them 
to  his  presence,  and  was  for  some  time  in  earnest 
consultation  with  them.  He  declared  that  he  had  no 
wish  to  oppose  the  progress  of  the  British  army,  but 
that  he  had  compromised  himself  too  far  to  recede, 
and  that  the  people  would  not  hear  of  submission.  The 
English  officers  assured  him  that  his  defeat  was  certain ; 
and  that  opposition  to  our  advance  would  only  occasion 
an  useless  expenditure  of  life.  "  I  know,"  said  the  Sirdar, 
"  that  I  have  everything  to  lose ;  but  it  is  too  late  to 
recede."  He  declared  that  he  was  indifferent  as  to  the 
result.  The  issue  of  the  contest  was  in  the  hands  of 
God,  and  it  little  mattered  to  him  who  was  the  victor. 

On  the  following  morning  he  sent  for  Troup,  and  an- 
nounced that  he  and  Bygrave  must  accompany  him  to 
Koord-Caubul.  Arrived  at  that  place,  intelligence  of 
the  intended  halt  of  Pollock's  army  at  Tezeen  reached 
the  Sirdar.  The  Afghan  chiefs  had  intended  to  make 
their  last  decisive  stand  at  Koord-Caubul ;  but  the  halt 
of  the  advancing  army  seemed  to  indicate  indecision, 

♦  They  required  Troup,  however,  the  messengers  returned  some  days 

to  write  a  letter  to  General  Pollock  afterwards,  declaring  that  they  had 

making  known  Akbar  Khan's  wishes,  not  been  able  to  penetrate  the  British 

and  inclosing  one  from  the  Sirdar  camp. — ICaptain   Troup  to   General 

himself.    The  letters  were  sent,  but  Pollock,    MS.  Correspondence,'] 

VOL.  II.  2  P 


^ 


578  THK  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

mi  it  was  rumoured  that  difficulties  had  arisen  to  ob- 
struct the  progress  of  the  force.  On  this,  he  at  once 
determined  to  move  on  to  Tezeen ;  and  sent  to  Troup  to 
announce  his  intentions.*  The  English  officer  sought 
and  obtained  permission  to  return  to  Ali  Mahomed's 
fort;  and  Akbar  Khan  went  forward  to  do  battle  with 

the  British.f 

On  the  13th  the  two  forces  met.  Great  were  the 
advantages  of  the  ground  to  the  Afghan  levies.  The 
valley  of  Tezeen  is  commanded  on  all  sides  by  lofty 
hills;  and  the  chiefs  had  posted  their  jezailchees  on 
every  available  height.  Indeed,  on  that  morning  of 
the  13  th  of  September,  Pollock's  camp  was  encircled  by 
the  enemy;  and  it  was  plain  that  every  effi)rt  had  been 
made  to  turn  the  natural  defences  of  the  coimtry  to  the 
best  possible  account.  There  was  a  hard  day's  work 
before  Pollock's  army ;  but  never  were  a  finer  body  of 
troops  in  finer  condition,  or  more  eager  for  the  work 
before  them.  All  arms  had  now  a  chance  of  dis- 
tinguishing themselves — the  cavalry  on  the  plain,  the 
infantry  on  the  hills,  and  the  artillery  everywhere.  For- 
tunately the  enemy's  horse  entered  the  valley,  attracted 
by  the  hope  of  plundering  our  ba^age.  The  oppor- 
tunity so  eagerly  desired  by  the  dragoons  was  now  at 
hand.  The  British  squadrons  were  let  loose  upon  the 
A%han  horsemen.  The  Native  cavalry  followed.  There 
was  a  brilliant  and  successful  charge.  The  enemy 
turned  and  fled;  but  the  sabres  of  the  dragoons  fell 
heavily  upon  them;  and  many  were  cut  up  in  the 
flight. 

The  infantry  were  not  less  successful.  Gallantly  they 
ascended  the  heights  on  either  side  of  the  pass,  and 

•  Bygrave  had  before  cone  on  to    lock,    MS,  Correspondence,    iSee  Ap' 
Tezeen  with  Sir-Bolund  Khan.  pendix, 

t  Captain  Troup  to  General  Pol* 


THfi  BATTLE  OF  TEZBSN.  579 

gallantly  the  Afghans  advanced  to  meet  them.  The 
stormers  of  the  13th  Light  Infantry  domb  the  hills  on  the 
right;  the  9th  and  31st  on  the  left;  and  as  they  went, 
hotly  and  thickly  upon  them  poured  the  iron  rain  £rom 
the  Afghan  jezails.  But  neverr^g  ft  momenta  beneath 
the  terrible  fire  that  greeted  them,  as  they  pushed  up 
the  hill-side,  did  these  intrepid  soldiers  waver  for  a 
moment.  They  knew  that  their  muskets  were  no  match 
for  the  A%han  jezails.  The  enemy,  indeed,  seemed  to 
deride  them.  So,  having  reached  the  hill-top,  they  fixed 
their  bayonets,  and  charged  with  a  loud  hurrah.  The 
cold  steel  took  no  denial.  Down  went  the  Afghan 
marksmen  before  the  English  bayonets;  the  foremost 
men  stood  to  be  pierced,  and  the  rest,  awed  by  the  ML 
of  their  comrades,  and  the  desperate  resolution  of  the 
British  troops,  fled  down  the  hill  in  confiision.  The 
strength  of  the  A%han  force  was  broken ;  but  the  work 
of  our  fighting  men  was  not  done.  All  through  the  day 
a  desultory  warfare  was  kept  up  along  the  ridges  of 
these  tremendous  hills.  The  A^hans  occupying  the 
highest  ground,  fired  down  upon  our  infantry,  hiding 
themselves  when  they  could  behind  the  rocks,  and 
shrinking  now  fix)m  a  closer  contest.  Never  did  British 
troops  display  a  higher  courage  in  action,  or  a  more 
resolute  perseverance.  Nobly  did  the  Native  Sepoy  vie 
with  the  European  soldier;  and  nowhere  was  there  a 
finer  sight  than  where  Broadfoot  with  his  sappers  clam- 
bered up  the  steepest  ascents  under  the  hottest  fire,  and 
drove  before  them  the  stalwart  A%hans — giants  beside 
the  little  Goorkhas  who  pressed  so  bravely  upon  them. 
Many  gallant  feats  were  done  that  day ;  and  many  an 
A%han  warrior  died  the  hero's  death  on  his  native  hillsi 
cheered  by  the  thought  that  he  was  winning  Paradise 
by  such  martyrdom.  Desperate  was  the  effort  to  keep 
back  the  invaders  fix>m  clearing  the  heights  of  the  Hufi^* 

2p2 


580  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

Kotul;  but  the  British  troops,  on  that  day,  would  have 
borne  down  even  stouter  opposition.  The  Huft-Kotul 
was  mounted ;  and  three  cheers  burst  from  the  victors 
as  they  reached  the  summit  of  that  stupendous  ascent. 

A  more  decisive  victory  was  never  gained.    The  Af- 
ghan chiefs  had  brought  out  their  best  fighting  men 
against  us.    They  had  done  their  best  to  turn  the  difficul- 
ties of  the  country  to  good  account  against  the  strangers. 
Their  people  were  at  home  in  these  tremendous  defiles ; . 
whilst  few  of  our  troops  had  ever  seen  them — few  were 
accustomed  to  the  kind  of  warfare  which  now  alone  could 
avail.    There  was  everything  to  stir  into  intense  action 
all  the  energies  of  the  Barukzye  chief  and  his  follow- 
ers.   They  were  fighting  in  defence  of  iheir  hearths  and 
altars;  the  very  existence  of  the  nation  was  at  stake. 
It  was  the  last  hope  of  saving  the  capital  from  the  grasp 
of  an  avenging  army.    But  with  everything  to  stimulate 
and  everjrthing  to  aid  him,  Akbar  Khan  could  ofier  no 
effectual  resistance  to  the  advance  of  Pollock's  retri- 
butory  force.    The  Afghans  were  fairly  beaten  on  their 
own  ground,  and  in  their  own  peculiar  style  of  warfare. 
It  has  been  often  said  that  our  troops  were  maddened  by 
the  sight  of  the  skeletons  of  their  fallen  comrades,  and 
that  they  were  carried  onward  by  the  irrepressible  energy 
of  revenge.    It  is  true,  that  all  along  the  line  of  country, 
from  Gundamuck  to  Koord-Caubul,  there  rose  up  before 
the  eyes  of  our  advancing  countrymen  hideous  evidences 
of  the  great  January  massacre — enough  to  kindle  the 
fiercest  passions  in  the  hearts  of  the  meekest  men.     But 
I  believe  that,  if  no  such  ghastly  spectacles  had  lain  in 
the  path  of  the  advancing  army,  the  forward  feeling 
would  have  glowed  as  strongly  in  the  breasts  of  every 
soldier  of  Pollock's  force. 

The  struggle  was  now  at  an  end.    Akbar  Khan  saw 
that  the  game  was  up,  and  that  it  was  useless  to  attempt 


FUGHT  OF  AKBAB  KHAN.  581 

to  bring  together  the  scattered  fragments  of  his  routed 
army.  Taking  Captain  Bygrave  with  him  as  the  com- 
panion of  his  flight,  he  fled  to  the  Ghorebund  valley. 
The  fighting  men,  who  had  opposed  us  at  Tezeen,  were 
now  in  disordered  masses,  hurrying  homewards  along 
their  mountain  paths,  and  seeking  safety  in  places  re- 
mote from  the  track  of  the  avenging  army,  whilst  Pol- 
lock marched  onwards  with  his  regiments  in  orderly 
array,*  and  on  the  15th  of  September  encamped  on  the 
Caubul  race-course.f 

*  Nothing  could  have  been  better  four  days'.    In  this  way  we  were  en- 

tban   the    conduct    of   the   troops    abled  to  move ,  The  night 

throughout  the  whole  of  these  opera-  before  I  left  Gundamuck,  I  received 
tions.  **  I  think  no  officer,"  wrote  an  official  letter  and  a  survey  report, 
Pollock,  in  a  private  letter,  on  the  setting  forth  that  the  whole  or  the 
23rd  of  September,  **  could  possibly  camels  of  one  regiment  were  un- 
have  had  nner  raiments  under  lus  serviceable,  and  that  tiiey  could  not 
command  than  I  have,  and  to  Uiem  get  up  even  without  tneir  loads, 
do  I  owe  all  my  success,  which,  as  far  This  was  rather  provoking,  for  I  have 
as  I  am  able  to  judge,  has  been  so  only  three  Native  regiments  with 
far  complete.  I  hope  the  Governor-  me.  My  answer  was  short.  ^  Tell 
General  may  think  so,  and  I  shall  be  the  commanding  officer,  that  if  his 
satisfied.'*  ^  In  this  letter,  the  dif-  regiment  can't  march,  he  will  relieve 
ficulties  with  which  Pollock  had  to  the  two  wines  ordered  to  remain  be- 
contend,  from  the  scarcity  of  cattle,  hind,  and  who  are  willing  to  go  for- 
are  thus  detailed.  **  I  have  had,'*  he  ward  on  any  terms.'  The  regiment 
wrote,  *'  great  difficulties  to  contend  marched,  and  I  heard  no  more  about 
against  even  to  the  last,  from  the  great  their  camels.  Afler  our  last  engage- 
want  of  carriage-cattle.  At  Gunda-  ment  with  the  enemy  (it  was  a  se* 
muck,  afler  my  first  engagement  with  vere  struggle)  we  had  160  killed  and 
the  enemy,  I  foxmd  myaeU  so  reduced  wounded ;  and  again  carriage  was  in 
in  cattle,  that,  to  enable  me  to  take  requisition.  The  spare  horses  of  the 
on  only  fourteen  days*  supplies,  I  was  cavalry  were  had  recourse  to ;  and  I 
obUged  to  leave  at  that  place  two  lentmy  own  riding-horse  to  one  poor 
horse-artillery  guns,  two  squadrons  fellow.** — [ilfS.  Correspondence,'] 
of  cavalry,  and  two  win^  of  Native  f  It  should  have  been  mentioned^ 
infantry ;  and  yet  with  afl  this,  all  the  in  the  note  t  to  puse  567,  that  during 
camp-u>liowers,  public  and  private,  the  advance  or  Pollock's  army  on 
were  compelled  to  carry  eight  days'  Caubul,  a  detachment  of  troops  was 
supplies.  The  fighting  men  carried  posted  at  Dakha  (on  the  Peuiawur 
three.  The  1st  Cavalry  carried  eight  side  of  Jellalabad)  as  well  as  at  Gnuk' 
days*  supplies  on  their  horses.  The  damuck  and  Jellalabad. 
rest  of  uie  cuvalry  carried  three  or 


582        THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 


CHAPTER  n. 

[May— September:  1842.] 

The  Advance  from  Candahar — The  Relief  of  Kelat-i-6hil2je— Reappear- 
ance  of  Aktar  Khan — Greneral  Action  with  the  Douranees^Surrender 
of  Safder  Jang — ^The  Evacuation  of  Candahar — Disaster  near  Mookoor 
—The  Battle  of  Goaine— The  Recapture  of  Ghuznee— Flight  of  Shum- 
flhoodeen  Khan — Arrival  at  Caubul. 

Whilst  the  force  under  General  Pollock  was  fighting 
its  way  from  Jellalabad  to  Caubul,  and  carrying  every- 
thing before  it,  the  Candahar  division,  under  General 
Nott,  was  making  a  victorious  march  upon  the  same 
point  along  the  countries  to  the  westward. 

But  it  is  necessary  that,  before  I  trace  its  progress  to 
the  capital,  the  circiunstances  which  preceded  the  eva- 
cuation of  Candahar  should  be  briefly  narrated.  It 
has  been  stated  that,  in  obedience  to  the  instructions 
contained  in  the  government  letters  of  the  19th  of 
April,  a  brigade  under  Colonel  Wymer  had  been  de- 
spatched to  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  to  rescue  the  garrison  there 
beleaguered,  and  to  destroy  the  defences  of  the  place. 
On  the  19th  of  May,  Wymer's  force  left  Candahar.  It 
seems  that  the  Ghilzyes  had  obtained  information  of  the 
intended  movement,  and  determined  to  anticipate  the 
attempted  relief  by  making  a  desperate,  and,  as  they 


THE  DEFENCE  OF  KHELAT^I-GHILZYE.       583 

believed^  decisive  assault  upon  the  place.  Accordingly 
they  prepared  a  number  of  scaling  ladders,  practised 
escalading,  and,  in  the  dim  twilight  of  early  morning 
on  the  21st  of  May,  advanced  in  two  heavy  columns^ 
each  2000  strong,  to  the  attack.  Ascending  the  mound 
where  the  slope  was  easiest,  they  placed  their  scaling 
ladders  against  the  waUs,  and  gallantly  mounted  to  the 
assault  Three  times  they  ascended  to  the  crest  of  the 
works,  and  three  times  they  were  nobly  repulsed  by 
Craigie  and  his  men.  The  heavy  showers  of  grape  and 
musket-shot  which  the  garrison  poured  in  upon  them 
did  not  deter  those  desperate  assailants — ^they  went  on 
again  and  again  to  the  attack,  and  were  bayoneted  on 
the  parapets.  For  more  than  an  hour  this  desperate 
struggle  lasted ;  and  then  the  assailants,  whose  impetuous 
courage  had  been  overmatched  by  the  steady  gallantry 
of  Craigie's  garrison,  gave  way  and  abandoned  the  as- 
sault. The  failure  was  dearly  purchased.  More  than 
a  hundred  dead  bodies  were  found  at  the  foot  of  the 
works ;  and  it  was  computed  that  the  entire  loss  of  the 
enemy  did  not  fall  short  of  five  himdred  men.  Not  a 
man  of  the  British  garrison  was  killed. 

Before  sunset  the  Ghilzyes  had  dispersed.  Colonel 
Wymer,  when  he  reached  Khelat-i-Ghilzye,  had  nothing 
to  do  but  quietly  to  withdraw  the  garrison,  and  to  destroy 
the  works  of  the  place.  It  was  believed  that  the  mea* 
sure,  as  indicating  the  intentions  of  the  British  Grovem- 
ment  to  withdraw  from  Afghanistan,  would  create  con- 
siderable sensation  throughout  the  country,  and  greatly 
embolden  the  enemy.  But  the  A%hans  seemed  rather 
to  wonder  why  we  had  not  extricated  the  garrison  of 
Khelat-i-Ghilzye  before,  and  did  not  associate  it  with  any 
ideas  of  the  general  policy  to  be  pursued  by  the  British. 

But  before  Wymer  had  returned  from  the  northward*, 
the  Douranees  had  again  made  trial  of  their  strength 


584  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

in  the  field,  and  had  again  been  signally  beaten.  Aktur 
Khan,  the  Zemindawer  chief,  who  throughout  the  pre- 
ceding year  had  been  keeping  the  western  districts  of 
Afghanistan  in  a  state  of  continual  turmoil,  and  who  had 
more  than  once  given  battle  to  our  troops,  was  now 
again  in  the  field  against  us.  He  had,  since  his  return 
from  Herat,  whither  he  had  betaken  himself  for  safety, 
watched  the  progress  of  events  without  openly  com- 
mitting himself,  and  had  hitherto  shown  little  dispo- 
sition to  link  himself  with  the  Douranee  cause.  Indeed, 
at  the  beginning  of  May  he  had  made  overtures  to  the 
British  authorities,  and  offered,  if  they  would  confirm 
him  in  the  government  of  Zemindawer,  to  attack  the 
Douranee  camp.*  As  the  month  advanced,  his  conduct 
became  more  and  more  mysterious.f  He  was  in  con- 
stant communication  with  the  Douranee  chiefe,  and  yet 
at  the  same  time  he  was  professing  the  strongest  friend- 
ship for  the  British  Government,  and  offering  to  break 
up  the  Douranee  camp.  But  before  the  expiration  of 
the  month  he  threw  off  the  mask,  joined  his  brother- 
chiefe  with  a  considerable  body  of  fighting  men,  and 


*  **  May  8. — I  received  letters  firom  active  communication  with  the  Dou- 

Aktur  Khan,  and  from  our  people  at  ranees,  but  he  has  at  the  same  time 

Ghirisk.    The  former  maintains  his  been  sending,  without  any  solicitation 

tone  of  friendliness,  and  promises  to  on  our  part,  repeated  messages  to  us, 

send  away  Sydul  Khan  from  Zemin-  professing  friendship,  and  proposing 

dawer.     He  also  offers  to  attack  the  to  break  up  the  Ghazee  camp.     He 

Douranee  camp,  if  we  will  let  by-  is  known  to  be  personally  ambitious, 

gones  be  bygones,  and  confirm  him  in  and  most  disinclined,  therefore,  to  act 

the  government  of  Zemindawer.    He  in  subordination  to  the  other  Dou- 

evidently  does  not  think  it  for  his  in-  ranee  chiefs.     He  has  also  an  old 

terests  at  present  to  join  the  almost  grudge  against  Meerza  Ahmed,  and 

desperate  Douranee  cause ;  but  still  I  we  have  thus  thought  it  possible  that 

cannot  believe  that  he  would,  for  our  he  might  be  sincere  to  us,  his  natural 

sakes,  commit  himself  openly  with  his  enemies,  and  false  to  the  Douranees» 

brother-chiefs.'' — [Major  Rawlinson's  his  natural  friends.      After  playing 

MS,  Journal.']  hst  and  loose  for  some  two  months, 

f  *'  Aktur  Khan's  proceedings  have  he  has  at  length  actually  joined  the 

throughout,  and  indeed  still  wear  an  Douranee  camp.*' — [Major  Rawlin^ 

bppearancc  of  mystery.    He  has  been,  son's  MS.  Journal:  May  25,  1 842.] 
ever  since  his  return  fropa  Herat,  in 


BEAPPEABANCE  OF  AKTUB  KHAN.  585 

took  the  command  of  the  van-guard  of  the  Douranee 
force. 

It  was  obvious  now  that  we  were  on  the  eve  of 
another  conflict.  The  Ghazees  moved  down  on  the  Urg- 
hundab,  and  made  arrangements  to  concentrate  their 
troops  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Baba-Wullee.  It  seemed 
probable  that  they  would  be  able  to  raise  the  neigh- 
bouring tribes  against  us;  and  bring  into  the  field  a 
body  of  4000  or  5000  men.  Weakened  by  the  absence 
of  Wymer's  brigade,  and  remembering  the  danger  to 
which  the  city  had  been  exposed  when  he  last  moved 
out  to  attack  the  Douranee  camp,  Nott  determined  to 
halt  the  detachment  which  he  was  about  to  despatch  to 
the  Kojuck  to  bring  up  the  carriage  which  had  been 
assembled  for  the  withdrawal  of  his  force.  The  enemy 
had  chosen  their  time  wisely  and  well.  They  believed 
that,  in  the  absence  of  some  of  his  best  regiments,  and 
nearly  the  whole  of  his  cavalry  force,  Nott  would  be  little 
able  to  hold  Candahar  and  to  do  battle  with  the  Dou- 
ranee force  in  the  open  field.  So  they  neared  the  city ; 
and  on  the  29  th  of  May  seemed  to  invite  the  contest. 

Aktur  Khan  had  drawn  into  his  hands  the  chief 
control  of  the  force.  What  were  his  designs,  at  this 
time,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  On  the  27th  he  had 
again  made  overtures  to  the  British  authorities,  offering 
to  seize  Meerza  Ahmed,  and  to  do  his  best  to  dissolve 
the  Douranee  force.  At  all  events,  if  he  could  not 
accomplish  this,  he  would,  he  said,  on  the  first  attack  of 
the  British,  draw  off  his  own  followers,  and  then,  taking 
advantage  of  their  discomfiture,  fall  on  their  rear  and 
plunder  their  baggage.  But  these  offers  were  thrown 
away  upon  Nott  and  Bawlinson.  They  had  no  fiiith  in 
the  man. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  of  May  the  enemy 
began  to  appear  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar — 


586 


THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAE. 


hovering  about  the  cantonments,  and  carrying  off  our 
baggage-cattle.  As  the  day  advanced,  their  numbers 
increased;  but  it  was  still  believed  by  the  Greneral  that 
they  were  only  reconnoitring  our  position,  and  that 
they  would  not  then  give  battle  to  our  troops.  Under 
this  impression,  Colonel  Stacy,  with  two  regiments  of 
infantry  and  four  guns,  had  been  sent  out  to  sweep 
away  the  intruders.  It  happened  that  his  movements 
deceived  the  enemy.  BeHeving  at  one  time  that  he  was 
retreating,  the  Ghazees  pushed  forward  and  occupied 
some  rocky  heights  to  the  west  of  our  cantonments,  firom 
which  they  opened  a  distant  fire  on  om*  line,  •  These 
movements  were  seen  fi'om  the  city,*  It  was  obvious 
that  the  enemy  were  determined  to  bring  on  an  engage- 
ment So  Nott  sent  out  the  41st  Queen's  and  eight 
guns;  and  an  hour  after  mid-day  mounted  his  horse  and 
rode  out  to  take  the  command  of  his  troops.  Rawlinson 
went  with  him. 

Covered  by  the  fire  of  the  guns,  the  light  companies 
were  now  ordered  to  storm  the  heights.  The  work  was 
done  rapidly  and  well.  Standing  out  in  bold  relief 
against  the  sky,  the  forms  of  our  stormers  were  soon  seen 
upon  the  ridge  of  the  hills;  and  as  the  enemy  were 
driven  down,  Chamberlaine's  Horse  swept  round  amongst 
them  and  cut  them  up  with  heavy  slaughter.  Bawlinson 
then  took  the  Parsewan  Horse  to  clear  the  hillocks,  to  the 
right,  of  the  detached  bodies  of  the  enemy  which  still 
clung  to  them,  and  Tait,  with  his  HorsCj  was  sent  to 
support  him.     The  Parsewan  Horse  charged  gallantly; 


*  "  The  view  from  the  look-out  in 
the  city,"  wrote  Rawlinson  in  bis  jour- 
nal, **  was  now  very  line.  The  hil- 
locks on  the  right  were  crowned  with 
masses  of  horsemen,  numbering  ap- 
parently about  1500— a  crowd  of  foot- 
men occupied  the  rocky  heights  in 
front  of  our  line  and   beyond,  the 


shoulder  of  the  Peer-Faee-Mal  hiU 
was  covered  with  human  beings  thick 
as  a  flight  of  locusts,  bodies  of  hon^ 
continually  debouching  round  the 
shoulder  and  pushing  on  to  join  their 
comrades  on  the  right." — [Major  RaW' 
Unson^s  MS,  Journal'] 


DISFEBSION  OF  THE  ElinSMY.  587 

bat  the  ground  was  difficult,  and  the  enemy  fled  towardcf 
the  mouth  of  the  BabarWullee  Pass.  Bawlinson  pushed 
on  in  hot  pursuit ;  but  turning  off  to  follow  a  party  of  the 
enemy's  horse»  who  seemed  to  have  missed  the  outlet, 
well-nigh  cut  down  or  captured  Mahomed  Atta  himself 
who  was  afterwards  known  to  have  been  at  the  head  of 
them. 

The  rout  of  the  enemy  was  complete.*  But  the  move- 
ments of  our  troops  were  too  slow  to  turn  it  to  good 
account.  The  Ghazees  made  for  the  Baba-WuUee  Pass* 
They  had  barricaded  this  pass  with  stones,  and  they  had 
thrown  up  a  strong  breast^work  in  another  direction,  in- 
tending  them  as  defences  to  lie  between  the  British  posi- 
tion and  their  own.  But  now,  instead  of  finding  these 
works  in  their  front,  they  found  them  in  their  rear. 
They  had  not  intended  that  the  battle  should  be  fought 
so  near  to  the  walls  of  Candahar.  It  was  their  design 
to  take  up  a  position  within  these  defences;  but,  em- 
boldened by  the  stories  of  the  scouts,  who  had  reported 
that  we  were  too  weak  to  operate  beyond  the  walls,  they 
had  determined  to  pitch  their  camp  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
cantonment  and  to  invest  Candahar.  Had  our  guns  been 
pushed  on  with  sufficient  activity,  the  enemy  would  have 
found  the  barricade  which  they  had  erected  for  their 
defence  a  terrible  obstruction  on  their  retreat.     But  the 

*  Nott^  in  his  public  despatches,  had  8000  men  in  position  and  2000 

was  always  somewhat  chary  of  his  in    reserve.      We  had   1500  of  aU 

praise,  but  in  his  private  letters  he  arms  in  the  field.     The  enemy  have 

delighted  to  dwell  upon  the  achieve-  broken  up.     I  expect  Wvmer  back 

ments  of  his  Sepoy  regiments.    Writ-  in  a  day  or  two,  when  I  will  drive  the 

ing  to  Hammersley  about  this  affair  rebels  out  of  the  Candahar  district, 

of  the  29th  of  May»  he  said :  '*  You  How  I  should  like  to  go  to  Caubul  I 

will  hear  enough  of  our  affair  of  the  It  is  wonderful   that  the  people  in 

29th  with   the  enemy.    The  troops  Hindostan  should  be  so  panic-etrucki 

behaved  well,  and  I  am  really  ^r*  and  they  seem  to  believe  that  our 

prised  that  our  loss  was  so  tnflingi  Sepoys   cannot  stand   the  Afghans, 

but  I  have  remarked  that  the  Afghans  Now  I  am  quite  sure,  and  should  like 

fire  high.     Our  Sepoys  are  noble  fel-  io  try  it  to-morrow,  that  5000  Beneal 

lows— 1000  are  fully  equal  to  5000  Sepoys  would  lick  25,000  Afghans.'*--* 

Afghans  or  more.     A  detail  of  the  [Oeneral  Nott  to  Lieut  Hammersley  t 

1st  Cavalry,  under  Chamberlaine,  be-  June  2, 1842.   MS,  Correspondence,] 
haved  very  well  indeed.    The  enemy 


588         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 

greater  number  of  them  effected  their  escape;  and  Nott, 
contented  with  his  victory,  drew  off  his  troops.* 

On  the  following  day  Stacy  went  oat  v^ith  a  brigade, 
and  Bawlinson  took  the  Parsewan  Horse  to  the  banks  of 
the  river.  The  enemy's  horse  had  not  wholly  disap- 
peared; and  it  was  believed  that  they  might  again  be 
drawn  into  another  skirmish.  But  they  were  not  inclined 
for  more  fighting.  As  our  skirmishers  advanced,  they 
fell  back  and  crossed  the  river.  The  chiefs  held  a  coun- 
cil of  war,  and  the  day  was  spent  in  stormy  debate. 
But  when  the  shades  of  evening  fell  upon  them,  they  had 
matured  no  plan  of  operations.  They  broke  up  without 
a  decision.  Again  they  met  on  the  following  day.  One 
plan  and  then  another  was  discussed.  Some  proposed 
that  they  should  proceed  to  Caubul.  Some  that  they 
should  assemble  in  Zemindawer.  Others  recommended 
that  they  should  hold  their  ground  upon  the  Urghundab; 
but  the  greater  number  were  of  opinion  that  it  would 
be  more  expedient  to  move  off  to  the  northern  district, 
and  there  await  the  issue  of  events  at  the  capital.  Many 
of  them  sent  into  the  British  camp  to  ask  for  terms ;  and  it 
was  obvious  that,  although  the  suspicion  of  our  approach* 
ing  departure  kept  up  considerable  excitement  through- 
out the  country,  the  Douranees  had  now  arrived  at  the 
inevitable  conclusion  that  it  was  useless  any  longer  to 
contend  with  us  in  the  field.f 

*  It  is  said  that  the  widow  of  Ak-  no  less  a  personage  than  the  slaugh- 

rum  Khan,  who  was    executed   at  tered  widow  of  the  heroic  Aknim 

Candtthar  in  the  preceding  autumn,  Khan.     Throwing  aside    her    timid 

was  in  the  field,  riding  her  husband's  nature  with  her  *  Boorkha,'  she  had 

charger,  and  bearing  a  Ghazee  stan-  left  the  sacred  privacy  of  the  Zenana 

dard.  Lieutenant  Rattray  writes :  **As  for  the  foremost  rank  in  the  iMittle- 

Che  enemy  drew  near,   a  white  ob-  field,   had    bestrode    her  huabajud's 

ject  was  observed  in  the  centre  of  charger,  and  with  his  standard  in  her 

their  front  ranks,  which  seemed  the  hand  had  assembled  the  tribes.** 
lallying-point  for  the  Gbazees,  chief-        f  Major  RawUnson's  MS,  JmamdL 

tains,   moollahs,   kettle-drums,   and  It  appears  that  early  in  June  the 

Standard-bearers.    This  proved  to  be  enemy's  suspicions  of  our  intended 


SUBMISSION  OF  SUEDEB  JUNO.         589 

In  the  mean  while,  Prince  Sufder  Jung  was  waiting  a 
favorable  opportunity  to  cast  himself  upon  the  mercy  of 
his  enemies.  On  the  day  after  the  action  of  the  29th  of 
May,  he  had  received  a  letter  from  his  brother,  Futteh 
Jung,  at  Caubul,  urging  him  to  throw  himself  upon  the 
protection  of  the  British;  and  the  young  Prince,  weary 
of  the  peril-laden  life  he  had  been  leading,  and  seeing 
clearly  the  hopelessness  of  the  cause  to  which  he  had 
attached  himself,  determined  to  follow  the  advice  of  his 
brother.  So,  on  the  following  day,  he  despatched  a  mes- 
senger with  a  note  to  Rawlinson,  informing  him  that  he 
was  on  the  point  of  mounting  his  horse  to  ride  into  the 
British  camp.  But  before  the  British  officer's  answer 
reached  him,  Meerza  Ahmed  and  the  chiefs  discovered 
his  intentions,  and  carried  him  off  with  them  across  the 
river.  His  resolution,  however,  was  not  to  be  shaken. 
The  chiefs  made  him  a  close  prisoner,  and  openly  de- 
nounced him  as  a  traitor.  But  he  continued  to  make  over- 
tures to  Rawlinson,  and  at  last  effected  his  escape.  On 
the  18  th  of  June  a  letter  was  brought  into  the  British 
camp,  announcing  that  he  had  forsaken  the  Douranees, 
and  had  made  a  night-journey  to  Baba-WuUee.  Rawlin- 
son reported  the  circumstance  to  Nott,  and  the  General 
consented  to  receive  the  submission  of  the  boy.*    So,  on 

withdrawal  were  confirmed  in  a  curl-  we  were  preparing  to  destroy  the  four 
ous  manner,  and  that  tliev  seemed  comer  bastions  of  the  city  and  the 
then  to  think  of  terms.  Uawlinson  gateways,  aud  that  we  should  leave 
says  :  *'  It  appears  that  when  the  en-  in  a  month  hence.  This  decided  the 
tire  party  of  the  Douranee  chiefs  were  cliiefs  on  dropping  their  offers  of  ae- 
on the  point  of  dissolution,  a  Uin-  commodation,  aud  holding  on  until 
dostanee  deserter  joined  the  camp  events  became  more  developed." 
from  the  town,  saying  that  lie  and  his  *  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that 
comrades  had  received  letters  from  the  supreme  political  authority  had 
India,  stating  positively  that  orders  been  vested  by  the  Indian  Grovern- 
had  been  sent  up  for  our  retirement,  ment  in  the  GeneraL  Nott,  how« 
The  man,  in  fact,  explained  in  detail  ever,  was  not  inclined  to  interfere  in 
all  our  plans — the  abandonment  and  the  political  management  of  affurs, 
destruction  of  Khelat — the  march  of  and  jEUwUnson  continued  to  conduct 
the  brigade  to  bring  up  camels  from  them  very  much  as  he  had  done 
Quettah— and  he  even  asserted  that  before  the  order  was  issued ;  but  he 


690         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  British  political  chief  rode 
out  with  a  party  of  Parsewan  Horse  to  the  mouth  of 
the  BabapWuUee  Pass,  and,  through  a  crowd  of  excited 
gazers,  who  lined  the  thoroughfares  from  the  cantonments 
to  the  city,  brought  the  Prince  into  Candahar.* 

No  easy  part  was  that  which  Bawlinson  was  now 
called  upon  to  play.  The  conflicting  claims  and  inte- 
rests of  the  two  Princes  greatly  distracted  and  perplexed 
him.  Justice  and  policy  appeared  to  be  at  variance 
with  each  other.  Timour  was  a  well-intentioned  man; 
his  fidelity  had  never  been  questioned.  He  was  the 
eldest  son  of  Shah  Soojah,  and  his  claims  to  the  throne 
of  Caubul  were  more  valid,  therefore,  than  those  of 
either  of  his  brothers.  But  he  was  utterly  without  in- 
fluence. Convinced  that  he  could  never  make  his  way 
with  the  chiefs  or  people  of  Afghanistan,  the  British 
authorities  were  unwilling  to  support  his  pretensions. 
Even  for  the  governorship  of  Candahar  they  held  him 
to  be  incompetent;  and  now  that  Sufder  Jung  had 
returned  to  his  allegiance,  they  desired,  on  the  earliest 
fitting  opportunity,  to  place  the  administration  in  his 

referred  all  important  questions  to  turbances  rather  than  to  any  popu- 
the  General,  who,  for  the  most  party  lar  admiration  for  the  individual.  I 
deferred  to  the  opinions  of  hui  more  found  Sufder  Jung  considerably  im- 
experlenced  political  associate.  proved  ;  but  in  the  first  bustle  of  re- 
*  "June  19. — I  went  out  this  mom-  ception  I  could  not  satisfy  myself  of 
ing  at  daj^ight  with  the  Parsewan  his  real  views  and  feelings.  I  took 
Horse  and  Tait's  Cavalry  to  the  Baba-  him  to  breakfast  with  Prince  Timour, 
Wullee  Pass.  Met  Sufder  Jung,  and  where  I  understand  a  somewhat  sin- 
brought  him  back  with  me  to  the  gular  scene  occurred  between  the 
town.  The  curiosity  evinced  by  the  brothers.  The  only  feeling  they  po»- 
Candaharees  on  tne  occasion  was  sess  in  common  is,  that  Britisn  sup- 
something  quite  extraordinary  —  in  port  is  necessary  to  protect  them 
general,  a  profound  apathy  prevails  from  the  Barukzyes  —  on  all  other 
on  all  these  matters,  but  to-day,  to  points  they  are  diametrically  opposed. 
my  surprise,  the  entire  population  The  General  insisted  on  Sufder  Jong's 
thronged  out  to  see  the  spectacle,  and  followers  being  disarmed,  which,  of 
from  the  cantonments  to  the  city  the  course,  was  anything  but  agreeable  to 
road  was  lined  with  crowds  of  gazers,  the  boy,  though  he  did  not  yenture  to 
I  think  tills  unwonted  interest  is  to  offer  any  objection.* — [Mtijar  RaW' 
be  attributed,  however,  to  the  excite-  linsons  mS,  Journal,'] 
ment  produced  by   the  recent  dis- 


THE  RIVAL  FBINCES.  591 

hands.  The  Candahar  force  was  under  orders  to  return 
to  Hindostan,  and  the  best  means  of  disposing  of  Prince 
Timour  was  by  the  quiet  removal  of  his  Highness  to  the 
British  provinces.  This  was  not  yet  to  be  openly  an- 
nounced to  the  Prince,  for  it  was  expedient  that  the 
measure  of  withdrawal  should  not  be  publicly  declared ; 
but  Kawlinson  hoped,  that  when  the  time  came,  he 
would  be  able  to  persuade  Timour  to  accompjiny  the 
army  to  India,  and  to  leave  Sufder  Jung  in  possession  of 
Candahar.  In  the  mean  while,  both  Princes  were  un- 
easy and  dissatisfied.  Jealous  of  his  younger  brother, 
Timour  protested  against  his  being  permitted  to  mediate 
for  the  Douranee  chiefs,  or  to  interfere  with  the  Canda- 
har Government;  whilst  Sufder  Jung  was  continually 
complaining  of  the  incertitude  of  his  position,  and  im- 
portuning Bawlinson  to  come  to  some  definite  explana- 
tion with  him  • 

So  Kawlinson  determined  to  temporise.  Putting  off 
from  day  to  day  the  adjustment  of  these  differences,  he 
trusted  to  the  chapter  of  accidents,  and  ere  long  found 
something  written  down  in  his  favour.  Before  the  end 
of  June,  it  was  announced  at  Candahar  that  Futteh 
Jung  had  been  overcome  by  the  Barukzyes  at  Caubul, 
and  that  he  was  in  effect  a  mere  prisoner  in  their  hands. 
The  intelligence,  as  regarded  British  interests  in  general, 
was  supposed  to  be  unfavorable;  but  it  went  far  to 
diminish  the  difficulties  which  the  presence  of  the  two 
Princes  at  Candahar  arrayed  against  the  British  autho- 
rities. "Whilst  Futteh  Jung's  star  was  on  the  ascen- 
dant," wrote  Kawlinson  in  his  journal,  "  it  was  equally 
difficult  to  manage  Timour  and  Sufder  Jung ;  but  now 
they  both  feel  that  they  are  entirely  dependent  upon  us 
for  support,  and  are  disposed,  in  consequence,  to  lay  aside 
their  private  jealousies." 

♦  Major  Ran'linsoiCs  MS.  Journal 


592  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 

The  three  first  weeks  of  July  passed  away ;  and 
Nott  was  preparing  for  his  retirement  from  Afghanistan. 
Major  Clarkson  had,  at  the  end  of  June,  brought  up  the 
convoy  of  camels  from  Quettah.  The  supply  of  carriage 
and  provisions  for  the  movement  of  the  army  had  now 
reached  its  necessary  amount.  Everything  was  in  train 
for  withdrawal,  when  the  Governor-Greneral's  letter  of 
the  4th  of  July  was  put  into  Nott's  hands.  He  saw 
at  once  the  weight  of  responsibility  that  it  threw  upon 
him;  but  he  did  not  shrink  from  assuming  the  burden. 
Cheerfully  taking  it  up,  he  wrote  to  the  Governor- 
General  on  the  2&th  of  July:  "Having  well  considered 
the  subject  of  your  Lordship's  letter  of  the  4th  instant; 
having  looked  at  the  difficulties  in  every  point  of  view, 
and  reflected  on  the  advantages  which  would  attend  a 
successful  accomplishment  of  such  a  move,  and  the 
moral  influence  it  would  have  throughout  Asia,  I  have 
come  to  a  determination  to  retire  a  portion  of  the  army 
under  my  command  vid  Ghuznee  and  CaubuL" 

The  Candahar  force  was  now  to  be  divided.  A  por- 
tion of  it  was  to  be  sent  to  Quettah  and  Sukkur  tinder 
General  England;  and  the  remainder,  under  General 
Nott,  was  to  !'  retire"  to  India  by  the  route  of  Ghuznee, 
Caubul,  and  Jellalabad.  The  heavy  guns  and  six  pieces 
of  the  Shah's  artillery  were  to  be  sent  down  with  Eng- 
land's column,  and  with  it  were  to  be  despatched  the 
Bombay  Infantry,  two  companies  of  Bengal  Artillery, 
three  regiments  of  the  late  Shah's  force,  and  some  details 
of  Irregular  Horse.  Nott  would  not  part  with  one  of 
those  beautiful  Sepoy  regiments  which  had  fought  so  well 
for  him  ever  since  he  had  commanded  the  Candahar 
division;  nor  could  he  think  of  suffering  the  40th 
Queen's  to  be  disunited  from  their  old  comrades.  But 
of  the  41st  Queen's  he  wrote  to  Lord  EUenborough: 
"  I   certainly  could  have  wished   to   have  taken  her 


ORDERS  TO  ADVANCE.  593 

Majesty's  41st  Regiment  with  me,  knowing  the  great 
consequence  of  the  adventurous  march  before  me.  But 
when  I  look  to  Sindh,  and  to  the  want  of  confidence  in 
our  brave  troops  shown  by  certain  oflScers,  I  must  give 
up  that  wish,  however  desirable,  to  ensure  the  safety  of 
the  division  which  I  am  not  to  accompany."  But  he 
subsequently  changed  his  mind,  and  took  the  41st  with 
him.  Two  or  three  days  passed;  some  slight  prepa- 
rations betokening  departure  were  made;  the  old  and 
unserviceable  guns  were  destroyed;  the  repairs  which 
were  going  on,  on  the  works,  were  arrested ;  and  then  it 
was  publicly  announced  that  the  force  was  to  hold  itself 
in  readiness  to  return  to  India.  But  by  what  route  it 
was  to  retire  was  still  a  secret.  Speculation  was  busy 
throughout  the  garrison.  There  were  all  sorts  of  ru- 
mours and  conjectures,  and  then  it  was  declared  that 
Nott's  column  was  to  make  its  way  across  the  country 
by  the  route  of  Dehra  Ismael  Khan.  It  soon,  however, 
was  obvious  that  this  was  nothing  more  than  a  report, 
which  might  have  its  uses,  and  the  heart  of  every  sol- 
dier in  Nott's  division  soon  beat  with  chivalrous  emo- 
tion at  the  thought,  that  the  General  under  whom  they 
had  so  long  and  so  gloriously  served  was  about  to  lead 
them  on  to  the  re-conquest  of  A%hanistan.* 

And  now  again  came  up  for  adjustment,  rather  than  for 
consideration,  the  question  of  the  disposal  of  the  Princes. 
Timour  was  eager  to  proceed  with  the  British  force 
to  Caubul,  and  hoped  to  ^be  placed  upon  the  throne  by 

♦  "  The    particular    object  to  be  wards  accounted  for,  whether  justly 

gained  by  adopting  this  latter  route  it  or  not,  by  this  fact,  that  if  the  Lohau- 

was  difficult  to  divine,  and  the  gene-  nies,  upon  whom  we  were  dependent 

rally-received  impression  among  the  for  a  large  proportion  of  our  camels, 

officers  —  perhaps    because  the  one  had  had  an  idea  that  our  intention 

most  desired — was  that  our  General  was  to  have  marched ^on  Ghuznee  and 

was  to  lead  us  on  to  Caubul,  and  that  Caubul,  they  would  nave  declined  ac- 

the  mention  of  Dehni  Ismael  Khan  companying  our  army." — [^NeilTs  i2c- 

was  merely  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  collections.'] 
of  the  natives.     Indeed,  it  was  after- 

VOL.  II.  2   Q 


594         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAUAR. 

his  old  supporters.  His  fidelity  at  least  deserved  our 
support — but  something  else  was  required  to  induce 
the  British  authorities  to  identify  themselves  with  the 
interests  of  the  Prince.  It  was  fortunate  for  Rawlinson 
that  at  this  time  the  decision  was  not  left  in  his  hands. 
On  the  29th  of  July  letters  were  received  from  the 
Governor-General,  emphatically  expressing  his  opinion 
of  the  inexpediency  of  permitting  the  Prince  to  accom- 
pany the  army  in  the  direction  of  Caubul,  or  even  of 
permitting  him  to  remain  at  Candahar.  His  presence 
at  Caubul,  it  was  said,  might  greatly  embarrass  our  pro- 
ceedings there ;  and  though  it  would  be  advantageous 
for  us  that  he  should  establish  his  independent  autho- 
rity at  Candahar,  there  seemed  so  little  likehhood  of 
his  being  able  to  maintain  his  position  after  the  depar- 
ture of  the  British  troops,  that,  on  the  whole,  it  was  the 
most  expedient  coiurse  that  he  should  accompany  that 
portion  of  the  force  which  was  to  proceed  by  the  way 
of  Sindh  to  the  provinces  of  India.  The  communica- 
tion of  these  resolutions  to  the  Shaz-zadah  was  a  painfiil 
duty ;  and  when  Rawlinson  announced  them,  they  pro- 
duced an  explosion  very  foreign  to  the  passive  nature 
of  the  apathetic  Prince.* 

On  the  7th  of  August  the  British  force  evacuated 
Candahar.  There  were  no  demonstrations  of  ill-will  on 
the  part  of  the  inhabitants.  No  acts  of  licentiousness 
were  committed  by  the  soldiery.f    The  movement  was 

•  "  July  29.— I  duly  communicated  roused  him  for  once  from  his  natural 

these  instructions  to  Prince  Timour  insensibilitj,  and  he  spoke  his  mind 

in  the  evening,  and  the  interview  was  pretty  plainly." — {^Major  EawUnsoHS 

as  disaCTeeable  a  one  as  I  ever  went  MS»  Journal'] 

through.  His  Royal  Highness  had  t  "  -^"i/*  7. — We  have  thb  evening 
previously  made  up  his  mmd  that  he  evacuated  Candahar  in  the  most  re- 
was  to  accompany  the  force  to  Cau-  gular  and  orderly  manner  conceiv- 
bul,  and  ou  our  withdrawal  that  he  able.  There  has  been  no  indication 
would  be  left  by  us  on  the  throne,  of  ill-will  on  the  part  of  the  citizens, 
The  sudden  change  in  all  his  views  no  disposition  on  the  part  of  the 
which  my  communication  involved,  Sepoys  to  indulge  in  military  license. 


THE  EVACUATION  OF  CANDAHAR.         695 

effected  in  the  most  orderly  and  peaceable  manner.  The 
soldiers  and  the  citizens  were  seen  embracing  each  other.* 
Before  night  closed  upon  the  scene,  Prince  Timour  moved 
out  of  the  citadel,  and  Sufder  Jung  remained  in  possession 
of  Candahar. 

On  the  following  day,  completing  their  Commissariat 
arrangements,  Nott  and  England  remained  in  camp  imder 
the  city  walls.  Many  of  the  most  influential  people  of 
the  new  government  waited  upon  Bawlinson,  seeking  his 
advice.  On  the  9th,  Nott  commenced  his  march  to  the 
northward,  and  England  prepared  to  move  in  the  oppo- 
site direction.  The  latter  was  dissatisfied  with  the  com- 
ponents of  his  force.  He  applied  to  Nott  for  an  Euro- 
pean regiment  to  accompany  him,  and  received  in  reply 
an  indignant  rebuke. 

From  Candahar  to  Mookoor  the  progress  of  Nott's 
division  was  easy  and  uneventful.  But  few  traces  of 
the  recent  excitement  were  discernible  along  the  line  of 
march.  The  villages  seemed  wonderfiilly  tranquil  The 
villagers  brought  in  their  supplies  more  freely  than  our 
officers  had  ever  ventured  to  expect.  Every  precaution 
was  taken  by  the  Greneral  to  prevent  the  commission  by 
his  troops  of  acts  of  lawless  depredation.  He  declared, 
that  if  any  soldier  were  caught  in  the  act  of  plundering, 
or  returning  with  plunder  in  his  possession,  he  would 
hang  the  offender,  and  remove  the  officer  to  whose 
regiment  he  might  belong  from  the  command  of  his 
corps. 

On  the  27th  of  August  the  force  arrived  at  Mookoor. 

Instead  of  the  tumult,  the  confusion,  arms  against  us,  I  have  been  agree- 
the  general  excitement  to  which  I  ably  disappointed  in  finding  a  pro- 
used  to  look  forward  as  inseparable  found  tranquillity,  and  eyery  appear- 
from  our  evacuatioa  of  the  capital  of  ance  of  a  mutuallj  good  understand* 
a  province  where  so  many  conflicting  ing." — [Major  RawMUon's  MS,  Jour' 
interests  prevail,  and  where  a  large  nal,"] 

part  of  the  military  population  luis  *  General  Nott  to  the  Adjuiant-Oe' 

been  for  so  long  a  time  arrayed  in  neral 

2q2 


596         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

Up  to  this  point — a  distance  of  160  miles — ^not  a  shot 
had  been  fired.  But  there  were  sjrmptoms  now  of  more 
active  work  for  our  troops.  Some  days  before  their 
arrival  at  Mookoor,  Shumshoodeen  Khan  had  moved 
out  of  Ghuznee  with  a  party  of  500  horse  and  two  gims, 
to  collect  revenue  in  the  adjacent  country.  He  was 
ignorant  at  that  time  of  our  advance;  but  when  the 
tidings  reached  him,  he  prepared  at  once  to  contest  the 
progress  of  the  British  force ;  threw  all  his  energies  into 
the  work  of  raising  the  country  between  Ghuznee  and 
Mookoor ;  and  made  arrangements  "  for  all  the  chiefs  to 
rendezvous  at  the  latter  place,  and  fight  us  at  the  source 
of  the  Tumuck."* 

But  the  British  force  approached  Mookoor;  and 
Shumshoodeen  Khan  was  not  ready  to  receive  thenu 
The  chiefs  had  not  come  to  the  rendezvous.  His  pre- 
parations were  not  completed.  He  had  fallen  back 
to  the  vicinity  of  Oba,  and  there  the  chiefe  were 
flocking  to  his  standard.  But,  as  Nott  advanced  that 
sultry  morning  through  a  thick  haze  upon  Mookoor,  it 
was  plain  to  him  that  he  was  in  an  enemy's  country. 
The  villages  were  deserted.  SuppUes  were  not  brought 
into  his  camp.  He  was  compelled  to  send  his  cavalry 
out  to  forage.  It  was  plain,  too,  that  the  enemy  had 
wisely  chosen  the  ground  on  which  they  had  determined 
to  give  us  battle.  There  was  no  more  defensible  posi- 
tion on  the  whole  line  of  country  from  Candahar  to 
Caubul  than  that  at  the  source  of  the  Tumuck,  which 
Shumshoodeen  Khan  had  selected  as  his  point  of  de- 
fence.f 

*  Major  EawUnson  to  Major  Ou"  our  left,  and  the  strong  grounds  inter* 

tram:  Ghuznee,  Sept,  7.     MS.  Cor^  sected  with  bogs  and  canals,  and sup^ 

respondence.  ported  by  forts  upon  our  right,  every 

t  "  We   accordingly  marched  on  one  acknowledged  that  there  was  no 

unmolested  to  our  encamping-ground,  better  defensible  position  on  the  entire 

and  as  wc  passed  the  source  of  the  road  from  Candahar  to  Caubul.** — 

Tumuck,  with  the  precipitous  hill  on  [Majoi'  Rawlinson^s  MS.  Journal,'] 


MOOKOOB.  597 

The  next  day  was  an  eventful  one.  On  the  morning 
of  the  28th  of  August  the  force  advanced  from  Mookoor. 
The  rear-guard  had  scarcely  moved  from  their  encamp- 
i^g-ground  when  the  enemy  came  down  upon  them.  Nott 
ordered  out  his  irregular  cavalry,*  who  cut  up  some 
fifty  of  the  enemy's  footmen ;  and,  but  for  an  interposing 
ravine,  would  have  destroyed  the  whole.  Without  fur- 
ther molestation  the  force  reached  its  halting-groimd 
and  encamped.  It  was  known  that  Shumshoodeen  was 
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood ;  but  through  the  thick 
haze  which  enveloped  the  camp,  it  was  impossible  to  de- 
termine his  position.  The  camels  went  out  to  graze. 
The  grass-cutters  went  out  to  obtain  forage  for  their 
horses.  Everything  was  going  on  in  camp  after  the 
wonted  fashion,  when,  an  hour  before  noon,  a  report 
came  in  that  Delamain's  grass-cutters  were  being  cut  to 
pieces  by  the  enemy.  Delamain  waited  for  no  orders — 
never  paused  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the  story  that 
was  brought  to  himf — but  at  once  ordered  his  troopers 
into  their  saddles,  and  rode  out,  with  all  the  disposable 
cavalry,  in  search  of  an  imaginary  foe. 

He  soon  found  that  it  was  a  false  alarm.  His  grass- 
cutters  were  not  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  But  he 
went  on  to  reconnoitre,  and  about  three  miles  from  camp 
came  up  with  a  party  of  the  enemy's  footmen  on  the 
plain.  Some  twenty  of  them  were  cut  down  by  our 
troopers,  and  the  remainder  put  to  confiision  and  flight. 
Delamain  went  after  them  in  hot  pursuit,  and  coming 
to  the  foot  of  a  range  of  hills,  turned  the  shoulder  of 
one  of  them,  and  found  that  the  heights  were  crowned, 
in  considerable  strength,  by  the  enemy's  jezailchees, 
who  opened  upon  him  a  galling  fire.     He  was  falling 


*  Captain  Christie  commanded.         movement  to  Nott,  but  the  report 
f  He  appears  to  liave  reported  the    never  reached  the  General. 


598  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

back,  in  orderly  retreat,  when  a  body  of  the  enemy's 
Horse,  about  150  strong,  showed  themselves  on  the 
ridge  of  a  hill,  flaunting  a  white  standard.  Delamain 
at  once  determined  to  attack  them.  A  squadron  of  the 
8rd  Bombay  Cavalry  charged  up  the  hill;  but  a  hot  fire 
firom  a  party  of  jezailchees,  who  suddenly  appeared  on 
their  flanks,  saluted  them  as  they  advanced;  and  then 
the  enemy's  Horse  poured  down  upon  them  with  tre- 
mendous eflFect.  Captain  Reeves  was  shot  near  the  foot 
of  the  hilL  Captain  Bury  and  Lieutenant  Mackenzie 
gained  the  ridge ;  but  fell  beneath  the  sabres  of  the  Af- 
ghan horsemen.  The  troopers  now  seeing  their  officers 
fall,  borne  down  by  the  weight  of  the  A%han  Horse, 
and  suffering  severely  firom  the  fire  of  the  jezailchees, 
turned  and  fled  down  the  hill.  Their  companions  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill  caught  the  contagion  from  them. 
The  panic  spread,  and  the  whole  body  of  British  Horse 
were  soon  in  disastrous  flight.  Riding  each  other  down 
in  wild  confusion,  they  were  not  easily  reduced  to  order. 
The  loss  among  them  had  been  severe.  Two  officers 
were  killed,  and  three  wounded;  and  fifty-six  of  our 
men  had  been  killed  or  disabled  in  the  fight. 

In  the  mean  while,  exaggerated  stories  of  the  ♦disaster 
had  spread  throughout  Nott's  camp.  Messenger  after 
messenger  had  come  to  the  General,  and  reported  that 
the  enemy  were  in  immense  force,  and  that  Delamain 
and  his  cavalry  had  been  annihilated.*    Twice  he  sent 

*  i^  The  Gfeneral  fini  learnt  of  posted  on  some  rising  grround  to  be 
what  was  going  on  about  two  o^clock,  attacked.  The  Grenersd  again  ordered 
when  an  orderly  came  back  fh)m  the  troops  back.  A  tmrd  orderi/ 
Captain  Delamain  reporting  that  no  came  galloping  in^  to  say  the  cavalry 
enemy  was  in  sight,  and  asking  for  were  engaged;  and  very  shortly  after- 
orders.  The  General  immediately  wards  other  men  came  from  the  fields 
ordered  the  troops  back.  Shortly  at-  declaring  our  Horse  to  be  annihilated, 
terwards  Lieutenant  Brett  galloped  The  General  now  went  out  with  all 
in,  saying  that  about  2000  of  the  the  troops,  for  the  enemy's  force  was 
enemy  hwl  appeared  in  front  of  Cap-  reportccl  to  be  above  7000,  and  we 
tain  Delamain,  and  were  too  strongly  expected  them  to  be  flashed  with 


MASSACRE  IN  A  VILLAGE.  599 

out  instructions  for  the  troops  to  return  to  camp.  At 
last  it  was  reported  to  him  that  the  enemy  were  7000 
strong,  and  that  Delamain,  if  not  already  destroyed, 
was  in  imminent  peril.  So  Nott  took  out  his  army 
and  moved  against  the  enemy — expecting  to  find  them 
flushed  with  success  and  eager  for  a  general  action. 
But  when  they  came  upon  the  ground,  it  was  found  that 
the  enemy  had  moved  off.  Their  videttes  alone  were  to 
be  seen  on  the  peaks  of  the  hills. 

But  there  was  still  work  to  be  done.  From  some 
fortified  villages  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  field  of 
action  it  was  said  that  shots  had  been  fired.  The 
General  marched  upon  them.  In  an  attitude  of  abject 
submission  the  villagers  came  out  and  prayed  for  quar- 
ter. Nott  granted  the  boon.  But  a  company  of  the 
40th  Queen's  was  sent  in  to  search  the  houses,  where  it 
was  believed  some  plunder  would  be  found.  From  the 
matchlocks  of  some  Ghazees  shots  were  fired  as  our  sol- 
diers  entered  the  place.  The  result  of  the  misdeed  was 
terrible.  The  place  was  given  up  to  carnage.  The 
women  and  children  were  spared;  but  the  men  were 
indiscriminately  butchered.*    Not  less  than  a  hundred  of 

their  success.  The  horse  artillery  not  think  the  men  were  to  blame- 
reached  firsts  and  Leslie  took  the  had  thej  supposed  themselves  corn- 
command.  We  came  up  shortly  af-  mitted,  they  would  have  fled  to  the 
terwards,  and  found  the  cavalry  still  hills  before  the  troops  moved  out, 
in  a  body,  but  having  evidently  suf-  but  no  doubt  there  were  Ghazui  in 
fered  a  defeat.^* — [^Major  BawlinsorCs  the  place,  desperate  men  who  had  no 
MS,  Journal.']  wish  to  save  their  own  lives,  provided 
*  '^  The  General  now  turned  down  they  could  destroy  an  infidel,  and  to 
to  some  forts,  from  which  some  shots  the  infatuation  of  these  few  men  were 
were  reported  to  have  been  fired,  the  others  sacrificed.  Five  Commis- 
The  villagers  all  came  out  with  Ko-  sariat  camels  were  found  inside,  so 
rans  and  ropes  round  their  necks,  that  parties  in  the  fort  had  certainly 
praying  for  quarter.  The  Greneral  been  plundering;  and  as  we  ap- 
granted  quarter,  but  sent  in  the  light  proached  tlie  place,  I  remarked  a 
company  of  the  40th  to  search  the  Moollah  from  one  of  the  Boorjes, 
houses.  A  shot  was  fired  from  some  evidently  haranguing  the  people  and 
Ghazee  in  the  place,  and  orders  were  urging  them  to  die  as  Ghazees.  It 
then  given  for  an  indiscriminate  mas-  has  been  a  most  unsatisfactory  bu^- 
sacre.  The  women  and  children  ness  altogether,  and  a  few  more  such 
were  spared,  but  I  suppose  100  of  afiairs  will  compromise  us  seriously." 
the  vilUgers  were  butcnered.    I  do  —  [illa/or  RawhMSon*s  MS.  Journal,'] 


600 


THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 


the  villagers  were  massacred  for  the  offences  of  a  few 
men. 

Whilst  the  General  was  thus  employed,  the  cavalry, 
which  had  sustained  so  mortifying  a  defeat,  were  endea- 
vouring, with  the  aid  of  the  horse  artillery  and  some 
infantry  details,  to  rescue  the  bodies  of  their  dead.  The 
corpses  were  brought  off*;*  and  then  the  entire  force 
returned  to  camp.  That  evening  the  two  European 
officers*  received  Christian  biurial.  The  woimded  officers 
recovered. 

"  This  was  a  bad  beginning,**  wrote  Rawlinson  to 
Outram,  "  but  we  have  amply  redeemed  it  since."  On 
the  30th  of  August  the  Candahar  division  was  again 
engaged  with  the  enemy ;  and  with  better  success.  On 
the  preceding  day,  Shumshoodeen  Khan  had  sent  round 
the  heads  of  the  officers  who  had  fallen  in  the  action  of 
the  28th,f  and,  greatly  exaggerating  the  victory  he  had 
gained,  endeavoured  to  raise  the  people  against  the  in- 
fidels whom  he  had  beaten  so  gloriously  in  the  field. 
On  that  day  considerable  reinforcements  joined  him. 
He  was  seen  on  the  hills  to  the  right  of  Nott's  camp, 
with  four  or  five  thousand  men,  and  it  was  believed 
that  he  would  attack  our  troops  in  the  course  of  the 
morrow's  march.  The  morrow  came.  Nott  marched 
to  Ghoaine.  Shumshoodeen  Khan  moved  parallel  to 
him,  and  took  up  his  position  again  on  the  hills  to 
the  right  of  the  British  camp.  As  every  hour  was 
increasing  his  numbers,  he  desired  to  postpone  the 
inevitable   collision.       On   the   afternoon   of  the   30th 


*  Reeves  and  Bury — "  Reeves  was 
shot.  Burywas  cut  down.  Mackenzie 
received  a  severe  sabre-wound  in  the 
elbow-joint  of  his  right  arm.  .  .  . 
Ravenscroft  had  been  shot  before 
the  charge ;  but  the  wound  turns 
out  not  to  be  dangerous.  Malet  had 
a  Tery  narrow  escape.  Uis  hunting- 
cap  (round  which  a  shawl  was  wound) 
Aired    him,    but   he   was   slightly 


wounded  in  the  face.  Christie  was 
ridden  over  in  the  confusion  and  lost 
his  horse,  but  was  remounted  by  one 
of  his  Native  officers  and  saved," — 
[^Major  Rawlinson  to  Major  Outram : 
Ghuznee,  September  7,  1842.  MS. 
Records,] 

f  He  declared  that  one  of  them  was 
Nott'^. 


ACTION  AT  GHOAINE.  601 

he  is  said  to    have    mustered  not  less  than   10,000 
men.* 

Not  far  from  the  ground  on  which  Nott  halted  on 
that  morning,  was  a  fort  held  by  the  enemy  which  he 
determined  to  attack.  But  the  day  was  sultry.  The 
troops  were  exhausted  by  their  march.  So  the  General 
pitched  his  camp  at  once,  arid  giving  his  troops  a  few 
hours  to  recruit  and  refresh  themselves,  postponed  the 
attack  to  the  afternoon.  At  three  o*^clock  the  General 
went  out  with  the  40th  Queen's,  the  16th  and  38th 
Native  Infantry  Regiments,  all  his  cavalry  details,  An- 
derson's troop  of  Horse  Artillery,  two  guns  of  Blood's 
battery,  and  two  eighteen -pounders.  The  ground  be- 
tween our  camp  and  the  fort  was  difficult.  Some  time 
elapsed  before  the  guns  could  be  brought  up  to  breach- 
ing distance.  And,  when  at  last  they  opened  upon  the 
fort,  they  made  so  little  impression,  that  Shumshoodeen 
was  persuaded  by  his  chiefs  not  to  shrink  any  longer  from 
a  general  action  with  a  force  whose  cavalry  had  been 
already  beaten  in  the  field,  and  whose  artillery  now 
seemed  so  little  formidable.  So,  scattering  his  horsemen 
on  both  sides  so  as  to  outflank  us,  Shumshoodeen  moved 
down  with  the  main  body  of  his  infantry  and  his  guns ; 
and,  planting  the  latter  on  the  nearest  height,  opened  a 
rapid  and  well-directed  fire  on  the  British  columns,  f 
Then  Nott  drew  oflF  his  troops  from  the  attack  of  the  fort, 
and  advanced  in  column  to  the  right,  flanked  by  An- 
derson's guns  and  Christie's  Horse,  upon  the  main  body 
of  Shumshoodeen's  fighting  men.  On  this  the  enemy 
crowded  upon  the  other  flank,  keeping  up  a  smart  fire 
both  from  their  guns  and  jezails;  so  Nott  "changed 
front  to  the  left,  deployed,  threw  out  skirmishers,  and 

*  Major  JRawlinson  to  Major  Ou'  t  Fired,  howeyer,  from  a  height, 
tram:  September  7, 1842.  MS,  CorrC'  the  balls  never  ricocheted,  and  did 
spondenceJ]  little  mischief. 


\ 


602  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

advanced  in  line,  supported  by  the  guns."*  For  some 
time,  the  enemy  seemed  inclined  to  engage  us,  and  kept 
up  a  sharp  fire  from  their  guns  and  jezails;  but  when 
our  troops  came  to  the  charge,  and  pushed  on  with  a 
loud  and  cheerful  hurrah,  they  turned  and  fled  before 
us.  One  of  their  guns  broke  down  and  was  immediately 
captured.  Christie,  with  his  Horse,  went  off  in  pur- 
suit of  the  other,  sabred  the  drivers,  and  carried  off  the 
piece.  Shumshoodeen's  tents,  magazines,  and  stores  were 
found  scattered  about  the  plain.  The  chief  himself  fled 
to  Ghuznee ;  and  the  tribes  who  had  joined  his  standard 
now  dispersed  to  their  homes. 

Nott  halted  upon  his  ground  during  the  following 
day,  and  on  the  Ist  of  September  resumed  his  march. 
On  the  5th  he  was  before  Ghuznee.  The  day  was  spent 
in  desultory  fighting.  Shumshoodeen,  who  had  been 
reinforced  from  Caubul  by  Sultan  Jan,  occupied  with  a 
strong  body  of  horse  and  foot  some  heights  to  the 
north-east  of  the  fortress.  The  gay  attire  and  fine 
chargers  of  the  chiefs  made  them  conspicuous  even  at  a 
distance.f  The  giardens,  the  ravines,  and  water-courses 
were  filled  with  jezailchees;  and  the  city  seemed  to  be 
swarming  with  men.  Before  encamping  his  force,  Nott 
determined  to  clear  the  heights ;  and  gallantly  the  work 
was  done.  Our  troops  ascended  in  noble  style,  and 
drove  the  enemy  before  them  until  every  point  was 
gained.J  In  the  mean  time  the  camp  had  been  pitched. 
Two  infantry  regiments  and  two  guns  were  left  out  to 
occupy  the  heights,  and  the  remainder  of  the  troops 
were  then  withdrawn. 

Scarcely,  however,  had  the  troops  entered  their  camp, 
when  the  great  Ghuznee  gun,  the  "  Zubbur  Jung," 
began  to  open  upon  it.     It  was  plain  that  Nott  had 

*  Major  Ratrlinson  to  Major  Ou'        f  Colonel  Staqfs  Narrative, 
tram:  iicpt,  7,  1842.    MS,  Records.  %  General  NotCs  Official DespatdL 


NOTT  BEFORE  OHUZNBE.  603 

taken  up  a  position  too  near  to  the  enemy's  works. 
Fourteen  shots  were  thrown  into  our  camp  without 
doing  any  mischief;  but  the  warning  was  not  thrown 
away.  The  tents  were  struck,  and  the  camp  was 
moved  to  another  position,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  village 
ofKoza.*  Themovement  was  not  without  danger  ;f  but 
the  enemy  wanted  spirit  to  turn  it  to  good  account — 
and  in  their  new  position  our  troops  were  secure.J 

Before  sunset  the  firing  had  ceased.  Sanders,  the 
engineer,  a  man  of  rare  talent,  now  began  to  make  his 
arrangements  for  the  siege  of  Ghuznee.  It  was  not  be- 
lieved that  the  defence  would  be  conducted  with  much 
vigour.  The  fort  was  very  poorly  manned.  It  was  ob- 
vious that  Shumshoodeen  had  trusted  more  to  external 
operations.  The  tribes  who  had  been  summoned  for 
the  defence  of  the  city  had  already  begun  to  lose  heart. 
When  they  saw  our  engineers  at  work  busily  construct- 
ing their  batteries,  they  called  upon  Shumshoodeen  to 
come  within  the  walls,  and  take  his  share  of  the  dangers 
of  the  siege.     Vainly  he  represented  that  his  cavalry 

*  **  The  extensive  village  or  town  above  its  value.    No  man  nor  living 

of  Roza  is  situated  about  two  miles  thing  was  injured." — {^General  NoU 

from  Ghuznee,and  is  lovely  to  behold,  to   tA«    Adjutant' General :   Lnchnow^ 

When  this  city  was  taken  by  the  force  April  4,  1843.] 
under  my  command,  Roza  was  full  of        f  ^'  An  active  and  spirited  enemy 

inhabitants — men,  women,  and  chil-  might  have  annoyed  us  exceedingly 

dren.   My  troops  were  encamped  dose  during  this  movement;  but  the  At- 

to  its  walls.   Its  gardens  and  its  houses  ghans  appeared  to  have  lost  all  heart 

were  full  of  property ;  its  bams  and  from  the  affair  of  the  morning,  and  a 

farmyards  were  well  stored ;  its  or-  little  cavalry  skirmishing  was  all  that 

chards  were  loaded  with  fruit;  its  occurred.** — [Major  RawUnsoiCs  MS, 

yineyards  bent  beneath  a  rich  and  ripe  Journal.'] 

vintage ;  the  property  taken  from  our        J  "  The  enemy  appear  to  have  been 

murdered  soldiers  of  the  Ghnznee  gar-  unable  to  traverse  their  big  gun  saf- 

rison  was  seen  piled  in  its  dwelling^,  ficiently  to  bring  it  to  bear  on  our 

.  .  .  Four  days  the  victorious  Can-  new   position;   and  I  suspect,   also, 

dahar  army  remained  encamped  close  they  must  have  expended  their  shot, 

to  this  village,  with  all  these  tempta-  for  the  lost  two  rounds  which  were 

tions  before  it,  and  at  its  mercy  ;  but  fired  as  we  were  changing  ground, 

not  a  particle  of  anything  was  taken  and  which  fell  short,  were  old  snclls  of 

from  the  Afghans.   Tlie  fruit  brought  ours  filled  with  earth.*' — [/6tc/.] 
for  sale  was  ppid  for  at  a  rate  far 


604         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

were  of  greater  service  beyond  the  walls — vainly  he  set 
forth  that  as  there  was  no  barley  in  the  city  his  horses 
could  not  be  fed.  They  had  made  up  their  minds  to 
evacuate  the  place ;  and  when  night  closed  in  upon 
them,  they  moved  out  quietly  by  the  water-gate  of  the 
city,  and  betook  themselves  to  the  hills.  Seeing  now 
that  all  was  over,  Shumshoodeen  mounted  his  horse,  and 
with  a  small  party  of  followers  set  off  for  Caubul. 

The  engineers  worked  busily  throughout  the  night; 
but  as  the  batteries  took  shape  under  their  hands,  the 
stillness  within  the  walls  of  Ghuznee  aroused  their  sus- 
picions. So  at  early  dawn,  with  a  party  of  some  twenty 
men.  North,  the  engineer,  went  down  to  reconnoitre ;  and 
finding  the  water-gate  open,  and  the  city  apparently 
abandoned,  sent  intelligence  to  the  party  on  the  hill, 
and  the  16th  Regiment,  which  had  remained  out  to  pro- 
tect the  working  parties,  was  marched  down  to  occupy  the 
place.  They  found  it  almost  deserted.  A  few  Hindoos 
and  some  Sepoys  of  the  unfortunate  27th  Regiment  were 
the  only  occupants  of  Ghuznee.*  And  when,  at  early 
dawn,  the  officers  of  Nott's  camp  looked  through  their 
telescopes  towards  the  citadel,  they  plainly  saw  our 
Sepoys  on  the  ramparts.  Soon  the  British  flag  was 
waving  from  the  highest  tower,  and  Shumshoodeen's 
artillery,  worked  by  his  enemies,  was  roaring  out  a  royal 
salute  in  honour  of  their  triumph.  The  General  and  his 
staff  rode  out  from  camp  to  inspect  the  place,  and  to  make 
arrangements  for  its  destruction.  They  found  the  city  a 
mass  of  ruins;  and  in  the  houses  which  had  been  occu- 
pied by  the  officers  of  Palmer's  garrison,  many  sor- 
rowful mementoes  of  the  sufferings  they  had  endured, 
written  or  scratched  on  the  walls.  The  citadel  was  in 
good  repair,  and  every  one  who  inspected  it  marvelled 
how  it  happened  that  Palmer  had  yielded  it  up,  and 

*  Colonel  Palmer  and  the  other  British  officers  had  been  carried  to  Caubal. 


THE  TOMB  OF  SULTAN  MAHMOUD.  605 

trusted  himself  and  his  men  to  the  hoaour  of  his  trea- 
cherous opponents.* 

And  now  began  the  work  of  destruction.  The  artil- 
lery officers  burst  the  enemy's  guns,  and  the  engineers 
ran  mines  and  exploded  them,  under  different  parts  of 
the  works.  After  this,  the  town  and  citadel  were 
fired.  The  wood- work  soon  ignited,  and  all  through 
the  night  the  flames  of  the  burning  fortress  lit  up  the 
sky. 

But  there  was  something  else  now  to  be  done.  At 
the  village  of  Roza,  in  the  vicinity  of  Ghuznee,  is  the 
tomb  of  Sultan  Mahmoud.  A  peculiar  odour  of  sanc- 
tity is  exhaled  from  that  shrine.  The  priests,  in  whose 
guardianship  it  is  held,  have  their  traditions  concerning 
it,  in  which  the  spurious  greatly  prevails.  Its  boasted 
antiquity  is  not  supported  by  any  credible  evidence ;  and 
when  Major  Rawlinson  carried  to  the  examination  of 
the  inscriptions  on  the  tomb  all  that  profound  knowledge 
and  acute  penetration  which  have  since  attained  for 
him,  in  the  Eastern  and  in  the  Western  world,  so  wide 
a  celebrity  as  the  first  of  Oriental  antiquarians,  he 
had  at  once  detected  unmistakeable  proofs  of  their  be- 
longing to  a  more  recent  period  than  the  MooUahs  had 
claimed  for  them.f ,  Still  the  shrine  was  a  venerable 

*  The  engineer  officers  fathomed  Moollaks  of  the  shrine.    They  assert 

the  great  well  in  tiie  citadel,  and  that  the  tomb  was  constructed  in  its 

found  fif^-one  feet  of  water  in  it.  present  state  immediately  after  Mah- 

The  bottom  of  the  well  is  belieyed  to  moud*s  death ;  that  it  remained  intact 

be  below  the  level  of  the  riyer,  so  during  the  Ghuzneevide  and  Ghooride 

that  it  could  not  be  drained.    The  dynasties,  but  that  when  Ghenghiz 

fear  of  a  failure  of  water  oocht  not,  Khan,  in  his  pursuit  of  Jellaladeeo, 

therefore,  to  have  driven  Pahner  to  tlireatened  Ghuznee,  the  inhabitants 

surrender.     He  might  easily    have  heaped  the  tomb  over  with  earth  and 

secured  the  possession  of  the  well  by  ruins  to  preserve  it  from  desecration, 

running  a  covered  way  from  it,  and  and  deserted  the  place.    They  further 

protecting  it  with  his  guns.  pretend  that  the  tomb  thus  remained 

t  '*  I  visited  Roza  in  the  evening,  buried  until  the  time  of  Sultan  Ah- 

toolc  another  copy  of  the    Cufic  in-  dool  Rizak,  the  grandson  or  great* 

scriptioi)  upon  Mahmoud*s  tomb,  and  grandson  of  Timour,  to  whom  the 

had  a   long  conversation   with    the  spot  was  revealed  in  a  vision,  and  who 


606         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAE. 

one,  and  by  the  priesthood  of  Afghanistan  held  in  no 
common  esteem.  The  famous  sandal- wood  gates  of  Som- 
nauth,  which  IVIahmoud  had  carried  oflf  from  their  home 
in  Guzerat,  were  deposited  at  the  conqueror's  tomb. 
Such  at  least  had  long  been  the  popular  faith;  and 
ampng  the  priesthood  and  the  people  of  Afghanistan,  no 
one  doubted  that  the  trophies  were  genuine.  It  was 
reserved  for  European  scepticism  to  cast  discredit  upon 
the  reality  of  the  sacred  relics. 

But,  whether  genuine  or  spurious,  upon  these  gates 
Lord  EUenborough  had  fixed  his  desires.  What  he 
knew  about  them,  where  he  had  read  of  them,  or  by 
whom  his  attention  was  drawn  to  them,  History  cannot 
determine.  It  is  sufficient  that  on  the  4th  of  July,  when 
the  Governor-General  wrote  to  Greneral  Nott,  authoris- 
ing him  to  "  retire"  to  the  provinces  of  India,  by  the 
route  of  Ghuznee,  Caubul,  and  Jellalabad,  he  inserted 
in  this  memorable  letter  a  paragraph  instructing  the 
General  to  despoil  the  tomb  of  Sultan  Mahmoud.  "  You 
will  bring  away,''  he  wrote,  "  from  the  tomb  of  Mah- 
moud of  Ghuznee,  his  club,  which  hangs  over  it,  and  you 


excavated  and  repaired  the  place,  and  precise  date  of  the  Su]tan*s  death,  u 

dedicated  to  it  rich  endowments  of  obviously  of  a  much  later  age.    From 

lands.     The  endowments    remained,  many  ciroumstances,  I  feel  positively 

they  say,  till  the  time  of  Nadir,  when  certain  that  the  tomb  does  not  boast 

they  were  resumed    by  tlie  govern-  a  higher  antiquity  than  that  of  Sultan 

mcnt,  and  since  that  time  the  esta-  Abdool  Rizak,  who  built  the  present 

blishment  at  the  tomb  has  been  de-  walls  of  Ghuznee,  and  who  is  himself 

pendent  for  support  upon  a  few  gar-  buried  in  a  rude  mausoleum  on  the 

dens  attached  to  the  village,  and  on  outskirts  of  tlie  village  of  Roza.    The 

tlie  voluntary  offerings  of  devotees,  gates,  therefore,  are  certainly  not  those 

The  Moollahs  uphold  that  the  gates  of  Somnauth ;  but  it  is  of  course  the 

are  really  those  of  Somnauth,  and  tliat  interest  of  the  Moollahs  to  keep  up 

the  inscriptions  on  the  tomb  date  from  the  delusion,  and  to  affect  for  the  spot 

the  time  of  the  son  of  Mahmoud;  but  the  odour  both  of  sandal  and  sanctity. 

this  I  hold  to  be  morally  impossible,  I  was  much  struck  by  the  crowds  of 

for  although  the  Cufic  may  possibly  pilgrims,  Mussulman  officers  in  our 

be  of  the  form  used  in  that  age  (wliich,  ranks,  who  thronged  the  tomb  during 

however,  I  doubt),  the  inscription  in  my  visit  there  to  make  the  ZiaruL*^ — 

the  Nuskh  cliaracter  on  the  reverse  IMajor  BavfUnsonkS  MS.  JoumaL] 
of  the  siircoj)hagus,  which  dernils  the 


THE  GATES  OP  SOMNAUTH.  607 

will  bring  away  the  gates  of  his  tomb,  which  are  the 
gates  of  the  Temple  of  Somnauth."  So,  on  the  8th  of 
September,  under  Sanders's  superintendence,  the  gates 
of  Mahmoud's  tomb  were  carried  off,  as  tenderly  as  they 
could  perform  the  duty,  by  a  party  of  English  soldiers. 
The  MooUahs  wept  bitterly.  But  the  shrine  was  not 
otherwise  profaned  ;  and  the  excitement  which  the 
spoliation  created  scarcely  extended  beyond  the  holy 
circle  of  the  priesthood.* 

Onward  went  Nott  with  his  trophies.  On  the  12th  he 
was  before  Sydeabad,  where  Woodbum  and  his  men  had 
been  decoyed  and  massacred.  This  fort  was  at  once  de- 
stroyed; and  another  was  fired  by  the  camp-followers.f 

*  Major  Rawlinson's  account  of  ship  of  the  tomb  for  generations  in 
the  removal  of  the  gates  is  very  inte-  their  &mi[y,  will  be  the  chief  sufferers 
resting.  "  We  moved  our  camp,**  he  bv  the  measure.  I  doubt  if  the  Af' 
writes,  "  this  morning  from  the  west  gnan  tribes  lately  risen  from  obscurity 
to  the  east  of  Roza,  preparatory  to  to  power,  and  holding  the  country 
fairlv  settinz  out  on  the  march  to  rather  as  conquerors  than  citizens, 
Caubul ;  and  during  the  day  the  mea-  possess  that  feeling  of  unity  with  each 
sure  was  carried  into  effect  of  remov-  other,  ana  identity  with  the  interests 
ing  the  gates  of  Mahmoud*s  tomb,  they  are  supposed  to  protect,  to  view 
The  work  was  performed  by  Euro-  the  abductionofthe  gates  as  a  material 
peans,  and  all  possible  ddicacy  was  outrage.  The  act  may  be  made  use 
observed  in  not  desecrating  the  shrine  of  by  the  priesthood  to  excite  fanati- 
further  tlian  was  absolutely  necessary,  cism  against  us ;  but  if  the  Barukzye 
The  guardians  of  the  tomb,  when  tliey  chiefs  could  only  retain  their  darling 
perceived  our  object,  retired  to  one  plaything,power,  they  would  care  little 
corner  of  the  court  and  wept  bitterly ;  about  the  gates  of  Somnauth.  With 
and  when  the  removal  was  effected,  Shah  Soojah  the  case  was  different, 
they  again  prostrated  themselves  be-  As  the  representative  of  the  Suddozye 
fore  the  shrine  and  uttered  loud  family,  aiming  at  the  reconsolidation 
lamentations.  Their  only  remark  of  monarchioil  power,  he  could  not 
was :  '  You  are  lords  of  the  country,  but  view  the  demand  of  Runjeet 
and  can  of  course  work)  your  will  on  Singh  for  tlie  eates  as  a  national  in- 
us :  but  why  this  sacrilege  ?  Of  what  dignity,  powerfully  affecting  his  own 
value  can  these  old  timbers  be  to  personal  and  political  interests.  At 
you  ;  while  to  us  they  are  as  the  present,  religious  excitement  is  alone 
breath  of  our  nostrils  ?*  The  reply  to  be  apprehended  from  our  carry- 
was  :  '  The  gates  are  tlie  property  of  ing  off*  these  trophies.  I  call  them 
India — taken  from  it  by  one  con-  trophies,  although  assured  that  they 
queror,  they  are  restored  to  it  by  are  spurious,  for  the  belief  in  their 
another.  We  leave  the  shrine  un-  genuineness  is,  politically  considered, 
desecrated^  and  merely  take  our  own.*  Uie  same  as  if  they  really  were  so." — 
The  sensation  is  less  than  might  have  \^Major  RawUnsons  MS,  JoumalJ] 
been  expected ;  and  no  doubt  the  t  The  enemy  liaraased  our  camp 
MooIIahs,  wiio  Imvchad  thcguardinn-  at  night,  firing  on  our  picquets,  i;nd 


608         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 

On  the  followiDg  day  tlie  enemy  crowned  the  hills  on 
both  flanks;  but  not  until  the  14th  did  they  appear 
in  sufficient  numbers,  or  assume  such  an  attitude,  as 
to  bring  on  a  collision  with  our  advancing  troops.  On 
that  day,  near  Mydan,  Nott  attacked  them  on  the 
heights.  It  seemed  that  Shumshoodeen  and  Sultan  Jan 
had  determined  to  make  a  last  stand  for  the  defence  of 
the  capital ;  but  having  hitherto  gained  so  little  advan- 
tage by  meeting  us  in  the  open  country,  had  resolved  to 
try  the  effect  of  opposing  us  at  the  gorge  of  the  hills 
stretching  towards  Mydan.  Here  they  had  thrown  up 
breast- works.  Nott,  however,  precipitated  the  engage- 
ment, and  carried  the  contest  to  the  heights.*  All  arms 
were  now  engaged.  The  day  was  a  busy  one.  It  was 
one  of  doubtful  victory  on  either  side.  The  heights 
were  carried;  but  they  were  not  held.  And  when 
night  fell  upon  the  contending  hosts,  and  the  moon 
again  lit  up  the  scene,  it  seemed  that  the  work  was  not 
yet  done.  A  busy  night  was  looked  for  as  the  sequel 
of  a  busy  day.  But  suddenly  the  exertions  of  the 
enemy  slackened.  News  of  the  defeat  of  Akbar  Khan 
at  Tezeen  had  reached  the  camp  of  the  chiefs.  They 
seemed  to  have  changed  their  tactics,  and  to  have 
moved  off  to  Urghundeh — a  place  a  few  miles  nearer  to 
the  capital. 

working  us    other  annoyance.      '*  I  rived  just  in  time  to  prevent  Shum- 

doubt  the  policy ,**  wrote  Rawlinson,  shoodeen  from  availing  himself  of  this 

**  of  our  firing  a  few  forts  and  going  advantage.  We  were  all'most  anxious 

no  further.     It  exasperates  the  Af-  to  have  gone  straight  on  to  Mydan> 

ghans  without  intimidating  them.    I  and  to  have  attacked  Shumshoodeen 

believe  that  we  should  either  have  in  his  position,  throwing  the  light 

abstained  altogether  from  retribution,  companies  along  the  heights  to  the 

or  have  carried  fire  and  sword  before  left,  which  were  already  in  our  pos- 

ns.*' — [^Major  RawlinsotCs  MS.  Jour-  session,  the  wliole  way  down  to  the 

naL]  Mydan  gorge  ;  but  the  General  would 

*  "The  attack  upon  the  heights  not  stir  beyond  the  place  he  liad  first 

and    their  subsequent  abandonment,"  marked  out  for  his  encampment,  for 

says  Major  Rawlinson  "might  have  fearof  harassing  the  cattle." — IMajor 

led  to  unpleasant  consequences,  had  RawUnsorCs  MS.  Journal,'] 
not  the  news  of  Akbar's  defeat  ar- 


ARRIVAL  AT  URGHUXDEH.  609 

The  position  which  Shumshoodeen  had  intended  to 
take  up,  at  the  gorge  of  the  Mydan  Pass,  was  found, 
when  Nott  advanced  on  the  following  day,  to  have  been 
abandoned.     But  the  day  was  a  busy  one.     The  tribes 
were  up  along  the  line  of  march  and  harassed  us  severely 
with  their  jezails.     The  breaking  down  of  one  of  our 
guns  crippled  our  movements  and  gave  some  temporary 
advantage  to  the  enemy.     All  arms  of  our  force  distin- 
guished themselves.    The  practice  of  the  guns  was  excel- 
lent.   The  infantry  clomb  the  heights  with  their  wonted 
gallantry ;  and  the  cavalry  did  good  service.    The  result 
was  all  that  could  be  wished,  and  to  the  Afghans  the 
day  was  a  disastrous  one.     The  Mydanees,  who  had 
been  actively  engaged  in  the  Caubul  insurrection,  and 
some  of  whom  had  now  accompanied  Sultan  Jan  in  his 
march  to  the  southward,  and  been  engaged,  imder  his 
standard,  with  the  British  troops  at  Ghuznee,  now  sent 
a  deputation  to  the  General   claiming  his   protection. 
Nott  dismissed  them  with  an  indignant  rebuke.     Little 
protection  was  there  in  store  for  them.    The  Sepoys  and 
camp-followers  began  to  fire  their  forts,  and  at  sunset 
six-and-twenty  of  them  might  have  been  counted  light- 
ing up  the  evening  sky. 

The  march  was  now  nearly  at  an  end.  Passing 
Urghundeh  on  the  16  th  of  September  —  the  place 
where,  in  the  autumn  of  1839,  Dost  Mahomed  had 
planted  his  guns,  and  determined  to  make  a  last  stand 
against  Sir  John  Keane's  advancing  army — ^Nott's  divi- 
sion neared  Caubul.  On  the  17th  it  had  encamped  at  a 
distance  of  some  four  or  five  miles  from  the  city.  But 
the  Jellalabad  army  had  anticipated  its  arrival.  Caubul 
was  already  in  possession  of  the  British.  Pollock  had 
planted  the  British  ensign  upon  the  heights  of  the  Balla 
Hissar. 

VOL.  II.  2  R 


610  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL 


CHAPTER  m. 

[September— October :  1842.] 

The  Re-oceupatlon  of  Caubul— Installttion  of  Futteh  Jun^-— The  Becoverj 
of  the  Prisoners — Theu*  Arriyal  in  Camp — ^The  Expedition  into  the  Ko- 
histan — Destmotion  of  the  Great  Bazaar — ^Depredations  ui  the  City — 
Accession  of  Shahpoor— Departure  of  the  Britbh  Army. 

On  the  15th  of  September,  Pollock's  force  had  en- 
camped on  the  Caubul  race^course.  It  had  encountered 
no  opposition  along  the  line  of  road  &om  Bootkhak,  and 
it  was  plain  now  that  there  was  no  enemy  to  be  encoun- 
tered at  the  capital.  Akbar  Khan  had  fled  to  Ghore- 
bund,  ready,  if  need  be,  to  take  flight  across  the  Hindoo- 
Koosh,  The  other  hostile  chiefs  were  supposed  to  be 
in  the  Kohistan.  Everything  at  Caubul  betokened  the 
panic  engendered  by  the  approach  of  our  retributory 
arms. 

On  the  day  after  his  arrival,  Pollock  prepared  form- 
ally to  take  possession  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  A  detach* 
ment  of  horse  and  foot,  with  a  troop  of  horse  artillery, 
was  told  ofi*,  to  give  effect  to  the  ceremony*  The  British 
flag  was  to  be  hoisted  on  the  highest  point  of  the  cita- 
del, and  the  British  guns  were  to  roar  forth  a  royal 
ealute  in  honour  of  the  re-occupation  of  the  capital  of 
A%hanistan. 

All  this  was  done — but,  on  that  September  morning, 


INSTALLATION  OF  FUTTEH  JUNG.  6H 

there  occurred  coincidentally  with  it  another  event  much 
controverted  and  much  misunderstood.  The  wretched 
Prince  Futteh  Jung,  who,  two  weeks  before,  had  carried 
his  tattered  clothes  and  his  bewildered  brain  to  General 
Pollock's  camp  at  Gundamuck,  had  now  returned  under 
the  General's  protection,  to  start  again  as  ^  candidate  for 
the  throne  from  which  he  had  been  driven  by  the 
Barukzye  Sirdar.  It  was  not  the  policy  of  the  British 
Government  openly  to  interfere  for  the  establishment  of 
any  government  in  Afghanistan,  or  to  identify  itself  with 
any  particular  party  or  Prince.  But  both  Pollock  and 
Macgregor  were  of  opinion,  that  so  long  as  the  British 
were  to  remain  at  Caubul,  it  would  be  desirable  that  a 
government  of  some  kind  should  be  established,  if  only  to 
enable  our  armies  more  aurely  to  obtain  their  supplies. 
Some  sort  of  indirect  assistance  and  protection  was 
therefore  extended  to  the  Prince.  The  friendly  chiefe 
were  encouraged  to  give  in  their  allegiance  to  him ;  and 
he  was  suffered  to  turn  to  his  own  uses  the  ceremony  of 
the  re-occupation  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  He  asked  and 
obtained  permission  to  accompany  the  British  detach- 
ment; because,  he  said,  treachery  was  to  be  appre- 
hended if  he  proceeded  to  the  paUce  without  the  sup- 
port of  his  father's  allies. 

And  so  it  happened,  thftt  when  the  British  detach- 
ment moved  from  its  ground  towards  the  Balla  Hissar, 
the  Prince,  attended  by  some  of  his  principal  adherents, 
fell  in  at  the]  head  of  the  procession.  A  portion  of  the 
town  was  traversed  by  the  detachment  on  its  w^y  to 
the  citadel.  But,  although  the  hideous  sights  of  the 
last  few  days  were  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  the 
troops,  they  resisted  all  temptation  to  violence  and  out- 
rage. Not  ^  man  was  hurt,  or  ^  house  injured.  I^ 
orderly  procession  they  streamed  into  the  citadel.  The 
road  tQ  the  ppint  at  which  the  qoloura  were  to  be 

2r2 


612  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

hoisted  ran  by  the  palace  gates.  As  a  road  for  the  pas- 
sage of  artillery,  indeed,  it  terminated  there.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  General  should  halt  the  guns  and 
troops  in  the  vicinity  of  the  palace.  There  was  no  point 
beyond,  to  which  they  couldj  proceed.  The  Prince  and 
his  attendants  entered  the  royal  abode ;  and  the  British 
General,  with  some  of  his  principal  officers,  were  invited 
to  appear  at  his  installation.  Pollock  sate  on  a  chair  at 
the  right  of  the  throne,  and  M'Caskill  at  the  left.  Then 
was  gone  through  the  ceremony  of  appointing  officers  of 
state ;  and  the  British  allies  of  the  new  King  took  their 
departure,  and  went  about  their  own  work.  The  Ge- 
neral and  his  staff  moved  forward  with  the  British 
colours,  and  planted  them  on  the  highest  conspicuous 
point  of  the  BaUa  Hissar.  As  the  colours  were  raised 
the  troops  presented  arms,  the  guns  broke  out  into  a 
royal  salute,  the  band  struck  up  the  National  Anthem, 
and  three  hearty  cheers  went  up  to  announce  that  the 
vindication  of  our  national  honour  was  complete. 

So  far  was  the  restoration  of  Futteh  Jung  to  the 
throne  of  his  fathers  encouraged  and  aided  by  the  Bri- 
tbh  General.  The  Prince  had  been  suffered  to  hang  on 
to  the  skirts  of  Circumstance,  and  make  the  most  of  a 
favorable  coincidence.  But  so  careful  was  Pollock  not 
to  encourage  in  the  breast  of  the  Shah-zadah  and  his 
adherents  any  hope  of  more  direct  assistance  from  the 
British  Government,  that  Macgregor  was  deputed  to 
wait  on  Futteh  Jung  after  the  Durbar,  and  to  enter  into 
a  definite  explanation  of  our  views.  He  was  empha- 
tically told  that  he  was  to  look  for  no  assistance,  in  men, 
money,  or  arms,  from  the  British  Government;  and  that 
therefore  it  behoved  him  to  turn  his  own  resources  to 
the  best  account.*    He  was  instructed,  too,  that  the 


•  (t 


As  it  appeared  desirable  that    established   between    the  camps  as 
a  direct  communication  should  be    soon  as  possible,  I  proposed  to  the  Ge- 


ELECTION  OF  A  MINISTEB.  613 

British  authorities  were  unwilling  to  interfere  in  any 
way  in  the  administration,  and  that  it  was  necessary 
that  he  should  immediately  proceed  unbiassed  to  the 
election  of  a  minister.  The  choice  lay  between  the 
Nizam-ood-dowlah  and  Gholam  Mahomed  Khan,  Popul- 
zye.  On  the  evening  of  the  18th  a  council  was  held, 
and  the  decision  of  the  Prince  and  the  chiefs  was 
eventually  in  favour  of  the  latter. 

In  the  mean  while.  Pollock's  mind  was  heavy  with 
thoughts  of  the  probable  fate  of  the  British  prisoners. 
They  had  been  carried  off  towards  the  regions  of  the 
Hindoo-Koosh,  and  were,  perhaps,  even  now  on  the 
way  to  hopeless  slavery  in  Toorkistan.  Immediately  on 
his  arrival  at  Caubul,  Pollock  had  despatched  his  mili- 

neral,  on  arriving  at  Urghundeb,  that  ance  to  him,  and  he  had  so  far  given 
I  should  ride  in  and  see  General  Pol-  him  his  countenance  as  to  accompany 
lock.  My  offer  was  accepted,  and  I  him  to  the  Balla  Hissar  in  the  morn- 
immediately  put  on  an  Afghan  dress,  ing,  and  even  as  the  Shah  elect  took 
and  escorted  by  the  Parsewans  who  his  seat  on  the  throne  to  fire  a  royal 
had  come  out  to  the  camp,  rode  in  salute,  ostensibly  for  the  remountm^ 
through  the  town  to  the  race-course,  of  the  British  colours  on  the  citadel 
where  I  found  the  Jellalabad  force  of  Caubul,  but  of  course,  in  the  appre- 
encamped.  I  experienced  no  sort  of  hension  of  the  Afghans,  as  an  honorary 
difficulty  or  inconvenience  on  the  recognition  by  us  of  the  new  mo- 
road,  being  generally  taken  for  an  narcn  s  accession.  I  met  Macgregor 
Afghan.  I  now  learnt  from  General  in  my  way  to  the  camp,  coming  into 
Pollock  that  there  were  no  fresh  the  Balla  Hissar  with  all  the  chiefs 
orders  from  Lord  Ellenborough  re-  to  make  their  salaam  to  Shah  Futteh 
gardin^  the  establishment  of  an  Af-  Jung  as  he  is  now  called,  and  I  now 
ghan  Government;  in  fact,  that  he  hear  that  Macsregor,  who  conducts 
was  prohibited  from  pledging  the  all  the  politiciu  duties  of  General 
government  to  recognise  any  one.  Pollock's  camp,  endeavoured,  in  a 
but  that  still,  as  Futteh  Jung  had  private  audience  which  he  had  of  his 
thrown  himself  on  our  protection,  and  Majesty  afler  the  Durbar,  to  come  to 
that  as  it  was  absolutely  necessary  an  explanation  with  him  regarding 
something  like  a  government  should  our  inability  to  support  him  with 
be  established,  in  order  to  enable  us  men,  money,  or  arms,  and  the  neces- 
to  obtain  supplies  (the  Jellalabad  sity,  in  consequence,  of  his  relying 
Commissariat  being  entirely  exhaust-  entirely  on  his  own  resources.  At 
ed)  as  well  as  to  facilitate  our  sub-  first  sight,  it  appears  to  me  out  of  the 
sequent  departure.  General  Pollock  question  that  Futteh  Jung  should  be 
had  resolved  to  give  Futteh  Jung  able  to  hold  his  own  after  our  de- 
such  indirect  assistance  as  he  was  parture,  and  I  see  no  great  object 
able.  In  this  view  he  had  recom-  even  in  making  the  attempt,  but  I 
mended  the  Kuzzilbash  and  Dou-  cannot  yet  form  a  proper  judgment/' 
rapee  chiefs  to  tender  their  allegi-  [^Major  RawlinsorCs  mS,  Joumal.'] 


614  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

tary  secretary,  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear,  with  a  party 
of  600  KuzzUbash  Horse,*  to  overtake  the  prisoners  and 
their  escort.  But  there  was  a  possibility  of  this  party 
being  intercepted  by  the  enemy.  It  was  said  that  Sultan 
Jan  was  hovering  about  with  some  such  mischievous 
intent.  At  all  events,  it  was  expedient  to  send  a  strong 
detachment  of  British  troops  to  the  support  of  Shake- 
spear  and  his  Kuzzilbashes.  The  service  was  one  which 
any  officer  might  have  been  proud  to  imdertake.  Pol- 
lock offered  the  honour  of  the  undertaking  to  Nott 
and  the  Candahar  division.  But  the  offer  was  not 
accepted. 

The  two  divisions  of  the  British  army  were  on  oppo- 
site sides  of  Caubul.  The  first  communication  that  had 
taken  place  between  them  was  accomplished  through 
the  agency  of  Major  Rawlinson.  He  had  ridden  in 
Afghan  costume  from  Nott's  camp  at  Urghundeh,  and 
had  joined  Pollock's  division  on  the  morning  of  the 
16th  of  September,  shortly  after  the  British  colours  had 
been  planted  on  the  Balla  Hissar.  On  the  following 
day  Rawlinson  returned  to  Nott's  camp.  Mayne,  who 
had  done  such  good  service  at  Jellalabad,  and  who  was 
now  attached  to  Pollock's  staff,  rode  with  him,  attended 
by  a  party  of  Irregular  Horse.  They  bore  a  note  from 
Pollock,  suggesting  that  a  brigade  from  the  Candahar 
division  should  be  detached  towards  Bameean,  to  assist 
the  recovery  of  the  prisoners.  The  Candahar  force  were 
pitching  their  camp  at  Char-Deh,  when  Rawlinson  and 
Majme  reached  them.  Nott  received  the  letter  of 
his  brother -general  in  no  very  genial  mood  of  mind. 
He  had  already  made  up  his  mind  on  the  subject. 
Twice  before  had  the  officers  of  his  own  force  suggested 
to  General  Nott  that  the  recovery  of  the  prisoners 

*  Shakespear,  with  characteristic    service.    I'he  Kuzzilbashes  had  ten- 
gallantry,  bad  volunteered  for  this    dered  their  services  to  Pollock. 


MAYNE  S  RECEPTION. 


6ii 


would  be  facilitated  by  the  despatcii  of  a  detachment 
from  his  division.*  But  he  had  always  answered,  that 
he  believed  the  recovery  of  the  prisoners  to  be  a  matter 
of  indifference  to  Government,  and  that  he  did  not  con- 
sider it  expedient  to  divide  his  force. 

When,  therefore,  the  proposal  came  to  him  in  a  mor6 
official  shape  from  his  brother-general — ^upon  whom,  as 
the  senior  officer,  had  now  devolved  the  command  of 
all  the  troops  in  Afghanistan — ^he  received  it  as  one 
on  which  he  had  no  consideration  to  bestow,  and 
determined  at  once,  within  the  bounds  of  due  subordi- 
nation, to  decline  it.  It  would  be  well  if  there  were 
nothing  else  to  record.  Unhappily,  the  temper  of  the 
Candahar  General  was  such  that  the  officer — one  of  the 
bravest  and,  for  his  years,  the  most  distinguished  in 
Afghanistan — who  presented  himself  in  Nott's  cftmp,  to 
bring  back  the  General's  answer,  met  with  a  welcome 
which  may  little  have  surprised,  however  much  it  may 
have  pained,  the  officers  of  Nott's  staff,  but  which,  upon 
one  accustomed  in  Sale's  and  Pollock's  camps  to  the 
courtesies  due  to  a  soldier  and  a  gentleman,  burst  like  a 
loaded  shell.  Chafing  under  the  thought  of  being  re- 
commended by  his  superior  to  do  what  his  own  better 
judgment  suggested  to  him  that  he  ought  to  have  done 
unprompted,  the  Candahar  General  poured  upon  Mayne 

*  *'  September  14.— As  we  find  that  vid  Caubul,  without  turning  to  the 

the  prisoners  have   certainly  been  right  or  left ;  and  that  he  considered, 

carried  off  to  Bameean,  and  the  Kuz-  from  the  tenor  of  all  Lord  Ellen- 

zilbashes  are  disposed  to  assist  us  in  borough*s  despatches,  the  recoverj  of 

their  recovery,  while  General  Fol-  the  prisoners  to  be  a  matter  of  indif* 

lock  is  not  likelj  to  encounter  further  ference  to  government." 
opposition  on  his  march  upon  Caubul,        "  September  15. — It  was  again  to- 

it  was  suggested  to  the  General  to-  day  urged  upon  the  General  to  send 

day  that  he  should  despatch  a  brigade  a  brigade  to  Bameean,  or  in  that 

from  Urghundeh,  where  the  Bameean  direction,  to  assist  in  the  rescue  of 

road  strikes  off,  to  form  a  support  for  the  prisoners,  but  he  seems  to  haye 

our  party-,  assisted  by  the  Uazarehs,  made  up  his  mind  that  he  will  not 

tofafl  back  upon.  He  would  not,  how-  separate  his  force  unless  positively 

ever,  listen  to  this  proposal,  declaring  ordered  to  do  so  by  higher  autho- 

that  be  had  only  one  object  in  view,  niy'^^lMaJorEawUnsmiMS.Jotir' 

that  of  marching  his  force  to  India  nat] 


616  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

and  his  escort  all  the  vials  of  his  wrath.  What  he 
said  was  heard  by  many,  and  is  upon  record.  Mayne, 
stung  by  the  insult  put  upon  him  by  the  veteran  com- 
inander,  refused  to  continue  in  his  camp,  and  said  he 
would  await  at  the  outlying  picket  the  answer  which 
he  was  commissioned  to  carry  back  to  PoUoclc's  tent.* 

But  when  Nott  entered  his  tent,  and  sate  down  to 
write  a  reply  to  his  brother-general,  he  did  not  wholly 
forget  the  duties  of  a  soldier  to  his  superior  in  rank.  He 
stated,  in  emphatic  language,  his  reasons  for  protesting 
against  the  adoption  of  the  course  suggested  to  him ;  but 
at  the  same  time  declared  his  willingness  to  obey  the 
orders  of  his  superior  officer.  What  these  reasons  were 
must  be  set  forth  in  his  own  words : 

Mt  DEAB  GenebaL,  Camp,  September  17th,  1842. 

I  have  been  favoured  with  your  note  of  this  date.  In  which 
you  express  a  wish  that  I  should  detach  a  brigade  towards  Bameean ; 
before  you  decide  on  sending  it,  I  would  beg  to  state  as  follows: — 

1st.  The  troops  under  my  command  have  just  made  a  long  and 
very  diflScult  march  of  upwards  of  300  miles,  and  they  have  been 
continually  marching  about  for  the  last  six  months,  and  most  cer- 
tainly require  rest  for  a  day  or  two — the  same  with  my  camels 
and  other  cattle.  I  lost  twenty-nine  camels  yesterday,  and  ex- 
pect to-day's  report  will  be  double  that  number. 

2nd.  I  am  getting  short  of  supplies  for  Europeans  and  natives, 
and  I  can  see  but  little  probability  of  getting  a  quantity  equal  to 
my  daily  consumption  at  this  place.     I  have  little  or  no  money. 

3rd.  I  have  so  many  sick  and  wounded  that  I  fear  I  shall  have 
the  greatest  inconvenience  and  difficulty  in  carrying  them ;  and 
should  any  unnecessary  operations  add  to  their  number,  they  must 
be  left  to  perish.  If  I  remain  here  many  days  I  shall  expect  to 
lose  half  my  cattle,  which  will  render  retirement  very  difficult. 

4th.  I  sincerely  think  that  sending  a  small  detachment  will  and 
must  be  followed  by  deep  disaster.     No  doubt  Mahomed  Akbar, 

•  Statement  o/LieiU.  Mayne, — MS,  sertion,  thatMayne's  escort  crowded 

Correspondence  of  Officers  on  the  Staff  on  Nott's  staff.      Mayne  posted  his 

of  General  Nott.  — The  only  apologetic  horsemen  on  the  reverse  flank,  and 

explanation  of  this  which  has   yet  it  is  his  belief  that  they  were  not  in 

reached  me  is  to  be  found  (n  the  as-  the  way  of  the  staff. 


NOTT  AND  THE  PRISONERS.  617 

Shumshoodeen,  and  the  other  chiefs,  are  uniting  their  forces,  and 
I  hourly  expect  to  hear  that  Sir  R.  Shakespear  is  added  to  the 
number  of  British  prisoners.  In  my  last  affair  with  Shumshoodeen 
and  Sultan  Jan,  they  had  12,000  men;  and  my  information  is 
that  two  days  ago  they  set  out  for  Bameean. 

5th.  After  much  experience  in  this  country,  my  opinion  is 
that,  if  the  system  of  sending  out  detachments  should  be  adopted, 
disaster  and  ruin  will  follow. 

6th.  After  bringing  to  your  notice,  showing  that  my  men 
require  rest  for  a  day  or  two,  that  my  camels  are  dying  fast,  and 
that  my  supplies  are  nearly  expended,  you  should  order  my  force 
to  be  divided,  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  implicitly  to  obey  your 
orders;  but,  my  dear  General,  I  feel  assured  you  will  excuse  me 
when  I  most  respectfully  venture  to  protest  against  it  under  the 
circumstances  above  noted.  I  could  have  wished  to  have  stated 
this  in  person  to  you,  but  I  have  been  so  very  unwell  for  the  last 
two  months  that  I  am  sure  you  will  kindly  excuse  me. 

Yours  sincerely, 

Wm,  Nott. 

On  the  following  day,  Nott  having  excused  himself 
on  the  plea  of  ill  health  from  visiting  Pollock  in  his 
camp,  Pollock,  waving'  the  distinction  of  his  superior 
rank,  called  upon  his  brother-general.  The  conversa- 
tion  which  ensued  related  mainly  to  the  question  of  the 
despatch  of  the  brigade  in  aid  of  the  recovery  of  the 
British  prisoners.  Nott  had  made  up  his  mind  on  the 
subject.  He  was  not  to  be  moved  from  his  first  posi- 
tion. There  were  few  besides  himself  who  considered 
the  arguments  which  he  advanced  to  be  of  the  over- 
whelming and  conclusive  character  which  Nott  himself 
believed  them  to  be;  and  it  was,  at  all  events,  suf- 
ciently  clear,  that  as  it  was  of  primal  importance  on 
such  a  service  to  lose  the  least  possible  amount  of  time, 
it  was  desirable  to  detach  a  brigade  from  Nott's  camp, 
in  preference  to  one  from  Pollock's,  if  only  because  the 
former  was  some  ten  miles  nearer  to  Bameean  than  the 
latter.    Nott  was  inflexible.    Government,  he  said,  "  had 

*  MS.  Correapondenct. 


618  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

thrown  the  prisoners  overboard*' — why  then  should  he 
rescue  them  ?  He  would  obey  the  orders  of  his  superior 
officer,  but  only  under  protest.  So  Pollock  returned  to 
camp,  and  delegated  to  another  officer  the  honoiuable 
service  which  Nott  had  emphatically  declined.  Sir  Ro- 
bert Sale  was  not  likely  to  decline  it.  Though  his  own 
heroic  wife  had  not  been  one  of  the  captives,  every 
feeling  of  the  soldier  and  the  man  would  have  responded 
to  the  appeal. 

So  Sale  took  out  with  him  a  brigade  from  the  Jellala- 
bad  army,  and  pushed  on  in  pursuit  of  Shakespear  and 
the  Kuzzilbashes.  But  already  had  the  release  of  the 
prisoners  been  effected.  They  had  accomplished  their 
own  liberation.  Sale  met  them  with  Shakespear  and 
the  Kuzzilbash  escort  on  their  way  to  Pollock's  camp. 

The  story  which  they  had  to  tell  was  this.  On  the 
afternoon  of  the  25th  of  August  the  prisoners,*  who  had 
already  received  a  general  intimation  that  they  were  to 
be  carried  off  to  Bameean,  but  who  had  still  ventured  to 
hope  that  some  efforts  might  be  made  by  the  chiefs  in 
our  interests  to  release  them,  were  warned  by  Captain 
Troup,  who  had  just  returned  from  an  interview  with 
the  Sirdar,  to  prepare  for  the  journey  towards  the 
Hindoo-Koosh.  Soon  after  sunset  a  guard  of  three 
hundred  men  arrived  to  escort  them.  Their  ponies, 
camels,  and  litters  were  brought,  and  an  hour  or  two 
before  midnight  they  started  upon  their  dreary  journey. 

They  were  not  suffered  to  sleep  that  night,  nor  the 
next;  but  still  hurried  towards  the  inhospitable  regions 
of  the  Indian  Caucasus.  All  the  forts  and  villages  by 
which  they  passed  poured  forth  their  inhabitants  to  stare, 
with  wondering  curiosity,  at  the  Feringhee  captives-f 

*  Thej  had  been  joined  by  their  forth  its    inhabitants    to  stare  and 

fellow-captives  from  Ghuznee.     See  wonder  at  the  Feringhee  prisoners, 

note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Not  an  uncivil  word  or  gesture  have 

f  "  August  28. —Every  hamlet  and  I  ever  heard  or  seen  in  all  oup  wan- 
fort  we  passed  after  daybreak  poured  derings ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  many  a 


THE  PRISONERS  AT  BAMEEAN.  619 

But  none  insulted  them  in  their  misfortunes.  Often, 
indeed,  by  the  rude  inhabitants  of  the  country  through 
which  they  passed,  were  many  looks,  and  words,  and  deeds 
of  kindness  freely  bestowed  upon  them.  Onwards,  still 
in  upward  direction,  they  went,  thousands  of  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea.  The  days  were  painfully  sultry,  and 
the  nights  were  bitterly  cold.  The  alternations  of  climate 
told  fearfully  upon  the  constitutions  of  the  European 
prisoners;  and  their  sick  increased  in  numbers.  The 
soldiers  and  camp-followers,  for  whom  no  carriage  was 
provided,  dragged  their  infirm  limbs  wearily  over  the 
barren  wastes  and  up  the  steep  ascents  of  the  Hindoo- 
Koosh,  the  officers  giving  up  their  horses  to  the  ladies, 
for  whom  the  camel  panniers  were  no  longer  secure, 
toiled  wearily  after  them  up  the  rugged  slopes. 

On  the  3rd  of  September  they  reached  Bameean. 
Conducted  to  one  wretched  fort  and  then  to  another, 
they  remonstrated  against  the  noisome  quarters  to 
which  it  was  proposed  to  consign  them  ;  and  twice 
their  importunities  prevailed.  But  at  last,  on  the  9th 
of  September,  the  commandant  of  their  escort  ordered 
them  to  take  up  their  abode  in  another  fort,  scarcely 

STmpatliismg  word  and  look  has  been  generous  and  kindly  feeling.      Our 

expressed,  and  especiallj  by  people  Bttle  fellow-prisoners — botli  boys  and 

who  had  previously  any  knowledge  girls — had  such  a  feast  as  they  have 

of  us.*' — "  August  29.  —  On  passing  not  had  for  many  a  day.    On  arriv- 

the  above  fort  (  Mustapha  Khan,  Euz-  ing  at  our  bivouac,  another  Ruzzil- 

zilbash),  where  Saleh  Mahomed  and  bash,  who  had  a  fort  close  by,  hearing 

I  were  the  first  to  arrive,  I  was  most  from  Ahmed  Khan  that  I  wanted  to 

agreeably  surprised  by  the   owner  buy  a  horse,  brought  me  one  for  sale, 

bringing  out  two  or  three  large  trays  As  I  was,  however,  afraid  of  running 

full  of  excellent  cakes  and  sweet-  out  of  funds,  I  told  him  my  fears, 

meats,  and  begging  I  would  distri-  His  reply  was,  *  I  know  you,  and  I 

bute  them   among  the    ladies    and  will  be  satisfied  with  your  note  of 

children  —  expressing  at  the  same  hand.    I  am  a  relation  of  Naib  Sheriff 

time  the  most  unfeigned  sympathy  Khan.*    This  was  a  mark  of  confi- 

for  all  of  us.    To  people  in  our  un-  dence  I  could  not  have  expected  in 

fortunate  situation,  a  civil  word  even  such  dangerous  times,  when  my  life 

is  well  appreciated,  but  such  a  mark  is  not  worth  twenty-four  hours  pur- 

of  kindness  as  this  worthy  Persian  chase.    I  did  not  take  the  animal.** — 

showed  us,   is  not  easily  forgotten.  ^Captain  Johnson^s  Narrative.    MS,"] 
His  very  look  bespoke  liim  a  man  of 


620  THE  BE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

less  wretched  than  the  others,  and  portioned  out  among 
them  some  small  and  comfortless  apartments,  so  dark 
that  they  could  scarcely  see  in  them,  and  so  filthy  that 
they  could  write  their  names  in  the  soot  that  covered 
the  roof.  But  their  residence  in  this  place  was  but 
brief.     They  soon  effected  their  escape. 

The  commander  of  the  escort  was  one  Saleli  Ma- 
homed. A  soldier  of  fortune,  who  had  visited  many 
countries  and  served  under  many  masters,  he  had  been 
at  one  time  a  subadar  in  Captain  Hopkins's  regiment  of 
infantry,  and  had  deserted  with  his  men  to  Dost  Ma- 
homed on  the  eve  of  the  contest  at  Bameean.  A  good- 
humoured,  loquacious,  boasting  man,  he  was  never 
happier  than  when  narrating  his  adventures  to  the  Eng- 
lish officers  under  his  charge.  Among  them  there  was  not 
one  who  better  understood  the  Afghan  character,  or  who 
had  made  more  friends  in  the  country,  than  Captain 
Johnson;  and  now,  in  a  short  time,  between  him  and 
Saleh  Mahomed  an  intimacy  was  established,  which  the 
former  began  to  turn  to  the  best  account.*  He  rode  with 
the  commandant,  listened  to  his  stories;  and  soon  began 
to  throw  out  hints  that  a  lakh  of  rupees  and  a  pension  in 

*  "  The  commandant  of  our  guard  fellow,  and  without  any  prejudices 

appears  very  civil    and  inclined  to  aprainst  us  Kaffirs.     He  is  a  soldier 

oblige  us  in  every  possible  way — at  of  fortune,  cares  little  whom  he  serves, 

any  rate  he  is  so  to  me.    I  was  quite  has  been  to  Bokhara,  Yarkund^  and 

delighted  to  hear  him  talk  in  such  was  at  the  taking  of  Kokund  a  few 

enthusiastic   terms  of  my  deceased  months  ago.     Kode  with    him  the 

and  lamented  friend  Hopkins   (his  whole  march,  and  was  much  amused 

former    commanding   officer).      On  at  his  traveller's  tales.     He  is  the 

asking  him  why  he  deserted  with  his  greatest  hero  in  his  own  estimation  I 

company  to  Dost  Mahomed  in  Sep-  ever  came  across.    There  is  no  end 

tember,  1840,  his  reply  was,  that  he  to  his  feats  of  valour,  to  which  I  am 

was  disgusted  with  the  abusive  Ian-  a  ready  listener,  for  two  reasons : 

guage  used  towards  him  by  the  Euro-  Jirstly,  that  I  am  amused  ;  secondly^ 

ran  non-commissioned  officers ;  and  that  he  is  flattered  by  my  being  so 

do  not  doubt  that  this  had  a  great  good  a  listener — by  which  I  hope  to 

effect  in  alienating  him  from  our  ser-  turn  him  to  good  account." — fCap- 

vice,  although  certainly  not  the  im-  tain  JohnsorCs  Narrative  of  his  Capti' 

mediate  cause  of  his  desertion.  Saleh  vity.     MS,"] 
Mahomed  is  a  good-humoured,  jolly 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  SALEH  MAHOMED.  621 

Hindostan  might  be  found  for  him,  if,  instead  of  carry- 
ing off  his  prisoners  to  Bameean,  he  would  conduct 
them  in  safety  to  the  British  camp.  To  Pottinger,  who 
had  hitherto  been  the  chief  negotiator  on  the  part  of 
the  captives,  Johnson  would  have  now  confided  the 
delicate  duty  of  inducing  the  deserter  again  to  desert; 
but  the  task  was  declined,  on  the  plea  that  the  attempt 
was  more  likely  to  succeed  in  the  hands  of  the  latter, 
who  seemed  to  have  inspired  a  feeling  of  friendship  in 
the  breast  of  the  commandant.  Pottinger  disliked  the 
man ;  and  the  man  seemed  to  dislike  him.  So  Johnson 
began,  with  admirable  tact  and  address,  to  work  upon 
the  cupidity  of  his  friend. 

On  the  29th  of  August  the  suggestion  was  put  forth, 
in  a  light  and  jesting  manner ;  and  not  until  he  had  con- 
vinced himself  that  there  would  be  no  danger  in  a  more 
direct  proposition,  did  Johnson  suffer  Saleh  Mahomed 
to  feel  that  he  was  thoroughly  in  earnest.  The  Afghan 
was  in  no  hurry  to  commit  himself.  Days  passed.  The 
party  reached  Bameean;  and  no  allusion  was  made 
to  the  subject;  till  one  day — the  11th  of  September — 
Saleh  Mahomed  sent  for  Johnson,  Pottinger,  and  Law- 
rence, and,  in  a  private  room  of  the  fort,  which  had 
been  appropriated  to  Lady  Sale,  produced  a  letter 
which  he  had  just  received  from  Akbar  Khan.  The 
Sirdar  had  instructed  him  to  convey  the  prisoners  to 
Kooloom,  and  to  make  them  all  over  to  the  WuUee  of 
that  place.  It  seemed  then  that  they  were  about  to 
end  their  days  in  hopeless  captivity  among  the  Oosbegs. 
But  the  despair  which  fell  upon  them  was  but  short-lived. 
Saleh  Mahomed  soon  dispersed  their  fears  by  sajdng  that 
one  Syud  Moorteza  Shah,  a  Cashmeree,  who,  during  the 
Caubul  insurrection,  had  helped  Johnson  to  collect  grain 
from  the  villages,  had  arrived  from  Caubul,  and  brought 
a  message  from  Mohun  Lai  to  the  effect,  that  if  he 
would  release  the  prisoners,  General  Pollock  would  ensure 


622  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

him  a  life-pension  of  1000  rupees  a  month,  and  make 
him  a  present  of  20,000  rupees.  ^^  I  know  nothing  of 
General  Pollock,'*  then  said  Saleh  Mahomed,  ^but  if  you 
three  gentlemen  will  swear  by  your  Saviour  to  make 
good  to  me  what  Syud  Moorteza  Shah  states  that  he  is 
authorised  to  offer,  I  will  deliver  you  over  to  your  own 
people."  The  offer  was  at  once  accepted.  With  little 
delay  an  agreement  was  written  out  in  Persian  by  Syud 
Moorteza  Shah,  and  signed  by  Johnson,  Pqttinger, 
Lawrence,  and  Mackenzie.'*  It  was  a  perilous  game — 
for  Saleh  Mahomed  had  twice  played  the  traitor  before, 
and  might  assume  the  same  character  again.  But  the 
prize  was  too  great  and  too  tempting  for  them  to  hesitate 
even  to  risk  their  lives ;  so  they  flung  themselves  with- 
out hesitation  into  the  hazardous  plot. 

Cheerfully  did  the  prisoners  now  bind  themselves  to 
provide  from  their  own  resources,  all  according  to  their 
means,  the  money  that  was  required  to  carry  out  the 
grand  object  of  their  liberation.  The  signatures  of  all 
the  officers  and  ladies  were  obtained  to  the  bond.f    Saleh 


*  The  words  of  the  bond  may  be  the  Agreement  given  hy  Safeh  Mako' 

thus  translated : —  med  to  Captain  J6hnson,'\ 

"  We  gentlemen,  Pottinger,  John-  t  The  agreement  is  tnus  worded : 

son,  Mackenzie,  and  Lawrence,  in  the  *^  W^e,  whose  si^atures  are  hereunto 

presence  of  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  do  attached,  do  bmd  ourselves  to  paj 

enter  into  the  following  agreement  into  the  hands  of  Major  Pottinger 

with  Saleh  Mahomed  Khan : — When-  and  Captains  Lawrence  and  Johnson, 

ever  Saleh  Mahomed  Khan  shall  free  on  condition  of  our  release  beiiig  ef- 

us  from  the  power  of  Mahomed  Akbar  fectedbyan  arrangement  with  Saleh 

Khan,  we  a^ee  to  make  him  (Saleh  Mahomed  Khan,  such  a  number  of 

Mahomed  Khan)  a  present  of  20,000  months*  pay  and  allowances  as  they 

rupees,  and  to  pay  him  monthly  the  sh^ll  demand  from  us — such   pay 

sum  of  1000  rupees ;  likewise  to  ob-  and  allowances  to  be  rated  by  the 

tain  for  him  the  command  of  a  regi-  scale  at  which  we  shall  find  our« 

ment  in  the  govemment  service ;  and  selves  entitled  to  draw  from  the  date 

we  attest  that  this  agreement  is  not  of  our  release  from  captivity.     We, 

false;   and  should  we  have  spoken  who  are  mamed,  do  further  agree 

falsely  then  will  we  acknowledge  our-  to  pay  the  same  amount  for  our  wives 

selves  to  be  false  men,  even  in  the  and  mmilies  as  for  ourselves.     We, 

presence  of  Kings.  whose  husbands  are  absent,  do  pledge 

"  E.  PoTTixQBB,  C.  Mackenzie,  ourselves  in  proportion  to  our  hus- 

'*H.  Johnson,    G.St.P.  Lawrence."  bands*  allowances."    The  agreement 

-^[Translated  from  the  counterpart  of  is  drawn  up  on  half-a-sheet  of  fbola- 


pottinger's  proceedings  at  bameeak.        623 

Mahomed  proved  to  be  staunch  and  true.  The  con* 
spiracy  was  wholly  successful;  and  the  conspirators  soon 
grew  bold  in  their  success.  The  rebellion  of  Saleh  Ma- 
homed and  his  European  allies  was  openly  proclaimed  to 
all  the  chiefs  and  people  of  Bameean  and  the  surrounding 
country.  A  flag  was  hoisted  on  the  fort  which  they  oc« 
cupied.  They  deposed  the  governor  of  the  place,  and 
appointed  a  more  friendly  chief  in  his  stead.  They  levied 
contributions  upon  a  party  of  Lohanee  merchants,  who 
were  passing  that  way ;  and  so  supplied  themselves  with 
funds.  And,  to  crown  all,  Major  Pottinger  began  to  issue 
proclamations,  calling  upon  all  the  neighbouring  chiefs  to 
come  in  and  make  their  salaam;  he  granted  remissions  of 
revenue ;  and  all  the  decent  clothes  in  the  possession  of 
the  party  were  collected  to  bestow  as  Khelats. 

But,  in  spite  of  the  boldness  of  their  outward  bearing 
at  this  time,  they  were  not  without  some  apprehensions 
that  their  dominion  might  soon  be  broken  down,  and 
the  lords  of  to-day  reduced  again  to  captives  and  slaves 
to-morrow.  Some  of  the  confederate  chiefs  might  ere  long 
appear  at  Bameean  and  overwhelm  the  rebellion  of  Saleh 
Mahomed.  So  the  new  rulers  began  to  strengthen  their 
position,  and  make  preparations  to  stand  a  siege.  They 
had  promised  their  guards — in  all  some  250  men — four 
months'  pay,  as  a  gratuity,  on  reaching  Caubul ;  and  there 
was  every  reason  to  rely  on  their  fidelity,*  Commanded 
by  European  officers,  it  was  believed  that  they  would 
make  a  good  show  of  resistance.     So  Pottinger  and  his 

cap   paper,   in  the  hand-writing  of  tinger  and  Captains  Lawrence  and 

Captain  Johnson.     The  names  of  all  Johnson,  in  furtherance  of  the  above 

the  prisoners  (officers  and  ladies)  are  scheme" — "In  our   prison    at  Ba- 

attached  to  it ;  the  first  being  that  of  meean  :    11th    September,    1842." — 

Brigadier  Shelton.  There  is  a  codicil  [J/iS.  Records,'] 
to  it,  signed  by  Lady  Macnaghten        *  The  European  soldiers  at  Ba- 

and    Mrs.   Sturt,    in    these  words :  meean  were  so  reduced  by  sickness 

"We,  who  are  widows,  do  pledge  as  to  be  scarcely  able   to   hold  a 

ourselves  to  pay  such  sums  as  may  musket.  And  they  had  lost  all  heart, 
bedcmandcd  irom  us  by  Major  Ptt- 


624  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

companions  began  to  clear  out  the  loopholes  of  the  forts 
— to  dig  wells — to  lay  in  provisions — and  otherwise  to 
provide  against  the  probability  of  a  siege.  They  were 
busily  employed  in  this  manner  on  the  15th  of  Septem- 
ber, when  a  horseman  was  observed  approaching  from  the 
Caubul  side  of  the  valley.  Eager  for  intelligence  from 
the  capital,  they  left  their  work  and  gathered  round  him. 
He  brought  glad  tidings.  Akbar  Khan  had  been  de- 
feated by  General  Pollock  at  Tezeen,  and  had  fled  no 
one  knew  whither.  The  aspect  of  affairs  was  now 
changed,  indeed.  The  common  voice  of  the  prisoners — 
prisoners  no  longer — declared  in  favour  of  an  immediate 
return  to  Caubul.  It  was  decided  that,  on  the  following 
morning,  they  should  set  out  for  Pollock's  camp. 

At  eight  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  they  set 
out  on  their  journey.  Sleeping  that  night,  in  the  clear 
moonlight,  on  hard  stony  beds,  they  were  awakened  by 
the  arrival  of  a  friendly  chief,  who  brought  a  letter  from 
Sir  Richmond  Shakespear,  stating  that  he  was  on  his 
way  to  Bameean,  with  a  party  of  600  Kuzzilbash  horse. 
This  was  cheering  intelligence.  At  daybreak  they  were 
again  astir,  pushing  on  with  increased  rapidity,  in  a 
whirl  of  excitement,  unconscious  of  hunger  or  fatigue. 
Their  trials  were  now  nearly  at  an  end.  They  had  heart 
enough  to  do  and  to  suffer  anything. 

About  three  hours  after  noon  on  the  17th  of  Sep- 
tember, a  cloud  of  dust  was  observed  to  rise  from  the 
summit  of  a  mountain-pass  in  their  front.  Presently  a 
few  straggling  horsemen  made  their  appearance,  and,  in 
a  little  time,  the  English  officers  could  plainly  see  a 
body  of  cavalry  winding  down  the  pass.  Great  now 
was  the  excitement  in  our  little  party.  The  horsemen 
who  were  now  approaching  might  be  Shakespear  and 
the  Kuzzilbashes,  or  they  might  be  a  body  of  the  enemy. 
It  was  well  at  least  to  prepare  for  their  reception.    Saleh 


LIBERATION  OF  THE  PRISONERS.  625 

Mahomed's  drums  were  beaten;  all  stragglers  were 
called  in;  every  man  stood  to  his  arms;  a  line  was 
formed;*  the  muskets  were  loaded;  and  Saleh  Maho- 
med seemed  all  eagerness  to  give  the  enemy  a  warm 
reception.  But  there  was  no  enemy  to  be  defeated.  An 
English  officer  soon  appeared  galloping  a-head  of  the 
horsemen.  Shakespear  had  arrived  with  his  Kuzzil- 
bashes.  He  was  soon  in  the  midst  of  the  prisoners, 
offering  them  his  congratulations,  receiving  their  thanks, 
and  endeavouring  to  answer  their  thick-coming  ques- 
tions. 

At  daybreak  on  the  following  morning  they  pushed 
on  again.  Some  better  horses  had  been  obtained  from 
the  Kuzzilbashes ;  and  now  they  moved  forward  with 
increased  rapidity.  On  the  20th,  as  two  or  three  of  the 
officers  riding  on  a-head  of  the  party  were  nearing  Ur- 
ghundeh,  which  was  to  be  their  halting-place,  another 
cloud  of  dust  was  observed  rising  over  the  hills ;  and  soon 
the  welcome  tidings  reached  them  that  a  large  body 
of  British  cavaby  and  infantry  was  approaching.  This 
was  the  column  which  Pollock  had  sent  out  in  support 
of  the  Kuzzilbash  Horse — the  column  that  Sale  com- 
manded. In  a  little  time  that  intrepid  veteran  had  em- 
braced his  wife  and  daughter;  and  the  men  of  the  13th 
had  offered  their  delighted  congratulations  to  the  loved 
ones  of  their  old  commander.  A  royal  salute  was  fired. 
The  prisoners  were  safe  in  Sale's  camp.  Their  anxieties 
were  at  an  end.  The  good  Providence  that  had  so  long 
watched  over  the  prisoner  and  the  captive  now  crowned 
its  mercies  by  delivering  them  into  the  hands  of  their 
friends.  Dressed  as  they  were  in  Afghan  costume,  their 
faces  bronzed  by  much  exposure,  and  rugged  with  beards 

*  '^  In  order  "  Bays  Captain  John-    posing  a  front  as  possible,  there  was 
SOD,    from   whose  Narrative   these    no  rear  rank.'* 
details  arc  taken,  "to  show  as  im- 

VOL.  II.  2  S 


626  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

and  moustachios  of  many  months'  growth,  it  was  not  easy 
to  recognise  the  liberated  officers  who  now  pushed  for- 
ward to  receive  the  congratulations  of  their  friends.  On 
that  day  they  skirted  the  ground  on  which  the  Canda^ 
har  force  was  posted,  and  out  went  officers,  and  soldiers, 
and  camp-followers,  eager  and  curious,  to  gaze  at  the 
released  captives,  and  half-inclined  to  fall  upon  their 
guards*  On  the  21st  of  September  they  passed 
through  the  city,  on  their  way  to  Pollock's  camp.  They 
found  the  shops  closed;  the  streets  deserted;  and  paused, 
as  they  went  along,  before  some  melancholy  memorials 
of  the  great  outbreak  which,  a  year  before,  had  over- 
whelmed us  with  misery  and  disgrace.f 

Great  was  the  joy  which  the  recovery  of  the  prisoners 
diffused  throughout  the  camps  of  Pollock  and  Nott ;  and 
great  was  the  joy  which  it  diffiised  throughout  the 
provinces  of  India,  Rightly  judged  Pollock  that,  if  he 
returned  to  Hindostan  without  the  brave  men  and 
tender  women  who  had  endured  for  so  many  months 
the  pains  and  perils  of  captivity  in  a  barbarous  country, 
his^  coimtrymen  would  regard  the  victory  as  incomplete. 
Let  him  fight  what  battles,  destroy  what  forts,  and 
carry  oflf  what  trophies  he  might,  he  would,  without 
the  liberation  of  the  prisoners,  be  only  half-a-conqueror 
after  all.     Pollock  knew  that  his  countrymen  had  not 

*  Seeing  that    Saleh  Mahomed's  to  see  the  whole  place  unroofed,  I 

men  wore   our    English  belts  and  was  not  prepared  for  such  a  scene  of 

{>ouches,  the  soldiers  of  Nott*s  diyi-  desolation.    Not  one  brick  was  left 

sion  were  disposed  to  fall  upon  them,  standing  on  another  in  either  mj 

It    was     intimated     to    the    com-  house    or    that    of   Sir    Alexander 

mandant  that  it  would  be  expedient  Bumes  (the  adjoining  one).     The/ 

to  remove  them  out  of  the  waj  of  were  nothing  but  a  heap   of  dirt» 

danger.  covering  the  mouldering  remains  of 

t  "  On  passing  the  comer  of  the  our  unfortunate  people.    A  spot  was 

street  were  I  formerly  lived,  I  could  pointed  out  to  me  in  Sir  Alexander's 

not  forego  the  desire  of  looking  on  garden  as  that  in  which  his  body  had 

the  ruins  of  a  house  in  which  I  iiad  been  interred.^' — [^Captain  Joknsoris 

Eassed  a  period    of  two   years  of  Narratioe  ofkii  Captivitif,   MS,^ 
appiness.   Although  I  had  expected 


THE  QUESTION  OF  BETBIBUTION.  ()27 

"  thrown  the  prisoners  overboard,"  He  had  rescued 
them  now  from  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  that  object  of 
the  war  was  obtained.  There  was  little  else,  indeed, 
liow  to  be  done,  except  to  leave  upon  Caubul  some  last- 
ing mark  of  the  just  retribution  of  an  outraged  nation. 
It  had  been  the  declared  wish  of  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment that  the  army  should  leave  behind  it  some  decisive 
proofs  of  its  power,  without  impeaching  its  humanity ; 
and  now  Pollock  prepared  to  carry,  as  best  he  could 
interpret  them,  those  wishes  into  effect. 

The  interpretation,  however,  was  not  easy.  Very 
different  opinions  obtained  among  the  leading  officers  in 
the  British  camp  relative  to  the  amount  of  punishment 
that  it  now  became  the  British  General  to  inflict  upon 
the  Afghan  capital.  It  is  even  now  a  moot  question 
whether  more  or  less  ought  to  have  been  done ;  but  it  is 
seldom  or  never  questioned  whether,  at  this  time,  justice 
and  expediency  did  not  alike  require  that  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Caubul  and  the  neighbourhood  should  be  pro- 
tected against  unauthorised  acts  of  depredation  and 
violence.  Against  the  plunderings  of  soldiers  and  camp- 
followers  Pollock  had  steadfastly  set  his  face ;  but  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Nott's  camp  much  was  done  to  de- 
stroy the  confidence  which  Pollock  was  anxious  to  re- 
establish, and  to  alarm  and  irritate  the  chiefs  whom  he 
desired  to  conciliate.*     After  a  few  days  the  new  minis- 

*"  September  10.— Our  Sepoy  land  strojred.     In  the   present  »tate   of 

camp-followers,  taking  their  cue,  I  feeling,  any  accidental  quarrel  would 

fancy,  from  their  officers,  are  very  un-  lead  to  a  general  rush  upon  the  town, 

ruly,  and  commit  extensive  depro-  and  the  Sepoys  once  there,  massacre 

dations  on  Uie  lands  and  villages  near  and  conflagration  would   assuredly 

our  camp ;  and  as  the  property  thua  follow.     General  Pollock,  by  procla- 

plundered    chiefly    belongs    to    the  mations  of  encouragement,  has  been 

Kuzzilbash  chiefs.  General  Pollock,  endeavouring  to  persuade  the  Cau- 

who  relies  mainly  on  these  people  for  bullees  to  return  to  their  houses  and 

the  consolidation  of  the  new  govern-  re-open  their  shops;  but,  afler  all  that 

ment,  is  subjected  to  great  embar-  has  happened,  it  is  difficult  to  per« 

rassment.    I  have  a  sort  of  misgiving  suade  tne  townspeople  that  we  do 

that  Caubul  will,  after  all,  be  de-  not  aim  at  retributios,  and  the  pro- 

2s2 


628 


THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OP  CAUBUL. 


ter  and  Khan  Shereen  Khan  determined  to  represent  to 
Pollock,  in  a  joint  letter,  the  grievances  of  which  they 
thought  they  were  entitled  to  complain.  The  Greneral 
at  once  forwarded  a  translation  of  the  letter  to  Nott, 
who  sent  it  back  with  his  comments.  The  charges  and 
the  denials  appear  as  they  were  forwarded  to  Pollock's 
camp: 


Abstract  Tramslatton  of  a  Letter 
FROM    Gholah   Mahomsd  Khan, 

THE  WUZEER,  AND  KhAN  ShBREEN 

Khan,  the  Euzzilbash  Chief,  to 
THE  Address  of  General  Pol- 
lock, C.B. 

A.C. 

On  the  14th  of  Shah 

Bau  (20th  September)  the  in- 
habitants of  Aushar  and  Chai- 
deh  were  plundered  by  the 
Candahar  force,  and  sustained 
loss  of  life  and  property  (1): 
their  women  were  not  respected. 
In  the  village  of  Deh  Dana  Cau- 
sim,  and  in  Zeibah  Shewan 
Khan,  and  at  Chardeh^  two  per- 
sons were  killed  (2).     The  Aus- 


Remares  bt  General  Nott. 


1.  This  is  unfounded,  with 
the  exception  of  a  few  worthless 
articles,  stolen  by  surwans  and 
grass-cutters,  and  for  which 
they  were  most  severely  pun- 
ished. 


2.  I  never  heard  of  two  Af- 
ghans having  been  killed ;  but 
four  Europeans  unarmed,  walk- 

ceedings  about  our  camp  at  Char  Deh  minister.  .  .  .  .  The  towns- 
are  anything  but  calculated  to  allay  people  had  returned  in  small  num- 
their  suspicions ;  the  city  continues,  oers  to  the  town,  and  had  re-opened 
therefore,  more  than  half'  closed,  and  their  shops ;  but  owing  to  the  affair 
supplies  are  procurable  with  diffi-  at  Deh  Afshur,  I  believe,  a  panic 
culty."  seized  the  people,  and  every  one  fled, 

*^  September  20.  —  Our  men  have  believing  tnat  orders  had  been  issued 

been    plundering  to  -  day  as   usual  for  a  general  massacre.*' 

about  the  camp,  and  in  some  scuffle  *'  September  22. — ^The  depredations 

which  took  place  at  Deh  Afshur,  four  of  the  Sepoys  and  followers  £rom  this 

of  the  Kuzzilbashes,  witb  Khassim  camp  continue,  notwithstanding  all 

Khan,  a  chief,  were  slain  by  the  Se-  the  efforts  that  are  made  to  repress 

poys.'*  them.    The  Kuzzilbashes  cannot  help 

"  September  21. — The  fort  of  Mar  believing  that  we  encourage  these 

homed  Meerza,  one    of  our  worst  excesses,  and  in   consequence  they 

enemies,  was  given  up  to  plunder,  and  are  not  hdf  satisfied  of  General  FoU 

we  did  not  even  respect  the  property  lock's  sincerity."  —  [^Major  BawUn- 

at  Aliabad,  which  belongs  to  Gholam  son*s  MS.  Journal,^ 
Mahomed  Khan,  the  lately  appointed 


CHARGES  AGAINST  NOTT's  DIVISION. 


629 


harries  are  employed  in  your 
service,  in  the  rescue  of  your 
prisoners:  if  their  houses  are 
plundered  and  their  people  (3) 
killed,  all  confidence  among  the 
people  will  at  once  be  destroyed. 
If  it  is  your  intention  that  pro- 
tection should  be  afforded  to  the 
people^  and  to  avail  yourself  of 
our  resources  (4),  redress  should 
be  granted  under  our  promises 
of  protection  to  the  people  re- 
turning to  their  homes. 

We  are  satisfied  that  it  is  not 
your  pleasure  that  the  troops 
should  behave  in  this  manner 
(5). 

To-day,  the  15th  of  Shah  Bau 
(21st  September),  the  army 
which  was  appointed  to  destroy 
Meer  Hajee's  fort  also  destroy- 
ed the  property  belonging  to 
people  of  the  neighbourhood: 
these  people  should  also  have 
redress  granted  them  (6). 

If  the  English  do  not  grant 
them  redress,  the  ryots  (7)  will 
fly  from  their  homes,  and  they 
will  have  no  longer  confidence 
in  us. 

Just  now  news  has  reached 
us  that  the  Candahar  force  has 
encamped  at  Alladbad  (8), 
which  belongs  to  us,  and  where 
our  families  are  lodged  (9);  the 
force  has  already  plimdered  our 
grain  and  fruit  (10). 


ing  at  a  little  distance  from 
camp,  were  killed  by  these 
monsters. 

3.  What  people?  The  popu- 
lation of  this  valley  had  left  it 
before  my  force  had  arrived,  and 
have  not  been  here  since,  with 
the  exception  of  a  few  indivi- 
duab. 

4.  Why  are  not  these  re- 
sources brought  in  when  an  ex- 
travagant price  is  offered  for 
them? 

5.  This  is  a  false  assertion,  for 
which  the  writer  ought  to  be 
instantly  punished :  the  troops 
have  not  behaved  ill. 

6.  What  this  man  means  by 
this  I  know  not;  no  army,  no 
detachment  was  appointed  by 
me  to  destroy  a  fort.  I  did 
hear  that  General  Sale  ordered 
one  to  be  burnt,  but  whether  he 
did  so  or  no  I  do  not  know; 
but  if  he  did,  I  dare  say  he  had 
good  reasons. 

7.  I  repeat  that  there  are  no 
ryots  in  the  villages.  All  men 
capable  of  bearing  arms  are  with 
different  chiefs,  and  there  is  no 
knowing  the  hour  we  may  be 
attacked  by  them. 

8.  Yes,  I  have  encamped,  and 
I  can  but  admire  the  extreme 
insolence  of  this  man  in  pre- 
suming to  object  to  it. 

9.  This  is  fabe ;  there  are  no 
families  near  the  place. 

10.  This  is  false  ;  with  the 
exception  of  firuit  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  camp. 


630 


THE  RB-OCCDPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 


If  your  friends  suffer  in  this 
way,  what  may  your  enemies 
expect?  (11).  Those  people 
who  returned  to  the  town  are 
leaving  it  again. 

Redress  should  be  speedily 
granted,  and  Lamars  should  be 
stationed  at  each  village  for  its 
protection  (12). 


11.  We  have  not  a  friend  in 
Afghanistan;  and  I  know  what 
our  enemies  ought  to  expect  for 
their  cruelty,  treachery,  and 
bloody  murders. 

12.  What  insolence  in  this 
man,  whose  hands  are  still  red 
with  the  blood  of  our  country- 
men, to  dictate  how  and  where 
we  are  to  place  our  troops  I 

I  cannot  conclude  my  re« 
marks  on  this  document  with- 
out offering  my  opinion  that 
the  writer  should  be  instantly 
seized  and  punished  for  sending 
such  a  grossly  false  and  insolent 
statement. 

W.  NoTT,  M.-Gen. 

The  writers  of  this  letter  were  the  new  minister  and 
Khan  Shereen  Khan,  the  chief  of  the  Kuzzilbashes,  who 
had  done  us  such  good  service.  The  former  had  been 
anxious  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  gallant  commander  of 
the  Candahar  division,  and  had  waited  upon  him  with  a 
letter  from  Macgregor;  but  Nott  had  peremptorily  re- 
fused to  give  him  an  audience.  He  believed  it  to  be  the 
desire  of  Lord  Ellenborough  that  no  A%han  Govern- 
ment should  be  recognised  by  the  British  authorities, 
and  he  was  unwilling  to  favour  any  such  recognition  by- 
receiving  visitfi  of  ceremony  from  the  functionaries  ap- 
pointed by  the  government  that  had  been  established  at 
Caubul.  As  Pollock  had  not  been  equally  nice  upon 
this  point,  the  refusal  of  his  brother-general  to  extend 
his  courtesies  to  the  minister,  could  only  have  embsur- 
rassed  our  supreme  authorities  at  Caubul,  and  attached 
suspicion  to  the  sincerity  of  our  proceedings.  But  Nott, 
at  this  time,  was  in  no  mood  of  mind  to  extend  his 
courtesies  cither  to  Afghan  or  to  British  authorities.     It 


OPINIONS  OF  POLLOCK  AND  NOTT.  631 

was  his  belief  that  even  then  the  British  army  ought  to 
have  been  on  its  way  to  Jellalabad.  He  had  with  him 
a  sufficiency  of  supplies  to  carry  him  to  the  latter  place ; 
and  was  irritated  at  the  thought  that  Pollock  had  come 
up  to  Caubul  without  provisions  to  carry  him  back.* 
If  he  had  been  in  supreme  authority  at  Caubul,  he 
would  have  destroyed  the  Balla  Hissar  and  tlie  city  of 
Caubul,  and  marched  on  with  the  least  possible  delay 
to  Jellalabad.  He  placed  his  sentiments  on  record  re- 
garding the  impolicy  of  the  halt  at  Caubul — declared 
that  he  would  be  compelled  to  make  military  requi- 
sitions to  rescue  his  troops  from  starvation;  and  de- 
nounced  Futteh  Jung  and  the  new  ministers  as  the 
enemies  of  the  British.  Nothing,  indeed,  as  the  follow- 
ing letter  shows,  could  dissuade  Nott  that  every  A%han 
in  the  country  was  not  our  bitter  foe : 

Camp  near  Caubul,  22nd  September,  1842. 

Sib, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  this  day's  date,  and  to  acquaint  you  that  I  conceive  that 
General  Pollock,  C.B.,  must  have  received  some  erroneous  infer* 
mation.  No  army  ever  moved  with  fewer  instances  of  plunder 
than  that  under  my  command,  and  not  an  instance  of  irregularity 
has  occurred  without  punishment  being  inflicted.  The  persons 
who  had  made  this  complaint  ought  to  be  made  to  prove  the 
truth  of  what  they  say.  I  believe  the  enemy  (I  mean  Futteh 
Jung's  party  and  the  rest  of  the  people)  are  organising  a  system 
to  bring  our  men  to  the  same  state  of  starvation  to  which  General 
Elphinstone's  army  was  reduced,  in  hopes  of  the  same  results. 

While  I  think  it  my  duty  to  state  this,  I  must  declare  that  I 
will  not,  to  please  a  few  Afghans,  who  have  scarcely  washed 
their  hands  from  the  blood  of  our  countrymen,  allow  my  army 
to  be  destroyed,  and  my  country  to  be  dishonoured.     There  is 

*  He  asked  Majne,  on  the  17th,  had  about  a  week's  supplies  for  his 

when   that  officer  appeared  in  his  troops,  '*  What  business,  then,*'  asked 

camp,  as  mentioned  at  page  615,  how  Nott,  **  has  General  Pollock  up  at 

many  days'  supplies  General  Pollock  Caubul  with  only  a  week's  suppbes?" 

had  with  him?  and  when  Mayne  re-  Mayne,  of  course,  made  no  answer, 
plied  that  he  believed  the  Greneral 


632  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

grain  in  the  country,  and  I  think  it  ought  to  be  brought  in  im- 
mediately, the  same  being  paid  for. 

General  Pollock's  order  shall  be  proclaimed  through  my  camp 
immediately^  but  I  have  not  heard  of  a  single  act  of  plunder 
during  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 

I  have^  &c. 

^  W.  NOTT,  Major-Greneral, 

Commanding  Field  Forces. 

To  Captain  Fonsonby, 
Assistant  Adjutaat-Greneral,  Camp. 

Pollock,  however,  was  inclined  to  discriminate — to 
protect  our  friends  and  to  punish  our  enemies.  Whilst 
supplies  were  coming  in  but  slowly  to  his  camp,  it 
seemed  good  to  him  that  another  blow  should  be  struck  at 
the  hostile  chiefs.  It  was  reported  to  him  that  Ameen- 
oollah  Khan  was  in  the  field  at  Istalifi*,  in  the  Koh-i- 
da-man,  endeavouring  to  bring  together  the  scattered 
fragments  of  the  broken  Barukzye  force.  It  was  believed 
to  be  the  design  of  the  chief  to  attack  the  British  on  their 
retirement  from  Caubul;  and  it  was  expedient,  there- 
fore, at  once  to  break  up  his  force,  and  to  leave  some 
mark  of  our  just  resentment  on  a  part  of  the  country  which 
had  poured  forth  so  many  of  the  insurgents  \vho  had 
risen  against  us  in  the  preceding  winter.  A  force  taken 
fi:om  the  two  divisions  of  the  British  army  was  there- 
fore despatched,  under  General  M'Caskill,  to  Istaliff,  to 
scatter  the  enemy  there  collected,  and  to  destroy  the 
place.  It  was  thought,  moreover,  that  Ameen-ooUah 
Khan,  dreading  the  advance  of  the  retributory  army, 
would  endeavour  to  conciliate  the  British  General,  by 
delivering  up  to  him  the  person  of  Mahomed  Akbar 
Khan,  if  he  could  adroitly  accomplish  his  seizure.  The 
Sirdar  had  sent  his  family  and  his  property  into  Turk- 
istan ;  and  was  himself  waiting  the  progress  of  events 
in  the  Ghorebund  Pass,  ready,  it  was  said,  to  follow 


RELEASE  OF  CAPTAIN  BYGRAVE.         633 

his  establishment  across  the  hills,  if  the  British  troops 
pushed  forward  to  overtake  him. 

The  hostile  chiefe  were  all  now  at  the  last  gasp — all 
eager  to  conciliate  the  power  that  a  few  months  before 
they  had  derided  and  defied.  Already  had  Ameen- 
oollah  Khan  begun  to  make  overtures  to  the  British 
authorities — to  declare  that  he  had  always  at  heart  been 
their  friend ;  but  that  he  had  been  compelled  to  secure 
his  own  safety  by  siding  with  the  Barukzyes.  And 
now  Akbar  Khan,  with  the  same  object,  sent  into  Pol- 
lock's camp  a  peace-offering,  in  the  shape  of  the  last 
remaining  prisoner  in  his  hands.  Captain  Bygrave 
was  now  restored  to  his  friends.  It  might  have  been  a 
feehng  of  generosity — for  generous  impulses  often  welled 
up  in  the  breast  of  the  Sirdar — or  it  might  have  been  a 
mere  stroke  of  policy,  having  reference  solely  to  his 
own  interests — or  it  might,  and  it  probably  was,  a  mix- 
ture of  the  two  influences  that  prevailed  upon  him ;  but 
he  would  not  any  longer  make  war  upon  a  single  man, 
and  upon  one,  too,  whom  he  personally  respected  and 
esteemed  with  the  respect  and  esteem  due  to  a  man  of 
such  fine  qualities  as  Bygrave.  So  he  sent  the  last  re- 
maining prisoner  safely  into  Pollock's  camp;  and  with  him 
he  sent  a  letter  of  conciliation,  and  an  agent  commis- 
sioned to  treat  for  him.  He  was  eager  to  enter  into 
negotiations  with  the  British.  It  was  little  likely  that  so 
weak  a  Prince  as  Futteh  Jung  would  be  able  to  main- 
tain his  regal  authority  in  Afghanistan  a  day  after  the 
departure  of  the  British;  and  it  appeared  to  him  not 
wholly  improbable  that,  wishing  to  leave  behind  them  a 
jfriendly  power  in  Afghanistan,  the  British  authorities 
might  be  induced  to  enter  into  a  convention  with  him 
before  their  final  departure  from  the  country. 

Even  now  was  Futteh  Jung  himself  beginning  to  ac- 
knowledge his  utter  inability  to  maintain  himself  in  the 


634  THE  BB-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

Balla  Hissar  after  the  striking  of  Pollock's  camp.  Pol- 
lock had  refused  to  supply  him  with  troops,  money,  or 
arms;  and  the  Prince  himself  had  closed  the  door  of 
reconciliation  with  his  old  Barukzye  enemies  by  destroy- 
ing their  houses  and  property.  Among  the  houses  thus 
destroyed,  it  is  deplorable  to  have  to  state  that  the 
house  of  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan  was  one — ^the  very 
house  in  which  the  good  old  man,  with  real  parental 
kindness,  had  so  long  and  so  faithfully  protected  the 
British  hostages.  The  houses  of  Oosman  Khan,  Jub- 
bar  Khan,  and  others  fell  also.  It  was  the  policy  of 
the  Prince  thus  to  compromise  his  supporters,  and  to 
prevent  an  alliance  between  them  and  the  Barukzye 
party ;  but  having  done  this,  he  felt  that  it  was  only  by 
destroying  the  hostile  chiefs  that  he  could,  in  any  way, 
maintain  his  position.  He  watched,  therefore,  with 
anxiety  the  issue  of  the  expedition  into  the  Kohistan, 
and  deferred  his  ultimate  decision  until  the  return  of 
M'Caskiirs  force. 

M^Caskill  was  completely  successful.  He  made  a 
rapid  march  upon  Istaliff,  and  took  the  enemy  by  sur- 
prise. The  Afghan  chiefs  had  collected  in  this  place 
their  treasure  and  their  women.  They  had  looked  to 
it  as  to  a  place  of  refuge,  secure  from  the  assaults  of  the 
invading  Feringhees.  They  had  relied  greatly  on  the 
strength  of  the  place ;  and  scarcely  any  defensive  mea- 
sures had  been  taken  to  repel  the  assaults  of  the  enemy. 
When  M'Caskill  entered  the  gardens  which  surround 
the  town,  a  panic  seemed  to  have  seized  the  people. 
They  thought  no  longer  of  defence.  Their  first  thought 
was  to  save  their  property  and  their  women.  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  himself  fled  at  the  first  onset.  As  our 
troops  entered  the  town,  the  face  of  the  mountain  be- 
yond was  covered  with  laden  baggage-cattle,  whilst  long 
lines  of  white-veiled  women,  striving  to  reach  a  place  of 


APPREHENSIONS  OF  FUTTEH  JUNG.        635 

safety,  streamed  along  the  hill-side.  What  our  troops 
had  to  do  they  did  rapidly  and  well;  but  the  fire  of  the 
enemy's  jezails  soon  slackened  when  the  9th  Foot,  with 
Broadfoot's  Sappers  and  the  26th  N.L  dashed  into  the 
gardens  where  the  Afghan  marksmen  had  been  posted. 
And  as  their  gallantry,  so  their  forbearance  is  to  be 
commended.  M'Caskill,  respecting  the  honour  of  the 
women,  would  not  suffer  a  pursuit ;  but  many  fell  into 
the  hands  of  our  people  in  the  town,  and  were  safely 
delivered  over  to  the  keeping  of  the  Kuzzilbashes. 
Two  guns  and  much  booty  were  taken ;  the  town  was 
fired;  and  then  M'Caskill  went  on  towards  the  hills, 
meeting  no  opposition  on  the  way,  destroyed  Charekur, 
where  the  Goorkha  regiment  had  been  annihilated,  and 
some  other  fortified  places  which  had  been  among  the 
strongholds  of  the  enemy ;  and  then  returned  triumph- 
antly to  Caubul. 

On  the  7th  of  October,  M^Caskill's  force  rejoined  the 
British  camp.  It  was  now  necessary  that  immediate 
measures  should  be  adopted  for  the  withdrawal  of  the 
British  troops  from  the  capital  of  Afghanistan.  Already 
had  Pollock  exceeded,  but  with  a  wise  discretion,  the 
time  which  the  Supreme  Government  would  have  ac- 
corded to  him.  But  there  was  yet  work  to  be  done.  No 
lasting  mark  of  our  retributory  visit  to  Caubul  had  yet 
been  left  upon  the  accursed  city.  Pollock  had  been 
unable  to  shape  his  measures,  for  the  nature  of  the 
retribution  to  be  inflicted  was  dependent  upon  the  con- 
stitution of  the  new  Afghan  Government;  and  it  was 
long  uncertain  what  government  the  British  General 
would  leave  behind  him.  Futteh  Jung  had  been  for 
some  time  trembling  at  the  thought  of  the  prospect  be- 
fore him.  If  M'Caskill  had  brought  back  Akbar  Khan 
a  prisoner,  or  had  sent  his  head  to  the  British  camp,  the 
new  King  might  have  summoned  resolution  to  maintain 


636  THE  KE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

his  seat  on  the  throne.  But  he  could  never  forget  the 
treatment  he  had  received  from  the  Sirdar,  or  nerve 
himself  again  to  meet  the  unscrupulous  Barukzye.*  So 
now  he  peremptorily  declined  to  wear  the  crown  which 
we  would  fain  have  kept  a  little  longer  on  his  head; 
and  implored  the  British  General  to  afford  him  the  pro- 
tection of  his  camp,  and  convey  him  to  the  provinces  of 
India. 

Willing  to  spare  the  city  and  the  Balla  Hissar  for  the 
sake  of  a  friendly  government,  Pollock  had  despatched 
Shakespear  to  the  Kuzzilbash  camp,  which  was  then  in 
the  Kohistan,  to  take  counsel  with  Khan  Shereen  Khftn^ 
and  the  other  chiefs  of  the  Persian  party.  It  seems 
that  they  had  been  sceptical  of  the  intentions  of  the 
British  Greneral  to  evacuate  the  country ;  but  Shakespear 
now  announced  that  the  departure  of  the  army  was  at 
hand,  and  that  it  was  necessary  finally  to  determine 
upon  the  nature  of  the  new  government.    In  this  con- 

*  '^  Shortly  after  my  arrival  at  Cau-  chief  of  the  Kuzzilbashes,  on  the  part 

bul  I  despatched  a  force,  under  Ma-  of  several  other  chiefs,  avowing  tneir 

jor-General  M^Caskill,   to    disperse  determination  to  support  the  brother 

the  followers  of  Ameen-ooUah  Khan  of  Futteh  Jung  (Snahpoor)  on  the 

and  Mahomed  Akbar,  and  to  endea-  throne   of   Caubul.      It    was    long 

vour  to  secure  the  person  of  Uie  before  I  could  convince  the  chi^ 

latter.    Futteh  Jung  continued  for  comprising    this    party    that    they 

several  days  in  power,  and  appeared  could  not  hope  for  any  assistance 

disposed  to  endeavour  to  retain  it.  from  the  British  Grovemment,  either 

The  hope  which  then  existed,  that  in  money  or  troops;  but  as  they  still 

Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  would  fall  persisted  in  urging  me  to  allow  the 

into  our  hands,  no  doubt  had  great  rrince  Shahpoor  to  remain,  and  as 

influence  with  him;  but  when  this  he  repeatedly  assured  me   he  was 

hope  vanished,  the  representations  of  anxious  to  do  so,  I  did  not  conceive 

his  female  relations,  and  the  remem-  myself  authorised  by  my  instructions 

brance  of  the  gross  treachery  he  had  to  remove  him  forcibly  from  Caubul, 

experienced  from  the  chiefs  on  former  and  only  stipulated  that  the  British 

occasions,   appear  to  have   alarmed  Government  should  not  be  supposed 

him ;  and  at  length  he  announced  to  to  have  raised  him  to  the  throne. 

me  his  determination  to  accompany  On  the  morning  of  the  12th  instant, 

the   British   troops    to   Hindostan.  after  the  British  troops  had  marched 

At  the  same  time  I  received  a  let-  from  Caubul,  Prince  Shahpoor  was 

ter,   a  translation   of  which  I  have  put  on  the  throne,  and  the  chiefii 

now  the  honour  to  forward,  from  took  the  oaths  of  fidelity  to  him."— 

Gholam  Mahomed  Khan  (the  minis-  [General  Pollack  to  Lord  EUenborough: 

ter)  and  ELhan  Shereen  Khan,  the  MS.  Correspondence. 


NOMINATION  OP  SHAHPOOR.  637 

juncture,  the  Kuzzilbashes,  trembling  for  the  safety  of 
the  city,  and  feeling  that  there  was  little  hope  of  their 
being  reconciled  to  the  Barukzye  party,  laid  their  hands 
upon  another  puppet.  There  was  a  younger  scion  of 
the  Suddozye  House  then  at  Caubul — the  Prince  Shah- 
poor.  His  mother  was  a  high-born  Populzye  lady,  and 
it  was  believed  that  his  recognition  would  tend  to  con- 
ciliate the  Douranees.  Postponing,  however,  the  final 
enunciation  of  their  views  until  their  return  to  Caubul, 
they  now  proposed  that  the  young  Prince  should  be  set 
up  in  the  place  of  his  brother.  At  Caubul  a  general 
meeting  of  the  chiefe  was  held.  The  voice  of  the 
assembly  declared  in  favour  of  the  elevation  of  Shah- 
poor.  The  Prince  himself,  a  high-spirited  boy,  willingly 
accepted  the  crown  that  was  oflFered  to  him,  and  the  fol- 
lowing declaration  was  then  sent  in  to  Pollock's  camp : 

From  Wuzeer  Gholam  Mahomed  Khati^  Populzye ;  and  Khan 
Shereen  Khan^  chief  of  the  Kuzzilbashes^  on  the  parts  of  all 
the  chiefs  at  Caubul. 

A.C. 

Be  it  known  to  you,  that  since  we,  the  Populzyes  and  the 

other  Douranee  tribes  and  the  Kuzzilbash  cannot  exist  under  the 
Barukzyes;  and  as  such  a  state  of  things  is  altogether  out  of  the 
range  of  possibility;  and  moreover,  since  his  Royal  Highness 
Putteh  Jung  has  decided  on  quitting  the  country  ;  we  agree 
and  accept  of  the  Prince  Shahpoor  as  our  King,  and  will  obey 
him  as  our  ruler.  But  we  hope  that  you  will,  from  this  time, 
put  a  stop  to  the  destruction  of  forts  and  other  property,  that  the 
people  may  regain  confidence  and  return  to  their  own  houses; 
and  we  also  beg  that  Meer  Soofaee  Byanee,  who  is  a  prisoner  in 
Charekur,  be  sent  for  and  made  over  to  us,  that  people  may  be 
induced  to  come  in  to  us.  And  if  you  will  make  over  to  us  any 
guns  and  ammunition,  it  will  be  a  great  assistance.  For  the  rest, 
as  long  as  we  live  we  shall  hope  for  the  friendship  of  the  British 
Government.* 

Determined  to  make  a  last  eflfort  to  obtain  substantial 

•  MS.  Beeardi. 


638  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

assistance  from  the  British  authorities,  the  chiefe  now 
waited  upon  Pollock,  and  entreated  him  to  leave  some 
British  troops  behind  him  for  the  support  of  the  new 
monarch.  Pollock  resolutely  refused  the  request.  They 
then  asked  him  for  money.  This  he  also  refused.  Then 
came  before  them  the  painful  subject  of  the  "  mark" 
that  was  to  be  left  on  Caubul.  The  chiefs  pleaded  for 
the  city  and  for  the  Balla  Hissar.  Urgently  they  now 
set  forth  the  necessity  of  a  Suddozye  Prince  maintaining 
the  appearance  of  royalty  in  the  palace  of  bis  fatheni 
— urgently  they  now  set  forth  that  the  Arabs  and  Hin> 
dostanees,  who  in  the  hour  of  extremest  peril  had  been 
so  faithful  to  Futteh  Jung,  were  all  located  in  the  Balla 
Hissar ;  and  that  the  blow  would  £a.ll  with  the  greatest 
severity  on  those  who  were  least  deserving  of  punish* 
ment.*  So  Pollock  consented  to  spare  the  Balla  Hissar. 
But  it  was  still  necessary  that  some  mark  of  the  re- 
tributory  visit  of  the  British  should  be  left  upon  the  of- 
fending city;  so  Pollock  determined  to  destroy  the  great 
Bazaar.  There  the  mutilated  remains  of  the  murdered 
Envoy  had  been  exhibited  to  the  insolent  gaze  of  the 
Afghans ;  and  there  it  was  deemed  fit  that  the  retribu- 
tory  blow  should  fall.  So,  on  the  9  th  of  October, 
Abbott,  the  chief  engineer  with  Pollock's  force,  received 
instructions  from  the  General  to  destroy  the  Bazaar; 
but  so  anxious  was  Pollock  not  to  extend  the  work  of 
destruction,  that  he  strictly  enjoined  the  engineer  to 
abstain  from  applying  fire  to  the  buildii^,  and  even 
from  the  employment  of  gunpowder,  that  other  parts 
of  the  city  might  not  be  damaged  by  his  operations. 
At  the  same  time,  a  strong  detachment  of  British  troops, 
under  Colonel  Kichmond — one  of  the  best  and  ablest 
officers  of  the  force — was  sent  with  the  engineers,  to  pro- 
tect the  town  from  injury  and  the  inhabitants  from 
plunder  and  outrage. 

*  Major  Rawlmmm's  MS,  Journal 


EXCESSES  IN  THE  CITY. 


639 


But  it  was  no  easy  task  to  destroy  that  great  Bazaar 
simply  by  the  work  of  men's  hands.  Abbott  did  his  best 
to  obey  the  instructions  he  had  received  from  the  Gene- 
ral ;  but  he  was  baffled  by  the  massiveness  of  the  build- 
ings on  which  he  had  been  sent  to  operate.  It  was  neces- 
sary to  employ  a  more  powerful  agent.  On  his  own  re- 
sponsibility, therefore,  he  betook  himself  to  the  use  of  gun- 
powder. But  the  explosions  damaged  no  other  buildings 
than  those  which  had  authoritatively  been  marked  for 
destruction.  The  operations  against  the  great  Bazaar 
lasted  throughout  the  9th  and  10th  of  October.  Every 
effort  was  made  to  save  the  city  from  further  destruction ; 
but  all  Richmond's  protective  measures  were  insufficient 
to  control  the  impetuosity  of  the  soldiers  and  camp-fol- 
lowers who  poured  themselves  into  the  town. 

That  many  excesses  were  then  committed  is  not  to  be 
denied.  The  principal  gates  of  the  city  were  guarded; 
but  there  were  many  other  points  of  ingress,  and  our 
people  streamed  into  the  streets  of  Caubul,  applied  the 
firebrand  to  the  houses,  and  pillaged  the  shops.  Guilty 
and  innocent  alike  fell  under  the  heavy  hand  of  the 
lawless  retribution  which  was  now  to  descend  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  CaubuL  Many  unoffending  Hindoos,  who, 
lulled  into  a  sense  of  delusive  security  by  the  outward 
re-establishment  of  a  government,  had  returned  to  the 
city  and  re-opened  their  shops,  were  now  disastrously 
ruined.*      In  the  mad  excitement  of  the  hour,  friend 


*  *'  On  the  9th  oar  engineers  set 
to  work  to  blow  up  and  destroy  the 
Char  Chutta.  The  cry  went  forth 
that  Caubul  was  given  up  to  plunder. 
Both  camps  rushed  into  the  city,  and 
the  consequence  has  been  the  almost 
total  destruction  of  all  parts  of  the 
town,    except    the    Gholam    Khana 

quarter  and  the  Baila  Hissar 

Numbers  of  people  (about  4000  or 
5000)  had  returned  to  Caubul,  rely- 


ing on  our  promises  of  protection- 
rendered  confident  by  the  comparative 
immunity  they  had  enjoyed  during 
the  early  part  of  our  sojourn  here, 
and  by  the  appearance,  ostentatiously 
put  forth,  of  an  Afghan  Government. 
They  had  many  of  them  re-opened 
their  shops.  These  people  have  been 
now  reduced  to  utter  ruin.  Their 
goods  have  been  plundered,  and  their 
houses  burnt  over  tl>eir  heads.    Tlie 


640  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

and  foe  were  stricken  down  by  the  same  unsparing 
hand.  Even  the  Chundarwal — where  dwelt  the  friendly 
Kuzzilbashes — narrowly  escaped  destruction.  Such  ex- 
cesses as  were  committed  during  the  three  last  days  of 
our  occupation  of  Caubul  must  ever  be  deplored,  as  all 
human  weakness  and  wickedness  are  to  be  deplored.  But 
when  we  consider  the  amount  of  temptation  and  provo- 
cation— when  we  remember  that  the  comrades  of  our 
soldiers  and  the  brethren  of  our  camp-followers  had 
been  foully  butchered  by  thousands  in  the  passes  of  Af- 
ghanistan— when  everywhere  tokens  of  our  humiliation, 
and  of  the  treachery  and  cruelty  of  the  enemy,  rose  up 
before  our  people,  stinging  them  past  all  endurance,  and 
exasperating  them  beyond  all  control,  we  wonder  less, 
that  when  the  guilty  city  lay  at  their  feet,  they  should 
not  wholly  have  reined  in  their  passions,  than  that,  in 
such  an  hour,  they  should  have  given  them  so  little 
head. 

It  was  now  time  that  the  British  army  should  depart. 
Nothing  remained  to  be  done.  Any  longer  continuance 
at  Caubul  would  only  have  aggravated  the  sufferings  of 
the  people  and  increased  our  own  diflSiculties.  So,  on 
the  11th  of  October,  orders  were  issued  for  the  com- 
mencement of  the  march  on  the  following  day.  The  im- 
happy  Prince,  Futteh  Jung,  had  claimed  and  sought 
j)ermission  to  accompany  Pollock's  camp  to  India,  and 
to  seek  an  asylum  in  the  Company's  dominions.  The 
old  blind  King,  Zemaun  Shah,  after  all  the  vicissitudes 
of  his  eventful  life,  was  now  about  again  to  become  an 

Hindoos  in  particular,  whose  numbers  our  parties  of  plunderers  would  not 

amount  to  some  500  families,  have  have  forced  an  entrance  had  not  the 

lost  everything  they  possess,  and  they  Gholam  Khana  stood  to  their  arms, 

will  have  to  beg  their  way  to  India  in  and  showed  and  expressed  a  deterroi- 

rear  of  our  columns.     The  Chundarw  nation  to  defend  their  property  to  the 

wal  has  had  a  narrow  escape.    Safe-  last.** — [Major  EawUnaotCt  MS.  JoV'' 

guards    have    been    placed    at    the  na/.] 
different  gates ;   but  I  doubt  not  if 


DEPARTURE  OF  THE  ARMY.  641 

exile,  and  to  end  his  days  in  the  same  hospitable 
country.  For  the  family  of  Shah  Soojah  protection 
also  had  been  sought,  and  not  refused;  and  now  all 
these  fragments  of  the  great  wreck  of  royalty — these 
miserable  records  of  a  most  disastrous  enterprise — were 
committed  to  the  charge  of  one  who  had  largely  partici- 
pated in  its  sufferings,  but  had  happily  escaped  the  ruin 
which  had  overwhelmed  his  comrades  and  his  chief.* 
On  the  evening  of  the  11th  of  October  they  came  out  of 
the  town,  and  found  safety  in  Pollock's  hospitable  camp.f 
The  British  colours,  which  had  floated  over  the  Balla 
Hissar,  were  now  lowered ;  the  regiment  which  had  been 
posted  there  was  withdrawn ;  and  every  preparation  was 
made  for  the  departure  of  the  British  army. 

On  the  following  morning  the  two  divisions  com- 
menced their  march.  Fearful  that  the  Candahar  divi- 
sion, if  left  in  occupation  of  its  old  ground,  whilst  the 
head-quarters  of  the  army  were  proceeding  in  advance, 
would  commit  many  unauthorised  excesses,  Pollock 
had  determined  that  the  whole  force  should  move  on 
the  same  day.  There  was  some  inconvenience  in  this, 
for  Nott's  division  came  up  before  Pollock's  had  crossed 
the  Loghur  river ;  but  to  the  cause  of  humanity  it  was, 
doubtless,  great  gain.  The  unfortunate  Hindoos,  who 
had  been  rendered  destitute  by  the  destruction  of  Ghuz- 
nee  and  the  spoliation  of  Caubul  had  crowded  into  the 
British  camps,  hoping  to  obtain,  in  their  utter  misery, 
safe  conduct  to  the  provinces  of  India.J    Pollock  took 

*  Captain    G.  St.    P.   Lawrence,  of  the  Suddozye  seraglio  falling  to 

Sir  W.  Maciiaghten's  Military  Secre-  the  lot  of  either  Mahomed  Akbar  or 

tary,  who  had  been  present  at  his  the  Ghilzyes.     Some  attempte  were 

murder,  and  had  subsequently  shared  in  consequence  made  at  incendiarism, 

the  perils  of  the  captivity.  but  the  flames  did  not  spread." — 

t  "  Futteh   Jung  had  urged  his  iMajor  Rawlin»on*s  MS.  Journal'] 
people  to  set  fire  to  the  palace  as  he        t  They  seem    to  have  been  ad- 
came  out,  observing  that  Shahpoor^s  mitted  by  Pollock,  but  to  have  been 
rule  would  be  a  brief  one,  and  that  expelled  by  Nott.     "  General  Pol- 
his  own  feelings  revolted  at  the  idea  locVs  camp,**  wrote  Rawlinson  in  his 

VOL.  n.  2  T 


642  THE  BE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

with  him  what  trophies  he  could,  but  he  had  not  car- 
riage for  all  the  guns,*  and  even  on  the  first  day's  march 
he  was  compelled  to  begin  their  destruction  ;  whilst 
Nott,  rejoicing  in  a  letter  from  the  Governor-Greneral, 
who  was  in  ecstasies  about  the  gates  of  Somnauth,  and 
in  the  notification  of  his  appointment  to  the  Residency  of 
Lucknow,  went  off  with  those  venerable  relics,  and 
turned  his  face  towards  the  country  irom  which  they 
had  been  traditionally  ravished. 

And  on  that  day,  as  Pollock  was  leaving  Caubul,  and 
Nott  was  striking  his  camp,  the  guns  of  the  Balla  Hissar 
roared  forth  a  royal  salute  in  honour  of  the  accession  of 
Prince  Shahpoor — the  Fatiha  was  read  in  his  name,  and 
the  chiefs  tendered  their  allegiance.  It  was,  perhaps, 
a  mere  mockery;  but  it  had  saved  the  Balla  Hissar.f 
So  the  new  King  was  paraded  about  the  streets  of  Cau- 
bul— only  to  be  dethroned  again  before  the  British 
army  had  reached  the  provinces  of  India ;  and  that  army 

journal*  *'i8  crowded  with  hangers-  lated  natives  of  India,  crippled   by 

on,  imperfectly  provided  with   car-  wounds  or  by  the  frost,  who  had  es- 

riage  or  supplies,  and  he  necessarily  caped  with  their  lives  from  the  great 

experiences  much  inconvenience  in  wreck  of  Elphinstone's  army.     Pol* 

consequence.    General  Nott  has  posi-  lock  now  provided  them   with   car- 

tively  refused  to  permit  his  force  to  riage,  appointed  two  officers  to  the 

be  encumbered  in  the  same  way,  and  charge  of  them,  and  conveyed  them 

yesterday  evening  a  general  clear-  to  Hindostan. 

ance  of  our  camp  took  place,  prepa-        f  Major  Rawlinson  saya :   *^  It  is 

ratory  to  the  march.      About  500  whispered  that    the    recognition   of 

men  were  expelled  from  the  Bazaar  Shahpoor  on  the  part  of  the  Gkolam- 

of  the  16th  Kegiment  alone,  where  Khana  has  been  a  mere  ruse  to  save 

they  had  taken  refuge.      Most   of  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  that  the  chiefs 

these    people     were    the    destitute  hope  to  make  use  of  this  successful 

Hindoos  of   Caubul  and  Ghuznee.  manoeuvre  to    propitiate   Mahomed 

They  had  hoped  to  have  found  means  Akbar.      The  Kuzzilbash,  however, 

of  returning  to  Hindostan  with  our  if  they  do  meditate  anything  of  this 

column;  but  have  been  now  obliged  sort,  will  assuredly  overreadi  them- 

to  go  back  to  Caubul  and  bide  their  selves,  for  if  any  bond  Jide  Afghan 

fate  among  the  Afghans.** — \^Major  Government  succeeds  in  establishing 

RawUn»<m*8  MS,  Journal.'}  itself  at  Caubul,  the  Gholam-Khana, 

*  Pollock  took  forty-four  guns  and  after  what  has  happened,  wlU  cer- 

a  large  quantity  of  ordnance  stores  ;  tainly    be    extirpated,      root    and 

but  not  the  least  of  his  trophies  were  branch.*' —  {Major  RawUmon's  MS. 

a  large  number  of  miserable,  niiiti-  Journal.'] 


THE  GHUZNBE  PRISONERS.  643 

turned  its  back  upon  Afghanistan,  not  as  of  old,  in  the 
agony  of  humiliation  and  defeat,  but  in  the  flush  of  vic- 
tory and  triumph.* 

*  I  have  stated,  at  page  618,  the  terrace  of  the  citadel  for  one  hour. 
Caubul  prisoners,  before  their  removal  .  .  .  Just  at  this  period  (June  15) 
to  Bameean,  had  been  joined  by  their  one  of  our  number,  Lieutenant  Davis, 
fellow-captives  from  Bameean.   Some  27th  N.  I.,  had  sickened  with  typhus 
idea  of  the  sufferings  of  the  latter  may  fever.   We  had  no  medicines,  no  com- 
be derived   from  the  following  pas-  forts  for  him,  and  he  lay  on  the  ground 
sages  of  Lieutenant  Crawford's  Nar-  delirious,  raving  about  home  and  his 
rative:  "Every  little  thing  we  had  family,  and  every  hour  proving  worse, 
managed  to  secure,  such  as  watches,  till,  on  the  19th,  death  put  an  end  to 
penknives,    money,  &c.,  was    taken  his  sufferings.     We  read  the  burial 
from  us,  and  we  were  strictly  confined  service,  and  then  made  his  body  over 
to  a  small  room,  eighteen  feet  by  thir-  to  the  guard  to  bury ;  but  I  am  afraid 
teen.   In  it  there  were  ten  of  us.  .  .  .  they  merely  flung  the  poor  fellow  into 
When  we  lay  down  at  night  we  exactly  a  ditch  outside  the  gate.     On  the  fol- 
occupied  the  whole  floor;  and  when  lowing  day  we  were  removed  to  an- 
we  wanted  to  take  a  little  exercise  we  other  building,  where  we  had  three  or 
were  obliged  to  walk  up  and  down  four  rooms  to  ourselves,  and  a  court- 
(six  paces)  by  turns.     Few  of  us  had  yard  to  walkabout  in.  This  was  a  de- 
a  change  oflinen,  and  the  consequence  lightful  chanee.     From  this  date  the 
was  we  were  soon  swarming  with  ver-  conduct  of  Shumshoodeen  towards  us 
min,  the  catching  of  which  afforded  us  improved  greatly.  .  .  .  It  was  on  the 
an  hour's  employment  every  morning.  19th   of  August,  we  had,  as  usual, 
I  wore  ray  solitary  shirt  for  five  weeks,  wrapped  ourselves  up  in  our  cloaks, 
till  it  became  literally  black  and  rot^  and  taken  lodgings  on  the  cold  ground 
ten.  .  .  .  On  the  7th  of  April  we  for  the  night,  when  the  chief  suddenly 
heard  of  Shah  Soojah's  death, and  from  entered  the  yard,  and  told  us  we  were 
that  date  the  severities  of  our  confine-  to  march  immediately  for   Caubul; 
ment  were  redoubled.  They  shut  and  and  sure  enough  in  half  an  hour  we 
darkened  the  solitary  window  from  found  ourselves  moving  towards  the 
which  we  had  hitherto  derived  light  capital.  .  .  We  went  direct  to  Maho- 
and  air,  and  they  also  kept  the  door  of  med  Akbar's  quarters  in   the  Balla 
our  room  constantly  closed,  so  that  Hissar,  and  from  him  we  met  with  the 
the  air  we  breathed  became  perfectly  kindest  reception.     He  bade   us  be 
pestiferous.   On  the  21st  of  the  month  of  good  cheer,  as  our  future  comfort 
they  tortured  Colonel  Palmer  with  a  would  be  his  care,  and  we  should  find 
tent-peg  and  rope  in  such  a  manner  ourselves  treated  like  officers  and  gen- 
that  It  is  wonderful  he  ever  recovered  tiemen.  .  .  .  We  found  our  country- 
the  use  of  his  foot.     I  cannot  in  a  men  living  in  what  appeared  to  us  a 
letter  explain  the  process  of  the  tor-  small  paradise.  They  had  comfortable 
ture,  but  we  all  witnessed  it,  and  it  quarters,  servants, money,  and  no  little 
was  something  on  the  principle  of  the  baggage,  and  a  beautiful  garden  to 
Scotch  boot  described  in  '  Old  Mor-  walk  in.^'     It  ought  to  have   been 
tality.'  ...  In  the  end  of  April  our  mentioned,  when  last  I  spoke  of  the 
guards  suddenly  became  particularly  Caubul  prisoners,  that  one  of  their 
civil  to  us  for  a  few  days,  and  we  number,  John  Conolly,  the  last  of  the 
found  that  they  had  a  report  of  the  three  brothers,  died  at  Caubul  on  the 
advance  of  our  troops.  .  .  .  On  the  7th  of  August,  deeply  deplored  by  all 
12th  of  May  we  were  permitted  to  who  served  with  him  in  Afghanistan, 
quit  our  prison-room,  and  walk  on  the 

2t2 


644  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[October— December :  1842.] 

Effect  of  the  Victories— Lord  Ellenborough  at  Simlab — The  Manifesto  of 
1842 — The  Proclamation  of  the  Gates— The  Restoration  of  Dost  Maho- 
med— The  Gathering  at  Ferozepore — ^Reception  of  the  Troops — The 
Courts-Martial. 

Never  was  intelligence  received  in  India  with  stronger 
and  more  universal  feelings  of  delight  than  the  inteUi- 
gence  of  the  victories  of  Pollock  and  Nott;  and  the 
happy  recovery  of  the  prisoners.  There  was  one  gene- 
ral shout  of  triumphant  congratulation,  caught  up  from 
station  to  station  along  the  whole  line  of  country  from 
Sirhind  to  Tinnevelly.  Suspense  and  anxiety  now  died 
away  in  the  European  breast ;  and,  in  the  words  of  one 
of  the  ablest  Indian  statesmen,  "  it  was  a  comfort  again 
to  be  able  to  look  a  native  in  the  face."* 


*  The  late  Colonel  Sutherland,  end,  perhaps,  shown  that  they  did, 

**  It  is,  indeed,"  he  wrote,  '*  a  comfort  had  not  the  noble  resolution  been 

to  be  able  to  look  a  native  in  the  face  taken  of  moving  forward  to  retrieve 

again  with  confidence ;  for  although  our  tarnished  reputation.     Now  all 

there  was  in  reality  no  change  that  is  right.  How  easily  achieved !    And 

one  could  see  in  their  bearing  to-  wc  stand  on  surer  ground  now  in  all 

wards  us  in  this  region,  yet  one  could  quarters  than  we  ever  did  at  any 

Hot  help  feeling  that  we  had  fallen  iormer  period  of  our  Indian  history, 

from  our  high  position;    and  they  — [3/iS.  Correspondenct.'] 
would  have  felt  this  too,  and  in  the 


EFFECT  OF  THE  VICTORIES.  645 

To  Lord  EUenborough  the  brilliant  achievements  of 
the  two  Generals  were  a  source  of  unbounded  gratifica- 
tion. Everything  that  he  could  have  desired  had  been 
accomplished.  Pollock  and  Nott,  under  his  orders,  had 
"retired"  so  adroitly  from  A%hanistan,  that  everybody 
believed  they  had  advanced  upon  the  capital  of  the 
country.  The  movement  had  produced,  or  was  pro- 
ducing, a  grand  moral  eflFect  all  over  Hindostan.  Again 
was  there  likely  to  be  a  season  of  universal  repose.  The 
excitement  which  had  stirred  the  hearts  of  the  native 
community  was  now  passing  away.  All  those  vague 
hopes  and  longings  which  had  sprung  up,  at  the  contem- 
plation of  our  disasters,  in  Native  States  of  doubtful 
fiiendliness  and  fidelity,  were  now  stifled  by  the  know- 
ledge of  our  success.  The  Governor-General  had 
threatened  to  save  India  in  spite  of  every  man  in 
it  who  ought  to  give  him  support  ;*  but  it  now  seemed 
as  though,  in  reality.  Pollock  and  Nott  had  achieved 
the  work  of  salvation,  in  spite  of  the  Governor-General 
himself. 

But  Lord  EUenborough  was  not  less  delighted  than  if 
the  work  had  been  emphatically  his  own.  He  was  at 
Simlah  when  the  glad  tidings  of  the  re-occupation  of 
Caubul  reached  him.  He  was  at  Simlah,  and  in  the 
very  house  which  had  been  the  cradle  of  the  great 
manifesto  of  1838,  out  of  which  had  come  all  our 
disasters.  He  was  at  Simlah;  and  the  1st  of  October 
was  temptingly  at  hand.  On  the  1st  of  October,  four 
years  before,  that  manifesto  had  been  issued.  From 
Simlah,  therefore,  now,  on  the  1st  of  October,  another 
manifesto  was  to  be  made  to  issue.  The  utter  failure  of 
Lord  Auckland's  policy  in  A%hanistan  was  to  be  pro- 
claimed from  the  very  room  in  which  it  had  taken  shape 

*  See  letter,  ante^  pa^  552,  note^ 


646        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEBOZBPORE. 

and  consistency.*  From  this  very  room  was  to  go  forth 
to  all  the  chiefs  and  people  of  India  a  proclamation,  lay- 
ing bare  to  the  very  core  the  gigantic  errors  which  had 
been  baptised  in  the  blood  of  thousands,  and  shrouded 
in  contumely  and  disgrace. 

And  thus  ran  the  proclamation : 

Secret  Dqtartment,  SMah^  the  1st  of  October^  1842. 

The  Government  of  India  directed  its  army  to  pass  the  Indus 
in  order  to  expel  from  Afghanistan  a  chief  believed  to  be  hostile 
to  British  interests,  and  to  repkce  upon  his  throne  a  sovereign 
represented  to  be  friendly  to  those  interests,  and  popular  with 
his  former  subjects. 

The  chief  believed  to  be  hostile  became  a  prisoner,  and  the 
sovereign  represented  to  be  popular  was  replaced  upon  his  throne ; 
but,  after  events,  which  brought  into  question  his  fidelity  to  the 
government  by  which  he  was  restored,  he  lost  by  the  hands  of 
an  assassin  the  throne  he  had  only  held  amidst  insurrections^ 
and  his  death  was  preceded  and  followed  by  still  eidsting 
anarchy. 

Disasters  unparalleled  in  their  extent,  unless  by  the  errors  in 
which  they  originated,  and  by  the  treachery  by  which  they  were 
completed,  have,  in  one  short  campaign,  been  avenged  upon 
every  scene  of  past  misfortune ;  and  repeated  victories  in  the  field, 
and  the  capture  of  the  cities  and  citadels  of  Ghuznee  and  Caubul, 
have  again  attached  the  opinion  of  invincibility  to  the  British 
arms. 

The  British  arms  in  possession  of  Afghanistan  will  now  be 
withdrawn  to  the  Sutlej. 

The  Governor-General  will  leave  it  to  the  Afghans  themselves 

•  "  October  1 . — The  Governor-Gc-  borough  signed   his  notification   of 

neral  brought   me   some  papers  to  altered  intentions,  in  a  clear,  ihort, 

consult  me  upon.     Among  others,  a  decided  paper,  which  I  much   ap- 

proclamation  announcing    that    we  prove.     He  could  not  avoid  avowing 

retire  from  Afghanistan,  leaving  to  some  of  his   predecessor's   military 

the  Afghans  the  choice  of  their  sove-  errors ;  but  he  has  not  touched  at 

reign.    It  was  on  this  day,  four  years  any  length  on  the  political,  further 

ago,  that  Lord  Aucklana  issued  the  than  that  we  lost  our  name  and  an 

proclamation  announcing  the  grounds  army  by  neglect  on  the  part  of  our 

of  his  interference;  and  on  the  same  agents.'' — [Sir  Jasper  NicolU  MS, 

day,  in  the  same  roonu,  Lord  Ellen-  Journal.'] 


THE  MANIFESTO  OF  1842.  647 

to  create  a  government  amidst  the  anarohy  whioh  is  the  oonee- 
quence  of  their  crimes. 

To  force  a  sovereign  upon  a  reluctant  people,  would  be  as  in- 
consistent with  the  policy  as  it  is  with  the  principles  of  the  British 
Government,  tending  to  place  the  arms  and  resources  of  that 
people  at  the  disposal  of  the  first  invader,  and  to  impose  the  bur- 
den of  supporting  a  sovereign,  without  the  prospect  of  benefit 
from  his  alliance. 

The  Govemor^General  will  willingly  recognise  any  government 
approved  by  the  Afghans  themselves,  which  shall  appear  desirous 
and  capable  of  maintaining  friendly  relations  with  neighbouring 
states. 

Content  with  the  limits  nature  appears  to  have  assigned  to  its 
empire,  the  Government  of  India  will  devote  all  its  efforts  to  the 
establishment  and  maintenance  of  general  peace,  to  the  protec- 
tion of  the  sovereigns  and  chiefs  its  allies,  and  to  the  prosperity 
and  happiness  of  its  own  faithful  subjects. 

The  rivers  of  the  Punjaub  and  Indus,  and  the  mountainous 
passes  and  the  barbarous  tribes  of  Afghanistan,  will  be  placed 
between  the  British  army  and  an  enemy  approaching  from  the 
West,  if  indeed  such  enemy  there  can  be,  and  no  longer  between 
the  army  and  its  supplies. 

The  enormous  expenditure  required  for  the  support  of  a  large 
force,  in  a  false  military  position,  at  a  distance  from  its  own  fron- 
tier and  its  resources,  will  no  longer  arrest  every  measure  for  the 
improvement  of  the  country  and  of  the  people. 

The  combined  army  of  England  and  of  India,  superior  in 
equipment,  in  discipline,  in  valour,  and  in  the  officers  by  whom 
it  is  commanded,  to  any  force  which  can  be  opposed  to  it  in  Asia, 
will  stand  in  unassailable  strength  upon  its  own  soil,  and  for  ever^ 
tmder  the  blessing  of  Providence,  preserve  the  glorious  empire  it 
has  won,  in  security  and  in  honour. 

The  Governor-General  cannot  fear  the  misconstruction  of  his 
motives  in  thus  frankly  armouncing  to  surrounding  states  the 
pacific  and  conservative  policy  of  his  government. 

AfghanistlEm  and  China  have  seen  at  once  the  forces  at  his  dis- 
posal, and  the  effect  with  which  they  can  be  applied. 

Sincerely  attached  to  peace  for  the  sake  of  the  benefits  it  con- 
fers upon  the  people,  the  Governor-General  is  resolved  that  peace 
shall  be  observed,  and  will  put  forth  the  whole  power  of  the 


648        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEBOZEPORE, 

British  Government  to  coerce  the  state  by  which  it  shall  be  in- 
fringed. 

By  order  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Goveror- General  of  India. 

T.  H.  Maddock, 

Secretary  to  the  Gt>vemment  of  India,  with  the 
Governor-General. 

It  would  have  been  well  if  Lord  Ellenborough  had 
resisted  the  puerile  temptation  to  date  this  proclamation 
on  the  1st  of  October.  That  it  was  written  then  is  not 
to  be  doubted.  But,  though  written,  it  was  not  issued.* 
The  Governor-General  was  not  prepared  to  issue  it. 
There  was  no  immediate  necessity,  indeed,  for  the  pre- 
paration of  such  a  notification  as  this.  It  might  have 
been  delayed  for  a  few  weeks  without  injury  to  the 
state;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  it  could  not  have  been 
delayed  for  a  few  days  without  great  advantage  to 
Lord  Ellenborough.  On  the  1st  of  October,  the  Go- 
vemor-General  knew  that  the  British  ensign  was  float- 
ing over  the  Balla  Hissar  of  Caubul;  but  he  did  not 
know  that  the  British  prisoners  had  been  released  from 

♦  Lord   Ellenborough's  explana-  here  on   the    5th    removed    every 

tions  on  this  subject  are  to  be  found  ground  for  withholding  the  publica- 

in  the  following  letter  to  General  tion  of  the  proclamation^   had  the 

Pollock,  which  calls  for  no  comment :  translation  been  prepared ;   but    in 

"  Simlah  Oct.  12  1842.  consequence  of  the  absence  of  Mr. 

"Genebai^— I  enclose  for  your  in-  Clerk  on  duty  in  the  plains,  no  such 

formation  a  copy  of  a  proclamation,  translation  had  been  made  as  I  could 

signed  by  me  here  on  the  1st  of  this  ^"1^7  rely  upon, 

month,  but  withheld  from  immediate  .  "  In  the  mean  time,  by  a  combina- 

publication,   with  the  view   to   the  t»op  o(  accidents,  and  some  irregu- 

having  previously  made  and  circu-  larity  in  the  transaction  of  business 

lated  to    the    IS  ative  Courts,    and  in  the  Secretary's  office,  the  printed 

amongst  the    natives    generally,    a  copies    of  the    proclamation   were, 

correct  translation  which  might  be  without  my  knowledge,  or  that  of 

the  official  document  in  the  native  the  Secretary  himself,  transmitted  to 

language,  and  prevent  any  misrepre-  the   presidencies  and    the  _  political 

sentation,  or  misapprehension  or  the  officers  generally.     There  is  no  ob- 

intentions  of  the  government.   I  fur-  ject  in  your  publishing  the  procla- 

ther  wished  not  to  make  known  here  mation  m   your  camp.     Mr.  Clerk 

the  intention    of  withdrawing    the  returned  last  night,  and  the  transla- 

army,  until  I  knew  that  you  had  tion  will  hardly  be  ready  for  trans- 

actually  the  prisoners  in  your  hands,  mission  before  to-morrow, 

and  had  made  arrangements  for  leav-  "  I  have,  &c.       Ellenborough," 

ing  Caubult    Your  letter  received  —[^JS,  Correspondence,^ 


THE  PROCLAMATION  OF  THE  GATES.        649 

captivity.  Had  he  suppressed  the  inclination  to  write 
"  October  1"  at  the  head  of  his  proclamation,  he  might 
have  announced  in  it  the  attainment  of  all  those  objects 
which  his  countrymen  had  at  heart,  and  fully  declared 
that  the  war  was  at  an  end.  But  there  were  not  want- 
ing those  who  now  commented  bitterly  on  the  fact 
that  this  proclamation  was  drawn  up  by  the  Governor- 
General  of  India  whilst  yet  in  ignorance  of  the  fate 
of  the  prisoners.  The  delay  of  a  few  days  would 
have  placed  him  in  possession  of  the  intelligence,  for 
which  all  India  was  looking  with  the  deepest  interest 
and  anxiety;  but  the  temptation  of  the  "  1st  of  October" 
was  not  to  be  resisted ;  and  Lord  EUenborough  sacrificed 
his  character  for  humanity  for  the  sake  of  a  little  dra- 
matic effect. 

Having  drawn  up  this  proclamation,  and  handed  it 
over  to  the  translators  to  be  anayed  in  Oriental  costume. 
Lord  EUenborough  began  to  take  counsel  with  Sir 
Jasper  NicoUs  on  the  subject  of  the  honorary  distinctions 
to  be  conferred  on  the  officers  and  men  who  had  gained 
these  great  victories  in  Afghanistan;  and  to  draft  an- 
other proclamation  to  be  issued  to  the  Chiefe  and  Princes 
of  India.  This  was  the  famous  proclamation  of  the 
Gates.  On  the  5  th  of  October  he  sent  a  rough  draft  of 
it  to  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  inviting  the  comments  of-  the 
Chief.  Freely  asked,  they  were  freely  given.  What 
they  were  is  not  on  record.  The  Governor-General 
took  the  comments  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  '•  in  good 
part,'*  and  was  not  wholly  impervious  to  the  criticism  of 
the  veteran  commander.*  Subjected  to  a  long  and 
laborious  incubation,  this  address  to  "all  the  Princes, 
chiefs,  and  people  of  India,"  was  translated  into  the 

*  "  October  5. — His  Lordship  sent  vited  remarks  on  it,  which  I  freely 

me  the  draft  of  his  letter  to  the  gave;   and  he  took  them  in  good 

Hindoo  chiefs,  relating  to  the  gates  part,  adoptin?  some  of  them.*' — [6'ir 

of  the  Somnauth  temple ;    and  in-  Jasper  Nicola  MS,  JoumaL'} 


650  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZBPORB. 

Hindee  language,  circulated  among  those  to  whom  it 
especially  appealed,  and  finally  published  in  its  Eng- 
lish dress  on  the  16th  of  November, ♦  It  was  by  no 
means,  therefore,  an  ebullition  of  impulse  and  enthu<> 
siasm  on  the  part  of  the  Governor-General,  but  the 
result  of  many  weeks  of  thought  and  study,  and,  per* 
haps,  much  consultation  with  others.  The  Duke  of 
Wellington  called  it  a  *^  Song  of  triumph."  Thus  rose 
the  psBan,  in  its  Enghah  dress: 

From  the  Governor-General  to  all  the  Princes  and  Chiefs^  and 

People  of  India. 

My  Brothers  and  my  Friends, 

Our  victorious  army  bears  the  gates  of  the  temple  of  Som- 
nauth  in  triumph  from  Afghanistan,  and  the  despoiled  tomb  of 
Sultan  Mahomed  looks  upon  the  ruins  of  Ghuznee. 

The  insult  of  eight  hundred  years  is  at  last  avenged.  The 
gates  of  the  temple  of  Somnauth,  so  long  the  memorial  of  your 
humiliation,  are  become  the  proudest  record  of  your  national 
glory;  the  proof  of  your  superiority  in  arms  over  the  nations  be- 
yond the  Indus. 

To  you,  Princes  and  Chiefs  of  Sirhind,  of  Rajwarra,  of  Malwa, 
and  of  Guzerat,  I  shall  commit  this  glorious  trophy  of  eucceasful 
war. 

You  will  yourselves,  with  all  honour,  transmit  the  gates  of 
sandal-wood  through  your  respective  territories  to  the  restored 
temple  of  Somnauth. 

The  chiefs  of  Sirhind  shall  be  informed  at  what  time  our 
victorious  army  will  first  deliver  the  gates  of  the  temple  into  their 
guardianship,  at  the  foot  of  the  bridge  of  the  Sutlej. 

My  Brothers  and  my  Friends, 

I  have  ever  relied  with  confidence  upon  your  attachment 
to  the  British  Government.  You  see  how  worthy  it  proves 
itself  of  your  love,  when,  regarding  your  honour  as  its  own,  it 

*  The  Goyemor-General,  when  he  it,  lest  bj  some  untoward  acoident 

first  drafted  the  proclamation,  only  the  gates   might  be   lost    on    their 

knew  that  Nott  had  reached  Caubiu  journey  throogh  the  paases  of  Af- 

with  the  gates.  He  maj  have  thought  ghanistan. 
it  expedient  to  withhold  the  issue  of 


THE  PBOCLAMATION  OF  THE  GATES.       661 

exerts  the  power  of  its  arms  to  restore  to  you  the  gates  of  the 
temple  of  Somnauth,  so  long  the  memoiial  of  your  subjection  to 
the  Afghans. 

For  myself,  identified  with  you  in  interest  and  in  feeling,  I  re« 
gard  with  all  your  own  enthusiasm  the  high  achievements  of  that 
heroic  army;  reflecting  alike  immortal  honour  upon  my  nativQ 
and  upon  my  adopted  country. 

To  preserve  and  to  improve  the  happy  union  of  our  two 
countries,  necessary  as  it  is  to  the  welfare  of  both,  is  the  constant 
object  of  my  thoughts.  Upon  that  union  depends  the  security  of 
every  ally,  as  well  as  of  every  subject  of  the  British  Government, 
from  the  miseries  whereby,  in  former  times,  India  was  afflicted: 
through  that  alone  has  our  army  now  waved  its  triumphant 
standards  over  the  ruins  of  Ghuznee,  and  planted  them  upon  the 
Balla  Hissar  of  Caubul. 

May  that  good  Providence,  which  has  hitherto  so  manifestly 
protected  me,  still  extend  to  me  its  favour,  that  I  may  so  use  the 
power  now  entrusted  to  my  hands,  as  to  advance  your  prosperity 
and  secure  your  happiness,  by  placing  the  union  of  our  two 
countries  upon  foundations  which  may  render  it  eternal. 

Ellenbobough. 

No  document  that  ever  emanated  from  the  bureau  of 
a  statesman  has  been  overwhelmed  with  so  much  ridi- 
cule as  this.  It  is  still  fresh  in  the  recollection  of  men 
who  dwelt  in  India  at  this  time,  how  the  authenticity 
of  the  proclamation  was  gravely  doubted — ^how  many, 
at  first,  declared  their  conviction  that  it  was  a  news- 
paper satire  upon  the  Napoleonic  style  of  address  which 
Lord  EUenborough  had  recently  adopted ;  and  how  at 
last,  when  it  came  to  be  known — thoroughly  known  and 
understood  that  it  was  a  genuine  emanation  from  the 
"  Political  Department,"  with  the  right  official  stamp 
upon  it,  such  a  flood  of  ridicule  and  censure  was  let 
loose  upon  it  as  had  never  before  descended  upon  an 
Indian  state-paper.  The  folly  of  the  thing  was  past  all 
denial.  It  was  a  folly,  too,  of  the  most  senseless  kind,  for 
it  was  calculated  to  please  none  and  to  offend  many.     It 


652        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

was  addressed  to  "  all  the  Princes  and  Chiefs,  and  People 
of  India."  The  "  Brothers  and  Friends"  thus  grandilo- 
quently apostrophised,  were  a  mixed  family  of  Maho- 
medans  and  Hindoos.  Upon  the  Mahomedans  it  was 
an  open  and  most  intelligible  outrage.  To  the  Hindoos, 
the  pompous  offer  of  the  polluted  gates  of  Somnauth  was 
little  better  than  a  covert  insult.  The  temple  to  which 
it  was  to  have  been  restored  was  in  ruins,  and  the  sacred 
ground  trodden  by  Mahomedans.  Looking  at  the  effu- 
sion from  the  Oriental  side,  it  was  altogether  a  failure  and 
an  abortion.*  Among  Europeans,  worldly  men  scouted 
the  proclamation  as  a  folly,  and  religious  men  denounced 
it  as  a  crime.  It  was  said  to  be  both  dangerous  and 
profane.  The  question  suggested  by  the  latter  epithet 
I  do  not  purpose  to  discuss;  but  of  the  dangers  of  such 
a  proclamation  it  may  be  said  that  they  existed  only  in 
the  imaginations  of  those  who  discerned  them.  It  was 
altogether  an  event  of  no  political  importance.  In  Af- 
ghanistan, the  rape  of  the  Gates  created  little  or  no 
sensation.  In  India,  the  proclamation  produced  no  ex- 
citement among  the  "  brothers  and  friends"  to  whom  it 
was  addressed.  The  effect  of  the  measure  was  personal 
to  Lord  EUenborough  himself.  It  damaged  his  reputa- 
tion, and  left  the  rest  of  the  world  as  it  was  before. 

But  there  was  another  proclamation  pubUshed  about 
this  time — launched  into  the  world,  indeed,  before  the 
proclamation  of  the  Gates,  but  of  a  somewhat  later 
conception.  The  Afghan  drama  was  now  well-nigh 
played  out.  The  Afghan  policy  of  Lord  Auckland  had 
been  publicly  declared  a  failure,  and  the  grounds  on 
which  it  had  been  originated  wholly  a  mistake.  Every- 
thing, indeed,  was  to  be  reversed.    The  Tripartite  treaty 

•  We  have  no  word  very  fitly  to    h^ldse.    It  was  a  Ae^e  of  the  (irsl 
represent  the  character  of  the  anair.    magnitude. 
Toe  French  would  have  called  it  a 


THE  RESTORATION  OF  DOST  MAHOBfED.  653 

was  at  an  end.  Shah  Soojah  was  dead.  The  people  of 
Afghanistan  had  felt  an  obvious  distaste  for  foreign  in- 
terference, and  had  evinced  it  in  a  very  unmistakeable 
manner.  The  Suddozye  Princes  had  demonstrated  the 
feebleness  of  the  tenure  by  which  they  could  hope  to 
maintain  possession  of  the  throne.  It  was  impossible 
wholly  to  revert  to  the  state  of  things  that  had  existed 
in  1838,  for  thousands  of  lives  and  millions  of  money 
had  been  buried  in  the  passes  of  Afghanistan — and  there 
was  no  earthly  resurrection  or  restoration  for  them.  But 
there  was  one  victim  of  the  war  in  Afghanistan  for  whom 
restoration  was  yet  possible.  The  first  victim  of  our 
national  injustice  was  yet  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the 
British.  The  Governor-General  had  publicly  announced, 
in  his  proclamation  of  the  1st  of  October,  that  Dost  Ma- 
homed was  only  "  believed  to  be  hostile  to  British  in- 
terests," and  that  Shah  Soojah  was  only  "  represented 
to  be  Mendly  to  those  interests,  and  popular  with  his  own 
people."  It  was  announced,  too,  in  this  proclamation, 
that  the  British  Government  had  determined  to  leave 
the  Afghans  to  form  a  government  for  themselves,  and 
to  recognise  that  government  when  formed.  After  such 
announcements  as  these,  the  retention  of  Dost  Mahomed 
in  captivity  would  have  been  confessedly  inconsistent 
and  unjust. 

Ever  since  intelligence  of  the  outbreak  at  Caubul  had 
reached  the  provinces  of  Hindostan,  Dost  Mahomed 
had  been  watched  with  greater  suspicion,  and  guarded 
with  greater  care.  It  was  believed  that  he  would  place 
himself  in  communication  with  the  leaders  of  the  revo- 
lutionary party,  and  would  make  an  effort  to  escape 
from  the  captivity  which  surrounded  his  lot.  It  does 
not  appear,  however,  that  he  manifested  any  feelings  of 
exultation  at  the  thouc^ht  of  the  calamities  which  had 
befallen  his  captors,  or,  in  any  way,  desired  to  increase 


k 


654  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPOBE. 

the  difficulties  which  surrounded  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  seemed  willing,  if  not  anxious,  to  impart  to  the 
British  Government,  through  Captain  Nicolson,  such 
local  information  as  he  thought  would  be  serviceable  to 
them  in  the  conjuncture  which  had  arisen;  and  even 
offered  suggestions  tending  to  facilitate  their  re-invasion 
of  his  country.  The  vigilance  with  which  he  was 
guarded,  and  the  consequent  inconveniences  to  which 
he  was  subjected,  seemed  to  cause  him  much  vexation 
and  annoyance.  He  always  protested  that  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  secret  history  of  the  Caubul  outbreak — 
that  it  was  his  beUef  the  Suddozyes  had  instigated  it,  as 
no  other  family  in  Afghanistan,  since  the  overthrow  of 
the  Barukzyes,  had  sufficient  influence  to  initiate  a  great 
national  movement.  Any  expression  or  intimation  of  a 
doubt  of  his  honesty  seemed  to  pain  him.  "  Recollect," 
he  said,  on  one  occasion  to  Captain  Nicolson,  "  that  I 
have,  from  the  first  day  I  came  in,  been  on  your  side, 
heart  and  soul.  I  swear  by  the  most  holy  God,  that 
since  my  submission  I  have  not  communicated  with 
Caubul  and  its  people,  except  through  you.  But  it  is 
possible  that  news  may  have  reached  my  sister  at  Loo- 
dianah  through  her  other  brothers.  I  am  your  guest 
or  your  prisoner,  whichever  you  please.  I  came  to 
you  in  the  hope  of  being  in  time  employed  by  you;  and 
I  should  say  what  is  not  true,  if  I  denied  still  entertain- 
ing that  hope ;  and  I  am  ready  to  lay  down  my  life  in  your 
service."*  It  may  be  doubted  whether  he  entertained  any 
hope,  or  any  desire  to  regain  the  dominion  he  had  lost. 
He  had  resigned  himself  submissively  to  his  fate.  If  it 
seemed  to  be  the  will  of  God  that  he  should  return  to 
Caubul,  he  was  wilUng  to  retrace  his  steps  to  the  Balla 
Hissar.     But  he  was  Httle  inclined  to  take  into  his  own 

*  Memorandum  by  Captain  Peter    Mahomed  Khan:  February  13,  1842. 
Nkol$an  of  a  Convermtion  with  Dost    MS.  Records, 


LOBD  ELLENBOROUGH  AT  FEROZEPORE.      655 

hands  the  shaping  of  his  future  destinies,  and  to  win  his 
way  back  to  empire  by  violence  or  fraud.* 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  Government  of  India,  ever 
since  the  disastrous  downfall  of  our  efforts  to  prop  up 
the  Suddozye  dynasty,  had  contemplated  the  possibility 
of  restoring  Dost  Mahomed  to  the  country  from  which 
we  had  expelled  him.  Lord  Auckland  had  hinted  at 
the  restoration  of  the  ex- Ameer  as  a  measure  to  which, 
under  certain  circumstances,  he  would  offer  no  opposi- 
tion. He  would  gladly,  indeed,  have  availed  himself  of 
the  opportunity  afforded,  by  a  proposed  interchange  of 
prisoners,  to  render  tardy  justice  to  the  man  whom  he 
had  so  palpably  wronged.  The  subsequent  progress  of 
events  had  tended  to  render  more  and  more  obvious  the 
propriety  of  this  resolution.  It  was  now  plainer  than 
ever  that  the  retention  of  Dost  Mahomed  as  a  prisoner 
of  state  could  no  longer  be  justified,  on  the  score  either 
of  political  rectitude  or  expediency.  So  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  did  as  it  became  him  to  do.  He  issued  a  pro- 
clamation, setting  forth  that  when  the  "  British  army  re- 
turning from  Afghanistan  shall  have  passed  the  Indus, 
all  the  Afghans  now  in  the  power  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment shall  be  permitted  to  return  to  their  country." 
This  was  equally  reasonable  and  just.  But  the  procla- 
mation was  not  without  characteristic  disfigurements,  for 
•the  Governor-General,  who  had  set  his  heart  upon  a 
grand  pageant  at  Ferozepore,  added  a  codicil,  to  the  effect 
that  the  released  Afghan  Princes  were  to  present  them- 
selves, before  returning  to  their  desolated  country,  at  the 

•  He  was  candid  enough  too,  at  above,  "  by  using  an  expression  ex- 
one  time,  to  acknowled^  that,  after  actly  the  same  as  one  Shah  Sodah 
the  expulsion  of  the  iBritish  firom  uses  in  his  letter  to  Captain  Mac- 
Caubul,  the  only  chance  of  establish-  gregor.  He  said :  "  The  people  can- 
ing a  settled  government  was  through  not  now  do  without  the  Kmg,  for 
the  agency  m  Shah  Soojah.  "  The  there  is  no  one  else  could  carrv  on 
Ameer  concluded,"  says  Captain  the  government.'' — [.MS.  Eecoras,'] 
Nicolson,  in  the  memorandum  cited 


656        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

Durbar  of  the  Governor-General  in  his  camp  at  Feroze- 
pore. 

The  popular  feeling  against  this  contemplated  outrage 
was  strong  and  universal.  There  was  not  a  generous 
mind  in  the  country  which  did  not  feel  deeply  the 
wrong  that  was  to  be  done  to  these  imfortunate  Princes. 
But  the  Govemor-General,  in  a  better  hour,  con- 
scious  of  error,  consented  to  forego  the  pitiful  delight  of 
gracing  his  triumph  with  the  presence  of  a  dethroned 
monarch,  whose  national  feelings  were  not  so  wholly  ex- 
tinguished by  exile  as  to  render  his  appearance  at  the 
Ferozepore  festivities  anything  but  a  painful  and  humi- 
liating trial.  The  order  issued  in  thoughtlessness  was 
revoked  in  good  feeling,  and  Dost  Mahomed  returned  to 
Afghanistan,  without  enduring  this  last  crowning  injury 
at  the  hands  of  the  British  Government.* 

Quitting  Simlah,  the  Governor-General  moved  down 
to  the  plains  of  Ferozepore.  There  an  army,  under 
the  personal  command  of  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs,  was  now 
assembled.  It  had  been  originally  projected  by  Lord 
Auckland,  at  a  time  when  it  was  believed  that  the 
presence  of  such  an  army  on  our  north-western  fron- 
tier would  have  a  great  moral  eiOfect  upon  the  neigh- 
bouring states.  It  has  been  said,  that  when  it  did 
assemble,  at  the  commencement  of  the  cold  season  of 
1842-1843,  it  was  intended  to  answer  no  other  purpose 
than  that  of  a  vast  pageant;  that  the  Governor-General 
had  determined  on  celebrating  the  return  of  the  vic- 
torious armies  with  all  possible  pompj  and  that  he 
looked  forward,  with  childish  delight  and  anxiety,  to 
the  magnificent  fHe  champHre  of  which  he  had  ap- 
pointed himself  director-in-chief.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  Lord  EUenborough  took  a  somewhat  undignified 
interest  in  the  details  of  these  puerilities;  but  the  justice 

*  Calcutta  Kevietv, 


LORD  ELLENBOROUGH  AT  FEROZEPORE.      657 

of  the  assertion,  that  the  army  was  kept  together  for  no 
other  purpose  than  that  of  presenting  arms  to  the  "  Illus- 
trious Garrison"  of  Jellalabad,  and  turning  out  for  a 
grand  field-day,  may  be  reasonably  disputed.  The  fidelity 
of  the  Sikhs  had  long  been  suspected.  It  was  now  con- 
sidered by  no  means  an  impossible  event,  that  the  march 
of  our  army,  worn,  sick,  and  encumbered,  through  the 
Punjaub,  would  offer  a  temptation  too  strong  to  be 
resisted  by  the  mutinous  Sikh  soldiery,  whose  real 
feeling  had  betrayed  itself  early  in  the  year  at  Peshawur. 
Had  the  Governor-General  felt  secure  in  the  reality  of 
the  formal  alliance  with  the  Punjaub,  he  might  have 
dispersed  the  Army  of  Reserve  when  the  Afghanistan 
force  crossed  the  Attock.  Such  expositions  of  the  mili- 
tary resources  of  a  great  nation  are  never  wholly  with- 
out profit  in  such  troubled  times;  and  as  doubts,  and  not 
unreasonable  doubts,  of  Sikh  fidelity  had  arisen,  it  was 
sound  policy  to  keep  a  force  on  the  frontier  until  the 
returning  troops  had  actually  crossed  the  Sutlej. 

On  the  9th  of  December  the  Governor-General  ar- 
rived at  Ferozepore.  The  Army  of  Reserve  was  drawn 
out  to  receive  him.  A  noble  sight,  it  must  have 
stirred  the  heart  of  one  who  loved  to  express  his  regret 
that  circumstances  had  not  made  him  a  soldier.  There 
was  much  work  to  be  done ;  and  he  flung  himself  into  it 
with  characteristic  energy,  resolute  to  give  the  returning 
warriors  an  honourable  reception,  and  to  dazzle  the  eyes 
of  all  the  native  potentates  who  could  be  lured  to  the 
scene  of  triumph.  Four  years  before  there  had  been  a 
grand  gathering  at  the  same  place,  when  Runjeet  Singh 
and  Lord  Auckland  had  exchanged  courtesies,  and  the 
Army  of  the  Indus  had  commenced  its  march  for  the 
invasion  of  the  Douranee  Empire.  The  war  in  Afghan- 
istan had  opened  with  a  grand  spectacle  at  Ferozepore; 

VOL.  II.  2  u 


658        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPOBB. 

and  now,  with  due  dramatic  propriety,  it  was  to  close 
with  a  similar  effect.  The  Maharajah  of  the  Punjaub, 
with  his  ministers  of  state  and  his  principal  military 
chiefs,  were  invited  to  grace  the  festival.*  The  Princes 
of  Sirhind,  and  other  "  brothers  and  friends,"  were  asked 
to  take  part  in  the  rejoicings.  And  everywhere  from 
the  neighbouring  stations,  under  lordly  encouragement, 
flocked  our  English  ladies  to  Ferozepore — the  wives  and 
daughters  of  the  returning  warriors  and  of  the  oflicers 
there  assembled — and  everywhere  was  a  flutter  of  ex- 
citement, such  as  had  not  been  known  in  those  regions 
for  years. 

Day  after  day,  as  Lord  EUenborough  busied  himself 
with  his  preparations  for  the  reception  of  the  victorious 
Generals,  tidings  reached  him  from  their  camps.     There 
was  nothing  in   this  intelligence   to   dim  the  pleasure 
which  was  animating  his  Lordship's  breast.      Pollock 
had  brought  back  his  army  with  little  loss  through  the 
formidable  passes  of  Afghanistan,  and  was  now  making 
an  uninterrupted  march  through  the  Punjaub.       The 
withdrawal  of  the  force  had  been  looked  forward  to 
with  some  anxiety   by  many,  who  believed  that  the 
tribes  would  harass  the  rear  of  the  retiring  army,  and 
work  them  grievous  annoyance.     But  so  completely  had 
the  strength  of  the  Afghans  been  broken  by  continual 
defeat,  that  they  scarcely  made  an  effort  to  annoy  the 
British  columns  on  their  line  of  march.     Pollock  wrote 
that  he  had  not  seen  an  enemy ;  but  M'Caskill  and  Nott, 
who  followed  with  the  centre  and  the  rear  divisions, 
were  not  quite  so  fortunatei     From  Caubul  to  Jellala- 

♦  Mr.  Clerk  was    despatched  to  Prince,   Pertab  Singh,    and  Dhjan 

Lahore  with  an  invitation  from  the  Singh,   the  minister,  were  sent  to 

(Tovemor^ General ;  and  Shere  Singh  represent    the    Maharajah    at    the 

was  inclined  to  accept  it,  but  he  was  Governor- General's  Court, 
overruled  in  Durbar.     The  Crown 


THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  JELLALABAD.  659 

bad,  however,  there  was  little  to  contend  against,  except 
some  desultory  night  attacks  on  our  baggage.*  There 
was,  indeed,  no  organised  resistance. 

The  entire  force  assembled  at  Jellalabad ;  and  halted 
there  for  a  few  days.  Pollock  had  determined  to  de- 
stroy the  defences  of  the  place.  It  had  been  in  con- 
templation to  transfer  Jellalabad  to  the  government 
of  the  Sikhs;  but  the  Durbar  had  been  so  slow  to  an- 
nounce its  acquiescence  in  the  proposed  arrangement, 
that  when  the  acceptance  of  the  offer  was  announced  to 
General  Pollock,  he  had  already  completed  the  work  of 
destruction.  When  the  British  army  was  halting  at 
Peshawur,  the  question  of  the  transfer  of  Jellalabad  to 
the  Sikhs,  as  a  douceur  to  ensure  cordiality  of  co-opera- 
tion with  us,  had  been  earnestly  discussed  ;f  but  at  that 
time  the  project  had  fallen  to  the  ground.  It  was  felt, 
that  so  long  as  Shah  Soojah  existed,  and  the  Tripartite 
treaty  had  not  been  annulled,  any  design  to  dissever  the 
Douranee  Empire,  and  to  invite  the  Sikhs  to  share  in 
the  partition,  would  be  premature,  both  as  regarded  the 
justice  and  the  expediency  of  the  measure.  But  the 
death  of  Shah  Soojah  gave  a  new  aspect  to  the  state  of 
affairs ;  and  the  British  Government  lost  little  time,  after 
authentic  intelligence  of  that  event  had  been  received,  in 
communicating  to  Mr.  Clerk  its  willingness  that  certain 
territories  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Indus  should  pass 
into  the  possession  of  the  Sikh  Government  or  of  the 
Jummoo  Rajahs,  with  the  permission  of  the  Lahore  Dur- 


♦  A  smart  skirmish  between  NottV  In  Colonel  Stacy^s  Narrative  and  Can- 
division  and  the  enemy,  on  the  Hufl-  tain  NeilTs  Recollections  ofSeryicey  the 
Kotul,  may,  perhaps,  be  considered  reader  will  find  ample  details  of  all 
OS  an  exception.  Uolonel  Stacy  de-  the  operations  of  tne  rear  division, 
scribes  it  as  "a  severe  affair;'^  and  Lieutenant  Greenwood's  Narrative  msLy 
Nott,  who  was  not  inclined  to  write  also  be  consulted  for  some  particulars 
lengthy  despatches,  or  to  exaggerate  of  the  movements  of  M'Caskill's  divi- 
the  importance  of  his  engagements,  sion. 
thought  it  worthy  of  a  brief  despatch.  f  See  ante^  book  vi.,  chapter  v. 

2u2 


G60  THE  GATIIKRING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

bar;  and  it  was  intimated  that  the  British  Government 
would  facilitate  the  accomplishment  of  this  object  by 
placing  Jellalabad  in  the  hands  of  the  Sikhs.     The  offer 
was  formally  made ;  but,  in  the  then  uncertain  position 
of  affairs,  prudently  declined.     It  was  not  unreasonably 
urged  by  the  Durbar,  that  until  they  were  in  possession 
of  the  ultimate  intentions  of  the  British  with  respect  to 
Afghanistan,  it  would  be  hardly  politic  in  the  Sikhs  to 
place  themselves  in  a  prominent  position,  or  in  any  way 
to  identify  themselves  with  measures  the  future    out- 
turn of  which  they  could  as  yet  but  dimly  foresee.     But 
it  was  believed,  that  as  soon  as  ever  our  withdrawal 
from  Afghanistan  was  fully  determined  upon,  and  about 
to  be  put  in  execution,  the  Sikhs,  without  further  ex- 
planation, would  be  willing  to  take  possession  of  Jellala- 
bad.    And  they  were  so ;  but  not  having  fully  made  up 
their  minds  upon  the  subject  (probably  from  some  mis- 
trust of  our  intentions)   until    the  British   force  had 
actually  marched  from  Caubul,  their  acceptance  of  the 
offer  came  too  late  to  save  the  place  from  destruction. 
General  Pollock  had,  in  accordance  with  instructions, 
destroyed  the  fortifications  of  Jellalabad  before  he  re- 
ceived a  communication  from  the  government,  intended, 
if  possible,  to  arrest  such  proceedings,  and  ordering  him 
to  make  over  the  place  uninjured  to  our  allies.     It  may 
be  doubted  whether  either  party  very  much  regretted 
the  accident.* 

Having  destroyed  the  defences  of  Jellalabad,  Pollock 
pushed  on  to  Peshawur.  The  Khybur  Pass  had  now 
to  be  traversed  again.  The  Afreedi  Maliks  offered  to 
sell  us  a  free  passage;  but  Mackeson  answered  that 
Pollock  would  take  one.  The  first  division,  under  the 
General  himself,  who  effectively  crowned  the  heights  as 
he  advanced,  passed  through  with  only  the  loss  of  two 

*  Calcutta  lie  view. 


THE  RETUKN  THROUGH  THE  PUNJAUB.       661 

or  three  privates.  M'Caskill  was  not  equally  successful. 
He  had  not  taken  the  same  precautions,  and  the  Khy- 
burees  came  down  upon  the  rear-guard,  under  their  old 
enemy,  Brigadier  Wild.  Favoured  by  the  darkness  of 
night,  they  rushed  among  our  people,  and  threw  them 
into  confusion.  Two  of  our  officers  were  killed,*  and 
two  of  our  guns  were  abandoned.  But  the  only  object 
of  the  Khyburees  seems  to  have  been  plunder.  They 
made  no  effort  to  carry  off  the  guns.f 

Altogether,  the  return  march  of  the  British  troops  was 
singularly  peaceful  and  imeventful.  If  the  same  precau- 
tions to  crown  the  heights  along  the  line  of  march,  as 
were  systematically  taken  by  Pollock,  had  been  taken 
by  M'Caskill  and  Nott,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  we 
should  even  have  heard  of  the  appearance  of  an  enemy. 
The  Afghans  arc  famous  plunderers,  and  they  are  ha- 
bitually armed.  When  they  saw  their  opportunity,  they 
came  down  upon  our  baggage-laden  columns,  and  mo- 
lested us  as  best  they  could.  But  there  was  nothing 
like  organised  resistance;  and,  in  all  probability,  if  the 

♦  Lieut.  Christie,  of  the  Artillery;  and  all."  —  [Af5.  Correspondence  of 

and  Ensign  Nicolson,  of  the  30th  Na-  General  Pollock :  Camp  nearAlirMus^ 

tive  Infantry.  jidj  Nov,  1,  1842.]     Of  this  unfortu- 

f  "  It  was  a  night  attack  of  some  nate  business,  another  officer  writes  : 

plunderers  to  obtain  baggage.    There  "  Night  overtook  our  unfortunate  3rd 

appears  to  have  been  sad  confusion.  Brigade.     The   enemy,   emboldened 

Tlie  two  otiicers  were    about    that  by   the  darkness,  came  down  upon 

time  killed.     But  the  guns  were  not,  them  in  strength.    Some  of  our  men 

I  believe,  even  attempted  to  be  car-  were  cut  off  in  the  column.     Numbers 

ried  off;  otherwise  we  certainly  never  of  them   were  hit  by  stones,  which 

should  iiave  seen  anything  of  them  were  flying  in  all  directions.     The 

again,    whereas,  the    next  day,  the  confusion  must  have  been  great.   Tlie 

mountain  howitzer  and  carriage  were  Irregular  Cavalry  rode  right  over  the 

found  in  statu  quo,  and  the  carriage  infantry,  knocking  down  several   of 

of   the     three-pounder ;    and    were  the   officers.     Christie  and  his  two 

brought  in.     I  dare  say  the  three-  mountain-guns  were  lost  sight  of  in 

pounder  was  not  far.     It  in  all  pro-  the  dark,  and  are  lost,  himself  killed, 

bability  upset  and  parted  from  the  Young    Nicolson,    of   the    30th,   is 

carriage;  but  if  an  enemy  (so  usually  killed.     As  to  the  number  of  men 

termed)  had  made  the  attack,  it  is  very  killed,  nothing  is  yet  known  ;  but  the 

improbable  that  either  guns  or  car-  whole  of  the  Gholundauz  that  were 

riage  would  have  been  left,  for  a  very  with  Christie  are  missing." —  IMS, 

few  men  could  carry  gun,  carriage,  Correspondence,'] 


662  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEFOKE. 

heights  had  been  crowned  by  the  second  and  the  third 
divisions,  as  they  were  by  the  first,  they  would  have 
achieved  the  march  with  comparative  immunity.  Not 
a  shot  was  fired  at  Pollock  between  Caubul  and  Pe- 
shawur.* 

The  fortress  of  Ali-Musjid  was  destroyed,  and  the 
army  then  pushed  on  to  Peshawnr.  Having  partaken 
of  Avitabile's  magnificent  hospitality,  the  victorious  Ge- 
nerals commenced  their  march  through  the  Punjaub. 
It  was  an  uneventful,  but  a  melancholy  one.  Sickness 
broke  out  in  the  returning  army.  There  had  always  been 
a  scarcity  of  carriage- cattle,  and  now  the  number  of  sick 
made  it  more  severely  felt.  But  all  the  inconveniences 
of  the  march  were  from  within.  The  Sikhs  wrought  us 
no  annoyance. 

Whilst  such  were  the  tidings  from  the  returning  army 
which  reached  the  Governor-General  in  the  midst  of  his 
preparations,  there  came  from  Afghanistan  intelligence 
of  a  more  dubious  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  less  interest- 
ing character.  Lord  Ellenborougli  had  left  the  Afghans 
to  sufier  the  punishment  due  to  their  crimes;  and  it 
little  mattered  to  him  whether  one  party  or  another 
were  dominant  at  Caubul.  But  the  news  which  now 
reached  him  from  the  Afghan  capital  all  went  to  show 
that  the  Suddozye  Princes  were  utterly  destitute  of 
power  and  influence;  and  that  the  new  government  had 
not  the  means  of  supporting  the  youthful  puppet  upon 
the  throne.  The  Wuzeer  had  sought  to  re-establish  the 
supremacy  of  the  Douranees,  had  hedged  in  the  new 
King  with  Douranee  influences,  and  by  his  exclusiveness 
given  general  ofience.    The  downfall  of  the  Suddozye 

♦  Pollock,  determined  to  give  the  not  come  on  should  be  shot,   and 

robber  tribes  as  little  opportunity  as  that  his  load,  if  it  could  not  be  brought 

possible  of  plundering  his  baggage,  on,  should  be  immediately  burnt. 

ordered  that  every  eamcl   that  cofild 


RECEPTION  OP  THE  ILLUSTRIOUS  GARRISON.  663 

Prince  followed  rapidly  upon  this.*  Akbar  Khan  had 
been  biding  his  time  about  the  regions  of  the  Hindoo- 
Koosh.  He  was  in  no  hurry  to  return  to  Caubul.  It 
was  more  prudent  to  leave  the  dissensions  which  were 
certain  to  arise  at  the  capital  to  work  out  their  own 
debilitating  effects  upon  those  in  power,  and  pave  the 
way  for  his  triumphant  return  to  the  capital. 

And  so,  after  a  time,  there  came  into  Ferozepore 
tidings,  forwarded  from  Pollock's  camp,  to  the  effect 
that  the  Suddozye  Prince,  Shahpoor,  had  been  expelled 
from  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  had  fled  for  safety  to  Pesha- 
wur.    The  poor  boy  had  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life. 

♦  One  more  glimpse  at  Afghan  homes  at  Caubul.  Newab  Zemaun 
politics  from  Major  llawlinson^s  in-  Khan,  Jubbar  Khan,  Oosman  Khan, 
terestingjournal,  may  be  afforded  be-  and  Meer  liadiee,  arc  said  to  be  at 
fore  we  finally  close  it :  "  A  messenger  Khooloom.  The  people  of  Caubul 
arrived  to-daj  from  Caubul  with  letters  have  nearly  all  returned  to  the  city, 
from  the  Kuzzilbash  party,  inviting  and  are  busy  reopening  their  houses 
the  Nizam-ood-Dowlan  to  return,  as  against  the  winter.  Many  of  the 
Gholam  Mahomed  Khan  had  already  Kohistan  chiefs,  Gool  Mahomed  and 
given  offence  by  endeavouring  to  re-  Khoda  Buksh,  Ghilzyes,  have  also 
establish  an  exclusive  Douranee  in-  paid  their  respects  to  Shahpoor,  and 
fluencc  round  the  puppet  King.  At  Ameen-oollah  was  expected  shortly 
present.  Khan  Shereen  is,  as  far  as  to  return.  Mahomed  Akbar  either 
real  power  is  concerned,  paramount,  really  fears  for  his  personal  safety, 
and  ne  seems  determined  to  carry  now  that  a  party  with  which  accommo- 
things  with  a  high  hand,  having  given  dation  is  impossible  has  come  into 
out  that  if  Shahpoor  lends  himself  to  power,  or  he  thinks  it  better  policy  to 
Douranee  intrigue  he  will  force  him  allow  dissension  to  fructify  in  the 
to  abdicate  in  favour  of  another  capital  before  he  makes  his  reappear- 
Prince.  A  strong  Kuzzilbash  de-  ance  on  the  scene.  The  Douranees 
tachment  has  at  the  same  time  been  are  in  a  large  minority  at  Caubul, 
sent  to  Ghuznee  under  Mahomed  and  must  necessarily  give  way  before 
Hussein  Khan,  to  occupy  that  place,  the  Gholam  Khana,  if  Khun  Shereen 
and  in  conjunction  with  the  Hazarehs  acts  with  any  energy.  I  look  to  Can- 
to hold  in  check  any  possible  move-  dahar  as  their  natural  and  necessary 
ment  of  Ghilzyes  or  Douranees  from  retreat,  and  no  doubt  at  that  place 
the  Westward.  Prince  Hyder,  with  Suddozye  royalty,  supported  by  their 
another  party  of  the  Gholam  Khana,  influence,  will  continue*  to  glimmer 
has  gone  to  Bameean,  and  expects  to  on,  until  Persia  turns  her  attention 
secure  the  passes  during  the  winter  to  her  eastei^n  frontier,  and  pushes 
against  the  return  of  the  Barukzyes.  forward  the  Barukzye  Sirdars  to  play 
Mahomed  Akbar^s  force,  which  re-  a  game  for  her.  The  Kuzzilbasbes, 
mained  for  some  time  at  ELhanjan,  is  at  the  same  time,  cannot  expect  to 
said  to  have  completely  dispersed,  the  hold  their  ^und  at  Caubul  for  anv 
Sirdar  himself,  with  Ameen-oollah,  leng^  of  time." — [Major  RawUmon  a 
having  gone  to  Tash  Noorghan,  and  MS,  Journal.'] 
the  men  having  all  returned  to  their 


664        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPOBE. 

Akbar  Khan  had  made  a  descent  upon  Caubul  and  car- 
ried everything  before  him.  The  Newab  Zemaun  Khan, 
it  was  said,  had  been  made  Governor  of  Jellalabad, 
Shumshoodeen  of  Ghuznee,  Sultan  Jan  of  Candahar; 
and  in  the  mean  while  Dost  Mahomed  was  making  his 
way  through  the  Punjaub  to  his  old  principality. 
"Everything,"  it  was  added,  with  bitter  significance, 
"  is  reverting  to  the  old  state  of  things — as  it  was  before 
we  entered  the  country." 

And  now  the  heart  of  the  Governor-General  began  to 
beat  with  expectation  of  the  immediate  arrival  of  the 
victorious  armies.  Everything  was  ready  for  their  recep- 
tion. The  Array  of  Reserve  was  spread  out  over  the 
great  plain  of  Ferozepore.  Triumphal  arches  had  been 
erected.  A  temporary  bridge  had  been  thrown  across 
the  Sutlej.  The  elephants,  no  insignificant  portion  of 
the  coming  spectacle,  had  been  gorgeously  painted  and 
decorated,  and  tricked  out  in  their  gayest  trappings  and 
caparisons ;  and  as  much  of  tinsel,  and  bamboo- work,  and 
coloured  cloth,  as  could  give  eflfect  to  the  triumph,  had 
been  expended  to  grace  the  occasion.  On  the  17th  of 
December,  Sir  Robert  Sale  crossed  the  Sutlej  at  the  head 
of  that  gallant  body  of  troops  which  had  cou)posed  the 
garrison  of  Jellalabad.  The  Governor-General  went 
forth  to  meet  them.  A  street  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
elephants,  more  or  less  caparisoned,  had  been  formed, 
and  through  this  marched  the  heroes  of  Jellalabad — the 
13th  Light  Infantry,  Sale's  own  regiment,  at  the  head 
of  the  column.  The  morning  was  dull  and  lowering — 
not  a  gleam  of  sunshine  lighted  up  the  festive  scene; 
but  there  Avere  sunny  hearts  and  bright  faces;  and  as 
the  horse-artillery  guns  boomed  forth  their  Avelcome, 
and  the  band  of  the  Lancers  struck  up  the  ever-animating 
"  Conquering  Hero"  tune,  and  each  regiment  in  suc- 
cession, as  the  column  passed  on,  saluted  their  loner  ab- 


THE  COUKTS-MAKTIAL.  665 

sent  comrades,  the  heart  must  have  been  a  dull  one  that 
did  not  acknowledge  that  there  is  something  of  a  bright 
side  even  to  the  picture  of  war. 

On  the  19th,  General  Pollock  crossed  the  Sutlej;  and 
on  the  23rd,  General  Nott  arrived,  bringing  with  him 
the  Gates  of  Somnauth.*  Then  there  was  feasting  and 
festivity  in  the  gigantic  tents,  hung  with  silken  flags,  on 
which,  in  polyglot  emblazonments,  were  the  names  of 
the  actions  that  had  been  fought;  many  complimentary 
effusions,  in  tlie  shape  of  after-dinner  harangues  ;f  and  in 
the  mornings  grand  field-days,  more  or  less,  according  to 
the  "  skyey  influences."  The  year — a  most  eventful  one 
— was  closed  with  a  grand  military  display.  The  plain 
was  covered  with  British  and  Sikh  troops,  and  in  the 
presence  of  Pertaub  Singh,  the  heir  apparent  of  Lahore; 
Dhyan  Singh,  the  minister;  tlie  Governor-General,  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  and  others  of  less  note,  some  forty 
thousand  men,  with  a  hundred  guns,  were  manoeuvred 
on  the  great  plain.  On  this  grand  tableau  the  curtain 
fell;  and  the  year  opportunelv  closed  in  gaiety  and  glit- 
ter—in prosperity  and  parade. 

The  Sepoy  regiments  having  been  feasted  with  their 
"  favourite  mehtoys^^  (sweetmeats),  and  the  important 
event  announced  in  a  Government  notification,  the  Army 
of  Reserve  was  broken  up;  but  not  before  the  Governor- 

♦  Lord   Ellenborough    had  deter-  vice."  —  [^Sir   Jasper   Nicolls'    MS. 

mined  to  bestow  exclusive  honours  Journal,'] 

upon  Sale's  brigade  ;  but  Sir  Jasper        t  The  rejoicings,  in  the  opinions  of 

Nicolls  desired  to  receive  both   Pol-  many,  were  very  much  marred  by 

lock  and  Nott  with  the  same  mili-  the  prejudiced  exclusiveness  of  the 

tary  distinctions.     **  I  wished"    he  Grovernor-General,who8eemetohave 

wrote  in  his  journal,  "  to  have  one  of  set  his  face  very  strenuously  against 

the  reserve  divisions  to  receive  each  the  political  officers,  no  matter  what 

of  the  divisions  as  it  came,  but  he  theur  services.     With  all  his  admira- 

(Lord  Ellenborough)  did  not  desire  tion  of  the  Illustrious  Garrison,  Lord 

that  the  honours  paid  to  the  garrison  Ellenborough    slighted    Macffregor, 

should  be  extended  to  any  other  part  who  was  its  very  life  and  soul;  and 

of  the  army.    This  I  regret,  for  they  with  all  his  appreciation  of  gallantry , 

have  all  seen  hard  work,  great  expo-  he  seemed  unable  to  appreciate  too 

sure,  and  some  arduous  days  of  ser-  services  of  Eldrcd  Pottmger. 


666        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

General,  moved  by  that  characteristic  admiration  of 
gallantry,  which  earned  for  him  in  India  the  title  of  the 
*'  Friend  of  the  Army,"  had  done  all  that  lay  in  his 
power  to  reward  the  troops  who  had  achieved  such 
brilliant  successes.  The  honours  which  he  could  not 
bestow  he  solicited  from  the  Crown,  on  behalf  of  the 
brave  men  who  had  so  fairly  earned  them;  and  the  dis- 
tribution of  honorary  distinctions  which  ensued  gave 
almost  universal  satisfaction.  It  erred  rather  on  the 
side  of  liberality;  and,  perhaps,  there  are  some  old  sol- 
diers, in  the  scantily-decorated  Queen's  army,  who  think 
that  during  the  last  few  years,  honours  have  been  be- 
stowed so  profusely  as  to  lower  their  real  value,  by 
showing  how  easily  they  are  to  be  earned.  But  it  is 
better  to  err  on  the  side  of  liberality  than  of  chariness — 
better  even  that  the  unworthy  should  be  decorated,  than 
that  the  worthy  should  pine  in  vain  for  distinction.* 

But  there  was  still  something  more  to  be  done.  The 
prisoners,  towards  whom  the  flood  of  sympathy  had 
been  setting  in  so  strongly  for  many  months,  and  whom 
the  English  in  India  now  welcomed  back  with  cordiality 
and  delight,  were  not  to  be  suffered  all  at  once  to  sink  into 
privacy  and  obscurity.  Some  of  them  were  to  be  tried 
by  courts-martial,  or  to  be  summoned  before  courts  of 
inquiry,  for  abandoning  their  posts,  going  over  to  the 
enemy,  or  otherwise  disgracing  themselves.  The  courts 
sate,  but  they  could  not  pronounce  the  officers  arraigned 
before  them  guilty  of  any  offence.  Brigadier  Shelton  was 
acquitted.    Colonel  Palmer,f  Captains  Anderson,  Boyd, 

♦  Pollock  and  Nott  received  most  Fcrozepore  on  a  triumphal  car,  were 

deservedly    the    distinction    of    the  deposited  in  the  magazine  of  Agra. 
Grand  Cross  of  the  Batli ;  and  Lord        f  In   confirming  the  acquittal  of 

Ellenborough,  who  was  created  ah  Colonel  Palmer,  Sir  Jasper  Nicolk 

Earl,  formally  invested  them  at  Agra,  wrote  tliat  "  the  circutnstances  under 

and  delivered  some  flowing  speeches  which  Colonel  Palmer   surrendervd 

upon  the  occasion.     It  may  be  men-  Ghuznec  to  the  Afghans,  were  such 

tioned  here  that  the  gates  of  Som-  as  he  could  neither  control,  alter,  or 

nautli,  that  Ind  been  brought  up  from  alleviate." 


CONCLUSION.  667 

Troui"),  and  Waller,  and  Lieutenant  Ejrre,  Ivere  honour- 
ably acquitted ;  and  the  court  of  inquiry,  over  which  Mr. 
Clerk  presided,  must  have  risen  from  its  investigation  into 
the  conduct  of  Major  Pottinger  with  increased  respect 
for  the  high  soldierly  qualities  of  the  young  officer  who 
had  beaten  back  the  Persians  at  Herat,  and  protested 
against  the  capitulation  of  Caubul  in  the  teeth  of  all  the 
veterans  of  the  force. 

On  the  20th  of  January  1843,  Dost  Mahomed  arrived 
at  Lahore,  on  his  way  to  the  frontier  of  Afghanistan, 
and  was  honourably  received  by  the  Sikh  Durbar.  The 
Suddoyze  Princes  and  their  families,  to  whose  reception 
in  the  British  provinces  Lord  Ellenborough  had  evinced 
an  insuperable  repugnance,  found  an  asylum  in  the  Sikh 
dominions;  and  British  connexion  with  Afghanistan  was 
now  fairly  at  an  end. 

Little  more  remains  to  be  said.  The  proclamations 
which  were  issued  by  the  Supreme  Government  of 
India  in  the  autumn  of  1842,  are  in  themselves  the  best 
commentaries  on  the  War  in  Afghanistan.  The  Gover- 
nor-General of  1842  passed  sentence  of  condemnation 
upon  the  measures  of  the  Governor-General  of  1838. 
No  failure  so  total  and  overwhelming  as  this  is  recorded 
in  the  page  of  history.  No  lesson  so  grand  and  im- 
pressive is  to  be  found  in  all  the  annals  of  the  world. 
Of  the  secondary  causes  which  contributed  to  the  utter 
prostration  of  an  unholy  pohcy,  much,  at  different  times, 
has  been  written  in  the  course  of  this  narrative ;  much 
more  might  now  be  written,  in  conclusion,  of  the  mighty 
pohtical  and  military  errors  which  were  baptised  in  the 
blood  and  tears  of  our  unhappy  countrymen.  These 
errors  are  so  patent — are  so  intelHgible — ^they  have  been 
60  often  laid  bare  by  the  hand  of  the  anatomist — and 
they  have  been  so  copiously  illustrated  in  these  volumes, 
that  I  do  not  now  purpose  to  enlarge  upon  them  be- 


668  CONCLUSION. 

fore  I  lay  down  my  pen.  The  secondary  causes  of  the 
great  failure  were  not  badly  summed  up  by  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief, when,  on  the  24th  of  March,  1842,  he 
wrote  to  the  Governor-General: 

The  causes  to  which  I  ascribe  our  failure  in  Afghanistan  are 
these: 

1st.  Making  war  \yith  a  peace  estabhshment. 

2n(l.  Making  war  without  a  safe  base  of  operations. 

3rd.  Carrying  our  native  army  out  of  India  into  a  strange  and 
cold  climate,  where  they  and  we  were  foreigners,  and  both  con- 
sidered as  infidels. 

4th.  Invading  a  poor  country,  and  one  unequal  to  supply  our 
wants,  especially  our  large  establishment  of  cattle. 

5th.  Giving  undue  power  to  political  agents. 

6th.  Want  of  forethought  and  undue  confidence  in  the  Afghans 
on  the  part  of  Sir  William  Macnaghten. 

7  th.  Placing  our  magazines,  even  our  treasure,  in  indefensible 
places. 

8th.  Great  military  neglect  and  mismanagement  after  the  out- 
break. 

But  if  none  of  these  things  had  been  in  operation  to 
defeat  and  frustrate  our  policy,  it  must  still  have  broken 
down  under  the  ruinous  expenditure  of  public  money 
which  the  armed  occupation  of  Afghanistan  entailed 
upon  the  Government  of  India.  It  is  on  record,  by  the 
admission  of  Lord  Auckland  liimself,  that  when  our 
friendly  connexion  with  Afghanistan  was  brought  sud- 
denly to  a  violent  and  disastrous  termination,  it  had  cost 
the  natives  of  India,  whose  stewards  we  are,  more  than 
eight  millions  of  money.*  To  this  are  to  be  added  the 
cost  of  the  great  calamity  itself,  and  the  expenses  of  the 
War  of  Retribution.  All  this  enormous  burden  fell  upon 
the  revenues  of  India;  and  the  country  is  still  groaning 
under  the  weigh  t.f 

*  Lord  Auckland's  Finance  Minute:  f  The  bitter  injustice  of  this  need 
February  19,  1842.  hardly  be  insisted  upon.   Thcchar^ 


CONCLUSION.  669 

And  what  have  we  gained  ?  What  are  the  advantages 
to  be  summed  up  on  the  other  side  of  the  account  ? 
The  expedition  across  the  Indus  was  undertaken  with 
the  object  of  erecting  in  Afghanistan  a  barrier  against 
encroachment  from  the  West.  The  advance  of  the  British 
army  was  designed  to  check  the  aggressions  of  Persia  on 
the  Afghan  frontier,  and  to  baflBie  Russian  intrigues,  by  the 
substitution  of  a  friendly  for  an  unfriendly  power,  in  the 
countries  beyond  the  Indus.  And  now,  after  all  this 
waste  of  blood  and  treasure,  a  Persian  army  is  at  Herat, 
and  every  town  and  village  of  A%hanistan  is  bristling 
with  oiu:  enemies.  Before  the  British  army  crossed  the 
Indus,  the  English  name  was  honoured  in  Afghanistan. 
Some  dim  traditions  of  the  splendour  of  Mr.  Elphinstone's 
Mission  were  all  that  the  Afghans  associated  with  their 
thoughts  of  the  English  nation ;  and  now,  in  their  place, 
are  galling  memories  of  the  progress  of  a  desolating  army. 
The  Afghans  are  an  unforgiving  race;  and  everywhere 
from  Candahar  to  Caubul,  and  from  Caubul  to  Pesha- 
wur,  are  traces  of  the  injuries  we  have  inflicted  upon 
the  tribes.  There  is  scarcely  a  family  in  the  country 
which  has  not  the  blood  of  kindred  to  revenge  upon  the 
accursed  Feringhees.  The  door  of  reconciliation  is  closed 
against  us;  and  if  the  hostility  of  the  Afghans  be  an 
element  of  weakness,  it  is  certain  that  we  have  contrived 
to  secure  it. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  tendency  of  all  these  great 
movements  in  Central  Asia  has  been  to  diminish  the 
mutual  jealousies  and  apprehensions  of  the  British  and 
the  Muscovite  powers,  by  revealing,  in  all  their  true  pro- 
portions, the  tremendous  quicksands  which  lie  waiting  to 

of  the  war,  in  spite  of  a  feeble  efibrt  ters  of  the  Crown  are  mainly  respon- 

to  shift  a  part  of  the  burden  upon  sible  for  the  invasion  of  Afghanistan, 

the  revenues  of  Great  Britain^  have  but  the  revenues  of  the  East  India 

all  been  defrayed  from   the   Indian  Company  have  been  compeiled    to 

treasury.      And  yet  it    was  a    war  bear  the  expense.    It  wos  aaruitly  de- 

neither  initiated  by  the  East   India  signed,  inderd,  from  the  beginninjr, 

Company,  nor  at  any  stage  approved  that  tlko  Company  sliould   hear  the 

of  by  that  great  body.     The  mini^  charges  of  the  war. 


670  CONCLUSION. 

engulph  our  armies  in  the  inhospitable  countries  between 
the  borders  of  the  Russian  and  the  Indian  Empires, 
But  although  both  states  have  learnt — ^the  one  from  her 
Afghan,  the  other  from  her  Khivan  expedition — terrible 
lessons  not  to  be  forgotten,  it  may  still  be  questioned 
whether  the  Cossack  and  the  Sepoy  are  further  apart 
than  they  were.  The  "  macadamisation"  of  Sindh  and 
the  Punjaub  has  given  England  a  forward  position, 
which,  advantageous  as  it  is  in  itself,  may  have  stimu- 
lated Russia  to  increased  activity,  whilst  our  awftil  dis- 
asters in  Afghanistan  have  encouraged  anew  the  aggres- 
sions of  the  Persian,  and  the  intrigues  of  his  Muscovite 
ally,  by  revealing  the  sources  of  our  disinclination  to  en- 
tangle our  armies  again  in  its  perilous  defiles. 

It  needed  but  the  announcement  of  the  arrival  of  a 
Persian  army  at  Herat  to  consummate  the  completeness 
of  the  failure.  The  very  policy  which  ought  to  have 
been  pursued  in  1837 — the  pohcy  which  was  recom- 
mended by  Sir  John  M'Neill* — is  that  which  now 
presents  itself,  but  under  what  altered  circumstances,  for 
our  adoption.  If,  instead  of  expelling  Dost  Mahomed 
from  his  principality,  we  had  advanced  him  a  little 
money  to  raise,  and  lent  him  a  few  officers  to  drill,  an 
army,  the  Persians  would  not  now  be  lining  the  walls 
of  Herat.  But,  instead  of  strengthening  the  Afghans,  we 
have  weakened  them.  Instead  of  making  them  our 
friends,  we  have  made  them  our  implacable  foes.  The 
policy  which  we  pursued  was  disastrous,  because  it  was 
unjust.  It  was,  in  principle  and  in  act,  an  unrighteous 
usurpation,  and  the  curse  of  God  was  on  it  from  the 
first.  Our  successes  at  the  outset  were  a  part  of  the 
curse.  They  lapped  us  in  false  security,  and  deluded  us 
to  our  overthrow.  This  is  the  great  lesson  to  be  learnt 
from  the  contemplation  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the 
Afghan  War.  ''  The  Lord  God  of  recompenses  shall 
surely  requite." 

*  Ante,  \o\. \,^  v^^"^  *i^'^. 


APPENDIX. 


[Vol.  II.,  Book  v.] 

SIR  WM.  MACNAGHTEN'S  REPORT  OF  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF 

THE  CAUBUL  OUTBREAK. 

[^Found  unfinished  in  the  Envoy's  desh  after  his  death.] 

Sir, 

1.  It  is  with  feelings  of  the  deepest  concern  that  I  acquaint 
you,  for  the  information  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor- 
General  in  Council,  of  my  having  been  compelled  to  consent  to 
the  abandonment  of  our  position  in  this  country. 

2.  The  Major-General  commanding  in  Afghanistan  will  doubtless 
detail  the  military  disasters  which  have  led  to  this  direful  neces- 
sity, and  I  shall  have  occasion,  therefore,  to  touch  upon  them  but 
briefly  in  the  course  of  this  narrative. 

3.  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  ult.  1  was  informed  that  the  town 
of  Caubul  was  in  a  state  of  commotion,  and  shortly  afterwards  I 
received  a  note  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir  A.  Burnes,  to  the 
effect  that  his  house  was  besieged,  and  begging  for  assistance.  I 
immediately  went  to  General  Elphinstone,  and  suggested  that 
Brigadier  Shelton's  force  should  proceed  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
thence  to  operate  as  might  seem  expedient;  that  the  remaining 
troops  should  be  concentrated,  the  cantonment  placed  in  a  state  of 
defence,  and  assistance,  if  possible,  sent  to  Sir  A.  Burnes. 

4.  Before  Brigadier  Shelton  could  reach  the  Balla  Hissar,  the 
town  had  attained  such  a  state  of  ferment  that  it  was  deemed  im- 
practicable to  penetrate  to  Sir  A.  Burnes's  residence,  which  was  in 
the  centre  of  the  city.  I  also  sent  messages  of  assurance  to  his 
Majesty  by  my  assistant  (Captain  Lawrence),  but  so  great  had  be- 
come the  excitement,  that,  by  noon,  the  road  between  the  canton- 
ment and  the  city  was  hardly  passable. 


G72  APPENDIX. 

5.  His  Majesty,  on  first  hearing  of  the  insurrection,  had  sent  out 
his  son,  Futteh  Jung,  and  the  Minister,  with  some  of  the  house- 
hold troops,  to  repress  it;  but  this  party  was  speedily  repulsed 
with  great  slaughter,  and  in  the  mean  time  I  grieve  to  state  that 
Sir  Alexander  Bumes,  his  brother,  Lieutenant  C.  Bumes,  and 
Captain  W.  Broadfoot,  had  fallen  victims  to  the  fury  of  the  mob. 

6.  From  that  time  affairs  grew  generally  worse.  The  enemy 
showed  great  judgment  in  their  work  of  annoying  us.  They 
seized  the  strongest  positions  between  the  cantonment  and  the  city, 
and,  what  was  worse  than  all,  they  seized  the  fort,  which  contained 
all  our  stores  and  provisions.  This  step  was  well-nigh  effecting  our 
immediate  destruction,  and  it  is  chiefly  to  it  that  I  attribute 
our  final  discomfiture.  We  had  only  four  or  five  days'  supplies 
for  the  cantonment.  The  Balla  Hissar,  as  well  as  the  cantonment, 
was  in  a  state  of  siege.  We  could  not  hope  for  provisions  from 
thence,  nor  would  the  place  have  afforded  us  either  food  or  shelter, 
and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  military  authorities,  to  return  thither 
would  have  been  attended  with  ruin.  A  disastrous  retreat  seemed 
the  only  alternative,  but  this  necessity  was  averted  by  the  attack, 
on  the  10th  ult.,  of  a  neighbouring  fort,  which  had  intermediately 
furnished  us  with  a  scanty  supply  of  provisions,  but  which  subse- 
quently espoused  the  cause  of  the  rebels.  The  place  was  carried, 
after  a  desperate  resistance.  We  lost  in  the  operation  no  less  than 
sixty  men  killed  and  wounded  of  her  Majesty's  44th  Regiment 
alone,  but  our  immediate  wants  were  supplied  by  the  provisions 
found  in  the  fort.  I  lament  to  add,  that  Colonel  Mackrell, 
Captain  M'Crae,  and  Captain  Westmacott,  fell  on  the  occasion. 

7.  On  the6th  ult.  I  received  a  hurried  note  from  Major  Pottinger, 
to  the  effect  that  he  was  closely  besieged  at  Charekar,  and  unable 
to  hold  out  for  want  of  water.  Major  Pottinger  himself,  with 
Lieutenant  Haughton,  came  into  cantonments  a  day  or  two  after- 
wards, having  left  the  4th  Regiment  in  a  disorganised  state  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Istaleff;  but,  melancholy  to  relate,  that  no 
authentic  tidings  of  them  have  up  to  this  day  been  received. 
There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  entire  corps  (officers  and 
men)  have  been  annihilated.  Captains  Codrington  and  Rattray 
and  Lieutenant  Salisbury  were  killed  before  Major  Pottinger  left 
Charekar,  and  both  he  and  Lieutenant  Haughton  were  severely 
wounded. 

8.  I  had  wvlttcu  \o  C\\tvi\s\\\xT  ^wA.  Vq  Ci\\vi^i\muck  for  assistance 


APPENDIX.  673 

immediately  on  the  occurrence  of  the  outbreak,  but  General  Sale's 
brigade  had  proceeded  to  Jellalabad,  the  whole  country  between 
this  and  that  place  being  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  and  a  return  to 
Caubul  being  deemed  impracticable.  From  Candahar,  though  I 
sent  Cossids  vrith  pressing  requisitions  for  assistance  almost  every 
day,  I  could  gain  no  intelligence,  the  road  being  entirely  occupied 
by  the  troops  and  emissaries  of  the  rebels.  We  learnt  from  native 
reports  that  Ghuznee  was  invested  by  the  enemy,  and  that  Captain 
Woodburn,  who  was  on  his  way  to  Caubul  from  Candahar,  had 
been  massacred,  with  a  party  of  leave-of-absence  men  by  whom 
he  was  accompanied,  in  a  small  fort  on  this  side  of  Ghuznee. 

9.  We  continued,  up  to  the  commencement  of  the  present  month, 
to  derive  a  scanty  supply,  at  great  pecuniary  sacrifices,  from  the 
neighbouring  villages,  but  about  that  time  the  enemy's  plans  had 
become  so  well  organised,  that  our  supplies  from  this  source  were 
cut  off.  The  rebels  daily  made  their  appearance  in  great  force  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  cantonment,  and  I  lament  to  add  that 
their  operations  were  generally  attended  with  success.  The  details 
will  be  communicated  by  the  military  authorities.  In  the  midst 
of  their  successes  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  arrived  from  Toorkistan, 
an  event  which  gave  new  life  to  the  efforts  of  the  rebels. 

10.  In  the  mean  time  I  had  received  so  many  distressful  ac- 
counts from  the  General  commanding  of  the  state  of  our  troops 
and  cattle  from  want  of  provisions,  and  I  had  been  so  repeatedly 
apprised  by  him  (for  reasons  which  he  will  himself  doubtless  ex- 
plain) of  the  hopelessness  of  further  resistance,  that,  on  the  24th 
ultimo,  I  deemed  it  my  duty  to  address  an  official  letter  to  him, 
a  copy  of  which  accompanies  Appendix  A. 

The  GeneraPs  reply  was  dated  the  same  day,  a  copy  accom- 
panies, as  Appendix  B. 

11.  Affairs  had  attained  so  desperate  a  state  on  the  8th  instant, 
that  I  again  addressed  the  General  a  letter,  copy  of  which  accom- 
panies, as  Appendix  C,  and  a  copy  of  the  General's  reply  of  the 
same  date,  signed  by  three  of  his  principal  officers,  accompanies 
as  Appendix  D.  On  the  next  day  I  received  another  letter  from 
the  General,  copy  of  which  is  sent  as  Appendix  E.* 

At  my  invitation,  deputies  were  sent  from  the  rebels,  who  came 
into  cantonment  on  the  25th  ultimo,  I  having  in  the  mean  time 
received  overtures  from  them  of  a  pacific  nature,  on  the  basis  of 
our  evacuating  the  country.     I  proposed  lo  tWoL^^  ^'^^  n^wsa 
*  The  letters  here  alluded  to  are  printeiWn  iVetViQ^^  o^VN^a^^^-— ^^^""^ 
VOL.  IT.  2  X 


674  APPENDIX. 

which,  in  my  opinion^  could  be  accepted  with  honour;  but  the 
temper  of  the  rebels  may  best  be  understood  when  I  mention 
that  they  returned  me  a  letter  of  defiance  the  next  morning,  to 
the  effect  that,  unless  I  consented  to  surrender  our  arms,  and  to 
abandon  his  Majesty  to  his  fate,  we  must  prepare  for  immediate 
hostilities.  To  this  I  replied,  that  we  preferred  death  to  dis- 
honour, and  that  it  would  remain  with  a  higher  Power  to  decide 
between  us. 

12.  I  had  subsequently  a  lengthened  correspondence  with  Ma- 
homed Oosman  Khan,  Barukzye,  the  most  moderate  and  sensible 
man  of  the  insurgents,  and  as  on  the  11th  instant  we  had  not  one 
day*8  provisions  left,  I  held  a  conference  with  the  whole  of  the  rebel 
chiefs.  The  day  previous  I  had  learnt  from  a  letter  from  Colonel 
Palmer,  at  Ghuznee,  that  there  was  no  hope  of  reinforcements 
from  Candahar.  I  had  repeatedly  kept  his  Majesty  informed  of 
the  desperate  state  of  our  a£&irs,  and  of  the  probability  that  we 
should  be  compelled  to  enter  into  some  accommodation  with  the 
enemy. 

13.  The  conference  with  the  rebels  took  place  about  a  mile 
from  cantonments.  I  was  attended  by  Captains  Lawrence,  Trevor, 
and  Mackenzie,  and  there  were  present  on  the  part  of  the  rebels 
the  heads  nearly  of  all  the  chief  tribes  in  the  country.  I  had 
committed  to  paper  certain  propositions,  to  which  I  had  reason  to 
believe  they  would  have  no  objection,  and  I  read  it  to  the  meet- 
ing. A  copy  accompanies  as  Appendix  F.*  When  I  came  to  the 
second  article,  Mahomed  Akbar  interrupted  me,  and  observed 
that  we  did  not  require  supplies,  as  there  was  no  impediment  to 
our  marching  the  next  morning.  I  mention  the  above  fact  to 
show  the  impetuous  disposition  of  this  youth.  He  was  reproved 
by  the  other  chiefs,  and  he  himself,  except  on  this  one  occasion, 
behaved  with  courtesy,  though  evidently  elevated  by  his  sudden 
change  of  fortune. 

15.  The  next  day  I  was  waited  upon  by  a  deputation  from  the 
chiefs,  with  a  proposition  that  Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  should  be 
left  nominally  as  king — the  Barukzye  exercising  the  functions 
of  minister;  but  this  proposition,  owing  to  the  mutual  jealousies 
of  the  parties  concerned,  as  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  fell  to  the 
ground. 

16.  From  the  foregoing  review  of  occurrences,  I  tnist  it  will  be 
evident  that  I  had  no  recourse  left  but  that  of  negotiation ;  and  I 

*  Given  «A>  1918^  Yl*^. — AvJliKor. 


APPENDIX.  675 

had  ascertained  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  rebel  chiefs  were  perfectly 
aware  of  our  helpless  situation,  and  that  no  terms  short  of  our 
quitting  Afghanistan  would  satisfy  them. 

17.  The  whole  country,  as  far  as  we  could  learn,  had  risen  in 
rebellion;  our  communications  on  all  sides  were  cut  off;  almost 
every  public  officer,  whether  paid  by  ourselves  or  his  Majesty, 
had  declared  for  the  new  governor,  and  by  far  the  greater  number 
even  of  his  Majesty^s  domestic  servants  had  deserted  him.  We 
had  been  fighting  for  forty  days  against  very  superior  numbers, 
under  most  disadvantageous  circumstances,  with  a  deplorable  loss 
of  valuable  lives,  and  in  a  day  or  two  we  must  have  perished 
from  hunger^  to  say  nothing  of  the  advanced  season  of  the  year, 
and  the  extreme  cold,  from  the  effects  of  which  our  native  troops 
were  suffering  severely.  I  had  been  repeatedly  apprised  by  the 
military  authorities  that  nothing  could  be  done  with  our  troops; 
and  I  regret  to  add  that  desertions  to  the  enemy  were  becoming 
of  frequent  occurrence  amongst  our  troops.  The  terms  I  secured 
were  the  best  obtainable,  and  the  destruction  of  fifteen  thousand 
human  beings  would  little  have  benefited  our  country,  whilst  our 
government  would  have  been  almost  compelled  to  avenge  our 
fate,  at  whatever  cost.  We  shall  part  with  the  Afghans  as  friends, 
and  I  feel  satisfied  that  any  government  which  may  be  esta- 
blished hereafter,  will  always  be  disposed  to  cultivate  a  good  un- 
derstanding with  us. 

18.  A  retreat  without  terms  would  have  been  impracticable. 
It  is  true  that,  by  entering  into  terms,  we  are  prevented  from 
undertaking  the  conquest  of  the  entire  country,  a  measure  which, 
from  my  knowledge  of  the  views  of  government,  I  feel  convinced 
would  never  be  resorted  to,  even  were  the  means  at  hand.  But 
such  a  project  in  the  present  state  of  our  Indian  finances,  and  the 
requisitions  for  troops  in  various  quarters,  I  knew  could  not  be 
entertained.  If  the  expense  already  incurred  in  such  a  case  would 
have  been  intolerable  .  .  .  {^Sentence  imperfect.'] 

13.  I  would  beg  leave  to  refer  to  the  whole  tenor  of  my  former 
correspondence  for  the  causes  which  have  produced  this  insurrec- 
tion. Independently  of  the  genius  of  the  people,  which  is  prone 
to  rebellion,  we,  as  conquerors  and  foreigners,  of  a  different  creed, 
were  viewed  with  particular  disfavour  by  the  chiefs,  whilst  the 
acts  of  some  of  us  were  particularly  calculated  to  excite  the  general 
jealousy  of  a  sensitive  nation.  The  haughty  demeanour  of  his 
Majesty  was  not  agreeable  to  the  nobles,  and,  above  all^  the  mea.- 


676  APPENDIX. 

sures  of  economy  to  which  it  was  found  necessary  to  resort  were 
particularly  galling. 

Throughout  this  rebellion  I  was  in  constant  communication 
with  the  Shah,  through  my  assistant,  Lieutenant  J.  B.  ConoUj, 
who  was  in  attendance  on  his  Majesty  in  the  Balla  Hissar.  On 
the  18th  inst.  it  was  agreed  upon  that  our  troops  should  evacuate 
the  Balla  Hissar,  and  return  to  the  cantonments,  while  the  Ba- 
rukzyes  should  have  a  conference  with  his  Majesty  with  a  view 
to  his  retaining  the  nominal  powers  of  sovereignty,  they  for  their 
own  security  placing  a  guard  of  their  own  in  the  upper  citadel 
No  sooner,  however,  had  our  troops  left  the  Balla  Hissar,  than  his 
Majesty,  owing  to  some  panic  or  misunderstanding,  ordered  the 
gate  to  be  shut,  and  the  proposed  conference  was  thereby  prevented. 
So  offended  were  the  Barukzyes,  that  they  determined  never  to  o£fer 
his  Majesty  the  same  terms  again.  In  explanation  of  his  conduct, 
his  Majesty  states  that  the  party  whom  the  Barukzyes  dearcd 
to  introduce  was  not  that  party  which  had  been  agreed  upon. 

His  Majesty  shut     *     ♦     *     ♦ 
True  Copy. 

(Signed)  G.  St.  P.  Lawrence,  Capt., 

Mil.  Sec,  late  Envoy  and  Minister. 

IMS.  Records.;\ 

[Vol.  II.,  Page  106.] 

STATEMENT  OF  CAPTAIN  MACKENZIE. 
[Belative  to  the  Circumstances  preceding  the  Death  of  Sir  W.  Mocnagfaten.] 

The  proposition  which  induced  the  envoy  (in  opposition  to  his 
theretofore  avowed  principle  and  practice  in  refusing  to  meet 
Mahomed  Akbar  or  any  of  the  other  Khans,  save  in  a  body)  to 
grant  the  fatal  interview  to  the  Sirdar  and  his  more  imm^ate 
confederates,  had  emanated  from  the  murderer  himself,  and  had 
been  conveyed  to  the  envoy  the  night  previously  by  Mahomed 
Sadig  Kiian,  half  brother  of  Akbar,  by  Surwar  Khan  Lohanee, 
who  came  into  the  cantonment  in  company  with  the  late  Captain 
Skinner,  then  released  for  the  first  time  from  the  custody  in  which 
he  had  been  retained,  first  by  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  and  latterly  by 
Mahomed  Akbar  himself. 

The  Sirdar  had  acquainted  Captain  Skinner  with  the  nature  of 
his  pretended  wishes,  as  if  in  friendly  conference,  requesting  him 
to  act  the  part  of  chief  ambassador.  Captain  Skinner's  disapproval 


APPENDIX.  677 

of  which  in  all  probability  saved  his  life  for  the  time  being;  but 
he,  Captain  Skinner,  was  the  only  officer  present  during  the 
eventful  conference  of  the  evening  of  the  22nd,  and  from  him  I 
subsequently  derived  the  information  which  I  now  give  of  the 
nature  of  Mahomed  Akbar's  message.  It  was  to  this  effect, — that 
he  and  his  particular  friends  (to  wit,  the  Ghilzyes)  should  either 
come  over  in  a  body  into  the  cantonment,  placing  themselves 
under  the  orders  of  the  envoy,  or  that,  at  a  preconcerted  signal, 
without  giving  warning  to  the  other  confederates,  in  concert  with 
a  body  of  British  troops,  take  possession  of  the  fort  of  Mahmood 
Khan ;  then  seizing  the  person  of  Ameen-oollah  Lohganee,  whom 
for  a  pecuniary  reward  they  proposed  to  murder;  that  the  Sirdar 
should  acknowledge  Shah  Soojah  for  his  sovereign,  his  reward 
being  the  payment — a  present  bonus  from  the  British  Govern- 
ment— of  thirty  lakhs  of  rupees,  and  a  stipend  of  four  lakhs  of 
rupees  per  annum  for  life ;  that  the  British  troops  should  be  allowed 
to  remain  unmolested,  as  if  with  the  perfect  concurrence  and  by 
the  express  wish  of  the  so-formed  Afghan  Government,  for  a  period 
of  six  months,  at  which  time  they  were  to  evacuate  the  country  as 
if  by  their  own  free  will,  thus  carrying  with  them  an  untarnished 
reputation  (the  expression  was  **  saving  their  PurrfaA"),  and  thus 
securing  a  favourable  opportunity  for  the  British  home  Govern- 
ment to  negotiate  a  treaty  favourable  to  the  security  of  our  Indian 
frontier  with  the  cabinet  of  St.  Petersburgh.  Up  to  that  date, 
viz.,  22nd  of  December,  Sir  Wm.  Macnaghten  had,  in  spite  of  his 
conscientious  fulfilment  of  his  verbal  engagements  with  the 
assembled  Khawaneen  (for  no  written  treaty  had  theretofore  been 
exchanged),  been  worn  out  by  their  utter  falsehood  and  bad  faith, 
their  original  demands  having  risen  to  a  pitch  of  insolence  and 
unreasonableness  which  amounted  to  open  mockery — their  con- 
duct had  in  fact  virtually  released  him  from  any  obligation  to 
adhere  to  any  of  his  original  propositions ;  and  in  despair,  as  a 
drowning  man  catches  at  straws,  the  troops  having  long  before 
proved  themselves  utterly  inadequate  to  his  support,  or  in  fact  to 
their  own  protection,  with  immediate  ruin  and  disgrace  to  him- 
self and  his  country  staring  him  in  the  face,  he  was  in  an  evil 
moment  induced  to  assent  to  the  above  proposals,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  murder  of  Ameen-oollah,  from  which  (Captain  S. 
assured  me)  he  shrank  with  abhorrence  and  disgust^  assuring  the 
ambassadors  that  as  a  British  functionary  nothing  would  induce 
him  to  pay  a  price  for  blood.     So  far  as  it  may  be  said  that  the 


678  APPENDIX- 

lute  Envoy  allowed  hiniBclf  to  be  duped  by  s  man  of  the  notoiio 
bad  character  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  in  all  matten  of  % 
iaith  even  among  his  treacherous  countrymen,  I  can  only  mj 
it  is  Bot  only  my  firm  belief,  but  that  also  of  Captain  Lawrei 
and  others  who  best  knew  Sir  William,  that  two  montha  <^ 
cessant  fatigue  of  mind  and  body,  and  the  load  of  care  which 
during  tliat  time  weighed  him  down,  had  at  last  completely 
hinged  his  strong  mind.  Contrary  to  his  usual  practice,  he  i 
suited  none  of  tboac  who  had  all  along  posaened  his  perfect  i 
fidencc;  his  manner  was  flurried  and  agitated;  and  when,  ; 
vious  to  leaving  the  cantoumcnt  on  the  morning  of  the  23rd 
having  for  the  first  time  learnt  his  intentions,  declared  my  < 
viction  "  tliat  it  was  a  trap,"  he  abruptly  answered,  "  Leave 
to  manage  that;  trust  mc  for  that."  He  also  observed,  I  beli 
to  Captains  Trevor  and  Lawrence,  while  riding  forth  to  the  si 
of  his  murder,' "  Death  is  preferable  to  the  life  we  are  lev 
now." — [Answer  to  Interrogatoriet  put  by  Oen.  PoUock.  MS. 
cordM.  I  have  given  this  statement,  and  the  important  evidi 
contained  in  the  next  section  of  the  Appendix,  in  place  of 
letters  referred  to  at  page  181,  note.] 


[Vol.  II.,  Page  106.] 

[Instead  of  the  letter  from  Mohun  Lai  alluded  to  at  page  106,  note,  I  giv 
following  extmcta  Trom  an  elaborate  article  in  the  Fnatd  iif  India  (Senn 

newspaper),  on  tlic  cliurgcs  brought  againit  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten.] 

"  To  crown  the  evidence  of  Sir  William  Macnaghtcn'a  n 
having  been  implicated  in  this  alleged  assassinatioQ  of  the 
cliicfa,  we  have  an  acknowledgment  under  Mohun  Lal'a  own  sij 
tiirc.     When  he  was  claiming  remuneration  for  hia  services  of 
Court  of  Directors,  he  delivered  in  the  following  document,  wl 
has  been  copied  for  u^  from  a  paper  in  his  own  handwriting. 
Advanced  to  Abdool   Aziz,  who  ofiered  to  kill 
Abdoolkili  Khan,   by  such  means  which  the 
Envoy  did  not  approve,  therefore  the  balance       Rs. 

11,000  rupees  was  not  paid 4,000 

"  Thus  it  appears  that  while  Mohun  Lai  told  the  Reviewer  I 
Sir  William  objected  to  pay  the  balance,  because  he  had 
seen  the  heads;  lie  told  the  Court  of  Directors  that  the  bala 
was  not  paid  because  the  Envoy  did  not  approve  of  the  nu 
liiat  had  been  uscdV     •     •     •     • 


APPENDIX.  679 

Major  Colin  Troup  writes  thus  in  a  letter  now  before  us: 
**  Akbar  Khan  never  would  allow  Macnaghten's  name  to  be 
mentioned  before  him  but  in  terms  of  the  greatest  respect;  and 
has  in  private,  both  to  poor  Pottinger  and  myself,  over  and  over 
again  regretted  the  deed,  and  stated  that  it  never  was  premedi* 
tated;  so  far  the  contrary,  that,  having  been  accused  by  Ameen- 
ooUah's  party  of  being  friendly  to,  and  intriguing  with  the  English, 
to  disarm  suspicion,  he  in  open  Durbar  volunteered,  if  he  was 
allowed  time,  to  bring  Macnaghten  a  prisoner  into  Ameen-oollah's 
house  within  eight  days.    This  being  agreed  to,  it  was  then  that 
he  planned  the  treacherous  conference  with  Sir  William;  but, 
finding,  after  some  delay,  that  he  was  not  likely  to  accomplish  his 
object,  and  fearing  to  meet  his  party  if  he  failed  in  his  boasted 
adventure,  and  hearing  a  cry  that  our  troops  were  marching  out 
of  the  cantonments  to  where  he  and  Sir  William  were  sitting,  he, 
in  a  moment  of  desperation,  out  with  his  pistol  and  shot  Sir 
William ;  but  he  always  loudly  declared  that  on  the  morning  of 
the  conference,  when  he  came  out  to  meet  Sir  William,  he  never 
for  one  moment  contemplated  doing  him  any  harm  whatever.     I 
have  all  this  written  down,  and  can,  if  necessary,  take  my  oath  to 
what  I  have  written,  as  coming  from  the  mouth  of  Akbar  Khan 
himself,  and  you  are  most  welcome  to  make  what  use  of  it  you 
please,  in  defence  of  the  character  of  one  of  the  brightest  orna* 

ments  our  country  ever  did,  or  ever  will  produce." 

We  have  the  most  abundant  evidence  that  Sir  William  Mac- 
naghten's  character  for  integrity  and  good  faith  always  stood 
equally  high  among  the  Afghans;  and  that  when  their  chiefs 
were  triumphant,  and  bitterly  reproached  the  British  prisoners  for 
the  wrongs  their  nation  had  inflicted  on  Afghanistan,  the  charge 
of  encouraging  assassination  was  never  whispered  for  a  moment. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lawrence  states:  **  During  our  lengthened 
imprisonment,  I  unhesitatingly  affirm  that  not  one  of  the  prisoners 
ever  heard  Mahomed  Akbar,  or  any  of  the  chiefs,  accuse  Sir 
William  of  bribing  men  to  assassinate  them;  and  it  is  not  likely 
they  would  have  been  silent,  if  they  had  so  heavy  a  charge  to 
bring  forward.  On  the  contrary,  I,  as  well  as  others,  have  heard 
both  Mahomed  Akbar  IQian  and  other  chiefs  express  deep  regret 
at  the  Envoy's  untimely  death,  and  much  admiration  of  his  cha- 
racter. Ameen-oollah  Khan,  when  1  was  his  prisoner,  told  me 
that  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten  had  offered  a  lakh  of  rupees  for  his 
head.     Prisonez^  though  I  was,  I  deivoxmcfcdL  \\i\tv  cy^T\.X>M^w.  ^^ 


680  APPENDIX. 

an  Infamous  lie,  and  never  heard  any  more  about  it."     Captain 
Colin  Mackenzie  writes:  "If  Sir  William  had  ever  instructed 
Mohun  Lai  or   any   other   person   to   employ  assassins  for  the 
removal  of  our  treacherous  and  inveterate  enemies,  it  would  have 
been  well  known  to  the  Afghans  themselves,  and  they  would  pot 
have  failed  to  urge  so  plausible  a  ground  of  complaint  against  us, 
while  we  were  captives  in  their  hands,  which  they  never  did,  al- 
though they  constantly  reproached  us  with  every  act  of  supposed 
injustice  on  the  part  of  government,  and  with  the  private  vices 
and  improprieties  of  individuals."    Captain  W,  Anderson,  another 
of  the  prisoners,  writes:  **  I  never  heard  any  Afghan  accuse  Sir 
W.  H.  Macnaghten  of  any  acts  for  which  any  friend  of  his,  or 
any  Englishman,  need  feel  ashamed.     On  the  contrary,  I  always 
heard  him  spoken  of  with  great  respect,  and  frequently  with 
admiration."     Captain  Warburton  states:    **I  went  into  Caubul 
to  the  Newab's  on  the  28th,  I  think,  of  December,  1841.    I 
remained  in  his  house  till  we  were  forced  out  of  it  on  the  12th  of 
April  following.     During  that  time,  no  one  was  prevented  seeing 
us.     Our  party  consisted  of  J.  ConoUy,  Airey,  Walsh,  Webb, 
Drummond,  and  myself  (besides  Haughton  and  Campbell,  who 
joined  us  afterwards).     We  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  and 
conversing  with  most  of  the  chiefs  at  Caubul,  who  remained  after 
Akbar  Khan  had  left.     None  of  these  people  ever  concealed  their 
opinions  regarding  the  acts  of  our  government,  or  people.    Ameen- 
oollah  Khan,  in  particular,  spoke   at  times  very  strongly,  but 
neither  from  him,  nor  from  any  other,  during  the  period  of  my 
residence,  did  I  ever  hear  a  word  regarding  the  charge  now 
brought  forward  against  Sir  William  of  having  offered  money  for 
the  assassination  of  the  chiefs.     I  had  sufficient  opportunities  of 
hearing  something  about  the  matter,  if  any  such  offer  had  been 
made." 

[Vol.  IL,  Page  271.] 

SIR  J.  NICOLLS  TO  LORD  FITZROY  SOMERSET,  K.C.B. 
[On  the  Appointment  of  General  Pollock  to  the  Command  of  the  Troops.] 

My  Lord, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  your  Lordship's  letter 
of  the  13  th  of  June,  calling  upon  me  for  explanation  on  the  sub- 
ject  of  an  appeal  made  to  the  General  Commanding  in  Chief,  by 
Major-General  Sir  Joseph  ThackwcU,  in  consequence  of  his  not 
being  permitted   to   accompany  the  regiment   of  which   he  is 


APPENDIX.  681 

senior  Colonel,  on  service  beyond  the  Indus — I  beg  you  will 
apprise  liis  Lordship,  that,  in  addition  to  the  rule  quoted  by  Sir 
J.  Thackwell,  the  special  appointment  of  Major-General  Pollock 
prohibited  his  employment  in  Afghanistan. 

I  shall  explain  the  circumstances  of  that  appointment. 

In  December,  1841,  the  Governor-General  of  India  in  Council 
instructed  me  to  place  Major-General  Lumley,  of  the  Company's 
army,  in  command  of  the  reinforcements  which  passed  through 
the  Punjaub  in  January  last;  and,  in  addition  to  the  command  of 
the  whole  force  in  Afghanistan,  it  was  his  Lordship's  intention  to 
place  in  his  hands  the  political  control  also. 

Major-General  Lumley's  health  was  such  as  to  preclude  all 
hope,  or  even  desire,  that  he  should  undertake  so  great  a  charge, 
and  it  became  necessary  that  I  should  propose  another  officer  for 
this  important  duty.  Twice  I  laid  before  the  Governor-General 
the  name  of  Major-General  Sir  Edmund  Williams;  and  as  a  Light 
Infantry  officer  he  seemed  most  qualified  to  meet  an  enemy  in 
a  mountainous  country:  he  was  active,  zealous,  and  in  perfect 
health.  In  the  command  of  a  division  he  had  shown  a  clear 
judgment,  and  given  me  satisfaction. 

I  need  not  inform  Lord  Hill  that  the  management  of  the  native 
army,  or  of  small  portions  of  it,  is  a  matter,  at  times,  of  delicacy 
and  difficulty.  It  will  not  do  to  distrust  or  disparage  it,  as 
Colonel  Monson  did.  The  Governor-General  gave  such  an  un- 
willing and  discouraging  reply  to  my  second  communication,  that 
I  clearly  saw  the  whole  onus  of  the  appointment  and  of  its  con- 
sequences would  be  mine.  This  I  would  not  undertake,  and 
Major-General  Pollock  being  near  at  hand,  and  honoured  by 
Lord  Auckland's  confidence  (as  I  know),  I  ordered  him  by  dawk 
to  join  the  9tli  Foot  and  other  corps.  This  done,  Government 
was  pleased  to  confer  upon  him  the  political  powers  intended  for 
Major-General  Lumley;  without  which  Sir  Edmund  Williams 
would  have  had  to  act,  not  from  himself,  but  according  to  requi- 
sitions made  by  the  local  political  authorities — viz., Brevet-Captains 
Mackeson  and  M*Gregor.  Upon  the  more  abstract  question  of  the 
Lieutenant-Colonelcy,  it  must  be  remarked  that  Sir  Edmund  Wil- 
liams held  that  rank  in  the  9th  Foot,  which  gave  him  no  claim  to 
go  to  Afghanistan,  though  some  officious  friend  has  since  asserted  it. 

I  had  soon  occasion  to  rejoice  that  Sir  Edmund  was  not  ap- 
pointed to  the  command  on  my  sole  responsibility,  for  the  four 
sepoy  corps  first  sent,  under  Brigadier  Wild,  having  been  most 


682  APPENDIX. 

sadly  mismanaged  (at  the  instance  of  the  political  atUhorUiet^ 
against  my  instructions  and  earnest  caution\  when  Major-Greneral 
Pollock  arrived  at  Peshawur  he  found  1800  men  of  the  four 
regiments  in  hospital ;  the  sepoys  declaring  that  they  would  not 
advance  again  through  the  Khybar  Pass;  the  Sikh  troops  spread- 
ing alarm^  and  in  all  ways  encouraging  and  screening  their 
desertion,  which  was  considerable.  It  was  well  that  a  cautious, 
cool  officer  of  the  Company's  army  should  have  to  deal  with  them 
in  such  a  temper,  363  miles  from  our  frontier.  Greneral  Pollock 
managed  them  exceedingly  well,  but  he  did  not  venture  to  enter 
the  pass  till  April  (two  months  and  a  half  after  Brigadier  Wild's 
failure),  when  reinforced  by  the  3rd  Dragoons,  a  regiment  of 
cavalry,  a  troop  of  horse  artillery,  and  other  details.  Lord  Hill 
will  at  once  perceive  that  the  morale  must  have  been  low  when 
horse  artilkry  and  cavalry  were  required  to  induce  the  General 
to  advance,  with  confidence,  through  this  formidable  pass.  Any 
precipitancy  on  the  part  of  a  general  officer  panting  for  fame 
might  have  had  the  worst  effect.  I  must  now  return  to  Sir  J. 
Thackwell's  appeal.  The  General  Order,  quoted  very  ingenuously 
by  the  Major-General,  contains  a  full  and  complete  reply  to  his 
complaint.  He  was  senior  to  Major-General  Pollock,  and  his 
proceeding  with  the  3rd  Dragoons  would  have  interfered  with  a 
divisional  command.  He  certainly  did  oflfer  to  serve  under  that 
officer,  but  I  could  not  recommend  the  government  to  suffer  him 
to  do  so,  all  such  arrangements  being  in  my  opinion  most  &ulty 
in  principle,  and,  depending  chiefly  on  good  temper,  dangerous. 
I  have  since  called  up  Sir  Joseph  Thackwell  to  my  head-quarters 
in  order  to  command  the  cavalry,  had  it  been  necessary  (as  seemed 
possible)  last  winter  to  collect  an  army.  The  Major-Greneral  is 
in  error  when  he  states  that  I  intended  him  to  command  an 
army  of  observation  on  the  Sutlej:  that  post  I  retained  for 
myself,  aided  by  Lieutenant-General  Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot.  In 
November  next  it  is  proposed  to  collect  an  army  of  reserve  in 
this  vicinity,  and  Sir  J.  Thackwell  will  have  the  command  of 
the  cavalry.  I  cannot  have  the  smallest  objection  to  the  Major- 
General's  bringing  himself  to  Lord  Hill's  notice  as  he  has  done, 
except  the  infraction  of  a  rule  in  doing  so  direct.  But  if  he  had 
remembered  that  he  commanded  the  cavalry  of  Lord  Keane's 
army;  had  been  twice  named  by  me  for  similar  duty;  has  long 
been  a  Brigadier  commwidcvxi^  «i  Kv^m^iTR.  ^^t^taAion;  he  would 
hove  found  little  cauae  lo  cota^iva.  ^l  '^  iotXxiTL^  <st  t^kj^^^x.  \ 


AFPSNDIX.  683 

have  known  many  of  her  Majesty's  officers,  Colonels  and  old 
Lieutenant-Colonels,  to  reside  ten  to  fifteen  years  in  India  with- 
out having  had  any  such  opportunities  of  service  and  distinction, 
and  further  to  command  divisions  without  receiving  the  smallest 
remuneration. 

I  have  the  honour,  Ac. 

(Signed)        J.  NiCOLLfl. 
P.S. — I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  Governor-General  has  dis- 
placed all  the  minor  political  agents  in  Afghanistan  but  one,  and 
entrusted  the  power  to  the  Generals  Pollock  and  Nott. 

J.N. 

Simlah,  2nd  Sept.,  1842. 

IMS.  Records,'] 


[Vol.  II.,  Book  VIII.] 

BIB  GEORGE  POLLOCK  TO  LORD  ELLENBOROUGH. 

[Touching  the  Destruction  of  Bazaar  at  Caubul,  and  the  imputed  Excessei 

of  the  Troops.] 

April  2nd,  1843,  Allahabad 

My  Lord, 

I  have  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  Lordship's  letter, 
dated  23rd  ultimo,  intimating  that  disapprobation  had  been  ex- 
pressed at  the  destruction  of  the  bazaar  and  mosque  at  Caubul, 
and  of  trees;  also,  that  excesses  have  been  imputed  to  the  troops. 
It  is  difficult  to  grapple  with  vague  and  anonymous  accusa- 
tions against  the  conduct  of  the  troops.  Many  detailed  state- 
ments in  the  newspapers  were  entirely  unfounded^  and  were  got 
up  with  the  sole  object  of  creating  a  sensation;  but  I  confess  that 
if  individual  and  isolated  instances  of  excess  had  occurred,  I 
should  not  have  been  much  surprised,  composed,  as  all  Indian 
armies  are,  of  such  a  heterogeneous  mass,  comprising  all  classes  and 
castes ;  more  than  two-thirds  of  whom  are  either  public  or  pri- 
vate servants  and  adventurers,  who,  though  nominally  following 
some  occupation  useful  to  an  army,  proceed  with  it  for  the  sole 
purpose  of  plundering  when  a  favourable  opportunity  offers. 
Some  excesses  may,  unknown  to  me,  have  been  committed ;  but 
I  will  venture  to  assert  that  no  troops  ever  conducted  themselves 
with  more  forbearance  under  such  unprecedented  aggravations: 
perhaps  no  army  was  ever  placed  in  a  viioi^  Xr^Vxi^^ANxaJ^wi* 


684  APPENDIX. 

During  the  whole  course  of  their  progress  towards  the  capital 
they  had  ocular  proofs  of  the  treachery  and  brutality  of  a  merci- 
less enemy;  but  still  I  am  unable  to  call  to  mind  any  wanton, 
deliberate  act  of  inhumanity  on  the  part  of  the  troops ;  and  can- 
not but  regret  that  the  culpable  instances  alluded  to  have  not 
been  specified,  as  I  may  possibly  be  suspected  of  suppressing 
facts.  This,  however,  I  beg  to  assure  your  Lordship  I  have  no 
wish  to  do. 

The  feeling  of  the  Hindoos  against  the  Afghans  was  tcij 
naturally  strong,  in  consequence  of  the  latter  having  deprived  the 
Hindoos  of  their  caste  whenever  they  came  into  their  power; 
but  no  troops  could  feel  otherwise  than  excited  at  the  sight  of 
the  skeletons  of  their  late  brethren  in  arms,  which  still  lie  cover- 
ing the  road  from  Gundamuck  to  Caubul ;  and  as  if  the  more  to 
rouse  a  spirit  of  revenge,  the  barricade  at  JugduUuck  was  lite- 
rally covered  with  skeletons. 

What  I  have  stated  above  will  not  be  considered  as  justifying 
excesses  on  the  part  of  a  British  army ;  but  it  may  be  admitted  in 
extenuation  of  individual  cases. 

A  few  days  previous  to  the  march  of  the  brigade  under  Bri- 
gadier Monteith,  an  European  was  murdered  by  the  Afghans  at 
Jellalabad.  The  destruction  of  Alii  Boghan  by  some  men  under 
Brigadier  Monteith *s  command,  was  caused  by  one  of  those 
sudden  bursts  of  feeling  which,  being  wholly  unexpected,  no  pre- 
cautions were  deemed  necessary;  but  it  was  a  solitary  instance, 
and  occurred  nearly  as  follows: — Some  camp  followers  entered 
the  village,  and  having  found  parts  of  the  dress  of  some  of  our 
soldiers  who  had  been  massacred  on  the  mai*ch  from  Caubul,  a 
number  of  men  proceeded  to  the  village,  which  was  eventually 
burnt,  whether  accidentally  or  intentionally  is  doubtful,  so  very 
soon  was  the  mischief  perpetrated,  that  the  Brigadier  was  hardly 
aware  of  it  till  the  place  was  in  flames.  He  immediately  took 
measures  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  such  scenes,  and  I  wrote  in 
strong  terms  on  the  subject.  Subsequent  to  that  event,  during 
the  whole  time  the  Brigadier  was  detached,  I  heard  of  no  more 
excesses.  In  the  instance  of  Alii  Boghan,  after  a  most  minute 
inquiry,  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  not  a  man,  woman,  or  child 
was  injured,  and  I  know  the  greater  part  of  the  property  was  re- 
turned to  the  head  man  of  the  village. 

In  subsequent  engagements  with  the  enemy  at  Mamookail, 
JugduUuck,  and  Tezeen,  I  neither  saw  nor  heard  of  any  excesses. 


APPENDIX.  685 

A  report  was  circulated  that  an  European  was  burnt  alive  at 
JugduUuck,  and  that  two  Afghans  were  burnt  in  like  manner  by 
our  troops  in  revenge,  the  whole  of  which  was  an  infamous 
fabrication. 

I  know  of  no  instances  of  cruelty  or  excess  at  Istaliff;  and  the 
feeling  of  the  army  could  not  have  been  very  prone  thereto  when 
about  four  or  five  hundred  women  and  children  were  protected 
from  insult  and  injury,  and  made  over  to  their  families  after  the 
engagement.  If  any  excess  has  been  committed  which  I  have 
not  noticed,  I  can  only  affirm  that  I  recollect  none ;  and  I  beg  to 
add,  that  the  praise  bestowed  on  the  troops  on  a  late  occasion  by 
your  Lordship  for  their  **  forbearance  in  victory,"  is,  as  far  as  I 
am  able  to  judge,  well  merited;  and  I  trust  your  Lordship  will 
never  have  cause  to  alter  your  good  opinion  of  their  conduct. 

On  the  subject  of  trees  being  destroyed,  I  am  unable  to  call  to 
recollection  what  occurred  in  Brigadier  Monteith's  detachment; 
and  the  only  instance  of  their  destruction,  which  came  under  my 
personal  observation,  was  at  Mamookail,  where  the  ground  was 
such  that  I  was  obliged  to  encamp  the  different  regiments  in  the 
gardens  surrounding  the  fort.  Without  this  precaution  I  should 
have  been  subjecting  the  troops  to  constant  annoyance,  as  the 
enemy  would  certainly  have  occupied  them.  The  destruction  of 
the  vines  and  other  small  plants  was  almost  a  necessary  conse- 
quence of  our  occupying  Mamookail. 

With  regard  to  the  destruction  of  the  Caubul  bazaar  and 
mosque,  it  may  possibly  be  supposed  that  with  them  was  de- 
stroyed other  property;  but  this  was  not  the  case. 

The  insult  offered  to  the  remains  of  the  late  Envoy  was  noto- 
rious to  the  whole  of  the  chiefs  and  inhabitants  of  the  city.  They 
admitted  that  the  mutilated  body  was  dragged  through  the 
bazaar  and  treated  by  the  populace  with  every  indignity,  and 
eventually  hung  there,  that  every  Afghan  in  the  city  might  wit- 
ness the  treatment  of  the  remains  of  the  representative  of  the 
British  Government.  The  intended  measure  was  communicated 
to  the  chiefs,  who  not  only  admitted  the  propriety  of  destroying 
a  place  where  such  scenes  had  transpired,  but  offered  to,  and  did, 
accompany  the  party  sent  for  its  destruction.  Those  who  resided 
at  and  near  the  bazaar  had  two  days'  previous  notice  to  remove 
their  property  (which  they  did),  and  I  am  not  aware  of  any  in- 
stances of  violence  having  occurred.     It  was  not  possible  entirely 


686  APPENDIX. 

to  prevent  plundering;  but  during  the  time  the  engineer  was  em- 
ployed in  the  destruction  of  the  bazaar  and  motque  attached,  both 
cavalry  and  infantry  were  on  duty  in  the  city  to  prevent  any 

outrage. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

Qeo.  Polloci:. 

IMS.  Records.'] 


FROM  QENEEAL  POLLOCK  TO  LORD  ELLENBOBGUGH. 

Ghazeepore,  lOth  April,  1843. 

My  Lord, 

Since  I  had  the  honour  to  address  your  Lordship  on  the 
2nd  instant,  in  reply  to  your  Lordship's  letter  dated  the  23rd 
ultimo^  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  I  could  not  produce  better 
proof  of  the  forbearance  of  the  troops  under  my  command  than 
by  a  reference  to  their  conduct  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  of 
September  last.  I  have  already  officially  detailed  the  number  of 
troops  which  accompanied  me  on  the  occasion  of  planting  the 
colours  on  the  Balla  Hissar.  It  was  deemed  advisable  on  that 
occasion  to  go  through  a  part  of  the  city,  and  although  the  troops 
had  arrived  only  the  day  before  from  a  march  which  was  abun- 
dantly calculated  to  irritate  and  exasperate  them,  they  so  fully 
and  literally  obeyed  the  orders  I  had  previously  given,  that  not  a 
house  or  an  individual  was  injured,  either  in  going  or  returning 
from  the  Balla-Hissar.  The  destruction  of  the  residence  of  Eoda 
Bux,  the  chief  of  Teezeen,  may  perhaps  have  been  considered  an 
excess ;  I  will  therefore  explain,  that  during  the  time  the  army  re- 
mained in  advance  of  Teezeen^  the  chief  of  that  place  was  the 
cause  of  our  communication  being  cut  ofif.  He  was  repeatedly 
warned  what  the  consequences  would  be,  when  an  opportunity 
offered,  if  he  persisted  in  such  a  course;  but  I  beg  to  add  that 
the  injury  sustained  by  the  chief  in  the  destruction  of  his  resi- 
dence entailed  no  loss  on  others  that  I  am  aware  of,  as  the  injury 
done  was  confined  almost  entirely  to  the  fortified  dwelling. 
Forage  was  found  there  and  brought  to  camp,  but  not  an  indi- 
vidual was  injured. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c.  &o. 

Geo.  Pollock. 


APPENDIX.  687 


FROM  GENERAL  POLLOCK  TO  THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL. 

Dinapore,  18th  Aprils  1843. 

Sir, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  dated  the  29th  ult.,  which  awaited  my  arrival  here.  I  re- 
gret that  I  was  not  sooner  in  possession  of  your  letter,  as  I  fear 
this  will  be  too  late  for  the  purpose  required.  Nearly  all  the  in- 
formation it  is  in  my  power  to  give  is  contained  in  the  accom- 
panying copies  of  letters  which  I  have  addressed  to  the  Right 
Honourable  the  Governor-General  in  reply  to  a  reference  his 
Lordship  was  pleased  to  make  to  me.  With  respect  to  the  extent 
of  injury  done  by  the  brigade  under  Brigadier  Monteith,  I  am 
unable  to  give  any  detailed  account.  The  provisions,  grain,  &c., 
and  materials  for  building,  were  taken  from  those  of  the  inha- 
bitants who  were  openly  opposed  to  our  troops;  but  in  both  cases 
the  cost  of  things  taken,  were  carried  to  the  account  of  govern- 
ment. I  have  already,  in  my  letters  to  his  Lordship,  stated  that  I 
am  not  aware  of  any  Afghans  having  been  killed  when  unresist- 
ing, or  from  any  feeling  of  revenge  on  the  part  of  the  troops. 
Torabauz  Khan,  the  chief  of  Lallpoora,  and  the  governor  of 
Jellalabad,  accompanied  the  brigade  to  point  out  what  property 
should  be  respected.  With  regard  to  the  violation  of  women,  I 
heard  of  no  instance  of  the  kind;  and  I  am  quite  sure  that 
Brigadier  Monteath  would  have  done  his  utmost  to  prevent  such 
excesses.  I  have  stated  to  his  Lordship  what  occurred  at  Mamoo 
Kail,  and  I  know  most  positively  that  no  Afghan  was  killed  on 
that  occasion  except  in  fair  fighting.  The  families  had,  I  believe, 
gone  the  day  before  the  place  was  taken.  I  cannot  say  when  or 
by  whom  the  fort  or  adjoining  houses  were  set  fire  to.  I  passed 
through  with  the  right  column  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  and  did 
not  return  till  the  afternoon,  when  I  had  determined  to  encamp 
there.  On  my  return  I  found  Brigadier  TuUoch  with  his  column 
(the  left)  occupying  the  gardens.  The  fort  and  adjacent  houses 
were  still  burning.  On  the  return  of  the  whole  of  the  troops,  it 
was  necessary  for  their  security  to  take  advantage  of  the  gardens 
surrounded  by  walls,  and  the  men  were  accordingly  encamped 
there.  The  destruction  of  the  vines  was  a  necessary  consequence, 
as  every  one  must  know  who  has  seen  how  grapes  are  cultivated 


688  APPENDIX. 

in  Afghanistan.  There  were  very  few  trees  cut  down,  but  the 
bark  of  a  number  of  them  was  taken  for  about  two  or  three 
inches.  With  reference  to  the  third  paragraph  of  your  letter,  I 
beg  to  state,  that  from  the  date  of  my  arrival  at  Caubul  on  the 
15th  of  September,  the  inhabitants  commenced  Fetursing  to- 
their  houses.  They  had  assurances  from  me  of  protection,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  the  covered  bazaar,  I  did  my  utmost  to 
protect  both  the  inhabitants  and  their  dwellings  from  injury.  I 
have  already  stated  to  his  Lordship  why  I  considered  that  particu- 
lar spot  (the  bazaar)  should  sufier,  and  on  the  9th  of  October  the 
engineer  commenced  his  operations.  I  believe  I  am  quite  justified 
in  stating  that  no  lives  were  lost;  the  private  property  had  been 
removed,  and  I  had  both  cavalry  and  infantry  on  duty  in  the  city 
to  prevent  plundering.  Some  injury  was  no  doubt  sustained  by 
the  city,  but  the  damage  done  even  when  we  left  it  was  partial 
and  comparatively  trivial.  I  consider  it  mere  justice  to  the 
troops  who  proceeded  under  my  command  to  Caubul,  and  who 
passed  over  scenes  which  were  particularly  calculated  to  cause 
great  excitement  among  them,  to  state,  that  their  conduct  on  pro- 
ceeding to  the  Balla  Hissar  (passing  through  a  part  of  the  city) 
was  quite  unexceptionable,  and  the  good  effect  resulting  there- 
from was  immediately  felt:  confidence  was  restored;  in  proof  of 
which  I  may  state  that  supplies  both  of  grain  and  forage  were 
brought  in  abundantly,  everything  being  paid  for.  I  have  no 
memorandum  from  which' to  quote  the  exact  quantities  of  grain 
which  came  into  camp,  but  my  recollection  of  the  quantities  in 
round  numbers  is  as  follows: — The  first  day  500  maunds,  second 
day  1000  maunds,  third  day  1600  maunds,  fourth  day  2000 
maunds,  fifth  day  1000  maunds.  The  falling  off  of  the  supplies 
on  the  fifth  day  was  the  consequence,  I  was  told,  of  some  of  the 
men  of  General  Nott's  force  having  plundered  those  who  were 
bringing  in  supplies.  I  wrote  to  General  Nott  on  the  subject; 
but  from  that  period  the  supplies  never  came  in  so  freely  as 
before,  and  I  am  sorry  to  add  that  many  complaints  were  made. 
I  have  hitherto  been  silent  on  this  subject,  and  should  have 
continued  so,  for  reasons  which  it  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  ex- 
plain ;  but  as  the  third  paragraph  of  your  letter  calls  for  a  more 
particular  report  than  I  have  hitherto  made,  I  reluctantly  forward 
the  accompanying  documents,  upon  which  it  is  unnecessary  for 
me  to  make  any  commeii\;&. 


APPENDIX.  689 

I  beg)  however,  to  state  distinctly,  that  until  plundering  com- 
menced supplies  of  every  description  were  abundant,  and  the 
people  were  fast  returning  to  the  city.  In  reply  to  that  part  of 
the  third  paragraph  In  which  I  am  directed  to  state  what  Injury  I 
understood  had  been  committed  by  the  Candahar  force  after  my 
march,  I  have  merely  to  observe,  that  from  all  I  had  heard  I 
thought  it  advisable  that  the  whole  foix^e  should  move  from 
Caubul  the  same  day ;  and  this  precaution,  I  have  reason  to  believe, 
prevented  some  excesses. 

In  reply  to  the  fourth  paragraph^  I  believe  I  may  with  great 
truth  state  that  no  Afghans  were  destroyed  in  cold  bloody  either 
before  or  after  reaching  Caubul.  No  women  were  either  dis- 
honoured or  murdered,  that  I  am  aware  of.  With  regard  to  the 
destruction  of  that  particular  part  of  the  Caubul  bazaar  where  the 
envoy's  remains  were  treated  with  indignity,  and  brutally  dragged 
through  to  be  there  dishonoured  and  spit  upon  by  every  Mussul- 
man^  I  admit  that  I  considered  It  the  most  suitable  place  In  which 
to  leave  decided  proofs  of  the  power  of  the  British  army,  with- 
out Impeaching  Its  humanity. 

I  have,  as  directed  by  you,  forwarded  a  copy  of  this  letter  and 
the  original  documents  to  Colonel  Stewart,  for  the  information  of 
the  Governor-General. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir,&c.  &c.  &c. 

Geo.  Pollock. 


POLITICAL  DEPARTMENT. 

THE   COUBT  OF   DIRECTOBS  TO  THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL   OP 

IINDA  IN  COUNCIL. 

London,  2nd  April,  1843. 

The  Secret  Committee  has  communicated  to  us  the  letters 
noted  below*  relating  to  Inquiries  addressed  by  order  of  the 
Governor-General  to  the  General  Officers  lately  commanding  in 

*  Extract    letter   from    the    Go-        Major-General    Pollock    to   Lord 

vemor-General  to  tlie  Secret  Com-  Ellenborough,  2nd  April,  1843. 
mittee,  No.  26,  dated  6th  April,  1843.        Major-General  Pollock  to    Lord 

Letter  from  Major-General  Mac-  Ellenborough,  16th  April,  1843. 
Caskil  to  Military  Secretary  to  Go-        Major-General    Nott  to    Military 

vernmenty  2nd  April,  1843.  Secretary  to   Government  of  India, 

Letter  to  Adjutant-General  Lum-  4th  April,  1843. 
Icy,  2nd   April,   1843,    with    enclo-        Major-General  Nott  ls\  KASjaXawsN*- 

sure.  Oeti^t^X  VaxtxAs^  ,  V^  Kv^^*'^^*^^  - 

VOL.  IL  2  i: 


690  APPENDIX. 

Afghanistan,  on  the  subject  of  certain  rumours  of  outrages  alleged 
to  have  been  perpetrated  by  the  British  toops,  and  conveying 
replies  to  those  inquiries  from  Major-Generals  Sir  George  Pollock^ 
Sir  William  Nott,»  and  Sir  John  M^Caskill. 

When  these  rumours  were  first  brought  to  our  knowledge,  we 
deemed  them  to  be  great  exaggerations,  if  not  altogether  un- 
founded; and  we  did  not  doubt  that  we  should  receive,  in  due 
course,  full  and  exculpatory  explanations  as  to  what  had  actually 
taken  place. 

Whilst  we  regard  the  statements  made  by  the  three  General 
Officers  as  generally  satisfactory,  we  cannot  avoid  the  expression 
of  our  regret  that  Sir  William  Nott  should  have  been  hurried, 
by  the  warmth  of  his  feelings,  into  throwing  on  the  government 
which  he  served  the  reflection  contained  in  the  last  paragraph  of 
that  letter^  and  which  was  quite  unnecessary  to  the  vindication 
of  his  own  character,  and  that  of  the  troops  under  his  command. 
Neither  can  we  do  otherwise  than  notice  with  regret  the  pub- 
lication of  Sir  William  Nott's  letter  in  an  English  newspaper. 
We  have  not  the  means  of  ascertaining  how  this  irregularity 
occurred,  but  we  must  observe,  that  unauthorised  disclosure  of 
official  correspondence  on  any  subject  is  highly  improper,  and 
may  lead  to  the  greatest  inconvenience. 

We  are,  &c. 
(Signed)      John  Cotton.  E,  Macnaghten. 

John  Shepherd.       W.  H.  C.  Plowden. 

W.  AsTELL.  John  Masterman. 

C.  Mills.  W.  B.  Batley. 

J.  LUSHINGTON.  Hy.  ALEXANDER. 

Russell  Ellis.         M.  T.  Smith. 
R.  Jenkins. 

[MS.  Records,'} 

•  Sir  W.  Nott's  letter  is  to  be  found     Quarterly  Review  (3u\y^  1845^,  and 
in  Captain  M'Neill's  narrative,  in  the    elsewhere. — Author, 


THE   END. 


>VVllTWiO   BE.KV^'JO^T  \!LO\i««^  «\^K»1>.  J^ 


^: 


f  ^m 


'   •#> 


iiiiiiiiiiiiia 

3  9015  02509  8875 


■i 


DO  NOT  REMOVE 

OR 
Mf  \i 


