2                                       From Reich to State
up dominating the centre and that they produce the small sparks that start
great ﬁres, to paraphrase Braudel.2
   The Rhineland’s historiography reﬂects its status as a borderland. It mir-
rors the present and reﬂects the past, with each generation of historian ad-
dressing contemporary concerns. The comparatively brief period of French
dominance during the revolutionary era has attracted controversy ever since
the departure of the last Napoleonic grognard.3 Until the mid-twentieth
century, competing French and German national agendas dominated. For
Germans, the Rhine became a symbol of resistance to French imperialism,
whilst generations of Frenchmen were taught that the river represented
civilisation’s frontier with barbarism. Rhinelanders, caught in-between,
felt obliged to assert their essentially German culture against claims from
both sides that they tended towards francophilia and ultramontanism.4
Nationalistic stridency increased in times of Franco-German conﬂict, es-
pecially in the aftermath of the First World War, when historians sought to
justify their countries’ claims to the Rhineland by reference to Napoleonic
rule a century earlier. Only those least preoccupied with contemporary
politics and closest to the sources – local historians and archivists – then
produced scholarly works that have withstood the tests of time.5

2 Fernand Braudel, quoted by Raimondo Strassoldo, ‘Centre-Periphery and System-Boundary: Cul-
    turological Perspectives’, in Jean Gottmann (ed.), Centre and Periphery. Spatial Variation in Politics
    (Beverly Hills and London, 1980), p. 48.
3 The historiography of the Rhineland in the revolutionary age is itself the subject of a number of
  articles and at least one doctoral dissertation. An accessible survey is provided by T. C. W. Blanning,
  The French Revolution in Germany. Occupation and Resistance in the Rhineland 1792–1802 (Oxford,
  1983), pp. 1–17.
4 Justus Hashagen, for example, felt obliged to introduce his in other respects scholarly study of
  the Rhineland under French rule with an explicit refutation of accusations that Rhinelanders were
  somehow pro-French. Justus Hashagen, Das Rheinland und die französische Herrschaft, Beiträge zur
  Charakteristik ihres Gegensatzes (Bonn, 1908), p. 2. Such accusations were no more forthrightly
  expressed than by Heinrich von Treitschke, who compared Prussia’s ﬁght for German freedom with
  the ‘weak willed population’ of ‘the crozier-ridden lands of the Rhine’, who had ‘become so foreign
  to the nation’. Heinrich von Treitschke, History of Germany in the Nineteenth Century (translated by
  Eden Paul and Cedar Paul, London, 1915), pp. 31–2, 59, 73, 107, 138, 146, 149, 200–3, 219. For the
  anti-Catholicism of the small-German school, see Helmut Walser Smith, German Nationalism and
  Religious Conﬂict. Culture, Ideology, Politics, 1870–1914 (Princeton, 1995), pp. 27–34.
5 Two representatives of the post-First World War nationalistic French genre are L. Engerand and
  Jean de Pange, listed in the bibliography. Equally nationalistic, though of greater scholarly worth, is
  Philippe Sagnac, Le Rhin français pendant la Révolution et l’Empire (Paris, 1918). On the German side,
  see the works by Herrmann Oncken, Alexander Conrady and Max Springer, also listed in the bibliog-
  raphy. Not all publications produced in the interwar period can be dismissed as crudely nationalistic.
  Max Braubach’s contributions on the history of electoral Cologne, for example, remain of great
  value. See especially Max Franz von Österreich, letzter Kurfürst von Köln und Fürstbischof von Münster
  (Münster, 1925). Amongst the best products of Landesgeschichte are Carl Georg Bockenheimer’s vari-
  ous publications on the history of Mainz and the numerous contributions published in the Zeitschrift
  des Aachener Geschichtsvereins. As for the professional archivist, a great debt is owed by historians of
