                                 Preface


This book has been long in gestation, and in that time I have incurred
innumerable debts. My thanks are due in the ﬁrst instance to the British
Academy, whose three-year studentship provided the necessary ﬁnancial
support for my doctoral research completed in Cambridge in 1996, and
upon which much of this book is based. A smaller British Academy grant
facilitated a subsequent follow-up visit to the Rhenish archives in 1998.
Financial support for research in Germany in 1994/5 was provided by
the European Commission-administered ERASMUS Inter-University Co-
operation Programme, for which I offer my thanks. I must also record my
gratitude to Nufﬁeld College, Oxford, for the Prize Research Fellowship
they awarded me from 1996 to 1999. This, together with grants from the
College, allowed me to conduct additional archival research in Berlin in
1997, and to attend conferences around the world where I beneﬁted from
those exchanges that are so essential to academic scholarship. This book
has evolved and matured through such exchange and discussion. With this
in mind, my greatest debt of all is to Professor Tim Blanning, my doctoral
supervisor, whose criticism and encouragement, not to mention practical
assistance, has proved invaluable over the last nine years. I am also deeply
grateful to Professor Wolfgang Schieder, for the welcome he extended me
during my visits to Cologne, and to Dr Geoffrey Ellis and Dr Brendan
Simms. Many other individuals, too numerous to mention by name, have
assisted along the way – the archivists and librarians in Aachen, Berlin,
Cambridge, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Koblenz, London, Oxford and Paris;
the participants in the many seminars and conferences where I have pre-
sented my ﬁndings and ﬂoated ideas; and, most recently, my colleagues at
the School of History, Queen’s University Belfast, and especially Professor
Peter Jupp. Finally, I would like to thank my wife, for her unfailing support,
which has been moral, practical and professional. It goes without saying, I
hope, that the responsibility for the various defects of this work is entirely
my own.

Queen’s University, Belfast                               michael rowe
July 2002
                                     viii
