                                        chap t e r 1

                                     Introduction




This book is concerned with borderlands and transitions. Geographically,
it examines a region bordering Germany and France; chronologically, it
spans the Old Regime, French Revolution, Napoleon and Restoration. Two
reasons justify this focus. First, the Rhineland experienced with unique in-
tensity episodes that shaped modern Germany: the Enlightenment, French
Revolution, Napoleon, Prussian reform movement and industrialisation.
Each contributed to the development of the state. Second, the modern
state that eventually triumphed represented only one of several compet-
ing forms that for centuries had co-existed in Europe.1 Alternatives – the
city state, the ecclesiastical state and universal empire – remained uniquely
strong and able to command allegiances in the Rhineland until the late
eighteenth century, when they were ﬁnally overthrown by outside forces.
The transformation was completed in a generation.
   The Rhineland was especially exposed to the French Revolution. This
swept away old structures and created the modern state with its absolute
claims to sovereignty. In itself, the state’s triumphant progress is a familiar
story, often recounted in different contexts. The eventual outcome never
appears in doubt, despite resistance and continuities that persist for several
generations before succumbing. Yet, such an account is incomplete. It rep-
resents the centre’s perspective, epitomised by Napoleon’s interior minister
who impatiently expected government commands to ﬂow to every local-
ity with electric speed. It dismisses opposition as futile and obstructive to
progress. It ignores that politics in Germany at least remained primarily
local until the late nineteenth century. It ascribes to the locality the status
of victim. It fails to recognise that historically peripheries have often ended

1 For the comparatively slow development of the concept ‘sovereign state’ in Germany, see Hans Boldt
 and Reinhart Koselleck, ‘Staat und Souveränität’, in Otto Brunner, Werner Conze and Reinhart
 Koselleck (eds.), Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe (8 vols., Stuttgart, 1972–97), 6, pp. 1–6.



                                                 1
