6                                     From Reich to State
and so extended back by ﬁfty years the beginnings of Germany’s modern
constitutional development.18
   The Rhineland formed the western extremity of the ‘unique combi-
nation of centrifugal dispersion of political authority counterbalanced by
the centripetal forces of imperial law and German culture’19 that was the
Empire. More than any other region apart from the south-west, it epit-
omised the values upon which the Empire rested. Its political landscape,
dominated by ecclesiastical electorates, imperial cities, home towns, im-
perial abbeys, counts and knights, and a plethora of other entities that
elsewhere had succumbed to early-modern state formation, survived so
long thanks to the protective legal cocoon provided by the Reich. In that
sense, the parochial depended upon the universal, a connection still evident
in Cologne whose gothic cathedral boasts prebendal stools reserved for the
Emperor and Pope. Historically, the Rhineland is rich in other sources that
help us better understand the alternative order the Reich represented: its
foundations, legitimacy and potential for reform.
   Rehabilitation of the Reich has extended to encompass entities depen-
dent upon it. These included the ecclesiastical states, the archetypal terri-
torial unit in the pre-revolutionary Rhineland that earned it the unﬂatter-
ing sobriquet ‘die Pfaffengasse’ (‘the priests’ alley’). Worthy of ridicule and
condemnation for their religious intolerance and lack of dynamism, earlier
generations of nationalist historian identiﬁed their major failing as their in-
ability to protect Germany’s western marches from French expansionism.20
However, as with the Reich, the adoption of criteria other than military
power as a measure of success, including education, culture and general
quality of life, has shed a more positive light on these states. They might
have represented the antithesis of the Protestant work ethic, but (probably
for that reason) commanded the allegiance of their subjects.21 The same

18 Horst Dippel, ‘Der Verfassungsdiskurs im ausgehenden 18. Jahrhundert und die Grundlegung
   einer liberaldemokratischen Verfassungstradition in Deutschland’, in idem (ed.), Die Anfänge des
   Konstitutionalismus in Deutschland. Texte deutscher Verfassungsentwürfe am Ende des 18. Jahrhunderts
   (Frankfurt a. M., 1991), pp. 8–9. The full reference to Breuilly is John Breuilly, ‘The National Idea
   in Modern German History’, in idem (ed.), The State of Germany. The National Idea in the Making,
   Unmaking and Remaking of a Modern Nation-State (London and New York, 1992), p. 3.
19 Another pithy summary that encapsulates the essential nature of the Reich, on this occasion from
   T. C. W. Blanning, Joseph II (London, 1994), p. 9.
20 Within this context, it is worth noting that German travellers returning from Paris during the
   French Revolution commonly held up the ecclesiastical Rhenish states as a foil to the dynamism and
   progressiveness of France. Uwe Hentschel, ‘Revolutionserlebnis und Deutschlandbild’, Zeitschrift
   für historische Forschung 20 (1993), pp. 321–44.
21 Peter Hersche, ‘Intendierte Rückständigkeit: Zur Charakteristik des geistlichen Staates im Alten
   Reich’, in Georg Schmidt (ed.), Stände und Gesellschaft im Alten Reich (Stuttgart, 1989), pp. 147–8.
   In English, see above all T. C. W. Blanning, Reform and Revolution in Mainz 1743–1803 (Cambridge,
   1974).
