                                          chap t e r 2

                             Land, Stadt and Reich




Rivers convey ideas as well as merchandise, Victor Hugo observed during his
Rhineland tour of 1838–9.1 Though essentially a geographical expression,
the ‘Rhineland’ encompasses a distinct if diverse historico-cultural space,
albeit one whose precise limits have varied over time. Like many, Hugo
was especially captivated by the central stretch of the river, the Middle
Rhine, which ﬂows between Bingen and Bonn. Enclosed by rocky hills,
this segment presents the familiar panorama of ruined castles and vineyards
clinging precariously to terraces. Less known are the upper reaches of the
Rhine, between Basel and Mainz, where the wide and shallow river valley
is bordered by the Black Forest in the east and Vosges in the west, and
the lower reaches north of Bonn, where the Rhine undergoes its second
metamorphosis as it merges with the great northern European plain.2
   The Rhine has moulded its surrounding landscape and shaped the civil-
isation that developed along its banks over the last two millennia. Rome,
whose legions stood on its banks for the ﬁrst four centuries after Christ, left
its indelible mark in the form of cities – notably, Moguntiacum (Mainz),
Conﬂuentia (Koblenz), Colonia Agrippina (Cologne) and Augusta
Treverorum (Trier) – and the Church. These survived Roman rule and
the subsequent Frankish epoch that closed with the Carolingian Empire’s
collapse in the ninth century. They survived over the following cen-
turies, within the framework of the Holy Roman Empire. Architecturally,
Romanesque abbeys and cathedrals attest to the medieval Church’s vitality.
Institutionally, it was reﬂected in the concentration of three archbishoprics
within the region: Mainz, Cologne and Trier. These combined spiritual and
temporal power and, together with the only signiﬁcant secular ruler, the
Counts Palatine, were elevated to electors in the fourteenth century. Con-
currently, Rome’s other great legacy, the cities, also witnessed a highpoint

1 Victor Hugo, Le Rhin. Lettres à un ami (2 vols., Paris, 1912, Nelson edn), 1, pp. 189–90.
2 Étienne Juillard, L’Europe rhénane. Géographie d’un grand éspace (Paris, 1968).


                                                   13
