                                          Introduction                                               7
applies to the imperial cities and home towns, entities that also previously
faced condemnation as conservative bastions against ‘movers and doers’,
but have more recently enjoyed some rehabilitation as a result of a separate
debate over the origins of early German liberalism, discussed below.22
   Research into the origins of German liberalism and constitutional devel-
opment connects with another institution dependent upon the Reich for
survival in the eighteenth century, the representative estates (Landstände).
These, whose precise composition varied where they persisted, not only
survived but experienced a revival before the French Revolution. They
served to check the onward march of princely absolutism. Scholarly de-
bate revolves around the extent to which they represented precursors of
nineteenth-century parliaments. Opinions remain divided on this, and the
danger of assessing the Landstände according to whether they resembled
nineteenth-century assemblies needs to be recognised. Those who argue
that they offered no prospect for further development point to their foun-
dation upon the concept of a society of orders, and failure to embrace
the notion of individual rights that underpins all modern constitutions.
According to this line, the intervening phase of ‘bureaucratic state abso-
lutism’ of the Napoleonic period that destroyed the old estates was, para-
doxically, a necessary precursor for later liberal constitutional development.
The alternative explanation asserts that whether or not the Landstände were
open to reform depended upon the nature of the society they represented:
in places like Württemberg, where the bourgeoisie provided the domi-
nant element, the estates were more progressive than in the Mecklenburg
duchies, dominated by the landed nobility. This explanation privileges
the socio-economic over the institutional. Whether the Landstände were
‘Reformfähig’ depends upon where one looks.23 Certainly, the Landstände
remained signiﬁcant in the eighteenth-century Rhineland, and this did
have implications for later developments, as this book will show.
   Whether the order of Reich, Land and Stadt was ‘Reformfähig’ in the late
eighteenth century might appear pointless speculation. After all, did not
Napoleon sweep aside this order, preparing the ground for the sovereign
22 For an accessible and still useful example of the older, more negative literature on the home towns,
   see Mack Walker, German Home Towns: Community, State, General Estate, 1648–1871 (New York,
   1971).
23 The volume of literature produced over the last twenty years that is devoted to the representa-
   tive estates is considerable. Groundbreaking, in many respects, was the collection of essays in Karl
   Bosl and Karl Möckl (eds.), Der moderne Parlamentarismus und seine Grundlagen in der ständischen
   Repräsentation (Berlin, 1977). Amongst more recent contributions, see Eberhard Weis, ‘Kontinuität
   und Diskontinuität zwischen den Ständen des 18. Jahrhunderts und den frühkonstitutionellen
   Parlamenten von 1818/1819 in Bayern und Württemberg’, in idem (ed.), Deutschland und Frankreich
   um 1800. Aufklärung – Revolution – Reform (Munich, 1990), pp. 218–42; and Dippel, ‘Verfassungs-
   diskurs’.
