10                                      From Reich to State
of commonweal and civic autonomy. The ﬁrst, ‘newer’ value system pre-
dominated in north German liberalism, the second ‘older’ ingredient in the
south, with the divide running through the Rhineland. What united both
was a shared hostility to the nobility as well as to the arbitrary exercise of
power by the prince. This socially broad-based liberal ideology emerged at
the end of the eighteenth century, and dissolved under the pressures of the
second great revolution, the industrial, which hit Germany with full force
in the mid-nineteenth century. Thereafter, liberalism degenerated into an
elitist class ideology of the upper bourgeoisie that withered electorally in
the face of new mass movements, political Catholicism and socialism.
   Gall’s thesis of a socially broad-based liberalism is not universally ac-
cepted. Doubts centre on the ability of the old Städtebürgertum to liberate
itself from a social vision centred on privileged orders. According to this
critique, the emergence of modern liberalism depended upon the rise of a
new elite that deﬁned itself through wealth and talent rather than through
ancient civic afﬁliations.27 This study draws on and seeks to contribute to
this debate, a debate of especial signiﬁcance for a region whose political
culture was dominated by the Bürgertum in the nineteenth century. On
its conclusions rest our assessment of how deeply rooted and hence how
durable its values were. To this end, this book is divided into three parts.
The ﬁrst examines developments under the Old Regime and ends with
consideration of the French Revolution’s impact, the Revolutionary Wars,
and the establishment in Mainz of the ﬁrst modern republic on German
soil. The second focuses on the Napoleonic episode, exploring how Bona-
partism functioned in practice, the degree of continuity and change, social,
economic and cultural developments, attempts by the French to mould
identity, and military conscription. The third, ﬁnally, examines the tran-
sition from French to Prussian/Bavarian rule, including an assessment of
German nationalism, debate over the French legacy, and the successor
states’ attempts to integrate their new trans-Rhenish territories on their
own terms.
27 For this point of view, see Fehrenbach, ‘Bürgertum und Liberalismus’, pp. 16–22. For an intermediate
     position, see Michael Stolleis, who argues that the old Bürgertum did not make the switch to modern
     individualism, but that its self-perceptions nonetheless developed into a new form. Michael Stolleis
     (ed.), Recht, Verfassung und Verwaltung in der frühneuzeitlichen Stadt (Cologne, 1991), p. xiii. Much
     of the debate hinges around changing perceptions of commonweal and private property. For this, see
     Winfried Schulze, ‘Vom Gemeinnutz zum Eigennutz. Über den Normenwandel in der ständischen
     Gesellschaft der Frühen Neuzeit’, Historische Zeitschrift 243 (1986), pp. 591–626.
