                                 Land, Stadt and Reich                                      15
(1784–1801), was the youngest brother of Emperor Joseph II (1765–90) and
a model enlightened prince. Of the numerous secular territories, the most
signiﬁcant was the Wittelsbach agglomeration, including the duchies of
Jülich and Berg in the Lower Rhine, and the Rhineland-Palatinate and
Pfalz-Zweibrücken along the Middle Rhine. After 1777, all these territo-
ries with the exception of Pfalz-Zweibrücken were governed from Munich
by Elector Karl Theodor (Elector Palatine, 1742–99). Pfalz-Zweibrücken,
a cluster south of the Moselle containing 80,000 mainly Protestant in-
habitants, remained under a cadet Wittelsbach branch in the shape of the
eccentric Duke Karl II August (1775–95). His main achievement was Schloß
Karlsberg, a vast set of pavilions whose construction bankrupted the duchy
and triggered the eighteenth-century equivalent of IMF intervention in the
form of a Reich investigative commission. The other great dynasty with a
sizeable stake in the Rhineland were the Hohenzollerns. Their possessions
included the duchies of Cleves and Geldern, and Lordship of Moers, to-
gether with a substantial bloc straddling the Lower Rhine containing a con-
fessionally mixed population of about 125,000. Apart from these territories,
the Rhineland boasted four of the Reich’s ﬁfty-one imperial cities: Cologne
(population: 45,000) and Aachen (27,000), both overwhelmingly Catholic
and located in the north, and predominantly Protestant Speyer (5,000)
and Worms (6,000) in the south. Finally, the left bank counted nearly 100
additional quasi-sovereign (Reichsunmittelbar: enjoying unmediated rela-
tions with the Emperor) entities, ruled over by imperial counts, abbots,
abbesses and lords, whose populations were measured in the thousands if
not hundreds.

Historical development lent Rhenish political culture distinct features.
However, before these are examined, it is logical to analyse the socio-
economic context. As noted, shambolic territorial arrangements and sur-
viving medieval forms did not prevent the Rhineland from experiencing
economic recovery in the eighteenth century. Population grew rapidly in
the century, surpassing the pre-Thirty Years’ War level in the 1720s and
rising by a total of 30 per cent until it reached the 1.5 million mark on
the eve of French rule. Demographic pressure became acute in some areas.
The Palatinate produced almost 10,000 (over 5 per cent of population)
emigrants between 1776 and 1785 alone, most of whom settled in Poland,
Transylvania, Russia and the Americas.5 Population increase meant greater
demand for agricultural products and higher prices; this, combined with
5 Walter Rödel, ‘Demographische Entwicklung in Deutschland und Frankreich’, in Helmut Berding,
 Etienne François, and Hans-Peter Ullmann (eds.), Deutschland und Frankreich im Zeitalter der
 Revolution (Frankfurt a. M., 1988), pp. 28–38.
