8                                    From Reich to State
state? This might be considered especially true of the Rhineland, where
Napoleonic hegemony was experienced most intensely. However, such a
position is only defensible if it is accepted – as much of the literature does –
that Napoleon was a revolutionary whose rule marked a new beginning. It
is this study’s contention that whilst French rule did result in momentous
change, the new order that eventually emerged represented a synthesis that
drew on the Old Regime’s legacy. The older literature, which portrays
the eighteenth-century Rhineland as a backward region distinguished by
a conservative Volkskultur, tends to exaggerate the drama of French rule.
The period of French domination can only be comprehensively assessed by
placing it within the context of what happened before and after, as well as
by looking at the principles of Napoleonic governance elsewhere in Europe.
    This leads to the second great historiographical debate, that concerned
with Napoleon. Napoleon has inspired a mass of research. One dimension of
this concerns his location within the revolutionary tradition and in particu-
lar, on the social basis of his regime. Beginning in the 1970s, research on the
so-called notabilités undermined the Marxist notion of 1789 as a bourgeois
revolution, and instead demonstrated that the Napoleonic elite consisted
of essentially the same fusion of elements that were already emerging into
prominence under the auspices of the Old Regime.24 A second, related area
of research that has resulted in several important publications over recent
years concerns the state-formation process. Based upon local as well as na-
tional archival resources and hence better informed on the perspective from
below, this research questions the extent to which the Napoleonic state –
an institution that appeared uncompromisingly formidable on paper – pen-
etrated downwards in practice.25 Though it ultimately imposed its will in
the key areas that really mattered to Napoleon – taxation and conscrip-
tion – it did so through a process of negotiation and adaptation as well as
brute force. Napoleon emerges from these studies less as a revolutionary or
counter-revolutionary than as a pragmatic manager who drew on dominant
elements and traditions within a locality where they served his interests.
With respect to the Rhineland, it might be believed that there were few
24 Seminal for our understanding of the ‘notables’ is the survey into the departmental elites, Louis
   Bergeron and G. Chaussinand-Nogaret, Les ‘Masses de granit’: cent mille notables du Premier Empire
   (Paris, 1979). Also, see Geoffrey Ellis, ‘Rhine and Loire: Napoleonic Elites and Social Order’ in
   G. Lewis and L. Lucas (eds.), Beyond the Terror: Essays in French Regional and Social History,
   1794–1815 (Cambridge, 1983); and, most recently of all, Rafe Blaufarb, ‘The Ancien Régime Origins
   of Napoleonic Social Reconstruction’, French History 14 (2000), pp. 408–23.
25 Two relatively recent studies on Napoleonic state formation from below stand out: Alan Forrest,
   Conscripts and Deserters. The Army and French Society during the Revolution and Empire (Oxford,
   1989); and, more general in its focus, Isser Woloch, The New Regime. Transformations of the French
   Civic Order, 1789–1820s (New York and London, 1994).
