                                           Introduction                                                9
such elements and traditions that might be proﬁtably drawn upon. After
all, did not the region historically represent the very antithesis of the de-
manding sovereign state that was Napoleonic France? Yet, it will be argued,
Rhinelanders found much in the Napoleonic system they liked. It was not
just that Napoleon was adept at rallying established elites – that in itself
is not startling – but rather, that he allowed reinvigoration of practices,
traditions and, more subtly, mentalités commonly associated with the old
order. This was especially apparent in the area of law, conﬂict-resolution
and those institutions that mitigated the authoritarianism also inherent in
the Napoleonic style of government. Napoleonic institutions ultimately
enjoyed such longevity in the region – the Code Napoléon remained in
effect until 1900 – not because they swept away the previous order or im-
posed ‘social discipline’, but because they were in harmony with what went
before.
   Reappraisal of the Old Regime and Napoleon has implications for
our understanding of developments following Napoleon’s fall and hence
connects with a third historiographical area, concerned with nineteenth-
century Germany. Over the last decades, this has been especially focused on
the middle class (Bürgertum) and its attendant ideology, liberalism, both
of which were peculiarly strong in the Rhineland. Two projects begun
in the 1980s, in Bielefeld (‘Sozialgeschichte des neuzeitlichen Bürgertums:
Deutschland im internationalen Vergleich’ ) and Frankfurt (‘Stadt und
Bürgertum im 19. Jahrhundert’ ) have contributed to our understanding.
The second project – led by Lothar Gall – with its focus on the interaction
between the historically rooted town burghers (Städtebürgertum) and the
emerging middle class deﬁned by wealth (Besitz) and education (Bildung), is
especially interesting for this study.26 It gives due weight to the contribution
made by old civic traditions to Germany’s modern political development.
Early liberalism, according to this interpretation, was founded socially upon
an amalgamation of the new middle classes and the Städtebürgertum, and
hence represented an uneasy compromise between two value systems, the
one based on individualism and private property and the other on notions
26 The Frankfurt project, headed by Lothar Gall, examined seventeen cities, including Aachen and
  Cologne. Apart from specialised studies on the cities themselves, this project has also produced
  several edited collections that present the research ﬁndings. These include Lothar Gall (ed.), Vom
  alten zum neuen Bürgertum. Die mitteleuropäische Stadt im Umbruch 1780–1820 (Historische Zeitschrift
  Beiheft 14, Munich, 1991); and idem (ed.), Stadt und Bürgertum im Übergang von der traditionalen
  zur modernen Gesellschaft (Munich, 1993). Also, more recently idem (ed.), Bürgertum und bürgerlich-
  liberale Bewegung in Mitteleuropa seit dem 18. Jahrhundert (Historische Zeitschrift Sonderheft Band 17,
  Munich, 1997), which includes an excellent survey of the current state of research on the emergence
  of the modern bourgeoisie and liberalism, Elisabeth Fehrenbach, ‘Bürgertum und Liberalismus. Die
  Umbruchsperiode 1770–1815’, pp. 1–62.
