18                                      From Reich to State
crops and methods.11 Nor was an inequitable ﬁscal system helpful. For
though taxes were comparatively low, they fell disproportionately on the
land. Worse, they weighed excessively on a proportion because large tracts
enjoyed exemption thanks to privileged status or because of out-of-date land
cadastres. Electoral Cologne’s most recent land survey had been completed
in 1669. This had assessed property not according to area but commer-
cial value, something likely to change after a century. Furthermore, land
brought under cultivation after 1669 was not assessed at all, whilst a further
one-third was recorded as exempt from tax because it was owned by the no-
bility or Church which, with its 90,000 acres, was the greatest landowner.12
Though tax exemption beneﬁted tenants through lower rents, it nonethe-
less provoked mounting criticism with the arrival of ideas associated with
French physiocracy, which held the peasantry as the economic foundation
of the state. Especially inﬂuential was Gaspard de Réal’s publication Science
du gouvernement (1761–4), which argued that the Church should share the
tax burden for the common good. Yet, despite institutional weaknesses, the
Old Regime bequeathed the French a thriving agricultural sector that was
capable of further adaptation and increasingly commercialised.
   A healthy agricultural sector contributed to the Rhineland’s emergence
by the late eighteenth century as one of Germany’s most advanced manu-
facturing regions. That said, manufacturing was still limited to unevenly
spread pockets. It was largely absent from electoral Cologne, Mainz, Trier
and the Palatinate, but predominated in Jülich and Berg, Aachen and the
Prussian enclave of Krefeld. Berg, located on the right bank, experienced
the most dramatic economic development. There, religious tolerance com-
bined with abundant natural resources proved a winning combination.
Meanwhile, Jülich’s natural advantages – high population density (cheap
labour), nearby highlands dotted with sheep (wool), moors covered in peat
(fuel), and lime-free water (needed for the washing, dyeing and fulling pro-
cess) from the Rur – facilitated the development of a thriving textile sector
centred on Monschau. Nearby Aachen inadvertently provided know-how
in the form of Lutherans escaping discrimination. Above all, commercial
freedom encouraged prosperity. To quote one contemporary:
The general well-being of this land has resulted from the freedom of commercial
action, and from the factories and businesses which have developed in this freedom.
Trade and factory business have risen to a peak since 1742, and particularly in the
11 Henn, ‘Bauern’, pp. 252ff.
12 Karl Essers, Zur Geschichte der kurkölnischen Landtage im Zeitalter der französischen Revolution
     (1790–1797) (Gotha, 1909), pp. 22–33, 100, 105, 124.
