20                                 From Reich to State
proved a serious hindrance within the region as a whole, though they might
hold back individual towns and cities.
   One reason for this was the Rhineland’s territorial fragmentation.
Fragmentation might be considered inimical to economic development.
Yet, in an era of porous borders (even the Reich’s frontier with France was
properly policed only after 1789) fragmentation encouraged development.
Certainly, it failed to prevent the establishment of business connections
that transcended frontiers and the formation of a regional economic elite.
It failed to prevent, for example, the marriage of the daughter of Aachen’s
most important cloth manufacturer, Esajas von Clermont, to Friedrich
Heinrich Jacobi, a prominent Düsseldorf merchant and councillor for in-
dustrial affairs; or the establishment of familial ties between the Lutheran
manufacturing aristocracy of Monschau and the economic elites of Aachen,
Burtscheid, Krefeld, Berg and Mark; or the marriage of Palatine merchant
families into Krefeld’s manufacturing elite. Larger ﬁrms, like families, tran-
scended borders. Monschau’s largest enterprises, for example, had branches
extending into Prussian, Palatine and Austrian territory. The putting-out
network of the von der Leyens extended well beyond the Prussian enclave of
Krefeld into Jülich-Berg and electoral Cologne. Territorial fragmentation
encouraged economic liberalism by making the alternative impractical. It
encouraged competition for investment, which resulted in policies bene-
ﬁcial for business, including greater religious tolerance and favourable tax
regimes. For example, in much of Germany, tax was substantially derived
from excise duties levied on commerce passing through town gates; this
was impractical in the Rhineland, partly because so much industry was lo-
cated in the countryside, but also because territorial fragmentation meant
that trade could be diverted towards towns with the most competitive tax
regimes. In the Prussian enclaves, for example, peasants purchased goods in
neighbouring territories where taxes were lower. Over time, ﬁscal compe-
tition resulted in lower taxes everywhere and harmonisation between town
and country, and a shift to direct property taxes.16 The advantages of terri-
torial fragmentation were recognised by enlightened contemporaries, such
as Franz Wilhelm von Spiegel, curator of Bonn university, who ascribed
Germany’s cultural renaissance to inter-territorial competition; or the fu-
ture Mainz Clubbist Georg Forster, who praised fragmentation because
it stimulated competition and therefore reform; or Niklas Vogt, an early
liberal, who argued that the state’s role was to guarantee freedom rather
than itself instigate improvements, and that fragmentation helped preserve

16 Barkhausen, ‘Government’, pp. 212–73.
