16                                      From Reich to State
physiocratic appreciation of agriculture and an inﬂow of new ideas from
Britain and the Netherlands, stimulated improvement, though this was
uneven. Whilst most of the region adhered to the three-ﬁeld system, ar-
eas with richer soil along the alluvial plane of the Lower Rhine practised
crop rotation, whilst in the barren Eifel a two-ﬁeld system persisted. How-
ever, the manorial system had disappeared throughout as long ago as the
twelfth century. Instead, a varied pattern of tenancy dominated the land-
scape in which personal, non-monetary obligations played a comparatively
small role, though they were more common in the south.6 In the north,
hereditary tenure was common, a form that created a degree of certainty
and hence investment. Hereditary tenants could divide the land freely and
sub-let, something that encouraged ﬂexibility in response to market pres-
sures. About one-third of agricultural land, including most Church land,
was however subject to ﬁxed-term tenancies that generally ranged from six
to twenty-four years. These did not usually allow for further sub-division,
but rather preserved larger units (200 acres or more). Generally, such ten-
ancies included obligations on the tenant to ensure that the land did not
deteriorate. Arguably, ﬁxed-term tenure stimulated productivity in that it
allowed landlords to beneﬁt from rising prices by periodically increasing
rents.7
   New methods, including greater use of fertilisation, boosted productivity.
Fertilisation required livestock, which in turn depended upon well-tended
pastures, new fodder crops and stall feeding. When in place, a virtuous
circle ensued that allowed for the transition from the three-ﬁeld system to
crop-rotation. In practice, this was limited to the Lower Rhine, with its rich
pastures, whilst stall feeding was only common in parts of the Middle Rhine
where pastures were lacking. Dairy farming, which was concentrated near
urban centres, was a relatively commercialised sector and employed up-to-
date methods introduced from the Netherlands. Elsewhere, arable farming,
with the cultivation of cereals and especially rye, predominated. The ﬂat
lands between Aachen and Cologne were especially productive. Here a
wealthy class of tenant farmer prospered through the export of surpluses to
the Netherlands. Apart from cereals, there were scattered pockets of market
6 There was a tendency in the Middle Rhine towards a greater exploitation of feudal dues in the
  last decades before the French invasion. Roger Dufraisse, ‘L’Inﬂuence de la domination française
  sur l’économie du Palatinate’, in idem, L’Allemagne à l’époque napoléonienne. Questions d’histoire
  politique, économique et sociale (Bonn and Berlin, 1992), pp. 105–10.
7 Volker Henn, ‘Die soziale und wirtschaftliche Lage der rheinischen Bauern im Zeitalter des Abso-
  lutismus’, Rheinische Vierteljahrsblätter 42 (1978), pp. 242–5; also, idem, ‘Zur Lage der rheinischen
  Landwirtschaft im 16. bis 18. Jahrhundert’, Zeitschrift für Agrargeschichte und Agrarsoziologie 21 (1973),
  pp. 173–88.
