                                  Land, Stadt and Reich                                           23
tenuous links to Rome. Mainz’s Elector, Friedrich Karl, was attracted by
Hontheim’s arguments, though as Aretin dryly comments, proved ‘a couple
of sizes too small’ to carry them through.24 Nonetheless, he implemented
various enlightened reforms that outraged orthodox opinion, such as the
secularisation of several monasteries in order to fund education. He also
ordered that mass should be celebrated in German and not Latin, though
this was abandoned after vigorous protests from both the people and the
Papal nuncio in Munich.25 ‘Febronianism’ lent a new signiﬁcance to dis-
putes over the responsibilities of the Papal nunciature and over other issues
that bedevilled relations between Rome and the German hierarchy in the
1780s. The climax came in 1786, when the German archbishops gathered
at Ems came close to proclaiming a German National Church, but then
drew back when Mainz’s delegation went too far by proposing the abolition
of celibacy. Rome did not forget this episode and had its revenge in 1802,
when Pope Pius VII compelled the Rhenish prelates to ‘voluntarily’ give up
their left bank holdings so as to conform with the Napoleonic Concordat.26
   Part of the imperative behind the Catholic Enlightenment was eco-
nomic. The dynamism of areas on their doorstep spurred the imperial
cities and ecclesiastical electorates to consider measures to emulate their
success, and a debate ensued over the connection between religious prac-
tices and economic progress. Numerous religious holidays, enlightened
Catholics argued, restricted growth and should be diminished. The same
applied to religious discrimination. This issue assumed greater importance
after Joseph II introduced religious tolerance in his dominions in October
1781. Other Catholic territories such as Frankfurt followed, and France
introduced greater religious equality in November 1787. This embold-
ened proponents of tolerance in the Rhineland. In late November (1787),
Cologne’s Protestant minority successfully petitioned the city council for
permission to found a church and school in the city, arguing this would
help attract enterprising Protestant refugees from the Netherlands, which
was then experiencing civil war. Exactly the same consideration lay behind
Trier’s decision the previous February to extend toleration. Meanwhile, the
Palatinate encouraged the settlement of Mennonites, Jews and Anabaptists
as a means of encouraging manufacturing activity outside the control of

24 Karl Otmar Freiherr von Aretin, ‘Friedrich Karl. Der letzte Kurfürst-Erzbischof von Mainz’, in
  Christoph Jamme and Otto Pöggeler (eds.), Mainz – ‘Centralort des Reiches’. Politik, Literatur und
  Philosophie im Umbruch der Revolutionszeit (Stuttgart, 1986), pp. 77, 85, 92–3.
25 Blanning, Mainz, pp. 163–94, 207–9.
26 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 113–14, 561–3. Also, Karl-Georg Faber, Andreas van Recum 1765–1828. Ein
  rheinischer Kosmopolit (Bonn, 1969), pp. 20–49.
