24                                    From Reich to State
the guilds.27 Yet even before the extension of formal toleration, Protestant
and Catholic elites socialised in such institutions as Masonic lodges. Most
Rhenish towns and cities boasted at least one lodge by the 1780s, and these
allowed minorities to mingle with the established elite. Protestant manufac-
turers in stolidly Catholic Aachen and Cologne, for example, viewed their
membership of the cities’ lodges as the ﬁrst step towards political eman-
cipation. Even leading Mennonite families in the Lower Rhine, who had
been distinguished by their austere dress and aloofness in the seventeenth
century were, a hundred years later, culturally indistinguishable from other
notables in their embrace of ‘enlightened sociability’. They too merged
into a new class whose interaction in the proliferating societies of the 1770s
and 1780s contributed to the emergence of a well-informed, secular pub-
lic sphere before which current political issues were critically judged. This
was especially important in the territorially fragmented Rhineland, where
‘cosmopolitanism’ acted as an antidote to stiﬂing localism and bigotry, and
where there was a craving for news on foreign improvements which might
be applied locally.28
   Most Rhenish lodges followed the hierarchical French structure in their
organisation. Reading societies, in contrast, through their procedures, in-
troduced a small (under 2 per cent of the population) but inﬂuential number
of Rhinelanders to annual secret elections to ofﬁce, clearly deﬁned mem-
bership criteria, debating rules and transparent administration, principles
and conventions that two generations later lay at the heart of demands for
constitutional reform. Indeed, some Rhenish radicals in the 1790s argued
that their constitutional model be adopted for society as a whole.29 The
ﬁrst such societies appeared in the region in the 1750s. Those of Bonn,
Koblenz and Trier boasted separate rooms for reading and discussion, and
subscribed to French, English and Italian as well as German journals. They
reﬂected the new social value attached to cultured comportment as opposed
to courtly elegance. Most, however, dedicated themselves to the propagation
of useful knowledge rather than radical politics. Mainz’s society proved a
notable exception, and many of its members later joined the ‘Jacobin’ Club
27 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 89–92, 114–17, 167–8, 209–13.
28 Winfried Dotzauer, Freimaurergesellschaften am Rhein. Aufgeklärte Sozietäten auf dem linken Rhein-
   ufer vom Ausgang des Ancien Régime bis zum Ende der Napoleonischen Herrschaft (Wiesbaden, 1977),
   passim. Also, Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 41–75, 1035–45 (for the Illuminati). For the special im-
   portance of sociability within the conﬁnes of a small territory, see Andreas Hofmeister-Hunger,
   ‘Provincial Political Culture in the Holy Roman Empire. The Franconian Margravates of Ansbach
   and Bayreuth’, in Eckhart Hellmuth (ed.), The Transformation of Political Culture. England and
   Germany in the Late Eighteenth Century (London, 1990), pp. 149–64.
29 The importance of the reading clubs in this respect is convincingly argued by Theuringer, Liberal-
   ismus, pp. 142ff., 157.
