                                     Land, Stadt and Reich                                            25
established during the French occupation of 1792/3. However, even the
less overtly political societies met the craving for news that contemporaries
agreed gripped Germany following the Seven Years War.30
   Education determined the social breadth of this craving and more par-
ticularly the ability of ordinary Rhinelanders to follow the conﬂict fought
out in the press between proponents of reform and conservatives. The
Rhineland enjoyed a comparatively high literacy rate, thanks to good
public education. This possibly represented the Old Regime’s most im-
portant legacy. Crowning the educational ediﬁce were the universities of
Bonn, Cologne, Mainz and Trier. Their importance in the Rhineland’s late-
eighteenth-century political development was without parallel in Britain
and France, where the old saying ‘out of scribblers and students are world
rulers made’ (‘Aus Schreiber und Studenten werden der Welt Regenten’) would
have then been unimaginable. In the mid-eighteenth century, the impetus
for university reform that spread from Halle and Göttingen reached the
Rhine, where higher education was still dominated by Thomist-Aristotelian
scholasticism. However, the need to stem the growing tide of students
heading for the reformed Protestant universities forced change.31 This was
especially the case with Mainz, whose emergence as an intellectual centre
owed much to the elector’s ex-ofﬁcio function as imperial chancellor. This
ofﬁce demanded university-educated ofﬁcials and jurists capable of admin-
istering imperial responsibilities, something especially important following
Friedrich Karl’s election given his determination to play a leading role in
German politics. So, brushing aside opposition from a conservative cathe-
dral chapter, Friedrich Karl embarked upon reform partly funded through
the dissolution of some monasteries. By the eve of the French Revolution,
Mainz university – or ‘Catholic Göttingen’, as it became known – was a
leading centre of Kantian thought.32
   Substantial reform was also completed in the university of Trier. There,
intellectuals inﬂuenced by the doctrines of Febronius and Kant began to
enter the faculties. Concurrently, bright young students from Trier went to
Göttingen supported by electoral scholarships and subsequently returned
imbued with the latest philosophical ideas. Less, in contrast, was achieved
30 Klaus Gerteis, ‘Bildung und Revolution: Die deutschen Lesegesellschaften am Ende des 18. Jahrhun-
   derts’, Archiv für Kultur-Geschichte 53 (1971), pp. 130–2, 136–7. A list of the journals subscribed to
   by the reading societies of Mainz, Koblenz and Bonn is provided by Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 17, 36,
   216.
31 Notker Hammerstein, Aufklärung und katholisches Reich. Untersuchungen zur Universitätsreform und
   Politik katholischer Territorien des Heiligen Römischen Reichs deutscher Nation im 18. Jahrhundert
   (Berlin, 1977), pp. 10ff.
32 Ibid., pp. 142–58. For Kantian intellectual inﬂuences in Mainz, see Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 659–62.
