                                     Land, Stadt and Reich                                             17
gardening as well as commercial crops of tobacco and ﬂax, not to mention
the vineyards of the Moselle and Middle Rhine.
   Agriculture depended ultimately upon geography and climate, but it is
important not to overlook institutions. Legally, equal inheritance was the
norm for most of the Rhineland with the exception of the far north, where
impartible inheritance predominated. Some have linked this to the greater
political radicalism of the south compared with the north.8 However, one
should not exaggerate the distinction. Studies from elsewhere in Europe
suggest that neither type of inheritance was common in its pure form,
and that pragmatic considerations rather than law dictated practice. The
pattern of agriculture determined inheritance, not the reverse. This would
remain so even after the French Revolution, when a diversity of systems
of preferential partibility survived irrespective of the Napoleonic code. In
any case, in areas like the Rhineland with widespread leasehold, inheritance
made little impact on the size of farms, which was determined primarily
by economic considerations.9 These dictated that isolated farmsteads and
larger holdings should represent the norm in the north, and village settle-
ments and smaller farms dominate the south. Nor should it be assumed
that parcelisation necessarily represented an impediment to improvement.
Even in the Palatinate, where parcelisation was acute, development pro-
ceeded thanks to government encouragement and demographic pressure.
It was one of the ﬁrst regions in Germany to experiment with cultivation of
the potato. In the decades before the French invasion, the Palatine govern-
ment successfully encouraged land reclamation, all-year stall-feeding, the
use of mineral fertilisers and enclosure, and established model farms that
cultivated clover, turnips and potatoes, which it then made a concerted
effort to introduce from the 1760s onwards. A similar effort was made with
tobacco in the 1770s. Comparable government-led attempts at innovation
and improvement occurred elsewhere, especially in Mainz.10
   Inevitably, there was resistance to innovation. Peasants uprooted new
crops and hacked down apparently useless novelties such as mulberry trees.
More fundamentally, legal complexities, common rights and obligations
deriving from the dispersal of plots, and the tithe, obstructed the new

8 Thomas Theuringer, Liberalismus im Rheinland. Voraussetzungen und Ursprünge im Zeitalter der
   Aufklärung (Frankfurt a. M., 1998), p. 53.
9 Lutz K. Berkner and Franklin F. Mendels, ‘Inheritance Systems, Family Structure, and Demographic
   Patterns in Western Europe, 1700–1900’, in Charles Tilly (ed.), Historical Studies in Changing Fertility
   (Princeton, 1978), pp. 214–20.
10 Mainrad Schaab, Geschichte der Kurpfalz (2 vols., Stuttgart, 1988–92), 2 (Neuzeit), pp. 221–8; T. C.
   W. Blanning, Reform and Revolution in Mainz 1743–1803 (Cambridge, 1974), pp. 91–3, 185–7.
