                                     Land, Stadt and Reich                                               21
freedom.17 In conclusion, the political and social structures of the old-
regime Rhineland were more conducive to economic development than
they have generally been credited for.

Contemporaries blamed the lack of manufacturing in the ecclesiastical
states on the persistence within them of sectarian bigotry and baroque
religiosity. The linkage is unproven and arguably territorial fragmentation
mitigated the worst confessional discrimination. Certainly, vibrant popular
piety distinguished the Pfaffengasse. In towns and cities, religious brother-
hoods gave institutional expression to this and served as points of social
orientation. Closely associated with the guilds, they provided material and
spiritual relief and sponsored public festivals that bound civic culture to
religion.18 In the countryside, quasi-religious peasant superstitions persisted
within a few leagues of enlightened beacons like Bonn and Mainz univer-
sities. As late as the early nineteenth century, there was a reported case of a
suspected witch being lynched in the Lower Rhine.19
   More commonly, bigotry expressed itself in religious intolerance. The
Rhineland, though mainly Catholic, included sizeable Protestant and Jew-
ish communities. Protestants predominated in the Palatinate and formed
a sizeable group in the Lower Rhine. The legal status of all confessions
varied signiﬁcantly. Only Zweibrücken extended religious tolerance to Jew,
Calvinist, Lutheran and Catholic alike; only Krefeld tolerated Mennonites,
a minority that had suffered persecution almost everywhere else. In the other
Hohenzollern possessions and Wittelsbach Jülich-Berg, each town and vil-
lage decided for itself the creed it adopted. In contrast, in the imperial city
of Cologne, only Catholics could become burghers after 1617. However,
by the 1780s, about 400 Protestants lived there, of whom twenty-four were
amongst the seventy-one highest tax-payers. Though debarred from public
ofﬁce, they socialised freely with the elite. Jews, in contrast, were excluded
from the city after 1424. In nearby Bonn, electoral Cologne’s capital, Jews
enjoyed toleration, but not Protestants. In the imperial city of Aachen,
the tiny Protestant minority of ﬁfty families was excluded from public of-
ﬁce and forbidden from celebrating religious services. Instead, Protestants
celebrated services outside the city gates, though these were occasionally
17 For Spiegel and Forster see Joseph Hansen (ed.), Quellen zur Geschichte des Rheinlandes im Zeitalter
   der französischen Revolution 1780–1801 (4 vols., Bonn, 1931–8), 1, pp. 478–83. For Vogt, see Theuringer,
   Liberalismus, pp. 278–80.
18 Jonathan Sperber, Popular Catholicism in Nineteenth-century Germany (Princeton, 1984), pp. 30–3.
19 Wilhelm Schmitz, Die Misch-Mundart in den Kreisen Geldern (südlicher Teil), Kempen, Erkelenz,
   Heinsberg, Geilenkirchen, Aachen, Gladbach, Krefeld, Neuss und Düsseldorf, sowie noch mancherlei
   (Dülken, 1893), p. 125.
