                                    Land, Stadt and Reich                                             33
the position, those ‘Landstände’ that survived into the eighteenth century
perceived themselves as representing the interests of the ‘Land ’.
   Thanks to the Reich’s protective legal cocoon, representative estates
survived early-modern princely absolutism in much of Germany. More
than that, they actually revived in the eighteenth century, something at-
tributable to international developments. In the later seventeenth century,
Habsburg emperors depended upon the German princes for military sup-
port against the Ottomans and Louis XIV, and hence used imperial institu-
tions to weaken the estates because these obstructed ‘resource mobilisation’.
Following the diminution of the Ottoman and French threat, Habsburg
policy changed. The turning point came in 1714, when the Reichshofrat
ruled that the estates enjoyed the right to approve taxation. Thereafter,
mounting Habsburg fears of the princes provoked further rulings that
favoured the estates, including dramatic interventions in Mecklenburg in
1727 that saw the duke brieﬂy removed from ofﬁce, and Württemberg,
where the estates emerged much strengthened and subsequently earned the
oft-quoted accolade from Charles James Fox as the only ‘parliament’ (apart
from Westminster) worthy of the name.
   In the Rhineland, only two of the larger territories, Mainz and the
Palatinate, lacked estates. To the north, estates survived in the Hohenzollern
possessions of Cleves, Moers and Geldern despite efforts to bring them to
heel. They continued to meet regularly until the French occupation in the
1790s. In neighbouring Jülich and Berg, the Wittelsbach dukes made even
less progress in weakening the estates. As with the Hohenzollern posses-
sions, this was partly because of the duchies’ peripheral status within a wider
dynastic agglomeration. Interestingly, a memorandum drawn up in 1742
for the new duke, Karl Theodor, warned that whilst he might exploit the
Palatinate at will because of the extinction of its estates, in Jülich-Berg he
must tread carefully. In neighbouring electoral Cologne, the estates not only
approved taxation but ran the ﬁnancial administration. Moving still further
south, Trier’s estates deserve special attention for their assertiveness under
the last elector, Clemens Wenzeslaus. Nor should the plethora of smaller
territories be forgotten, which enjoyed analogous institutions whose rights
were likewise protected by the imperial courts.50
50 For Cleves and Jülich-Berg, see F. L. Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany. From the Fifteenth
   to the Eighteenth Century (Oxford, 1959), pp. 258–347. For electoral Cologne, Essers, Landtage. For
   the smaller mini-states, Helmut Gabel, Widerstand und Kooperation. Studien zur politische Kultur
   rheinischer und maasländischer Kleinterritorien (1648–1794) (Tübingen, 1995). For contemporary
   recognition that territories with representative estates enjoyed lower taxation, see Anton Klebe,
   Reise auf dem Rhein durch die teutschen und französischen Rheinlander nach Aachen und Spaa (2nd
   edn, Frankfurt a. M., 1806), p. 50.
