                                   Land, Stadt and Reich                                         29
this category. At the opposite extreme came the imperial cities (Reichsstädte),
entities that in centuries past had won their independence from princely
rule and now recognised no secular authority other than the Emperor.
The Rhineland boasted four Reichsstädte: Aachen, Cologne, Speyer and
Worms. Finally, between these extremes came numerous semi-autonomous
‘home towns’, ranging in size from about 1,000 to 10,000 inhabitants and
accounting for roughly a quarter of the region’s population. Each cate-
gory – the Residenzstädte, Reichsstädte and home towns – enjoyed certain
characteristics, as did individual cities within those categories. They also
shared commonalities, including a predilection for political conﬂict be-
tween magistracies and burghers. At least twenty-one Rhenish cities, in-
cluding Cologne, Aachen, Trier and Koblenz, experienced such conﬂict in
the years immediately preceding the French Revolution.41
    An increasing socio-economic and cultural gap between the mass of
burghers and urban elites (sometimes misleadingly labelled ‘patrician’)
largely accounted for rising political conﬂict. The decline of the burgher-
dominated craft guilds lay at the heart of this. These were threat-
ened on three fronts. Economically, their role diminished as merchant-
manufacturers bypassed restrictive practices. In a territorially fragmented
region, this was relatively easy: entrepreneurs simply moved their establish-
ments to jurisdictions beyond the guilds’ reach. By the late eighteenth cen-
tury even this inconvenience was unnecessary, as merchant-manufacturers
found ways of undermining the guilds from within or surreptitiously
establishing workshops within city walls. Many a sumptuous merchant-
manufacturer’s town house concealed workshops discreetly behind rococo
façades and representational rooms. Politically, the guilds lost ground.
Ofﬁcially, according to faded medieval charters that served as civic con-
stitutions, sovereignty resided with the guilds. Civic rights were derived
through them. Of course, only a minority enjoyed such rights – in Cologne
about 4,000 out of 40,000 inhabitants. However, by the eighteenth cen-
tury, the magistracies had largely escaped from the supervision of the guilds.
In Trier, for example, the guilds lost control of the city council in the sec-
ond half of the seventeenth century after selling their seats to wealthy
businessmen, whilst in Aachen, merchant-manufacturers purchased guild
membership in order to inﬂuence their policies from within.42 Finally,
guild-dominated urban culture was challenged by the new elitist culture
41 Klaus Müller, ‘Städtische Unruhen im Rheinland des späten 18. Jahrhunderts. Ein Beitrag zur
   rheinischen Reaktion auf die Französische Revolution’, Rheinische Vierteljahrsblätter 54 (1990),
   pp. 166–9.
42 Joachim Kermann, Die Manufakturen im Rheinland 1750–1833 (Bonn, 1972), pp. 118–60.
