28                                      From Reich to State
to propagate radical politics amongst a wider audience.38 However, the
assumption was not necessarily justiﬁed. If anything, the stress placed by
enlightened educational theory on the need to teach pupils according to
the role they would fulﬁl as adults reinforced the concept of a society of
orders to a greater extent than the earlier religious emphasis on educating
children for membership of a common community of belief characterised
by a basic equality.39 Certainly, educational reform enhanced the prestige of
the ecclesiastical states in the eyes of the enlightened elite. It demonstrated
their ability to reform and gave enlightened Catholics a new conﬁdence.
This was reﬂected in 1785, when Philipp Anton von Bibra, Mainz’s lead-
ing minister, sponsored an essay competition on the weaknesses of the
ecclesiastical states and how these might be overcome. The resulting list of
perceived weaknesses contained in the essays appears disheartening at ﬁrst
glance: non-hereditary rule harmed long-term development; the selection
process for electors encouraged bribery, foreign pressure and the imposition
by cathedral chapters of selﬁsh conditions binding winning candidates; the
ecclesiastical states functioned as a Papal Trojan Horse in Germany; the
‘dead-hand’ of church ownership of large estates caused economic under-
development, proof of which was provided by widespread mendicancy;
revenues were squandered on degenerate courts and clerical drones; cler-
ical inﬂuence was pernicious to education, enlightenment and religious
tolerance; and so on. Yet nowhere was the status of the ecclesiastical states
questioned. Instead, the remedies suggested included the secularisation of
a few monasteries to ﬁnance improvement and the collection of statistics.
Signiﬁcantly, some identiﬁed the elective principle and role of the cathedral
chapters as strengths that guarded against despotism.40

Over the centuries, not only the Church but also towns and cities shaped the
Rhineland. These came in a variety of forms and can be categorised accord-
ing to the degree of independence they enjoyed from territorial rulers. The
so-called Residenzstädte – literally, ‘residence cities’ – containing princely
courts enjoyed the least independence. Mainz, Koblenz and Bonn fell into
38 One of the most important ‘enlightened’ publications aimed at the wider Rhenish public was,
   J. B. K. von Schönebeck, Das Gesetzbuch der reinen Vernunft, oder kurze Darstellung dessen, was die
   Vernunft allen Menschen zur Regel ihres Betragens und zur Sicherung ihrer Glückseligkeit vorschreibt
   (Bonn, 1787). Schönebeck brieﬂy held the chair in botany in Bonn before becoming editor of the
   pro-reform Bönnische Intelligenzblattes. Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 179–201.
39 Theuringer, Liberalismus, pp. 72, 79ff, 109ff., 120–2.
40 Wende, Staaten, pp. 9, 16–38. Notably, Friedrich Carl von Moser, whilst recommending the secu-
   larisation of the ecclesiastical states, argued in favour of the preservation of the elective principle as
   a defence against absolutism. Friedrich Carl von Moser, Über die Regierung der geistlichen Staaten in
   Deutschland (Frankfurt a.M. and Leipzig, 1787), pp. 176–8.
