                                    Land, Stadt and Reich                                             35
different conclusion is reached when focusing on the perspective from
below.53 This approach has shed light on how the estates connected with
the communities they represented through consultation, petitions and re-
porting, and how through this certain principles, such as voting by head
and accountability, were disseminated. The estates formed but the tip of
a broader consensus-building pyramid. Throughout the Rhineland, as in
Justus Möser’s Osnabrück, this contributed to a peculiarly ‘corporatist’ slant
to the Enlightenment fundamentally opposed to absolutism.54
   This in itself does not overturn the argument that the Landstände were
fundamentally different from later representative institutions, based on
equal citizenship and individual rights. Analysis of the Rhenish case does
not entirely overturn this conclusion, though it does suggest that some of
the estates increasingly viewed themselves as representatives of all the peo-
ple and not simply a particular privileged order. This was evident in Trier,
for example, where the Landtag in 1780 started referring to its members
as ‘the people’s representatives’ (‘des volckes Repräsentanten’) and claimed to
speak on behalf of all inhabitants over the entire electoral territory. This
represented a fundamental shift in the Landtag’s self-perception.55 Devel-
opments in electoral Cologne were less dramatic, though signiﬁcantly at an
institutional level, various committees and conferences bridged the division
between the orders represented in the four curia. Such institutional arrange-
ments reinforced the notion that, collectively, the Landstände represented
more than the sum of their parts.56
   The estates’ self-perception as the representatives of the ‘Land ’ was
reinforced by the Rhineland’s territorial order. All the larger territories
were either elective monarchies (the three ecclesiastical electorates) or (the
Hohenzollern and Wittelsbach possessions) ‘Nebenländer’ – peripheral ter-
ritories geographically separated from the dynastic core to which they were
loosely bound through personal union. What characterised both was that
neither enjoyed close emotional bonds to a particular dynasty. Instead,
and with the possible exception of the Protestant elite in Cleves, Rhenish

53 The two pioneering studies that adopt this new perspective from below are Peter Blickle, Landschaften
   im Alten Reich. Die staatliche Funktion des gemeinen Mannes in Oberdeutschland (Munich, 1973);
   and Karl Bosl, Die Geschichte der Repräsentation in Bayern. Landständische Bewegung, landständische
   Verfassung, Landesausschuß und altständische Gesellschaft (Munich, 1974).
54 Jonathan B. Knudsen, Justus Möser and the German Enlightenment (Cambridge, 1986), pp. 11, 61–2.
55 Theuringer, Liberalismus, pp. 337–9, 359.
56 Essers, Landtage, pp. 6–7, 14–22, 156–8. More generally, also, Rudolf Vierhaus, ‘Land, Staat und
   Reich in der politischen Vorstellungswelt deutscher Landstände im 18. Jahrhundert’, Historische
   Zeitschrift 223 (1976), pp. 41, 59–60. Peter Blickle, ‘Kommunalismus, Parlamentarismus, Repub-
   likanismus’, Historische Zeitschrift 242 (1986), p. 540.
