32                                     From Reich to State
that the imperial courts were then examining cases involving thirty-one
of the ﬁfty-one Reichsstädte.47 One contemporary blamed this prevalence
of conﬂict on the participatory political culture of the cities, where ‘the
burgher likes to have a voice in the government, and out of natural van-
ity believes that he is as well – nay, better – qualiﬁed to understand it
than his neighbour’. Another blamed the lack of openness in government:
if only magistracies acted more transparently, then a hundred cases be-
fore the courts would end.48 Conﬂict often centred on ﬁnancial account-
ability. Another frequent demand made by burgher deputations was for
a greater separation of powers, especially between what today would be
classiﬁed the judiciary and executive. This agenda – open government,
transparent procedures, ﬁnancial accountability, an independent judiciary –
hardly reﬂected the political backwardness of the Zunftbürger, but rather
pre-empted the standard package of demands presented by nineteenth-
century liberals.49 As seen in Aachen, such demands attracted a broad social
coalition.
   Imperial cities, with their histories, traditions and republican sentiments,
functioned as independent states and were represented in the Reichstag.
Other towns and cities belonged to a particular territorial state. Despite this
subordinate position, many enjoyed wider inﬂuence within the so-called
Landstände, or representative estates. These essentially medieval institu-
tions comprised the representatives of the ‘Land’, a term without equiv-
alent in English. A ‘Land’ was deﬁned by its peculiar (and supposedly
ancient) customs and laws rather than by geography. It might not neces-
sarily coincide with the dynastically deﬁned territory of the prince. For
example, dynastic agglomerations like Prussia, the Habsburg Monarchy
and Wittelsbach holdings encompassed many ‘lands’. Alternatively, a par-
ticular ‘land’ might be divided amongst several princely possessions. Such
was especially the case in fragmented regions like the Rhineland. Whatever

47 Johann Jacob Möser, Von der Reichsstättischen Regiments-Verfassung ( = Neues Teutsches Staatsrecht,
   Bd. 18) (Frankfurt a. M. and Leipzig, 1772), pp. 420–68. For the at times ambiguous role of the
   Reichshofrat in conﬂict resolution, see Christopher R. Friedrichs, ‘Urban Conﬂicts and the Imperial
   Constitution in Seventeenth-Century Germany’, Journal of Modern History 58 (supplement), (1986),
   pp. 98–123. Also, Aretin, Reich, 1, p. 90–4.
48 Both quotes are taken from Theuringer, Liberalismus, pp. 345–53, 361–6.
49 Many scholars remain unconvinced of any progressive political potential in the home towns and
   imperial cities. Press, for example, argues that the ‘legalisation’ of conﬂict resolution froze all fur-
   ther development within the imperial cities. Volker Press, ‘Die Reichsstadt in der altständischen
   Gesellschaft’, in Johannes Kunisch (ed.), Neue Studien zur frühneuzeitlichen Reichsgeschichte
   (Zeitschrift für historische Forschung Beiheft 3, Berlin, 1987), pp. 14–16, 23–4. For another scepti-
   cal interpretation, see Etienne François, ‘Villes d’Empire et Aufklärung’, in Pierre Grappin (ed.),
   L’Allemagne des lumières. Périodiques, correspondances, témoignages (Metz, 1982), pp. 9–24.
