                                     Land, Stadt and Reich                                             31
by examination of the conﬂict that rocked another imperial city, Aachen,
in the 1780s. There, bitter constitutional conﬂict – the so-called ‘Great
Mäkelei’ – embroiled the somewhat misleadingly labelled ‘New’ and ‘Old’
parties. Analysis reveals that the two parties were socially indistinguish-
able. The division was essentially political. As in Cologne, conﬂict cen-
tred on accusations of corruption and mismanagement levelled against the
incumbent (‘Old Party’) administration and demands by the opposition
(‘New Party’) for more accountable government. The ‘New Party’s’ agenda,
though formulated by a small elite dominated by businessmen and freema-
sons, appealed to a socially broad-based coalition. Both sides legitimised
their position by claiming to act on behalf of the Bürgerschaft – all those
with civic rights – from which they variously solicited supportive petitions.
Matters in Aachen ﬁnally came to a head in 1786, when the ‘Old Party’
declared itself victorious in a bitterly contested election. This sparked riots
during which a mob stormed the city hall and forcibly installed a ‘New
Party’ administration.45
   An interpretation of urban conﬂict based upon social reductionism ap-
pears even less convincing following research that uncovers the surprising
degree of social mobility within the Reich’s cities. This discovery extends
even to Cologne, overturning the caste-like reputation of its ruling clique.
Dominated by about 250 great merchant families, this ‘clique’ readily assim-
ilated wealthy newcomers. Throughout the eighteenth century, if not ear-
lier, Cologne willingly accorded civic status to the wealthy and talented, and
provided institutions for their integration. The same was true of Aachen,
where a special guild for professionals (the Gelehrtenzunft) allowed a new
elite to participate in old civic culture. 46
   Disputes between burgher deputations and magistracies frequently
ended up in the Reichshofrat in Vienna, which served as a constitutional
court for imperial cities. Johann Jacob Moser, writing in 1772, estimated
45 The older literature, including Jeffry Diefendorf, Businessmen and Politics in the Rhineland, 1789–1834
   (Princeton, 1980), ignores the social breadth of ‘New Party’ support, and instead focuses on the tiny
   elite of businessmen. Theuringer, Liberalismus, p. 351, and Sobania, ‘Bürgertum’, pp. 193–4, 200–6,
   redress the balance. What can be conceded is that businessmen tended to dominate the ‘New Party’
   leadership, whilst members of the judicial elite were better represented amongst the ‘Old Party’
   hierarchy. Carl Horst, ‘Die Aachener Mäkelei 1786–1792. Konﬂiktregelungmechanismen im alten
   Reich’, Sonderdruck aus Zeitschrift des Aachener Geschichtsvereins 92 (Aachen, 1985), p. 115.
46 Wolfgang Herborn, ‘Der Graduierte Ratsherr. Zur Entwicklung einer neuen Elite im Kölner Rat
   der frühen Neuzeit’, in Heinz Schilling and Hermann Diederiks (eds.), Bürgerliche Eliten in den
   Niederlanden und in Nordwestdeutschland. Studien zur Sozialgeschichte des europäischen Bürgertums
   im Mittelalter und in der Neuzeit (Cologne, 1985), pp. 337–74; Joachim Deeters, ‘Das Bürgerrecht
   der Reichsstadt Köln seit 1396’, in Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte 104 (1987),
   pp. 1–3, 32–3, 50, 75. More generally, Mettele, ‘Bürgertum’, pp. 235–49, and for Aachen, Sobania,
   ‘Bürgertum’, pp. 188–93, 195–6.
