34                                     From Reich to State
   Traditionally, the Landstände comprised the clergy, nobility and towns,
but by the eighteenth century a more varied picture existed. In some areas,
such as Moers, peasants were represented, though in most cases the towns
and cities, which invariably controlled hinterlands, claimed also to speak for
rural populations. This was signiﬁcant, as it reinforced the sense amongst
the towns and cities that they represented the people as a whole, and not
just those enjoying civic rights. Such was the case in electoral Cologne, for
example, whose estates comprised four curia: the cathedral chapter, repre-
sentatives of the imperial counts, the imperial knights, and representatives
of the cities, who together convened regularly in Bonn as they had done
since 1463. In Jülich and Berg, the nobility and cities were represented,
and convened annually in Düsseldorf for six weeks throughout the sev-
enteenth and eighteenth centuries. In other territories, especially those of
the Middle Rhine (notably Trier), the ‘unmediated’ nobility had no terri-
torial representation, leaving a bicameral structure of cities and clergy. In
Protestant Länder, in contrast, the clergy disappeared as an independent
estate following the Reformation, leaving a bicameral division of towns
and nobles. Variations similarly distinguished the procedures of the differ-
ent Landstände, though most appear to have convened regularly and often
annually.51 They were an institution and not an event, to adopt Conrad
Russell’s memorable phrase. In electoral Cologne, at least, they deliber-
ated in secret, with the public admitted only to their ceremonial opening.
The elector feared they might become a public tribunal and sought to
prevent the circulation of reports on their deliberations. However, in elec-
toral Cologne, at least, news of their proceedings did invariably leak out
and formed the basis for pamphlets that circulated whenever they were in
session.52
   The most signiﬁcant power the Landstände held was that of the purse.
Taxation and the sale of public property required their consent. They also
generally enjoyed the right to petition the ruler. Beyond that, their signif-
icance, legacy and whether they represented a precursor to nineteenth-
century constitutional developments, remains debatable. The inﬂuen-
tial conservative, Friedrich von Gentz, argued during the debates over
Germany’s reordering following Napoleon’s fall that representation through
estates (which he and his employer, Metternich, supported) was incompat-
ible with modern forms of representation. This interpretation has tended
to stick. Certainly, there were institutional discontinuities. However, a
51 Gustav Croon, Der Rheinische Provinziallandtag bis zum Jahre 1874. Im Auftrage des Rheinischen
     Provinzialauschusses (Bonn, 1974), pp. 21–6.
52 Essers, Landtage, passim.
