44                                    From Reich to State
with the Landstände. The electoral government restricted religious toler-
ance, closed reading societies, imposed strict censorship, issued threatening
circulars against disturbers of the peace, and employed military force to
suppress demonstrations. However, the issue that ﬁnally brought matters
to a head was the welcome extended by the elector to the French émigrés.84
The ﬁrst wave of émigrés reached the Rhine in the summer of 1789. Most
did not settle but moved on, so that at the beginning of 1791 the French
ambassador in Koblenz counted only a dozen émigrés in the city plus a
few more in Trier. This position changed in February 1791 when Friedrich
Karl of Mainz, ever concerned to raise his international proﬁle and much
to the annoyance of Emperor Leopold II, offered hospitality to the French
princes Artois and Condé. Over the following months, numerous followers
settled in the region. Their presence and arrogance greatly aggravated the
domestic political conﬂict within the electorate of Mainz at a time when
Friedrich Karl’s government, like that of Clemens Wenzeslaus, was engaged
in a clampdown that resulted in a purge of Kantians. Radicals like Georg
Forster lumped together what they termed the German ‘aristocratic party’
and the French émigrés, and feared that together they would bury reform
in the name of counter-revolution.85
   Not to be outdone, Clemens Wenzeslaus offered émigrés hospitality in
Koblenz, a city that soon earned the nickname ‘Klein-Versailles’ on account
of its transformation over the summer of 1791 into the headquarters of
the comtes de Provence and d’Artois.86 These ensconced themselves in
Schloß Schönbornlust, a palace that Clemens Wenzeslaus placed at their
disposal. Here they established a government-in-exile, replete with minis-
ters, mistresses, guards and sycophants jockeying for positions that would
be claimed upon the triumphal return to Versailles. Rhinelanders looked
on with bemusement at the antics within this exiled court, and the arrogant
contempt with which the émigrés treated locals. The Habsburg represen-
tative in Koblenz reported that the number of impregnated local girls and
general decline in morals in those areas where émigrés settled made it ap-
propriate to rename the ‘French disease’ the ‘aristocratic disease’. Several
Rhenish journals reached the opposite conclusion, and lumped together
the émigrés with their revolutionary opponents as joint examples of French
84 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 345–6, 401–4, 439, 502, 520, 691.
85 Ibid., pp. 767, 774, 778–81, 791.
86 Max Franz, in contrast to his counterparts in Trier and Mainz, refused hospitality to the émigrés
   and more generally criticised the provocative counter-revolutionary course embarked upon in the
   southern electorates. He even spent part of 1791 in Vienna so as to avoid having to receive the French
   princes in Bonn. Emperor Leopold II refrained from maintaining an embassy in Koblenz after 1791
   for similar reasons; his representative in the region was henceforth based in Bonn.
