42                                   From Reich to State
We increasingly enlighten them as to their interests and position through the
application of science and publicity. – Then, ﬁnally, we dismantle the Gothic
scaffolding.77
This sentiment was shared by the last generation of thinkers who con-
tributed to the genre of political writing known as ‘Reichspublizistik’
(publications concerned with the reform of imperial institutions). They
included Carl Friedrich Häberlin and Nikolaus Thaddäus von Gönner,
both of whom attempted to update the Reich through the application of
new concepts emerging from France. Häberlin, for example, linked the
imperial maietas with the revolutionary concept ‘nation’, before conclud-
ing that the Reich encouraged freedoms which the French only achieved
through Revolution. Gönner went even further, legitimising the Emperor’s
authority as an expression of the ‘general will’.78
   The apparent effectiveness of the Empire contrasted with the failure of
France to arrive at a durable internal settlement contributed to a sense of
Reichspatriotismus in the Rhineland in the early 1790s. Opponents of the
Revolution exploited this and introduced a new ingredient by connecting
it with more obviously national sentiments. Increasingly, there appeared
in the conservative press national stereotypes that contrasted such German
virtues as loyalty (‘deutsche Treue’), honesty and steadfastness with French
collective violence and superﬁciality. It is unclear whether such arguments
struck a popular chord, though it is indicative that the anti-revolutionary
press felt them worth making. In this context it was fortuitous that 1789
should mark the centenary of Louis XIV’s devastation of the Palatinate, an
atrocity that remained alive in the region’s collective memory. Of course, the
anniversary could be ‘spun’ in different ways, with the blame pinned either
on the French people or, as pro-revolutionaries preferred, on the Bourbons.
Another opportunity to exploit francophobia presented itself with the dis-
pute that erupted between the German princes and new French government
over the status of Alsace. When, in August 1789, the French Constituent
Assembly abolished feudalism throughout France, it quite naturally in-
cluded Alsace within this legislation. This infringed the treaty rights enjoyed
by German princes in the region. The anti-revolutionary press within the
Rhineland interpreted the resulting conﬂict not primarily in social (nobles
versus peasants) or ideological (historical rights versus national sovereignty)
terms, but rather, as a national conﬂict.79

77 Theuringer, Liberalismus, pp. 307–10.      78 Gross, Empire, pp. 455–75.
79 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 374, 422–3, 435, 475, 639, 733–4, 796, 807.
