40                                      From Reich to State
whilst in Boppard, a small town at the other end of the electorate, a long-
festering conﬂict over forestry rights provoked sinister threats to ‘follow
the Parisian example’. Electoral ofﬁcials feared for their safety to the extent
of requesting the evacuation of their families. Meanwhile, within the city
of Trier, signs of radicalisation appeared with the circulation of pamphlets
calling for resistance to the elector.69 Moving north, large-scale, intimi-
dating demonstrations directed against the magistracy rocked Cologne in
October, with discontented burghers threatening to deal with the mayor
‘in the French manner’.70 Here, as elsewhere, disaffected groups played
upon the authorities’ fears to force concessions in existing disputes. They
employed threatening references to events in France, used revolutionary
rhetoric and displayed revolutionary symbols such as cockades that now
bloomed in a variety of colours. Popular political awareness undoubtedly
reached new heights. The imperial secretary in Koblenz reported to Vienna
in September 1789 that the common people avidly read newspapers, whilst
Johanne von Müller wrote to his brother shortly thereafter of the ‘all per-
vasive spirit of renewing liberty’ that existed in Jülich, Cologne and Trier.
Where would it all end, he asked.71 The previous trend towards conﬂict
resolution through legal channels, it appeared, was being superseded by
direct action.
   Yet, popular demonstrations never quite transcended the bounds within
which conﬂicts had been fought previously.72 They remained sporadic and
less radical than in France; blood-curdling threats were never carried out.
Calls for an overthrow of the existing order enjoyed no popular support even
in places racked by conﬂict like Aachen. The preconditions for revolution
were not there. The pocket-sized Rhenish territories proved better able to
spot trouble early and take remedial action in the form of concessions,
relief or application of military force. The small Rhenish armies, though
useless at ﬁghting wars, were well suited for dealing with internal trouble;
and, should they fail, imperial forces stood ready to intervene. Not that the
Reich’s contribution to peace was limited to its military capacity. Greater
was the ongoing contribution made by its institutions of conﬂict resolution.
69 Ibid., pp. 367–8, 394, 556–7, 575, 613–15. Also on Trier, Alois Schumacher, Idéologie révolutionnaire
   et pratique politique de la France en Rhénanie de 1794 à 1801. L’exemple du pays de Trèves (Paris, 1989),
   pp. 20–1.
70 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 401 n. 1, 417.
71 Imperial secretary in Koblenz to the imperial vice-chancellor, Colloredo, September 1789 and
   Johanne von Müller to his brother, March 1790, quoted from Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 440–2 and
   561 n. 2 respectively.
72 This conclusion applies even to the serious disturbances that occurred in Mainz in August 1790
   when apprentices from the guilds brieﬂy gained control of the city. The limited political objectives
   of the guilds are revealed in Schmitt, Zunftwesen, pp. 41–7.
