36                                     From Reich to State
loyalties centred on the ‘Land’, not the ‘Staat’.57 The ecclesiastical electors,
it was sometimes claimed, lacked the same commitment to their subjects
as hereditary rulers because they had no heir to pass their legacy to. This
was not necessarily justiﬁed; it hardly seemed applicable to rulers of Max
Franz’s calibre, for example, who represented a paradigm of conscientious-
ness and dedication to public service. The accusation concerning commit-
ment might more realistically have been levelled against the rulers of the
Nebenländer, who neglected their peripheral territories and concentrated
their reforming zeal on the core. This was the case in the Hohenzollern
holdings, for example, which escaped the centralising reforms imposed
elsewhere in Prussia during the eighteenth century. In the west, the re-
forms foundered on the colourful but generally lethal reef of opposition
from the estates backed by imperial law, and because Berlin lacked the
will to overcome this.58 Though perhaps welcome in the short term, such
a lack of commitment over the longer term increased the perception of
the ruler as being somehow foreign to the Land, and this in turn made
any arbitrary acts by him or his ofﬁcials appear all the more illegitimate.
It also reinforced the view that there existed a hierarchy of laws, with the
old laws of the Land – ‘altrechtliche Verfassungsgefüge’ – possessing a far
higher status than mere ministerial ordinances or police decrees. With the
appearance of a new political vocabulary following the outbreak of the
French Revolution, some started to equate ‘altrechtliche Verfassungsgefüge’
with the ‘pouvoir constituant’ – the power to make constitutional law. At
least this was the connection made by one venerable defender of the old
estates in Württemberg, Ludwig Uhland, whose political career spanned
the disappearance of the old order and who ﬁnished as a left-wing deputy
in the Frankfurt parliament in 1848.59
   Ultimately, the Landstände reﬂected the societies they represented, and it
was the balance within those societies that determined the estates’ response
to the challenges they faced. In a region like Mecklenburg, dominated by
the landed nobility, it was hardly surprising that the Landstände should
57 In Trier this was symbolised by the 1650 ruling according to which public ofﬁcials needed to swear a
   triple oath of loyalty to the elector, the cathedral chapter and the estates. Theuringer, Liberalismus,
   pp. 117–18.
58 Horst Carl, Okkupation und Regionalismus: die preußischen Westprovinzen im Siebenjährigen Krieg
   (Mainz, 1993), pp. 412–41. More speciﬁcally on the Hohenzollern duchy of Geldern see Heinrich
   Holthausen, Verwaltung und Stände des Herzogtums Geldern preußischen Anteils im 18. Jahrhundert
   (Geldern, 1916).
59 Gerhard Dilcher, ‘Vom ständischen Herrschaftsvertrag zum Verfassungsgesetz’, Der Staat 27 (1988),
   pp. 163–5, 170ff., 187–93. Gerhard Oestreich, ‘Zur Vorgeschichte des Parlamentarismus: ständische
   Verfassung, landständische Verfassung und landschaftliche Verfassung’, Zeitschrift für historische
   Forschung 6 (1979), pp. 65, 75–6, 78.
