                                   Land, Stadt and Reich                                          41
The contrast with France, where it took violent revolution to end despotism,
was not lost on contemporaries. It was obvious to the peasants of the county
of Saarbrücken, for example, who, in the summer of 1789, responded to the
arbitrariness of their local ruler not through revolution but by appealing to
the Reichskammergericht. Within months the court found in their favour
and issued an ofﬁcial warning to the count, who accepted a compromise
that was celebrated outside Saarbrücken’s town hall that November.73
   Imperial intervention, in the form of an arbitration commission, simi-
larly defused the ongoing political crisis in Aachen. Crucially, this interven-
tion did not aim at simply restoring the old order but rather attempted to
reach consensus over a new constitutional document. To this end, the com-
mission consulted widely and solicited detailed reform proposals. Several
radical draft constitutions were submitted, and one of these – drawn up
by the Prussian diplomat Christian Wilhelm von Dohm – served as the
basis (albeit, in modiﬁed form) for Aachen’s revised ‘Gaffelbrief ’ of 1792
approved by the Reichskammergericht. This document started from the
principle that the burgher of Aachen was ‘a free man, subject to no one
but only the laws of the Empire and this city’, and its provisions repre-
sented an attempt to graft new principles concerning personal freedom
and the inviolability of private property onto existing structures. Above all,
it transformed Aachen’s guilds from closed trade-based institutions into
‘political’ bodies open to all enjoying civic rights, a development Thomas
Würtenberger correctly describes as ‘revolutionary’.74
   Though never implemented because of the French invasion and internal
opposition, Aachen’s new Gaffelbrief demonstrated the ability of the Reich
to embrace reform.75 Even radicals like Franz Dautzenberg (who submitted
his own proposed constitution for Aachen) and Niklas Vogt believed in
the Holy Roman Empire’s progressive potential; Dautzenberg praised the
imperial constitution as the ‘the ﬁrst bulwark of German freedom’,76 whilst
Vogt described it as
the best support, the scaffolding, behind which the most beautiful construction of
civic freedom can emerge. – So, we keep the scaffolding standing for the moment,
and progressively establish a better balance between burgher, estates and states.

73 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 412–14, 471–4, 501–5.
74 Würtenberger, ‘Staatsverfassung’, pp. 93–5, 115.
75 Though, as Horst Carl stresses in his study of the Aachener Mäkelei, the scope for intervention
   by the imperial courts in future conﬂicts within the imperial cities was much restricted by the
   ‘Wahlkapitulation’ extracted by the territorial princes from Leopold II in 1790. Carl, ‘Mäkelei’,
   pp. 177–9.
76 Hansen, Quellen, 1, p. 583.
