                                   Land, Stadt and Reich                                         39
The French Revolution set in train events that brought about the Reich’s
dissolution. News of the Bastille’s fall travelled quickly up the Rhine from
Strasbourg and dominated the regional press from 20 July 1789 onwards.
Leading newspapers such as the Mainzer Zeitung, Kurtrierische Intelli-
genzblatt and Kölnischer Staatsboth generally welcomed events. In this, they
reﬂected educated opinion as expressed by prominent intellectuals like
Georg Forster, who wrote on 30 July of philosophy’s triumph in France.
Accompanying press reports of widespread violence in France dented initial
optimism, but was blamed as the inevitable consequence of centuries of
Bourbon despotism. However, very soon – within weeks – the ﬁrst negative
commentaries began to appear accompanied by warnings not to follow the
French example.66
   Fears that the revolutionary contagion might spread created something
akin to the Grande Peur over the summer. Alarmist reports of unrest in areas
bordering France appeared in Cologne’s newspapers in August, conjuring
up visions of rampaging peasants burning property and assaulting clergy-
men and forestry ofﬁcials.67 These reports, though exaggerated, contained
some truth in that unrest did surface in various localities. In September, it
erupted in Annweiler and Bergzabern in the duchy of Zweibrücken close to
Alsace. In Annweiler, conﬂict revolved around how communal ﬁelds were
leased by the town council, and complaints that the process was rigged.
Local councillors arrested some of the more vocal critics, thereby sparking
both protests and petitions to the ducal government. This responded sym-
pathetically and matters quickly quietened down. Signiﬁcantly, Annweiler
would remain loyal to the duke during the ﬁrst French occupation in 1792/3.
Ducal conciliation also kept the rest of Zweibrücken relatively quiet. For ex-
ample, a cull of wild animals and the sale of their meat at low prices soothed
popular discontent over forestry rights and hunting policy. Elsewhere, rulers
attempted to forestall unrest with similar concessions. Generally, they were
successful, despite rural discontent that was worst in the Middle Rhine and
especially in the electorate of Trier. Everywhere forestry infractions mul-
tiplied, though they were most common in relatively poor areas such as
the Hunsrück.68 Peasants in the vicinity of Trier staged a brief tax strike,

66 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 380–5.       67 Ibid ., pp. 412–14.
68 Georg Forster, writing in 1790, even warned that the wood shortage might spark a Europe-wide rev-
   olution. Joachim Radkau, ‘Holzverknappung und Krisenbewußtsein im 18. Jahrhundert’, Geschichte
   und Gesellschaft 9 (1983), pp. 513–43. For a contemporary Rhenish source on rural conﬂict, see the
   chronicle of Johann Peter Delhoven reproduced in H. Cardauns and R. Müller (eds.), Die rheinis-
   che Dorfchronik des Joh. Peter Delhoven aus Dormagen (1783–1823) (Cologne, 1926). Also, Hansen,
   Quellen, 1, pp. 451, 531–2.
