38                                         From Reich to State
long proceedings, the failure to reach verdicts, and the inability to enforce
rulings. Amongst the weaknesses previously identiﬁed was the privilegium de
non appellando. This was enjoyed by the larger German states, and prevented
their subjects from seeking redress in the imperial courts. However, this priv-
ilegium never prevented the imperial courts from hearing complaints of a
denial to grant justice, and such cases accounted for three-ﬁfths of the cases
brought annually to the Reichshofrat and Reichskammergericht. As for en-
forcement, this varied greatly between territories. Larger states were largely
immune. Smaller states, as predominated in the Rhineland, were more
vulnerable, as the courts might authorise a potentially hostile, powerful
neighbour to enforce their rulings. In such entities, imperial law provided a
deterrent against the arbitrary exercise of judicial power (‘Kabinettsjustiz’)
of the kind that Prussia witnessed during the notorious Müller-Arnold
case (1779), and instead encouraged regular, standard judicial procedure.
According to a contemporary jurist, Joseph Schick, the majority of cases
brought before the imperial courts hinged around the question of due
process and judicial independence. Certainly, the Reichskammergericht
became increasingly outspoken in its judgements against ‘Kabinettsjustiz’
in the 1780s, something linked to the penetration of that court by the radi-
cal Illuminati. Similarly, the Reichshofrat, whose rulings were increasingly
informed by natural law, and which took on a more theoretical and even
quasi-constitutional form in the late eighteenth century, also proved more
willing to strike down examples of Kabinettsjustiz. Consequently, its pres-
tige rose and the volume of appeals it received increased.64 Amongst those
Rhenish rulers on the receiving end of imperial rulings on account of their
arbitrariness was Count Karl Magnus of the Rheingrafschaft, who in 1778
was sentenced by Joseph II to ten years’ penal conﬁnement for ‘irrespon-
sible misuse of authority’, and the Bishop of Speyer, Count August von
Limburg-Styrium, who was ﬁned by the Reichskammergericht in 1787 for
‘infringing the civic freedom’ of the burghers of Speyer. Thus the imperial
courts afﬁrmed the concept of the Rechtsstaat.65

64 Ibid., pp. 28, 33ff., 160–2, 170–2. Also, Hanns Gross, Empire and Sovereignty. A History of the
     Public Law Literature in the Holy Roman Empire, 1599–1804 (Chicago and London, 1975 reprint),
     pp. 29–42.
65 For individual cases of imperial intervention against arbitrary rulers, Eberhard Weis, ‘Ländliche und
     städtische Unruhen in den linksrheinischen deutschen Gebieten von 1789 bis 1792’, in idem (ed.),
     Deutschland, pp. 115–16. For the broader constitutional implications, see Thomas Würtenberger,
     ‘Staatsverfassung an der Wende vom 18. zum 19. Jahrhundert’, in Wendemarken in der deutschen
     Verfassungsgeschichte (Der Staat. Zeitschrift für Staatslehre, öffentliches Recht und Verfassungsgeschichte
     Beiheft 10, 1993), pp. 86–7, 106. For the effect of court interventions on the ground, see Gabel,
     Widerstand.
