                            French invasion and exploitation                                   53
(17 October). To the fury of proponents of natural frontiers, Bonaparte, who
conducted negotiations without reference to Paris, focused on territorial
gains in Italy and failed to secure the Rhine. Instead, the parties decided to
convene a special international congress at Rastatt in 1798 to decide on that
frontier.

The vagaries of revolutionary politics as much as the course of war de-
termined French policy in the Rhineland. The occupation itself can be
divided into four phases. The ﬁrst, lasting from autumn 1792 to spring
1793, involved only the southern portion of the region, and is associated
with the ‘Republic of Mainz’. The second opened with France’s occupation
of the entire left bank in autumn 1794. It was characterised by exploitation.
The third phase, from March 1797 to September 1797, was bound up with
Lazare Hoche. The fourth, ﬁnally, started in November 1797 and involved
the administrative integration of the occupied lands into France. It ended
with Napoleon’s seizure of power in 1799.
   The French army that occupied Mainz on 21 October 1792 professed lib-
eration. Ofﬁcial instructions from Paris promised security and freedom. Im-
plicit from the beginning, of course, was the assumption that Rhinelanders
receive fraternity only if they opted for liberty, but the French held high
hopes of this. Initial signs from the Palatinate, where peasant discontent was
apparent, were encouraging. The new soundbite, ‘peace on the cottages, war
on the palaces’, seemed to strike a chord amidst reports of peasants plunder-
ing noble ﬁelds and wine cellars, expelling old-regime ofﬁcials, and spon-
taneously planting liberty trees.11 However, very quickly – within weeks –
the French discovered that discontent with the Old Regime did not mean
adherence to revolution. Disappointed, the French engaged more actively in
propaganda, which was provided primarily by the minority of local radicals.
When this failed, the French sought out scapegoats and found them in the
old-regime ofﬁcials whom they had initially kept on. So, a month into the
occupation of Mainz, they abolished the old administrative structures and
created new ones staffed by radicals. They also ‘municipalised’ the city gov-
ernments of Worms and Speyer, though this did not involve a major change
in personnel. It was at this point that the French confronted the difﬁculty
of reconciling their long-term political objective of propagating revolution,
which meant favouring radicals, with the short-term requirements of the
army, which were best met through co-operating with the established elite.

11 Franz Dumont, Die Mainzer Republik von 1792/93. Studien zur Revolutionierung in Rheinhessen und
  der Pfalz (Alzey, 1982), pp. 61–6, 79–80. Hansen, Quellen, 1, p. 414; 2, pp. 562–4, 785–6.
