                                          chap t e r 3

                   French invasion and exploitation




       The territory that lies between Paris and Saint Petersburg as well as
       Moscow will soon be made French, municipal and Jacobin. (Pierre
       Gaspard Chaumette, president of the Paris commune, 16 November
       1792)1
It took two decades before Napoleon brieﬂy justiﬁed Chaumette’s pre-
diction, minus the Jacobin ingredient. Initially, the Rhineland enjoyed
strategic and ideological front-line status following the French declaration
of war on Austria in April 1792. The Austrians and Prussians ﬁrst held
the initiative, advancing and capturing Verdun on 2 September. Then the
French, under Dumouriez, managed to redeploy and block the Prussians at
Valmy (20 September), a battle that condemned Europe to a generation of
war. The French, exploiting their numerical superiority, followed up Valmy
by invading the Reich: one army, under Custine, entered the Palatinate,
whose cities fell quickly, whilst a second, under Dumouriez, advanced into
the Netherlands, pushed aside the Austrians at Jemappes (6 November),
captured Brussels and invaded the Lower Rhine.2
   As the situation deteriorated, Austria attempted to mobilise the mil-
itary potential of the Holy Roman Empire. This proved difﬁcult. Ofﬁ-
cially, France was not at war with the Reich, as she had declared war on
the Habsburgs as kings of Hungary. The Reich as a whole lacked the in-
ternal consensus to resort to force, and this French diplomats exploited.
Opposition to the war was led by France’s old allies, the Wittelsbachs,
but was a sentiment that extended widely. In electoral Cologne domes-
tic opposition to war from the estates prevented mobilisation. Legally,
such opposition could only be overcome with an imperial declaration of
war, something that would forbid neutrality and require all to contribute

1 Jean Favier et al., Chronicle of the French Revolution (London, 1989), p. 304.
2 T. C. W. Blanning, The French Revolutionary Wars 1787–1802 (London and New York, 1996),
 pp. 71–82, 88–91.

                                                  48
