46                          From Reich to State
dimension. Orthodox Catholicism opposed the Catholic Enlightenment,
and the two sides engaged in bitter debate in the ﬁnal decades before the
Revolution. Neither side emerged triumphant at the time of the Bastille’s
fall. Both sides made full use of the public sphere to whose development
they contributed. Both sides also employed the ancient but reinvigorated
conﬂict-resolution structures available within the Holy Roman Empire.
   Conﬂict between Enlightenment and Orthodoxy tended to obscure an
older set of disputes that persisted in the region and engaged a broader
social spectrum. These generally pitted magistracies against burghers, and
princes against estates, and revolved around a myriad of particular issues
that varied in detail from locality to locality, but which tended to increase
as a consequence of economic development. Often, the conﬂict between
Enlightenment and Orthodoxy superimposed itself on top of these older
struggles as protagonists sought to gain advantage by legitimising their posi-
tion through association with a set of transcendental beliefs. Such occurred
in Aachen, for example, in the conﬂict between the ‘Old’ and ‘New’ parties;
the same was true of the centuries-old struggle that pitted the archbishops
of Cologne against the imperial city. Failure to unravel different layers of
conﬂict leads to a misunderstanding of motives and the misapplication
of labels such as ‘progressive’ or ‘reactionary’ to factions in disputes that
cannot be understood in those terms.
   All existing conﬂict, whether it be between the enlightened and ortho-
dox, the magistrate and burgher, or the prince and representative estate,
would soon be overwhelmed by the revolutionary and Napoleonic tidal
waves. Viewed from a longer-term perspective, the conﬂicts of the Old
Regime often appear farcically trivial. Certainly, their detail might attract
the specialist’s attention, but why should they be of wider interest, for they
would soon be overtaken by events? Arguably, the conﬂicts in themselves
were of little consequence. More important was the political culture they
reﬂected, reinforced and bequeathed. This culture was not founded upon
new institutions associated with enlightened sociability, which appealed
to a restricted elite. Rather, it was based upon the older conﬂict-resolution
mechanisms found within the Reich and its territories. These mechanisms –
including the imperial courts and commissions, representative estates and
burgher deputations – extended further down the social spectrum and fur-
ther back in time. Until recent decades, the historiography has dismissed
them as ineffectual. Even now, they are blamed for blocking Germany’s
development and are contrasted negatively with the enlightened absolutist
rulers, who drove through far-reaching reform from above. This negative
appraisal is inaccurate, because institutions such as the imperial courts and
