52                                    From Reich to State
Rhinelanders were mature enough to enjoy liberty, and that the tyranny
of priests was worse than the tyranny of princes. Only a minority opposed
annexation. Rather, the general sentiment was summed up by the dictum
espoused by one deputy: ‘The ﬁrst right is to preserve oneself; the highest
justice is to obtain and conserve the means.’ However, the French did not
annex the Rhineland in 1795, but signed an agreement – the Treaty of Basel
– with Prussia that marked the ﬁrst step in its acquisition. Berlin agreed to
cede its Rhenish territories to France in return for compensation.8
   Prussia’s defection coupled with German suspicions that Austria was pur-
suing the war for selﬁsh dynastic reasons increasingly undermined imperial
defence. The creation, following Basel, of a north German neutral zone un-
der Prussian guarantee greatly hampered the military efforts of those states,
like electoral Cologne, that remained committed to the war but whose terri-
tories lay within that zone. Furthermore, Berlin’s example encouraged other
less committed states to enter into their own agreements with France. The
Wittelsbachs in particular were tempted to follow the Prussians, though
they were deterred by possible Habsburg retaliation. Bavaria’s future king,
Max Joseph of Pfalz-Zweibrücken, in particular strove for an understand-
ing with France. He extended peace-feelers through a Rhenish go-between,
Andreas van Recum, who would later serve as a Napoleonic sub-prefect and
legislator. As part of these dealings, Max Joseph appears to have allowed
the French to capture the strategically important fortress of Mannheim in
September 1795. Certainly, the Austrians suspected treachery and arrested
two Palatine ministers following the recapture of the fortress; the resulting
controversy became a sensation in Germany. Recum kept low whilst care-
fully ﬁling away incriminating material proving Max Joseph’s involvement
for possible future use.9
   Whilst Vienna’s policy remained under the direction of Franz Maria
Thugut, a statesman who viewed revolutionary France as a menace to
civilisation, Austria stood ﬁrm.10 Indeed, following much effort, the Habs-
burg position within the Reich improved in late 1795. It was only in 1796,
following defeats by Bonaparte in Italy, that Vienna approached the ne-
gotiating table. Another débâcle, at Rivoli (14 January 1797), produced
the armistice of Loeben (18 April) followed by the Peace of Campo Formio
8 For the debate in the Convention, see Hansen, Quellen, 3, pp. 651–6. For a full text of the Treaty
   of Basel, see Alexandre de Clercq, Recueil des traités de la France (23 vols., Paris, 1861–1919), 1,
   pp. 232–6.
 9 Karl-Georg Faber, Andreas van Recum 1765–1828. Ein rheinischer Kosmopolit (Bonn, 1969), pp. 51–8,
   61–2, 81–92, 124–5, 131–3.
10 Karl A. Roider Jr., Baron Thugut and Austria’s Response to the French Revolution (Princeton, 1987),
   pp. 170–230.
