                      French invasion and exploitation                        51
   Georges-Jacques Danton expounded the new policy to the Convention
on 31 January 1793: ‘The limits of France are marked by nature and we will
reach them on the four corners of the horizon: the banks of the Rhine,
the shores of the ocean, the line of the Alps. To there must extend the
boundaries of our Republic.’ Not that this policy went unopposed. Some,
including Carnot, believed that insistence on natural frontiers would pro-
long the war and endanger the Revolution. French territorial objectives
subsequently remained ill-deﬁned during the Jacobin Terror. Maximilian
Robespierre never spoke of natural frontiers and with foresight feared that
generals might use conquered territories as bases from which to intrigue
against the Republic. He rejected the feasibility of exporting revolution
and instead focused upon its preservation at home. The international-
ism of the early Revolution evaporated. Chauvinism now triumphed in
Paris and claimed the heads of various foreign radicals including their self-
appointed leader, the Rhinelander Anacharsis Cloots, guillotined in March
1794. In conquered territories, the Committee of Public Safety decreed (on
18 September 1793) brutal exploitation.
   This was the position inherited by the Jacobins’ successors, the
Thermidorians. They approached the question of frontiers with character-
istic pragmatism. The issue became pressing as French armies again pushed
forward and completed the occupation of the Austrian Netherlands and
Rhineland by the autumn of 1794. The following year witnessed a debate
in the Convention over Belgium’s future. Deputies paid lip service to self-
determination, but the debate quickly turned to the advantages that would
accrue from territorial expansion, including an appreciation of the revo-
lutionary paper-currency (assignats). Such considerations took precedence
over any other principles: as Merlin de Douai concluded on the govern-
ment’s behalf, ‘in order to indemnify itself for the evils and costs of the most
unjust of all wars as well as to place itself in a state to prevent their recur-
rence by new means of defence, the French Republic can and must either
retain these lands through right of conquest or through treaty as it sees
ﬁt, without consulting the inhabitants’. During the debate, the Conven-
tion also spent some time considering the Rhineland’s future in discussions
closely followed in that region’s press. Amongst the plethora of justiﬁca-
tions deputies presented for annexation were that the Rhine alone provided
a sufﬁcient defensive barrier, that the region had been part of Roman Gaul,
that its inhabitants were destined to be French, that the Rhenish electorates
had sent contingents to ﬁght the Republic, that after years of sacriﬁce it
was absurd to respect ‘miniature sovereigns’ with their ‘Golden Bulls’, that
