50                                    From Reich to State
   Carnot seized the advantage back for France in late 1793. In response,
Francis II proposed mass Reich mobilisation, but this encountered decisive
Prussian-led opposition. Given his later enthusiasm for popular insurrec-
tions, it is signiﬁcant that Berlin’s chief ofﬁcial in the Rhineland, Freiherr
vom Stein, fully shared his government’s reservations about arming the
people. The other Rhenish princes entertained similar fears. These were
not unjustiﬁed: in the Palatinate, peasants responded to the call to arms
with demands for the abolition of noble privilege, whilst in Trier the estates
rejected a planned levee of 6,000 conscripts, a proposal that provoked calls
for rebellion. Electoral Cologne’s estates resisted approving military con-
tingents, and pressed their own demands for an end to clerical and noble
privilege. The government, like its counterparts elsewhere, suspended mo-
bilisation rather than make concessions. Only in the summer of 1794 did
ofﬁcial attitudes change, but by then it was too late.6
   For France, military success raised the question over the future location of
the eastern frontier. The theory that peace depends upon nations possessing
borders determined by natural features gained ground in the eighteenth
century and unexpected conquests presented the new Republic with the
prospect of acquiring such frontiers. At the very least, military success
opened new options with regards to the Reich. Essentially, there were three
alternatives: continuity with the relative disengagement of Louis XVI, but
with France allied to Prussia, not Austria; the division of the Reich between
Austria, Prussia and France along the lines of the Polish partitions; or French
support for the medium-sized German states at the expense of the smallest
territories and ecclesiastical entities, to counterbalance Prussia and Austria.
This last option, which was eventually followed, enjoyed the advantage of
conforming to France’s traditional strategic policy whilst at the same time
satisfying ideological demands.7

6 For Stein’s opposition to a levée en masse, Wilhelm Steffens, ‘Die linksrheinischen Provinzen Preußens
  unter französischer Herrschaft 1794–1802’, Rheinische Vierteljahrsblätter 19 (1954), pp. 405–6. For
  the situation in electoral Cologne, see Max Braubach, Max Franz. Letzter Kurfürst von Köln und
  Fürstbischof von Münster (Vienna, 1961), pp. 278–80, 290–1, 303–4; and Eduard Hegel, Geschichte des
  Erzbistums Köln, vol. 4, Das Erzbistum Köln zwischen Barock und Aufklärung vom Pfälzischen Krieg
  bis zum Ende der französischen Zeit 1688–1814 (Cologne, 1979), pp. 490–1. More generally, Roger
  Dufraisse, ‘Les Populations de la rive gauche du Rhin et le service militaire à la ﬁn de l’Ancien
  Régime et à l’époque révolutionnaire’, Revue Historique 231 (1964), pp. 117–19.
7 Eckhard Buddruss, ‘Die Deutschlandpolitik der Französischen Revolution zwischen Traditionen
  und Revolutionärem Bruch’, in Karl Otmar Freiherr von Aretin and Karl Härter (eds.), Revolution
  und Konservatives Begarren. Das alte Reich und die Französische Revolution (Mainz, 1990), pp. 145–54.
  Sydney Seymour Biro, The German Policy of Revolutionary France. A Study in French Diplomacy during
  the War of the First Coalition 1792–1797 (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), pp. 1–6, 21–4.
