                            French invasion and exploitation                                     57
evacuated in the other direction by the electors, including the shrine of
the Magi (by Nicolas of Verdun) from Cologne. Tragically, many of these
treasures were subsequently sold, dispersed or melted down to ﬁnance the
war. The French, meanwhile, requisitioned plundered ecclesiastical build-
ings and turned them into depots or prisoner-of-war camps. Teaching in
Bonn, Cologne and Trier universities, which had resumed following the
occupation, was disrupted by the ongoing war and the loss of endowment
income. Mainz university remained closed, due to the siege. The French
abolished all four universities in early 1798.18
   Cultural disruption was not the main concern of ordinary Rhinelanders
under occupation. Apart from pressure on scarce resources came military
brutality. At worst, troops ran amok, inﬂicting atrocities against civilians
that foreshadowed Napoleon’s war in Spain. Many French ofﬁcers were
themselves shocked by what they saw, but there were limits to what they
could do following the disintegration of military justice after 1792–3. Those
who attempted to enforce discipline faced possible denunciation as counter-
revolutionaries. The short-lived civil administrations established by the
French between 1794 and 1797 proved incapable of controlling the army,
which now justiﬁed Robespierre’s worst fears of ‘praetorianisation’. The
restoration of the primacy of civilian government would come only in
1800, thanks to a general, Napoleon Bonaparte. As for civilians, open re-
sistance was hardly an option, given the massive military presence. When
resorted to, it triggered uncompromising retaliation, as experienced by
the towns of Kusel and Westhopfen, which the French razed to the
ground.19
   Such dramatic confrontation between occupier and occupied mercifully
proved exceptional. Most Rhinelanders accepted the advantages of some
degree of co-operation, as will be seen. As for the French, they recognised
the need for local collaboration. Upon occupying the region in 1794, they
decreed that natives make up three-quarters of the local administration. The
Republic had a right to talent, which it ‘requisitioned’ like everything else.
In the south, where the military situation remained precarious, the Rhin-et-
Moselle army simply took over the existing administrative structures. In the
18 For the extraction commission, see Ferdinand Boyer, ‘Les Conquêtes scientiﬁques de la Convention
   en Belgique et dans les Pays Rhénans (1794–1795)’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine 18
   (1971), pp. 355–7, 366–7, 373. For the cultural impact on the archdiocese of Cologne, see Hegel,
   Erzbistums Köln, 4, pp. 487, 512–13.
19 Blanning, Germany, pp. 91–8, 203, 302–3. The fullest account of the many ad hoc administrative
   structures erected by the French remains Ludwig Käss, Die Organisation der allgemeinen Staatsver-
   waltung auf dem linken Rheinufer durch die Franzosen während der Besetzung 1792 bis zum Frieden
   von Lunéville (1801) (Mainz, 1929).
