                               French invasion and exploitation                                           59
guaranteed by the Reich or independently of the various consensus-building
and conﬂict-resolution mechanisms. These mechanisms, of course, repre-
sented the antithesis of arbitrary governance inherent under any military
occupation. The two were impossible to reconcile. This fundamental con-
ﬂict became apparent when Aachen’s magistracy responded to Hoche’s
policy by angrily challenging its legality on the grounds it had not been
conﬁrmed by the Reichskammergericht.23 Hence, Hoche’s strategy was
doomed even before the two events that sealed its fate: the Fructidorian
coup of 4 September, which resulted in a reshufﬂe of the Directory and a
shift towards the annexationist faction led by the Alsatian Director Reubell
and, on 19 September, Hoche’s own death. The following month, France
and Austria signed the Treaty of Campo Formio.
   At Campo Formio, Austria agreed to evacuate Mainz whilst the Prussians
reafﬁrmed cession of their Rhenish possessions in return for compensa-
tion. The details would be decided at the forthcoming Rastatt negotiations.
Paris sought to pre-empt these with the administrative incorporation of the
Rhineland into France. To this end, in November 1797 the Directory cre-
ated the civilian post of commissaire du gouvernement for the Rhineland and
appointed the Alsatian François Rudler as its ﬁrst commissioner. Rudler re-
organised the entire civil, judicial and ﬁnancial administration along French
lines, starting with the division of the region into four departments, the
Roër, Rhin-et-Moselle, Sarre and Mont-Tonnerre. Rudler did not, how-
ever, extend any democratic elements as existed in France proper. Instead,
he abolished the old-regime institutions through administrative ﬁat. On
a single day alone in early 1798, Rudler issued no less than 625 decrees
and orders to this end. Thus the French swept away the structures of the
Old Regime.24 There was greater continuity with respect to personnel. Of
the 900 ofﬁcials employed in the new departments, over 60 per cent were
natives of the region. Of the rest, a signiﬁcant proportion were Alsatian,
whose bilingualism together with the patronage of Reubell – in whose
‘patrimony’ the Rhineland was said to be – afforded them an advantage.25
Most natives originated from the university-educated elite, having com-
monly studied law or cameralism at a Rhenish or German university, and
23 Luise Freiin von Coels von der Brügghen (ed.), ‘Das Tagebuch des Gilles-Leonard von Thimus-
   Goudenrath, 1772–1799’, Zeitschrift des Aachener Geschichtsvereins 60 (1939), pp. 185–6.
24 As well as Käss, Organisation, see also Sabine Graumann, Französische Verwaltung am Niederrhein.
   Das Roërdepartement 1798–1814 (Essen, 1990), pp. 18–45, and Roger Dufraisse, ‘L’Installation de
   l’institution départementale sur la rive gauche du Rhin (4 novembre 1797–23 septembre 1802), in
   idem, L’Allemagne à l’époque napoléonienne. Questions d’histoire politique, économique et sociale (Bonn
   and Berlin, 1992), pp. 77–104.
25 AN, F1e 43, nos. 19–27.
