64                                   From Reich to State
   The Republic of Mainz encompassed a substantial rural hinterland. The
‘Clubbists’ sought to exploit rural discontent by ﬂooding the countryside
with ﬂy-sheets, pamphlets and revolutionary theatre directed against the
Old Regime. Attacks against the proﬂigate electoral court touched a raw
nerve in the countryside, where suspicion of urban culture ran deep. A
minority of priests preached reform and stressed the Christian basis of
the Revolution. In places, ‘clubs’ of peasants gathered spontaneously, to
read revolutionary pamphlets from Mainz and complain about the existing
order.34 However, as with the city of Mainz, it is important to consider
the precise nature of rural agitation. Certainly, the countryside was riddled
with conﬂict on the eve of occupation. The peasant’s life depended pre-
cariously on the cycle of seasons and weather, upon which he relied for
his livelihood. Suspicion of new ideas emanating from the cities was well
ingrained. Yet deep-rooted conservatism did not necessarily signify satis-
faction with existing realities. Conﬂict over common usages and rights,
such as access to wood, were rife and on the increase. Such conﬂict, for
example, lay behind the apparently revolutionary eruption in Bergzabern
in 1792/3. Jacobin terminology, perhaps transmitted through the radical
poems of Eulogius Schneider, which at least one contemporary eyewitness
noted were read by humble day labourers, were employed in Bergzabern
and elsewhere to give expression to grievances. However, the grievances re-
mained the same as before, and the agitation in Bergzabern and elsewhere
was directed by individuals with a long history of insubordination rather
than a new generation of revolutionaries.35
   Overall, the geographical extent of rural ‘Jacobinism’ was limited mainly
to the Palatinate, and the Clubbists were privately disappointed at the
poor response to their blandishments. They responded initially with yet
more propaganda, purges of administrative personnel and pressure to force
people to commit themselves. Most opted for the status quo. This became
apparent in the elections for the new Rhenish National Convention in
February 1793. The electoral arrangements gave all males over twenty-one
the vote on condition they swore an oath to be ‘faithful to the people and

34 Almost all of the Clubbist publications are printed in Heinrich Scheel (ed.), Die Mainzer Republik
  (2 vols., Berlin, 1975–81).
35 Dumont, Mainzer Republik, pp. 181–93. Wegert, German Radicals, pp. 43–51, 54–74. Thomas
  Theuringer, Liberalismus im Rheinland. Voraussetzungen und Ursprünge im Zeitalter der Aufklärung
  (Frankfurt a. M., 1998), p. 192. A minority in Bergzabern established a revolutionary municipality
  and Jacobin Club, and then petitioned the Convention in Paris for incorporation into the French
  Republic. Several nearby small localities followed suit, and met with (brief ) success when the Con-
  vention decreed their ‘reunion’ with France on 14 March 1793. The course of events can best be
  followed in Hansen, Quellen, 1, p. 414; 2, pp. 562–4, 785–6.
