                           French invasion and exploitation                61
centre of tension between radicals and conservatives, matters spiralled out
of control in October 1799 when the radical-controlled municipality or-
chestrated a campaign of harassment against moderates. As was often the
case, the army distrusted the radicals, and in Koblenz the garrison com-
mander, General Leval, retaliated at their provocations by declaring a state
of siege and dissolving the town council amidst widespread popular re-
joicing. A mini White Terror ensued. Despite attempts to seal off the city,
news of the affair reached Lakanal in Mainz who rescinded Leval’s orders,
though signiﬁcantly he conﬁrmed the general’s abolition of the town coun-
cil. French policy had turned full-circle since those heady days in late 1792,
and Rhenish radicals emerged the losers, simultaneously ‘persecuted by
the military, intimidated by their fellow-citizens, and abandoned by their
[French] superiors’.29

Throughout Europe, the revolutionary wars and terrorism in France
widened the gulf between radicalism and conservatism. Both sides became
more ideologically coherent. Rhenish radicalism – often misleadingly la-
belled ‘Jacobinism’ – came to prominence with the Republic of Mainz,
whose rise and fall was inextricably bound with the French occupation.
However, its ideological roots extended deeper, into the Catholic enlight-
enment centred on the university in the 1780s. In that decade, proponents
of reform – university professors like Matthias Metternich, Felix Blau,
Anton Joseph Dorsch, Andreas Hofmann, Rudolf Eickemeyer – looked to
the elector to carry forward their agenda. After 1789, they became disil-
lusioned that progress might occur within the existing framework. It was
less the Revolution that caused this than the Old Regime’s response to it,
which in Trier and the Palatinate as well as in Mainz resulted in a reversal
of the previous course. Only in electoral Cologne was an open breach be-
tween the regime and radicalism avoided thanks to Max Franz’s moderation.
These differing ofﬁcial responses to the Revolution possibly contributed
to the distinction apparent in the nineteenth century between a southern
Rhineland marked by a radicalism suspicious of princely government and
a more moderate north.
   Persecuted, many radicals opted to leave the Rhineland after 1789 and
settle in nearby Alsace. In 1792, they returned in triumph to Mainz
in the French baggage train.30 Almost immediately, they established a
French-style ‘Club’, named ‘Society of the Friends of Liberty and Equality’
(‘Gesellschaft der Freunde der Freiheit und Gleichheit’). The Club ﬁrst met on

29 Blanning, Germany, pp. 278–81.   30 Blanning, Mainz, pp. 267–70.
