                            French invasion and exploitation                                  63
fraternity. As for equality, the Clubbists shared the then common assump-
tion that socio-economic equality automatically follows from legal and
political equality. They rejected state redistribution of wealth and favoured
economic liberalisation in the belief that this would encourage Rousseau’s
‘heureuse médiocrité ’ of craftsmen and farmers. As for religion, the Clubbists
condemned the Catholic Church as part of the Old Regime and favoured
a return to the simpler liturgy supposedly followed by early Christianity.
Their entire programme, the Clubbists conceded, could only be achieved
through ‘reunion’ with France, and their belief, along with the rest of
Germany’s intelligentsia, in the existence of a German Kulturnation, did
not alter this conclusion. Rather, they clung to a cosmopolitan and vol-
untarist conception of the nation state that made a distinction between
culture and power. If the Russian tsars and Habsburg emperors could rule
over many nationalities, Georg Forster asked rhetorically, why might not
France be able to extend its political principles to the Rhine whilst accepting
that its inhabitants spoke in a different tongue?32
   How far this agenda attracted popular support is hard to gauge. Member-
ship ﬁgures for the Club alone reveal little as to why Rhinelanders joined. A
better source is the electoral investigation into collaboration that followed
Mainz’s recapture in early 1793. This reveals that for many, Club member-
ship stemmed less from ideological than pragmatic considerations. Fear,
reinforced by peer pressure, was a motivator for many. Dependants and the
vulnerable – public employees, Jews, those reliant on public poor relief – in
particular felt less able to resist pressure to publicly proclaim revolutionary
sympathies. Commercial gain motivated others, such as the coffee-house
owner who donned a Phrygian cap to gain business from French ofﬁcers.
Others blamed a few too many Schoppen of wine for their brief ﬂirtation
with revolutionary politics. Certainly, all ‘collaborators’ under investiga-
tion had a strong incentive to play down the ideological signiﬁcance of
their actions, just as their enemies emphasised the opposite in the ﬂood
of denunciations submitted to the electoral commission. Arguably, it was
in the interests of the electoral authorities themselves to minimise the im-
portance of revolutionary ideology so as to be able to portray committed
‘Clubbists’ as an isolated minority. However, even taking these consider-
ations into account, the investigation exposed a whole range of possible
motives for adherence to the Republic of Mainz.33

32 Ibid., 2, pp. 533, 584–6; Dumont, Mainzer Republik, pp. 170–9.
33 Karl H. Wegert, German Radicals Confront the Common People. Revolutionary Politics and Popular
  Politics 1789–1849 (Mainz, 1992), pp. 26–37.
