                           French invasion and exploitation                  65
the principles of liberty and equality’. Despite pressure to vote, the elections
proved a disaster on account of the minuscule turnout. In Mainz, only 400
out of the city’s 30,000-plus-strong population bothered to vote; only 100
out of 900 rural communities voted.36
   This, together with the outburst of public fury against leading Clubbists
following the fall of Mainz, ﬁnally disillusioned Rhenish radicals as well as
the French of the notion that they would win large-scale popular support.
The French, as noted above, responded by retreating into a chauvinis-
tic siege mentality. This, coupled with the descent into Terror, presented
Rhenish radicals with an awful dilemma. For having burned their bridges
with the Old Regime, they were limited to two choices: either withdraw
from political life or else continue to support the French irrespective of
their policies in the hope of change in the future. Most chose the second
option and, following the French reoccupation of the Rhineland in the
summer and autumn of 1794, found employment in the administration.
There, they enjoyed no control over the policies they found themselves
implementing, policies geared solely at exploitation and that through as-
sociation earned for them and their agenda ever greater popular hostility.
Yet, only the continued occupation guaranteed they would escape the kind
of retribution some of their number experienced following Mainz’s fall in
1793. Hence their terror in early 1797 when the truce of Loeben suggested
the Rhineland would return to its pre-war status.
   The radicals’ insecurity increased with Hoche’s policy of restoring old-
regime structures. However, salvation presented itself in August 1797 with
the prospects of an independent ‘Cisrhenan’ Republic, and radicals rallied
around this cause earning for themselves the label ‘Cisrhénan’. This label is
misleading, as the territorial objective was incidental to their thought. Of
greater importance was the evolution of their constitutional ideas. Here,
the legacy of the Mainz Republic’s fall and popular hostility, together with
the radicalisation of the Revolution and brutality of the occupation, had all
left their mark. Shocked by the excesses of the Terror, Rhenish radicals had
travelled the same ideological journey as many of their French counterparts.
They too now rejected the radical democracy of the Jacobin constitution
of 1793 as ‘premature by many centuries’, and instead favoured the French
constitution of 1795 with its restricted franchise. Above all, their political
thought was informed by Kantian ethics, which provided the basis for
their critique of the Revolution to date. The Revolution, they argued, had
failed to fuse morality and liberty, as demonstrated by the behaviour of the

36 Blanning, Mainz, pp. 280, 289, 299–300.
