58                                     From Reich to State
north, under the Sambre-Meuse army – which, unlike the Rhin-et-Moselle
army, was solidly republican – the French created new institutions, but
depended upon local personnel. This was especially true of the judiciary,
where local lawyers alone could make sense of the myriad Rhenish laws.20
   The various short-lived administrative structures the French experi-
mented with after 1794 hardly coped with meeting immediate military
requirements, let alone laying down any long-term foundations. By 1797,
the Rhineland was utterly exhausted and demoralised. Stein, reporting to
Berlin, complained bitterly of French maladministration, something that
would only end with a full restoration of the Old Regime.21 Stein was hardly
an impartial observer, but his assessment resembled that of the Sambre-
Meuse army’s new commander, General Lazare Hoche. Hoche was one of
a fresh breed of political general whose coming Robespierre had dreaded.
He identiﬁed ‘misguided extremism’ and ‘false political and administrative
principles’ as the cause of all ills, and recommended the return not only of
the personnel but also the institutions of the Old Regime as alone possessing
legitimacy and popular conﬁdence. ‘Experience should have corrected our
mania of wanting to municipalise Europe,’ he concluded, noting that after
their experience of occupation, it would be pointless trying to reconcile
Rhinelanders to the Revolution.22 Paris accepted Hoche’s recommenda-
tions and, on 12 March 1797, reintroduced the old structures.
   Hoche’s concept proved fundamentally ﬂawed, as it was founded on
misunderstanding. Most Rhinelanders believed the restoration of old in-
stitutions heralded the imminent restoration of the Old Regime in its en-
tirety. This demoralised the minority of radicals who genuinely supported
French rule. The French government obviously had no such intention, but
rather favoured a ‘Cisrhenan Republic’ under French protection. Carnot,
who dominated the Directory at this time, outlined these plans to Hoche in
August. More fundamentally still, Hoche misunderstood the nature of old-
regime governance in believing it might function outside the legal structure

20 For the requisitioning of native administrative talent, see Hansen, Quellen, 3, pp. 4, 230, and Archives
   Nationales, Paris (AN), D. XLII, 7, fo. 380. For the dependence of the French on local lawyers, see
   Marcel Erkens, Die französische Friedensgerichtsbarkeit 1789–1814 unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der
   vier rheinischen Departements (Cologne, Weimar and Vienna, 1994), pp. 137–9. For a recent contri-
   bution on French administrative policy in general in the occupied Rhineland, see Jörg Engelbrecht,
   ‘Grundzüge der französischen Verwaltungspolitik auf dem linken Rheinufer (1794–1814)’, in Christof
   Dipper, Wolfgang Schieder and Reiner Schulze (eds.), Napoleonische Herrschaft in Deutschland und
   Italien – Verwaltung und Justiz (Berlin, 1995), pp. 79–91.
21 See especially Stein’s memorandum of 10 January 1797. Erich Botzenhart (ed.), Freiherr vom Stein.
   Briefe und amtliche Schriften (8 vols., Stuttgart, 1959–70), 1, pp. 442–3.
22 Hoche to the Executive Directory, 2 February 1797. Longy, La Campagne de 1797 sur le Rhin (Paris,
   1909), p. 462. Hansen, Quellen, 3, pp. 878–9.
