62                                  From Reich to State
23 October 1792, in the electoral palace. Twenty members signed up that
evening. Over the following weeks membership expanded, peaking at about
500 in December. This represented about 6 per cent of those in Mainz
eligible to join, a ﬁgure that compares not unfavourably with the 8–10
per cent achieved by Jacobin Clubs in French towns and cities. In order
to ensure a modicum of ideological cohesion, the Club’s rules required
new applicants to win the support of six existing members and swear an
oath to ‘live free or die’. Yet, despite a promising start, the Club never
developed into a committed mass movement. Above all, it never attracted
support from the guilds, who feared the extension of revolutionary legisla-
tion (the Le Chapelier law of 14 June 1791) banning corporations. Instead,
it was dominated by university-trained professionals, who made up just
under one-third of the membership. Within this group, a small number of
personalities, collectively known as the ‘Clubbists’, set the tone. They in-
cluded the professors Metternich, Blau, Dorsch, Hofmann and Eickemeyer,
as well as the doctor Georg Wedekind and, most famously, the naturalist
and philosopher Georg Forster, a ﬁgure of international renown who had
accompanied Captain Cook on one of his expeditions. Signiﬁcantly, a
majority of ‘Clubbists’ were ‘foreigners’, something that provided ammu-
nition to their opponents: Metternich was a native of Trier, Hofmann of
Würzburg, Forster and Wedekind of Göttingen. Each brought different
talents to the enterprise: Metternich, who recognised the need to engage
the peasantry, emerged as the Club’s propagandist; Wedekind, whose sister
translated Thomas Paine’s Rights of Man into German, became the leading
political theorist; and Dorsch, who subsequently headed the government
of the Republic of Mainz, distinguished himself as an organiser.31
   A set of fundamental beliefs bound these personalities. Central was the
notion that democracy alone could guarantee liberty. Drawing on Kant and
Rousseau, the Clubbists believed that people need only obey laws granted by
themselves as an expression of the common will. Private ‘egoisms’ must be
subordinated to these laws. In constitutional terms, the Clubbists favoured
representative rather than direct democracy, though they argued that leg-
islators must be bound closely to the electorate – consisting of males over
twenty-one, excluding dependants such as servants – through a two-year
electoral cycle and plebiscites. They insisted upon judicial independence.
Absent from their concept was any notion of ‘loyal opposition’ or ‘parties’;
those favouring a different constitution could expect neither liberty nor

31 For proﬁles of the leading Clubbists, see Dumont, Mainzer Republik, pp. 130–5, 205–9; Blanning,
  Mainz, pp. 283, 291, 295–6. Also, Hansen, Quellen, 2, p. 499.
