60                                    From Reich to State
a majority had previously served in the administration or judiciary. Even
in the commercially dynamic Roër, only 9 per cent of ofﬁcials originated
from the economic elite. Above all, it was within the judiciary, with its
professional requirements, that the degree of continuity was greatest and
native predominance most pronounced.26
   As in France itself, new structures did not end conﬂict. Rather, they
simply institutionalised the various battles – ideological, political, social,
economic – that had been raging since before the French Revolution. If
anything, the administrative structures of directorial France actively en-
couraged discord. In particular, the practice of attaching politically com-
mitted republican commissioners to oversee the regular administration,
which was dominated by old-regime ofﬁcials (or ‘vile egoists, who only
covet public employment in the hope of serving personal interests’, as the
Roër’s commissioner, Anton Dorsch, preferred to describe them) aggra-
vated existing conﬂicts. In Aachen, relations between the magistracy and
local commissioner degenerated into ﬁsticuffs.27 French institutions con-
nected essentially local conﬂicts that had been raging for decades with the
far broader ideological struggles that continued to destabilise directorial
France. The various factions of different ideological hues that came and
went with bewildering frequency in the coups that rocked Paris in these
years fought out their battles by proxy in the Rhineland.
   Matters reached a head after the Prairial putsch of 18 June 1799, which
ideologically pushed the Directory to the far left. The neo-Jacobin regime
despatched a new commissioner, Lakanal, to the Rhineland together with
the full panoply of extremist legislation including the infamous ‘Law of
Hostages’ of 24 Messidor VII (12 July 1799). Lakanal proceeded to estab-
lish denunciation committees to root out ‘counter-revolutionaries’ holding
public ofﬁce. ‘Has there been a police state, Citizen minister,’ the Roër’s
departmental administration complained to Paris, ‘since the destruction of
the Venetian oligarchy that has resorted to such measures?’28 Under these
pressures, the occupation dissolved into disorder. In Koblenz, for years a
26 Karl-Georg    Faber, ‘Verwaltungs- und Justizbeamte auf dem linken Rheinufer während der
   französischen Herrschaft. Eine personengeschichtliche Studie’, in Aus Geschichte und Landeskunde.
   Forschungen und Darstellungen. Franz Steinbach zum 65. Geburtstag gewidmet von seinen Freunden
   und Schülern (Bonn, 1960), pp. 350–88. Graumann, Verwaltung, pp. 156–60, 164, 166, 176–7. Erkens,
   Friedensgerichtsbarkeit, pp. 149–51.
27 AN, F1b II Roër 1, (nos. 69–70, 72, 76).
28 Central administration in Aachen to the minister of justice, 11 October 1799, AN F1c III Roër 3,
   nos. 5 and 8; also, F1e 43, nos. 398–400. Philippe Sagnac, Le Rhin français pendant la Révolution
   et l’Empire (Paris, 1917), pp. 218–19. For Lakanal’s hatred of Reubell, which had repercussions in
   the Rhineland, see J. R. Suratteau, ‘Reubell’, in Albert Soboul (ed.), Dictionnaire historique de la
   Révolution Française (Paris, 1989), pp. 898–903.
