66                                     From Reich to State
French occupation. The Rhineland, with its unshakeable Kantian ethics,
could make a unique contribution to humanity, they argued, by making
the French Revolution moral.
   An ex-priest and journalist, Johann Baptist Geich, and a lawyer, Christian
Sommer, helped translate Cisrhénan philosophy into a political programme.
Geich, in his writings, rejected the restricted liberal view of the state and
instead supported active state promotion of morality. This meant compul-
sory state education to prepare all for liberty. Geich hoped that the French
would employ German Kantians, including Schelling and Fichte, in the
newly established central schools in the region that replaced the universities.
Thus, Geich argued, would the Rhineland bridge the gap between Kant and
the Revolution. Sommer’s contribution came in his proposed constitution
for the city of Cologne. Sommer was much inﬂuenced by the French con-
stitution of 1795. His suspicion of democracy was reﬂected in his exclusion
of the poor from the franchise and employment of complex, indirect elec-
toral arrangements. In this, Sommer’s draft resembled the later Napoleonic
constitution. In the short term, enlightenment needed protection from
the ignorant masses as well as from counter-revolutionary princes. Over
the long term, the free education Sommer’s constitution guaranteed for all
would extend enlightenment to society as a whole.37 More immediately,
the Cisrhénans put their faith in propaganda activities such as liberty-tree
plantings to educate the masses.38
   Synthesising the Revolution and Kantian ethics proved a hopeless ideal
given the Directory’s notorious immorality, something an increasing num-
ber of Cisrhénans including the young Joseph Görres recognised. Like
the Clubbists, they never managed to appeal beyond a small minority.
According to Görres – who, through his periodicals, Das rote Blatt and
Der Rübezahl, emerged as the most prominent Cisrhénan – their number
never exceeded 2,000. In Bonn, they numbered 140 at most, or 3.5 per cent
of the adult population. In Koblenz, the other centre of their activities,
there were 300 Cisrhénans (again, equivalent to 3.5 per cent of the adult
population), composed mainly of university-trained professionals.39 Their
37 Horst Dippel, ‘Der Verfassungsdiskurs im ausgehenden 18. Jahrhundert und die Grundlegung
   einer liberaldemokratischen Verfassungstradition in Deutschland’, in idem (ed.), Die Anfänge des
   Konstitutionalismus in Deutschland. Texte deutscher Verfassungsentwürfe am Ende des 18. Jahrhunderts
   (Frankfurt a. M., 1991), pp. 17, 22, 68–113. Theuringer, Liberalismus, pp. 311–19.
38 Hansen, Quellen, 4, pp. 48–50, 619, 642–4. Wolfgang Hans Stein, ‘Die Ikonographie der rheinischen
   Revolutionsfeste’, Jahrbuch für westdeutsche Landesgeschichte 15 (1989), pp. 194–212.
39 For Görres’s estimate, see Max Braubach (ed.), Joseph Görres, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 1: Politische
   Schriften der Frühzeit, 1795–1800 (Cologne, 1928), p. 589. Hansgeorg Molitor, Vom Untertan zum
   Administré. Studien zur französischen Herrschaft und zum Verhalten der Bevölkerung im Rhein-Mosel-
   Raum von den Revolutionskriegen bis zum Ende der Napoleonischen Zeit (Wiesbaden, 1980), pp.
   147–51.
