                            French invasion and exploitation                                       71
like the von der Leyens of Krefeld and van Recums of the Palatinate should
hedge their bets and maintain cordial relations with both the French and
the princes.50
   Whilst the vast majority of Rhinelanders remained behind, the princes
and their courts, plus many nobles and clerics, emigrated across the
Rhine in face of the French. Max Franz evacuated to Mergentheim,
Clemens Wenzeslaus to Augsburg and Friedrich Karl to Aschaffenburg.
The French gave émigrés two weeks to return or else face the conﬁsca-
tion of their property, though later they relaxed these provisions slightly.
Subsequently, many returned to reclaim their possessions. However, for
the vast majority who opted to remain behind, the princes’ ﬂight rein-
forced the perception that they were alien to the ‘land’. This sense of
abandonment turned to resentment when the exiled princes started issuing
threats against those co-operating with the French.51 Patriotism towards
the Land (‘Landespatriotismus’) dictated engagement with the occupier in
the community’s interests, and in order to prevent worse being imposed by
‘foreigners’, be they Protestants, Catholics or burghers from a rival town;
for, as a representative of one of Cologne’s old families wrote, to be ruled
by the French was a small evil compared to being governed by the wrong
sort of German.52 According to this view, it was better that trusted locals
of standing serve as interlocutors with the French. Throughout the region,
such individuals emerged. They organised petitions and managed the dis-
tribution of the burdens of occupation, often acting without reference to
the exiled governments. The chronicler of Dormagen – a small town north
of Cologne – recorded how the local mayor, on his own authority, managed
demands from the French army, organised patrols to counter plundering
by isolated bands of soldiers, ensured the town’s provision of ﬁrewood in
winter, dealt with outbreaks of disease caused by troop movements, bribed
key ofﬁcials to lighten requisitioning, and travelled to the French army

50 For the assessment of the representatives-on-mission, see Hansen, Quellen, 3, pp. 380–2, 440. For
   later French assessments of the problem, see Rudler (government commissioner in the Rhineland)
   to Lambrechts (minister of justice), 15 December 1797, AN, F1e 41, no. 18; the central administra-
   tion of the department of Mont-Tonnerre to Shée (government commissioner in the Rhineland),
   12 April 1800; and Shée to Abrial (minister of justice), 14 April 1800, respectively, AN, F1e 43,
   nos. 367, 369. For the von der Leyens, Kurschat, Leyen, pp. 33, 45–52, 58–9.
51 Those issued by Clemens Wenzeslaus were especially threatening, and provoked resentment. Hansen,
   Quellen, 3, pp. 280–2. For a similar sense of abandonment in the Prussian territories, see Johann
   Adolf Kopstadt, Ueber Kleve. In Briefen an einen Freund aus den Jahren 1811 und 1814 (Frankfurt
   a. M., 1822), pp. viii–x.
52 Theresa von Wittgenstein to her brother-in-law, Franz von Coels, 5 April 1801, Historisches Archiv
   der Stadt Köln (HASK), Bestand 1123, Kastennr. 22, dossier ‘Johann Jacob v. Wittgenstein (Briefe).
   Abschriften aus dem Archiv v. Coels-Aachen, nos. 1814ff’.
