68                                   From Reich to State
a target for the anti-clericalism of the French army. It was quite natural that
ordinary Rhinelanders should associate the desecration of their churches
and the suppression of manifestations of popular piety with earlier attempts
by radicals to dismantle the entire paraphernalia of the Baroque Church.
Just as religion lay at the heart of ideological disputes in the 1770s and
1780s, so in the 1790s it occupied centre stage. Not that Rhinelanders per-
ceived the French Revolution as fundamentally anti-clerical from the very
start. However, with Pius VI’s condemnation of the Civil Constitution of
the Clergy in 1791 and the increasing vociferousness of revolutionary anti-
clericalism, Rhinelanders were confronted with a choice between their faith
and the new ideology. Inevitably, the vast majority opted for the former.
Rhenish Protestant responses to the Revolution, in contrast, were initially
more positive. Did it not herald the defeat of Catholic absolutism and the
liberation of their co-religionists in Alsace? As for the Jewish minority, the
sources are obscure, though one might assume a similar response as for
Protestants. Certainly, the anti-revolutionary press made much of popular
unease in Alsace over moves to emancipate the Jews.42
   With the occupation, Rhinelanders experienced revolutionary anti-
clericalism at ﬁrst hand. This assumed a variety of guises: the desecration
of churches, the requisitioning of ecclesiastical buildings and their conver-
sion to profane use, the harassment or suppression of religious services and
processions, and not least the prominence of radical ex-priests amongst na-
tive collaborators. All this offended Catholic sensibilities and turned most
clergymen into proponents of counter-revolution. This had serious politi-
cal repercussions, as ﬁrst became apparent in the elections to the Rhenish
Convention in February 1793, when the line adopted by the parish priest
usually proved decisive in persuading people to abstain. Of course, Rhenish
culture and religion remained so inextricably linked that it is difﬁcult to ab-
stract opposition to revolution motivated by religious faith alone. In a place
like the city of Cologne, where popular civic culture and religion were inter-
connected and where urban republican perceptions centred on notions of
the city as a Catholic bastion against irreligious enlightened absolutism,
French anti-clericalism posed a threat on several fronts. Through its dis-
ruption of the Church’s infrastructure it threatened salvation. Beyond that,
it threatened the city’s cultural life, identity, dignity and independence.
These essentially secular considerations were felt more acutely after the
French authorities established their headquarters in Bonn and recruited
former electoral ofﬁcials. For Cologne, Bonn as the Residenzstadt of the

42 Hansen, Quellen, 1, pp. 774 n.1, 784, 786, 804–5.
