                              French invasion and exploitation                                       69
archbishops was perceived historically as a location from which challenges
emanated. On these grounds alone Cologne’s burghers felt justiﬁed in ob-
jecting to the French.43 The French, in contrast, ignored such subtleties
and simply lumped together all opposition as ‘counter-revolutionary’.
   As for inter-confessional relations, the French occupation threatened
to undermine the delicate balance established by the Westphalian settle-
ment of 1648. This ignited sectarian feuds. Catholic communities forced
to take out loans to meet French demands found themselves dependent
upon Protestant and Jewish creditors, and became resentful. Jealousies arose
where religious minorities found their public status radically improved un-
der the occupation. Such was the case in Aachen, where the Protestants’ rise
to prominence created Catholic resentment, or Worms, where Lutherans
complained as previously excluded Calvinists and Catholics entered high
ofﬁce.44 At times, common suffering and shared disgust at French de-
Christianisation united all confessions. The Rhineland escaped the worst
of de-Christianisation in 1793/4, but did receive a heavy dose in 1798 and
1799. Administrative incorporation in 1798 brought with it a raft of anti-
clerical measures previously implemented in the Republic, including the
ban on monasteries taking novices, the abolition of the tithe and sequestra-
tion of Church property, the ban on public religious processions and their
replacement with the revolutionary fest-cycle, and the abolition of religious
education in the newly established central schools.45 Radical Rhenish ofﬁ-
cials often went further in venting their anti-clericalism through rigorous
enforcement of this legislation. Yet at least the region experienced nothing
comparable to neighbouring Belgium, where 8,000 priests were arrested
and deported after 1797.46
   Apart from religion, attitudes towards the old-regime secular authorities
greatly inﬂuenced Rhinelanders’ choices under occupation. These attitudes
included loyalty and fear. Fear as a disincentive to collaboration ﬂuctuated
in intensity with shifting military fortunes and the likelihood of the princes’
return. This possibility ended only in 1801, with the Peace of Lunéville that
legitimised French rule in international law. Before then, collaboration with
the French could be construed as treason not only against the princes, but
the Reich itself. Emperor Francis II issued several warnings (notably, on

43 Hashagen, Rheinland, pp. 47–50, 72. Hansen, Quellen, 3, p. 735.
44 For Catholic resentment of Protestants in 1790s Aachen, see Albert Huyskens, ‘Die Aachener
   Annalen aus der Zeit von 1770 bis 1803’, Zeitschrift des Aachener Geschichtsvereins 59 (1939), pp. 10,
   51, 62.
45 Hegel, Erzbistums Köln, 4, pp. 488–90.
46 Martyn Lyons, France under the Directory (Cambridge, 1975), p. 107.
