                             French invasion and exploitation                                      75
to electors and bishops had produced a deeply ingrained mentalité that
made it impossible for them to distinguish between the obviously fraudu-
lent revolutionary concept of liberté and the older but tangible notion of
rights. Such sentiment was weaker in the Residenzstädte, where it had been
undermined by direct princely rule; and it was, of course, these cities –
Bonn, Koblenz and Mainz – that were the centres of radicalism in the
1790s.
   It might be argued that hostility to the French in defence of historic rights
represented the last gasp of a defunct system. However, in the short term
at least, the French threat led to a closing of ranks between magistracies
and guilds in favour of the status quo. This occurred in Cologne, whose
guilds feared the extension of French legislation suppressing corporations
and whose magistracy feared the loss of power. The latter recognised the
advantages of guild support, which would enable it to portray itself as a
popular government in its dealings with the occupation authorities. Signif-
icantly, the word ‘guild’ was translated into ‘section’ in its communications
with the French in order to better appeal to their political sensibilities.62
   It was not only in the imperial cities that attempts were made to
steer a course between revolution and counter-revolution. Histories of the
Republic of Mainz have generally focused on the radical political agenda
of the Clubbists to the exclusion of alternatives. These looked to existing
institutions as the basis for constitutional development. Amongst the pro-
posals circulating widely in Mainz following the Elector’s ﬂight, according
to Schlick, was one package calling for the formation of a Landtag rep-
resenting peasant, noble, burgher and clerical estates and enjoying ﬁscal
responsibility, the immediate replacement of Friedrich Karl with his radi-
cal coadjutor, Dalberg, the participation of popular representatives in the
nomination of future electors, and the establishment of a civil list to support
the head of state.63 Possibly, Schlick was referring to the ideas propounded
by the canon Schumann and his circle. Schumann was much inﬂuenced by
Friedrich Carl von Moser, a thinker who saw the potential for reformed ec-
clesiastical states to provide a barrier against absolutism. Moser’s proposals
centred on the secularisation of the cathedral chapters in the ecclesiastical
states. It was the chapters that both elected the electors and represented
a check on their powers. Their development according to Moser’s vision
would have transformed the ecclesiastical states into elective constitutional
62 Hansen, Quellen, 3, pp. 366ff. Gisela Mettele, ‘Kölner Bürgertum in der Umbruchszeit (1776–1815)’,
   in Lothar Gall (ed.), Vom alten zum neuen Bürgertum. Die mitteleuropäische Stadt im Umbruch
   1780–1820 (Munich, 1991), pp. 249–63.
63 Schlick to Colloredo, 2 November 1792. Hansen, Quellen, 2, pp. 557–9.
