                               French invasion and exploitation                                     67
isolation made them completely dependent upon the French. Their procla-
mation of a Rhenish Republic in Cologne on 17 September 1797 remained
stillborn because of Paris’s change of policy in favour of annexation.40 They
now had little choice but to support this, and were exploited by the French
who wished to use evidence of favourable public opinion to justify territo-
rial claims during the Rastatt conference. Hence, they were instructed in
early 1798 to organise a petitioning campaign throughout the Rhineland
calling for ‘reunion’ with the Republic. Predictably, this ended in failure:
under 15 per cent of those eligible to sign did so and of these a sizeable
proportion were Frenchmen; entire communities simply refused to submit
any signed address at all, and the few successful results represented the fruit
of vote rigging and intimidation.41

Motives for adherence to radicalism ranged from the ideological to the
pragmatic. The same was true of counter-revolution. Whilst the French
occupation catapulted Rhenish radicals to positions of prominence and
endowed them with an administrative and propaganda machine, it also
tainted them through association with all the hardships inﬂicted by the
revolutionary army. Such hardships remained at the forefront of ordinary
people’s concerns judging from such contemporary sources as the petitions
submitted by afﬂicted communities to the occupation authorities. Violence,
requisitioning, billeting, forced loans and forced labour were amongst the
litany of burdens endured. They were inevitable in a region that served as
a base of operations for military forces that were equivalent numerically
to over ten per cent of the population. Military occupation was not, of
course, unprecedented in Rhenish history. The Hohenzollern duchies had
experienced occupation by Austro-French forces within living memory,
during the Seven Years War. In terms of intensity and destructiveness,
Louis XIV’s devastation of the Palatinate was worse than the 1790s, but
that was small comfort for those alive at the time.
   The extent to which Rhinelanders blamed radical politics for their suf-
fering, as opposed to ‘the French’, is hard to discern. Certainly, conservative
propaganda connected radicalism with the sufferings of occupation. Whilst
native Clubbists and Cisrhénans used what little inﬂuence they enjoyed
with the French to mitigate the occupation, for ordinary Rhinelanders
oppression at the hands of the revolutionary army was associated with rev-
olutionary politics. This was especially the case when it came to religion,
and speciﬁcally the Roman Catholic Church, an institution that provided
40 Jacques Droz, L’Allemagne et la Révolution française (Paris, 1949), pp. 217–47.
41 Josef Smets, ‘De la coutume à la loi. Le pays de Gueldres de 1713 à 1848’ (Montpellier III Doctorat
   d’Etat, 1994), pp. 468ff.
