                            French invasion and exploitation                                     81
   Nothing, of course, came of this, as the Rhineland’s destiny was deter-
mined elsewhere. Yet the various proposals illustrate the state of German
political thought in this transitional period. Whether they were forward- or
backward-looking has divided historians. Hashagen, writing a century ago,
described Dumont’s proposal in Mainz as the ﬁrst signiﬁcant formulation
of Rhenish liberalism. More recently, Dumont’s namesake, Franz Dumont,
has similarly emphasised the progressive, modern, forward-looking dimen-
sion of the document, especially with its stress on the division of powers.
Others, notably Horst Dippel, have played down the progressive nature of
this and similar hybrids because of their failure to list fundamental rights
and the absence within them of any notion of progress so crucial to later
liberal thought. Certainly, none of the Rhenish documents produced in the
1790s advocated complete economic liberalism or the abolition of corporate
restrictions; in their terminology, they went out from the basis of restoring
ancient liberties and to varying degrees included the Holy Roman Empire
in their provisions.75 Yet reference to the constitutional texts themselves
refutes accusations of anachronism. For example, a reading of Dumont’s
proposal of 1792 or that of Lassaulx in 1797 does reveal an unmistakable
vision of progress and betray a conﬁdence that they conformed with the
spirit of the age that one ﬁnds in later constitutional proposals put forward
by Rhenish liberals like David Hansemann during the Vormärz.76 Equally
important in giving these documents a radical edge was the immediate
context in which they were drafted. Though nulliﬁed by changes in French
policy in the short term, the notion of limited government founded upon a
socially inclusive concept of Bürgertum and self-administration, was made
more attractive over the longer term by the experience of arbitrary military
government in the 1790s. It appeared more feasible with the irreversible
emigration of the electors and their ‘foreign’ courts in 1794, and the subse-
quent elevation by the French military of local elites – an amalgamation of
relatively ‘new’ groups such as businessmen and well-established elements –
to ﬁll their place.

This chapter has attempted to guide the reader through difﬁcult terrain.
One way of making sense of this period is to reduce it to a struggle between
revolution and counter-revolution. This struggle engulfed much of Europe

75 Hashagen, Rheinland , p. 387. Dumont, Die Mainzer Republik, p. 222. Dippel, ‘Verfassungsdiskurs’,
  pp. 20–1, 31. Also, more recently, Theuringer, Liberalismus, pp. 306–7, 320–1.
76 See, for example, David Hansemann’s memorandum on the state of Prussia of December 1830, in
  Joseph Hansen (ed.), Rheinische Briefe und Akten zur Geschichte der politischen Bewegung 1830–1850
  (2 vols., Bonn, 1919–42), 1, pp. 12–78.
