                             French invasion and exploitation                                      79
inevitably raised fundamental questions relating to equality, legitimacy and
representation.
   This was especially the case in electoral Cologne and Trier. In the for-
mer, which Hoche assessed at 1,751,680 livres, the city curia responded to
the general’s initiative by naming a representative, the Bonn law profes-
sor Johann Jakob Schmitz, to negotiate with the exiled Max Franz over
an appropriate response. Schmitz argued that all groups must contribute
to meeting French demands, irrespective of their privileged status. Even
before 1797, the extraordinary costs of the war had made clerical and no-
ble ﬁscal privilege politically unacceptable. Such privilege, its opponents
argued, went against both imperial law, which stated that extraordinary
taxes imposed following the declaration of a Reichskrieg must be levied
equitably irrespective of existing privileges, and natural law. Acceptance of
ﬁscal equality brought with it wider constitutional implications. Since the
clergy (as opposed to the cathedral chapter) were not represented amongst
Cologne’s estates, Schmitz suggested they should unite with the ‘people’ in
the fourth estate, sharing the same burdens and privileges. Max Franz, to-
gether with the cathedral chapter and clergy, accepted Schmitz’s proposal.
Max Franz distrusted Hoche, but supported the restoration of institutions
on the left bank as a prelude to their subordination to himself. However, he
instructed that the estates could only reconvene following his return. On
no account were there to be formal negotiations between the estates and
Hoche, but only informal contacts between the French and individual no-
tables that carried no wider constitutional implications.71 The noble curiae
rejected Schmitz’s proposals out of hand, to which he replied that if nobles
wished to return from exile, they would need to accept modiﬁcations to
their status (‘. . . dem Adel, wenn er als Adel zurückkommen sollte, machen
wir . . . eine solche Rechnung, daß er aufhören muß, Freiherr zu sein, wenn er
Bürger sein will’). The nobles responded by playing on Max Franz’s fears
of revolution, and accused the cities of colluding with the Cisrhénans. This
was not the case. However, the cities, through the extension of their estate
to encompass the clergy, certainly hoped for a redistribution of power in
their favour. The collapse of Hoche’s policy in September 1797 meant that
Schmitz’s plan remained on paper.72

71 Ibid., 3, pp. 935–42. HStAD, Kurköln II, 3254, nos. 13–16, 37–40. Also, Braubach, Max Franz,
   pp. 386–90. Similar tensions emerged between the local estates and government – in this case,
   the Prussian – in the Hohenzollern duchies as a result of Hoche’s initiative. Steffens, ‘Provinzen’,
   pp. 422–5, 438.
72 Karl Essers, Zur Geschichte der kurkölnischen Landtage im Zeitalter der französischen Revolution
   (1790–1797) (Gotha, 1909), pp. 34–7, 78ff., 106, 118–25.
