82                           From Reich to State
in the 1790s. Nor was it contained within the chronological conﬁnes of the
revolutionary decade, but rather represented the culmination of a longer
ideological struggle between the radical Enlightenment and its opponents.
A commonly posed question in the historiography of the Rhineland is
which side attracted the support of ordinary people. The impression hope-
fully conveyed by this chapter is that few sided with the radicals, especially
after these developed into ‘Jacobins’ and became tainted through association
with the French occupation. However, it has been stressed that counter-
revolution similarly failed to attract a broad following. Rather, moderate
reform built upon existing foundations, appealed to the majority.
   The preceding paragraph describes a political spectrum, stretching from
revolution to counter-revolution. Moderate reform is located in-between.
The intention of this chapter is not to present such a misleading image. For
arguably the choice that presented itself in the 1790s was less one between
revolution and counter-revolution, than between arbitrary government and
government constrained by law, custom and consensus. Certainly, this ap-
pears to be how most Rhinelanders adjudged the choice that confronted
them. Revolution, almost by deﬁnition, fell into the ‘arbitrary’ camp. Few
forces more arbitrary can be imagined than the French revolutionary army,
especially in the period between Robespierre’s fall and Brumaire. At least
before Thermidor, the French army was controlled to an extent by the
fearsome Jacobin People’s Representatives-on-Mission, and after Brumaire
by a strengthening of the civilian administration. Between those dates, the
descent of the French army resembled the arrival of a biblical plague of
locusts. What it meant to be occupied by the French has been covered at
greater length and more eloquently elsewhere. That the overwhelming ma-
jority of Rhinelanders should shrink back in horror and reject everything
the revolutionary army represented is hardly surprising. More surprising is
the attempt made by some historians to prove the contrary.
   More controversial, perhaps, is the argument that counter-revolution
similarly smacked of arbitrariness in the eyes of the majority. In reality, the
threat from this quarter appeared the greater at times. Such was the case, for
example, in 1791, when French émigrés settled in large numbers in the region.
Equally threatening in its arbitrariness was the ongoing political clampdown
in response to the French Revolution, even though its main victims were
an unrepresentative minority of radical intellectuals. After the summer
of 1792, counter-revolution, like revolution, meant resource mobilisation
on an ever-greater scale. At a territorial level, counter-revolution brought
with it the threat of the Reich’s partition between Austria and Prussia.
Poland’s fate heightened fears of such an eventuality. Hence, the prospect of
