80                                    From Reich to State
   In Trier, Hoche’s initiative also resulted in interesting developments in-
volving the estates. These reconvened in March 1797 to discuss Hoche’s
proposals, despite the determination of the elector to have nothing to do
with the general. In an unprecedented move, they proposed co-operation
with their counterparts in electoral Cologne and Jülich-Berg in order to
present a united Rhenish front. Trier’s estates aimed at regaining ﬁscal
control from the occupation authorities and to this end proposed the es-
tablishment of a central council on which would be represented all classes –
the nobility, clergy and third estate (cities) – who contributed to meeting
French demands. As before, the syndic Lassaulx, together with his col-
league Hetzrodt, emerged as proponents of radical reform. Lassaulx, writ-
ing in 1797, argued that the majority of Rhinelanders rejected revolution.
However, thanks to the propaganda war between the French and their op-
ponents, they were also more aware of their civic rights and liberties than
before and, according to Lassaulx, hoped that peace would lead to a new
constitution and not a restoration of ﬁscal and legal inequalities. Above all,
constitutional methods alone would ﬁll Rhinelanders with conﬁdence.73
   Following Hoche’s death and Campo Formio, Trier’s estates renewed
their efforts to form a common front with their northern counterparts at
the forthcoming Rastatt conference. In furtherance of this, Lassaulx sent
a political memorandum to Clemens Wenzeslaus in which he argued that
politics had changed fundamentally since the outbreak of the revolution-
ary war. Unlike earlier conﬂicts, this war was an ‘Opinionenkrieg’, a war
in which public opinion was important. Only radical reform, he argued,
would counter Cisrhénan propaganda that exploited popular fear of a return
of aristocratic privilege. ‘The spirit of the age has advanced so far that su-
perstition and stupidity can no longer overcome genuine enlightenment,’
he warned, ‘and only those states [will] remain standing whose form of
government is founded upon justice and fairness.’ Lassaulx proposed the
creation of a neutral, independent Rhineland, linked to France through
a free-trade agreement. Internally, this state would end ﬁscal and judicial
privilege, and the noble monopoly over public ofﬁces, and reorganise the
system whereby the Land was represented. In this last point, Lassaulx’s pro-
posal approached, conceptually, the notion of a Staatsbürgertum. The estates
would no longer represent particular interests, but cover the entire territory
of the state and represent all groups. Lassaulx’s proposals were subsequently
reafﬁrmed.74

73 Hansen, Quellen, 4, p. 376; also 3, pp. 846, 920–3, 931–6, 1204–9; 4, 85ff., 155–6, 202–5.
74 Ibid., 4, pp. 372–87.
