                             French invasion and exploitation                                          77
also emerges is that the guilds, far from restricting themselves to parochial
politics, took a keen interest in the wider territorial settlement, something
they recognised would have a great impact on their own future. Unfortu-
nately for them, pragmatism did not exist amongst the French, for whom
the petition came as an unpleasant surprise. The occupation authorities
abolished the guilds on 25 February 1793, from which time on their former
members were implacable foes of French rule. Yet whilst they welcomed
the expulsion of the French that summer, they equally feared an aristocratic
reaction with the return of the Old Regime, and were disappointed that
the elector continued with his previous policy of whittling away at their
autonomy. Their agitation for constitutional reform in Mainz continued,
albeit underground.67
   Mainz lacked the political focus that representative estates provided.
Such was not the case in electoral Cologne and Trier, where relations be-
tween elector and estates were at times fraught. Max Franz suspected that
Cologne’s estates were prepared to exploit the threatened French invasion
to strengthen their political position, and took care to dissolve them before
evacuating Bonn because it would be ‘extremely dangerous’ to have them
assembled under enemy occupation.68 In Trier, the breach between prince
and estates was more serious. Conﬂict centred on the elector’s counter-
revolutionary policies, which the estates feared would provoke French ret-
ribution. They openly called for neutrality following the outbreak of war.
Matters came to a head with Custine’s capture of nearby Mainz in October
1792. Trier’s estates dreaded the imminent occupation of Koblenz which
Parisian newspapers had threatened with destruction on account of its
status as the emigrés’ headquarters. To prevent this, the estates petitioned
Clemens Wenzeslaus to allow them to declare neutrality, something he re-
jected before abandoning Koblenz to its fate. The elector’s ﬂight reinforced
the sentiment that the estates alone represented the interests of the Land .
With this in mind, one of their representatives, Lassaulx, travelled to Cus-
tine’s headquarters in Mainz and, on behalf of the people, distanced himself
from the elector. In the event, the assurances Lassaulx eventually extracted
from Custine proved unnecessary, as Koblenz was saved by a Hessian relief
force. Lassaulx returned home and was promptly imprisoned. Despite a
successful appeal to the Reichskammergericht, he remained incarcerated
whilst the government initiated an investigation into his alleged treason. It
67 Friedrich Schmitt, Das Mainzer Zunftwesen und die französische Herrschaft. Ein Beitrag zur Charak-
   teristik ihres Gegensatzes (Darmstadt, 1929), pp. 58, 62–4, 67, 69–70, 77, 79–80, 82, 87, 90, 97.
68 Hansen, Quellen, 3, pp. 79–80, 255. Braubach, Max Franz, pp. 286, 389. Hegel, Erzbistums Köln, 4,
   pp. 483–5.
