76                                    From Reich to State
monarchies where the representative element would have dominated the
executive.64
   A better-known set of constitutional proposals from occupied Mainz in
this period emanated from Daniel Dumont. These were not unsolicited,
but were the outcome of a request from Custine to Mainz’s guilds. Custine
viewed the guilds in political rather than economic terms, and treated
them as the people’s representatives early in the occupation. Mainz’s guilds
collectively delegated the task of drafting a response to the merchants’
guild, which entrusted the task to the businessman Dumont. Dumont’s
draft proceeded from the principle that rejected the simple transplanta-
tion of the French constitution because it was ill suited to the German
character. Beyond that, his document contained provisions for a constitu-
tional monarchy with executive power limited by an elected assembly of
the ‘nation of Mainz’ holding the power of the purse, a two-year legisla-
tive cycle, an end to clerical and noble privilege, and the reservation of
public ofﬁce for natives. Dumont drew on both the French constitution
of 1791 and the traditional division in urban Germany between burghers
(with civic rights) and Beisassen (those without) in his distinction between
‘active’ citizens enjoying full political rights and ‘passive’ citizens. Mainz
would remain part of the Holy Roman Empire, but its constitution would
come under French guarantee.65
   The Clubbists contemptuously rejected Dumont’s proposals. They were
especially dismissive of his identiﬁcation of a unique German character
and his attachment to the Reich, which they contested was irredeemably
defunct.66 The French eventually expelled Dumont from Mainz. Before
then, in November 1792, the later Napoleonic mayor of Mainz, Macke,
an individual who enjoyed a measure of popular trust, organised a peti-
tion to Paris requesting that the French not impose their own constitution,
but modify that already in existence in Mainz. Over a three-day period
in November, Macke negotiated with the guilds, the majority of whom
supported the despatch of the petition. What was signiﬁcant in these dis-
cussions was the guilds’ lack of ideological attachment to the elector; if
the French offered them a better settlement, so much the better. What
64 Theuringer, Liberalismus, p. 371. For more on this important potential of the cathedral chapters see
   Friedrich Carl von Moser, Über die Regierung der geistlichen Staaten in Deutschland (Frankfurt a. M.
   and Leipzig, 1787), pp. 176–8. Also, Wende, Die geistlichen Staaten, pp. 42–7.
65 Hansen, Quellen, 2, pp. 569–73.
66 For attempts to combine republicanism within the framework of the Holy Roman Empire,
   see Monika Neugebauer-Wölk, ‘Reich oder Republik? Pläne und Ansätze zur republikanischen
   Neugestaltung im Alten Reich 1790–1800’, in Heinz Duchhardt and Andreas Kunz (eds.), Reich
   oder Nation? Mitteleuropa 1780–1815 (Mainz, 1998), pp. 21–50.
