                           The Napoleonic method of government                                             93
regulated ofﬁcial etiquette (laws of 28 Pluviôse (16 February 1800) and 8
Messidor VIII (26 June 1800)). Whilst ofﬁcial regulations banned priests
from publicly wearing clerical attire, they prescribed elaborate uniforms for
mayors, adjuncts, local police and, after July 1804, the presidents of depart-
mental and district electoral colleges, and presidents of cantonal assemblies.
Other regulations (notably the imperial decree of 24 Messidor XII (12 July
1804)) regulated the ofﬁcial hierarchy. Signiﬁcantly, these accorded primacy
to civilians over the military: mayors preceded the commandants de place,
and prefects the departmental military commanders. Honorary positions
held by local notables also enjoyed elevated positions: presidents of the
departmental electoral colleges came immediately after the archbishop but
before the prefect, whilst the presidents of the arrondissement colleges came
before the sub-prefects. Further provisions regulated the number of hon-
our guards different ofﬁcial grades might expect and, for the more senior
echelons, the number of gun salutes and duration of church-bell ringing
during their inspection tours.28
   Emphasis on ceremonial display might be ridiculed as the obsession of
a parvenu regime or even the militarisation of society by a dictatorship. In
reality, it represented one element in a range of measures aimed at restoring
order. From the Rhenish perspective, these measures represented less the
militarisation of civilian life than the re-establishment of the primacy of
civilians over the soldiery. Beyond that, they demonstrated a determination
to co-opt the local elite. Hence, for example, the importance Napoleon ac-
corded to the prefects’ ability to sustain the appropriate lifestyle enabling
them to interact socially with the wealthiest propriétaires. As Roederer stated
to the Tribunate in 1801, ‘it is necessary that he [the prefect] can mix with in-
ﬂuential persons possessing social connections whose signiﬁcance is greater
than one wished to believe over the last ten years’.29 Napoleon reversed
the pay cuts for public ofﬁcials introduced during the War of the Second
Coalition and established generous new scales for prefects (up to 12,000
francs) set according to the population of the towns in which they were
located on the grounds that this best reﬂected living costs. Napoleon disap-
proved of prefects lacking adequate personal fortunes, whom he suspected
of being prone to avarice, parsimony or even corruption, all of which
reﬂected badly on the government.30
28 Keil, Handbuch, 1, pp. 67–8.
29 Archives Parlementaires de 1787 à 1860. Recueil complet des débats législatifs et politiques des chambres
   françaises. Imprimé . . . sous la direction de MM. I. Mavidal et E. Laurent, etc., 2nd series (1800–1860),
   (Paris, 1862–), 1, p. 171.
30 Simon, the Roër’s ﬁrst prefect, fell into this category. Jollivet (government commissioner in the
   Rhenish departments) to the minister of the interior, 14 August 1801, AN F1b II Roër 1, dossier
