                         The Napoleonic method of government                                        89
Palatine noble families who remained in Hohenzollern and Wittelsbach
service respectively.10 The French treated the small number of Rhenish im-
perial counts, including the Metternichs, as sovereigns and ‘annexed’ their
estates. In compensation, they received secularised property on the right
bank.11 In contrast, the French viewed other nobles including the imperial
knights as private individuals and lifted the sequestration on their proper-
ties on condition they return and adopt French citizenship. Most returned,
‘rallied’ and, as we shall see, entered Napoleonic service.
   The conclusion of the Concordat with Pius VII in 1801 further rein-
forced the sense of harmony restored. Propaganda reinforced this over the
following years, culminating in the series of ofﬁcially sponsored obsequious
addresses from Rhenish cantons welcoming Napoleon’s assumption of the
imperial dignity in 1804: ‘Men and things have been put back in their
place,’ declared one; ‘Disabused of systems which have successively made
their unhappy progress, he [Napoleon] senses the necessity of returning to
the principles and the foundations of social order which the experience of
centuries has conﬁrmed,’ trumpeted a second; ‘Europe will be consolidated
upon its ancient foundations,’ and ‘A happy calm will now truly succeed
the terrible storms of ﬁfteen years of agitation and of torment,’ stated an-
other two. And so on.12 The new monarchical theme was demonstrated in
1804 when Napoleon visited Cleves, where he drank a toast to the King of
Prussia and renamed the main street Königsstrasse (‘King’s Street’).13 By the
end of the Empire, ofﬁcial almanacs located the Bonapartes, or the ‘fourth
dynasty’ (following the Merovingians, Carolingians and Capetians), within
the ancient monarchical tradition.14 Things had come full circle.

It took more than an image makeover to rectify the ills Shée discovered upon
taking up his post. In a series of damning reports, he painted a bleak picture
of administrative chaos and incompetence. Government had collapsed in
many areas, he concluded. Everywhere, ofﬁcials were resigning whilst the
administration languished in ‘the most complete stagnation’, and was ‘as
without life and without energy as . . . without good will’. Only introduction
of the prefectoral system would improve the situation, as it was cheaper
and required less personnel than the bloated bureaucracy set up by the
10 For the Palatine nobility, see Marcel Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les
  débuts du royaume de Bavière 1806–1810 (Paris, 1942), pp. 59–60.
11 Alan Palmer, Metternich. Councillor of Europe (London, 1997 pbk edn), pp. 25, 39.
12 AN, F1c III Roër 3, no. 31–4.
13 Justus Hashagen, Das Rheinland und die französische Herrschaft. Beiträge zur Charakteristik ihres
  Gegensatzes (Bonn, 1908), p. 109.
14 Almanach du Roër (Aachen, 1813), pp. 33ff.
