90                                   From Reich to State
Directory. Only such a radical solution would facilitate a purge of existing
personnel, only one-third of whom Shée classiﬁed as ‘good’. The rest,
composed mainly of left-wing extremists or, to quote Shée, ‘conspirators
who crept in during the ﬁrst precipitous organisation made without local
knowledge . . . ignoramuses who dishonour their ofﬁce . . . rascals, who only
serve in order to tyrannise the people’, would be replaced by individuals
with good mores and local knowledge.15
   Napoleon responded quickly by decreeing the introduction of the pre-
fectoral system in the Rhenish departments on 14 May 1800.16 The First
Consul, through councillor of state Roederer, subsequently outlined his
thoughts on the new territories’ integration to the Corps Législatif:
The introduction of every French law in a land which not only differs from France,
but which contains within itself areas with varying customs and laws, must no
longer be attempted without consideration, nor enacted with violence and precip-
itation! Changes in the law must be preceded by education, by persuasion, and with
the authority provided by positive examples. One surely knows today the costs of
premature reform. Furthermore, one senses that even the most useful changes still
need to be made agreeable to a people whose affection is too recent not to require
special care.17
These sentiments provided a welcome contrast to neo-Jacobinism. Yet, de-
spite the rhetoric, the new prefectoral system as established in ‘old France’
by the law of 28 Pluviôse VIII (17 February 1800) and supplementary con-
sular decree of 17 Ventôse VIII (8 March 1800) was hardly distinguished
by its responsiveness to local concerns. Rather, it reinforced the central-
isation of power through a strict hierarchical chain that ran from Paris
(ministers) to the departments (prefects), districts (sub-prefects) and mu-
nicipalities (mayors), and along which instructions supposedly sped with
the rapidity of electricity.18 Napoleon concentrated responsibility for each
administrative tier in the hands of an individual ofﬁcial. As in the army,
the emphasis was on swift executive action. Ofﬁcial correspondence was
conﬁned to strict hierarchical guidelines: ofﬁcials could only correspond
with the next tier, and letters sent in contravention of this were returned
unopened.19 Signiﬁcantly, the new constitution (Article 75) put an end to
15 Hansen, Quellen, 4, pp. 1268–78.
16 Napoleon ﬁrst consulted with Talleyrand over the foreign policy ramiﬁcations of such a step.
   Napoleon to Talleyrand, 10 May 1800, Napoleon I, Correspondance de Napoléon Ier publiée par ordre
   de l’empereur Napoléon III (32 vols., Paris, 1858–69), 6, p. 261.
17 AN, 29 AP 75, no. 182.
18 Felix Ponteil, Napoléon Ier et l’organisation autoritaire de la France (Paris, 1956), p. 47.
19 Anton Keil, Handbuch für Maire und Adjuncten, für Polizey-Commissare, Gemeinde-Räthe, Steuer-
   Empfänger und Vertheiler, Spital- und Armenverwalter, Pfarrer, Kirchen-Räthe und Kirchenmeister,
