                          The Napoleonic method of government                                            95
How far they expanded their role beyond functioning as letter-boxes passing
on communications between the prefectures and mairies depended on their
own personalities and the willingness of individual prefects to accord them
a wider role.33 Whilst only ﬁve out of the initial batch of eleven sub-prefects
appointed on the left bank in 1800 were Rhenish, subsequent appointments
favoured natives so that by the end of Napoleonic rule Rhinelanders rep-
resented a clear majority. Within the sub-prefectoral corps in particular,
Napoleon favoured those who appeared ‘likely to render dignity to their
ofﬁce’, as one circular put it. Hence the corps provides a good measure
of ‘ralliement’: the rallying of the old elite, who could best render dignity.
Whilst only one of the initial batch of native appointees was of noble ori-
gin, half of the twelve subsequent appointments were ex-nobles; the ﬁrst
appointees included radicals inherited from the Directory, but after 1804
Napoleon was able to replace these with old-regime personnel.34
   Elsewhere, former radicals experienced marginalisation. After Brumaire,
‘anarchist’ became an epithet bandied about to ruin their career prospects.
Rhinelanders, when petitioning the French for employment, obviously em-
phasised those qualities they believed would impress. Signiﬁcantly, under
Napoleon, applicants stressed loyal service to the Old Regime rather than
association with the occupation authorities in the 1790s.35 Yet it took time
before representatives of the established elite felt sufﬁciently conﬁdent to
‘rally’. For example, in Cologne Abraham Schaaffhausen, one of the re-
gion’s richest men, rejected his nomination as maire in November 1800 as
did the two favoured contenders for adjunct; and when Schaaffhausen’s al-
ternative, the ex-Bürgermeister Johann Jakob von Wittgenstein, was offered
the post, his brother-in-law wrote him: ‘As I hear, you are being threatened
with the position of mayor. I do not wish that on you.’36 The thesis that a
newly emerging, thrusting Bürgertum was clamouring for public positions
was certainly not universally applicable. Given recent experiences, many

33 Graumann, Verwaltung, pp. 69–70. An account of the activities of a Rhenish sub-prefect, Karl
   Ludwig von Keverberg of Cleves, is provided by Gustav Mücke, Die geschichtliche Stellung des
   Arrondissements und seines Verwalters zur Zeit der napoleonischen Herrschaft, dargestellt an dem Leben
   und Wirken Karl Ludwig von Keverbergs als Unterpräfekt in Cleve (Bonn, 1935).
34 Roger Dufraisse, ‘Les notables de la rive gauche du Rhin à l’époque napoléonienne’, Revue d’histoire
   moderne et contemporaine 18 (1970), pp. 759–60. See also AN, F1e 43, no. 383, ‘Etat indicatif des
   personnes que le commissaire du gouvernement croit les plus propres à remplir les places, de préfets,
   sous préfets, secrétaires généraux et conseillers de préfecture, maires & adjoints de police dans les
   quatre départements’, 22 May 1800.
35 Ibid.
36 For Schaafhausen, Historisches Archiv der Stadt Köln (HASK), FV4373, nos. 2–4, 6, 102–3. For
   Wittgenstein, see HASK, Bestand 1123, Kastennr. 22, Paket betr. J. J. von Wittgenstein, Haes,
   Cramer, v. Biegeleben, etc.
