                                            chap t e r 4

              The Napoleonic method of government




       [We] committed a great error when, being too rigorous with regards to
       political opinions, we did not choose a certain number of functionaries
       from the classes of former magistrates and rich proprietors of these
       lands: by this means we would have inspired more conﬁdence in
       the people and prevented the great dilapidation committed by those
       individuals who supplied no guarantee, either to the public treasury
       or to their fellow citizens.1
News of Napoleon’s coup of Brumaire received a mixed reception in the
Rhineland. Talleyrand’s agent in the region reported that the majority joy-
fully welcomed the new regime with great ‘hope that the equity of the
members of the government will make cease the vexations which they
have suffered, and of which they are still the victim despite protests’.2
Commissioner Lakanal, who was to blame for the vexations, reported that
the coup aroused no disquiet, but that Napoleon’s creation of a Commis-
sion consulaire exécutive aroused concern of a military dictatorship. The
commissioner was obviously expressing his own fears and the justice min-
ister was sufﬁciently concerned to write: ‘Your sense of civic duty and your
talents assure me that you share the general opinion, and that the consuls
can count you amongst those who will strive to insure the success of all
that has been done up to now, and all that remains to be done.’3
   Napoleon quickly removed Lakanal and embarked upon the process of
winning Rhenish loyalties. This necessitated overcoming past ideological
battles and creating a new image for the regime. Given Bonapartism’s prag-
matism, it was easy to select a variety of images for different audiences.
For the Rhineland, the challenge was simpler given the total discredit into

1 Archives Nationales, Paris (AN), F1e 43, no. 411, ‘Tableau des quatre nouveaux départemens, depuis
  leur organisation jusqu’à ce jour, présenté le 21. Vendémiaire (13 Oct. 1800)’.
2 AN, F1e 43, no. 121.
3 Lakanal to the justice minister (17 November 1799) and the minister’s reply (19 November), AN,
  F1e 43, nos. 186, 189.

                                                     87
