96                                 From Reich to State
viewed public service as an unpleasant distraction. They were not willing
to ‘rally’ at any price. Yet, by the end of the Consulate, an increasing num-
ber judged the beneﬁts of ‘rallying’ outweighed the costs. Such was the
case with Wittgenstein, who accepted his nomination as maire in 1803 by
the municipality that recommended him because the ‘choice of the old
magistrates of this ancient, small republic as present-day ofﬁcials will apply
a salutary balm to the wounds inﬂicted by the evils of war on this worthy
commune, and will give to the government the unlimited conﬁdence on the
part of its administrés’.37 The following year, another ex-Bürgermeister of
Cologne, Reiner von Klespe (whose father and grandfather had also served
as Bürgermeister), accepted his nomination as sub-prefect of Cologne. His
pompous installation ceremony took place in October 1804.38 The French
appointed a third former Bürgermeister of Cologne, Johann Dumont,
prefectoral councillor.
   Cologne’s old elite ﬂourished under Napoleonic rule. This was not sur-
prising given its success over previous decades at reinvigorating itself and
amalgamating new elements. It presented a united front to the French, and
was unchallenged by disaffected rivals who might have provided an alter-
native basis of rule in the city. Such was not always the case elsewhere. For
example, in Aachen, the established elite had been divided politically in the
last decades of the Old Regime and proved far less successful at integrating
new elements. Hence, French rule marked something of a new beginning as
that quintessentially Napoleonic process of ‘amalgamation’ produced a new
ruling elite of ‘notables’. This comprised a fusion of old and new elements
that for the ﬁrst time in centuries saw economic and political power in the
city united. Aachen’s three Napoleonic mayors collectively personiﬁed the
new fusion: the ﬁrst, Kolb, a cloth manufacturer, freemason, Protestant and
recently settled immigrant, typiﬁed the new element; the second mayor,
Lommessen, in contrast, as a member of a well-established family who
had initially ﬂed Aachen in the face of the French invasion, represented
the old; the third, Guaita, a needle manufacturer and descendant of Ital-
ian migrants who had settled in Germany in the early eighteenth century,
combined elements of the new and old. What united all three was their vast
wealth: Kolb boasted a fortune of 300,000 francs, Lommessen 400,000,
and Guaita an undisclosed but vast sum. A similar mix of personalities
dominated the city council. Middling burghers who had dominated the
37 HASK, Bestand 1123, Kastennr. 18 (Verschiedene Verwaltungs- und Prozeßsachen der Stadt Köln,
  18. Jahrhundert).
38 HASK, Bestand 1134, no. 12.
