                       The Napoleonic method of government                                  99
see, the Prussians attempted just such a categorisation of Rhinelanders
following the end of French rule, though without much proﬁt.
    Public service, it might be surmised, represented an unambiguous com-
mitment to the new regime. This would assume that those who entered
public service did so primarily to serve the state. An examination of the
interface between the state and society – the municipalities – presents a
different picture. The municipalities formed the lowest level of the ad-
ministration. In conformity with Napoleonic practice, they were adminis-
tered by individual maires assisted by adjoints and councils. It was another
peculiarity of Napoleonic governance that rural and urban municipalities
enjoyed the same status, irrespective of the discrepancies in their relative
size, and that a maire responsible for a few hundred souls should have
the same duties as his counterpart in Aachen, Mainz or Cologne, with
populations measured in the tens of thousands. Nor were mayoral duties
inconsiderable, though they were well summed up by one of Cologne’s
adjoints in 1803 as interpreting the paternal views of the government whilst
representing the interests of the community.47
    A handbook, published in German and running into two volumes and
1,300 pages, elaborated on this. Mayoral responsibilities ranged from po-
litical police duties, such as the investigation of publishers and bookshops
to enforce the censorship laws, the surveillance of suspect individuals and
posting of secret agents, to the more mundane examination of stagecoach
passenger lists, supervision of workers’ pass books and organisation of noc-
turnal patrols to protect isolated hamlets, a duty that sometimes incurred
personal risk. Mayors were also responsible for the management of com-
munal property, supervision of public works, maintenance of order and
hygiene on the streets and setting the price of meat and bread. Amongst
their most vital duties was the maintenance of civil registers recording births
and deaths, upon which conscription and taxation ultimately depended.
Mayors who failed to maintain the registers faced ﬁnes of 100 francs and
those who deliberately falsiﬁed them a life sentence of hard labour.48
    The mayoral guidebook represented an ideal that was rarely met. In-
stead, local notables served on their own terms, something the government
had little choice but to accept. For example, ofﬁcially mayors served un-
remunerated, but in practice they often awarded themselves handsome
sums ostensibly to cover expenses. Cologne’s mayor, for example, received
47 HASK, FV4378, nos. 11–14.
48 Keil, Handbuch, 2, pp. 58–61. One Rhenish mayor was sentenced to branding and twenty years
  in irons for forgery in 1807, though he subsequently received an imperial pardon. Moniteur 116
  (26 April 1807).
