                         The Napoleonic method of government                                      101
   Whatever the difﬁculties the government experienced in the cities, they
paled when it came to the hundreds of rural municipalities. Some of these
were very small, with populations in the low hundreds. It was difﬁcult
to ﬁnd suitably qualiﬁed mayors for these entities. As late as June 1802,
two years after their creation, the interior minister reported to Napoleon
that only a few mayors had been nominated in the Rhenish departments.54
Dauchy reported in the same year that few suitable candidates accepted
their nomination, that prefects were forced to employ special commission-
ers and that local government in the region was in a state of ‘la plus grande
irrégularité’. In France, the appointment of a special commissioner – who
was paid for by the locality on which he was imposed – was viewed as pun-
ishment. In the Rhineland it was greeted as liberation from an unproﬁtable
distraction.55 Mayoral candidates with the appropriate talent simply did
not exist in sufﬁcient numbers in the rural municipalities. Most who were
eventually appointed were ill-qualiﬁed farmers, and only a tiny fraction –
under 13 per cent in the Roër – belonged to the constitutionally deﬁned
group of ‘notables’ (the top 600 tax-payers in the department), though the
proportion was slightly higher – 18 per cent – in the cantonal chefs-lieux
(the equivalent of market towns). Few rural mayors – under one-ﬁfth – bid
for nationalised property, accounting for under 400 of the 9,000 lots sold
in the Roër.56 Even in a wealthy district like Aachen, only a tiny minority –
ten out of 188 in one list – were classiﬁed as ‘riches’ or ‘très aisés’. Most were
‘aisés’ (sixty-ﬁve), ‘médiocres’ (ninety) or lacked any fortune (twenty-three),
and their average private income as a whole was well below 1,000 francs.
Some rural mayors were so poor they even doubled up as church sextons,
a position that placed them under the parish priest. Poor mayors not only
undermined the state’s dignity, but were impossible to discipline through
ﬁnes. The threat of dismissal carried few fears, as neither mayors nor their
deputies gained much through service, though unofﬁcially many seem to
have deducted expenses from communal budgets. So, whilst the prefectures
regularly expressed alarm, there was little they could do.57
   The viability of the smaller Napoleonic rural municipalities was ques-
tionable, and not only in terms of personnel. Financially, many were crushed
by debts inherited from the revolutionary wars. Municipalities relied upon
local direct taxes for funding, but the government restricted these to a level
the prefects complained was inadequate, especially given Napoleon’s in-
struction that they use a proportion of their revenues to pay off 10 per cent
54 Report presented by the minister of the interior to the consuls, 10 June 1802, AN F1e 43, no. 106.
55 AN, AFIV 1025, dossier 3, no. 13.      56 Rowe, ‘Empire’, pp. 660–1.
57 Lameth to the minister of the interior, 11 September 1807, AN, F1b II Roër 3.
