104                                   From Reich to State
the Rhine in 1798, along with France’s eastern tariff barrier which it po-
liced. The direction included a hierarchy of directors and inspectors that
supervised the paramilitary ‘brigades’ of customs men who patrolled the
frontier. Napoleon established three customs ‘directions’ in the Rhineland,
based at Mainz, Bonn and Cleves. Each employed between 600 and 700
agents, which translated into one douanier per 1.5 kilometres of frontier.
Subsequent reinforcement increased this to one per kilometre. The customs
administration was almost wholly French, with Rhinelanders providing less
than 3 per cent of all employees. This is unsurprising, as the existing per-
sonnel had quite naturally been kept on when the agency moved eastwards
in 1798. Nonetheless, the national imbalance hardly endeared the customs
service to locals, most of whom thoroughly hated it on account of its asso-
ciation with all the negative aspects of Napoleon’s Continental System.71
    The ﬁnance ministry also ran the agency responsible for the collection of
direct taxes (direction du recouvrement des impositions directes). This organi-
sation was responsible for the tax rolls that were based upon data collected
by the municipalities. The upper echelon of the direction consisted of the
tax directors, who were usually French. The more humble tax controllers,
in contrast, included Frenchmen and Rhinelanders, with former radicals
prominent amongst the latter. Yet another equally unpopular ﬁscal agency
collected the registration fees for ofﬁcial documents and stamped paper,
the patent tax, taxes on playing cards, and also managed national prop-
erties (régie de l’enregistrement et des domaines nationaux). In terms of rev-
enue collected, this was the most important agency. Its departmental heads
(directors) were all Frenchmen, and subordinate places were occupied by
Frenchmen and a minority of Rhinelanders. In 1804, some of their duties
were taken over by a new administration for the collection of indirect taxes
(régie des droits réunis) including those on tobacco and alcoholic drinks. The
régie des droits réunis gained an especially nasty reputation for violating the
privacy of homes. Overall, it can be concluded that any type of tax-collector
was always likely to be unpopular, but that matters were little helped by the
fact that most were Frenchmen, especially at the senior levels.72 Napoleon
was aware of this and (in 1804) instructed his long-serving ﬁnance minister,
Gaudin, to reserve more places for Rhinelanders: ‘These lands can only

71 Roger Dufraisse, ‘La Contrebande dans les départements réunis de la rive gauche du Rhin à l’époque
  napoléonienne’, Francia 1 (1973), p. 523.
72 Graumann, Verwaltung, pp. 112–31. Hansen, Quellen, 4, pp. 521 n. 2, 959 n. 3. For contemporary
  German resentment at Frenchmen monopolising lucrative posts, see J. W. von Archenholz, ‘Briefe
  über den gegenwärtigen Zustand der deutsch-französischen Rheinländer’, Minerva 1 (1802), pp. 13,
  26, 27, 241–2, 477.
