100                                   From Reich to State
a ‘gratiﬁcation’ of 6,000 francs annually, something approved by the prefect
because it was supported by the city council, which argued it was important
for the city’s dignity that its representative compete with other dignitaries.
The interior minister, whilst reafﬁrming that the ‘legal and general’ princi-
ple was that mayors serve without pay, accepted they might receive compen-
sation for costs incurred in the ‘interests of their communes’. The councillor
of state, Jollivet, quite openly advised the mayors of Cologne and Mainz
to budget for their salaries under the heading ‘frais de représentation de la
Mairie’, rather than ‘traitement’ or ‘indemnité’, so as to avoid trouble.49
Napoleon occasionally complained about this and observed in 1810 that
mayors often received more generous salaries than prefects.50 Yet, this was
the price for attracting suitable candidates.
   It was not only with respect to remuneration that local practice con-
ﬂicted with ofﬁcial regulations. Given the reputation of Napoleonic France
for rigorous centralisation, it is surprising to discover the extent to which
older practices persisted, even in the largest cities. In Cologne, for exam-
ple, the superior French authorities encountered difﬁculties in penetrating
the workings of the ex-imperial city, controlled by the old elite. The ex-
Bürgermeister Klespe and Wittgenstein, as sub-prefect and maire respec-
tively, together sabotaged government attempts to farm out the collection
of local tax (larger cities had the right to impose duties on selected goods
entering their gates) so as to keep it under local control. More seriously,
they conspired to cover up serious instances of anti-government protest in
order to prevent intrusive investigations.51 They pre-selected candidates for
the city council by presenting the government with nominees who had no
intention of taking up their posts should they be chosen, thereby giving
their preferred choices a free run.52 Contrary to Napoleonic procedure,
Wittgenstein closely involved the city council in the administration, as had
been the practice in the past. From at least 1805 onwards, the council became
a near permanent ﬁxture of Cologne’s administration and councillors even
started referring to themselves as ‘Senator’, as they had done previously;
and whilst initially the mayor at least respected current form by convening
the council ‘in accordance with a decision of the prefect’, in later years he
dropped even this pretence.53
49 HASK, FV4373, nos. 93, 97–8, 101, 109–11. The mayor of Mainz received an annual ‘remuneration’
  of 4,000 francs.
50 Napoleon to the interior minister, 17 September 1810, Napoleon I, Correspondance, 11, pp. 123–4.
51 HStAD, Roër dept., 3009, nos. 44–53. Also, Lameth to the minister of the interior, 27 September
   1807, F1b II Roër 3.
52 HASK, FV4377, no. 4.
53 Gisela Mettele, ‘Kölner Bürgertum in der Umbruchszeit (1776–1815)’, in Gall, Bürgertum, pp. 262–3.
