98                                      From Reich to State
titles.44 ‘Aristocratisation’ culminated at the highest levels with Napoleon’s
marriage to the Habsburg archduchess, Marie-Louise, in 1810. News of the
impending dynastic match immediately sparked rumours in the Rhineland
that Napoleon would reverse the entire revolutionary legacy: in Aachen and
Cologne, people spoke of the imminent celebration by Napoleon of a mass
in memory of Louis XVI, the expulsion of ex-conventionnels, including
the prefects Lameth and Jeanbon Saint-André, the banishment of native
‘patriots’, and the outbreak of a second revolution that would devour those
associated with the ﬁrst.45

Napoleon’s regime was socially exclusive and politically inclusive. It wel-
comed wealth and talent. As time passed, it assumed an aura of perma-
nency that had eluded its predecessors, and the conclusion of peace with
the other powers and the Catholic Church won it prestige. Prosperity grad-
ually returned. Talented and wealthy Rhinelanders increasingly ‘rallied’.
Yet they did so on their own terms, for ‘ralliement’ represented a compro-
mise between two parties rather than the imposition of somebody’s will
on another. A variety of motives accounted for ‘rallying’. For the young
Keverberg, for example, Napoleon as an enlightened reformer represented
the successor of Frederick the Great. For others, he represented the restorer
of order and Christianity, whilst another group saw in him defence against
counter-revolution. Bonapartism was all things to all men.46 There were
also gradations of ‘ralliement’, ranging from full ideological commitment
to pragmatic considerations. Napoleon learnt the lesson of the revolution-
ary decade by accepting this and providing a range of institutions through
which individuals might determine their intimacy with the regime. For the
majority, ‘ralliement’ was about positioning oneself on a spectrum rather
than choosing between the extremes of fanatical commitment and outright
opposition. Hence the futility of categorising Rhinelanders as ‘collaborators’
or ‘resisters’. How, for example, should one label the banker Schaaffhausen,
who refused his appointment as Cologne’s mayor, engaged in smuggling
activities, but who also bought sizeable secularised properties? As we shall

44 Wittgenstein was one of those few Rhinelanders – about half a dozen – awarded a knighthood, and
   with it a new coat of arms consisting of the old family shield overlaid with Napoleonic symbols.
   HASK, Bestand 1123, Kastennr. 22, dossier ‘Entlassungs und Pensions-Versuch des bürgermeister
   Joh. Jacob von Wittgenstein betreffend’.
45 Ernest d’Hauterive (ed.), La Police secrète du Premier Empire: Bulletins quotidiens adressés par Fouché
   à l’ Empereur, 1804–1810 (5 vols., Paris, 1908–64), 5, p. 359 (police report of 29 March 1810). See
   also Ladoucette to Count Réal, 10 March 1810, and Georgéon to Count Réal, 15 March 1810, AN,
   F7 8390, dossier ‘Situation’.
46 Rowe, ‘Empire’, pp. 655–7.
