                          The Napoleonic method of government                                         109
Both episodes illustrated the authoritarian tendencies of Napoleonic gov-
ernance. However, their real signiﬁcance comes in their demonstration of
the institutional strength of the Napoleonic state, the importance accorded
to the rule of law (Sethe was, after all, not shot), and the guarantees this
provided against arbitrary government.

‘Power is based upon opinion,’ Napoleon once stated. ‘What is a gov-
ernment not supported by opinion? Nothing.’85 Authority might come
from above, but conﬁdence emanated from below, in Sieyès’s formulation.
Allowing this conﬁdence expression without creating a force that might
claim sovereignty was the challenge that faced Napoleon following the
Directory’s overthrow. Napoleon wished to tap the power generated by
popular legitimacy, but not release it uncontrolled. To this end, he in-
troduced a complex set of institutions that ran parallel to the executive
branch of government. These included a hierarchy of electoral colleges,
starting with the cantonal assemblies at the bottom, followed by the district
(or arrondissement) and departmental electoral colleges. The cantonal as-
semblies comprised one-tenth of all citizens, and they chose the electors
who sat in the colleges. After 1802, the departmental electors could only
be chosen from the top 600 tax-payers in the department. For the average
department, this meant an annual income of at least 3,000 francs or 60,000
francs in capital assets.86 The cantonal assemblies also nominated JPs. The
district and departmental electoral colleges nominated candidates for the
hierarchy of advisory councils. They also selected a national list of candi-
dates for the Tribunate (until 1807) and Corps Législatif. The Senate, which
together with the Tribunate and Corps Législatif represented the legislative
branch, chose members of the two other houses from this national list.
   The complexity of this electoral system poses questions as to its worth.
Certainly, it fails to meet the criteria demanded of modern representational
systems. It was supposed to give the Napoleonic regime popular legitimacy
whilst avoiding any dangerous concentration of power within any particular

   des Rheinländers Christoph Wilhelm Heinrich Sethe aus der Zeit des europäischen Umbruchs (Cologne,
   1973). For Rebmann and the Schill episode, see N. S. Wraskaja, A. G. F. Rebmann. Leben und Werke
   eines Publizisten zur Zeit der grossen französischen Revolution (Heidelberg, 1907), p. 147. For Rebmann
   more generally, Karl-Georg Faber, Die Rheinlande zwischen Restauration und Revolution. Probleme
   der Rheinischen Geschichte von 1814 bis 1848 im Spiegel der zeitgenössischen Publizistik (Wiesbaden,
   1966), pp. 46–55.
85 Jacques Ellul, Propaganda. The Formation of Men’s Attitudes (translated from the French by Konrad
   Kellen and Jean Lerner; with an introduction by Konrad Kellen, New York, 1968), p. 123.
86 Ellis, ‘Rhine and Loire’, p. 238.
