106                                  From Reich to State
the appointment of a special commissioner was considered an attack on
the city’s autonomy. Bitter conﬂict ensued. Matters came to a head in
August 1812, over a dispute as to whether the municipality or the po-
lice ministry should furnish the commissioner’s new ofﬁces. At one point
a local court, with the municipality’s backing, issued a summons to the
commissioner on the grounds that he had defrauded a local furniture sup-
plier. Naturally, nothing came of these proceedings, but the commissioner
complained subsequently to his superiors that the municipality was con-
tinuously undermining his authority.78
   It was characteristic of the region that recourse should be made to the
courts to resolve political conﬂict. Such had been the case under the Reich.
Such was the case now, with the new French judicial institutions. These
gained widespread acceptance. They were not viewed as an imposition or
as serving the state’s interests, but rather as a defence against injustice be
it committed by individuals or the state itself. The fact that the judiciary
was dominated by locals reinforced this perception. This dominance was
especially apparent at the lowest tier that came into regular contact with
the people: of the 259 Justices of the Peace (JPs) and notaries in the Rhenish
departments in 1800, only twelve originated from outside the region, and of
these, eleven came from Belgium or Alsace-Lorraine.79 JP courts tried minor
civil cases for which they could impose modest ﬁnes, and less serious police
infractions, which attracted larger ﬁnes or even short custodial sentences. In
cantons (the circumscription of a JP court) located on the frontier, JPs were
inundated with cases related to smuggling but, much to the government’s
fury, proved lax in this area. After 1810, Napoleon transferred these cases to
more reliable special courts. From Rhinelanders’ perspective, the JP courts
enjoyed several advantages: their proceedings were mainly oral so they
circumvented the provision introduced in 1798 that ofﬁcial documents be
drawn up in French; their proceedings were relatively quick and therefore
cheap, as cases needed to be resolved within four months or were else
quashed; the JP courts attempted prior mediation, though in practice this
degenerated over time into little more than a formality. Indeed, in 1805,
the Council of State seriously considered abolishing this facility, though it
was eventually enshrined in the Code de procédure civile. As for the JPs

78 AN, F7 6343, nos. 657–68.
79 Karl-Georg Faber, ‘Verwaltungs-     und Justizbeamte auf dem linken Rheinufer während der
  Französischen Herrschaft. Eine personengeschichtliche Studie’, in Aus Geschichte und Landeskunde,
  Forschungen und Darstellungen. Fritz Steinbach zum 65. Geburtstag gewidmet von seinen Freunden und
  Schülern (Bonn, 1960), p. 359. For the original lists of personnel in the Roër, see HStAD, Microﬁlm
  A54 (‘Etat des services des fonctionnaires’).
