                   The Napoleonic method of government                    115
talented Rhinelanders, but because it restored law and order after a pe-
riod characterised by arbitrariness. Napoleonic government has sometimes
been seen as ‘militarising’ French society. One thinks of the uniforms for
civilian ofﬁcials, the rigid hierarchies and the prominence of the military
in ceremonies and as recipients of patronage. However, it is possible to in-
terpret things differently and indeed, documents relating to the Rhineland
do tell another story. According to this, the 1790s were characterised by
exploitation and arbitrary action by military commanders who acted inde-
pendently of civilian control. After 1799, in contrast, military commanders
found themselves constrained by an increasingly formidable civilian appa-
ratus whose backbone was provided by the prefects. These wore uniforms,
but this reﬂected not so much the ‘militarisation’ of the civilian adminis-
tration but rather Napoleon’s attempt to boost its status in the eyes of the
population. Hence, the time and paperwork lavished on questions related
to etiquette and precedence. The fruit of this effort was not the triumph of
military values, but the re-establishment of ordered civilian administration.
   Of course, this administration was not perfect. In practice, it failed to
conform to the impressive blueprint drawn up in the various laws of Year
VIII. Much of this chapter has been devoted to revealing the limitations of
Napoleonic administration. These were especially glaring in rural areas, but
also in larger towns and cities where the established elite remained intact.
Overall, the Napoleonic state’s ability to penetrate the peripheral depart-
ments – departments whose inhabitants spoke a foreign language – should
not be overestimated. In practice, old ways survived, albeit within the new
administrative framework. The Rhineland was not ‘colonised’ by the French
Empire; rather, Rhinelanders ‘colonised’ certain French institutions. This
was especially the case with the judiciary. The various consultative councils
and colleges designed to allow the expression of ‘conﬁdence’ from below
must also be mentioned in this context. Evidence suggests these played a
more important function than previously thought. As we saw in earlier
chapters, Rhinelanders were used to institutions that allowed for a degree
of popular participation in government and that placed restrictions on the
exercise of power. It is therefore unsurprising that Rhinelanders quickly
adopted the new Napoleonic judicial and consultative structures as their
own, even though they then used them not to further the interests of the
state as the French intended, but of the Stadt and Land. Ironically, French
rule ultimately gained widespread acceptance in the Rhineland because of
what Napoleon and his circle would have identiﬁed as its weaknesses.
