110                                  From Reich to State
body. Beyond that, the system as a whole provided additional links that
bound the departments to the centre.87 It also provided checks against
arbitrary acts by subaltern ofﬁcials. Certainly, Napoleon took the elec-
toral/representative system seriously; for example, he described the depart-
mental electoral colleges as being ‘of great importance for public order’.88
This was because the various electoral colleges, assemblies and councils
represented something of an early-warning mechanism. Whilst Napoleon
never willingly suffered public criticism, he nonetheless was open to ad-
vice and above all betrayed an insatiable appetite for information. This the
colleges and councils provided. In that sense, to dismiss them simply as a
constitutional sham misses their point.
   This conclusion certainly holds true if we include the prefectoral councils
(conseils de préfecture) in our analysis. These councils comprised four or ﬁve
members, depending upon the department’s size. They included a mixture
of local notables and outsiders who, unlike their counterparts on the depart-
mental and district councils, were appointed by Napoleon and not selected
by the electoral colleges. They were also paid. In some respects they should
be classiﬁed as part of the executive hierarchy. However, they resembled the
other councils in that their primary function was to provide the govern-
ment with information on local conditions. This was especially important
in the Rhineland, where local knowledge of the manifold laws and complex
procedures of the former electorates was vital to the smooth running of the
administration. Arguably, this lent the Rhenish prefectoral councils greater
signiﬁcance than their counterparts elsewhere. In addition to supplying the
prefect with such information, the councils (which sat permanently) func-
tioned as an administrative court. In this capacity, they heard appeals from
individuals for a reduction in their tax assessment, ruled on claims against
the administration, and in disputes between private contractors and the
state. They also dealt with disputes relating to the nationalised properties,
something that ﬁgured greatly in the activities of the Rhenish councils. The
rulings of the prefectoral councils could only be reversed by the Council of
State. Prefects attended their meetings and held the casting vote in cases of
division. Napoleon took particular care in his appointment of prefectoral
councillors, and generally opted for individuals with prior administrative or
legal experience. In the Rhineland, radicals predominated amongst the ﬁrst

87 Newly elected Rhenish senators and legislators (no Rhinelanders entered the Tribunate) were in-
   undated by congratulations upon their nomination by individuals and localities placing them-
   selves under their ‘protection’. Stadtarchiv, Aachen (StAA), Bestand RAII (Allgemeine Akten), 248,
   no. 56; HASK, FV4347.
88 Napoleon to Cambacérès 12 August 1807, Napoleon I, Correspondance, 14, p. 487.
