                          The Napoleonic method of government                                       113
on candidates arose ‘because each district wishes to enjoy a preponderance
of members’.99
   Nor were Rhenish electors submissive in the face of Napoleonic bullying.
The Roër’s departmental electoral college spectacularly humiliated the gov-
ernment in 1804 when it refused to elect Marshal Bernadotte to the Senate,
despite ofﬁcial entreaties. It instead elected Belderbusch, a former senior
ofﬁcial of Max Franz who later became prefect of the Oise. Bernadotte,
according to the college president, suffered from the ‘circonstance fatale’ of
having been stationed in the Rhineland in the 1790s and thus ‘obliged’ to
impose ‘terrible’ requisitions on the region. The prefect, Laumond, com-
plained that the electoral colleges simply refused to elect anyone other than
locals and that the many Frenchmen living in the department who stood as
candidates all failed.100 Obviously, the Indignatsprinzip remained stronger
than government pressure. This culture of stubborn deﬁance continued
under one of Laumond’s successors, Ladoucette, who in January 1810 com-
plained to the interior minister that the departmental electoral college had
just passed over seven government candidates for the departmental council,
despite ofﬁcial ‘instructions’ to the college’s president. Instead, according
to a report from the police minister, Fouché, submitted to Napoleon, the
college elected two judges previously sacked by the government.101
   Examination of how the electoral colleges and consultative councils func-
tioned in practice leads to the following conclusion: some Rhinelanders, for
whatever reason, failed to engage with them, but a large number availed
themselves of them for their own purposes. Foremost amongst these pur-
poses was defence of the interests of the Land against threats such as the
regime attempting to impose its favoured candidates at the expense of locals,
and rival Länder gaining preponderance on this or that college or council.
For the French government, the employment of its institutions for these
ends represented an unintended outcome. It was extremely irritating that
councils and colleges should serve as fora for ‘useless debates and . . . idle dis-
cussions, which only hamper the administration without enlightening it’,
as one prefectoral circular characteristically put it.102 Yet for Rhinelanders,
the existence of participatory institutions was far from useless. Rather, it
was something they were used to under the Reich. Napoleon, through
his provision of such institutions unwittingly preserved a link between the

  99 Count Loë to the interior minister, 18 December 1809, AN, F1c III Roër 2, no. 49.
100 Laumond to the interior minister, 1 October 1805, AN, F1c III Roër 1, nos. 141–2.
 101 Ladoucette to the interior minister, 21 January 1810, AN, F1c III Roër 2, no. 47. Also, Hauterive,
   Police secrète, 5, p. 290 (report of 9 January 1810).
102 Prefectoral circular of 5 January 1801, HStAD, Roër dept. 1520, no. 19.
