108                                  From Reich to State
by Napoleon, these tried cases including murder, forgery of coins, attacks
against the purchasers of nationalised properties, bribery of recruitment
ofﬁcers and rebellion. They functioned without juries and their sentences,
against which there was no appeal, were carried out within twenty-four
hours. The special criminal courts (cours de justice criminelle spéciale; after
1810, cours spéciale ordinaire) tried similar crimes, and were also composed
of a mixture of judges and military ofﬁcers who sat without juries. After
1810 they were complemented by the non-jury customs courts (tribunaux
ordinaires des douanes and cours prévôtales des douanes). Given their unpop-
ularity, it is not surprising that judges serving on these courts ﬂed into the
French interior in the face of the Allied invasion in early 1814.83
   The non-jury special courts disappeared in 1814, unmourned. Fortu-
itously shorn of its authoritarian elements, the French legal system subse-
quently became a surrogate constitution. A broad social spectrum united
in its defence. Serving or retired judicial personnel led this defence out
of conviction or professional necessity. Amongst them were Christoph
Wilhelm Sethe and Georg Friedrich Rebmann, both of whom we shall
encounter later. Sethe in particular played a crucial role after 1814 as head
of the Prussian commission that decided in favour of the preservation of
French judicial forms, whilst Rebmann deployed his journalistic talents
after the Restoration in countering the wave of nationalism that sought
‘de-Napoleonisation’. Previous episodes had shown them the strengths of
the institution they were now defending. For Sethe, this episode came in
1813, whilst he was senior procurator in the grand duchy of Berg. During
the serious uprising of that year, Sethe used his position to mitigate the re-
pression that followed. As a consequence, Sethe faced condemnation from
his superiors and was even summoned by Napoleon to Paris, where he
was told the Emperor could have him shot. ‘Then he will have to shoot
the law ﬁrst,’ Sethe is said to have replied. Rebmann, as a superior judge
in Mont-Tonnerre on the left bank, found himself in an analogous posi-
tion following the abortive uprisings in Germany against French rule that
accompanied the Austrian War of 1809. When followers of one of these
uprisings – that led by the Prussian major Schill – were arrested, Napoleon
determined they should be tried as common criminals and not combatants.
However, Rebmann, in whose court they appeared, successfully employed
technicalities to spin out proceedings until the collapse of French rule.84
83 Graumann, Verwaltung, pp. 169–71, 194–6. LHAK, Bestand 241, fascicles 1029, 1247, 1255.
84 For Sethe, see Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (56 vols., Leipzig, 1875–1912), 30, pp. 152–3; also,
  Adolf Klein and Justus Bockemühl (eds.), 1770–1815. Weltgeschichte am Rhein erlebt. Erinnerungen
