114                           From Reich to State
practices of the Old Regime and the demands for participatory government
that lay at the heart of nineteenth-century liberalism.

The reader may have approached this chapter with an image of Napoleonic
government as centralised, efﬁcient and authoritarian. This chapter has
attempted to modify this image. The most important characteristic of
Napoleonic government was less its centralisation and more its dependence
upon local elites. Napoleon recognised the immutability of the ‘notables’,
and designed his administrative structures accordingly. He hoped the nota-
bles would put aside the ideological differences of the past and ‘rally’. In that
sense, the Napoleonic system was politically relatively inclusive, though so-
cially exclusive. For ‘notability’ depended chieﬂy upon wealth, with ‘talent’
playing a less signiﬁcant though not unimportant role in deﬁning status. Of
course, wealth and talent as much as birth had, in practice, deﬁned social
status under the Old Regime to a greater extent than might be thought. We
have seen how in old-regime Cologne, for example, civic institutions pro-
vided mechanisms whereby newcomers in possession of wealth and talent
could rise to prominence within the city. Aachen had been less successful in
this respect, in that a variety of institutional barriers prevented the perfect
translation of wealth and talent into political power. Here, and in places
where similar institutional barriers had previously existed, Napoleonic gov-
ernment resulted in signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the elite. Elsewhere, the
new regime was marked by continuity.
   Napoleonic rule was imposed upon the Rhineland from outside. How-
ever, it quickly gained a measure of local support. Rhinelanders, like
their fellow Frenchmen, were weary of ideological conﬂict and welcomed
Napoleon’s ‘depoliticisation’ of public life. The new regime, in contrast to
its revolutionary predecessors, showed outward respect for local traditions
and sensibilities. For some ambitious Rhinelanders it even provided career
opportunities. Certainly, these faced some discrimination, but as provin-
cials and not as Germans. Furthermore, this discrimination diminished
over time. However, the majority of Rhinelanders did not set their sights
on careers that would transport them to the outer reaches of Napoleon’s
ever-expanding empire. The horizons of most remained conﬁned to the
city, town, ‘Land ’ and, increasingly, the region; they wished to serve the
new regime locally, and resented competition from Frenchmen. Similar ten-
sions between centre and periphery would continue following the collapse
of French rule, and persist for much of the nineteenth century.
   Napoleonic rule gained acceptance not so much because it provided
new opportunities to a large number of previously excluded wealthy and
