120                                  From Reich to State
a scale from civilised to savage and the theory of the culturally deﬁned
nation.20 The Jacobin Convention ordered the elimination of local lan-
guages and patois throughout France, and despatched Saint Just to Alsace
to ‘Gallicise’ the province. He accused defenders of German of spreading
‘poison royalistico-aristocratique’, and had them guillotined. Paris shut down
Strasbourg university, whose professors had dared mount a Burkean defence
of Alsace’s historical development. For one visiting member of the Conven-
tion even this was insufﬁcient: he recommended guillotining one-quarter of
all Alsatians and the expulsion of the rest. Only the Jacobins’ overthrow in
July 1794 prevented ‘Gallicanisation’ of the Republic’s peripheries through
ethnic cleansing. Anti-German legislation in Alsace was subsequently re-
pealed. The Lakanal Law on primary education (17 November 1794) did
not insist that French be the exclusive language of instruction in areas where
the population spoke German, Breton, Flemish or some other language.21
   The Rhineland was fortunate that its permanent occupation came after
the Jacobins’ overthrow. The regimes that followed were distinguished by
pragmatism, not cultural purity. On the Rhine, Paris was concerned with
sustaining the war effort, not linguistic uniformity, and ofﬁcials posted to
the region made pragmatic concessions to gothic particularism. Grégoire,
who had earlier denounced Alsatian German as the language of slaves, now
justiﬁed the introduction of revolutionary government in the Rhineland
on the grounds it conformed with ancient Germanic custom.
   Plans to transform Rhinelanders into ‘new Frenchmen’ came only with
the decision to integrate the region administratively with France. In January
1798, justice minister Lambrechts outlined French cultural policy in the
occupied territories. Ignorance, he wrote, accompanies servitude and en-
lightenment must precede conferment of liberty, especially where crushed
for centuries by ‘fanaticism’ and ‘tyranny’. Liberation would come only
with French, enabling communication between locals and Frenchmen
which would result in the former being transformed into virtuous citizens.
French instruction in schools, Lambrechts continued, was a necessity,
though unfortunately one that would bear fruit only in the long term.
Two months later, Rudler decreed French the ofﬁcial language of the new
departments.22 His successors spent the following sixteen years battling to
20 Peter McPhee, ‘A Case-study of Internal Colonization: the Francisation of Northern Catalonia’,
  Review 3 (1980), p. 406.
21 Isser Woloch, The New Regime. Transformations of the French Civic Order, 1789–1820s (London and
  New York, 1994), p. 183.
22 For Lambrecht’s memorandum, see Hansen, Quellen, 4, pp. 503–5. For Rudler’s subsequent decree,
  Karl Theodor Friedrich Bormann and Alexander von Daniels (eds.), Handbuch der für die königlich-
  preußischen Rheinprovinzen verkündigten Gesetze, Verordnungen und Regierungsbeschlüsse aus der Zeit
  der Fremdherrschaft (8 vols., Cologne, 1833–45), 6, p. 635.
