                                         chap t e r 5

                      Identities and state formation




       At Cologne they speak simply a coarse vulgar German, which
       degenerates in approaching the ﬂats of Holland: but at A[a]chen, bad
       German, bad French, some Dutch and Flemish (bad or good I know
       not) and a mixture of the Walloon dialect, of which you hear more at
       Liège, conspire to form a Babel of harmonious diversity.1
       An objection [against the reunion of the Rhenish departments with
       France] . . . is that a mixture of many peoples of differing language and
       character can destroy harmony, public opinion, internal peace.2
Few sights more disconcerting could have confronted a rationally minded
Napoleonic bureaucrat than the heterogeneous Rhineland. He viewed cul-
tural diversity ‘not [as] the characteristic of the rational individual, but [as]
evidence of the historical survival among groups and communities of be-
liefs and superstitions that belonged to earlier ages’.3 It was not only that
a Rhenish department like the Roër encompassed under the Old Regime
thirty-two territorial entities. Territorial fragmentation was matched by
confessional diversity and a plethora of local patois, or ‘local dialects and
ways of speech’, as Braudel more accurately refers to them.4
   Contemporaries experienced difﬁculty placing Rhinelanders within any
single, culturally deﬁned category. Dorsch, the former radical who became
sub-prefect of Cleves, distinguished between Rhinelanders of Dutch origin,
who spoke ‘German gibberish’, and ‘Prussians’.5 Many Germans from the

1 C. E. Dodd, An Autumn Near the Rhine; or, Sketches of Courts, Society, Scenery, & c. in Some of the
  German States Bordering the Rhine (London, 1818), p. 523.
2 Lakanal (French government commissioner of the Rhenish departments) to Cambacérès (minister
  of justice), 13 October 1799, Joseph Hansen, Quellen zur Geschichte des Rheinlandes im Zeitalter der
  Französischen Revolution 1780–1801 (4 vols., Bonn, 1931–8), 4, p. 1197.
3 Stuart Woolf, ‘French Civilisation and Ethnicity in the Napoleonic Empire’, Past & Present, 124
  (1989), p. 107.
4 Fernand Braudel, The Identity of France (2 vols., London, 1988–90), 1, pp. 91–6.
5 Dorsch to the justice minister, 16 March 1798, Archives Nationales (AN), F1e 44, dossier ‘Correspon-
  dance relative à la division territoriale des quatre départements an VI–VIII’.

                                                 116
