                              Identities and state formation                                   121
enforce this. Little had been achieved by June 1802, when another com-
missioner, Jeanbon Saint-André, reminded subalterns that all public acts
must be in French. ‘This is the formal intention of the government,’ he
admonished, ‘and it is the duty of all ofﬁcials who are placed amongst the
inhabitants of the four departments to employ their efforts to make them
accustomed to the idiom of their new patrie.’ Even sub-prefectures were still
using German, he complained. He ordered the prefects to make monthly
progress reports on French usage and identify those ignoring his directive.23
   State formation includes the imposition of standard cultural practices.
As in other areas, so with language, the French encountered huge obsta-
cles. In practice, they recognised that German would remain the majority
language for at least a generation. The state councillor, Dauchy, reporting
to the Consuls on his fact-ﬁnding mission of 1802, wrote that ‘knowledge
of the German language will be indispensable for a long time for those
Frenchmen destined for administrative or judicial functions in our new
acquisitions; it will always be useful for those who wish to make progress in
a diplomatic or military career’.24 The commissioners Jollivet and Jeanbon
Saint-André recommended the government appoint only bilingual prefects
in the Rhineland.25 Paris considered it especially important that gendarmes,
who came into daily contact with ordinary people, understand German.
The same held for the judiciary, especially following complaints from state
procurators that Rhenish juries were reaching perverse verdicts because of
difﬁculties over the translation of German into French, difﬁculties smart
lawyers exploited.26 Judges who understood only French were prejudicial
to fair proceedings, complained one procurator, as most defendants and
witnesses were Germans, and the translation of evidence proved extremely
difﬁcult when the innocence or guilt of the accused depended upon the
sense, nuance and inﬂection of particular words and phrases in the local
jargon.27 Paris therefore favoured bilingual Frenchmen, notably Alsatians,
in its appointments; the Alsatian objective of bridging French and German
culture thereby came true.
   The government printed public pronouncements and laws in German
and French throughout the Napoleonic period. Napoleon took a prag-
matic line on the propagation of French, which he himself had difﬁculty
23 Jeanbon Saint-André (general commissioner of the Rhenish departments) to Jacobi (acting-prefect
  of the Roër), 22 June 1802, HStAD, Roër dept. 1520, no. 254.
24 AN, AFIV 1025, dossier 3, no. 2.
25 The minister received this advice from Jollivet on 14 August 1801 and Jeanbon Saint-André on
   8 March 1802, AN, F1b II Roër 1, dossier ‘Préfet- renseignements . . .’
26 Landeshauptarchiv Koblenz (LHAK), Bestand 241, 1043, nos. 61–2, and Bestand 241ff., 2279,
  nos. 1–12.
27 LHAK, Bestand 241, 1029.
