122                                    From Reich to State
mastering. Though he despatched Senator Garat to the Rhineland in 1804
to ‘investigate the condition of public education and to research the means
to take for the propagation of the French language in these countries
and accelerate the progress of the fusion of their spirit into the general
spirit of the Empire’, he allocated few resources to this end.28 The com-
ment: ‘Let them speak their jargon, as long as they ﬁght like Frenchmen,’
summed up his priorities.29 Prefects were judged on their success in mo-
bilising conscripts and raising taxes, not their enforcement of French,
the overzealous imposition of which created a plethora of administrative
problems.
    ‘Frenchiﬁcation’ was stepped up only in the ﬁnal years of Napoleonic
rule. In August 1810, an ordinance directed that all public and private
announcements be made in French – ‘the general language of the Empire’ –
though a German translation might be provided. It also changed street signs
from German to French and ordered the closure of schools that did not teach
French from 1 January 1811. At the same time, the government accorded
higher pay to bilingual teachers and introduced French as the language of
instruction in secondary schools.30 When France annexed the strategically
sensitive enclave of Wesel in 1811, Napoleon decreed that only ‘Frenchmen
originating from the old departments of the empire’ might settle there so
that the laws, language, ‘customs’ and ‘usages of the Empire’ might establish
themselves; as from 15 March 1812, no teacher could occupy a post in Wesel
unless he knew French, whilst the town’s inhabitants were banned from
sending their sons to foreign universities. The interior minister recognised
these provisions infringed a citizen’s basic right to settle in any part of
France, but conceded that this ‘right’ could be overridden by a measure of
‘haute police’.31
    ‘Frenchiﬁcation’s’ effect is difﬁcult to assess. Reports from the Consulate
suggest that most Rhenish notables already had a knowledge of French:
‘there is not a single house belonging to the decent bourgeoisie where
one cannot speak and write it passably well’, Aachen’s mayor conﬁdently
stated.32 Reports from elsewhere identiﬁed ‘merchants and bourgeois fam-
ilies’ as propagators of French; it was they who sent their children to France
to learn French, whilst the ‘old rich’ – nobles and ex-ofﬁcials – remained
28 For Garat’s mission, see Napoleon I, Correspondance de Napoléon Ier publiée par ordre de l’empereur
   Napoléon III (32 vols., Paris, 1858–69), 9, pp. 431–2.
29 Bell, ‘Nation-building’, p. 489.
30 Recueil des actes de la préfecture du département de la Roër (11 vols., Aachen, 1802/3–13), (1810),
   pp. 226–8.
31 AN, FIc III Roër 4, nos. 145–7, 153.
32 Stadtarchiv Aachen (StAA), Bestand RAII (Allgemeine Akten), 248, no. 40.
