118                                    From Reich to State
   The region’s sixteenth- and seventeenth-century role as a receptacle for
Catholic and Protestant refugees from France and the Netherlands, and for
economic migrants, contributed to its cosmopolitanism. In the eighteenth
century, these migrants were joined by frequenters of spa towns. An early
nineteenth-century Prussian ofﬁcial noted the consequences of territorial
fragmentation and contact with outsiders:
the large number of different sovereignties into which the country was formerly
divided, and the resulting conﬂicting interests, is the sole reason why no particular
national character ever appeared. This was even more blurred through the mass
of foreigners, who were drawn here from all the neighbouring countries by the
factories, and by trade and industry, and who subsequently settled down. Another
contributory factor was the many foreign visitors who came for short periods either
because of business or for the famous spas. Through this constant friction and
contact with the most diverse peoples, the inhabitants . . . have gained an excellent
style of cunning and shrewdness in all dealings of a bourgeois nature.14
State-building involves erecting clearly demarcated boundaries within
which favoured, standardised, high cultures ﬂourish.15 The Rhineland
lacked such boundaries prior to French rule; before then, its borders were
bands pock-marked with enclaves and exclaves, not abrupt frontiers marked
with a double line of customs posts.
   Cultural diversity was acceptable in the eighteenth-century Rhineland. It
was unwelcome to revolutionary state-builders. The French interior minis-
ter, visiting in 1798, was shocked by the numerous customs that confronted
him, and which he blamed for obstructing ‘the fusion of the various parts
of these diverse countries into a completely republican single whole’.16 The
old territorial divisions were so great as to utterly confuse revolutionary
commissioners posted to the region.17 For them, the imposition of cultural
and above all linguistic uniformity was not merely a question of admin-
istrative efﬁciency. Nor was it an example of cultural imperialism, for the
revolutionaries evinced little interest in attempting to impose French be-
yond the Republic’s ‘natural frontiers’. ‘A universal language’, the Abbé
Grégoire observed, ‘is of the same order as the philosopher’s stone in chem-
istry.’ Rather, the question was political, as reﬂected in Grégoire’s famous
report to the National Convention of 4 June 1794. This condemned local
patois – ‘the gothic style’ – within France as sustaining the ‘divide and

14 Neigebaur, Statistik, p. 48.      15 Gellner, Nations, p. 62.
16 François de Neufchâteau to the executive directory, 17 August 1798, AN, F1e 42, dossier ‘Dénonciation
  des abus qui seront introduits dans l’administration de ces départemen[t]s’.
17 Talleyrand (minister of foreign affairs) to Lambrechts (justice minister), 24 October 1798, AN, F1e 44,
  dossier ‘Correspondance relative à la division territoriale des quatre départements an VI–VIII’.
