                                  Identities and state formation                                           119
rule’ strategy of feudal forces. For Grégoire, the question revolved around
popular participation in government:
If these places [ofﬁcial posts] are occupied by men incapable of expressing them-
selves and writing correctly in the national language, how will the rights of citizens
be guaranteed in the laws whose wording will include inaccurate terms and a con-
fusion of ideas? If, on the other hand, ignorance [those ignorant of the French
language] is excluded from positions, soon there will be reborn that aristocracy
which formerly employed patois in order to show its protecting afﬁnity with those
it insolently called les petites gens. Soon, society will be re-infected by the ‘proper
sort’. The liberty of suffrage will be restricted, cabals easily formed and more difﬁ-
cult to break, and in consequence a kind of hierarchy established between the two
separated classes [ofﬁcials and citizens]. Thus ignorance of the language will either
compromise the social wellbeing or destroy equality.
Grégoire rejected the translation of ofﬁcial documents into local patois on
grounds of cost, the slowing of the administrative process, and because the
‘sense’ of a law might be lost or undermined by counter-revolutionaries.
This last concern was not unfounded: in the Napoleonic Rhineland, un-
popular measures, especially those concerning the Church, were often mod-
erated in tone when translated into German by local authorities.18
   Grégoire’s stance reversed the cultural liberalism of the early Revolution,
when the Constituent Assembly had decreed (14 January 1790) the trans-
lation of legislation into local patois. Grégoire, in contrast, condemned
patois as ‘very degenerate’ and recommended they be replaced by standard
French through ‘national festivals’ and military service. Grégoire’s Jacobin
contemporaries proposed even more radical measures in exterminating such
feudal leftovers as German in Alsace, a region where French was virtually
unknown outside the major towns.19 Under the Old Regime, Alsatians
happily reconciled allegiance to the French crown with the preservation of
German culture. Even after the Revolution, the elite continued to think in
terms of a ‘separate, inviolate Alsatian German “cultural sphere” within the
larger framework of French sovereignty’. Some Alsatians even viewed the
region as a bridge between Germany and France. The revolutionaries in
Paris initially welcomed these ideas. The outbreak of war in 1792, followed
by the rise of the Jacobins, destroyed prospects for diversity. Two ideas now
fused and justiﬁed ‘Frenchiﬁcation’: the classiﬁcation of all languages on
18 For Grégoire’s report, see Archives Parlementaires de 1787 à 1860. Recueil complet des débats législatifs
   et politiques des chambres françaises. Imprimé . . . sous la direction de MM. I. Mavidal et E. Lurent, etc.
   1st series (1787–99), (Paris, 1868–), 91, pp. 318–27.
19 The rest of the paragraph, on Alsace, is based on David Bell’s excellent article, ‘Nation-building
   and Cultural Particularism in Eighteenth-century France: the Case of Alsace’, Eighteenth-Century
   Studies 21 (1987–8), pp. 472–90.
