124                                  From Reich to State
Recently, historians have generally dismissed nationalism as a force mo-
tivating German opposition to Napoleon.42 Yet portrayals of Germans as
passive spectators of the Napoleonic wars are misleading. Certainly, this was
not an assessment made by the French themselves. Rhinelanders, like other
Europeans, possessed multiple identities. However, under French rule, cul-
ture and language increasingly entered the equation. Not that the territorial
status of the Rhineland engendered any political German nationalism on
either bank before 1813. Indeed, the initial lack of interest in Germany in
the Rhineland’s fate contrasted starkly with the lively debate in France over
‘natural frontiers’. To paraphrase Friedrich Meinecke, the Rhineland had al-
ready been lost by the time German philosophers took an interest in the real
world.43 Certainly, lingering dynastic loyalties provided some immunity to
‘Frenchiﬁcation’. However, these were only strong in the former Prussian
duchies, where the cult of Frederick the Great permeated widely.44 Rather,
it was the imperial Habsburg ideal that emerged as a substitute for the
immediate loyalties formerly focused on the electors, especially amongst
Catholics. Austria’s struggle against Napoleon reafﬁrmed its prestige, and
provided a link between the old imperial patriotism and emerging German
nationalism.45
   Pro-Habsburg sentiment manifested itself in the War of the Third
Coalition. Police reports reﬂected growing public agitation as the Grande

42 For a recent deconstruction of the ‘modernist’ school of nationalism, as represented especially by
   Eric Hobsbawm, John Breuilly, Ernest Gellner and Benedict Anderson, see Adrian Hastings, The
   Construction of Nationhood. Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism (Cambridge, 1997), pp. 1–34. T. C.
   W. Blanning emphasises the importance of German ‘national consciousness’ as an ingredient of
   Rhenish counter-revolutionary sentiment in the 1790s. T. C. W. Blanning, The French Revolution
   in Germany. Occupation and Resistance in the Rhineland 1792–1802 (Oxford, 1983), 247–54. Less
   convincing, in this respect, is Michael Broers’s otherwise stimulating survey of Napoleonic Europe,
   which places the Rhineland ﬁrmly within the ‘inner core’ of Napoleon’s possessions in terms of
   attachment and loyalty. Michael Broers, Europe under Napoleon 1799–1815 (London, 1996), passim.
   James Sheehan similarly asserts that the mass of Germans was ‘unmoved’ by the struggle against
   France. James J. Sheehan, ‘State and Nationality in the Napoleonic period’, in John Breuilly (ed.),
   The State of Germany. The National Idea in the Making, Unmaking and Remaking of a Modern
   Nation-State (London and New York, 1992), p. 57. As Sheehan writes, opposition and resistance in
   Germany was a reaction against the unrestrained power of the abstract state as symbolised by the
   power to tax, conscript and interfere with religious practices. However, for Rhinelanders at least,
   these evils were inextricably associated with the French.
43 Friedrich Meinecke, The Age of German Liberation, 1795–1815 (Berkeley, Los Angeles and London,
   1977), p. 19.
44 Gustav Mücke, Die geschichtliche Stellung des Arrondissements und seines Verwalters zur Zeit der
   napoleonischen Herrschaft, dargestellt an dem Leben und Wirken Karl Ludwig von Keverbergs als
   Unterpräfekt in Cleve (Bonn, 1935), p. 6.
45 Thomas Nipperdey, Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck 1800–1866 (translated by Daniel Nolan,
   Dublin, 1996), p. 14. Delhoven, in his chronicle, referred to the Emperor of Austria as the ‘German
   emperor’ even after 1806. Cardauns, Dorfchronik, p. 201.
