                                Identities and state formation                                      131
Could not France also procure for itself equally great advantages, in strengthening
more and more the ties of union which connect all her children and in moderating
the character of one through that of the others? What better means of achiev-
ing this aim than through the establishment of colonies, or rather, through the
transplantation of the diverse peoples of the French Empire. Could we soon not
have, stretching from the Rhine to the Pyrenees, only one spirit, one language, and
one homogeneity of sentiments?73
Paris set aside 6 million francs of nationalised land for ﬁve veterans’ camps
in the Rhineland and north Italy (law of 1 Floréal XII (20 April 1804)),
including two centred on the citadels of Jülich and Mainz. The veterans
were required to farm their own land and form a home guard in times
of crisis.74 The government also encouraged them to marry local girls,
thereby furthering the assimilation process. Eventually, only one camp was
established in Jülich, though other veterans settled independently in the
region. However, the overall numbers involved were too small for this
policy to make any cultural impact or contribute to assimilation. Rather,
it was the host culture that assimilated the veterans. In addition to the
veterans’ colony, the French planned to establish an orphanage in Max
Franz’s former summer residence in Brühl for the children of soldiers, some-
thing that can be viewed as another element of Napoleon’s ‘transplantation’
policy.75
    Ultimately, the Rhineland’s assimilation into France depended upon
time. Even within families, the passage of a generation was sometimes
sufﬁcient to change allegiances. Such was the case with the Gossens of
Jülich-Berg. Franz Heinrich Gossen, son of a leading Wittelsbach ofﬁcial,
entered French service in 1796 and subsequently rose to head the domains
administration of Krefeld where he commanded a massive annual salary. His
father, in contrast, lost his job with the arrival of the French and steadfastly
refused any dealings with them.76 The same pattern was followed amongst
the von Keverbergs of Geldern. The young Karl Ludwig von Keverberg was
captivated by Napoleon, whom he viewed a worthy successor of Frederick
the Great. He entered French service, ﬁrst as sub-prefect of Cleves and
then as prefect of the Upper-Ems department. Following Napoleon’s fall,
he entered Dutch service and eventually rose to the Council of State. His
father, in contrast, who had served the Prussian monarchy for a quarter of a
73 AN F1e 42, ‘Mémoire sur la situation des esprits dans les 4 nouveaux départements de la rive gauche
   du Rhin, par Commissionnaire Rostan, Cologne 13 Pluviôse VII [1 February 1799]’.
74 Napoleon I, Correspondance, 8, pp. 40–1. For Jülich’s camp, see HStAD, Roër dept. 2332, no. 77.
75 Ladoucette, Voyage, p. 88.
76 August Klein, Die Personalpolitik der Hohenzollernmonarchie bei der Kölner Regierung. Ein Beitrag
   zur preußischen Personalpolitik am Rhein (Düsseldorf, 1967), p. 36.
