134                                      From Reich to State
by eighteenth-century Prussia. A caste of bureaucrats bound together by
Bildung and celebrated by Hegel as the universal estate never appeared in
France, though the Napoleonic auditors came close. Professionalisation in
the strict sense was unacceptable to Napoleon, who rejected limitations
on his power to appoint or promote whom he liked when he liked. He
relied upon ‘old-regime’ methods to control his ofﬁcials, as with the cre-
ation of a new nobility.86 Though the baccalauréat was revived in March
1808 and stands as a great Napoleonic legacy, it did not then enjoy the
prestige it gained subsequently. The stipulation that those embarking upon
higher education ﬁrst acquire the ‘bac’ was simply ignored. As there were no
set educational requirements for state employment, Rhinelanders had less
incentive to patronise either the lycées or écoles spéciales. Ultimately, this di-
minished their interest in the survival of French institutions as a whole after
the collapse of Napoleonic rule, as they had little ‘cultural capital’ invested
in them. In contrast, one of Berlin’s ﬁrst actions upon assuming control
in 1815 was to found Bonn university as an institution where Rhinelanders
might gain the stringent educational requirements necessary for entry into
the Prussian bureaucracy.
   The distrust many Rhinelanders felt for Napoleonic schools and
academies was in part also a legacy of the Directory’s anti-clericalism.87
Rhinelanders had boycotted the central schools set up by this regime: whilst
the university and Gymnasien in Cologne counted over 700 pupils annually
in the ﬁnal years of their existence, the French école centrale that replaced
them averaged well under 300 pupils. One might surmise that those who
did attend were attracted less by the radical new curriculum and more by
the teaching staff of the new school, half of whom came from the old
university.88 Instead, Rhenish parents sent their sons to private boarding
schools, where they received instruction in the classics and religion, and
then to German universities. The fact that the language of instruction in
the lycées and écoles spéciales was French, and that Rhenish applicants for
the école polytechnique needed to sit preliminary examinations in Brussels,
Mainz or Strasbourg in French grammar, may have served as a further

86 Bernd Wunder, ‘Rolle und Struktur staatlicher Bürokratie in Frankreich und Deutschland’, in
   Helmut Berding, Etienne François and Hans-Peter Ullmann (eds.), Deutschland und Frankreich im
   Zeitalter der Französischen Revolution (Frankfurt a. M., 1989), pp. 166–71. See also Clive Church,
   Revolution and Red Tape. The French Ministerial Bureaucracy (Oxford, 1981), p. 263.
87 For the Roër, see AN, F1c V Roër, no. 123. For similar problems in the Sarre, see LHAK, Bestand
   276, 1967, ‘Mémoir[e] statistique sur la situation du dept. de la Sarre, prendt. les ans 10, 11 et 12,
   adressé par le prefet de ce dept. à S. Ex. le Ministre de l’Intérieur, pour faire faite au Grand mémoire
   statistique’, p. 22.
88 Leyhausen, Schulwesen, pp. 31–2.
