                               Identities and state formation                                     133
families a love of our institutions and our laws.’83 Napoleon stressed the
importance of teacher-training institutes in binding together the empire,
and instilling in it ‘not only uniform methods and the art of communicating
instruction, but rather common impressions and habits, and the sentiments
which must animate the entire teaching body’.84
   The new lycées replaced the central schools set up under the Directory.
They embodied Napoleonic concepts. They were centralised: the central
government funded them, the head of state appointed their teachers and
special inspectors from Paris supervised their teaching. They were mili-
tarised, with military exercises and uniforms for pupils. Their curriculum
was conservative, providing a classical education centred on Latin, maths
and literature. This contrasted with the radical mix of ethical philosophy,
mathematics, science and ‘legislation’ (including natural law) provided by
the central schools, where the emphasis was on the creation of useful and
active citizens. Napoleon aimed at stability, not activity, and trusted old
methods. The culmination of Napoleon’s reaction against the pedagogi-
cal philosophy of the ‘Ideologues’ came in 1808 with the foundation of
the imperial university. This functioned as an education ministry and was
headed by Louis de Fontanes. Beneath him emerged the new educational
hierarchy, headed by specialised institutes for training professionals, lycées
and secondary schools, which emphasised practical training including, in
the Rhineland, two-year courses in French. Fees for the secondary schools
were modest – 24 francs for the two junior classes, and 48 francs for the
two senior – as compared to the exclusive lycées. These remained the elite’s
preserve, though the government offered a small number of scholarships
to gifted sons of soldiers and ofﬁcials who lacked the necessary ﬁnancial
means.85
   Napoleon’s educational institutions failed to ‘lock’ in the Rhenish elite,
which resented the destruction of the universities. More fundamental was
the absence of ‘professionalisation’ within the Napoleonic bureaucracy. This
lacked the standard examination requirements for entry and set, deper-
sonalised, promotion paths as were then being introduced into the bu-
reaucracies of the south German states, and which had been pioneered

83 Napoleon’s ‘exposé de la situation de la République’ of 22 November 1801, Napoleon I, Correspon-
   dance, 7, p. 327.
84 AN, F1c I, nos. 14–23, dossier ‘Exposé de la situation de l’Empire. Fin de l’Année 1813’, sub-ﬁle
   ‘université’ (no. 1).
85 Wilhelm Leyhausen, Das höhere Schulwesen in der Stadt Köln zur französischen Zeit [1794–1814]
   (Bonn, 1913), pp. 44–5.
