                                Identities and state formation                                     129
(decree of 26 August 1811 and avis of the Council of State of 21 January
1812). The French were more ﬂexible when it came to foreigners in their
service: when the police minister complained that native Prussians served
as ofﬁcials in the Rhineland, he was told by the justice minister that many
non-Frenchmen were employed there, and that when they had obtained
the ‘conﬁdence’ of the government, ‘one does not pay particular attention
to their place of birth’.64
   The French disrupted cultural links between the Rhineland and
Germany. They imposed restrictions on the import of printed material.65
This, combined with cultural arrogance, arguably reinforced Rhinelanders’
sense of German identity. The derogatory comments by one Parisian jour-
nal on German literature – what could be translated from German was
not worth translating, and what was worth translating was untranslatable –
elicited an especially indignant response from the Kölnische Zeitung: ‘If only
the Parisians would cease ﬁnding fault with a language whose Original-
Genius they cannot hope to reach, and whose tortured and diluted trans-
lation into their wretched idiom leaves no idea of the strength, mean-
ing and national spirit of German.’66 For though not at the centre of
German intellectual developments, the Rhineland nonetheless partici-
pated in them. Rhinelanders visited German universities; they ﬂocked
across the frontier to read newspapers censored at home; they had in
their midst Joseph Görres and Friedrich Schlegel, who maintained con-
nections with leading thinkers across the Rhine. Görres’s house in Koblenz
became a meeting place for intellectuals, poets and playwrights from all
Germany.67
   However, despite these beacons and some lesser lights, tough restrictions
on the freedom of expression were not conducive to the dissemination of
new ideas. Napoleon stated that if he allowed press freedom, he would
lose power within three months. Hence, he created a ‘division for press
liberty’ within the police ministry to enforce censorship. A later decree
(5 February 1810) forcing all printers and book-dealers to apply for new
licences, aimed at restricting their number. Prefects provided a raft of reports
and statistics not only on newspapers, printers, book clubs, book-dealers
and bookbinders, but even on itinerant peddlers of publications. These
reveal that subscriptions to newspapers were falling as the public lost interest

64 Fouché (minister of police) to Abrial (minister of justice), 28 January, 3 February 1800, AN, F1b II
   Roër 1, dossier ‘Cen Ehrlich originaire de Prusse’ (nos. 2, 3).
65 Napoleon to Regnier (minister of justice), 4 April 1804, Napoleon I, Correspondance, 9, p. 314.
66 Kölnische Zeitung, 11 October 1803.     67 Neue Deutsche Biographie (Berlin, 1953–), 4, pp. 532–6.
