                              Identities and state formation                                  137
eldest – who had been ‘designated’ by the Emperor – on the supposed
grounds of the latter’s weak constitution. The police subsequently reported
Hompesch as having said that in reality he was reserving his eldest for ‘a
more meticulous and better education than one ordinarily receives in a
lycée’.102
   The only academy established in the Rhineland was the law school in
Koblenz. It occupied Count Metternich’s former house, which still stands.
Though Napoleon distrusted lawyers, whom he blamed for the Revolution,
he was sufﬁciently enlightened to recognise the importance of law and its
administration by professionals. As a result, the judiciary was the only part
of the administration to experience genuine professionalisation, and only
jurists who had passed the relevant examinations could enter the profession.
This in turn created a need for law schools. Koblenz’s opened in November
1806. Napoleon was determined to limit the curriculum of the schools
to the learning by rote of his codes, not theory (‘metaphysics’) or natural
law (‘political speculation’). Experienced jurists rejected this view, asking
what a lawyer without theoretical knowledge would do if the relevant code
provided no solution to a particular case. However, Napoleon, as was often
the case, represented the opinion of France, which was tired of debates
and theories. So, the new academies ignored natural and international law,
and examined Roman law only in relation to the civil code. The greatest
Prussian jurist of the period, Friedrich Karl von Savigny, provided the most
damning criticism of this education when he observed that the lawyers
emerging from the new French law schools would not themselves be able
to produce a work comparable in scope to the Napoleonic codes they
studied so meticulously. Potential German students shared this assessment,
and the mainly Rhenish professors in Koblenz admitted as much when
they offered additional classes in Roman law in order to compete with such
German universities as Heidelberg and Würzburg. The prospect of being
taught ‘éloquence du barre’ by Görres should have served as an additional
attraction for potential students. Yet, despite these efforts, Koblenz’s law
school remained the worst attended in the Empire.103

Whilst Germany’s intellectual elite had transcended the culture of the
Enlightenment before the Napoleonic period, the majority of Rhenish
notables remained enthused by its ethos. The Enlightenment provided
102 Georgéon (commander of the gendarmerie in the Roër) to Count Réal (head of the 1st imperial
    police district), 15 March 1810, AN, F7 8390, dossier ‘Situation’.
103 Luitwin Mallmann, Französische Juristenausbildung im Rheinland 1794–1814. Die Rechtsschule von
   Koblenz (Cologne and Vienna, 1987), pp. 56–8, 107, 111–13, 120–1, 148–51.
