144                                   From Reich to State
and selected parishioners, under episcopal and sub-prefectoral supervision.
Ironically, it now required French intervention to insure that municipalities
provided adequate support for their priests. Apart from the dioceses and
parishes, the most important Catholic institutions were the seminaries of
Mainz and Cologne, institutions initially dominated by Alsatians. They
subsequently became centres of ultramontanism, despite the Gallican ten-
dencies of the Napoleonic church that had founded them.136
   According to the Concordat, Napoleon had the authority to name arch-
bishops and bishops within France, though the Pope retained the power of
canonical investiture. For the people, the subordination of Church to state
was symbolised by newly appointed bishops having to swear an oath of
loyalty to the state between the hands of the prefect, and parish priests
having to do the same between the hands of the mayor. Napoleon nom-
inated an Alsatian, Marc Antoine Berdolet, as ﬁrst bishop of the largest
Rhenish diocese, Aachen, in April 1802. Berdolet owed his appointment
partly to his knowledge of German and partly to his acquaintance with
Josephine Beauharnais, which dated from the time of the Terror. These
factors counted for more than the opposition of Pius VII, who opposed
former ‘Constitutionals’ and who delayed Berdolet’s canonical investiture
until 1805.
   Initially, Rhinelanders rejected Berdolet as a tool of French rule. Yet
though obsequiously loyal to Napoleon, whom he credited with having
saved religion, Berdolet took his pastoral duties very seriously, travelling
throughout his diocese to areas never before visited by a bishop. He assisted
in the return of stolen relics and used his connections with the Beauharnais
clan to assert his position against the secular authorities.137 Gradually, he
won the trust of the public, for whom this modest bishop represented
a completely new experience. For Berdolet marked the transition from
the aristocratic Church of the Old Regime to the ultramontane of the
nineteenth century: like his predecessors, he discouraged over-enthusiastic
displays of baroque piety and was inﬂuenced by Jansenism; like his succes-
sors, he strictly followed the Papal line on such issues as mixed marriages.138
Berdolet died in August 1809, and was succeeded by Jean-Denis-François
Camus, who was appointed in October 1810, but never invested because of
Napoleon’s renewed conﬂict with Pius VII after 1808.
136 Eduard Hegel, Geschichte des Erzbistums Köln, vol. 4: Das Erzbistum Köln zwischen Barock und
    Aufklärung vom Pfälzischen Krieg bis zum Ende der französischen Zeit 1688–1814 (Cologne, 1979),
    pp. 523–6.
137 Jakob Torsy, Geschichte des Bistums Aachen während der französischen Zeit (1802–1814) (Bonn, 1940),
    pp. 45–9, 59, 65.
138 Hegel, Köln, pp. 514–15, 530–1.
