140                                   From Reich to State
the hierarchy. Cambacérès, Napoleon’s imperial arch-chancellor, became
a kind of minister for masonic affairs, adopting the pompous title ‘Grand
Commander of the Supreme Council’. French masonic imperialism subse-
quently extended into the German satellites. Napoleon subordinated lodges
in these states to the Grand Orient in Paris and cut existing ties with rival
mother lodges located in enemy capitals. French ofﬁcials who dominated
the governments of Berg and Westphalia joined local lodges, where they
rubbed shoulders with native elites. Their true function became apparent
in 1811, when amid growing Franco-Prussian tension, German masons in
Kassel appealed that they should continue to act in the interests of human-
ity as a whole. This was swept aside by the Grand Master, the Frenchman
Siméon, who also happened to be Westphalia’s chief minister, with the
observation that politics was more important than masonic solidarity.116
Association with the foreign invader would earn freemasonry the enmity
of German nationalism.117
   Of Germany’s numerous lodges, the Rhenish had forged the closest links
with Paris under the Old Regime. Lodges in both Aachen and Cologne had
been afﬁliated to the Grand Orient of France and received their original
constitutions from Paris.118 In 1779, Aachen’s freemasons even appealed to
France for protection against persecution by the magistracy. In the 1780s,
many of Aachen’s freemasons joined the so-called ‘New Party’ attempting
to reform the Reichstadt’s antiquated constitution. The following decade,
they distinguished themselves in their espousal of the French cause. Their
calls for ‘reunion’ with the mother lodge in Paris paralleled those for politi-
cal ‘reunion’ with France.119 In the ceremony marking masonic ‘reunion’ in
1799 – two whole years before the legal annexation of Aachen to France –
the city’s freemasons swore an oath ‘to be obedient and attached to the laws
of the Government of the Republic’. In a banquet a few days after Brumaire,
Aachen’s masons celebrated the renaissance of their lodge – Constance –
under Napoleon’s patronage and contrasted this with the trials and tribula-
tions previously faced from ‘prejudiced fanatics’ and ‘superstitious people’
under ‘monkish inﬂuence’. Aachen’s other lodge, Concorde, founded in
1803, similarly ﬂattered Napoleon as the restorer of ‘interrupted masonic
116 Heinz Gürtler, Deutsche Freimaurer im Dienste napoleonischer Politik: die Freimaurer im Königreich
   Westfalen 1807–1813 (Struckum, 1988 reprint), pp. 20, 41.
117 Ernst Moritz Arndt, Noch ein Wort über die Franzosen ([Leipzig], 1814), pp. 29, 33.
118 Winfried Dotzauer, Freimaurergesellschaften am Rhein. Aufgeklärte Sozietäten auf dem linken Rhein-
    ufer vom Ausgang des Ancien Régime bis zum Ende der napoleonischen Herrschaft (Wiesbaden, 1977),
    p. 235.
119 Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris (BN) (Manuscrits), FM2 533, dossier 1, nos. 6–9.
