                               Identities and state formation                                    153
sub-prefectures and civil courts, and smaller towns for the location of a
cantonal seat. Such competition was given an additional edge when com-
munities formerly belonging to different principalities found themselves
lumped together in the new administrative sub-divisions. Napoleon ex-
ploited such rivalries to pose as a benefactor for which the Rhineland, with
its historical associations, offered an especially appropriate setting. The new
regime contrasted its plans for poplar-lined avenues, canals, harbours, pris-
ons, barracks and schools with revolutionary vandalism. During Napoleon’s
two ofﬁcial visits, in 1804 and 1811, cities bombarded him with petitions
for the relocation of this or that lycée, foundation of a new bishopric or
seminary, or creation of an additional sub-prefecture.177 Amongst the two
most important infrastructure projects planned were a canal connecting the
Meuse and Rhine – something Charlemagne ﬁrst thought of, according to
the Roër’s prefect – and a new port in Cologne, ‘a city already rendered
famous by Caesar, Agrippa, Clovis and Charlemagne’.178 Civic pride and
imperial propaganda combined in a more bellicose form in 1804, when
the Rhenish departmental councils agreed to ﬁnance the construction of
gunboats for the invasion of Britain, though only on condition that they
were named after local towns and rivers.179
    Napoleonic rule coincided with the ﬁrst stirrings of romanticism, a move-
ment that emerged in part as a reaction against the despoliation of the
Church. In response to this cultural tragedy, a small number of private
enthusiasts agitated for the cataloguing, protection and restoration of an-
cient monuments and historical artefacts. The beginnings of some famous
collections of medieval church art, notably that housed within Cologne’s
Wallraf-Richardtz Museum, date from this period. The French, for pro-
paganda purposes, associated themselves with this cultural development.
Ofﬁcials, such as the Rhin-et-Moselle’s prefect, Lezay-Marnesia, enthu-
siastically co-operated in the preservation effort. They founded sociétés
d’émulation as a means of furthering integration between Rhinelanders
and Frenchmen, and associating the government with local history and
culture. Some of these societies survived Napoleonic rule and a few are still
in existence.180 Local authorities subsequently saved many ﬁne monastic
churches by declaring them parish churches and substituting them for less
signiﬁcant structures. The new regime made good some of the cultural van-
dalism inﬂicted by the revolutionaries, returning items hauled off to Paris
177 StAA, Bestand RAII (Allgemeine Akten), 248, nos. 50–55, 59–60.
178 Ladoucette’s compte moral to the departmental council, 15 February 1810, HStAD, Roër dept., 199,
   nos. 41–2.
179 Hashagen, Rheinland , p. 126.     180 Pabst, ‘Bildungs- und Kulturpolitik’, p. 195.
