152                                 From Reich to State
in which the population was demoted to a passive spectator. The Catholic
Church, which enjoyed over a millennium’s experience in the ﬁeld, was now
co-opted and the revolutionary calendar ﬁnally abolished (1 January 1806).
Instead, a new festive cycle was instituted and grafted onto the Church
calendar: the feast of the Assumption (15 August) became St Napoleon
day and, together with the ﬁrst Sunday of December (commemorating
Napoleon’s coronation and the Battle of Austerlitz), served as the most im-
portant national holiday. By merging his personality cult with the religious
fest-cycle, Napoleon succeeded in creating something all-encompassing, in
contrast to revolutionary festivities, which stood isolated in space and time.
   Napoleonic festivities, whether commemorating 15 August, 2 December
or the baptism of the King of Rome, followed a ﬁxed pattern. At the centre
of the day’s activities was the marriage of a French veteran to a local girl ‘of
spotless character’, with the newly weds receiving an endowment from the
local municipality. In practice, municipalities often failed to ﬁnd suitable
brides, provoking suspicions in Paris less as to the virtue of local women
than of a reluctance to squander money on endowments. A religious service
followed the civil wedding, attended by ofﬁcials in full dress uniform. In
mixed communities, ofﬁcials attended services in the churches of both con-
fessions. There, they would hear an appropriately obsequious sermon, the
best of which were subsequently reprinted in departmental newspapers.
They generally included the assertion that Napoleon was ‘ﬁghting for
peace’, followed by an appeal to conscripts to do their duty. Following the
service, bread and meat were distributed to needy families.174 In summer,
outdoor activities might follow, including processions of honour guards
and ofﬁcials in resplendent uniforms, the distribution of free wine, horse
races, shooting competitions, aerostatics, the distribution of prizes to en-
terprising farmers and entrepreneurs, and athletic events. One mayor even
organised athletic events for young women, who were normally excluded
from such activities, provoking ofﬁcial concern at the ‘amazonisation’ of
his municipality.175
   Napoleon sought to win local opinion by praising old institutions.
Cologne’s ancient university, previously condemned as ‘fanatic’, was thus
rehabilitated.176 The French played on local pride and civic rivalries that
had only increased as cities competed for the location of criminal courts,
prefectures and bishoprics to compensate for the loss of the old universities,
electoral courts and archbishoprics. Market towns similarly competed for
174 LHAK, Bestand 276, 314, nos. 139–40, 155–66.     175 LHAK, Bestand 276, no. 315.
176 Ladoucette’s compte moral to the departmental council of 15 February 1810, HStAD, Roër dept.,
   199, no. 35.
