                                Identities and state formation                                    147
converged on Trier for a glimpse of Christ’s shroud.148 Rather than ban pro-
cessions and pilgrimages, Napoleon’s government regulated them. Those
crossing diocesan boundaries were forbidden outright, partly because it
was suspected they acted as a cover for smuggling. Paris also regulated the
ringing of church bells. In reality, such restrictions were often ﬂouted. Even
processions spanning the Rhine continued, as did the celebration of banned
feast days.149
   Education proved the most fruitful area of church–state co-operation.
Napoleon always believed that religion should be taught in school and after
1802, secondary schools were legally required to provide such instruction if
demanded by a majority of parents. For ﬁnancial reasons, the government
increasingly relied upon the clergy to run and inspect state schools. In rural
areas, it was common for church sextons to be employed as schoolteachers.
In 1807, Paris introduced episcopal visitations of schools to ensure that reli-
gion was being taught and by the following year, with the foundation of the
imperial university, religion was ﬁrmly embedded in the education system.
The Catholic hierarchy assisted in overcoming peasant superstition when
preaching in favour of small-pox vaccinations; it used its inﬂuence to sup-
port conscription. Yet there were limits to what even Napoleon could get
away with: the attempt in April 1806 to introduce the Imperial Catechism,
which threatened those who opposed the Emperor with eternal damnation,
met with determined resistance, and was largely abandoned, as it was in
neighbouring Belgium.150 The cult of St Napoleon similarly failed to rec-
ommend itself, and people remained seated or left church when the priest
led prayers for the Emperor. Yet, despite setbacks, the relationship between
the Catholic Church and state was close enough by November 1811 for
Rhinelanders to request that the French complete Cologne cathedral.151 In
the century following Napoleonic rule, the Rhineland witnessed a resur-
gence in popular Catholic piety.
   French rule marked a turning point for Rhenish Protestantism. Commu-
nities that had previously been merely tolerated were now allowed to wor-
ship freely. Elsewhere, completely new communities were founded. Not that
the French were the ﬁrst to foster tolerance. During the eighteenth century,
neighbouring Protestant and Catholic Rhenish states tacitly agreed to treat
their minorities decently. Electors deﬁed popular opposition in encouraging
Protestant settlement to stimulate economic development. At the elite level,
148 Hegel, Köln, p. 529.
149 Justus Hashagen, Das Rheinland und die französische Herrschaft. Beiträge zur Charakteristik ihres
   Gegensatzes (Bonn, 1908), pp. 140–7, 158.
150 Hegel, Köln, p. 534. Torsy, Aachen, p. 279.    151 Hashagen, Rheinland, p. 178.
