156                                From Reich to State
on the Capitol.193 Rhinelanders, rather than ﬁnding themselves within a
narrowly deﬁned nation state, appeared again to be reverting to their old
status as subjects of an empire with universalistic pretensions.

Modern state formation has been marked not only by the development of
government institutions, but also by attempts at the imposition of uniform
‘standard high cultures’. The French Republic of the early 1790s might be
cited as the ﬁrst attempt to forge a nation state through the marriage of
culture and power. The implications of this for the Rhineland, a culturally
diverse frontier region, were obviously great. However, the Jacobins’ fall in
1794 on the eve of the Rhineland’s occupation heralded a more pragmatic
French policy that took greater account of local conditions. ‘Frenchiﬁcation’
was not exactly put on hold under the Directory and Napoleon; however,
it moved down the priority list. There it remained until the ﬁnal years of
French rule, by which time the ofﬁcially approved culture appeared more
‘imperial’, ‘European’ or ‘Bonapartist’ than ‘French’.
   To what extent did the culture and identity of Rhinelanders evolve un-
der French rule? Certainly, Rhinelanders, be they businessmen or peasants,
were not transformed into Frenchmen. Whether they were in the process
of making this transition is hard to say. Fragmentary evidence suggests that
the usage of the French language was spreading slowly; there is also evi-
dence of a surprisingly high level of intermarriage between Rhinelanders
and Frenchmen and French women. However, societal life seems to have
fractured partly along national lines, at least in some cities. There is also
evidence of national friction in the law courts. So it is difﬁcult to arrive at
a conclusion. More generally, it has been argued that French imperialism
in the Napoleonic era built upon cultural imperialism of the preceding
century. Whilst accepting the argument that the Enlightenment cannot be
viewed as purely ‘French’, it is nonetheless true that Napoleon could build
upon some shared eighteenth-century cultural foundations that bound
France with other regions of Continental Europe. Napoleon’s somewhat
crude exploitation of freemasonry for his own ends is an example. How-
ever, it is ironic that just as France and Germany moved together politically,
so new cultural divisions opened up between them. These partly revolved
around the purpose of education and the value attached socially and cul-
turally to specialised, vocational knowledge as opposed to what Germans
called ‘Bildung’. This divergence had serious implications for the long-term

193 Hans Kohn, Prelude to Nation-States. The French and German Experience, 1789–1815 (Princeton,
   1969), pp. 94–6, 102–5.
