                                           War and society                                            171
arrive at a deﬁnition broader than that intended by the government, whilst
the provision concerning married men led to the emergence of an entire
industry built up to exploit this loophole, replete with professional wives
and marriage brokers.49 Scope for skulduggery was also provided by the
system through which the physically unﬁt were weeded out. Hargenvilliers
described the medical examination process as the most important element
of conscription – and the most abused.50 The director-general estimated
that only one in six conscripts should be discharged for medical reasons,
though this proportion might vary regionally depending on the physique
of the local population. In Brittany, for example, 50 per cent of young men
failed to meet the height requirements. According to statistics relating to
the years IX to XIII (1800–1805), the average discharge rate for France as
a whole was 32 per cent, with the Rhineland managing a creditable 26 per
cent. Far from declining, this rate increased over time, both in France as
a whole, which averaged 36 per cent between 1806 and 1810, and in the
Rhineland, where exemptions spiralled to 40 per cent.51 Military surgeons
contended with the most ingenious attempts at faking ill-health. Removal of
the front teeth – used for biting open paper cartridges containing the musket
ball and powder – and of the right index ﬁnger – for pulling the trig-
ger – were only the most common forms of self-mutilation.52 Within the
Rhineland, the majority of exemptions were granted for failure to meet
the statutory height requirements, whilst many others were discharged for
the somewhat vague reason of having a ‘weak constitution’.53
   The government progressively centralised conscription to stamp out
abuses, transferring responsibilities from locals to more reliable bureaucrats
and army ofﬁcers. In August 1802, it removed responsibility for sub-dividing
quotas between the districts and cantons from the departmental and district
councils to the prefects and sub-prefects. Paris also established departmen-
tal recruitment councils made up of the prefect and army ofﬁcers but no
local representatives. These could reverse exemptions granted by the mu-
nicipalities, a responsibility formerly exercised by local councils composed

49 Prefectoral (Roër) circular of 13 Pluviôse XI (1 February 1803), Recueil (1802/3), part 2, p. 86. For
   the ‘marriage industry’, see Forrest, Conscripts, p. 51.
50 Vallée, Compte général, p. 25.
51 Ibid., pp. 28–31. AN, AFIV 1124, ‘Compte général sur la conscription depuis l’établissement de la
   Direction, jusqu’au 1er Janvier 1811’.
52 For a fascinating early-nineteenth-century account of ingenuity in faking illness, and the challenge
   this represented to the military surgeon, see Henry Marshall, Hints to young Medical Ofﬁcers of the
   Army on the Examination of Recruits; . . . with ofﬁcial documents and the regulations for the inspection
   of Conscripts for the French and Prussian Armies (London, 1828).
53 For a list of exemptions from the Roër’s chef-lieu see, STAA, RA II no. 391.
