                                          War and society                                             169
   The bare ﬁgures recording the impôt de sang hardly do justice to the ad-
ministrative achievement they represented. Initially, this achievement was
based upon devolution. This was greatest in the early years of the Jourdan
Law. However, the government soon discovered that delegation to the lo-
calities resulted in inequalities, injustice and the paying-off of old scores.41
The government responded by centralising the process, yet even then local
notables remained crucial for the success or failure of conscription. They,
like the prefects, were reminded that their preferment depended upon their
management of the draft. ‘It is in this part of your duties,’ the Roër’s prefect
reminded his mayors in 1805, ‘that you must give proof of your ﬁrmness and
devotion . . . it is the most certain evidence you can give him [Napoleon]
of your attachment to his person, and at the same time the surest way of
assuring yourselves of his benevolence.’42 The special handbook prepared
for ofﬁcials in the Rhenish departments devoted 200 out of its over 1,000
pages to conscription, a duty given priority over all others.43 Signiﬁcantly,
the Loi Jourdan entrusted mayors and sub-prefects with preparing the lists
of young men that formed the basis for the entire operation. These lists
recorded their name, date of birth, height, profession and domicile. The
government compelled mayors who missed the deadlines for preparing
these lists to pay special commissioners appointed ‘to stimulate their activ-
ity’. It held sub-prefects responsible for delays if they failed to employ all
the means at their disposal. Every year the government sacked a number of
mayors and hauled them before the courts for failing to fulﬁl their duties,
publicising their fate in local newspapers as a warning. Yet, as one contem-
porary with access to departmental records in the Rhineland noted, local
ofﬁcials continued to present deliberately deﬂated population estimates.
Furthermore, even when compiled, communal lists needed to be preserved
from destruction through accident or arson – perhaps with the connivance
of local ofﬁcials – something difﬁcult to guarantee in isolated rural areas
lacking proper archives.44
   A fundamental principle of the Jourdan Law was that each tier – de-
partment, district, canton, commune – was held collectively responsible

41 Forrest, Conscripts, pp. 27–31.
42 Hauptstaatsarchiv Düsseldorf (HStAD), Roër dept., 2332, no. 80.
43 Anton Keil, Handbuch für Maire und Adjuncten, für Polizey-Commissare, Gemeinde-Räthe, Einnehmer
   und Vertheiler der Steuern, Spital- und Armenverwalter, Pfarrer, Kirchen-Räthe und Kirchenmeister,
   Feld- und Forsthüter und Geschäftsmänner. Zweyte ganz umgearbeitete und vermehrte Auﬂage (2 vols.,
   Cologne, 1811–13).
44 Sylvain Meinrad Xavier de Golbery, Considérations sur le département de la Roër, suivies de la notice
   d’Aix-la-Chapelle et de Borcette. Ouvrage composé d’après les recherches de l’Auteur et les documents
   réunis dans les archives de la préfecture (Aachen, 1811), pp. 501–7.
