                                         War and society                                            173
have impugned the prefect’s authority, something Napoleon was not pre-
pared to countenance. The distinct impression of a cover-up is reinforced
by the subsequent failure of two independent military surgeons to ﬁnd
anything wrong with Müller.56

Müller, given his fortune, might have done better to hire a replacement,
for Napoleonic legislation became increasingly ﬂexible with respect to this
and the related practice of substitution. Replacement represented a le-
gal contract that included the payment of a 100-franc tax and involved
an individual agreeing to replace somebody who was deﬁnitely mobilised.
Substitution was simply a private arrangement between individuals whereby
conscripts from the same class and locality undertook to swap their num-
bers before it had been decided how many would be mobilised. Revolu-
tionary governments in the 1790s viewed replacement with ambivalence.
The right of replacement was conceded in the law of 28 Floréal X (18 May
1802), and so preceded the extension of conscription to the Rhineland. This
right was originally restricted, but subsequently extended until a free mar-
ket for replacements existed at a national level by the end of the Empire.57
Criticised as one more Napoleonic retreat from revolutionary principle, the
practice drew on traditions of communal self-help in the Rhineland and
provided an opening for notables not only to avoid conscription them-
selves, but also extend protection to clients and thereby retrieve some lost
autonomy.
   Under the Old Regime, Rhinelanders had avoided military service by of-
fering their princes monetary compensation. This practice continued dur-
ing the revolutionary wars, when localities struck deals with both the princes
and French invaders to avoid military conscription or compulsory labour
service. When electoral Cologne ordered Worringen to supply nine men
for its army in 1794, for example, the local authorities paid an indemnity
instead. Other towns in electoral Cologne collected voluntary donations

56 The account of this scandal is based on the correspondence between Cologne’s special police com-
   missioner (Pauzle d’Ivoy) and Réal (head of the 1st police district) from August to October 1812,
   contained in AN, F7 3609, dossier ‘Roër 1806–1813’.
57 The law of 28 Floréal X (18 May 1802) allowed a conscript who drew an unlucky number to pay
   a serving soldier with at least one year’s service to remain in the army for a further ﬁve years.
   Subsequent laws (18 Thermidor X (6 Aug. 1802) and 16 Floréal XI (26 April 1803)) allowed draftees
   to hire substitutes from outside the army corps to which they had been assigned. The original
   stipulation that only individuals from the same arrondissement might be hired was ﬁrst tightened
   by the imperial decree of 18 Nivôse XIII (7 January 1805), which limited the selection to the smaller
   canton, and shortly thereafter liberalised by the decree of 8 Fructidor XIII (25 August 1805), which
   allowed substitutes to be hired from anywhere in the department. Eventually, even this restriction
   was lifted. Monnier, ‘Conscription’, pp. 466, 471. See also Forrest, Conscripts, pp. 58–61.
