170                                   From Reich to State
for its quota. Whilst conscription furthered centralisation and penetration
by the state through the strengthening of an entire range of compulsive in-
struments, it also crystallised community solidarity. Resistance to the draft
was always a matter of local solidarity and cohesion rather than individual
choice.45 Prefects, sub-prefects and mayors, though representatives of the
state, in practice also presented the interests of their administrés to the tier
above. To an extent, they acted as a buffer, being familiar both with the state
of local opinion and versed in the arguments that would impress their su-
periors. Capable prefects, such as Jeanbon Saint-André of Mont-Tonnerre,
Laumond, Lameth and Ladoucette of the Roër and Lezay-Marnesia of
Rhin-et-Moselle, frequently petitioned Paris for an alleviation of the bur-
den on their departments and attempted to ward off punitive methods by
providing glowing reports of loyalty and devotion. Those with powerful
connections in Paris, such as Lezay-Marnesia, a client of the Josephine clan
in whose ‘pocket’ the Rhin-et-Moselle lay, stood some chance of receiving
a favourable response.46 Sub-prefects and mayors in turn petitioned pre-
fects in an attempt to reconcile the requirements of the state with local
opinion. Failure to strike a balance between the two might result in popu-
lar resistance or government repression. Fear, obduracy, humanitarianism,
economic self-interest and the wish to shield clients, provoked notables
into repelling, or rather, deﬂecting onto those at the margins, the burden
of conscription. And despite its formidability, the Napoleonic state toler-
ated a certain degree of local interpretation of the law so long as the ﬂow
of taxes and conscripts continued. Over time the regime, in its despera-
tion for ever more troops, increasingly ignored legality, fairness and social
justice.47
   One weakness in the law exploited by notables to protect clients was
the provisions concerning exemptions. These expanded as the egalitarian
principles of the Loi Jourdan-Debrel were progressively relaxed. Married
men were exempt from the beginning, but were subsequently joined by
the eldest sons of widows, brothers of those in uniform, and ecclesiastics.48
Inconsistencies in the deﬁnition of this last group allowed local ofﬁcials to

45 Woloch, New Regime, pp. 412ff.
46 Director-general of conscription to Lezay-Marnesia, 30 October 1807, HASK, Bestand 256, 6227,
   [nos. 11–12]. See also Ladoucette to Montalivet, 24 December 1810, AN, F1c I, dossier 25, no. 335,
   and Ladoucette to Savary, 14 May 1813, AN, F7 3609, ‘Roër 1806–1813’, [no. 21].
47 Forrest, Conscripts, pp. 36, 40–1.
48 Married men needed to prove they had wed at least one day before the law mobilising their class
   arrived in their department. For the extension of exempt categories in general, see François Monnier,
   ‘Conscription’, in Jean Tulard (ed.), Dictionnaire Napoléon (Paris, 1987), p. 470. Also, Forrest,
   Conscripts, pp. 53–6.
