166                                       From Reich to State
Eickemeyer predicted that the extension of conscription to the Rhineland
might provoke violence.32
   Lunéville, followed by annexation, legally paved the way for the introduc-
tion of conscription in the Rhineland. Yet Napoleon delayed promulgating
the relevant legislation. Paris waited a full year (until 5 July 1802) before
extending the law of 19 Fructidor VI (5 September 1798) – the famous Loi
Jourdan-Debrel – to the new departments.33 This law was so well framed
that it formed the basis of conscription in France until 1872. Its preamble
and ﬁrst article reﬂected the revolutionary principle that underlay the state’s
right to call upon all citizens for defence: ‘Every Frenchman is a soldier and
must devote himself to the defence of the patrie.’34 The following arti-
cles, which were slightly modiﬁed by Napoleon, put these principles into
practice. The law classiﬁed all single men aged between twenty and twenty-
ﬁve years as ‘conscripts’, liable for mobilisation. It divided these into ﬁve
‘classes’ according to age, and mobilised the youngest ﬁrst. Those reaching
twenty-ﬁve years without mobilisation were automatically discharged from
further commitments. The proportion of conscripts mobilised depended
upon military requirements, so that the burden placed on individual classes
varied. Initially, mobilisation was authorised by the Corps Législatif, which
also ﬁxed each department’s contribution. From September 1805 onwards,
contingents were mobilised by senatus consultum, a device that allowed
Napoleon to bypass the legislature.
   Victory depended upon the rapid mobilisation of resources, and the con-
scription process that emerged was quintessentially ‘Napoleonic’: strategic
decision-making was centralised, representative bodies by-passed, and the
exercise dependent upon the administration functioning like clockwork.
How the system was supposed to work even when Napoleon was campaign-
ing at the other end of Europe – in this case, Poland – is illustrated in the
director-general of conscription’s report of April 1807. One hundred days
elapsed from the presentation of a relevant law in Napoleon’s privy council
to the conscripts’ departure for their units: day 1: presentation of the draft
law to the privy council; day 2: presentation to the senate; day 4: adoption by
the senate; day 5: presentation to the council of state dividing the contingent
between the departments; prefects ordered to form lists of conscripts; day 6:
32 Eickemeyer to the minister of war, undated (1801), AG, Xk 41.
33 Karl Theodor Friedrich Bormann and Alexander von Daniels (eds.), Handbuch der für die königlich-
   preußischen Rheinprovinzen verkündigte Gesetze, Verordnungen und Regierungsbeschlüsse aus der Zeit
   der Fremdherrschaft (8 vols., Cologne, 1833–45), 7, pp. 486–7.
34 C. M. Galisset, Corps du droit français ou recueil complet des lois, décrets, ordonnances, sénatus-consultes,
   règlements, avis du conseil d’état, rapports au roi, instructions ministérielles, etc., publiés depuis 1789
   jusqu’à nos jours (11 vols., Paris, 1833–52), 1, pp. 1828–31.
