172                                  From Reich to State
of fathers of serving conscripts assisted by a government representative and
doctor.54
   Yet bribery, clientage, exploitation of legislation on exemptions, falsiﬁca-
tion of medical examinations and inter-departmental rivalry undermined
conscription even in later years. In 1813, the general in charge of recruitment
in the Gironde reported that sons of rich Bordeaux families were still able
to secure bogus medical exemptions, whilst the local prefect complained
that if medical notes were to be believed, the entire population must be
hospitalised.55 One scandal, exposed in Cologne in 1812 by the special po-
lice commissioner, serves as an example for many other cases that could
be related on account of its inclusion of all the most popular methods of
draft evasion. The scandal centred around a certain Müller, whose tutor at-
tempted to ‘purchase’ his discharge with the co-operation of ofﬁcials in the
sub-prefecture. These placed Müller in the category least likely to be called
up on the spurious grounds that he was the eldest brother of orphans. This
falsity was discovered and Müller compelled to participate in the draw.
When he drew an unlucky number, the ofﬁcials resorted to bribing the
recruitment council, whilst a doctor named Kruse helped Müller fake var-
ious deformities in return for 1,500 francs. Kruse, according to Cologne’s
special police commissioner, enjoyed ‘great inﬂuence’ with the departmen-
tal recruitment council and exploited this ‘for affairs of the same nature,
which have earned for him considerable sums’. The commissioner, who
reported directly to the police ministry, warned against involving the local
sub-prefecture in his investigation, as it had covered up the affair and could
not be trusted. Instead, he interrogated Müller in person, as the suspect pos-
sessed a fortune of 9,000 francs and might ‘make use of [this as a] means
of seduction, [something] he appears accustomed to employ and which
the Germans [sic] have great difﬁculty in resisting’. Far from supporting
the commissioner, the prefect, Ladoucette, was enraged when he discov-
ered the secret investigation and the accusations levelled at the recruitment
council chaired by himself. Rufﬂed feathers were hardly smoothed when
the commissioner tersely informed the prefecture that he was acting un-
der the direct authority of the police ministry. The matter now progressed
beyond the fate of Müller and revolved around the responsibilities of the
special police commissioners appointed by Napoleon in major cities in
1811. The relationship between the commissioners and the prefects was
never clearly delineated, resulting in endless conﬂict. Ladoucette eventu-
ally won the tussle, and Müller was discharged. Any other decision would

54 Forrest, Conscripts, pp. 35–47.   55 Ibid ., pp. 46, 48.
