178                                   From Reich to State
imposing its will must be qualiﬁed. Certainly, the state got its conscripts,
but the management of their supply was partly on Rhenish terms.76
   Replacement smoothed the conscription process. Signiﬁcantly, its inci-
dence was highest in those departments that made the greatest contribution
to the Napoleonic war effort: the departments of the north and east, with
their tradition of soldiering. In contrast, departments with the highest in-
cidence of draft evasion and desertion were also those with the lowest level
of replacement. In the Rhineland at least, dealers in replacements ‘pur-
chased’ young men in the countryside in order to ‘sell’ them in the towns
where they commanded a higher price. Whilst the Rhineland can hardly
be said to have enjoyed an especially strong military tradition – its small
states maintained only tiny armies in the eighteenth century, geared to-
wards policing and representational duties – it was nonetheless a centre
of the soldier trade, with the British, Dutch, Prussians and Austrians all
recruiting in the region. The Dutch extended their activities even into the
Napoleonic period. A ready supply of potential replacements existed on the
right bank and, as already shown, Rhenish mayors collaborated with dealers
by the provision of bogus certiﬁcates in tapping this supply. Overall, the
structure of the replacement industry reinforces the sociological thesis that
the Napoleonic Empire functioned best in commercial, urbanised regions,
such as the Rhenish departments.

Despite replacement, desertion and draft dodging remained the only means
of escaping military service for the majority.77 The two comptes généraux
sur la conscription, drawn up by the directorate for conscription in 1808 and
1810, and covering the periods 1798 to 1805 and 1806 to 1810 respectively,
include detailed statistics on desertion and draft dodging. They are broken
down by department, allowing for comparison between regions of the
French empire over time.
   Draft dodging rather than desertion posed the greater problem in the
Rhineland, accounting for about a third of those mobilised, compared
to the national average of 21 per cent (1800/1–1804/5) and 31 per cent
(1806–10). The vast majority of these, perhaps 90 per cent, simply failed
to present themselves for medical examination and the drawing of lots
in the cantonal chefs-lieux. Desertion, on the other hand, was less of a
problem, averaging only 13 per cent of those mobilised from years 1800/1
76 For substitution in France as a whole, including the prices of replacements in other departments,
   consult Woloch, New Regime, pp. 397–404, 411–26.
77 A deserter was a soldier who illegally left his unit. A draft dodger was someone who failed to present
   himself for conscription.
