                                        War and society                                        183
to hospital beds were allowed to remain behind, but were transported to
the interior in requisitioned carts.91 The penalties they faced depended
upon the precise circumstances of their crime; draft dodgers, who were
tried before civilian courts, could expect a 1,500-franc ﬁne and a ﬁve-year
sentence in a depot. The penalty for desertion, which was tried before special
conseils de guerre, varied from two years’ hard labour for simple desertion
to ten years in the hulks for those deserting on foreign soil or with their
equipment. Capital punishment was prescribed for those deserting to the
enemy.92
   Mobile columns proved relatively successful. The great drive imple-
mented in 1811 came close to grinding down opposition to conscription. On
one level, this marked another advance in the onward march of the state,
though another possible explanation for success might be the economic
crisis of that year that made military service more attractive. On another
level, the use of collective punishment revealed the continued reliance of
the state on local elites and the inability of the state to establish a direct rela-
tionship between itself and the individual citizen. One can thus agree with
Alan Forrest’s ﬁnal observation with regards to conscription, namely that it
revived village archaisms and jeopardised the new civic order that Napoleon
attempted to construct.93
   This conclusion appears more convincing following recent research into
compulsory military service elsewhere in Europe. Even in eighteenth-
century Prussia, conscription was not simply about brutal state power as
represented by the corporal’s stick. Rather, compulsion was the last resort,
employed only if the acceptance of volunteers and those deemed burden-
some on the community failed to raise sufﬁcient numbers. The Prussian
authorities too demonstrated a preference for the devolution of the pro-
cess. Nor can the scope for legal redress in the Prussian courts be entirely
dismissed. The image of the ‘socially disciplined’ or ‘socially militarised’
Prussian peasant, brutalised into submission, as is provided in the older
literature, is thus overturned. The attempt to apply the same concept –
‘social disciplining’ – to Napoleonic France must be treated with similar
reservation. Bureaucratic routine over generations, not the dramatic ap-
pearance of a mobile column for a few weeks, alone could achieve such a
fundamental social transformation.94

91 General de Bon to the commander of gendarmerie in the Sarre, 22 May 1811, LHAK, Bestand 256,
   6227, [no. 121].
92 Forrest, Conscripts, p. 188.   93 Ibid ., p. 237.
94 Peter H. Wilson, ‘Social Militarization in Eighteenth-Century Germany’, German History 18 (2000),
   pp. 1–39, 117–18.
