                                         War and society                                            181
and Cologne. They reported directly to the police ministry and, as noted
earlier, often found themselves in conﬂict with the prefects.83
   Statistically, deserters and draft dodgers stood the greatest chance of arrest
by the gendarmerie. Garrisoned separately from the population, it totalled
15,500 men in the empire in 1809, with 527 stationed in the Rhineland after
its introduction in 1798. Most gendarmes were mounted, and grouped
into ‘brigades’ of ﬁve men commanded by a junior ofﬁcer. These in turn
formed companies, covering single departments, and squadrons, two of
which patrolled the four Rhenish departments, which formed the 25th
gendarmerie ‘legion’. About a quarter of the gendarmes stationed in the
Rhineland were locals, and even native Frenchmen serving were supposed to
have a knowledge of German.84 Mayors, as well as sub-prefects and prefects,
could summons the gendarmes if they feared a breakdown of order. As part
of the struggle against draft dodging and desertion, the gendarmerie carried
out regular sweeps of the countryside, and searches of private homes and
manufacturing establishments. Manufacturers harbouring such fugitives
received heavy ﬁnes. Yet, despite their efforts and those of other security
forces, only 7 per cent of draft evaders were arrested in the Rhineland, as
compared with 16 per cent for France as a whole.85
   As we shall see in chapter 8, the security apparatus was reinforced in
1813, as Coalition forces advanced through Germany. Even then, the gov-
ernment succeeded only in containing evasion rather than preventing it
completely. The government therefore fell back on a carrot-and-stick pol-
icy of offering amnesties followed by the deployment of dreaded mobile
columns to collectively bully communities into surrendering the intran-
sigent. Mobile columns consisted of soldiers and gendarmes who swept
through the departments, ﬂushing out deserters, draft dodgers, and any
other social ﬂotsam they might net. They were garrisoned at the expense of
communities being administered punishment and where possible, on the
relatives of deserters and draft dodgers. In practice, these were usually too
poor to meet the expense of forced billeting, or pay other ﬁnes imposed
upon them. Of the twenty-nine families of condemned draft dodgers in
Cologne in 1807, for example, only ﬁve owned any property which could
83 The best account of policing in the Napoleonic Rhineland is provided by Hansgeorg Molitor, Vom
   Untertan zum administré. Studien zur französischen Herrschaft und zum Verhalten der Bevölkerung
   im Rhein-Mosel-Raum von den Revolutionskriegen bis zum Ende der Napoleonischen Zeit (Wiesbaden,
   1980), p. 118–29.
84 Hansen, Quellen, 4, pp. 521 n. 2, 959 n. 3. For later gendarmerie strengths, see AG, C10 60, dossier
   ‘15 Novembre’, n. 6 (unpaginated).
85 AN, AFIV 1124, ‘Compte général sur la conscription depuis l’établissement de la Direction, jusqu’au
   1er Janvier 1810’.
