                                           War and society                                               185
These lands were formerly either under the control of Prussia, the ecclesiastical
authorities [or] imperial regencies, and everywhere voluntary contributions and
replacements recruited from abroad substituted compulsory service. Everywhere,
one gave money instead of soldiers, so that the military spirit is absolutely zero and
the inhabitants do not even hide their aversion to the dangers of war . . . in these
conditions the organisation of the National Guard would be extremely difﬁcult
even in ordinary times.100
In the former Hohenzollern duchies, there were fears that Prussia would join
Austria, and that those serving in the National Guard would be treated as
rebels. Lameth reported to Marshal Lefebvre, commander of the National
Guard contingents, that a large number of communes in the Rhin-et-
Moselle department formally opposed the mobilisation. He had been com-
pelled to deploy troops to re-establish order, ‘the resistance and spirit of
disobedience having spread with extreme rapidity.’ He doubted the dead-
line for the supply of the Rhin-et-Moselle’s contingent could be met.101
Only Napoleon’s decisive victory at Austerlitz, which came just before
the Rhenish National Guards were fully mobilised, relieved some of the
pressure.
   Opposition to the National Guard re-emerged with the outbreak of
the Prussian war in 1806, but subsided following rapid French victories.102
Even more widespread resistance, representing one of the biggest overt
manifestations of deﬁance Napoleon faced within French borders, oc-
curred during the Franco-Austrian war of 1809. During that conﬂict, the
British attempted to assist their Habsburg allies by landing 40,000 men on
Walcheren island off the Netherlands. With Napoleon and the army en-
gaged on the Danube, Fouché – as police and acting interior minister – acti-
vated the National Guard in a display of Jacobin initiative. The mobilisation
passed off smoothly in Mont-Tonnerre, the Roër and Rhin-et-Moselle. In
the Sarre, it provoked large-scale disturbances in early September in three –
Birkenfeld, Prüm and Trier – out of four arrondissements, with bands of sev-
eral hundred converging on the cantonal chefs-lieux to sack ofﬁcial buildings
and mishandle ofﬁcials. The troubles lasted twenty-four hours, and were
provoked as much by local circumstances as wider events.103 The prefect,
Keppler, ordered the gendarmerie to make many arrests, and circulated a
paternalistic warning in which he blamed the rebellion on enemies who

100 Report from 2nd imperial police district to Fouché, 12 November 1805. AN, F7 3617.
 101 Lameth to Lefebvre, 17 November 1805, LHAK, Bestand 256, 6229.
102 Lameth to Réal, 4 November 1806, AN, F7 3617, dossier ‘Roër’.
103 Roger Dufraisse, ‘Une Rébellion en pays annexé: le soulèvement des gardes nationales de la
   Sarre en 1809’, Bulletin de la Société d’Histoire Moderne 14th series, no. 10, 68th year (1969), pp. 1–6.
