180                                  From Reich to State
their training. For the Napoleonic state such movement was unwelcome in
creating additional administrative problems.79 On average, only one gen-
darme covered every league of frontier. Regimental commanders warned
repeatedly that Rhenish conscripts stationed for prolonged periods near the
river ﬂed into Germany and found employment, whilst Paris complained
that local police in riverain communities connived with deserters crossing
the Rhine, or at least demonstrated gross incompetence.80 Evidence sug-
gests that at least some deserters and draft dodgers made a living through
smuggling, in return for protection. Smuggling proved an ideal means of
survival, as it was a socially acceptable form of criminal activity; alterna-
tives risked alienating the wider population, upon whom deserters and
draft dodgers were ultimately dependent. On occasion, local authorities
and even douaniers were involved in illegally harbouring fugitives.81
   The French employed greater repression to prevent evasion. They re-
stricted freedom of movement through a system of internal checks and
frontier controls. Rhinelanders wishing to cross into Germany required
passports issued by the prefecture – documents prepared by mayors were
invalid – stating they had met their military obligations. Bulging ﬁles in po-
lice archives attest to the frequent harassment of young men at the frontier.
In particular, such restrictions disrupted the traditional ties that Rhenish
apprentices maintained with Germany.82 Within the departments, draft
dodgers and deserters needed to defeat a multi-tiered security apparatus.
At the lowest level, they encountered the village mayors, and in the larger
towns professional police inspectors. In addition, the prefects disposed of
special budgets for the employment of secret police. The entire security
establishment was tightened up in 1804 with the re-establishment of the
police ministry, under Fouché, and division of France into four police dis-
tricts. The Rhineland was assigned to the 1st, under the councillor of state
Pierre François Réal. Prefects reported to Fouché on all matters relating
to security, often on a daily basis. The system was further reinforced in
1811 with the appointment of about thirty commissaires spéciaux de police
to strategic points throughout the empire, including one each in Mainz

79 Hudemann-Simon, ‘Réfractaires’, pp.12–13, 39–41; Forrest, Conscripts, pp. 84–9. On the other hand,
   the level of draft dodging in the riverain Alsatian departments averaged less than a third of the
   Rhenish in the Years IX–XIII and under one half from 1806 to 1810.
80 Klespe (sub-prefect of Cologne) to Wittgenstein (mayor of Cologne), 17 May 1804, HASK, FV 3051,
   no. 2. For the Rhin-et-Moselle department, see LHAK, Bestand 256, 88, no. 157.
81 AG, C10 1, D1, no. 124. AN, F7 3609, dossier ‘Roër 1806–1813’, [nos. 45–6]. HASK, Bestand 256,
   6227, [nos. 5–7].
82 For apprentices arrested by Cologne’s police whilst attempting to cross the Rhine, see HASK, FV
   3020.
