                                         War and society                                            177
payment in foreign currency, reﬂecting the perilous position the Napoleonic
Empire found itself in.71 Such subtleties reﬂected the complexities of the
replacement market and the commercial acumen of Rhinelanders.72
   Many contracts concerning the provision of replacements by ofﬁcials
acting as intermediaries were witnessed by notaries, indicating they were
considered perfectly legal.73 A conclusive account of the scale of this practice
in the Rhineland awaits detailed analysis of all the relevant notarial records.
The general view for France as a whole is that about 5 per cent of those
conscripted were replacements. The practice was more common in the
Rhineland, where the price of a replacement was signiﬁcantly lower than
in ‘old France’. The colonel of the 9th Cuirassiers, stationed in the region,
complained to the war minister in 1804 that most conscripts from the
area were replacements whose only motivation was to receive their money
and then desert. Indeed, many were professional deserters, including from
foreign armies. The colonel requested that no more conscripts from the
recently annexed departments be sent to his regiment, as a seventh of
the last batch had deserted in a few months.74 The general direction of
conscription informed Napoleon in January 1811 that 8 per cent of Rhenish
conscripts called up between 1806 and 1810 were in fact replacements, with
the wealthy Roër department averaging close to 9 per cent, double the rate
for France as a whole.75 This suggests the existence of a commercialised
market in replacements, as would emerge in France under the Restoration
and July Monarchy. Whilst in the interior departments, substitution and
replacement met with resentment from those lacking the means to escape
service, there is little evidence of such hostility in the Rhineland. The
tradition of purchasing replacements in lieu of performing military duty,
plus the commercial acumen of the region, are explanations of why this
was the case. Against this context, the victory of the Napoleonic state in
71 Ibid., Rep.160,13 (Notary Efferz of Cleves), no. 114.
72 Following the collapse of French rule, the question arose as to the validity of replacement contracts.
   The Austro-Bavarian occupation authorities issued an ordinance on 21 February 1815 which ruled
   that those substituted could not demand any money back that had already been paid out, whilst
   those replacements discharged on account of their wounds, or the families of those killed, must
   be paid the full amount agreed. In other cases, the amount due would be calculated according to
   the proportion of the expected ﬁve-year term the replacements actually spent with their regiments
   before the 30 May 1814 (First Treaty of Paris). LHAK, Bestand 371, 549.
73 For examples, see HStAD, Schloß Kalkum, Notarial Akten, Rep. 287 (Notary Hopmann of Cleves),
   nos. 4 and 246 respectively, and Rep. 2874 (Notar Hoven of Cologne), no. 7420.
74 Colonel of the 9th Cuirassiers to Berthier (minister of war), 6 June 1802, AG, C10 1, D1, no. 124.
75 AN, AFIV 1124, ‘Compte général sur la conscription depuis l’établissement de la Direction, jusqu’au
   1er Janvier 1810’. The ﬁgure of 8.2 per cent for the two Alsatian departments was also comparatively
   high.
