192                         From Reich to State
of the Lower Rhine. Napoleon eventually extended the Loi Jourdan to the
Rhenish departments in 1802. The context of its introduction seemed propi-
tious enough; Napoleon’s popularity was riding high. Thanks to peace, the
contingents demanded were low as a proportion of the population. Unlike
in the Vendée and Belgium, the introduction of conscription passed off
smoothly. Nor was there any signiﬁcant problem over the following years,
despite the ever-increasing burden. Indeed, by the end of the Napoleonic
period, the Rhenish departments were contributing signiﬁcantly more than
their fair share.
    On one level, the successful enforcement of conscription might be viewed
as the triumphant imposition of state power. However, this is heavily quali-
ﬁed by the observation that the Napoleonic state, even through the mecha-
nism of conscription, never established an unmediated relationship between
itself and the individual citizen that must surely represent the hallmark of
modern government. Rather, collective responsibility was reinforced, not
undermined, by conscription. For though the conscription process was pro-
gressively centralised, the local element could not be eliminated entirely.
It remained crucial. This element provided the opportunity for local elites
to deﬂect the burden of military service onto those on the margins, and
away from themselves and their clients. Loopholes with respect to exemp-
tions, weaknesses in the system of medical examination and, above all, the
replacement industry were fully exploited to these ends. Draft dodging,
which remained high in the Rhenish departments throughout, attested
to the survival of communal solidarity; the proportion of draft dodgers
arrested was always dismally low, apart from those brief periods when the
French deployed mobile columns. Of course, Napoleon received his levees.
He did not break social cohesion, however. Arguably, the various weaknesses
listed above – replacement, fraud, draft dodging – represented the necessary
pressure-valves that made conscription sustainable until the system began to
unravel in the ﬁnal months of 1813. Napoleon could get away with creaming
off up to about 30 per cent of males within eligible age-groups. Anything
more than that, including supplementary levees for the National Guard,
created problems. Within bounds, Napoleonic conscription proved less so-
cially disruptive than might have been thought. That is not to diminish
the disaster it represented for the many individuals who collectively made
up the statistical raw material so valuable for the historian.
