194                                   From Reich to State
‘réaction seigneuriale’, with even seemingly personal obligations requiring
compensation.1
    The provisions concerning the redemption of ‘feudal dues’ made little
difference to the overall economy. This was especially the case in the Lower
Rhine, where tenants and landlords had long been bound by purely com-
mercial obligations. Of greater signiﬁcance was the secularisation of the
vast holdings of the Catholic Church and their auction from 1803 onwards.
Unlike in ‘old France’ and other parts of Germany, the authorities in the
Rhineland sold these properties – biens nationaux – without ﬁrst dividing
them into smaller plots. Napoleon’s aim in selling these was to maximise
returns, not to engage in any social engineering. The government’s decision
to ﬁx the minimum price for individual lots at twenty times their average
annual revenue, which was higher than in the French interior, was further
evidence of the primacy of ﬁscal considerations. The totals subsequently
offered for sale were vast. In the Roër department alone, they amounted
to 33,614,220 francs’ worth of land. In all, the authorities presented 16,521
individual lots at auction in the four departments and of these 13,824 were
sold.2 This represented a total of 92,000 hectares, or 8.1 per cent of all cul-
tivatable land. The volume of sales peaked in 1807. In addition to land, the
government also auctioned off numerous ecclesiastical buildings. Many of
these were deliberately sold at knock-down prices to businessmen to serve
as manufactories. Finally, Napoleon also transferred a considerable amount
of secularised property to the Domaine extraordinaire de la Couronne to
endow the imperial nobility, Légion d’honneur, Senate and veterans. Much
of this land was also subsequently auctioned off to third parties.3
    One effect of secularisation was the destruction of the social relief provi-
sion of the Catholic Church. This brought hardship, for the state, despite
some initiatives, never proved able to ﬁll the gap in provision it had cre-
ated. As for agriculture, the effects of secularisation were rather limited. The
size of holdings remained largely as before, though associations of specu-
lators (who played a large role in the initial purchase of biens nationaux)
occasionally divided or consolidated lots to maximise their value before
selling them on at a proﬁt. As for the ﬁnal purchasers, any conclusions
remain somewhat imprecise, as the notarial records only provide details on
1 Roger Dufraisse, ‘De quelques conséquences économiques et sociales de la domination française
  sur les régions du Rhin inférieur 1794–1814’, in Peter Hüttenberger and Hansgeorg Molitor (eds.),
  Franzosen und Deutsche am Rhein 1789–1918–1945 (Essen, 1989), pp. 129–41.
2 Wolfgang Schieder (ed.), Säkularisation und Mediatisierung in den vier rheinischen Departements
  1803–1813: Edition des Datenmaterials der zur veräussernden Nationalgüter (5 vols., Boppard am Rhein,
  1991), 1, p. 44.
3 Ibid .
