                                        War and society                               189
‘I desire,’ he commanded, ‘that those amongst your fellow citizens with
children in foreign service recall them to France. A Frenchman must shed
his blood only for his prince and for his patrie.’117 He estimated that 10,000
‘Frenchmen’ remained in Austrian service and offered them an amnesty if
they returned by the end of the year. Even this measure was not a complete
success. In the following year, families in Cologne were still being subjected
to forced billeting because their sons were serving in the Habsburg army.118
   ‘Nationalisation’ of military service occurred throughout Europe. In
Italy, conscripts were subjected to a sustained policy of eliminating local
identities in favour of a supra-regional consciousness.119 A similar attempt at
identity formation occurred in Bavaria, which introduced conscription in
1804, Württemberg (conscription introduced in 1806), and Baden (1808/9).
In Württemberg, for example, the recruitment of foreigners was discour-
aged, foreign recruiters expelled, new national decorations introduced, sub-
jects from the old and new territories mixed in the same units, and subjects
serving abroad recalled under threat of seeing their property conﬁscated.
At least one unfortunate Württemberger serving with the Austrians in 1809
was captured, tried by court martial for treason, and presumably shot. As in
the Rhineland, the Habsburg connection remained strong: in Baden, many
ofﬁcers resigned their commissions in 1805 rather than ﬁght against their
emperor, Francis II. Yet, overall, the south German armies served loyally and
effectively alongside regular French units in both the 1809 and 1812 cam-
paigns. Conscription, though unpopular, appears to have met with little
resistance, despite the fact that the south German princes not only met their
treaty requirements with respect to their contingents, but exceeded them
(in Württemberg’s case by 50 per cent in 1809), placing a greater burden on
their peoples than Napoleon on France. Further north, Westphalia – a to-
tally new creation – similarly experienced few problems in raising an army
in excess of what was required, thanks in part to a reliable gendarmerie com-
posed almost entirely of German-speaking Frenchmen. Again, an attempt
was made to forge a truly ‘national’ army. To an extent, this succeeded,
with most of the army remaining loyal during the abortive risings of Katte,
Dörnberg (an ex-Prussian ofﬁcer serving in the Westphalian guard) and
Schill in 1809. Less rosy was the situation in Berg. Not only was conscription
hated in the grand duchy – that was hardly unique in Napoleonic Europe –
but was especially hard to administer, particularly in former Prussian
districts that remained loyal to the Hohenzollerns. French ofﬁcials who
administered Berg warned against the employment of its troops within

117 Napoleon I, Correspondance, 20, pp. 174–6. See also ibid., 21, pp. 54–6, 285–6.
118 HASK, FV 3042, no. 143.       119 Schneid, Soldiers, pp. 90–103, 126–30.
