                                          War and society                                             191
   Rhinelanders in French service were more likely to be ‘praetorianised’
than nationalised. During the Directory, soldiers’ allegiances shifted from
the nation state, which neglected them, to their commanders, who sup-
plied them with loot. Napoleon monopolised this form of control after
Brumaire. The loyalty instilled in soldiers by Napoleon as a charismatic
leader remained personal and transcended national differences even after
he became head of the French state. Equally signiﬁcant, no doubt, was the
fact that French ofﬁcers led from the front, as reﬂected in the dispropor-
tionately high casualties they suffered.126 The intensity of loyalty felt by
Rhenish soldiers was often extreme, judging from surviving memoirs and
letters. Often, this ran counter to the sentiments shared by their parents at
home. Karl Schehl from Krefeld, for example, though he had experienced
the rigours of the Russian campaign, reminisced years later that whilst he
had wept at the news of Napoleon’s downfall, his parents rejoiced. He had
shared in the legendary esprit du corps of the imperial army: ‘we loved
all our ofﬁcers,’ he wrote, ‘from sergeant to ﬁeld-marshal; the emperor,
however, we viewed as a superior being’.127
   Such enthusiasm provided an ingredient for the later Napoleonic cult,
which was preserved in the numerous Rhenish veterans’ associations that
sprang up from the 1830s onwards, to the Prussians’ annoyance. The
longevity of this legacy can be gauged from the fact that the last recorded
veteran died in 1883.128 The memory of these veterans lives on in the monu-
ments to Napoleon’s soldiers in the region’s cemeteries. One, erected in the
1850s, can still be seen in Melaten in Cologne, where it sits in uncomfort-
able proximity to a suitably martial-looking tomb of a Prussian General
von Seydlitz and to a memorial commemorating those Rhenish soldiers
who defeated Napoleon’s nephew in 1870.

Military conscription represented the area where the interests of state and
society diverged most widely. This was especially the case in the Rhineland,
where military service had previously been viewed almost as a voluntary
commercial transaction, and where even during the revolutionary wars
communities offered monetary payments in lieu of contingents. The ab-
sence of a martial tradition encompassed even the Hohenzollern duchies
126 An estimated 60,000 French ofﬁcers were killed or wounded between 1805 and 1815. Muir, Tactics,
   p. 189.
127 Karl Schehl, Mit der großen Armee 1812 von Krefeld nach Moskau. Erlebnisse des niederrheinischen
    Veteranen Karl Schehl, Krefeld (Düsseldorf, 1912), pp. 54, 126. In addition, a small number of letters
    of Rhinelanders serving in Napoleon’s forces survive in HASK, Bestand 256, 6225.
128 For the Rhenish veterans’ societies, see Walther Klein, Der Napoleonkult in der Pfalz (Munich and
    Berlin, 1934).
