186                                  From Reich to State
had misled citizens into believing that the mobilisation was illegal because
it had not been authorised by an imperial decree.
   Keppler subsequently inspected the affected areas, as local reports re-
mained vague, and ordered further arrests in October and November.104
An infuriated Napoleon ordered Réal to investigate the disturbances. He
was especially interested in the conduct of local ofﬁcials and clergymen
during the disturbances. Both Keppler and the sub-prefects reported that
priests were not in a position to oppose their parishioners on whom they
were ﬁnancially dependent. As for local ofﬁcials, only two distinguished
themselves, including one who completed the draft barricaded inside a
church brandishing two pistols against the insurgents. Overall, mayors
and JPs had not dared resist the insurgents, Keppler reported. The prefect
nonetheless opposed draconian retribution as unnecessarily provocative.105
   Napoleon ignored the advice and established (on 5 December) a spe-
cial military commission under General Henry, commander of the impe-
rial headquarters guard, to conduct an investigation. The preamble to the
decree reﬂected Napoleon’s fury at the ‘many communes of the Sarre . . .
communes [that] uniquely amongst those of our vast empire have been agi-
tated by evil doers who have compromised public tranquillity and therefore
given hope to our external enemies . . .’106 Investigation revealed that sev-
eral mayors from the canton of Daun had a hand in the disturbances.
These were arrested and interrogated by the president of the tribunal of
ﬁrst instance in Prüm, who rejected the accusations and ordered the may-
ors’ release. It then emerged that most of the suspects were linked to the
president of the tribunal himself, and that several judges and policemen in
his pay were assisting in a cover up.107 Further investigation ordered by the
local sub-prefect concluded that the ringleaders of the original rebellion –
who had circulated pieces condemning the mobilisation of the National
Guard and advising young men to resist – had been protected by the local
authorities. The president, together with other judges and ofﬁcials were
arrested, and interrogated by one of Henry’s subordinates. The sub-prefect
informed Keppler that the tribunal in Prüm had always shown hostility to
the government in its judgements.108
   Surprisingly, Napoleon did not act on these allegations. No ofﬁcials were
amongst the 300 individuals arrested. Of those arrested, ﬁfty-seven were

104 Prefecture (Sarre) to Réal, 9 October 1809, LHAK Bestand 276, 1883.
105 Keppler to Réal, 16 November 1809, ibid.    106 Ibid .
107 Prudhomme (sub-prefect of Prüm) to Keppler, 22 December 1809, ibid.
108 Gerhards (prefectoral councillor and acting prefect in Trier during Keppler’s tour of the troubled
   areas) to Réal, December 1809, ibid.
