                       The Rhineland and the Continental System                                          195
the ﬁrst buyers. It seems that the most proliﬁc purchasers of secularised
properties in the Lower Rhine were members of the well-established urban
elites who sat upon generations of accumulated capital. They enjoyed an
additional advantage in that auctions occurred in the departmental capitals
and not in the countryside. Nonetheless, wealthier farmers also purchased
neighbouring plots, shoved off tenants and rounded out their holdings.
The proportion of land farmed by owner-occupiers relative to tenants in-
creased. This did not amount to a social revolution, but rather reinforced
existing socio-economic conditions. Possibly the most important conse-
quence of the sale of the biens nationaux was that it further blurred the
distinction between town and country. Urban purchasers of secularised
lots now possessed a vested interest in the countryside, something that
accounts for their support for the elimination of legal and administrative
distinctions between rural and urban communes under the Napoleonic sys-
tem. Prussian attempts to reintroduce such distinctions after 1815 aroused
widespread opposition. A slightly different though broadly comparable
pattern emerged in the Middle Rhine region south of Bonn. Here, where
smaller farming units (under 15 hectares) accounted for two-thirds of the
total cultivated area, secularisation tended to reinforce established patterns
of land-ownership rather than beneﬁt the urban elite. In the Palatinate,
for example, only one-ﬁfth of purchasers of national property came from
outside the region, and half originated from the area in which the property
was located. Whilst it might be thought that secularisation diverted capital
away from potentially more fruitful sectors such as trade and industry, it
should be remembered that land represented security on which to take out
future loans for investment elsewhere. So, on balance, it indirectly assisted
developments in the non-agricultural sector.4
   As for the privatisation of common lands, the French government proved
more circumspect. Indeed, in 1798 the government passed a law forbidding
indebted Rhenish communes from selling their common lands without
higher authority. This policy was only reversed in the ﬁnal desperate months
of French rule in 1813, when Napoleon in effect conﬁscated and sold all com-
munal holdings to ﬁnance the war. A related area, namely forestry policy,
experienced more dramatic change. Not surprisingly, the Rhineland’s forests

4 Gabriele Clemens, Immobilienhändler und Spekulanten: die sozial- und wirtschaftsgeschichtliche Bedeu-
  tung der Grosskäufer bei den Nationalgüterversteigerungen in den rheinischen Departements (1803–1813)
  (Boppard am Rhein, 1995), passim. For secularisation in the Palatinate, Roger Dufraisse, ‘L’Inﬂuence
  de la domination française sur l’économie du Palatinat’, in idem, L’Allemagne à l’époque napoléonienne.
  Questions d’histoire politique, économique et sociale (Bonn and Berlin, 1992), pp. 141–3. For the Lower
  Rhine, Dufraisse, ‘Rhin inférieur’, pp. 142–4, 148–52, 154.
