                               chap t e r 7

       The Rhineland and the Continental System




The Rhineland’s military contribution to Napoleon’s war effort, though
impressive, made up but a small fraction of the total combined effort of
the Grande Empire. The region’s place within the so-called Continental
System, the economic component of Napoleon’s struggle for hegemony,
was in contrast central. First, the region was one of the most industri-
alised within the French Empire. It thus made an important contribution
to Napoleon’s attempts to establish autarchy within the Empire’s frontiers
and French economic dominance beyond them. Second, the Rhineland’s
geographical location placed it on the frontline in the war against smug-
gling, which posed the greatest threat against the System. However, be-
fore examining this, it is necessary to look at the Rhenish economy more
generally. Despite the dramatic expansion of manufacturing in parts of
the Lower Rhine in the late eighteenth century, agriculture remained
the most important sector within the region as a whole. Here, French
rule brought three important developments: the abolition of ‘feudalism’
(26 March 1798), the sale of secularised lands and ‘privatisation’ of common
rights.
   The abolition of ‘feudalism’ in the Rhineland was less favourable to the
peasantry than in France proper, but more generous than elsewhere in
German-speaking Europe. The French abolished tithes, the corvée, noble
administrative and judicial privileges, as well as exclusive hunting and ﬁsh-
ing rights. They did this without requiring the payment of compensa-
tion to landlords. In addition, they granted peasants enjoying hereditary
tenure full property rights over their land. However, they required that
peasants compensate their landlords for dues deﬁned as ‘commercial’ at
the rate of twenty times (twenty-ﬁve times if paid in kind) their annual
value. The government, as the greatest landowner, had a vested interest
in deﬁning ‘commercial’ as broadly as possible and thereby maximising
the compensation payments ﬂowing into the treasury. The result was a

                                     193
