196                                     From Reich to State
suffered terribly from over-exploitation during the 1790s. This was caused
not only by the French army, but also by Rhenish communities that ex-
ploited the upheaval to reassert ‘ancient rights’. The Napoleonic regime
ﬁnally brought order to forestry administration through the establishment
in 1801 of the Administration des Eaux et Fôrets and along with it the strict
French forestry code that essentially dated back to Colbert. This placed se-
vere restrictions on common usages. Less positively, the Napoleonic admin-
istration failed to undertake any grand replantings of forests to make good
earlier deprivations. The lack of access to cheap wood subsequently became
an increasingly serious social issue, as will be discussed in chapter 9.
   Nonetheless, overall Rhenish agriculture recovered during the Napo-
leonic period. Encouragement of enterprise, especially agriculture, was
one area where individual prefects could demonstrate initiative. Lezay-
Marnesia in particular distinguished himself in encouragement of agri-
cultural improvement.5 Amongst various government initiatives that suc-
ceeded in boosting the sector was the introduction of clover in the highlands
of the Eifel and Hunsrück, a measure that encouraged animal husbandry in
these poor areas. Previously, such innovations had been hindered by legal
restrictions and patterns of property ownership. Now, the replacement of
the variable tithe with a ﬁxed property tax encouraged productivity im-
provements. Slowly, the area under cultivation increased. In Speyer district
(Mont-Tonnerre), for example, the increase was from 58 per cent of the
surface area in 1800 to 67 per cent in 1813. The wider implementation
of innovations initiated in the eighteenth century – new crops, stall feed-
ing, mineral fertilisation – boosted productivity. The only area, apart from
forestry, that took longer to recover was livestock farming. This too suf-
fered immensely in the 1790s and, despite the ban on livestock exports
introduced in 1800, never fully regained its pre-1792 levels even by the end
of Napoleonic rule. Viticulture, in contrast, recovered quickly and even
expanded in the area of cultivation. Wine remained an important export
commodity from the region, with Mont-Tonnerre alone accounting for
120,000 hectolitres in an average year.6
   More dramatic was the spread of other commercial crops, including
madder, oil-seed rape and tobacco. Napoleon particularly encouraged crops
that substituted for colonial produce. In September 1811, his government
reserved vast tracts of land throughout the Empire for sugar beet produc-
tion, including 1,000 hectares in the Rhin-et-Moselle department, 6,000
5 Egon Graf von Westerholt, Lezay Marnesia. Sohn der Aufklärung und Präfekt Napoleons (1769–1814)
  (Meisenheim am Glan, 1958), passim.
6 Dufraisse, ‘Palatinat’, pp. 105–92.
