198                                     From Reich to State
for economic supremacy. Under Napoleon this struggle, initiated by the
Directory, blossomed into the ‘Continental System’. Ofﬁcially instituted
with the Berlin and Milan decrees (1806–7), the ‘System’ aimed at keeping
the British out and establishing the economic supremacy of France at the
expense of other Continental states. These the System treated as economic
colonies whose function was to supply France with cheap raw materials
and a captive market for French manufactures. To this end, the French ban
on imported manufactured goods extended to all states and not just the
British.10
   Assessment of the Continental System’s impact divides economic histo-
rians, though the Rhineland is generally held up as the one region which
beneﬁted most.11 Certainly, the System could draw upon a modicum of sup-
port from some Rhinelanders, who believed Britain had grown fat on the
stolen wealth of the Continent.12 However, sectors dependent upon inter-
national commerce suffered from both the Continental System, the British
blockade and the various wars in Germany. These collectively depressed
trade along (though not across) the Rhine. This is revealed in statistics

10 For French economic policy, see Geoffrey Ellis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade: the Case of Alsace
  (Oxford, 1981), pp. 104–48.
11 A mass of literature has been lavished on the Continental Blockade and Continental System. Inter-
   pretations have been bound up with the debate between proponents of free trade and protectionists.
   Eli F. Heckscher, The Continental System. An Economic Interpretation (Oxford, 1922), remains a classic
   critique of the Blockade from the perspective of the former. The counter argument, that moderate
   protection was a precondition for industrial development, is posed (amongst others) in François
   Crouzet, ‘Wars, Blockade, and Economic Change in Europe, 1792–1815’, Journal of Economic History
   24 (1964), pp. 567–88. With respect to Germany and French departments bordering Germany, it
   makes sense to distinguish between the Blockade (which eliminated British competition) and the
   System (which favoured French manufactures). Such is the approach of Marcel Dunan, Napoléon
   et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts du royaume de Bavière 1806–1810 (Paris, 1942), and
   also Ellis, Continental Blockade, studies which illustrate the short-term beneﬁts that accrued to Con-
   tinental manufacturers through the elimination of British competition, but which also reveal the
   additional boost given to French manufacturers at the expense of their Continental rivals. Taken
   together, according to Crouzet and Ellis, the System and Blockade had the effect of shifting the
   economic centre of gravity in Continental Europe away from the Atlantic seaboard and towards the
   Rhine. Amongst those who stress the beneﬁts of these developments to the Rhineland in detail is
   Herbert Kisch, in ‘The Impact of the French Revolution on the Lower Rhine Textile Districts. Some
   Comments on Economic Development and Social Change’, Economic History Review 2nd series, 15
   (1962–3), pp. 304–27. Less positive in their assessment of the Napoleonic contribution are F. Schulte,
   Die Entwicklung der gewerblichen Wirtschaft in Rheinland-Westfalen im 18. Jahrhundert (Cologne,
   1959), and Max Barkhausen, ‘Government Control and Free Enterprise in Western Germany and
   the Low Countries in the Eighteenth Century’, in Peter Earle (ed.), Essays in European Economic
   History 1500–1800 (Oxford, 1974), pp. 212–73, both of which give due consideration to economic
   development achieved in the pre-French period. More recently, Koltes, Rheinland, reafﬁrms the
   critique that much of the growth achieved during French rule proved ephemeral and withered after
   1815. This view in itself, however, does not contradict Kisch or Jeffry M. Diefendorf, Businessmen
   and Politics in the Rhineland, 1789–1834 (Princeton, 1980) in their positive assessment of the wider
   contribution made by French institutions.
12 Heckscher, Continental System, p. 53.
