                       The Rhineland and the Continental System                                      203
ﬁnancial markets resulted in cash shortages throughout the French period.
Smaller denominations, required to pay workers, were especially scarce so
that wages were often paid in kind or else in larger denominations to groups
of employees who were then forced to exchange them into smaller units
at disadvantageous rates. Furthermore, a range of currencies – German,
pre-revolutionary French, Dutch – remained in circulation, and would do
so until the 1860s. These ﬂuctuated against each other, with real exchange
rates varying from locality to locality, depending upon trade ﬂows and ir-
respective of ofﬁcial rates. The franc was simply one of many currencies,
though after 1808 it became the only one in which taxes could be paid.24
   Coins were not only of economic importance, but provided a visible
sign of the state’s presence. The same was true of infrastructure projects.
Napoleon embarked upon an ambitious road construction programme
throughout France. Roads fell into several categories: ‘classiﬁed’ roads –
ﬁrst- and second-class imperial routes and third-class departmental roads –
funded from national and departmental funds, and non-classiﬁed routes
funded locally. A decree even laid down the height of poplars to line each cat-
egory and another speciﬁed that prefects and sub-prefects make annual and
quarterly inspections of roads within their jurisdictions. Amongst the more
important imperial routes were the Paris–Mainz and Metz–Mannheim con-
nections, completed and managed, like the entire network, by the famed
Administration des ponts et chaussées. This body was also responsible for
bridges, canals and rivers as well as the introduction of new weights and
measures. At the local level, prefects in effect reimposed the old corvée (com-
pulsory labour service) on municipalities in order to maintain local roads.
Apart from roads, the most spectacular projects included the 12 million-
franc 53 kilometre-long Meuse–Rhine canal started in 1808 but abandoned
following the annexation of the Netherlands, and a new all-weather harbour
for Cologne to replace one destroyed in 1784.25 Of course, superb infra-
structure is no guarantor of economic vitality: as Arthur Young observed
during his visit before the Revolution, France might have superb roads,
but they were devoid of commercial trafﬁc.26 If anything, they represented
a misallocation of scarce resources. However, it can be conceded that in
the long term, the absence of decent infrastructure might hinder further
development.27
   Apart from infrastructure, the French established institutions to support
trade and industry. In the 1790s, Rhenish businessmen came to prominence
24 Tilly, Financial Institutions, pp. 19–29.   25 Ladoucette, Voyage, pp. 82–4.
26 Arthur Young, Travels in France during the Years 1787, 1788 and 1789 (edited with an introduction by
   Jeffry Kaplow, Gloucester, Mass., 1976), p. 13.
27 Sidney Pollard, Peaceful Conquest. The Industrialization of Europe 1760–1970 (Oxford, 1981), pp. 125ff.
