200                                    From Reich to State
   Manufacturers reliant upon imported raw materials suffered. The dis-
ruption of supplies of raw material ﬁgured prominently in petitions from
businessmen for a reduction or elimination of customs duties. The most
important such material was raw cotton. Initially, this attracted only a
modest duty, but from February 1806 Paris increased this to 60 francs per
two-hundredweight, and from February 1810 to 120 francs. The govern-
ment imposed still greater restrictions on spun cotton, which it banned
outright from December 1809. Such restrictions placed Rhenish industry
at a disadvantage to its counterparts in Germany, where the Blockade was
less strenuously enforced and raw materials correspondingly cheaper. For
example, in 1812 raw Louisiana cotton cost 14 francs per kilogram on the
left bank, but only 6 francs per kilogram on the right bank of the Rhine.
The tobacco industry, which had represented the largest industrial sector in
Cologne measured by capital invested and value of output, suffered from the
ban on manufactured tobacco and tobacco leaves emanating from British
sources, and the restriction on the importation of leaves from elsewhere to
designated entry points against payment of an ever-increasing duty. Due to
this, the industry was already in decay before the coup de grâce was delivered
with the introduction of a state monopoly in December 1810.15
   The French blockade was never watertight. The British managed to mit-
igate its effects through their seizure of Heligoland in 1807, which became
a huge warehouse for English manufactures destined for Germany. Only
after July 1810, with the French annexation of Holland and the Hanseatic
cities, and the Fontainebleau decree (18 October 1810), did the blockade
become effective, and then only brieﬂy. Smuggling and fraud, which ap-
peared in the Rhineland with the extension of the tariff barrier, undermined
the Continental System.16 Court records and ofﬁcial reports suggest that
it occurred on a grand scale, with at least 5,000 smugglers active between
Mainz and Antwerp. The public’s acceptance of smuggling is revealed by
the involvement of a whole cross-section of society, from wealthy merchants
and bankers to humble boaters, porters and peasants, who might earn in
one night’s smuggling the equivalent of a week’s wages. Even lawyers and
the future rector of the academy of Mainz were caught smuggling. Mayors
and tavern owners often played a key role: whilst the former provided
15 Roger Dufraisse, ‘La Contrebande dans les départements réunis de la rive gauche du Rhin à l’époque
  napoléonienne’, Francia 1 (1973), pp. 511, 514.
16 French law distinguished between fraud and smuggling. The former was tried by ‘correctional’ courts
  and carried a maximum sentence of six months’ imprisonment followed by ﬁve years’ special police
  surveillance plus a ﬁne equivalent to triple the value of the property seized; the latter came under
  the purview of the criminal courts. These imposed long prison sentences with forced labour and
  branding, or, in extreme cases, capital punishment.
