                 The Rhineland and the Continental System                  209
extended beyond territorial consolidation into less tangible areas. Institu-
tional reforms, especially with respect to law, established greater uniformity,
simplicity and certainty. The abolition of the guilds removed a barrier to
innovation. Reforms further strengthened the entrepreneurial spirit in the
Rhineland. Wealth, including non-landed wealth, acquired an unparalleled
degree of institutionalised social prestige. It determined membership of ju-
ries, electoral colleges, consultative councils, honour guards, and ‘society’.
Never had the socio-political as well as economic rewards of successful
entrepreneurial activity been greater.

The Rhineland was economically stronger at the end of the Napoleonic
period than at the beginning. That said, the beginning of Napoleonic rule
came at a low point in the region’s economic fortunes, following ﬁve years
of ruthless exploitation. A far harder question is the counterfactual: would
the Rhineland have been better off had the French Revolution, the Revo-
lutionary Wars and the Napoleonic episode never happened, and instead
the region continued on the steady upward trajectory sustained for most
of the eighteenth century? Certainly, agricultural improvement would have
continued, with the introduction of new crops and methods. More land
would have been brought under cultivation, and the sector become in-
creasingly commercialised. The secularisation of ecclesiastical lands would
not have taken place. However, despite the vast amount of land concerned,
the overall effects of secularisation appear to have been marginal, simply
reinforcing existing structures and trends. As for trade and industry, the
absence of economic warfare with Britain and the ever-growing ﬂood of
cheap textiles from that country would no doubt have stiﬂed the kind of
hothouse developments that characterised the Napoleonic years. Instead,
only industries that could respond to competition with new techniques
and technologies would have survived. Hence, the likelihood of faster tech-
nology transfer within a smaller but more efﬁcient sector. Of course, the
absence of the Continental Blockade would also have meant the absence of
smuggling, a business that accounted for some very large fortunes that were
subsequently invested in other sectors. Smuggling arguably encouraged the
concentration of trade in a few hands whilst placing smaller commercial
and industrial operations at a disadvantage. The absence of smuggling in
favour of free, legal trade might have been disadvantageous to a wealthy
few, but would have beneﬁted a larger number of small and medium-sized
enterprises. Some of the great infrastructure projects planned and carried
through under Napoleon’s auspices, such as the long-distance roads and
all-weather port in Cologne, would have been beyond the small states into
