                     The Rhineland and the Continental System                               207
   Economic theory tends to support the Prussians in their appraisal of
the French economic legacy in the Rhineland, a legacy determined above
all by Napoleon’s Continental System. In the short term, inclusion within
the protected French market brought beneﬁts. This was recognised by
those excluded such as the manufacturers of Berg who, in 1811, petitioned
Napoleon for annexation to France to stave off ruin.39 However, access to a
large market in itself cannot guarantee industrial growth. Such an assump-
tion erroneously implies that economies of scale exist only at the level of the
entire economy, not the individual ﬁrm, and that 100 manufactories serving
50 millions are inevitably more efﬁcient than four serving 2 millions. Nor
does inclusion within a large market appear crucial for capital investment
when it is remembered that in Britain capital was generally invested locally,
not nationally, during the earliest phases of industrialisation. More funda-
mentally, the same critique might be applied to the Continental System as
has recently been applied to the Prussian Zollverein, namely that it did not
create but divert trade. It simply substituted trade with areas beyond the
customs area for trade within the area. As a result, comparative advantages
were no longer fully exploited and resources misallocated.40 In any case, of
greater signiﬁcance than the overall extent of markets is their stability. Only
this allows for sustained specialisation which lies at the heart of modern
economic development. And here, Napoleon’s Continental System scored
badly.41
   Specialisation beneﬁts from new technology. Arguably, the Continental
System discouraged this by hindering ‘technology transfer’ from the leading
manufacturing power, Britain. Such transfer involved far more than smug-
gling out blue-prints or disassembled machines, but required a painstaking
process of dispersal, diffusion and assimilation, and this occurred only with
economic incentives. These incentives could only be supplied by exposure
to British competition, something that ended with the Continental System.
This provided short-term protection, but removed a stimulus for techno-
logical advance; and, the further the Continent fell behind, the greater the
costs of catching up. These conclusions hold true, despite such dramatic
examples of technology transfer as the tanner Lieven Bauwens’s smuggling
of a spinning mule out of Britain in 1798 and the creation, based on this,
39 Berg’s annexation was opposed by Cologne’s Chamber of Commerce, which demonstrated Schaden-
   freude at Berg’s plight and welcomed the prospect of the ‘return’ of manufacturers from the
   grand duchy ‘to their mother country’, thereby reversing the emigration of the eighteenth cen-
   tury. Heckscher, Continental System, p. 314.
40 Hans-Joachim Voth, ‘The Prussian Zollverein and the Bid for Economic Superiority’, in Philip
   G. Dwyer (ed.), Modern Prussian History 1830–1947 (Harlow, 2001), pp. 109–25.
41 Mokyr, Industrialization, pp. 208–15. Pollard, Conquest, pp. 36–7, 118.
