                             The end of the French Rhineland                                      215
in December 1814. Not that the Prussians were alone in not wanting the
Rhineland, with its vulnerable location next to France. Other German
powers, notably Austria and Bavaria, also schemed to consolidate their
own position through acquiring conterminous territories that were easier
to defend and to integrate with their existing states. Amongst the many
ideas ﬂoated during 1814 was Austrian annexation of Alsace-Lorraine (sug-
gested by the Russians, who wanted Galicia in return), a partition of the
Rhineland between Prussia and Austria (proposed by the Prussian chancel-
lor, Hardenberg, in August 1814), and the formation of a Rhenish state to
compensate King Frederick Augustus for the cession of Saxony to Prussia
(put forward by Hardenberg in December 1814). Only on 11 February 1815
were the essentials of the ﬁnal settlement agreed, with Prussia receiving two-
ﬁfths of Saxony and the left bank of the Rhine north of the Moselle.6 This
represented a British triumph. For most Rhinelanders the future was set-
tled: on 5 April 1815 King Frederick William III reluctantly took possession
of his new western territories.
   The Rhineland’s future south of the Moselle remained unresolved and a
matter of dispute between Bavaria and Austria. Vienna agreed in principle
in the Treaty of Ried (October 1813) that Bavaria should receive compensa-
tion in exchange for ceding Salzburg to Austria. Where this compensation
lay remained undetermined. Conﬂict also centred on Mainz, which the
Bavarians claimed, but the Prussians refused to see under a traditional
French ally. As no agreement was reached in time for the First Treaty of
Paris, the Allies decided that the southern Rhineland (except Mainz) be pro-
visionally administered jointly by the Austrians and Bavarians. Mainz was
occupied by an Austro-Prussian garrison. Bavaria wished to acquire areas
conterminous to itself, and the Rhineland lay too far to the west, separated
from the core by Baden, Württemberg and Hessen-Darmstadt, states with
similarly ambitious territorial appetites. Instead, Munich wished to keep
Salzburg, which it had taken from Austria in 1809. Metternich, himself a
Rhinelander, was happy to sacriﬁce Salzburg in return for the Rhineland-
Palatinate, but was overruled by the army leadership, which maintained
the area was militarily indefensible against the French.7 To add to the
uncertainty, the Prussian zone’s extension to the south of the Moselle in
May 1815 led to renewed conﬂict over the demarcation-line separating this
area from the Austro-Bavarian area. Final agreement between Munich and
6 Harold Nicolson, The Congress of Vienna: a Study in Allied Unity 1812–22 (London, 1989 edn), pp. 69,
  124, 175, 177–80.
7 Friedrich Schmitt, Die provisorische Verwaltung des Gebietes zwischen Rhein, Mosel und französischer
  Grenze durch Österreich und Bayern in den Jahren 1814–1816 (Meisenheim, 1962), p. 25.
