                             The end of the French Rhineland                                     225
On 12 January 1814 the Allies set up a provisional civilian authority
in the liberated Rhineland subordinate to the Inter-Allied Central Ad-
ministration. This body was headed by Prussia’s former ﬁrst minister, Karl
Freiherr vom Stein, and was responsible for German territories ‘vacated’
by their sovereigns and whose future would be determined at the peace
settlement. The Central Administration’s remit was subsequently extended
to occupied French departments. Its supreme executive organ, though es-
tablished by the Allied powers, was not subordinate to any one of them
individually. Composed of Austrian, Prussian and Russian ofﬁcials, the
blandly named Central Administration developed into a power base to
further Stein’s political agenda of providing Germany with robust, federal
institutions, at the expense of the states of the Confederation of the Rhine.
In the words of Stein’s secretary, the nationalist Ernst Moritz Arndt, it
provided the tool to reawaken the Volk and the Reich after 500 years of
sleep.61 The Central Administration quickly developed as a focal point for
those who hoped that Napoleon’s defeat had cleared the ground for radical
political reform. Metternich suspected that Stein had placed himself at the
head of the ‘revolutionary’ party in Germany and subsequently blamed the
Central Administration’s ‘direct inﬂuence’ for the revolutionary upsurge in
later years. Signiﬁcantly, Metternich’s pre-emption of the Central Adminis-
tration in most of Germany through the conclusion of separate agreements
with the princes proved impossible in the ‘vacated’ territory to the west of
the Rhine.62
   The Allies grouped the Rhenish departments into two general-
governments subordinate to Stein: the Lower Rhine, administered from
Aachen by the Prussian privy-councillor Johann August Sack, and the
Middle Rhine, under Justus Gruner, based in Trier. The Middle Rhine
included the Rhin-et-Moselle, Sarre and Mont-Tonnerre, and the Lower
Rhine the Roër together with the Belgian departments of Ourthe and Meuse
Inférieure.63 This arrangement continued until 31 May 1814, when the Allies
dissolved the Central Administration and responsibility for the Rhineland
devolved to the individual powers pending the ﬁnal settlement. Prussia took
over the region between the Maas, Rhine and Mosel, which became the
general government of the Lower and Middle Rhine, and the Austrians
and Bavarians established a joint commission (k. k. österreichische und
61 Peter Graf von Kielmansegg, Stein und die Zentralverwaltung 1813/14 (Stuttgart, 1964), p. 60.
62 Ibid ., pp. 19–25, 60.
63 Johann Daniel Ferdinand Neigebaur, Statistik der preußischen Rhein = provinzen in den drei Perioden
   ihrer Verwaltung: 1) Durch das General =Gouvernment vom Niederrheine; 2) Durch jenes vom Nieder =
   und Mittelrheine; 3) Nach ihrer jetzigen Begränzung und wirklichen Vereinigung mit den Preußischen
   Staate. Aus ofﬁziellen Quellen. Von einem preußischen Staatsbeamten (Cologne, 1817), pp. 2ff.
