228                                   From Reich to State
native Rhinelanders selected ‘with special reference to [their] attitude to the
present French regime’, to quote the ofﬁcial guidelines. The secret police
in particular must include only ‘Deutschgesinnten’ (men with a ‘German
attitude’), though gendarmes could ‘on the whole be kept on, whilst higher
ofﬁcials must ﬁrst be used and then discarded’.72 Native sub-prefects were
retained on condition they swore an oath of loyalty to the Allies, and mayors
generally kept in place. In practice, the Allied administration encountered
difﬁculties in ﬁnding notables willing to assume public responsibilities.
With memories of the 1790s still fresh, few cherished the prospect of shoul-
dering ofﬁcial burdens in turbulent times.73
   Ofﬁcially encouraged nationalist rhetoric undermined the credibility of
the administration inherited from Napoleon. In Cologne, the mayor –
who was forced by popular pressure not to wear the Légion d’Honneur –
experienced a co-ordinated campaign of denunciation which employed
German nationalist rhetoric in the mistaken hope that this would appeal
to the new authorities.74 When Tsar Alexander I visited Cologne in July
1814, elements controlling the civic guard humiliated and marginalised the
mayor during the ofﬁcial celebrations, whilst posters appeared throughout
the city denouncing him for ‘consistently [showing] himself a friend and
supporter of the hereditary enemy of Germans and of all that is sacred’,
and calling on ‘the old courage and strength of the people of Cologne’ to
protect the ancient liberties of the Imperial City by petitioning ‘the great
Reichstag in Vienna’. Whilst the Allies attempted to persuade Cologne’s
mayor to resign, they stubbornly avoided the appearance of giving in to
public pressure.75
   More controversial was the position of native Frenchmen, whose dis-
missal from public ofﬁce Stein ordered. Only this, he argued, would preserve
‘the unique German common spirit’ from ‘corrupting, paralysing, interfer-
ence’, whilst the new Bourbon government’s expulsion of ‘new Frenchmen’
from ofﬁce provided further justiﬁcation.76 Gruner refused to implement
Stein’s order, arguing that Frenchmen settled in the Rhineland should be
treated like Germans so long as they were not Bonapartists. Stein’s order

72 Ibid ., pp. 446–9.
73 The Allies experienced difﬁculty in ﬁnding Rhinelanders willing to shoulder public responsibility
   even in the larger towns and cities, including Krefeld, Monschau and Aachen. Bölling to Sack,
   28 October 1814, 4 February 1815, HStAD, Gen. Gouv. Nieder- und Mittel Rhein, 27.
74 Ladoucette to Montalivet, AN, F1c III Roër 4, no. 326. Ladoucette reported that Wittgenstein wished
   to retire but was prevented from doing so by the Allied authorities. See also HASK, Bestand 890,
   387, nos. 1–4, 7–8.
75 HASK, Bestand 890, 387, nos. 9–10, 17–20, 25–6, 29–30, 37–8, 41–2.
76 Stein, Briefe, 4, p. 771.
