                             The end of the French Rhineland                                      231
in Aachen because it contained too much German in an area that was
French. Sack complained to Gneisenau, accusing the Swedes of enrich-
ing themselves, not ﬁghting Napoleon. Gneisenau replied that Prussian
headquarters knew of Bernadotte’s ‘treachery’, that they had even more
evidence of it than he, but that nobody had the courage to confront him
with his ‘trickery’. Sack, Gneisenau urged, should make public Bernadotte’s
outrages to turn public opinion against him and so further the ‘good
cause’.87
   Allied disunity confused Rhinelanders over their future status and con-
ﬁrmed the lack of dynastic bonds attaching them to the rest of Germany.
Indeed, a secret article of the First Treaty of Paris implied that most of
the region would aggrandise Holland, not some German state. As German
nationalists never tired of pointing out, the threat from France remained
omnipresent, even under Louis XVIII: ‘In those [Bourbon] lillies,’ Görres
wrote, ‘with which it decorates itself, remain hidden the old [Bonaparte]
bees and wasps, still on the lookout for honey.’88 Rumours abounded.
In April 1814, Cologne’s mayor listed those circulating in the city. Many
predicted – and feared – Prussian rule, whilst others spoke of the Powers
uniting the four departments into a single ‘Kingdom of Austrasia’, ruled
over by the Austrian Archduke Ferdinand.89 The possibility of Habsburg
rule was lent greater credence by the Austrians regaining recruiting rights
in the region.90 The press and pamphlets stimulated public speculation of
an imminent restoration of French rule in the form of hordes of customs
ofﬁcials.91 Given the uncertainty, one can understand the exasperation of
one Rhinelander, who despaired that ‘only the gods know whether and
when our souls in this land shall be badenised, darmstadtised, prussianised
or austrianised’.92
   Such uncertainty was unwelcome to Gruner and Sack, who supported
the expulsion of the French and stronger German federal structures

87 Sack to Gneisenau, 17 March 1814, and Gneisenau’s reply of 23 April. Steffens, Briefwechsel, part 2,
   pp. 77; Kielmansegg, Stein, p. 119.
88 Rheinischer Merkur, 19 May 1814.
89 Wittgenstein to Fritz von Coels (Wittgenstein’s stepson), 24 April 1814, HASK, Bestand 1123, Kas-
   tennr. 22, dossier ‘Johann Jakob von Wittgenstein (Briefe); Abschriften aus dem Archiv v. Coels-
   Aachen, 1814’.
90 The Austrian Baron von Luninck recruited Rhinelanders for the Legion des Nieder-Rheins, and Count
   Bentheim for the Austro-German Legion. For the former see the printed broad-sheet dated 14 April
   1814 in StAA, Bestand RAII (Allgemeine Akten), 1231, no. 3. For the latter, see Stein’s letters to
   Gruner and Sack of 10 March 1814. Stein, Briefe, 4, p. 621.
91 Rheinische Merkur, 27 April 1814.
92 ‘Übrigens, wissen die Götter, wenn und wann unsre Seelen hier zu Lande gebadet, gedarmt, gepreußt
   oder geösterreichert werden.’ Schmitt, Verwaltung, p. 24 n. 58.
