238                                 From Reich to State
exclusion from lucrative markets and British competition following the
Continental System’s collapse.

Nationalist efforts to instil a sense of patriotism in Rhinelanders were
tested sooner than anyone would have predicted. On 26 February 1815,
Napoleon escaped from Elba where he had been exiled following his ﬁrst
abdication. Within a month he was in Paris. The news of his escape broke
in Vienna on the morning of 7 March. The assembled Allied monarchs
and ministers reacted decisively: within a week they issued a public dec-
laration indicting ‘Napoleon Bonaparte’ as an outlaw, by which time in-
structions had been sent to the armies placing them on alert. On 25 March,
Austria, Britain, Prussia and Russia each pledged 150,000 troops to defend
the European settlement. Napoleon decided to strike before his opponents
concentrated their forces. In mid-June he advanced into Belgium at the head
of 120,000 men. The only troops opposing him were a motley force under
Wellington’s and Blücher’s army, which had moved into eastern Belgium
in order to cover the British. At this critical point Bavarian propaganda
scored its ﬁrst success. The previous December had witnessed the culmina-
tion of the Poland-Saxony crisis. Bavaria opposed Prussian aggrandisement
at the expense of a fellow medium-sized former member of the Confed-
eration of the Rhine. As part of its campaign, the Bavarian authorities in
the Rhineland sponsored the publication of an anti-Prussian piece enti-
tled Sachsen und Preußen, which they then circulated amongst the sizeable
Saxon contingents stationed near Koblenz which had been forcibly assim-
ilated into the Prussian army. The piece called on the Saxons to ﬁght only
under their lawful king. This subversion bore fruit in Belgium in April and
May, when the Saxon units subordinate to Blücher’s command mutinied.
Order was only restored after severe repression.124
   Of greater concern to Sack in Aachen, which lay within walking dis-
tance of the Belgian frontier, was the presence of an estimated 20,000
Rhenish veterans of the Napoleonic army. Almost immediately after his
return, Napoleon ordered the distribution of pamphlets in Belgium and
the Rhineland calling on veterans to return to the eagles.125 Sack, fearing
for the veterans’ loyalty – their ‘continued devotion to Napoleon was only
too well known’ – took decisive measures to neutralise the threat. On 24
March – four days after Napoleon’s arrival in Paris – he decreed that all
veterans must join the Prussian forces within twenty-four hours, thereby

124 Schmitt, Verwaltung, pp. 61–2, 141. Piereth, Bayerns Pressepolitik, pp. 112–13.
125 Napoleon to Marshal Davout, 10 April 1815, Napoleon, Correspondance, 28, pp. 99–100.
