                             The end of the French Rhineland                                         241
during the limited ‘de-Napoleonising’ exercise conducted under Stein’s
prompting. Individuals closely associated with Gruner and the German
patriotic movement, on the other hand, experienced great difﬁculty in
ﬁnding employment under the LAK. Overall, 84 per cent (136 out of 162)
of the ofﬁcials conﬁrmed in their posts by the Bavarians after they for-
mally annexed the Rhineland-Palatinate in 1816 had previously served the
French.135 The French legacy therefore lived on, with implications not only
for the Bavarian Rhineland-Palatinate and the Prussian Rheinprovinz, but
for Germany as a whole.

Napoleonic rule collapsed in 1813. Its unravelling exposed a lack of any deep-
seated popular commitment to French rule. Certainly, conscripts marched
off, taxes were paid and supplies provided, but only reluctantly and under
compulsion. There was no hint of enthusiasm or urgency in defence of the
Napoleonic regime. Rather, in the climate of uncertainty, social tensions
came to the fore. For many ordinary Rhinelanders, the collapse of legitimate
authority provided an opportunity to attack such age-old bogeys as the
forestry guard, tax-collector and customs man. These were often native
Frenchmen, which gave an opportunity subsequently to justify actions as
being patriotic. For its part, the Rhenish elite feared social upheaval, but not
to the extent of rallying around the crumbling Napoleonic regime. German
nationalism, though it loomed large amongst French fears, in reality played
hardly any role in the events of 1813 and 1814. Rhinelanders remained
wedded to sub-national identities. German nationalists such as Arndt, who
ﬂocked to the Rhine following its liberation, interpreted this lack of national
commitment as a sign of depravity resulting from a generation of alien
rule.
   The actual transition from French to Allied rule came relatively quickly
and proceeded surprisingly smoothly. That was in no small part due to
the professionalism and calibre of those serving within the Inter-Allied
Central Administration. This body was dominated by some leading lights
of the Prussian reform movement, notably Stein, Sack and Gruner. Signiﬁ-
cantly, none of these three were ‘old Prussians’, though they had long served
the Hohenzollerns. Instead, they originated from the west: from Nassau,
Cleves and Osnabrück respectively. They did not share the same emotional
attachment to the old Prussian values that could be found east of the Elbe.
Instead, they hoped to carry forward their reforms and extend them to
135 Heiner Haan, ‘Kontinuität und Diskontinuität in der pfälzischen Beamtenschaft im Übergang von
   der französischen zur bayerischen Herrschaft (1814–1818)’, Jahrbuch für westdeutsche Landesgeschichte
   2 (1976), 285–309.
