240                                   From Reich to State
is even more vital in the current critical situation threatening the city’.131 As
the One Hundred Days campaign reached it climax the following month,
Sack issued conﬁdential instructions to his subordinates on evacuation
procedures in case of an invasion.132
    Waterloo, followed by Napoleon’s second abdication on 22 June, re-
moved the threat and closed a two-year period of uncertainty. Rhinelanders
had witnessed dramatic events in that period. Large armies moved through
their region, their territorial status changed, and they found themselves
at the heart of a debate over Germany’s future. The Napoleonic order’s
destruction in 1814/15, like the Third Reich’s collapse, appeared to many
contemporaries to return the clock to Stunde Null. Germany might now
be reordered at will, and a new blue-print imposed upon an apparently
clean slate.133 In the brief interlude following the collapse of Napoleonic
censorship and the political clampdown instituted by the Karlsbad Decrees,
these alternatives were presented quite openly to a wider public. Within
the Rhineland itself, a set of almost fortuitous circumstances in the years
1813–15, starting with the collapse of the least popular and most authoritar-
ian elements of Napoleonic governance, followed by the arrival of Gruner
and Sack and their relative freedom of action, resulted in the appearance of
a new blue-print. It was based upon principles already well ingrained in the
region: participation in governance, a degree of representation and, above
all, the limitation of executive power by law. This settlement subsequently
proved difﬁcult to modify, as we shall see.
    Continuity rather than change distinguished life in the village and small
town in these turbulent years. Two-thirds of the sixty-seven mayors, for ex-
ample, in the former arrondissement of Cologne in 1816 had been inherited
from the French. Over a quarter had served for at least a decade.134 The de-
gree of continuity was even greater in the southern Rhineland, administered
by the Austro-Bavarian LAK after June 1814. The LAK favoured ofﬁcials
who had formerly served under the French not least because both the Aus-
trians and Bavarians were most concerned with the ﬁscal exploitation of
the Palatinate to ﬁll their own empty coffers. A disruptive personnel policy
would hinder this. Additionally, the Austrians and Bavarians were more
suspicious of Prussophiles than Napoleonic collaborators. The LAK re-
employed many ofﬁcials, including native Frenchmen, formerly removed
131 HASK, Bestand 890, 214, no. 53.         132 LHAK, Bestand 354, 354.
133 This sense of possibility is well brought out in Piereth, Pressepolitik.
134 This is extrapolated from the Annuaire du département de la Roër (Aachen 1809–13), the Kalender
   für den Kreis und die Stadt Köln auf das Schaltjahr nach der Geburt unseres Herrn Jesu Christi 1816
   (Cologne, 1816) and the Handbuch über den Königlich-Preussischen Hof und Staat für das Jahr 1818
   (Berlin, 1818).
