244                                   From Reich to State
the people’ through an ‘assembly of representatives of the land’, a vague
formulation that implied representation through estates. Nevertheless, the
edict raised Rhenish expectations.
    Prussia’s expansion occurred at a decisive moment in the struggle be-
tween reformers and conservatives. In Bavaria, in contrast, a broad con-
sensus emerged favourably disposed towards the French legacy in its new
western province, the Rhineland-Palatinate. Indeed, Montgelas’s govern-
ment wished to see Napoleonic institutions extended throughout Bavaria
as a whole.4 Bavaria underwent ‘state-building from the periphery’ whilst
Prussia experienced centre–periphery conﬂict. That reformers should dom-
inate Prussia’s western provinces whilst the political pendulum in Berlin
was swinging towards reaction was in part fortuitous, as we have seen.5
Their conservative opponents were led by interior minister Friedrich von
Schuckmann and police minister Wilhelm Ludwig von Wittgenstein, to-
gether with privy councillor Karl Albert von Kamptz. Kamptz remained
a bugbear amongst Rhenish liberals into the 1830s. The balance between
reformers and conservatives was held by state chancellor Karl August von
Hardenberg, the statesman next to Stein most associated with Prussia’s re-
generation. He was sympathetic to reformers in the Rhineland and favoured
aspects of the Napoleonic legacy, but was also sensitive to conservative ten-
dencies at court. Hardenberg, more than Stein, represented those ambi-
guities in the reform movement that caution against viewing the political
alignments in Prussia in terms of homogeneous blocs of ‘reformers’ and
‘conservatives’.6
    Following annexation, Berlin intended to appoint Sack governor of
Jülich-Cleves-Berg, and Friedrich zu Solms-Laubach governor of the Lower
Rhine. By late 1815, Sack’s position looked increasingly tenuous. His out-
spokenness against the ‘obscurantist’ ‘Hatzfeldt-Schuckmann-Wittgenstein
clique’ gained him enemies, as did his tolerance of Görres. In the Rheinischer
Merkur, Görres bluntly reminded Frederick William of his promise to grant
the Rhineland ‘an appropriate constitution’, whilst criticising various gov-
ernment policies and shortcomings. His portrayal of the Merkur as an arena
for the free expression of political opinion incensed Frederick William.
When Sack refused to suppress the newspaper, the King pressurised
4 Heiner Haan, ‘Die bayerische Personalpolitik in der Pfalz von 1816/18 bis 1849’, Jahrbuch für west-
  deutsche Landesgeschichte 3 (1977), pp. 351–94.
5 Graf Peter von Kielmansegg, Stein und die Zentralverwaltung 1813/14 (Stuttgart, 1964), pp. 23, 75,
  100, 111–12, 138, 140–1, 144.
6 For  the complexities of Hardenberg’s position, see Matthew Levinger’s article, ‘Hardenberg,
  Wittgenstein, and the Constitutional Question in Prussia 1815–22’, German History 8 (1990),
  pp. 257–77.
