                              The end of the French Rhineland                                           237
cons of Napoleonic rule. Amongst the former he included the principle of
representation, abolition of feudal impositions, tithes and tax privileges, the
respect accorded private property, conscription as the basis for a national
army, state encouragement of agriculture, and the civil and commercial
codes (though not the criminal code, which he rejected as tyrannical).
The Napoleonic era, he observed, had allowed the south German states to
modernise antiquated institutions in the spirit of the eighteenth-century
Enlightenment, in which his own liberalism was ﬁrmly rooted; in Prussia,
he conceded, it had been marked by brutal occupation and exploitation. He
completely rejected and ridiculed the unhistorical romantic gloriﬁcation of
the Middle Ages.121
   Rebmann and Görres represented the political press that formed in
Germany in the years between the collapse of Napoleonic censorship and
repression following the Karlsbad Decrees of 1819.122 This press polemically
elaborated and disputed fundamental political questions and concepts that
would dominate German discourse for almost half a century. The French
legacy in Germany, and especially in the Rhineland, lay at the heart of this.
The press’s actual impact on the wider population is harder to discern. We
know that 10,000 copies of Arndt’s Landwehrkatechismus were circulated
in the Rhineland in early 1814, and that the circulation of the Rheinischer
Merkur peaked at about 3,000 later that year. Such ﬁgures reveal little on
how this material was received, or the role of mediators in disseminating
and interpreting it to third parties. We have already seen that the literacy
rate in the Rhineland was one of the highest in Europe. Charles Dodd, an
English traveller in the region shortly after Napoleon’s defeat, noted with
surprise that even most peasants could read and write well. Rhinelanders
evinced an insatiable appetite for news. During Napoleonic rule they had
crowded across the Rhine in droves in order to read material censored at
home. Dodd described how this appetite was in part met after 1814 by the
‘casinos’ that existed in almost every town, the best of which subscribed
to a profusion of both French and German journals.123 The same trav-
eller might condescendingly criticise German journals for being somewhat
abstract. Yet seemingly abstract debates about the French legacy had very
tangible implications for those formerly employed in the Napoleonic ad-
ministration, purchasers of biens nationaux and businessmen who faced

121 Faber, Rheinlande, pp. 46–55.
122 Karl Heinz Schäfer, Ernst Moritz Arndt als politischer Publizist. Studien zur Publizistik, Pressepolitik
   und kollektivem Bewußtsein im frühen 19. Jahrhundert (Bonn, 1974), pp. 217–25.
123 Charles Edward Dodd, An Autumn Near the Rhine; or Sketches of Courts, Society, Scenery, & c. in
   Some of the German States Bordering on the Rhine (London, 1818), pp. 485–8, 493.
