                                          chap t e r 9

             The Rhineland and the development of
                     Germany, 1815–1830



On 5 April 1815, Frederick William III proclaimed the incorporation of
the two Rhenish provinces – the grand duchy of the Lower Rhine, and
the duchies of Cleves, Berg and Geldern – into Prussia. Two million
souls, including 1.5 million Catholics, were thereby added to his kingdom.1
Frederick William undertook to protect property, safeguard religious beliefs
and ensure justice. Signiﬁcantly, he promised the creation of a representa-
tive body.2 The vast majority of Rhinelanders became aware of the transfer
of sovereignty with the appearance of Hohenzollern eagles in their towns
instead of French symbols. On 30 April, Berlin decreed the future adminis-
trative structure for the enlarged Monarchy, and the King promised ‘respect
for the constitution, uniformity of action, liberality and impartiality’, and
the protection of ‘all advantages gained through the free employment of
personal talent’. Prussia was divided into ten provinces, each headed by a
governor (Oberpräsident), and twenty-ﬁve districts, administered by district
governors (Regierungspräsidenten). The two Rhenish provinces were Jülich-
Cleves-Berg, administered from Cologne, and the grand duchy of the Lower
Rhine, governed from Koblenz. Each was sub-divided into three districts.3
At the local level, the French structure remained intact and, like other
Napoleonic institutions, became the focus of dispute between reformers
and conservatives. To complement the administrative reforms, Frederick
William issued his fateful edict of 22 May, promising ‘representation of
1 J. A. Demian, Geographisch-statistische Darstellung der deutschen Rheinlande, nach dem Bestande vom
  1. August 1820 (Koblenz, 1820), pp. 30, 39, 41.
2 Geheimes Staatsarchiv Preußischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin-Dahlem (GStA), rep. 74, HII ‘Organisa-
  tion Niederrhein’, no. 2a Bd. 1, nos. 10–11, 14–15. The government published the two patents of
  annexation – one for each province – in the special supplement of the Journal des Nieder- und
  Mittel-Rheins of 16 April 1815.
3 The grand duchy of the Lower Rhine included the districts of Koblenz, Trier and Aachen, whilst
  the province Jülich-Cleves-Berg grouped together the districts of Cologne, Düsseldorf and Cleves.
  GStA, rep. 74, HII ‘Organisation Niederrhein’, no. 2a Bd. 1, nos. 29–34 (‘Verordnung wegen verbesserte
  Einrichtung der Provinzial-Behörden’). See also Max Bär, Die Behördenverfassung der Rheinprovinz seit
  1815 (Bonn, 1919), pp. 124–34.

                                                    243
