236                                   From Reich to State
Described as the ﬁrst Rhenish liberal, Benzenberg had initially admired
Napoleon, but in 1813 was won over to the patriotic cause. After the Allied
occupation of the Rhineland, he joined the cluster of reformers gathered
around Gneisenau in Koblenz.118 He too condemned bureaucratic cen-
tralisation and despaired of the individual’s defencelessness against the
state. Signiﬁcantly, he employed the historicist argument that the ‘con-
stitution’ for each province in Germany must conform to social reality
to press the case of the ‘Mittelstand’ (bourgeoisie) as alone representing
an alternative to bureaucracy in the Rhineland.119 This, in its essentials,
was the argument employed by Rhenish liberals until the middle of the
century.
   Those opposed to the Prussophile Francophobia of the Merkur found
a mouthpiece in the Bavarian-sponsored press in the southern Rhineland.
Bavaria, as the leading state of the former Confederation of the Rhine and
Napoleon’s chief German ally, represented the greatest impediment to those
hoping for greater national unity. In addition, Munich was engaged in a
dogged dispute with Sack’s general government over the border between
its zone and the Prussian zone in the Rhineland, and over the future of
Mainz. The kingdom emerged as champion of those favourable to the
Napoleonic order in Germany.120 Munich responded to the insults of the
Merkur and other nationalist publications by sponsoring Rhenish writers
hostile to Prussia and more sympathetic to French institutions.
   Georg Friedrich Rebmann emerged as the leading ﬁgure in this press, and
Görres’s most noteworthy opponent. Rebmann, like Görres, had initially
welcomed the French Revolution and joined radical circles in the 1790s.
Unlike Görres, he served under Napoleon, as an appeals court judge in
Mont-Tonnerre. As noted earlier, he exploited this ofﬁce to temper the
worst abuses of the increasingly despotic regime. Rebmann was drawn into
the Prusso-Bavarian dispute in 1814, and over the following years published
several pamphlets and articles directed against the Rheinischer Merkur. This
was not out of hostility to German nationalism per se; indeed, whilst in
Napoleonic service, Rebmann published a piece emphasising the German
character of the Rhineland. Rather, he recognised the illiberal potential of
the nationalism spouted by Görres. He rejected north German accusations
that south Germans and Rhinelanders had besmirched themselves through
collaboration, and defended the French legacy against those who sought
to ‘de-Napoleonise’ everything. In a balanced way he listed the pros and
118 Neue Deutsche Biographie, 12, p. 60.
119 Johann Friedrich Benzenberg, Wünsche und Hoffnungen eines Rheinländers (Paris, 1815), pp. 14, 34.
120 Piereth, Pressepolitik, pp. 106ff.
