                       The Rhineland and development of Germany          249
conservatives, who favoured the extension westwards of stricter legislation,
and in conﬂict with reformers and liberals ﬁghting for the preservation
of the French codes. On primary education, Prussian ofﬁcials co-operated
with the clergy in the reconstruction process necessitated by French neglect.
The government founded Catholic as well as Protestant teacher training
colleges, and accorded the deacons an important role as school inspectors.
Ironically, this increase in Church inﬂuence over education contributed
to the subsequent Catholic revival that would later cause Berlin so much
trouble.21
   There were some points of conﬂict between Church and state, even in
the 1820s. Clerical jurisdiction, which had been eliminated by the French
but existed elsewhere in Prussia, became a bone of contention; on this
issue at least, even conservative ministers in Berlin argued the virtues of
Napoleonic legislation. Yet it was only in the 1830s that a dramatic dete-
rioration occurred. One reason was the death in 1831 of Ingersleben, with
whom Spiegel had enjoyed excellent relations. More serious was increasing
anti-Catholicism amongst court circles in Berlin. It was against this back-
ground that the issue of mixed marriages became important. Numerically,
their number was minute, accounting for barely 3 per cent of the total in
the archdiocese, a ﬁgure that is an interesting measure of inter-confessional
relations. Differing practices in the eastern provinces, where the Catholic
clergy took a lax view, led Frederick William to conclude that fundamen-
tal tenets of Catholic belief were not at stake. Instead, he favoured mixed
marriages as a tool for Protestant proselytisation. This objective lay behind
the 1803 law stating that where parents in a mixed marriage were in dis-
agreement, all the children would be brought up according to the father’s
wishes. As the majority of Prussia’s population was Protestant, and as men
were more mobile than women, the majority of fathers in mixed marriages
in the Rhineland tended to be Protestant.
   Problems arose when Berlin extended the 1803 law to the Rheinprovinz
in the cabinet orders of 6 April 1819 and 17 August 1825, the second of which
threatened to remove priests who solicited promises from couples to raise
their children as Catholics. Spiegel, who followed the strict Papal line on
mixed marriages, failed to oppose Berlin directly but prevaricated and, to
gain time, focused on the state’s right to suspend clergy. As to the main
issue, he recommended that Berlin should approach Rome whilst avoiding
precipitous action against clerics. This advice was followed and, soon there-
after (in 1827), the Monarchy’s resident in Rome optimistically reported that

21 Ibid ., 1, pp. 430–5.
