248                                   From Reich to State
was it especially generous when it came to material support for the Church,
as demonstrated by Cologne city council’s stinginess in allocating funds for
the unﬁnished cathedral (Frederick William III, in contrast, gave gener-
ously). The numerically small Catholic nobility, unlike the bourgeoisie,
remained devout.18
   Before focusing on the laity, Spiegel needed to improve the clergy. This
emerged from Napoleonic rule divided into three ideological strands. Many
older priests educated in pre-revolutionary Bonn retained sympathy for the
Enlightenment and even Febronianism. Another group of older clerics re-
mained attached to old-church scholasticism, which had been ingrained
in them in pre-revolutionary Cologne. A third group of younger priests,
ﬁnally, had received inadequate training in the deﬁcient seminaries estab-
lished by Napoleon.19 Spiegel’s hope for improvement lay in the theological
faculty of the newly established university of Bonn, where the famous Georg
Hermes occupied the chair in Catholic theology from 1820 until his death
in 1831. Though subsequently condemned by Rome for his radical theology
of reconciliation between religion and science, Hermes successfully ﬁlled
his lecture theatres and contributed to the ﬂowering of the faculty that by
1829 numbered 340 students.20
   Focus on Church–state tension risks diminishing conﬂict within the
Church itself. Relations between Spiegel and Rome were by no means
free of discord. Conﬂict occurred when the Vatican, determined to bypass
Berlin, opened an unofﬁcial correspondence with a small group of trusted
clerics in the Rhineland via the nunciature in Munich. Rome, to Spiegel’s
annoyance, employed this parallel information network to gather reports,
and both he and the government agreed that this practice must cease.
Within the archdiocese itself, many parish priests and parishioners resented
the quarterly visitations by the deacons, and proved uncooperative. On
this issue too, Berlin supported Spiegel’s efforts to reinforce control. In
1829, the government acceded to Spiegel’s request for an increase in the
number of religious holidays from the Napoleonic four to fourteen, thereby
bringing the Rheinprovinz into line with the rest of Prussia. As to moral
issues relating to marriage, Spiegel found himself in harmony with Prussian
18 Wilfried Evertz, Seelsorge im Erzbistum Köln zwischen Aufklärung und Restauration 1825–1835
   (Cologne, Weimar and Vienna, 1993), pp. 66–84. For Cologne cathedral, see Eberhard Gothein,
   ‘Verfassungs- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte der Stadt Cöln vom Untergange der Reichsfreiheit bis zur
   Errichtung des Deutschen Reiches’, in City of Cologne, Die Stadt Cöln im ersten Jahrhundert unter
   Preußischer Herrschaft. 1815 bis 1915 (Cologne, 1915), p. 193.
19 Evertz, Seelsorge, pp. 7–9.
20 Walter Lipgens, Ferdinand August Graf Spiegel und das Verhältnis von Kirche and Staat, 1789–1835.
   Die Wende vom Staatskirchentum zur Kirchenfreiheit (2 vols., Münster, 1965), 1, pp. 349–50, 445–60.
