250                                    From Reich to State
Pope Leo XII had accepted the Prussian legislation. This proved grossly in-
accurate, but defused things until Clement August von Droste-Vischering
succeeded Spiegel as archbishop in 1835. Droste-Vischering refused to be-
lieve Berlin’s interpretation of negotiations with the Vatican and vigorously
enforced conditions for the solemnisation of mixed marriages. The govern-
ment responded by arresting Droste-Vischering in November 1837, an act
that attracted Europe-wide attention. The most important consequence of
the resulting struggle, which only ended in 1840 with Frederick William
IV’s accession, was the ‘confessionalisation’ of provincial politics and the
emergence of a distinct Catholic ‘party’.22 Thereafter, the Rhenish Catholic
liberal bourgeoisie, though not especially devout, demonstrated markedly
less hostility to the Church than its counterpart in southern Germany,
where Church and conservative forces within the states remained closely
associated. The Rhenish bourgeoisie happily reconciled economic liberal-
ism with its faith until at least the 1850s, and even thereafter its identity was
never solely deﬁned by class.23
   The Cologne Wirren, as the conﬂict sparked by mixed marriages became
known, aggravated relations between Catholic periphery and Protestant
centre, and obscured tensions between laity and hierarchy. During riots in
Cologne in 1830, Spiegel was lumped together with the Prussian authorities
as an object of popular vitriol; seven years later, his successor became the
focal point of opposition to the Prussians. As for popular religiosity, the real
turning point came in the 1850s and 1860s. Until then, both Catholic hier-
archy and Prussian state suspected, discouraged and controlled displays of
popular piety, thus continuing the policy of the archbishop electors and the
French. Pilgrimages all but died out in the 1840s, and their resurgence some
twenty years later marked something new that was a direct consequence
of the hierarchy which now, for the ﬁrst time since the early eighteenth
century, systematically encouraged and institutionalised popular religious
sensibilities.24
   Though the degree of Prussophobia should not be exaggerated before
the late 1830s, Catholic Rhinelanders never doubted that the Monarchy
was essentially Protestant.25 Prussia was not their state, but that of their
confessional rivals. Protestants, after all, dominated the court and highest
22 Ibid ., 1, pp. 415–30. For the electoral consequences of the conﬂict see Herbert Obenaus, Anf änge des
   Parlamentarismus in Preußen bis 1848 (Düsseldorf, 1984), p. 269.
23 Thomas Mergel, Zwischen Klasse und Konfession: Katholisches Bürgertum im Rheinland 1794–1914
   (Göttingen, 1994), passim.
24 Sperber, Popular Catholicism, pp. 30, 56.
25 In the Bavarian Palatinate the confessional position was reversed, with a Protestant periphery battling
   against a Catholic core. An interesting contemporary French assessment of the nature of this conﬂict
