254                                   From Reich to State
could, tightening export restrictions, releasing military supplies, banning
the use of scarce grain for the production of spirits and purchasing 2 million
Reichsthaler worth of rye in the Baltic ports that they then sold at below mar-
ket prices in the western provinces. However, much of this arrived too late.
In addition, the export ban proved difﬁcult to enforce, and further supplies
left the region legally to provision troops stationed in France. The inade-
quate poverty relief institutions were overwhelmed, whilst the multi-tiered
collegiate administrative system appeared both excessively expensive –
it accounted for a quarter of the government’s budget – and ponderous in
responding to the crisis when compared to its streamlined Napoleonic pre-
decessor. Many notables decided self-help was more effective, and founded
so-called ‘Grain Associations’ resembling joint stock companies that even-
tually purchased 1 million Reichsthaler of rye that they then sold at below
market price. Civic initiative rather than the reputation of the Prussian
state emerged strengthened from this immediate postwar crisis.37
   Instead, economic difﬁculties fuelled Rhenish fears of exploitation by
poor easterners, a perception best expressed by the wealthy banker Abraham
Schaaffhausen, who, upon ﬁrst hearing of the Rhineland’s cession to Prussia
in 1815, supposedly exclaimed: ‘Jesus, Mary and Joseph! We are marry-
ing into a poor family!’ Such fears were reinforced by accusations that
the Prussians, like the French, monopolised lucrative positions. The ques-
tion of the balance between natives and outsiders in the administration
remained controversial for most of the nineteenth century.38 Certainly,
initial ofﬁcial reports revealed grave misgivings on Berlin’s part over
the ability of Rhinelanders to govern themselves, because of Napoleonic
contamination.39 In part, this sense derived from the ﬁction maintained by
the French that mayors should perform their duties unremunerated though,
as noted earlier, they had in practice rewarded themselves with generous
37 Hans-Heinrich Bass, ‘Hungerkrisen in Posen und im Rheinland 1816/17 und 1847’, in Manfred Gailus
   and Heinrich Volkmann (eds.), Der Kampf um das tägliche Brot. Nahrungsmangel, Versorgungspolitik
   und Protest 1770–1990 (Opladen, 1994), pp. 150–75. Volcanologists consider the eruption of Tomboro
   as the greatest such event since 1500, with the volume of ash ejected into the atmosphere estimated
   at up to 1,000 cubic kilometres. The ejection of this mass of particles created a reverse greenhouse
   effect, reducing incoming solar radiation whilst allowing reﬂected radiation back out to space. The
   result was a global decrease in temperature in 1816, amounting to a 2.1 degree Fahrenheit drop below
   the average (for the years 1768–1819) in northern Germany. John D. Post, ‘A Study in Meteorological
   and Trade Cycle History: The Economic Crisis Following the Napoleonic Wars’, The Journal of
   Economic History 34, 2 (1974), pp. 315–49.
38 A memorandum of 21 June 1831 sent to the ministry of the interior stated that the perception that
   natives were discriminated against, though not necessarily justiﬁed, had become deeply embedded.
   GStA, rep. 77, tit. 50, nr. 50, nos. 21–4.
39 Bölling to Sack, 24 December 1814, Hauptstaatsarchiv Düsseldorf (HStAD), Gen. Gouv. Nieder-
   und Mittel Rhein, 27, [no. 18].
