                    The Rhineland and development of Germany                                   247
clergy. Jesuits remained barred. Religious orders, with a few exceptions,
were only readmitted in the 1850s. Restrictions on pilgrimages continued.
Correspondence between the hierarchy and Vatican needed to pass through
the Ministry of Ecclesiastical Affairs. This had been set up to administer
the Protestant churches and contained no special department for Catholic
affairs. Yet despite these irritants, relations between Berlin and Cologne’s
new archbishop, Ferdinand August von Spiegel (installed in 1825), were
initially good. With government co-operation, he stamped his authority
on the new province. Crucial to this were the forty-four deacons appointed
in 1827 to act as an intermediate tier between himself and the 689 parishes,
and it is their reports that provide the best insight into the state of the
Church at local level.
    Ordinary Catholics, the reports concurred, were generally apolitical, re-
spectful of authority and even grateful to the Prussians for restoring order.
Frederick William III, together with the Pope and bishops, were remem-
bered in prayers. Subordinate Prussian ofﬁcials, in contrast, were generally
disliked because they were usually Protestant and considered prejudiced.
Relations between them and priests were often strained. As for religious
life, the reports suggested that ordinary people were devout, at least out-
wardly: their lives were governed by the Church calendar, they regularly
received the sacraments and ostracised deviants. Even reports from the cities
were generally optimistic in this respect, despite references to immorality
blamed on French rule. There, religious brotherhoods survived Napoleon,
escaping suppression with the connivance of local authorities. New founda-
tions appeared after 1815, but increasingly resembled secular mutual beneﬁt
societies, preserving only tenuous religious connections.17 Reports from
majority Protestant areas were less optimistic, complaining that Catholics
tended to be neglectful of their spiritual duties. The young also gave cause
for concern. Overall, whilst most deacons were satisﬁed with outward dis-
plays of piety, they were less sanguine in their estimation of genuine piety.
In particular, they complained about various popular practices, though they
noted approvingly that the Prussians, unlike the French, were as hostile as
themselves to these. As for the bourgeoisie, much of this was infected by
secularising tendencies, viewed religion chieﬂy as a form of ‘police’ over
the lower orders, participated in religious festivities simply to display its
prestige, and undermined popular devotion through criticism and ridicule.
Through Catholicism, it preserved its civic status under foreign rule. Nor
17 Jonathan Sperber, Popular Catholicism in Nineteenth-century Germany (Princeton, 1984), pp. 33–4.
  Also, T. C. Banﬁeld, Industry of the Rhine (2 vols., London, 1846–8), 2: Manufactures: Embracing a
  View of the Social Condition of the Manufacturing Population of Their District, pp. 46–7.
