                      The Rhineland and development of Germany                                   265
enforcing censorship, plus the creation of a federal investigative bureau in
Mainz to root out subversion. The swing towards reaction contributed to a
government crisis in Berlin leading to the dismissal of the reforming min-
isters Beyme (legislation), Boyen (war) and Humboldt (estate affairs), and
triumph for the conservatives.88
   Reaction aggravated centre–periphery tensions over the French legacy
in the Rhineland. In 1819, Görres published another polemic, Deutschland
und die Revolution, in which he condemned the ‘corrosive poison of sense-
less, despotic principles of government’ and ridiculed the imposition of
‘freedom’ through Cabinet order instead of a constitution. The trust of the
Rhenish provinces had been lost, he wrote, as their inhabitants rejected
the Prussian ‘bureaucratic/arbitrary state’. Paris was now the liberal capital
of the world and Berlin overcome by ‘spiritual inﬂuenza’.89 The Prussian
government decided to arrest Görres, who sensibly left the Rhineland and
moved to Frankfurt. Berlin requested his extradition, but Görres man-
aged to ﬂee to Strasbourg, from where he continued his polemics safely
beyond the Prussian authorities’ reach. His subsequent publications ac-
cused Berlin of breaking all its promises to Rhinelanders and of employing
despotic Napoleonic police methods, the only defence against which was
the Rhenish judicial system.90
   Görres’s attacks, though embarrassing, where at least in the open. More
dangerous, from Berlin’s viewpoint, were the activities of secret societies, es-
pecially those centred on Bonn’s new university. The government appointed
Arndt professor of history at Bonn in August 1818, but was greatly annoyed
a month later when he published a piece (the fourth part of Geist der Zeit)
critical of the police. Wittgenstein presented a copy to Frederick William,
who as a result seriously considered abandoning the foundation of the uni-
versity. Hardenberg persuaded him otherwise, and the university opened
as planned on 18 October. Arndt was now on probation and himself recog-
nised the danger from the ‘Wittgenstein-Kampzianer’. These bided their
time and then struck during the crackdown following Kotzebue’s murder.
On 15 July 1819 Prussian police conducted a thorough early-morning search
of Arndt’s house in Bonn, seizing a large number of papers. A hundred
‘Burschen’ gathered around the house during the search and greeted the
police with whistles and cat-calls as they emerged. Despite petitions from
provincial governor Solms-Laubach, Berlin followed the advice of the
federal investigative bureau and suspended Arndt in November 1820. He
88 For a general overview of the swing towards reaction in Berlin, and the wider context, see James J.
   Sheehan, German History 1770–1866 (Oxford, 1993 pbk edn), pp. 420–3.
89 Görres, Deutschland , pp. 3, 23, 38, 67–8, 96, 115–16.
                                                        90 Görres, Sachen, pp. 150–63, 203–29.
