                      The Rhineland and development of Germany                                       263
from ‘old Prussia’ increasingly entered the Rhenish judiciary. Eventually,
about 40 per cent of all judges from the eastern provinces served in the
Rhineland for some time. Most returned to the east, impressed by the
Napoleonic system’s strengths.82 So, when in 1843 the revision of the ALR
was sufﬁciently close to completion for Berlin to submit it to the provincial
estates, it was hardly surprising that the response in the Rhineland was
hostile. Yet again, the old arguments were aired and the revised ALR rejected
on the familiar grounds that it threatened the jury system, allowed for
corporal punishment and undermined equality. That the ALR punished
property crimes more leniently than the Napoleonic code hardly endeared it
to the Rhenish elite; yet their opposition received vigorous support from the
wider community, as demonstrated in the petitioning campaign organised
in defence of the existing system. Yet again, the entire Bürgertum could
unite in defence of the French legacy.83 Following the 1848 revolutions it
was the Rhenish system that provided the model for Prussia and the rest of
Germany.

Berlin’s decision in 1818 to preserve French law in the Rhineland came at a
time of heightened political tension throughout Germany, especially in the
west, where radicals remained active despite the Rheinischer Merkur’s sup-
pression. Görres remained an embittered thorn in the side of the Prussian
government and exploited his dismissal as director of education in Koblenz
to allege discrimination against Catholics. He played a prominent role in
the 1817 petitioning campaign in support of a constitution, a movement
that developed out of the poverty relief associations founded the previous
year.84 His native Koblenz presented its petition, signed by over 3,000 in-
dividuals, to Hardenberg in January 1818, during the chancellor’s visit. The
provincial government gave its tacit support to this exercise – which also
occurred in Aachen, Cleves, Cologne and Trier – and overturned attempts
by conservative county commissioners (Landräte) to block the collection of
signatures. The petition itself reminded Frederick William of his promise
to grant a constitution.85

82 Christina von Hodenberg, Die Partei der Unparteiischen. Der Liberalismus der preußischen Richter-
   schaft, 1815–1848/49 (Göttingen, 1996), p. 80.
83 Blasius, ‘Geschworenengerichte’, pp. 154–6.
84 Joseph Görres, In Sachen der Rheinprovinzen und in eigener Angelegenheit (Stuttgart, 1822), pp. 45–58,
   77–9, 258–61.
85 Görres’s account, dated 24 January 1818 and entitled ‘Die Übergabe der Adresse der Stadt Koblenz
   und der Landschaft an S. Majestät den König in öffentlicher Audienz bei S. Durch. dem Fürsten
   Staatskanzler am 12. Januar 1818’, appears as a separately paginated supplement at the end of Joseph
   Görres, Deutschland und die Revolution (Koblenz, 1819).
