                     The Rhineland and development of Germany                                      261
   Hardenberg fended off such opposition whilst the law commission ac-
tively solicited lawyers for their views on constitutional, administrative and
judicial matters, and even encouraged ordinary Rhinelanders to present
their grievances over abuses committed by ‘old Prussian’ ofﬁcials and
policemen.73 Reformers in the provincial administration similarly enlisted
local support to reinforce their own constitutional demands in reports
to Berlin.74 The western provincial governors – Solms-Laubach (Jülich-
Cleves-Berg), Ingersleben (Lower Rhine) and Vincke (Westphalia) – in
particular stressed their status as spokesmen for the peculiar interests of
their provinces, against the opposition of the interior and police minis-
ters, who wished to subordinate them to their own ministries. This was in
keeping with the provincial governors’ self-image as representatives of local
interests in lieu of parliamentary institutions.75 Rhinelanders were thus mo-
bilised as auxiliaries in the struggle against Prussian conservatism. Thanks
in part to this support, Sethe’s commission successfully completed its work
and made its recommendations, which were enshrined in the Cabinet order
of 19 November 1818. This preserved French law in the Rhineland until the
general revision of law within the Monarchy as a whole, something that
would occur only at the end of the century.76
   The preservation of Napoleonic forms ensured that the judiciary re-
mained overwhelmingly Rhenish in terms of personnel, as ‘old Prussian’
jurists lacked education in French methods. Native lawyers and judges sub-
sequently emerged as the most important defenders of the French legacy,
upon whose survival their own careers depended. Former students of the
French law school in Koblenz were especially prominent in employing
their pens in the following years in defence of what soon became known as
Rhenish law.77 They rejected the tendency of some in Berlin who viewed
the French period as an illegal interregnum. Instead, they clung on to
Napoleonic codes that for them fulﬁlled a quasi-constitutional function.
   Their opponents identiﬁed them as carriers of the revolutionary con-
tagion which had infected the west, whose population was dominated by
‘sophistic lawmongers’.78 Kamptz, the future justice minister – whom one
73 Ibid ., pp. lxii–lxiii.
74 Rüdiger Schütz, Preußen und die Rheinlande. Studien zur preußischen Integrationspolitik im Vormärz
   (Wiesbaden, 1979), pp. 178–9.
75 Rüdiger Schütz, ‘Zur Eingliederung der Rheinlande’, in Peter Baumgart (ed.), Expansion und
   Integration. Zur Eingliederung neugewonnener Gebiete in den preußischen Staat (Cologne and Vienna,
   1984), pp. 206–9.
76 Landsberg, Gutachten, pp. xxxix, xlv–xlvi, lii–liii, lx–lxi.
77 Luitwin Mallmann, Französische Juristenausbildung im Rheinland 1794–1814. Die Rechtschule von
   Koblenz (Cologne and Vienna, 1987), pp. 176–7.
78 Landsberg, Gutachten, p. xli.
