262                                     From Reich to State
senior Rhenish judge referred to as the ‘lie made ﬂesh’ – feared that ‘old
Prussia’ itself might be corrupted by French principles via the western
judiciary, which he denounced less on technical grounds and more for rea-
sons of ‘national character’. Juries, he argued, suited the superﬁcial French
but not the Germans, who were less inﬂuenced by appearances. He advised
Rhinelanders to reconform to ‘German customs, German attitudes and the
German way of thinking’, and hoped that ‘old Prussians’ might counter
French inﬂuences and help propagate ‘German virtues and habits’.79 He
welcomed the closure of the Napoleonic law school in Koblenz in 1817, and
the absence of a chair in French law in Bonn (one was created only in 1844).
Friedrich Karl von Savigny, the greatest Prussian jurist of his age, expressed
similar hostility to the Napoleonic codes (at least initially), and advised
the government against employing men ‘with a one-sided predilection for
French law’.80
   Kircheisen similarly condemned the jury system, stating it represented
class justice, not the right of individuals to be tried by their peers. He sub-
sequently attempted to undermine the system by making difﬁculties over
how juries were selected. According to the Napoleonic Code d’instruction
criminelle, juries were chosen from amongst a clearly deﬁned group of
‘notables’: members of the electoral colleges, the 300 top tax-payers per
department, holders of doctorates and other approved professional qual-
iﬁcations, notaries, businessmen paying large amounts of patent tax, and
so on. Following the abolition of the electoral colleges and changes to the
tax system, these provisions became redundant and necessitated modiﬁca-
tion. Initially, the district governors took a free hand in selecting juries,
but not according to any ﬁxed rules or criteria, and this gave opponents
of the French structures a new opportunity to attack them per se. Rhenish
jurists and the Rhenish appeal court in Cologne responded by attempting
to formulate new criteria for jury selection, criteria that represent an in-
teresting example of the various moral virtues contemporaries associated
with ‘bourgeois values’. These were eventually agreed and approved by
Berlin. As under the French, the numbers eligible for jury service repre-
sented a small fraction of the total population. In the district of Düsseldorf,
for example, only 723 were eligible as jurors, out of a population of
72,774.81
   Despite powerful opposition, ‘Rhenish law’ survived, and even won some
converts, including Savigny himself. Over the following decades lawyers
79 Kamptz, Annalen, 1 (1817), part 1, pp. 292–3, 297.        80 Mallmann, Juristen, pp. 163–4.
81 Dirk Blasius, ‘Der Kampf um die Geschworenengerichte im Vormärz’, in Hans-Ulrich Wehler (ed.),
   Sozialgeschichte Heute. Festschrift für Hans Rosenberg zum 70. Geburtstag (Göttingen, 1974), pp. 153–4.
