                     The Rhineland and development of Germany                                     259
of the Prussian government to change something based on these ancient
rights . . . before the introduction of the new constitution’.64 Thus were old,
parochial concerns for the preservation of civic privilege explicitly linked
to the ‘modern’, liberal demand for a constitution, though as yet to no
avail: the police reform was conﬁrmed and plans for constitutional repre-
sentation shelved. Mylius resigned, and became an appeals court judge in
1819. From this position within the judiciary, he continued to vex Berlin
into the 1830s. Cologne’s experience was by no means unique. Elsewhere
in western and southern Germany, where urban traditions were strong,
liberals exploited older civic traditions in their struggle against the state.
Old rights were reinterpreted as guaranteeing liberal freedoms. Thus were
the ﬁrst generation of liberals able to widen their social base, attracting
those less impressed by political abstractions than by deeply ingrained civic
republican sentiment.65

Napoleon’s law codes served as a substitute constitution for the Prussian
Rhineland before 1848, and were defended vigorously. They fulﬁlled a sim-
ilar function in the Bavarian Palatinate and Hessian territories to the south.
As the Mainzer Zeitung reported in 1817: ‘The inhabitants of this side [of
the Rhine] expect no more from an all-Hessian constitution than what we
already possess.’66 In November 1814, the Prussian government indicated
that the Allgemeines Landrecht (ALR) should be reintroduced in the former
Hohenzollern duchies in place of the French codes. The ALR, promulgated
in 1794, was an ambiguous legacy of Frederick the Great’s reign. According
to Robert Berdahl, it resembled an ‘archaeological excavation’ with various
layers representing different periods with but a ‘hint of the future’ to attract
those hoping for reform.67 Amongst the numerous sections not hinting at
the future were the 152 paragraphs concerned with offences against hon-
our, which stipulated higher punishments for commoners insulting nobles
on the principle that different social groups had innate moral characteris-
tics. For Rhinelanders this was absurd. The fact that the ALR ultimately

64 Minutes of the municipal council of Cologne, 5 September 1817, ibid ., nos. 265–8.
65 For a judicious survey of recent research into the linkages (or lack of them) between older civic
   traditions and nineteenth-century German liberalism, see Elisabeth Fehrenbach, ‘Bürgertum und
   Liberalismus. Die Umbruchsperiode 1770–1815’, in Lothar Gall (ed.), Bürgertum und bürgerlich-
   liberale Bewegung in Mitteleuropa seit dem 18. Jahrhundert (Historische Zeitschrift Sonderheft Band
   17, Munich, 1997), pp. 1–62.
66 Mainzer Zeitung 140 (18 December 1817).
67 Robert M. Berdahl, The Politics of the Prussian Nobility: The Development of a Conservative Ideology
   1770–1848 (Princeton, 1988), p. 98.
