264                                      From Reich to State
   Hardenberg, according to Görres’s account, accepted Koblenz’s peti-
tion in good grace. He explained that provincial assemblies needed to be
formed before the creation of an all-Prussian parliament, and admitted
that his government faced great difﬁculties in uniting the Monarchy’s dis-
parate territories under one constitution, a problem under discussion at
the highest levels. Other grievances presented by the delegates concerned
the plight of the Catholic Church, burden of military service, lack of press
freedom, problems faced by industry and the quartering burdens in gar-
rison towns. The delegates went on to praise certain Napoleonic institu-
tions, especially French legal procedures. Görres claimed this represented
a transformation of public opinion, which previously had opposed French
institutions because of the evil motivating force behind them. People now
favoured the French system as ‘the better, animated form’ as against the
‘ponderous, paralysing’ Prussian system ‘imposing itself ’ from outside. As
a result, complained Görres, Rhinelanders faced the outrageous accusation
of being francophile by Prussian conservatives.86
   Görres’s role in the petitioning campaign hardened the conservatives’
determination to neutralise him. They increasingly enjoyed the support of
Frederick William, who did not share Hardenberg’s equanimity over the
campaign and criticised the provincial government for allowing it. The King
condemned Görres’s subsequent published account of it as indicative of the
‘utmost pernicious intrigues in the Rhine provinces’.87 Matters reached a
climax the following year. On 23 March 1819 the conservative playwright,
August von Kotzebue, was assassinated in Mannheim by a student, Karl
Sand. Sand turned out to be a member of a Burschenschaft, a movement
that had started in Jena in 1815 when it became clear that patriotic hopes for
the reordering of Germany had lost out to Metternich’s agenda. Kotzebue’s
murder had serious repercussions throughout Germany. Metternich ex-
ploited Frederick William’s consternation at the outrage by meeting him
at Teplitz in July and persuading him that constitutions were one short
step away from revolution. A few months later, Metternich, with Prussian
support, cajoled the rest of the Germanic Confederation into passing the
Karlsbad Decrees, a series of repressive laws that imposed strict supervision
over universities to ensure youth would not be poisoned ‘by [the] spread
of harmful ideas which might subvert public peace and order, and un-
dermine the foundations of the existing states’. Complementary measures
included tighter press restrictions and co-operation between the states in
86 Görres, ‘Übergabe’, p. 44. Görres, in the Koblenz address, also praised the old estates of the electorate
   of Trier, and refuted claims that they were rotten or out of date.
87 Levinger, ‘Hardenberg’, p. 267. See also Görres, Deutschland, pp. 69–70, and idem, Sachen, p. 108.
