256                                    From Reich to State
disproportionately well because they were over-represented amongst uni-
versity graduates, from whom civil servants were recruited. It was from the
1850s, with the rise of political Catholicism and politicisation of appoint-
ments following the 1848 revolution, that confession made a difference.49
Nonetheless, what was ultimately signiﬁcant was that Rhinelanders per-
ceived they were discriminated against and, as the liberal Benzenberg ob-
served, that they wished to govern themselves.50 This was hardly surprising
given the survival of the deeply ingrained notion of an ‘Indignatsprinzip’ –
the principle that public positions should be held by natives – that had been
a matter of conﬂict between Land and princes under the Old Regime.

This sentiment was strongest in the former imperial cities, whose elites pre-
served a degree of autonomy even under French rule. Like Frankfurt and
Hamburg, which successfully preserved their independence in 1815, the
Rhenish cities united around a common bourgeois ideology that sought to
diminish internal social divisions and present a united front against intru-
sions by the territorial state.51 In both Aachen and Cologne, voices were
raised following Napoleon’s fall calling for their restoration as independent
mini-states within a re-established Reich. They used the expulsion of the
French as an excuse to brieﬂy restore their old civic symbols and unfurl
their ancient banners.52 Berlin had other plans, though these were at ﬁrst
concealed by promises to respect constitutional order and local customs.
Misunderstanding resulted in conﬂict, especially in the Rhineland’s largest
city, Cologne. In August 1815, Cologne’s municipality presented its extensive
demands to Hardenberg. These included calls for the re-establishment of
the archdiocese, the location of the planned Rhenish university in the city,
the return of treasures stolen by the French or, if these had been lost, by the
transfer of other artistic objects held in Paris, compensation for losses suf-
fered by private individuals at the hands of the French, and compensation
for endowments lost by church-schools and hospitals. More fundamen-
tally, Cologne’s representatives referred to the city’s ‘constitutional rights’,
and stated that the city deserved an appropriate degree of representation
amongst the Prussian estates when these were ﬁnally established. Why, they
49 John R. Gillis, The Prussian Bureaucracy in Crisis 1840–1860. Origins of an Administrative Ethos
  (Stanford, 1971), pp. 35–6, 207–8.
50 Johann Friedrich Benzenberg, Wünsche und Hoffnungen eines Rheinländers (Paris, 1815), p. 25.
51 Lothar Gall, ‘Vom alten zum neuen Bürgertum. Die mitteleuropäische Stadt im Umbruch
   1780–1820’, in idem (ed.), Vom alten zum neuen Bürgertum. Die mitteleuropäische Stadt im Umbruch
   1780–1820 (Historische Zeitschrift Beiheft 14, Munich, 1991), pp. 16–17.
52 Ladoucette to Montalivet, 4 March 1814, AN, F1c III Roër 4, no. 326. For civic patriotism in Cologne,
   see also Kölnische Zeitung, 1 February, 19 April, 7 July 1814.
