268                                  From Reich to State
not changed fundamentally with the subsequent sale of the vast properties
conﬁscated from the Catholic Church. Even in its reconstituted form, the
Rhenish nobility as a whole represented a social foundation for rule that
was both extremely thin and unevenly distributed. Nonetheless, this class
showed skill in presenting its case at the Congress of Vienna, receiving
inﬂuential support from Stein. It turned liberal calls for constitutional gov-
ernment into an argument for the restoration of noble estates. Ironically, the
Rhenish nobility, as a united, cohesive group, never existed under the Old
Regime, but only emerged in 1814/15 to present its case for ‘restoration’.99
Though it would have preferred to see the restoration of its old privileges,
it recognised the need for some accommodation with the modern state and
constitutional arrangements. This pragmatism, and synthesis of moder-
nity and tradition – ‘calculating pseudo-modernity’ – typiﬁed Germany’s
subsequent development.
    Powerful elements in Berlin, centred around the Crown Prince and Stein,
favoured the reconstitution of the nobility as the basis of the Rhenish social
order. In this they were opposed by Hardenberg and most of the provin-
cial bureaucracy, which favoured equal citizenship, with civil servants alone
mediating relations between the individual and state. Reform-minded bu-
reaucrats posted to the west lost no opportunity in publicly humiliating ex-
Rhenish nobles who insisted on recognition of their former titles. Whether
conservatives deceived themselves as to the isolation and insigniﬁcance of
the Rhenish nobility is not clear. They should have lost their illusions
during the petitioning campaign of 1817–18, when the great majority of
Rhinelanders supported ‘French’ equality, and rejected the noble submis-
sion drafted largely by Stein that seemed to reject the legality of Napoleonic
rule and imply that lands contained inherent values that were inviolable
even by international treaty.100 Frederick William nonetheless wished to
reconstitute the Rhenish nobility, stating in his Cabinet order of 6 March
1821 that only one ‘internal state law’ existed within the Monarchy, and that
this law recognised nobility. This provoked opposition from the provin-
cial administration, which argued that the nobility remained abolished in
the Rhineland. The police minister, Wittgenstein, responded by informing
99 Christof Dipper, ‘Der rheinische Adel zwischen Revolution und Restauration’, in Helmuth Feigl
    and Willibald Rosner (eds.), Adel im Wandel. Vorträge und Diskussionen des elften Symposions des
    Niederösterreichischen Instituts für Landeskunde, Horn, 2.–5. Juli 1990 (Vienna, 1991), p. 100.
100 Christof Dipper, ‘Die Reichsritterschaft in napoleonischer Zeit’, in Eberhard Weis (ed.), Reformen
    im rheinbündischen Deutschland (Munich, 1984), pp. 66–74, 104–6. Horst Lademacher, ‘Der
    Niederrheinische und Westfälische Adel in der Preussischen Verfassungsfrage’, Rheinische Viertel-
    jahrsblätter 31 (1966–7), pp. 442–54. See also Sack’s circular, dated October 1815, LHAK, Bestand
    355, no. 76.
