                       The Rhineland and development of Germany                               267
another society – ‘Rhenanie’ – whose members (mainly university teachers
and students) wore bands coloured red, blue, black and green. Berlin was
alarmed. Signiﬁcantly, the ministry advised the local police commander not
to notify the provincial authorities of its ﬁndings, but instead to employ
an ofﬁcial with ‘laudable, loyal devotion to the state’ who was guaranteed
to make further enquiries.95 Meanwhile, Rhinelanders closely associated
with the ‘patriots’ found their careers in government service effectively
ended.96

The conservatives, triumphant in Berlin after 1819, subsequently sought to
undermine the 1818 settlement preserving the Napoleonic codes. This was
facilitated by the fact that the law commission’s conclusions were never
ofﬁcially published, though they became generally known. Nonetheless,
the government’s acceptance of the commission’s original ﬁndings in 1818
made it politically impossible to reopen the question fully. Instead, the
newly constituted government adopted salami tactics, slicing away at the
codes with individual measures, such as the Cabinet orders of 20 August
1819 and 6 March 1821 that decreed that all crimes against the state would
henceforth be tried under the ALR, even if committed in the Rhineland.97
   A more fundamental challenge to the essentially bourgeois Rhenish so-
cial order came with the native nobility, which Berlin now identiﬁed as a
tool for integrating the western provinces on the east’s terms. As already
noted, French rule damaged the southern Rhenish nobility far more than
its northern counterpart, whose revenues, consisting of money-rents from
tenants, remained untouched by the abolition of ‘feudalism’. ‘Feudalism’
could hardly be reintroduced after 1814, though the successor governments
agreed to return unsold nationalised secular properties to their former
owners. There were few of these left, however, as revealed by the inves-
tigation conducted into the fate of Metternich’s former holdings along
the Moselle.98 Most had long since been sold, and disentangling the pre-
cise status of all such properties, whether sold or unsold, proved a time-
consuming affair. The northern nobility, which was territorial (mediated),
had not been affected by revolutionary sequestration, unlike the imperial
nobility to the south. However, even before the Revolution, the northern
nobles had owned only a relatively small proportion of the land. This had

95 Interior ministry to the commander of the gendarmerie, Koblenz, 14 December 1822, GStA,
   rep. 77, tit. 17, nr. 54, nos. 1–4.
96 Klein, Personalpolitik, pp. 23–5; Landeshauptarchiv Koblenz (LHAK), Bestand 403, 4134, nos. 1–3,
   5, 7–9, 11, 17–21, 25–8.
97 Landsberg, Gutachten, pp. cxxvii–cxxviii.    98 LHAK, Bestand 350, 103, no. 5.
