                    The Rhineland and development of Germany                                    273
though foreign coin continued to circulate in the Rhineland for decades
after 1815.118
   As for ﬁscal policy, the new tax regime introduced in 1820 was favourable
to manufacturing, as most of the burden fell on land. Industrial cities such
as Krefeld paid about half the per capita rate of tax of administrative centres
like Bonn and Koblenz. The controversy over whether the Rhineland was
ﬁscally exploited rumbled on in a number of publications, notably David
Hansemann’s Preußen und Frankreich, published in 1833. This compared
(unfavourably) Prussian ﬁscal policies with those of the French, and con-
cluded that Berlin overtaxed its westernmost province by up to a quarter.
Recent research that has also taken account of government expenditure –
bureaucrats’ salaries, investment in roads, spending on education, and mili-
tary expenditure covering not only the maintenance of 18,000 troops in the
region, but also major works on fortiﬁcations like at Ehrenbreitstein – has
rejected the notion that the Rhineland was exploited to ﬁnance develop-
ment in the east. Only about one-sixth of revenue raised in the Rhineland
went to the centre, with the rest spent in the region.119
   Statistical surveys of the 1820s suggest that the economic geography of
the Rhineland emerged little changed from the postwar recession. The
painful readjustment after 1815 had the arguably beneﬁcial effect of elim-
inating under-capitalised enterprises founded in the Napoleonic period,
many of which sold shoddy products compared to the competition. Firmly
rooted establishments that sold top-quality products enjoying a Europe-
wide reputation, such as eau de Cologne, survived and then ﬂourished.
Wuppertal and Berg remained centres of metallurgy, Krefeld a centre for
textiles, and the district of Aachen for mining, metallurgy and cloth mak-
ing. Technology was slowly making an impact: by 1818, Düsseldorf district
counted eighteen and Aachen ﬁfteen steam engines, though there were none
elsewhere in the Rheinprovinz. Putting-out, not concentration into manu-
factories, remained the norm for the dominant industrial branch, textiles:
half of the cotton and two-thirds of woollen processing occurred in rural
areas. Only the silk industry was predominantly urban. This pattern was
beginning to change in the 1820s, a decade that witnessed dramatic growth

118 Johann Joseph Eichhoff, Betrachtungen über den XIX. Artikel der deutschen Bundesakte nebst An-
   denkungen, wie in Gefolge desselben dem Handelsverkehr zwischen den Verschiedenen Bundesstaaten
   Erleichterung zu verschaffen (Wiesbaden, 1820), pp. 10–11.
119 Wolfgang Zorn, ‘Preußischer Staat und rheinische Wirtschaft (1815–1830)’, in Landschaft und
   Geschichte. Festschrift für Franz Petri zu seinem 65. Geburtstag am 22 Februar 1968 (Bonn, 1970),
   pp. 552–60.
