                     The Rhineland and development of Germany                                     275
beneﬁted from preferential access to the Prussian market. This ended in
1828, with the Prusso-Hessian customs agreement. Hessian wine, which
was cheaper to produce, now ﬂooded onto the market, and Nassau’s ac-
cession to the union in 1835 aggravated the situation further. The growing
plight of the Rhenish vintners brought other grievances to the fore: the
fact that the tax on vineyards took as its base year one that had witnessed
an uncommonly good harvest; that consumption taxes were structured so
they could not be passed on to consumers; the unscrupulousness of wine
merchants, who spread rumours about the quality of the wine to depress
the price so as to purchase it cheap; or the perceived ruthlessness of Jewish
money lenders. The vintners plight highlighted social problems associated
with the disappearance of common property rights, an issue that attracted
the attention of the young Karl Marx.123 Vintners were especially dependent
upon wood from commons not only as a source of fuel, but also for barrels
and stakes. Unfortunately, the Prussian state encouraged the swiftest possi-
ble liquidation of communal debts, with the result that common lands and
woods were privatised. Wood prices soared. This resulted in real hardship,
especially during cold winters, as revealed by reports of epidemics of gastric
fever.
   Rural poverty provoked social conﬂict, including anti-Semitism, a prob-
lem that attracted the attention of the 1826/7 Landtag. It also encouraged
rural crime, especially wood theft. This reached such proportions in the
1820s and 1830s that the government completed several investigations that
provide our best source for this phenomenon. In 1834, of the 30,038 crimes
tried in Rhenish courts, 26,749, or over 89 per cent, were wood theft, the in-
cidence of which rose dramatically in the following years, peaking at 72,918
in 1847. Rural society distinguished morally between property that was
manifestly the result of labour, whose theft was unacceptable, and natural
items such as wood. This distinction is reﬂected by the fact that wood theft
was a crime committed disproportionately by women and children. The
provisions of the Code pénal, whose severity shocked some Prussian ofﬁ-
cials, made no such distinction. The harshness of the proscribed sentences,
coupled with the fact that more than half the crimes that came before
Rhenish juries in this period were crimes against property, and that these
juries were selected from the highest tax-payers, provoked not only the con-
demnation of Marx, but also criticism from the eminent jurist Savigny. In
their eyes, defence of ‘Rhenish’ law was chieﬂy about narrow class interest.

123 Hans Pelger, ‘Karl Marx und die rheinpreußische Weinkrise’, Archiv für Sozialgeschichte 13 (1973),
   pp. 309–75.
