                    The Rhineland and development of Germany                                     271
evidence to recognise the claims of twenty-four counts, 190 Freiherrn, and
492 other nobles in the Rheinprovinz.110
    The consciously bourgeois self-perception of the urbanised Rhenish elite,
who set the social and cultural tone for the Rheinprovinz as a whole, re-
mained undiminished throughout the nineteenth century. It was immu-
nised by its economic strength against feelings of inferiority towards the
re-established nobility.111 Nor were the professions cowed into modifying
their self-consciously liberal outlook by aping the nobility. The judiciary
in particular held out, its egalitarian mentalité symbolised by Sethe’s de-
cision, as president of the Rhenish supreme appeal court, to turn down a
patent of ennoblement. Those few nobles who joined the judiciary were
‘bourgeoisiﬁed’ in terms of marriage patterns and lifestyle.112 Nor was there
any difference between Rhinelanders and ‘old Prussians’ in this respect,
as many of the latter who decided to enter the Rhenish judiciary as un-
paid trainees did so precisely because they were dissatisﬁed with the eastern
system and wished to study Napoleonic institutions.113 They reinforced
rather than undermined an ethos hostile to anything that challenged legal
equality.
    An example of this ethos came in June 1828, when the Crown Prince of
Hessen, Frederick William (a nephew of Frederick William III), was ordered
to present himself before Bonn’s justice of the peace. The summons arose
from a dispute with a builder contracted to extend his private residence in
the city. Signiﬁcantly, the district government of Cologne, to which Bonn
belonged, supported the JP’s actions, arguing that there were no privileged
courts in the Rhineland, and that Prussian law compelled foreign princes to
recognise the particular laws of the various provinces when visiting as private
individuals. The administration rejected the accusation that the summons
had employed ‘the coarsest expressions’; any other form would have been
illegal. The outraged Crown Prince naturally ignored the summons, and
the commander of the regiment providing his honour guard enquired of
the provincial governor what he should do when the local police arrived
110 LHAK, Bestand 403, 9710, nos. 1–34, ‘Verzeichnis derjenigen Individuen, deren Ansprüche auf
    adliche Prädicate bis jetzt anerkannt worden sind’. The Rhenish district with the largest number
    of nobles was Düsseldorf, located on the right bank, with close to 300 listed. Trier district, on
    the other hand, only produced a dozen individuals suitable for inclusion on the list. Aachen and
    Cologne counted between 150 and 200 each. LHAK, Bestand 403, 9754, nos. 63–6 (Trier), 83–130
    (Aachen), 149–238 (Düsseldorf ), 301–40 (Cologne). Unfortunately, there is a non-locatable gap in
    this Bestand, which presumably contained ﬁgures for the district of Koblenz.
111 Hans-Peter Schwarz, Konrad Adenauer. A German Politician and Statesman in a Period of War,
    Revolution and Reconstruction, vol. 1: From the German Empire to the Federal Republic, 1876–1952
    (Oxford and Providence, 1995), p. 20.
112 Hodenberg, Partei, pp. 11ff.       113 Ibid ., pp. 79–80.
