                                            Reﬂections                                            285
Germany. Hence their determination to destroy the French legacy in the
Rhineland after 1815.
   Political struggle between two competing visions therefore distinguished
the Restoration and Vormärz: the one was monarchical and aristocratic, the
other constitutional and broadly Bürgerlich. The failure of full-blown rev-
olution to break out in 1830/32 suggested the continued triumph of the
former. However, in the Rhineland at least, that quintessentially liberal
French institution, the jury, blunted the conservative counter-offensive
that followed those years. Not only did Rhenish jurors acquit the partici-
pants in the Hambach Fest, but the open court proceedings gave wider
publicity to the politics they espoused. Similar acquittals of political agita-
tors occurred over the following years. Karl Marx, for example, the most
famous Rhenish agitator of all, was twice cleared by juries of alleged press
offences. This hardly modiﬁed his opinion that juries dispensed class jus-
tice, an assessment that does not square with the evidence. In practice,
jurors defended civil liberties, and would continue to do so even after the
1848 revolutions, as the numerous acquittals in political cases over the fol-
lowing years illustrate.3 Not surprisingly, radicals elsewhere in Germany
identiﬁed ‘Rhenish’ judicial institutions as their favoured model, and when
the Europe-wide crisis of the 1840s led to revolution in 1848, these served
as a model for the so-called liberal ‘March ministries’ that came to power
(and in which Rhenish liberals, including many jurists, played a prominent
role).4 Brieﬂy, in 1848, it appeared that the constitutional values of the west
had triumphed over the monarchical east.
   Events in the Rhineland in 1848 were bound up with the early career
of Karl Marx. At ﬁrst glance, it seems difﬁcult to connect Marx’s political
beliefs with the region’s traditions. Certainly, his doctrinaire belief in class
struggle runs at odds with the picture presented here, with its emphasis upon

3 Jonathan Sperber, Rhineland Radicals. The Democratic Movement and the Revolution of 1848–1849
  (Princeton, 1993 pbk edn), pp. 101–2, 265.
4 In Prussia, the new ministry appointed by Frederick William IV in March 1848 was dominated by
  two liberal Rhenish businessmen, Camphausen and Hansemann. In addition, the Rhenish merchant
  and banker Hermann von Beckerath held the ﬁnance portfolio in the all-German Reich government
  that was established later that year. Meanwhile, Rhenish lawyers took over the justice ministries in
  Hessen and Bavaria, and there presided over the introduction of French-style judicial proceedings
  throughout those states. Furthermore, 100 of the 500 members of the Frankfurt pre-parliament were
  native Rhinelanders, a disproportionately large number. Signiﬁcantly, the overwhelming majority
  of these delegates came from the towns and cities, reﬂecting the essentially urban ﬂavour of politics
  in the Rhineland; only ten of the hundred came from rural areas, in which three-quarters of the
  population still lived. James J. Sheehan, ‘Liberalism and the City in Nineteenth-century Germany’,
  Past & Present 51 (1971), p. 122 n. 12. For a recent contribution on the business elite, see James M.
  Brophy, Capitalism, Politics, and Railroads in Prussia, 1830–1870 (Columbus, OH, 1998).
