                The Rhineland and development of Germany                  277
eschewed any meaningful factory legislation to prevent the worst abuses,
tolerated such practices, which were common. On this occasion, industrial
ﬁnes sparked a dangerous situation when rumours ﬁltered in of successes
achieved by textile workers in neighbouring Belgium. The arrival of manu-
facturers from Belgium seeking refuge added to the tension. On 30 August,
Aachen’s textile workers marched on Nellesen’s establishment to claim their
full wages and the abolition of ﬁnes. Elements who had joined the protest
attempted to storm the factory, but were held back by the workers them-
selves until the authorities arrived. These, far from calming matters, exac-
erbated the situation before ﬂeeing in the face of the crowd that started
chanting ‘Auf nach Cockerill’ (‘On to Cockerill’s!’). The mass then pro-
ceeded to the property of this representative of industrial wealth, which
they wrecked in a ritual of Luddite destruction. This having been achieved,
the crowd identiﬁed its next target, the city prison, and proceeded to re-
lease imprisoned ‘brothers’. Signiﬁcantly, almost 90 per cent of prisoners
were serving ‘correctional’ sentences for crimes such as wood theft. These
might be viewed seriously by the Prussian authorities and Aachen’s elite,
but appeared justiﬁed by the poor, especially in the light of that year’s crop
failure and increase by a third in the price of rye bread that August. It was
at this stage that the 230-strong civic guard intervened, and put down the
uprising.
   Thus had a protest against a speciﬁc industrial practice, initiated by
a small number of workers, spiralled into a wider demonstration against
poverty. Industrial workers who had, after all, prevented the storming of
Nellesen’s establishment, were not involved in the later actions against
Cockerill’s residence and the prison. Indeed, the number of active par-
ticipants in this violence was small, numbering no more than 100. This
number swelled to perhaps 4,000, representing an eighth of Aachen’s pop-
ulation, if passive participants and sympathetic onlookers are included. Of
the hardcore, as represented in the ﬁfty-four subsequent convictions, half
were youths aged between ﬁfteen and twenty. Most were unemployed or
under-employed labourers from the needle and textile industries, with the
rest mainly young unskilled craftsmen, especially from the building trade.
These represented very much the bottom of the social pile. The Bürgertum
remained cohesive. The main social division was located within the lower
class, not between the lower and middle classes. Industrial workers, apart
from their involvement in the beginning, subsequently found themselves
on neither side of the conﬂict, whilst craftsmen were to be found both
amongst the rioters and the civic guard.
