                                          Reﬂections                                         283
as more dependent upon local elites, than is recognised in accounts that
focus simply on the awesome administrative structures. These proved im-
pressive on paper, but in practice underwent modiﬁcation when confronted
with the challenges of governing a recently annexed peripheral region with
a largely alien culture.
   This study emphasises the Napoleonic state’s limitations. It does not
intend to diminish the signiﬁcance of French rule. This was of huge signif-
icance, for several reasons. One was that some French institutions gained
a surprising degree of popular support. Superﬁcially, this seems bizarre,
given that the Napoleonic order apparently represented the antithesis of
what Rhinelanders were used to. Yet, several factors allowed the new regime
to gain acceptance, including its very ﬂexibility and fragility. Furthermore,
Napoleon followed upon a brief but disastrous period of military occupa-
tion characterised by the arbitrary exercise of power. More fundamentally,
some Napoleonic institutions, including the various representative coun-
cils and electoral colleges – bodies which cannot be dismissed as a sham –
suited the existing political culture very well. Most signiﬁcant of all in this
respect was the judiciary: the codes and multi-tiered system of courts with
their oral proceedings and juries. Napoleon’s state was a Rechtsstaat, where
executive action was conﬁned by procedural regulations. This holds true,
despite the occasional spectacular acts of arbitrariness committed at the
highest levels.1 For Napoleon jealously reserved such arbitrary discretion
for himself, whilst binding his subordinates with guidelines. Furthermore,
he established institutions that enabled citizens to gain redress if these were
deviated from. For Rhinelanders, long accustomed to the checks provided
by representative estates and imperial courts, such institutional protection
against arbitrariness was immensely important. This sentiment was exposed
by later Prussian investigation of the pros and cons of the French legal sys-
tem: what Rhinelanders really appreciated was the transparent and equitable
court procedures rather than the laws themselves, which in many respects
were harsher than the Prussian alternative. As the liberal David Hansemann
observed in the 1830s, Rhinelanders cared more about equality – by which
he meant equitable treatment by public authorities – than liberty.
   Napoleonic institutions, like those of the old Reich, provided protection
against the arbitrariness Rhinelanders experienced under occupation in the
1790s, and which most associated with the eastern monarchies. With respect
to these, Rhenish prejudices remained remarkably consistent. They were

1 Isser Woloch, Napoleon and His Collaborators. The Making of a Dictatorship (New York and London,
 2001), p. 56.
