280                                   From Reich to State
Free Press’ (Vaterlandsvereins zur Unterstützung der freien Presse), a cre-
ation that quickly took root and spread until its branches covered southern
Germany and extended to the north; there was even a section in Paris,
which boasted Heinrich Heine amongst its members.
    Political conﬂict over representation and press freedom overlay deep-
ening economic hardship in the Rhineland-Palatinate. This, coupled with
broader centre–periphery conﬂicts that revolved around confession and ﬁs-
cal policy, contributed to the radicalisation of broader social groups. An
explosion resulted on 27 May 1832 with the Hambach Fest, a great public
festival that represented the highpoint of early German liberalism. Like
their counterparts in Berlin, conservatives in Munich blamed the political
agitation on former Rhenish servants of Napoleon. During the Hambach
Fest itself, the Bavarian government even feared that veterans of Napoleon’s
army might lend military muscle to the moderate calls of intellectuals and
journalists addressing the crowds.133 Characteristically for this period, the
event’s political potential hinged upon the ability of liberal activists to make
a connection between their demands for the overthrow of the existing po-
litical order, and the grievances of the ordinary people. These grievances,
according to the investigation conducted by the Bavarian authorities fol-
lowing the event, were directed less against the Monarchy in the abstract but
rather against individual ofﬁcials who were especially unpopular. Popular
engagement with the ‘high’ political agenda and theorising of the radi-
cal (and for the majority inaudible) speakers who addressed the crowd
at Hambach, in contrast, remained minimal. It was not that the masses
were apolitical, but rather that their political consciousness was rooted
elsewhere.134 Nonetheless, French institutions gave this consciousness ex-
pression. In the words of the Bavarian army’s commander, Field-Marshal
Wrede, in his letter to Metternich shortly after Hambach, it was these
institutions ‘that contained the poison within themselves’. Metternich, of
course, needed no convincing, and exploited the festival to initiate yet
another crackdown against opposition movements throughout Germany,
whilst in Bavaria a reaction set in against the ‘palatinisation’ of the state.135

Prussia annexed the Rhineland at a time when the Monarchy’s future course
remained undetermined. The reforms initiated by Stein and Hardenberg
133 Walther Klein, Der Napoleonkult in der Pfalz (Munich and Berlin, 1934), p. 14.
134 Karl H. Wegert, German Radicals Confront the Common People. Revolutionary Politics and Popular
   Politics 1789–1849 (Mainz, 1992), pp. 102ff., 144–71.
135 Wrede to Metternich, 31 July 1832. Quoted in Heiner Haan, ‘Kontinuität und Diskontinuität
   in der pfälzischen Beamtenschaft im Übergang von der französischen zur bayerischen Herrschaft
   (1814–1818)’, Jahrbuch für westdeutsche Landesgeschichte 2 (1976), pp. 308–9.
