278                                  From Reich to State
   Cologne’s Bürgertum similarly remained cohesive during disturbances
that occurred following the arrival of news of Aachen’s events on the night
of 31 August, though on this occasion it appears to have instigated the
trouble directed at the Prussian authorities. Certainly, police reports of
Cologne’s disturbances suggest it was more than a bread riot, and point to
the openly anti-government spirit of the city’s elite, which led the other
classes in ridiculing the Prussian authorities. Large crowds gathered on city
squares, chanting: ‘Long live Napoleon and the Constitution.’ Signiﬁcantly,
the Rhenish appeal court was the only government institution that explic-
itly met with the crowd’s approval. The crowd eventually dispersed, but
reassembled the next evening in even greater strength, but again dispersed
without major incident. On the third day the 25th infantry regiment arrived
from Koblenz and re-established order.127
   Berlin, fearing revolution, appointed Prince William governor-general
of the Rhineland and Westphalia with extraordinary powers. The govern-
ment also instructed its ofﬁcials to minimise contacts with representatives
of the ‘rebellious’ Belgian regime, lest such intercourse offend Prussia’s
‘honour’.128 Signiﬁcantly, both Ingersleben and Prince William identiﬁed
Cologne’s police commissioner, Struensee, and his ‘predilection for drastic
measures’, as responsible for the trouble (Struensee’s original appointment
in 1816, as noted earlier, had sparked bitter protests from the city govern-
ment). Both favoured his transfer out of the province, as he was hated
by the judiciary, Catholic Church and members of the ‘highest estate’.129
Struensee defended himself and blamed the disturbances on the army’s ab-
sence and the revolutionary spirit spreading from France and Belgium. This
had emboldened the masses into demonstrating openly against unpopu-
lar taxes. It was at this point that events took a sinister turn, he reported,
with the ‘party’ composed of the city’s elite allegedly turning the mob
against the Prussian police. The hatred of this ‘party’, Struensee claimed,
had frequently manifested itself since the beginning of his appointment
in various incidents. Despite his defence, Ingersleben succeeded in getting
Struensee out by sending him on a fact-ﬁnding tour of prisons in the eastern
provinces.130
   Struensee’s transfer represented a defeat for his conservative support-
ers in Berlin, including the justice minister, Kamptz, who distrusted the
provincial administration. To investigate possible connections between
Rhinelanders and foreign revolutionary emissaries, Berlin dispatched a

127 LHAK, Bestand 403, 4163, nos. 49–50.       128 LHAK, Bestand 403, 96, nos. 3–6, 51–4, 99–100.
129 LHAK, Bestand 403, 4163, nos. 31–2, 35–6, 57–60.     130 Ibid ., nos. 33–5, 39–48, 83–5, 89–90.
