               The Rhineland and development of Germany                  281
in response to Prussia’s defeat by Napoleon remained incomplete. Would
Berlin continue down the path of reform? The expansion of the Monarchy
westwards through the incorporation of provinces previously within the
Napoleonic orbit offered to breathe new life into the process. For conserva-
tives, in contrast, the danger of contamination by an alien set of values now
presented itself. In the Rhineland, prejudices against Prussian militarism
and brutality – prejudices that predated the Napoleonic period – came
to the fore. The confessional question, which further divided the largely
Catholic population from an essentially Protestant state, also undermined
attempts at integration. That said, this issue was not paramount in the ﬁrst
decades of Prussian rule, when hierarchy and state found many areas of
co-operation. It was only in the 1830s that relations collapsed under the
burden of the mixed-marriages crisis.
   More important than religion in determining relations between centre
and periphery was the French legacy. Initially, reform-minded Prussian of-
ﬁcials played a crucial role in ensuring that this was not immediately swept
aside. This should never be forgotten. Beyond that, defence of ‘French’
institutions potentially united a broad social coalition within the region
itself. Too often, preservation of the French legacy has been seen in Marxist
terms of class conﬂict. Certainly, wealthy liberal businessmen had an in-
terest in seeing most Napoleonic institutions preserved. However, there
was more to these institutions than the protection of property. For many
Rhinelanders, the French legacy provided a defence against the arbitrary
exercise of authority that was, rightly or wrongly, associated with ‘Prussian
methods’. As we saw in previous chapters, Napoleonic rule, far from mak-
ing Rhinelanders used to authoritarianism, endowed them with a new set
of institutions that blunted it. Chief amongst these was the law.
