284                                 From Reich to State
shared by a broad social spectrum, and were indeed an integral part of what
it meant to be a Rhinelander. Now, for the eighteenth century, much of the
historiography interprets this as clinging on to outmoded rights in the face
of ‘modernisation’ as was being imposed from above in the ‘enlightened’
monarchies to the east. For the nineteenth century, in contrast, the same
values appear as a progressive and liberal defence of the concept of due
process against monarchical and ministerial despotism. Of course, such a
shift did not occur within Rhenish mentalités. Rather, it is the consequence
of a theoretical framework that identiﬁes the absolute monarchies as the sole
repositories of progress during the Old Regime, and the liberal bourgeoisie
as the bearers of modernity in the nineteenth century. Such a framework –
a linear model, in which the path to modernity proceeds from the late
medieval/early-modern world of rights and privileges to the nineteenth-
century world of constitutions and liberties, and of necessity passes through
an intervening phase of enlightened absolutism – makes no sense within the
Rhenish context.
   The Napoleonic period should not be viewed in Weberian terms, as
bureaucratic modernisation forced through against ‘traditional’ opposition.
What is true is that Napoleon provided a new institutional framework
through which existing values were updated and could be expressed more
effectively in a region that had already embarked upon the transition from
corporations to class. In achieving this, French institutions also transposed
to a wider territorial stage the values previously formed in the context of
Land and Stadt. A comment by Peter Heinrich Merkens, deputy to the
Rhenish Landtag of 1833, encapsulates this process: ‘The era of the petty
town burgher has given way to that of the citizen’ (‘Die Zeit der Pfahl- und
Spiebbürger ist der Zeit des Staatsbürgers gewichen’).2 Here lies Napoleon’s
signiﬁcance.
   Napoleonic institutions struck deep roots in the Rhineland and gained
widespread acceptance. Such support facilitated their survival in the hos-
tile climate of the Restoration. For whilst their initial preservation after
1814/15 depended upon a small number of pro-reform Prussian, Bavarian
and Hessian ofﬁcials, it seems unlikely that these would have prevailed in
the longer term had the French legacy represented some unpopular foreign
imposition. For that was how conservatives within Prussia and the other
successor states sought to portray Napoleonic institutions. They feared they
carried within them the germs of revolution that would infect the rest of
2 Quoted from Friedrich Lenger, ‘Bürgertum und Stadtverwaltung in rheinischen Grossstädten des
 19. Jahrhunderts. Zu einem vernachlässigten Aspekt bürgerlicher Herrschaft’, in Lothar Gall (ed.),
 Stadt und Bürgertum im 19. Jahrhundert (Munich, 1990), p. 102.
