                              chap t e r 10

                               Reﬂections




This study examines the diffusion of political ideas and institutions. Several
conclusions can now be drawn. Popular suspicion of new ideas and institu-
tions in the Rhineland in the revolutionary era cannot be ascribed to apathy
or ignorance, even though such an interpretation was shared by successive
waves of reformers, radicals and revolutionaries, and has entered the histo-
riography. Nor can unease at externally imposed innovation be dismissed as
conservative parochialism or unquestioning satisfaction with the existing
order, as this underplays the indigenous conﬂicts that distinguished this
period. Historical research has revealed the extent of these under the Old
Regime, though their continuation through the superﬁcially depoliticised
Napoleonic and Restoration periods may come as a surprise. Their survival
illustrates the degree of continuity that existed between those two great
revolutionary decades, the 1780s and 1840s.
   Discontent with the existing order in the 1780s and 1790s, coupled with
suspicion of radical alternatives, led to various moderate reform proposals
that one might label ‘third way’ were that phrase not encumbered by modern
connotations. In any case, that bland term is fundamentally inaccurate in
this context, as it implies location on the modern political spectrum, and
not to the alternative order of Reich, Land and Stadt which shaped the
Rhineland’s political culture. This culture was vibrant, capable of evolution,
receptive to external inﬂuences and able to thrive within new institutional
settings.
   Napoleon, who straddled the old and new order, is central to this study.
At one level, Napoleon was less signiﬁcant than is sometimes claimed. He
did not mark a new beginning if that implies the elimination of earlier
traditions. Nor can Napoleonic rule be reduced to a simple account of state
imposed ‘social-disciplining’ that inexorably ground down local resistance.
Throughout, the sources have revealed the effectiveness of resistance to
‘social-disciplining’, and also the willingness of the Napoleonic state to ac-
commodate this. Napoleonic government emerges as more pragmatic, and
                                     282
