                     The Rhineland and development of Germany                                    279
special police agent, Schnabel, to the province. The provincial governor
and his subordinates viewed Schnabel as another representative of eastern
reaction, entrusted with the task of spying on themselves. The suspicion
was not unfounded. Secret police reports despatched from the Rheinprovinz
to Berlin in the 1830s betrayed a mixture of mistrust and contempt for the
senior provincial ofﬁcials in place, a sentiment fully reciprocated.131 The
result was the continuation into the 1830s and 1840s of centre–periphery
conﬂict within the Prussian administration. This provided an opening for
a new generation of Rhenish liberal who now came of age, led by the busi-
nessmen David Hansemann, Gustav Mevissen and Ludolf Camphausen.
They would increasingly assume leadership of the movement not only to
preserve the Rhineland’s unique institutions, but see their extension to the
rest of Germany.132
   The 1830 disturbances in the Rheinprovinz failed to escalate into full-
blown revolution mainly because the core of the Prussian Monarchy
remained calm. Berlin could therefore rapidly deploy military force to
nip problems in the bud. Similarly, the Bavarians eventually mastered
the even more dramatic upsurge in their Rhenish possessions. Here too
centre–periphery tension had been brewing since the beginning of Bavarian
rule and worsened after 1828 when King Ludwig I signalled a more con-
servative, clerical course with the appointment of Eduard von Schenk as
minister of the interior and of cults. This shift represented a provoca-
tion for the largely Protestant Rhineland-Palatinate, and it was against this
context that news broke of the French revolution of July 1830. Munich re-
sponded with reaction, a course challenged by the Bavarian Landtag. Here
Palatine deputies – notably, the lawyers Christian Culmann and Friedrich
Schüler – played a leading role in the liberal opposition, but seemed to
have achieved little by late 1831 when a frustrated King Ludwig dissolved
the body. However, salvation for the liberals and democrats came with the
Rhineland-Palatinate’s French institutions. The dissolution of the Landtag
left the free press as the sole organ through which the opposition could
effectively express itself and in the Rhineland-Palatinate it escaped govern-
ment repression thanks to the protection afforded by the legal system. This
extended not only to local newspapers, but also to the increasing number
of radical papers that relocated from elsewhere in Bavaria to escape cen-
sorship. These collectively founded the ‘Association for the Support of a
131 See, for example, the secret police report, dated 3 September 1833, GStA, rep. 89, nr. 16157, 2–4.
132 For an examination of the ideas of the most famous – though, through his attachment to Realpolitik,
   uncharacteristic – Vormärz Rhenish liberal, see Alan Kahan, ‘Liberalism and Realpolitik in Prussia,
   1830–52: The Case of David Hansemann’, German History 9 (1991), pp. 281–307.
