                                          Reﬂections                                           289
arrogance echoed the earlier comments by Schaaffhausen, about marrying
into a poor family. Ensconced within the municipal administrations of the
larger cities and shielded from mass politics by the plutocratic three-tier
voting system pioneered in the region, the bourgeois elite could afford to
feel smug.
   For the majority, religion remained the deﬁning element in their culture.
In the early nineteenth century, religion generally acted as a cohesive force,
binding the elite to the masses. It helped bridge social differences. Certainly,
there were some divisions. Sectarian differences obviously divided Catholics
and Protestants, though these were more pronounced at the popular than at
the elite level. Within the Catholic laity, divisions also existed, as we saw in
the deacons’ reports sent to Archbishop Spiegel. According to these, liberal
bourgeois Catholics tended to sneer at the popular piety of the masses,
and involved themselves in religious festivities mainly to assert their social
superiority rather than for spiritual reasons. Liberal Catholic bourgeois
felt more comfortable with their social equals from the Protestant and
even Jewish communities with whom they mixed socially and co-operated
politically. As such, there was no unbridgeable chasm between liberalism
and Catholicism. Indeed, both could come together in their opposition to
the Prussian state.
   This changed after the 1850s. Those two forces that had shaped Rhenish
culture over the centuries – urban culture and the Catholic Church – moved
apart. Liberalism, which was rooted in the city, became increasingly incom-
patible with what it saw as Catholic ‘obscurantism’. Scientiﬁc certainty, and
especially the evolutionary theories of Darwin, pulled free-thinking liberals
in one direction, and the uncompromising doctrinal developments of Pius
IX’s pontiﬁcate coupled with a revival in popular piety pulled Catholics in
the other. Liberal Catholics faced an awful dilemma. Germany’s uniﬁcation
by Prussia in 1871 and the accompanying attempt to construct a national
canon in which Catholics found no place compounded this dilemma for
some, but also ensured that the majority would rally around their co-
religionists rather than their social equals during the so-called Kulturkampf
that now followed.13 At one level, this battle was fought out between Church
and state, and is in particular associated with a series of legislative measures
taken by the Prussian government between 1871 and 1876. The most im-
portant of these were the so-called ‘May Laws’ of 1873, through which the
state assumed greater control over the Catholic clergy. Whilst Pope Pius IX
13 During the Austro-Prussian war of 1866, Austrian propaganda propagated a confessional view of
  the conﬂict, and even called on Catholics to refuse to serve in the Prussian army. This propaganda
  appears to have met with success in some parts of the Rhineland. Margaret Lavinia Anderson,
  Windthorst. A Political Biography (Oxford, 1981), p. 98.
