290                               From Reich to State
threatened to excommunicate anyone observing the laws, the government
acted vigorously against clergy who refused to obey them, so that by 1876
ten out of twelve Prussian bishops (including the Archbishop of Cologne
and Bishop of Trier) were either under arrest or in exile, and 1,400 parishes
(representing one-third of the total) were without incumbents. For many
free-thinking liberals, like the National Liberal politician Rudolf Virchow
(himself a Rhinelander), who originally coined the phrase Kulturkampf ,
the conﬂict represented a profounder clash of ‘civilisations’.
   Politically, the Kulturkampf proved a godsend for political Catholicism
(as represented by the ﬂedgling Centre Party) in the Rhineland and a disaster
for liberalism. For the vast majority of Catholic Rhinelanders, the heavy-
handed actions of the Prussian government transformed the conﬂict that
liberals recognised – a conﬂict between cultures – into a far more familiar
struggle against the authoritarian state. Certainly, this was how the leaders
of the Centre Party sought to portray the conﬂict as they mastered the
politics of moral outrage focused on the abuse of executive power. In this,
they could resurrect all the old anti-Prussian stereotypes. This tactic proved
successful in rallying many liberal Catholics, who were frankly embarrassed
by Pius IX’s pontiﬁcate. Liberals, in contrast, encountered grave ideological
difﬁculties on the terrain selected by the Centre Party. They faced the
choice of either supporting Bismarck’s heavy-handed methods or else siding
with a culture they found profoundly threatening. The majority opted for
the former route; indeed, many National Liberals criticised the Prussian
government for not being tough enough in its pursuit of the Kulturkampf .
Left Liberals, in contrast, though equally strong in their opposition to
Catholic ‘obscurantism’, expressed some unease at government actions.14
   The Centre’s tactics brought electoral rewards in the Rhineland and
elsewhere. In the 1874 Reichstag elections, the Centre attracted an estimated
83 per cent of the Catholic vote in Germany as a whole and achieved an
especially high degree of voter mobilisation in the Rheinprovinz. On a
broader level, the Kulturkampf encouraged the expansion of a counter-
culture in the Rhineland that was opposed to the ofﬁcial culture of the
newly founded Kaiserreich, and from which Protestants were excluded.
Well might National Liberal supporters of Bismarck, like the historian
Heinrich von Treitschke, fume about the Rhineland as the ‘region of the
crosier’. Sectarian divisions within the region, as in Germany as a whole,
tended to widen rather than narrow in the ﬁnal decades of the nineteenth

14 David Blackbourn, Marpingen. Apparitions of the Virgin Mary in Nineteenth-Century Germany
  (New York, 1994), pp. 263–7.
