                                           Reﬂections                                           287
alien dynastic states, and not from any desire for submergence within a
larger territorial unit. Confessional differences often reinforced this senti-
ment, but were not of fundamental importance. What was crucial was the
deﬁcit of legitimacy suffered by the dynastic states within newly acquired
regions. Nor was this deﬁcit quickly overshadowed by social conﬂict as
the 1848 revolutions progressed. Rather, it remained at the forefront to the
bitter end. It provided the glue that held together a broad social coalition,
and this survived into 1849. For far from betraying the revolution as later
Marxist interpretations argue, the Rhineland’s bourgeois elite remained
vociferous in demanding political change. Cologne’s well-established no-
tables, for example, meeting in deﬁance of the Berlin authorities in early
1849, yelled ‘German! German! Secession from Prussia!’ when prompted
by a speaker with the question of whether they wanted to be German or
Prussian.7
   Accounts that (unconvincingly, in my opinion) privilege the social dy-
namic behind the 1848 revolutions have often distinguished between the
northern and southern Rhineland, contrasting the more radical south with
the moderate north. A differing social structure – a south dominated by a
relatively homogeneous middling bourgeoisie versus a north distinguished
by a small elite of wealthy capitalists – has sometimes been proffered as an
explanation for this. Other explanations have looked back to the 1790s, and
sought to establish familial connections between the Middle Rhine radicals
of the 1840s with the Mainz Jacobins. None of this is convincing as com-
pared to the most straightforward explanation: the Prussian state was simply
better at crushing disorder than its southern counterparts. For ultimately,
the revolutions of 1848/9 collapsed not because of social divisions or weak-
ness within the Rhineland, but because of the deployment by Prussia of
overwhelming military force. Military power, which throughout Germany
remained at the princes’ disposition and rested upon the unshaken dynas-
tic loyalty of the mainly rural populations of the core provinces, ended the
revolutions.8
   In many respects, the defeat experienced by progressive forces in 1848/49
was less dramatic than previously thought. At least in the Rhineland, the lib-
eral bourgeoisie was not cowed into political inaction by the threat of social
revolution or government repression. For example, it vigorously protested
Berlin’s re-establishment in 1851 of the provincial Landtag in its old form.
The broad-based social coalition founded around opposition to the state’s
7 Ibid., p. 360.
8 Whilst the western regiments of the Prussian and Bavarian armies proved unreliable in 1848/9, those
  recruited from the core eastern provinces remained loyal. Ibid., pp. 247–8, 398–9.
