286                                      From Reich to State
a broad-based social coalition uniting around common hostility to the ar-
bitrary exercise of state power. Marx’s Left-Hegelian philosophical abstrac-
tions hardly contributed to the formation of this coalition. Yet, as Jonathan
Sperber reveals in his book on 1848, Marx rarely mixed philosophy with
practical politics and, as a practical politician in 1848, he acted very much as
a Rhinelander. Far from playing up class war, Marx did everything he could
to contribute to the formation of a socially broad-based political alliance
founded upon common hostility to monarchical authority and the bureau-
cratic/military apparatus through which it was exercised. Marx avoided
actions that might jeopardise this objective, such as attacking the Roman
Catholic Church.5 Instead, he followed the precepts already outlined in his
Communist Manifesto, written in collaboration with another Rhinelander,
Friedrich Engels. This demanded the overthrow of the existing East-Elbian,
aristocratic, ‘Prussian’ order by a broad-based bourgeois-led coalition. For
this to succeed, working-class consciousness needed to be diminished, not
increased. Indeed, the Communist Manifesto went so far as to accuse so-
called ‘true socialists’ – those engaged in class war – of aiding and abetting
Prussian absolutism. When, in the course of 1848, Marx seized control of
the Workers’ Association of Cologne, he used it as a mechanism to attach
the city’s lower classes to the broader democratic movement, and not to
engage in independent working-class politics. The subsequent struggles he
was personally involved in, such as the tax boycott of November 1848, were
deﬁnitely directed against the bureaucratic and military apparatus of the
state.6
   Radicals like Marx were not alone in exploiting anti-Prussian sentiment.
Catholic-clericals, occupying the other end of the political spectrum, and
moderate liberals, did the same. Centre–periphery conﬂict, pitting outlying
regions against dynastic cores to which they had been unwillingly attached
at the beginning of the century, lay at the heart of much of what occurred
in Germany in 1848. Certainly, this centre–periphery dimension was of
overriding importance in the entire Rhineland, including Rhine-Hessen
and the Bavarian Palatinate as well as the Prussian Rheinprovinz. Friedrich
Engels recognised the revolutionary potential of this situation when he
stated at a provincial democratic congress in 1848: ‘The character trait of
the Rhineland is hatred of Prussianism, especially the Prussianism of the
state ofﬁcials; this sentiment will, hopefully, continue.’ Demands in 1848
for the creation of a German nation should be viewed within this context.
At least within the Rhineland, they stemmed from a hope of rescue from

5 Sperber, Rhineland Radicals, p. 303.      6 Ibid ., pp. 300–1.
