                                            Reﬂections                                             291
century. This, despite Bismarck’s abandonment of the Kulturkampf in
1878/9 and repeal of the last May Laws in 1885. Liberals emerged with
nothing to show for their loyalty to the government, apart from internal
divisions and a falling share of the vote. In the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth
century, the Rhineland served as a liberal stronghold; by the century’s end,
liberalism was of marginal political importance and lingered in the cities
thanks only to plutocratic voting systems. These in turn would disappear
along with the Kaiserreich in 1918.
   The Kulturkampf ’s impact on the Rhineland’s position as a compo-
nent of the Hohenzollern Monarchy is rather complicated. On one level,
it demonstrated what many Rhinelanders viewed as inherent Prussian au-
thoritarianism. Confessional conﬂict delayed the day when the majority
of the region’s inhabitants would ever feel any emotional attachment to
the Monarchy. The feeling was mutual, as indicated by William II’s de-
scription of his Catholic subjects several decades later as being ‘without a
Fatherland’. Instead, Rhenish Catholics, like their co-religionists elsewhere
in the Reich, retreated into their own counter-culture, which survived the
Hohenzollerns’ fall.15 Indeed, this counter-culture arguably stood them in
good stead, as it provided immunisation from the kind of trauma felt by
many other Germans at the establishment of a republic in 1918. It was
no accident that Rhinelanders, of all Germans over the following ﬁfteen
years, were amongst those least likely to gravitate towards the political
extremes.
   A dominant Prussia within Germany outlived the Hohenzollerns, and
the majority of Rhinelanders remained loyal to this entity and rejected the
separatist agenda supported by France in the 1920s. Respect for Prussian
institutions contributed to this sentiment. For whilst the Kulturkampf of
half a century earlier had prevented the development of any emotional bond
between the Hohenzollern Monarchy and its western periphery, it paradox-
ically reinforced the belief that the Prussian state now met the standards
expected of a Rechtsstaat. Certainly, this is the impression left by David
Blackbourn’s analysis of the Marian apparitions in the Rhenish village of
Marpingen in the mid-1870s, an episode that in microcosm brought to the
boil the various conﬂicts of the Kulturkampf . For whilst the executive arm of
the state behaved with a degree of arbitrary ruthlessness, the Prussian courts
(eventually) intervened and unravelled the fragile legal basis of government

15 For more on this, see the fascinating study, Ute Schneider, Politische Festkultur im 19. Jahrhundert.
  Die Rheinprovinz von der französischen Zeit bis zum Ende des Ersten Weltkrieges (1806–1918) (Essen,
  1995).
