

As much as debt finance was an essential part of war funding, it was backed by a strong increase in taxation, with tax receipts accounting for 58 percent of the extra revenues necessary to fund the wars (O'Brien Reference O'Brien1988).Footnote 9 Yet, by 1809, the government had exhausted its possibilities for taxation. The introduction of the income tax in 1799 had only been possible given the highly exceptional circumstances. By February 1799, the price of consols had declined by 26 percent, to the lowest levels of the French Wars, reflecting grave doubts about the stability of public securities. The strength of opposition to the so-called “repugnant tax” was visible in its instant revocation upon the Peace of Amiens in 1802 and in 1816, shortly after the victory at Waterloo (O'Brien Reference O'Brien1988).

For excise taxes, a broad social consensus argued that it was indecent to impose duties on the necessities or the poor; so mostly goods consumed by the affluent were further taxed. Between 1793 and 1815, two-thirds of the extra taxation required to finance the French Wars came from taxes levied on the incomes and consumption patterns of the wealthy andFootnote 10 further increases in tax rates had become self-defeating (O'Brien Reference O'Brien1988, Reference O'Brien2007).

As a result, the Treasury had to rely heavily on the Bank for war finance. Short-term borrowing against Exchequer or Navy bills (unfunded debt) increased by 22 percent in 1809 (Mitchell Reference Mitchell1988). Unfunded debt had the great advantage of not necessitating parliamentary assent and of not coming with earmarked taxes.Footnote 11 It was, thus, often used to finance unforeseen expenditures (O'Brien Reference O'Brien2007). As both manager and holder of public debt, the Bank of England became essential for financing the war effort.

The Bank could hardly refuse requests for credit from the Treasury in times of war, especially since the monopoly of issue it enjoyed in the wider London area was subject to periodic renewal. With the Bank charter renegotiable at will, bargaining over renewals were often reached along with war loans, as was the case in 1781 and 1800 in the midst of the American and French Wars (Broz and Grossman Reference Broz and Grossman2004).

The Bank's interactions with the Treasury came with certain risks. During the Restriction Period, more than half of the Bank's assets were held in public securities; in the aftermath of the war, this rose to almost 70 percent. Holding substantial amounts of sovereign short-term debt on its balance sheet, the Bank's financial solidity depended on the Treasury's will to honor its running obligations.

War finance was, nonetheless, a very lucrative business for the Bank and its shareholders. Figure 4 displays the evolution of the Bank's stock price over the 25 years from January 1796 to December 1821. The monthly price index is set to 100 in January 1797, the month before the suspension, and deflated by the pound's value in gold. The stock price almost tripled between the suspension of convertibility (solid left line) and its peak in November 1817. Especially after the beginning of the Third Coalition War against France in May 1803 (dashed line) the stock price increased markedly.Footnote 12