

The Bank of England had indeed expanded its note issue, but the peak was reached only when the bursting of the South American bubble in late 1810 caused widespread panic and business failures (Feavearyear Reference Feavearyear1963; O'Brien Reference O'Brien2010). Amid spreading commercial distress, country banks started to contract their note issue drastically. The liquidity shortage was broadly acknowledged and the Treasury attempted to overcome it by issuing Exchequer Bills. Thus, at least part of its note issue could be accounted for by its normal function to sustain the domestic payment system, when other forms of credit were disappearing (O'Brien Reference O'Brien2010; Clapham Reference Clapham1944; Flinn Reference Flinn1961).

The marked devaluation of the pound after 1809 coincided rather with the military misfortunes of the British than with the evolutions in the Bank's note issue. Moreover, with the intensification of hostilities around 1809 a turning point would also be attained in terms of public finance.

## FISCAL PRESSURE AND INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE BANK AND THE TREASURY

Institutional characteristics enabled Britain to mobilize war finance at an impressive scale and laid the basis for her military and commercial supremacy over most of Continental Europe (Brewer Reference Brewer1988). Parliament gained broad powers over public expenditures and taxation through the Glorious Revolution; loans to government and the taxes earmarked to service them necessitated parliamentary assent (Sussman and Yafeh Reference Sussman and Yafeh2006). Furthermore, the government created a separate sinking fund to cover the planned reimbursements in case revenues earmarked for specific loans proved insufficient (Cox Reference Cox2015). Partisan politics further rendered outright default politically unacceptable (Stasavage Reference Stasavage2007).

The Bank of England acted as an additional private constraint on the government. It was responsible for assuring the continuity of promised reimbursements. As such, it could have refused to grant new loans whenever arrears on existing ones occurred. Channeling all public credit through the Bank therefore implied that it would become difficult to utilize funds of current loans whenever previous obligations were not honored (Macaulay Reference Macaulay1914; North and Weingast Reference North and Weingast1989). Thus, by the time the French Wars had to be financed, contemporaries dismissed the risk of strategic default, making large scale debt accumulation possible (Acworth Reference Acworth1925; Neal Reference Neal1990; O'Brien Reference O'Brien2010).

Nonetheless, by 1809, prolonged and intensified warfare had taken toll on public finances. Following the usual practice, expenditures during the first years of the war were paid for by issuing long-term government debt (Barro Reference Barro1987). As a result the national debt had doubled during the first six years of unsuccessful warfare against Revolutionary France and large loans against bonds (funded debt) continued to be issued in every year of the war.Footnote 8 Only in 1809, considerable loans were floated for England, Ireland, and Portugal (Grellier Reference Grellier1812).