

How did contemporaries view the chances of returning to the pound's pre-war gold content? I quantify this using financial data that captures the expectations of economic agents as manifested in market prices (see Frenkel Reference Frenkel1977; Webb Reference Webb1986). In particular, I use a series, the agio, that is computed as the difference between the pound's official exchange rate into gold (the mint price) and its market exchange or spot rate, reflecting transactions undertaken instantaneously.Footnote 3 The mint price carried the promise that pounds would be exchanged against gold at the pre-war parity at some unknown moment in the future, conditional on the conclusion of a definite peace treaty. As such, the mint price can be seen as the price of a forward contract on the pound.Footnote 4 Differences between the two then were reflected in the discount factor that differentiated the value of a paper pound at time t from its expected gold content in the future. The discount factor captured how risky and, by extension, how credible the promise of resuming the gold standard at its pre-war parity was in the eyes of contemporaries.

Switching from the gold standard to a fiat currency regime effectively replaced the risk of sovereign default with the risk of inflation (Calomiris and Haber Reference Calomiris and Haber2014). Adjustments in the real value of outstanding debt could be engineered through devaluations of the currency. In other words, monetary regime choices and their operation shaped how people expected debt to be stabilized. Inflation risk, in turn, was equivalent to the expectation of not getting back to the pound's pre-war parity. The operation of the gold standard pinned down a nominal exchange rate of domestic paper money into gold. Such a system yielded a relatively stable price level in the long run, implying on average low growth rates of inflation (Barro Reference Barro1979).Footnote 5 The path of inflation during a suspension was, by the same token, affected by the exchange rate at which convertibility would be resumed and the expectations thereof. For the suspension period, a forecast of on average zero inflation in the long term was an accurate one, only if people were convinced that resumption at the pre-war parity was certain.

Significant changes in the agio, thus, convey information about events that caused contemporaries to alter their predictions on the future state of public finances and should be identifiable as structural breaks. I verify the importance of events, matched with detected break dates by considering contemporary sources and archival evidence. In particular, I consult the London Times, the London Gazette, the government's official journal, and ledgers from the Bank of England archives to establish links between observed price movements and the incidents that caused them. I find that significant changes in the agio coincided with events that prompted reassessment of Britain's expected military fate. In particular, with unfavorable news, of a battle lost, for example, the pound's internal value declined, as devaluation became more likely. With favorable news, the pound's purchasing power increased. As Britain's payment system during the suspension period rested on the paper pound, changes in the agio implied changes in the aggregate price level.