

## THE ONSET OF CONVERTIBILITY SUSPENSION AND THE BULLION REPORT

The French Wars, 22 years of almost uninterrupted warfare between 1793 and 1815, encompassed Europe's political reshuffling following the French Revolution and Britain's struggle against Revolutionary and later on Napoleonic France. France's drive to export revolutionary ideals soon drove the country to war with most of Europe. The execution of King Louis XVI in January of 1793 sealed the first coalition against France.Footnote 6 It would take a total of seven differing coalitions between the Continental European powers and Britain to finally defeat Napoleon at Waterloo on 18 June 1815.

The wars exerted extreme political and financial pressures on all belligerents. The Reign of Terror in France, beginning in early 1793, produced a sharp outflow of capital, with silver and gold leaving France for Britain and providing increased liquidity for the British banking system (Neal Reference Neal1991; Sargent and Velde Reference Sargent and Velde1995). When the assignats collapsed in France in 1795, money for ordinary payments was in short supply and those with claims or credit in Britain drew on them to fill the gap. The ensuing return flow of capital to France, by lowering the stock of precious metal, put deflationary pressure on Britain (Kindleberger Reference Kindleberger1984).

Against this backdrop, French military actions in February 1797 triggered bank runs in Britain with depositors hoping to convert notes into gold coin. The consequences were felt throughout the country, putting numerous (country) banks out of business (Feavearyear Reference Feavearyear1963). Eventually, the run reached the ultimate provider of specie and, thus, de facto center of the British payment system, the Bank of England. With gold reserves threatened, the Bank was given permission to cease payment of its notes in gold on the 27th of February 1797 and suspension ensued.

With suspension, local bank notes were now convertible only into Bank of England notes, shifting Britain's monetary system from a commodity standard to a fiat currency with flexible exchange rates. Once the constraints imposed by the gold standard were abandoned, it became possible to accommodate the external drain of specie caused by Britain's expenditures on the Continent, and to grant the means of payment necessary for internal transactions, while absorbing increasing public debt issues (Bordo and White Reference Bordo and White1991). Britain now had a payment system in which the money supply was controlled by the Bank and the Treasury.

Conceived as an emergency measure, the suspension was regularized in November 1797 and extended several times. In December 1803, the Bank Restriction Act finally fixed its end at six months after the ratification of a definitive peace treaty. Over the 22 years of the French Wars, resumption of the gold standard was often a remote and uncertain prospect. Peace treaties proved to be inconclusive such as those of Amiens (in April 1802) and Paris (in June 1814). Even after the peace treaty of 1815, resumption was postponed several more times.