

Figure 1

DEBT-TO-GDP RATIO, 1692–2011

Sources: Mitchell 1988; Officer and Williamson 2013.

The Restriction Period (1797–1821) is crucial for an understanding of the history of British institutions and price history. Starting with the suspension, a long-standing debate has attributed the evolution of prices during the “paper pound” period to either real or monetary factors. Thomas Tooke (Reference Tooke1824), an eminent political economist, and the Bank of England administration articulated the Real Bills doctrine arguing that the Bank's note issue could not be inflationary since it was undertaken against sound commercial bills. Rather bad harvests, the war, and trade blockades induced higher domestic prices, while the outflow of funds used to pay for food imports and to subsidize British allies on the continent caused the external devaluation of the pound. For David Ricardo (Reference Ricardo and Sraffa1817) and advocates of the bullionist position, it was the issue of Bank of England notes themselves that primarily affected prices, as reflected in the paper pound's gold value in the market.Footnote 1

In this article, I propose a novel, third explanation: expectations of how debt would be stabilized post war determined the pound's exchange rate into gold. Such expectations would also determine the Greenback's gold price during the much shorter American Civil War (Calomiris Reference Calomiris1988; Guinnane, Rosen, and Willard Reference Guinnane, Rosen and Willard1996). Given substantial debt accumulation and inflation, returning to the pound's pre-war gold content would come at high deflationary cost: wartime inflation had to be undone by peacetime deflation. Another option—namely, getting back to the gold standard at a devalued pound—was by no means precluded (Acworth Reference Acworth1925; Fetter Reference Fetter1965; Kindleberger Reference Kindleberger2000). Not only would devaluation have spared the war-ridden economy from deflation and its impacts on economic activity, but by decreasing the purchasing power of the pound, it would also have alleviated the burden of outstanding debt. Some contemporaries were even concerned with the possibility that cash payments would never be resumed, as uttered by Bank proprietors when the suspension of convertibility was reiterated for the first time after hostilities had ceased in the spring of 1816 (London Times 13 April 1816).

Contemporaries understood this trade-off between the nominal value of the pound and the real amount of outstanding government debt and could form expectations about fiscal prospects to gauge whether the future policy choice would induce deflation or inflation. The type of information that mattered for predicted fiscal sustainability related to war finance, with roughly two-thirds of Britain's budget dedicated to warfare (O'Brien Reference O'Brien1988).Footnote 2 Moreover, apart from being a costly endeavor, war could, in the worst outcome, render otherwise solid public finances unsustainable. For instance, severe territorial losses and the resulting impact on an economy's tax base or imminent reparation payments (Oosterlinck Reference Flandreau and Oosterlinck2012) could push an economy to a point where devaluation-induced inflation would become inevitable. On the other hand, as British supremacy was in the making over the long conflict, so too was the credibility of certain promised policies—such as the resumption of the gold standard at the pre-war parity—that were to be enacted conditional on the outcome of the war.