

These sources also conveyed information regarding transmission times for news. For instance, Madrid capitulated to the French on 4 December 1808. News of the capitulation, however, only reached London on 19 December. I, consequently, pay close attention to the fact that break dates have to coincide with the moment at which information concerning an event reached London, rather than with the timing of the event itself.

While it is rather straightforward that Madrid's capitulation made the news in December 1808, it is less easy to determine which event affected contemporaries' perceptions, when there were several important battle lines. In these cases, I search the Times and the Gazette for keywords in the vicinity of the break date and retain the event yielding the highest number of references. I pay particular attention to the frequency of mentions in the London Times lead articles. In August 1812, for example, intelligence from neither the Russian nor the Spanish fronts made the headlines; rather the American declaration of war occupied most news space.

In addition to these sources, I rely on ledgers and related documents from the Bank of England Archives that contain prices for precious metals, exchange rates, and different titles of public debt.Footnote 24 The ledgers recorded events significant to the Bank, establishing a link between observed price movements and the incidents that caused them. In other words, contemporaries were well aware of the fact that political and military events had a bearing on the evolution of asset prices. The ledger (10A2702) recorded fortnightly averages of the aforementioned price data and was compiled in real time for the years 1705 to 1880. This makes the ledger a reflection of how events were understood as they unfolded. It is, therefore, reassuring that practically all estimated break dates and related events, discussed in the next section, are mentioned in the ledger.

My approach is inspired by Steven B. Webb (Reference Webb1986) in that it allows detection of events that influenced contemporaries' perceptions in real time, by combining ex-ante agnostic break tests with the study of contemporary sources. The Online Appendix provides an example of how this methodology forestalls detecting events that suffer from ex post bias. For example, historiography regards the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813 as Napoleon's decisive defeat, yet contemporaries' perception of the event explains why it did not affect asset prices; the British victory was anticipated and was not expected to alleviate fiscal strain.

Various studies in economic history (Guinnane, Rosen, and Willard Reference Guinnane, Rosen and Willard1996; Brown and Burdekin Reference Brown and Burdekin2000; Flandreau and Oosterlinck Reference Flandreau and Oosterlinck2012) have relied on break point tests. The procedure used here to estimate break dates is based on Jushan Bai and Pierre Perron (Reference Bai and Perron1998, 2003). It has the advantage of allowing for a very wide range of specifications (serial correlation and heteroskedasticity in the errors, lagged dependent variables, trending regressors, as well as different distributions for the errors and the regressors across different segments). The procedure also encompasses different break point tests (sequential and global methods), increasing the robustness of the results.