

1 More recently, Bordo and Schwartz (Reference Bordo and Schwartz1981) re-emphasized the importance of monetary factors for price level determination vis-á-vis Lewis (Reference Lewis1978) and Rostow (Reference Rostow1948).

2 The same was true for most other European countries during that period (Hoffman Reference Hoffman2011).

3 The market price of gold was published twice a week in Castaing's and—later on— Wettenhall's Course of the Exchange. For contemporaries this was, therefore, easily available information.

4 The mint price differs somewhat from a classic forward contract, as the obligation to exchange paper pounds against a pre-determined quantity of gold does not commence at a known date but is conditional on the materialization of a certain event.

5 The adjustment mechanism embedded in the gold standard requires that inflationary outbursts are countered by deflationary episodes. While this entails on average low rates of inflation, it also induces high short- to mid-term volatility in prices and activity (Meltzer and Robinson Reference Meltzer, Robinson and Bordo1989).

6 Following the execution, Britain expelled the French ambassador and on 1 February France responded by declaring war on Great Britain.

7 Neal (Reference Neal1991) argues that the interruption of trade with the Continent caused the exchanges to fall. By implementing the Continental System, Napoleon consciously sought to undermine British war financing. In particular, by rendering it difficult to import British goods, Napoleon attempted to constrain corresponding capital flows from the Continent to Britain.

8 Report by the Secretary and Comptroller General of the Proceedings of the Commissioners for the Reduction of the National Debt, 1891.

9 Income from seigniorage remained negligible (Bordo and White Reference Bordo and White1991).

10 The remainder was mostly levied on two widely approved objects of taxation, namely alcohol and tobacco.

11 As soon as Britain went to war in 1793, 33 Geo. III, c. 32 officially legalized the already usual practice of advancing funds for Exchequer bills without parliamentary authorization or funding, a practice not in compliance with the Bank's Foundation Act (5 and 6 William and Mary, c.10).

12 The increase encompasses the years preceding the battle of Trafalgar (October 1805) at which the French fleet was defeated, averting the danger of French invasion. The absence of any sizable departures from the increasing trend in the stock price casts doubt on whether financial markets perceived the threat of French invasion as an imminent one.

13 “The increased advantages derived by the Bank from war conditions and war loans” had not escaped Chancellors of the Exchequer (Sir Henry Petty, Committee of Treasury Books 5, March 1806). Consequently, management fees charged to the Treasury were lowered by Perceval in early 1808. Shortly before, the Bank had increased its yearly dividends to 10 percent (Clapham Reference Clapham1944).

14 Winding down the Army and the Navy was costly; so were the public measures necessary to cope with post-war depression (Clapham Reference Clapham1944; Flinn Reference Flinn1961). On the contrary, the presence of Wellington's army as occupation forces in France between June 1815 and September 1818 was not detrimental to Britain's public finances. As stipulated by the Second Treaty of Paris—signed after Napoleon's final defeat—France had to cover the related expenses. Moreover, Wellington's presence in France reassured British holders of newly issued French debt and guaranteed that war reparations were duly paid (Oosterlinck, Ureche-Rangau, and Vaslin Reference Oosterlinck, Ureche-Rangau and Vaslin2014).