

The  Index  to  the  Cross  Roads,  it  is  conceived,  is  so  copious  an<i 
explicit,  as  to  require  no  further  explanation  than  what  is.  given  at 
the  beginning  of  it. 


a  2 


Having 


Having  he/ore  observed  how  much  he  should  feel  olliged  to  those 
Travellers  who  would  do  him  the  favour  to  communicate  notice  of 
any  Error  which  they  may  occasionally  detect  in  this  Work,  it  may 
appear  intrusive  again  to  soticit  their  attention  ;  hut  the  Proprietor 
hopes  his  anxiety  will  he  excused,  in  consideration  of  the  advantage 
which  the  Puhlic  must  feel,  in  having  a  Work  of  this  nature  correct 
in  all  its  parts,  and  that  to  render  it  so  exceeds  the  possibility  of  in- 
dividual exertion — In  the  performance  of  this  task,  he  has  used  his 
utmost  endeavours  to  make  his  Book  complete,  and  flatters  himself, 
that  in  the  Delineation  of  the  Roads  few  errors  will  he  found  ;  but 
it  scarcely  needs  remark,  that  in  giving  the  numerous  Seats  which 
this  Work  describes,  some  mistakes  must  occur,  to  rectify  which,  he 
takes  the  liberty  of  observing,  that  nothing  can  so  effectually  con- 
tribute, as  the  information  of  the  intelligent  Traveller,  whose 
assistance  he  most  particularly  requests  ;  as  also  that  of  Gentlemen 
of  local  information,  to  whom  he  would  consider  himself  highly 
indebted  for  their  communications 9  to  which  the  utmost  attention 
will  be  paid. 

It  would  add  to  the  obligation,  if  Gentlemen,  when  they  com- 
municate information,  would  have  the  goodness  to  sign  their 
Name  and  Address,  as  it  frequently  happens  that  further  expla- 
nation is  necessary,  and  it  would  remove  any  doubt  as  to  authen- 
ticity. 


TABLE 


TABLE    OF   CONTENTS. 


Index  to  the  Direct  Roads  from  London. 
Calculation  of  Posting. 
Rates  of  the  Postage  of  Letters. 
Circuits  of  the  Judges. 

List  of  upwards  of  Nine  Thousand  Places  branching  from  the 
main  Roads. — See  the  Remark  on  the  Fly  Leaf ,  facing  the  Title. 
Index  to  the  Rivers  and  Navigable  Canals. 
Alphabetical  Arrangement  of  the  principal  Places  that  occur  in 

the  Cross  Roads. 
List  of  the  Cross  Roads. 
Index  of  Places  which  occur  in  the  Routes  of  the  different  Coaches 

going  from  the  Metropolis. 
List  of  all  the  Inns  throughout  the  Metropolis  from  which  the 

Mail  and-  other  Stage  Coaches  depart. 
List  of  the  Stage  Coaches  going  from  London  to  all  the  circumja- 
cent Villages,  fyc. 
Separate  Maps   of  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  of  the  Environs  of 

London,  Bath,  Brighton,  Margate,  and  Cheltenham. 
Abbreviations,  fyc.  used  in  the  Work  —  Page    I 

Direct  Roads  measured  from  London  Bridge  —  — -  3 

Ditto  measured  from  the  Stones  End,  Borough  —  21/ 

Ditto  measured  from  Westminster  Bridge        —  —  35 