


MAP. 

The  Map  of  England  and  Wales,  which  accompanies,  has  been 
executed  with  the  utmost  oare  and  attention,  and  exhibits  the 
whole  of  the  Roads  contained  in  this  Work,  particularly  describing 
those  on  which  the  Mail  Coaches  travel. 

Figures  of  Reference  are  added  to  the  Cross  Roads,  correspond- 
ing with  the  number  of  the  Route  wherein  they  are  described  j 
thus  affording  an  additional  Index  to  those  Roads,  and  giving 
facility  to  the  Traveller  in  tracing  his  Route  in  every  direction, 
and  to  any  extent. 

Surveyors  employed  in  measuring  the  Roads  described  in  this  Work. 

George  Gretton,  Liverpool. 
Richard  Wollams,  Shirleywick. 
John  Burton,  Lancaster. 
Joseph  Singer,  Littletown,  Devon, 
L.  Hebert,  Strand. 

The  Measurements,  which  are  taken  in  miles  and  furlongs,  are 
arranged  in  columns  ;  the  first  and  second  giving  the  distance  from 
one  City,  Town,  or  Village,  to  the  next ;  the  third  and  fourth, 
the  number  of  miles  from  the  commencement  of  the  Road. 

Example. — Page  3. 

To  Shooter's  Hill 

From  Shooter's  Hill  to  Welling 

— Crayford 

, ■  Dartford — Bull  Inn 

Thus,  the  distance  is  given  for  Shooter's  Hill  in  the  third  and 

fourth  columns,  eight  miles  one  furlong  j  and  in  the  contiauation 

4  of 


M 

F 

M 

F 



- 

8 

I 

2 

I 

10 

2 

2 
1 

5 

7 

12 

14 

7 
6 

ADVERTISEMENT. 

©f  the  Road  to  Dartford  you  find  the  measurement  to  that  place 
from  London  to  be  fourteen  miles  six  furlongs. 

General  Directions  for  tracing  the  Roads, 

Suppose  you  want  the  Road  from  London  to  Doncaster — look 
for  the  name  of  that  place  in  the  Index  to  the  Direct  Roads  from 
London,  and  the  figure  opposite  to  it  (351)  refers  to  the  page  in 
"which  is  that  part  of  the  Road  containing  Doncaster,  though  the 
description  of  the  Road  in  which  it  is  situated  (being  that  from 
London  to  Carlisle  and  Glasgow)  begins  in  page  343,  and  ends  in 
page  360. 

In  describing  the  lesser  Roads  branching  from  the  greater,  the 
last  remarkable  place  on  the  great  Road,  or  the  spot  where  the 
lesser  turns  off,  is  first  given,  with  a  reference  to  the  page  in  which 
you  will  find  the  Road  so  far  as  to  that  place  j  and  afterwards  the 
Branch  is  continued  :  as,  for  instance,  to  find  the  Road  from 
London  to  Weymouth,  the  Index  refers  you  for  Weymouth  to 
page  84,  where  you  find  it  in  the  following  form,  viz. 

M    F       M    F 

To  Dorchester,  p.  56 119  6 

Brodeway  4  7  124  5 

Melcomb  Regis  25  127  2 

Weymouth  —  4  127  6 

By  which  it  appears  you  are  referred  to  page  56  for  this  Road  as 
far  as  Dorchester  (the  last  remarkable  place  on  the  great  Road)  j 
and  the  remainder  of  the  Road  to  Weymouth  is  given  after  the 
above  form  in  page  84*  as  directed  by  the  Index.  These  Refer- 
ences are  made  use  of  in  order  to  prevent  the  numberless  repeti- 
tions, which  would  otherwise  unavoidably  occur,  and  thereby  swell 
the  Book  to  an  inconvenient  size. 