

Macclesfield,  1  m.  before,  on  r.  is  Sutton 
Hall,  Countess  of  Lucan  ;  near  there- 
to John  Daintry,  Esq. ;  and  on  1 
By  rams  House,  M.  Daintry,  Esq. ; 
and  at  the  Entrance  of  Macclesfield, 
on  r.  is  a  Seat  of  J.  Ryley,  Esq. 

\  M.  beyond  Macclesfield,  on  r.  Brian 
Hodgson,  Esq. ;  and  on  1.  Mrs 
Brooksbank ;  and  2  m.  from  Mac- 
clesfield,  on  1.  is  Gawsworth  Hall, 
Earl  of  Harrington. 

Flash,  1  m.  beyond,  on  1.  is  Bonnisall 
Hall,  Rev.  Mr.  Watson;  and  1  M. 
further,  on  1.  Adlington  Hall,  Richd. 
Crosse  Legh,  Esq. 

Between  Hope  Green  and  Poynton,  on  1 
T.  Pickford,  Esq. 

Poynton,  on  r.  Viscount  Bulkeley  :  on  1 
near  the  Turnpike,  is  Norbury  Hall 
in  Ruins,  celebrated  as  the  Birth- 
place of  Lord  Chancellor  Clarendon. 

Stockport  has  an  extensive  Cotton  Manu- 
factory, which  is  in  the  Market  Place 

At  Ardivick  Green,  T.  Tipping,  Esq. 


The   Manchester  and  Ashton  under  Lyne\ 
Canal  commences  at  Manchester  and 
goes  to  Clayton,  and  thence  to  Fair- 
field, where    it     divides     into     two 
Branches,  one  to  Ashton  under  Lyne 
(where  it  connects  with  the  Hudders- 
field  and  Peak  Forest  Canals),  and 
the  other  to  the  Aqueduct  nearWater 
houses  :  it  here  divides  again  into  two 
more  Branches  ;  one   goes  to   Fair 
bottom,  the  other  to  Hollinwood,  the 
latter  called  the  Wemeth  Branch, 
At  Clayton,  as  above,  there  is  also  a 
Branch  which  goes  to  Heaton  Norris 
near  Stockport.     The  Length  of  this 
Canal,  including  its  several  Branches 
is   upwards   of   17    M.  upon  which 
there  are  25  Locks. 

Manchester    is    not    an     incorporated 
Town,  and   is   governed  only  as   a 
Manor,  by  Courts  Leet  and  Baron 
It  has  a  collegiate  Church,  which  is 
a  handsome  Gothic  Structure,  orna- 
mented with  some  beautiful   Sculp 
ture.       The    Tabernacle    Work    is 
very   curious,    and    it   has   a   large 
and   powerful   Organ.      The   colle 
giate  Body  consists  of  a  Warden,  4 
Fellows,  2  Chaplains,  2  Clerks, 
Choristers,  and  4  Singing-men.-     Be- 
sides the  collegiate  Church  it  has  ten 
others;  also  an  Hospital,  free  School 
and  Library,  each  of  them  well   en 
do  wed.     The  Theatre  is  a  very  neat 
Building:  the  Gentleman's  Concert 
Room  is  elegant  and  capacious,  and 
will   accommodate     1200    Persons: 
there  are  also  new  and  commodious 
Assembly  Rooms.     Manufactures  of 
the  greatest  Extent  are  carried  on  in 
Manchester  and   its   Neighbourhood 
but  the  most  important  Branch  is  in 
the  Cotton  Trade.     It  is  also  noted 
for  its  Velverets  and  Checks,  Tapes 
Laces,  Gartering,  &c.     The  Town  i 
well  paved  and  lighted, and  is  supplied 
with  Water,  after  the  Manner  of  Lon- 
don, by  means  of  underground  Pipes. 