

Papworih,  on  r.  a  new-built  House, 
late  Sir  John  Maynard  Cheere,  Bart. 

Godmanchester,  on  1.  —  Pascheller,  Esq. 

On  the  1.  ©f  Huntingdon  are  Hinchin- 
brook  House,  Earl  of  Sandwich;  and 
The  Views,  George  Sharpe,  Esq. 

Huntingdon  is  situated  near  the  River 
Ouse,  over  which  it  has  a  good  Free- 
stone Bridge,  of  six  Arches.  From 
its  ancient  convenient  Neighbour- 
hood for  Hunting,  it  is  supposed  to 

have   derived    its   Name Hunton 

Down  ;  and  was  originally  built  on 
a  Spot  that  was  an  entire  Forest. 
Near  the  Church  of  St.  Mary  was 
anciently  a  Priory  of  Black  Canons. 
On  an  Eminence  near  the  Town 
stood  a  Castle,  erected  by  Edward 
the  Elder,  and  enlarged  by  David 
the  First  of  Scotland,  Earl  of  Hunt- 
ingdon. The  Town  is  recorded  to 
have  formerly  had  fifteen  Parish 
Churches,  but  now  there  are  only 
two,  in  one  of  which  is  an  ancient 
Steeple.  It  now  chiefly  consists  of 
one  principal  Street,  and  is  well 
paved,  and  lighted  during  the  Win- 
ter. The  Town  Hall,  in  which  the 
Assizes  are  held,  is  a  commodious 
and  neat  Building,  standing  on  one 
Side  of  a  large  Square.  Here  is  also 
a  good  Free  and  Grammar  School. 
The  Ouse  being  navigable  to  Bedford, 
it  derives  a  great  Advantage  in  its 
Supply  of  Coals,  &c.  from  Lynn  by 
Barges.  Huntingdon  is  governed  by 
a  Mayor,  12  Aldermen,  and  a  Com- 
mon Council,  and  sends  2  Members 
to  Parliament. 

Little  Stukehy ,  on  r.  Rev.Dr.Torkington. 

[For  Remarks  betioten  Alconbury  Hill 
and  Brotherton  see  p.  346 — 354.] 

Brotheitotiy  on  r.  of,  is  Byram,  Sir  John 
Ramsden,  Bart. ;  and  about  1  M. 
beyond  Brotherton,  on  1.  is  Water 
Fryston,  Robt.  Milnes,  Esq. 

Fairbum,  2  M.  beyond,  onl.  is  Ledston 
Hall  and  Park,  an  ancient  Seat  of 
the  Earls  of  Huntingdon. 

Abberford,  near,  on  1.  is  Parlington, 
Robert  O.  Gascojgne,  Esq, 


At  Abberfbrdare  the  Ruins  of  anancien1 
Castle,  built  soon  after  the  Conquest- 

Bramham,  near,  on  1.  are  Bramham 
Park,  —  Fox,  Esq.;  and  Bramham 
Biggin,  Lord  Headley. 

Wetherby,  near,  on  r.  is  Wetherby 
Grange,  B.  Thompson,  Esq. 

The  Town  of  Wetherby  is  situated  on 
the  Banks  of  the  R.  Wharfe,  over 
which  it  has  a  handsome  Bridge. 

Wahhford,  near,  on  1.  is  Ribston  Hall, 
Sir  Henry  Goodricke,  Bart.;  and  3 
M.  beyond  IValshford,  on  r.  is  Aller- 
ton  Park,  Lord  Stourton. 

On  1.  of  ro/>c/i/?HsNewby,Ld. Grantham. 

About  £  m.  on  1.  of  South  Oiterington  is 
Newby  Wiske,  William  Revely,  Esq 

Between  South  and  North  Otterington 
on  1.  is  Sobergate,  Robt.  Hutton,  Esq 

North  Allerton  consists  principally  of 
one  Street,  of  about  ■§  a  Mile  long. 
The  Church  is  a  Gothic  Structure 
built  in  the  Form  of  a  Cross,  and 
contains  several  handsome  Monu 
ments.  Among  the  other  Improve 
ments  of  the  Town  is  a  new  Prison, 
erected  on  Mr.  Howard's  Plan  ;  it 
consists  of  30  Cells,  with  4  strong 
ones  for  capital  Offenders  ;  and  a 
Place  for  Correction  and  Labour 
Here  formerly  was  an  ancient  Castle, 
which  was  much  enlarged  by  Bishop 
Pudsey ;  but  was  seized  and  destroy 
ed  by  Henry  II.  A  small  Convent 
for  Monks,  of  the  Cistertian  Order, 
was  founded  here  by  Edward  I.  but 
no  Remains  are  extant.  The  whole 
of  the  Manor  has  been  subject  to 
the  Bishop  of  Durham  from  the  Time 
of  William  Rufus.  He  appoints  a 
Bailiff  for  Life,  who  presides  at  the 
Election  for  Members  of  Parliament, 
who  are  chosen  by  the  whole  of  the 
Housekeepers  that  pay  Scot  and  Lot. 
Near  this  Place  was  fought  the  cele- 
brated Battle  between  the  English  and 
Scots,  called  the  Battle  of  the  Stan- 
dard, in  1138:  the  Spot  where  it  was 
fought  retains  the  Name  of  Standard 
Hill  ;  and  some  Caverns  near  it  are 
supposed  to  have  been  the  Places 
wher$  the  Scots  were  buried. 