to feed the rest of Europe was lost to the market.” 129 For this reason, he labelled as illusory the fear that 70 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4
-1 9 1 4 Russia might some day flood Western Europe with cheap grain, to the ruin of its agriculture. He thus explained: There will always
remain the difficulty of internal transportation, reduced perhaps, but always calculable in its effects, which will reduce considerably the
quantity of exportable cereals. And this difficulty in internal transportation will become more evident to those who con­ sider that the
Russian railways pass through long stretches of unin­ habited land, and the stations cannot be so close to each other as the Piedmontese and
French lines, so that the cultivator must still cover large areas of bad roads just in order to transport his wheat from the field to those
places where he might load them on the railroad.130 In 1862, the United States consul agreed that more efficient trans­ port to the
hinterland was Odessa's great need: At present the great want of Odessa, then, is the means of communi­ cation with the far interior, the
country which really sustains and sup­ ports it, by means of railroads and canals.131 The effort to solve this problem of inland transport
inspired countless pamphlets and many imaginative projects. Early efforts were made to construct macadam roads, but progress was glacial. By
the middle of the century, one macadam highway united Kharkiv and Podol’sk and another led from Kiev to Ostrov and beyond.132 The continuing
bad state of roads in the South Ukraine inevitably caught the eye of local humorists. The following passage, from Il’f and Petrov, was
written in the early twentieth century, but its point—that modernization left roads unchanged—expresses a reality of life in the South
Ukraine. Between the village of Udoyevo, founded in A.D. 794, and Chernomorsk [that is, Odessa], founded in A.D. 1794, lay a thousand years
of time and 2000 miles of dirt roads and highways. . . . The life of the country changed with every century. Apparel changed, weapons were
improved, and the potato riots were suppressed. People began shav­ ing their heads. The first balloon was launched. . . . The iron twins—
the locomotive and the steamship—were invented. Motor cars began sounding their horns. But the road remained exactly as it was during the
time of Solovei the Highwayma