---
source_url: "https://www.usni.org/magazines/naval-history/2024/december/shot-shell-general-paixhans-revolutionary-artillery"
final_url: "https://www.usni.org/magazines/naval-history/2024/december/shot-shell-general-paixhans-revolutionary-artillery"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "1ea8c4f9b67b8bae7526dda2b8f8edc13ee206d6368ec6252fed803051da4786"
title: "From Shot to Shell: General Paixhans\u2019 Revolutionary Artillery | Naval History - December 2024, Volume 38, Number 6"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

From Shot to Shell: General Paixhans’ Revolutionary Artillery | Naval History - December 2024, Volume 38, Number 6

The Battle of Mobile Bay included action by numerous Federal and Confederate ironclads equipped with shell-firing cannon. The Civil War demonstrated that the era of roundshot and wooden men-of-war was coming to a close.

Library of Congress

# From Shot to Shell: General Paixhans’ Revolutionary Artillery

By Philip K. Allan

December 2024

Naval History

Armaments & Innovations

View Issue

Comments

The Pastry War, a brief conflict between France and Mexico from November 1838 to March 1839, was so named because it was triggered by the ill-treatment of French citizens, one of them a pastry chef. A French squadron was dispatched to blockade the Caribbean coast of the newly established Mexican Republic and to capture the port of Vera Cruz. The war would have been no more than a footnote in history, had the French action not included a naval bombardment of the formidable Mexican fortress of San Juan de Ulúa.

A woodcut of an 1842 Paixhans gun. Note the presence, at location “B,” of a shell for the gun. National Navy Museum of France

Vice Admiral Horatio Nelson once said—with good reason—that “a ship’s a fool to fight a fort,” because almost all the advantages rest with the fortification. Despite the great man’s warning, a squadron of French frigates unleashed such a devastating bombardment that the fortress was quickly silenced and forced to surrender. The reason for this remarkable victory was that the attacking ships were equipped with new shell-firing Paixhans guns, while the Mexicans could only respond with traditional cannonballs. The concept of a shell that explodes on reaching its target has a long history, particularly in siege warfare. The Ottoman Turks were recorded as using such weapons as far back as the siege of Rhodes in 1522. Early versions consisted of a spherical iron case with a powder charge inside. A fuze was trimmed to a length judged to make it explode just after reaching the target and was lit prior to firing. The projectile was then launched from a mortar. Toward the end of the 18th century, more-mobile shell-firing howitzers began to appear on the battlefield, although they were generally considered no more effective than cannonball-firing artillery. This was because the high launch trajectory made them less accurate, and the variability of fuze length resulted in many shells either detonating harmlessly in flight, or being extinguished on arrival before they could explode. Most navies considered such inaccurate weapons to be of little value at sea. They were unsuited for the flat trajectory required to penetrate the thick wooden sides of opponents’ ships. Furthermore, handling exploding shells with lit fuses in the confines of a packed gundeck during battle would constitute a considerable hazard to the firing ship. As a result, shells were confined to specialist vessels called bomb ketches, armed with one or two large mortars for shore bombardment. But one nation actively explored the possibilities of these weapons. France, faced with a widening gap in naval power with Britain, sought to bridge that divide by innovating. If in traditional naval battles cannonballs frequently penetrated the sides of ships and reached the interiors, then how much worse would it be if the projectiles exploded once inside? Trials were carried out in 1795 at Toulon with 18-, 24-, and 36-pounder shells fired from conventional naval cannon against wooden targets. The tests proved inconclusive, but an undeterred Napoleon set up a special commission in 1798 to work on the problem. More tests were carried out using various shell and gun designs, but much of the problem centered around the fuze. The higher muzzle velocity of a cannon compared to a howitzer often extinguished the fuze in flight or when it struck the target.