

An image by noted Civil War photographer Matthew Brady shows sailors at their stations with a IX-inch smoothbore Dahlgren gun on board a U.S. Navy gunboat—possibly the Miami (1862–65)—during the Civil War. Rear Admiral John Dahlgren’s eponymous guns built on the work of French artillery General Henri-Joseph Paixhans. Dahlgren’s guns could throw shells farther and faster than Paixhans’. Naval History and Heritage Command

Another problem arose in handling shells in action. Given how quickly a horizontally fired shell would reach its target, the fuze had to be very short to stop the enemy putting it out. As a result, shells would sometimes burst prematurely in the gun before they could be fired, exacerbating the concerns of the navy about handling such shells. Batches of 36-pounder shells eventually were issued, but only to coastal batteries. There is little evidence they proved effective against enemy shipping. In 1809, French artillery General Henri-Joseph Paixhans began work on a shell-firing naval gun that could solve these problems. His solution was to replace a traditional fuze with a wooden one that would be lit by the discharge of the gun and robust enough not to be extinguished in flight. His shell had a round iron front, to penetrate the side of a ship, mounted in a wooden sabot that positioned the fuze toward the charge. Once Paixhans had perfected prototype guns capable of firing his new shells, he demonstrated his inventions to the French Navy. In 1824, a redundant ship-of-the-line, the Pacificateur, was supplied to serve as a target. To the shock of the naval observers, the ship broke up and sank after a brief bombardment. Paixhans’ guns were quickly adopted by the French Navy, followed soon afterward by the navies of Britain and Russia. In 1839, following France’s capture of Vera Cruz, U.S. Navy Captain Mathew Perry was asked to conduct trials of the Paixhans guns that had so quickly reduced the port’s fortifications. Perry is often called the “father of the U.S. steam navy” and was a vocal proponent of modernization. He tested the new weapons on a gunnery range at Sandy Hook, New York, and was unequivocal about the results. He concluded that the U.S. Navy must adopt shell-firing guns to have any hope of competing with the navies of Europe. As a result, the first batches of Paixhans were ordered, and the new weapon began to be fitted in small numbers to U.S. warships, including four on the War of 1812 veteran Constitution. The pace of international adoption was modest at first, but it quickened after news of a November 1853 naval battle in the Black Sea sent shockwaves around the world. A force of 12 Turkish warships armed with guns that fired conventional cannonballs was blockaded in the port of Sinop, Turkey, by a Russian squadron of similar size but whose vessels were armed mostly with Paixhans guns. With his ships anchored in a solid line and protected by the harbor’s fortifications, the Turkish commander was confident of victory. Even when the Russian fleet forced its way into the port, he was not alarmed—until the Russians opened fire.