

[§](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#S1V0024P0_18121130_HOC_6) [Mr. Whitbread](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/people/mr-samuel-whitbread-2)

said, if the right hon. gentleman who spoke last but one had alluded to him as the person who was understood to have prepared an Amendment, he was correct in that allusion; but at for the period of the evening at which either the right hon. gentleman or the noble lord opposite might expect him to deliver his sentiments, in this he was sorry to disappoint them, though he begged to say that he considered his time for speaking was entirely at his own selection. It was true he was the person who had prepared an Amendment; but before he expressed his own he wished to hear the sentiments of the right hon. gentleman as well as those of the noble lord who had just sat down. He was particularly desirous of hearing the right hon. gentleman's opinion of affairs at this time, for the right hon. gentleman in his answer to his constituents at Liverpool, said it was his own fault if he was not now minister. However, he did not rise to-night to dwell in contention with him, as he might have done at former periods, but to deliver his sentiments on what he conceived to be the present state of the country. In his opinion, there were great omissions in the Speech of the Prince Regent, or rather of his Royal Highness's advisers. The Speech had professed to give, as it ought to give, ample information to the House, on the existing situation of the country, on the events that had occurred since the sitting of the last parliament, and the subject of our foreign relations, but there was no information with respect to the dispute with America; and with respect to Spain, there was nothing which could in anywise enable them to form a judgment as to what was the cause of the late losses which the country had so much reason

[91](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_91)
to deplore. He found himself, therefore, bound to call for information on these subjects. If ever there was a time when enquiry and information were called for, it was the present, when topics of so great and vital importance came before them for discussion and decision. He would ask whether the House recollected the lamentable situation in which the executive government was placed? Were they not informed that the recovery of his Majesty was hopeless; and that the frequent paroxysms to which he was subject rendered his life so precarious, that the existence of the present parliament was likely to be of very short duration, unless the noble lord should think proper to propose, what he had heard was his intention, early in the present session, namely, an Act for the continuance of its sitting notwithstanding the demise of his Majesty? Whether so bold an experiment was to be tried he knew not; but if such an infraction of the constitution should ever be attempted, he would oppose it, if alive, to the utmost of his power. If, however, such a proposition was not intended to be made, the tenure of their existence was necessarily precarious, and it behoved them therefore to take the earliest opportunity of applying to the Prince Regent, for information on the state of affairs. He did not believe that even the noble lord wished to stifle all inquiry into the transactions of Spain, or the negociation with America: for even now the noble lord had said that a negociation was on foot with America. Why should not the House be made acquainted with the steps that had been taken with respect to that country. He trusted that this flimsy pretence would neither be offered or received as a ground for withholding that intelligence from parliament which he contended to be so indispensable to their taking a right view of the political interests of the country, externally and internally.—There was another topic on which the Speech had not touched, at which he for one could not help expressing his astonishment, the more especially when he called to mind the debates and resolutions which had taken place upon it in the last parliament. He alluded to what was commonly called the Catholic Question. He wished to know why the noble lord had not counselled the Prince Regent, who was known to have once entertained sentiments favourable to the Catholics, after the debates which had taken place in that House, and
[92](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_92)
the small majorities which had been obtained, to take notice of the claims? Why he had not advised his Royal Highness to introduce into the Speech one small paragraph about Ireland, the omission of which could not but be a subject of mortification and indignation to the inhabitants of that country?—There were other circumstances intimately connected with our continental connections, which, in his opinion, ought to have formed a prominent part of the Speech, instead of being as they were, studiously avoided. One of these was the depreciated state of the currency of the country. If he was not grossly misinformed, such was the absolute want of specie, that the officers of that gallant army which had achieved those glorious victories of which we so deservedly boasted, were even unable to provide themselves with any of the comforts of life—at least, that no subaltern was enabled to provide himself with any other means of subsistence or additional comfort of life beyond the rations which he obtained from the commissariat.—From the same causes the debt of that gallant army was very great, and increasing from day to day, whereby its operations were crippled and frustrated. When the noble lord took a view of the manufactures of this country, was there nothing to make him pause before boasting of the present as the proudest period of the English annals? The right hon. gentleman (Mr. Canning) had mentioned our three wars. It was, unfortunately, but too true, that an acquisition of two of these wars had been made since the last session. In Russia we were accessaries after the fact. To that power we had not made subsidies as we had formerly done to other continental powers frequently with great profusion. Of the ability to act in that way we were now deprived. In the third war, which was with America, we stood in the character of principals and alone—a war the most disastrous and calamitous that ever was waged, and the existence of which cut up the sinews of the resources by which our other wars could be carried on. This was the proud, this was the unparalleled situation in which the country was placed, so much the subject of the noble lord's exultation. In his opinion, it afforded only grounds for apprehensions, and abundant reasons to dread the most serious calamities. But the noble lord looked at these things with a soldier's eye. He talked of the masterly retreat