

[89](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_89)
In Russia the spirit of desperate opposition to his aggressions was, as noticed in the Speech, unparalleled in history. The people of that country had been spoken of as barbarians, and as being a century behind other nations in civilization, but could they find in any country a resistance to invasion equal to that glorious spirit which was now displayed, firing every rank and description of men in the vast Russian empire? Nor was it for courage alone that the Russians had shone conspicuous during this contest; that heroic valour, for which they were famed on former occasions, was not now their only praise. The military councils and skill of the commanders also shone pre-eminently; and the whole conduct of the campaign proved them to be equal to the most difficult situations and trying emergencies. The retreat of the numerous great bodies of troops from the Niemen to Moskwa, and the able and judicious manner in which it was conducted under pressing circumstances, was scarcely to be equalled in the history of the most celebrated transactions of that kind. The retreat of Moreau, on which his highest fame rested, no military man would say could come into competition with this in Russia. When so many armies had marched over 500 miles of country before they united into one mass, invariably baffling the immense force of their enemy, fighting various battles, and never putting it in the power of that enemy to say that he had dispersed a single regiment, or captured a single gun or baggage waggon; so excellently executed a movement was not surpassed in the history of the world; and had evinced, on the part of the Russian commanders, the utmost skill and ability, which, with the known valour of their troops, added fresh hopes to those already entertained of the deliverance of Europe. The interests of this people were now identified with our own in the most gratifying manner, by their fleets approaching our harbours; an action on the part of our ally which was calculated to make the French feel that even the loss of another capital would not involve the loss of their fleet, or be considered any more than the former as involving the loss of the country. In this the emperor Alexander had shewn a glorious example of what a monarch ought to be, and of the true policy of a monarch, which, had it been acted upon by others, Europe would not have been in its present state. He had not
[90](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_90)
placed his strength in a capital city, but trusted to the spirit of his country for the pledge to stand by him, and repel the invaders, and in this he had not been disappointed. His lordship concluded by saying, "Thus in every quarter our prospects are most bright and happy. I have endeavoured to explain every thing that may appear doubtful, and congratulate the House and the nation, that from the state in which the country is on the opening of this new parliament, there is not a topic for condemnation, though there are so many for cheering us in our exertions, and encouraging us to hope that every thing will prosper to our wishes."