

[95](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_95)
from the stores of his imagination on the instinctive love which every people possessed for their native soil. This he believed to be true, they might love their country; but to suppose that the people of Russia could love their government, or to talk to them of the laws and constitutions of their country, which they were called on to defend, was altogether ridiculous. It was said, that the population of the empire was every where rising spontaneously round the French armies for the purpose of exterminating them. But where, he would ask, was the evidence of this? That the Russian army was now, as it always had been, famous for its valour and discipline, and for its implicit obedience, could not possibly be doubted. They were well known to pay implicit obedience to all the commands of their superiors without hesitation, and would probably act now as they did formerly, when on the death of their monarch, they changed sides, and fought to-day on the side against which they had fought the day before. They were known to obey without reflection and without hesitation the commands of their superiors with the prospect of certain and immediate death before them; but to expect public spirit from such a people was carrying too far even the power of the most brilliant fancy. Yet it was in this situation of affairs that the noble lord thought proper to compare the retreat from the Niemen to Moscow, with the well-known retreat of Moreau. But in what respects could they possibly be compared together? General Moreau executed his retreat when he was far into the enemies' country, and when he was pursued by powerful and warlike hosts; while on the other hand the Russians retreated into their own country, in consequence of plans which it was said had been long digested by them. They were to stop at a certain point, where they had their magazines and entrenched camps. But was it ever in contemplation that they should retreat to Moscow, before fighting the enemy, and afterwards burn Moscow? It was preposterous, therefore, in the noble lord, to speak of this retreat as a great military operation. If, however, the efforts of Russia had been great, as great they certainly were, how stupendous must have been the power and the efforts of the emperor of France, who, without being necessitated to carry his arms into Russia, and having the war of Spain already on his hands, began that great undertaking,
[96](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_96)
penetrated to Moscow, and would, in all probability, have accomplished his purpose, but for the awful act by which it was frustrated.—With respect to the state of affairs in the peninsula, it was generally known to the credit of lord Wellington, that he did not court the battle of Salamanca; but that the French commander being too secure of calling lord Wellington off, laid himself open to attack, which that great man, with his accustomed vigilance, immediately laid hold of. By following up his victory, he took possession of Madrid, and afterwards advanced to Burgos. He was willing to pay the highest deference to the opinion of lord Wellington, and to suppose that in acting as he did, he judged perfectly right; but the plan of his campaign, as he himself had acknowledged, had been utterly defeated from the want of means. But then the noble lord enlarged on the great good produced by having weakened the French, and prevented them from carrying on offensive operations, and contended, that even if lord Wellington should be again obliged to fall back on Torres Vedras the same glorious consequences would follow which had already taken place. But if he might be allowed to ask the question, what had the Spaniards been doing all the time? How were the Spaniards seconding the efforts of the great commander? It was true, as the noble lord had stated, that the French had left the south of Spain, and been obliged to evacuate Madrid, and that lord Wellington had been received there and every where with an enthusiasm approaching to idolatry. In his letter after entering Madrid, he said, he hoped the inhabitants of Madrid would in future do a little better than before. But after the last evacuation of Madrid, he said a very small French force took possession of the Retiro. He was appointed generalissimo of Spain; and the very first order which he issued in that character to general Ballasteros, one of the Spanish commanders, who had been more than usually successful in his operations against the enemy, was refused to be executed by him. It was true that that general was cashiered, and that his army was given to other hands; but be very much doubted, whether the feeling which seemed to have actuated general Ballasteros was not too prevalent in Spain, to admit of any advantage being taken by lord Wellington as commander of the forces of that country. The noble lord said that Russia would be satisfied