

[93](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_93)
of the Russians, which he thought superior to that of general Moreau. While the noble lord dwelt too with exultation on the achievements in Canada, he overlooked the capture of the Guerriere by the American frigate the Constitution. He took only the fluttering points into his picture, but it became the House to take every feature into their view. It was their duty to look at the situation in which lord Wellington was now placed since his abandonment of the siege of Burgos. The noble lord had thought proper to suppose that my lord Wellington might even be obliged to retreat to the lines of Torres Vedras. Lord Wellington himself, in his dispatches, said that the enemy were in great force, that they had received considerable reinforcements; and that it was with the greatest mortification and regret, that he saw himself obliged to give up an object which, if obtained, he considered the success of the campaign certain. They were told, that when pursued by the French army he was pressed hardly; and when at Rueda, that he could not make a stand there. But then they were told that the prosperity of the country was improved, and that the nation was in a glorious and grand situation. Why? Because Buonaparté was on his retreat to his resources;—his force not annihilated, though certainly in great danger. This was what the House were to congratulate themselves on, and for which they were to go to the Prince Regent with an Address, on the prosperous state of the country! If this situation of affairs on the continent was good for any thing, it was this; that the emperor of France, having failed in his object, an opportunity was now offered, when it would not be inglorious, and when it would certainly be highly useful to propose to the enemy some arrangement for peace.—The noble lord had by no means satisfactorily answered the question put to him by the right hon. gentleman respecting Sweden. It was, indeed, surprising that this country should become so easily the dupe of every state with which it happened to be allied. Great expectations were entertained by the government of this country from Sweden; but he saw nothing in the connection but fresh sacrifices and fresh disappointments. The rear of the enemy was to be harrassed by the Swedish army, under that great French captain, as he was called, the Crown Prince of Sweden. Now the noble lord says—Aye, you see we were right in
[94](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1812/nov/30/the-prince-regents-speech-on-opening-the#column_94)
our expectations—Buonaparté was obliged to leave two grand corps behind him, for fear of the Swedes. But yet some how or other, it would seem that Buonaparté was soon relieved of all apprehensions from any diversion in his rear, and availed himself in proper time of these two corps, so said to be kept in check by the Swedes; for the fact was, that under Victor and Augereau they had actually united themselves with the grand army against Russia.—As to the state of Russia itself, and the result of the present campaign, he differed altogether from the noble lord with respect to the resources and population of the Russian empire, and with respect to the view which had been taken of that horrible fact, the conflagration of Moscow. The noble lord had applied to Buonaparté the epithet of devastor of Moscow. Now, it appeared that Buonaparté was anxious, and did all that was in his power to be the preserver of Moscow, as he had preserved Vienna, Berlin, Rome, Madrid, Venice and Milan, into which he had entered as conqueror. This act, the burning of Moscow, which he could not sufficiently deplore, had been represented by the right hon. gentleman, and by the noble lord, as a proof of the spirit which animated the Russians, as a sacrifice they were willing to make to the safety of their country; nay, the noble lord had regretted that the example set by Russia, in the destruction of their capital, was not earlier made, and he chose to describe that event as an evidence of the temper of the Russian people, as if they had been perfectly willing to surrender their wives and children, their sick, wounded and dying, to the destructive flames which laid the city in ashes. But this was by no means the case. It was well known that Moscow was burnt by military command, and that the inhabitants had no will in its execution, and no power to prevent it. The people whose property and dearest connections fell a prey to the devouring flames were not consulted in the execution; they had no will in the matter; and now they had no refuge, no shelter to fly to; and whether the act were justifiable or not, it was certainly not voluntary on their part, but a penalty inflicted on them by their government. The right hon. gentleman wished he could know what were the real feelings of the Russian people with respect to that event, and had delivered a splendid passage and drawn a highly coloured picture