

 4 J. Holland Rose, Pitt and Napoleon: Essays and Letters (London, 1912) 137.

But when the reality of the menace in 1803–5 is accepted, curious doubts remain about the years after 1805; and some serious historians, who do not belittle the threat from Boulogne, allege that Nelson’s victory at Trafalgar made ‘any revival of the [invasion] threat impossible’ - an allegation which poses as ba£Sing a riddle as any in historiography today. How can that assertion be made by authors who also describe the Copenhagen campaign of 1807 and the Walcheren Expedition of 1809? For it is made by such authors; and yet the British attacks on both Copenhagen and the Scheldt were essentially defensive. Neither had a chance of weakening Bonaparte’s landpower, but each was a blow against the seapower with which he threatened England; and, with their kindred operations, Sir Sidney Smith’s threat to bombard Lisbon in November 1807 and Admiral Gambler’s very effective night attack on the Aix Roads in April 1809, 5 they betoken a change in the nature of the war.

 5 I say ‘Gambier’s … night attack’ because the attack with fire ships was his idea, proposed before the Admiralty inflicted Captain Lord Cochrane on him as its executant. I say ‘Very effective’ because it resulted in the complete destruction of one 50-gun ship and 3 ships of the line and put the other 7 French line of battle ships out of action by damaging them so severely that it took years, rather than months, to repair them. After carefully reading the evidence given at Gambier’s court martial I am left, first, with a conviction that nothing more could have been done in the action and, second, with a total contempt for Cochrane as a man of honour. His Autobiography of a Seaman is not only highly selective in the evidence it chooses to present; it also contains falsehoods which the age of its author at the time of writing cannot excuse. Errors of memory one may pardon; deliberate lies one may not; and Cochrane is just a plain and shameless liar who, in describing Gambier’s trial, presents, with all the paraphernalia of quotation marks and page references, texts that purport to be the actual words of the witnesses, but are in fact Cochrane’s own rewriting of their evidence with substantial modifications - all duly quoted and italicised beside the original by Lady Chatterton in her Memorials… of Admiral Lord Gambier, vol. 11. Before one complains that after the Aix Roads Cochrane ‘was slighted in every possible way [by the Admiralty] and never employed again’ one should ask what commander would consent to accept him as a subordinate after seeing how he had treated Gambier. See also E. Chevalier, Histoire de la marine française OParis, 1886), 341.

That change in the nature of the war came in 1806. Until 1806 was well advanced, there were no regular fortifications to protect the beaches of Kent and Sussex; instead the enemy’s handiest landing places were guarded by nothing better than guns in earthen entrenchments. Against such defences an assault landing had unpleasantly good prospects of success; and, while this was the case, Bonaparte could continue to plan an invasion of England with only a local and temporary command of the sea and with a flotilla designed for no more than a ten or twelve hour voyage in good weather. But this favourable situation ended in the autumn of 1806 when those new coast defences, the Martello Towers and the Royal Military Canal, were finished and ready for use. As we shall see, these formidable new fortifications made it fruitless to attempt an assault on those beaches which could be reached with a short voyage and only a local command of the sea. Henceforth, if Bonaparte was to subdue Britain, he must first defeat the Royal Navy on the seas.