

The data are as follows. First, the fleet, with which Bonaparte intended to protect his voyage, was to reach the Channel from the East, after going north-about round Ireland and Scotland and stopping off the Texel to pick up the Dutch battle squadron (Doc. 14c). Second, the distance from the Texel to Boulogne is nearly 300 miles; and 100 miles a day was a good average for ships under sail 3; also the Dutch might have to wait at least half a day for a tide to get them out of Texel. Hence a space of three days must be reckoned to elapse between the fleet’s arrival at the Texel and the start of the invasion. But, third, Texel was linked with Paris by the semaphore telegraph, and the fleet’s arrival there should be known to Bonaparte within an hour, and his marching orders to the army should be promptly issued. This means that additional troops should begin reaching Boulogne only some twenty-four hours after the fleet. Then, fourth, the Boulogne flotilla was so large that it needed six tides, or three days, to get to sea. So reinforcements ordered to march after the fleet’s arrival at the Texel was signalled should reach Boulogne in time probably for the third, certainly for the fourth, tide after the operation began. The only troops needed at the coast earlier than that were those who would go off on the first two or three tides; and for that some 93,000, or well over half the force the boats could carry, would seem ample.

 3 So I was first informed by my friend Mr B. Sivertz, recently Commissioner for the North West Territories and a former officer in the Royal Canadian Navy during the Hitler War, who in his youth twice crossed the Pacific under sail. I find his recollections supported by the record of Captain William Bligh, who averaged 108 miles per day on his voyage from Britain to Tahiti in the Bounty. It is proper to stress that we are here dealing in averages, taking good days with bad; and that on good days ships might do more than 100; but it is also proper to recall that the prevailing winds in the Channel are from the West, i.e. head winds for a fleet proceeding from the Texel to Boulogne.

The fact, then, that Bonaparte never concentrated on the coast more than two thirds of the men his invasion craft could carry is not evidence that he never seriously intended to invade England. It is nothing more than another example of how he applied his own maxim ‘Disperse to feed, concentrate to fight’ - and in these days, when trains, lorries and aircraft enable us so speedily to deliver any amount of tinned foods at a given point, it is important to remember how hard it then was to feed great masses of men in an age when our modern means of transport, and even the art of preserving tinned foods, were still undreamt of.

There should, then, be no doubts about the reality of the danger England faced in 1803–5. The British admiral commanding in the Straits of Dover believed it possible that the French might gain command of the narrow seas for long enough to land ‘any extent of Force’ on the English coast; and a study of the time factor leaves no grounds for the supposition that Bonaparte was only bluffing. Then add that Bonaparte devoted two years to building and assembling his vast flotilla of specially designed landing craft; that he created four new harbours to shelter it; also that on 14 March 1805 - the very year in which it is suggested his proposed invasion of England was a mere front to conceal preparations against Austria - he ordered an additional 20,000,000 francs to be spent on improving his roads from Paris to his naval bases, Brest, Cherbourg and Boulogne, but not a cent for the roads leading from Calais and Boulogne to Austrian territory; 4 and it becomes impossible not to believe that in 1803–5 Bonaparte had every intention of landing in England and crushing his enemies there on their own soil.