

## DANGERS CONFRONTING BRITAIN

The first thing to be said about the danger of invasion is that it was real; and the second is that we were misinformed when we were led to suppose that the victory of Trafalgar put an end to it.

It is necessary to insist that England’s danger was real, because today some make light of it. Among them are certain British naval historians who are perhaps over-impressed by Admiral Lord St Vincent’s remark to his fellow peers, ‘I do not say, my Lords, that the French will not come. I only say they will not come by sea’; and a more positive remark than that could hardly be made. But before one accepts it at face value, it is proper to ask whether, in the circumstances, St Vincent could have said anything less positive. For St Vincent was not only a distinguished seaman; he was also First Lord of the Admiralty in Addington’s cabinet; his preparations for defence were under bitter attack; this much quoted statement was part of his reply; and on such an occasion no politician can be expected to confess any doubts he may privately feel about his own handiwork. But St Vincent’s fellow admirals did not all share his publicly expressed confidence. Among those who differed was Admiral Lord Keith, whose command of the squadron charged with guarding the invasion coasts compelled him to examine carefully all possibilities open to the enemy; and in October 1803 he was at pains to give the Commander-in-Chief of the Army a confidential warning that the French fleet might ‘get out of Brest unperceiveď and run up to ‘the Downs or Margate Roads, in which case it might be superior to our squadron long enough to cover the landing of any extent of Force’ on the English coast (Doc. 2). And in this statement Lord Keith endorses the practicality of something very like Bonaparte’s actual plan for 1805.

Across the Channel the question of how seriously Bonaparte really intended to invade England was raised by no less a man than Col. Edouard Desbrière, who made so exhaustive study of French projects for attacking Britain. Desbrière noted that in July 1805, Bonaparte had landing craft enough to carry over 151,940 men across the Chanáel (a total of which had grown to 167,000 by 8 August), but no more than 93,000 at his Channel ports ready to sail nor any reinforcements nearer than Paris; and Paris was four days’ march away. These facts led Desbrière to suggest that the Boulogne flotilla was a mere bluff, designed partly to scare the British, and partly to enable Bonaparte to keep a great army ready for service at any moment against Austria; and Sir Julian Corbett was emphatically of the same opinion. 2 

 2 Edouard Desbrière, Projets et Tentatives de Débarąuement aux Isles Brìtanmques (Paris, 1902) IV, 830. Corbett was even more downright, declaring, ‘Nothing, not even the army itself, was ever ready’. The Campaign of Trafalgar (new edition, London, 1919) 1, 17.

But these authors had evidently not made some rather particular calculations which must be made before Bonaparte’s situation can be properly assessed; and when they are made it appears that he should have had ample time to complete his concentration.