

Glad  that  you  have  feen  it  proper  to  bring  forward  this  weighty  fubjeft,  and 
defirous  to  be  favored  with  your  further  communications  upon  it,  as  foon  as  may 
fuit  your  convenience. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)  EDWARD  PARRY, 

The  Right -Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  CHARLES  GRANT, 

SiC.  cic.  &c. 


No.  IV, 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direflors,  held  on  Wednefday,  the  7th  December  1808. 
No. IV.  T^HE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Court  Minutes  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Corre- 


Secret  Court, 
7  Dec.  1808. 


fpondence,  held  the  5th  Oftober  laft 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairs,  dated  the  30th 
September  laft,  referred  to  in  the  Minutes  above-mentioned ; 

Minutes  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  held  the  1 2th  Oclober  laft  4 
and 

Draft  of  a  Letter  from  the  Chairs  to  Mr.  Dundas,  dated  the  fame  day. 

It  was  then,  on  a  motion,  refolved  unanimoufly.  That  this  Court  approve  the  pro- 
ceedhigs  of  the  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  of  the  5th  and  1 2th  October, 
and  the  Letter  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  of  the  laft-mentioned  date. 


No.  V, 
At  a  Secret  Court  of  DireGors,  held  on  Friday,  the  i6th  December  1808. 

No.  v.  JVJiNUTES  of  the  7th  inftant  were  read  and  approved. 

Secret  Court.  Draft  of  a  letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  to  the  Right  Honorable  Robert 

/6  Dec.  1808.  Dundas,  offering  fome  fuggeftions  of  a  general  nature,  as  the  principal  foundations 
on  which  a  new  agreement  between  the  Public  and  the  Eaft  India  Company  may 
i>e  placed,  was  read  and  unanimoufly  approved,  being  as  follows,  viz. 

SiA, 


(    7    ) 

Sir,  Eaft-India  Hou'e,  the  i6th  DeccmbenSoS. 

IN  confequcnce  of  a  conference   which  wc  lately  had  the  honor  to  No.  V. 

hold  with  you,  we  had  hiid  before  the  Court  of  Direftors  the  letter  which  you  were 

pleafed  to  write  to  us,  under  date  the  30th  September  laft,  on  the  fubjeft  of  renewing  Chairman  and 
■the  Company's  Charter,  tof!;ether  vvith  tlie  aniwer  which  we  returned  to  that  letter,  '^"^^  *  "'"' 
on  the  12th  Odober  following  ;  and  we  are  now  intruded  by  the  Couit  to  Rate  to 
you,  that  they  approve  of  that  anfwer,  and  are  ready  to  enter  with  you,  through 
the  medium  of  their  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  into  a  confideration  of  the  va- 
rious objeds  to  which  it  may  be  proper  to  attend,  and  bringing  forward  fo  im- 
portant a  meafure. 

At  the  prefent  momeni:  it  would,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  be  premature 
in  them,  to  proceed  to  any  detailed  ipecification  of  tJiofe  objefts,  to  which  it  may- 
be proper,  on  the  part  of  the  Conipany,  to  attend,  or  to  anticipate  any  difcuflions, 
which  it  may  be  the  wifii  of  His  r-.lajefty's  Minilters  to  propofe  ;  but  the  Court  beg 
leave  to  offer  fome  fuggeftions  of  a  general  nature,  as  the  principal  foundations  on 
which  a  new  agreement  between  the  Public  and  the  Eaft-lndia  Company  may  be 
;|)laced. 