

2d.  In  the  view  which  I  have  already  taken  of  the  propofition  contained  in  the  pre- 
ceding articie,  it  is  certainly  unneceffary  to  difcufs  the  qi-ie'lion  of  the  Company's     ' 
right  to  the  permanent  poflefiion  of  the  Biitifli  territories  in  India.     It  is  impofllble-   ■ 
that  this  right  fliould  be  relinquiflied  on  the  part  of  the  Public,  or  that  a  ciaiin  can  be' 
admitted  en  the  part  of  the  Company,  to  the  extent  which  has  fome  times  been  main- 
tained, and  to  which  you  feem  to  have  adverted  in  the  fecond  article. 

3d.  It  is  equally  impoflible  to  acquiefcein  all  the  reafoning,  though  I  am  perfe£lljr. " , 
wilhng  to  concur  in  the   conclufion  deduced  from  it   in  the  third  article.     I  think!' 
it  very  defirable,  that  ro  meafure  fhould  be  adopted,  in  the  renevv.Tl  of  the  Charter^ 
which  would  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  value  of  the  capital  ftock  of  the  Eafl-^"* 
India  Company,  and   that  due  care  fliould  be  taken  to  fecure  their  proper  Oiai-e  of 
advantage,  in  any  future  ameliorauon  of  their  affairs ;  but  as  the  law  has  regulated 
rhe  mode  in  which  thofe  affairs,  at  home  and  abroad,  fhould   be  admiailtered,  I 
cannot  enter  into  tlw;  ditlinction  which  is  ftated  in  this  article,  and  which  I  have 
met   with  on  other  occafions,  as  to  the  equitable  claim  of  the  Company    to  any 
remuneration   from  the  Public,    or  other  benefit,  on    account  cf  wars,    or  other* 
events  which,  as  reprefented  in  your  letter,  did  not  origin-ate  in  "  the  Executive 
"  Body  of  the  Company,  but  proceeded  from  caul^es  wliicii  that  Body   couid  not 
*'  contruul." 

It  would  he  permature,  in  this  flage  of  the  difcudion,  to  enter  into  any  details, 
as  to  the  proportion  of  benefit  to  be  derived  by  the  Company  or  the  Public,  refpec- 
tively,  from  ar.y  future  amehoration  in  the  fla'.e  of  your  finances  ;  and  any  contingent 
expectation  of  that  nature  mufl,  at  all  events,  be  poltponed,  till  a  large  portion  of  the 
Indian  debt  has  been  difcharged. 

4th.  The  liquidation  of  that  debt  is  undoubtedly  a  meafure  of  indifpenfable  ne- 
cefTity,  not  only  to  the  Coriipany  but  to  the  Public.  If  wc  were  now  called  upon 
to  difculs  the  ri^^ht  of  the  Public  to  the  territorial  revenues  v.'hich  have  been  obtained 
in  India,  either  by  cefhon  or  conqucfi,  it  would  be  impoflible  to  relieve  the  queflion 
from  the  fair  claims  of  the  Company  and  their  creditors  to  a  reimbuifcment  of  the 
expences  which  have  been  incurred,  and  the  difcharge  of  the  debts  which  have  been 
contrafted,  in  the  acquifition  and  m.aintenance  of  thofe  pofTcfiions.  Entertaining, 
that  opinion,  and  convinced  that  the  liquidation  of  the  Indian  debt,  in  the  molt 
fpeedy  and  effectual  mode,  would  be  a  merfure  of  mutual  intercft  and  advantage, 
I  do  not  fuppol'e  that  your  fuggeflion  in  the  .fourth  article  would  be  objeded  to  by 
Government,  provided  the  necefTity,  or  at  leafl  the  expediency  of  fuch  an  inter- 