


Tor  .that  pmpofe.     1  need  not  remind  you,  however,  that  any  fuch  aid  from  the 
(590  C  Public 


{  10  ) 

NoAl.         Public  will  be  ahavailiflg,  and  the  relief  afforded  by  it  will  be  temporary  and  deluTive, 

,       unlefs  by  the  zealous  exertions  of  your  Governments  abroad,  and  the  minute  and 

T  t't'-r  ^  *      detailed  invefligation  and  unremitting  attention  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  the  or- 
""       '  dinary  expenditure  in  India,  including  the  interefl:  of  debt,  fliali  be  brought  within 

the  limit  of  your  annual  income.  The  mofl:  fanguine  expeclafions  of  a  refult  even 
more  favorable,  and  of  a  large  furplus  revenue  above  your  ordinary  expences  in  time 
of  peace,  have  recently  been  conveyed  to  you  by  Lord  Iviinto;  but  I  trufl;  that  the 
Court  of  Directors  will  not  be  induced  by  thofe  hopes,  however  well  founded,  to 
relax  in  their  exertions.  Every  item  of  thofe,  or  any  other  eflimates,  which  the 
Court  may  exhibit,  muil  be  llriclly  fcrutinized  and  compared  with  the  actual  refuhs 
of  former  years,  and  with  the  deiailcd  account  of  any  reductions  which  may  have  been 
ordered  or  carried  into  effedt. 

^.t'ii,.5th.  I  can  have  no  hefitation  in  acceding,  with  fome  limitations,  to  the  principle 
for  which  you  contend  in  your  fifth  article.  It  is  abfiu'd  and  unrcafonable  to  fuppofe, 
that  the  Eafl  India  Company,  out  of  tbtir  own  revenues,  can  long  maintain  a 
contefl  againll:  the  power  of  France,  aided  by  the  greater  part  of  Europe  and  a  large 
portion  ot  Afia.  If  the  principal  theatre  of  the  war  between  European  nations  is 
to  be  transferred  to  Hindoit;ni,  it  mufl  be  fupported,  to  a  confiderable  extent,  by 
European  refources  ;  and  if  our  empire  in  India  is  an  objeft  worth  preferving,  this 
country  muft  contribute  to  its  defence,  againft  any  attack  of  the  defciiption  which 
we  have  been  taught  to  expeft.  The  extraordinary  expences  incurred  in  the 
iiecelfary  preparations  for  fuch  a  warfare,  or  in  the  adiual  contefl,  ought  not,  in 
{uilice,  to  be  impofed  as  a  burthen  on  the  Company  alone,  even  if  they  were  able  to 
.fu  (lain  it. 

6tb.  lam  not  aware  of  any  reafon  for  extending  the  duration  of  the  Charter 
beyond  fuch  a  limit,  as,  with  the  unexpired  term,  will  be  equal  to  the  period 
£;ranted  in  1703  ;  but  I  ilate  this  merely  on  the  firfl  confideration  of  the  fuhjccl ; 
and  if  the  general  queftion  is  to  be  dilcuffed,  I  fliall  pay  due  attendon  to  auy 
fuggeflions  which  the  Court  may  think  it  right  to  offer  on  that  particular  point. 

Having  thus  adverted,  at  greater  length  perhaps  than  was  neceffary,  to  the 
various  topics  introduced  into  your  letter,  I  fhall  proceed  to  itate  fuch  oblervations 
as  appear  to  me  neceffary  to  be  fubmitfed  to  the  confideration  of  the  Court  of 
Diredors,  for  the  purpofe  of  enab!J!;g  them  finally  to  decide,  whether,  under  the 
circumdances  of  the  prefent  fituation  of  the  Company's  affairs,  and  of  the  ex- 
pectations which  will  probably  be  entertained  by  the  Public,  and  fandioned  by 
Government,  they  will  adheie  to  their  intention  of  applying  now  to  Parliament  for 
a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter. 