

4th.  The 


No.  v. 
Deputy'*  iicUer. 


(      S      ) 

4th.  The  Hquiddtion  of  the  Indian  debt  is,  on  all  hands,  agreed  to  be  a  mea- 
fure  of  indifpcnfable  neceflity.  From  the  magnitude  to  which  the  debt  has  now  rifen, 
and  the  circumftances  of  theprefent  unexampled  time,  the  aid  of  the  Public  will  pro- 
bablybe  neceflary  to  the  attainment  of  this  moil  defirable  objeft.  For  the  aid  that 
may  thus  be  afforded,  the  Court  conceive  that  fufiicient  means  of  reimburfement 
from  the  Indian  territory  and  revenue  may  be  found  ;  and  the  arrangement  of  a  plan, 
forthefe  purpofes,  might,  as  the  Court  conceive,  form  a  very  material  part  of  the 
yrovifions  of  the  new  Charter. 

5th.  To  apportion  duly  between  the  Public  and  the  Company  the  militaiy  ex- 
■penfes  of  the  Indian  empire,  is  another  meafure  now  become  unavoidable.  For  wars 
■growing  out  of  the  Indian  fyftem,  or  out  of  fources  purely  Indian,  the  revenues  and 
•other  means  of  the  Company  were  long  made  to  fufifice,  including  even  the  charges 
of  occafional  attacks  upon  the  Indian  fettlements  of  Eurorean  nations ;  but  the  in- 
fluence of  European  war  has,  in  the  prefent  protradted  period  of  hoflility,  extended 
itfelf  more  and  more  to  India,  occalioning  the  expenfe  of  various  diftant  expeditions, 
and  the  encreafe  of  the  military  eftabhihment,  particularly  in  the  European  troops  of 
his  Majelty,  which,  from  being  twenty  years  ago  only  a  very  few  regiments,  now 
amount  to  above  twenty  thoufand*  men,  and  thofe  of  the  molt  expenfive  defcription 
of  troops  compofmg  the  military  force  of  Britifli  India  :  nor  is  at  all  improbable,  that 
from  the  avowed  defign  of  France  to  invade  our  Indian  pofleflions  with  great  armies 
by  land,  it  may  be  neceffary  iUU  largely  to  augment  our  European  force  in  that 
quarter.  For  a  war  of  this  defcription  the  Indian  revenues,  it  unincumbered  with 
debt,  would  be  very  inadequate.  It  would  be  an  European  war  for  European  objects ; 
a  ftruggle  between  Great  Britain  and  France,  on  the  foil  of  India,  for  the  main- 
tenance and  fupport  of  their  power  in  Europe.  For  fuch  an  objed,  to  which  the 
national  funds  only  are  commenfurate,  the  national  funds  undoubtedly  ought  to  pro- 
vide^  .and  as  we  know  that,  in  this,  we  (late  only  what  your  own  mind  has  already 
perceived  and  approved,  we  the  more  confidently  hope,  that  in  a  new  Charter  proper 
attention  will  be  paid  to  the  due  regulation  of  fo  important  a  concern. 

6th.  As  the  early  renewal  of  the  Charter  will  ferve  to  flrengthen  the  hands  of  the 
Company  in  the  ti-anfacfion  of  their  affairs,  and  improve  their  credit,  fo  its  renewal, 
for  the  like  period  as  the  prefent  one  run,  and  from  the  Time  of  its  expiration,  would 
conduce  to  the  fame  ends ;  and  the  Court  are  not  aware  of  any  objection  to  the 
propofition  of  this  term. 