

"nr^HE  propriety  and  expediency  of  applying  to  Parliament  for  a  renewal  of  the  pri- 
vileges of  exclufive  trade  enjoyeti  by  the  Eafl  India  Companv,  with  fuch  modi- 
fications as  may  be  deemed  neceiiary,  and  for  the  continuance  of  the  fyftem  of  go- 
vernment in  the  Briiilh  Territories  in  India  on  its  prefent  bafis,  but  with  fuch 
amendments,  alfo,  as  the  experience  of  its  eiFeds  may  appear  to  demand,  having 
lately  been  the  fubjed  of  frequent  confideration  and  difcuflion,  you  will  probably 
concur  with  me  in  opinion,  that  it  is  advifeable  now  to  afcertain,  whether  the  Court 
of  Direftors  are  defirous  of  agitating  the  queflion  at  prefent,  and  of  fubraitting  it, 
in  all  its  details,  to  the  early  confideration  of  ParJiament. 

I  haye  the  honour  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

Youi*  moft  obedient  and  humble  fervant, 

(Signed)         ROBERT  DUNDAS. 
To  the  Ghairman  and  Deputy  Chairman 
of  the  Eafl:  India  Company. 


No.  in. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondeitce,  the  isthOdober  i8o8. 

^^GREED  to  the  following  Draft  of  an  anfwer  to  the  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,         Nc  m, 
from  the  Right  Honorable  Roba-t  Dnndas.  ' 

Sscret  Committee, 
(.Secret.)  12  Oft.  1808. 

Sir,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  12th  Odober  1808.  chairman  and 

WE  now  propofe  to  do  ourfclves  the  honour  of  replying  to  your  letter    Deputy'*  Ltuer. 
of  the  30th  of  iaft  month. 

From  the  communications  we  have  at  different  times  had  with  the  Members  of 

the  Coui  t  of. Direct-  .rs,  we  are  well  affured  it  is  the  general  fenfe  of  that  bodv,  that  it 

will  be  for  the  intereft  of  the  Public  and  the  Companv,  that  the  Charter  fliould  be 

(59)  B  early 


No.  III. 

•Chairman   and 
Deputy's  Letter. 


(     6     ) 

early  renewed.  Convinced  that  this  is  their  opinion,  and  apprehenfive  left  incon- 
venience might  be  produced,  by  fetting  this  important  fubieft  afloat  before  it  -was  in 
fome  degree  matured,  we  havt  not  tlioiight  it  neceflary  formally  to  relort  to  the 
Court  for  a  declaration  of  their  judgment  upon  the  queftion  you  are  pleafed  to 
propofe  to  us ;  but  we  have,  in  order  to  obtain  Ayhat  we  conceive  to  be,  with  the 
knowledge  we  before  pofl'eiTed,  fufficient  warrant  to  us  to  give  an  anfwer  to  your 
preliminary  enquiry,  laid  your  letter  before  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence : 
and  we  are  authorized  to  ftate  it  to  be  their  opinion,  as  .it  is  our  own,  not  only  that 
the  interefts  of  the  Public,  as  well  as  of  the  Company,  will  be  beft  confulted,  by 
continuing  the  prefent  fyftem  of  Indian  adminiflration,  but  that  it  is  material  the 
Charter  fliould  be  fpeedily  renewed. 

With  refpeft  to  any  modifications  which  you  or  His  Majefty's  Government  may 
have  it  in  contemplation  to  propofe,  we  Ihall  be  happy  to  be  made  acquainted  with 
them,  and  to  bring  them  under  the  moft  ferious  conlideration  of  this  Houfe.  We 
can  at  prefent  only  flate,  that  we  trull  there  will  be  no  difpofiiion  to  introduce  any 
.change,  that  would  alter  or  weaken  the  main  principles  and  fubftance  of  the  prefent 
fyftem,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Company,  is  eliential  to  the  due  management 
and  prefervation  of  Britifli  India;  and  that,  with  refpeft  to  minor  pohits,  as  far  as 
they  may  be  realiy  compatible  whh  thofe  effential  objefts,  the  Court  will  not  be 
influenced  by  any  partial  views  to  withhold  from  them  the  fair  confideration  due 
to  them. 