

No.  XX.  Hints  approved  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  and  fubmiited  to  the  Con- 
fideration  of  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXI.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  i8th  March  18 12. 

No.  XXII.  Correfpondence  with  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh,  noticed  in 
the  preceding  Minute,  viz. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount 
Caftlereagh,  dated  3d  December  1803. 

(59-)  A  2  Letter 

270654 


1^ 


•a: 


(     4     ) 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 

Chairman,  dated  the  20th  December  1803. 
Letter  irom  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,   to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount 

Caftlereagh,  dated  7th  July  1804. 
Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh,  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 

Chairman,  dated  the  I2th  September  1804. 

JHo.  XXin.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  i8th  March  i8iz. 

No.  XXIV.  Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifc9unt  Melville,  dated 
the  18th  March  i8i3,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXV.  Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  dated 
the  19th  March  18 12,  alfo  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXVI.  Minute  of  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Tuefday  the  24th  March  1812. 

No.  XXVII.  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorsible  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  to  the  Chairman  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  21ft  of  March  18 12,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXVIII.  Obfervations  on  the  Hints  fuggefted  by  the  Deputation  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, the  3d  March  18 13,  adverted  to  in  the  foregoing  Letter. 

No.  XXIX.  Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chairman  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  23d  March  1812,  alfo  noticed  in  the  Minute  above- 
mentioned. 


PAPEES,   &c. 


No.  I. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Covrefpondence,  the  5th  Odober  1808. 

T>EAD  a  letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairs,  dated  No.  I. 

the  30th  September,  defiring  to  afcertain  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  as  to  the  

propriety  and  expediency  of  bringing  forward,  in  the  next  feflion  of  Parliament,  the  Secret  Committee, 

lubject  of  renewing  the  Company's  Charter.  ^  ^^-  '^°^ 

The  Committee  having  deliberated  thereon,  agreed  on  the  fubllance  of  an  anfwer» 
tc  be  further  £onfidered  at  their  next  meeting. 


■» 


Mr.  Dund»s*» 
Letter. 


No.  II. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas  to  the  Chairman  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Gentlemen,  _  _  Melville  Caftle,  30th  September  1808.  No.  II 