

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)  EDWARD  PARRY, 

The  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  CHARLES  GRANT, 

&c.  &;c.  he. 


No.VL 

Secret  Court, 
13  Jan.  1809. 

Mr.  Diindas's 
Letter. 


No.  VI. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  DireSors,  held  on  Friday,  the  ijth  January  1809. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  dated  the  28th  December 
lad,  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy,  in  reply  to  their  letter  of  the  i6th 
December,  was  read,  viz. 

Gentlemen,-  Downing  Street,  28th  December  i8o8« 

IN  fubmitting  to  your  confideration  fuch  obfervations  as  have  occurred  to  me  on 
your  letter  of  the  16th  inftant,  it  is  neceffary  that  you  fhould  undeiftand  them  to 
be  merely  preliminary.,  in  contemplation  of  future  difcuiiions,  and  by  no  means  as 
the  refult  of  any  plan  or  projefted  fyftem,  matured  in  concert  with  His  Majefty's 
confidential  Servants.  It  will  depend  on  the  judgment  which  the  Court  of  Directors 
may  form  on  the  propriety  or  neceffity  of  adhering  to  the  prefent  fyftem  of  their 
Indian  trade  and  adminiftration  in  all  its  parts,  whether  1  fliall  be  enabled  to  hold  out 
to  them  any  expeftation,-  that  their  application  to  Parliament  for  a  renewal  of  the 
Company's  Charter  will  meet  with  the  concurrence  of  Government. 

Ilhall 


Mr.  Unndai's 
Lei  It  r. 


(    9    ) 

lihall  follow  the  order  adopted  in  your  letter,  in  rcfped  to  the  fubjefts  which  you         No.  VI, 
have  particularly  mentioned,  and   Ihall  offer  fome  additional  remarks  on  any  other 
important  branches  of  the  prefent  fyfteni,  in  which  alterations  may  probably  be 
deemed  indifpenHibly  necelTary. 

ift.  Concurring  in  fubfrance  with  the  propofition  contained  in  the  firfl:  article,  I 
fiiall  not  enlarge  upon  its  details.  I  have  not  yet  heard  or  read  any  arguments  againrt 
the  continuance  of  the  fyftem  under  which  the  Britifli  Pofleffions  in  India  are  governed, 
of  fuffieient  weight  to  counterbalance  the  practical  benefits  which  have  been  derived 
from  it,  in  their  increafed  and  increafmg  profperiiy,  and  the  general  fecurity  and 
happinefs  of  their  inhabitants.  It  is  polTible  that  the  fame  efFetts  might  have  been 
produced  under  a  government  immediately  dependent  on  the  Crown ;  but  for  the 
attainment  of  thofe  objedts,  the  experiment  is,  jit  Icaft,  unneceffary,  ;md  it  miglit  be 
attended  with  dangers  to  the  Conftitution  of  this  Country,  which,  if  they  can  be 
avoided,  it  would  be  unwife  to  uncounter.  Any  alteration,  therefore,  which  may 
be  fuggefied  in  tliis  part  cf  the  fyftcm,  will  probably  be  only  in  its  details.  It  may, 
however,  be  deem.ed  advifable,  to  extend  the  controuling  authority  of  the  Board  of 
Commiilioners  to  fuch  proceedings  of  the  Court  of  Directors  in  England,  as  are  im- 
mediately conneiSled  with  the  govenuTient  or  revenues  of  the  Company's  territorial 
poflellions  in  India,  more  efpecialiy,  if  the  fuggeflion  contained  in  your  fourth  article 
fhould  be  adopted. 