

iff.  The  fyftem  by  which  the  Legiflature  has  continued  to  the  Company  the 
government  of  the  territories  acquired  by  it  in  the  Eaft,  with  regulated  monopoly 
of  the  trade,  has  been  held  iy  the  mofl;  eminent  perfons  converfant  with  that  quarter 
and  its  affairs,  to  be  the  moft  expedient,  both  for  the  toreign  and  domeltic  interests 
of  this  country.  Under  it  thofe  territories  have  been  improved,  and  the  fecurityand 
■happinefs  of  the  vaft  population  they  contain  have  been  fignally  increafed.  It  is  alfo 
a  fyftem  which  eftablifhes  falutary  checks  for  the  excrcife  of  the  authority  lodged  in 
this  country  over  the  Indian  adminiftration,  and  for  all  the  local  details  of  that  ad- 
miniftration,  in  its  politic:'!,  judicial,  financial,  and  commercial  departments  ;  and 
provides  with  fmgular  ielicicy  for  a  fucceffion  of  a  body  of  able  and  honorable 
European  fervants,  who  yield  in  general  charader  and  utility  to  no  clafs  of  public 
funfti'jnaries  under  the  Empire.  In  Hke  manner,  the  conftitution  of  the  Indian 
army  has  proved  itfelf  calculated  to  produce  a  body  of  officers  of  high  mihtary  fpirit, 
and  of  very  diftinguifhcd  fkill  and  conduft.  The  Court,  therefore,  trufls  that  no 
riaterial  chivnge  in  this  fyftem  ; — no  change  which  would  afFe£l  its  principles  or  ini- 
pdir  its  efficiency,  will  be  propofed. 

2d.  In  this  cafe,  it  will  be  unnecefTary  to  enter  into  any  difcufTion  of  the 
right  of  the  Company  to  the  territorial  pofTeffions  ;  a  right  which  they  hold  to  be 
clear,  and  muft  always  maintain,  as  flowing  from  their  acquifition  of  thofe  territories, 
•under  due  authority,  and  after  long  hazards  and  vicifTitudes,  and  great  expenfe, 

3d.  The  fituation  of  the  Company  is,  at  this  time,  very  different  from  what 
it  was  at  the  laft  renewal  of  the  Charter,  in  1793.  European  war,  with  hardly  any 
incermiffion,  through  the  whole  of  the  period  that  has  fince  elapfed,  has  exceedingly 
encreafed  the  expenfes,  and  reduced  the  profits  of  the  Company  at  home  ;  and  has 
likewife  enlarged  the  fcale  of  expenfes  abroad  ;  where,  nioreover,  wars  with  the 
Native  Powers  have  been  repeatedly  carried  on,  to  the  vaft  accumulation  of  the  Indian 
debt,  now  advanced  from  eight  million  ftcrhng,  at  which  it  Itood  in  1793,  to  about 
thirty-two  millions.  Without  meaning  at  all  to  advert,  in  this  place,  to  the  quef- 
tion  concerning  the  policy  of  ibme  of  thofe  wars  with  the  Princes  of  India  ;  it  is  fafe 
and  proper  to  affirm,  that  they  were  not,  in  any  degree,  direfted  by  the  Executive 
.Body  of  the  Company,  but  proceeded  from  caufes  which  that  body  could  not  con- 
trol. As,  in  confequence  of  all  the  events  which  have  happened  fince  the  vear 
J  793,  the  benefits  intended  to  the  Proprietors  of  Eafl-India  Stock,  by  the  Charter 
then  paffsd,  have  not  been  realized  ;  fo  the  Court  truft,  that  in  the  formation  of  a 
new  C.hajter,  due  care  will  be  taken  to  fecure  their  proper  ihare  of  advantage  in  any 
future  amelioration  of  the  Company's  affairs,  and  elpecially  that  no  meafure  will  be 
adopted,  which  can  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  value  of  their  capital  ftock.  The 
dividend  on  that  ftock,  which  is  only  equivalent  to  the  legal  intereft  of  monev,  is  all 
that  the  Proprietors  have  ever  received  from  the  united  fources  of  Indian  revenue 
.and  Indian  commerce,  whilfl  the  country  has  been  enriched  by  the  long  contiiiued 
influx  of  private  wealth,  and  raifed  in  the  fcale  of  nations  by  the  poll  ical  importance 
of  the  Indian  empire. 