

before 


(     i6     ) 

"No.  Viri.  efore  they  are  ufed,  there  is  already  abundant  provlfron  made  for  their  impor-tation, 

-; to  the  utmoft  extent  of  demanc'. 

Chairman   and 

•  JDcputy's  Lciter.  There  remains  then  to  be  confidered,  of  all  the  commodities  above  enumerated,  only 
the  raw  material  of  cotton ;  and  to  this  may  be  added  another  of  high  importance, 
which  India  is  in  time  likely  to  produce  abimdantly,  namely,  hemp.  Now,  with 
refpedt  to  the  former  of  ihefe,  the  Company  have  formerly  imported  it,  and  per- 
jnitted  private  merchants  to  do  fo  ;  but  it  was  found,  that  the  cotton  of  hidia  could 
not  enter  into  competition  with  that  produced  nearer  home,  in  the  Brazils,  the 
Weft  Indies,  and  North  America.  Of  late,  fmce  the  interrupdon  of  our  trade  with 
the  laft  mentioned  country,  the  Company  have  themfelves  commiflloned  cotton 
•from  India,  and  have  been  willing  to  encourage  individuals  to  export  it  from  thence  ; 
but  that  it  can  fupport  a  competition  with  the  cotton  of  Georgia,  when  the  Ameri- 
can embargo  is  taken  off,  or  become  an  article  of  extenfive  demand  in  this  country, 
■fupplied  with  it  fi-om  fo  many  nearer  quarters,  is  not  very  likely.  The  culture  of 
hemp  .in  India  is  yet  in  its  infancy.  A  change  in  the  circumftauces  of  Europe  may 
check  it  ;  but  if  it  is  not  checked,  years  mult  elapfe,  before  the  quantity  produced 
can  form  a  confiderable  article  of  exportation.  And  with  regard  to  both  thefe 
commodities  of  cotton  and  hemp,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  firft,  that  cargoes  for  Europe 
cannot  be  compofed  of  them  only,  fome  other,  more  ponderous  for  its  bulk,  being 
neceffary  for  dead  weight,  and  fugar,  almoft  the  only  article  of  this  nature  that 
India  can  fupply,  muft  generally  be  rather  a  loling  one  :  fecondly,  it  is  to  be  ob- 
ferved, that  the  private  fliips  ready  to  be  employed  in  India,  mult  be  abundantly 
Sufficient  for  the  fupply  of  ail  the  tonnage  that  can  be  required  for  thefe  articles, 
which  could  hardly  abforb  any  very  large  amount  of  capital.  Thus,  then,  it  is  alfo  ap- 
parent, that  the  country  and  produ'ilions  of  India  aflbrd  no  new  field  of  importance 
for  the  commercial  enterprize  of  the  merchants  of  Great  Britairu 

But  were  it  indeed  othervi'ife,  where,  in  the  prefent  circumftances  of  the  European 
Continent,  could  new  commodities,  imported  into  this  country  from  India,  find  a 
vent,  when  many  of  thofe  already  made,  and  of  articles  which  the  Continent  ufed 
to  take  off,  remain  in  our  warehoufes .''  And  hence  may  appear  the  inapplicability 
of  that  argument,  which  has  lon;etimes  been  urged  in  favour  of  enlarging,  or  rather 
opening  the  Indian  trade  to  individuals,  "  that  they  fiiould  be  allowed  to  bring 
"  home  the  furplus  produce  of  India  v/hich  the  Company  did  net  require."  There 
can  be  no  room  lor  additional  importations,  vvhtn  the  ordinary  fcale  proves  too 
large.  But  in  the  ufe  of  this  plaufible  plea,  refpetting  furplus  produce,  there  was 
always  a  great  fallacy.  It  ftcmed  to  imply,  that  there  was  a  ftock  of  commodities  in 
India  which  continually  remained  undilpoicd  of,  whereas  nothing  is  more  evident, 
than  that  the  produfliioas  of  any  country  will  be  regulated  by  the  demand,  and 
that  no  agiicalturifts  or  minufadurers  will  go  on  from  year  to  year  to  produce 
that  ior  which  they  have  no  fale.  The  term,  as  connefted  with  the  Company, 
might  alfo  convey  the  idea,  that  they  were  the  only  purchafers  in  the  country ; 
whereas,  at  that  very  time,  Britifli  refidents  and  foreign  nations  had  the  privilege  of 
exporung  goods  to  the  weftern  world,  and  there  was  a  great  coafling  and  internal 
trade  from  one  part  of  India  to  another.  But  the  argument  tor  permitting  individuals 
to  export  the  furplus  produce,  included  fully,  though  not  profeffedly,  the  principle 
of  tranfplanting  Bridffi  capital  to  India,  in  order  to  raife  produce  there  ;  a  principle 
which,  it  may  be  thought,  this  country  has  already  carried  fufficiently  far  in  its 
other  diftant  dependencies,  "and  which  could  not  be  appacd  to  India  without  poli- 
tical  cocfequences. 