meafure  would  eilentially  exclude  the  mother  country  from  being  the  meJium  and 
emporium  of  our  Indian  trade ;  and  whiKt  it  ferved  to  enrich  Imlia,  rather  than 
Britain,  would  facilitate  the  progrefs  of  the  former  to  independence.  If,  however, 
fo  dangerous  an  innovation  were  not  adopted  into  our  commercial  code,  it  is  alto- 
gether probable  that  EnoliOi  fliips,  admitted  without  hmitation  into  the  Indian  S-^as, 
would  take  the  liberty  of  failing  to  thofe  markets  which  woukl  be  thought  the  molt 
promifing  ;  fo  that,  in  effeft,  the  opening  of  the  Indian  trade  v/ould  be  not  folely 
or  chiefly  for  this  countiy  alone,  but  for  other,  perhaps  for  all  parts  of  the  world. 

Having  thus  fhev/n,  that  the  opening  of  the  Indian  trade  to  the  fubjeds  of  Great 
Britain  could  not  materially  increafe,  either  the  export  of  the  manufadlures  of  this 
country,  or  its  commerce  in  the  produ£tions  of  India,  it  will  next  be  proper  t& 
confider,  what  the  effefts  of  the  propofed  change  would  be  upon  the  Ealt  India 
Company  and  upon  Britifh  India. 

And,  in  the  firft  place,  it  would,  in  fubftance  and  in  form,  entirely  abolifh  the 
qualified  monopoly  which  the  Company  (till  enjoys  of  the  Indian  trade.  The  ad- 
miflion  of  all  private  merchants,  at  their  pleafure,  and  of  their  Ships,  into  the  trade, 
would  make  it  as  perfedly  free  as  the  trade  to  our  American  or  Weft  Indian  colo- 
nies. There  would,  as  to  India,  be  an  end  of  all  exclufive  privilege  of  trade. 
This  would  not  be  any  modification  of  the  A&  of  1703,  but  ai^  effential  departure 
from  it.  That  a£l  permitted  only  the  export  of  Britifh  manufadtures,  and  intended 
only  to  provide  for  the  returns  to  them,  and  for  the  remittance,  in  goods,  of 
Britifli  fortunes  fi'om  India ;  both  on  the  fhips  of  the  Company.  The  propofed 
meafure  muft,  in  the  nature  of  it,  make  the  trade  from  India  not  merely  a  vehicle 
for  the  remittance  of  fortunes  acquired  there,  or  the  produce  of  BridOi  manufaftures, 
but  a  general  trade;  and  what  is  a  ftill  more  radical  change,  inftead  of  a  limited 
amount  of  tonnage  not  incompatible  with  the  Company's  fyftem,  it  admits  all  fliips, 
without  any  iinntation,  or  opdcn  on  the  part  of  the  Company  :  it  throws  all  India 
open  to  thofe  /liips,  and  thus  fets  afide  the  Company  from  being  the  fole  channel 
and  medium  of  the  trade,  through  their  own  {hipping,  or  fliipping  engaged  by  them, 
which  completely  divefts  them  of  the  lalt  remnant  of  exclufive  privilege  in  that 
trade. 

It  would  be  no  argument  to  fay,  that  in  a  trade,  by  which  they  now^  gain  little, 
they  might  admit,  without  much  facrifice,  the  reft  of  the  commercial  world  to  fliare. 
The  lofs  of  the  Indian  monopoly,  fuch  as  it  was  left  by  the  A61  of  1793,  would 
lead,  by  no  flow  procefs,  to  the  entire  fubverfion  of  the  Company,  both  in  their 
commercial  and  political  capacity,  and  of  that  fyftem  which  the  Legiflature  has  ap- 
pointed lor  the  government  of  Britifli  India,  of  v.hich  fyftem  the  Company  forms 
an  integral  and  effential  part. 