

Now,  with  refpe£t  to  the  benefits  fuppofed  to  t>e  derivable  from  opening  the  trade 
with  India,  it  is,  in  the  firft  place,  to  be  obferved,  that  no  material  enlargement,  if  any 
enlargement  at  all,  is  to  be  expelled  in  the  exports  of  our  manufattures  to  that 
quarter.  The  records  of  the  Company,  for  two  centu-ies,  are  filled  with  accounts 
of  their  endeavours  to  extend  the  fale  of  Britifh  products  in  India,  and  of  the  little 
fuccefs  which  has  attended  them.  The  French,  Dutch,  and  other  European  nations 
tiading  thither,  have  equally  failed  in  introducing  the  manufactures  of  Europe  there. 
This  was  not  owing  to  their  trading  chiefly  in  the  form  of  Companies  :  the  Americans, 
who  within  the  lait  twenty  years  have  entered  into  the  Indian  commerce,  and  traded 
largely,  not  as  a  Company,  but  by  numerous  individuals,  each  purfuing  his  own  fcheme 
in  his  own  vi^ay,  in  which  courfe  no  part  of  the  Eaft  is  left  unexplored,  carry  hardly 
any  European  m.anufaclures  thither,  their  chief  article  for  the  purchafe  of  Indian 
goods  being  filver ;  and  fuch  has  been  the  ftate  of  the  trade  from  Europe  to  India 
fmce  the  time  of  the  Romans.  This  ftate  refults  from  the  nature  of  the  Indian 
people,  their  climate,  and  their  ufages.  The  articles  of  firft  neceinty  their  own 
country  furnifhes,  more  abundantly  and  more  cheaply  than  it  is  poflible  for  Europe 
(59.)  D  .  to 


(      14     ) 

No.  VIII.        to  fupply  them.     The  labour  of  the  gre:\t  body  of  the  common  people  only  enables 

•— them  to  fubfilt  on  rice,  and  to  \vear  a  flight  covering  of  cotton  cloth  ;  they,  there- 

Chiirman  and  {q^q^  cjin  purchafe  none  of  the  fuperfluities  we  offer  them.  The  comparatively  few 
Deputy  s  Letter.  .^  better  circumftances,  reftrifted,  like  the  reft,  by  numerous  religious  and  civil 
cuftoms,  of  which  all  are  remarkably  tenacious,  find  few  of  our  commodities  to  their 
tafte,  and  their  climate  fo  diffimilar  to  ours,  renders  many  of  them  unfuitable  to  tlieir 
ufe ;  fo  that  a  commerce  between  them  and  us  cannot  proceed  far  upon  the  principlo 
of  fupplying  mutual  wants.  Hence,  except  woollens,  in  a  very  limited  degree,  for 
mantles  in  the  cold  feafon,  and  metals,  on  a  fcale  alfo  very  limited,  to  be  worked  up 
by  their  own  artizans  for  the  few  utenfiis  they  need,  hardly  any  of  our  ftapic  com- 
modities find  a  vent  among  the  Indians  ;  the  other  exports  which  Europe  fends  to 
India  being  chiefly  confumed  by  the  European  population  there,  and  fome  of  the 
defendants  of  the  ear'ly  Portuguefe  fettlers,  all  ot  whom,  taken  coUeQively,  form 
but  a  fmall  body,  in  view  to  any  quellion  of  national  commerce. 