

Let  it  be  inquired,  in  the  next  place,  whether  the  adoption  of  fo  great  a  change 
in  our  Indian  fyftem,  would  be  followed  by  the  difcovery  of  fuch  new  and  valuable 
produdions  of  the  Eaft,  as  v/ould  ferve  materially  to  augment  the  trade  of  this 
country  with  the  Continents  of  Europe  and  Ameiica  ;  for,  with  regard  to  the  fupply 
of  our  home  confumption  of  Indian  commodities,  it  cannot  be  aflerted,  that  the  im- 
portations already  made  by  the  Company  and  individuals  do  not  abundantly  fuffice 
for  it,  or  nny  not,  at  any  time,  be  extended  to  the  exigencies  of  the  market ;  in 
which,  it  m?.y  be  noted,  that  a  preference  is  given  to  the  cotton  and  filk  manufactures 
of  our  own  country,  and  to  fome  of  the  tropical  produftions  brought  from  our 
Weft  Indian  Colonies.  Nor  can  it  be  aflerted,  that  new  adventurers  in  the  Eaftern 
trade,  fitting  out  from  Great  Britain,  could,  with  any  profit  to  themfelves,  furnilh 
the  home  confumption  on  cheaper  terms  than  it  is  now  fupplied  ;  for  both  the  Com- 
pany, 


(     15    ) 

pany,  and  Britifli  individuals  refident  in  India,  muft:  have  an  advantage  over  fuch       No.  VIII. 

adventurers  in  the  provifion  of  goods  there  (Britifh  refidents  in  the  Freight  alfo), 

and  yet,  of  lare,  the  great  Indian  ftaple  of  cotton  piece  goods  has  been  a  lofing  d^  utX  Lcuer 
article  in  this  country. 

Now,  as  to  the  produ£tions  of  India  valuable  for  foreign  commerce,  the  trade  of 
Europeans,  of  different  nations,  to  all  parts  of  it,  in  the  courfe  of  the  laft  three  cen- 
turies, may  well  be  prefumed  (o  have  left  little  for  difcovery  in  that  way.  The  Por- 
tuguefe,  who,  in  their  early  time,  ipread  themfelves  along  all  the  fliores  of  the  Eaft, 
explored  every  confiderable  part  of  it,  and  they  were  followed  by  the  Dutch,  Englifli, 
and  French  Companies,  with  their  numerous  eftabiiihments,  fome  of  which  extended 
inland  to  the  Upper  India.  But  the  modern  European  merchants,  refident  in  the 
Eaft,  who  have  long  been  the  chief  navigators  and  adventurers  in  what  is  called  the 
coalting  trade,  have  become  well  acquainted  with  the  commercial  capacity  of  every 
region  walhed  by  .tl-.e  Indian  feas  ;  fo  that  many  countries  fuppofed  here  to  be  little 
known,  becaufe  little  vifited  by  the  (hips  of  Europe,  are  iamiliar  to  them,  and 
whatever  Articles  thofe  countries  furnifh,  valuable  for  the  commerce  of  the  Welfj 
are  already  conveyed,  through  the  medium  of  private  or  foreign  trade,  to  Europe. 

The  chief  commodities  fuited  to  the  European  market,  which  India  has  hitherto 
been  found  to  produce,  are  fpices,  pepper,  drugs,  fugar,  coffee,  raw  filk,  faltpetre, 
indigo,  raw  cotton,  and  above  all,  cotton  manfacfures  of  fmgular  beauty  and  in 
cndlcfs  variety.  Thefe  hft  have,  as  already  intimated,  formed,  from  time  immemo- 
rial, the  grand  ftaple  of  India ;  but  from  the  rife  and  excellence  of  fimilar  manu- 
fadfures  in  Europe,  particularly  in  our  own  country,  and  from  the  general  impo- 
verifhment  which  wars  and  revolutions  have  brought  upon  the  Continent  of  Europe, 
with  the  Obflrucfions  oppcfed,  in  much  the  greater  part  of  it,  to  our  Commerce, 
the  Confumption  of  the  fine  Fabricks  of  India  has  confiderably  decreafed,  and_  it  .- 
is  not  likely  that  it  can  be  reltored  to  its  former  ftandard.  Spices,  fugar,  and  coffee,' 
have  been  furnifhed  chiefly  from  the  Moluccas  and  Java,  Dutch  iflands  not  in  our 
poffefTion,  nor,  in  a  commercial  view,  worth  the  expenfe  of  conquering  and  keeping 
them.  The  cinnamon  of  Ceylon,  now  ours,  may  be  brought,  in  fufficient  quantity 
for  the  fupply  of  all  Europe,  in  one  or  two  of  the  Company's  lliips.  Pepper  is  a 
very  lofing  article.  Sugar  has  been  of  late  imported  from  our  territories ;  but  the 
neceffary  expenfe  of  conveyance  from  fo  great  a  diftance,  prevents  it  from  being 
profitable,  and  it  can  be  much  encouraged  only  at  the  expenfe  of  our  Weft  India 
colonies.  Raw  filk  and  indigo,  now  produced  in  great  pcrfeftion  in  Bengal  and  its 
dependencies,  have  been  brought  to  that  ftaie,  by  the  expenfe  incurred,  and  the 
fupport  afforded  by  the  Company.  Both  are  articles  occupying  little  fpace,  in  pro- 
portion to  their  value.  The  factories  where  the  former  is  coUedfed  and  prepared 
are  in  the  hands  of  the  Company,  who  have,  in  the  courfe  of  many  years,  eflabhfhed 
them  with  great  labour  and  expenfe.  They  can  furniih  not  only  all  the  raw  filk  this 
country  requires,  but  much  for  the  confumption  of  the  Continent,  if  it  was  poffiblc 
to  bring  it  there  into  competition  with  the  raw  filk  of  Italy,  and  the  tonnage  already 
employed  by  the  Company  is  quite  fufhcient  for  its  importation  from  India.  The 
indigo  produced  in  Bengal  and  the  adjacent  Provinces  isequal,  probably,  to  three- 
fourths  of  the  demand  of  all  Europe,  and  may  eafily  be  raifedto  the  whole  demand  ; 
but  the  manufatlure  of  this  article  is  entirely,  and  the  trade  in  it  chiefly,  in  the  hands 
of  individuals,  who  need  and  require  no  Ihipping  from  this  country,  except  v/hat  the 
Company  provide,  to  convey  to  Europe,  all  that  Europe  can  confume  of  it.  Salt- 
petre, furnifhed  only  from  Bengal,  is,  for  political  reafons,  prohibited  to  foreigners, 
and  exported  exclufively  in  the  fliips  of  the  Company  ;  for  the  fame  realons,  it 
could  never  be  prudent  to  allow  the  private  {hips  of  this  country  to  carry  it  away  at 
pleafure.  Where  then  is  the  fcopefor  the  admiffion  of  new  fliipping  and  new  adven- 
turers,  without  limitation,  into  the  trade  of  India  with  Great  Britain  ?  In  general, 
it  may  be  obferved,  that  the  commodities  which  have  hitherto  come  from  that  coun- 
try, in  a  ftate  prepared  for  ufe,  fuch  as  the  great  ff  aple  of  cotton  piece  goods,  being 
articles  of  luxury,  can  have  only  a  limited  confumption,  arid  that  the  demand  for 
them  could  not  be  encreafed  at  all  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  new  competitors 
that  lliould  enter  into  the  trade.  The  lame  niiiy  be  faid  of  all  kinds  of  fpices  and 
drugs,  which,  from  their  nature,  have  a  limited  confumption  ;  and,  with  regard 
to  the  important  articles  of  raw  filk  and  indigo,  which  require  a  further  preparation 