

to  the  public  interefl ;  and  for  the  correction  of  the  anomalous  fyftem  of  divided 
refponfibility,  which  prevails  at  prefent  iu  this  country,  in  every  thing  that  relates  to 
.the  military  defence  of  India.  The  only  eiJeftual  remedy  for  thcfe  evils  will,  pro- 
bably, be  found  iji  arrangements  for  confolidadng  your  Indian  ai-niy  witii  the  King's 
troops,  four. Jed  upon  the  plan  fo  ftronTly  recommended  by  Lord  Cornwallis, 
with  fuch  nicdificalions  as  the  actual  conllitution  ofyt)ur  fervice  may  render  ex- 
pedient or  neceflai-y.     Thefe  arrangements  need  not  be  attended  wiih  any  altera- 

■  tion  in  the  fyftem  of  promotion  now  in  operation  among  the  officers  of  the 
native  branch  of  the  fervice,  or  with  any  diminution  (they  might  more  probably 

•  produce  an  increafe)  of  any  other  profeflicnal  advantages  which  thofc  officers 
now  enjoy;  neither  would  they,  in  any  degree,  interfere  with  the  general  authority 
now  poHefled  by  the  Court  of  Directors  and  the  Governments  in  India  over  all 
His  Majefty's  forces  ferving  in  thofe  parts,  or  with  their  controul  over  ail  difburl'ements 
■of  a  military  nature.  I  am,  moreover,  not  au'are  of  any  reafon  againft  continuing 
in  the  Court  of  Direftors  the  nomination  of  all  cadets  deftined  to  hold  commiffions  .• 
-in  the  Indian  armv. 

Having  thus  ftated  to  you,  for  the  confideration  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  the 
.principal  points  to  which  I  was  defirous  of  drawing  their  attention  upon  this  occa- 
sion, I  have  only  to  alTure  you,  that  it  will  be  the  earnefl  defire  of  His  Majefly's 
Government,  to  fugged  to  Parliament  fuch  a  fyftem  only,  as  fhall  be  conformable 
to  the  principles  on  which  the  regulations  of  1784  and  1793  were  founded, 
as  will  fecure  to  this  kingdom  all  the  benefit  that  can  pradicably  be  deiived  from 
its  trade  with  our  poiTeihons  in  India,  and  to  the  natives  of  thofe  countries  a 
•government,  and  an  aJminiilration  of  laws,  fuited  to  their  cuftoms,  habits,  and 
prejudices,  and  confiftent  with  the  Britilh  character,  and  which  fliall  atfo  be 
ilrong  and  efficient,  without  adding  unneceifarily  to  the  authority  of  the  Execu- 
tive Government  at  home,  or  increafiug,  to  any  dangerous  extent,  the  influence  of 
the  Crown. 

I  have  the  lionour  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervant. 

To  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)  ROBERT  DUNDAS. 

of  the  Eaft-India  Company. 

Draft  of  a  propofed  letter,  in  reply,  prepared  by  the  Committee  of  Corre- 
fpondence,  was  alio  read, 

Refolved,  That  the  faid  draft  be  taken  into  confideration  on  Tuiffdar  hext,  th^ 
17th  Inftant.  ■*■-'.  ^f  .r  ' 


No.  VII. 

At  a  Secret  Comt  of  Dire-Slors,    held  on  Tuefday,  the   17th  January  1809. 