

n^HE  draft  of  a  propofed  letter  to  Mr.  Dundas,  which  was  read  the  13th  inftant.        No.  VII. 
being  again  read  ;  ' 

Refolved  unamioufly,  That  •  this  Court  approve  the  faid  letter  fj'jIn.^.'S 

No.  VIII. 


(  12  ) 

No.  VIII. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman   and  Deputy  Chairman  to   the  Right  Honor- 
able Robert  Dundas,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Sir,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  13th  January  1809. 

^°  rn-Aj^E  letter  which  you  did  us  the  honor  to  addrefs  to  us,  on  the  28th   of  lafl 

Chairman  and  month,    on    the  important   fubjeft   of  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter, 

Deputy's  Letter,    has  received  the  mod  ferious  confideration  of  the  Court  of  Direftors,  and  we  are, 

by  their  unaminous  relolution,  inftruded  to  fubmit  to    you  the  following  anfwer 

to  It. 

The  Court  having,  in  the  letter  which  we  had  the  honor  to  addrefs  to  you 
on  the  1 6th  of  laft  month,  thought  it  fufficicnt  to  fl^etch  the  outlines  of  thofc  prin- 
ciples and  propofitions  which  fnould,  in  their  opinion,  form  the  bafis  of  a  new 
Charter,  and  the  reply  you  have  been  pleafed  to  make  to  it,  declaring  the  fame 
intention  of  dating  obfervations  merely  preliminary,  and  '•  not  the  refult  of  any 
"  plan,  or  projeded  fyftem,  matured  in  concert  with  His  iMajefty's  confiden- 
"  tial  Servants,"  our  prefent  letter  will  abftain  from  any  difcuflion  of  minor 
points,  thnfe  efpecially  relating  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Court  of  Dire6lors 
with  fervants  of  the  Company  returned  from  India,  to  which  article  your  letter 
is  underftood  to  allude  ;  and  likewife  from  feme  other  points,  connefted  with  the 
exercife  of  their  authority  at  home,  which  may  be  found  to  require  revifion 
and  modification.  Neither  can  it  be  neceifary  to  go  now  into  the  fubjeft  of 
Indian  Expenditure,  although  it  is  impoflible,  after  the  notice  taken  of  it  in  your 
letter,  to  omit  faying,  that  the  Court  feel  with  the  livelieft  folicitude,  how  indii- 
peufable  it  is  to  reduce  that  article  far  below  the  income,  and  are  determined  to  ad 
accordingly. 

The  attention  of  the  Court  will,  tlierefore,  be  confined,  at  prefent,  to  two 
propofitions  ol  the  highefl  im.portance,  contained  in  your  letter  ;  the  one  fuggeif  ing 
fuch  an  enlargement  of  the  trade  of  individuals  with  Briiilh  India,  as  Ihall  admit 
into  it  indifcritninately  the  merchants  and  the  fliips  of  this  country  ;  and  the  other 
the  transfer  of  the  Company's  Indian  army  to  His  Majefty.  If  thefe  propofitions  had 
not  been  accompanied  by  the  declaration  with  which  your  letter  concludes,  they 
-would  have  filled  the  Court  with  the  deepeft  concern  ;  but  you  are  pleafed  to  clofe 
the  whole  of  your  obfervations  with  an  aifurance,  '•  that  it  will  be  the  earneft  defire 
"  of  His  Majefly's  Government  to  fugged  to  Parliament  fuch  a  fyftem  only,  as  Ihall 
*'  be  conformable  to  the  principles  on  which  the  regulations  of  1784  and  1793  were 
*'  founded,  as  will  fecure  to  this  kingdom  all  the  benefit  that  can  prafticably  be  derived 
*'  from  its  trade  with  our  polfeiTions  in  India,  and  to  the  natives  of  thofe  countries  a 
*'  government  and  an  adminillration  of  laws,  fuited  to  their  cufloms,  habits,  and 
"  prejudices,  and  confident  with  the  Britifli  charafter,  and  which  fhall  alfobedrong 
"  and  efficient,  without  adding  unnecefiarily  to  the  authority  of  the  Executive 
*'  Government  at  home,  or  increafing,  to  any  dangerous  extent,  the  iiifluence  of 
"  the  Crown."  Satisfied,  by  this  declaration,  that  His  .  JVIajedy's  Government 
underdand  the  intereds  of  this  country  and  of  Britifn  India  too  well,  to  intend  any 
alteration  that  would  fubyert  or  endanger  the  fydern  by  which  thofe  vail  polTeflions 
have  been  acquired,  governed,  and  improved,  and  by  which  alone  they  can  be  held, 
to  the  mutual  benefit  of  their  immenfe  population  and  of  the  paramount  ftate,  the  Court 
mud,  of  courfc,  believe,  that  the  propofitions  whicii  have  jud  been  quoted,  are 
fuppofcd  to  be  compatible  with  the  continuance  of  that  fydem,  or  reducible  to  a 
confidency  with  it.  Thefe  fuppofitions  the  Court  are  now  called  upon  to  examine, 
and  they  will  endeavour  to  do  lb  with  the  rcfpecl:  due  to  the  authority  with  which 
they  have  to  ticat,  with  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  their  condituents,  and  with  that 
regard  for  the  intereds  of  their  country,  which  they  do  not  intend,  nor  feel  them- 
lelves  required  to  fink,  in  fupporting  the  integrity  of  the  prefent  Indian  fydem. 