

empire  J 


(     23     > 

empire;  and  it  might  then  be  conceived,  that  a  further  change  only  could  fupply        No.VIIL 
what  was  defedive.  ' 

.  CKairman   and 

But  this  is  not  the  only  way  m  which  the  meafure  in  queltion  appears  to  the  Deputy"*  Letter. 
Court  to  be  pregnant  with  danger.  It  propofes  to  place  in  the  entire  difpofal  of 
the  Crown,  a  regular  army,  amounting  to  one  hundred  and  forty  thoufand  men, 
commanded  by  above  three  thoufund  European  ofEcers,  having  a  great  variety 
of  places  of  honor  and  emolument  ;  and  ail  the  vafl:  patronage  attaching  to  fuch  an 
.ariny  (faving  the  nominati.^n  of  cadets)  would,  mediately  or  immediately,  be  under 
the  influence  or  controul  offomeof  the  Members  of  His  Majefty's  Government. 
This  would  be  a  fignal  departure  from  the  fpirit  and  letter  of  the  Ads  of  1784  and 
1793,  a  profeffecl  principle  of  which  was,  that  the  Indian  patronage,  civil  and 
military,  fliould  be  kept  entirely  out  of  the  hands  of  the  fervants  of  the  Crown.  It 
is  not  for  the  Court  to  enlarge  upon  a  propofition  Co  momentous ;  but  they  beg 
leave,  with  the  utmoll  deference,  to  ftate,  that  they  would  deem  it  a  dereliction  of 
their  duty,  to  which  no  confideration  could  induce  them  to  fubmit,  to  recommend 
any  meafure  of  this  defcription  to  the  adoption  of  their  conflitucnts.  Knowing 
however.  Sir,  your  concern  for  the  promotion  of  the  public  interclt,  a  concern 
which  we  have  frequently  witneffed,  the  Court  ftill  flatter  thcmfelves,  that  the  con- 
fideration of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  a  meafure  which  they  believe 
to  be  for  the  intercfl  of  the  nation  as  well  as  of  the  Company,  will  go  on  without 
your  infifiing  on  this  propofition,  or  any  further  on  the  other  which  has  been 
above  dii'cuiled,  than  may  be  really  compatible  with  the  prefervation  of  the  prefent 
Indian  fyflem. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be.  Sir, 

Your  moil  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)  EDWARD  PARRY, 

The  Right  Honorable  Robert  Dundas,  CHARLES  GRANT. 

&c.     &c.    &c. 


No.  IX. 
At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  28th  February  \Sog. 

n[^HE  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  reported  to  the  Committee,  than  in   confe-  No.  IX. 

quence  of  an  invitation  from  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners,  they 

had  yeflerday  an  interview  with  him,  in  which  he  difcourfed  with  them  on  the  prefent   Secret  Committee, 
ftate  of  the  negotiation  for   the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter.     He  inquired,  i?o9> 

in  the  firft  place,  whether  the  Company  would  have  occafion  to  apply  to  the  Public 
for  pecuniary  aid  in  the  courfe.  of  the  prefent  year.     'I'o  this  inquiry  the  Chairman 
and  Deputy  anfwered,  that  from  an  eflimate  lately  made  up  of  the  Company's  re- 
ceipts and  payments,  till  the  month  of  January    1810,  it  appeared   probable  they 
might  be  able  to  do  without  any  public  afliuance  till  that  period  ;  but  that  this  could 
not  be  pofitively  affirmed  by  the  Chairs  without  further  and  more  certain  invef- 
tigation.     Mr.  Dundas  then  faid,  that  if  the  Company  were  not  under  a  neccffiry 
ot  coming  to  Parliament  this  feflion  on  the  fcore  of  their  finances,  he  thought  it  would 
be  expedient  to  delay  the  agitation  of  the  fubjeft  of  the  Chu;  ;er  in  Parliament  tiil 
next  feiLon,  becaufe  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  for  inquiring  into 
the  ftate  of  the  Company's  affairs,  recently  re  appointed,  being  about  to  examine 
into  all  the   great  branches  of  thofe  affairs,  which    would  neceffarily  engage  the 
public  atteiuion  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter,  it  would  be  expcfted  by  the  Houfe, 
that  the  reports  of  that  Committee  fliould  be  fubmitted  to  them,  before  the  queftion 
of  the  renewal  was  brought  forward,  and  from  the  number  and  weight  of  the  fubjeds 
to  be  invefligated,  it  would  be  inipraff-licablc  to  report  upon  them,  foon  enough  to 
afford  fuificitnt   time  to  the  Houfe  to  go  through  the  confideration  of  them  in  the 
r^maii.der  of  the  fcflion  :  it  was,,  therefore,  Mr.  Dundas's  opinion,  t!:at  it  would 
be  advifable  to  poffpc.ne  the  agitaiion  of  the  queftion  until  next  ftilion  ;  but  before 
he  fixed  his  determination,  he  wilhed   to  receive  the  fcntiments  of  the  Chairs  and;,  i 