

the; 


r  24  ) 

Jvo.  IX.         the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  on  this  important  point,  and  thofc  fentiments  would 

—  ■-  probably  influence  him  in  fliaping  his  anfwer  to  the  lafl  letter  of  the  Court,  dated 

Secret  Compiittee,  j^^jj  January   i5og,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter.     The  Chairman  and  Deputy 

18  F«b,  iivc9.      (Chairman  beg   leave   to   ftate,  that  they,  in  reply,  exprefled  their  opinion  to    be 

clearly  in  favor  of  proceeding  with  the  bufinefs  ot  the  Charter  this  fefiion,  if  it  fhould 

be  praflicable  for  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  to  make  the  reqiiifite  reports  in 

due  time. 

The  Committee  having  deliberated  on  this  communication,  are  of  opinion,  firft, 
that  it  will  be  neceffary  to  form  as  accurate  an  elfimate  as  poflible  of  the  home 
finances  of  the  Company  for  the  current  year  ;  fecondly,  that  it  is  very  defirable 
the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter  fliould  be  brought  forward  in  Parliament  this 
fellion,  even  if  the  Company  ihould  ftand  in  need  of  no  pecuniary  aid  ;  but,  thirdly, 
that  if  the  Select  Committee  cannot  prepare  their  reports  in  due  time,  and  His 
Majefty's  Miniiters  deem  it  proper  to  wait  till  next  feffion,  the  Court  muif,  of 
courfe,  acquiefce  ;  yet  in  the  wifh  and  hope,  that  if  any  circumflances  fhould  occur 
in  the  courfe  of  the  prefent  feffion,  favorable  to  the  agitation  of  the  meafure,  it 
may  flill  be  brought  forward  ;  and  if  not  in  this  feffion,  as  early  as  poflible  in  the 
next }  to  which  end  the  Committee  will  be  very  ready  to  proceed  with  the  Prefadetit 
of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners  in  the  difcuffions  already  commenced. 


•  No.  X. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  5th  December  1809. 

No  X  T?^"'^^  ^^^  approved  draft  of  a  letter  to  the  Right  Hon.  Robert  Dundas,  propofmg 

'_J_     .  that  the  difcuffions  between  him  and  the  Court,  on  the  fubjeft  of  the  Charter, 

Secret  Committee,   be  refumed.  from  the  point  at  which  they  were  left  by  the  letter  from  the  Chairman 
5  Dec.  1809.  ...and  Deputy,  dated  J3th  January  laft. 


■."»?: 


No.  XI. 


No.  XL 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honorable 
Robert  Dundas,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

(Private) 

Sir,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  5th  December  1809. 

"pROM  the  conference  the  Chairs  had  the  honor  to  hold  with  you  on  the  13th  of 

February,  on  the  fubjeft  of  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  we  were  given 

Chairman  and      to  underftand,  that  although  His  Majefly's  Miniflers  did  not  deem  it  expedient  to 
Deputy's  Ltticr.    bring  that  fubjeft  under  the  confideration  of  Parliament  in  the  feffion  then  pre- 
ceding, it  might,  in  their  opinion,  be  proper  to  prepare  for  tlje  agitation  of  it  in  the 
•  next  following  one. 