

With  regard  to  the  other  reafon  affigned  for  the  propofed  change,  the  Court  I 'eg 
leave  to  obferve,  in  the  firft  place,  that  they  do  not  perceive  the  neceffary  connedion 
between  the  inconvenience  which  is  alleged,  and  the  remedy  fuggelled  for  it ;  fince, 
if  it  were  true  that  the  queftion  of  refpoufibility  in  England,  refpecting  the  appoint- 
ment of  Commander  in  Chief,  lay  under  obfcurity  and  uncertainty  detrimental  to 
the  public  fervice,  it  does  not  appear  to  follow  that  the  Indian  army  ought  to  be  tranf-  ■ 
ferred  to  the  King,  to  remedy  this  defect.  But,  in  the  humble  apprehenfion  of  the 
Court,  no  oblcuniy  hangs  over  that  queftion.  The  appointment  ot  Commanders  in 
Chief  of  the  Kmg"s  lorces  there  refts  with  His  Majeiiy,  and  the  officer  chofen  by  him 
will,  by  virtue  of  his  coniniillion,  generally  command  the  Com.pany's  army  on  fer- 
vice. The  appointment  of  Commanders  in  Chief  for  the  Company's  army  is  placed, 
(59-;  F^  by.. 


(       i2       ) 

No.  VIII.        by  law,  in  the  fivti  inftanec,  in  the  Court  of  Directors,  bur  w'nh  a  power  veftcd  in 

IHs  Majcfly  to  annul  Inch  appointments.     This  neceiTarily   points   to  an  aereenient 

Chaiiir.an  and  between  His  I\l;ijeily's  Governn-.ent  and  the  Court  of  Diredois,  in  refpcd  to  thofe 
Deputy'.  Letter,  appointments,  and  the  Couit  are  not  aware,  that  they  have,  on  any  occafion,  ufed 
the  fliare  of  power  left  to  th.eni  by  t!n»  arrangement,  for  the  exerciil*  of  which  they 
feel  that  they  are  refponfiblc,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  public  fervice.  Ihey  mull,  at 
the  fame  time,  humbly  cxprefs  their  opinion,  that  the  law,  as  it  now  Hands,  is 
wifely  conceived,  fince  it  d:es  not  halve  the  refponfibiliiy,  but  double  it,  making 
both  His  Majedy's  Government  and  the  Court  of  Directors  fully  anfwerable  for  the 
appointment  cf  the  Company's  Commanders  in  Chief:  and  if  it  fhould  ftill  be  faid, 
that,  in  point  of  fafl:,  the  ftleclion  of  a  Coinniander  in  Chief  for  His  Majefty's  forces 
maybe  rendered  difficult,  by  reluftance,  en  the  part  of  the  Court,  to  accept  of  the 
lame  officer  for  the  command  of  the  Company's  army,  it  may  be  juftly  replied,  that 
they  make  a  facrifice  to  the  public  intercft,  in  agreein^■  that  the  Commander  in  Chief 
of  His  Majefi.'s  {hail  alfo  be  the  Company's;  and  when  he  is  not  only  to  command 
their  army,  but  expeds  to  be  made  a  Member  of  their  civil  and  political  Government, 
it  cannot  be  deemed  unreafonable,  that  they  Ihould  poffefs  the  right  of  fatisfying 
themfelves  as  to  his  competency  for  filling  thofe  high  offices  :  neither  is  it,  as  they 
think,  to  be  (hewn  from  theoretical  reatoning,  or  by  an  appeal  to  facts,  that  the 
Icrvice  will  fuffer,  or  has  fullered,  by  their  alfertion  of  this  right. 