

If  the  Indian  trade  were  thrown  <"pen,  fhips  would,  at  firft  no  doubt,  fwarni  into 

it,  and  there  would  be  a  ruinous  competition  in  the  markets,  both  abroad  and  at 

(59.)  E  home. 


(     i8     ) 

1^0.  ^in."       home.     Gootls  would  be  enhanced  in  cod  there,  as  well  as  deteriorated  in  quality: 

the  felling  prices  at  home,  already  too  low,  reduced   ftill  lower,  and  the  market 

Chairman  and  Qverflocked.  '1  his  was  the  effeft,  in  ferae  nieafure,  produced  by  throwing  open  the 
OJeputy  s  citer.  ^^^^^  .^  ^^^  ^.^^^  ^^  Oliver  Cromwell,  who,  after  the  experience  of  a  few  years, 
revived  the  Company.  The  fame  efleft  follov/sd  from  die  collilion  of  the  Old  and 
New  Companies,  in  the  beginning;  of  the  lail  century,  which  forced  them  to  unite, 
and  their  union  received  the  fanilion  of  government.  It  is  not  fufficient  to  fay,  on 
this  head,  that  increafed  demand  abroad  will  produce  increafed  fuppiy,  and  the 
diminilhecl  price  of  goods  at  home  increafc  the  fales,  fo  that  things  will,  at  length, 
in  both  countries,  hud  their  due  level.  From  the  nature  of  the  Indians  and  their 
divifion  into  cades,  it  is  not  lb  eafy  among  them,  as  in  Europe,  to  meet  an  increafed 
demand  bv  increaied  production  ;  and  it  is  flill  lefs  eafy  when  they  can  fubfid  by 
furnifuing  things  of  low  or  ordinary  quality,  to  make  them  aim  at  excellence,  which 
the  fuppofition  of  increafed  fales  at  hi^ne  would  require.  But  of  fuch  an  increafe, 
in  tile  prefent  and  profpective  ilate  of  the  trade  in  Indian  imports,  enough  has  been 
above  faid  to  (hew  the  improbability  ;  and  before  that  i'uppofition  could,  in  any  cafe, 
be  realized,  the  ruin  of  the  parties  immediately  embarked  in  the  trade  (a  trade  fo 
diftant,  requiring  large  capitals,  and  making  flow  returns)  might  be  completed,  with 
the  ruin  alio  of  the  Company,  whofe  edablifliments  would  have  been  deranged  by 
this  great  change.  If  the  change  itfclf  did  not  ocrafion  the  fall  of  the  Company, 
the  difappointmcnts  which  the  private  adventurers  could  not  fail  to  experience  would, 
by  them,  be  charged  to  the  influence  of  the  remaining  privileges  of  the  Company, 
a-nd  they  would  not  reft  until  the  whole  were  extinguifhed.  But  it  may  be  ob- 
terved  here,  and  it  is  an  obfervation  which  might  be  urged  more  formally  and  fully, 
that  although  the  Company  have  the  juflefl  claim  to  thofe  territories,  which  the 
powers  veiled  in  them  by  the  laws  of  this  land,  the  ability  of  their  fervants,  and  the 
hazards  they  have  encountered,  have  enabled  them  to  acquire,  and  that  this  right 
was  never  quedioned,  until  the  acquifitions,  and  confequently  the  merit  of  making 
them,  became  great  ;  yet  that,  in  a  more  peculiar  fenfe,  all  the  principal  marts  and 
fadories  of  Britilh  India  are  their  property,  acquired  in  their  purely  commercial 
period,  either  with  their  money  or  by  grants  from  the  native  princes  of  the  country, 
and  that  the  power  of  admittiiTg  fettlers  and  traders  to  them  itriftly  belongs  to  the 
Company. 