

The  other  important  propofition  which  is  next  to  be  confidered,  is  the  transfer 
oT  the  Indian  Army  to  the  King.  The  reaibns  afligned  for  this  propofition  ax"e, 
■that  an  end  may  be  put  to  the  jealoufies  and  divifions  which  have  too  much 
prevailed,  between  the  officers  of  His  Majefly's  army  and  thofe  employed  by  the 
Company,  and  tlxat  the  refponfibility  in  the  country,  of  providing  for  the  military 
defence  of  India,  may  be  afcertaiaed  and  flrengthened. 

The  Indian  army  is  the  main  inftniment  by  which  the  Company  have  acquired 
and  retained  the  territorial  pofleffions  they  have  added  to  tliC  Britifh  Empire.  The 
people  of  thofe  countries  lubmitted  more  eanly  to  an  authority  exercifed  by  means 
pf  a  body  formed  from  among  themfelves.  We  fought  battles  and  governed  pro- 
vinces as  the  native  powers  did ;  and  our  new  fubjecfs,  undifgufled  with  the  fight  of 
a  foreign  conquering  army,  fuppofed  the  government  to  continue  fubilantially  the 
fame,  and  the  principal  change  to  be  in  the  individuals  who  exercifed  it.  The  con- 
ftitution  and  character  which  this  Indian  army  his  acquired,  have  been  the  fubjeft  of 
jufl.  admiration.  Thefe  have  been  owing,  efientially,  to  the  h.ippy  mixture  of  bravery 
and  generofity,  of  firmnefs  and  kindnefs,  exerciled  towards  the  Sepoys  by  their 
European  officers.  The  fuperior  lights  and  energy  of  the  European  charafter  have 
directed  the  powers  and  conciliated  the  prejudices  of  the  native  troops  ;  bu;  it  was 
becaufe  the  officers  knew  the  people  and  their  prejudices  well.  Thefe  officers  had 
been  trained  up  among  them  from  an  early  age :  the  nature,  the  ufages,,  and  the 
language  of  the  natives,  u'ere  become  fan.iihar  to  them;  and  the  natives,  remarkably 
the  creatures  of  habit,  in  return,  from  being  accuftomed,  became  attached  to  them. 
Without  fuch  knowledge,  however,  on  the  part  of  ihe  officers,  they  might  eveiy  day 
have  revolted  the  minds  of  io  peculiar  a  race,  and  have  alienated  them  f;om  our 
ifervice  and  government. 

An  Indian  military  education,  from  an  early  age,  is  effential  to  the  formation  of 
a  good  Sepoy  officer;  and  gradual  rife  in  the  fervice  by  feniority,  is  no  lefs  indifpen- 
iable. .  In  this  way,  the  hulian  army  has  been  conftituted  and  rendered  eminently 
efficient ;  and  all  meainres,  tending  to' change  or  weaken  the  conllituent  parts  of  this 
fabrick,  arc.  to  be  deprecated.  When,  excepting  a  few  regiments  of  European 
artillery  and  infantry,  the  whole  military  force  of  Britifh  India  was  compofed  of 
Sepoy  corps,  the  ofEcers  of  that  aimy,  of  courfe,  pofTeifed  entire  the  emoluments 
.and  advantages  which  the  fervice  afforded.  The  intruduftion  of  European  troops 
■from  His  Majefly's  army  into  India  altered  this  ftate  of  things.  Young  officers,  of 
jio  Indian  experience,  who  had  obtained  their  commiffions  by  purchafe,  took  rank 
of  men  of  long  and  tried  fervice:-  the  King's  officers  were  thought  to  come -in,  alfo, 
...  for 