

When  they  can  no  longer  be  kept  up,  the  means  of  conveyance  they  have  hitherto  "^^  '^ 
lo  well  afforded  for  troops,  and  the  large  fupplies  of  naval  and  military  (lores  an- 
nually fent  to  India,  muit  be  loft. 

But  there  is  no  reafon  to  believe  the  evils  would  end  here.  The  monopoly  of 
the  China  trade,  which  it  is  propofed  to  continue,  would  not  be  fafe  ;  Britifli 
Ships,  when  permitted  to  range  at  pleafure  through  the  Indian  Seas,  however 
interciifted  from  that  trade,  would  attempt  to  participate  it  in  either  by  reforting 
to  it  as  the  country  Ihips  do,  under  color  of  carrying  on  the  coafling  trade,forby  other 
means  obtaining  teas,  and  the  other  produftions  of  China,  at  the  moft  convenient 
Indian  ports.  Love  of  gain,  difappoiutments  in  other  ways,  the  hope  of  impunity 
would  ftitnulate  their  conductors  to  break  through  reftrictionsimpofedin  this  country. 
Britifii  fubjeds,  who  now  navigate  the  Indian  Seas,  fail  from  fome  one  of  our  eftabliflied 
fettlements  there,  and  are  amenable  to  the  laws  of  it :  it  would  not  be  fo  with  men  hav- 
ing no  domicile  in  India.  In  ranging  the  numerous  iflands  and  coate  of  the  Eaftern 
Seas,  where  they  would  be  unknown,  and  whence  they  could  not  be  follovv-ed  to 
England  by  complaints,  the  probability  of  impunity  might  tempt  them  to  commit 
upon  the  weak  natives  accuftomed  to  repofe  conlidence  in  Engliftanen,  atts  of  in- 
juftice  and  licentiouinefs,  which  v/ould  wound  the  national  charafter,  raife  complaints 
throughout  India,  and  fet  the  people  again  ft  us.  In  this  manner  the  Portucuefe 
formerly  rendered  themfelves  odious  in  the  Eaft,  and  contributed  to  the  downfall  of 
their  own  power.  In  China,  where  the  efl'ccts  of  fuch  a  fpirit  would  be  moit  to  be 
feared,  we  could  exercife  no  authority,  furlicient  to  controul  men  not  within  the 
reach  of  the  Indian  Governments,  or  to  defeat  their  fchemes  and  affociations  for 
elud'ng  the  laws.  Pradice  would  emboldem  them,  and  time  increafe  their  numbers. 
It  is  hardlv  conceivable  they  would  not  venture  upon  irregularities  which  would  offend 
the  ChiuLfe  Government,  who,  whilft  the  delinquents  efcaped  to  England  with  im- 
punity, would  doubtlefs  take  fatisfaflion  of  the  national  factory,  and  the  pride  and 
jealoufy  of  that  Government,  alarmed  by  repeated  inftances  of  this  nature,  from  the 
defultory  vifits  of  a  new  order  of  Engliflimen,  iniubordinate  to  the  reprefentatives  of 
the  nation,  might  determine  to  difmifsthe  whole  together.  If  this  extreme  cafe  be 
not  fuppo'ed,  which  however  is  too  probable  and  too  momentous  in  its  confequences  to 
be  hazarded,  can  it  be  doubted,  that  whilft  the  duties  on  tea  continue  at  even  the 
fourth  part  of  v/hat  they  are  at  prefent,  private  Englilh  fhips  adventuring  to  the  Eaft- 
ern Seas  will  not,  by  means  of  country  veffels  and  intermediate  ports,  if  by  no  other 
means,  procure  teas,  and  revive  the  practice  of  fmuggling  them  into  this  kingdom.'' 
The  confequence  feems  inevitable,  and  the  fliips  of  our  own  country,  efpecially  if 
allowed  to  chufe  their  port  of  difcharge,  as  the  propofed  change  feems  to  require,  would 
-have  facilities,  which  thofe  of  foreign  Europe  or  i^merica  could  not  command. 
Inthefeways,  the  China  monopoly  of  the  Company,  reduced  in  its  profits,  would 
be  rendered  likewife  infecure,  and  in  the  end  untenable  ;  an  .i  the  noble  fleet  of  Ihips, 
employed  in  that  trade  by  the  Company,  muft  be  alfo  laid  afide.  Flow  the  immenfe 
revenue,  now  derived  by  Government  from  the  very  high  duties  on  tea,  could, 
under  fuch  circumflances,  be  realized,  or  a  fubftitute  found  for  them,  may  be  an  im- 
portant, and,  to  all  appearance,  a  moft  difficult  fubjecl  of  enquiry. 