

One  part  of  the  prefent  fydem,  and  a  beneficial  one  for  all  parties,  is  to  have 
only  one  place  of  fale  for  Indian  goods,  that  is  London  ;  to  make  all  fales  by  public 
auction  at  dated  periods,  and  thefe  fales  to  be  regulated  and  conduced  by  the 
Company.  With  the  propofed  enlargements,  it  would  feem  hardly  pofhble  to 
continue  that  praftice.  Dilferent  tov/ns  would  have  their  own  fales,  at  their  own 
times.  Individuals  might  frequently  chufe  to  difpofe  of  their  goods  by  private 
bargain.  The  general  refort  of  buyers  which  the  fales  were  wont  to  bring  to 
London,  a  refort  often  produttive  of  other  commercial,  fpeculations,  would  thus 
be  at  an  end  ;  and  the  benefit  derived  from  public  auftion,  when  that  was'the  fole 
mode,  would  be  lodj  in  the  midd  of  many  private  fales  and  competitions  :  but  to 
difpofe  of  the  goods  of  the  Company  by  private  negociation,  might  open  a  door  to 
many  abufes,  which  would  render  that  mode  totally  unfuitable  for  their  bufinefs. 
The  Company,  with  fuch  a  competition,  could  not  go  on  to  purchafe  the  goods  of 
India.  With  the  ceffat ion  of  their  Indian  trade,  their  Indian  fubordinate  faftcries, 
which  have  been  reared  in  the  courfe  of  more  than  a  century,  and  which  are  the 
feats  of  the  bed  manufaftures  produced  in  the  country,  mud  be  abandoned,  and  all 
the  commercial  branch  of  their  civil  fervants  be  thrown  out  of  employ.  Their  pur- 
chafes  of  goods  at  home,  for  the  Indian  market,  mud  alfo  ceafe,  with  the  circula- 
tion of  money  which  has  enabled  them  to  fupport  their  credit  in  England,  and  to 
provide  for  the  payment  of  bills,  which  it  has  been  long  and  necellarily  the  pratticc 
to  draw  on  them  from  India ;  a  prafticc  which,  under  fuch  a  change  of  circum- 
fiances,  could  not  be  conthmed  :  and,  in  general,  the  great  aid  which  the  political 
affairs  of  Britifh  India  have,  at  all  times,  derived  from  the  commercial  credit  and, 
refources  of  the  Company,  with  the  reciprocally  beneficial  co-operation  of  the  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  Company's  fydem,  mud  thus  be  deRroyed.  In  like  manner,  the 
Company  mud  ceafe  to  employ  the  numerous  clafs  of  excellent  ihips  they  have 
engaged  for  the  Indian  trade,  fhips  condruded  for  warlike  defence  as  well  as  for 
commerce,  and  rendered  expenfive  only,  by  being  neceffarily  dedined  and  fitted  for 

the 


(     19     ) 

the  performance  of  political  fervices.     Thofe  fliips  the  Company  have  contrafted  to  No.  VIII. 

employ  for  the  terra  of  their  duration  :  there  is  a  large  capital  embarked  m  them,  ■- 

and  they  can  be  employed  in  no  other  way  than  in  that  for  which  they  were  built.  ^  ''^'^"J^"  ^^""^ 