


(      21       ) 

for  too  large  a  fhare  of  employments  and  advantages-     To  redrefs  the  complaliits        Ko.  VIII. 

which  the  Company's  officers  made  of  fuperceffions  and  partialities,  and  to  give  them 

a  better  fliare  of  the  benefits  of  the  fervice,  was  the  leading  object  of  Lord  Coinwullis's     /''''»"''^3"  '"'^ 
Military  Plan  of  1794,  and  with  him  a  pi-incipal  motive  for  propofing  to  transfer  the       "'"  ^  * 
Indian  army  to  the  King,  no  other  prafticable  means  having  then  occurred  to  him. 
But  the  objed:  was,  in  fubftaiice,  attained  by  the  Military  Regulations  of  i  796,  paflld  in 
concert  with  His  Majefty's  Government,  without  that  transfer,  of  which  hisLordfhip 
did  not  revive  the  idea  on  his  lalt  return  to  India,  thofe  regulations  having  given  in- 
creafed  rank  and  retiring  pay  to  the  officers  of  the  Company's  army.     'Ihe  caufes  of 
complaint,  however,  did  not  entirely  ceafe.     To  avoid  the  collifion  of  authorities,  the 
Company  had  adopted  the  nfage  of  appointing  the  Commander  in  Chief  of  the  King's 
troops,  alfo  their  Commander  in  Chief ;  and  one  confequence  of  this  has  been,  that  the 
Companv's  officers,  refident  from  early  youth  in  India,  poffeffing  little  influence  in  Eng- 
land, unknown  to  officers  ot  high  rank  inHisMajefty's  fervic?,  have  thought  themfclvts 
treated  with  lefs  favour  and  diftinclion,  than  younger  officers  of  that  fervicft  recently 
arrived,  but  better  patronized.    You  know,  Sir,  that  there  have  been  indances  of  this 
fort,  which  the  Court,  with  the  fanftion  of  your  Board,  have  interpofed  to  reprefs  :  but 
as  long  as  the  Britifh  force  in  India  is  made  up  of  two  armies,  fo  differently  conflituted, 
with  fo  large  a  portion  of  King's  officers,  the  whole  commanded  by  generals  of  His 
Majefty's  fervice,  there  will,  probably,  be  real  or  apprehended  ground  for  the  like 
complaints.     They  do  not  arife  becaufe  one  army  has  the  honour  to  belong  to  His 
Majefty  and  the  other  ferves  the  Company,  but  becaufe  the  conltitution  of  the  two 
armies  are  radically  different,  and  muft  continue  fo,  whether  the  armies  are  under 
one  head  or  two.    The  Indian  army  cannot  be  maintained  without  officers  attached  to 
it  from  an  early  age,  and  rifmg  by  feniority.     Frequent  changes  of  King's  regiments 
ferving  in  India,  and  the  confequent  frequent  arrival   of  young  men,  promoted  in 
them  by  purchafe,  cannot  be  avoided :  the  former  clafs  will  be  comparatively  un- 
known to  the  King's  commanders,  the  latter  will  have  among  them  the  connetl:ions 
of  thofe  commanders,  or  of  men  of  influence  in  England.     It  is  not  difficult  to  fee, 
therefore,  to  which  fide  the  cxercife  of  military  patronage  will  lean ;  and  to  prevent 
caufes  of  complaint,  and  to  keep  the  balance  even,  raufl  be  an  important  objeft  in 
the  Government  of  India.     It  does  not  feem  the  way  to  effeft  this,  to  put  the.  Indian 
army  wholly   in  the  power  of  the  Commander  in  Chief.     It  is  of  the  partiality  of      '• 
that  ftation  of  which  the  Company's  officers  have  fometimes  complained;  and  the 
Court  fee  no  reafon  whatever  to  fuppofe,  that  their  jealoufy  and  diifatisfadion  would" 
be  removed,  by  putting  them  entirely  under  its  control :  and,  indeed,  by  placing  two 
armies,  of  fuch  different  races  and  fo  differently  conflituted,  under  the  fame  mafter, 
it  would  feem  difficult  to  avoid  attaching  the  idea  of  permanent  inferiority  to  that 
which  was  Indian.     Nor  is  it  a  thing  to  be  taken  for  granted,  that  the  Sepoys,  fo 
much,  as  already  obferved.  under  the  influence  of  habit,  would  chufe  to  be  tranf- 
ferred  from  that  fervice  to  which  they  have  been  always  accuftomed,  to  one  of  wliich 
they  have   little  experience,  and  that  experience  not  always  of  a   conciliatory  kind. 
To  place  the  officers  of  the  Indian  army  wholly  under  that  authority  of  which  they 
have  hitherto  complained,  does  not  certainly  appear  to  be  the  way  to  render  them 
eafy.     It  might,  on  the  contrary,  lead  to  ferious  difcontent ;  and  though  the  Court 
would  be  far  from  countenancing  that  fpirit  among  their  officers,  or  yielding  to  anv 
irregular  exertion  of  it,  yet  it  muft  be  faid,  on  the  other  hand,  that  thofe  officers  are 
a  body  of  men  who  have  defcrved  too  well  of  the  Company  and  their  country,  to  have 
real  caufes  of  difcontent ;  and  that  it  would  be  impolitic  to  adopt  any  fyftem,    likely 
to  generate  iuch  caufes,  either  among  them  or  the  men  they  command. 