

But  a  more  ferious  confequence  than  ail  thefe  woidd  ftill  remain.  A  free  trade 
to  India  would,  unavoidably,  draw  after  it  the  refidence  of  numerous  and  continually 
increafing  Europeans  there,  whatever  prohibitions  might,  at  flrft,  be  oppoied  to  thejr 
fettling  in  the  country.  When  all  reftraint  to  the  importation  of  fhips  and  goods  i  s 
taken  oft',  men  mult  be  allowed  to  follow  their  property,  and  to  remain  at  the  place 
where  they  land  it,  till  they  have  difpofed  of  it ;  they  muft  be  allowed  to  navigate  the 
Indian  Seas,  and  to  return  to  the  fame  place  when  their  bufmei's  calls  them  ; 
they  will  thus,  infenfibly,  and  with  hardly  reafonable  grounds  for  oppofition, 
domiciliate  themfelves;  nor  would  an  unfuccefsful  trade  prevent  them,  but 
many  would  feek  to  indemnify  themfelves  on  fhore  for  their  loffcs  by  the  voyage. 
The  inftances  of  fuch  fcttlem.ents  will  be  numerous,  and  it  will  be  impoffible  lor 
any  police  to  follow  up  the  cafes  of  individuals,  and  continually  to  exercife  a 
rigorous     fyftem   of    e.xciufion.     This     has     not    hitherto   been     done,    though 

attended 


(      20      ) 

Is'o.  VIII.        attended  with  comparatively  little  difficulty  ;  and  the  attempt  would  foon,  under  the 
~.  new  order  offhin;;s,  be  abandoned   as  hopelefs.     Colonization    muft,  in  fuch  cafe 

D^putv^s  LeUtr.  f°Jl*^^^'-  Large  conininnities  ot  Europeans  will  Urug^h  for  popular  rights  :  new 
feelings  with  refpect  to  the  mother  country,  new  inferefts  and.  attachments  will  then 
fpring  up  ;  and  in  a  region  fo.  remote,  fo  rich  and  populous,  and  fo  aceuftomcd  to 
yield  to  the  afccndancy  of  the  European  charadler,  the  tendency  and  proccfs  of  thefe 
things  cannot  be  difficult  to  conceive. 

With  the  profpc^  of  all  thefe  confequences,  commercial  and  political,  before  the 
Court,  it  is  impoffible  that  they,  as  faithful  guardians  of  the  interefts  committed  to 
their  care,  or  as  men  truly  folicitous  for  the  welfare  of  their  counti-y,  which  they 
•  profefs  themfelves  to  be,  can  advife  their  conftituents  to  feek  a  renewal  of  their 
Charter,  on  conditions  v/hich  would  defpoil  it  of  all  its  foiid  advantages,  deprive  the 
Company  of  their  moft  valuable  privileges,  and  incapacitate  them  from  performing, 
for  themfelves  and  tne  nation,  the  part  hiiherto  afligned  to  them  in  the  Indian  fyftem. 
Such  a  further  enlargement  of  the  Indian  trade,  in  favor  of  individuals,  as  may  be 
compatible  with  the  prefervation  of  thefe  effential  objects,  the  Court  will,  in  prefent 
circumftaitces,  certainly  be  difpofed  to  reconnnend.  'I'hey  will  be  ready  to  enter  into 
a.fcrious  inquiry  concerning  the  conceflions  which  may  be  made,  without  trenching 
■iipon  the  principles  edr.bhihed  by  the  Ad  of  1793  ;  and  they  truft  that  the  juftice 
iind  wifdom  of  His  IVIajelty's  Minifters  will  not  require  the  Company  to  make 
jeffential  facrifices,  for  th.e  lake  of  giving  to  the  public  what  would,  after  all,  be 
more  an  idcrd  than  a  real  benefit,  and  be,  in  other  relpefts,  productive  of  incalculable 
difad  vantages. 