

But  the   flrongefl:  objedions  of  the  Court  to   the  propofed  transfer   arife  from 
political    confiderations.     They  conceive  the   continuimce  of  the   Indian  army  in 
the  hands  of  the  Company  to  be  effeniial  to  the  adminiilration  of  the  civil,  financial, 
and  political  affairs  of  Britifli  India,  according  to  the  prefent  fyftem.    The  Company's 
Government    has   hitherto  been  refpefted,  both  by  its   own  fubjefts   and   foreign 
powers,  becaufe  it  poffeffed  a  great  mihtary  force.     Organizing  this  force,  enlarging 
or  reducing  it  at  pleafure,   appointing  its   officers,  rewarding  merit,  puniffiing  the 
unworthy,  providing  for  the  comfortable  retirement  of  the  veteran  foldier  and  officer, 
and,  in  fhort,  exercifing  all  the  funftions  of  a  governing  power  over  a  very  numerous 
body  ot  men  of  high  mihtary  fpirit,  it  has  poiVeffed  all  the  refpeftabihty  and  the 
benefit  of  their  attachment  and  fidelity.     Looking  upon  the  Members  of  the  civil 
Government  and  the  body   of  civil   fervants  as  belonging  to  the  fame  mafter  with 
themfelves.  and  as  the  fiilt  order  in  the  Itate,  they  have  paid  a  wiHing  obedience  to 
their  authority,  and  have  thereby  upheld  their  internal  adminiilration  and  their  con- 
iequence  abroad.     The  introdudion  of  certain  King's  regiments  has  been  under- 
ftood,  as  ii  was   interided,  to  be  merely  in  fupport  of  the  public  interefl  under  the 
exiiliijg  fyftem;    but  if  the    Company  were  to  be  diverted  of  the  whole  of  their 
military   force   and  power  ;  if  they  were  to   be  no  longer  mart ers  of  a  fingle  re- 
giment, Tio  longer  capable  of  entertaining  any  foldiers  nor  of  giving  one  fubaltern's 
commiffion  ;    if  the  immenfe  body  of  men,  who  have  fo  long  looked  up  to  them, 
were  to  be  transferred  from  them,  the  people  muft  confider  their  power  as  fallen 
and  di-avving  rapidly  to  a   clofe.     Continuing  llill  to  their  Gr-vernments  a  general 
controul  over  the  employment  of  the  army,  and  to  t'neir  civil  fervants  the  internal 
adminiftration  of  their  affairs,  would  give  the  people  no  affurance  to  the  contrary. 
Thofe  ervants,  in  the  dil'charge  of  their  different  funclions  of  judges,  magillrates, 
colletlors,  could  not  exptcl  the  fame  refpect  and  fupport,  either  from  pubhc  opinion 
or  the  attachment   of  the  native  troops,  as  when  all  looked  to  the  fame  head  for 
protecficn,  patronage,  and  reward.     Indeed,  to  make   fo   wide  a  reparation  of  the 
military  from  the  civil  power  ;   to  take  away  the  organization,  the  interior  regulation, 
and  with  thefe,  the  patronage  of  the  army,  from   the  local  Government ;   to  place 
all  thofe  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  Commander  in  Chief,   fubjed   only,  in  the 
exercifc  of  them,  to  an  authority  at  the  dillance  of  half  the  globe,  v.'ould  throw  the 
means  and  the  temptation  of  a  dangerous  afceudancy  into  the  fcale  of  the  military 
department,  which  conftituted  by  His  Majefty,   might  eafily  be  led   to  flight  the  . 
civil  fervants  of  a  meaner  mafter,  and  their  chance  of  difla  it  reJrefs      Among  the. 
natives  of  India   it  has  been   ufual    to    confider    the   military    power,  and    thofe  . 
■poffeiling  it,   as  pre-eminent ;  and    they  fee,  in  fome  examples  of  the  prefent  day, 
that  power,  under  the  idea  of  affifling  the  civil  and  political  adminiftration,  actually 
controuling   it.      The    Company's    Government,    in    fhort,    lowered    and    over- 
fliadowed  m    this  way,  would  not,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  continue  to  poffefs  . 
the  authority  nec!.ffciry  For  the  proper  adminiftration   of  the  affairs  of  that  great 