

To  this  muft  be  added,  the  amount  of  advances  in  India  and  at 
home,  for  Stores  of  various  kinds,  applicable  to  the  purpofes  of  Go- 
vernment, and  in  conftant  ufe  for  military  equipments,  &c.  ;  of  cafli, 
arms,  &c. ;  and  of  debts  due  to  the  Company  from  various  ftates 
and  princes,  Sec;  and  other  articles,  making  at  the  clofe  of  the  Indian 
year  18 lo, about  ....  21,282,279 

If  to  thefe  fums  be  fubjoined  the  abfolute  expenditure  made  by 
the  Company,  for  the  acquirement  of  a  territory,  with  forts,  am- 
munition, &c.  and  the  aftual  purchafe  of  many  taiStories  and  territories, 
building  of  docks,  purchafe  of  forefls,  &c.  including  a  confidorable 
fum  which  has  been  paid  by  them,  at  various  times,  to  the  Public,  or 
difburbed  for  expeditions,  and  the  maintenance  of  captures  afterwards 
furrendered  up  to  the  enemy,  ws.  -  -  15,052,170 

They  form  altogether  an  aggregate  of       -     ^■'51,182,127 

(59-)  "  The 


Deputy's  Letter. 


(      30      ) 

No.  X\Mr,                     Aggregate  diiburfements  brought  forward  -                •     5^51,182,127 

~ The  capital  ol"  the  Company  is  :— 

Demi't™!"  ^nt     ^"  money  advanced  by  the  adventurers,  about         -  ^7,780,000 

And  they  receive  from  the  aid  of  bonds  at  home         -  7,000,000 
And  from  other  contingent  credits,  at  home  and  abroad, 

about                »                ...               -  7.787»953 

Together 22,567,953 

Leaving  a  balance  of        -        ^28,614,174 

Conftituting  at  this  raoment  a  permanent  debt  in  India  and  in  Europe.  (See  C.) 

This  aggregate  of  ^i; 1, 1 82, 1 2 7,  a  part  of  which  fum  only  has  been  employed 
upon  the  territorial  acquifitions  of  the  Company,  forms  an  outlay,  beyond  the  capital 
of  the  Company,  of  fo  large  an  amount,  as  to  make  it  more  matter  of  wonder,  how 
the  Company  have  hitherto  been  able  to  carry  on  the  concern  at  all,  than  to  rendei- 
it  extraordinary  that  they  ihould  have  been  conftrained,  refpeclfuUy  and  at  various 
times,  to  reprefent  the  urgency  of  their  affairs,  and  to  prefs  upon  the  Public  for  the 
mere  return  of  thofe  funis,  which  had  been  fairly  expended  by  the  Company  abroad 
for  the  public  fervice ;  a  return  which  has  never  yef  been  granted  to  the  Company, 
to  the  extent  to  which,  in  juftice,  it  ought  to  have  reached.  In  every  war  which 
has  taken  place  fince  the  Company  became  poffeffed  of  the  territorial  acquifitions, 
large  fums  of  money  have  been  expended  in  capturing  the  fettlements  of  the  French, 
Dutch,  and  Danes,  and  heavy  expenfes  incurred  in  keeping  the  fame,  till  the  political 
views  of  the  Public  occafioned  thefe  fettlements  to  be  reftored,  in  return  for  other 
objeds,  in  which  the  Company  had  no  particular  intereft.  The  Company  have  alfo 
been  compelled  to  pay  part  of  the  expence  of  capturing  and  maintaining  an  ifland, 
afterwards  referved  for  theexclufive  benefit  of  the  Crown  ;  to  difburfe  a  confiderable 
fum  for  a  force,  of  which  the  Public  have  derived  all  the  benefit  at  home ;  and  even  to 
contribute  to  the  Egyptian  expedition,  the  whole  of  which  expenfes  the  Company 
have  always  thought  ought  to  have  fallen  upon  the  State. 