

Ordered,  that  the  fame  be  taken  into  confideration  to-morrow. 


No.  XIV. 

Secret  Court, 
28  Feb.  1812. 


No.  XV. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Saturday  the  29th  February  181 2. 

'T'HE  Court  proceeded  to  take  the  propofed  draft  of  a  reply  to  Lord  Melville's 
letter  into  confideration. 


No.  XV. 

Secret  C'Hirt, 
ap  Feb.  1813. 


No.  XVI. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direilors,  held  on  Monday  the  2d  March  1812. 

'TpHE  draft  of  the  propofed  reply  to  Lord  Melville's  letter,  of  the  17th  December 
■*-    laft,  was  unanimoufly  approved. 

Refolved,  1  hat  a  Deputation  of  this  Court  be  appointed  to  wait  on  His  Majefty's 
Minilters,  in  coafequence  thereof ;  and  that  the  laid  Deputation  do  confift  of  the 
Chairman,  Deputy  Chairman,  Charles  Mills  Efq.  the  Honourable  William  Elphin- 
ilone,  and  Edward  Parry  Efq. 


No.  xvr. 

Secret  Court, 
2  March  181Z. 


No.XVil. 

Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honor- 
able Lord  Vii'count  Melville,  with  its  Enclofures,  noticed  in  the  pre- 
ceding Minute. 

My  LoRi),  Eaft  India  Houfe,  4th  March  18 12. 

''E  duly  received  and  laid  before  the  Court  of  Directors  your  Lordfliip's  letter 
of  the  17th  of  December  laft.  We  truft  that  the  great  Importance  of  the 
Matter  contained  in  it  will  explain,  in  a  fatisfadtory  Manner,  to  your  Lordftiip  aiid 
to  His  Majefty's  Government,  why  an  Anfwer  has  not  been  prepared  at  an  earlier 
Period. 

By  that. letter  \ve  think  it  is  to  be  underftood,  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  have 
made  up  their  minds,  not  to  hold  out  to  the  Eaft  India  Company  an  Expeftation  of 
theia-  being  difpofed  to  concur  in  an  offer  to  Parliament  of  any  propofition  for  the 
continuance  of  the  prefent  fyftem  of  trade  with  India,  at  the  clofe  of  the  term  limited 
by  the  Act  of  1793,  which  is  now  nearly  expiring,  without  a  previous  confent,  on 
the  part  of  the  Eail  India  Company,  as  the  bafis  of  fuch  concurrence,  that  the  trade 
with  India  ftiall  be  extended  to  the  ftiips,  as  well  as  goods  of  private  merchants, 
under  fuch  rellriclions  as  may  be  deemed  neceffary  ;  but  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
are  of  opinion,  with  refpeft  to  the  fabjed  cf  the  Indian  army,  that  the  idea  which 
was  hild  out  in  your  Lot dfliip's  letter  of  the  28th  of  December  1S08,  relative  to 
the  transfer  of  the  Company's  army  to  the  Crown,  will  not  be  contended  for ;  and 
that,  upon  thefo  grounds  of  underftanding,  your  Lordfliip  will  be  prepared  to  receive 
from  the  Court  of  Dire6lors  any  fuggeftions  which  they  may  have  to  offer  on  the 
fubjefl:  of  the  Co.iipany's  debt,  and  upon  the  mode  by  vvhic'n  the  Court  propofe 
that  funds  for  its  liquidation  fliould  be  provided. 