

From  the  terms  in  which  the  firft  propofition,  refpc£ting  the  trade  with  India, 
has  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Court,  they  conceive  that  it  is  intended,  on 

the 


No.  XVII. 

Chairman   and 
Deputy's  Letter. 


(     2S     ) 

No.  XVII.      the  part  of  His   Majcfty's  Government,  to  preclude  the  Court  from  any  further 

agitation  of  a  qucftion  already  fo  fully  difcuffed.     The  Court,  indeed,  cannot  avoid 

Cliairir.an  and      coufidering  this  as  the  obvious  interpretation  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter  refpeding  a 
Deputy  I  Letter.    pgjjj[-^  upon  wliich,  perhaps,  it  might  be  out  of  their  power  to  offer  any  arguments, 
not  contained  in  the  letter  of  the  Chairs  to  your  Lordfhip  of  the  13th  of  January 
1809. 

Whatever  opinion,  therefore,  the  paft  experience  and  daily  obfer\'ation  of  the 
Court  may  have  jullly  induced  themjto  form  upon  this  fubjecl:,  or  however  incontro- 
vertible they  may  believe  many  of  the  arguments  to  be,  that  are  made  ufe  of  in  the 
letter  of  the  Chairs  to  your  Lordfliip,  to  which  they  have  referred,  they  think  it 
their  duty  to  ftate,  that  if  this  alteration  be  made  an  indifpenfable  condition,  on  the 
part  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters,  of -their  propofing  to  Parliament,  the  renewal  of 
the  Company's  privileges,  the  Court  v.ill,  though  reludiantly,  ofi'er  this  meafure  to 
the  coniideration  of  the  Proprietors,  with  whom  alone  the  power  refls  of  confenting 
to  fuch  a  fundamental  change  in  the  conilitution  of  the  Company.  But  they  mud, 
at  the  fame  time,  beg  leave,  in  the  mofl  unequivocal  manner,  to  declare  their  con- 
viftion,  that  though  this  alteration  may,  and  probably  will,  be  attended  with  many 
ferious  inconveniences  to  the  whole  frame  oi  that  Government,  which,  whatever 
opinion  may  h^ve  been  formed  of  its  imperfections,  has,  beyond  all  difpute,  acquired 
and  maintamed  for  Great  Britain  a  paramount,  and  almoft  undifputed  fovercignty 
in  the  Eaft,  it  will  not  give  to  the  nation  thofe  commercial  advantages,  which  it 
has  been  the  habit  of  many  of  the  commercial  interelts  of  this  Country  to  con- 
lemplate^ 

.  The  Court,  however,  hope  it  will  be  underflood  by  your  Lordfnip,  that  they  have 
entertained  this  opinion,  not  upon  the  narrow,  and  now  juilly  exploded  ground, 
•which  they  are  forry  to  fee  has  been  imagined  by  your  Lordfliip  to  exift,  that  the 
Company  have  ever  confidered  a  monopoly  to  be  more  beneficia',  in  all  cafes  of 
"  foreign  and  diftant  trade,  than  an  unreftrained  commerce,"  but  upon  the  con- 
vi<51ion  v/ith  which  they  have  been  imprefled,  that  an  exclufive  trade  with  India  is 
'the  only  one  really  applicable  to  the  maintenance  of  the  public  interefts  with  that 
country,  interwoven  as  that  trade  is  with  the  very  frame  and  integrity  of  thofe  pof- 
feflions,  and  refting,  as  it  does,  upon  many  highly  important  confiderations,  which  are, 
in  no  wife,  applicable  to  other  commercial  eitabliihments. 