

There  are  two  points,  however,  of  confiderable  importance,  which  are  adverted 
to  in  the  above-mentioned  letters,  and  oa  which  it  may  be  advifable  that  1  fliould 
liatp.to  you  fhortly  whatocoiu  sto  me. 

■  I'he  firfl:  relates  to  the  transfer  of 'the  Company's  army  to  the  Crown  ;  a  meafure 
which  has  been  frequently  fuggelted  by  perfons  iutimately  acquainted  with  the  mili- 
tary concerns  of  the  Company,  and  whofe  opinions  are  entitled  to  great  confideration. 
It  is  ■  impoffible;  however,  not  to  admit,  that  feveral  weighty  objeftions  to  fuch  a 
change  are  iiattd  iii  the  Letter  cf  the  i  3th  January  1809.  Events  which  have  fince 
occurred,  mufl:,  alio,  have  an  iniluence  in  deciding  this  queftion,  and  may  poffibly 
fugged;  the  ex;pediency  of  adoptini^  other  meafiu'es  for  promoting  the  difcipline  and 
efficiency  of  tlie  army  in  India.  Further  difcuflion  on  this  fubjed  may  be  deferred  till 
a  future  opportunity,  and  any- arrangements  which  may  be  deemed  proper  can  be 
carried  into  eiTecl,  without  having  recourfe  to  fpecial  legiflative  enaftments. 

The  other  point  to  which  I  allude,  is  the  propofition  for  enabling  the  Company 
to  meet  the  heavy  demands  which  were  then  expected,  and  which,  to  a  certain  extent, 
have  fince  come  upon  them,  by  the  transfer  of  their  Indian  aebt  to  this  country. 
All  uncertainty,  as  to  the  poffible  amount  of  thofe  demands,  is  now  removed  ;  and 
the  period,  I  Ihould  hope,  is  arrived,  to  which,  during  Ibme  years,  we  have  looked 
forward  with  anxiety,  for  providing  out  of  the  Company's  ovm  refources,  without 
any  pecuniary  aid  from  the  Public,  the  means  of  enabling  them  to  fatisfy  all  the 
claims  of  their  Indian  creditors.  Tlie  {anciion  of  Parliament  will  probably  be  necef- 
fary for  cahying  into  effe£l:  any  arrangement  for  that  purpofe  ;  and  if  the  Court  of 
Direftors  are  willing  that  thefe  difcuflions,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter,  fliall  pro- 
ceed,  in  fo  far  as  releites  to  the  queftion  of  the  trade,  on  the  principle  to  which  1 
have  adverted,  I  fhali  be  ready  to  receive  from  you  any  fuggeftions  you  may  have 
to  offer  on  the  fubjecl  of  the  debt,  and  on  the  mode  by  which  you  propofe  that  funds 
for  its  liquidation  ila;ill  be  provided. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

^our  mofl  obedient  humble  fervant. 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)         MELVILLE, 

of  the  Eafl-Indir.  Company. 


No.  XIV 


(      27      ) 


No.  XIV. 
At  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredtors,  held  on  Friday  the  28th  February  1S12. 

TTHE  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  laid  before  the  Court  the 
draft  of  a  reply  to  Lord  Melville's  letter  of  the  17th  of  December  laft,  which 
was  read  : 