

Indian  trade  with  the  navigation  lyflem  could  be  appreciated,  and  the  Court,  if.  it 

Ihould  be  thought  likely  to  be  of  public  utility,  are  ready  to  have  that  information 

collected  ;  but  without  fuch  call,  and  without  prefling  their  reafons  at  length,  either 

upon  your  Lordfhip  or  the  other  Members  of  His  Majeity's  Government,  they  will 

content  themfelves  with  the  declaration  thty  have  already  made  of  their  opinion  upon 

this  fubjeft. 

The  Court  arc  defirous  of  taking  this  opportunity  to  offer  fome  remarks,  and  to 
anfwer,  in  a  curlbry  manner,  part  of  thofe  put;lic  accufations,  which  have  been  fo  af- 
fiduoufly  urged  againft  the  Eall  India  Company,  and  agaudl  the  further  continuance 
of  a  fyftem,  which,  they  hope,  will  appear  to  reft,  not  upon  the  grounds  of  individual 
intereft,  but  upon  the  firm  bafis  of  national  advantage. 

Whatever  opinions  the  Court  may  deliver,  upon  a  fubjefl:  in  which  they  are  maiii" 
fellly  interefted,  will  doubtlefs  be  received  with  circumfpedion;  but  the  Court  think, 
that  they  may  be  allowed,  and  widi  juiUceupon  the  prefent  occafion,  to  sffcrr,  that  the 
leading  difpofition  of  their  minds  is,  to  preferve  the  empire  obtained  in  India  to  t!ie 
parent  flate. 

The  firft,  and  the  mofl:  prominent  of  the  charges,  which  have,  at  various  times, 
been  brought  againit  ihe  Company,  is  the  repeated  calls  which  they  are  accufed  of 
having  made  upon  the  public,  tor  money  for  the  profccution  of  ruinous  concerns  ; 
as  if  they  had  diffipated  large  fums  in  ufelels  and  improvident  undertakings.  Upon 
this  head  it  may  be  fuflicient  for  the  Court  to  obferve,  that  their  commercial 
affairs  (and  to  thofe  alone  was  the  Company's  management  reftriifced)  have  been 
invariably  attended  with  fucctfs,  as  they  are  prepared  to  fhew,  if  the  proof  fhould 
be  called  for;  and  that  thcfe  advantages  have  been  fufficient  to  allov.'  of  a  mode- 
rate dividend  to  the  Proprietors  of  Ea(t  India  Stock.  Over  and  above  this  dividend, 
a  furplus  fum  has  been  applied,  arifmg  from  this  fource,  towards  the  extenficn  of 
that  territory,  the  acquifition  of  which  has  been  under  the  immediate  diredion  of  His 
Majefty's  Minifters. 

But  the  Court  are  perfuaded,  that  the  magnitude  of  the  afi'airs  which  the  Company 
have  had  to  manage,  has  been  little  known  and  little  attended  to,  otherwife  it  would, 
at  once,  have  been  feen,  that  one  of  the  principal  difficuhies  with  which  the  Company 
have  had  to  contend,  is  a  capital,  not  in  any  refpect  equal  to  the  great  extent,  variety, 
and  importance  of  thofe  affairs. 

The  diflaurfement  of  the  Company  upon  the  fingle  article  of  com- 
merce in  goods  and  wares,  &c.  or  of  articles  necefTary  for  its 
management,  a  difburfement  of  fums  going  from  and  returning  to 
the  Company,  from  one  moment  to  another,  was,  at  the  clofc  of  the 
year  18 1 1,  not  lefs  than  about  -  -  -  ^£14,847, 678 