

Ordered,  That  it  be  referred  to  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  to  confid^r 
what  reply  it  may  be  right  and  proper  to  make  to  the  letter  from  Lord  Melville,  now- 
read  ;  and  to  report  their  opinion  thereon  to  the  Court. 


Ko.  Xll. 

Secret  Court, 
3d  Jai!.  1811. 


No.  XIII. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chair- 
man  and  Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  17th  December  181 1,  noticed 
in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  17th  December  18 11. 

UNDERSTANDING  from  you,  that  it  is  the  wi(h  and  opinion  of  the  Court  of 
Direftois,  that  a  propofition  (hould  be  fubmitted  to  Parliament  in  the  courfe  of 
the  next  feinon,  for  continuing  to  the  Eaft-India  Company,  for  a  further  term,  their 
privileges  of  exclulire  trade  and  the  government  of  the  Britilh  territorial  po(re(Iions 
in  India  ;  it  will  be  nece(rary,  before  I  can  proceed  with  you  to  the  difcu(rion  of  that 
queftion  in  all  its  details,  that  certain  preliminary  matter  fliould  be  again  brought 
under  your  confideration. 

In  a  letter  which  I  addreffed  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,  on  the  28th 
December  1808,  the  outlines  of  fuch  a  fyftem,  in  regard  to  the  trade  between  this 
countiy  and  the  Eafl  Indies,  were  (tared,  as  His  Majelty's  Government  at  that  time 
were  willing  to  propofe  to  Parliament.  In  a  reply  to  that  letter,  dated  the  13th 
January  1809,  detailed  reafons  were  urged,  for  the  Court  of  Direftors  declining  to 
"  advife  their  conftituents  to  feek  a  renewal  of  their  Charter,  on  conditions  whicJi" 
(59-)  G  (as 


No.  XIIL 

Id.  Melville'* 
Lrlter. 


Ld.  Melville's 
Letter. 


(      26      ) 

No,  XIII.  (as  afferted  by  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman)  "  would  defpoil  it  of  all  its 
"  foliJ  advantages,  deprive  the  Company  of  their  rnoft  valuable  privileges,  and  in- 
"  capacitate  them  for  performing  for  ihemftlvcs  and  the  nation,  the  part  hitherto 
''  alhgned  to  them  in  the  Indian  fyftem." 

I  do  not  feel  it  requifite,  in  this  ftage  of  thebufinefs,  to  enter  upon  a  minute  ex- 
amination of  the  arguments  from  which  that  couclufiou  was  drawn.  Many  of  them 
have  reference  to  poflible  dangers,  which  might  arife  from  a  fyllem  of  trade  wholly 
unreftrifted  ;  againft  which  liangers,  however,  it  was  exprefsly  admitted  in  my 
letter,  that  it  would  be  eifentially  neceffary  to  guard.  A  confiderable  portion  of  their 
reafoning,  alfo,  would  lead  to  the  inference,  as  a  general  propofition,  applicable  to 
all  cafes  of  foreign  and  dillant  trade,  that  a  monopoly  was  more  beneficial  to  both 
countries  than  an  unreftrained  commerce  ;  and  that  the  facilities  intended  to  be  af- 
forded to  private  trade  with  India,  by  the  Aft  of  1793,  were  inexpedient  and  im- 
politic. There  are  (everal  ftatements  in  the  letter,  in  which  I  fully  concur  ;  but  it 
is  unneceffary  to  advert  to  them  at  prefent,  becaufe  if  the  Court  ot  Dire£tors  adhere 
to  the  above  mentioned  determination,  I  cannot  hold  out  to  you  the  lead  expedia- 
tion,  that  His  Majelly's  Government  will  be  difpofed  to  depart  from  the  propofal 
contained  in  my  letter,  or  that  they  will  concur  in  any  application  to  Parliament, 
for  the  continuance  of  a  fyRem  of  trade,  conducted  under  all  the  reltraints  now 
impofed  upon  it,  and  for  the  permanency  of  which  the  Court  of  Direftors  have  fo 
flrenuhufly  contended.  If  they  are  willing,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  fhips  as  well 
as  goods  of  private  merchants,  may  be  admitted  ijito  the  trade  with  India,  under 
fuch  reRriftions  as  may  be  deemed  neceffary,  1  Ihall  be  ready  to  difcufs  with  you  ail 
the  other  details  of  the  fyftem. 