

This  large  and  neceflary  outlay,  in  faft,  now  conftitutes  the  fource  of  the 
Company's  embarraffment.  A  confiderable  part  of  the  money  railed  in  India  upon 
periodical  loans,  to  meet  this  outlay,  has  (as  your  Lordfliip  well  knows)  by  the 
terms  of  thefe  loans,  which  made  them  payable,  if  required,  in  England,  and  in 
confequence  of  a  general  reduction  of  intereft  from  eight  to  fix  per  cent,  been 
at  once  thrown  upon  the  Company  for  immediate  payment  in  Europe ;  a  fum 
which,  without  the  aid  of  Parliament,  it  is  impoffible  for  the  Company  to  difcharge. 

Of  this  large  expenditure,  fanftioned,  and  in  many  cafes  fpecificaliy  directed  by 
the  Minifters  of  the  Crown,  it  may  with  juftice  be  afked,  what  part  ha^  been  in- 
curred for  the  partial  or  exclufive  advantage  of  the  Company  ? — It  is  evident,  that 
the  whole  concern  has  been  begun  and  continued  by  private  exertions  alone  ;  nor 
have  the  Proprietors  received,  by  any  means,  an  adequate  recompence  for  thofe  ex- 
ertions ;  they  have  fcarcely  derived  more  benefit  than  the  common  intereft  of  money. 
And  if  India  be  an  objedi:  of  regiu-d  to  the  world,  the  Company  may  have  the  fatis- 
faftion  of  thinking,  that  they,  at  their  own  rifk  and  expenfe,  have  refcued  it  from 
contending  Nations,  and  may  claim  the  merit  of  having  land  it  at  the  feet  of  their 
country  ;  acquired  and  preferved,  it  is  true,  at  a  great  pecuniary  £xpenfe,  and  by 
fuch  abilities  and  fuch  exertions,  both  civil  and  military,  as  not  only  to  reflefl  the 
hlgheft  credit  upon  the  Eaft-India  Company,  but  alfo  to  raife,  as  the  pageof  hiftory 
•will  teftify,  the  national  charafter.  They  venture  to  hope,  that  when  all  the  great 
political  lelations  of  this  acquifition  are  confidered,  the  price  paid  for  it  will  not  be 
deemed  as  out  of  proportion  to  its  intrinfic  value. 

The  wifdom  of  Parliament  will,  the  Court  make  no  doubt,  be  applied  to  pre- 
ferve  what  has  been  fo  acquired,  and  finally  do  juftice  to  thofe,  at  whofe  rilk  it 
has  been  obtained  ;  and  net  be  induced  to  barter  pofitive,  and  very  large  immediate 
advantages,  againft  fpeculalive  notions  and  theoretical  plans. 

In  the  fecond  place,  it  has  been  often  urged,  that  the  Company  have  been  favoured 
-during  thefe  exertions,  with  an  exclufive  trade,  and  that  the  nation  has  thereby 
loft  an  opportunity  of  extending  their  commercial  enterprizes  over  a  large  quarter 

of 


(    3»     ) 

of  the  globe.     It  is  true,  that  the  Company  have  been  f.ivoured  with  this  cxcUifive       No.  XVU. 

trade ;  but  it  may  fairly  be  afked,  would  India  have  belonged  to  Great  Britain  if 

this  exclufive  trade  had  not  exifted  ?     That  this  trade  would  have  been  of  greater    ^'i*'™*™  ««"' 
magnitude  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  is  yet  a  matter  that  remains  to  be  proved  :        '"'^  *     ''*^"^'' 
but  it  is  obvious,  that  during  part  of  the  above  period,  viz.  from  the  year  iy68  to 
1812,  the  Public  have  received,  in  direct  contributions  from  the  CompaHV,  a  funi 
not  falling  Ihort  of  .i^'5,135,319,  as  will  appear  by  the  accompanying  Account  (D.) 