

We  now,  therefore,  by  the  Authority  of  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence, 
whom  the  Court  of  Diredors  have  empowered  to  condud  the  details  of  negocia- 
tion  on  the  fubjeft  in  queftion,  beg  leave  to  ftate  to  you,  that,  in  their  ophiion,  it  is 
defirable  the  difcuflion  concerning  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  fliould  be  brought  on 
in  the  enfuing  feffion,  both  on  account  of  the  general  fituation  of  the  Company's 
affairs,  and  jdfo  on  account  of  the  particular  prellure  on  their  finances  (arifing  chiefly 
from  the  transfer  of  certain  fums  of  the  India  debt  to  England;  which  we  have  already 
had  the,  honor  to  reprefent  to  you  and  to  Lord  Harrowby ,  and  which  renders  neceffary 
fuch  an  application  for  public  aid,  as  may  of  itlelf,  be  e.xpeded  to  lead  to  a  general 
confideration  of  the  Company's  affairs. 

We 


(      25      ) 


•  •  We  .thet'efore  take  the  liberty  to  propofe,  that  the  difcufllons  between  you  and 
the  Court,  on  the  fubjed  of  the  Charter,  be  refunied,  from  the  point  at  which  they 
-were  lefc  by  the  letter  the  Chairs  addrcfled  to  you,  under  date  the  i  ith  January 
laft. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)         CHARLES  GRANT, 
The  Right  Honourable  Robert  Dundas,  WILLIAM  ASTELL. 

&c.  &c.  &c. 


No.Xr. 

Chairman   a  id 
Deputy'*  Lcltcr. 


No.  XII. 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors,  held  on  Friday  the  3d  January  i8i;. 

n^HE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Court,  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Lord  Melville 
to  the  Chairs,  dated  the  17th  of  lail  month,  upon  the  fubjeft  of  continuing 
to  the  Eafl  India  Company,  for  a  further  term,  their  privileges  of  exclufive  trade  and 
the  government  of  the  Britifh  territorial  poffeflions  in  India,  in  which  his  Lordlhip 
adverts  to  his  letter  addrefled  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman,  on  the  28th 
December  1H08,  and  to  their  reply,  dated  the  13th  January  1809,  ^""^  adds,  that 
If  theCourt  ofDiredors  are  willing  that  the  (hips,  as  well  as  goods  of  private  merchants, 
may  be  admitted  into  the  trade  with  India,  under  fuch  reftriftions  as  may  be  deemed 
neceffary,  he  fliall  be  ready  to  difcufs  with  the  Chairs  all  the  other  details  of  the  fyllem: 
and  his  Lord  (hip  alluding  to  two  points  of  confiderable  importance,  adverted  to  in 
the  above  mentioned  letters,  viz.  the  (irft  relating  to  the  transfer  of  the  Company's 
army  to  the  Crown,  upon  which  fubjed  circumftances  may  poflibly  fuggeft  the  ex- 
pediency of  adopting  other  meafures,  for  promoting  the  difcipline  and  efficiency  of 
the  army  in  India ;  and  the  fecond  point,  being  the  Indian  debt,  upon  which  fubjeO: 
his  LorcKhip  obferves,  that  the  period  he  (hould  hope  is  arrived,  for  providing,  out 
of  the  Company's  own  refources,  without  any  pecuniary  aid  from  the  Public,  the 
means  of  enabling  them  to  fatisfy  all  the  Claims  of  their  Indian  Creditors. 