

Wc 


(    39    ) 

We  tha-efore  venture  to  exprefs  a  fanguiite  hope,  that  under  a  proper  cpnfidcra-       No.  XXII. 

tion   of  all   the  circumftances  of  the  prefent  cafe,    under    a  review  of  the  very 

large  Sums  annually  paid  to  Government  out  of  the  Company's  trade,  amounting  °J|t^hTord"" 
tonotlefs  than  ;f. 3,200,000,  as  appears  by  the  enclofed  account,  and  which,  in  faft,  c«(lleTMgh. 
ought  in  part  to  be  confidered  as  an  anticipated  partition  of  the  Public  out  of  the 
Indian  revenues,  fince  nothing  fhoit  of  a  furplus  in  India  would,  we  conceive,  have 
enabled  the  Company  to  fupport  them  to  the  extent  they  are  now  impofed ; — that, 
under  a  due  attention  to  the  benefits  which  even  the  Public  themfelves,  (when  we 
advert  to  their  intereft,  in  the  ukiinate  profperity  of  the  Co;npany)  may  derive  from 
an  increafed  value  to  the  price  of  the  Company's  Stock,  which  may  be  affixed  by 
fuch  a  meafure,  in  cafe  a  commerce,  extended  beyond  its  prefent  amount  (an 
event  not  at  all  improbable),  fhould  hereafter  demand  additional  funds  to  carry 
that  commerce  on; — and,  finally,  that  under  a  confidtration  of  what  is  due 
to  the  known  and  experienced  liberalitv  of  the  Company's  efforts  in  t'ne  pub- 
lic ferviee,  your  Lordihip's  interference,  with  the  re!l  of  His  Majelly's  Minillers, 
will  be  given,  to  ailiil  what,  we  hope,  may  be  confidered  in  the  li;^htof  the  neither 
unjuft  or  the  unreafonable  pretenfions  of  the  Court  of  Directors,  in  behalf  ot  the 
body  they  reprefent  upon  the  prefent  occafion. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be.  My  Lord, 

Your  mod  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed;        JACOB  BOSANOUET, 
JOHN  ROBERTS. 
The  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh, 
ice.  Sec  &c. 


Letter  from  the    Ri^ht    Honorable  Lord   Vifcount    CaRlereaoli  to  the    Ld.CnAIc-cagS't 
•^  ^  Letter. 


Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman. 


ul 


I 


Gentlemen,  Whitehall,  20th  December  i8oj'. 

HAVE  to  acknowledge   the  honor  of  your  letter   of  the  2d  inftant   on  the 
fubjeft  of  which  I   have   had  a  very   full  and  deliberate  difcullion  with  Mr. 
Addington. 

We  {hould  both  feel  an:tioufly  difpofed  to  lend  our  aid  to  the  accompiilhment  of 
any  meafure  which  had  a  tendency  to  accommodate  the  holders  of  Ea(t  India 
Stock,  but  under  all  the  circumftances  of  the  prefent  cafe,  regard  being  had  to 
the  exifling  appropriations  under  the  aft  of  1793,  the  degree  in  which  the  funds  at 
home  and  abroad  may  be.  aflecled  by  the  peculiar  circumllances  of  the  prefent  year, 
:*nd  the  difHculty  that  muii  necdiariiy  attach  to  the  propofition,  whether  it  be  con- 
fidered in  the  light  of  relieving  Irom  the  tax  a  particular  delcriplion  of  income  arifing 
from  property,  by  throwing  the  fame  on  other  funds,  or  in  that  of  a  temporary  and 
fpecial  increafe  of  dividend  to  the  Proprietors,  we  do  not  feel  ourfelves  warranted  in 
advifmg  the  Court  to  fubmit  a  bill  for  this  purpofe  to  Parliament. 