

13th.  The  fhlps  of  private  perfons  to  be  fubjeft  to  the  fame  regulations,  in  refpeft 
to   convoys,  &:c.  as  thole  belonging  to  the  Company. 

14th.  No  private  fhip  to  be  permitted  to  fail,  either  from  Great  Britain  to  India, 
or  from  India  to  Great  Britain,  of  a  lefs  burthen  than  four  hundred  tons. 

1 5th.  The  Company  to  be  fubject  to  no  obligation  with  refpect  to  Exports  to 
India,  except  in  comnvm  with  the  private  traders. 

16th.  The  Lafcars  and  Chinefe  failors  brought  home  in  private  fhips,  to  be  placed 
under  proper  regulations.  Not,  upon  any  account,  to  be  fulfered  to  wander 
about  the  ftreets  of  London.  Good  treatment  to  be  fecured  to  them,  and  the 
Company  to  be  enabled,  by  fome  funnnary  procefs,  to  recover  the  expences  to 
which  they  fliall  be  fubjeded,  in  the  event  of  negled  on  the  part  of  the  owners  of 
fuch  fhips  in  thefe  refpefts. 

17th.  The  Company  to  be  indemnified  for  their  unexpired  engagements  for  extra 
ihipping,  provided  for  the  accommodation  of  the  private  traders. 

i8th.  An  unrcflrained  intercourfe  with  India  to  be  prevented,  and  the  exifling 
-reflriiSlions,  with  refpeft  to  reiidence  in  India,  to  be  continued. 

19th.  The  number  of  His  Majefly's  forces  in  India  to  be  in  future  maintained 
by  the  Eafl  India  Company  to  be  now  fixed,  and  any  troops  fent  beyond  that  number 
(except  at  the  exprefs  requifition  of  the  Eafl  India  Company)  to  be  at  the  charge  of 
the  Public. 

20th.  The 


Hinls. 


(    37    ) 

loth.    The  Company  to  be  releafed  from  any  future  accouftt  with  the  Pay  Oftlcc,        No.  XX. 
and  to  be  henceforward  charged,  either  fo  much  per  regiment  of  a  given  force,  or  fo 
much  per  man. 

a  I  ft.  The  prefent  heavy  current  and  poflponed  demands  of  the  Pay  Office  againft 
the  Company  to  be  arranged  upon  fome  footing  of  general  equity,  and  fome  adver- 
tance  in  fettling  this  account  made  to  the  (hare  which  the  Company  have  been  obliged 
to  bear  in  foreign  captures  not  retained  by  them,  and  to  their  iiaviiig  been  conftrained 
to  maintain  anEuropean  and  native  force,  larger  than  what  was  required  for  the  defence 
(jf  the  Peninfula,  and  other  heavy  expences. 

22d.  The  Proprietors  to  be  fecured,  as  at  prefent,  in  the  receipt  of  their  dividend 
of  ten  and  a  half  per  cent.,  upon  the  faith  of  which  dividend  the  capital  in  1793 
was  raifed. 

23d.  The  v/hole  of  the  furplus  of  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  be  appropriated  to 
a  diuihiution  of  their  debts,  until  the  debts  be  reduced  to  the  fum  of  ten  millions 
llerlino;. 

a4th.  The  funis  required  by  the  Eaft  India  Company  to  liquidate  tlie  debt  tranf- 
ferred  from  India  to  Europe,  and  becoming  payable  in  1812  and  1813,  to  bcfunded 
by  the  Minifter,  the  intereft  of  which  fhall  be  regularly  paid  into  His  Majfcfty's  Ek- 
chequer  by  the  Company,  together  with  iuiy  fuch  per  centagc,  for  tlie  gradual  liqui- 
dation of  tlie  capital  or  redemption  of  the  fund,  as  fl:iall  be  deemed  proper  by  His 
Majefty's  Minifters. 