


No.  XXII. 

CORRESPONDENCE  wiih  the  Right  Honourable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftlereagh, 

noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

No.  XXII.  Letter  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  Right  Honourable 

■ Lord  Vifcount  CalUercogh. 

Correfpondence  t-    n  t     v    t 

with  Lord  My  Lord,  Ealt  India  Houfe,  Dec.  2d,  1803. 

CaiUereagh.  TV-^  ^^"^^^  waited  until  we  had  obtained  a  diftinft  legal  opinion  from  the  Company's 
liw  advifer,  with  refpeft  to  the  power  poiTeffcd  by  the  Company  of  paying  the 
Property-tax  out  of  the  Profits  t;f  the  Company,  previous  to  the  declaration  of  a  divi- 
dend to  the  Proprietors  of  Eaft-India  Stock. 

But  that  opinion  having  been  lately  returned  to  us  in  a  fhape  unfavourable  to  our 
hopes  and  expeftations,  we  have  received  the  injunftions  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors to  fubmit  this  opinion  to  your  Lordlhip's  confideration,  and,  at  the  fame 
time,  to  exprefs  their  hopes,  that  your  Loidfliip  and  the  refl  of  His  Ma,- 
jefly's  Miniflers  will  think  it  juft  and  aJvifeable,  that  the  power  to  which  we 
have  above  referred  fhould  be  granted  to  the  Company  by  fome  legifiativc 
provifion. 

Upon  this  cccafion  we  have  to  obferve  to  your  Lordfliip,  that  as  the  law  at 
prefent  ftands,  the  Company  are  obliged  to  deduft  the  full  amount  of  the  tax  in 
queftion  from  all  the  dividends  payable  to  foreigners  or  other  pcrfons,  however  finall 
the  amount  of  their  capital  flock  may  be  ;  although  it  is  fairly  queflionable,  how  far 
the  former  is  legally  chargeable  to  this  tax,  in  refpeft  to  thofe  profits  that  may  be 
prefumeJ  to  arife  from  the  Company's  foreign  pofTeiiions,  and  whether  the  latter,  in 
ibme  cafe*:,  may  not  be  entitled  to  a  partial,  and  in  others  to  an  entire  return  of  the 
tax  fo  retained,  in  refpeft  of  the  finallnefs  of  the  proprietors  incomes.  We  mufl  alfo 
fubmit,  that  as  the  greater  part  of  the  other  public  Companies  poflefs  the  power, 
and,  £s  we  underftand,  are  difpofed  to  exercife  the  means  of  difcharging  this  tax  out 
of  their  furplus  pre  fits,  it  mull  appear  doubly  irkfome  to  the  Proprietors  of  Eaft- 
India  Stock  tafeem  an  almoft  folitary  exception  to  this  general  praftice,  particularly 
when  they  advert  to  the  difpofition  which  has,  at  all  tunes,  been  evinced  by  them, 
cheerfully  and  voluntarily,  to  come  forward  for  the  fervice  of  the  State,  even  when 
their  own  immediate  interelfs  have  thereby  been  placed  at  flake. 

We  feci  the  more  freedom  in  prefTing  this  point,  becanfe  we,  in  common  with 
your  Lordfhip,  have  entertained  an  expeftation,  that  the  public  (after  a  w.4r  which 
has  exifled  almoft  fince  the  lad  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  tradej  would 
have  been  placed  in  pcfl'eflion  of  the  fhare  of  the  Company's  profits,  fecured  to  them 
by  the  aft  of  1793,  ifthe  enormous  taxes  which  the  neceffities  of  the  State  have  ren- 
dered i"  nec(.(Iiiry  to  impofe  upon  teas  and  the  other  articles  of  the  Company's  Trade, 
and  the  inevitable  expences  of  another  war,  had  not  placed  a  bar  to  thofe  expectations, 
which  we  think  might  otkerwife  reafonably  have  been  formed. 