

.  We  are  further  of  opinion,  that  the  relief  fought  by  the  meafure  is  not  of  that 
magnitude,  which  fhould  induce  the  Company  to  folicit  this  indulgence  from  Par- 
liament, under  the  diinculties  above  fiated  ;  nor  are  we  perfuaded  if,  in  point  of 
■faft,  other  corporate  bodies  have  fo  relieved  themfelves  from  the  tax,  that  the  pro- 
ceeding, on  their  part,  however  warranted  by  law  affords  a  precedent,  which  in 
principle,  the  Eaft  India  Company,  witrt  an  enlarged  view  to  their  own  interefts, 
■  Ihould  be  foliciious  to  follow. 

1  have  the  honor  to  be,  Gentlemen, 

Your  molt  obedient  fervant. 
The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)  CASTLEREAGIL 

Of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 


Letter 


.  No.  XXIT.  Letter  from  t1ie  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  to  the  'Right  Honorable 

.^  ■;  v:     ■■.  '   Lotd  Vifcount  Caftkreagh. 

Deputy'*  Letter,  My  Lord,  Eafl:  India  Houfe,  the  7th  July  1804. 

tT  is  in  conlVquence  of  the  inflrudlions  of  a  General  Court  of  Proprietors  which 
^  lately  affcmbled  co  take  into  confidcration  the  tax  levied,  in  virtue  of  the  43d  of 
.  the  King,  on  the  dividends  payable  on  Eaft  India  flock,  that  we  now  lake  the  liberty 
to  addrefs  your  Lordfliip  again  on  that  fubjeil. 

Notv/ithftanding  the  anfwer  returned  by  your  Lordlhip  to  the  application  which 
our  predeceflbrs  in  office  made  to  you,  under  date  the  2d  December  laft,  for  the  aid 
ot  His  Majelly's  Minifters,  in  order  to  relieve  the  holders  of  the  Company's  flock 
from  the  payment  of  the  Property-tax  out  of  their  dividends,  the  Proprietors  ftil! 
think,  that  whether  regard  be  had  to  the  defign  and  fpirit  of  the  Aft  of  1793,  to  the 
general  ftate  and  circumflanccs  of  the -Company,  or  to  the  peculiar  fituation  of  the 
■Stock-holders,  thcv  are  a'j:grieved  by  the  operation  given,  in  their  cafe,  to  the  A'ft 
impofmg  a  tax  on  property.  '  ^   sd^  ^'; 

It  -was  after  a  full  coniideration  and  adjuftment  of  the  intereft  of  all  parties,  the 
.  Public,  the  Company,  and  individuals,  that  on  the  renewal  of  the  Charter,  the 
dividend  of  the  8lock-holders  was  fixed  at  ten  and  a  half  percent,  per  annum.  The 
law  then  made,  in  allowing  it  to  rife  to  that  rate,  forbade  it  to  go  higher  ;  and 
the  reduction  of  it  below  that  rate  was  left  to  the  diicrclion  of  the  Proprietors  ihem- 
■  felves.  /I'his  was,  therclore,  underltood  to  be  the  fixed  certain  income  ailigned  to 
the  Members  of  the  Company,  out  of  al!  its  funds,  territorial  and  commercial.'  Aird 
hence  we  think  it  may  fairly  be  argued,  that  fuch  a  deliberate  formal  fettlvrmeiif 
cannot  juftly  bedifturbed,  but  by  a  proceeding  equally  diredt  and  appropriate  ;  and 
that  no  mere  meafure  of  taxation,  having  only  a  general  aim,  without  any  cog- 
nizance of  the  ptculiar  circun'iftances  under  v^'hich  this  arrangement  was  concluded, 
ought  to  defeat  it,  becaufe  if  the  contrary  principle  be  once  admitted,  whilft  the 
Public  is  ftill  imnienfely  benefitted  by  Indian  revenue  and  trade,  and  all  the  ether 
■clafles  of  fubjedts  connected  with  them  continue  to  derive  the  advantages  provided 
for  them,  the  Proprietors  of  that  flock,  which  has  been  the  foundation  and  fupport 
of  the  whole,  may  abfolutely  be  divefted  of  all  the  dividend  they  were  to  receive  from 
it.  We  think,  therefore,  it  may  be  contended,  that  conformably  to  the  fpirit  of  the 
Act  of  1793,  the  Property-tax  fhould  not  operate  upon  the  dividend,  but  be  acharge 
upon  the  general  funds  of  the  Ccmpany, 