

The  I'wcnty -fifth  article  did  not  form  a  part  of  the  propofitions  fubrtiitted  to  Lord 
Melville,  but  is  nov/  introduced  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  and  is  as 
follows,  viz, 

25th.  That,  in  order  to  give  the  utmoft  poffible  extenfion  to  the  commerce  of 
private  merchants,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  fecure  the  Company's  exclufive  trade  to 
and  from  China,  private  fliips  be  not  permitted  to  go  farther  eaftward  than  Point 
•Romania,  at  the  entrance  of  the  China  Seas,  and  to  the  northward,  not  beyond 
the  equinoftial  line. 

N.  B.  Should  it  be  the  intention  of  Government  that  private  traders  fhall  be 
excluded  f  om  the  Spice  Iflands,  the  limits  ought  then  to  be  for  them  not  to  go 
to  the  eaftward  of  the  Straits  of  Bally,  nor  to  the  northward  of  the  Line. 


No.  XXI. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  i8th  March  iSie. 

fyHE  Chairman   acquainted   the  Committee,  that   the   Deputy  and   himfelf  had        No.  XXI. 

yefttrday  waited  on  Lord   Melville,  and    that   his  Lordihip  had  appointed  to- 

-morrow,  at  one  o'clock,  for  a  conference  with  the  Members  of  the  Deputation.   Secret  Committee, 

18  March  l8i3. 

The  Committee  agreed  to  recommend  to  the  CoQrt  to-day,  that  the  Quarterly 
General  Court,  to  be  held  on  Wcdnefday,  the  25th  inllant,  be  made  fpecial,  for 
the  purpofe  of  laying  before  the  Proprietors  the  Communications  which  have  taken 
place  between  His  Majefty's  Government  and  the  Court  of  Dire>Sors,  rofpeding  the 
renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter. 

It  was  alfo  refolvcd.  That  the  Papers  containing  the  faiJ  communications  he  printed 
for  the  information  of  the  Proprietors,  and  under  the  fuperintendance  of  the  Affiftant 
Secretary. 

Draft  of  a  Letter  to  Lord  Melville,  to  be  figned  by  the  Members  of  the  Deputation, 
requefting  that  a  longer  term  than  that  which  was  fixed  in  1793,  may  be  granted 
for  [he  lenewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  was  read  and  approved. 

The  Chairman  calling  the  attention  of  the  Committee  to  the  correfpondence  which 

had  paffed  between  Lord  Caftlereagh  and  the  Chairs  at  a  former  period,  as  to  re- 

(.59-)  i^  lieving 

270654.  '^ 


iS  starch  iSj  J. 


(    38    ) 

No.  XXI.       licvirtg  the  Proprietors  of  Eall  India  Stock  from  the  payment  of  the  Income-tax  oa 

their  dividends, 

Sfcret  Co™mj"«.  The  fame  was  read,  viz. 

Letters  from  the  Chairs  to  Lord  Cadlereagh,  dated  the  2d  December  1803 
and  7th  July  1 S04  ;  and. 

Letters  from  his  Lorddiip  to  the  Chairs,  dated  coth  December  1803  and 
1 2th  September  1804. 

Draft  of  a  letter  to  be  figned  bv  the  Deputation  and  addrefTcd  to  Lord  Melville 
upon  that  fubj eft ;  and  alio  fuhmitting  to  his  Lordfiiip's  confideration,  the  expe- 
diency of  providing  that  the  adciitional  dividend  of  ten  fliillings  per  cent,  paid  on  the 
Company's  ftock  under  the  Aft  of  the  Thirty-lhird  of  His  prefent  Majefly,  cap.  52, 
fee.  124,  may  be  paid  out  of  the  general  profits  of  the  Company. 