


No.  XIX. 


Secret  Court, 
6th  March  1S12. 


No.  XX. 

Hints  approved  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  and  fubmitted  to 
the  Confideration  of  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Melville,  noticed  in  the 
preceding  Minute. 

'J^HAT  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  fliall  proceed  upon  (hebafis  of  the  Ad  of  1707, 

and  that  no  greater  extenfion  of  the  trade  fhall  be  granted  than  what  was  allowed 

oy  that  Act}  but  the  Deputation  are  ready  to  recommend  to  the  Court  of  Directors, 

and 


No.  XX. 


Hinu 


^Htnt^ 


C    36    ■) 

No.  XX.        and  ultimately  to  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  to  admit  fuch  modifications  as  may  be 
deemed  neceffary  to  give  greater  facilities  to  the  private  trader. 

I  ft.  No  Britifh  or  Indian  fliip  to  fail,  direftly  or  circuitoufly,  from  a  Britifii 
port  in  Europe  to  China. 

ad.  No  Britifh  fubjeft  to  be  permitted  to  refiJe  rn  China,  without  the  Com- 
pany's licence. 

3d.  No  goods,  the  growth  or  produce  of  China,  to  be  imported  into  any 
of  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  except  l>y  the  Eafl  India  Company. 

4th.  The    power    of  levying  duties  in    India    upon  Britifh  fubjeas,    and  the 

i  fubjects  of  foreign  nations,  to  be  continued  to   the   Company,  upon  the  footing 

■on  which  it  at  prefent  exifls ;  and  the  fame  power,  with  refpeft  to  Britifh  fubjecls,  to 

be  extended  to  the  diflrids  within  the  jurifdi^tion  of  the  courts  of  Calcutta,  JVIadras, 

Bombay,  and  Prince  of  Wales  Ifland.  .    .. 

5th.  Saltpetre  to  be  confidered  as  a  political  article,  and  to  be  confined  exclu- 
■fively  to  the  Company. 

6th.  The  whole  of  the  Indian  trade  to  be  brought  to  the  port  of  London,  and 
the  goods  fold  at  the  Company's  fales,  and  to  be,  as  at  prefent,  under  the  Company's 
mana-jement. 

7lh.  The  three  per  cent,  now  paid  to  the  Company  by  the  private  traders,  for 
the  warehoufing  and  management  of  the  private  trade,  to  be  increafed  to  five  per 
icent. 

8th.  No  private  fliip  to  be  permitted  to  fail  for  India,  except  from  the  port  of 
London. 

9th.  No  fhip  to  be  permitted  to  I'ail,  except  under  a  Licence  from  the  Eafl  India 
Company.  Ships  obtaining  this  licence,  to  deliver  one  copy  of  their  journals  at  the 
Eafl  India  Houfe  ;  and  the  licence  to  contain  fuch  claufes,  as  may  be  likely  to  prevent 
an  unlimited  or  unproper  inlercourfe  of  individuals  with  India. 

loth.  Fire-arms,  military  and  naval  flores,  to  be  prohibited  articles. 

I I  th.  Exifling  reflridions,  with  refped  to  the  article  of  piece  goods,  to  be 
continued. 

1 2th.  It  being  defirable,  as  well  for  the  Public  as  for  the  Company,  that  the  quality 
of  the  filk  grown  in  India  fliould  not  be  deteriorated,  it  is  fubmitted  that  this  article 
be  confined  to  the  Company. 