

This  will  appear  more  reafonable,  if  it  be  confidered  that  very  many  of  the  Pro- 
prietors of  India  Stock,  who  have  held  that  flock  long,  receive  no  more  on  the  coft 
of  it  than  the  common  interefl  of  money,  namely  live  per  cent,  whilil:  their  property 
is  expofed  to  the  influence  of  ail  the  adverfe  contingencies  to  which  the  Company's 
affairs  are  liable;  and  whilft  the  Company,  that  is  to  fay,  thofe  Proprietors  in  theif 
coUedtive  capacity,  ferve  as  the  channel,  or  medium  by  which  immenle  advantages 
are  diifufed  through  the  natioii,  in  its  commerce,  its  revenues,  and  the  wealth  of  all 
the  fucccffive  races  of  Britifli  fubjeftr-,  employed  in  or  connected  with  their  teiri- 
toj-ics  and  affairs.  Thefe  juil  obfervations  acquire  now  a  peculiar  force,  when,  in 
duties  and  cuftoms  alone,  the  Eallern  commerce  pays  to  the  State  ;^3,226,opo  per 
annum,  and  when  the  receipts  of  the  Company,  for  the  lalt  twelve  months,  are  di- 
miniihed  near  a  million  flerling,  in  confequence  of  the  nev.'  and  czcelfive  duties  im- 
pofcd  on  their  trade. 

We  are  unwilling  to  urge  the  liberality  vvhich  the  Company  has  on  all  occafions 
manifefted,  to  aid,  according  to  its  means,  the  exertions  of  the  State  >  but  the  duly 
impofed  on  us  by  our  Conilituents  requires  that  liberality  fliould  be  noticed  on  the 
prefent  occafion.  By  fubfcribing  for  two  millions  of  the  Loyalty  Loan  in  1797,  the 
Company  loft  the  fum  of  ;^ 206,000.  The  three  compleat  and  effe£tive  regiments 
of  volunteers,  which  they  have  maintained  for  a  number  of  yeais  pail,  have  cofl 
them  very  large  fums ;  and  the  lafl  aid  given  by  them  in  {hipping,  on  the  particular 
fuggefllon  of  Government,  is  a  new  inftance  of  the  promptitude  and  alacrity,  with 
which  they  devote  their  funds  to  the  fupport  of  the  public  interell. 

After  all  thefe  contributions,  it  has  appeared  ungracious  to  the  Proprietors,  that, 
y/hillt  other  public  bodies,  which  had  not  given  fo  largely  to  the  wants  of  the  State, 

were 


(     4t      ) 

were  allowed  to  defray  ttie  Property-tax  out  of  their  general  funds,  the  Proprietor j  No.  XXII. 

of  EalUIndia  Stock  were  required  to  charge  the  modicum  they  received  for  the  ufc  of  

their  own  money,  and  for  being  the  agents  in  fuch  vaft  couGerns,  with  a  tax  hard  Cluirmin  tnJ 

upon  them  though  unimportant  in  its  amount,  to  the  Public,  and  from  which  they  ^■'P"7''  -Lctwr. 
conceive  the  Act  of  1793  ought  to  protect  the  dividend  then  accorded  to  them. 

When  our  predeceflors  in  office  mentioned  a  reference  to  Parliament,  they  pro- 
bably had  no  mora  in  view  than  fome  fuppofed  neceflity  of  a  modification  of  the  Pro- 
perty-tax ;  but  we  humbly  apprehend  that,  in  order  to  exonerate  the  Proprietors, 
individually  from  the  payment  of  the  tax,  no  fuch  reference  is  neceffary,  fince  for 
engaging  in  the  Loyalty  Loan,  for  forming  the  three  regiments  of  volunteers,  and 
for  the  late  aid  of  fhipping,  it  was  thought  fufficient  that  His  Majefty's  Minillers 
fliould  content  to  the  defraying  of  the  charges  arifmg  from  thefe  meafui'cs,  out  of 
the  general  funds  of  the  Company. 