


Letter. 


No.  XXII. 


(     42     ) 

Perfonal  relief  from  the  tax  itfelf.     If  not,  the  propofuion  refolves  itfelf  either  into 

— Sn  encreafed  dividend,  or  into  a  new  appropriaiion  of  the  net  proceeds,  enabling 

Lord  Caftlercagh's  ^j,g  Company  to  charge  the  tax  on  their  funds  generally,  as  fome  other  Corporations 
^'■""'  have  done,  who  are  fnle  proprietors  in  fuch  funds.     This  opens  fo  large  a  queftion 

in  principle,  and  for  fo  fmatl  an  object,  either  as  it  affefts  the  intereft  of  the  Public 
or  .the  individual  Proprietors,  that  I  fhould  conceive,  under  all  the  circuniftances, 
tlie  Court  will  not  feci  difpofed  to  prefs  it  at  fuch  a  moment  upon  the  attention  of 
Parliament. 

1  have  the  honor  to  be.  Gentlemen, 

Your  mofl:  obedient  humble  fervant, 

(Signed)         CASTLEREAQH.,, 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Ealt-India  Company. 


No.  XXIII, 


Secret  Court, 
iSMarch  j8i2. 


No.  XXIII. 
At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors,  held  on  Wednefday,  the  i8th  March  1812; 

n^HE  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  laying  before  the 
■  -*■  Court  draft  of  a  letter  to  Lord  Melville,  to  be  figned  by  the  Deputation,  re- 
quefting  that  a  longer  term  than  that  which  was  fixed  in  1793  may  be  granted  fdr 
the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  the  fame  was  read  and  approved.; 
as  was  alfo, 

Draft  of  a  letter  to  his  Lordfnip,  to  be  figned  by  the  Deputation,  fubmitting  to 
his  confideration  the  expediency  of  providing,  that  the  additional  dividend  of  ten 
{hillings  per  cent,  paid  on  the  Company's  ftock,  under  the  aft  of  the  33d  of  His 
prefent  Majefty,  cap.  52.  fee.  124,  may  be  paid  out  of  the  general  profits  of  the 
Company  ;  and  alfo,  that  authority  may  be  given  to  make  the  Property-duty  on  the 
dividends  a  charge  on  thofe  profits. 


No.  XXIV. 


Depuration  hetuu 


No.  XXIV. 

Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Mel- 
ville, noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

My  Lord,  Eafl-India  Houfe,   18th  March  181 2. 

A  LTHOUGH  we  are  aware  that  this  may  not  be  confidered  the  proper  time  to 

difcufs  the  term  of  years  for  which  the  exclufive  privileges  of  the  Company  Ihould 

be  renewed,  yet,  under   the  profpefl;   of  your  Lorufhip's  fcon    leaving   the  India 

Boaidj  we  are  anxious  to  avoid  any  delay,  in  requefling  your  Lordlhip's  attention  to 

that  point. 

On  reference  to  the  negociations  in  1793,  we  obferve  that  the  principal  ground 
on  which  the  company  founded  their  application  for  a  renewal  of  their  pnvileges 
for  a  long  term,  was  that  fufficient  time  might  be  allowed  for  the  liquidation  of 
their  debts  at  intereft  in  India,  the  amount  of  which,  at  that  period,  was  feven 
millions  fterling.  The  term  then  granted  was  twenty  years,  from  the  1  ft  of  March 
J  794,  including  the  ufual  notice  of  three  years,  this  term  being  confidered  adequate 
to  the  objeft:  in  view. 