

The  additional  flock  has  not  been  raifed,  and  the  feparate  fund  has  been  found 
adequate  to  the  payment  of  the  dividend  of  ten  fliiUings  per  cent,  upon  the  ex- 
illing  capital  hitherto,  and  will  continue  to  be  fo  until  the  year  1819,  when  it  will  be 
nearly  exhaufted. 

As  the  Proprietors  have  derived  from  the  dividends  little  more  than  five  per 
cent,  on  the  capital,  it  appears  to  us,  that,  on  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  pri-- 
vileges,  they  may  entertain  a  reafuiiable  expeftation  of  conrinuing  to  receive  this 
addition  of  ten  fliillings  to  the  ufual  dividend  of  ^"'lo  per  cent.  ;  and  as  the  feparate 
fund  will  not,  as  flated  above,  be  fuflicient  for  the  purpofe,  during  any  probable  term, 
for  which  the  renewal  m.ay  be  granted,  v.'e  take  the  liberty  of  fubmitting  to  your 
Lordfliip's  confideration  the  expediency  of  providing  for  the  additional  dividend,  out 
of  the  general  profits  of  the  Company. 

The  other  point  to  which  we  requeft  your  Lordfhip's  attention  is,  the  payment 
of  the  Property  Duty  on  the  dividends.  The  Court  of  Direclors  and  Proprietors 
have  always  confidered  it  a  hardfhip,  that  this  duty  was  not  allowed  co  be  paid  from 
the  profits  of  the  Company ;  we  have  the  honor  to  enclofe  copies  of  letters  on  this, 
fubjeft,  which  were  addrelfed  to  Lord  Caftlereagh  in  1003  and  1804.  and  we  flatter 
ourfelves  that  the  arguments  they  contain  will  induce  your  Lordlhip,  when  the 
queftion  of  renewing  the  privileges  of  the  Company  is  under  difcufhoii,  to  recom- 
mend that  authority  may  be  given  to  make  the  Property  Duty  on  the  dividends  a 
charge  on  the  general  profits  of  the  Company. 

As  the  profits  of  the  Company  were  fpecifically  appropriated  by  the  Act  of  1793, 
fome  difficulty  may  pofTibly,  from  that  circumitance,  have  occurred  in  conceding 

this 


Dcputa:ion  Letter. 


No.  XXV- . 


Oepaiatioa  Letter. 


(     44     ) 

this  point ;  but,3s,  in  any  tjew  arnnojement,  the  fubjpfl:  of  appropriation  will  necef- 
farily  undergo  confiderable  modification,  we  fhouli  hope  that  the  objedion  formerly 
lu-ged  may  eiifily  be  obviated. 

If  it  fhould  be  finally  deterinined,  that  the  funender  of  any  confiderable  propor- 
tion of  the  exci\ifive  privileges  of  theCompany  is  to  be  made,  it  appears  to  be  the  more 
neceflai-y,  that  fonie  boon  fhould  be  held  out  to  the  Proprietors,  in  alleviation  of  tb'i 
facrifices  to  which  theirconfent  may  be  required ;  we  hope,  ihereforcj  we  may  be 
permitted  to  indulge  a  confident  expe£tation  of  your  Lordfhip's  favourable  confidera- 
tion  of  the  points  now  fubraitted. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be.  My  Lord, 

Your  Lordfliip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 
'       ^  (Signed)        JACOB  BOSAN^UET, 