


(     46     > 

No.  XXVII.  be  opened  to  all  Britiih  flilps,  jn  tlie  manner  already  pointed  out,  there  feems  tobe 
no  fufficient  veafon  for  breaking  in  upon  the  fyflem  of  our  navigation  laws,  by  per- 

Ld.Melvrk's  nutting  any  other  than  Biitilli  (liips,  with  a  due   proportion  of  Britiih  feamen,  to 

^^*^'''  import  colonial  produce  into  the  United  Kingdom. 

I  have  not  thought  it  requifite,  in  this  letter,  to  trouble  you  with  any  obferva- 
tions  on  fevera!  points  adverted  to  in  your's  of  the  4th  inftant,  which  are  alfo  no- 
ticed in  the  enclofed  paper  of  hints  and  of  replies  to  the  feveral  propofitions.  I 
ihall  abflain,  aifo,  from  any  lemaik.s  on  the  cdculations  detailed  in  your  letter,  and 
which  are  introduced  more  with  the  view,  as  I  conceive,  to  vindicate  the  Company 
in  their  pafl  nianagement  of  the  exclufive  trade  to  India  and  the  government  of 
their  territorial  poflefTions,  than  to  any  praftical  rjfults  to  be  derived  from  your 
flatement,  in  relation  to  the  matters  at  prefent  in  difcui!ion  between  His  Majedy's 
Government  and  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
mons on  Eall  India  Affairs  have  already  fubmiited  to  the  Houfe  detailed  ftatements 
on  that  piirt  of  the  fubjecl,  and  in  any  further  reports  which  they  may  prefent  they 
will  probably  complete  the  inveftigation.  '■  .-  ' 

I  am.  Gentlemen, 

Your  moll  obedient  humble  fervant. 
To  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)         MELVILLE, 

of  the  Eaft-lndia  Company. 


No.  XXVIII. 

Obfervations  on  the  Hints  fuggefled  by  the  Deputation  of  the  Court  of 
Directors,  3d  March   1812,  adverted  to  in  the  foregoing  Letter. 

N    XXVIII  *^5  2d,  and  3d.  IT  is  deemed  advifeabie,  with  a  view    to  the   fecurity   of  the 

"  '  revenue  and  to  other  objeds  connefted  with  the  trade  to  China,  to  leave  it  on  its 

Obfervations  prefent  footing,  and  toguard  by  proper  regulations,  againfl  any  encroachment  on  that 

on  Hiiiu.  brar.ch  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privilege. 

^  4th.  This    propofition   ought  to  be  acceded  to  ;  with  the  refervation,  however, 

that  the  Governments  in  India  ought  to  be  reftrifted  from  impofing  new  duties,  with- 
out the  previous  fandion  of  the  authorities  in  England. 

5th.  The  Company  are  underftood  to  have,  in  fome  degree,  the  power  of  re- 
gulating the  inteiT.al  trade  of  faltpetre  in  India  ;  it  appears,  therefore,  to  be  fcarcely 
nectflarv  to  mpofe  any  other  reftric'tions  on  the  exportation  of  faltpetre  from  India, 
than  fuch  as  may  be  deemed  expedient  for  political  objedls,  efpecially  in  time 
of  war. 

6th,  The  adoption  of  the  regulation  fuggeded  in  this  propofition,  will  probably 
tend  to  the  fecurity  and  advantage  of  the  public  revenue,  in  collefting  the  duties  on 
all  articles  imported  from  the  Eaft  Indies  and  China,  as  well  as  other  countries  to 
the  eaftward  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 