

_  Wifhing.  to  flate  nothing  upon  this  fubjeft,  but  what  appears  to  us  naturally  to 
grow  out  of  it,  we  fliall  only  add,  that  the  effect  of  the  impofed  tax  upon  the  value 
of  the  Company's  Itock  muft  be  very  obvious,  fmce  the  dividend  receivable  upon 
any  public  fund  is,  in  fa£t,  the  meafure  of  its  value  in  the  market,  and  every  de-- 
duction,  by  whatever  means,  effefted  in  the  produce  of  any  ftock,  is  in  reality  a  re- 
duction in  the  worth  of  the  capital ;  and,  accordingly,  we  find  that  the  flock  of  the 

,  India  Company,,  compared  with  that  of  the  Bank,  fells  at  a  price  difproportionably  low. 

Upon  all  thefe  grounds,  with  thofe  which  have  been  before  urged,  we  cannot 
but  reqtieft  and  hope,  that  as  the  determination  of  the  point  which  our  ConltituentSjr 
not  from  intereft  only,  but  from  various  other  motives,  have  fo  much  at  heart, 
feems  not  to  depend  upon  any  revifionary  proceeding  of  Parliament  (which  however, 
if  neceflary,  we  firould  ilill  urgently  defire)  but  upon  the  scquiefcence  of  His  Ma- 
jerty's  Miuiilers.  we  cannot  but  f:arneftly  requefl  and  hope,  that  it  will  feem  ex- 
pedient to  your  LordOiip  to  add  your  own  recommendation  to  this  reprefentation, 
and  that  you  will  have  the  goodnefs  to  fubmit  both  to  the  Chancellor  of  His  Ma- 
jcllj's  Exchequer. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  My  Lord, 

Your  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)         W.  F.  ELPHINSTONE. 
CHARLES  GRANT. 
The  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Caftleveagh, 
&c.     &c.     &c. 


Letter   from  the   Right  Honorable   Lord  Vifcount    Caftkreagh   to   the  j^^^^ 

Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman.  Caftlereaa-h'« 


Gentlemen,  India  Board,  lath  September  1804. 

IN  compliance  with  the  defire  of  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  as  exprcflk-d  In  your 
letter  of  the  7lh  July  laft,  I  have  reconfidered,  with  the  moft  earneft  difpofition  at 
all  times  to  promote  their  wifhes,  the  opinion  which  I  before  prefiuned  to  exprefs, 
on  the  propriety  of  their  dividends  being  difcharged  from  any  deduction  on  account 
of  the  late  tax  upon  property,  by  caufing  the  fame  to  be  paid  out  of  the  general 
funds  of  the  Company,  and  1  have  alfo  communicated  with  Mr.  Pitt  on  this  fubjeft. 

Notv^ithftanding  the  very  ingenious  reafoning  contained  in  your  Letter,  we  are 
clearly  of  opinion,  that  a  payment  of  this  nature,  diredled  to  the  individual  emolu- 
ment of  the  Proprietors  of  India  Stock,  and  not  in  any  refpect  to  the  public  fervice 
of  the  Company,  cannot  be  ifl'ued,  under  the  exifting  appropriations  affcding  then- 
funds,  without  the  exprefs  fanclion  of  Parliament. 

Had  the  tax  been  directly  Impofed  on  income,  as  under  the  former  law,  we  appre- 
hend it  never  would  have  fuggefted  itfelfto  the  Court  of  Proprietors,  that  income  de- 
rived from  the  dividends  of  the  Company  ftiould  enjoy  any  partial  exemption.  The 
policy  of  the  Legiflature  has  recently  been,  to  apply  the  tax  to  the  fources  of  income, 
rather  than  to  levy  it,  as  formerly,  upon  the  llatement  of  the  poifelTor.  It  does 
not  appear  to  us,  that  this  change  in  the  mode  of  alfelTment  can  juflify  a  claim  to 
(59.)  L  perfonal 