

1 8th.  It  will  be  indifpenfably  neceffary,  for  the  purpofe  of  guarding  againft  the 
inconvenience  herein  alluded  to,  that  the  exiding  reftrictions  fhall  be  continued, 
with  fuch  alterations  as  may  be  requifite,  in  the  new  fyflem  of  trade. 

19th.  The   number  of  His  Majefty's  forces  to  be  maintained  by  the  Eafl-India'^ 
Company  may,  without  inconvenience,  be  limited,  as  herein  fuggefted.     It  will  be 
neceffary,  however,  in  confequence  of  the  increafed  extent  of  the  Britifli  territories 
in  India,  fince  the  pafling  oi  the  A&  by  which  the  number  is  at  prefent  regulated, 
that  a  confiderable  addition  fhould  be  made  to  it.      ,  '  fi 

2cth.  It  will  be  neceffary,  that  the  prefent  fyftem  of  accounting  between  the 
Eaft-India  Company  and  the  Paymafter  General  (liould  be  abolifhed,  and  new  regu- 
biions  enaifted. 

2 1  ft.  Thefe  demands  mufl  neceffarily  be  arranged  on  the  principles  fuggeR^d 
by  the  Cuinniittees  ot  the  Houfc  of  Commons,  who  have  reported  upon  the  fubject  0^ 
the  accounts  herein  referred  to.  ]f  it  were  neceffary  or  proper,  in  difcuffmg  the  futur^ 
regulations  which  it  may  be  deemed  advifable  to  eftablilh,  refpefting  the  atlairs  of  the 
Eaft  India  Company,  there  would  be  no  difEculty  in  demonflrating.  that  the  amount  of 
force  maintained  in  India  has  not  gone  beyond  what  was  requifite  for  the  defence  and 
fecurity  of  the  Company's  poffeffions,  and  for  other  operations,  intimately  and  in- 
feparably  connected  with  thofe  objects. 

2 2d.  The  Proprietors  ought  to  be  fecured,  as  at  prefent,  in  their  dividend  of 
ten  and  a  half  per  cent. 

23d.  The  whole  of  the  furplus  funds  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  at  home  an"d 
abroad,  ought  to  be  applied,  in  the  firfi:  inftance,  to  the  reduction  of  debt,  till 
it  is  reduced  in  India  to  the  fum  of  ten  millions,  and  the  bond  debt  at  home  to  the 
fum  of  three  millions,  after  providing  for  a  proportionate  encreafe  of  the  capital 
ftock  of  the  company,  if  they  Ihall  think  fit  to  avail  themfelves  of  the  power  now 
vefted  in  them  by  law  to  that  effeft. 

24th.  It  is  intended  to  i'"ubmit  to  Parliament  a  propofition  to  that  effed,  or  fimilar 
in  fubftance. 

25th.  If  the  objed  adverted  to  in  this  propofiiion  can  be  obtained  by  exclufion 
from  the  dominions  of  the  Emperor  of  China,  and  a  prohibition  to  import  the  pro- 
duce of  that  country  without  licence  from  the  Company,  it  will  be  preferable  to  the 
mode  herein  fuggefted.  Ihere  feems  to  be  no  reafonfor  excluding  the  private  trade 
from  the  Spice  Iflands. 

No.  XXIX, 


Lelter, 


C    43-    >  " 

No.  XXIX. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chair- 
man and  Deputy  Chairman,  alio  noticed  in  the  Minute  above- 
mentioned. 