

7th.  The  Company  ought  at  leafl  to  be  indemnified  from  the  cha-ges  incurred  by 
this  management. 

Sth.  There  does  not  appear  to  exiil  any  fufficient  reafon  for  preventing  fhips- 
from  clearing  out  for  the  Lad  Indies  from  oilier  pons  of  the  United  Kingdom  bo- 
fides  the  port  of  London. 

9th.  It  will  be  neceffarv,  either  by  the  regulations  fuggefled  in  this  propofi- 
tion, or  by  others  of  a  fimiiar  defcription,  to  guard  againll  the  evil  therein  de- 
fcribed. 

loth.  It  will  probably  be  necelTary  to  regulate  the  exportation  of  military  (lores 
to  the  Eail-lndies,  and  alfo  of  naval  (lores  in  time  of  war. 

1  ith.  It  is  underftood  that  the  objeft  of  this  propofition  is  to  fecure  to  the  manu- 
fafturers  of  piece  goods  in  India  the  continuance  ot  regular  and  conllant  employment, 
under  the  fame  fyflem  of  local  management,  for  their  benefit,  which  prevails  at  pre- 
fent.    If  that  objeft  is  likely  to  be  attained,  without  continuing  the  reflridions  men- 
tioned 


(     47     ) 


Obfervatioiii 
on  lIJQtt 


tioncd  in  this  propofition,  it  certainly  would  be  defirable  that  they   fiinuiii  ccHfe,      No.  XXVIII 
except  in  fo  far  as  it  may  be  neceiTary  to  regulate  the  importation  of  Indian  piece 
goods,  with  a  view  to  the  protedion  of  Britiih  manufadures. 

12th.  As  no  fuch  reftriftlon  exifts  at  prefent  in  the  importation  of  filk  by  private 
merchants,  and  as  the  reafons  which  have  hitherto  been  adduced,  on   the  part  of 
the  Court  of  Direftors,  for  eftablifliing  fuch  a  regulation,  though  entitled   to  much  -i 
confideration,  do  not  appear  to  be  conclufive,  it  will  fcarcely  be  deemed  expedient ' 
to  agree  to  this  propofal. 

13th.  This  fuggeftion  appears  to  be  perfectly  reafonable. 

14th.  It  is  underflood,  that  this  propolition  is  founded  on  a  principle  of  guard- 
ing againfl:  the  dangers  to  which  veffels  of  lefs  burthen  than  four  hundred  tons  would 
be  expufed  on  a  voyage  to  the  Eafl-lndies,  and  alio  of  providing  for  the  fecuritv  of 
the  revenue,  which  nught  be  affefted  by  permitting  importations  in  inialler  vellcls, 
Thefe  reafons,  though  entitled  to  due  confideration,  do  not  appear  to  be  fufHcientlv  ' 
ftrong  to  jullify  the  propofed  reftridion,  or  the  making  a  ciiftincUon,  in  that  refpect', 
between  fhips  trading  to  the  Eaft-Indies  and  to  other  countries. 

1 5th.   This  feems  to  be  reafonable. 

t6th.  It  will  be  neceflary  to  provide,  by  proper  regulations,  for  the  care  and 
maintenance  of  thefe  perfons,  and  for  their  return  to  the  Eaft-Indies. 

17th.  This  propofal  would  be  wholly  inadmiffible,  unlefs  it  were  limited  to  fuch 
unexpired  engagements  as  do  not  extend  beyond  March  1 8  1 4,  when  the  Company's 
prefent  term  of  exclufive  privileges  will  expire ;  but  the  Public  may  fairly  look  to 
the  Company  to  bear  this  burthen,  as  a  compenfation,  to  a  certain  extent,  for  the 
continuance  of  the  exclufive  trade  to  China. 