

The  Righ t  Hon .        "  HUGH  ING LIS , 

Lord  Vifcount  Melville,  W.  H.  KLPKINSTONE, 

"&c".  Sic.  8cc.  EDWARD  PARRY, 

CHARLES  MILLS. 


Ko.  xxvr. 


Secret  Coiiitj 

24  March  18  la^ 


No.  XXVL 

At  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors,  held  on  Tuefdi?y]the  24th  of  March  1S12.- 

'T^HE  Chairman   from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondencc  laid  before  the  Court  a 
■*■     letter  Irom  Lord  Melville  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy,  dated  the  2i{l  inftant, 
ftating  his  fentiments  in  reply  to  their  letter  of  the  4th  inftant,  and  enclofing 

A  paper  containing  "  Obfei^ations  on  the  Hints  fuggefled  by  the  Deputation  of  the 
«  Court  of  Direftors,  3d  March  1812." 

'  The  Chairman  alfo  laid  before  the  Court  a  letter  from  Lord  Melville  to  the  Chair- 
man and  Deputy,  dated  the  23d  inftant,  in  reply  to  the  two  letters  which  the  Depu- 
tation from  the  Court  of  Directors  addrelfed  to  his  Lordfiiip  on  the  il>th  and  jgth 
inftant. 

The  fame  were  read. 

The  Chairman  then  moving  the  Court, 

Ordered,  That  the  feveral  papers  now  read,  together  with  the  other  correfpond- 
encc, which  has  paffed,  refpefting  the  negociation  for  the  renewal  of  the  Company's 
exclufive  privileges,  be  laid  before  the  General  Court  to  be  held  to-morrow,  and 
printed,  as  fpeedily  as  poffible,  for  the  information  of  the  Proprietors. 


No.  XXVII. 


Ld.  Mclvilk's 
Leuer. 


No.  xxvir. 

Letter  from  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville  to  the  Chairman 
and  Deputy  Chairman,  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  21ft  March  1812. 

I  HAVE  delayed  anfwering  your  letter  of  the  4th  inftant  (received  the  6th)  until  I 
could   tranfmit   to   you,  at  the   fame   time,  replies  to    the   feveral   propofitions 
brought  forvirard  by  the  Deputation  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  at  our   conference 
on  the  4th  Inftant. 

In  fubniitting  to  you  thefe  obfervations,  however,  I  beg  to  be  diftin5:ly  underftood, 
as  conveying  to  you  only  the  prefent  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government  on  the 
feveral  points  to  which  the  propofitions  relate.  Public  diCcuffion  on  fuch  an  import- 
ant queftion,  may  poffibly  produce  an  aiieration  of  opinion  on  fome  of  the  details  j 
and  though  the  fubjeft  has  been  fully  confidered,  it  may  be  deemed  necefiary,  in 
the  further  progrefs  of  the  meafure,  topropofe,  on  fome  points,  legulations  of  a  dif- 
ferent defcription  from  thofe  which  are  luggefted  in  the  cnclofed  obfervations. 

The 


(     45     ) 

The  Court  of  Directors  are  pcrfeftly  correifl  in  fiippoflng  thiit  it  Is  no\v,  as  It  h:'3      ^■o•  XXVI!. 
been  for  a  confiderable  time  palL  the  iixed  intention  of  His  Maieftv's  Governnienr,  to  ■" 

withhold  their  concurrence  from  any  propofition  which  might  be  fubmitied  to  Par-       La-.Mfiviue» 
liament  for  continuing  to  the  F'afl:  India  Company  their  privileges  of  exclufive  trade 
on  their  prefent  footing.     It  is  unneceflaiy  now  to  liifcufs,  whether  the  provifions  of 
the  Aft  of  1793  (by  which  the  Company's  monopoly  was  fo  far  relaxed,  as  to  adnxft 
the  goods  of  private  merchants  to  be  conveyed  in  the  Company's  (hips)  have  in  anv 
degree  fulfilled  the  expccLations  or  intentions  of  the  Legillature.    It  will  not  be  denied 
that  the  facilities  granted  by  that  aft  have  not  been  fatisfaftory,  at  lealt  to  the  mer- 
chants, either  of  this  coiintry  or  of  India.     They   have  been  the  iouice  of  conllant 
difpute,  and  they  have  even  entailed  a  htavv  expence  upon  the  Company,  without 
afibrding  to  the  Public  any  adequate  benefit  from  fiich  a  facrifice.     You  will  do  me 
the  juliicc  to  recolleft,  that  in  all  our  difcufllons  on  this  fubjeft,  both  recently  and 
on  former  occafions,  the  admiirion  of  the  (hips  of  merchants   in  this  countrv  into 
the  trade  of  India,  In  concurrence  with  thofe  of  the  C<impanv,  has  never  been  urged 
as  a  meafure,  from  which  much  Immediate  benefit  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  derived, 
either  to  the  country  or  to  the  individuals  who  might  embark  in  thefpcculatlon  ;  and 
I  certainly  am  not  without  confiderableapprehenfion,  that,  at  leall  on  the  firit  opening 
of  the  trade,  the  public  expeftation,  as  to  the  BritKh  territories  in  India  affording  any 
confiderable  outlet  for  Britilh  manufaftures,  beyond  the  amount  of  our  prefent  ex- 
ports, may   be  difappolnted.     On  that  admiflion,  however,  and  on  the  neceffity  of 
guarding  againlt  the  unreltrained  Intercourfe  of  Europeans  with  the  territories  of  the 
Company,  or  of  the  native  Stares  in  India  (In  which  alfo  I  fully  concur),  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  arguments  adduced  by  the  Court   of  Direftors  againfl  any  opening  of 
the  trade  are  founded.     But  it  mud  be  recollefted,  that  in  determining  the  quedion,  -^'f 