

The  Company's  debts  at  intereft  in  India  are  now  fuppofed  to  amount  to  twenty- 
five  millions  fterling,  exclufive  of  the  debt  in  Europe  ;  we  truft,  therefore,  it  will  be 
evident,  that  a  longer  terni  than  that  which  was  granted  in  1793  ^^  indifpenfable,  to 
admit  of  the  gradual  reduction  of  the  prefent  debt,  and  the  effedtual  operation  of  any 
xneafures  which  may  be  determined  on  for  thatpurpofe. 


"Without  mentioning  any  particular  term,  we  take  the  liberty  of  referring  your  Lord- 
fliip  to  the  Ad  of  the  3d  cf  George  li.  cap.  i4,  to  fhew  that  a  longer  perioJ  than 

that 


(     43     )' 

tfiat  'gfalntedin  179^  has  been  conceded  ;  and  as,  under  every  view  of  the  fubjed.      No.  XXIV, 

confideiinp;  the  contingencies  of  war,  or  other  interruption,  we  are  convinced  of  the  — 

■ncceflity  of  a  more  extended  teim,  for  the  purpofes  of  hquidating  dtbls  of  fuch  I^-'P"'-*"""  i-^ti*""- 
niaf^nitii  le,  and  of  reftoring  the  Company's  afi'airs  to  that  Hate  of  profpenty,  which 
is  efTenticil  both  to   them  and   the  Public.     We  rely  with  confidence    on  your 
Lordlhip's  concurrence  in  the  opinion  we  have  fubmitted. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  greatefl:  refpeft, 

Your  Lordfliip's  mod  obedient,  humble  Servants, 

,       .           (Signed)  JACOB  BOSANQUET, 

,  ,  ■    HUGH  ING1.IS, 

Thc-'kigh'tHon.  Lord  Vifcount  Melville,.  W.  F.  ELPHTNSTONE, 

&C.&C.  &c.                         •  EDWARD  PARR y. 


No.  XXV. 

Letter  from  the  Deputation  to  the  Right  Honorable  Lord  Vifcount  Melville^       No.  XXT.- 
alfo  noticed  in  the  preceding  Minute. 


I 


My  Lord,  Eafl:  India  Houfe,  19th  March  1812. 

N  addition  to  the  fubjedt  on  which  we  had  the  honor  to  addrefs  your  Lordfhip 
yefterday,  there  are  two  points  to  which  we  are  very  defirous  of  calling  youratten- 
tion  before  your  Lord Ihip  leaves  the  India  Board. 

The  firft  point,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  hints  fubmitted  to  your  Lordfh'p 
on  the  4th  inltant,  is  the  diviile)iil  of  ten  fhiliings  per  cent,  paid  to  the  Proprietors, 
under  the  Ad  of  the  33d  of  His  prefent  Majeily,  cap.  52,  fee.  1 24,  iVom  the  feparate 
fund  of  the  Company.  .i. 

When  it  was  in  contemplation  to  increafe  the  capital  flock  of  the  Company  iri 
1797,  it  was  found  that  the  payment  of  this  dividend  to  the  Proprietors  of  the 
new  {lock  would  have  exhaniied  the  feparate  fund,  previous  to  the  expiration  of  the 
prefent  term  of  the  Company's  exclufive  trade.  To  guard  againfl  this,  a  claal'e  was 
inferted  in  the  Aft  of  37th  of  His  Majefty,  cap.  31,  authorizing  the  payment  of  a 
dividend  of  ten  fhiliings  per  cent,  to  the  proprietors  of  the  increafed  flock,  from  the 
annual  profits  of  the  Company's  trade. 