

THE  Chairman  ftated  to  the  Committee,  that  the  Chairs  had  a  conference 
yederday  with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  CommilFioners. 

Letter  from  Lord  Melville,  dated  the  2ifl  March,  was  read  and  further 
confidered. 

AT  a  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Monday  the  6th  April  181 2. 

On  a  motion, 
Ordered,  That  the  Company's  feal  be  affixed  to  their  Petition  to  the  Honourable 
Houfe  of  Commons,  which  was  approved  in  Court,  and  in  the  General  Court  on 
the  2d  inftant ;  alfo,  to  a  Petition  for  leave  to  prefent  the  fame ;  and  that  fuch 
members  of  this  Court  as  are  members  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  be  req^aeiled  to 
prefent  the  fiiid  Petitions. 

AT  a  Court  of  Diredors,  held  onThurfday  the  9th  April  18 12, 

On  a  motion, 
Refolved,  That  agreeably  to  the  Court's  refolution  of  the  2d  ultimo,  appointing 
a  deputation  of  Directors  to  confer  with  His  Majedy's  minifters  on  the  fubjcct  of 
a  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  the  under-mentioned  gentlemen 
be  appointed  for  that  purpofe  ;   viz. 

The  Chairman,  the  Deputy  Chairman,  the  Honourable  William  Fullarton 
Elphinflone,  Jacob  Bofanquet,  Efquire,  Charles  Grant,  Efquire,  George  Smitii, 
Efquire,  Edward  Parrv,  Efquire,  William  Aflell,  Efquire. 

(32-)  '  B  AT 


&        CORRESPONDENCE  bttit'een  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  i  ith  of  April  i8ia. 

THE  Chairman  dated,  that  the  deputy  and  himfelf  had  a  conference  with  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamfliire,  on  Tuefday  laft. 

Read  again  the  hints  and  obfervations,  and  deliberated  thereon  as  far  as  article 
twelve. 

And  adjourned  to  Monday  next  at  two  o'clock. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  13th  April  18 12. 

Proceeded  in  deliberating  further  on  the  hints  and  obfervations, 

And  adjourned  to  Wednefday  next. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation. 

Draught  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  was  read  and 
approved. 

And  the  Chairman  was  requefted  to  fubmit  the  fame  to  the  Court  of  Directors 
this  day. 

AT  a  Secret   Court   of  Directors,  held  on  Wednefday  the   15th 
April  18 12. 

THE  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  fubmitting  to  the 
Court  draught  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  for  the 
affairs  of  India. 

The  fame  was  read,  and  unanimoufly  approved. 

My  Lord,  Eaftlndia  Houfe,   15th  April  1812. 

THE  correfpondence  between  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Conimiflioners  on 
the  part  of  His  Majefty's  government,  and  the  Court  of  Direftors  of  the  Eaft 
India  Company,  on  the  fubje<5l  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  charter,  having 
been  laid  before  the  General  Court  of  Proprietors,  we  now,  in  confequence  of  the 
refolutions  of  that  body,  propofe  to  ourfelves  the  honour  of  continuing  the 
correfpondence  with  your  Lordfhip,  and  efpeciaily  to  reply  to  the  letters  of  the 
late  Prefident,  dated  the  2 ill:  and  23d  of  March,  and  to  his  obfervations  accom- 
panying the  former  of  thefe  letters. 