

lam,  Gentlemen, 

Your  mofl  obedient  humble  fervant, 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed)  MELVILLE- 

of  tlie  Eaft  India  Company. 


•^^^g'^^^ 


COPIES  of  the  CORRESPONDENCE  that  has  taken 
place  between  The  Prefident  of  the  Commlflioners  for 
the  Affairs  of  India,  and  the  Chairman  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Court  of  Diredtors  of  The  Eafl  India 
Company; — together  with  the  Minutes  of  the  Court 
of  Dire6lors    of   the    faid    Company ; — refpedling    the 

Renewal  of  their  exclufive  Privileges  : As  laid  before 

the  Proprietors  of  E all  India  Stock,  at  their  feveral 
General  CouitSj  fubfequent  to  the  25th  of  March 
1812. 


R 


At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  31ft  March  18 12. 


E  A  D    again,    and    confidered.     Letter   from    Lord   Melville,    dated   the 
2 1  ft  March  ;  and  his  Lordfiiip's  Obfervations  on  the  Hints. 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of 
England  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Thurfday  the  2d 
April  1812  ; — 

MINUTES  of  the  laft  Court,  of  25th  ultimo,  were  read.  The  Chairman 
acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  was  aflembled  for  the  purpofe  of  taking  into  con- 
fideration  the  Papers  which  were  laid  by  the  Court  of  Directors  before  the  General 
Court  on  the  2  i;th  ultimo. 

It  was  then  moved  ;  and,  after  a  mature  deliberation, 

Refolved  unanimoufly,  Th^at  this  Court,  having  perufed  the  Papers  laid  before 
them  at  the  laft  General  Court,  defire  to  exprefs  the  high  fenfe  which  they  enter- 
tain of  the  great  ability,  zeal,  and  fidelity,  with  which  the  Diredtors  have  main- 
tained the  intereft  of  the  Eaft  India  Company.  They  return  them  thanks  for  the 
powerful  and  convincing  arguments  by  which  they  have  fliown  the  danger  which 
would  await  the  Briiifh  Empire  from  opening  the  Trade  of  India,  and  the  immenfe 
advantages  which  the  nation  has  derived,  in  ftrength,  revenue,  territory,  and 
charafter,  from  the  capital  and  the  exertions  of  this  corporation. 

That  although  this  Court  will  feel  it  their  duty,  on  all  occafions,  to  bow  to  the 
determination  of  the  Legiflature,  they  cannot  but  obfcrve  with  extreme  concern,, 
that  no  propofiticn  is  fuggefted  of  an  increafed  or  further  dividend,  either  now  or 
hereafter,  or  advantage  of  any  kind  whatever,  to  the  proprietors  of  Eaft  India 
ftock  ;  notwithftanding  the  negotiation  for  the  renewal  of  the  Charter  in  1 793 
begun  with  a  propofal  for  an  increafe  of  dividend  of  two  per  cent,  which  Charter 
opened  the  trade  but  in  a  limited  and  partial  degree ;  and  notwithftanding  that 
while  fuch  great  and  progrelFive  advantages  have  been  obtained  for  the  public  at 
large,  the  proprietors  themfelves  have  made  little  more  than  common  intereft  of 
their  money.  That  now  to  be  called  upon  to  part  with  an  undefined  proportion  of 
a  trade  thus  eftabliftied,  and  maintained  hitherto  at  their  fole  expenfe,  without 
any  confideration  for  the  fame,  feems  to  them  to  be  wholly  inequitable.  Under 
thefe  impreffions,  this  Court  confides  to  the  Honourable  Court  of  Dire£lors  the 
care  of  its  interefts  in  the  further  negotiation  for  a  new  Charter,  trufting  to  the 
(3  2.  J  A  juftice 