


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  5. 

trovertible  fa£t:,  that  greater  public  benefit  would  accrue  from  its  being  continued 
in  its  prefent  ftate  tlian  from  its  being  any  further  opened,  yet  Your  Petitioners 
do  venture  humbly,  but  confidently,  to  aifure  this  Honourable  Houfe,  that  the 
trade  with  China  could  not  be  opened  in  any  degree  without  extreme  danger  ; 
that  if  it  fliould  not  be  feen  lit  to  enlarge  the  term  now  held  by  Your  Petitioners 
in  the  whole  of  the  trade  whicli  they  now  enjoy  without  qualification,  Your  Peti- 
tioners are  ready  to  fubmit  to  fuch  regulations  as  fhall  be  juit,  a!ul  as  Parliament  in 
its  wifdom  fhall  enact,  for  the  condud  of  the  commercial  intercourfc  of  His  3T:'.iefl:y's 
fubjeds  with  thofe  places  which  are  within  the  exclufive  limits  granted  to  Your 
Petitioners  ;  that  on  account  of  the  length  and  variety  of  the  matters  neceflarv  to 
be  confidered  and  prepared  in  relation  to  the  fubjevil  of  this  Petition,  Your  Peti- 
tioners were  unable  to  prepare  a  Petition,  praying  leave  to  bring  in  a  Bill  or  Bills 
relative  to  the  Indian  territories  and  trade,  until  the  time  limited  for  p:  eientino' 
petitions  for  private  bills  was  expired ;  Your  Petitioners  th-jrefore  muil  humbly 
pray,  that  leave  may  be  given  to  Your  Petitioners  now  to  prefent  a  petition  to  this 
Honourab!  ?  Houfe,  praying  that  leave  may  be  given  to  bring  in  a  Bill  or  Bills  for 
continuing  the  pofl'eifion,  government,  and  management  of  the  territorial  acquifii 
tions  in  the  Eaft  Indies  in  Your  Petitioners,  fubjed  to  regulation,  and  for  altering 
the  appropriations  of  the  profits  arifing  from  the  Indian  revenues ;  and  for 
enabling  Your  Petitioners  to  raife  fuch  fums  of  money,  or  to  contract  fuch  pecu- 
niai-y  obligations  as  their  affairs  may  require,  in  refpe£t  of  the  payment  in  this 
country  of  debts  originally  contrafted  in  India  ;  and  for  fettling  the  trade  to  the 
Eaft  Indies  and  China,  and  other  places,  from  the  Cape  of  Bona  Efperanza  to 
the  Straights  of  Magellan ;  or  that  Your  Petitioners  may  have  fuch  other  relief  as 
their  cafes  may  require. 

And  Your  Petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  fhall  ever  pray. 

It  was  then  moved  ;  and  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  do  approve  the  above  Petition. 

The  Court  then,  on  the  queftion,  adjourned. 

AT  a  Meeting  of  the  Deputation,  the  4th  of  April  1812. 

THE  Chairman  ftated,  that  himfelf  and  the  deputy  had  a  conference  yeflerday 
with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  CommifTioners. 

Read  again,  and  confidered  the  hints  and  obfervations  on  them. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  6th  April  1812. 