

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  23d  March  1812. 

No.  XXIX.        T  Have  had  the  honor  to  receive  the  two  letters  which  the  Deputation  from  the 
^  Court  of  Direftors  addreffed  to  me,  on  the  18th  and  19th  inflant. 

Ld.  Mtlville'*  ]f  jg  undoubtedly  reafonable,  that  the  further  term  now  propofed  to  be  granted 

to  the  Eaft  India  Company  of  their  privileges  of  exclufive  trade  and  the  jj;ovfcrnment 
of  the  Britilh  territorial  poffeffions  in  India,  fhould  be  for  fuch  a  period,  as  may  be 
fufficient,  if  unforefeen  contingencies  do  not  arife,  to  produce  a  confiderable  reduction 
of  the  debt,  both  in  India  and  at  home.  The  experience,  however,  of  the  laft 
twenty  years,  has  fufficier.tly  demonlfrated,  that  it  is  impoffible  to  calculate,  with 
any  degree  of  accuracy,  on  what  may  be  the  ftate  of  the  Company's  affairs  in  India 
at  the  expiry  of  another  period  of  the  fame  duration.  If  they  are  profperous,  the 
iame  term  as  was  granted  in  1793  will  be  fufficient  for  the  purpofes  defcribed  in 
your  letter  of  the  iSth;  but  if  untoward  events  fhall  occur,  and  the  Company  fhall 
be  again  engaged  in  expenfive  wars,  it  will  be  defirable  that  Parliament  fhould 
have  the  opportunity  of  reconfidering  the  fubjeft,  and  of  making  fuch  new  provifions 
as  the  cafe  may  appear  to  require.  Under  thofe  circumdances,  I  do  not  think  it 
will  be  advifable  to  propofe  a  longer  term  than  what  was  granted  by  the  Act  of  1793, 
viz.  twenty  years  from  the  expiry  of  the  exiifing  period,  with  three  yeras  previous 
notice. 

I  have  no  hefitation  in  admitting  that  the  fuggcftion  in  your  Letter  of  the  !9th 
inflant,  relative  to  the  continuance  of  the  dividend  of  ten  fliillings  per  cent,  on  the 
cxi.^.in"-  capital  of  the  Eafl-India  Company,  after  the  feparaie  fund  fhall  be  exhaufled, 
is  reafonable,  and  that  it  will  be  proper  to  comply  with  it. 

Your  propofition,  in  regard  to  the  payment  of  the  Property  Tax,  requires  much 
more  confideration,  and  I  cannot,  at  prefent,  bring  myfelf  to  concur  in  the  expediency 
t)f  agreeing  to  fuhmit  it  to  Parliament.  A  confident  expeftation  may  be  entertained, 
from  the  ffate  of  the  Company's  revenues  in  India,  and  from  the  reduftion 
of  expenfe  vshich  has  already  taken  place,  or  v.hich  may  flill  be  efieded, 
both  at  home  and  abroad,  by  means  completely  within  your  power,  that  a  large  annual 
furplus  will  be  available  towards  the  reduction  of  debt ;  but  when  it  i«  recolleded, 
that  though  the  amount  of  the  debt  in  India  has  recently  been  confiderably  di- 
rainifhed,  it  has  been  proportionably  encreafed  at  home,  and  cnfidering,  alio,  that 
proviiion  muff  be  made,  for  the  poffible  contingency  of  the  Company  having  to 
pay,  in  this  country,  the  intered,  not  only  of  their  large  debt  at  home  but  alio  of 
the  whole  debt  of  India,  I  do  not  think  that  it  would  be  wife  or  prudent,  at  leafl  till 
after  the  exprrience  of  a  few  years,  to  make  an  addition  to  the  perman  nt  charges  of 
the  Company -at  home,  to  the- amount  of  the  Property  Tax  upon  their  dividends. 