

At  prefent,  the  duties  upon  Eaft  India  goods  are  colle£ted  and  paid  in  London, 
at  a  very  fmall  expenfe  to  Government,  and  to  the  full  extent  to  which  they 
ought  to  be  paid.  This  follows  becaufe  the  value  of  the  goods  is  afcertained  by 
competition  at  the  Company's  fales.  Were  every  port  to  have  its  India  Houle, 
where  would  be  this  general  competition  ?  The  fame  goods  which  pay  the  duty 
ad  i-alorem,  would  be  liable  to  one  amount  of  duty  at  Fowey,  to  another  at  Dub- 
lin, to  a  third  at  Port  Glafgow  ;  all  differing  from  each  other,  and  from  that  paid 
at  London.  There  would  be  no  remedy  for  this  inconvenience,  whatever  may  be 
faid  by  interefted  perfons  to  the  contrary.  The  endtefs  variety  of  Indian  commo- 
dities renders  it  impoffible  that  they  Ihould  generally  pay  what  are  called  rated 
duties,  of  fo  much  per  piece  or  fo  much  per  yard.  Pepper  may  pay  a  fixed 
fum  by  the  pound,  and  fugar  by  the  hundred  weight ;  but  the  ftaple  article  of 
piece-goods,  and  many  others,  muft  ever  be  rated  by  the  value,  quantity  being  no 
juft  criterion. 

It  therefore  follows  from  what  has  been  above  obferved,  that  were  the  trade 
to  be  carried  to  the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the  revenue  drawn  from 
Indian  goods  muft  be  greatly  diminiftied,  and  the  charges  of  collecting  it  greatly 
increafed. 

Let  it  be  next  inquired.  What  would  be  the  efteft  of  fuch  a  charge  on  different 
interefts  ;  the  perfons  already  poffeffed  of  valuable  property  employed  for  the 
Indian  trade  ;  the  exporters  of  Indian  commodities  from  this  country  ;  and  on  the 
Eaft  India  Company  iti'elf? 

The  City  of  London,  in  their  corporate  capacity,  as  confervators  of  the 
Thames,  and  all  claffes  of  perfons  in  the  metropolis,  who  are  engaged  in  the 
building  and  out-fit  of  fliips,  in  the  carriage,  warehouling,  forting,  buying,  and 
felling  of  the  Company's  goods,  have  alfo  a  dired  intereft  in  the  prefent  dif- 
cuffion. 

The  Eail  India  Dock  Company  have  hkewife  a  very  great  and  obvious  intereft 
in  keeping  the  Indian  trade  in  the  Port  of  London. 

"vVlth  refpedl  to  the  re-export  trade  in  Indian  commodities,  at  leaft  three-fourths 
of  the  imports  from  India  have  hitherto  been  for  the  fupply  of  the  continental 
markets.  The  foreign  buyers  repofe  confidence  in  the  regularity  and  publicity 
with  which  the  Company's  fales  are  conduced.  When  the  trade  was  folely  in 
the  hands  of  the  Company  the  particulars  of  their  cargoes  were  publiflied  imme- 
diately  on  the  arrival  of  the  Ihips,  and  diftributed  all  over  the  continent ;  notices 
of  the  quantities  to  be  fold,  and  periods  of  fale,  were  alfo  publiftied  for  the  like 
(liftribution.  1  he  fales  of  each  defcription  of  goods  were  made  at  ftated  periods, 
twice  in  the  year  ;  the  buyers  of  courfe  knew  the  ftate  of  the  market  at  the  time 
of  coming  to  theflile,  and  the  purchafes  were  made  under  an  affurance  that  no 
more  goods  of  fuch  defcription  would  be  difpofed  of  before  the  next  fale;  hence 
they  had  a  certainty  of  the  market  for  fix  months.  This  eftabliflied  a  folid  con- 
fidence, which  very  much  benefited  the  fales  ;  fuch  confidence  has,  no  doubt, 
been  much  weakened  fince  1793,  when  private  perfons  were  partially  admitted 
into  the  trade ;  the  chief  objedt  of  the  private  trader  being,  as  it  always  muft 
be,  to  obtain  prompt  fales  to  meet  the  payment  of  bills  ;  Eaft  India  goods  are 
frequently  re-fold  while  they  remain  in  the  Company's  warehoufe,  merely  by  a 
transfer  of  vouchers.     The  goods  when  fo  fold  will  produce  from  five  to  ten  per 