

'*  to  be  acceded  to ;  with  the  refcrvation,  however,  that  tl.e  governments  in  India 
"  ought  to  be  reftriCted  from"  making  any  alteration  in  the  rates  of  the  duties 
fanclioned  by  the  authorities  in  England,  or  that  they  may  hereafter  fanCtion. 

To 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &:c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY. 


ntioni. 


I 


To  the  conceflion  on  this  head  we  wifli  it  to  be  added,  that  the  Company  "!"«• 
fliall  have  a  fair  price  for  all  the  faltpetre  they  fhall  fupply  to  the  government.       — 

As  the  confinement  of  the  private  trade  to  and  from  India  to  the  port  of  Z- 
London  is  an  article  of  eflential  importance  on  the  whole  of  tlio  prefent  queftion, 
involving  the  fafety  of  the  Company,  it  may  be  expedient  that  we  ftate  fome- 
what  fully  the  various  and  powerful  confiderations  on  which  the  propriety  and 
necefTity  of  the  meafure  refts.  Thefe  confiderations  relate  to  the  ufages  reffjiting 
unavoidably  from  the  nature  of  the  Company,  which,  for  political  as  well  as 
commercial  purpofes,  it  is  fo  material  to  preferve ;  from  the  law  of  the  land  ;  the 
exifting  rights  of  individuals  ;  the  convtnieiiry  of  the  re-exportation  of  Indian 
commodities,  and  the  fecurity  of  the  public  revenue. 

From  the  firfl;  inftitution  of  the  EafI:  India  Company  they  have  ufed  the  port 
of  London  only  ;  and  the  pradlice  of  felling  their  imports  by  public  audion  only 
is  alfo  almoft  coeval  with  the  company. 

The  utility  which  di£tated  the  firfl:  of  thefe  praftices  is  obvious :  a  little  c:>n- 
fideration  will  (hev/  the  other  to  be  yet  more  neccffary.  — If  private  bargaining 
and  trafficking  with  individuals,  and  from  day  to  clay,  were  allowed  in  the  fales 
of  the  great  imports  of  the  Company,  how  many  doors  would  be  open  for  collu- 
fion,  impofiiion  andabufe!  It  would  be  impoffible  the  bufmefs  could  go  on  in 
that  way ;  and  the  very  liability  of  it  to  fufpicion  would  be  enough  to  deliroy  the 
confidence  of  the  proprietors  and  the  public— --Befides,  the  im.portations  of  the 
Company  coming  in  fleets  at  ftated  feafons,  it  fuited  the  convenience  of  all  parties 
that  the  fales  ihould  alfo  be  only  at  ftated  feafons,  and  pubhc,  which  would  afford 
the  opportunity  to  buyers  to  reibrt  from  all  parts,  foreign  as  well  as  domeftic,  to 
thofe  fales. 

In  the  ninth  and  tenth  years  of  King  William  the  Third,  the  legiflature  inter- 
pofed  to  prohibit  fale  of  Eafl  India  goods  othcrwirc'than  by  public  auftion,  and 
in  the  next  year  of  that  Prince  it  was  enafted,  that  E:lft  India  goods  fhould  be 
fold  only  in  London,     Thus  the  law  at  prefent  ftands. 

The  immediate  objeft  of  the  legiflature  in  thefe  enaftments  appears  to  have 
been  the  fecurity  of  the  revenue,  then  appointed  to  be  derived  from  the  cuftoms 
laid  on  Indian  goods  imported.  r    . 