

The  fnips  employed  in  private  trade  lliould  be  conilrained  to  navigate  with 
a  certain  number  of  Europeans  outward,  fo  as  to  prevent  as  much  as  poffible 
the  introduction  of  native  feamen  to  this  country  j  and  hence,  for  the  fake  of 
humanity,  a  furgeon  becomes  a  neceifary  perlbn,  the  employment  of  whom 
may  well  comport  with  the  fize  of  Ihiprf  of  iour  hundred  tons  or  upwards, 
but  not  with  thofe  of  two  hundred  and  fiftv,  or  lefs.  If  the  health  and  lives  of 
feamen  be  thought  of  confequence  to  the  Itate,  the  larger  clafs  of  fhips  fhould 
certainly  be  preferred.  If  the  prefent  fuperior  clafs  of  Weft  India  fliipping 
are  of  four  or  five  hundred  tons,  where  the  paflage  is  not  more  than  fix  weeks, 
it  appears  at  leail  as  reafonable  that  thofe  employed  in  an  Eaft  Indian  voyage, 
which  may  lafl  many  months,  fliould  be  equally  competent  and  formidable  as 
the  running  fhips,  and  not  ftand  on  a  fcale  beneath  thofe  of  the  firft  clafs 
upon  Lloyd's  books,  fo  that  the  premium  of  infurance  upon  the  goods  fliipped 
may  be  kept  at  the  loweft  poilible  rate. 

Whenever  fuch  enlargements  as  may  induce  the  fubjeiSts  of  this  country  to 
embark  very  large  property  in  the  Indian  trade  fhall  be  opened  to  them,  it  muit 
be  highly  expedient  that,  for  fuch  time  at  leaft  as  may  be  fufEcient  for  the  return 
of  one  voyage,  the  utmofl  pofTible  fecurity  which  the  Legiflature  can  devife  fliould 
be  provided,  in  order  to  check  fuch  hazardous  adventures  as  might  otherwife  be 
carried  on  in  any  defcription  of  velTel,  or  under  the  conduft  of  characters  not 
fufficiently  refponfible,  and  at  the  riflv  or  coft  of  the  underwriter. 
■  If  an  honourable  commercial  intercourfe  wfth  India  be  the  object,  fuch  whole- 
fome  regulations  will  promote  it  ;  but  if  fpeculations  of  mere  chance  outward, 
and  fmuggling  homeward,  fliould  be  in  the  contemplation  of  any  adventurers, 
proteftion  to  the  fair  trader,  to  the  Eaft  India  Company,  and  to  the  revenue,  can 
only  be  fecured  by  fome  efficient  law  relpefting  the  fize  of  the  fnips,  and  their 
confequent  equipment  in  ftqres  and  force,  under  the  conduct  of  able  and  refpon- 
'^'""-  vations  fible  commanders  and  crews. 

J 6.      1 6.         The  regulations  propofed  with  refpeft  to  Lafcars-  are  only  intended  for  a  time  of 
war.     No  Lafcars  fhould  be  brought  to  this  country  in  a  time  of  peace. 

i8,      i8.  The  exifting  regulations  as  to  ingrefs  and  fettlcment  of  unlicenfed  Europeans 

into  the  Company's  eltablifhmehts  and  territories  to  be  continued.  No  Britifh 
fubjefts  to  be  allowed  to  fettle  in  any  country  within  the  Company's  limits,  and 
not  under  the  government  of  the  Company. 