

cent. 


.f 


^nd  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  i : 

cent,  more  than  when  in  the  hands  of  individuals ;  this  is  particularly  (he  cafe  as 
to  drugs,  which  are  fubject  to  great  adukcration. 

The  confidence  that  has  been  entertained  of  the  Company's  regularity  and  fair 
dealing  has  been  fuch,  that  the  foreign  buyers  have  given  their  orders  to  their 
correfpondents  in  London,  on  the  faith  merely  of  the  defcriptivc  marks  ;  anJ 
goods,  on  their  arrival  on  the  continent,  frequently  pafs  ihrough  various  hands 
before  they  are  finally  unpacked. 

By  the  mode  propofed  it  is  to  be  feared  the  foreign  buyer  will  ceafe  to  be  at 
any  certainty  as  to  his  purchafes,  and  the  quality  of  the  commodities  ;  and  th's  may 
eventually  lead  foreigners  to  look  direftly  to  India  for  the  fupply  that  has  hitherto 
been  furnifhed  through  the  medium  of  this  country. 

To  fpeak  now  of  the  eflFedts  of  the  propofed  change  upon  the  interefts  of  the 
Company  :  and  firft,  with  refpe£l  to  the  Eaft  India  trade,  properly  fo  called,  as 
contra-diftinguifhed  from  the  imports  from  China  ;  — If  the  mode  of  private  (lile 
of  Indian  goods  in  every  town  in  the  kingdom  were  introduced,  would  not  the 
ftated  and  the  public  fales,  to  which  the  Company  are  reftrided,  be  continually 
anticipated,  and  confequently  the  fupply  of  the  foreign  markets  befo  alfo ;  though 
on  the  whole  thefe  markets  could  not  take  off"  more  ?  Could  thefe  fales,  then, 
fecure  a  general  affemblage  of  buyers  ?  Could  it  be  reckoned  upon,  that  the 
Company's  goods  would  go  off  as  they  ufually  have  hitherto  done  at  the  fales  ? 
Could  the  prices  be  expefted  to  indemnify  the  Company,  when  the  market  fliould 
be  lowered  by  the  neceffity  or  impatience  of  private  importers  ?  Could  the  reali- 
zation in  money  of  the  Company's  Indian  imports  be  depended  on — that  realiza- 
tion fo  neceflary  to  the  finances  of  the  Company  ?  and  if  not,  how  could  the  cur- 
rency of  their  affairs  be  preferved  ?  How  could  they  pay  for  exports  to  India  ? 
How  could  they  maintain  the  fleet  of  fliips  they  now  employ  in  their  Indian  Com- 
merce, a  fleet  fo  neceffary  for  the  tranfportation  of  troops  and  ftores  and  warlike 
fervices  in  India  ?  And  if  the  Company's  Indian  commerce  failed,  and  fo  much 
of  the  Indian  imports  were  transferred  to  out-ports,  what  niuft  become  of  many 
of  the  Company's  wharfs,  warehoufes,  and  other  articles  of  dead  fl:ock,  formed 
at  a  vaft  expenfe  in  confequence  of  this  Indian  trade  ?  And  where  would  be  the 
benefit  to  the  nauon  by  the  change?  Would  it  be  any  thing  elfe  but  transfer- 
ring to  Briftol,  Liverpool,  Glafgow,  and  Dublin,  that  which  London  now  has  ? 
Would  it  be  really  any  acceffion  of  benefit  to  the  empire  at  large  ?  And  what,  to 
look  towards  India,  would  be  the  effed  of  an  unlimited  trade  from  the  out-ports 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  to  all  thofe  regions?  Would  it  be  poflible  to  en- 
force the  regulations  which  His  Majefty's  minifters  think  abfolutely  neceffary  for 
perventing  an  uncontrolled  intercourfe  with  the  Eaft,  and  for  averting  the  evils 
that  would  enfue  from  it. 