

19.  19.  The  King's  forces  maintainable  by  the  Company  in  India  not  to  exceed  fifteen 

thoufand  men  in  all,  and  this  number  to  be  reduced  as  may  be  found  pradicable» 

20.  20,  If  the  propofition  made  by  the  Company,  to  be  henceforth  charged  fo  much  per 

regiment  of  a  given  force,  or  fo  much  per  man,  be  not  adopted,  we  fhall  be  glad 
to  receive  any  fpecific  propofition  for  putting  upon  a  clear  and  equitable  footing 
the  adjuftment  of  accounts  between  the  Pa)-ofIice  aud  the  Company.  By  any 
fuch  arrangement  we  gannot  doubt  that  at  leait  the  intricacies  of  the  prefent  mode 
of  fettlement,  utterly  unfatisfactory  as  it  is  to  the  Company,  will  be  got  rid  of, 
even  if  the  expenfe  fliould  not  be  diminilhed  ;  but  will  it,  for  example,  admit  of 
any  queflion,  whether,  when  the  Company  have  been  charged,  as  they  really 

have 


end  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  15 

have  been,  with  the  expence  of  an  entire  recruiting  company  at  home  as  con- 

ftantlv  raifing  recruits  ;  and  whilft,  in  many  inltances,  the  recruits  fo  raifed  have 

been  fent,  not  to  India  but  to  other  quarters,  the  recruiting  company  having  alfo 

been  at  all  times  available  for  internal  fervice,  it  can  come  within  the  equity  of  the 

127th  claufc  of  the  Aft  ot   1793,  or  ever  could  have  been  intended  to  charge 

the  expenfe  of  fuch  company  to  the  Indian  territories  ;  or  is  it  juil,  that  the  ex- 

penfe  of  the  colonel  of  a  regiment  employed  either  at  home  or  on  the  Continent, 

or  perhaps  on  a  furlough  ftaft'  appointment,  fiiould  be  partly  charged  to  the  Eaft 

India  Company,  and  his  pay  be  drawn  from  them  ?  As  all  parties  therefore  agree  oiftr- 

in  the  propriety  of  an  alteration,  the  fooner  it  is  made  the  better.  '" ''  *"'«"»• 

The  Court  of  Directors  have  already  objefted,  and  mufl  ever  objeft,  to  the  21  •  21. 
arbitrary  mode  adopted  by  a  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons  in  1805,  for 
the  feltlement  of  the  demands  of  the  Company  on  Government.  We  think  it  a 
clear  and  equitable  principle  that  the  expenfe  of  captures  made  and  not  retained 
by  the  Company,  but  transferred  to  His  Majefly,  or  by  His  Majefly  reftored  to  the 
enemy,  fhould  be  charged  to  the  public. 

The  ordinary  pay  of  the  Company's  troops  employed  on  fuch  fervices,  and 
efpecially  in  places  out  of  the  fphere  of  India,  as  in  Egypt,  fliould  alfo  be  placed 
on  account  of  the  public. 

On  thefe  grounds  we  beg  leave  to  propofe,  that  the  balance  of  demands  now 
made  by  the  Pay  Office  on  the  Company  be  fet  off  by  the  funis  which  they  are 
yet  unpaid  for,  the  capture  of  Cieylon,  and  the  Moluccas,  and  for  the  expeditioii 
to  Egypt.  Even  then  the  fettlement  will  be  greatly  to  the  advantage  of  the  public, 
as  the  Company  have  made  good  to  the  Pay  Office  a  fum  exceeding  two  millions  ; 
in  addition  to  which  they  have  fnice  the  year  1797  been  charged  for  King's  troops 
beyond  the  number  for  which  the  law  obliged  them  to  pay,  at  the  average  annual 
rate  of  about  three  thoufand  firelocks,  befides  the  officers  and  ferjeants  requifiLp.for 
that  number  of  men. 