

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  it  feems  moft  certain,  that  on  fuch  (lender  grounds 
with  refpeft  to  advantage  (an  advantage  as  before  mentioned,  only  to  be  taken 
from  London  for  the  out-ports)  with  fo  little  certainty  of  eflabllfhing  any  great 
trade  to  or  from  India,  with  fuch  imminent  hazard  to  the  Eaft  India  Company 
and  to  the  Revenue,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  prudent  poHcy  which  this 
Nation  has  generally  obferved,  and  moft  unwife  in  itfelf  to  venture  upon  fo  great 
an  innovation,  fome  of  the  efFeds  of  which  were  pointed  out  to  the  Prefident  of 
the  Board  of  CommifTioners  three  years  ago  (Printed  Papers,  page  30,)  efFefts 
which  by  his  fdence  he  feems  to  have  admitted  ;  and  in  a  word,  it  may  be  appre- 
hended that  they  would  amount  to  the  deftruftion  of  the  Company's  Indian  trade, 
their  Indian  commercial  eftablifnments,  their  Indian  {hipping,  and  finally  leave 
the  China  monopoly  fo  infulated  and  unfupported  as  to  bring  that  alfo  at  length 
to  its  fall,  and  with  it  the  whole  fabric  of  the  Company,  and  the  great  revenue 
now  fo  eafily  realized  through  its  medium  ;  nor  can  it  be  at  all  doubtful  that  in 
fuch  cafe  the  China  trade  would  alfo  be  loft  to  the  Nation. 

It  is  not  irrelevant  to  this  fubjefl:  to  advert  to  a  paflage  in  the  hiftory  of  the 
Dutch  Eaft  India  Company,  under  the  year  1602.  "  The  plurality  of  Eaft  India 
partnerftiip  or  focieties  at  this  time  formed  in  Holland  creating  much  diforder  and 
clafiiing  in  that  commerce,  the  States  General  fummoned  before  them  the  diredors 
of  all  thofe  companies,  and  obliged  them  to  unite  for  the  future  into  one,  to 
which  united  company  the  States  granted  the  fole  commerce  to  Eaft  India,  for 
iwenty-one  years,  from  the  20th  March  1602."  They  had  in  coni'equence,  feve- 
ral  chambere  of  Eaft  India  commerce  in  Holland,  as  Amfterdam,  Middleburgh, 
*^""-    vations   &c.  but  thev  wefe  all  under  one  united  Diredion  *. 

7.  7.         In  the  time  of  King  William  the  Company  were  allowed  five  per  cent,  on  the 

private  trade.  ,^ 

8.  8.         Many  remarks  made  upon  the  fixth  article  will  alfo  apply  to  this  which  might 

have  properly  formed  a  part  of  it.  We  need  thereiore  only  obferve  here,  that 
the  permitting  of  fliips  to  fail  from  the  out-ports  will  go  very  materially  to  injure 
the  intereft  of  thofe  who  w'ere  let  into  the  Indian  trade  by  the  Ad  ot  1793  ;  to 
increafe  the  danger  of  colonization  abroad,  and  of  injury  to  the  revenues  by 
fmuggling  at  home,  as  well  as  another  danger  to  be  noticed  in  the  next 
article. 

so.  lo.  It  is  not  only  to  all  our  Indian  pofleftlons  that  the  exportation  of  military  ftores 
ought  always  to  be  prohibited,  but  alfo  to  the  numerous  iflands  in  the  Eaftern 
feas,  inhabited  by  a  vindidive  race  of  people  who  may  be  ready  not  only  to  buy 
v.-arlike  ftores,  but  to  engage  Europeans  in  their  quarrels  \  and  the  failing  of  (hips 
v/ill  certainly  increafe  the  danger  of  thefe  evils. 