

Every  one  will  admit  that  there  is  more  of  refpeftabllity  in  the  larger  clafs  of 
fliips,  and  this  circumllance  fiiould  not  altogether  be  loft  fight  of  with  the  in- 
habitants of  India.  The  impreihons  of  the  fuperiorlty  of  our  maritime  ftrength 
to  that  of  other  nations,  and  particularly  to  the  Americans,  who  fpeak  the  fame 
language,  and  who  navigate  very  fmall  velfels  to  and  from  the  ports  of  the  Eaft 
fliould  be  kept  alive,  and,  as  a  rcafon  of  ftate,  fliould  have  its  due  weight  in  the 
confideranon  of  this  fubjeft. 

It  is  not  only  the  refpeclabillty  of  thefiip  that  fliould  be  attended  to,  but  there 
is  alfo  a  degree  of  refpectability  and  refponfibility  attached  to  the  charafter  of  the 
commander  and  of  the  officers  (of  whom  there  is  a  greater  eftablifhment  in  the 
larger  fliips).  Their  information  is  pre-eminent,  particularly  in  thofe  eifential 
articles  of  nautical  fcience,  the  variation  and  the  lunar  obfervadons  in  the  navi- 
gation of  the  Indian  feas,  and  to  and  from  thence,  by  fuch  men.  A  better  dif- 
ciphne  is  eftabHlhed  in  thofe  larger  fliips  which  fuit  them ;  the  fliips  are  alll> 
better  armed,  and  lefs  liable  to  capture  than  veffels  of  the  fmaller  clafs.  The 
length  of  voyage  requires  not  only  fuperior  equipment  and  a  ftouter  velfel, 
but  in  order  to  guard  againft  contingencies  of  every  kind,  fubordinate  officers 
and  their  afliftants  are  indifpenfable^  becaufe  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  the 
principal  officers  the  knowledge  and  fkill  requifite  to  fupply  their  places,  ef- 
pecially  in  cafes  of  emergency,  could  be  derived  from  no  other  quarter.  Small 
veflTels  cannot  have  thefe  neceflfary  advantages  j  an  obfervation  which   applies- 

(32.)  D  more 


14        CORRESPONDENCE  beiv:een  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

more  particularly  to  fuch  petty  oflicers,  as  carpenters  and  caulkers,  in  refpeft  to 
matters  that  concern  the  hull  of  the  lliip,  and  to  medical  men  in  refped:  to  the 
crew. 

It  has  been  fdimd  bv  experience  that  larger  fhips  can  be  navigated  at  a  Icfs 
rate  per  ton  than  fmall  ones ;  hence,  one  of  four  hundred  tons  will  require  lefs 
rate  of  freight  than  two  of  two  hundred  tons ;  a  point  of  economy  in  the  con- 
veyance of  goods,  which  is  not  to  be  difregarded  even  in  a  national  view.  As 
India  is  concerned,  the  fmaller  veflels  v.ili  multiply  a  defcription  of  perfons  in 
the  ports,  and  tliroughout  the  country,  whofe  coadad  may  have  ferious  effects 
on  the  peace  and  quiet  of  the  Afiatic  govermnents,  from  the  caufes  before 
mentioned.  The  minor  ports  throughout  the  country  will  admit  of  an  inter- 
courfe  and  conne>^tiou  bct\\ccn  Europeans  and  the  Natives,  which  the  vigilance 
and  power  of  our  governments  cannot  dil'cover  nor  controul. 