

II.  SI.  The  exifting  laws  as  to  piece-goods  enables  the  Company  to  confine  the  im- 
portation of  that  article  to  themfelves  ;  they  have  never  availed  thonfelves  of 


Obfer- 


•  See  Anderfon'i  Comraerct,  and  Macpherlon's  Annals  of  Commerce,  under  idzz. 

this 


14-      14- 


nnd  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  13 

his  privilege;  but  yet  it  may  be  proper  to  continue  it,  becaufe  "  the  reji^ular 
and  conftant  employment  of  mnnufr.ftun  r-;  und^r  the  exifting  fyflcm  of  local 
management,"  is  a  matter  of  conl'tquence  not  likely  to  be  otherwife  fo  well 
guarded  ;  and  that  great  importations  of  piece-goods  would  operate  againft  the  q,,c^_ 

home  manufaftures,  whilll  a  fuudler  feleft  importation  would  be  ufeful.  "'"""  v^tion.v 

There  is  a  new  reafou  for  the  fame  rcflric^ion  in  favour  of  the  Company  in  the  12.  12. 
article  of  raw  filk,  becaufe  fuch  a  general  competition  is  now  to  be  opened  againlt 
them,  and  becaufe  they  have  at  great  expenfe  in  a  long  courfe  of  years,  by  means 
of  their  own  eflabliflimcnts,  brought  the  raw  filk  of  Bengal,  wliich  they  export,  to  a 
hi'^h  fhue  of  pprfeclion  ;  and  ii  .Iiat  article  is  left  to  the  compotition  or  individuals, 
who  will  o'ten  have  to  refort  to  the  agency  of  indolent  natives,  the  quality  of  the 
article  n)av  be  expefted  materially  to  fall,  and  the  filk  manufactures  of  this 
country  to  be  much  worfe  fupjjlied  than  they  are  at  prefent. 

It  is  proper  to  add  on  this  fubjeft,  that  the  reftriction  in  favour  of  the  Company 
in  the  article  of  piece-goods  is  by  no  means  of  the  value  it  was  at  firft,  the  demand 
for  that  Indian  ftaple  being  now  greatly  diminifhed  in  this  country. 

Lord  Melville  has  obferved,  on  the  reafons  which  he  apprehends  had  influenced 
the  Court  in  propofing  that  fhips  of  lefs  than  four  hundred  tons  (hould  not  be 
allowed  to  fail  to  India,  that  "  though  entitled  to  due  confideratiou,  they  do  not 
"  appear  to  be  fufficieutly  flrong  to  juftify  the  propofed  reftriction,  or  the  making 
"  a  diftin<^ion,  in  that  refpefc,  between  fliips  trading  to  the  Eafl  Indies  and  to 
"  other  countries  ;"  it  is  therefore  deemed  necelTary  to  difcufs  die  propofuieu 
more  at  length. 

In  examining  the  fubjecl  of  the  fixth  propofition,  the  facility  which  fmall  fliips 
would  afford  to  fmuggling  were  the  out-ports  opened  for  the  difpofal  of  the 
homeward  cargoes,  has  already  been  confidered.  In  further  fupport  ot  the 
fourteenth  propofition,  refpedling  the  lead  fize  of  fliips  that  fliould  be  permitted 
to  go  to  India  on  account  of  individual?,  the  practice  of  the  India  Company  in 
the  early  part  of  their  intercourfe  with  the  Eaft  might  be  adduced,  for  they  foon 
dropped  the  fmaller  clafs  of  ihips  for  one  of  five  hundred  tons ;  but  as  this 
country  in  its  improved  ftate  of  navigation  and  commerce  has  few  fliips  of  that 
burthen,  except  thofe  employed  by  the  Eall  India  Company,  the  limiting  of 
fhips  to  be  now  employed  in  the  private  trade  to  India  to  four  hundred  tons  was 
fuppofed  to  afford  facility  to  the  mofl:  refpectable  houfes  to  benefit  by  the  pro*- 
pofcd  enlargement  ot  the  trade. 