

And  nothing  fo  effeftual  could  be  devifed  for  that  fecurity' tb  bring  the  imports 
to  one  place ;  to  have  them  lodged  under  the  keys  of  government  officers ;  to 
have  them  fold  publicly  in  the  prefence  of  thofe  officers  ;  and,  finally,  to  have  the 
duties,  thus  carefully  afcertained,  coUefted  through  the  medium  of  the  company, 
with  hardly  any  charge :  the  whole  of  this  pradice  is  the  moft  complete  provifion 
that  can  be  imagined,  againft  defecl,  fraud,  or  expenfe,  in  realizing  this  branch 
of  revenue  to  the  public.  •  .  •  ■    -. 

But  if  this  was  material  in  the  time  of  King  William,  when  perhaps  the  revenue 
from  Eafl  India  goods,  including  china,  did  not  exceed  .5^^100,000,  how  efTential 
mufl  it  be  at  prefent  to  the  ftate,  when  that  revenue  exceeds  four  millions. 

With  all  the  care  now  taken,  and  when  London  is  the  only  lawful  place  of 
Importation,  it  is  well  known  that  teas,  fliav/ls,  filks  (prohibited  for  the  encou- 
ragement of  our  own  manufactures),  and  other  articles,  are  at  the  prefent  time, 
to  fome  extent,  fmuggled  on  fliore  from  the  Eafl  India  fliips,  notwithltanding  the 
penalties  of  the  law  ;  and  when,  in  addition  to  the  legal  penalties,  the  oflending 
parties,  if  the  Company's  fervants,  are  liable  to  farther  fines  and  ntultls  on  all 
illicit  trade.  But  the  hope  of  evading  the  heavy  duties  will  ever  continue  to 
operate  on  perfons  who  look  no  farther  than  their  own  immediate  profit  or 
convenience. 

Every  deviation  from  the  eflablifhed  ufage  would  fo  far  deflroy  its  fimplicity 
and  efliciency,  and  open  the  way  to  abufes.  Suppofe  the  importations  to  be 
allowed  to  go  only  to  one  out-port,  a  new  ellablilhment,  new  expenfe,  new 
trouble,  would  be  created,  and  a  channel  opened  for  finuggiing,  fraud,  and  abufe. 
What  would  it  be,  then,  if  feveral  out-ports  were  opened  for  the  landing  and  fale 
of  Indian  and  Chinefe  goods  ? 

(32.)  C  But 


to       CORRESPONDENCE  between    PRESIDENT  0/ INDIA  BOARD 

But  this  ftili  fuppofes  the  Company,  either  for  itfelf,  or  for  private  traders,  to 
be .  the  only  medium  of  importation.  If,  however,  all  individuals  were  to  be 
allowed  to  import,  and  into  all  the  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom,  elpecially  if  it 
were  allowed  to  employ  fhips  of  fmall  burthen,  which  drawing  little  water  could 
run  into  obfcurc  parts  in  the  remote  parts  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland, 
where  would  be  the  prafticability  of  any  fafe  control  ?  Legions  of  Cuftom-houfe 
and  Excife  officers  muft  be  appointed,  at  a  very  great  expence ;  and  after  all, 
where  the  duties  are  fo  high  as  they  are,  efpecially  on  the  articles  of  tea,  filk,  and 
fine  mullins,  fmuggling  without  end  muft  be  expected.  If  private  fliips  were 
allowed  to  go  to  the  Eaftem  iflands  they  could  find  means  to  procure  tea  ;  and  if 
alfo  allowed  to  return  to  the  out-ports,  fmuggling  in  that  article  would  be  by  faf 
the  moft  gaining  trade. 