

Thefe  queftions,  to  add  no  more,  ouglit  to  be  very  clearly  and  fatisfaclorily 
anfwered,  before  fo  great  a  change  is  attempted  5  before  an  order  of  things  that 
has  fubfiftedTo  long,  and  done  fowell,  is  fubverted  and  deftroyed.  If  great  and 
fudden  mnovations  ought  at  all  times  to  be  regarded  with  caution  and  diftruft, 
furely  ought  thofe  in  pardcular  which  are  propofed  by  men  for  their  own  imme- 
diate advantage. 

But  what  are  the  arguments  with  which  the  merchants  of  the  om-ports  may  be 
fuppofed  to  enforce  their  claim  ?  Natural  right ;  the  freedom  of  trade  ;  allowing 
every  man  to  carry  on  his  own  bufinefs  in  his  own  way  ;  the  odium  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  monopoly  ;  the  advantage  with  which  ihey  would  carry  on  the  trade  if 
they  were  obliged  to  bring  back  their  Ibips  to  London,  inftead  of  their  own  ports  j 
the  difadvantage  to  the  country  confumers. 

To  all  this  it  may  be  replied,  that  fuppofing  the  whole  true,  are  thefe  arguments 
of  weight  and  value  fufficientto  overturn  the  prefcnt  long-eftabliflied  fyftemof  the 
Company,  and  to  endanger  fo  large  a  portion  of  the  public  revenue  ?  As  to  the 
arguments  for  natural  right,  &c.  fuch  arguments  muft  always  be  limited  by  con- 
fiderations  of  practical  good.  The  only  praft'cal  argument  that  occurs  in  favour 
of  the  out-ports  is  the  advantage  to  the  merchants  themfelves  and  to  the  country 

confumers. 


12      CORRESPONDENCE  beiween  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  feOARD 

confumers.  Now  what  is  the  amount  of  this  advantage  ?  Let  it  not  be  forgotten 
that  at  prefent  it  is  problematical,  at  lead,  whether  any  great  Indian  trade  can  be 
eflabliflied  bv  the  private  mercliants  ;  that  at  any  rate  the  chief  part  of  Indian  goods 
imported  into  England  is  intended  for  re-exportation  ;  that  London  is  the  fitted 
port  and  mart  for  the  foreign  trade,  efpecially  (ince  the  warehouling  ad  ;  that 
there  is  realiy  little  confumption  of  Indian  goods  in  the  interior  of  this  country  ; 
and  that  if  no  great  acceffion  of  trade  fliould  be  brought  to  the  country  by  the 
private  merchants,  then  they  will  have  facrificed  the  exifting  fyftem  without  even 
attaining  the  objed  for  which  the  facrlfice  was  made. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  faid,  that  the  Hudfon's  Bay  Company  has  public  fales, 
and  that  yet  there  are  liiles  on  account  of  individuals  of  the  fame  articles  the  Com- 
pany import.  But  this  will  form  no  parallel  cafe  as  to  companies  ;  nor  is  there 
any  great  queftion  of  revenue  concerned.  The  only  article  imported  b\  the 
Hudfon's  Bay  Company  is  Furs.  The  fales  of  this  article  on  private  account  are 
alfo  by  auftion  ;  and,  it  is  believed,  confined  to  London.  I'he  wiiole  is  compara- 
tively a  fmall  affair,  and  can  be  of  no  weight  in  the  prefent  queftion. 