

HAVING  concluded  our  remarks  upon  the  "  Propofitions"  and  "  Obfervations'' 
hitherto  brought  under  difcuffion,  we  next  beg  leave  to  fuggeft  fome  other  regu- 
lations growing  out  of  the  general  fubjed  now  under  confideration,  and  of  our 
pafl  correfpondence.  Thefe,  we  truft,  will  be  found  fo  obvioufly  proper  and 
neceflary  as  to  require  no  enforcing  argument. 

26th  Propofition  : — That  no  fhip  fliall  go  from  any  Britiih  colony  to  the  Eafl 
Indies  or  China  without  the  fpecial  licence  of  the  Company. 

27th  Propofition  : — Private  fliips  going  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  India,  to 
fail  direft  from  that  kingdom  thither,  and  from  India  to  that  kingdom,  without 
purfuing  any  circuitous  route. 

a 8th  Propofition  : — Ships  going  from  this  kingdom  to  India  not  to  engage  in 
the  coaiting-trade  of  India,  but  to  be  permitted  to  go  from  one  port  of  delivery 
of  the  original  cargo  to  another,  for  the  full  difcharge  of  it. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  humble  Servants, 

(Signed)         Hugh  Ingus,  Charles  Grant, 

RouERT  Thornton,  Edward  Parry, 

The  Right  Honourable  Jacob  Bosanqukt,  William  Astell, 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  W.F.  ELrniNSTONE,  George  Smith. 

&c.  &c.  &c. 


AT 


aiid  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  17 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  17th  April  1812. 

THE  Committee  took  into  confideration  the  flate  of  the  negotiation  for  the 
renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges,  and  deliberated  maturely  upon 
the  feveral  points  connected  therewith. 

At  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  acth  April  1812. 

The  Chairman  .laid  before  the  Committee  minutes  of  a  converfation  held 
yefterday  evening,  between  the  Prefident  of  tiie  Board  of  Commiflioners  and 
himfelf. 

k  was  unanimoufly  agreed,  that  the  fame  be  fubmitted  to  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors to-day,  together  with  a  minute  thereon,  now  read  and  unanimoufly  approved, 
being  as  follows  ;  viz. 

Lord  BuckinghamOiire  dated,  that  it  had  been  determined  to  preferve  the  mo- 
nopoly of  the  tea  trade  to  the  Company,  but  to  permit  the  private  traders  to  fill 
up  and  aifort  their  cargoes  with  nankeens  and  other  articles,  the  produce  of  China,, 
which  they  would  procure  in  India. 

His  Lordfliip  then  ftated,  that  it  was  the  determination  of  His  Majefhy's  Mi- 
nifters  to  recommend  to  Parliament,  to  permit  private  fhips  to  clear  out  from  any 
port  of  the  United  Kingdom,  but  that  they  fliould  only  be  permitted  to  import 
into  thofe  places  where  the  warehoufing  fyftem  exifted.  Sir  Hugh  IngHs  ftated 
it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  Court  of  Directors  in  the  firfl:  inllance,  and  the  Court 
of  Proprietors,  when  laid  before  them,  would  refill  by  every  means  in  their 
power  a  meafure  fo  fatal  to  the  vital  interefts  of  the  Company  and  to  the  public 
revenue,  as  would  be  the  meafure  of  allowing  the  (hips  of  individuals  to  import 
into  any  place  but  the  Port  of  London  ;  and  that  fituated  as  he  was,  he  ihould 
confider  it  his  duty  to  refill:,  and  recommend  to  the  Court  of  Direftors,  and  ulti- 
mately the  Proprietors,  to  refill  the  propofition. 