

In  confidering  the  terms  propofed  for  the  renewal  of  the  charter,  as  they  would 
ftand,  ftould  the  fuggeftions  I  have  conveyed  to  you  in  this  letter  be  adopted,  you 
will  be  fenfible  of  the  high  importance  of  bringing  to  a  conclufion  an  arrange- 
ment, in  which  the  interefts  of  the  Company  and  the  nation  at  large  are  fo  deeply 
implicated,  with  as  httle  delay  as  may  be  deemed  compatible  with  a  mature  con- 
fideration and  fatisfaftorv  adjuftment  of  the  feveral  claims  and  pretenfions  of  the 
parties  concerned. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 

Gentlemen, 
Your  moft  obedient  humble  Servant, 
To  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  (Signed )  Buckinghamjhire. 

of  the  Court  of  Diredors. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  29th  April  18 12. 

READ  a  letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Com- 
miffioners,  dated  the  27  th  inftant. 

Read  alfo,  and  approved,  draught  of  letter  to  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Com- 
mifTioners,  in  reply. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors,  held  on  Wednefday  the  29th  April 
1812. 

THE  letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commif- 
fioners,  dated  the  27th,  and  read  in  Court  the  28th  inftant,  was  again  read. 

10  The 


20     CORRESPONDENCE  bcttoecn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

The  Chairman  from  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  laid  before  the  Court, 
draught  of  a  propofed  letter  in  reply  thereto  , — 

And  the  fame  was  read,  and  unanlniouily  approved. 

My  Lord,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  29th  April  1812. 

THE  letter  which  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  had  tlie  honour  of 
receiving  from  your  Lordfhip  on  the  27th  inflant,  was  the  day  following  laid  before 
the  Court  of  Direfiors,  and  engaged  their  moil  fcrious  attention ;  it  has  again 
been  confidered  by  them  this  day  ;  and  we  have  now  to  fubmit  to  your  Lordlhip 
the  anfwer  which  they  have  inftrufted  us  to  make  to  it ;  an  anfwer,  which,  from 
having  before  v/ell  reflected  on  the  principal  fubject  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter, 
delivers  their  mature  opinion  ;  and,  as  they  prefume  to  hope,  in  the  leafl  time 
poflible,  being  fenfible,  with  your  Lordfhip,  that  in  the  prefent  critical  period  of 
the  negotiation  all  unneceflary  delay  is  to  be  avoided. 

It  IS  with  extreme  concern  the  Court  find,  that  fmce  the  publication  of  the 
correfpondence  between  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners  and  the 
Court  of  Direftors,  on  the  momentous  queftion  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's 
charter,  His  Majefty's  Minifters  have  been  led  by  the  reprefentations  which  have 
been  made  to  them,  "  to  entertain  an  opinion  that  they  would  befl  confult  the 
"  public  intereft  by  not  confining  the  import  trade  from  the  Eafl  Indies  to  the 
"  port  of  London,"  and  that  they  ftill  hold  this  opinion. 