

It  is  perfe6l:iy  known,  that  for  a  feries  of  years  paft,  fmce  the  Indian  territory 
has  been  loaded  with  an  immenfe  political  debt,  the  Company  have  derived  no- 

furplus 


end  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY. 


2  1 


furplus  from  the  revenues  ;  they  have  carried  on  the  currency  of  tlieir  home 
affairs,  they  have  even  aided  the  political  concerns  of  India  ;  and  above  all, 
they  have  made  good  the  dividends  to  the  proprietors  from  the  profits  on  their 
commerce  ;  and  of  late  years  thefe  profits  have  been  derived  chielly  from  the 
China  trade.  From  the  flill  exillina;  territorial  debts  of  tlie  Company,  and  the  fcale 
of  their  Indian  expenditure,  after  all  endeavours  to  reduce  it,  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors have  no  profpeft  of  pecuniary  acquiiitions,  except  through  the  fame  medium 
of  commerce,  for  many  years  to  come  ;  and,  as  already  intimated,  it  is  the  com- 
mercial profits  of  the  Company  which  enable  them  to  difcharge  the  political 
fundions  afligned  to  them  in  the  management  of  the  Indian  empire.  Without 
this  refource,  or  fome  equivalent  one  not  within  their  power,  the  dividends  could 
not  be  continued,  the  value  of  the  llock  would  diminilh,  and  the  Company  be 
brought  to  a  Hate  of  diffolution. 


■^Cl 


It  is  the  extinftion  or  material  diminution  of  the  commercial  profits,  arifing 
chiefly,  as  we  have  faid,  from  the  China  trade,  that  we  apprehend  from  the 
opening  of  the  out-ports  to  the  returns  of  the  Indian  commerce.  If  this  extinc- 
tion or  diminution  were  to  take  place,  your  Lordfliip  will  doubtlefs  agree  with  the 
Court  in  admitting,  that  the  fatal  confequences  they  contemplate  would  follow  ; 
and  that  after  going  on  a  few  years  on  the  new  plan,  the  Company  would  be  fo 
impaired  in  its  refources,  as  to  be  inadequate  to  the  important  part  allotted  to  it 
in  the  fyftem  of  Indian  adminiftration. 

When  the  Court  of  Directors  thus  view  the  confequences  of  opening  the  out- 
ports,  His  Majelty's  Minillers  will  not  blame  the  anxiety  with  which  they  re- 
fpecttully  contend  againft  that  meafure.  The  duty  they  owe  to  their  conftituents, 
to  their  own  charafters,  and  to  the  public,  requires  them  in  fuch  a  cafe  to  aft 
with  the  greateft  circumfpeclion,  in  order  to  obtain  a  reafonable  affurance  that 
the  terms  of  the  new  Charter  will  be  fuel)  as  will  enable  the  Comp:my  to  go 
on  efficiently  in  the  performance  of  the  political  fundions  it  has  hitherto  dif- 
charged. 

We  do  not  apprehend,  my  Lord,  that  there  is  any  difference  in  principle  oa 
thefe  points  between  His  Majefty's  Minifters  and  the  Court  of  Diredors  j  the 
main  difference  in  refpecl  to  the  queflion  of  opening  the  out-ports  is,  as  to  the 
practical  effects  of  that  meafure.  It  appeared  in  the  conference  we  had  the 
honour  of  holding  with  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  and  your  Lordfliip,  to 
be  his  opinion  that  checks  could  be  devifed  to  prevent  an  indefinite  extent  of 
fmuggling  Tea,  ruinous  to  the  Company,  which  we  fear  from  opening  the  out- 
ports  to  the  Indian  trade  ;  we  have  already  given  many  reafons  for  thinking 
that  the  practice  of  fmuggling  would,  in  fuch  cafe,  be  uncontrollable.  Thofe- 
reafons,  which  need  not  to  be  repeated  here,  we  believe  it  will  be  difficult  for 
the  parties  molt  adverfe  to  the  Company  to  refute  ;  but  the  fubjecl  being  fo  im- 
portant in  the  prefent  dilcuffion,  we  beg  leave  to  add  a  few  more  obfervations 
on  it. 