

READ  and  confidered,  a  Letter  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  Prefident  of 
the  Board  of  CommilTioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India,  dated  the  27th  inftant. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  28th  April  181 2. 

THE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Committee  a  Minute  of  a  Conference  held  on 
Saturday  laft,  which  was  read  and  approved ;  and  the  Chairman  was  defired  to 
lay  the  fame  before  the  Court. 

Mem. — This    Minute    is    contained    in    the    fucceeding   Minutes    of   the 
Court,  No.  54. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredlors  held  on  Tuefday,  the  28th  April  1812. 

THE  Chairman  froin  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  reports  to  the  Courtj 
that  in  confequence  of  the  requefl  contained  in  the  Minute  of  the  20th  April, 
which  was  communicated  to  Lord  Buckinghamlhire,  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer  and  his  Lordfliip  favoured  the  deputation  with  an  interview  on  Satur- 
day the  25th  inftant,  at  which  Mr.  A^allace  was  alfo  prefent. 

At  that  meeting  various  points  belonging  to  the  prefent  negotiation  were 
touched  upon,  but  the  difcuffion  majnly  turned  on  the  important  queftion  of  per- 
mitting the  Clips  of  private  merchants  generally  to  import  goods  from  India  at 
the  out-ports  of  the  United  Kingdom.  The  deputation  urged  every  thing  which 
occurred  to  them  in  fupport  of  the  propofition  of  the  Court  upon  this  fubjecl:,  as 
involving  the  eflential  interefts  of  the  Company  ;  but  they  found  with  regret,  that 
the  impreflions  which  His  Majefty's  Government  had  received  refpeding  it,  fmce 
the  date  of  Lord  Melville's  letter  of  the  2ift  March,  were  not  in  confonance  with 
the  fentiments  of  the  Court  of  Directors.  The  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 
however,  and  Lord  Buckinghamlhire,  esprelled  their  intention  of  communicating 
in  writing  the  judgment  they  had  formed  on  the  fubjefl;  in  queftion,  and  Lord 
Buckinghamftiire  having  accordingly  addrell'ed  a  letter  to  the  Chairman,  and 
Deputy  Chairman,  dated  the  27th  inftant,  that  letter  is  now  laid  before  the 
Court. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  April  27th  1812. 

IN  communicating  to  you  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government,  after 
a  full  confideration  of  the  feveral  points  which  have  been  brought  under  their 
view,  in  confequence  of  the  conferences  and  explanations  I  have  had  with  you 
and  the  deputation,  fmce  I  had  the  honour  of  receiving  your  note  of  the  3d 
inftant,  it  is  unneceflary  for  ine  to  enter  upon  the  difcuffion  of  the  hints  and  ob- 
fervations  which  Iiave  been  the  fubjedl  of  the  correfpondence  between  the  late 
Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Control  and  yourfelves,  as  far  as  thofe  hints  and 
obfervatlons  have  been  fanftioued  by  the  general  Court. 