

As  afupplement  to  this  article,  the  Court  cannot  help  again  fubmitting  to  con-  22.  22. 
fideration  the  earneft  defire  and  hope  of  the  Proprietors  to  be  exonerated  out  of 
the  general  funds  of  the  Company  from  the  payment  of  the  property  tax.  The 
dividends  of  other  pubhc  companies  are  thus  exempted  ;  and  it  is  but  a  fmall  con- 
fideration  in  the  immenfe  concerns  of  the  Company,  from  which  the  proprietors 
have,  on  the  whole,  yet  derived  only  the  ordinary  mterell  of  money  in  return  for 
all  the  hazards  their  property  has  run. 

The  debt  of  which  the  Court  of  Diredors  meant  to  fpeak  in  the  twenty-third  2^.  2', 
propofition  was  the  whole  of  the  Indian  debt,  part  of  which,  to  the  amount  of 
about  feven  millions,  has  been  transferred  to  England.  The  obfervation  of  Lord 
Melville  will  coincide  with  this  propofition  ;  and  the  Court  of  Direttors  can  have 
no  material  objedion  to  his  Lordfliips  provifo  refpefting  the  I'eduQion  of  the  bond 
debt  at  home  to  three  millions ;  but  experience  has  fhcwn  the  inconvenience  of 
contining  within  narrow  limits,  by  parliamentary  regulation,  the  amount  of 
this  debt. 

Confidering  how  probable  it  is  that  private  adventurers  will  defire  to  obtain  a  ^r.  25. 
fupply  of  the  article  of  tea,  m  order  to  be  fmuggled  into  this  country,  and  to 
foreign  parts,  and  confidering  alfo  the  importance  of  not  endangering  the  com- 
mercial intercourie  now  permitted  by  the  Chinefe  to  the  Britiih  nation  through  itS 
long-eftabliffied  organ  the  Eaft  India  Company,  it  is  obvious  that  effectual  provilion 
ought  to  be  made  in  fome  mode  or  other  for  preventing  both  thefe  evils  ;  and  we 
fhall  be  glad  to  hear  any  propofitions  which  wer^i  in  Lord  Melville's  contemplation, 
or  may  be  in  your  Lordlhip's,  as  more  likely  to  fuit  that  end  than  the  fuggeftion 
we  have  offered.  In  the  mean  time,  we  feel  it  incumbent  upon  us  to  requeft 
your  Lordfhip's  attention  to  fome  remarks  on  the  queftion  of  admitting  private 
fliips  to  the  Spice  Iflands.  The  demand  of  all  Europe  for  the  fpices  of  the 
Moluccas  is  fo  limited,  that  one  or  two  of  the  Company's  fhips  may  import  a  fuf- 
ficient  quantity  for  the  fupply  of  it ;  the  divifion,  therefore,  of  this  fupply  among 
the  Ccnipany  and  the  merchants  in  general  of  this  country,  will  leave  fo  little  to 

the 


i6     CORRESPONDENCE  betioccn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

*he  individuals  of  the  latter  clafs,  as  to  form  no  object  worthy  of  long  and  diilant 
enterprizc.  not  to  mention  that  fpiccs  are  now  rifing  up  in  other  parts  of  the  eaft, 
which  renders  thefe iflands  lefs  important  limn  they  have  been.  The  maintenance 
of  the  Molucca  Iflands,  which  produce  no  valuable  co.  .modify  but  fpices,  occafions 
to  the  Company  a  heavy  cxpciife,  and  can  only  be  compejifated  by  a  monopoly  of 
their  trade ;  and  if  private  merchants  are  to  participate  in  that  trade,  they  ought 
alfo  to  hear  a  proportionable  fhare  of  the  charge  of  eftablifliment  in  thofe  iflands. 
But  the  fpice  trade  is  not  the  moft  infercfting  confideration  belonging  to  this 
queftion.  If  m  any  of  the  ifiands  of  the  Ivaltern  Seas  not  belonging  to  the  Com- 
pany, Britifii  fubjefts  were  to  fettle,  (a  thing  which  the  Company,  even  if  armed 
with  legal  powers,  would  find  it  dllTicult  to  prevent  after  th')fe  leas  fliould  be  open 
to  all  the  ihips  of  this  country),  it  would  fecm  impoffible  to  hinder  them  from 
obtaining,  by  one  means  or  other,  a  fupply  of  the  teas  of  China,  for  the  purpole 
of  being  fmuggled  into  Europe.  That  objcft  alone  might  be  tempting  enough  to 
induce  a  fettlement,  where  no  other  circumltancc  was  fufiiciently  inviting  ;  and  if 
from  this  motive,  or  a  concurrence  of  others,  which  might  be  fuppofed,  a  num- 
ber of  Engliflrmen  were  once  to  unite  themfeives  in  that  quarter,  whither  nev/ 
individuals  might  continually  refort,  and  whence  again  they  might  repair  to  all 
the  ports  of  the  Indian  continent,  it  would  fecm  fcarcely  prafticable  to  preferve  the 
efiiciency  of  regulations  formed  either  here  or  by  the  Indian  governments,  for  the 
exclufion  of  unlicenfed  perfons  from  their  territories.  Such  would  be  the  danger 
efpecially  of  any  Britifn  fettlement  in  the  Eaftern  Archipelago  not  fubjefted  to  the 
governinent  of  the  Company,  a  danger  very  ferioufly  to  be  deprecated  ;  and  even 
in  thofe  held  by  them,  as  the  Moluccas,  if  they  were  open  to  all  Britiih  fhips,  it 
may  well  dePerve  confideration,  whether  there  might  not  be  fwine  liability  to  danger 
of  I'he  fame  kind.  On  all  thefe  grounds  it  really  feems  advifable  that  Britifti 
fhips  from  Europe  fhould  not  have  accefs  to  the  Spice  Ifiands. 