

It  is  a  fact  notorious,  tliat  tea  has  been  fmuggled  by  the  way  of  India  into 
this  country,  even  when  the  duty  was  comparatively  finall,  when  the  Indian 
import  trade  was  confined  to  eight  or  ten  Company's  fhips,  and  to  the  river- 
Thames.  How  much  more,  then,  is  fmuggling  beyond  all  bounds  to  be  ex- 
pefted  when  the  fhips  fhall  be  unlimited  in  number  and  fize,  and  may  refort 
to  the  out-ports  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland  ?  This  pracHce  would  be 
much  facilitated,  becaufe  in  the  numerous  Eaftern  iflands  not  fubject  to  any 
European  powers,  where  we  have  faid  tea  might  be  brought  for  Englifh  fhips 
rom  China,  there  is  no  uiage  of  clearing  out  veffels,  or  giving  them  papers  or 
manifefts.  It  would  thence  be  eafy  for  them  to  break  bulk  in  the  paffage 
home,  and  as  they  approached  the  coaits  of  Britain  and  Ireland,  to  put  tea,  as 
well  as  other  articles  chargeable  with  duty,  on  board  of  Ihips  and  cutters 
deftined  either  for  the  ports  of  the  continent,  or  the  remote  coafts  of  Scotland 
and  Ireland,  on  which  for  an  hundred  miles  together,  every  where  acceflible 
from  the  fea,  there  is  fcarcely  a  cuftom-houfe,  and  where  cuftom-houfes  could 
not  be  fufficiently  multiplied.  Veffels  of  very  fmall  fize  being  allowed  in  the 
Indian  trade,  they  could  enter  into  ports  and  bays  little  frequented,  and  run 
(32.)  E  goods. 


22      CORRESPONDENCE  hcttueen  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

goods  to  be  carried  inland,  and  there  difperfed.  In  feme  of  theNorthern  and 
Weflern  ports  of  the  United  Kingdom  we  have  heard  that  collufive  praftices 
between  the  revenue  officers  and  the  fmugglers  are  not  unufual ;  if  this  is  the 
cafe  in  refpeil  to  articles  which  pay  a  comparatively  fmall  duty,  what  would  it 
be  where  the  articles  of  tea  and  Indian  goods  were  in  quellion  ?  Ships  might 
flop  at  intermediate  ports  for  orders,  and  there  fmuggle,  as  thofe  bound  to  the 
Weftern  coail,  at  Cork  and  Falmouth  ;  thofe  to  the  Eaftern  coaft,  at  Falmouth 
and  the  Downs  ;  thofe  goinjr  North-about  on  the  Irifh  and  Scotch  coails. 
Ships  having  feveral  ports  of  difcharge  would  thereby  obtain  facilities  in  fmug- 
gling,  and  the  Itate  of  rehtions  between  this  country  and  parts  of  Northern 
Europe  may  be  fuch  as  to  afford  the  means  of  running  goods  into  thofe  parts 
which  from  their  proximity  may  again  be  able  to  fmuggle  the  goods  into  our 
remote  ports.  In  a  word,  we  are  led  to  appreheiul  that  the  means  and  tempta- 
tion of  fmuggling  tea,  when  an  unlimited  trade  is  permitted  to  India  and  the 
Eaftern  iflands,  mull  be  in  a  very  great  degree  uncontrollable  by  any  checks 
which  His  Majefty'^s  Government  can  in  fuch  circumltances  interpofe  ;  nor  is  it 
to  be  overlooked,  that  a  cluls  of  Indian  goods,  flyled  in  the  revenue  language, 
fro}ytbited,  becaufe  excluded  altogether  as  interfering  with  the  manufadures  of 
this  country,  will  by  all  the  openings  which  the  new  trade  will  produce,  be 
every  where  unavoiclably  brought  into  ufe.  It  is  true,  that  even  if  the  return 
of  India  were  confined  to  the  channel,  as  we  propofe,  fmuggling  might  be 
expeded,  but  certainly  not  in  our  opinion  at  all  to  the  fame  extent  ;  and  had 
we  conceived  otherwife,  the  fame  objeftion  we  now  advance  againft  opening 
the  out-ports,  would  have  been  urged  againft  that  enlargement  of  trade  in  which, 
the  Court  have  acqtnefced,  and  for  the  fame  reafon,  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  the 
Company,  which,  did  His  Majefty's  Minifters  apprehend,  they  would  doubtlefs 
in  either  cafe  have  a  defire  to  prevent,  even  by  retufmg  the  required  conceflions 
to  the  Britifli  merchants. 