

That  the  profeiTed  objeft  for  which  thepropofed  changes  are  to  be  made,  and 
fuch  innnenfe  flicrifices  hazarded,  namely,  the  increafe  of  the  commerce  of  this 
kingdom,  cannot  be  in  any  great  degree  attained,  there  being  no  prafticability  of 
extending,  materially,  the  uie  of  our  manufaftures  among  the  Indian  people;  the 
tonnage  allotted  by  the  Company,  or  afforded  by  Indian  fliips  in  the  management 
of  intlividuals,  for  fuch  exports,  not  having  been  fully  occupied.  Neither  does  it 
appear  prafticable  largely  to  augment  the  importation  of  profitable  commodities 
from  thence,  of  all  which  the  example  of  the  American  trade  to  the  Eaft  is  a 
proof.  Britifh  maimfactures  which  they  could  eafily  have  procured,  making  no 
part  of  it,  nor  their  returns  exhibiting  any  new  articles  ol  importance.  That 
therefore  the  trade  novv'  enjoyed  by  the  Company,  and  individuals,  will  be  the 
only  certain  trade  to  which  new  adventurers  can  have  recourfe.  And  this  will  be 
no  addition  to  tlie  commerce  of  the  country,  but  only  a  transfer  from  one  fet  of 
hands  to  another  ;  lb  that  old  eltablifhments  will  be  fubverted  without  fubftituting 
any  thing  equally  good  in  their  place,  and  to  all  appearance  with  great  detriment 
to  the  Nation,  particularly  in  the  defalcation  of  a  large  part  of  the  duties  now 
coUedted  on  tea  to  the  amount  of  four  millions  fterling  per  annum  ;  for  all  which 
defalcation,  whether  one,  or  two,  or  three  millions,  new  taxes  mult  be  laid  on 
the  people. 

That  the  caufe  of  the  Company  has  been  deeply  injured  by  prejudice,  ignorance, 
erroneous  affumptions,  and  of  late   by   extenfive  combinations,  and  by  unfair 

roprefentation,. 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.   of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  25 

reprefentation,  canvafs,  and  intimidation,  in  all  which  the  merits  and  rit^hts  of 
the  Company,  the  political  intcrefts  of  Britifla  India,  and  of  this  country  as  con- 
nected with  them,  have  been  left  out  of  fight ;  and  the  fingle  object  of  the  exten- 
fion  of  commerce,  an  objed  too  only  of  fpeculation  in  oppofition  to  pad  expe- 
rience, is  the  governuig  principle. 

This  Court,  however,  confidently  hope  that  Parliament  will  not  decide  the  fate 
of  the  Company  on  the  reprefentations  and  demands  of  private  intereds,  but  on 
juft  and  comprehenfive  views  of  national  policy  ;  and  the  Court  muil  alfu  believe 
that  His  Majefty's  Miniflers  are  too  enlightened  and  equitable  finally  to  adopt  any 
meafnre  calculated  to  deftroy  the  commercial  profits  of  the  Company,  and  thereby 
to  difable  them  from  performing  their  political  fundions ;  this  Court,  therefore, 
entirely  approving  both  of  the  firmnefs  which  their  Directors  have  {hewn  in  main- 
taining the  interefts  of  the  Company,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  they  have  in 
t!ie  papers  now  produced  by  them  defended  thofe  interefts,  doth  recommend  it  to 
ihem  to  perfevere  in  the  negotiation  with  His  Majeity's  Miniftcrs  upon  the  fame 
principles,  affured  of  the  determination  of  this  Court  to  fupport  them  to  the 
utmoft  in  maintaining  the  permanence  of  the  Company,  and  the  national  interefts 
which  are  involved  in  their  ftability. 