

It  was  in  the  hope  that  the  opening  T)f  the  export  trade  with  India  to  the  mer- 
chants of  the  City  of  London  and  of  the  out-ports,  whilfl  the  import  was  con- 
fined to  the  Port  of  London,  might  not  be  found  inconfiftent  with  this  principle, 
that  a  difpofition  was  felt  by  the  Government  to  propofe  an  arrangement  to  that 
cff"ea. 

In  confequence,  however,  of  the  promulgation  of  fuch  an  intention,  feveral 
perfons  interefled  in  the  commerce  of  the  out-ports  reprefented  hi  the  flrongeft 
terms,  that  the  propofcd  limitation  of  the  import  trade  from  India,  rendered  the 
extenfion  of  the  export  of  no  value  to  them  ;  and  they  declared  themfelves 
prepared  to  maintain  that  this  limitation  was  not  called  for  by  any  adequate 
motive  of  public  interefl. 

They  urged  their  claim  to  an  equal  participation  in  the  general  trade  to  India, 
and  their  conviftion,  that  the  ground  upon  which  the  exclufion  in  favour  of  the 
Port  of  London  was  defended,  viz.  the  additional  danger  of  fmuggling,  could  not 
be  fupported  ;  and  they  were  fatisfied  that  the  alleged  danger  might  be  obviated 
by  revenue  regulations.  They  alfo  entered  largely  into  the  fubject  of  the  China 
trade,  contending  ftrenuoufly  againfl  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
Charter,  and  ftated  their  reaibns  for  believing,  that  meafures  might  be  adopted 
by  which  that  trade  could  be  open,  without  injury  to  the  revenue,  and  without 
liazarding  the  continuance  of  the  intercourfe  with  the  Emperor  of  China's  do- 
minions. 

The  importance  attached  to  thefe  reprefentations  induced  His  Majefty's  Go- 
vernment  to  revife  the  arrangement  which  had  been  in  contemplation  ;  and 
although  they  did  not  fee  caufe,  under  all  the  circumftances  bearing  upon  this 

queftion, 


-oKt/  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  39 

queftion,  to  alter  the  opinion  they  had  entertained  of  the  propriety  of  continuing 
the  cxifting  rcftrictiong  upon  the  commercial  intorcourfe  with  China,  and  of  pre- 
ferving  to  the  Company  the  monopoly  of  the  tea  tra.de,  they  neverthelefs  felt  that 
the  merchants  belonging  to  the  out-poits  had  eftablillied  a  claim  againfl  an  ab- 
folute  reftriction-of  the  import  trade  to  the  Port  of  London. 

Under  this  impreflion  I  addreflfed  my  letter  to  you  on  the  27th  of  April  ultimo. 

The  obfervations  made  by  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  in  their  reoly  of 
the  29th  of  the  fame  month,  did  not  fail  to  engage  the  ferious  attention  of  His 
Majelty's  Government ;  but  after  the  beft  examination  of  thole  obl'ervations, 
aided  by  all  the  information  they  have  obtained  from  the  Boards  of  Culloms  and 
Excife,  they  are  not  enabled  to  concur  in  the  opinion,  that  the  propofed  exten- 
fion  of  the  import  trade  from  India  would  be  produclive  of  any  great  increafe  of 
fmuggling,  and  certainly  not  to  the  extent  flated  by  the  Court  of  Dircdors. 