

Before  we  difmifsthis  topic,  may  we  be  allowed  to  bring  under  your  Lordfhip's 
infpeftion  a  fuccind  view  of  the  capital  and  interefts  concerned  in  the  Indian  and 
China  trade  from  the  port  of  London. 

There  are  about  fourteen  hundred  commanders  and  officers  belonging  to  the 
fhips  of  the  Ea(l  India  Company,  befides  the  feamen,  who  may  be  about  eight 
thoufand  ;  the  tradefmen  engaged  in  the  fupply  of  the  Company's  (hipping  In  the 
river  Thames  are  about  twelve  thoufand,  and  the  labourers  employed  in  their 
warehoufes  are  about  three  thoufand  ;  all  thefe,  with  their  families  and  depend- 
ants, making  an  aggregate  of  upwards;  of  thirty  thoufand  perfons,  would,  by  the 
removal  of  the  Indian  trade  from  the  port  of  London,  be  generally  reduced  to 
great  diftrefs,  and  many  of  them  become  burthenfome  to  their  parifhes. 

The  capital  now  employed  in  the  Indian  trade  may  be  moderately  computed  as 
follows : 

The  Company's  Capital  Stock  of  ^6,000,000.  at  the  price  at  which 

many  Proprietors  purchafed,  will  amount  to  -               •  af  10,800,000 

Capital  in  Warehoufes         -               -                 .  _            .  1,000,000 

Capital  in  Ships         -             .              .             _  .             ^  3,800,000 

Capital  in  Docks             .              _                 .  .                 .  400,000 

Capital   of  individuals   in    the   Metropolis   may   be  moderately 

eftimated  at         -              -             .               _  .             .  5,000,000 

.5^21,000,000 

The  trade  in  which  this  large  capital  is  employed  produces,  as  we  have  had 
occafion  repeatedly  to  obferve,  an  annual  revenue  to  Government  of  more  than 
four  millions  fterling  ;  and  the  net  faving  to  Government  from  the  prefcnt  mode 
of  colleding  the  duties  may,  we  conceive,  be  fairly  eftimated  at  .^i  50,009.  per 
annum.  By  means  of  direft  and  indireft  taxation,  the  capital  itfelf  and  the  profits 
upon  it,  yield  a  further  lum  of  large  amount  to  Government ;  but  the  produ<5tive- 
nefs  of  the  capital  in  this  refpect  depends  wholly  upon  the  folidity  of  the  bafis  on 
which  it  refts. 

Thefe,  my  Lord,  are  the  fentlments  and  obfervations  which  we  are  directed  to 
communicate  to  your  Lordfhip.  The  refleiflion  upon  them  has,  we  truft,  been 
mature,  though  the  expreffion  of  them,  In  the  fliort  time  allowed  for  the  prepa- 
ration of  this  letter,  may  require  indulgence.  But  we  are  further  fpeciaily  direfted 
to  add,  that  this  is  a  concern  of  too  great  moment  for  the  Court  to  truft  to  its 
own  judgment,  or  to  aft  on  Its  own  refponfibllity  ;  the  Directors  have  therefore 
fummoncd  a  general  Court  of  Proprietors  to  meet  on  Friday  next,  when  the  cor- 
refpondence  with  your  Lordftiip,  Including  this  letter,  will  be  laid  before  them  for 
their  confidcration. 