

And  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  were  requefted  to  wait  on  the  Ri"-ht 
Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiftioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India, 
and  to  communicate  to  his  Lordftiip  the  above  proceedings  of  this  day. 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors  held  on  Tuefday  the  22d  December 
1812. 

THE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  in  obedience  to  their  refolution  of 
the  18th  inftant  the  Deputy  and  himfelf,  on  Saturday  laft,  waited  on  the  Right 
Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  .India, 
with  a  copy  of  the  minutes  of  the  Secret  Court  of  the  18th  inftant. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  the   aSth  December 
1812. 

Read  a  letter  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of 
Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman, 
dated  the  34th  inftant ;   and 

Paragraphs  propofed  to  form  part  of  the  draught  of  a  Letter  to  his  Lordfhip, 
in  reply. 


AT 


^8      CORRESPONDENCE  bet%ueen  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Directors  held  on  Monday  the  28th  Decerabei 
1812. 

MINUTES  of  the  15th,  i6th,  18th,  and  2 2d  inflant,  were  read  and  approved. 

Read  a  letter  from  the  Ri^ht  Honourable  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of 
ConimiiTioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India  to  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman, 
dated  the  24th  inflant ;  alfo. 

Paragraphs  propofcd  to  form  part  of  the  draught  of  a  Letter  to  his  Lordfliip, 
in  reply : 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  24th  December  1812. 

THE  conferences  held  at  this  Board  with  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence, 
having  had  for  their  objecl  the  mod  vmreferved  and  candid  difcuflions  upon 
points  of  the  greatefl  importance,  with  refped  to  the  renewal  of  the  Eafl 
India  Company's  Charter,  and  it  having  been  underftood  that  no  further  fteps 
fhould  be  taken  upon  the  fubjeft  until  a  communication  was  made  by  me, 
in  an  official  fhape,  to  the  Court  of  Direftors,  it  was  not  without  fome  furprife 
that  the  copy  of  their  refolution  of  the  18  th  inflant  was  received  by  His  Ma- 
jefty's  Government,  becaufe  that  refolution,  adopted  under  fuch  circumftances, 
appeared  to  them  to  have  for  its  objeft  an  abrupt  termination  to  all  difcuffion. 

They  cannot,  however,  confider  it  the  lefs  incumbent  upon  them,  through  you, 
as  the  proper  official  channel,  to  bring  before  the  Court  of  Directors  the  princi- 
ples upon  which  the  opinions  I  have  to  apprize  you  have  been  formed,  in  order 
to  prefent  to  the  Proprietors  and  the  Public  a  corred  view  of  a  fubjed  to  which 
fo  much  importance  is  attached. 

I  {hall,  therefore,  convey  to  you  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government 
precifely  in  the  terms  I  fhould  have  done  if  no  intimation  had  been  made  of 
the  refolution  of  the  Court  of  Direftors  of  the  i8th  inflant ;  and  with  that  objeft 
I  proceed  to  inform  you,  that  with  regard  to  thofe  points  to  which  the  attention 
of  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  has  been  chiefly  direfted  at  the  conferences 
held  at  this  Board,  the  principle  uniformly  maintained  as  the  bafis  of  any  arrange- 
ment for  the  renewal  of  the  Eafl  India  Company's  Charter,  viz.  that  the  mer- 
chants of  this  country  have  a  fubflantial  claim  to  as  much  liberty  of  trade 
as  they  can  enjoy  without  injury  to  other  important  national  interefts,  cannot 
be  departed  from. 