

Refolved  unanimoufly.  That  the  thanks  of  this  Court  be  given  to  Randic  Jack- 
fon,  Efq.  for  his  very  luminous  and  excellent  fpeech  this  day  ;  for  the  great  zeal, 
ability,  and  induftry,  he  has  on  various  occafions,  and  particularly  on  this,  dif- 
played  for  the  honour  and  advantage  of  this  Company. 

Refolved  unanimoufly,  That  the  warmeft  thanks  of  this  General  Court  be 
offered  to  the  Chairman,  Deputy  Chairman,  and  Court  of  Directors  of  this  Com- 
pany, for  their  very  able  conduit  in  the  negotiation  with  Government  for  the 
renewal  of  the  Charter,  ahke  evincing  the  molt  luminous  ideas  of  the  bed  interefts 
of  this  Company,  and  their  mod  honourable  condud  in  the  management  of  fo 
important  a  concern. 

The  Court  then  on  the  Ouedion  adjourned. 

AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  the  27th  November  1812. 

THE  Chairman  reponed  to  the  Committee,  that  he  and  the  Deputy  Chairmart 
had  this  morning  a  conference  with  the  Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners, 
on  the  fubjed  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter  ;  at  which  his  Lordfliip; 
declared  it  to  be  the  intention  of  His  Majedy's  Miniders  not  to  abandon  the  pro. 
pofition  they  had  made  for  allowing  adired  trade  between  India  and  the  out-ports 
of  the  United  Kingdom  ;  but  that  the  propofition  might  be  modified,  by  confining 
the  ports  to  which  fhips  fiiall  be  allowed  to  import  goods  from  India,  to  a  number 
lefs  than  that  to  which  the  Warehoufing  Ad  now  extends.  Lord  Buckingham- 
fhire,  however,  was  defirous,  before  refuming  the  correfpondence  relating  to  it, 
that  the  Comnnttee  of  Correfpondence  Ihould  hold  a  conference  with  Lord  Liver- 
pool and  himfelf  upon  the  fubjed. 

The  Chairman  further  dated,  that  in  reply  to  Lord  Buckinghamdiire  the 
Deputy  Chairmain  and  himfelf  declined  making  any  obfervation  at  prefent,  but 
dated  their  intention  to  communicate  the  fubdance  of  his  Lorddiip's  remarks  to  the 
Committee  of  Correfpondence  ;  and  alfo  exprefled  their  wi(h,  that  the  Committee 
might  have  the  honour  of  waiting  upon  his  Lordfliip,  previouHy  to  the  propofed 
conference  with  Lord  Liverpool,  to  which  Lord  Buckinghamdiire  confented. 

The  Committee  in  confequence  refolved  to  ademble  at  eleven  o'clock  on 
Tuefday  next,  for  the  purpofe  of  deliberating  upon  the  fubjed  of  the  above 
communication,  previoufly  to  waiting  upon  Lord  Buckinghamlhire  at  the  hour 
of  two  on  that  day. 

My  Lord,  Ead  India  Houfe,  28th  November  1812. 

WE  have  the  honour  to  acquaint  your  Lordlhip  that  we  have  communicated 
to  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpomience  the  fubdance  of  the  converfation  which 
we  had  yederday  the  honour  of  holding  with  your  Lordfliip,  INIr.  Wallace  and 