

(32.)  G  Mr. 


ib      CORRESPONDENCE  I'efween  PRESIDENT  ef  INDIA  BOARD- 

Mr.  Sullivan,  and  in  which  it  was  notified  to  us,  that  the  opinion  of  Hi&  Majefty's 
Government  remains  unaltered  regarding  the  expediency  of  not  confining  the 
import  trade  from  the  Eaft  Indies  to  the  port  of  London. 

The  Committee  received  this  communication  with  the  deepefl:  concern  and 
regret  ;  its  members  unanimoufly  concurring  with  us  in  opinion,  that  fliould  the 
propofed  extenfion  of  the  trade,  even  to  a  fmall  number  of  the  out-porta  of  the 
kingdom,  be  fanftioned  by  the  Legiflature,  the  meafure  will  be  highly  preju- 
dicial to  the  public  revenue,  injurious  to  the  Eail  India  Company,  and;  detri- 
mental to  the  profperity  of  the  merchants,  manufafturers,  traders,  and  other 
numerous  bodies  intereited  in  the  commerce  with  India,  as  now  carried  on 
through  the  channel  of  the  river  Thames.  The  Committee  being  flill  defirous-of 
an  opportunity  of  renewing  their  reprefentations  to  your  Lordfliip  upon  this 
important  queftion,  before  any  communication  is  made  to  the  Court  on  the  fub- 
jeft,  have  direcled.  us  to  requefl  the  honour  of  a  conference  with  your  Lordfhip 
for  that  purpofe.  Should  it  be  perfeftly  convenient  to  your  Lordfliip  to  receive 
the  Deputation  on  Tuefday  next  at  two  o'clock,  we  Ihall  be  able  to  lay  the  refult 
of  the  conference  before  the  Court  on  the  following  day. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be, 
my  Lord, 
The  Right  honourable  Your  Lordfliip's  moft  obedient 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire,  humble  fervants,. 

&c.  &c.  &c.  (Signed)  Hugh  Inglis. 

Robert  Thornton. 

Sir,  India  Board,  28th  November  18 12. 

I  HAD  the  honour  of  receiving  your  letter  of  this  day,  propofing  that  the 
Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence  fliould  wait  upon  me  at  this  Board  on  Tuef- 
day next. 

I  fliall  be  happy  to  have  the  honour  of  feeing  them  ;  but  as  I  am  defirous  that 
Lord  Liverpool,  and  other  members  of  the  Board,  fhould  be  prefent  at  the  in- 
terview, and  as  I  find  that  twelve  o'clock  will  be  more  convenient  to  them  than 
two,  you  will,  I  hope,  have  no  objedion  to  make  the  appointment  for  the  former 
hour. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 
Your  mofl  obedient  and  faithful  humble  fervant, 
Sir  Hugh  Ing'lis,  Bart.  (Signed)  Buckinghamjhire. 

kc.  Sec.  &c. 


AT  a  Secret  Court  of  DIreftors  held  on  Wednefday  the  2d  December 

l8l2. 

THE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  a  meeting  took  place  yellerday  at 
the  Board,  between  feveral  of  His  Majefty's  Minifters  and  the  Committee  of 
Correfpondence,  upon  the  fubjecl  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
privileges,  when  it  was  agreed  that  no  minutes  fhould  be  then  taken,  in  order 
to  afibrd  the  moft  unreferved  mode  of  carrying  on  the  difcuilion,  at  the  conclu- 
fion  of  which  it  was  underftood,  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters  would  communi- 
cate in  writing  their  fentiments  upon  the  whole  of  the  fubjeft. 