

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors  held  on  Tuefday  the    15th  Decem- 
ber 181 2. 

MINUTES  of  the  2d  inftant  were  read  and  approved. 

The  Chairman  ftated,  that  two  conferences  between  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
and  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence  had  taken  place  fince  the  2d  inftant,  viz. 
on  the  5th  and  12th  inftant,  but  that  he  had  nothing  further  to  communicate,  to 
the  Court  in  confequence. 

AT 


end-  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  27 

AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Diredors  held  on  Wcdnefday  the  16th  Decem- 
ber I  Si  2. 

THE  Court  adverting  to  the  ftatcment  which  the  Chairman  had,  with  their 
approbation,  made  to  the  General  C'ourt  to-day  as  to  the  late  conferences  with 
His  Majefty's  Minifters,  upon  the  fubjeft  of  renewing  the  Company's  exclufive 
privileges ;  and  this  Court  deeming  it  a  proper  mark  of  refpeft  to  His  Majeily's 
Minifters  that  they  ihould  bo  apprifed  of  the  fome  as  early  as  poflible : 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman  were  requefted  to  wait  on  the  Prefident 
of  the  Board  of  Commiflioners  for  the  Aifairs  of  India  to-morrow,  to  communi- 
cate to  his  Lordfhip  what  had  paffed  in  the  General  Court  this  day,  and  to  ftate 
to  his  Lordfliip,  that  the  Court  of  Direftors  continue  decidedly  to  entertain  the 
opinion  which  they  have  formerly  exprefled  to  His  Majefty's  Minifters  as  to  the 
ruinous  confequences  of  admitting  the  imports  from  India  to  the  out-ports  of  this 


kingdom 


'  o 


AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Direftors  held  on  Friday  the  i8th  December 

l8l2. 

THE  Court  having  refolved  itfelf  into  a  Committee  of  the  whole  Court, 
And  being  refumed,  the  following  report  from  the  Committee  of  the  whole 
Court  was  read : 

"  The  Committee  taking  into  confideration  the  prefent  ftate  of  the  negotia- 
"  tion  with  His  Majefty's  Minifters  for  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
"  privileges,  deem  it  to  be  highly  important  that  the  fentiments  of  the  Court  of 
**  Diredors,  upon  the  propofition  brought  forward  for  admitting  the  imports 
**  from  India  to  the  out-ports  of  this  kingdom,  fliould  be  unequivocally  known 

"  The  Committee  therefore  recommend  to  the  Court  to  pafs  a  refolution' 
"  ftating,  that  the  propofition  in  queftion  is,  for  various  reafons  already  fet  forth 
"  in  the  Court's  writings,  pregnant  with  ruin  to  the  affairs  of  the  Company, 
"  inafmuch  as  it  would  render  them  incapable  of  performing  the  functions  allotted 
*'  to  them,  as  well  in  their  commercial  as  in  their  political  capacity ;  and  that  the 
*'  Court  cannot,  therefore,  confiftently  with  their  duty  to  their  conftituents,  re- 
"  commend  to  them  the  adoption  of  fuch  a  propofition." 

And  it  was,  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved  unaniinouily,  That  this  Court  approve  the  faid  report. 