

We  have  the  honour  to  be, 
My  Lord, 
•v"  Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 

(Signed)         Hugh  Inglis,  Edward  Parry, 

Robert  Thorntox,  Charles  Grant, 
The  Right  Honourable  Jacob  Bosaxuuet,      George  Smith, 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfliire,  W.  F.  Eli'Hinstone,  Wm,  Astell. 


&c.  ^*^c.  &c. 


AT 


34        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  c/ INDIA  BOARD 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of 
England,  trading  to  the  Eafl  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  5th  May 
1812: 

MINUTES  of  the  laft  Court  of  the  ift  inflant  were  read.  The  Chairman 
acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  is  met  by  adjournment  for  the  purpofe  of  taking  into 
further  confideration  the  papers  which  were  laid  by  the  Court  of  Directors  before 
the  General  Court  on  the  ift  inftant : 

And  the  Court  having  confidered  the  fame  accordingly, 

It  was,  on  a  motion, 
Refolved  unanimouily.  That  this  C.ourt  has  learnt  with  deep  concern  and  fur- 
prize,that  His  Majeily's  Minifters  have  been  induced  to  change  the  view  they  firft 
entertained  of  the  propriety  of  contining  to  the  Port  of  London  the  returns  of  the 
trade  to  India  now  to  be  permitted  to  all  Britifli  fubjecls.  That  the  meafure  of 
opening  the  out-ports  to  veiTels  of  all  defcriptions  from  India,  comprehending  in 
that  term  the  Eailern  lilands,  appears  to  this  Court  to  be  fraught  with  conl'e- 
quences  ruinous  to  the  Company,  and  all  the  long  train  of  interedis  connected 
with  it,  by  removing  from  the  Port  of  London  the  greater  part  of  the  Indian 
trade  which  it  has  hitherto  enjoyed — by  rendering  ufelefs  many  of  the  expenfive 
eftabliihments  formed  there  for  the  merchandize  and  fliipping  of  that  trade,  and 
throwing  out  of  bread  many  thoufands  of  perfons  who  now  derive  conftant  em- 
ployment from  it — by  deranging  the  practice,  and  frulf rating  the  end  of  Ifated 
public  fales,  which  are  ufeful  and  Important,  both  to  the  country  and  the  Com- 
pany, who  arc  neceilarily  reftrifced  to  this  practice ;  but  above  ail,  by  affording 
facilities  for  the  fmuggiing  of  teas  into  the  ports  and  harbours  of  England,  Scot- 
land, and  Ireland,  to  an  extent  unlimited,  and,  as  this  Court  apprehend,  uncon- 
trollable. That  the  coufequence  of  this  muft  be  the.deftruftion  of  the  Company's 
China  trade,  their  beil  fource  of  commercial  p.roht — the  faihu-e  of  their  dividend 
— the  depreciation  of  theii"  flock  ;  and,  unlefs  a  fund  is  provided  from  fome  other 
fource  for  the  payment  of  the  dividend,  inability  on  their  part  to  condnue  to  per- 
form the  funftions  alTigned  to  them  in  the  government  of  Britifli  India  :  That  if 
the  conftitution  by  which  the  Indian  Empire  is  now  adminiflered  Ihould  thus  be 
fubverted,  the  excellent  i'yftem  of  civil  and  military  fervice  formed  under  the 
Company,  and  maintainable  only  by  fuch  a  body,  will  be  broken  down  j  the 
tranquillity  and  happinefs  of  the  vaft  population  which  that  empire  contains ;  the 
interells  of  this  country  in  Afia,  ?jid  its  conftitution  at  home,  will  be  imminently 
endangered. 