

With  regard  to  thofe  points  to  which  you  have  alluded,  as  requiring  particular 
regulation,  the  Minifters  of  His  Royal  Highnefs  the  Prmce  Re  ;ent  having  fig- 
nified  to  you,  that  confiftently  with  their  fenfe  of  public  duty  they  can  fubmit  no 
arrangement  to  Parliament  that  does  not  include  an  extenfion  of  the  import  trade  ; 
and  the  Court  of  Direftors  having,  with  a  knowledge  of  their  opinions  upon  that 
point,  by  their  Relblution  ot  the  i8th  ultimo,  declined  to  recommend  to  the. 
Court  of  Proprietors  to  agree  to  luch  an  extenfion,  it  would  feem  premature  ta. 
enter  into  details  until  that  queftion  (hall  have  been  finally  determined. 

You  are  apprized  of  the  difpofition  of  His  Majefty's  Government  to  adhere 
to  the  prefent  fyftem  of  adminiftration  in  hidla ;  and  I  am  not  aware  that  if 
circumftances  fhould  admit  of  its  continuance,  it  would  be  neccflary  to  propofe 
any  material  alteration  in  the  exifthig  provifions  for  carrying  it  into  execution, 
except  fuch  as  may  arife  from  the  opening  of  the  trade. 

The  confidence  you  exprefs  in  the  wifdom  and  juftice  of  Parliament  will,  I  am 
perfuaded,  not  be  difappointed  ;  nor  is  it  to  be  fuppofed,  that  in  the  confidera- 
tion  of  this  great  queftion  (to  ufe  your  own  wordsj  "  the  fafety  of  the  Britifh 
"  Enjpire  in  India,  and  the  Britilh  Conftitution  at  home"  will  be  overlooked  either 
by  the  Legiflature  or  the  Minifters  of  the  Crown. 

If  the  government  of  India  cannot  be  carried  on  with  fafety  to  the  Conftitution 
except  through  the  intervention  of  the  Company,  the  propofitions  of  the  Court 
of  Direftors,  whatever  they  may  be,  muft  unconditionally  be  admitted. 

It  will  be  for  Parliament  to  determine  whether  the  nation  is  in  this  refpeft 
without  an  alternative,  or  whether,  if  a  change  of  iyftem  fliould  be  rendered 
neceflary  by  the  decifions  of  the  Eaft  India  Company,  meafures  might  not  be 
taken  for  opening  the  trade,  and  at  the  fame  time  providing  fuch  an  adminiftra- 
tion of  the  government  of  India  as  might  be  found  compatible  with  the  interefts 
and  fecurity  of  the  Britifli  Conftitution.    I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

Gentlemen, 
Your  obedient  and  faithful  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)  Bu<kinghanijhire» 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman 
of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 

AT 


and  CHAIRMAN,  8rc.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  35 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England  tradin? 
to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  jth  of  January,  1813. 

THE  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court  that  it  is  efpecially  fummoned  for  the 
purpofe  of  there  being  laid  before  them  further  papers  refpcding  the  negotiation 
for  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges. 