

You,  gentlemen,  muft  be  aware,  that  from  its  approaching  expiration,  provifion 
muft  be  made,  without  delay,  for  the  future  government  of  India,  and  that  His 
Royal  Highnefs  the  Prince  Regent,  in  his  fpeech  at  the  opening  of  the  prefent 
feffion,  has  called  upon  Parliament  to  make  fuch  provifion. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 
Gentlemen, 
Your  moft  obedient  and  faithful  humble  Servant, 

(Signed)         Buckinghawjhire. 
The  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairman 
of  the  Court  of  Directors. 


AT  a  Secret  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  the  30th  Dec.  18 12. 

DRAUGHT  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefidcnt  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners,  in 
reply  to  his  Lordfhip's  letter  of  the  241!!  infiant,  was  read  and  unanimoufly 
approved. 

AT  a  Secret    Court   of  Direftors,  held  on  Wednefday  t!ie  30th 
December  1812. 

DRAUGHT  of  a  letter  to  the  Prefidcnt  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners,  in 
reply  to  his  Lordfhip's  letter  of  the  24th  inftant,  was  read  and  unanimoully 
approved. 

My  Lord,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  30th  December  181 2. 

WE  were  honoured  on  the  25th  inftant  with  the  letter  wliich  your  Lordihip  was 
pleafed  to  addreis  to  us  on  the  preceding  day,  and  have  laid  it  before  the  Court  ot 
Direftors. 

We  are  inftrufted  by  the  Court  to  acquaint  your  Lordfliip,  that  a  General  Court 
of  Proprietors  of  Eaft  India  Stock  has  been  fummoned,  for  the  fpecial  purpofe 
of  taking  into  confideration  the  important  fubjefts  treated  of  in  your  Lordfliip *s 

letter 


««i  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  0/ The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  31 

letter  ;  and  we  fhall  lofe  no  time  in  fubmitting  to  your  Lordfliip  the  refult  of  the 
deliberations  at  that  meeting. 

In  reference  to  the  firfl:  paragraph  of  your  Lordfliip's  letter,  in  which  the  refo- 
lution  paffed  by  the  Court  on  the  i8th  inftant  is  ftated  to  have  caufed  fome  fur- 
prife  to  His  Majefly's  Government,  as  appearing  to  Iiavc  for  its  objeft  an  abrupt 
termination  to  all  difcuffion,  we  are  defircd  by  the  Court  of  Direftors  refpedlfuliy 
to  offer  the  following  explanation  : 

Your  Lordiliip  is  aware,  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  recent  conferences 
on  the  fubje*;;!:  of  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter,  it  was  agreed  between 
your  Lordfhip  and  the  Deputation  from  the  Court,  that  no  minutes  fliould  be 
taken  of  what  pafled  in  converfation  ;  accordingly  no  particular  communication 
was  made  prior  to  the  receipt  of  your  Lordfhip's  letter  of  the  24tii  inftant,  of 
the  refult  of  thefe  conferences ;  but  an  earneft  defire  having  been  exprefled  by 
thofe  gentlemen  in  the  Direction,  who  are  not  membeis  of  the  Committee  of 
Correfpondence,  to  be  informed  whether  the  diilerences  of  opinion  formerly 
known  to  exift  on  fome  important  points  between  His  Majefty's  Governnient 
and  the  Court  were  in  a  train  of  reconciliadon,  and  the  general  anfwer  which 
we  thought  ourfelves  bound  in  duty  to  give  not  having  tended  to  afi'ord  them  the 
fatisfadlion  they  expefted,  they  deemed  it  proper  that  the  fenfe  of  the  Court 
refpefting  the  queftiou  of  the  Out-ports  fliould  be  formally  notified  to  your 
Lordfhip,  and  in  confequencc-  the  unanimous  refolution  of  the  i8th  was  tranf- 
mitted. 