

This  Court,  however,  confidently  hope  tliat  Parliament  will  not  decide  the  fate 
of  the  Company  on  the  reprefentations  and  demands  of  private  interefl,  but  on 
jull  and  comprehenfive  views  of  national  policy  ;  and  the  Court  mufl  alio  believe 
that  His  Majefty's  Miniflers  are  too  enlightened  and  equitable  finally  to  adopt 
any  meafure  calculated  to  deftroy  the  commercial  profits  o\  the  Company,  and 
thereby  to  difable  them  from  performing  their  political  lun£tions.  This  Court, 
therefore,  entirely  approving  both  of  the  firmnefs  which  their  Diredors  have 
fhown  in  maintaining  the  interells  of  the  Company,  and  of  the  manner  in  which 
they  have,  in  the  papers  now  produced  by  them,  defended  ihofe  interefts,  doth 
recommend  it  to  them  to  perfevere  in  the  negotiation  with  His  Majefty's  Minifters 
upon  the  fame  principles,  allured  of  the  determination  of  this  Court  to  fupport 
them  to  the  utnioft  in  maintaining  the  permanence  of  the  Company,  and  the  na- 
tional interefts  which  are  involved  in  their  ftability. 

Refolved  unanimoufly.  That  the  thanks  of  this  Court  be  given  to  Randle 
Jackfon,  efq.  for  his  very  luminous  and  excellent  fpec:ch  this  day,  to:  the  great 
zeal,  abihiy  and  induftiy,  he  has  on  various  occafions,  and  particulaily  on  this, 
difplayed  for  the  honour  and  advantage  of  this  Company. 

Refolved 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  ^7 

Refolved  unanimoufly,  That  the  warmefl;  thanks  of  this  General  Court  be 
offeied  to  the  Chairmain,  Deputy  Chairman,  and  Court  of  Diredtors  of  this  Com- 
pany, for  their  very  able  condud  in  the  negotiation  with  Government  for  the 
renewal  of  the  charter,  ahke  evincing  the  moft  luminous  ideas  of  the  heft  interert: 
of  this  Company,  and  their  moft  honourable  condud  in  the  management  of  fo 
important  a  concern. 

It  was  then  moved,  and  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  do  highly  approve  the  vigilance,  attention,  and  able 
condud  of  the  Court  of  Diredors,  in  their  negotiation  with  His  Majefty's 
Minifters  for  the  i  enewal  of  the  Charter;  and  that  for  the  purpofe  of  taking  the 
important  fubjed  now  fubmitted  to  them  into  their  moft  ferious  deliberation,  the 
Court  do  adjourn  unto  Tuefday  the  19th  inftant. 

And  the  Court  adjourned  accordingly. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  1 9th  January 
1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  5  th  Inftant,  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Comrt,  that  it  is  met  by  adjournment  for  the 
purpoTe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  papers  laid  before  them  at  their 
laft  meeting. 

The  following  motion  was  then  made,  and  feconded,  viz. 