

We  have  the  honour  to  be. 

My  Lord, 
The  Right  honourable  Your  Lordfhip's  molt  obedient 

the  Earl  of  Buckinghamftiire,  humble  Servants, 

&c.  &c.  &c.  (Signed)  Hugh  Inglis, 

Robert  Thornton, 


AT  a  Secret  Court  of  Dircftors,  held  on  Tuefday  the  5th  January 
1813. 

THE  Chairman  laid  before  the  Court,  a  letter  from  the  Right  honourable  the 
Prefident  of  the  Board  of  Commiffioners  for  the  Affairs  of  India,  dated  the  4th 
inftant,  which  was  read. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  4th  January  1813. 

I  HAD  the  honour  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,  and  proceed  to 
convey  to  you  the  fentiments  of  His  Majefty's  Government,  as  far  as  it  would 
feem  advlfable  under  prefent  circumltances,  to  continue  the  difcuflion. 

•.^(32.)  I  With 


34      CORRESPONDENCE  heiwem  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

With  refpeft  to  your  obfervation,  that  the  reprefentations  which  induced 
His  Majefty's  Government  to  form  their  opinions  upon  the  fubjeft  of  the 
<extenfion  of  the  import  trade,  have  been  withheld  from  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, and  that  your  objedions  to  that  extenfion  have  not  been  "  adequately 
anfwered,"  you  mufl:  allow  me  to  avail  myfelf  of  this  occafion  to  apprize  you, 
that  although  His  Majefty's  Government  have  fhown  a  ftrcng  difpofiiion  to  enter 
into  the  mofl  frank  and  unrefervcd  explanations  with  the  Court  of  Direftors, 
they  have  not  felt  that  it  was  within  the  range  of  their  duty  to  engage  in  a  con- 
troverfy  upon  the  points  at  iffue  ;  that  duty  has  been  fufficiently  difcharged,  in 
ftating,  for  the  information  of  the  Court  ot  Proprietors,  the  conditions  upon 
which  they  were  prepared  to  fubmit  a  propofition  to  Parliament  for  the  renewal 
of  the  Charter,  accompanied  by  fuch  reafons  as  are  conveyed  in  the  communica- 
tions they  have  authorized  me  to  malce. 

I  can,  however,  have  no  difficulty  in  acquainting  you,  that  the  claims  of  the 
merchants  connected  with  the  out-ports  have  not  been  brought  before  Govern- 
ment by  written  documents ;  that  they  have  been  urged  and  difcuffed  at  perfonal 
conferences  with  individuals  interefted  in  their  fuccefs  ;  and  that  you  have  already 
been  informed  of  the  grounds  upon  which  they  were  fupported  ;  but  that  it  doe;; 
not  appear  to  His  Majelty's  Government  that  you  can  be  warranted  in  expedling 
that  they  fliould  give  a  more  particular  account  of  the  arguments  adduced  at  thofe 
conferences. 

I  may  add,  however,  that  as  the  merchants  and  manufaSurers  connected  with 
the  out-ports,  confidering  themfelves  entitled  at  the  expiration  of  the  Charter  of 
the  Eaft  India  Company  to  carry  on  that  trade  from  which  they  had  been  excluded 
for  a  limited  time,  had  entered  into  a  ftatement  of  their  cafe  by  petitions  prefented 
to  Parliament  in  the  courfe  of  the  laft  feilion,  you  may  obtain  from  thofe  records 
that  further  information  which  you  appear  defirous  to  poffefs. 