

That,  with  a  view  to  their  financial  difficulties,  thus  incurred  on  the  public 
account,  the  Direftors,  in  the  year  1803,  apprehending  the  confequcnc.s  of  the 
transfer  of  the  Indian  territorial  debt  to  England,  propofed  methods  to  meet  and 
provide  for  thofe  confequences  ;  but  that  His  Majeity's  Miniilers  refufed  to  for- 
ward thofe  propofitions  to  India,  and  have  not  lubllituted  any  other  proceeding 
for  the  fame  end. 

That  the  Court  appeal  confidently  to  the  following  particulars  from  the  clofe 
of  the  Fourth  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Houle  of  Commons  appointed  in 
the  late  Parliament,  for  a  proof,  not  only  that  the  Company  have  carried  on 
their  affair's  without  any  expence  10  the  finances  of  this  country,  but  that  the 
operations  of  their  fyftem  have  been  in  manifold  uays  beneficial  to  its  interefts. 

ift. — That  fince  1791  Britiih  induftry  has  been  encouraged  by  the  employment 
of  ^£'46, 000, 000. 

2d. — That  the  pi'oduce  and  manufadlures  of  India,  purchafed  with  this  fum, 
together  with  thole  in  China  fold  in  England,  realized  in  fale,  amount  nearly  to 
^140,000,000. 

^d. — That  the  purchafe  of  the  produce  and  manufadlures  of  England  amounted 

to  .l€'29,2CO,000. 

4lh. — That  the  employment  of  Britifti  fhipping,  amounted  to  ^25,000,000. 

5th. — That  the  duties  on  imports  collected  through  the  Company,  at  a  trifling 
expenfe  to  Government,  aniounted  to  ^39,300,000.  and  on  exports  to  ^660,000. 
together  ^£"39, 960,000. 

6th. — That  the  combination  of  thefe  and  other  fums,  producing  ^185,960,000. 
fliows  that  on  an  average  of  the  laft  fcventeen  years  =£'10,900,000.  has  been 
diffufed  in  various  channels  through  the  whole  circulation  of  the  Britifh 
empire,  &c. 

(32.)  L  That 


42      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

That  for  proof  of  the  moral  and  political  benefits  derived  to  the  population  of 
India  from  the  government  of  the  Company,  this  Court  appeals  to  the  Fifth- 
Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  which  exhibits  the  gratify- 
ing piclure  of  a  people  raifed  from  the  loweft  diforder  and  degradation,  to  a  ffate 
of  induftry,  fecurity,  and  freedom  ;  and  that  this  Court  confidently  hopes  the 
improvement  in  the  condition  of  fifty  millions  of  natives  will  not  be  interrupted 
by  the  pernicious  experiments  to  which  the  fanftion  of  Parliament  is  now  fo  loudly 
foiicited. 

That  the  interefts  of  the  Company  are  now  become  fo  interwoven  with  the 
political  and  commercial  fyftem  of  Britain,  that  by  their  fudden  diffolution  the 
credit  and  grandeur  of  this  country  would  receive  a  fhock  which  muji  be  perilous, 
and  might  be  fatal ;  and  that  the  meafures  propofed  by  Government  are  therefore 
anxioufly  to  be  deprecated,  inafmuch  as  they  mail  have  the  effect  of  bringing  the 
Company  to  fpeedy  deftruftion. 