

That  the  difcharge  of  the  political  functions  of  the  Company  depends  on  the 
continuance  of  its  commercial  privileges.  That  the  propofitions  of  His  Majefty's 
Government,  by  giving  a  fatal  blow  to  the  commercial  interefts  of  the  Company, 
will,  if  infilled  on,  eventually  terminate  in  its  political  diflblution  ;  and  that  po- 
litical advantages,  of  the  highefl  importance,  will  thus  be  loll  to  the  country, 
amon<T  which  the  following  deferve  to  be  difl:in£tly  noticed,  as  much  too  valuable 
to  be  facrificedfor  a  trifling  redudion  in  the  freight  of  Indian  goods  to  Europe. 

I, — A  marine  of  100  large  fliips,  containing  a  tonnage  of  103,333  tons,  employ- 
ing i,4Co  officers  and  10,000  ieamen,  of  acknowledged  fkill  a!id  bravery,  and 
which  has  been  feund  ready  and  able  at  all  times  to  rainilter  to  the  national  coii- 
venience,  and  to  augment  the  national  glory. 

2. — An  extenfive  eftablifliment  of  yards,  which  has  often  rendered  large  and 
feafonable  ailiftance  to  the  Royal  Navy,  and  might  in  cafes  of  neceflity  be  made 
available  to  the  national  defence. 

n — The  remittance  of  the  fortunes  accumulated  by  above  3.000  officers  of  the 
Company's  military  fervice,  and  fome  hundreds  of  civil  fervaiws,  which  are  trans- 
ferred to  the  capital,  and  fliinulate  the  induflry  of  Britain, 

That 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  41 

That  in  addition  to  thcfe  confidcrations,  the  liberal  dilburrements  of  the  Com- 
pany for  national  enterprizes,  and  the  meritorious  contributions  of  their  fervice 
to  the  national  fund  of  fcrtngth  and  glory,  are  entitled  to  ajufl  and  honourable 
remembrance  in  the  preparation  of  any  mcafure  which  may  vitally  afTcft  their 
interefts. 

That  connefled  with  this  department  on  the  fubjecl,  is  the  extreme  danger 
to  which,  in  cafe  of  the  Company's  diffolutlon,  the  balance  of  the  conflitution 
would  be  expofei)  by  the  transfer  of  the  Indian  patronage  to  the  Crown,  and 
the  enormous  burden  which  would  be  entailed  on  the  public,  in  fatisfying  the 
claims  of  compenfation  on  behalf  of  the  Company,  and  of  all  the  complicated 
interefts  which  would  be  involved  in  its  fate. 

That  by  the  deftruftion  of  the  Company,  a  vaft  number  of  thofe  proprietors, 
amongit  whom  its  capital  of  twelve  millions  flerling  is  divided,  would  be  reduced 
to  extreme  diltrefs  ;  and  nearly  40,000  perfons,  direftly  employed  by  the  Com- 
pany, with  many  others  indirectly  concerned  in  its  profpericy,  would  be  brought 
to  a  llate  of  abfolute  beggary. 

That  from  the  tenor  of  the  preceding  confiderations,  it  appears  to  this  Court, 
that  no  cafe  of  political  or  commercial  delinquency  has  been  ellablilhcd  againil 
the  Company,  to  juftify  the  ruin  with  which  they  are  threatened,  or  to  tovfeit 
their  claim  to  a  continuance  of  their  Charter ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  their  com- 
mercial management  has  been  frequently  deranged  and  interrupted  by  codiy  enter- 
prizes, to  Vv'hich  they  were  compelled,  on  grounds  of  imperial  policy,  and  which 
no  temporary  poflellion  could  have  induced  them  to  execute ;  that  their  remon- 
ftrances  againil  thefe  undertakings  were  fdenccd  by  reference  to  future  and  diftant 
recompence,  in  the  improved  profpeft  of  permanent  peace,  revenue,  and  com- 
merce, and  that,  by  arguments  which  implied  little  lefs  than  a  pledge  that  their 
privileges  (hould  be  continued,  at  leaft  until  their  indemnity  fliould  be  complete  ;. 
and  that  it  is  manifeftly  unjuft  to  allege  againft  them,  as  a  proof  of  commercial 
mifmanagcmenr,  pecuniary  difficulties  arifing  out  of  this  forcible  diverfion  of  their 
commercial  funds  to  national  purpofes. 