

And  a  debate  having  arifen  on  the  propofed  amendment. 

It  was  moved,  and,  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  the  further  debate  on  the  faid  queftions  be  adjourned  till  Friday 
next  the  22d  inftant. 

And  it  was  then  moved,  and,  en  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  do  now  adjourn  till  Friday  next  the  2 2d  inftant. 

And  the  Court  adjourned  accordingly. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng. 
land  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Friday  the  22d  January 
1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  19th  were  read. 

•  The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  met  by  adjournment,  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  Papers  which  were  laid  before  them 
on  the  5  th  inftant. 

The  Court  then  proceeded  to  take  into  confideration  the  motion  made  at  the  laft 
General  Court,  and  the  amendment  propofed  thereto. 

And,  after  a  debate  of  very  confiderable  length. 
It  was  moved,  and,  on  the  queftion, 

Refolved,  That  the  further  debate  on  the  faid  motions  be  adjourned  till  Tuefday 
next  the  26th  inftant,  and  that  a  General  Court  be  fummoned  to  meet  on  that 
day,  at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  precilely. 

And  then  the  Court,  on  the  queftion,  adjourned  till  Tuefday  next  accordingly. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  26th  January 
1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  2 2d  inftant  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  met  by  adjournment,  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  papers  which  were  laid  before  them 
on  the  jth  inftant. 

■  .        The 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY,  39 

The  motion  made  on  the  19th  inftant,  and  the  amendment  propofcd  (0  be 
made  thereto,  were  read. 

It  was  then,  after  a  debate  of  confiderable  length,  moved,  that  the  words  b 
the  original  motion,  propofcd  to  be  omitted,  ftand  part  of  the  queftion. 
And,  the  queftion  thereon  being  put, 
The  fame  was  carried  in  the  affirmative. 

The  main  queftion  being  then  put, — It  was 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  perceives  with  deep  regret,  that,  after  a  long  cor- 
refpondence  and  difcuffion,  conduced  with  exemplary  firmnefs,  temper,  atid 
ability  on  the  part  of  the  Court  of  Direftoi-s,  and  with  much  difference  of  opinion 
among  the  feveral  Minifters  who  have  reprefented  His  Majefty's  Government 
in  the  difcufHon,  and  clofed  on  the  part  of  His  Majefty's  prefent  Mmifters  with  a 
reference  to  the  Petition  lately  prefentcd  to  Parliament  as  a  ground  of  their  new 
determination,  the  parties  have  at  length  arrived  at  a  point  when  decifion  is  abfo. 
lutely  required  between  the  ruin  of  the  Company  and  the  difappomtment  of  the 
petitioners  againft  their  Charter. 