

ierenues^ 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  5 1 

revenues,  or  for  reimburfement  of  immenfe  fiims  expended  for  the  State  in  mili- 
tary expeditions — funis  very  tardily  acknowledged,  and  not  yet  fully  paid ;  or  to 
enable  the  Company  to  meet  the  transfer  of  Indian  territorial  debt  to  this  country, 
a  debt  not  increafcd  by  their  order,  or  according  to  their  wiih,  though  the  pe- 
titions charge  the  increafe  to  them,  but  fanftioned  by  His  Majcfty's  GovcrnuiL-nt 
and  by  Parliament ;  a  debt  which,  every  intelligent  perfon  knows,  it  never  was  or 
can  be  pofTible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  to  difcharge  out  of  the  Company's 
commercial  funds,  and  therefore  nioft  unjuftly  made  a  ground  of  accufation  againft 
them. 

Fourthly,  The  claim  to  a  full  and  free  Trade,  as  the  right  by  birth  and  inhe- 
ritance of  every  fubjeft  in  the  realm,  and  the  arguments  in  favour  of  extending 
it  to  the  Outports,  are  contained  under  the  fourth  head. 

With  regard  to  the  general  pofition  on  which  the  arguments  are  founded,  little 
need  be  faid.     It  is  an  obvious  principle,  that   men,  living  in  fociety,  mul^  fub- 
mit  to  the  laws  of  the  fociety  and  to  reftraints  upon  their  natural  liberty,  when  the 
public  intereft,  in  the  opinion  of  the  legiflative  authority,  requires  it.    The  Indian 
monopoly  was  at   firft  e'labUfhed,  becaufe  it  was  thought  beneficial   to   the  com- 
mercial interefts  of  the  country.     It  was  long  continued  on   the  fame  principle  ; 
now  it  is  more  a  political  than  a  commercial  queilion.     It  may  be  (hated  thus  : — 
whether  it  be  more  for  the  intereft  of  the  nation  to  maintain  the  Indian  empire, 
under  the  fyftem  which  has  hitherto  preferved  and  improved  it, — a  fyftem  greatly 
relaxed  as  to  the  trade  with   India,  and  which   has   alfo  preferved  a   lucrative 
commercial  intercourfa  with  China, — or  to  adopt  a  fyftem  of  entirely  free  com- 
mercial communication  with  both  countries  at  the  hazard  of  lofmg   that  empire 
and  the  China  trade,  or  of  rendering  the  tranquillity  and  retention  of  the  one, 
and  the  enjoyment  of  the  other,  lefs  fecurc.     Until  this  qneftion,  or  one  reduced 
to   ftill  lower  terms,  namely,  whether  it  would  be  prudent,  for  the  fake  of  the 
obj.e6t:  in  yiew,  to  run  any  hazard  where  the  ftake  is  fo  great,  is  folvcd  in  favour 
of  an  open  trade,  the  plea  of  natural  inherent  right  has  no  title  to  be   heard. 
No  fuch  folution  has  yet  been  produced.     It  has,  on  the  contrary,  been  fliewn, 
that  dangers  and  difadvantages,  both  in  the  Eaft  and  at  home,  would  attend  the 
opening  of  the  Trade  ;  but  it  has  not  been  fliewn,  that  any  meafures  which  have 
been  fuggefted  as  preventives,  would  be  at  all  eflectual.     No  adequate  provifion, 
therefore,  againft  thofe  dangers  and  difadvantages  is  yet  propofed  ;  hence  it  may 
fairly  be  prefumed,  none  has  been   found.     But,  until   fuch  a  remedy  is  difco- 
vered,  the  prefent  fyftem  ought  not  to  be  overturned.     The  opening  ol  the  Out- 
ports would,  according  to  the  unanfwered  reafonings  of  the  Court,  have  this 
effect.     The  opening  of  a  part  of  the  Outports   would    lead  to  the  fame  effeft, 
though,  perhaps,  by  a  fomewhat  flower  progrefs  ;  for  it  would  immediately  re- 
duce  and    derange    the  periodical  public    fales   of  the  Company,  which  is  the 
mafter  wheel  in  the  mechanifm  of  their  Import  Trade.     His  Majefty's  Minifters, 
in  not  propofing  to  open  all  the  Outports,  botli  admit  the  contingency  of  danger 
from  fuch  a  meafure,  and   fet  afide  the  argument  of  univerfal  uiherent  right ; 
but  it  remains  utterly  unproved,  that  danger  would  not  refult  from  opening  even 
a  few  Outports,  efpecially  if  the  Export  Trade  is  allowed  to  all  J  and  that  after 
any  had  been  fo  privileged,  which  would  be  in  effecl  a  monopoly  againft  the  reft, 
thofe   others  would  never  be  quiet,  until  they  alfo  were  admitted ;  fo  that  the 
whole  of  the  danger  will  follow  from  the  firft  flep,  and  ought  to  be  contemplated 
accordingly.     It  may  juft  be  obferved,  that  the  quality  afcribed  to  certain  coun- 
tries, as  giving  the  petitioners  more  particularly  a  right  to  a  free  Trade  with  them; 
the  quality  of  having  been  "  acquired  and  maintained  by  the  efforts  and  valour 
"  of  the  forces  of  His  Majefty,"  properly  appertains  neither  to  Hindoftan  nor  to 
China,  and  that  the  ta-ritories  held  by  the  Company  were  acquired  by  undue 
^xclufive  powers  and  privileges  received  from  the  legiflature. 