

9th,  That  the  imagined  hardlhip  of  depriving  the  Company  of  the  only  lucra- 
tive branch  of  their  trade,  that  to  China,  will  be  alleviated  by  the  wealth,  influ- 
ence, knowledge,  and  experience,  which  in  their  united  capacity  they  will  ftill  be 
enabled  to  oppofe  to  the  unaffifted  efforts  of  private  merchants  : — that  if,  indeed, 
the  Company  can  carry  on  trade  to  greater  advantage  than  the  private  merchant, 
■they  have  nothmg  to  fear,  they  v/ill  reap  their  merited  reward  by  the  benefit  of 

competition  j 


end  CHAIRMAN,  kc.  r/ The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.     ^      4^ 

cempetition ;  and  without  competition  neither  would  commerce  have  rifen  to  its 
prefent  ftandard,  nor  will  it  increafe  to  bear  the  incceafing  expenccs  of  the  nation, 
^nd  with  refpeft  to  the  danger  of  exccfiive  fpcculation,  it  is  faiil  by  Glafgow  to 
be  imaginary,  becaufe  the  enteiprize  of  individuals  is  uniformly  limited  by  their 
means  and  fuccefs  ;  becaufe  any  evil  of  this  nature  is  temporary,  and  checks  itfelf ; 
and  that  the  -very  uorjl  ihat  can  cccur  in  the  event  nf  the  abandonment  of  the  trade 
by  the  Public,  would  be,  that  7iuiitcrs  luould  again  return  to  their  prefent  Jiate.  On 
all  the  grounds,  therefore,  flated  in  the  Petitions,  they  in  general  require  a  full 
and  entire  freedom  of  trade  tj  the  Eaftviird  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  including 
China,  and  all  the  countries  within  the  Charter  of  the  Eall  India  Company  ;  and 
for  the  means  of  indemnifying  or  remunerating,  the  claims  of  the  Company,  one  peti- 
tion propofes,  "  a  fair  and  equal  impofi  on  the  trade  in  quefiion.'" 

Your  Committee  having  thus  fubmitted  an  abftracl:,  under  different  heads,  of 
the  contents  of  the  petitions,  in  which  abftrad  they  are  perfuaded  nothhig  mate- 
rial is  omitted,  will  now  proceed  to  offer  fome  obfervations  on  each  of  thofe  heads. 

And  firft.  With  regard  to  the  doftrine  of  monopolies  in  general,  yoiu'  Com- 
mittee do  not  conceive  that  they  are  much  called  upon  to  enter  jnto  any  difcuffion 
of  it ;  becaufe  what  is  termed  the  monopoly  of  the  Eafl  India  Company  is,  as  it 
now  exifts  and  has  long  exiited,  an  inftitution  of  a  fmgular  nature,  formed  upon 
principles  peculiar  to  itfelf,  not  merely  or  chiefly  for  the  purpofes  of  trade,  and 
muff  be  examined  with  reference  to  the  ends  of  its  inftitution,  and  the  importance 
of  thofe  ends,    which  will    be   the  fubjeft   of  the   next  article.     In  the  mean 
time,  it  may   be   obferved    upon  this    firft    head,  that  the  ablefl  writers  upon 
political  economy,  and   the  moft  ftrenuous  againft  monopolies,  have  not  con- 
demned them  fimply  and  univerfally,  as  moft  of  the  Petitions  now  in  queftion  do. 
Even  Dr.  Adam  Smith  acquiefces  in  the  eftablilhment  of  the  Chartered  Banks 
:of  England  and  Scotland,  which  are  a  fpecies  of  monopoly;  and  he  praifes  the 
AQ.  of  Navigation,  which  is  founded  on  the  principle  of  exclufive  privilege.     He 
admits  alfo  the  propriety  of  a  temporary  monopoly  of  new  machines  and  new 
books  ;  and  what   is  more   immediately  to   the  prefent  purpofe,  he   grants,  in 
agreement  with  Montefquieu  and  others,  as  fome  of  the  petitioners  feem  alfo  can- 
didly to  allow,  that  "  when  a  Company  of  Merchants  (to  ufe  his  own  words) 
"  undertake,  at  their  own  rilk  and  expenfe,  to  eftablifli  a  new  trade  with  fome 
*'  remote  and  barbarous  nation,  it  may  not  be  unreafonable  to  incorporate  them 
*'  into  a  joint  ftocls.  Company,  and  to  grant  them  a  monopoly,  in  cafe  of  their 
*'  fuccefs,  for  a  certain  number  of  years.     It  is  the  eafieft  and  moft  natural  way 
"  in  which  a  State  can  recompencc  them  for  hazarding  a  dangerous  and  expen- 
"  five  experiment,  of  which  the  Public  is  afterwards  to  reap  thfe  benefit."     But, 
even  in  this  propofition,  it  may  be  obferved,  that  the  interefts  of  the  two  parties, 
the  Company  of  Merchants  and  the  Public,  feem  fcarcely  to  be  equally  cared  for. 
The  privilege  given  by  the  State,  is  a  privilege  for  its  own  benefit,  which  is  to  coft 
it  nothing,  fhould  the  experiment  fail ;  and  of  which  it  is  to  enjoy  the  permanent 
advantage,  if  the  experiment  fucceed.     It  is  fafe  from  lofs  ;  and,  befides  its  fiiarc 
of  what  prefent  advantage  there  may  be,  is  to  have  ultimately  the  fee  fimple  of 
all  the  gain  that  may  refult.     Undoubtedly,  in  this  cafe,  tiie  term  cf  enjoyment 
.by  the  merchants,  after  .all  the  feafon  of  hazard  and  viciffitude  is  paft,  fliould  be 
ample  ;  and  it  were  to  be  wilhed,  that  thofe  who  are  now  fo  eager  to  take  gra- 
■  tuitous  poffeffion  of  all  the  commercial  eftabliihments  formed  at  fuch   immenfe 
rifks  and  expenfe  by   the  Eaft  India  Company,  would  confider  more  equitably 
than  the  language  of  their  petitions  docs,  the  fair  claims  of  a  body,   even  if  re- 
:garded  merely  in  a  commercial  light,  who  have  hitherto  been  working,  through 
.a  long  feries  of  time,  of  difficulties  and  dangers,  to  the  vaft  benefit  of  the  nation, 
.^hilft  their  own  fair  compenfation  yet  remains  to  be  obtained. 