

But 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  49 

But  it  ought  to  be  again  and  again  prefTed  upon  the  public  attention,  thai  th  e 
firft  and  great  objed  in  any  new  arrangement  for  India,  is  not  commercial,  but 
political  ;  and  that  the  fafe  and  beneficial  adminillration  of  that  empire,  is  a  con- 
fideration  paramount  to  all  others.  No  one  has  denied,  cither  that  the  Company 
have  conducted  and  do  coiulud  the  adminillration  to  the  great  improvement  of 
the  fecurity  and  happincfs  of  the  vaft  population  that  empire  contains,  or  that  the 
government  of  it  fhould  remain  with  them,  and  confcqucntly  that  the  means  requi- 
fite  to  enable  them  to  continue  to  execute  fo  great  a  truft,  fliould  alfo  be  afforded. 
The  nature  and  extent  of  thofe  means  form,  therefore,  the  precife  quedion  now 
at  illue  ;  but  on  this  important  point,  as  has  been  already  intimated,  the  petitions 
in  general  are  quite  filent,  and  the  propofitions  contained  in  them  go  to  deprive 
the  Company  wholly  of  thofe  m3ans,  particularly  the  monopoly  of  the  China 
trade,  the  reafons  for  continuing  which  will  be  explained  in  a  fubfequent  head. 

With  regard  to  the  effects  of  the  monopoly  on  the  manufaitures,  trade,  and 
other  interefts  of  this  country,  if  any  thing  faid  in  thefe  days  to  the  difcrcdit  of 
the  Company,  could  occafion  furprile,  it  would  be  the  reprefentatiojis  given  in  the 
petitions  on  that  head.  The  Company  are  accufed  of  obftructing  the  export  of 
the  manufaftures  of  this  country,  even  by  fome  (v/ith  an  honourable  exception 
of  the  reft)  of  thofe  Woollen  manufadurers  who  have  owed  their  chief  employ- 
ment to  the  Company's  commiffions,  continued  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation, 
under  a  certainty  of  deriving  no  profit  from  the  exported  article. 

Of  thofe  "  undeniable  documents,"  by  wiiiehone  of  the  petitions  in  an  autho- 
ritative ftyle  affirms,  '•'  it  is  proved,  that  if  the-  trade  be  allowed  to  remain  under 
"  its  prefent  reftrittions,  it  will  languifh,  decay,  and  pafs  into  the  hands  of  other 
"  States  ;  that  the  monopoly  mud,  if  continued,  diminifli  the  refources  of  pri- 
"  vate  wealth  and  of  national  revenue  j"  your  Committee  have  never  heard, 
and  they  cannot  conceive  that  any  fuch  documents  exift.  It  is  more  probable 
that  the  petitioners  have  put  their  own  fenfe  upon  the  ftafements  of  the  Company, 
which  furnifli  the  moft  authentic  materials  in  this  cafe,  and  if  fairly  examined, 
with  a  reference  to  other  relative  circumftances,  will  lead  to  conclufions  diredly 
oppofite.  The  fubjefl:  of  the  American  trade  to  India,  which  feems  chiefly  al- 
luded to,  will  be  difcuffed  in  the  fequel.  That  trade,  as  will  hereafter  more  fully 
appear,  has  owed  its  incrcafe  effentially  to  the  ftate  of  war  in  which  this  nation 
has  been  placed  for  a  long  feries  of  years  part.  If  the  American  trade  with  India 
were  ftill  going  on,  a  much  eafier  and  jufter  remedy  for  the  alleged  evils  of  it 
could  be  found,  than  the  extindion  of  the  Company's  remaining  commercial 
privileges.  But  thefe  heavy  forebodings  are  pronounced,  when  America  and 
every  European  nation  (the  diftrcffed  one  of  Portugal  excepted)  are  actually 
wholly  excluded  from  the  Indian  feas. 