

Thofe  dangers  were  contemplated,  upon  the  fuppofition,  that  only  the  opening 
of  the  Indian  trade  v/as  in  queftion  ;  and  in  this  way  your  Committee  will  now 
eonfider  them,  referving  to  a  future  article  fome  remarks  on  the  ftill  greater 
danger  of  fmuggling,  which  would  follow,  if  the  China  monopoly  were  abo- 
Hfhed  ;  and  which  would  be  experienced,  whilft  our  merchants  were  permitted  to 
Vifit  China  at  all.  It  is  from  the  facilities  of  fmuggling  tea,  that  fliips  cleared 
out  for  or  from  India,  would  find  in  the  Eaftern  Iflands,  in  the  voyage  home,  and 
on  the  coafts  of  Scotland  and  Ireland,  that  the  Court  have  apprehended  the  chief 
dangers  would  arife.  In  the  Eaftern  lilands  there  are  no  Cuftom-houfes,  clear- 
ances, or  manifefts.  There  are  great  ranges  of  coafts  in  the  remoter  parts  of  the 
United  Kingdom,  where  there  is  no  Cuftom-houfe  :  bulk  might  be  broken,  and 
no  detedion  follow  where  the  fiiip  fliould  afterwards  be  regularly  entered.  It 
does  not  in  the  leaft  follow,  that  thefe  evils  might  not  happen,  though  it  fliould 
be  true,  that  rhe  taxes  on  Weft  Indian  and  American  commodities  are  fafely  col- 
lefted  ;  for  thefe  comm.odities  come  generally  in  very  large  unwieldy  cafks  or 
packages,  are,  in  proportion  to  their  bulk,  of  much  lefs  value  than  Tea,  which 
is  alfo  packed  in  fmall  portable  cafes,  and  they  come  from  countries  abounding 
with  regular  Cuftom-houfes,  whence  they  cannot  fail  without  manifefts  and  clear- 
ances ;  yet  with  all  thefe  fafeguards,  your  Committee  are  credibly  informed,  that 
th?  Am.erlcans  find  means  to  fmiiggle  Tea  into  this  country.  But,  even  fuppofing 
fhips  came  direft  to  an  Outport,  without  having  broken  bulk,  what  comparifor^ 
is  there  between  the  collection  of  duties  at  any  port,  provincial  or  metropolitan, 
and  the  collection  of  tea  duties  with  perfedl  certainty,  facility,  and  a  very  trifling 
expenfe,  at  the  India  Houfe  ?  The  objeQions  ftated  at  large  in  the  Court's  letters, 
your  Committee  b.eg  leave  to  repeat,,  remain  without  any  found  anfwer  j  and  it 

is 


and  CHAIRMAN,  Sec.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  ^i, 

Is  extremely  material  to  obfervc,  tliat  file  opinions  maintaiiirtl  in  them,  on  this 
fubjeft,  are  corroborated  by  the  reports  which  the  Boards  of  Cullonis  and  Excife 
have  made  to  His  Majelly's  Minilters,  refpcding  the  danger  that  would  arife  to 
the  revenue  from  the  adoption  of  the  new  fyltem  j  a  danger  v.hich,  in  their 
judgment,  would  be  inevitable. 

The  third  argument  urged  in  the  petitions,  is  taken  from  the  necefiity  of  fe- 
curing  an  equality  with  foreigJi  nations,  which,  it  is  faid,  the  fuperior  economy 
and  difpatch  at  the  Outports  will  do.  If  this  alleged  advantage  of  the  Outport.s 
were  admitted,  it  would,  in  the  opinion  of  your  Committee,  weigh  but  little  in 
the  general  queflion.  The  diiterence  cannot  be  mat  .-rial  in  itfclf,  and  its  effed 
Uttle,  in  a  trade  fo  unlikely  to  become  of  any  magnitude. 