

Upon  the  fame  ground  of  natural  inherent  right,  and  of  the  necefTity  of  the 
€xercife  of  that  right,  as  effential   to  the  maintenance  of  the  manufactures  and 
commercial  profperity  of  the  country,  is  placed  the  clainr  of  the  Outports  to  a 
iiree  importation  of  goods  from  India  and  China.     Under  the  fourth  bead,  there- 
fore, 


5 a      CORRESPONDENCE  ktic-een  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

fore,  your  Committee  have  colleiSVed  the  ftrength  of  the  arguments  contained  in 
the  petirions  in.  fupport  of  this  claim  ;  arguments  to  which  the  Prefident  of  the 
India  Board  was  pleafed  to  refer  the  Court.  The  argument  of  inherent  right  has 
been  ah-eady  confidered  :  the  other  arguments,  which  maybe  given  in  the  words 
of  the  Giafgow  petition,  are,  "  That  the  confinement  of  the  Indian  imports  to 
*'  the  port  of  London  would  be  unnecefl'ary,  impolitic,  and  unjult :  unneceffary 
"  becaufe,  firft,  the  ideal  difficulty  of  collefting  the  taxes  is  fully  obviated,  by  the 
."  known  fafety  with  which  the  duties  are  levied  on  articles  of  Wefl;  Indian  and 
"  American  produce  :  and  fecondly,  becaufe  the  duties  may  be  collefted  with 
"  greater  eafe  and  lefs  lofs  from  pilferage  in  the  Outports  ;  unjuft,  becaufe  every 
'•  mercantile  place  in  the  kingdom  is  entitled  to  the  fame  privileges ;  and  im- 
''  politic,  becaufe  the  fuperior  economy  and  difpatch  that  prevail  at  the  Outports 
"  are  requifite  lo  fecure  an  equality  with  foreign  nationSi" 

On  the  fecond  of  thefe  three  arguments  it  may  be  obferved,  that  the  claim  of  all  the 
Outpoi-ts  to  a  participation  in  the  Indian  trade,  as  matter  of  equal  right,  (lands  upon 
the  fame  principle  as  the  claim  6f  all  individuals,  which  has  jufc  been  confidered, 
and  muft  be  determined  in  the  fame  way  and  order;  it  therefore  demands  no 
farther  notice  here.  If  it  fliall  be  judged,  that  no  larger  inrereft  than  that  of  the 
Outports  oppofes  their  claim,  then,  and  then  only,  will  it  be  entitled  to  attention. 

The  firft  argument  is  ;  the  known  fafety,  and  greater  facility,  with  which  duties 
are  collected  at  the  Outports  Whether  that  facility  be,  in  fact,  greater  or  not, 
it  is  needlefs  to  examine.  If  it  were  indeed  fo,  it  would  ftill  leave  undecided  a 
much  more  important  queltion  ;  the  danger  of  fmuggling.  On  that  danger  the 
Court  have  enlarged  in  their  Letters  to  the  Prefident  of  the  India  Board,  of  the 
13th  January  1809,  and  15th  and  29th  of  April  181 2.  Your  Committee  can- 
not but  hope,  that  thefe  Letters  will  be  perufed  by  Members  of  Parliament,  as 
their  contents  are  material  to  a  juft  confideration  of  the  fubjeft.  The  Court  have 
refpeftfully  ftated  to  Lord  Buckinghamihire,  that  no  adequate  anfwer  has  been 
given  to  thefe  letters  :  his  Lordfhip,  in  addition  to  what  he  has  himfelf  faid,  has 
referred  the  Court  to  the  petitions.  The  argument  jufl:  quoted,  is  the  mofl  dired 
and  indeed  the  only  one  to  the  point  v.'hich  your  Committee  have  difcovered  in 
all  the  petitions.  But  it  does  not  meet  the  main  objections  of  the  Court,  taken 
frorri  the  danger  of  finuggling  ;  they  remain  untouched  and  unnoticed. 