

Fifthly,  On  the  China  monopoly.  Befides  the  connexion  already  noticed  of 
the  China  monopoly  with  the  policy  of  our  Indian  fyltem,  the  uniting  of  this 
trade  under  one  head  is  neceflary,  both  on  account  of  the  extreme  caution  re- 
quired in  the  conduct  of  our  intercourfe  with  fo  jealous  and  inflexible  a  govern- 
jnent  as  the  Chinefe,  and  of  the  fecuritv  of  the  large  revenue  derived  by  the 
(32.)  O   '  Britifli 


54      COR  RESPONDENCE  hekoean  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

Brlrifh  public  from  the  branch  of  commerce.     The  habits  of  the  Chinefe  nation 
ar3  known  to  be  as  fixed  as  tiicy  are  peculiar  ;  their  government  is  a  pure  defpot- 
ifm,-  jealous  of  the  fmalleft  tendency  to  infubordination  or  innovation  ;  the  people 
are  i^uided  by  a  principle   of  implicit  fubmiflion  to   their  faperiors ;  and  both 
government   and  people  hold  all  diforderly  conduct   in  the  utmofc  abhorrence. 
FojTfign  trade  is  held  in    low  eflimation,  and   the  commerce  which  Europeans 
have  been  permitted  to  carry  on  is  fubjefted  to  manifold  and  rigorous  reflriftions, 
intendea  to  prevent  the  intermixture  of  ftrangers  with  the  natives,  and  to  guard 
.  againft  their  entrance  into  the  interior   ef  the  country,  and  hazard  of  their  be- 
coming, in  any  way,  troublefome  to  the  government.     The  fiiips  of  European 
nations  are  allov.'ed  to  refort  to  only  one  port  in  an   empire  of  fo  vaft   extent ; 
and  there  even,  no  ftranger  is  permitted  a  conftant  refidence  without  credentials 
from  the  fovereign  of  the  ftate  to  v/hich   he  belongs.     When  a  faftory  is  efta- 
biifhed,  for  which   one  fpot   is  fixed,  the  factors  are  confined    to  very  narrow 
precinfts  around  it ;  they  dare  not  make  an  excurfion  beyond  thofe  precinfts  into 
the  open  fields,  nor  enter  into  the  clofely  adjoining   city  of  Canton.     The  go- 
vernment of  China  does  not  allow  to  its  own  fubjects  freedom  of  trade,  or  unre- 
flrained   intercourfe  with  foreigners  :  both  are   interdifted  ;  and  the  relfriftions 
impofed,  together  with  the  fumptuary  laws  in  force,  oppofe  the  ftrongefl:  obftacles 
to  any  great  extenfion    of   the   fale  of  our  manufactures   among  the   Chineie. 
The  trade  with  Europeans  is  given  in  monopoly  to  a  company  of  ten  or  twelve 
•  Chinefe  merchants,  ftyled  the  Hong  ;  and  thefe  merchants  become  refponfibie 
to  the  government  for  the  conduft  of  the  foreigners  with  whom  they  deal.  After 
the  fhips  are  difpatched  lor  the  feafon,  the  factors  are  obliged  to  witlidraw  to  the 
Ifland  of  Macao,  a  low  Portuguefe  fettlement,  till  the  fliips  of  next  year  arrive. 
And  with  refpeA  to  the  fliips,  they  are,  whilil  in  harbour,  under  the  controul  of 
the  Chinefe  officers,  who  are  empowered   by  law  to   take  the  cuflody  of  their 
guns.     And  if,  in  the  intercourfes,  and  consequent  frays,  between  the  natives  and 
our  Englifli  failors,  one  of  the  former  happens  to  meet  his  death,  by  accident,  from 
an  unknown  hand,  it  may  produce,  the  mod  ferious  confequences  ;,  for  the  Chi- 
nefe government  has  been  known,  in  fuch  a  cafe,  to  claim   the  life  of  an  Euro- 
pean in  expiation ;  and  for  an  occurrence  like  this  the  Company's  eftabhfhment 
is  held  refponfibie,  and  their  trade  liable  to  be  flopped.     With  a  government  fo 
abfolute  in  requiring  implicit  conformity  to   its  peculiar  law  and  ufages,  and  fo 
marlced  with  pride,  fufpicion,  and  defpotilm,  Britifli  fubjects  have  the  utmoft  dif- 
ficulty to  act ;  and  the  Company's  agents  frequently  fubmit  to  caprices  and  hu- 
miliations, to  which  the  honour  of  a  Sovereign  would  not  allow  any  reprefentative 
of  his  to  yield.     Is  it  therefore  in  the  leaft  probable,  that   the  Chinefe  would 
tolerate  the  indifcriminate  ingrefs  of  numberlefs   unconnefted,  unaccredited  Eu- 
ropeans ?  or,  if  they  did  give  them  admiffion,  that  their  multiplied,    irregular, 
deiultory  vifits  and  intercourfes  with  the  natives,  would  not   be  attended  with 
diforders  ;  with  violations  of  Chinefe  ufages  (with  fmuggling  for  inftance.  a  high 
offence  in  China),  which  would  foon  end  in  the  utter  expulfion  and  exclufion  of 
thefe  ftrangers,  or  in  fuch  injuflice  and  humiliating  punifliments,  on  the  part  of 
the  Chinefe  government,  as  might  call  on  the  honour  of  this  country  to  demand 
redrefs  ?     The  fplendid  embaify  which  His  Majefty  fent  by  Lord   Macartney  to 
the  Emperor  of  China,  had,  with  all  its  impofing  attendant  circumftances,  and 
all   the  fkilful  addrefs  of  that  nobleman,  no  influence   to  induce  the  Chinefe  go- 
vernment to  relax  from  their  rigid  reftridtions  on  tile  commerce  and  intercourfe 
of  Britifli  fubje£ts  with   its  territories ;  and  it  may  be  fafely  concluded,  that  all 
which  that  government  mufl  have  lince  heard  refpefting  the  revolutions  in  Eu- 
rope, will  make  it  adhere  fiill  more  obllinately  to  its  jealous  precautionary  fylteni. 
To  all  thefe  probable  dangers,  the  petitioners  oppofe  nothing  but  the  honourable 
charadter  of  Britons,  and  the  example  of  the  American  adventurers   to  China. 
Frail  dependence ! — Britiih  failors  carry  to  every  fhore  their  habits  of  excefs,  as 
is  too  often  found  in  the  Company's  fliips,  notvv^ith Handing   the  flrifl:  difcipline 
eflabliftied  in  them.     The  American   feamen  are  a  much  more  fober  and  quiet 
clafs  of  people,  and  the  adventurers  of  that  nation  have  derived  in  China  a  fanc- 