

In  all  this  progrefs,  not  the  ability  and  wifdom  of  their  civil  fervants  only  have 
been  confpicuous,  but  the  talents  and  valour  of  their  military  officers  have  figiially 
added  to  the  glory  and  renown  of  the  Britifli  nation.  By  thofe  officers,  a  grand 
army  has  been  formed  of  native  troops,  in  difcipline,  attachment  and  efficiency, 
a  juft  fubjeft  of  admiration ;  and  from  the  time  of  the  firft  Clive  downward,  the 
exploits  performed  by  the  Company's  military  fervants  in  India,  equal  in  bril- 
liancy thofe  recorded  in  any  period  of  modern  hiftory. 

To  all  thefe  public  benefits  is  to  be  added,  the  dired  wealth  with  which  the 
Company  have  been  the  means  of  enriching  the  nation.  The  amount  of  thefe 
contributions,  confifling  in  the  profits  of  manufacturers,  fiiip-builders  and  tradef- 
men,  fhip-ovvners  and  officers,  fervants  and  labourers,  miners,  re-exporters  of 
Eaftern  productions  to  foreign  parts,  and  other  defcriptions  of  perfons  gaining 
by  the  Company's  trade,  in  dividends  to  proprietors,  payments  to  Government, 
and  the  influx  of  private  fortunes  acquired  in  India,  efpecially  in  the  lafl  fifty-five 
years,  may  perhaps  be  moderately  eftimated  at  one  hundred  millions  fteriing. 
Such  are  the  injuries,  the  grievances,  the  evils,  fiich  the  degradation,  which  the 
Eafl  India  Company  have  brought  on  the  country. 

Thirdly,  The  charges  under  the  third  head  are  nothing  more  than  groundlefs 
accufations,  calculated  to  render  the  Company  unpopular,  and,  except  the  firft 
article,  which  is  new,  have  been  often  anfwered  ;  as  to  this  article,  it  is  not  true 
that,  on  the  whole,  the  Company's  imports  have  decreafed,  although  the  fales 
have  in  fome  years,  fallen  off,  by  the  exciufion  of  Britifli  commodities  from  the 
European  continent ;  an  evil  common  to  all  the  merchants  ot  this  country,  but 
now  the  occafion  of  a  charge  againit  the  Company.  And  what  virtue  can  the 
expulfion  of  enemies  and  rivals  from  the  Indian  Seas  have  to  increafe  trade,  if, 
when  merchandize  is  brought  to  Europe,  there  is  only  a  tardy  and  diminiihed 
lale  for  it  ?  Again,  is  it  a  thing  of  courfe,  that  recently  acquired  provinces,  im- 
poveriflied,  unfetiled,  containing  a  people  every  way  diffimilar  to  us,  Ihould  pur- 
chafe  our  commodities,  when  the  inhabitants  of  other  parts  of  Kindoitan,  where 
U'e  have  been  fettled  for  ages,  have  flill  fo  little  relifh  for  them  ?  The  ftipulation 
in  the  ACl  of  1793,  for  a  pecuniary  participation  by  the  Public,  was  a  conditional 
fiipulation,  depending  on  a  contingency,  which  has  rever  become  a  reality  but 
in  one  year,  that  immediately  following  the  laft  renewal  of  the  Charter.  The 
long  war  in  which,  with  hardly  any  iutenniffion,  this  country  has  been  engaged 
ever  fmce  1793.,  has,  by  increafing  the  Company's  expenfes  beyond  the  moit  ex- 
travagant  fuppofition  that  could  have  been  previoufly  formed  on  that  head,  al>- 
forbed  all  the  expected  fources  of  accumulation.  Of  this,  every  Adminifiration, 
fince  1794  has  been  fenfible  ;  but  the  fame  utterly  groundlefs  charge  continues 
to  be  repeated.  "  This  promifed  participation,"  fay  fome  of  the  petitions,  "  has 
"  been  converted  by  the  Company  into  repeated  claims  on  the  public  purfe,  and 
"  credit  for  enormous  fums,  to  fupport  their  eftablilhoients  :"  a  moft  unfounded 
ftat^ment.  The  Company  have  never  had  occafion  to  apply  for  aid  to  fupport 
their  eftablilhments  ;  their  applications  to  Parliament  have  either  been  in  confe- 
q^uenge  of  levies  -by  Goverivnent  qo  the  fcore  of  participation  in  the  territorial 