

tion 


I 


0nd  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  oflht  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.         S5 

tlon  from  the  pre-crtablifliment  and  credit  of  the  Englifli  faflory,  to  which,  from 
their  language  and  manners,  they  appeared  to  be  related.  It  is,  hideed,  by  the 
prudent  refpeflable  conduft  of  the  Company's  reprefentatives  there,  in  the  ma- 
nagement of  their  own  truft,  and  the  controul  cxercifed  by  them  over  other 
Britifli  fubjects ;  it  is  by  this  means,  and  by  the  extent  and  regularity  of  the 
Company's  dealings ;  by  their  probity  now  fo  famed,  as  to  pafs  the  bales  which 
have  their  mark,  without  infpcftion,  through  the  Chinefe  empire,  that  this  jea- 
lous and  fuperciiious  people  have  been  at  length  greatly  coik, :liated  :  but  the 
Company's  eftablifliment  could  not,  on  the  principles  new  propofed,  retain  either 
its  credit  or  pofition.  To  expofe  a  trade  of  fuch  value  and  importance  to  the 
nation  and  the  revenue,  to  hazards  fo  great ;  to  break  down  the  prefent  fyftem, 
with  the  immenfe  eftablillimenls  and  property  connedted  with  it,  particularly  the 
China  fleet  of  the  Company,  a  thing  unparalleled  in  the  commercial  annals  of 
the  world,  would  therefore,  in  every  view,  commercial,  financial,  and  political, 
be  utterly  unwifc  ;  and  if  this  defperate  rifk  were  run,  further  evils  would  av.ait 
the  new  fyltem  at  home.  Upon  the  fuppolition  of  a  general  refort  of  Britiili 
iTiips  to  Ciiina,  how  would  it  be  pofiible  to  prevent  the  fmuggling  of  Tea  on 
the  coalls  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  with  the  facihty  which  exifts  of 
receiving  that  article  on  board  in  many  of  the  Eaftern  Iflands,  where  there  are 
no  Cullom-houfes,  and  with  the  temptation  of  evading  a  duty  of  ninety-five 
per  cent,  at  home  ?  The  petitions  offer  not  the  leafl  fatisfattion  on  this 
point ;  a  point  highly  interefting,  as  has  already  appeared,  if  the  queftiou 
were  only  about  opening  the  Indian  trade  to  the  Outports ;  but  yet  more  inte- 
refHng  in  refpeft  to  the  propofal  for  laying  open  the  China  trade,  which  is,  at 
the  beft,  a  propofal  to  incur  the  moft  imminent  rifk  of  lofing  that  trade,  and 
the  great  revenue  arifmg  from  it,  merely  in  order  to  change  the  hands  through 
which  it  fhall  pafs  ;  for  fupiwfing  it  to  be  prcfcrved  to  the  nation,  there  is  no 
reafonabie  ground  to  think  that  it  could  be  increafed,  becaufe  the  Chinefe  now 
take  our  Woollens  onlj  in  barter  for  Tea,  and-  the  prefent  importations  of  Tea 
are  as  large  as  the  ccuntry  reqtiircs. 

Sixthly,  On  the  complaints  of  the  fuperior  advantages  enjoyed  by  neutrals, 
particularly  the  Americans,  in  the  Indian  trade.  The  veffels  of  the  American 
States  fir  it  appeared  in  the  Indian  feas  about  the  year  1785.  At  that  time  feveral 
European  nations  poiifefTed  fettlements  on  the  continent  of  India,  in  vn-tiie  of 
grants  from  the  native  fovereigns,  recognifed  by  this  country,  after  the  Company 
obtained  territorial  dominion.  It  had  not  then  been  difputed,  that  thofe  fettle- 
ments might  receive  other  European  flags  as  well  as  their  own  (though  the  Com- 
pany have  within  thefe  few  years  properly  held,  that  the  original  grant  gave  a 
right  ot  trade  only  for  the  fhips  of  the  nation  to  whom  the  grant  was  made)  ; 
therefore  the  Bengal  government  thought  it  politic  to  admit  the  American  fliips 
into  the  Britifli  ports,  rather  than  oblige  them-,  by  refiifal,  to  carry  their  cuftom 
to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Danes.  This  was,  however,  merely  a  gratuitous  li- 
cence, revokable  at  pleafure.  But  in  1794,  the  government  of  this  country, 
induced  by  the  polincal  circumflances  of  the  time,  gave  to  the  United  States, 
by  treaty,  a  right  to  a  direft  trade  between  their  own  ports  and  thofe  of  Bridfli 
India,  on  the  terms  of  the  mofl:  favoured  nation;  and  in  1797  the  privilege  of 
free  ingrefs  to  the  Britifli  ports  in  India  was  conferred  on  all  friendly  nadons. 
By  the  long  condnuance  of  the:  war  which  followed  the  French  revolution,  thefe 
conceflions  proved  of  unforcfeen  high  advantage  to  the  fubjetis  of  the  American 
Stat-es,  The  fettlements  on  the  Indian  continent,  of  the  French,  and  of  the  Dutch 
and  Danes,  who  had  fallen  under  French  influence,  were  fucceflively  captured 
by  the  Englifli.  The  Portuguefe  and  Americans  were  then  the  only  neutrals 
who  frequented  the  Indian  feas ;  and  the  troubles  of  Portugal  at  length  left  the 
neutral  trade  very  much  in  the  hands  of  the  Americans,  who  fucceeded  in  elTeft 
to  the  excluded  traders  of  foreign  Europe,  and  fupplied  their  wants,  as  well  as 
thofe  of  the  increafing  population  of  the  United  States,  and  the  demands  of 
Spanifii  America.  The  fubjefts  of  thofe  States,  undoubtedly,  abufed  the  privi- 
leges conceded  to  them  by  His  Majefly's  Government,  in  the  Indian  trade  ;  they 