


*  Other  Averages  of  tlie  American  trade  with  India,  fr^m  Statements  before  your  Committee, 
paay  alfo  be  here  noted  : 


In  fix  Years  from  i3oJ-3 

to  1807-S. 

In  tliree  Yeai 

•sfrom  1S08- 

ptoi8ic-ri. 

Goods. 

Bullion. 

Total. 

Goods. 

Bullion. 

Total 

Jl 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

Imports  into  all  India 

9S7."4 

6,528,250 

7.4«7.534 

351,602 

4.53i>a33 

4,882,836 

Exports  -  ditto  - 

6,901,269 

35,696 

6,916,965 

5>i07'3'8 

9.625 

5.ii7>443 

belligerents 


aiid  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  cf  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  sj 

belligerents  are  fliut  out,  enables  them  to  navigate  more  cheaply,  eafily  and  expe- 
ditioufly  ;  and  it  may  be  taken  as  a  certainty,  that  whenever  war  ceafcs,  all  their 
advantages  will  ceafe  with  it,  and  their  power  of  entering  into  competition  with 
us  in  the  trade  of  our  own  fettlemcnts,  be  very  greatly  reduced.  The  cry  that 
has  been  raifed  and  continued  againft  the  Company  on  this  account,  confelFedly 
with  the  view  of  obtaining  a  general  admiflion  of  Indian  fhips  into  England,  is 
therefore  altogether  unfair.  If  a  circuitous  trade  in  Indian  commodities,  from 
Biitainto  foreign  parts,  has  been  prevented  by  the  rivalfhip  of  the  Americans, 
the  Company  have  fuffered  as  well  as  individuals.  They  have  fuffcrcd  alfo  by 
the  fmuggling  of  Eaflern  articles  from  America,  into  our  Well  Indian  and  North 
American  colonies.  They  were  anxious  to  check,  the  abufes  of  the  treaty  of 
179^.,  and  when  it  expired,  they  obtained  the  confent  of  His  Majcfly's  miniflers 
to  impofe  a  double  duty  on  the  neutral  trade  with  India,  which  then  applied 
almofi;  folely  to  the  Americans  ;  but  if  the  complaints  againft  the  rivalfnip  cf  the 
Americans  in  the  Indian  trade  had  been  well  founded,  what  was  the  natural  and 
proper  remedy  ?  Was  it,  that  the  Company,  part  of  whofe  own  trade  had,  during 
the  war,  paffed  into  American  hands,  fliould  facrifice  the  rcfl  of  their  exclufive 
privileges,  and,  by  the  extinc?lion  of  them,  endanger  the  territorial  pofredions  ? 
Or  was  it  not  obvioufly,  that  the  Americans  fhould  be  excluded  from  a  trade 
fuppofed  to  be  carried  on  ac  the  expenfe  of  Great  Britain  ?  Yet  this  cry  is  flill 
unaccountably  kept  up,  even  v^'hen  v.e  are  at  war  with  America,  and  the  flag  of 
the  United  States  dares  not  be  feen  in  the  Indian  feas.  Nay,  it  is  kept  up  to 
injure  the  caufe  of  the  Company,  after  they  have  atlually  agreed  on  enlargements 
of  the  trade  to  England,  greater  than  ever  were  contemplated,  even  by  the  pri- 
vate merchants  of  India,  before  the  prefent  negotiation  ;  and,  if  enlargements 
could  effeft  the  objeft,  more  than  fufficient  to  bring  the  whole  Indian  trade  of 
the  Americans  to  the  port  of  London. 