

Upon  a  calculation  of  all  thefe  advantages,  it  will  be  found  that  an  American,  in  war  time,  could 
make  a  faving  voyage  from  any  of  thefe  ports  to  this  country  and  home,  when  an  Englifh  vefTel 
■would  inevitably  have  brought  her  owner  into  debt  ;  and  that  an  American  could  actually  import 
'roods  into  the  United  States  from  this  country,  and  fell  them,  at  their  average  wholefale  import?,. 
tion  profit,  to  others  as  low  as  a  Briiilli  merchant  could  fend  them  to  America  in  a  Britilli  (hip, 
and  deliver  them  over  to   be  Iranfliipped  without  any  profit  at  all. 

The  American  (hips  being  of  a  lighter  conflrudlion  than  ours,  they  fail  with  at  lead  one  third 
fewer  hands. 

The  following  Statement  will  better  ehicidate  thefe  remarks.  An  American  of  250  tons  is  em- 
ployed in  a  voyage  to  Britain  and  back  ;  her  value,  as  a  firll-rate  vcffel  for  that  trade,  is  .i'a.ooo.  ; 
and  the  voyage  occupies  five  months.  A  (liip  of  230  tons  woidd  carry  3,000  barrels  of  flour,  at 
gs.  which  was  the  ordinary  freight  -  _  .  .  £1,350 

The  average  freight  home  of  fuch  vefTels  could  not  exceed  -  -  Ooo 


.€1,950 


AMERICAN  CHARGES 

Infurance  out  and  home  i/ajOOO 

at  4I  per  cent. 
8  men  5  months,  at  £^. 
Captain  and  mate,  £\o.  each 
2,400  lbs.  bread,  at  16  y. 
Beef,  10  barrels,  at  32^. 
Pork,  10     di).     at  50  i. 
150  gallons  rum 
Interetl  of  .t2,ooo.  5  months 


s. 

£ 

s.    d. 

9S 



- 

200 



- 

100 



- 

19 

4  — 

- 

16 

—  — 

- 

25 



- 

16 

17  — 

- 

4' 

13  4 

J? 

5'3 

-4  4 

BRITISH  CHARGES. 

Infurance  out  and  home,  vefTel 
v  due  J  at  ^'4,000.  at  9  percent. 

11  men  five  months,  at  .t'5. 

Captain  and  mate 

360  lbs.  of  bread  for  14  people 
5  months,  at  52  s. 

13  barrels  of  beef,  at  .£''4. 

15     do.     pork,  at  90J. 

220  gallons  rum,  at  5^. 

Intercll  of  ^'4,000.  5  months   - 


£    s. 

d. 

360  — 

— 

300  — 

— 

100  

— • 

57  12 
60  — 

— 

67  10 

— 

55  — 
«3  6 

8 

1,083  8 

8 

Thefe  are  not  to  be  underflood  as  the  total  charges  on  the  voyage,  but  are   thofe  which  flicw  the 
adrantajjes  which  Americans  have  enjoyed. 

Every 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  59 

Every  Britifli  heart  niuft  I:iment  tlie  obflruclions  to  whicli  our  ctiminerce  lias 
been  fubjedled,  muft  willi  fur  the  removal  of  all  continental  excUifions  as  well 
as  of  our  diil'erences  with  America,  and  that  commercial  freedom  and  aftivity 
may  be  reftored.  It  is  alfo  extremely  defirable  that  new  fourccs  of  trade  fliould 
be  difcovered,  and  natural  for  thofe  who  arc  now  fuflcrin;^  under  privations  and 
hardOiips,  to  catch  eagerly  at  the  flattering  profpects  and  promifes  fo  confidently 
held  out  to  them  from  opening  the  trade  with  the  Eait.  But  can  the  Court  of 
Dirciflors,  thoroughly  convinced  as  they  are,  that  all  fuch  expedations  are 
groundlefs  and  dclufive, — that  thofe  who  (hould  art  upon  them,  if  the  trade  were 
opened,  would  be  fure  to  experience  ruinous  Icifs  and  difappointment,  and  that 
the  abolition  of  the  Company's  commercial  privileges  would  be  in  eilett  the  ex- 
tinftion  of  the  whole  of -the  prefent  Indian  fvdem  ; — can  the  Court,  with  thefe 
conviclicns,  lend  themfelves  to  promote  a  dangerous  deception,  already  too  pre- 
valent, at  the  facrifice  of  fo  much  individual  intereft,  and  of  that  public  interclt, 
the' care  of  which  is  intruded  to  them  ?  If  it  were,  indeed,  probable,  that  by  a 
flow  procefs  the  commercial  intercourfe  between  this  country  and  the  Eall  could 
be  enlarged,  the  efiect  would  be  far  too  diftant  to  relieve  prefent  prellures,  and 
the  firfl:  adventurers  be  more  likely  to  plunge  the  trading  world  into  frefh  diffi- 
culties  ;  as  proved  lo  be  the  refult  of  the  general  rufli  into  the  trade  of  Buenos 
Ayres,  where  it  was  eafy  to  fend  exports,  but  difficult  to  find  fale  or  return.  It 
vvill,  perhaps,  now  be  faid,  that  the  trade  with  Buenos  Ayres  has  become  a  re- 
gular one  ;  but  it  can  be  a  regular  one  only  to  a  very  limiteJ  extent,  being, 
indeed,  partly  what  fubfifted  with  Lilbon,  before  it  was  turned  into  a  different 
channel ;  it  may  not,  in  a  long  time,  replace  the  vafl;  fums  at  firfl  lofl  there ;  anil 
at  any  rate,  it  diiplaced  no  important  fyflem  exifling  before.  From  the  late  very 
favourabie  change  in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  a  better  profpeft  of  relief  now  appears  ; 
from  the  Eafl,  it  will  be  found,  that  no  hope  of  any  can  be  rationally  entertained. 