

average. 


avd  CHAIRMAN,  .\c.  -/  The  EAST  INDIA  CC^IMPANY.  (n 

average,  not  to  exceed*  j^4.  los.  per  man,  per  annum.  They  arc  indolent  by 
nature,  frugal  by  habit,  under  in;mi(old  religious  rcllridions :  What  demand  oi" 
the  inanufaChires  from  Europe  is  to  be  expefted  from  thefe  ?  Of  the  better  claffcs 
few  are  rich,  unlefs  thofe  conneded  with  Europeans;  and  even  t/jrfc,  during  a 
courfe  of  nearly  three  centuries,  in  which  they  have  lived  in  European  fetllements, 
have  adopted  none  of  our  tafles  or  falhions  ;  unkfs,  perhaps,  in  a  few  articles  of 
jewellery  and  hardware,  looking-glafles,  and  carriages,  with  the  ufe  of  a  mantle 
of  broad-cloth  in  the  cold  feafon.  As  to  the  North  of  India,  though  the  climatt- 
there  be  lefs  diflimilar  to  ours,  the  people  are  extremely  fo  ;  and  in  poor  ill- 
governed  countries,  where  property  is  infecure  and  concealed,  what  hope  can 
there  be  of  a  vent  for  fireign  luxuries  ?  The  perfons  who  now  imagine  that  region 
to  prefent  a  great  field  for  commerce,  have  no  conception  of  the  ditliculty  of  carry- 
ing goods  there  from  the  fea ;  the  delays,  expence,  and  infecurity  that  muft  be 
experienced,  when  the  boundaries  of  the  Company's  Government  are  paflfcd  ;  and 
in  finding  and  bringing  back  returns,  if  the  European  commodities  could  be  dif- 
pofed  of.  With  refpect  to  China,  it  is  not  denied  tiiat  it  might,  in  all  probability, 
take  off  many  of  our  manufaclures,  if  the  Chinefe  Government  would  allow  the 
free  dilfemination  of  them.  I'he  jealous  reftridions  of  that  Government,  how- 
ever, which,  though  they  have  been  already  ftated,  it  may  be  proper  to  notice 
again  here,  prevent  their  own  fubjeds  in  general  from  any  de^dings  with  Euro- 
peans ;  and  it  has  been  feen,  that  the  magnificent  ftyle  of  Lord  Macartney's 
emhaffy,  which  befpoke  the  grandeur  of  the  Britifli  Sovereign,  with  the  refined 
diplomatic  talents  of  that  nobleman,  which  even  ifruck  the  Chinefe  Courtiers, 
were  incapable  of  moving  the  Government  to  depart  in  the  fmalleft  degree  from 
its  ellablilhed  policy.  If  inftead  of  the  regulated,  long  experienced  organ  for 
European  trade,  the  Company's  Canton  eftabhlhment,  under  whole  refpedability, 
in  fad,  the  Americans  were  admitted,  a  fwarm  of  unconneded  private  traders 
weie  to  be  let  loofe  upon  that  country,  it  is  altogether  probable,  that  the  Chinefe 
would  either  iliut  their  doors  entirely  upon  them,  or  contrad  even  the  prelcat 
narrow  entrance. 

If  fo  many  proofs  of  want  of  knowledge  on  Indian  fubjeds  did  not  crowd  on 
your  Committee,  they  might  cxprefs  furprife  at  finding  any  perfons  flill  fo  unin- 
formed, as  to  hold  up  the  trade  carried  on  by  individuals  in  the  time  of  Cromwell 
as  gahiful  to  the  parties,  and  ufeful  to  the  nation.  The  fad  is  now  afcertained  to 
have  been  notorioufly  otherwife.  The  competition  of  the  traders  led  them  to 
underfell  their  exports  in  India  and  their  imports  in  England  :  The  Public,  indeed, 
for  a  little  time,  got  Indian  goods  remarkably  cheap,  but  the  adventurer  could  not 
go  on  ;  and  Cromwell,  induced  by  the  reprefentations  made  to  him,  in  which 
leveral  of  thofe  very  adventurers  joined,  reftored  the  Company,  in  order  tofave 
the  Indian  trade  to  the  nation. 