

Parliament  is  now  told  by  the  Petitioners,  that  the  Private  Trade,  to  which  in- 
dividuals were  admitted  by  the  Ad  of  1793,  enlarged  by  the  arrangement  of  1802, 
has  fucceeded,  and  produced  a  profit,  even  whilll  the  Company  have  been  trading 
to  a  lofs.  The  Court  have  very  fubftantial  reafons  to  believe,  that  although  fomc 
arncles  of  Private  Trade  may  at  certain  times  have  fold  to  a  profit,  yet  that  large 
importations  of  other  articles,  both  into  India  and  into  England,  have  repeatedly 
fold  to  a  lofs,  or  have  remained  long  on  hand  for  want  of  lale. 

The  nature  of  this  trade  fhould  be  confidered  ;  the  numerous  commanders  and 
officers  of  the  Company's  fliips  (a  very  fuperior  clafs  of  nautical  men)  have  no 
adequate  provifion  from  dired  pecuniary  allowances ;  their  compenfation  has 
been  in  the  privilege  of  trade,  and  a  certain  allowance  of  tonnage,  freight  free. 
This  has  generally  made  them  traders ;  and  as  they  are  to  look  to  trade  for  their 
emolument,  (for  but  tew,  comparatively,  make  money  by  pailengers,)  they  con- 

*  In  a  late  ftatidical  account  of  Dinagepore,  a  province  of  Bengal,  there  are  ftatementj  of  tlie 
nrnual  expenfcs  of  different  clafTes  of  fociety  ;  and  among  them,  one  of  the  expcnfes  of  a  labouring 
man  with  a  wife  and  two  children.  The  amount  is  only  Ritjiees  2;.  10.  1 1.  or  near  .t3  per  annum  ; 
being  at  the  rate  ot  fifteen  (hillings  per  head.  The  article  of  clothing,  for  this  family  of  four  perfons, 
ie  only  fix  {hillings  per  anuum. 

(3?.)  Q  tinued 


62       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  c/ INDIA  BOARD 

tinued  to  adventure,  though  often  with  little  fuccefs  ;  and  your  Committee  are 
affured,  that  though  they  pay  no  freight  nor  commiffion,  being  tl.elr  own  agenrs, 
they  ftill  find  it,  on  the  whole,  a  precarious  unproductive  bufinel's.  Now,  if  thefe 
men  do  not  fucceed,  it  can  hardly  be  expefted  that  thof<;  who  have  freight  and 
commiflion  to  pay  can  fare  better. 

But  it  -will  be  faid  that  other  individuals  do,  neverthelefs,  embark  in  this  trade. 
To  this  it  is  to  be  ahfwered,  that  the  manufacturers  of  Indigo  iu  Bengal,  (an  ar- 
ticle originally  promoted  and  always  foflered  by  the  Company,)  generally  fcnt  their 
produce  to  England  ;  and  this  is  a  matter  of  necefiity  ;  becaufe  the  great  bulk  of 
the  article  cannot  otherwife  be  difpofed  of.  Again,  there  is  a  certain  annual 
amount  of  acquifition  by  Europeans  in  India  ;  and  as  this,  (doubtlefs  a  large 
amount  in  all,)  is  in  one  way  or  another  to  be  remitted  to  England,  merchants  in 
India  may  find  their  account  tolerably  well  in  taking  up  fuch  money  in  India  ;  in- 
verting it  in  goods,  and  granting  bills,  at  a  rate  favour  ble  to  the  drawer,  payable 
from  the  fales  in  this  country.  A  fort  of  new  tranfit  capital  ariles  in  this  way 
■every  year,  and  men  may  be  tempted,  occafionally,  to  feek  to  make  an  advantage 
of  it,  who  would  not  regularly  fix  a  capital  of  their  own  in  the  trade.  There  is 
alfo  a  third  fort  of  trade  Irom  India,  which  men  of  large  capital  fpeculate  in  when 
favourable  occafions  feem  to  offer ;  and  in  this  way  fometiraes  cotton  piece  goods, 
fometimes  cotton  wool,  fometimes  indigo  and  raw  filk  have  been  adventured  in- 
But  your  Committee  fuppofe  it  to  be  an  undilputed  faft,  that  thefe  larger  adven- 
tures have  repeatedly  been  attended  with  heavy  loffes  to  individuals,  particularly 
the  very  great  importations  of  piece  goods,  exceeding  in  value  two  millions  fler- 
ling  in  1802  ;  the  large  importations  of  Cotton,  and  even  of  Indigo,  fince  that 
time  ;  and  what  may  be  fufficiently  decifive  on  this  head  is,  that  very  large  quanti- 
ties of  thofe  have  remained  long  in  the  Company's  warehoufes  without  a  faie,  or 
uncleared  after  fale.  The  following  abflract  account  will  fufficiently  exhibit 
thefe  fads: 