

A  profound  obferver  of  human  affairs,  thePrefident  Montefquieu,  had,  before 
the  time  of  Dr.  Smith,  who,  however,  overlooks  his  opinion,  realoneJ  more  agree- 
ably to  nature  and  experience  on  this  fubjeil.     '-Although,"  fays  he,  "  commerce 
*'  be  liable  to  great  revolutions,  it  may  happen  that  certain  phyfical  caufes,  fucii 
"  as  the  quahty  of  foil  and  climate,  fhall  for  ever  fix  its  charafter.     In  the  cora- 
*'  merce  which  we  carry  on  with  India,  in  modern  times,  the  export  of  money 
"  thither  is  indifpenfable.     The  Romans  carried  to  India,  every  year,  about  fifty 
"  miWions  oi  frfferces.     That  money,  as  ours  now  is,  was  exchanged  for  goods, 
*'  which  they  brought  back  to  the  Weil.     Every  nation  which  has  traded  to  India 
■•'  has  uniformly  carried  the  precious  metals  thither,  and  brought  back  goods  in 
*'  return.    Nature  herfelf  produces  this  effeft.    The  Indians  have  their  aits,  which 
*'  are  adapted  to  their  manner  of  life.     Our  wants  iu-e  elfentially  different  from 
*'  theirs  ;  and  what  is  luxury  to  us,  never  can  be  fo  to  thetn.    Their  cdmate  neither 
"  requires  nor  permits  the  ufe  of  almoft  any  of  our  commodities.     Accuflomed 
'"  to  go  almoft  naked,  the  country  furniflics  them  with  the  fcauty  raiments  they 
"  wear;  and  their  religion,  to  which  thty  are  in  abfolute  lubjedion,  infills  into 
"  them  an  averfion  to  that  fort  of  food  which  we  confume  ;  they,  therefore,  need 
*'  nothing  from  us  but  our  metals,  which  are  the  iigns  of  value,  and  for  which 
"  they  give  in  return,  the  merchandize  that  their  frugality,  and  the  nature  of  the 
"  country,  fupply  in  abundance.     Ancient  authors,  who  have  writren  upon  India, 
"  reprel'ent  the  country  precifely  fuch  as  we  now  find  it,  as  to  police,  to  m-anners, 
"  and   to   morals.     India  always  has  been,    and  India  always  will  be,  what  it 
"  now  is ;  and  ihofe  who  trade  to  India,  will  carry  money  thither,  and  bring 
'*  none  back." 

As  the  Court  have,  in  their  Letter  of  the  13th  January  1809,  to  the  Prefident 
jof  the  India  Buard,  given  the  fame  views  and  in  fome  detail,  on  this  fubjedf,  not 
deriving  their  opinion  from  any  fingle  authority,  but  from  the  broad  page  of  hif- 
tory  and  practice,  it  is  unneceffary  for  your  Committee  again  to  enlarge  upon  it : 
but  may  not  the  attention  of  the  manufafturers  of  woollens,  metals,  cctton  fabrics, 
and  potteries,  be  ftill  called  to  the  habits  of  the  Indian  people,  the  bulk  of  whom 
live  all  their  days  upon  rice,  and  go  only  half  covered  with  a  flight  cotton  cloth  ; 
the  rice  and  cotton  both  produced  by  their  own  foil  ?  The  earnings  of  the  common 
labouring  claffes.,   and  confequently  their  expenceS;,  may  be  eftimated,   on  an 