


58        CORRESPONDENCE  bet^.mn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

if  the  pacific  relations  of  flate=;  pafs  for  no  account;  in  fuch  a  queftioii,  whence 
the  conj^a-atulations  we  fo  ofien  hear  upon  what  we  have  gained,  and  may  yet 
gain,  by  the  rupture  with  America  ?* 

Seventhly,  That  the  diflrefles  of  the  manufafturers,  the  exclufion  of  our  trade 
from  the  continent  of  Europe  and  from  North  America,  its  confequent  great  de- 
cline and  the  fupport  of  the  war,  require  new  chaimels  of  enterprife,  and  there- 
fore an  open  trade. 


*  The  followine  Ktatcment,  which  has  been  receivetl  from  an  intcllitrent  merchant  who  refidcd  a 
number  of  years  in  America,  (hews  the  advantages  under  which  the  trade  of  that  country  was  car- 
ried on,  in  a  Itate  of  peace. 

The  advantages  which  Americans,  as  fhip-owner?,  enjoyed  in  a  ftate  of  neutrality,  are  obyious  ; 
uot  only  from  their  free  communication  with  belligerents,  but  from  oilier  caufes. 

Their  firlt  rate  vefTols  do  not  coft  one  half  what  thofe  of  the  fame  tonnage  built  in  Britain  gene- 
rally cofl;  ;  hence  the  capital  employed  is  one  half  leis,  and  one  half  the  infurance  is  fulficient  to 
cover  the  property  at  flake. 

The  premium  of  infurance  of  an  American  neutral  from  Britain  to  America,  was  lefs  than  half 
what  was  given  ou  an  Englilh  veiTel  for  the  fame  voyage  ;  on  Americans,  the  premium  was  from 
two  to  two  and  a  half  per  cent.,  on  Englilh  velFels  from  five  to  fix  per  cent. 

The  countervailing  duties  in  America,  induced  fhippers  always  to  give  a  preference  to  American 
veffels.  Goods  arriving  in  America,  paid  twelve  and  a  half  to  fif'.een  per  cent,  duties,  whilft  the 
fame  goods,  by  a  Britifh  veflel,  not  only  paid  the  fame  rate  of  duty,  but  an  additional  ten  per  cent, 
on  the  amount  of  thofe  duties,  which  is  one  and  a  quarter  to  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  increased  duty. 

The  freight  of  goods  from  America  to  England,  in  American  bottoms,  was  never,  in  the  bed 
times,  higher  than  one  fhilling  and  fixpence  per  foot ;  and  many  times  the  whole  freight  of  an  home- 
ward-bound American  of  three  hundred  tons  (that  is  to  fay,  an  American  fgoing  from  this  country) 
couid  have  been  had  for  jCjoo.  or  £400.  The  cargoes  of  three  fourths  ot  Americans  homeward, 
confifted  either  of  crates  of  ware,  fait,  or  coals  ;  which  are  well  known  to  yield  but  a  very  finall 
freight  indeed,  taking  the  whole  difference  betwixt  th;  purchafe  and  fale,  as  freight. 

The  provifioning  a  fhip  in  America,  did  not  certainly  cofl  more  than  one  half  thai  provifioning 
the  fame  fhip  in  Britain  would  have  colt  ;  bread  at  16s.;  beef  at  304.  to  36  j.  ;  pork  at  45  s.  to 
50 i. ;  rum  at  2  s.;  I  believe  will  not  be  more  than  half  the  Britifh  prices  for  tlie  fame  articles;  and 
thefe  were  the  current  rates  in  1800  to  1805. 