

It  was  moved,  and,  on  the  queftion, 
Refolved,  That  the  further  confideration  of  tlie  faid  Petitions  be  adjourned  till 

'Tuefday  next. 

The  Chairman  then  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Petitions  will  lie  at  this 
houfe  for  the  perufal  of  the  proprietors. 

The  Chairman  further  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Committee  ofCorref- 
pondence  had  prepared  a  Report  on  the  Subjed:  of  the  Petitions  prefented  to  Par- 
liament  during  the  laft  Seffion  againft  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Charter, 
which  Report  was  laid  before  the  Court  of  Directors,  and  unanimoufly  approved 
by  them  on  the  i  oth  inftant,  and  that  the  faid  Report  is  now  printing  for  the 
information  of  the  proprietors. 

The  Title  of  the  Report  was  then  read,  as  was  alfo 

'Draft  of  a  Letter  to  Lord  Buckinghamfhire,  tranfmltting  Copy  of  the  above 
mentioned  Report,  and 

Leuer  from  Lord  Buckinghamfhire  in  reply. 

The  Court  then,  en  the  queftion,  adjourned. 

Gentlemen,  India  Board,  15th  Februaiy  1S13. 

I  HAD  the   honour  of  receiving  your  Letter  of  the  10th  inftant,  enclofing  a 
Report  of  the  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  to  which  you  defire  my  ferious  at- 
tention ;  and  you  may  be  afTured  that  the  Report  will  receive  that  ferious  and 
-'deliberate  attention  which  has  been  given  to  every  part  of  the  important  fubject 
to  which  it  relates. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be. 

Gentlemen, 

Your  obedient  and  fmthful  humble  fer\'ant, 
(Signed)  Buckinghamjhire. 

The  Chairman  and  Deputy 
•Chairman  of  the  Eaft  India  Company. 
;.-        (32.)  S  ■  AT 


70       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDJA  BOARD 

AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  held  on  Tuefday  the  23d  Februaiy 
1813. 

■MINUTES  of  lafl:  Court  of  the  17th  inftant,  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  t!:e  Court,  that  it  is  met  by  adjournment,  for  the 
;.purpofe  of  taking  into  further  confideration  the  drafts  of  the  Petitions  to  the  ho- 
nourable Houfe  of  Commons,  which  were  laid  by  the  Court  of  Diredors  before 
the  General  Court  on  the  17th  inftant. 

The  draft  of  the  Petition,  praying  a  renewal  of  the  Company's  exclufive 
:privileges,  in  which  fome  amendments  have  been  inferted,  as  propofed  by  the 
Court  of  Diredors  fince  the  laft  General  Court,  and  now  fubmitted  to  this  Court, 
■was  read. 

To  the  Honourable  the  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  in  Parliament  aflembled  ; 

The  humble  Petition  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England 
trading  to  the  Eall  Indies  j 

Sheweth, 
That  youT  Petiuoners,  in  approaching  this  Honourable  Houfe  with  an  appli- 
cation for  a  continuance  of  the  fyftem  by  which  the  relation  between  Great 
iBritain  and  the  Eaft  Indies  is  now  regulated,  hope  they  may  be  permitted  to  fhate 
the  outlines  of  the  Hiitory  of  the  Eftablilhment  of  your  Petitioners,  as  well  as 
their  prefent  fituatiou  as  to  their  property  and  rights,  their  fundions  and  obli- 
gations. 