

And  from  this  very  important  faft,  new  perhaps  to  your  Lordfhip  and  the 
public,  though  long  exifting  in  the  records  of  the  Company,  the  Court  of  Di- 
reftors  join  with  their  Committee  of  Correfpondence,  in  hoping  that  as  the  views 
of  the  Petitioners  are  unlimited,  going  in  the  fiift  place  to  the  fubverfion  of  all  the 
exifting  ellablifliments  in  the  India  and  China  trade  ;  as  this  ruin  would  be  im- 
menfe,  and  the  compenfation  which  would  be  due  for  it,  would  be  immenfc  alfo  ; 
as  the  political  evils  which  would  thence  follow,  as  detailed  in  the  former  letters 
of  the  Court  (evils  ftill  to  be  pre-eminently  regarded)  would  fatally  afteft  the 
interefts  of  the  whole  Empire  ;  and  as  the  means  are  now  offered  of  making  the 
fullelt  and  faireft  further  experiment  of  the  pradicability  of  enlarging  the  trade 
to  and  trom  India,  upon  fo  great  a  fcale  as  fhall  admit  the  whole  nation  to  par- 
ticipate in  it ;  as  this  is  an  experiment  which  may  be  made  without  breaking 
.down  the  prefent  fyftem  and  all  its  cftablifhments,  as  it  affords  a  method  of  afcer- 
taining  all  the  good  that  is  attainable,  without  hazarding  the  dreadful  evils  that 
are  othcrwife  to  be  apprehended  ;  we  fay,  my  Lord,  the  Court  of  Direftors  do, 
under  thefe  jnomentous  circumllances,  earneftly  hope  that  His  Majefty's  Minifters 

will 


and  CHAIRMAN,  Sec.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  69 

will  flill  fee  fit  to  flop  at  a  fafe  point,  which  will  give  the  utmoft  reafonahle  con- 
ceffions  to  one  fet  ol'  men,  whilil  it  will  prelerve  the  intercfts  of  Britifh  India,  of 
all  piirties  now  connected  with  it,  and  of  the  Empire  at  large,  from  ihe  difallrous 
confequences  ot  unbounded  innovation. 

We  have  tlv^  honour  to  be,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordlhip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervants, 
f Signed)  Hu^h  Jnglis. 

Robert  Thornton. 
The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamfhire, 
&c.  &c.  &c. 


AT  a  General  Court  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  theEall  Indies,  hdd  on  Wednefday  the  17th  Fe- 
bruary 1813. 

MINUTES  of  laft  Court  of  the  26th  ultimo,  were  read. 

The  Chairman  acquainted  the  Court,  that  it  is  aflembled  for  the  purpofe  of 
taking  into  confideration  the  draft  of  a  Petition  to  the  honourable  Houfe  of  Com- 
iTions,  refpecHng  the  renewal  of- the  Company's  exclufive  privileges. 

The  faid  Petition  was  then  read- 

The  Chairman  alfo  acquainted  the  Court,  that  the  Court  of  Direftors  had  pre- 
■  pared  the  Draft  of  another  Petition  to  the  honourable  Houfe  of  Commons,  for 
■payment  of  a  debt  due  by  the  public,  and  for  relief  by  way  of  loan. 

The  fame  was  alfo  read  ;  and. 

The  Court  proceeding  to  take  the  above-mentioned  Petitions  into  confideration. 