

(Signed)  Hugh.  Inglis. 

RoBT.  Thornton. 

Jacob  Bosanquht. 

Wm.  F.  Elphinstone, 

Theophilus  Metcalfe. 

Joseph  Cotton. 

Charles  Grant. 

Georgi  Smith. 

Edward  Parry. 

sweney  toone. 

William  Astell. 


LETTER. 


-68      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 


LETTER,  from  the  Chairman  and  Deputy  Chairann,  to  the  Right 
honourable  the  Earl  of  BuckinghamfliirCj  alfo  noticed  in  the  precedmg 
Minute. 

My  Lord,  Eaft  India  Houfe,  loth  February  i8 13. 

BY  the  defire  of  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  Eafl  India  Company,  we  have 
the  honeur  to  fubmit  to  your  Lordfliip  a  Report  of  the  Committee  of  Correfpon- 
dence,  and  refpeflfully  to  entreat  your  ferious  attention  to  it. 

It  contains  an  anfwer  to  the  matter  of  the  Petitions  which  were  laft  feflion 
prefented  to  the  Houfe  of  Commons  againft  the  renewal  of  the  Company's  Char- 
ter, and  particularly  to  thofe  arguments  to  which  your  Lordfhip  was  pleafed  to 
refer  us  in  fupport  of  the  claims  of  the  out-ports  to  be  opened  to  the  import 
trade  from  India  and  China;  it  alfo  enters  into  a  re\'iew  of  all  the  principal 
queftions  of  a  commer<:ial  nature  which  have  been  agitated  by  thofe  perfons  who 
demand  the  abolition  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges  ;  and  in  this  Minute, 
my  Lord,  the  Court  hope  you  will  find  the  following  pofitions,  among  many 
ethers,  well  edablifhed. 

Firfl,  That  the  Petitioners  have  not  correQly  defcribtd  the  prefent  flate  and 
effects  of  the  Company's  exclufive  privileges  and  trade,  nor  at  all  appreciated  the 
evils,  political  and  commercial,  which  would  refult  from  withdrawing  thofe  pri- 
vileges, but  have  arraigned  the  monopoly,  as  if  it  retained  all  the  flridnefs  given 
to  it  a  century  ago,  as  if  no  confiderable  relaxations  had  been  made  in  it  within 
the  la  ft  twenty  years,  and  as  if  ftill  larger  relaxations  were  not  now  acquiefced  in 
by  the  Company. 

Secondly,  That  the  clamours  which  have  been  raifed  againft  the  Company,  on 
account  of  the  trade  of  neutrals,  particularly  the  Americans  with  India,  are 
wholly  unjuft ;  that  no  fuch  trade,  unlefs  with  the  Port uguefe,  now  exifts,  and 
that  the  .prevention  of  injury  from  it  is  eafy. 

Thirdly,  That  the  Petitioners  have  by  no  means  obviated  the  objeftions  ad- 
vanced by  the  Court  againft  the  opening  of  the  out-ports,  nor  in  the  leaft  proved 
the  expediency  or  fafety  of  that  meafure  ;  and  that  the  adoption  of  it  would 
be  attended  with  thofe  dangers  which  the  Court  have  in  their  former  letter* 
defcribed  :  And, 

Fourthly,  That  all  the  former  reafonings  of  tlie  Court  againft  the  pradlicabi- 
-lity  of  enlarging  the  confuniption  of  Britifh  manufaQures  in  India  or  China,  or 
of  extending  profitably  the  imports  of  thofe  Countries  into  Britain,  are  confirmed 
•by  the  refult  of  the  large  experiment  which  has  aftually  been  made  by  private 
Merchants  and  Traders  in  the  courfe  of  near  twenty  years  paft,  from  which  ex- 
periment accurately  recorded,  it  appears  that  not  one  new  article  for  the  confumpiion 
.of  the  natives  of  the  Eajt,  has  in  all  that  time  been  fent  from  Great  Britain. 