

That  the  firft  Adventurers  in  a  Trade  from  England  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  by  the 
•way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  were  incorporated  by  Her  Majefty  Queen  Eli- 
zabeth, by  her  Royal  Letters  Patent,  bearing  date  the  31ft  day  of  December 
1601,'  by  the  ftile  of  "  The  Governor  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London 
*'  trading  into  the  Eaft  Indies,"  to  whom,  by  the  fame  inftrument,  the  excluftve 
right  of  trading  to  that  Country  was  granted  by  her  faid  Majefty  for  a  term  of 
fifteen  years  from  Chriftmas  then  laft  paft. 

That  the  Corporate  capacity  of  the  faid  Governor  and  Company  of  Merchants 
of  London  trading  into  the  Eaft  Indies,  with  the  privilege  of  the  exclufive  Trade, 
was  renewed,  revived  and  confirmed  to  them  in  perpetuity  by  feveral  Charters  or 
Letters  Patent,  granted  refpedtively  by  their  Majefties  King  James  the  Firft,  King 
Charles  the  Second,  King  James  the  Second,  and  King  William  and  Queen  ^  Mary, 
fubjeft  neverthelefs  to  a  provifion,  that,  if  the  continuance  of  any  of  their  Char- 
ters, in  the  whole  or  in  pan,  ftiould  not  be  profitable  to  the  Realm,  that,  upon 
three  years  warning  to  be  given  to  the  faid  Company,  all  the  faid  Charters  lliould 
ceafe,  determine,  and  be  void. ' 

That  the  faid  Governor  and  Company  were  empowered  by  their  Charters  to 
eftablifli  Fadories  and  Settlements  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  •*  to  have  the  Government 
of  fuch  Fa6lories  and  Settlements,  and  to  appoint  Governors  with  a  judicial  Power 
to  equip  and  maintain  military  forces  by  lea  and  land  for  the  defence  of  their 
Settlements,  with  the  power  of  making  peace  and  war  with  any  Princes  or  people 
who  were  not  Chriftians,  within  any  places  of  their  trade,  to  make  reprifals  from 
thofe  perfons,  in  thofe  parts,  from  whom  they  lliould  fuftain  any  lofs  or 
injury,  to  ered  caftles,  fortifications,  forts,  and  ganifons,  and  alfo  to  coin  Indian 
money.  ^ 

'   Printed  Charters,  jj.to  Edition,  page  3. 

»  Ibid.  3ill  May  1609  page  ay  ;  3d  April  i66f,  page  54  ;  5th  Oftober  1677,  page  108  ;  9th 
Aiiguft  1683,  page  116  ;  12th  April  1686,  page  125  ;  /th  Oftober  1693,  page  141  ;  inh  Nov. 
i6(jz-  page  J52.  '  Ibid.  aSth  September  1694,  page  181. 

1  Ibid,  jd  April,  13th  Charles  II.  i66l,  page  54. 

5  Ibid,  ctli  Oaober,  28th    Charles  II.  1677,  page  in. 

That, 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  71 

That,  by  virtue  of  thcfe  Powers,  the  faid  Governor  and  Company  made  Settle- 
ments, and  built  Forts  and  Factories,  at  different  places  in  the  Eall  Indies,  at  a 
very  great  expenfe,  which  Settlements,  Forts,  and  F..^1:ories,  with  ibme  territory 
annexed  to  them,  were  purchafed  from  the  native  Piir.ces  of  the  Countries  within 
their  limits  ;  the  fovereignty  remained  with  their  refpective  Chiefs,  but  the  imme- 
diate Governmenr  yf  thofe  acquifitions  was  exerciftd  by  the  Company  under  the 
powers  which  are  before  mentioned  to  have  been  granted  to  them  by  Charier ; 
and  the  laid  Company  alfo  made  a  Settlement  in  the  Ifland  of  St.  Helena,  on  its 
being  abandoned  by  the  Dutch,  about  the  year  1651. 