

For  the  deep  injuries  which  all  the  London  eftablifliments  connefted  with  the 
Eaftern  trade  would  receive,  there  is  abfolutely  no  relief  or  reparation  of  any 
kind  adverted  to.  And  for  the  Company,  they  are  told  firft  of  their  wealth, 
knowledge,  and  experience  (all  of  which  have  been  before  difparaged),  as  enabling 
them  to  oppofe,  unaflifted,  private  efforts ;  that  if  they  can  carry  on  trade  to 
greater  advantage  than  individuals  they  have  nothing  to  fear,  and  that  they  will 
reap  their  reward  in  competition.  All  this  is  particularly  applied  to  the  China 
trade,  which  is  not  a  new  trade,  nor,  as  has  been  (hewn,  either  fufceptlble  of 
increafe,  or  likely  to  be  preferved  at  all  as  a  general  trade.  The  transfer  of  it  to 
other  hands  would  add  nothing  to  the  nation,  whilft  the  entire  benefit  of  It  i» 

Bfice&ry 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/Thit  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  67 

neceflaiy  for  the  fupport  of  the  political  interefts  of  the  Company.  Secondly  • 
it  is  propofed,  that  for  indemnifying  and  remunerating  the  claims  of  the  Com- 
pany, they  "  (hall  have  a  fair  and  equal  impqll  on  the  trade  in  queflion."  If  the 
trade  and  rate  of  impoft  were  both  likely  to  be  confiderable,  which  your  Commit- 
tee  fee  no  reafon  to  fuppofe,  the  idea  of  an  indemnification  for  the  whole  br 
giving  afterwards  a  part  (and  probably  a  fmall  part),  can  hardly  be  treated  as  a 
ferious  idea. 

But  for  the  detriment  which  the  Company  in  their  political  capacity  might  fuf- 
tain,  for  all  the  ill  confequences  that  might  enfue  to  the  government  and  immenfc 
population  of  India,  no  provifion  whatever  is  propofed.  And  againft  an  entire 
failure  of  the  vail  profpeds  now  fo  fanguinely  entertained,  this  confolation  is  at 
laft  adminiftered,  that  *' the  very  woril  that  can  occur,  in  the  event  of"  the 
abandonment  of  the  trade  by  the  Public,  would  be,  that  matters  might  "■  return 
"  again  to  their  prcfent  Jlate" 

But  can  it  be  ferioufly  fuppofed,  that  after  the  fabric  of  the  Company  and  its 
immenfe  dependent  and  connefted  ellablifliments  in  England,  in  India  and  China 
fhould  have  been  fet  afide  and  left  to  decay  and  ruin ;  when  India  (hould  have 
been  laid  open,  and  the  China  eftablilhment  fuperfeded,  and  fo  much  capital 
funk,  that  things  could  be  brought  back  to  their  former  ftate.  The  poffibility 
of  fuch  a  mighty  convulfion,  and  the  eafe  with  which  it  is  contemplated  by  the 
Petitioners,  may  be  fufficient  to  excite  a  falutary  fear  of  the  rage  of  theory,  fpecu- 
lation  and  innovation,  may  fuggefl  the  prudence  of  (topping  Ihort  of  the  precipice 
to  which  they  would  conduct  us ;  of  at  leaft  refting  at  fome  point,  fo  far  fafe,  as 
not  to  expofe  the  whole  of  the  empire,  Indian  and  European,  to  the  terrible  alter- 
native here  brought  into  view.  A  great  extenfion  of  the  trade  to  or  from  the 
Eaft,  the  objed  for  which  fuch  dangers  are  to  be  run,  is  fhewn  in  the  preceding 
pages  to  be  impradicable  ;  and  it  has  been  alfo  fliewn,  that  in  the  profecution  of 
the  attempt  to  obtain  it,  the  interefts  of  Britifti  India,  and  of  the  finances  of  this 
country,  would  be  endangered.  But  if  an  experiment  is  ftill  required  to  be  made 
in  the  vaft  continent  of  Hindoftan,  and  its  adjacent  iflands,  (for  to  pu(h  the  Expe- 
riment into  China,  would  be  to  rifle  the  trade  of  that  country  and  all  its  advantages, 
without  the  chance  of  any  benefit),  the  means  of  making  a  large  ample  experi- 
ment, in  which  the  whole  nation  may  participate,  through  the  port  of  London, 
are  now  offered ;  means  which  fliall  give  the  faireft  opportunity  to  afcertain  the 
prafticability  of  extending  the  trade,  without  breaking  down  prefent  eftabliih- 
ments,  or  cxpofing  the  Empire,  in  cafe  of  failure,  to  the  moft  difaftrous  confe- 
quences. At  the  fame  point,  therefore  here  defcribed,  your  Committee  humbly 
hope  the  wifdom  of  His  Majelly's  Minifters  and  Parliament,  will  ftill  fee  fit 
10  reft. 