

That  the  faid  Sum  of  two  millions  was  fubfcribed  within  the  time  limited  by 
the  faid  Aft  ;  and  thereupon,  by  a  Charter  bearing  date  the  5th  day  of  Septem- 
ber 1698,"  His  faid  Majefty  was  pleafed  to  incorporate  the  larger  part  of  the 
Subfcribers  to  the  faid  loan,  by  the  ftile  of  "  The  Englilh  Company  trading  to 
"  the  Eaft  Indies  ;"  and,  by  the  faid  Charters,  powers  of  makiiig  Settlements, 

'  Printed  Charters,  page  80.  <  Ibid,  page  96. 

*  9  &  10  William  III.  cap.  44.  fcft.  Ci.  "  Sect.  Gi.  "  Se^.  70 

"  Sea.  ax.  '^  Printed  Charters,  page  1S8. 

aad 


yt       CORRESPONDENCE  bei'-Mcn  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD 

asui  governing  them,  and  maintaining  military  forces  for  their  defence,  were 
j?;ranied  to  the  Englifh  Company,  fmiilar  to  thole  which  are  before  ftated  lO  have 
been  granted  to  the  old  Company,  fmce  diftinguilhed  by  the  appellation  of  The 
London  Company  ;  the  fovereign  right,  power,  and  dominion,  over  all  the  Set- 
lliiaenis  to  be  made,  being  referved  to  His  fp.id  Majefty. 

lliat  the  above  Adi  of  Parliament  and  Charter  would  have  operated  to  have 
extingnifhed  and  determined  the  corporate  capacity  and  privileges  of  the  London 
Company,  but  the  Aft  contained  a  provifion  that  they  fhould  have  liberty  to 
trade  till  the  29th  of  September  170 1,  and  the  London  Company  having  fub- 
fcribedthe  fum  of  ^315,000.  towards  the  fum  of  ^2,000,000.  to  be  raifed, 
became  entitled  to  trade  in  refpect  of  it ;  and  therefore,  by  an  Ad  of  Parliament 
palied  in  the  i  2  th  year  of  the  Reign  ot  His  faid  Majefty  King  William  the  "^  Third, 
their  corporate  capacity  was  continued  to  them,  fubjeft,  neverthelefs,  to  be  deter- 
mined upon  the  redemption  of  the  fund  eftabliihed  by  the  faid  Ad  of  the  9th 
of  His  faid  JVkjefty's  reign. 

That  the  faid  Englifh  Company  acquired  and  fettled  feveral  Fadories  m  the 
Eaft  Indies, -at  a  very  large  expenfe."'' 

Thaf  previous  to  the  Eredion  of  the  Englifli  Company,  the  London  Company 
had  carried  on  their  I'rade  with  the  Eaft  Indies  in  competition  with  the  Portu- 
guefe  and  Dqtch  and  French  Companies,  and  alfo  in  competition  with  unlicenfed 
adventurers  from  Great  Britain  who  traded  there,  notwithftanding  the  exclufive 
grants  which  the  London  Company  was  in  poffeffion  of,  and  which  unlicenfed 
adventurers,  at  times,  acquired  confiderable  afcendancy  amongft  the  Native 
Powers,  '^  and,  -after  the  incorporation  of  the  Englifti  Company,  they  became  alfo 
competitors  in  the  faid  Trade.;  and  no  European  nation  having  then  acquired  any 
confiderable  territorial  dominion,  the  whole  of  the  trade  by  Europeans  was  car- 
ried on. entirely  at  the  defpotic  will  and  fuflerance  of  the  Native  Princes  of  the 
Mogul  Empire  ;  the  Government  and  Officers  of  which  almoft  conftantly  Ihevved 
their  favour  and  protedion  to  fuch  of  the  competitors  from  whom  they  could 
obtain  the  largeft  prefents ;  and  in  proportion  as  they  proteded  one  of  them, 
they  opprefled  tiie  others ;  as  an  inftance  of  which,  your  Petitioners  {how,  that 
the  fervants  of  the  Englifti  Company  in  India,  by  means  of  corrupt  influence  with 
the  minifters  and  fervants  of  the  Mogul,  procured  all  the  principal  Officers  and 
Members  of  the  Prefidency  of  the  London  Company  at  Surat,  then  the  chief  feat 
of  their  trade  in  India,  to  be  imprifoned  for  feveral  feafons,  and  wholly  to  inter- 
-rupt  their  commercial  tranfadions.'* 