

That  the  notice  required  by  the  lafl  mentioned  Aft  hath  been  given  by  the 
Speaker  of  your  honourable  Houfe,  for  determining  the  exclufive  Trade  of  your 
Petitioners  on  the  loth  day  of  April  1814. 

That  fince  the  pafTmg  the  faid  lail  mentioned  Aft,  a  further  acquifition  of  Ter- 
ritory and  Revenue  in  India  has  been  made,  and  is  now  in  the  pofTefTion  of  your 
Petitioners ;  and  your  Petitioners  alfo  fhow  that  they  have  taken  all  the  Forts 
and  Faftories  which  belonged  to  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Danes  in  Hindoflan  ; 
and  your  Pedtioners  are  now  in  pofiefTion  as  well  of  the  Territories  mentioned 
in  the  faid  laft-mentioned  Aft  of  Parliament  as  of  thofe  which  have  been  fince 
acquired,  and  the  Britifh  Dominions  in  India,  without  a  rival,  or  any  enemy,  now 
confifl  of  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  Peninfula,  befides  very  extenfive  Pro- 
vinces in  the  Noith  of  Hindoftan,  and  contain,  as  it  is  fuppofed,  above  fifty  mil- 
lions of  inhabitants,  and  have  been  acqtiired  wholly  at  the  expenfe  and  rifk  of  your 
Petitioners,  without  any  charge  whatever  to  the  Britifh  Exchequer,  for,  though 
land  forces  belonging  to  His  Majeftv  have  been  emploved,  in  conjunftion  with 
the  forces  raifed  by  your  Petitioners,  yet  the  whole  of  tl  ■  expenfe  of  fuch  forces 
of  His  Majefty,  whilft  they  have  been  employed  in  fuc'i  fervice,  as  well  as  for 
their  paffage  out  and  home,  and  in  recruiting,  has  bee-  defrayed  by  your  Peti- 
tioners ;  befides  which,  for  a  confiJerable  length  of  tine,  your  Petitioners  fur- 
nifhed  or  paid  for  viftualling  and  ftores  for  the  ufe  of  His  Majefl;y's  fhips  of  war 
in  the  Eaft  Indies. 


3«  33  Geo.  3<1.  cap.  51,  feift.  i.  "  Seift.  71. 

J*  Sea.  74.  "  See  Sea.  107.  to  II  J. 

Your 


7«6        CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  0/ INDIA  BOARD 

Your  Petitioners  beg  leave  humbly  to  reprefent,  that  the  welfare  and  happinefs 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Countiies  which  have  come  under  the  care  of  your  Pe- 
titioners have  been  their  chief  object,  and  they  have  reafon  to  hope  and  believe 
that  the  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  the  people  is  nioft  eminently  confpicuous, 
when  Hindofl?.n  was  firft  vifited  by  Brilifh  Traders,  and  long  i.fter  the  union  of 
the  two  Companies  before-mentioned,  when  the  oppofition,  not  only  ot  Britilh 
Subjed  againft  Britidi  Subjei^,  but  of  European  againft  European,  and  the  corrupt 
and  impolitic  attempts  which  were  conftantly  made  by  one  party  to  raife  the 
defpoilc  power  of  the  Indian  States  againft  other  parties,  had  in  fome  meafure 
ceafed,  the  chara61er  of  the  Native  governments,  as  well  as  of  the  Native  indivi- 
duals, remained  unchanged,  the  ill  uHige  which  they  had  received  from  individual 
and  aflbciated  Europeans  roaming  about  without  refoonfibility  or  controul,  raifed 
a  jealoufy  and  animofity  againft  every  ftranger  W'ithout  Gil!.in61:ion,  and  the  in- 
ternal ftate  of  the  Country,  where  juflice  and  injuftice  were  equally  articles  of 
traffic  to  be  bought  and  lold,  left  the  rights  of  perfons  and  property  entirely  at 
hazard. 