

That  .the  London  Company  .and  the  Englifh  Company,  finding,  that  if  their 
competition  had  continued,  ruin  muft  have  enfued  to  both,  agreed,  about  the 
.year  1702,  to  unite  together:  the  union  was  effeded  by  force  of  two  feveral  In- 
dentures, dated  refpedively  the  22d  day  of  July  1702,  one  being  an  indenture 
tripartite,  made  between  her  late  Majefty  Queen  Anne  of  the  firft  part,  and  the 
faid  London  Company  of  the  2d  part,  and  the  faid  Englifli  Company  of  the  third 
•part.;  ''  and  the  other  being  an  indenture  quinquepartite,  made  between  the  faid 
London  Company  of  the  firft  part,  the  faid  Englifh  Company  of  the  fecond 
part,  and  certiiin  perfons,  Truftees  of  Property  belonging  to  the  London  Com- 
pany, of  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  parts,  '*  and  by  force  of  an  Ad  of  Parlia- 
ment, pafTed  in  the  6th  year  of  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne, '"  and  of  an  Award  of 
the  Earl  of  Godolphin,  the  Lord  High  Treafurer  of  Great  Britain,  dated  the 
.29th  day  of  September  1708. 

By  the  terms  of  the  Union,  all  the  property  and  rights  belonging  to  both 
Companies,  at  home  and  abroad,  including  the  fettlements,  forts,  fadories,  and 


■3  Private  Afts,  12  William  III.  cap.  28. 

'"'  Indenture  quinquepartite,   page   316,     They  were  made  over  to    the   United  Company   for 
^£70,000.  'i  See  Annals  of  the  Ealt  India  Company. 


'^  Annali,  vol.  iil.  pages  519.  54.3,  563.  '?  Printed  Charters,  page  243. 

'*  J'rinted  Charters,  page  316.  "»  6th  Anne,  cap.  17. 


territories.. 


and  CHAIRMAN,  8:c.  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMl'ANY.  y^ 

territories,  vvliich  thcv  had  acquired  as  is  above  ftated,  were  vahie  1,  and  in  confide- 
ration  of  the  value  of  the  property  of  the  Loudon  Company  being  paid  or  al- 
lowed in  account  to  them,  they,  by  proper  legal  inflrumcnts,  transferred  and 
made  ov2r  all  their  property  to  the  Englifli  Company,  and  the  KngiilTj  Company 
we-c  allowed,  in  account,  the  value  of  their  property  ;  and  the  property  and 
rights  of  both  Companies  were  thenceforth  veiled  in  them,  for  the  beneiic  of  the 
united  conce.n  ;  and  the  London  Company  having-  completed  the  transfer  of  its 
property,  furrendered  its  corporate  capacity  ;  and  from  thenceforth  the  Englifi-» 
Company  took  the  ftyle  of  "  The  United  Company  of  Merchaiiis  of  England 
*'  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies  ;"  which  is  now  the  llyle  of  your  Peiiiioners. 

Your  Petitioners  crave  leave  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  Houfe  to  fome  part 
of  the  fubjeds  of  which  the  property  of  your  Petitioners  conllfted  at  the  time  of 
the  union  of  the  two  Companies  in  1702,  and  which  they  derived  by  transfer 
from  them,  with  the  ccgnifance  and  fanftion  of  Her  Majelty  Queen  Anne,  and 
of  the  Parliament ;  amongfl:  other  things  your  Petitioners  were  then  entitled  to 
and  poiTefled  of  the  iflands  of  Bombay  and  Saint  Helena,  the  fovercignty  of 
which  was  vefted  iii  the  Crown  of  Great  Britain  ;  they  were  entitled  to  and  pof- 
fefled  of  the  Fadories  of  Surat,  Swally,  Broach,  Amadavad,  Agra,  and  Lucknow  ; 
on  the  Coaft  of  Malabar,  they  were  entitled  to  and  poffeffod  of  the  Forts  of 
Carwar,  Telllcherry,  and  Ongengo,  and  the  Faiftory  of  Callicut ;  on  the  Coaft 
of  Coromandel  they  were  enlilled  and  poffeffed  of  the  Fort  Saint  George,  with 
the  Caftle,  Fortifications,  and  Territory  thereto  belonging,  on  which  a  large  City 
called  Madras  was  built,  the  houfes  of  which  belonging  to  and  paid  rent  to  your 
Petitioners  ;  Fort  Saint  David,  being  a  ftrong  fort  and  fadory,  and  about  three 
miles  compafs  of  the  circumjacent  country,  on  which  feveral  fmall  towns  and 
villages  were  erefled  ;  the  Factories  of  Codolore,  Porto  Novo,  Pettipoiee,  Mado- 
pollam,  and  the  Fort  and  F.iftory  of  Vizagapatam  ;  in  Bengal,  your  Petitioners 
were  entitled  to  and  poflefled  of  Fort  William  and  the  Town  of  Calcutta,  with  a 
large  territory  thereto  belonging  ;  the  Fadories  of  Balhrore,  Coiliutbuzar,  Dacca, 
Hughly,  Maulda,  Rajamaul,  and  Patna,  all  thefe  poflefTions  were  fubjed  to  the 
fovereignty  of  the  Great  Mogid  ;  on  the  Illand  of  Sumatra.,  your  Petitioners 
were  entitled  to  and  poffefled  of  York  Fort  at  Bencooien,  and  a  Faftory  with  a 
territory  of  about  five  miles  thereto  belonging,  and  a  Fadory  at  Indrapore. 