


■*•  47  Oeo.3.  cap.  41.  feft.  2  ;  51  Geo.  3  ;  52  Geo,  3.  cap.  135. 
♦^  ^o  Geo.  3.  cap.  135  ;  ^1  Geo.  3, 

fubmit 


8o      CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  cf  INDIA  BOARD 

f'lbniit  that  they  would  not  be  juflified  in  becoming  parties  to  any  fyflem  which, 
on  confideration,  (hould  appear  to  them  likely  to  prove  an  illufion. 

As  your  Petitioners  do  not  venture  to  anticipate  what  may  be  the  determination 
of  this  Honourable  lioufe  upon  the  queftion  hereby  fubmitted  to  its  decifion,  your 
Petitioners  hope  that  they  will  be  excufed  for  humbly  Itating  what,  in  the  event  of 
the  diffolution  of  the  prefent  fyflem,  they  conceive  would  be  found  to  be  the 
Tights  of  your  Petitioners,  as  well  aa  their  fair  pretenfions  upon  the  jufiice  and 
liberality  of  Parliament ;  the  abfolute  right  of  your  Petitioners,  for  their  own 
ufe,  to  a  confiderable  part  of  the  Forts,  Towns,  Iflands,  Territories,  and  Rights 
■which  they  have  acquired  abroad,  never  has  been  queftioned,  and  your  Petitioners 
believe  it  to  be  unquedionable ;  and,  notwithftanding  the  claim  made  for  the 
Public  to  other  parts  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  and  revenues  of  your  Petition- 
ers, they  entertain  a  ftrong  hope  that  the  property,  as  well  in  thofe  parts  which 
were  acquired  by  conqueft  under  the  powers  of  Peace  and  War  lawfully  exercifed 
by  your  Petitioners,  as  in  thofe  parts  which  were  otherwife  acquired,  would  be 
found  to  belong  to  your  Petitioners,  in  the  fame  way  as  any  other  property  within 
His  Majeily's  Dominions  belongs  to  the  owners  thereof,  fubjed  to  the  fovereignty 
and  allegiance  due  to  His  iVIajefty ;  but  even  fuppofmg  it  ihould  be  determined 
contrary  to  the  fenfe  and  expeftations  of  your  Petitioners,  touching  their  rights, 
that  thofe  places  were  not  the  property  of  your  Petitioners,  your  Petitioners 
fubmit,  that  in  that  cafe,  if  the  poifeflion  were  to  be  affumed  on  the  part  of  the 
Public,  your  Petitioners  would  have  a  juft  right  to  reimburfement  of  the  Expences 
•which  they  have  incurred  in  acquiring  and  maintaining  them,  and  in  making  the 
Fortifications,  and  Civil  and  IMilitary  Buildings  and  Works,  vi^hich  your  Petition- 
ers have  ere6led  and  improved  upon  them,  with  a  compenfation  for  the  fervices 
and  rilk  of  your  Petitioners  during  the  long  time  which  they  have  had  the  poflef- 
fion  and  government  of  fuch  Territories,  under  the  confirmation  of  Parliament, 
and  all  other  charges  incurred  by  your  Petitioners  relative  to  fuch  Territories ; 
thefe  expences  and  charges  amount  to  many  millions  of  money  ;  your  Petitioners 
alfo  fubmit,  that  they  have  a  juft  claim  to  be  reimburfed  all  the  fums  they  have 
paid  in  difcharge  of  debts  contrafted  on  account  of  the  Territories,  and  to  be  in- 
demnified againft  all  other  debts  in  refpe£t  of  them,  and  which  now  remain  un- 
dilcharged. 