

That,  by  another  Aft  of  52  Geo.  III.  to  amend  an  Aft  of  50  Geo.  TIL  for 
granting  a  fum  of  money  to  be  raifed  by  Exchequer  Bills  to  be  advanced  and 
applied  in  the  manner  and  upon  the  terms  therein  mentioned,  for  the  relief  of  the 
United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England  trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies,  it  is  enafted, 
that  it  Ihall  be  lawful  for  the  Commiffioners  of  His  Majefly's  Treafury,  or  any 
three  or  more  of  them,  to  carry  to  the  credit  of  your  Petitioners,  in  re-payment  of 
the  lums  advanced  under  the  provifions  of  the  faid  Aft  of  51  Geo.  Ill,  any  fum  or 
fums  ot  money  which  fhould  have  been  advanced  or  difburfed  by  your  Petitioners 
in  the  Eaft  Indies,  for  His  Majefty's  Navy,  or  any  public  fervices. 

That  your  Petitioners  compute,  that  after  allowing,  in  account,  fuch  fum  as 
your  Petitioners  are  indebted  to  His  Majefty  for  the  loan  of  the  faid  Exchequer 
Bills,  that  the  fum  of  ^2,294.426.  at  the  leaft  is  now  due  to  your  Petitioners,  in 
refpeft  of  money  which  has  been  advanced  or  difburfed  by  your  Petitioners,  in  the 
Eaft  Indies,  for  His  Majefty's  Navy  and  other  public  fervices. 

That  by  virtue  of  an  Aft  of  37  Geo.  III.  to  enable  the  Eaft  India  Company  to 
raife  money  by  further  increafing  their  Capital  Stock,  and  to  extend  the  Provifions 
now  exifting  refpefting  the  prefent  ftock  of  the  Company  to  the  faid  increafed 
Ifork,  your  Petitioners  are  now  authorized  to  raife  money  by  increafing  their 
capital  ftock  by  the  fum  of  .^2,000,000  ;  but  your  Petitioners  have  not  raifed  any 
money  in  exercife  of  the  powers  contained  in  the  faid  Aft. 

That  your  Petitioners  are  now  authorized  by  law  to  raife  money  in  England, 

upoa  Bonds,  to  the  amount  of  .^7,000,000  j  and  they  have  iflued  Bonds  to  the 

C33-)  X  amount 


82       CORRESPONDENCE  between  PRESIDENT  of  INDIA  BOARD,  ^c. 

amount  of  ^5,409,325.  and  are  at  liberty  to  iffue  further  Bonds  to  the  further 
amount  of  ,^1,590,675.  and  by  an  Ad  of  51  Geo.  III.  to  enable  the  Eafl;  India 
Company  to  raife  a  further  fum  of  money  upon  Bond,  inftead  of  increafing  their 
capital  ftock,  and  to  alter  and  amend  an  A£l  of  47  Geo.  III.  rekitive  thereto,  it  is 
provided,  that  when  your  Petitioners  fhall  have  railed,  under  and  by  virtue  of  the 
faid  Att  of  T^y  Geo.  III.  and  of  the  faid  Aft  of  47  Geo.  III.  and  of  that  Adt,  fuch 
fums  of  money  as  together  Ihould  amount  to  the  fum  of  ^4,000,000.  fterling  ; 
from  thenceforth  it  Ihould  not  be  lawful  for  your  Petitioners  to  raife  any  further 
fum  of  money  upon  Bond ;  and  all  money,  which  from  thenceforth  Ihould  be 
raifed  by  increafe  of  Capital  Stock,  under  and  by  virtue  of  the  faid  firft-mentioned 
Ad,  fhould  be  applied  in  difchargc  of  the  faid  Bond  Debt,  until  the  faid  Bond 
Debt  created  by  virtue  of  the  faid  AS.  of  47  Geo.  III.  or  of  that  Ad,  together  with 
the  money  to  be  raifed  by  increafe  of  Capital  as  aforefaid,  fhould  be  reduced  to 
the  fum  of  ^4,000,000.  flerling. 