

Your  Petitioners  do  not  queftion,  as  an  abftradl  principle,  the  right  of  any  of 
His  Majefty's  fubjeft s  to  trade  with  any  part  of  His  Majefty's  dominions  ;  but  they 
humbly  fubmit,  that  it  cannot  be  contended  that  any  perfons  can  have  a  right, 
except  with  the  confent  of  your  Petitioners,  to  ufe  the  Settlements,  Fadories,  and 
Seats  of  Trade,  or  to  avail  themfelves  of  the  means  and  facilities,  moral  and 
phyfical,  which  your  Petitioners,  at  a  great  expence  and  rifk,  have  created  or 
acquired,  and  now  at  great  current  charge  maintain,  for  the  purpofes  of  coni- 
merce  and  civil  intercourfe. 

Your  Petitioners  therefore  moft  humbly  pray  that  this  Honourable  Houfe  will 
take  the  premifes  into  its  confideration,  and  make  fuch  provifion,  as  in  its  wifdom 
it  {hall  fee  fit,  for  continuing  the  Government  of  the  territorial  acquifitions  in  the 
Eaft  Indies  in  your  Petitioners,  and  for  fettling  the  Trade  to  the  Eaft  Indies  and 
China,  and  other  places,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Streights  of 
Magellan,  according  to  the  prefent  fyftem ;  or  that  your  Petitioners  may  have 
fuch  relief  in  the  premifes,  as  their  cafe  may  require. 

And  your  Petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray,  &c. 

It  was  then  moved  to  amend  the  faid  Petition,  by  leaving  out  the  following 
words,  viz.  "  Your  Petitioners  fubmit  that  they  would  not  be  juftified  in  becoming 
"  parties  to  any  fyflem,  which,  on  confideration,  fhould  appear  to  them  likely  ta 
"  prove  an  illufion." 

And  the  queflion  being  put,  that  the  words  propofed  to  be  left  out,  ftand  part 
of  the  Petition,  the  fame  was  carried  in  the  afSrmative.^ 

It 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.  o/The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  8 1 

It  was  then  moved,  and,  on  the  queflion, 
Refolved,  That  this  Court  approve  the  above  Petition. 

The  Draft  of  the  Petition  to  the  Honourable  Houi'e  of  Commons,  for  payment 
of  the  debt  due  from  the  Pubhc  to  the  Company,  and  for  other  pecuniary  relief, 
in  which  Petition  fundry  amendments,  as  alfo  propofed  by  the  Court  of  Directors 
fince  the  laft  General  Court,  and  now  fubmitted  to  the  General  Court,  was 
read. 

To  the  Honourable  the  Commons  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland,  in  Parliament  aflembled  ; 

The  humble  Petition  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  England 
trading  to  the  Eaft  Indies  j 

Sheweth, 
That  loans  of  very  large  fums  of  money  have  heretofore  been  raifed  in  India 
on  the  credit  of  your  Petitioners,  for  the  defence  and  protection  of  the  Britifli  pof- 
feflions  there,  by  the  terms  of  which  loans  the  creditors  were  entitled  to  the  option 
of  being  paid  off  in  India,  or  by  Bills  of  Exchange  to  be  drawn  upon  London, 
and  upon  and  in  confequence  of  fuch  obligations  becoming  due,  bills  to  the 
amount  of  i€'i3, 104,924.  have  been  drawn,  fince  the  year  1807,  upon  your  Peti- 
tioners, payable  in  London;  and  the  fum  of  ^£10,902,924.  part  of  the  fum  of 
if  13,104,924.  has  been  diicharged  by  your  Petitioners  ;  and  ^2,202,000  refidue 
thereof,  now  remains  outftanding  ;  and  the  larger  part  of  the  bills  drawn  for  the 
fame  will  become  due  previous  to  the  month  of  March  1814  j  that,  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  enabling  your  Petitioners  to  pay  the  faid  Bills  of  Exchange  which  they 
have  fo  difcharged,  to  the  amount  of  iPi 0,902,924.  they  borrowed  Exchequer. 
Bills  of  the  Public  to  the  amount  of  .^1.500,000.  in  purfuance  of  an  Aft  of 
50  Geo.  HI.  fbr  granting  to  His  Majefty  a  (um  of  money  to  be  raifed  by  Exche-  * 
quer  Bills,  and  to  be  advanced  and  applied  in  the  manner  and  upon  the  terms 
therein  mentioned,  for  the  relief  of  the  United  Company  of  Merchants  of  Eng- 
land trading  to  the  Lilt  Indies ;  and  your  Petitioners  alfo  raifed  a  fum  of 
i^2, 500,000.  upon  Reduced  ^'j.  per  centum  Annuities  and  Confolidated  £t^.  per 
centum  Annuities,  refpedively  transferrable  at  the  Bank  of  England,  in  purfuance 
of  an  Aft  of  52  Geo.  III.  for  advancing  ^2,500,000.  to  the  Eaft  India  Company, 
to  enable  them  to  difcharge  part  of  the  Indian  Debt. 