


39  27  Geo,  3.  cap.  31.  "t"  340^0.  3.  cap.  4;  ;     47  Geo. 3.  cap.  41.  feft.  2.  51. 

That, 


and  CHAIRMAN,  &c.-  of  The  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  79 

I'hat,  in  purfuance  of  feveral  Afts  of  Parliament  fince  1807/'  your  Petitioners 
have  increafed  their  Bond  Debt  in  England  by  the  funi  of  i^2. 409,-^25  ;  and  in 
purfuance  of  an  Aft  of  Parliament  pafled  in  the  50th  year  of  the  Reign  of  His 
prefent  Majefty,  your  Petitioners  have  borrowed  Exchequer  Bills  of  the  Public  to 
the  amount  of  ^^i, 500, 000  ;  and  by  virtue  of  an  Aft  pafled  in  the  laft  Seflion, 
as  herein-before  mentioned,  your  Petitioners  raifed  on  Loan,  by  way  of  Reduced 
and  Confolidated  Annuities,  the  fiim  of  ^^3, 500,000  ;  and  all  fuch  fums  of 
money,  together  wiih  the  faid  fum  of  ^6,289,405,  which  has  arifen  from  the  fur- 
plus  profits  of  the  trade  carried  on  by  your  Petitioners,  as  herein-before  mentioned, 
have  been  abforbed  by  payment  of  debts  and  expences  incurred  in  refpeft  of  the 
territorial  acquifitions  in  India. 

That  in  the  expeditions  on  the  part  of  the  Britifli  Nation  againft  the  European 
Enemies  of  His  Majefly,  and  by  advances  tor  His  Majefty's  Navy  and  other  pub- 
lic fervices,  your  Petitioners  have  incurred  very  large  expences,  which  they  fub- 
mit  they  are  entitled  to  be  reimburfed  by  the  public  ;  and  your  Petitioners  com- 
pute, that  after  allowing  fuch  fum  as  your  Petitioners  are  indebted  to  the  public 
for  the  loan  of  Exchequer  Bills,  to  the  amount  of  j€'i, 500,000,  as  herein-before 
mentioned,  purfuant  to  an  Aft  for  that  purpofe,  paflTed  in  the  lafl  Seflion  of  Par- 

.  liament,""  and  after  allowing  fuch  fums  as  your  Petitioners  are  indebted  to  Hfs 
Majefliy  for  troops  in  India  and  for  recruiting,  the  fum  of  ££"25294,426,  at  the 

.leaft,  will  be  found  due  to  your  Petitioners. 

Your  Petitioners  have  now  exhibited,  they  hope,  with  candour,  the  real  fitua- 
tion  of  their  affairs,  and  of  the  Britifli  trade  and  relations  with  the  Eafl;  Indies  and 
China ;  your  Petitioners  do  not  prefume  to  offer  an  opinion  whether  any  other 
arrangements  than  thofe  which  have  taken  place  would  have  led  to  refults  equally 
or  more  advantageous  than  have  arifen  to  their  Country,  but  they  apprehend  it 
to  be  quite  undeniable  that  the  privileges  entrufted  to  your  Petitioners  have  pro- 
'duced  a  large  quantity  of  pofitive  benefit  to  the  Britifli  Empire,  and  they  fubmit 
that  any  material  change  in  the  Indian  fyfliera  would  be.  matter  of  experiment,  for 
•which  there  can  be  no  fufiicient  data  from  which  its  fuccefs  can  be  calculated  j 
your  Petitioners  feel  it  to  be  their  duty  to  exprefs  to  this  Honourable  Houfe  their 
Tincere  opinion  that  the  public  interefl:  cannot  be  better  confulted  than  by  continuing 
your  Petitioners,  as  the  fole  organs  and  channel  both  for  the  trade  with  and  the 
'Government  of  India,  upon  the  principles' efl:abliflied  by  the  Aft  of  the  33d  year 
of  His  Maiefl:y's  reign,  with  fuch  variations  as  to  the  financial  appropriations,  and 
;n  fonie  other  points  of  detail,  as  prefent  circumftances  require,  and  experience 
has  pointed  out ;  your  Petitioners  aik  not  for  an  exciufive  Trade  upon  the  narrow 
principles  of  monopoly,  for  the  mere  purpiife  of  commercial  gain  ;  they  have 
under  their  care  interefts  of  a  much  more  extended  and  liberal  nature,  which  it  is 
xheir  duty  to  attend  to;  your  Petitioners  are  ready  to  become  parties  to  any  ar- 
rangement which  fliall  be  confiflent  with  the  rights  of  your  Petitioners,  and  the 
fecurity  of  Britifli  India,  and  which  will  not  deprive  your  Petitioners  of  the  means 
of  fulfilling  their  pecuniary  engagements  with  the  public  and  individuals,  or  the 
performance  of  the  fuiiftions  which  may  be  continued  or  allutted  to  them  ;  they 
nope  they  will  not  be  deemed  prefumptuous  in  humbly  fubmitting  their  opmion, 
ccnfidered  and  re-confidered,  that  the  opening  the  Trade  with  China  in  any  degree 
would  endanger  its  exiftence  akcgether  ;  and  your  Petitioners  iiave  at  no  time  con- 
templated any  alteration  even  in  the  Export  Trade  to  the  Eaft  Indies  without  con- 
fideralle  doubt  and  hefitation  ;  but  your  Petitioners  are  firmly  of  opinio;',  that  the 
unreflirr.ined  liberty  of  importation  from  that  Country,  otherwife  than  through  the 
medium  of  the  Efl;abliflmients  of  your  Petitioners  in  London,  would  produce 
effefts  which  every  well-wiflier  to  his  Country  mufl:  deprecate,  and  which  would 
put  to  extreme  hazaid  any  pledge  on  the  part  of  your  Petitioners  for  the  good 
government  of  India,  or  the  performance  of  their  obligations ;  your  petitioners 