1800.            EXPEDITION TO THE MOKBIHAN.                      5

ship ’s company , quitted the Repulse , then stranded , and made
good their landing on one of the Glenan islands , situated about
two miles from the continent . From this island the British
officers and crew were sent as prisoners to Quimper, except the
first lieutenant , John Carpenter Rothery , the master , George
Finn , two midshipmen, and eight seamen ; who got into the
large cutter , and, on the fourth day, after experiencing much
had weather and being nearly lost, reached the island of
Guernsey.
   In a few months afterwards , on his return home, Captain
Alms, his officers, and crew, were tried by a court-martial for
the loss of the Repulse . The first lieutenant and master were
dismissed the service, and declared incapable of serving again,
for having disobeyed the orders of the captain , who, as already
stated , was incapacitated from active duty by a serious ac¬
cident : the captain and remainder of the crew were honourably
acquitted.
   In the latter end of March Lord Bridport resumed the com¬
mand of the Channel fleet off Brest , bringing with him 17 -sail,
making , when Sir Alan Gardner had gone home with seven
ships to refit, a fleet of 38 sail of the line. On the 24th of April,
however, Lord Bridport resigned the command of the Channel
fleet then in port, and Admiral Sir Alan Gardner sailed with it
on a cruise. Two days afterwards Admiral Earl St.-Vincent
hoisted his flag on board the 90-gun ship Namur at Spithead,
as the commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet, and soon after¬
wards joined it off Brest.
   On the 1st of June , Earl St .-Vincent detached Captain Sir
Edward Pellew , with the Impetueux and six other 74s, also
five frigates, one sloop, and five troop-ships, having on board
about 5000 troops including 200 artillery , commanded by
Major -general Maitland , for the purpose once more of rendering
assistance to the Chouans , and other royalists in Quiberon bay
and the Morbihan . On the 2d the squadron anchored in the
bay ; and on the 4th the 32-gun frigate Thames , Captain
William Lukin , 16-gun ship-sloop Cynthia , Captain Micajah
Mai bon, and some small-craft , attacked the south -west end of
Quiberon , and silenced the forts , which were afterwards de¬
stroyed by a party of troops, landed under Major Ramsay.
Several vessels are represented to have been brought off, and
some scuttled , with the loss of only two men killed and one
wounded on board the Cynthia.
    On the 6th , before daybreak , about 300 men of the Queen ’s
regiment landed in the Morbihan , covered and sustained by a
division of small-craft and gun -launches under Lieutenant John
 Pilfold , first of the Impetueux . This united force brought off
 two brigs, two sloops, two gun-vessels, and about 100 prisoners.
 The French 16-gun brig Insolente and several smaller vessels
 were burnt , the guns of the fort destroyed , and the magazine
