2                  BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                            1800.

powers at war with her , is greater in this than in any preceding
year f but some of the other years, the last especially, show, by
the “ Tons,” that those years greatly exceeded the present in the
real quantum of strength acquired . The wrecked cases still
continue to comprise nearly the whole annual loss sustained
by the British navy : the three captured vessels, indeed , did
not exceed a small sloop of war in their united tonnage .f
   The year 1797, as we formerly stated , gave the 32-pounder
carronade , for a quarterdeck and forecastle gun , to line-of-battle
ships in general        and , to complete the triumph of General
Melville ’s piece of ordnance, the year 1799 saw the carronade
established , in a similar manner , throughout the different classes
of frigates . On the 31st of May in that year, urged by the cap¬
tains of most of the frigates that were fitting , the navy-board
obtained an admiralty order to arm them all, 17 in number , with
carronades, § chiefly 32-pounders , on the quarterdeck and fore¬
castle , except in the pair of ports on each of those decks which
opened against , or in the wake of, the rigging . Towards the
end of the year, namely on the 12th of December , the order for
carronades was extended to frigates in general , and made to in¬
clude all the ports on the quarterdeck and forecastle, except the
two foremast ones. The reason of the exception is clear : long
guns, at any elevation to be given them through port-holes, car¬
rying farther than carronades , two of them would be useful as
bow, or, if shifted , as stern chasers.
   The order in question , and one we have to notice in the ensu¬
ing year, completed the demolition of the rating system, or that
system of classification founded upon the number of long guns
only mounted by the respective ships . || As the 74, by the sub¬
traction of 12 of her 18 long nines, to make room for the same
number of carronades , had , in strictness , been reduced to a 62-
   * See Appendix , Nos . 1, 2, 3, and 4.
   -■See Appendix , No . 5.
      See vol . ii., p. 106.
   $ The number of carronades, which the ordnance-board was directed im¬
mediately to supply, were one hundred and sixty-six 32-pounders and forty-
two 24-pounders. The frigates for which the former were ordered, were as
follows :
Gun.frigate
 40    ( Y ) Lavinia . . building, 16, with 4 nines, making 50 guns,

 38-
           ..
      J..Active
         . . Boadicia .
         . . Leda . . .
                         fitting, ")
                                   kl4         ditto        46
      . . . Hussar . .
       (i ?) Jason . . .
         „ Immortalite
 36 < (C) Aigle .        building k !4         ditto        44
         „ Apollo
     ( (j ) ) Decade . .
This makes but 142 out of one hundred and sixty -six 32-pounders : the re¬
maining 24 had been    ordered   for two prize frigates   ( 12 each ) which were
afterwards found on survey, not worth fitting out.
   j) See vol. i., p. 37.
