6         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL .              1800.

blown up ; all with the loss of only one seaman killed in the
boats , and some slight hurts . A descent upon Belle-Isle was
 intended to be the next operation ; but , intelligence being re¬
ceived that the force on the island amounted to 7000 men, the
enterprise was abandoned as impracticable . The British troops
then landed and encamped upon the small island of Houat,
 situated about two leagues to the south -east of Quiberon point;
 whence they subsequently re-embarked , and proceeded for the
 Mediterranean.
    Before we quit the neighbourhood of the Channel and bay of
 Biscay for the Mediterranean , we have to notice the loss of a
 second British ship of the line, off the coast of France . On the
 4th of November, in the night , while the British 74-gun ships
 Captain , Captain Sir Richard John Strachan , and Marlborough,
 Captain Thomas Sotheby , were cruising in company between
 the islands of Groix and Belle- Isle, the latter ship struck on the
 Bividaux or Bervadeux shoal. Here the Marlborough hung for
 several hours ; but , by the great exertions of her officers and
.crew in throwing overboard a part of her guns and the whole of
 her heavy stores, the ship got off. The Marlborough , however,
 had received so much damage that , even after all her masts had
 been cut away and the remainder of her guns thrown over¬
 board, the quantity of water she made obliged the officers and
 crews to leave her to her fate. The Captain , and a Danish brig
 which had just joined , received the whole of them ; and shortly
 afterwards the Marlborough sank at her anchors. Under these
 circumstances no blame could attach to her captain , his officers,
 or ship’s company, and a court-martial pronounced their full
 acquittal.
    There being no longer a French fleet to watch in the port of
 Toulon, Vice-admiral Lord Keith and his cruisers were principally
 employed in blockading the island of Malta , and in co-operating
 with the Austrians in their efforts to expel the French from
 Piedmont and Tuscany . On the 16th of March Lord Keith,
 having , with Lieutenant John Stewart and four other persons,
 landed at Leghorn from his flag-ship the Queen-Charlotte,
 ordered Captain Todd to get under way, and proceed to recon¬
 noitre the island of Capraia, distant about 36 miles from Leghorn,
 and then in the possession of the French ; and which island
 there was some intention of attacking . On the succeeding
 morning, the 17tli, when only three or four leagues from Leghorn
 on her way to Capraia , the Queen-Charlotte was discovered to
 be on fire. Every assistance was immediately forwarded from
the shore ; but a great many boats were deterred from ap¬
proaching the ship, in consequence of the firing of the guns,
which were shotted , and which, when heated by the fire, dis¬
charged their contents in all directions.
    Among the survivors on this melancholy occasion, was the
carpenter , Mr . John Baird . His account is as follows : “ At
