4                  BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                                        1800.

    As the best means of carrying into effect these new regula¬
 tions, a board of admiralty was appointed , resembling that of
 England as nearly as national customs and prejudices would
admit . One of the state -papers, published on this occasion,
represented the French navy to consist of 48 sail of the line at
 sea and in the different,ports of France , and 13 building, of which
 eight w'ere nearly ready for launching , and 42 ship and brig cor¬
vettes . The gun-brigs and smaller vessels, down to 177 flat-
bottomed boats, constructed for the descent on England , were
stated to amount to 243, making a grand total of 398 ships and
vessels. A very large proportion of this total , consisting of non¬
cruising and insignificant vessels, may fairly enough be com¬
pared with the largest total, 757, in the abstract of the British
navy for the commencement of the present year.
    Among the first diplomatic acts of Buonaparte at his assump¬
tion of the chief-consulship was a letter , dated the 25th of
December , 1799, addressed to the King of England , containing
proposals for a general peace.# To this letter Lord Grenville
replied , stating the terms to be inadmissible ; and the negotiation
was broken off. It was considered to be merely a plan of the
subtle chief to induce England to grant an armistice by sea, of
which immediate advantage was to be taken , in the transit of
troops and the entry of convoys with provisions and naval
stores.
    At the commencement of the present year the British Channel
fleet, composed of 28 sail of the line, under Admiral Sir Alan
Gardner in the Royal -Sovereign, cruised off the port of Brest,
blockading the combined French and Spanish fleet, composed,
as already mentioned, of 45 sail of the line.
    On the 9th of March the 64-gun ship Repulse , Captain
James Alms, having been detached by Sir Alan Gardner to
cruise off the Penmarcks , for the purpose of intercepting some
provision-vessels expected at Brest , experienced a violent gale of
wind ; in the height of which Captain Alms, by the rolling of
the ship, was thrown down the companion-ladder , and so seriously
injured as to be incapable of doing any further duty on deck.
For two or three days previous the weather had been so thick
as to render it impracticable to take an observation ; and on the
 10th, at about 10 p. m., the Repulse , then going about six knots
an hour, struck on a sunken rock, supposed to be the Mace,
about 25 leagues south -west of Ushant . After beating on the
rock for nearly three quarters of an hour, during which the
water rushed in so fast that the lower deck was flooded, the
Repulse got off, and, by great exertions, was kept afloat long
enough to be able to approach and run aground upon the French
coast, near Quimper.
    On the 11th, at 10 h. 30 m., a . m., Captain Alms, and his

        * For   a copy   of the   original   letter   , see   Appendix   , No . 7.
