1800.                      - CHARLOTTE BY FIRE.
           LOSS OF THE QUEEN                                        7

 about 20 minutes after six o’clock in the morning , as I was
 dressing myself, I heard throughout the ship a general cry of
fire ! I immediately ran up the fore-ladder to get upon deck,
 and found the whole half-deck, the front bulk -head ^of the
 admiral ’s cabin , the coat of the mainmast , and the boats ’ cover¬
 ing on the booms, all inflames ; which, from every report and
 probability , I apprehend was occasioned by some hay , that was
  lying under the half-deck, having been set on fire by a match in
 a tub , which was usually kept there for signal guns . The
 mainsail at this time was set, and almost instantly caught fire,
 the people not being able, on account of the flames, to come to
 dhe clue-garnets.
     “ I immediately went to the forecastle, and found Lieutenant
 {the Honourable George Heneage Lawrence) Dundas and the
 boatswain encouraging the people to get water to extinguish the
 fire. I applied to Mr . Dundas , seeing no other officer in the
 forepart of the ship (and being unable to see any on the quarter¬
 deck from the flames and smoke between them ), to give me
 assistance to drown the lower decks, and secure the hatches , to
 prevent the fire from falling down. Lieutenant Dundas accord¬
 ingly went down himself, with as many people as he could
 prevail upon to follow him ; and the lowerdeck ports were
  opened, the scuppers plugged , the fore and main hatches se¬
 cured , the cocks turned , water drawn in at the ports , and the
 pumps kept going by the people who came down, as long as
they could stand at them . Owing to these exertions , I think
 the lower deck was kept free from fire, and the magazines pre¬
 served from danger for a long tune : nor did Lieutenant Dundas
 or myself quit this station until several of the middledeck guns
 came through the deck . At about nine o’clock , finding it
 impossible to remain any longer below, Lieutenant Dundas and
 myself went out at the foremast lowerdeck port , and got upon
 the forecastle ; on which, I apprehend , there were then about
 150 of the people drawing water , and throwing it as far aft as
 possible upon the fire. I continued about an hour on the fore¬
castle , till finding all efforts to extinguish the flames unavailing,
 I jumped from the jib -boom, and swam to an American boat
approaching the ship ; by which boat I was picked up and put
into a tartan , then in the charge of Lieutenant Stewart , who had
 come off to the assistance of "the ship .”* Captain Todd , with
 Mr . Bainbridge , the first lieutenant , remained upon deck to the
last moment giving orders for saving the crew, without pro¬
 viding, or apparently caring , for their own safety.
    We shall now enter upon the sorrowful task of showing what
 loss of lives was the consequence of this dreadful accident . The
 number of persons on shore at Leghorn , including five who did
^ot know the ship had been ordered to sea, were the admiral,

                     * Schomberg, vol. iii., p. 431.
