10         BRITISH AND TRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.               1800.
 rowing 52 oars, and mounting two extremely long brass 36-
 pounders besides smaller pieces, an armed cutter , three armed
 •settees, and several gun-boats . On the 20th , in the afternoon,
 this flotilla, standing along outside of the new or south-western
 mole-head , exchanged several shot with some of the British
 ships in passing ; particularly with the Audacious, who was once
 or twice hulled by the long 36-pounders of the galley . At sun¬
 set the flotilla took up a position under the guns of the two
 moles and the city bastions , which were covered with troops,
 manifesting a determined resistance.
    Notwithstanding this formidable indication , the bombarding
 flotilla, at about 9 p. m., quitted the Minotaur to make a fourth
 attack upon the town and shipping . On the 21st, at about 1 a .m.,
a brisk cannonade was opened upon the town, and quickly re¬
 turned from various points ; particularly from the long 36-pound¬
ers of the Prima galley , now lying chain-moored close to the
inside of the old or eastern mole-head . Being unable , from his
lighter metal, to offer any effectual check to this annoyance by
a cannonade , Captain Beaver resolved to attempt carrying the
galley by boarding . For this service a detachment of 10 boats,
containing between them about 100 officers and men, immedi¬
ately drew off from the flotilla. While the British were proceed¬
ing with all possible silence, in the hope to approach undis¬
covered in the prevailing darkness , a gun-boat stationed between
the two mole-heads opened her fire upon them . Every moment ’s
delay now adding to the danger , the boats dashed on towards
the galley . On arriving alongside a new obstacle presented
itself . The gangway , or gunwale, of a galley projects three feet
and upwards from the side of the hull , and that of the Prima
was strengthened by a stout barricade , along the summit of which
 were mounted several blunderpieces and wall-pieces. As an
additional obstruction to the advance of boats , the oars were
banked or fixed in their places, ready for use, with the handles
secured to the benches or thwarts . Thus , with a crew of 257
fighting men, and those by the gun-boat ’s alarm , prepared for
resistance , the Prima galley , even had she not been chain-
moored in a harbour the entrance to which was guarded by
numerous batteries , would have been a formidable object of
attack.
    All this , however, as we shall soon see, was of no avail . The
first entrance was made amidships on the starboard side in the
most gallant manner, by a boat of the Haerlem , under the com¬
mand of Midshipman John Caldwell ; who was promptly sup¬
ported by some of the other boats . In the mean time the boats’
crews of the Minotaur ’s cutter , commanded by Captain Beaver,
and of the Vestal ’s launch , by Lieutenant William Gibson, sup¬
ported by the remaining boats,had clambered up the images on the
quarter , to carry the poop, where a considerable number of
French soldiers had assembled . After a desperate struggle
the British succeeded in their object ; and , as they gained footing
