1800.   CONVENTION BETWEEN FRANCE ANI) AUSTRIA
                                             .                  13
4th of June , consented to evacuate the town of Genoa, and , with
the 8000 of his troops that were able to march, retire to Nice.
In some preparatory conferences held on shore between General
d’Ott , Lord Keith/and General Massena , the latter expressed
as much contempt for Austria , as he did respect for England;
observing .to Lord Keith , “ Milord, si jamais la France et
l ’Angleterre s’entendre , elles gouverneraient le monde.” # Much
more passed in the same strain . There was, no doubt , a little
policy in all this ; and it may indeed be gathered from an ap¬
parently authentic account of the negotiation for the surrender
of Genoa, that the French general seldom paid a compliment to
the British admiral or nation , without exacting in return some
solid concession. On the 5th , the Minotaur , Audacious, and
Genereux 74s, Charon store-ship, Pigmy cutter , and a small
Neapolitan squadron , anchored in the mole of Genoa.
    On the very day on which the treaty was signed for the
evacuation of Genoa by Massena , the first consul of France,
having with a powerful army crossed the Alps, entered the city
of Milan , the capital of Lombardy, and on the same day pro¬
claimed afresh the Cisalpine republic . The Austrian general,
Melas , as soon as this news reached him, abandoned the whole
of Piedmont , and concentrated his forces at Alexandria . On the
7th of June , Buonaparte , still unacquainted with the surrender
of Genoa, quitted Milan to attack the Austrians . On the 9th
and 10th he defeated General d’Ott , who had evacuated Genoa
after three days ’ possession, at Casteggio and Montebello . On
the 14th was fought the famous battle of Marengo, in which
Buonaparte defeated General Melas , with a loss to the latter of
4500 left dead on the field of battle , nearly 8000 wounded, from
6000 to 7000 prisoners, 12 stands of colours, and 30 pieces of
cannon , and with a loss , to himself of only 2000 killed, 3600
wounded, and 700 prisoners.
    On the 15th , at Alexandria , a convention for a suspension of
arms was signed between the two commanders-in-chief ; by the
terms of which France was to be put in possession of the 12
following fortresses : Tortona , Alexandria , Milan , Turin , Piz-
zighittone , Arona, Piacenza , Cori, Seva, Savona, Genoa, and
Fort Urbin . Repossession of the city of Genoa was taken on
the 22d of J une by General Suchet , and on the 24th General
Massena himself returned to it . This reoccupation was so
sudden and unexpected , that the Minotaur found some difficulty
in warping herself out of the mole in time. We must now leave,
for a while, the shores of northern Italy , to attend to operations
in another quarter of the Mediterranean.
    At the close of the year 1798 we left the French general,
Vaubois , with about 3000 soldiers and seamen, shut up in the
fortress of Valetta , menaced on the land side by a powerful force

                Victoires et Conquetes , tome xii ., p . 210.
