1800.         CUTTING OUT THE PRIMA GALLEY.                            11

on one side, the greater part of their opponents fled overboard
on the other . Almost immediately afterwards the night burgee,
or commodore’s broad pendant , the only colours flying on board
the galley, was hauled down by Lieutenant Gibson, first of the
Vestal , and all further resistance ceased.
    The boats were immediately ordered ahead to tow ; and the
slaves, in seeming cheerfulness , manned the sweeps, crying out,
in broken English , “ Bless the king of Gibraltar !” After some
delay , the galley was cleared from the chains by which she had
been moored to the mole, and began moving to the entrance of
the harbour under a tremendous fire of shot, shells, and mus¬
ketry ; the latter from a numerous body of troops drawn up on
the mole-head ; round which the galley passed within 10 yards,
 with no greater loss or damage than five British seamen wounded
 one shot through the head of the mainmast , and some cut rig¬
ging . Of the galley’s people, one was killed , and 15 wounded,
 by the British when they boarded : a few others, in all proba¬
 bility , were drowned ; and many succeeded in gaining the shore.
 According to the French accounts , the captain , Bavastro , was
 among the latter , and had leaped into the water on seeing that
 50 Ligurian grenadiers, stationed on board his vessel, had trea¬
 cherously fired only three muskets at the assailants .* From
 the testimony of the latter , there is not the least ground for this
 accusation ; and, in Lord Keith ’s letter in the Gazette , the cap¬
 tain of the galley is named Patrizio Galleano.
    Soon after the Prima had passed the mole-head, Captain
 Beaver quitted her in his boat to acquaint Lord Keith with his
 success, and the command devolved upon Lieutenant Gibson,
 already mentioned as the officer, who, with his own hand , had
 struck the galley’s colours. Before the galley had got quite out
 of gun-shot of the mole-head , an alarm was raised of fire below.
  Lieutenant Gibson instantly rushed down, and found a half-
 drunken French sailor, with a light and a crow-bar, in the act
 of breaking open the door of the magazine, for the purpose , as
  he unhesitatingly declared , of blowing up the vessel and all on
  board of her . The man was promptly secured and a sentry
  placed over the hatchway . Had the wretch succeeded in his
 ^illanous attempt , between 400 and 500 souls might have
  perished ; for, besides the British officers and men who had cap¬
  tured the galley , and the 60 or 70 French soldiers and seamen
  remaining on board out of those that had belonged to her, there
  Were upwards of 300 miserable beings chained to the oars.
     It was principally by the exertion of these very slaves, that
 the galley shot so quickly past the mole-head , and thus
 escaped destruction by the batteries . So vigorously did these
  Practised rowers continue to ply their sweeps, that the galley
  Nearly overran the British boats towing ahead . As soon as the
  galley bad got out of gun-shot, the slaves, by the permission of
               * Victoires   et Conquetes   , tome   xii ., p . 199.
