12         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS
                                   .—MEDITER.                1800.

 the British commanding officer, released themselves from their
 fetters . This operation they performed with surprising quick¬
 ness ; and , now that the galley ’s lateen sails began to supersede
 the use of the oars, the poor fellows were jumping about the
 deck in a delirium of joy ; heaping blessings upon those who
 had restored them to liberty , and evincing so different a feeling
 towards their former masters in the galley , that the latter for
 their personal safety, were transferred to the boats towing astern.
    The half-frantic wretches little dreamt of the fate for which
 Lord Keith had reserved them . To that we shall come presently.
 We must first express our regret that Captain Beaver, who,
 throughout this dashing enterprise , appears to have conducted
 himself in the most gallant manner, was not allowed to write
 the official letter ; as, doubtless , he would have named the
 officers who served under him. Not one officer, besides Captain
 Beaver , is mentioned in Lord Keith ’s letter ; and it has been
 with no inconsiderable difficulty that we have been enabled to
 give the names of two of the number.
    Shortly after daylight on the 21st the galley was brought to
 an anchor under the stern of the Minotaur , and a more beautiful
 vessel of the kind had never been seen. Her extreme length
 was 159 feet, and her breadth 23 feet six inches. In her hold
 were 30 large brass swivels, intended to have been mounted
 upon her forecastle and poop. Not being a vessel adapted for
 the British navy, the Prima was sold to the Sardinians , for, we
 believe, the comparatively small sum of 15,000 dollars.
    The garrison of Genoa, as was well known to the British
 admiral cruising off the port, was in a state bordering on famine.
Had there been a doubt on the subject , the lank and miserable
appearance of the galley ’s crew must have instantly removed it.
 Perhaps it is conformable to the law's of war, however repugnant
to those of humanity , to press an evil of this sort upon an enemy.
At all events Lord Keith , with that object in view, restored to
 General Massena the few French or Ligurian soldiers and sea¬
men which, out of the small number taken , had survived the
 sudden change from starvation to plenty . His lordship did
more : he actually sent back the galley-slaves, or 250 of them at
least, about 50, fortunately for them , having been blown off’ the
coast in the Expedition 44. Lord Keith must have been certain
that the poor slaves would, at the least, have been rechained to
their oars. What some would consider a more merciful fate
awraited them . It having been made known to General Massena
that , by their aid principally , the galley was moved from her
strong position inside of the mole, he ordered the victims of
Lord Keith ’s breach of faith (for, surely, there was an implied,
if not an expressed promise not to betray human beings so
peculiarly circumstanced ), to be taken to the great square of the
town and shot!
   Starved at length into compliance, General Massena , on the
