14              BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                            1800.

 of Maltese , Neapolitans , and British , and blockaded at the mouth
of the harbour by a squadron of British and Portuguese ships.
 In the latter end of January , 1799, the garrison, already be¬
ginning to be straitened for provisions, received a supply by a
schooner from Ancona ; and in the early part of February the
French 36-gun frigate Boudeuse , from Toulon, with a still
greater quantity of stores , including some munitions of war,,
managed to elude the vigilance of the blockading squadron and
enter the harbour.
   During the remainder of the year, however, not a vessel was
able to get in, and General Vaubois and his troops , in con¬
sequence, began to experience the miseries of famine and dis¬
ease. Among the means taken to alleviate the sufferings of the
garrison , was the ordering out of the city of a portion of the in¬
habitants . This was done from time to time, until the original
number of 45,000 was reduced to barely 9000. On the 1st of
November, 1799, Rear -admiral Lord Nelson, then with his flag
on board the 80-gun ship Foudroyant , commanding the block¬
ading force, sent in a summons to surrender . To which General
Vaubois replied : “ Jaloux de meriter l’estime de votre nation,
comme vous recherchez celle de la notre , nous sommes resolus
de defendre cette forteresse jusqu ’a l’extremite .”
   So strictly had the island of Malta been blockaded since the
arrival of the Boudeuse , that the French were kept in ignorance
of the revolution of the 9th of November ; until January , 1800,
when an aviso, with despatches from the new government , and
Moniteurs to the middle of December , contrived to enter the
port . All was now joy and enthusiasm in Valetta ; and the
garrison , both officers and men, were so elated at the advance¬
ment of Buonaparte to be chief consul, that they rashly swore
never to yield up the island to the enemies of France.
   In the early part of February , Vice - admiral Lord Keith
cruised off Malta with the
 Gun-ship
     inn   r\      m i   . ..   i Vice -admiral   (r .') Lord   Keith , K .B.
     100 Queen-Charlotte... | Captain And JJ Todd.
      80 Foudroyant .       5 Scar-admiral (r.) L" d Nelson-
                Jl            Captain Sir Edward Berry.

           {Audacious„
               .
         Northumberland...
         Alexander .
                                   „   George Martin.
                                       Davidge
                               Lieutenant        Gould!
                                           William  Harrington, acting.
    64 Lion.                   Captain Manley Dixon.
  Sirena, Neapolitan frigate, and two or three sloops.

   On the 15th Lord Keith received intelligence from Captain
Shuldam Peard of the 32-gun frigate Success, cruising off' the
south -west end of Sicily, that a small French squadron was
approaching the island , with the view of attempting to throw in
a supply of troops and provisions. This squadron consisted of
the 74-gun ship Genereux , bearing the flag of Rear -admiral
