8          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                        1800.

one lieutenant , the admiral ’s secretary , with his two clerks , one
chaplain , one master ’s mate, two midshipmen , and two servants,
total 11. Those saved from the wreck by the boats that came
 off were, three lieutenants , two lieutenants of marines , one car¬
penter , one gunner , three midshipmen , one secretary ’s clerk , and
 146 seamen and marines, total 156 ; making 167 as the whole
number saved. Now for the contrary side. Those who perished
 appear to have been, one captain , three lieutenants , one captain
of marines, one master , one purser , one surgeon, one boatswain,
four master ’s mates , 18 midshipmen , one secretary ’s clerk , one
schoolmaster , one captain ’s clerk , three surgeon’s mates , and
about 636 seamen, boys, and marines ; making the total loss
 amount to 673 souls.
    A sad calamity indeed ! lamentable to humanity for the loss
of so many individuals , and , considering the origin of the acci¬
 dent , and the time of day in which it happened , not very credit¬
 able to the discipline of the ship . The Queen -Charlotte , and
her sister-vessel the Royal -George, were, next to the Ville-de-
 Paris , the largest British -built ships at this time afloat. It was,
then , no trifling loss which the British navy sustained , when the
 Queen -Charlotte , with all her guns , stores , and provisions , and
upwards of three fourths of her numerous ship’s company,
perished in the flames.
    The above, with a slight verbal alteration , is precisely as the
 account stands in the first edition of this work ; and yet the fol¬
lowing paragraph has since appeared in the work of a contem¬
 porary : “ We should have hoped, that the bravery , perseve¬
rance , and self-devotion of Captain Todd , who, to the last
moment gave orders to save the lives of his men, regardless of
his own, would have secured his memory from the imputations
cast on it by a contemporary historian , who observes, that 1the
accident was not very creditable to the discipline of the ship.’ ”*
What “ imputations ” are here cast upon the memory of Captain
Todd ? Who was the first, our contemporary or ourselves, to
record the “ self-devotion” of that officer1 Was the accident,
which is admitted to have originated in the manner we have
stated , creditable to the discipline of the ship ? Were the
 Queen -Charlotte ’s crew, in short, in a state of discipline ? Let
our contemporary answer the latter question himself. Referring
to the conduct of the Queen -Charlotte in the mutiny at Spithead
in April, 1797, Captain Brenton says, “ This ship, from the
shamefully relaxed state of discipline in which she had been
kept while the flag of Earl Howe was flying on board of her,
naturally became the focus of all mutiny , a character which she
maintained until she was burnt off Genoa .”T If we required
higher authority than Captain Brenton ’s, the same writer has
furnished us with it in the following extract of a letter from

       * Brenton , vol . iii ., p . 112.   f Ibid., vol. i., p. 414.
