.1800.    .   SIEGE AND BOMBARDMENT OF GENOA.                     9

Earl St.-Vincent to the secretary of the admiralty , dated April
16, 1799 : “ The Queen-Charlotte will be better here than on
home service, for she has been the root of all the evil you have
been disturbed with .” #
   The commencement of the present year saw the famous army
of Italy , which under Buonaparte had performed such prodigies,
reduced to less than 25,000 men, and those in the greatest
misery for the want of food and clothing . A powerful Austrian
army, under General Melas , presented an effectual barrier by
land , and the cruisers of Lord Keith shut out all supplies by
sea. On the 21st of April, after having sustained some severe
losses in action with the Austrians , and left at Savona a gar¬
rison of 600 men under Brigadier -general Buget , General
Massena retreated upon Genoa ; and General Melas imme¬
diately commenced the siege of that strong and important
fortress.                                                           (
   The Austrian force blockading the fortress of Savona was
under the command of Major -general Count St .-Julien ; and
the British fleet cruising before the port consisted of the 36-gun
frigate Santa -Dorotea, Captain Hugh Downman , the 18-gun
brig-sloop Chameleon, Lieutenant Samuel Jackson acting , and
the Neapolitan brig Strombolo , Captain Settimo . By Lord
 Keith ’s orders, the sea-blockade of Savona had been more
 especially committed to the care of Captain Downman ; and the
 boats of his little squadron with a highly commendable perse¬
 verance, rowed guard off the harbour ’s mouth during 41' nights;
 until , in fact, the garrison reduced by famine, on the 15th of
 May surrendered to the allies.
   The blockade of the port of Genoa was undertaken by Lord
 Keith himself ; who, after the accident to the Queen-Charlotte,
 shifted his flag, first to the 74-gun ship Audacious, Captain
 Davidge Gould , and subsequently to the Minotaur 74, Captain
 Thomas Louis. The principal part of the vice-admiral s force
 consisted of frigates sloops, and Neapolitan gun and mortar
 boats . These had on several occasions successfully co-operated
 with the Austrian army in attacks upon the outworks of Genoa.**
 The services of the 38-gun frigate Phaeton , Captain James
 Nicholl Morris, had been particularly noticed by the Austrian
 general , Baron d’Ott , who had succeeded General Melas in the
 command : and who, in the early part of May , had pushed his
 advance to the village of Coronata , and compelled General Mas¬
 sena to retire within the walls of Genoa.
    Within the first two or three weeks of May the town had
 been bombarded three times by the gun and mortar vessels and
 armed boats of the ships , under the direction of Captain Philip
 Heaver, late of the 28-gun frigate Aurora . Being much annoyed
     these attacks , the French determined to board the bombard-
      force by a flotilla of their own, consisting of one large galley,

                     * Brenton, vol . ii., p. 35G.
