18         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                 1800 .,

the Guillaume-Tell’s mizen chains, Sir Edward Berry called
upon the latter to strike , following up his demand with a treble-
shotted broadside . To this the Guillaume-Tell replied in a
similar manner, and with such effect as to cut away a great deal
of the Foudroyant ’s rigging . Having incautiously arrived up
with so much sail set, the Foudroyant necessarily shot ahead,
and could not, for several minutes, regain her position alongside
of her opponent. That object being at length effected, the
firing recommenced ; and the Guillaume-Tell’s second broad¬
side brought down the fore topmast , maintopsail yard ,jib -boom,
and spritsail yard of the Foudroyant . Having also had her
foresail, mainsail , and staysails cut in tatters , the British 80
dropped from alongside , leaving the Lion, who now lay upon
the Guillaume-Tell’s larboard side, and the Penelope upon the
same quarter , occasionally firing at her.
   At 6 h. 30 m., a . m., the French ship ’s main and mizen masts
came down. By this time, having cleared away the wreck of
her fallen spars and partially refitted herself, the Foudroyant
had again closed the Guillaume-Tell, and, after the exchange
of a few broadsides , nearly fell on board of her . At 8 a . m., the
foremast of the Guillaume-Tell was shot away . At 8h . 20 m.
a . m., Cape Passero     bearing   north-half -east   distant   seven
leagues, the Foudroyant and Lion being, one on her starboard,,
the other on her larboard quarter , and the Penelope close ahead,
the Guillaume-Tell, rolling an unmanageable hulk on the water,
with the wreck of her masts disabling most of the guns on the
larboard side, and the violent motion from her dismasted state
requiring the lowerdeck ports to be shut , hauled down her
colours.
   Both the Foudroyant and Lion were in too disabled a state to
take possession of the Guillaume -Tell ; that ceremony, therefore,
 devolved upon the Penelope . The damages of the Foudroyant
were very severe : her mainmast , mizenmast, fore topmast , and
bowsprit were wounded in several places ; and her mizenmast
was so much injured , that , in four hours after the action, it came
 down, wounding in its fall five men. The Foudroyant had also
received, in her hull , several of the Guillaume -Tell’s shot. The
masts of the Lion were likewise wounded, and her hull struck ;
but not to so great an extent as the Foudroyant ’s. The damages
of the Penelope were confined to her rigging and sails.
   The loss sustained by the Foudroyant , out of a complement
of 719 men and boys, amounted to eight seamen and marines
killed , her commander (slightly ), .one lieutenant (John Aitkin
Blow), her boatswain (Philip Bridge ), three midshipmen
(Edward West , Granville Proby , and Thomas Cole), and 58
seamen and marines, exclusive of the five that suffered by the
fall of the mizenmast, wounded . The Lion, out of a crew on
board of only about 300 men and boys, had one midshipman
(Hugh Roberts ) and seven seamen and marines killed, and one
