1800.                BLOCKADE OF MALTA.                         15

Perree , who had been exchanged soon after his capture in the
preceding June , 28-gun frigate Badine , two corvettes, and seve¬
ral transports , having on board about 3000 troops, with which
they had sailed from Toulon on the 7th . To intercept and pre¬
vent the disembarkation of this force, Lord Keith , with the
Queen-Charlotte , kept as close to the entrance of the harbour of
Valetta as the batteries would admit , and directed by signal, the
only mode of communication the weather would admit, the
Foudroyant , Audacious, and Northumberland to chase to wind¬
ward or in the south -east , and the Lion to look out off the
passage between Goza and Malta . The Alexander , at this
time, was under way on the south -east side of the island.
   On the 18th, at daylight , the Alexander fell in with and
chased M . Perree ’s squadron in sight of Lord Nelson’s three
ships. At 8 a . m. the Alexander fired at and brought to the
Ville-de-Marseille armed store-ship . At 1 h . 30 m. the Badine
and smaller vessels tacked ; but the Genereux , not being able
to do so without coming to an action with the Alexander , bore
up . The Success frigate being at this time to leeward , Captain
Peard , with great judgment and gallantry , lay athwart the
hawse of the French 74, and raked her with several broadsides.
Presently afterwards , however, the Success became exposed to
a broadside from the Genereux , and by it had one man killed,
her master and eight men wounded. At 4 h. 30 m. p. m. the
Foudroyant , followed closely by the Northumberland , got near
enough to discharge two shots ; whereupon the Genereux
finding it impossible to escape from her pursuers , fired the usual
ceremonious broadside , and struck her colours. Great praise
was awarded to Lieutenant Harrington , who, in the absence of
 Captain Ball, serving with the allied forces on shore, com¬
manded the Alexander , for his excellent management on first
descrying the French squadron ; and the spirited behaviour of
Captain Peard did not escape his lordship ^s notice. The Suc¬
cess, indeed, had watched M. Perree ’s squadron from the
moment of its appearance off Sicily, and had immediately
apprized Lord Keith of its approach.
   One omission we regret to observe in Lord Nelson’s letter:
some notice of the loss sustained by the Genereux just pre¬
viously to her surrender ; and which loss, although of a single
man, was, in all probability , the principal cause of that ship’s
comparatively feeble resistance . Rear -admiral Perree , having
received a severe splinter -wound in the left eye, said to those
about him, “ Ce n’est rien, mes amis, continuons notre besogne .”
He then gave an order for some manoeuvre, and had scarcely
done so, when a round -shot took off his right thigh . This brave
officer immediately fell insensible on the deck , and died a few
minutes afterwards ; deplored by his countrymen , and highly
respected and esteemed by all the British officers, some of them
