22         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MED1TER.                      1800.
in Egypt should evacuate the country , and should be allowed
to return to France .” This notice of the El -Arich treaty by the
official organ of the British government implied an approval of
the measure ; but , long before its appearance in the Gazette , the
convention had been disowned and denounced by a party , with¬
out whose entire concurrence it could not be carried into effect.
   Having employed all the month of February in making ar¬
rangements for removing his army according to the terms of the
treaty , General Kleber might well be surprised when, in the
early part of March , he was informed by the captain of the
Theseus 74, then cruising off’ Alexandria , that , by Sir Sidney
Smith ’s orders, he could allow no other vessel * to depart from
the ports of Egypt . Soon afterwards came a letter from Sir
Sidney himself dated at the Isle of Cyprus on the 20th of
February , informing the French general, that the commander-in-
chief’ of the British fleet in the Mediterranean had received
orders which opposed the immediate execution of the treaty of
El -Arich . Almost immediately upon this communication fol¬
lowed a letter from Lord Keith himself , in which his lordship
acquaints the French general , that he has received positive
orders to consent to no capitulation with the French troops in
Egypt and Syria, unless they lay down their arms and surren¬
der as prisoners of war, abandoning all the ships and stores in
the port and citadel of Alexandria ; that , in case of such capi¬
tulation , the troops would not be allowed to return to France
without exchange ; that all ships having troops on board , and
sailing from Egypt with passports signed by others than those
who have a right to grant them, will be detained as prizes.
   The instant he had read this letter , General Kleber deter¬
mined to give battle to the grand vizier, who had already been
making several hostile demonstrations : he, nevertheless , replied
calmly to Lieutenant Wright , the bearer of it, “ You shall know
to-morrow the answer I mean to give to your admiral .” That
very night the French general had the letter of Lord Keith
printed ; and, the next morning, with “ Proclamation ” for a
head , and with “ Soldats ! on ne repond a une telle insolence
que par des victoires : preparez-vous a combattre ! ” for a post¬
script , issued it to his army.
   Although , as we have elsewhere stated , Sir Sidney Smith did
not affix his signature to the formal convention concluded at El-
Arich, he appears to have signed , conjointly with General De-
saix and M . Poussielgue , a preliminary document containing the
basis of the treaty , and the third and last article of which runs
in these words : “ That the French army evacuate Egypt , with
arms and baggage , whenever the necessary means for such eva¬
cuation shall have been procured , and to withdraw to the ports

   * Generals Desaix , Davoust , and a few other officers of distinction had
already sailed for France.
