20        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER .             1800.

decked ship belonging to the British navy. The principal
dimensions of the two 80-gun ships were as follows:
                          Length of        Extreme            Tons.
                          first deck.      breadth.

                          ft. in.          ft. in.
Foudroyant . . .      .   183 8£           50 7|-             ‘2062
Guillaume-Tell .* .   .   194 4            5i n               2265

    The loss of the Guillaume -Tell, the only remaining line-of-
battle ship of the fleet of Vice-admiral Brueys at the battle of
the Nile, was calculated still more to depress the drooping
spirits of the garrison of Valetta . A fifth and a sixth summons
were sent in by the commanding officer of the blockading force ;
and by the last it was intimated , that a Russian fleet had arrived
at Messina, on its way to co-operate in an attack upon the city.
General Vaubois still refused to surrender ; saying : “ Cette
place est en trop bon etat , etje suis moi-meme trop jaloux de
bien servir mon pays et de conserver mon honneur, pour ecouter
vos propositions.”
    By the beginning of August all the beasts of burden had
been consumed, and dogs, cats , fowls, and rabbits , for want of
nourishment , had also disappeared . Firewood began likewise
to fail ; but this was remedied by breaking up the Boudeuse
frigate . The cisterns were dried up, and the troops were dying
from 100 to 130 a day . Being now convinced that he must
soon capitulate , General Vaubois wished to save to the republic
the two fine 40-gun frigates , Diane and Justice.
    Accordingly , favoured by a dark night and a fair wind, the
two French frigates , on the evening of the 24th , put to sea from
Valetta harbour . They were, however, seen and immediately
pursued by the 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Success , Captain
Shuldham Peard , and the Genereux and Northumberland
74s, Captains Manley Dixon and George Martin ; which last-
named officer had , since May, succeeded Captain Troubridgein
the chief command . After a short running fight with the Suc¬
cess, the Diane, with only 114 of her crew on board , hauled
down her colours ; but the Justice , under cover of the darkness,
effected her escape, and subsequently arrived at Toulon. The
 Diane was a fine frigate of 1142 tons, and was afterwards added
 to the British navy under the name of Niobe, there being a
 Diana already in the service.
    On the 3d of September General Vaubois held a council of
 war ; at which the French officers gave as decided a proof of
 their present wisdom, in unanimously concurring to treat for a
 surrender , as of their past folly, in having unanimously sworn
 that they never would do so. Accordingly , on the 4th , a
 flag of truce was sent to Major-general Pigot commanding
 the allied forces on shore ; and on the 5th the major-
 general and Captain Martin , on the part of the British , and
