24         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                1800.
  between the French army under General Kleber , stated at
   10,000 men, and the Turkish army under the Grand Vizier
  Jussuf , stated at the enormous amount of from 60,000 to 80,000
  men. After five days’ fighting in the plains of the province of
  Charquieh , during which the Turks were driven from village to
  village, the French gained the entire victory ; and the grand
  vizier, taking horse at Salalieh , fled across the desert with
  scarcely 500 followers, leaving his camp, artillery , and baggage
  to the conquerors. Of the loss on the French side we are not
  informed, but it was probably of trifling amount ; while the loss
  of the Turks , including those left dead on the field, or different
  fields of battle , massacred by the Arabs, and who perished in the
  desert , is represented to have exceeded 50,000.
     After the suppression of a revolt at Cairo, and the expulsion
 of a small British force under Lieutenant -colonel Murray , which
 had been disembarked from the 50-gun ship Centurion, and
 some smaller vessels at Suez, General Kleber , towards the end
 of the month of April, found himself again in tolerably quiet
 possession of the principal posts formerly occupied by the
 French army in Egypt.
     It was not, it appears, until towards the middle of June , that
 General Kleber received any intimation of the desire of the
 British government to renew the convention which had been
 broken off in the manner we have related . Either feeling not
 disposed to trust a second time to those who had once deceived
 him , or fancying himself too firmly established in his possession
 to be easily ousted, the French general refused to negotiate;
 and instantly began strengthening the principal defences along
 the coast, and making the best arrangements in his power to-
 repel the attack which, he considered it likely, would soon
 be made by the British.
     An event, however, soon occurred, which the French Egyptian
 army had good reason to deplore. On the 14th of June , as
 General Kleber , accompanied by the architect Protain , was
walking along a terrace belonging to his palace at Cairo, a
 stranger , indifferently habited in the oriental costume, rushed
out of an adjoining gallery and stabbed the general with a
 poniard . Mortally wounded, General Kleber had only time
to support himself against the wall of the terrace , and call out
to a domestic whom he saw approaching , u A moi, guide, je suis
assassine !” M . Protain , in the mean while, having no arms but
a small stick , was endeavouring to hold the murderer till some one
arrived to secure him ; but the latter , stabbing M. Protain badly,
 but not mortally , in six places, disengaged himself, and, having
replunged his dagger into the heart of his first victim, fled into
the gardens of the palace . On seeing the commander-in-chief
fall, the guide, instead of running towards him, hastened to the
house of General Dumas , where a large party of general officers
was then assembled.
