1800.                   BLOCKADE OF MALTA.                              17

board quarter of the Guillaume-Tell , and gave her the
broadside , receiving in return only the 80-gun shipstarboard    s stern-
chasers.
   Aware that , if he brought to, the ships then visible
verge of the horizon would soon take part in the                    on the
admiral Deeres continued his course to the northward       fight,    Rear-
                                                                and east¬
ward . The Penelope , whose rate of sailing
her adversary, and whose manoeuvres were exceeded that of
                                                directed by a prac¬
tised seaman, continued pouring in her raking
                                                    broadsides , with
such effect that , just before the dawn of day on
Guillaume -Tell’s main and mizen topmasts and main       the 31st , the
                                                              yard came
down. The ship was thereby reduced , with the
her mizen, to her head-sails, and these were greatly       exception      of
                                                           damaged by
the Penelope’s shot . From such a succession of
the Guillaume- Tell had also, no-doubt , sustained a raking fires,
loss of men ; whereas the Penelope , whose object considerable
                                                          was to avoid
exposing herself to a single broadside from so powerful
gonist , had the good fortune to escape with only a              an anta¬
to her rigging and sails. The frigate’s loss,            slight   damage
                                                         although
numerically great , included among the killed her master ,              not
Damerell ; and her wounded amounted to one                           Henry
                                                   midshipman (Mr.
Sibthorpe ), one seaman, and one marine.
   At 5 a . m., or a little after, the Lion, who at 1
                                                             a . m., after
having despatched the Minorca to the Foudroyant
                                                               and Alex¬
ander to leeward, had slipped her cable and
                                                       chased in the
direction of the firing, arrived up with the chase, showing
and a blue light every half hour as a signal to the               a rocket
Steering between the Penelope and the crippled             ships astern.
and so near to the latter , that the yard-arms ofGuillaume-Tell,
                                                        the two ships
barely passed clear, the Lion ranged up on the
                                                     larboard side of
her opponent, and poured in a destructive
                                                  broadside of three
round shot in each gun . The Lion then luffed up
bows of the Guillaume-Tell , the latter ’s jib -boom across the
tween the former’s main and mizen shrouds. In a passing be¬
                                                          few minutes,
to the advantage of the Lion, whose object , with
                                                           so
tively small a complement, was neither to board nor compara¬
the French 80’s jib -boom was carried away ; and be boarded,
 a capital position athwart the Guillaume -Tell’s the 64 gained
                                                          bows. Here,
aided occasionally by the Penelope , the Lion kept
                                                             up a steady
 cannonade, until about 5h . 30 m. a , m. ; by which
                                                                time the
Guillaume -Tell’s heavy shot had so damaged the Lion,
                                                                 that the
latter became unmanageable and dropped astern ,
however, as did also the frigate , whenever an                still  firing,
offered.                                                    opportunity
   At 6 a . m., the Foudroyant , who since midnight
 &nd made sail from her anchorage about three                had slipped
                                                      miles north -east
 of Valetta lighthouse , arrived up with a crowd
passing in that state close to the French ship’s            of sail, and,
                                                        starboard side,
 so close that the Foudroyant ’s spare anchor
    v ol. m ,                                    just passed clear of
                                      c
