1800.                     TREATY OF EL- ARICH.                               23

which shall be agreed upon . This agreement bears date on
board the Tigre , “ 8 Nivose,” or December 29, the very day on
which the French commissioners repaired on board at Sir Sid¬
ney ’s invitation . It was natural , therefore, that Sir Sidney
should feel highly mortified and indignant at the refusal of his
superiors to ratify a treaty which he (it has never been contended
unauthoritatively ) planned and matured . His letter to M. Pous-
sielgue , of date March 8, forcibly depictures the bitterness of
his feelings on the subject.
    In all the versions of this affair to which we have had access,
it is stated that Lord Keith , in refusing to ratify the treaty , was
merely complying with the instructions he had received from
his government. Indeed , his own words to General Kleber
are : “ I inform you that I have received positive orders from his
majesty to consent to no capitulation with the French army
under your command in Egypt and Syria , unless &c.” But
what says Lord Keith , in a letter dated more than two months
afterwards , and addressed to M . Poussielgue ? “ I have given no
orders or authority against the observance of the convention
between the grand vizier and General Kleber , having received
no orders on this head from the king’s ministers. Accordingly,*
I was of opinion that his majesty should not take part in it;
but , since the treaty has been ' concluded , his majesty being
desirous of showing his respect for his allies, I have received
 instructions to allow a passage for the French troops .”
    Upon the whole, therefore, we are disposed to acquit the
 British government of the chief blame in this most discreditable
business, and to transfer it to Vice-admiral Lord Keith ; who,
doubtless , had a precedent to quote in the still more disgraceful
breach of faith committed by Lord Nelson in Naples bay ; and
who might naturally feel somewhat personally affected at being,
by Sir Sidney Smith ’s blightful interference, thus suddenly cut
 off from becoming a principal sharer in that golden harvest
which the great expedition on foot was almost certain to reap.
    Whatever , or whoever, may have been the cause of the rup¬
ture of the El-Arich treaty , that rupture stimulated the injured
party , against every calculation of force and number, to wreak
the most signal vengeance upon the Turks , who undoubtedly were
not those by whom the breach of faith had been committed.
 Unluckily for them, however, they happened to be in immediate
contact with the enraged French army ; the grand vizier, with
his host of turbans , having possessed himself of the different
 strongholds , the instant the French had quitted them on their
 ■way to the coast to embark under the terms of the treaty.
    The first battle was fought on the 20th of March , at the vil¬
 lage of Matarieh (built upon the ruins of the ancient Heliopolis),
 , * “ Although” appears to be the proper word, but thus it stands in a work
\brenton , vol. iii., p. 57) now before us, and the only authority on the subject
to which, at this moment, we have the means of referring.
