  1800 .               SURRENDER      OF MALTA.
                                                                    21

  General Vaubois and Rear -admiral Villeneuve, on the part of the
  French , settled the terms of capitulation . These, alike ho¬
  nourable to both parties , were executed on the same day ; and
  the fortress of Valetta and its dependencies were immediately
  surrendered to the British . Of the two 64s in the port, one
  only, the Athenien , was in a seaworthy state, and she was
  a remarkably fine ship of 1404 tons . The Carthagenaise frigate
  was in a similar stated to the Dego , and therefore not worth
  removing:.
      ■xjtj-• ®                      •                 •
       We must not quit the subject       of Malta without naming, as
  the principal person to whom the loyal inhabitants were indebted
  mr the expulsion of their cruel invaders, Captain Alexander John
   Ball of the Alexander 74. This officer had served on shore
  during the greater part of the blockade , and , by the warmth of
   his attachment nor less than the wisdom of his measures, had
  endeared himself to the Maltese . Captain Ball therefore was
   the fittest person to preside over them ; and to that office, some
, short time after the surrender of the island , he was appointed
   by the British government.
       When we last quitted the shores of Egypt we left the two
   commissioners from General Kleber , and those from the
   grand vizier, on board the Tigre , Captain Sir Sidney Smith,
    contending with a gale of wind. That gale prevented the
   ship from returning to Alexandria until the 17th or 18th of
   January . In the mean time, however, the conferences had been
    carried on ; and the result was, that the parties landed and re-
              to the newly captured fort of El -Arich, and there, on the
    P th of January , signed a convention for the evacuation of
      gypt by the French army. Or rather , a convention to that
    e ect was signed by General Desaix and M . Poussielgue , as
    R 6 iHlf^ P^ ftbaries of General Kleber , and by Mustapha-
       achid Effendi and Mustapha -Rasycheh Effendi, as the pleni-
    po entimries of his highness the Grand Vizier ; but not by Sir
      ldney Smith . On the 28th , at Salahieh , this treaty was ratified
   ^General       Kleber , and subsequently , we believe, by the grand
      The convention consisted of 22 articles , the chief of which
   We re, that the French army should evacuate Egypt , embarking
   at Alexandria , Rosetta , and Aboukir ; that there should bean
   annistice of three months , or longer if necessary ; that all sub¬
   jects of the Sublime Porte prisoners among the French should
     e set at liberty, - and that vessels containing the French army
   should have proper passports to go to France , and not to be
    molested by any of the belligerents.
       Ahe moment this convention was signed, Sir Sidney Smith
    ^ht a copy of it to his government by the hands of Major
    18<0ri^ aS ^    le TiSre’8 mai’ines ; an(l 011 the 25th of March,
         h F     onven ^ on was announced     in the London Gazette   as
     he by which it had been agreed “ that the French troops        now
