16                                .—MEDITER.
          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS                             1800.

the most distinguished in the service, whom he had previously
met either as enemies or friends.
   Of the importance of the supplies on board the Genereux and
her convoy to the French garrison in Valetta , some idea may be
formed, by the following prices of the principal articles of food :
a fowl 16 francs, a rabbit 12 francs, an egg 20 sous, a lettuce 18
sous, a rat 40 sous, and fish six francs per pound . In addition
to this the typhus fever was making destructive ravages among
the troops, and the only bouille served to the sick in the hos¬
pitals was made of horse-flesh.* In this emergency General
Vaubois determined to despatch Rear -admiral Deeres , with the
Guillaume-Tell, to announce to the first consul, that the place
could not hold out longer than the month of June.
   Shortly after the capture of the Genereux Lord Keith pro¬
ceeded with the Queen-Charlotte to Leghorn ; off which port
that ship’s fate was sealed in the distressing manner already
detailed . In the early part of March Rear -admiral Lord Nel¬
son, being indisposed (mentally , if not corporeally ), retired to
Palermo , and thence , by the way of Leghorn and Vienna , to
England ; leaving the blockading squadron off Malta in charge
of Captain Troubridge of the Culioden . During the latter ’s
temporary absence, the British naval force cruising off the
island , at the latter end of March , consisted of the 64-gun ship
 Lion, Captain Manley Dixon, 80-gun ship Foudroyant , Captain
 Sir Edward Berry , 74-gun ship Alexander , Lieutenant William
 Harrington still acting for Captain Alexander John Ball , and
the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Penelope , Captain Henry
 Blackwood , accompanied by two or three sloops and smaller
vessels.
    On the 30th , at 11 p. m., the Guillaume -Tell, Captain Saul-
nier , bearing the flag, as already mentioned, of Rear -admiral
 Denis Deeres , taking advantage of a strong southerly gale and
the darkness that had succeeded the setting of the moon, weighed
 and put to sea from the harbour of Valetta . At 11 h. 55 m. f . m.
the Penelope , whose commander had been ordered to keep under
way between where the Lion lay at an anchor and the harbour ’s
mouth , discovered the Guillaume -Tell on her larboard or weather-
bow, under a press of sail, steering with the wind on the star¬
board quarter . The Penelope immediately despatched the
 Minorca brig, Captain George Miller, with the intelligence to
 the commodore, and apprized the latter by signal , that the chase
 was on the starboard tack . As soon as the French 80 had
 passed on, the British frigate tacked and stood after her. Half
 an hour after midnight , having arrived close up with the chase,
the Penelope luffed under the Guillaume -Tell ’s stern, and gave
 her the larboard broadside . She then bore up under the lar-

              * Victoires et Conquetes , tome xiii ., p. 142.
