1800.
                       CAPTURE OF THE HEUREUX.                            33
   Although , owing to some omission in Captain
letter , a little delay occurred in doing                  Newman ’s
                                          justice to the claims of
Captain Bazely, that officer, as well as his
                                               brother
Captain Horton , was at length promoted to post- commander,
    On the 1st of March , in the middle of the       rank.
                                                 night , the British
12- pounder 36-gun frigate Nereide ,
                                       Captain
cruising off the Penmarcks , discovered to Frederick Watkins,
and a schooner. As soon as she had             windward five ships
                                          made the necessary pre¬
paration for battle , the Nereide hauled up for
                                                      the strangers;
which, at daylight on the 2d, were seen to be
                                                  all armed vessels,
and were then lying to, as if determined to
the British frigate . Nor will it be            have a contest with
                                       considered that the French
commodore had formed a very rash resolve, when
ki ®squadron is stated.                                  the force of
    Fhe largest ship was the Bellone, of
643 tons, qnd mounting 24 long 8-            Bordeaux , measuring
                                       pounders on the main deck,
and six brass 36- pounder carronades on
                                              the
forecastle ; total 30 guns , with a complement quarterdeck and
men.* The three remaining ships, also                of at least 220'
the Vengeance, of 18 long 8-poundersf        from   Bordeaux    , were
                                           and 174 men, Favorite,
of 16 long 6-pounders and 120 men, and
                                             Huron ,
pounders and 87 men ; and the schooner was the of 16 long 4-
14 long 4-pounders and 80 men ;                        Tirailleuse , of
681 men.                            making a total of 94 guns and
    Just as the Nereide arrived within gun-shot
                                                     of these seemingly
pugnacious privateersmen , their hearts failed them        , and the four
ships and schooner made all sail on
                                             different courses. The
British frigate went in immediate chase,
suit until night shut out the fugitives and continued the pur¬
                                             from her view. On the
2d, however, at daylight , the Nereide
the ships ; and , after a 12 hours ’ chase regained    a sight of one of
                                             and a run of 123 miles,
captured the Vengeance.
    On the 5th of March , at 8 a . m., in
                                                latitude 50° 2' north,
longitude 14° 43/ west , the British 18- pounder
 Phoebe, Captain Robert Barlow, was borne                 36-gun frigate
                                                      down upon , and
tired at, by the French ship privateer
                                         Heureux , of 22 long brass
12-pounders and 220 men.
t . Phoebe for an Indiaman ,The     latter , as it appeared , mistook
                                and did not discover her mistake
mrtu she had arrived within point- blank
                                                  musket -shot. The
   eureux then wore upon the Phoebe’s
  o the wind on the same tack ; hopingweather         bow, and hauled
                                           , by a well- directed fire,
 o disable the Phoebe’s masts , rigging ,
                                              and sails, and thereby
effect her escape. The fire from the
                                            British frigate , however,
was too powerful toTje withstood by so
toe, and the Heureux struck her colours. comparatively inferior a

  * In   Captain   Watkins   ’s
                           letter in the  Gazette , 420 ; probably
graphical mistake. -                                                 a typo¬
  T Ibid. ; I2-pounders, but we know
                                       they were only 8-pounders.
   VOL. III .                         n
