 26        BRITISH AND SPANISH FLEETS.— ATLANTIC.                1800.

      On the same evening, after a fort of eight 24-pounders had
   been silenced by the fire of the Impetueux 74, Brilliant 28-gun
   frigate , Cynthia sloop, and St.- Vincent gun-boat , the troops were
   disembarked on the shores of the bay, along with 16 field-pieces,
   without the loss of a man . They were attended by a detach¬
   ment of seamen from the ships of war, to carry scaling-ladders
   and drag the guns up the heights ; a service which the seamen
   performed with their accustomed alacrity.
      Scarcely had the British troops gained the summit of the first
   ridge, when the rifle- corps under Lieutenant -colonel Stewart
   fell in with, and drove back , a detachment of the enemy, with
   some loss, including among the wrounded the lieutenant -colonel.
   At daybreak on the 26th , a considerable body of the enemy was
   repulsed , chiefly by the brigade under Major -general the Earl
   of Cavan. This advantage , with the comparatively slight loss
   of 16 killed and 68 wounded, gave the British the complete and
   undisturbed possession of the heights of Brion and Balon , which
   overlook the town and harbour of Ferrol. The general says, in
  his despatch , that he had now an opportunity of observing
  minutely the situation of the place, and of forming, from the
  reports of prisoners, an idea of the strength of the enemy. He
  did so, and requested the British rear-admiral to embark the
  troops and their cannon. All of which was done the same
  evening, in the ablest manner ; and, as at the disembarkation,
  without the loss of a man.
     If General Pulteney ’s “ prisoners,” in their reports , were as
  wide of the truth as Don Francisco Melgarejo ’s “ French sailor,”
  the Spaniards would not want men or guns to frighten away an
  invader . The sailor insisted that the British had landed 15,000
 men, and that they had 1000 killed , including a lieutenant-
  general and a colonel, and 800 wounded. The Spaniards them¬
 selves declare , that they had , at no time, more than 4000 men
 under arms, including 500 sailors and some militia ; whereas we
 find, by Lieutenant -general Pulteney ’s letter in the Gazette , that
 seven British regiments (one with both battalions ) and a rifle-
 corps shared in the loss. The probability then is, that there
 were at least 8000 British , to combat 4000 Spanish troops.
 That they did not do so, was matter of just triumph to the
 latter . At all events the navy performed its part ; and so would
 the army, or even two thirds of it, had “ circumstances permitted
it to act .”
     With his squadron and fleet of transports , Sir John after¬
 wards proceeded to Gibraltar , and there formed a junction with
 a much larger force under the Mediterranean commander -in¬
chief . On the 2d of October Lord Keith sailed from Gibraltar
with 22 ships of the line, 37 frigates and sloops, and 80 trans¬
ports , having on board about 18,000 men, under the command
of General Sir Ralph Abercromby. With this powerful force,
the vice-admiral, on the 4th , came to an anchor in the bay of
