1800.              CAPTURE OF THE PALLAS.                       31

the two sloops, the Pallas was gradually gained upon by the
chasing ships, the Loire, Railleur , and Harpy especially.
    At about 10 h. 30 m. p. m. the Loire had weathered her op¬
ponent so much as to be able to set her topgallant studding-
sails, and at 11 p. m. arrived up with the Pallas . The Railleur,
being ahead of the Loire, was directed to fire her broadside and
drop astern . This the sloop did ; and immediately afterwards,
the nearest of the Seven Islands bearing south -west by south
distant about 750 yards , the Loire commenced a close action
with the Pallas , who opened a spirited fire in return . In a
little time a battery upon the island , of several guns and a
howitzer, began a smart fire upon the British ships , and did
considerable damage to the Loire. In this way the action con¬
tinued between the French frigate and shore-battery on one
side, and the Loire, Railleur , Harpy , and Fairy on the other ; the
combatants all on the starboard tack , with the wind, as before,
blowing moderately from the south -east.
    At about 1 h. 30 m. a . m. on the 6th , the Harpy fetched close
under the stem of the Railleur , then engaging the Pallas with
great gallantry , and poured her broadside into the French
frigate ’s quarter . This was repeated with such destructive
effect, as to induce some one on board the frigate (especially as
a man had been shot while ascending the mizen shrouds with a
lantern to repeat the signal of surrender ) to hail the brig with
the exclamation , “ Ne tirez pas encore, messieurs, nous sommes
 a vous.” The Harpy then ceased her fire, as about the same
time did the Loire, Railleur , and Fairy . The Loire and Harpy
 each lowered down a boat and sent her first lieutenant (Edmund
 Rayner and James Watson ) to take possession of the prize.
 Conceiving, from a bustle abaft on board the Railleur , that a man
had fallen into the water , Lieutenant Watson yawed out of his
course : in consequence of this , the Loire’s boat reached the
 Pallas a few minutes before the Harpy ’s ; but the latter had the
honour of conveying Captain Epron to the Loire.
    The established complement of the Loire was 284 men and
boys ; but she had on board no more than 260 , about 100 of
whom had “ volunteered ” from the prison-ships, and ran from
their quarters almost as soon as the action commenced. Of
those 260 in crew, the Loire lost three seamen killed , and three
midshipmen (Watkins Owen Pell , Francis William Eves, and
John Allen Medway ), 15 seamen, and one marine wounded.
The Railleur , out of a complement of 76 men and boys, had one
midshipman (William Prothers ) and one gunner’s mate killed,
 and three seamen and one marine wounded. The Fairy , out of
 a complement of 120 men and boys, had , in the day action, four
 seamen killed, her commander (slightly ), purser (Mr . Hughes ),
 arid six seamen wounded , four of them badly ; but in the night
 ac von the Fairy had only one seaman wounded.         The Harpy,
      °f a crew the same as the Fairy ’s, had one seaman killed
