34         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                           1800.

   The Phoebe had three seamen killed , or mortally wounded,
and three slightly wounded ; the Heureux , 18 men killed , and
25 wounded , most of whom lost limbs . The latter was a very
complete , flush-decked ship, coppered and copper-fastened,
highly finished, and of large dimensions , measuring 598 tons.
She was therefore readily purchased for the use of the British
navy, and, under the same name, became classed as a 22-gun
post-ship.
    On the 15th of March the British 20-gun ship Danae , Cap¬
tain Lord Proby , while watching the French fleet in Brest,
became lost to the service under the following discreditable cir¬
cumstances . At 9h . 30 m. p. m., Jackson , one of the captains
of the foretop, and who had been secretary to Parker in the
Nore mutiny , assisted by some prisoners and a part of the crew,
rushed on the quarterdeck , knocked down the master , and cut
him severely over the head . They then threw him down the
main hatchway , and battened down the grating , placing over it
the boats , filled with shot . By this means the remainder of
the crew were prevented from retaking the ship . When the
mutiny broke out , all the officers, except Lord Proby , the
marine-officer, and the master , were in bed . On being informed
by the marine-officer of what had happened , Lord Proby
attempted to get up the after hatchway , but found it already
guarded by nearly 20 men. One of them cut his lordship on
the head ; and no possibility existed of forcing the hatchway.
    Lord Proby and the marine -officer then contrived to muster
about ten cutlasses , four muskets , and some pocket -pistols.
These were distributed among the most trustworthy of about 40
men ; who, when the business commenced , were asleep in their
hammocks . The hope then was that the mutineers would be
forced to keep the sea ; but the wind unfortunately changed,
and they were enabled the next morning , the 16th, to fetch
under Fort Conquete in Camaret bay , where they anchored the
ship . Jackson then sent the jollyboat on board the French
16-gun brig-corvette Colombe, at anchor in the bay ; and which
brig on the 14th, with a convoy under her charge , had been
chased in by the Danae herself . At 2 p. m. the first lieutenant
of the Colombe, accompanied by a detachment of soldiers, went
on board the Danae , and asked Lord Proby to whom he sur¬
rendered . His lordship replied, “ To the French nation , but
not to mutineers .’' Both vessels then steered for Brest , where
they arrived on the 17th, after having been chased during several
hours by the frigates Anson and Boadicea , Captains Philip
 Charles Durham and Richard Goodwin Keats ; who, deceived
by Jackson ’s hoisting the horary and numerical signals , sup¬
posed the Danae to be in chase of an enemy. Lord Proby
had , however, thrown out of the cabin-window, and sunk
 with lead attached to it, the box containing the private
 signals.
