1800.            CONSTELLATION AND VENGEANCE.                   27

Cadiz , and summoned the town to surrender , in order to get
possession of the Spanish squadron at anchor in the harbour.
The reply of Don Thomas de Morla , the governor of Cadiz, ac¬
quainting the two British commanders-in-chief that the plague
was raging in the town and environs, put a stop at once to all
hostile measures against the miserable inhabitants , and sent the
expedition back to Gibraltar , to be employed against a different
enemy in the manner we shall hereafter have to relate.

                LIGHT SQUADRONSAND SINGLE SHIPS.

    Having given an account of the first engagement fought
between an American and a French frigate, we shall offer no
apology for inserting in these pages an account of the second.
On the 1st of February , at 7 h. 30 m. a . m., the United States’
36-gun frigate Constellation , still commanded by Commodore
Thomas Truxton, * being about five leagues to the westward of
Hasseterre-road, Guadaloupe , working to windward, discovered
ln the south -east quarter , standing south -west, the .French 40-
gun frigate Vengeance, Captain Sebastien -Louis-Marie Pichot.
    The American commodore immediately went in chase ; and
M . Pichot ran from him, for the reason, as alleged afterwards by
some of the French officers, that the Vengeance had her decks
encumbered with hogsheads of sugar , which she had brought
from Guadaloupe , and was carrying to Europe . Let that have
been as it may, at 8 p. m. the Constellation got within hail of
the Vengeance, and received a fire from her stem and quarter
guns . In a little time the former, having gained a position
on the French frigate ’s weather quarter , opened a very destruc¬
tive fire ; and to which, from her position , the Constellation
received a much less effective return , than if she had run fairly
alongside . The mutual cannonade continued , in this manner,
until nearly 1 a . m. on the 2d ; when the Vengeance, owing to
the damaged state of the Constellation ’s rigging and masts , par¬
ticularly her mainmast , was enabled to range ahead out of gun¬
shot , and the battle ended.
    The force of the Constellation , in guns, men, and size, has
already been given.f The armament of the Vengeance , with the
 addition of four brass 36-pounder carronades , was the same as
that of her sister-ship, the Resistance , captured in March,
 1797 and her complement may also be stated the same as the
 latter ’s, exclusive of about 60 passengers.
    The loss sustained by the American frigate amounted to one
officer and 13 seamen and marines killed, and two officers and
23 seamen and marines wounded . That of the Vengeance is
represented , in the American accounts , at 150 in killed and

  * See vol. ii., p. 323.    f Ibid., p. 324.      f Ibid., p. 81.
