28           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1800.

  wounded ; but , according to a published letter from one of her
  passengers , it amounted to only 20 men killed and 40 wounded.
     The officer killed on board the Constellation was Mr. James
  Jervis , a young midshipman , who, with some of the men, fell
  overboard with the mainmast . “ It seems this young gentle¬
  man, ” says Commodore Truxton , “ was apprized of the mast
  going .in a few minutes, by an old seaman ; but he had already
 so much of the principle of an officer ingrafted on his mind,
 not to leave his quarters on any account , that he told the men,
 if the mast went, they must go with it ; which shortly afterwards
 occurred , and only one man was saved.”
    Although , undoubtedly , the American frigate was the superior
 both in force and effectiveness, yet , had the Constellation made
 a prize of the Vengeance, no one can deny that it would have
 redounded to the honour of Commodore Truxton , and been a
 subject of fair triumph to so young a navy as that of the United
 States . But , if it be true , as the French captain is represented
 to have stated , that the flag of the Vengeance came down three
 times during the contest , what was the Constellation about that
 she did not attempt to take possession ? It would seem that the
 Constellation , notwithstanding she was to windward, persisted in
 remaining at too great a distance from her antagonist , to observe,
 in the dark , what the latter was doing. According to Captain
 Pichot ’s account , indeed, the Vengeance lost all three masts by
the Constellation ’s fire ; and yet Commodore Truxton , although
 so minute in his “ Journal ” as to tell us that , previous to the
 action, he got “ the large trumpet in the lee gangway ready to
 speak ” the French frigate, takes no notice of the loss of her masts*
    The most extraordinary circumstance , however, remains to be
told . The Vengeance, M. Pichot declares, was compelled, owing
to the inexperience of her crew, to remain stationary for three
days , while jury -masts were erecting ; and, during the whole of
that time, the Constellation lay to windward, with her fore
and mizen masts still standing (her mainmast had fallen a few
minutes after the firing had ceased ), and yet did not bear down,
or evince the least inclination, to renew the engagement . The
Constellation , soon afterwards , made sail for and anchored in
Port -Royal , Jamaica ; and the Vengeance, no less happy than
surprised at such an escape, steered for Cura §oa, where she ar¬
rived in a very shattered state.
    No sooner did the commodore’s account of his rencontre
reach the United States , than his fellow-citizens, particularly
those of his own, or the federal party , set to work to bring to
an issue on paper, that which had been left undecided on the
ocean. They pronounced and published the action as a victory;
ate dinners , and drank themselves drunk , in honour of it ; and,
when the commodore arrived in port, assailed him on all sides
with addresses of congratulation , founded on assertions that the
commodore’s letter had never sanctioned , and from which,
