1800.          FAIRY" AND HARPY AND PALLAS.                      29

although not possessed perhaps of a very extraordinary share,
his modesty must have recoiled.
    We formerly mentioned , that the merchants of London pre¬
sented the commodore with a piece of plate for having captured
the Insurgente . Such was actually the spirit of party in the
United States , that the democrats abused Commodore Iruxton,
calling him Tory, &c., for having accepted it. About the
middle of the year 1800 the commodore was promoted 'to the
 command of the 44-gun frigate President ; but the moment the
democrats came into power, on March the 4th in the succeeding
 year , he was displaced , and , as a proof how liberal republics can
 be, was never afterwards put in command. The more moderate
 among the democrats , however, did at length relent a little ; and
 Commodore Truxton got appointed (of all places for a commo¬
 dore !) sheriff of Philadelphia ; in which office he realized an
 independency.
     On the 5th of February , at 6 a . m., the British 16-gun ship-
 sloop Fairy (armed similarly to Rattlesnake , vol. ii., p. 348 ),
 Captain Joshua Sydney Horton , and 18-gun brig-sloop, Harpy
 (same force as Racoon , vol. ii., p. 369), Captain Henry Bazely,
 weighed and set sail from St.-Aubin’s bay in the island of Jersey,
  with the wind a fresh breeze at north -west, to reconnoitre the
 port of St .-Malo, and discover if a French frigate , which on the
 preceding evening had chased the 14-gun brig Seaflower, Lieut.
  Murray , had got into that harbour . At 11 h. 30 m.A. m., Cape
  Frehel bearing south -east distant five or six miles, a large ship,
 evidently a frigate, was discovered in the south -south- west quar¬
  ter , running down close alongshore to the westward , with a light
  breeze nearly aft, or from the south-south -east . This was the
  French 38-gun frigate Pallas , Captain Jacques Epron , from St .-
  Malo bound to Brest , and the same, as it appears , that had
  chased the Seaflower.
      At about 20 m. p. m., seeing no chance of bringing the^Pallas
 to action while she remained so close under the land, Captain
 Horton tacked and stood off, in the hope that the frigate would
 follow the two sloops to an offing. This the Pallas immediately
 did ; and at 1 p. m. an engagement , within pistol-shot, com¬
 menced between her and the Fairy and Harpy , the latter close
 astern of her companion. The action, during which the Harpy
 obtained several opportunities of raking the Pallas , continued
 until 3 p. m. ; when the French frigate ceased firing, and made
 nil sail to the northward and eastward , having the wind now
 from the south -west.
      So great were the damages which the Fairy and Harpy had
 received in their rigging and sails, that it was not until 3 h. 15 m.
  P*M. that the sloops were in a condition to make sail in chase.
  A^out this time the Pallas , observing two sail nearly ahead , or
  lri the north -east by north , hauled up to the northward and
  Westward. Captain Horton immediately made the signal for
