30          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1800
 the Harpy , who was the more advanced in the chase, to endea¬
 vour to gain the wind of the enemy. At 4 p. m. three sail,
 including the two already noticed as seen by the Pallas , were
  discovered by the two sloops. No doubt being entertained that
 the vessels approaching were friends , the Fairy made the signal
  for an enemy ; which was repeated by the Harpy , both sloops
 firing guns every five minutes to enforce attention to it.
     These ships, then working up from the northward with a light
 wind from the south-east by south , were the British 38-gun
 frigate Loire, Captain James Newman Newman, 20-gun ship
  Danae , Captain Lord Proby , and 16-gun ship-sloop Railleur,
 Captain William James Turquand ; and all of which had sailed
 from Plymouth on the 27th and 28th of January , purposely to
 intercept the Pallas and a corvette, expected to be on their way
 from St .-Malo to Brest . At 4 h. 15 m. p. m. the Pallas bore
 away large ; and , in order to deceive her new pursuers and dis¬
 tract their attention , hoisted English colours, and endeavoured
 to repeat the signal made by the Fairy and Harpy . At 4 h.
 30 m. p. m. Roche Douvre bore from the Fairy north -north -east
 distant six or seven miles ; and at 5 h. 30 m. p.m. the Pallas bore
 west, and the Harpy west by south, the breeze now light from the
 south -east.
    At 7 p. m. Captain Bazely received orders to go ahead , as far
 as signals were discernible between the two sloops, and make
 the private signal to the two ships, the Loire and Danae , upon
 her lee bow. This was done, and subsequently the Fairy also
 made the private signal ; but it was not answered by either the
 Loire, Danae , or Railleur , which latter was considerably ahead
 and to windward of her two consorts . Notwithstanding this
apparent remissness, Captain Horton was tolerably satisfied that
the ships approaching were friends, and therefore stood on in
chase of the Pallas . We may add to this , that Captain New¬
man also knew (although that is no excuse for not answering the
private signal), that the two ships and brig in sight were the
Pallas , Fairy , and Harpy ; having learnt from Lord Proby , who
had been detached for information to Jersey , upon what mission
the two sloops had sailed.
    At about 7 h. 45 m. p.m., observing ahead, and close under
the Seven Islands , a ship approaching , which was the Railleur,
the Pallas tacked ; and at 8 p. m., while passing about three
miles to windward of the Harpy , and at a still greater distance
from the Loire, both on the opposite or larboard tack , was fired
at, of course, without effect, by the Loire. The latter and the
Harpy then tacked in chase ; and at about 9 p. m. the Loire
spoke the Fairy , who had also just tacked , and whose com¬
mander informed Captain Newman of the name and force of the
Pallas , at that time “ about a gun-shot and a half ” upon the
Fairy ’s weather quarter . Whether owing to bad management,
bad sailing, or disabled rigging from her previous action with
