32          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1800.

and three wounded in her first action, but escaped without any
casualty in her second ; making the total loss on the British
side nine killed and 36 wounded.
    The official letter of Captain Newman does not mention a
word of any loss having been sustained by the Pallas : a very
improper omission, as it leads to an inference that the enemy’s
frigate struck her colours without having lost a man in the
action. That such was not the case is clear, as well from the
 state of the ship ’s hull, which was pierced by shot in several
places , as from the state of her lower masts, all three of which,
just before daylight on the 7th , went over her side in a squall.
    Captain Newman states that the crew of the Pallas numbered
350 ; but the officers of the latter swore, in the prize-court, that
they had 362 men when the action, meaning, we presume, that
with the two sloops, commenced. Hence the 12 men con¬
stituting the difference between the two statements , were, in all
probability , killed in the preceding or day action. A greater
loss than that must , we suppose, have been incurred in the night
action , when the Loire’s heavy broadsides came into play;
but , for the reason already stated , we are unable to give the
particulars.
    Instead of exhibiting the usual comparative statement , we
shall merely say, that , unaided by any of her consorts, the
Loire, mounting 46 guns (long 18 and 9 pounders , with 32-
pounder carronades), was more than a match for the Pallas;
and that the latter ’s defence was highly creditable to her officers
and crew.
    The Pallas was a remarkably handsome frigate of 1029 tons,
and had never before been at sea. She was of course purchased
by government ; and, under the name of Pique , long continued
a favourite 36-gun frigate in the lists of the British navy.
    For what , on one side at least , may be called a single-ship
action , the details of the occurrences which led to the capture of
the French frigate Pallas have given us considerable trouble , and
are not yet drawn up to our entire satisfaction . Not , however,
because there has been so little said or written on the subject,
for few actions of the kind have given rise to so much discus¬
sion, as the pages of the Naval Chronicle can testify ; but owing
to the obscure and contradictory statements which have been
published , all resting upon authority equally respectable . At all
events, no one can deny that the conduct of Captains Horton
and Bazely was highly gallant and praiseworthy. Nor must the
efforts of the Harpy be disparaged simply because she was an
 18-gun sloop. The Harpy was armed in the same manner as
the Pelican , that had rendered herself so famous in beating off
the Medee ; and the former’s 32-pounder carronades , in the
close and raking position in which they were frequently fired,
did considerable mischief to the Pallas , as Captain Epron him¬
self was candid enough to acknowledge.
