 1800.             CAPTURE OF THE LIGURIENNE.                        35
                                                                          /
    The officers of the Danae were landed at Brest ; but
                                                             the ship’s
 company , including the mutineers , were, to the
 and chagrin of the latter , marched to Dinan astonishment
                                                     prison. Vice-
 admiral Bruix , together with the commandant
 the other French officers at the port, behaved of  marines and all
                                                  with great polite¬
 ness and attention to Lord Pro by and his officers ;
                                                        the whole of
 the former expressing their utter detestation of the
 the mutineers . Captain Louis- Leon Jacob ,               conduct of
 36 -gun frigate Bellone, captured with the Hoche  formerly      of the
                                                          in the year
  1798, nobly offered to give louis d’ors for all
 England notes of the officers. Several of the the             bank of
                                                        latter , soon
 afterwards , were permitted to return to England on
 parole.                                                           their
    On the 20th of March , in the evening, as
                                                         the British
 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Mermaid, Captain
                                                    Robert Dudley
 Oliver , and 16-gun ship-sloop Peterel (armed like
                                                          the
 Captain Francis William Austen , were cruising in the Fairy ),
                                                                 bay of
 Marseille , Captain Oliver directed the Peterel to keep
 shore by way of deception, thereby to capture any            close   in¬
 might be running along the coast.                       vessels    that
    On the next morning some vessels of a convoy
                                                          of 50 sail,
 from Cette bound to Toulon and Marseille , under the
 of an armed ship, brig, and xebec, were
                                                            protection
                                             descried and chased,
 and two of them , a bark and bombard , both laden
                                                         with wheat,
captured . On the same afternoon, when near to Cape
 ronne, the Peterel came to action with the three                  Cou-
                                                     armed vessels;
 but which, after a short contest, observing the
                                                            Mermaid,
 although at a great distance , beating up from to-leeward ,
 sail to get away. The ship and xebec, one, the Cerf              made
                                                           of 14 long
brass 6-pounders and about 90 men, the other ,
                                                        the
(named after the captain of the Genereux ), commanded Lejoille
                                                                by the
 commodore of the division, Captain (de vais.) Pierre -Paul
 Raccord , and mounting six long brass 6-pounders ,
 50 men, effected their escape by running on shore. and about
                                                           The brig-
corvette, which was the Ligurienne of 14 long 6-
two 36-pounder carronades , all brass , and 104 men,  pounders      and
                                                          Lieutenant
Fran ^ois- Auguste Pelabond , after sustaining the
Peterel , in a running fight of an hour and a half ’sfire of the
                                                             duration,
■within 250 yards , and sometimes half that
                                             distance
shore, struck her colours ; at which time the Peterel  only,     of the
six miles of the town of Marseille.                       was within
    Although this service was performed under a heavy fire
a battery of four 24 or 18 pounders ; and                         from
                                              although , for a few
minutes of the time, the §loop remained on a rock ,
stern had touched , the Peterel ’s damages were            which her
                                                  confined to a few
shot-holes in her sails, and to the upsetting of four
                                                         of her ( 12-
pounder) carronades . Her first lieutenant , gunner , and
being absent in prizes, the Peterel had on board but 89 30 men
                                                              men and
b° ysof whom she did not have a man hurt .
                                                   The Ligurienne
                                d 2
