1800.                                        .
          CAPTURE OF THE CARMEN AND FLORENTINA                   37

 another hour Mr . Thompson returned to the Peterel , bringing
 with him 13 Greeks , all that remained of the 80-gun ship’s
 crew ; one part , with the commander , having surrendered to the
 French , and the other part having managed to escape to the
 three corvettes . To the nearest of these, not one of which, from
 an alleged dread of being fired at from the shore, would afford
 the slightest assistance in preventing the French from plundering
 the wreck, Captain Austen sent the 13 Greeks . As a proof
 that the captain ’s promptitude had been of use, the French had
 already got out of the ship one of the quarterdeck guns, and
 were taking measures, when the Peterel entered the bay, to
 remove the remainder . At 5 p. m. the Peterel weighed, and,
.stood back to the westward ; and , not long afterwards , the
 captain pacha testified his sense of the service Captain Austen
 had performed , by presenting him with a handsome sabre and
 rich pelisse.
     On the 5th of April, in the afternoon, as a British squadron,
 composed of the 74-gun ships Leviathan , Captain James Car¬
 penter , bearing the flag of Rear -admiral John Thomas Duck¬
 worth, and Swifts ure, Captain Benjamin Hallo well, and the 18-
 pounder 36-gun frigate Emerald , Captain Thomas Moutray
 Waller , was cruising in the neighbourhood of the bay of Cadiz,
  12 sail were discovered from the mast-head . Chase was given;
 and at 3 a . m. on the 6th , the Emerald crossed and captured a
  Spanish ship, of 10 guns and 70 men, part of a convoy of 13
 ships and brigs, which had sailed on the 3d from Cadiz, bound
 to South America, under the protection of three frigates, two of
  which were the Carmen, Captain don Fraquin Porcel , and
  Florentina , Captain don Manuel Norates , both of the 34-gun or
  12-pounder class.
     At daybreak all the Spanish convoy had disappeared except
  a brig ; and she was so near and the weather so calm, that the
  boats of the Leviathan and Emerald , under the orders of Lieu¬
  tenant Charles March Gregory, second of the Leviathan , were
  detached in pursuit of her. After “ a smart skirmish of forty
  minutes, ” but in which no loss appears to have been sustained
  on either side, the “ Los-Anglese, ” or Barcelona , of 14 carriage-
  guns , six swivels, and 46 men, laden with bale goods, was cap¬
  tured by Lieutenant Gregory and his boat-party.
     By the time this brig had been secured, three sail were seen,
  east , west, and south . The Swiftsure , being to leeward (the
  wind very light from the northward ), was directed to chase
  south , and the Emerald , east ; while the Leviathan herself
  steered to the westward . At noon the Emerald made the signal
  for six sail in the north -east . On this the Leviathan put about
  and stood after the Emerald , and at dusk saw nine sail from the
  mast -head.
     It was at this time nearly calm ; but at 11 p. m. a fresh
   breeze sprang up from the north -west. Profiting by it, the
