1800.           BOAT- ATTACK AT NOIRMOUTIER.                          41

   Having assembled on board the Fisgard , the boats pulled off
in the evening, in three divisions, containing between them 192
officers, seamen, and marines, under the orders of Lieutenant
Burke , assisted by Lieutenants of marines John Thompson and
Charles Llenry Ballinghall , of the "Renown, Lieutenant William
Bean , and lieutenants of marines Mark A. Gerard , of the
Bisgard, and William Garrett and Hugh Hutton , of the Defence.
At midnight the British in the boats boarded , and, after much
resistance and loss on the part of the French , carried the ship
and the three other armed vessels, together with 15 sail of
merchantmen ; all, as well as the armed vessels, laden with
flour, corn, provisions, bale-goods, and ship-timber , for the fleet
at Brest . Finding it impossible to bring off his prizes, Lieu¬
tenant Burke caused them to be effectually destroyed.
    In high glee at having performed this essential service without
any loss, the British now proceeded on their return ; but unfor¬
tunately , in attempting to pass over the sand-banks , the boats took
the ground , and in less than ten minutes , lay perfectly dry . In this
helpless situation , Lieutenant Burke and his party became exposed
to a continual fire from the forts on Noirmoutier island, and from
about 400 French soldiers. Notwithstanding so formidable an
opposition , the British commenced an attack upon some other
vessels afloat near them , in the hope to secure one sufficiently
large to carry them all off". This they accomplished , and, with
 great intrepidity and exertion, drew her upwards of two miles
 over the sands, until she floated ; by which time the men were
 nearly up to their necks in water . It appears that 92 officers,
 seamen, and marines (several of them , including Lieutenants
 Burke , Thompson , and Ballinghall , wounded) were now taken
 prisoners ; but that the remainder of the party , numbering in all
 100, forced the French to retreat , and then got back to their
 ships by means of the boats they had taken . This was a very
 gallant , and , but for the latter half of it, would have been a very
 successful and important , boat-service.
     On the 27th of June a British squadron , composed of the 12-
 pounder 32-gun frigate Andromeda , Captain Henry Inman , 28-
 gun frigate Nemesis, Captain Thomas Baker , one 20-gun ship,
 two ship-sloops, one bomb-vessel, and 11 fire-ships, gun-brigs,
 hired cutters , and luggers , assembled off Dunkerque , to attempt
 the destruction of the four French frigates, Poursuivante , of the
 44-gun or 24-pounder class, Carmagnole , of the 40-gun, and
  Desiree and Incorruptible , of the 38-gun class ; and which four
  frigates had long been blockaded in that port.
     Contrary winds and a succession of unfavourable tides
  afforded no opportunity of making the attack until the 7th of
  July . On that evening the ship-sloop Dart (sister vessel to the
  Arrow already described*), Captain Patrick Campbell , followed
    * See vol . ii., p. 344 ; but the Dart appears to have mounted two addi¬
 tional carronades on her quarterdeck, or 30 in all.
