1800.            CUTTING OUT THE DESIREE.                      43

the explosion. By alacrity , however, in cutting their cables*
during which they were exposed to the fire, within pistol-shot of
the Dart , and of the gun-brigs Biter and Boxer, the three remain¬
ing French frigates escaped before the wind, and ran out of the
 road to a short distance down the channel that passes within the
Braak sand. One of them here got on shore, but at daylight
on the 8th got off ; and all three ships subsequently regained
their anchorage.
   During the attack the hired 14-gun cutter Kent , Lieutenant
Robert Baron Cooban, found employment for some French gun¬
boats that ' would otherwise have annoyed the attacking vessels.
In this cannonade the Kent had one seaman wounded ; and the
12-gun hired cutter Ann, Lieutenant Robert Young, and the
gun-brig Biter , Lieutenant Samuel Norman, had each one seaman*
and the latter her commander, wounded, in the service which they
were respectively rendering . The better to direct the enterprise*
Captain Inman , with 30 volunteers from the Andromeda, had em¬
barked on board the hired lugger Vigilant , Mr . William Dean*
master , and proceeded with the other vessels into Dunkerque
roads. Captain Inman , very humanely , sent the prisoners, many
of whom were dreadfully mangled , to Dunkerque on their parole.
For this he received the thanks of Commodore Castagnier . If
all the prisoners were thus sent away, the reason is explained
why there were no head -money certificates.
    For his skill and gallantry in laying on board and capturing
the Desiree , Captain Campbell was advanced to post-rank , and
appointed to the 20-gun ship Ariadne : in point of rank , cer¬
tainly a step forward, but , from the Dart to the Ariadne nearly
two steps backwards , as respected the relative force and
effectiveness of the two vessels . As the least reward that could
be bestowed upon an officer who had behaved so gallantly and
suffered so severely, Lieutenant M'Dermeit was promoted to the
rank of commander ; and we should, we confess, have been gra¬
tified at seeing Lieutenant Pearce among the newly made com¬
manders of the year . -
   We sincerely hope that those careful gentlemen, the established
pilots, got their deserts, for having pusillanimously abandoned
the charge of their ships when their services were most required.
We wish we knew their names, in order to hand them down with
becoming infamy. Fortunately the master of the Ann cutter*
 Mr . Henry Moor, was competent to take charge of the Dart;
and Mr . James Wheatland , mate of the Ann, also volunteered
his services. These, with some men obtained out of smugglers*
enabled Captain Campbell to send a pilot to each gun-brig and
hre-vessel.
    The Desiree was afterwards added to the British navy as a
36-gun frigate, and Captain Inman , very deservedly, was ap¬
pointed to commission her. One mistake we are bound to
rectify : it is as to the French gun-force' of the Desiree, as well
