36          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.               1800.

had her commander and one seaman killed, and one seaman and
one marine wounded.
    Admitting the active interference of the battery on shore to be
a fair set-off to the mere appearance of the Mermaid to leeward,
this affair was very creditable to the officers and crew of the
Peterel . Lieutenant Pelabond , had he lived, would doubtless
have expressed his sentiments on the premature flight of his two
consorts . As it was, the conduct of Captain Raccord , although
among the members of his court-martial we observe the fighting
names of Bombart and Infernet , was pronounced “ irreproach¬
able .” One thing we are bound to state : the Cerf is there
described as “ une demie-chebeck, ” and not as a ship-corvette.
The vessel, whatever may have been her rig or force, was, we
believe, totally wrecked ; but the Lejoille afterwards got off and
reached Marseille.
    The Ligurienne was a fine vessel of her class, well equipped
 with stores of all kinds , in excellent repair, and not two years
 old. She was built in a very peculiar manner , being fastened
 throughout with screw-bolts , so that she might be taken to
 pieces , and set up again, with ease ; and was originally in¬
 tended , according to the account given by the prisoners, to
 follow Buonaparte to Egypt . Screw-bolts were not qualifica¬
 tions required in a British cruiser ; and therefore the Ligurienne
 being found unadapted in other respects, was not purchased
 into the service.
    Before quitting Captain Austen , we shall relate another
 instance of his good conduct ; and in which, without*coming to
 actual blows, he performed an important , and not wholly im-
 perilous service. On the 13th of August , at 10 a . m,, as the
 Peterel , being then attached to the squadron of Sir Sidney Smith
 on the coast of Egypt , was standing in towards Alexandria,
 with the wind at north -north -west, a ship of the line, totally
 dismasted , was perceived aground between Aboukir island and
 the fort or castle . The Peterel immediately hauled to the wind,
  and stood in the direction of the grounded vessel ; which was a
 Turkish 80-gun ship, of remarkable beauty commanded by
 Indjee -Bey.
    At noon the Peterel anchored in four fathoms , about a mile
  and a half to the south-east of Aboukir island ; and a number
 of djerms were seen to put off from the ship and pull towards
 the shore. At half-past noon three Turkish corvettes, that had
  come from the eastward , anchored about a mile outside of the
 Peterel . By this time the latter had hoisted out her pinnace ;
 and in it was immediately despatched the master , Mr . John
 Thompson , with nine men, to endeavour to set the ship on fire,
 and prevent the French from obtaining any of the stores, guns,
 or ammunition.
    The master was soon on board ; and by 2 h. 30 m. r . m., he
 and his active party had completely set the ship in flames. In
