 44          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                   1800.
   as of one of the other frigates in her company . In his letter to
   Captain Inman , Captain Campbell states the maindeck guns of
   both the Desiree and Incorruptible to have been “ 24-pounders ;”
   and every one of our contemporaries, relying on such good
  authority , have assigned the Desiree guns of that caliber . But
  this French frigate, in fact, was armed the same as No. 6 in the
  table at p. 64 of the first volume, except in having two 8-pound¬
   ers more, and two carronades fewer, than the number there
  specified.
      In the latter end of July , while the 14-gun cutter Viper, com¬
  manded by acting Lieutenant Jeremiah Coghlan , and attached to
  Sir Edward Pellew ’s squadron , was watching Port -Louis, it
  occurred to the former young officer, that he might succeed in
  boarding one of the cutters or gun-vessels, which were constantly
  moving about the entrance of that harbour . His first step was
  to request of Sir Edward Pellew a ten-oared cutter , with 12
  volunteers . Having obtained the boat and men, Mr. Coghlan,
  on the night of the 26th , placed in her a midshipman of the
  Viper , Mr . Silas Hiscutt Paddon , and six seamen, making with
  himself a total of 20. With this ten-oared cutter , a boat from
  the Viper , and another from the Amethyst frigate, Mr . Coghlan,
 set out to board a French gun-brig, mounting three long 24, and
  four 6 pounders , full of men, moored with springs on her cables,
 lying in a naval port of difficult access, within pistol-shot of three
 batteries , surrounded by several armed small-craft, and not a
 mile from a French 74 and two frigates.
     Undismayed by such formidable appearances , regardless of
 the early discovery of his approach , as evinced by the gun-brig ’s
 crew being at quarters , or even of the lost aid of the two other
 boats , which in spite of all the endeavours of their respective
 crews, could not keep pace with the cutter, —in the very teeth
 of all these obstacles , Mr . Coghlan and his handful of men
 boarded the gun-brig on the quarter . Owing to the extreme
 darkness of the night , the leader of this resolute band jumped
 into a trawl -net hung up to dry . In this helpless situation Mr.
 Coghlan was pierced through the left thigh with a pike : several
 of his men were also hurt ; and the whole were forced back into
the boat.
     Unchecked in ardour , the British hauled their boat farther
 ahead ; and , again boarding the gun-brig, maintained against
 87 men, 16 of whom were soldiers, an obstinate conflict, during
which many of the British were knocked overboard, and the
whole, a second time, beat back to their boat . Notwithstanding
this , however, the assailants returned to the charge with un¬
abated courage ; and , after killing six men, and wounding 20,
among whom was every officer belonging to her, Mr . Coghlan
and his truly gallant comrades carried the Cerbere . His own
loss on this splendid occasion was one man killed and eight
wounded, himself in two places , and Mr . Paddon in six. With
