 38           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1800.
   Leviathan and Emerald steered north , in the hope soon to cross
    the strangers . At midnight three sail were seen ; and at 2 a . m.
    on the 7th , two of them were ascertained to be frigates,
                                                              standing
   to the north -north -west, and close together . The British
                                                                     74
   and frigate now steered a parallel course, proportioning their
   sail to that of the strangers , in order to be ready to commence
   the attack just before daybreak , the rear- admiral judiciously
   considering , that a fire commenced in the dark might alarm the
   convoy and lead to their escape.
      At dawn of day the Leviathan and Emerald bore down upon
   the Carmen and Florentina , who had evidently mistaken them
  for a part of their convoy. On being hailed by the Leviathan,,
  the weathermost frigate crowded sail to get off ; as did also her
  consort, then close upon her bow. A volley of musketry failing
  to induce the nearest frigate to strike, the Leviathan gave a
                                                                   yaw
  and fired all her guns before the gangway , in the hope to bring
  down some of the frigate ’s masts and yards , but without effect.
  In a few minutes, however, the Emerald having in a very spirited
  as well as judicious manner, closed with the leewardmost
                                                               frigate,
  the two became so disabled in their sails and rigging , that after
  firing a few straggling and ineffectual shot, and just as tho
  Leviathan had gained a position to discharge her broadside into
  both frigates , they hauled down their colours.
      The Emerald immediately proceeded in chase of the third
  frigate, but , appearing to lose ground in the pursuit , was re¬
 called and ordered to secure as many as she could of the convoy;
 four of the largest of which , before dark , fell into her hands.
  In the mean time the Leviathan lay by the two Spanish frigates,
 until they were in a state to make sail ; which was not until two
 hours after the surrender. The 74 then stood after the remaining
 frigate ; but the latter had by this time so increased her distance,
 that the Leviathan gave up the pursuit , and proceeded with her
 prizes to Gibraltar.
      As a proof that the Carmen and Florentina had not struck
 their colours without making an honourable resistance , the first,,
 out of a crew of 340, had one officer and 10 men killed, and 16
 men wounded ; the second, out of a crew of 314, one officer and
 11 men killed , her captain , first lieutenant , and 10 men
                                                             wounded.
 Each frigate was laden with 500 quintals of quicksilver , for the-
use of the mines at Lima. The Carmen measured 908, and the
Florentina 902 tons, and both were added to the British navy as-
 12-pounder 36-gun frigates.
     On the 12th of April Captain Joseph Baker , of the 16-gun
ship- sloop Calypso, being off Cape Tiberon, despatched the mas¬
ter, Mr . William Buckly , in the six-oared cutter , with 10 men,
properly armed and provided, and a swivel in her bow, to cruise
for two days under the cape, in order, if possible, to intercept
some of the small-craft that usually navigate within a mile of
the shore. On the following day, the 13th, at 11 a . m., Mr.
