1800.                                 , ETC.
                               , QUIMPER
           -ATTACKS AT ST.-CROIX
        BOAT                                                   39

Buckly perceived , and immediately pulled towards , a schooner
lying becalmed under the land . As the boat approached within
hail , the schooner desired her to keep off, and, finding the order
not attended to, opened upon her a fire of musketry . Heedless
of this, the British in the boat boarded , and after a short but
 smart conflict on the deck carried , the French privateer-
 schooner Diligente , of six carriage -guns, 30 stands of arms, and
39 men actually on board . In this very gallant boat -attack,
 the British had only one man wounded ; the French , seven, and
those dangerously.
    On the 21st of April, at 6 h . 30 m. a . m., the British hired
lugger Lark , of 14 guns (twelve 12-pounder carronades and two
fours ), and 50 men and boys, Lieutenant Thomas Henry Wil¬
son, cruising off the Vlie passage into the Texel, discovered and
chased a French cutter -privateer , which, after the exchange of
a few broadsides , ran herself on shore ; but , as the Lark was
unable to get near enough to destroy her, this privateer even¬
tually got off and reached in safety the Texel road.
    On the 25th , at 2 p. m., the Lark chased and soon came up
with another French cutter -privateer , which, after engaging the
lugger for some time, ran on shore upon the Vlie island . Here
the cutter , which was the Imprenable , Captain Sparrow , of 12
long 3, and two long 8 pounders , and a crew of 60 men, de¬
fended herself pretty well for nearly an hour ; at the end of
"which her men began escaping to the shore, under the cover of
a party of troops estimated at about 100.
   Seeing this , Lieutenant Wilson put off in the Lark ’s small
boat , and directed the master , Mr . Thomas Geltins , to follow
in the large boat . With his handful of men, and in the face of
a smart fire of musketry from the shore, to which by this time
all the French crew had escaped, Lieutenant Wilson boarded
the Imprenable . Finding his endeavours to get the cutter afloat
greatly impeded by the musketry from the troops, the lieutenant
detached the master in the large boat to dislodge them from the
sand-banks behind which they had taken shelter . This done,
the British succeeded , without the slightest loss, in getting off
the privateer , and carried her into Yarmouth roads . To add to
the value of this gallant exploit, the Imprenable had been a
great pest to British commerce in the North Sea.
   On the 10th of June Rear -admiral Sir John Borlase Warren,
bruising off the Penmarcks with the Renown and Defence 74s,
Captains Thomas Eyles and Lord Henry Paulet , and Fisgard
and Unicorn frigates , Captains Thomas Byam Martin and Philip
Wilkinson , detached the boats of the squadron to attempt to
cut out or destroy a convoy of brigs and chasse-marees lying at
St .-Croix, a small harbour within the Penmarck rocks, and
known to be laden with wine and provisions for the Brest fleet.
    In the evening the boats , eight in number , namely , two from
the Renown, commanded by Lieutenant Henry Burke , two
