 42          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1800.
   by tlie Biter and Boxer gun -brigs , Lieutenants William Norman
   and Thomas Gilbert , and the four fire-ships Wasp , Captain John
   Edwards , Falcon , Captain Henry Samuel Butt , Comet, Captain
   Thomas Leef, and Rosario, Captain James Carthevv, with the
   cutters and small-craft attending them , entered Dunkerque
  roads . At about midnight the Dart and her companions got
   sight of the French ships . Soon afterwards one of the latter
  hailed the Dart , and asked whence she came. The answer was,
   “ De Bordeaux .” The Frenchman then desired to know what
  convoy that was astern , meaning the gun-brigs and fire-ships.
  The reply was, “ Je ne sais pas .”
      This conversation ended, the Dart continued to pass on un¬
  molested , until she arrived alongside of the innermost frigate but
  one, when that frigate opened upon her a very heavy fire. This
  the Dart was enabled to return with 15 double-shotted 32-
  pounders , discharged in much quicker repetition than common,
  owing to the carronades being mounted on the non-recoil prin¬
  ciple . The Dart then ranged on, and boarded the innermost
  frigate, the Desiree , by running her bowsprit between the latter ’s
 foremast and forestay, having previously let go a stern-anchor to
 check her own way. The first lieutenant , James M ‘Dermeit,
 at the head of a division of seamen and marines, immediately
 boarded the French frigate on the forecastle, carrying all before
 him , but not without being badly wounded in the arm. He then
 hailed the Dart , to say he had possession of the ship ; but as he
 feared the crew would rally , and he was wounded, he requested
 that an officer might be sent to take charge . Having cut her
 stern -cable, the Dart had just swung alongside the Desiree ; on
 whose quarter Lieutenant William Isaac Pearce instantly leaped
with a second division of men. This officer completely repulsed
the French crew, who were rallying at the after hatchway.
Lieutenant Pearce then cut the frigate’s cables , got the Desiree
under sail, and steered her over the banks that could not have
been passed half an hour later in the tide.
     In this dashing enterprise, which was concluded in about 15
minutes , the Dart had only one seaman killed , her first lieutenant,
already named, one master ’s mate (James Hall ), and nine seamen
and marines wounded ; while the loss sustained by the Desiree,
a fine new frigate of 1015 tons, was supposed to have amounted
to full 100 in killed and wounded together , including nearly the
whole of the officers present . The established complement of
the Desiree was from 300 to 350 men ; but it does not appear
that the frigate had all her crew on board . The exact number
that was on board we are, however, unable to state ; especially
as, from some unexplained cause, no head-money certificates
were signed, or at least recorded.
    The four fire-ships were admirably conducted , and not aban¬
doned by their officers until completely in flames : on board the
Comet , indeed, the captain and one seaman were wounded by
