 1800.                 CAPTAIN HILLYAR AT BARCELONA,                                 51
 reload her guns . This was at 9 p. m. ; and in a few minutes
 afterwards , but not without a smart struggle , Captain Hillyar
  and his party boarded and carried the Esmeralda.
     The announcement of this victory, by the cheers of the
  British , was the signal for the Spaniards in the other ship to cut
 their cable, and endeavour to run close under the battery at the
 mole-head ; but the ship canting the wrong way, and the British
 being alert in their movements, the Paz , before 10 p. m., in spite
 of a heavy fire from four strong batteries , 10 gun-boats, two
 schooners, each armed with two long 36-pounders, and a fort
 upon Mount Ioni which threw shells , shared the fate of her con¬
 sort. At about 11 p. m. the two prize-ships, and the boats
 that had taken them , covered as they stood to the offing by two
 men of war, were brought off in safety ; with a loss to the
 British of only two seamen and one marine killed , the Minotaur ’s
 master , Mr. Reid and four seamen wounded . On board the
 Paz , one seaman was killed and four wounded ; and on board
 the Esmeralda , two seamen were killed , and 17 wounded.
    Each of the captured ships is represented to have measured
about 400 tons, and to have been laden with provisions and
stores supposed for Batavia . Besides which they were to have
taken on board between them 300 Batavian troops from the
island of Majorca . Admitting the crew ( for no number is stated
in the gazette letter ) to have amounted only to 50 men, we have
a ship of 400 tons, carrying , besides a cargo of provisions, 200
men, and mounted with “ 22 brass guns , 12 and 9 pounders .”
We must therefore be permitted to consider, that the guns of
the Esmeralda were only 8 and 6 pounders ; and that even the
majority of the guns were of the lesser caliber . Still the exploit,
performed as it was in the very teeth of a force both afloat and
ashore so very superior, reflected the highest honour upon the
victorious party.
    It is true that some altercation took place between the courts
of Spain and Sweden relative to the alleged seizure of the gal
liot to surprise the ships ; but it led to nothing except , for a
while, to mislead public opinion as to the merits of the case. A
contemporary states that the capture of the Paz and Esmeralda,
“ led   to   the   promotion     of Captain    Hillyar   and   Lieutenant   Schom-
berg .”* If so, the operation as regards Captain Hillyar at least,
was rather a tardy one ; for he was not, we find, made post until
February , 1804, rather more than six months after the senior
lieutenant who had served under him at Barcelona attained the
same rank.
   On the 10th of September , as the British privateer -brig,
Hover, of Liverpool, Nova-Scotia , armed with 14 long 4-pound-
ers and 54 men and boys, under the command of Captain God¬
frey, was cruising near Cape Blanco on the Spanish Main, the

                               * Brenton, vol. iii,, p. 24,
                                         E2
