52          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1800.

Spanish schooner Santa -Ritta , mounting 10 long 6-pounders and
two English 12-pounder carronades , with about 85 men, and
accompanied by three gun-boats also under Spanish colours, and
which , as well as the schooner, had the day before been
equipped by the governor of Puerto -Caballo, on purpose to cap¬
ture the Rover, came out from near the land to fulfil their orders.
The light breeze which had been blowing having died away, the
schooner and two of the gun-boats , by the aid of a number of
oars, gained fast upon the brig ; keeping up as they advanced a
steady fire from their bowr-guns, which the Rover returned with
two guns pointed from her stern , and , as her opponents drew
near , with her small-arms also.
     Apprized , by their motions, that the schooner intended to
 board on the starboard quarter , and the two gun-boats (the third
 appeared to keep aloof) on the opposite bow and quarter , the
 Rover suffered them to advance until they got within about 15
 yards of her : she then manned her oars on the larboard side,
 and , pulling quickly round , brought her starboard broadside to
 bear right athwart the schooner’s bow ; upon whose decks, then
 filled with men ready for boarding , the brig poured a whole
 broadside of round and grape . Immediately after this , her
 active crew passed over to the guns on the opposite side, and
 raked the two gun-boats in a similar manner . The Rover then
 commenced a close action with the Santa -Ritta , and continued
 it for an hour and a half ; when finding her opponent ’s fire grow
 slack , the Rover, by the aid of a light air of wind, backed her
 head -sails, and brought her stern in contact with the schooner’s
 side. The British crew then rushed on board of, and with
 scarcely a show of opposition carried , the Santa -Ritta . The two
 gun -boats , seeing the fate of their consort, sheered off, apparently
 in a very shattered state.
     Notwithstanding this long and hard -fought action, the Rover
 had not a man hurt ; while, on board the Santa -Ritta , every
 officer, except the commander of a detachmeut of 25 soldiers,
 was killed : the whole of the killed , as found on the deck,
 amounted to 14, and the wounded to 17. The prisoners in¬
 cluding the latter , numbered 71. These , being too many to be
  kept on board , were all, except eight , landed ; the Rover’s cap¬
 tain having previously taken from them the usual obligation not
 to serve again until exchanged . This was an achievement that
  did great honour to Captain Godfrey, his officers, and crew ; and
  proved how well the hardy sons of British America could emu¬
 late their brother -tars of the parent country.
     On the 8th of October , at 8 a. m., the British schooner Gipsy
  (tender to the 74-gun ship Leviathan , Captain James Carpenter,
  bearing the flag of Rear -admiral Duckworth ), of 10 long 4-
  pounders and 42 men, commanded by Lieutenant Coryndon
  Boo-er, cruising off the north end of Guadeloupe , chased and
  soon overtook an armed sloop ; which, on the schooner’s firing a
