50          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                   1800.

the ship ; the crew of which had previously cheered , to show
that they were prepared . Notwithstanding this , and that the
 Gu6pe ’s commander , Citizen Dupan , had laid over the hatches
to keep his men to their quarters , the British resolutely boarded,
and in 15 minutes carried the vessel ; with the loss of three
seamen and one marine killed , three lieutenants , 12 seamen,
and five marines wounded, and one seaman missing, probably
drowned.
    Among the wounded officers was the gallant leader of the
party , Lieutenant Burke , an officer who had previously dis¬
tinguished himself on more than one similar occasion ; and
who, immediately after this additional proof of his gallantry,
obtained the rank of commander . The two other wounded
Lieutenants were John Henry Holmes and Joseph (misnamed in
the Gazette James ) Nourse, both of the Courageux . The loss
on board the Guepe , as a proof how obstinately she had been
defended, amounted to 25 men killed and 40 wounded , including
 among the mortally wounded, her brave commander . This
formidable French privateer had been fitted out at Bordeaux,
 and was stored and provisioned, in the most complete manner,
 for a four months ’ cruise.
    On the 3d of September, at about 8 p. m., eight boats from the
 74-gun ship Minotaur , Captain Thomas Louis, and armed en
 flute (late 12-pounder 32-gun) frigate Niger, Captain James
 Hillyar , placed under the orders of the latter , assisted by Lieu¬
 tenants Charles Marsh Schomberg , and Thomas Warrand , Mid¬
shipmen James Lowry, and Richard Standish Haly , and Lieute¬
 nant of marines John Jewell, proceeded to cut out or destroy
 two Spanish armed ships, or corvettes, at anchor in Barcelona
 roads ; one, the Concepcion, alias Esmeralda , the other, the Paz,
 each described as mounting 22 long 12 and 8 pounders , and
 laden with stores, reported , but which did not prove to be the
 case, for the relief of Malta.
     At the time these eight boats wrere detached upon the service,
 one of them was boarding a Swedish galliot bound into the port;
  and , to join this boat and give directions to her commander,
  Captain Hillyar pulled , in the first instance , for the galliot . On
  arriving alongside the latter , the British boats hooked on, and
 they and the Swedish galliot of course stood together towards
 the mole of Barcelona.
     Having approached within about three quarters of a mile of
  the nearest battery , and being reminded , by two shots which
  passed over the galliot, that it was time to retire from under the
  shelter of a neutral vessel, Captain Hillyar and his party pulled
  away towards the object of attack . Shortly afterwards the
  oatermost of the two Spanish armed ships, the Esmeralda,
  discharged her broadside at the boats , but without effect, her
  shot falling short . Pushing on with their accustomed alacrity,
  the British were alongside the Esmeralda before the ship could
