48            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                         1800.

mentioned in French pounds, ” he has given the French a caliber
they never possessed. With respect to “ shifting guns on the
main and quarter decks, ” it appears , that the Vengeance had
every broadside port already filled. But even admitting that the
Vengeance fought a gun on one broadside which she transported
from the other, the Seine did the same ; as appears from the
following extract of a letter from Sir David Milne to Sir Robert
Seppings , *one of the surveyors of the navy. “ In La S-         e
I had the quarter -galleries formed into ports, and in action that
ship fought a gun there , by transporting it on (from) the other
side.”* Having , as we hope, cleared up these points, we can,
with^more confidence, present the following as the
          COMPARATIVE FORCE OF THE COMBATANTS.
                                                    SEINE.       VENGEANCE
                                                      24              26
Broadside-guns .                       |             434             498
Crew.                                       No.      281             326
Size .                                     tons     1146            1180

   Considering the inferiority in effectiveness between the French
and the English ship’s eight carronades to have been compen¬
sated by the former’s tier of swivels along the gangway , we may
pronounce this to have been as pretty a frigate-match as any
fought during the war. There is on the face of the statement,
undoubtedly , a numerical superiority in favour of the French
ship , but far too slight for a British ship to notice ; above all,
not such as to justify the captor in saying , “ Yourlordship will
perceive the Vengeance is superior in size, guns, and number
of men to his majesty ’s ship I have the honour to command .”
It is sufficient to say, that this was an action which, both in the
conduct and the result , did great credit to Captain Milne, his
officers, and ship ’s company ; and, let us be just in adding , it
was one, also, in which M, Pichot , on finding that to run would
not avail him, made a manful resistance , surrendering only when
his ship was reduced to an unmanageable hulk.
   As soon as the prisoners were removed and the wreck of the
masts cleared , the Seine, taking her prize in tow, proceeded with
her to Jamaica . On the 25th , in the morning, the mainmast of
the Vengeance , having been badly wounded, fell over the side.
On the 27th in the evening, the two ships, the prize with nine
feet water in the hold, anchored in the harbour of Port -Royal.
Shortly afterwards , as was fully his due, Lieutenant Edward
Chetham , first of the Seine, was promoted to the rank of com¬
mander.
   The Vengeance was purchased for the use of the British navy,
and became classed with the frigate that had captured her ; but,
owing to her damaged state and the heavy cost of repairs at
Jamaica , the ship never again quitted port. As the exaggerated
  ♦ Sir Robert Seppings’s Letter to Lord Melville upon Circular Sterns, p. 13.
