1800.                    SEINE AND VENGEANCE.                                    47

«hasers . At 11 h. 30 m. p. m. the Seine, having gained so in
the chase as to be close on her opponent ’s quarter , fired several
 broadsides at her ; but the Vengeance still stood on, firing in
 return all the guns she could bring to bear . This greatly-
damaged the rigging and sails of the Seine, and compelled her,
at about midnight , to drop astern.
    The remainder of the night was occupied in reeving fresh
 rigging , and preparing to renew the combat ; each ship carrying
every sail she could set. On the 21st , at 7 h. 30 m. a . m., the
Seine got again within gun-shot, and at 8 a . m. close alongside,
of the Vengeance . The action now recommenced, and con¬
tinued , with unabated fury, until 10 h. 30 m. a . m. ; when the
Vengeance, having lost her foremast , mizenmast , and main top¬
mast , all of which had fallen in-board, and being terribly shat¬
tered in her hull , surrendered . This was made known by an
officer, who hailed the Seine from the end of the French ship ’s
bowsprit.
    The Seine lost none of her masts , but had her mainmast
badly wounded, and received several shot in her remaining masts
and hull . Her loss, out of a complement of 281 men and boys,
amounted to her second lieutenant (George Milne ) and 12 sea¬
men killed, and one lieutenant of marines (Archibald Mac¬
donald ), her master (Andrew Barclay ), captain ’s clerk (Mr.
Horne ), 22 seamen, three marines, and one boy wounded. The
loss of the Vengeance , Captain Milne merely says, “ has been
very great .” As 291 were the number of prisoners received out
of her , and 326, according to the deposition of her officers in the
prize-court, the number of persons on board when the action
commenced, we may fairly set down the killed at 35 ; and the
wounded, if in the usual proportion , were probably about 70
or 80.
    The Seine, late the French frigate of that name taken by the
Jason and Pique in June , 1798,# carried two long nines and
eight 32-pounder carronades more than the establishment of her
class .f The force of the Vengeance has already , on more than
one occasion, been referred to.^ Captain Milne calls the eights
of the Vengeance twelves ; but no French frigate , not even the
Forte of 1401, nor the Egyptienne of 1430 tons , mounted a
heavier caliber than 8-pounders on the quarterdeck and fore¬
castle . Moreover the Vengeance , as Captain Milne admits , was
a sister-vessel to the Resistance ; and the latter , as has already
been shown, carried 8-pounders .§ In calling the 36-pounder
carronades 42s, Captain Milne has only erred as other captains
have done ; but , in adding , “ The weight of metal I have

  * See vol. ii., p. 220.
  +                                        iible at p. 91 of the first volume.
    See vol. i., p. 341, and vol. n., p. tSU.
