1800.                 KENT AND CONFIANCE.                        53

 shot at her , hoisted French colours and began cannonading in
 return . During one hour and a half the two vessels continued
 warmly engaged at close quarters ; when the Gipsy , receiving
 great annoyance from the musketry of her opponent , hauled a
 little further off. Here the Gipsy kept up a sharp fire with round
 and grape shot, and at lOh . 30 m. a . m. compelled the sloop, which
 was the Quidproquo , of eight guns, 4 and 8 pounders , and 98
 men, commanded by M. Tourpie, represented to have been for¬
 merly a capitaine de vaisseau, to strike her colours. Eighty of
 the 98 men were Guadeloupe chasseurs ; and it was to save his
 people from their powerful musketry that the Gipsy’s commander,
 with so much judgment , had hauled off to a long-gun range.
    The Gipsy had three seamen killed , and nine, including
 Lieutenant Boger, wounded ; the Quidproquo , her captain and
 four seamen killed , and 11 wounded. Although upon a small
 scale this action was not the less creditable to those who, by
 their skill and bravery , had brought it to a successful ter¬
mination.
    On the 9th of October the honourable East India company’s
 ship Kent , of 26 guns (20 long 12, and six long 6 pounders )^
commanded by Captain Robert Rivington , being off the Sand-
heads , on her way from England to Bengal , fell in with the
 French ship-privateer Confiance, of 20 or 22 long 8-pounders,
commanded by M. Surcouff, a very able and experienced officer.
An action immediately ensued , and was maintained with great
 bravery by the Indiaman , for one hour and 47 minutes ; during
which the two vessels were frequently foul of each other . At
length the Kent was carried by boarding ; her crew, besides
their inferior numbers , being very ill-supplied with weapons of
defence, while the assailants were all armed with sabres, pikes,
and pistols . After having given decided proofs of his bravery,
 Captain Rivington received, at the moment of boarding , a
musket -shot through his head .             •
    Besides the loss of her captain , the Kent had 13 men killed,
including four or five of her passengers , and 44 men wounded,
including also several passengers. The loss on board the Con- ~
fiance,does not appear to have been recorded . It is, indeed, to .,
be regretted , that on these interesting occasions some capable
person does not take the pains to collect and publish the par¬
ticulars . Many highly creditable actions between merchant
ships and enemy’s privateers are either given to the public with
such marks of doubt , that an historian is fearful of admitting
them into his pages ; or they are so summarily stated , that the
account , when the most is made of it, amounts to little more
than that one vessel was captured by another.
    The Confiance was a ship of 490 tons, and had , it is said , a
complement of 250 men. The Kent was a new ship , of 820
tons, and had probably about 90 or 100 men in crew, exclusive
of 38 male and three female passengers . Seven or eight of
