1800.     CAPTURE OF THE CONCORDE AND MEDEE.                      45

the aid of the two other boats , the British towed out their prize,
under a heavy but ineffectual fire from the batteries.
    The language of Sir Edward Pellew , in his letter to Earl St.-
Vincent, describing the affair, is so very energetic and appro¬
priate , that we cannot do better than transcribe his words : “ I
trust I shall stand excused by your lordship for so minute a de¬
scription , produced by my admiration of that courage , which,
hand to hand , gave victory to a handful of brave fellows over
four times their number , and of that skill which formed, con¬
ducted , and effected so daring an enterprise .” The officers and
men of Sir Edward ’s squadron , to mark their sense of such dis¬
tinguished bravery , gave up the Cerbere as a prize to the con¬
querors ; and Earl St .-Vincent was so much pleased with Mr.
Coghlan ’s intrepidity , that he presented him with a handsome
sword. Moreover, the young man obtained , what his aspiring
mind valued above all other gifts , a confirmation of his rank as
lieutenant ; and that , although he had not quite served the time,
which the regulations of the navy required , and which had
never been dispensed with, we believe, previous to this gallant
 affair.
     On the 4th of August , soon after daylight , the British 64-gun
 ship Belliqueux , Captain Rowley Bulteel , being off the coast of
 Brazil with a fleet of outward -bound Indiamen under her pro¬
 tection , discovered four sail in the north -west or leeward quarter,
 steering about north by east . These were the French 40-gun
 frigate Concorde, Commodore Jean -Frangois Landolphe , 36-gun
 frigates Medee , Captain Jean -Daniel Coudin , and Franchise,
 Captain Pierre Jurien , and a captured American schooner fitted
 out as a tender . This squadron had sailed from Rochefort on
 the 6th of March , 1799 ; and , after committing serious depre¬
 dations upon the coast of Africa, had refitted at Rio de la
 Plata.
     At 7 a . m., hoping to pick up a prize or two, the French
 commodore hauled his wind, tacked , and stood towards the
 convoy ; which, to facilitate the junction , bore down. At noon,
 when a nearer approach brought into full view the China ships
  with their two tiers of ports and warlike appearance , the French
 ships bore up under a press of sail, and by signal separated.
     The Belliqueux immediately steered for the Concorde as the
 largest ship ; and at 5 h. 30 m. p. m., after a partial firing of
 about 10 minutes’ duration , by which no one on either side
  appears to have been hurt , compelled the French commodore,
 with a crew, as asserted , of 444 men, to haul down his colours.
  In the mean time four of the Indiamen , the Exeter , Captain
  Henry Meriton, Bombay-Castle , Captain John Hamilton , Coutts,
  Captain Robert Torin , and Neptune , Captain Nathaniel Spens,
  all 1200-ton ships, had been ordered by signal to proceed in
  chase ; the first two, of the Medee , and the other two, of the
  Franchise.
