54          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.               1800.

those passengers had been taken from the Queen Indiaman,
when she was consumed by fire at St.-Salvador . So long and
manful a resistance with such limited means, was very honour¬
able to the officers, crew, and passengers of the Kent . In the
following month M. Surcouff arrived with his prize at the Isle of
France.
   We may remark , in passing , what an advantage the Kent
would have derived, had she mounted on her quarterdeck and
forecastle, a tier of 18 or 24 pounder carronades , instead of long
sixes. A few discharges of grape from the former would proba¬
bly have induced the Confiance to keep at long-shot, and then
the Kent ’s 12-pounders , well-plied, would either have captured
or repulsed her.
   Having already recorded two actions fought between Ameri¬
can and French ships of war, we will here give a brief account of
the third ; the last, indeed , of any consequence, which occurred
during the short interruption in the amicable relations of the
two countries . On the 12th of October , in latitude 22° 50'
north , longitude 51° west, the United States , 32-gun frigate
Boston (of the same long-gun force, we believe, as D in the
table at p . 91 of the first volume, with 12 carronades , 32-
pounders , in addition ), Captain Little fell in with the French
ship-corvette Berceau , of 22 long eights and two English 12-
pounder carronades , Lieutenant Louis-Andre Senes. An action
ensued , and continued , with mutual spirit, for two hours ; when
the Berceau , having had her masts reduced to a tottering
state , and being dreadfully shattered in hull , struck her colours
to the Boston ; whose masts , rigging , and sails, were also con-
  derably wounded and cut.
    Out of a crew of about 320 men and boys, the Boston lost
her purser and 11 seamen and marines killed or mortally
wounded, and eight others wounded who recovered. The precise
loss of the Berceau does not appear in Captain Little ’s letter.
We are only enabled to state , that , out of a crew of about 200,
exclusive of 30 passengers , it was very considerable in both
killed and wounded ; and that , among the former, was her cap¬
tain . We may add , also, that the fore and main masts of the
Berceau fell over the side soon after her surrender.
   Who can read of a two hours’ resistance under such a dis¬
parity of force as, without the aid of a comparative statement,
it is clear must have existed between these two ships, without
being surprised that no account of this action is to be found in
any French publication . Is it, then , French victories only that
French ears can listen to, or French patriotism record ? Too
true it is. The most insignificant triumph is puffed up to the
skies, while an unsuccessful action, no matter how resolutely
and ably fought , is passed over in silence. This will never make
a navy. Much credit is due to the American captain for his
candour (not the less estimable for its rarity on his side of the
