  46          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1800.
       According to Captain Bulteel ’s letter in the Gazette , the
    Medee , with a crew of 315 men, was captured at 7 p. m. by the
    Bombay -Castle and Exeter ; but the following somewhat dif¬
   ferent , and , we must add, not very consistent account , appears
   in the work of a contemporary : “ The chase was long, and at
   midnight Captain Meriton , of the Exeter , found himself coming
   very fast up with the enemy, while the Bombay -Castle, another
   Indiaman , commanded by Captain Hamilton , was still very far
   astern . The position was critical, and the British officer, with
   great presence of mind, formed his determination ; running
   alongside of the Frenchman with all his ports up, he com¬
   manded him to surrender to a superior force ; with this order,
   supposing himself under the guns of a ship of the line, the
   French captain instantly complied. Meriton gave him no time
  for deliberation , but sent an officer and brought him on board,
  and he delivered his sword to the English captain , in due form,
   on the quarterdeck . The Bombay -Castle was still at a great
  distance , but on her coming up , the prisoners were quickly
  taken out and divided. By this time the French captain began
  to recover from his surprise , and looking very attentively at the
  little guns on the quarterdeck , asked Captain Meriton what ship
  it was to which he had surrendered ? Meriton drily answered,
  4 To a merchant -ship the indignant Frenchman begged to be
  allowed to return with his people to the frigate and fight the
  battle again .” *
      The remaining French frigate , the Franchise , by throwing
  overboard a part of her guns, together with her anchors, boats,
  and booms, and by the timely approach of night , effected her
 escape ; as did also the armed schooner. Owing to the late
 period at which the Concorde and Medee (both of which were
 armed precisely according to the establishment of their re¬
 spective classes, already so frequently adverted to) arrived in a
 port of England , and to the turn which affairs had then taken,
 neither frigate was purchased for the use of the British navy.
     On the 20th of August , at 8 h. 30 m. a . m., the British 38-gun
 frigate Seine, Captain David Milne, cruising in the Mona pas¬
 sage with the wind easterly and very light , saw, right ahead,
standing to the northward on the starboard tack , the French
frigate Vengeance, Captain Pichot (the Constellation ’s late an¬
tagonist ), not many days from Curagoa, bound to France . The
Seine immediately made all sail in chase . At 10 a . m., the wind
having come more northerly , so as to prevent the Vengeance
from weathering Cape Raphael on the St.-Domingo shore, the
French ship tacked , and steered south-south-east under all sail.
At noon, or soon after, the wind shifted back to the eastward,
but was still very light ; and both ships continued under a crowd
of canvass . At 4 p. m. the Vengeance began firing her stern-

                     * Brenton, vol. iii., p. 341.
