 1800. THE ADMIRAL
                 - PASLEY AND SPANISH GUN-BRIGS.               59
 but , having just before detached the Lurcher cutter , Lieutenant
  Robert Forbes , to cruise off the Morbihan , Lieutenant Argles,
 instead of going in chase, permitted the French vessels to
 approach nearer to the point of St.-Gildas , in order to have the
 assistance of his consort in overtaking and capturing them.
    In the evening the Nile stood out from the shore and made
 the necessary signals to the Lurcher , who, being to windward,
 turned all the vessels and they made for the Vilaine. At 8 p. m.,
just as the battery on Pointe Saint-Jacques was hailing her, the
 Nile captured one small vessel, and manning her, sent her along¬
 shore ; by which means, before 4 a .m. on the 8th , five more
 vessels were taken . The whole coast was by this time alarmed,
 and the battery of Notre- JDame at the entrance of the river
 Peners kept up so brisk a fire as to send three shot through the
 last vessel boarded ; but the British , notwithstanding , brought
 her off with only one man slightly scratched by a splinter . The
 Lurcher , in the mean while, had succeeded in taking three more
 of the convoy, making nine in the whole. This enterprise
 reflects great credit upon the commanders and crews of the two
 cutters ; and shows what serious annoyance may be done to an
 enemy, even by such small vessels as the Nile and Lurcher,
 when under the guidance of an active and intelligent officer.
    On the 10th of December , the British armed brig Admiral-
 Pasley , of 16 guns, 14 of them 12-pounder carronades , with 40
men and boys, commanded by Lieutenant Charles I. Nevin,
 being off Ceuta on her passage from England to Gibraltar with
 despatches , was attacked in a calm by two Spanish gun-vessels
of the largest class. After an engagement of an hour and a half,
during the greater part of which the gun-vessels kept entirely
out of range of the Admiral-Pasley ’s paltry carronades , while
the former, with their heavy long guns were cutting the brig to
pieces, the Admiral-Pasley , having previously thrown overboard
her despatches , hauled down her colours.
    As a proof that the Admiral-Pasley had not been given awray,
her loss amounted to three seamen killed , her commander (in
three places), master (Mr. Gibbs, badly ), and eight seamen
wounded . The captors carried their prize first to Ceuta , and
afterwards to Algesiras. Here we have an example showing, in
the clearest manner, the unfairness of pronouncing upon the
merits of an action until its particulars are known. Fortunately
for the Admiral-Pasley ’s commander, the court-martial that sat
upon him took cognizance of all the circumstances ; and,
although captured in a 16-gun brig by two Spanish gun-boats,
Lieutenant Nevin was honourably and deservedly acquitted.

            COLONIAL   EXPEDITIONS   .— WEST   INDIES.

  On the 11th of September , while the British 12-pounder
36-gun frigate Nereide , Captain Frederick Watkins , was cruising
