1801.                 NEMESIS AND FREYA.                       63

arras, and , a very important duty in action, to attend to the
rigging and sails, and to work the ship in a proper manner. A
few active seamen, promptly sent to repair a shroud or stay,
will frequently save a mast ; and a manoeuvre, the success of
which may decide the fate of a battle , often depends upon
alacrity in splicing the old, or in reeving the new running-
rigging.
   The number of commissioned officers and masters , belonging
to the British navy at the commencement of the year, 1801,
including among the flag-officers all that were promoted on the
1st of January , in consequence of the union of Great Britain
and Ireland , as established by act of parliament on that day,
was,
          Admirals                                  46
          Vice-admirals                             39
          Rear -admirals                            69
                          superannuated 29
          Post -captains                           516
                              * „   ’    ' l8
            Commanders , or sloop-captains       .    391
            Lieutenants    .                         2135
              „ retired, with rank of
                      commanders      48
           Masters .                             .    517
and the number of seamen and marines, voted for the service of
that year, was 120,000 for the first three lunar months , and
 135,000 for the remaining ten,*
    Although no Dutch navy existed capable of giving alarm to the
 British , Holland ’s northern neighbours , with Russia at their
head , confederated together , to force England , either by diplo¬
macy or war, to abandon a long recognised right , that of search¬
ing the ships of neutrals for contraband of war. This sudden
uproar in the north arose out of a circumstance , of which we will
here present a summary.
    On the 25th of July , 1800, at 6 p. m., a British squadron, of
three frigates, the Arrow sloop, and a lugger, fell in with the
Danish 40-gun 18-pounder frigate Freya , Captain Krabbe,
having under her convoy two ships, two brigs , and two galliots.
Captain Thomas Baker , of the 28-gun frigate Nemesis, the
senior British officer, hailed the Freya , to say he should send
his boat on board the convoy. Captain Krabbe replied that,
if such an attempt were made, he would fire into the boat. Both
threats were put into execution ; and an action ensued, which,
with so decided a superiority against her, ended of course in the
Breya’s submission. This affair, unhappily , did not pass off
without loss. The Nemesis and Arrow had each two seamen
hilled and several wounded. The Freya had also two men

                      * See Appendix No. 13.
