 1800.               MILBROOK AND BELLONE.                        57

      The carronades of the Milbrook were seemingly fired with as
   much precision as quickness ; for the Bellone, from broadsides
   fell to single guns, and showed, by her sails and rigging , how
   much she had been cut up by the schooner’s shot. At about
   10 a . m. the ship’s colours came down ; and Lieutenant Smith
  used immediate endeavours to take possession of her. Not
  having a rope left wherewith to hoist out a boat , he launched
  one over the gunwale ; but , having been pierced with shot in
  various directions , the boat soon filled with water . At this time
  the Milbrook , having had 10 of her guns disabled , her masts,
  yards, sails, and rigging wounded and shot through , and all her
  sweeps cut to pieces, lay quite unmanageable , with her broad¬
  side to the Bellone’s stern . In a little while a light breeze
  sprang up, and the Bellone, hoisting all the canvass she could
  set, sought safety in flight.
     Out of the 47 men of her crew, the Milbrook had eight sea¬
 men and one marine severely, and her master (Thomas Fletcher,
 hut who would not quit the deck ), surgeon’s mate (I. Parster ),
 and one seaman, slightly wounded . The loss sustained by the
  Bellone, as rumoured at Vigo, into which port she was com¬
 pelled to put , amounted , out of a crew probably of 250 or 260
 men, to 20 killed , her first and second captains and 45 men
 wounded.
     The guns of the Bellone, as already has been stated , consisted
 of 24 long French 8-pounders and six or eight brass 36-pounder
 carronades . The ship, therefore, was almost quadruply superior
 to the Milbrook ; and Lieutenant Smith, by his gallantry and
 seamanlike conduct , not only preserved from capture a valuable
 convoy, but added , in no slight degree, to the naval renown of
 his country . This became appreciated in the proper quarter , and
 Lieutenant Smith was promoted to the rank of commander.
Also the English factory at Oporto , to evince their sense of the
service performed by the Milbrook , voted Lieutenant Smith their
thanks , accompanied by a piece of plate of 50/. value.
    There was another British schooner, armed much in the same
manner as the Milbrook , and cruising on the same station, whose
commander, although not afforded an opportunity of repulsing a
ship like the Bellone, distinguished himself greatly by his
activity in capturing privateers, and in protecting British con¬
voys from their depredations . The serviceable and far from
mglorious career of the Netley , Lieutenant Francis Godolphin
Bond , began in the months of November and December of the
preceding year ; and, on one occasion in particular , Lieutenant
Lond captured a Spanish privateer, with more men in her than
he had on board as a crew.
    We shall pass over several cases in which the Netley captured
Spanish privateers and retook their prizes, to relate one instance
of decided gallantry on the part of her commander and crew.
On the 7th of November in the present year, being off the rock
