58         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1800.

of Lisbon, Lieutenant Bond received information that a Spanish
privateer -schooner was lurking in the neighbourhood , and that
the vessels of the Newfoundland convoy, being dispersed , were
daily expected to approach the Tagus . Having, in the evening,
stood in close to the shore, the Netley , after dark , discovered
the above privateer, and a brig-prize which she had that morn¬
ing made, at anchor. Despatching her boat to take possession
of the brig, the Netley gallantly ran on board of, and, dropping
her anchor , carried , without the discharge of a shot or the loss
of a man, the Spanish privateer San-Miguel, alias l’Alerta , of
nine guns , described as 18 and 6 pounders, and 65 men. With
these her two prizes, the Netley , on the 8th, anchored in the
Tagus.
    On the 17th of November the British 74-gun ship Captain,
Captain Sir Richard John Strachan , 32-gun frigate Magicienne,
Captain William Ogilvy, and hired armed cutter Nile, Lieutenant
 George Argles, and lugger Soworrow, Lieutenant James Nichol¬
son, cruising off the entrance of the Morbihan , to intercept a
French convoy, discovered the French 20-gun ship-corvette Reo-
 laise , the commodore of a convoy, endeavouring to get under
the protection of the batteries . The Nile, by her skilful manage¬
ment , prevented the corvette from reaching the north shore ; and
the latter , upon the Magicienne ’s approach , ran into Port-
 Navalo ; where she took the ground , and struck her colours.
    Captain Ogilvy immediately despatched the boats of the Ma¬
gicienne , under the orders of Lieutenants George Skottowe and
the Honourable Edward Rodney , to endeavour to board and
bring off or destroy the corvette ; but the Reolaise rehoisting
her colours, and making sail, fired upon the boats and ran fur¬
ther into the port . On seeing this the Magicienne recalled her
boats . Lieutenant Rodney , however, being determined not to
return empty -handed , gallantly captured , with his single boat, a
merchant vessel 'from under one of the batteries.
    Being resolved to attempt the destruction of the corvette, Sir
Richard sent the boats of his little squadron , under the orders of
 Lieutenant William Hennah , assisted by Lieutenants Charles
 Clyde and Richard William Clarke (the latter , of the Marlbo¬
 rough , a portion of whose men were also present *), and also, we
 believe by the two lieutenants already named of the Magicienne.
The enterprise , thus intrusted to Lieutenant Hennah , was con¬
 ducted with great judgment and gallantry ; and, notwithstand¬
 ing a heavy fire from the shore on all sides, the Reolaise was
 boarded and destroyed . To add to the value of this exploit , it
 was performed with no greater loss to the British than one seaman,
killed and seven wounded.
    On the 7th of December the Nile cutter , while cruising off
 the mouth of the river Vilaine in Quiberon bay, discovered a
convoy of 15 or 16 vessels coming round the point of Croisic;
                            * See   p . 6.
