60          COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— WEST INDIES.               1800.

off the port of Amsterdam , in the island of Curagoa, the Dutch
inhabitants of the latter , tired out with the enormities of the band
ot 1500 republican ruffians that were in possession of the west
 part of the island, sent off a deputation to claim the protection
 of England . On the 13th the capitulation , surrendering the
island to his Britannic majesty , was signed in form, by the
 governor, Johan Rudolph Lausser, on the one part , and by Cap¬
 tain Watkins , of the Nereide , on the other . The vessels, large
 and small, lying in the harbour of Amsterdam , numbered 44 ; but
no ships of war were among them.
    In one of his despatches announcing this event, Captain Wat¬
 kins speaks of the “ activity and spirited conduct ” of Lieu¬
tenant Michael Fitton, * commanding the Active schooner, then
in company with the Nereide . Among the many occasions
which called forth that eulogium, one, although it did not end
decisively, may merit a place here. The Active was a schooner
of about 80 tons, tender to the Abergavenny 54, the flag-ship at
Jamaica , and carried eight 12-pounder carronades , with a crew
of about 45 men and boys. The service upon which the Active
had been ordered by Captain Watkins , was to watch the mouth
of the harbour of Amsterdam , while the Nereide cruised in the
offing. This the schooner continued to do for several days , stand¬
ing in frequently so near, as to be just out of range of the long
18s and 24s on Fort Fiscadera , and in full view of five or six
French privateers lying moored close to the walls of it, and one
of which was the Quidproquo , already mentioned as captured
by the Gipsy,f Upon these privateers Lieutenant Fitton looked
with a longing eye, till he could resist no longer. Observing
that , at a certain hour every day , the officers went on shore at
the fort to dine ; and aware that , owing to his daily practice of
standing across and across without molesting them , the priva¬
teersmen or garrison paid very little attention to the Active’s
manoeuvres, Lieutenant Fitton resolved to afford them an unex¬
pected treat . Having seen the boats pass as usual , and being
in perfect readiness, the Active stood close in, and bringing her
broadside to bear, opened the contents of it right into the sterns
of the cluster of privateers.
    Instantly all was bustle on board the latter and in the fort
and the boats , in their hurry back , became also exposed to a
destructive fire from the schooner ; some of whose 12-pounder
shot , so well and closely directed as they were, could not have
fallen harmless even in the fort itself. The instant he saw the
guns of the latter in motion (and the people in charge of them
appeared not very brisk ), Lieutenant Fitton crowded sail away,
in such a direction, however, as to expose no wider mark to the
enemy than the Active’s stern , This, as he anticipated , the
artillerists at the fort failed to hit ; although some of the shot

          * See vol ii ., p . 353.            f See p. 53.
