 1800.        LIEUTENANT BEAUFORT AT FUENGIROLA.                                              55

 Atlantic *) in publicly acknowledging , that u the captain of
 the Berceau fought his ship gallantly , so long as she was in a
 situation capable of being defended.” Captors , did they ^but
 know their true interest, always gain by such acts of fairness.
 The public places a greater reliance upon their remaining state¬
 ments ; and, after all, is there not more honour in conquering a
 brave than a cowardly enemy ?
    As soon as she had cleared away the wreck of the Berceau ’s
 masts, and properly secured her own, the Boston took her prize
 in tow, and on the 14th of November anchored with her in Nan¬
tucket road. A treaty of peace had , since the 30th of Septem¬
 ber, been signed at Paris between France and America ; and
 the Berceau, after being thoroughly repaired and refitted, was
 restored to the French government.
    On the 27th of October , late in the evening, the boats of the
 British 38-gun frigate Phaeton , Captain James Nicholl Morris,
 placed under the orders of her first Lieutenant , Francis Beaufort,
supported by Lieutenant George Huish , Lieutenant of marines,
 Duncan Campbell , and midshipmen Augustus Barrington
 Hamilton and Anthony Collings Stanton , proceeded to attack,
the Spanish national polacre-ship San-Josefj mounting two long
24-pounders in the bow, two long brass 18-pounders for stern-
chasers , and four 12 and six 4-pounders, all brass, on her sides,
having on board 34 seamen (out of a crew of 49, a boat ’s crew
being absent ) and 22 soldiers or marines, and lying moored
under the protection of five guns mounted upon the fortress of
Fuengirola , near Malaga.
    The launch , with an 18-pounder carronade in her, not being
able to keep up with the barge and two cutters , Lieutenant
Beaufort was proceeding with only the latter , when he was
unexpectedly fired at by a French privateer -schooner, which
had entered unseen in the night , and lay in a position to flank
the ship. The three boats, however, still advanced ; and on
the 28th , at 5 a . m., in the face of an obstinate resistance of
musketry and sabres, boarded , carried, and brought off the
polacre.
    In this gallant affair one seaman was killed alongside . Lieu¬
tenant Beaufort was first wounded in the head , and afterwards
received several slugs through his left arm and in his body;
Lieutenant Campbell received several slight sabre-wounds ; and
Mr . Hamilton was shot through the thigh while in the boat;
notwithstanding which he gallantly boarded with the rest . A
seaman also was wounded ; making the loss, on the part of the
British , one killed and four wounded. Of the San -Josef ’s crew,
six men were found badly , and 13 slightly , wounded.
   Being a fine fast-sailing little vessel, the San-Josef was im¬
mediately commissioned as a British sloop of war under the
name of Calpe, the ancient name of Gibraltar . It would have
  * The   Boston   writers   , for instance   , in their   account   of   this   very   action,
declared that the two ships were “ of nearly equal force,”
