64               BRITISH AND DANISH FLEETS.                   1801.
killed and five wounded, two of the latter badly . The English
vessels, accompanied by the Danish frigate and her convoy,
then proceeded to, and anchored in, the Downs ; where the
Freya , by the order of Vice-admiral Skeffington Lutwidge , the
commander in chief on that station , still kept flying the Danish
ensign and pendant.
 ‘ As, besides this fracas, a somewhat similar circumstance had
occurred in the Mediterranean , the British government lost no
time in despatching Lord Whitworth to the court of Denmark,
to place the business on an amicable footing. To give ad¬
ditional weight to his lordship ’s arguments , he was accompanied
by a squadron of four sail of the line, (to which six more were
afterwards added ), three 50-gun ships, and several frigates and
smaller vessels, under Vice-admiral Archibald Dickson , in the
74-gun ship Monarch . On the 29th of August Lord Whitworth
terminated the negotiation with the Danish minister, Count Bern-
storff ; and a convention was mutually signed, agreeing that the
Freya and convoy should be repaired at English expense , and
then released ; that the right of the British to search convoys
should be discussed at a future day in London ; that Danish
vessels should only sail under convoy in the Mediterranean , to
protect them from the Algerines, and should be searchable as
formerly ; and that the convention should be ratified by the two
courts in three weeks.
   Russia , although the ally of England , took offence at the
attack upon the Freya , and particularly at the passage through
the Sound of a British squadron . The first overt act of tne
Emperor Paul ’s displeasure , was to sequester all British pro¬
perty in his dominions ; the next , was to place his army and
navy upon a war-establishment . On the 22d of September,
however, about three weeks after it had been ordered , the seques¬
tration was taken off. But on the 5th of November, the news
of the capture of Malta having excited fresh anger in the breast
of the emperor, an embargo was again laid on all the British
shipping in the ports of Russia , amounting , at this time, to about
200 sail. This was followed, in December, by a convention be¬
tween Russia and Sweden, agreeing to the re-establishment of
an armed neutrality between those powers. Denmark also, at
the instigation of the first of these powers, and of Prussia , was
induced to join the confederacy.
   The menacing attitude thus assumed by the three principal
northern powers requiring to be met in a corresponding way by
England , the latter , on the 12th of March , despatched from
Yarmouth roads , under the command of Admiral Sir Hyde
Parker , in the London 9S, with Vice-admiral Lord Nelson in
the St .-George 98, as his second, a fleet of 15, afterwards aug¬
mented to 18, sail of the line, with as many frigates, sloops,
bombs, fire-ships, and smaller vessels, as made the whole amount
to about 53 sail : on board a division of which fleet had em-
