 56           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1800.
  gratified us to be able to state , that the officer, who as the con¬
  ductor of the enterprise had so gallantly and effectively co¬
  operated , as well as so seriously suffered, in capturing the
   vessel, an officer “ in whom,” says Captain Morris, “ I have
  ever found a most capable and zealous assistant, ” had been
  appointed to command her. But Vice - admiral Lord Keith,
  the Mediterranean commander-in-chief, chose to appoint to the
  Calpe an officer who, whatever may have been his merit in other
  respects , was both junior to Lieutenant Beaufort, and an utter
  stranger to the transaction at Fuengirola.
     Among the few vessels in the British navy to which the non¬
  recoil principle of mounting the carronade had been extended,
  was the Milbrook, a schooner of 148 tons, whose sixteen 18-
  pounders were so fitted, and whose commander, Lieutenant
  Matthew Smith , put such confidence in the plan, that he ven¬
 tured , as we shall presently show, to attack a ship mounting
  double his number of guns . The carronades of the Arrow and
  Dart sloops were also fitted upon the non-recoil principle ; and
  it is related of the latter of these vessels, that , when the British
 troops landed in Holland , in August , 1779, she fired one of her
 forecastle 32-pounders 68 times without breaking the breeching,
  or injuring the carriage, or even the paint that covered, or the
 pitch in the seams of it. The Eling schooner, armed with 18-
 pounders , is represented to have fired, on the same occasion,
 400 round shot from her aftermost carronade, without doing the
 slightest injury on board, or even breaking a single pane of glass
 in the cabin skylight.
     All this, if true (and the statement is officially founded),
 would appear to refute most of the objections made to non¬
 recoil guns : that they destroy the upperworks , break the
 breechings , dismount themselves, and expose the men, who are
 obliged to load outside the bulwarks , to the enemy’s fire. The
 last is certainly a very sei’ious objection, and one, we believe,
 which yet keeps its ground . But we must not, in digressing,
forget Lieutenant Smith and his exploit.
     On the 13th of November, early in the morning, the Mil-
brook , then lying becalmed off the bar of Oporto , descried a
French ship, wearing a pendant , and, to all appearance , a frigate
 of 36 guns. Having under his protection two brigs of a New¬
foundland convoy, and observing several other vessels in the
 offing, which, if as he conjectured English merchantmen , were
 equally an object of desire to the Frenchmen , Lieutenant Smith
 got out his sweeps, and pulled towards the enemy. At 8 a . m.
the schooner received a broadside from the ship, which was the
celebrated French privateer Bellone, of Bordeaux . Before the
Bellone could bring her second broadside to bear, the Milbrook
had fired three broadsides, and by the time the former had fired
her third , the schooner had discharged eleven broadsides. Such
was the rapidity of firing where no time was lost by running out
the guns.
