68                   BRITISH AND DANISH FLEETS.                    1801.

rebuoy the outer channel , a narrow passage lying between the
island of Saltholm and the Middle Ground . This was a very
difficult, as well as a very fatiguing duty , and the vice-admiral
                                                      attack from
rejoiced greatly when he had accomplished it. An examination
the northward was at first meditated : but a second
of the Danish position on the 31st , and a favourable change of
wind determined the vice-admiral to commence his operations
from the southward.
   On the morning of the 1st of April the British fleet weighed,
and shortly afterwards reanchored off the north -western ex¬
tremity of the Middle Ground , a shoal which extends along the
whole sea-front of the city of Copenhagen , leaving an inter¬
vening channel of deep water, called the Konig-Stiefe, or King ’s
Channel , about three quarters of a mile wide ; and in which
channel , close to the town, the Danes had moored their block-
ships , radeaus , prames , and gun-vessels. The distance of the
anchorage from the city of Copenhagen was about six miles.
In the course of the forenoon, Lord Nelson, embarking on board
the Amazon with some chosen friends, reconnoitred for the last
time, the position he was about to attack ; and soon after his
return at 1 p. m., the signal to weigh appeared at the Elephant ’s
masthead : a signal, which was received by the different ships’
companies with a shout that must have been heard at a consi¬
derable distance . Immediately afterwards the vice-admiral ’s
 squadron , amounting in the whole to 36 sail of square-rigged
 vessels got under way and set sail, in two divisions, with a Tight
but favourable wind ; leaving Admiral Parker at anchor wit
the
Gun-ship
                            Admiral (b.) Sir Hyde Parker.
       London               Captain William Domett.
                               „     Robert Waller Otway.
       St .-George                   Thos. Masterman Hardy.
       Warrior .                     Charles Tyler
       Defence .                     Lord Henry Paulet.
       Saturn .                      Robert Lambert.
       Ramillies.                    Jas. William Taylor Dixon.
       Raisonable                    John Dilkes.
       Veteran .                     Arch. Collingw. Dickson . '

   The ships of Lord Nelson ’s detachment , preceded by the
Amazon , entered the Upper Channel ; coasting along the edge
of the right -hand shoal or Middle Ground , until they had reached
and partly rounded its southern extremity . Here, off Draco
point , at about 8 p.m., just as it grew dark ; the detachment
anchored ; the north -westernmost British ship being then distant
about two miles from the southermnost ship of the Danish line.
    The same north -westerly wind, which had blown so fair pass¬
ing along the outer channel , was now as foul for advancing by
the inner one. This, however, occasioned no delay ; for in so
 difficult a navigation , daylight w'as as fully indispensable as a
