66               BRITISH AND DANISH FLEETS.                   1801.

    On the 23d the Blanche returned to the fleet, having on board,
with Mr . Vans it tart, Mr. Drummond , the British charge d ’affaires
at Copenhagen ; and from the Danish government, instead of a
reply of conciliation, came, as was to be expected , one of open
defiance. Much valuable time had thus been lost, and the
Danes were taking; advantage of it in strengthening their means
of defence ; the formidable appearance of which had already
excited the surprise of the British envoy.
    The pilots, who, not having to share the honours, felt it to be
their interest to magnify the dangers of the expedition, occasioned
a few more days to be dissipated in inactivity . In the course of
these Admiral Parker sent a flag of truce to the governor of
Elsineur , to inquire if he meant to oppose the passage of the fleet
through the Sound . Governor Strieker replied, that the guns of
Cronenburg castle would certainly be fired at any British ships of
war that approached . At length , at 6 a . M. on the 30th , the
British fleet got under way, and , with a fine breeze at north-
north -west, proceeded into the Sound, in line ahead ; the van
division commanded by Lord Nelson in the Elephant 74, into
which ship, as a lighter and more active one than the St .-
George, he had, the preceding day, shifted his flag ; the centre
division, by the commander-in- chief ; and the rear division, by
Rear -admiral Graves. At 7 a . m. the batteries at Elsineur com¬
menced firing at the Monarch , who was the leading ship, and at
the other ships, as they passed in succession. The distance,
however, was so great, that not a shot struck the ships ; nor did
any but the van-ships fire in return , and these only two or three
broadsides . The seven bomb-vessels, however, threw shells;
200 of which were stated to have fallen in Cronenburg and Hel-
singen, and, among other damages , to have killed two, and
wounded 15 men. The bursting of a 24-pounder on board the
Isis , whereby seven men were killed and wounded, was the only
casualty that attended the British in their passage through the
Sound.
    As the strait at Elsineur is less than three miles across, a mid¬
channel passage would undoubtedly have exposed the ships to a
fire from Cronenburg castle on the one side, and from the Swedish
city of Helsinburg on the other ; but the latter , the batteries of
which , instead of being a subject of dread as the pilots had given
out , mounted only eight guns of a light caliber, did not make
even a show of opposition. On observing this , the British in¬
clined to the Swedish shore, passing within less than a mile of
it ; and thus avoided a fire which, as coming from nearly 100
pieces of cannon, could not fail to have been highly destructive.
    About noon, or soon after , the fleet anchored at some distance
above the island of Huen , which is about 15 miles from the city
of Copenhagen . The commander-in-chief, Vice-admiral Lord
Nelson, and Rear - admiral Graves , accompanied by Captain
Domett , and the commanding officer of the troops, then pro-
