1801.           LORD NELSON AT COPENHAGEN.                       73
  Thus , the signal to discontinue the action was answered only,
not repeated , on board the Elephant ; and, although the Defiance
repeated it, Rear -admiral Graves would not suffer the signal to
be hoisted any where but at the lee maintopsail yard-arm, and
 still kept No. 16, the signal for close action, flying at the main
topgallantmast head . The frigates and sloops now hauled off
from the Trekroner batteries , and, by doing so, were probably
saved from destruction . It was while unavoidably presenting
 her stern to those batteries , that the Amazon had her gallant
 captain shot in two, and sustained the principal part of her loss.
    At 1 h. 30 m. p. m. the fire of the Danes slackened ; and, at a
little before 2 p. m., it ceased along nearly the whole of the line
 astern of the Zealand . Some of the prames and light vessels
 had also gone adrift ; but few, if any of the vessels, whose flags
had been struck , would suffer themselves to be taken possession
 of. They fired at the boats as the latter approached , and the
batteries on Amag island aided them in this irregular warfare.
“ This arose,” says Mr . Southey , “ from the nature of the
action ; the crews were continually reinforced from the shore:
and fresh men, coming on board, did not inquire whether the
flag had been struck , or, perhaps , did not heed it ; many, or
most of them , never having been engaged in war before, know¬
ing nothing , therefore, of its laws, and thinking only of defending
their country to the last extremity .”
    At all events it greatly , and very naturally , irritated Lord
Nelson ; who, at one time, had thoughts of sending in the fire¬
ships to burn the surrendered vessels. As a preliminary measure,
however, his lordship wrote the celebrated letter to the Crown
Prince of Denmark , wherein he says : “ Vice - admiral Lord
Nelson has been commanded to spare Denmark , when she no
longer resists. The line of defence which covered her shores has
struck to the British flag ; but , if the firing is continued on the
part of Denmark , he must set on fire all the prizes that he has
taken , without having the power of saving the men who have so
nobly defended them. The brave Danes are the brothers , and
should never be the enemies of the English .” A wafer was then
given him, but he ordered a candle to be brought from the cock¬
pit, and sealed the letter with wax, affixing a larger seal than
he ordinarily used. “ This,” said his lordship , “ is no time to
appear hurried and informal.”
    This letter was carried on shore, with a flag of truce , by
Captain Sir Frederick Thesiger (a young commander acting as
one of Lord Nelson’s aides-de-camp), who found the crown
prince at the sallyport . In the mean time the destructive can¬
nonade , still kept up by the Defiance, Monarch , and Ganges,
and the near approach of the Defence and Ramillies (the
Veteran far astern ), silenced the fire of the Indosforethen , Hol¬
stein , and the ships next to them in the Danish line. But the
great Trekroner, having had nothing but frigates and sloops
