70                BRITISH AND DANISH FLEETS.                     1801.
 batteries were commanded by the two two-decked block-ships
 Mars and Elephanten.
    The entrance into the harbour and docks, which latter lie in
 the heart of the city, was protected by a chain thrown across it;
 also by some batteries on the northern shore, and particularly by
 the Trekroner or Crown batteries already described . In ad¬
 dition to this , the two 74-gun ships Dannemark and Trekroner,
 a 40-gun frigate, two 18-gun brigs, and several armed xebecs,
 with furnaces for heating shot, lay moored in advantageous
 positions off the harbour ’s mouth . Along the shore of Amag*
 island , a little to the southward of the floating line of defence
 were several gun and mortar batteries ; thus making the whole
 line of defence, in front of Copenhagen , cover an extent of be¬
 tween three and four miles. The Danish naval commanding
 officer was Commodore Olfert Fischer , who had his broad pen¬
 dant on board the Dannebrog 62 ; nor was there a want of men,
 both skilful and brave, to work the Danish guns either afloat or
 on shore . One spirit, indeed, seemed to animate all Denmark,
and that was to repel the invaders by every possible means.
    The day of the 2d of April opened, as the British had hoped
 it would, with a favourable or south -easterly wind. The signal
 for all captains on board the flag-ship was hoisted almost as
 soon as it could be seen ; and at 8 a . m. the several captains
 were made acquainted with the stations assigned them . As cir¬
 cumstances , which will be mentioned in their place, prevented
 the plan’s being strictly followed, it may suffice to state , that all
the line-of-battle ships were to anchor by the stern abreast of
the different vessels composing the enemy’s line, and for which
purpose they had already prepared themselves with cables out
 of their stern-ports. The Amazon, Blanche , Alcmene, Arrow,
and Dart , with the two fire-ships, placed under the immediate
directions of Captain Riou , were to co-operate in the attack
upon the ships stationed at the harbour ’s mouth , and to act
otherwise as circumstances might require . The bomb-vessels
were to station themselves outside the British line, so as to throw
their shells over it ; and the Jamaica , with the brigs and gun-
vessels, was to take a position for raking 'the southern extremity
of the Danish line. A similar station was assigned to the
Desiree . It was also intended that the 49th regiment under
Colonel Stewart , and 500 seamen, under Captain Fremantle of
the Ganges, should storm the principal of the Trekroner bat¬
teries,,the instant that the cannonade from the ships had silenced
its fire.
    At 9 a . m. the pilots and several of the masters were ordered
on board the Elephant . Their hesitation and indecision, about
the bearings of the shoal and the line of deep water , might well
provoke a more patient man than Lord Nelson . At 9 h. 30 m.
A. m., however , the signal was made to weigh in succession . The

             * Spelt Amak by Southey , and other authors.
