74               BRITISH AND DANISH FLEETS
                                         .                    1801.

 opposed to it, and that only for a time , was comparatively un¬
 injured . This battery therefore continued its fire ; and, as about
  1500 men had been thrown into it from the shore, was con¬
 sidered too strong to be stormed . It was now deemed an
 advisable measure to withdraw the fleet out of the intricate
 channel while the w7ind continued fair ; and preparations were
 making for that purpose, when the Danish Adjutant - general
 Lindolm came, bearing a flag of truce : upon sight of which
 the Trekroner ceased firing ; and the action, after having con¬
 tinued five hours, during four of which it had been warmly
 contested , was brought to a close.
    The message from the crown prince was to inquire the par¬
 ticular object of Lord Nelson ’s note . The latter replied, in
 writing , that humanity was the object ; that he consented to
 stay hostilities ; that the wounded Danes should be taken on
 shore ; and that he should take his prisoners out of the vessels,
 and burn or carry off his prizes as he should think fit : his lord-
 ship concluded with a hope, that the victory he had gained
 would lead to a reconciliation between the two countries . Sir
 Frederick Thesiger, who had returned with the Danish adjutant-
 general , was again sent with the reply ; and the latter was re¬
 ferred to the commander-in-chief for a final adjustment of the
terms.
    The opportunity afforded by this delay, the London being
 nearly four miles distant , was not lost by Lord Nelson ; and the
 leading British ships, all erf which were much crippled in their
rigging and sails, weighed or slipped in succession. The Mo¬
 narch led the way, and touched upon the shoal ; but the Ganges,
 taking her amidships, pushed her over it . The Glatton , drawing
less water, passed clear ; but the Defiance and Elephant grounded
about a mile from the Trekroner ; and , in spite of the exertions
of their active crew’s, there remained fixed for many hours . The
 Desiree , also, at the opposite end of the line, having gone to
assist the Bellona , became fast on the same shoal as the latter.
The Bellona, however, was soon got afloat by resources of her
own. An experienced quartermaster , observing the Isis in the
act of slipping , suggested to the first lieutenant that , if a boat
were sent to pick up that ship ’s cable, they might haul off by it.
The hint was taken , and the Bellona quickly freed herself from
the shoal.
    Soon after the Elephant had grounded , Lord Nelson quitted
her , and followed the Danish adjutant -general to the London.
While the conference is holding , we will proceed to show, as
well as we are able, at what expense England had brought
Denmark to so subdued a tone. Taking the ships in the order
in which they stand in a list at a subsequent page, the Desiree
had one lieutenant (Andrew King ) and three seamen wounded;
the Russel , five seamen and one marine wounded ; the Bellona,
nine seamen and two private marines killed, and her captain (leg
