72                   BRITISH AND DANISH FLEETS,                            1801.
was the Amazon who, with the four other ships intrusted to
Captain Riou, had most gallantly taken a position (the three
frigates in particular ) right against the Trekronen batteries.
   At the end of a three hours’ cannonade , few if any of the
Danish block-ships, prames, or rideaus, had ceased firing ; nor
could the contest be said to have taken on either side a decisive
turn . It was at this time that , in consequence, as is understood,
of the pressing solicitations of the captain of the fleet, founded
upon information received a full hour before that signals of
distress were at the mast-heads of two British line-of-battle
ships (the Bellona and Russel ), and the signal of inability on
board a third (the Agamemnon), coupled with the imperfect view
which the London’s distance from the scene of action enabled
Sir Hyde himself to take of the relative condition of the parties
in it ; observing, also, the zig-zag course and necessarily slow
progress of the Defence, Ramillies, and Veteran , which had
been detached as a reinforcement to the vice-admiral, the com¬
mander -in-chief was persuaded to throw out the signal for dis¬
continuing the engagement .*
   The manner in which Lord Nelson received this signal is
very forcibly depictured in a popular biographical work.
“ About this time,” says Mr . Southey, “ the signal-lieutenant
called out that No. 39 (the signal for discontinuing the action)
was thrown out by the commander-in-chief. He continued to
walk the deck , and appeared to take no notice of it. The
signal-officer met him at the next turn , and asked if he should
repeat it. ‘ No,’ he replied, ‘ acknowledge it.’ Presently he
called after him to know if the signal for close action was still
hoisted ; and, being answeredpn the affirmative, said, ‘ Mind you
beep it so.’ He now paced the deck , moving the stump of his
lost arm in a manner which always indicated great emotion.
* Do you know, ’ said        he to Mr . Fergusson , ‘ what        is shown on
board the commander-in-chief ? Number 39 !’ Mr . Fergusson
asked him what that meant . ‘ Why , to leave off1action.’ Then,
shrugging up his shoulders, he repeated the words—‘ Leave off*
action ? Now d—n me if I do ! You know, Foley, ’ turning to
the Captain , ‘ I have only one eye,—I have a right to be blind
sometimes: 1—and then putting the glass to his blind eye, in
that mood of mind which sports with bitterness, he exclaimed,
‘ I really do not see the signal .’       Presently    he exclaimed    , ‘D—n
the signal ! keep mine for closer battle flying ! That ’s the way
I answer such signals. Nail mine to the mast .’ ”f
   * It is but common justice towards Sir Hyde Parker to state, that he made
 the signal “ to discontinue the action,” in order that Lord Nelson might with¬
draw from the contest, if, owing to the different ships unable to reach their sta¬
tion , some being a-ground, he felt his force insufficient to maintain the attack;
for it was evident that Sir Hyde’s division could not proffer the least assistance!
the signal was made with a generous intention , and Mr. Southey has added a
note similar to this in his second edition of his Life of Nelson .—Ed.
   f Southey’s Life of Nelson , vol. ii., p. 124.
