 1801. ARRIVAL OF ADMIRAL PARKER IN' THE
                                         SOUND
                                             .                        65
 barked , the 49th regiment under Colonel Isaac Brock ,
                                                             two com¬
 panies of the rifle-corps, and a detachment of artillery ,
 under the command of Colonel Stewart.                      the whole
    The nominal or paper force of the three powers
 this fleet was destined to act , was Russia 82,      against which
                                                 Denmark 23, and
 Sweden 18 sail of the line, besides, between them all,
                                                             about 89
 frigates , corvettes, and brigs, and nearly twice the
 armed small-craft. But Russia , even as late as           number      of
                                                     October in the
 present year, did not possess more than 61 sail of the
 which number 31 were in commission in the Baltic , andline ; of
                                                                the re¬
 mainder in the Mediterranean and Black seas. Those 31
 were divided between Petersburg , Archangel ,                     ships
                                                    Cronstadt , and
 Revel . Perhaps the effective number , or that which
                                                            might be
brought to act as a fleet, did not exceed 20 sail of the line
                                                                  ; and
 these were badly equipped , ill-appointed , and
The Swedes, atone time, had 11 sail of the lineworse          manned.
                                                       at Carlscrona
ready for sea, and , by all accounts , in tolerably
The Danish fleet at Copenhagen consisted, in the      fighting     trim.
March , of 10 sail of the line ready for sea, exclusivemiddle of
the same number in an unserviceable state.                    of about
    This makes 41 Russian , Swedish, and Danish
of the line, instead of 88, the number stated by effective ships
                                                     several writers
to have been afloat in this quarter . It must have
                                                        been a very
happy combination of circumstances that could have
in one spot 25 of those 41 sail of the line ; and          assembled
                                                   against that 25,
made up, as the number would be, of three different
mere novices in naval tactics , 18, or, with a Nelson tonations, all
them , 15 British sail of the line, were more than command
                                                            a match.
Without this explanation, it might seem the height of
in the British government to send to the Baltic so rashness
small a force.                                            apparently
   In the hope that Denmark , in spite of her hostile
tions, would prefer negotiation to war, the Honourable  demonstra¬
Vansittart , with full powers to treat , had , about a Nicholas
previous to the sailing of the fleet, departed for        fortnight
the 32-gun frigate Blanche , Captain Graham Eden    Copenhagen     in
Adverse winds kept the British fleet from reaching the    Hamond.
                                                            Naze of
Norway until the 18th ; and still heavier gales , during
                                                            the two
succeeding days, scattered the vessels, especially the
craft , in all directions . To collect these, the             small-
                                                   admiral, on the
21st , anchored at the entrance of the Sound, within
Roll point on the Swedish shore. Some of the               sight of
                                                    smaller vessels
were unable to rejoin ; and the Blazer gun-brig
                                                        was
under the Swedish fort of Warberg , and there captured . driven
                                                              In the
height of the bad weather the 74-gun ship Russel
pany , by signal, to take the Tickler gun-brig in      parted  com¬
                                                        tow ; and,
during the dark and hazy night that ensued, was
from being wrecked herself, by the great exertions      only saved
and crew.                                            of her officers
  VOL. Ill,
                                     F
