 1801.           LORD NELSON AT COPENHAGEN.                       71
  Edgar led. The Agamemnon was to have followed ; but , having'
  anchored rather outside, than off, the end of the great shoal, she
  could not weather it, and was obliged again to bring up, in six
  fathoms ’water . Here the current was so strong against her,
  that , although the ship afterwards re-weighed, and continued for
  a long time to warp with the stream and kedge anchors, the
  Agamemnon was compelled a second time to bring up, nearly in
  the spot from which she had last weighed. In the mean time
  the Polyphemus , by signal, had followed the Edgar ; and the
  Isis steered after the former. Owing to the unskilfulness or
  unsteadiness of her master , Mr . Alexander Briarly , who had
  undertaken the office of pilot, the Bellona , in spite of a fair
  wind and ample room, hugged the Middle Ground too closely,
 and grounded abreast of, and about 450 yards distant from, the
 rear of the Danish line. Following closely, the Russel also
 grounded , with her jib -boom almost over the Bellona’s taffrail.
     In compliance with the wish of the pilots, each ship had been
 ordered to pass her leader on the starboard side, from a suppo¬
 sition that the water shoaled on the larboard shore ; whereas
 Captain Hardy had proved, that the water kept deepening all
 the way to the enemy’s line. The Elephant was next to the
 Russel ; and Lord Nelson, as soon as he perceived the state of
that ship and the Bellona , ordered the helm to be put a-star¬
board, and passed to the westward, or along the larboard beam,
of those ships ; as, very fortunately , did all the ships astern of
the Elephant.
    At the same moment that Lord Nelson’s detachment weighed,
Admiral Parker ’s eight ships did the same ; and the latter took
up a new position somewhat nearer to the mouth of the harbour,
but still at too great a distance to do more than menace the north
wing of defence. A nearer approach , indeed, with both wind
and current against the ships, was impracticable ; in sufficient
time, at least, to render any active service in the engagement.
    At 10 a . m. the cannonade commenced ; and, lor nearly half
an hour, the principal British ships engaged were the Polyphe¬
mus, Isis, Edgar , Ardent , and Monarch . At about 11 h. 30 m.
a . m. the Glatton , Elephant , Ganges , and Defiance , got to their
stations ; as did several of the frigates and smaller vessels, and
the action became general. The Desiree was of great service in
raking the Provesteen , and drawing off a part of her heavy fire
from the Polyphemus and Isis ; particularly from the latter , who
bore the brunt of it, as her heavy loss will presently show.
Owing to the strength of the current , the Jamaica , with the
gun-vessels, could not get near enough to be of any service in
the action ; nor were the bomb-vessels able to execute much.
 •The absence of the Russel , Bellona, and Agamemnon, occa¬
sioned several of the British ships to have a greater share of the
enemy’s fire, than had been allotted to them, or than they were
Well able to bear. Among the many sufferers on this account
