SO                     BRITISH AND      DANISH FLEETS.         1801.

   Having taken some notice of the Danish accounts of this
battle , we must not behave so disrespectfully as to neglect
bestowing a word or two upon the English accounts . According
to the misplaced “ Note/ ’ which we formerly quoted from
Admiral Ekins ’s work,* Lord Nelson attributed the grounding
of the JBellona and Russel to his not having ordered his ships,
in so intricate and shallow a navigation, to cut instead of to
weigh. It is certainly the first time we ever heard that the
Vice-admiral was in this respect to blame : but we are con¬
vinced that , of all other men, Lord Nelson was the most likely
to acknowledge an error, if he thought he had committed
one.
   Although Admiral Ekins has not considered it necessary to
give any account of the Copenhagen affair, another contempo¬
rary has entered into it with rather more than his usual concise¬
ness . Captain Brenton has also given a “ Plan of the battle
but , as is often the case, the engraved and the letter -press de¬
scriptions do not correspond. One important instance will
suffice. The Bellona and Russel are placed in the plan, within
a ship’s length or so of their actual stations ; but the letter -press
tells us, that those ships were “ much exposed to the fire of the
Crown batteries ;”f which Crown batteries , as rightly laid
down in the same plan, are to the northward of the northern
extremity of the Danish line, or perhaps about two miles and a
half from the nearest of the two grounded ships, the Bellona.
The fact is, neither ship received or could receive a shot from
the Trekroner , although they both received several from the
Wagner and Provesteen ; and a Danish 36-pound shot, from one
of the batteries on Amag island, went through the centre of the
Bellona ’s mainmast.
   In almost all the published unofficial accounts , a mistatement
also occurs respecting the Agamemnon. Lord Nelson in his
letter says : “ The Agamemnon could not weather the shoal of
the middle and was obliged to anchor          but Captain Brenton
tells us, that “ the Agamemnon grounded on the starboard
quarter of the Bellona, ” and Mr . Southey (but who, by-the-by,
is very poor authority in naval matters ) declares that she was
“ immovably aground .”§
   The night of the 2d of April was employed by the British in
bringing out their shattered prizes, and in floating their
grounded ships . By the morning of the 3d the whole of the
latter , except the Desiree were got off. During the five days
that the negotiation was pending , all the prizes, except the 60-
gun ship Holstein , were set on fire and destroyed . The gene¬
rality of these were not worth carrying away ; but Sir Hyde ’s


  {Brenton
    ,vol
      .ii.,
          .p
  * See   vol . ii . p . 181.

     Ibid. p. 542.       545.
     Southey ’s Life of Nelson , vol. ii., p. 118.
