 1801.   LORD NELSON
                   ’S DEPARTURE FROM THE BALTIC
                                              .                  83
 and on tlie 3d had sailed for Cronstadt . A communication with
 the shore now took place ; and the Emperor Alexander repeated
 his friendly intentions , but expressed surprise at the appearance
 of the British admiral at Revel . On the 17th the latter quitted
 the road ; and on the 19th the Russians and Swedes took off
 the embargo that had been laid on British vessels in their ports.
 Thus were the amicable relations between England and those
 two powers once more restored.
    On the 6th of June , after having been at anchor some days
 off Rostock , Lord Nelson returned to Kioge bay, and on the
  13th received the sanction of the admiralty to an application
 which, on account of the bad state of his health , he had made to
 return to England . On the 17th or 18th Vice-admiral Sir
 Charles Morice Pole , in the 32-gun frigate iEolus , arrived to
 take the command ; and on the 19th Lord Nelson quitted the
 Baltic in the Kite brig. Vice-admiral Pole remained on the sta¬
tion until the latter end of July ; when, there being no longer
any occasion for so powerful a fleet in the Baltic , he was ordered
home. Although his command had been short and pacific,
Vice-admiral Pole found means to increase the high opinion that
his predecessor had gained for the British navy in these inland
seas, by carrying safely through the intricate channel of the
Great Belt , against an adverse wind, a fleet of line-of-battle
ships, two of which were three -deckers.
    For the successful result of the Copenhagen battle , and the
gallantry displayed in it by Lord Nelson and his associates , the
thanks of both houses of parliament were voted to the admirals,
captains, officers, and men of Sir Hyde Parker ’s fleet. Owing
to some political considerations , having reference, we believe, to
the ties that existed between the crowned heads of England and
Denmark , the only mark of royal approbation bestowed upon
the conquerors was the investment of Rear -admiral Graves with,
the order of the bath . This infraction of the usual custom did
fcot, however, extend to the promotion of the j unior class of offi¬
cers, all the lieutenants of the ships engaged , and perhaps a
tew others, being made commanders, and Captains Devonshire,
Brisbane, and Birchall , post-captains.

                 BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.

    The continental war having ceased, by a treaty of peace con¬
 cluded at Luneville on the 9th of February between France and
the Emperor of Germany , the first-consul began, more seriously
 than ever, to entertain hopes of being able to plant his victo¬
rious legions upon British ground. “ Tous les moyens propres
a entretenir la haine de la nation contre la Grande-Bretagne fut
employes avec activite et avec success. Les autorites , les ora-
teurs du gouvernement, les ecrivains publicistes , rivaliserent de
                               g 2
