82            BRITISH, SWEDISH, AND RUSSIAN FLEETS.
                                                                                  1801.

be manned, and , without even waiting for a boat-cloak (though
you must suppose the weather pretty sharp here at this season
of the year), and having to row about 24 miles with the wind
and current against him, jumped into her , and ordered me to go
with him, I having been on board that ship (the St .-George) to
remain till she had got over the Grounds . All I had ever seen
or heard of him could not half so clearly prove to me the sin¬
gular and unbounded zeal of this truly great man. His anxiety
in the boat for nearly six hours, lest the fleet should have sailed
before he got on board one of them, and lest we should not
catch the Swedish squadron , is beyond all conception . I will
quote some expressions in his own words. It was extremely
cold, and I wished him to put on a great coat of mine which
was in the boat : *No, I am not cold ; my anxiety for my
country will keep me warm. Do you think the fleet has sailed ?’
     should   suppose   not , my   lord   .1—‘   If   they   have   , we   will   follow
*I
them to Carlscrona in the boat, by God !’ ” The distance to
which place, Mr. Briarly goes on to state , was about 50 leagues.
At midnight , Lord Nelson reached the Elephant ; and Mr.
Briarly returned to the St.-George, to conduct her to Kioge
bay .                        _ ,
    On the 23d a lugger joined the fleet, then not far from Carls¬
crona on its way to the gulf of Finland , with despatches from
 Count Van der Paklen , the Russian ambassador at Copenhagen,
containing overtures of a pacific nature from Alexander I., who
now, by the decease of the Czar Paul , had become invested with
 the imperial sceptre . This induced Sir Hyde to return with the
 fleet to Kioge bay ; where, on the 5th of May , he was found by
 a vessel that brought despatches recalling him from the com¬
 mand . Shortly afterwards Admiral Parker sailed for England
 in the Blanche , leaving the command of the fleet to Vice-admiral
 Lord Nelson. Almost the first signal made by the new com¬
 mander-in-chief was, to hoist in all the launches and prepare to
 weigh. On the 7th the fleet, by the addition of the St .-George
 now augmented to 17 sail of the line, a 54 and a 50 gun ship,
 besides a few frigates and smaller vessels, set sail from Kioge
 bay . On the 8th, after having by a flag of truce informed Vice-
  admiral Cronstadt , that although Sir Hyde Parker had consented
  not to interrupt the Swedish navigation , he should act against
  the Swedish fleet if he found it at sea, Lord Nelson left Captain
  Murray , with the Edgar , Russel , Saturn , Agamemnon, Ardent,
  Raisonable , Glatton , and a frigate to cruise off Carlscrona ; while,
  with the remaining 11 sail of the line, one frigate, and two brig-
  sloops, the vice-admiral hastened to the gulf of Finland.
     On the 14th Lord Nelson anchored in Revel roads ; but no
  Russian squadron was in that quarter . The bay had been clear
  of firm ice since the 29th of April, at which time Sir Hyde
   Parker , with the fleet, was lying inactive at Kioge ; and the
  Russians had subsequently sawed through the ice in the mole,
