84               BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                    1801.

sele pour precher cette espece de croisade contre Peternelle enne-
mie de la France .”*
    The port of Boulogne was to be the central rendezvous of the
grand flotilla ; and on the 12th of July Buonaparte issued an
order for the assemblage there of nine divisions of gun-vessels,
and of the same number of battalions of troops, besides several
detachments of artillery to serve the guns on board the flotilla.
 Of which flotilla Rear -admiral Rene -Madeleine La Touche-Tre-
ville was appointed the commander-in-chief, with directions to
exercise the troops in ship-working, in firing the guns, in board¬
ing , and in getting in and out of the vessels.
    These preparations , exaggerated as they were by the French
journals , spread no slight degree of alarm on the shores of
 England , and caused corresponding preparations , in the defen¬
sive way, to be made by the British government . Among
other measures taken to calm the public mind, was the appoint¬
 ment of Vice-admiral Lord Nelson to the chief command of the
 defence constructing and collecting along the coast from Orford-
ness to Beachy Head.
     On the 30th of July the vice-admiral hoisted his flag onboard
 the 18-pounder 32-gun frigate Medusa , Captain John Gore, at
 anchor in the Downs ; and on the 3d of August , having under
 his charge about 30 vessels, great and small, Lord Nelson, by
 orders from the admiralty , of which Earl St .-Vincent was now
 at the head , stood across to Boulogne ; the port whence, as
 already stated , the main attempt was to be made, and which the
 French , informed by their secret intelligence that an attack
 would be made, had recently been fortifying with great care,
 ii On the 4th the English bomb-vessels threw their shells
 amidst the French flotilla, consisting of 24 brigs , lugger -rigged
 flats, and a schooner, moored in a line in front of the town. The
  effect of the bombardment was, by the English account, the
  sinking of three flats and a brig , and the driving of several others
  on shore ; but the French declare that only two gun-boats were
  slightly damaged , and that not a man was hurt on board the
  flotilla . Nor did the British sustain any greater loss than one
  captain of artillery and two seamen wounded by the bursting of
  a French shell.
     On the night of the 15th of August , Lord Nelson despatched
  the armed boats of his squadron , formed into four divisions, under
  the respective commands of Captains Philip Somerville, Edward
  Thornborough Parker , Isaac Cotgrave , and Robert Jones, and
   accompanied by a division of mortar -boats, under Captain John
   Conn, to attempt to bring off the French flotilla, which had
   been much strengthened since the last attack . At about 11 h.
   SOm. p. m. the boats put off from the Medusa , in the most

                                       , tomexiv., p. 18.
                 * Victoires et Conquetes
