                        I



1801.           LORD NELSON AT COPENHAGEN
                                       .                        81
 reason for extending the order to the Zealand , a much larger
  and finer ship than the Holstein , is not very clear.
    On the 9th , after some altercation as to the duration of the
 armistice, one was agreed upon for 14 weeks ; and Denmark
 engaged to suspend all proceedings under the treaty of armed
 neutrality , which she had entered into with Sweden and Russia;
 The prisoners, also, were to be sent on shore, and accounted for
 in case hostilities should be renewed. Moreover the British
 fleet had permission to provide itself, at Copenhagen and else¬
 where along the coast, with all things requisite for the health
 and comfort of the seamen.
    On the 12th, having despatched home the Holstein , Monarch,
 and Isis , with the wounded men, Admiral Parker sailed from
 Copenhagen road with the remainder of the fleet, except the St .-
 George and one or two frigates , and directed his course along
 the difficult channel of the Grounds , between the islands of
 Amag and Saltholm. This was both a tedious and a dangerous
 navigation, as most of the men of war had to trans-ship their
 guns into merchant vessels ; and even then , several of the former
 got on shore. The whole of the ships at length extricated
 themselves ; and, to the astonishment of Danes, Swedes, Rus¬
 sians, and Prussians , entered the Baltic by this route.
    The British admiral’s first object was to attack the Russian
 squadron at Revel, before the breaking up of the frost should
 enable it to effect a junction with the Swedish squadron at
 Carlscrona ; but , in his way thither , hearing that a Swedish
 squadron , reported at nine sail of the line, was at sea, Sir Hyde
 steered for the northern extremity of the island of Bornholm.
 The Swedish admiral, however, whose force consisted of only
 six sail of the line, conceiving himself no match for a British
admiral with 16, sought refuge behind the forts of Carlscrona.
 Here a negotiation was opened between Sir Hyde Parker , and
the Swedish Vice-admiral Cronstadt ; which, on the 22d, ended
in an agreement by his Swedish majesty to treat for the accom¬
modation of all existing differences.
    By this time Lord Nelson had joined the admiral, and had
his flag again flying on board the Elephant . How he had got
thither merits to be related . On the 18th the St .-George, having
removed her guns to an American vessel, and, by the excellent
management of Mr. Briarly , of the Bellona, whose local expe¬
rience was very great , succeeded in passing the Grounds , was
ready to follow Sir Hyde ; but a contrary wind detained her.
On the following evening Lord Nelson received intelligence from
the admiral, of the Swedish fleet’s having been seen by one of
bis look-out frigates. Instantly he quitted the St .-George, and,
embarking in a six- oared cutter , with Mr. Briarly, set off to join
the admiral , although the latter was at a distance of 24 miles, in
the very teeth of the wind and current . “ The moment he
received the account, ” says Mr. Briarly , “ he ordered a boat to
  VOL. Ill ,                      G
