88        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.               1801.

teaume, on the 8th , got under way, and stood through the
passage du Raz ; but here, contrary to his expectation , he was
discovered and chased by a division of the Channel fleet under
the command of Vice-admiral Sir Henry Harvey . This obliged
the French admiral to regain the coast ; and he soon afterwards
came to an anchor at the mouth of the river Vilaine. Thence, in
order that the British might be led to suppose he had no other
object in view than the other French squadrons in motion at this
time, M. Ganteaume subsequently departed , steering for the
road of Brest ; where he anchored, as if the service he had
been detached upon was executed.
    Here lay the French admiral , waiting for a northerly gale of
wind, to blow the British blockading force off the coast. On
the 23d a storm arose, favourable alike in direction and violence;
and late on that night the squadron of M. Ganteaume weighed
 and put to sea. The only safe passage under such circumstances,
that of Iroise, was now entirely free from British cruisers ; but
such was the violence of the gale that , besides carrying away
 the topmasts of several of the ships, it separated the Jndivi-
 sible and Creole from the rest of the squadron.
    On the 27th of January , at 9 p. m., Cape Finisterre bearing
 east half-north distant 25 leagues, the British 12-pounder 36-gun
 frigate Concorde, Captain Robert Barton , while steering to the
 eastward , discovered by the light of the moon seven large ships,
 about two miles to windward, under easy sail, standing to the
 westward . These were the Indomptable , Formidable , Desaix,
 Constitution , Jean -Bart , Dix-Aout, and Bravoure, under the
 orders of Commodore Moncousu.
    One of the 74s and the frigate immediately bore up in chase;
 whereupon the Concorde, casting off a Swedish ship she had in
 tow, made sail ahead . In a little time the line-of-battle ship,
 hauling up again, steered to rejoin her squadron ; while the
 Bravoure continued bearing away in chase of the Concorde. As
 soon as she had reached what was considered to be a distance of
 about six miles from the French squadron , the Concorde hove to,
 and , by the usual mode of signalling, presently convinced her¬
 self that the ship in chase of her was not a friend.
    After a mutual hail, an order to strike to a French frigate, and
 a volley of musketry , the Bravoure ranged up on the Concorde’s
 lee side, and gave and returned a heavy fire ; until , passing on,
 she shot so far ahead as to bring the Concorde on her larboard
 quarter . In this position the latter kept her opponent warmly
 and closely engaged, for about half an hour ; when the fire of
 the Bravoure ceased, and almost at the same instant one of her
 boats and some other wreck fell from her stem and larboard
 quarter . Captain Barton now concluded that his antagonist,
 having discontinued the action, had surrendered ; but presently
 the Bravoure was observed making sail, and soon stood away
before the wind. The damaged state of the Concorde’s running
