90        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.—-MEDITER.              1801 .

that rank until two years and eight months (September 24,
 1803) had elapsed since the date of the action upon the merits
of which M. Dordelin founded his pretensions.
   After this exploit by one of his squadron , Commodore Mon-
cousu pursued his way towards the Straits ; and on the 30th,
oft’ Cape Spartel , the first appointed rendezvous, effected his
junction with Rear-admiral Ganteaume ; who, on the preceding
 evening, after a long chase, had captured the British ship-sloop,
or fire-ship, Incendiary , Captain Richard Balling Dunn . Imi¬
tating the example of some British admirals and captains , M.
 Ganteaume described his prize as “ of,” when he should have
said, “ pierced for,” 28 guns . The Incendiary , we believe,
mounted only sixteen 18-pounder carronades ; but the Spitfire,
and one or two others of the Incendiary ’s class, were established
with 24 guns, for which, by opening their maindeck ports, they
had ample room.
   After destroying his prize, Rear -admiral Ganteaume stood
towards the Straits ; and, on the morning of the 9th of February,
passed through them into the Mediterranean under a press of
sail . The only sea-going ship at this time at Gibraltar , the 12-
pounder 32 - gun frigate Success, Captain Shuldham Peard,
immediately weighed and steered after the French squadron.
Having no doubt that M . Ganteaume ’s destination was Egypt,
Captain Peard intended , if he could, to pass him on the passage,
and apprize Lord Keith of his expected arrival. On the 10th, in
the morning, the Success came up with the French ships off
Cape de Gata , where the second rendezvous had been appointed,
and passed them in the night . During the whole of the 11th
and 12th, owing chiefly to light and variable winds, the French
squadron kept sight of the Success . Soon after dark the wind
began to blow fresh from the southward ; and , as the Success
went occasionally at the rate of nine knots an hour , Captain
Peard flattered himself that he should see no more of his pur¬
suers . At daylight on the 13th, however, the leading French
ships were close up with the British frigate. Finding escape
impossible, Captain Peard , with great judgment , put back to the
westward , not only to retard the French admiral in his progress,
but to expose him to the risk of meeting any British force that
might have been detached in pursuit . At noon the wind fell;
and at 3 p. m., after two or three of the line-of-battle ships had
got within musket -shot and opened their fire, the Success hauled
down her flag.
   Learning from his prisoners , among whom were the officers
and crew of the Sprightly cutter , Lieutenant Robert Jump,
captured and scuttled on the 10th, that Admiral Lord Keith , and
Rear -admiral Sir Richard Bickerton were already , where they
did not arrive until more than a fortnight afterwards, upon the
coast of Egypt with a great force, and that Rear -admiral Sir
John Borlase Warren , with a force about equal to his own,
