1801.             CRUISE OF ADMIRAL GANTEAUME.                                 89

rigging delayed her in chasing ; and , at 3 a . m. on the 28th , she
lost sight of the Bravoure . At daylight , however, the Concorde
again discovered the French frigate ; but the appearance of the
latter ’s squadron to windward compelled Captain Barton , not
only to relinquish the pursuit of the Bravoure, but to attend to
the safety of the Concorde.
    The latter ’s loss in the action, out of a crew on board of not
more than 224 men and boys, amounted to four men killed and
 19 wounded, one of them mortally . The loss on board the
 Bravoure, out of a complement of about 320 men and boys, is
officially stated to have been 10 men killed , including her third
 lieutenant and pilot, and 24 wounded, including her captain , who
had the misfortune to have half his hand carried away by a
 grape -shot.
   The guns of the Concorde have already appeared ; but owing to
 the bursting of one of her 28* maindeck 12-pounders on the 10th
of the preceding August , whereby nine men were killed and five
badly wounded, and another 12-pounder was disabled , the frigate
mounted on the present occasion but 40 guns . The Bravoure
 appears to have mounted 42 guns, two more than the establish¬
 ment of her class, on account of having , like the Concorde
 herself previous to her accident , 28 twelves on the main deck.
 In point of force, therefore, the Concorde and Bravoure were
 tolerably well matched ; but , in practical gunnery , the relative
 execution shows that , if the two combatants had been left to
 themselves , the British frigate, without some extraordinary
 chance in her opponent’s favour, must have;come off the conqueror.
    A writer in the French work so frequently quoted by us declares,
 that the two frigates did meet by themselves, but that Captain
 Dordelin , by closing with the intention to board, “ frightened
 away Captain Barton, ” “ effraya le capitaine ennemi.”f The
 latter assertion appears to be founded upon a statement , although
 not quite so forcibly expressed, in the despatch of Rear -admiral
  Ganteaume ; but who, be it understood , is merely reciting the
 report made to him by Commodore Moncousu, as the substance
 of the information received by the latter from Captain Dordelin
 himself. It is Captain Dordelin , therefore, who vaunts of his
  own prowess ; who declares that he compelled the Concorde to
 run away, that her guns were 18-pounders, and that he heard
“ groans    and   cries ” proceeded     from   her   after   the   discharge    of
his first broadside . Crediting the statement , M. Ganteaume
strongly urges the minister of marine to promote M . Dordelin
from a capitaine de fregate to a capitaine de vaisseaux ; but the
first-consul appears to have seen further into the business than
M . Ganteaume , and did not promote the Bravoure’s captain to
  * See vol. i., p. 201 .   We omitted to mention , that the Concorde differed
from her class in mounting 28, instead of 26 guns on the main deck ; but the
total of her guns is there correctly stated at 42.
  f Victoires et Conquetes , tome xiv., p. 151.
