86        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                1801.

    The third division, under Captain Cotgrave , displayed the
same gallantry , and experienced nearly the same opposition as
the two others had done ; and was equally compelled to retire
without effecting the object . The loss of this division amounted
to one midshipman (Mr . Berry ), and four seamen killed , one
gunner , 23 seamen, and five marines wounded • total , five killed
 and 29 wounded. The fourth division of boats , under Captain
Jones , not being able, owing to the rapidity of the tide, to get to
the westward of any part of the enemy’s line, put back to the
 squadron.
     The French say they captured four of the English boats , and
 ran down several others ; and that their loss amounted to only
 10 men killed and 30 wounded : whereas that of the British
 amounted altogether to 44 killed , and 126 wounded . Of
 course the French boasted , and certainly not without reason,
 of the successful opposition they had made to the persevering
 assaults of the British.
     The appellation of gun-brig, and of flat or raft, convey, with¬
 out some explanation , a very imperfect idea of the description of
 vessels of which the Boulogne flotilla was composed . The brigs
 were vessels of from 200 to 250 tons, armed with from four to
 eight heavy long guns, generally 24 and 18 pounders , and in
 some instances , 36-pounders. The account of a comparatively
  small lugger -flat, taken at Hffvre in the early part of the present
  year, may suffice for the generality of those at Boulogne. This
  flat drew but three and a half feet water, had very stout
  bulwarks , and carried 30 men in crew, besides 150 soldiers ; she
  was armed with one 13-inch mortar, one long 24-pounder , and
  four swivels, and had also abundance of small-arms.
      This was the last affair with the invasion-flotilla, except a
  spirited little boat attack performed in the neighbourhood of
  Etaples . On the 20th of August , in the evening, as the British
  24 -gun ship Jamaica , Captain Jonas Rose, accompanied by four
  or five brig-sloops and gun -vessels, lay at anchor off the above-
  named French port, a large fire was seen, and a heavy cannonade
  heard , in the south -south east . Captain Rose immediately got
  under way with his little squadron , and at 10 p. m., while
  running down to the spot, spoke Captain George Sarradine , of
   the brig-sloop Hound . From the latter , Captain Rose learnt
   that the light proceeded from a cargo of pitch and tar belonging
   to a vessel wrecked sometime before, and which the boats of the
   Hound , and of the Mallard gun-vessel, had set on fire ; that six
   flat-boats had come out from St .-Valery to attack the British,
   but had been driven on shore and then lay upon the beach.
      Being resolved to attempt the capture or destruction of these
   French boats , Captain Rose , on the morning of the 21st, de¬
   spatched upon that service the boats of the Jamaica , Gannet,
   and Hound sloops, and Tigress and Mallard gun -vessels, under
   the orders of Lieutenants James Agassiz and Henry Le Vesconte.
