 1801.                             INVASION -FLOTILLA.                          87

  The squadron at the same time stood in to cover the boats from
  the fire of the military and of five field-pieces, posted behind
  some sand-hills on the beach . In spite of this opposition, the
  British succeeded in bringing off three of the French boats, and
  would have brought off the others, had they not been scuttled:
  they were, however, damaged as much as the time would admit.
  The loss of the British on this occasion amounted to no more
 than one seaman killed, and one midshipman (Thomas Hamblin ),
 and three seamen wounded. The captured flats were each about
 45 feet long and 18 or 20 broad, and mounted one brass 8-inch
 howitzer.
    After his repeated promises to send supplies and reinforce¬
 ments to the army he had left in Egypt , Buonaparte must have
 felt sorely aggrieved that almost all his endeavours to do so had
 been frustrated by the vigilance of British cruisers : even the
 offer of large rewards to the equippers of merchant vessels or
 privateers that should first reach a port of Egypt with provisions
 and military stores, served only to augment the number and
 enhance the value of Lord Keith ’s prizes.
    Hitherto the efforts to relieve the Egyptian army had been
 confined to such frigates and smaller vessels, as might be able
 to escape from Toulon or some other French Mediterranean port;
 but , no sooner did the first-consul learn the real destination of
 the army under General Abercromby, than he contemplated the
 forwarding of a reinforcement upon a grander scale. That re¬
inforcement was to consist of seven two-deckers , the elite of the
 Brest fleet, having on board 5000 troops under the command of
 General Sahuguet.
' The officer intrusted with the charge of this secret and ha¬
zardous mission was orie of the ablest at this time belonging to
the republic, Rear-admiral Ganteaume ; and the following
were the ships of which his squadron was composed:
Gun-ship
      f Indivisible    .   .          ( Rear-admiral Honore Ganteaume.
                                      ( Captain Antoine -Louis Gourdon.
        Indomp table                    Commodore -           Moncousu.
      l Formidable                      Captain Joseph Allary,
      JDesaix
          ...
       Constitution
                                        Commodore Jean-Anne Christy-Palliere.
                                        Captain Gilbert-Amable Faure.
                                           „    Franfois -Jacques Meynne.
 ' * | Jean-Bart .         ,
     f Dix -Aout .         .               „    Jacques Bergeret.
Gun-frigate
 40   Creole .                               „   Pierre -Paul Gourrege.
 86   Bravoure    .        .   .   . Louis   „         -Auguste Dordelin.
 Lugger, Vautour.
   On the 7th of January this squadron sailed from Brest , and
anchored in the road of Bertheaume ; and about the same time,
in order to draw the attention of the British cruisers in a differ¬
ent direction, the French ships at anchor in the minor ports of
the Channel and bay of Biscay made demonstrations of putting
to sea. In the hope to profit by this ruse, Rear -admiral Gan-
