1801.     SQUADRONS IN SEARCH OF M. GANTEAUME.                  91

might be hourly expected in pursuit from the westward , Rear-
admiral Ganteaume steered for the gulf of Lyons, and on the
19th anchored with his squadron in the road of Toulon. After
a captivity of only five days, during which every attention was
paid to their comfort by Rear -admiral Ganteaume and those
about him, all the British officers and men were permitted to
depart in a cartel for Port -Mahon ; where, on the morning of
the 26th , they safely arrived.
   It is now time to see what steps had been taken , in con¬
sequence of the escape of this French squadron from Brest , by
the commander -in-chief of the Channel fleet, Admiral Earl St.-
Vincent . On the 3d of February the Concorde anchored at
Plymouth with the account of her engagement with the Bra-
voure ; and, in a day or two afterwards , Rear -admiral Sir Robert
Calder , with seven sail of the line, two frigates, and a brig , was
detached from the Channel fleet in pursuit of M . Ganteaume:
not , however, to the Mediterranean , but * owing to a lack of
information on the subject , to the West Indies.
   Nothing can afford a stronger proof of the national confidence,
as well as fairness, in naval warfare, than the sending in pursuit
of an enemy’s squadron a British squadron of the same
numerical force ; but we cannot help asking , what was the
nse of selecting six of the fastest two-deckers from the Channel
fleet, when the flag-officer in command of them was to take his
passage in a three -decker ? The question of force offers no
obstacle , for both the Caesar and the Malta were fully equal to
the Prince -of-Wales . The total number of three -deckers pos¬
sessed by France at this time was six ; and of these two
only were in a serviceable state ; whereas England had
actually at sea 18 three-deckers, 13 of which, at this very time,
were cruising off Brest . The superior accommodations of a
three -decker have, we know, been alleged as a reason for retain¬
ing so many of them in the service, especially to carry flags ; but,
in a fighting ship, the comfort of the commanding officer,
whether admiral or captain , ought always to be a secondary
consideration.
   The only British force, in a situation to molest Rear -admiral
Ganteaume , was the squadron of Rear -admiral Sir John Borlase
Warren , composed of the 80-gun ship Gibraltar , Captain Wil¬
liam Hancock Kelly , 74-gun ships Renown (flag), Captain John
Chambers White , Dragon, Captain John Aylmer, Genereux,
Captain Manley Dixon, and Hector , Captain John Elphinstone,
64-gun ship Haerlem , with only a portion of her lowerdeck guns
on board, Captain George Burlton , and two or three frigates and
smaller vessels.
   It was on the 8th of February , while cruising off Cadiz with
 a pai;t of this squadron , that the rear-admiral received the first
intelligence of the squadron of M . Ganteaume . Sir John im¬
mediately steered for Gibraltar : and, arriving there on the
