 1801.                   INVASION - FLOTILLA.                      85
   perfect order ; but the darkness of the night , co-operating with
   the tide and half-tide, separated the divisions.
      The first division, under Captain Somerville, on getting near
   to the shore, was carried by the current considerably to the east¬
  ward of Boulogne bay . Finding it impracticable to reach the
  French flotilla in the order prescribed , Captain Somerville
  ordered the boats to cast each other off and make the best of
  their way. By this means, at a little before the dawn of day
  on the 16th, some of the leading boats got up to and attacked a
  brig , lying close to the pier-head ; and, after a sharp contest,
  carried the vessel, but were prevented from towing her off, owing
  to her being secured with a chain, and owing to a heavy fire of
  musketry and grape-shot, opened as well from the shore as from
  three luggers and a second brig, lying within half pistol-shot of
  the first. Thus compelled to abandon their prize, and the day¬
  light putting a stop to further operations , the boats of the first
  division pushed out of the bay . The persevering efforts of the
  officers and men of this division had cost them dearly ; their loss
  amounting to one master 's mate (Alexander Rutherford ), 14
  seamen, and three marines killed, four lieutenants (Thomas
  Oliver , Francis Dickenson , Jeremiah Skelton , and William
  Basset ), one captain of marines (George Young ), one master ’s
  mate (Francis Burney ), one midshipman (Samuel Spratley ),
 29 seamen, and 19 marines wounded ; total , 18 killed and
 55 wounded.
     The second division, under Captain Parker , was more suc¬
 cessful than the first in meeting less obstacles from the current,
 and at about half an hour past midnight got to the scene of
 action . One subdivision of the boats , led by the captain , imme¬
 diately ran alongside of a large brig , the Etna , moored off the
 Mole head , wearing the broad pendant of Commodore Etienne
 Pevrieux . Nothing could exceed the impetuosity of the attack;
 but a very strong netting , traced up to the brig’s lower yards,
 baffled all the endeavours of the British to board, and an instan¬
 taneous discharge of her great guns and small-arms, the latter
from about 200 soldiers stationed on the gunwale, knocked back
into their boats nearly the whole of the assailants . The second
 subdivision , under Lieutenant Williams , carried a lugger , but , in
attacking a brig , the Yolcan, met with a repulse , and was
obliged to retire with the other subdivision . The loss sustained
by the British , in the two subdivisions, proved with what
obstinacy the contest had been maintained . It amounted to two
midshipmen (William Gore and William Bristow ), 15 seamen,
mid four marines killed , Captain Parker himself (mortally ), two
lieutenants (Charles Pelly and Frederick Langford ), one master
(William Kirby ), one midshipman (the Honourable Anthony
Maitland ), Mr . Richard Wilkinson , commander of the Grey¬
hound revenue cutter , 30 seamen, and six marines wounded
total , 21 killed and 42 wounded.
