94        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.               1801,

or some of the advanced ships belonging to it, hove in sight to
the eastward . The French admiral immediately cut his cables,
and crowded sail from the coast ; leaving two of his store-ships,
which could not keep up with him, to be captured by the British
28-gun frigate Vestal , and one or two smaller vessels, then far
ahead of their companions.
   On the 24th , at 3 h . 30 m. a . m., Cape Derna on the coast of
 Barbary bearing south -west distant about seven leagues, the
British 74-gun ship Swiftsure, Captain Benjamin Hallowell,
then , with the wind at north -west, steering towards the island
of Malta , to reinforce the squadron under Rear -admiral Sir John
Borlase Warren , discovered the squadron of M. Ganteaume
hull -down to leeward. From previous information Captain
Hallowell concluded that the ships were those of M. Ganteaume,
and made all sail to escape. At 5 h. 30 m. the Jean -Bart and
Constitution , by signal from the admiral , tacked and stood on
 until they fetched into the Swiftsure’s wake. At 8 a . m., the
remaining three French ships, having fore-reached considerably,
tacked also, until they arrived upon the lee quarter of the
Swiftsure, when they tacked again.
   Such was the very superior sailing of the French ships, that
by 2 p. m. the Indivisible, Dix-Aout, and Creole, had arrived
nearly within gun-shot . Observing that the ships astern were
also fast coming up, Captain Hallowell determined to bear down
and engage the three nearest , in the hope to disable one of them,
and effect his escape to leeward. Accordingly , at 3 p. m., the
Swiftsure bore down under all sail, steering to pass astern of the
rearmost of the three French ships ; whereupon all of the latter
tacked and stood towards her . In half an hour the Indivisible
and Dix-Aout , standing on in close order, opened their fire
within half gun-shot, and , by their superior rate of sailing,
baffled every effort of the Swiftsure to get to leeward . In this
way the action was maintained until 4h . 37 m. p. m. ; when , the
Constitution and Jean -Bart being within gun -shot, on the
Swiftsure ’s starboard quarter , and closing fast , the Indivisible
almost on board of her on the larboard bow, and the Dix -Aout
as near on the larboard quarter , the British ship struck her
colours.
   The masts, yards , rigging , and sails of the Swiftsure, were
completely cut to pieces ; but , it having been the principal
object of the French to dismantle the ship, her loss, out of a
crew at quarters , owing to 59 being sick and 86 of her best men
having been taken from her by Lord Keith , of not more than
450 men and boys, amounted to only two men killed , and one
lieutenant (Lewis Davis ) and seven men wounded, two of them
mortally . That the Swiftsure did not act quite so tenderly
towards her antagonists , appears by the French admiral ’s
return of loss ; according to which, the Indivisible had four men
killed and wounded , and the Dix-Aout, six men killed and 23
