1801.             PURSUIT OF M. GANTEAUME.                        93

 Chase was immediately given ; and, before evening, some of the
 British ships had gained upon the enemy ; but the slow sailing
 of the Gibraltar and Athenien induced the rear-admiral to order
 the remainder of the squadron to shorten sail, and at dark , or
 soon afterwards , every French ship disappeared . Nor was the
 enemy again seen ; as, while Sir John was hastening to the
 southward and eastward , M . Ganteaume had stood back to the
 northward , and shortly afterwards reanchored in Toulon.
    Buonaparte sent orders to M. Ganteaume to make a third
 attempt to reach Egypt . Accordingly , on the 27th of April,
 the persevering French admiral again set sail with his seven
 line-of-battle ships and two frigates , besides one corvette and
 two store-ships. Finding , when at Leghorn , into which port he
had put by the way, to co-operate in the siege of Porto -Ferrajo,
 that the formidable , Indomptable , and Desaix, as well as the
frigate Creole, were too short-manned to proceed on the voyage,
 Rear -admiral Ganteaume ordered them back to Toulon ; and,
 with four two-deckers, one frigate, one corvette, and four store-
 ships, stood away for the Straits of Messina. These he passed
 on the 25th of May ; and on the 5th of June , while on his way
to the coast of Egypt from off' Brindisi, where he had expected
to be joined by three Neapolitan frigates, M. Ganteaume fell in
with and chased , but could not overtake , the British 18-pounder
36-gun frigate Pique , Captain James Young.
    On the 7th , being only about 70 leagues to the westward of
Alexandria , the French admiral detached the corvette Heliopolis
to reconnoitre the Egyptian coast, and ascertain the exact situ¬
ation of the hostile fleet. On the 9th , at daylight , the Heliopolis
arrived close off Alexandria ; and, after a distant chase by the
Kent and Hector 74s and Cruelle cutter , succeeded in entering
the port . The fact is that , in consequence of the information
brought to Lord Keith by the Pique on the evening of the 7th,
the British squadron , on the morning of the 8th, made sail to
the westward , in search of the hourly expected French squa¬
dron . So that , when the Heliopolis arrived in sight of Alex¬
andria , the chief part of the blockading force was abreast of
the Arab ’s tower, or about four leagues to the westward.
    The non-return of the Heliopolis leaving scarcely a doubt that
she had been captured by the British fleet, Rear -admiral Gan¬
teaume , conformably to his instructions , searched to the west¬
ward of Alexandria for a convenient spot to disembark the
troops , and found it, as he conceived, at a small town situated
about 180 leagues to the eastward of Tripoli, and a dependance
upon that regency ; with which, as well as with the regency of
Tunis, Buonaparte had just concluded a treaty . Having come
to an anchor off Bengazi, the squadron began making prepara¬
tions to land the troops ; but , so spirited and effectual was the
opposition of the inhabitants , that the attempt was found im¬
practicable . Just at this moment the squadron of Lord Keith,
