1801.                 SIEGE OF PORTO- FERRAJO.                97
in chase under all sail ; and at 9 a . m. descried the Succes and
Bravoure to the northward , steering back towards Leghorn,
pursued by the Minerve.
   At about 10 h. 30 m. a . m., finding herself dropping astern of
her consort, the Succes ran aground on the shore of Vada ; and,
upon receiving a shot from the Minerve in passing , hauled down
her colours without firing a single gun in return . While the
Minerve stood on in chase of the Bravoure , the Pomone took
possession of the Succes , or, as now again entitled to be called,
the Success . The wind, shifting to the northward , frustrated
every attempt of the Bravoure to reach Leghorn ; and the French
frigate , after missing stays , and vainly attempting to wear, got
on shore under the Antignano battery , about four miles to the
southward of the mole. Here the three masts of the Bravoure
soon went by the board , and the ship became totally lost.
Owing to the height of the surf and the approach of night , and
to the enemy on shore firing upon the boats , Lieutenant William
Kelly , first of the Minerve, who had been sent to board the
Bravoure , was not able to bring away more than a few prisoners.
   By the exertions of Lieutenant Charles Thompson of the
Phcenix , and the officers and men under his orders, the Success
was at length got afloat without receiving any material injury,
and was restored to her rank in the British navy. This capture
of one, and destruction of a second French frigate, was per¬
formed without any loss on the part of the British . A con¬
temporary , with his accustomed inaccuracy in regard to the force
of ships, calls the Bravoure “ an 18-pound frigate, ” * although
Captain Halsted , in his letter to Sir John Warren , expressly
states that the Bravoure mounted “ twenty -eight 12-pounders on
the main deck , with 283 men.” In adding that the Bravoure
was “ of 46 guns,” Captain Halsted must of course have
adopted the report of Captain Cockburn ; but , according to a
document now before us, the Bravoure was pierced, exclusive of
two pairs of bow-chase ports , for no more than 40 guns;
although , by filling every port on her main deck , we have else¬
where assigned her 42.f
   Shortly after these French frigates , hitherto so annoying to
the garrison of Porto -Ferrajo , had thus been disposed of, Lieu¬
tenant -colonel George Airey, whom General Fox had recently
sent to supersede Captain Gordon in the command of the few
British troops in the fortress , applied to Rear -admiral Sir John
Warren , who had arrived off Porto -Ferrajo on the 12th of
September , for a detachment of marines and seamen from the
squadron , to assist in an attack upon some of the French bat¬
teries, those especially which shut up the port . This was
acceded to, and arrangements were forthwith made for an active
co-operation on the part of the squadron , which consisted of the

        * Brenton, vol. iii., p. 50,          j* See p.-89.
  VOL. in ,                            H'
