 1801.                BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                       99
 'Gun
    -ship
       Kent   .   .    .       Rear-Admiral (w.) Sir R. Bickerton, Bt.
                               Captain William Hope.
        Ajax    . . .            „     Hon . Alex . Inglis Cochrane.
  74 < Minotaur . .              „     Thomas Louis.
        Northumberland           „     George Martin.
        Tigre . . . .             „    Sir William Sidney Smith.
      . Swiftsure   . .          „     Benjamin Hallowed.
     As soon as news reached him that this powerful British arma¬
  ment had assembled at the island of Malta , Buonaparte could
  no longer be in doubt respecting its destination . We have
  already shown what efforts were made to get a squadron to
  Egypt from Brest . The port of Toulon also lent its aid ; but,
  as no seagoing line-of-battle ships were nojv there , it could only
  be by frigates. Two of these, the Egyptienne and Justice , each
  having on board a quantity of troops and munitions of war,
  anchored on the 3d of February in the old or western port of
  Alexandria . The number of French troops at this time in Upper
 and Lower Egypt , founded upon the returns published in the
  Moniteur , consisted of nearly 21,000 fighting men. Here were
 also about 900 sick, about 1000 sailors, 400 or 500 Greek auxi¬
 liaries, and perhaps 1000 or 1200 persons in civil employment;
 and the commander -in-chief of the whole was, as already men¬
 tioned (see p. 25), General Abdallah -Jacques Menou , a man very
 unfit for the station , and not at all liked by the army.
    After a considerable delay , arising from a twofold cause, the
 tardiness of the Turks and the badness of the weather , the
 British and Turkish men of war and transports , having on board
 in the whole about 16,000 men, set sail from Marmorice, and on
the 1st, with the exception of the Turkish division consisting of
several gun-boats and kaicks , which in a westerly gale had
bore up for Marcie, Cyprus , and other neighbouring ports,
arrived in sight of the minarets of Alexandria.
    Just as Lord Keith and his fleet gained a sight of Alexandria,
the French frigate Regeneree , with 200 troops and a company
of artillery on board , besides a quantity of military stores, slipped
into the western port . This frigate, in company with the Afri-
caine, had sailed from Rochefort on the 13th of February , and
since parted from her consort, of whose fate we shall hereafter
have to give some account . A contemporary states that the
Regeneree kept company with the British fleet during a whole
day , answering every signal that was made ; but we doubt the
assertion , no mention being made of it in the French accounts.
On the night of the 1st, or morning of the 2d, the brig-corvette
Lodi also got into Alexandria from Toulon.
    On the same day the British fleet brought up in Aboukir bay.
Too much of that day elapsed , however, before all the ships
could get to an anchorage , to accomplish the disembarkation
previously to the approach of night ; and a succession of strong
northerly gales, attended by a heavy swell, then set in, and lasted
                                h 2
