98         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                         1801.

 Renown, Gibraltar , Dragon , Alexander , Genereux , Stately , of
the line, Pomone and Pearl frigates , and brig-sloop Vincejo.
   On the 13th, at daybreak , the Dragon and Genereux , for the
purpose of creating a diversion, opened a fire upon a round,
tower at Marciana ; and on the 14th, a little before daylight,
449 marines and 240 seamen, commanded by Captain George
Long of the Vincejo, along with a party of Tuscans , peasants,
pioneers, &c., amounting in the whole to about 1000 men, were
landed in two divisions under the personal direction of Captain
John Chambers White , of the Renown. The attack was made,
and several of the French batteries were destroyed , and 55
prisoners, including three captains and two subalterns , brought
off ; but , the force being found insufficient to complete the whole
business, the allied detachment was compelled to retire with a
loss altogether of 32 killed , 61 wounded, and 105 missing. Of
this number the navy lost a very large proportion ; namely,
Captain Long, while gallantly leading on his men to storm a
narrow bridge, two seamen, and 12 marines killed , one officer,
17 seamen, and 20 marines wounded, and one officer, 12 seamen,
and 64 marines missing ; total loss to the navy, 15 killed,
33 wounded, and 77 missing.
   By the aid of a well-penned despatch , General Watrin makes
this repulse of the allied British and Tuscans , “ cover the troops
of the republic with glory . He augments the assailants to 3000
men, and their loss to 1200, exclusive of 200 prisoners, and
declares that his batteries wholly dismasted a frigate, and sank
seven of the British boats . But , in spite of all these strong
incentives to success on the part of his troops, the French gene¬
ral could make no impression upon Porto -Ferrajo ; of which
Lieutenant -colonel Airey, notwithstanding he lost the aid of Sir
John Warren and his squadron on the 22d of September, con¬
tinued to maintain possession until the treaty of Amiens relieved
him from his charge . The important operations of this year
upon the coast of Egypt now demand our attention.
   In our account of the last year’s proceedings of the British
and Spanish fleets, we noticed the assemblage at Gibraltar of a
powerful naval and military force under the respective com¬
mands of Admiral Lord Keith and General Sir Ralph Aber-
cromby.# On the 31st of January , after having stopped a short
time at Minorca and at Malta , the bulk of the British force,
intended to act against the French in Lower Egypt , anchored in
the fine harbour of Marmorice on the coast of Karamania , in
Asia Minor. The fleet here assembled consisted of full-armed
line-of-battle ships, frigates, and sloops, reduced 64s, 50s, 44s,
and frigates, in number from 60 to 70 sail, including the follow¬
ing squadron :                               ,
Gun-ship                         C Admiral ( b .) Lord Keith , K . B.
 80   Foudroyant   .   .   .   . 3 Captain Philip Beaver.
                                 (    „    William Young.
                                  * See p. 26.
