1801.                  SIEGE OF PORTO- FERRAJO.                                  95
wounded . M. Ganteaume manned his prize by detachments
from the ships of his squadron ; and, after labouring at her for
six days , in the most favourable weather (a tolerable proof of
the state to which she had been reduced ), succeeded in placing
her in a condition to accompany him to Toulon : where, on the
22d of July , the squadron safely arrived.
   In his public letter, Captain Hallowell, much to his credit, as
well as to the credit of his captors, speaks in the highest terms
of the treatment which himself, his officers, and men, experienced
from the officers of M. Ganteaume ’s squadron , and from the
French admiral in particular . On the other hand , M . Gan¬
teaume ’s report of the conduct of the Swiftsure ’s captain , has
called forth the following panegyric from a French naval writer,
“ Le capitaine Hallowell , se defendit avec opinihtrete , et n’amena
son pavilion que lorsqu ’il se vit en danger de couler bas .”* It
is almost unnecessary to state , that Captain Hallowell and the
late officers and crew of the Swiftsure, on their return to
England , were most honourably acquitted for the loss of their
ship.
   Having , by a treaty concluded on the 28th of March , upon
his own terms, got Naples to cede to him Porto -Longone, and
the whole of the Neapolitan part of the isle of Elba , the first
consul of France determined to possess himself of the remaining
or Tuscan portion of the island , including the strong fortress
of Porto -Ferrajo, but the garrison of which did not exceed
400 men.
   On the 2d of May General Tharreau , with about 1500 men,
disembarked at Porto -Longone from the opposite port of Piom-
bino ; and, after vainly summoning, and as vainly trying to
corrupt , Carlo de Fisson, the Tuscan governor, the French
general commenced his investment of the place . The only
British force off the port at this time were two frigates, the
Phoenix and Mermaid, under the orders of Captain Lawrence
William Halsted , of the former. But these soon afterwards
departed on some other service, and the harbour of Porto-
Ferrajo was blockaded by the French 28-gun frigate Badine,
and subsequently by the following French squadron:
Gun-frigate
  38    Carrfere . .   .   . Captain   Claude-Pascal Morel-Beaulieu.
  36    Bravoure . .   .   . Louis„          -Auguste Dordelin.
  32    Succes   . .   .   . Jac „        .-Fr.-Ignace Bretel, senior officer.

   Towards the latter end of July , to render still more critical
the state of the small garrison of Porto -Ferrajo , General Watrin,
at the head of 5000 men, landed on the island to supersede
General Tharreau in the command ; and, in pursuance of the
orders he had received from General Murat in Tuscany , the

                * Victoires et Conquetes, tome xiv., p. 157.
