 104       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                1801.

  memory will be recorded in the annals of his country , will be
  sacred to every British soldier, and embalmed in the recollection
 of a grateful posterity .”
     On the 26th a second Ottoman squadron arrived, having on
 board about 5000 Turks and Albanians . This made the Turkish
 force at anchor in the bay of Aboukir , including the Sultan-
 Selim three-decker, of 110 guns, amount to six sail of the line,
 and eight frigates and corvettes ; all tolerably fine vessels, but
 in bad hands . On or about the 3d of April the Turkish troops
 were landed , and shortly afterwards , with a division of 800
 British troops and eight pieces of cannon under Colonel Spencer,
 were sent to attack the town and castle of Rosetta , which com¬
 mands the western branch of the Nile. After a fatiguing march
 across the desert, the allied troops succeeded, with little or no
 opposition from the few French troops, apparently not more than
 800, there stationed , in gaining possession of this important
 post ; which, besides giving to the British the unmolested
 navigation of the Nile, enabled them to open a communication
 with the friendly inhabitants of the Delta , and thus obtain
 supplies of provisions for the numerous mouths they had to
 feed.
    On the 16th, at llh. 30 m. a . m., the castle of Jullien,
 situated on the banks of the Nile, and defended by 15 pieces of
 cannon , four armed djerms moored under its walls, and a garrison
 of nearly 400 men, part of the troops which had retired from
 Rosetta , was attacked , on the side of the Nile, by a division of
 British and Turkish gun-boats , commanded by Captain Richard
 Curry of the bomb-vessel Fury , and on the land-side by the
 British division of Colonel Spencer’s corps, including the prin¬
 cipal part of the artillery . Two other divisions, it appears , were
 sent against the tower of Abou-Mandhour and the village of
 Gehdid . These were soon reduced ; but it took until the 19th,
at 6 a . m., before the castle of Jullien surrendered . This the
 garrison, numbering 368 men, did upon honourable terms, after
a brave defence, in which they lost about 40 men in killed and
wounded.
    In the pocket of General Roize, left dead on the field of battle
at Canopus , was found a letter from General Menou at Cairo,
expressing a fear that the British had , or,would, cut the canal of
Alexandria , and thus let the waters of the Mediterranean , or
those more immediately of Lake Madieh , into the basin of the
ancient Lake Mareotis, which for ages past had been dry , except
that a considerable portion of it, at certain seasons especially,
was impassable owing to the swampy nature of its bed . The
hint was taken , and on the 15th of April the cut was made;
but , although the first rush of water, from its volume and im¬
petuosity , was awfully grand , some time elapsed before the
whole area of the lake became covered. As soon as that was
accomplished , the troops under General Menou , shut up in.
