96                                        .
                                  .—MEDITER
          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS                         1801.

newly-arrived French general began the most active preparations
for reducing the fortress.
    On the 1st of August Rear-admiral Sir John Warren , with the
Renown and squadron , arrived off the island, and, chasing the
Bravoure and Succes into Leghorn, raised the blockade of
Porto -Ferrajo.
    On the 3d, at 2 h. 30 m. p, m., the British 18-pounder 36-gun
frigate Phoenix, Captain Lawrence William Halsted , 18-pounder
40-gun frigate Pomone , Captain Edward Leveson Gower, and
 12-pounder 32- gun frigate Pearl , Captain Samuel James Ballard,
cruising off the west side of the island of Elba , discovered the
Carrere , on her passage from Porto -Ercole to Porto -Longone,
with 300 barrels of powder on board, and a convoy of small
vessels in charge laden with ordnance -stores and provisions.
    At 8h . 10 m. p. m., after the interchange of a few shot from
bow and stern chasers, and a resistance alongside of about
 10 minutes ’ duration , the Carrere hauled down her colours to
the Pomone, the only British ship near enough to open a fire.
Qut of her complement of about 320 men and boys, the Pomone
lost her boatswain (Thomas Cook ) and one quartermaster killed,
and one lieutenant of marines (Charles Douglas , loss of a leg)
and one seaman mortally , and two other *-seamen slightly
wounded . The loss on board the Carrere is not stated in
Captain Halsted ’s letter ; but , according to the French account,
it was tolerably severe. The whole of the convoy appear to have
escaped , and one or two of the vessels to have got into Longone.
    The Carrere was a fine Venetian-built frigate of 1013 tons,
and mounted the same guns as those assigned to her class, in
the small table at p. 54, vol. i., except that she had only two
carronades , and therefore but 40 guns in all, and that her
8-pounders were brass . Her complement, as deposed to by her
officers, was 352. The Carrere became added to the British
navy as an 18-pounder 36-gun frigate, but her reign as a cruising
 ship was a short one.
    Finding , towards the end of August , that the Phoenix was at
 anchor alone off Piombino , a port on the main land of Tuscany,
 distant about seven miles from the north-east extremity of Elba,
 General Watrin sent orders to Captain Bretel at anchor in
 Leghorn mole, to get under way with his two frigates , and en¬
 deavour to capture the British frigate . Accordingly , on the
 evening of the 31st, the Succ&s and Bravoure put to sea upon
 that service.
    On the 2d of September , very early in the morning, these two
 frigates , just as they were about to enter the Piombino channel,
 fell in with and chased the British 38-gun frigate Minerve,
 Captain George Cockbum ; who, at 6h . 30 m., made the signal
 for an enemy to the Phoenix, then at anchor in the south-east in
 company with the Pomone , who had rejoined two days before.
 The two last -named frigates, getting quickly under way, bore up
