 108       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS
                                   .—MEDITER
                                           .                  1801.
  ment , including three officers, having perished in the desert
  with thirst.
     The last division of the French troops taken prisoners at Cairo
  and at other places, the wftole of which amounted to nearly
   13,500 men, having , by the 10th of August , sailed from the bay
  of Aboukir , and Lieutenant -general Hutchinson having arrived
  from Cairo at his head-quarters before Alexandria , immediate
  measures were taken to reduce that remaining stronghold of
 the French in Egypt , and thus accomplish the ultimate object
  of the expedition.
     On the night of the 16th about 5000 troops under Major-
 general Coote, embarked on Lake Mareotis , in the boats of the
 men of war and transports , and in a quantity of djerms which
 had been assembled for the purpose , and , escorted by the flotilla
 of gun-vessels still under the orders of Captain Stevenson , pro¬
 ceeded to a position to the westward of the town of Alexandria.
 Early on the morning of the 17th the detachment disembarked
 with a slight opposition ; previous to which the French had set
 fire to their flotilla of 18 gun-boats , which had been stationed
 opposite to Pompey ’s pillar , under the protection of a battery of
 three long 18-pounders , The slight opposition experienced by
 the British is acknowledged by the French to have been mainly
 owing' to the spirited demonstration which Captain Sir Sidney
 Smith , with some sloops of war and armed boats, made upon
 the town of Alexandria from the sea.
     On the night of the 18th a combined military and naval
 attack was made upon the small fortified island of Marabou,
 which protects the entrance to the western or great harbour of
 Alexandria . The naval force consisted of the armed launches of
 the squadron , under the command of Captain Cochrane of the
 Ajax . Finding it in vain to hold out longer, the commandant
 of Marabou , chef de brigade Etienne , capitulated on the 21st;
 and on the same evening Captain Cochrane , with the ship-sloops
 Cynthia and Bonne-Citoyenne , brig-sloops Port -Mahon and
 Victorieuse , and three Turkish corvettes, entered the harbour:
 soon after which, to prevent the further progress of the British
to the eastward , the French sank several merchant vessels,
having previously moved their two 64s, frigates, and corvettes,
from Cape Figuiers close up to the town at the extremity of the
harbour.
    On the morning of .the 26th four batteries on each side of the
town were opened against the intrenched camp of the French;
and on the 27th , in the evening, being thus pressed on all sides,
General Menou sent an aide-de-camp to Lieutenant -general
Hutchinson to request a three days ’ armistice, in order to give
time to prepare a capitulation . This was acceded to ; and on
the 2d of September Alexandria surrendered . By the terms of
the treaty the garrison, consisting of upwards of 8000 soldiers,
