106       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                   1801.

 about 5000/. sterling in specie, some heavy pieces of ordnance,
 and about 150 troops , from Cairo to Rahmanieh . Having
 entered the Nile by the canal of Menouf, which joins the
 Damietta and Rosetta branches , the French commanding
 officer knew nothing of the retreat of General Lagrange and
 the surrender of Rahmanieh . On the 17th a division of cavalry
 and infantry under Brigadier - general Doyle, from previous
 information furnished by the Arabs , intercepted a body of
 550 camels escorted by 560 French under the command of
 chef de brigade Cavalier, going from Alexandria , which they
 had quitted on the 14th, towards the province of Bahireh , to
 procure provision, of which the garrison of Alexandria were now
 in great want. Finding himself likely to be overpowered, M.
 Cavalier very properly quitted his sluggish charge, and with his
 troops took to the desert . Here the French officer was over¬
 taken by a party of British cavalry, and surrendered upon
honourable terms.
    On the same day on which this surrender took place, the
 small garrison, about 2Q0, of the fort of Lesbeh, on the Damietta
 branch of the Nile, invested on the land -side by a Turkish force,
and near the Bogaz of Damietta by a flotilla of British gun¬
boats , abandoned the post and retired upon Bourlos. This post
the two garrisons , numbering together about 700 men, also
evacuated , and embarked on board five small vessels, in the
hope to be able to reach the new or north -eastern port of Alex¬
andria . Four of these vessels were captured and carried into
Aboukir bay ; but the fifth, after being chased in vain by a
Turkish corvette, succeeded in reaching the coast of Italy.
    Owing to delays from various causes, among others perhaps
the non-arrival of more than about 300 of the troops expected to
join from the borders of the Red Sea, the allied British and
Turkish forces marching towards Cairo, which is distant about
 164 miles from Rosetta , did not until the 20th of June arrive at
Embabeh , a village distant a mile and a half from the fortress of
 Giseh, on the banks of the Nile directly opposite to Cairo, and
in which fortress General Belliard had stationed a garrison . On
the 22d, while preparations were making to besiege Cairo and
its different forts by the allied forces (of which a numerous army
under the grand vizier, now formed a part ), General Belliard
sent a flag of truce to Lieutenant -general # Hutchinson , offering
to capitulate upon honourable terms . These were soon settled
and drawn up , and on the 27th were signed by the respective
parties . By the terms of the treaty the French troops, of which
 there were, in effective men, 8000, besides 1000 sick, and about
 half as many in a convalescent state , were to be conveyed to a
 port of France.
    Before we descend the Nile to bring the campaign to a con-

        * Promoted some time before, but we are uncertain when
