1801.         SALE OF SPANISH SHIPS TO FRANCE.                   Ill
been of one day or of one week, but for months together . In the
bay of Aboukir , on the new inundation , and on the Nile, for 160
miles, they have been employed without intermission , and have
submitted to many privations with a cheerfulness and patience
highly creditable to them and advantageous to the public
service.”
   We cannot dismiss the Egyptian campaign without observing,
that all the benefit derived from its successful termination , the
removal of the French army from Egypt , might have been at¬
tained 18 months before, had Lord Keith not refused to ratify the
treaty entered into by Sir Sidney Smith. What blood and trea¬
sure would then have been saved ! Treasure , indeed, could it but
be known how the British government was defrauded by jobbers,
contractors , and agents of one sort or the other . At all events,
the infraction of the treaty of El -Arich, how much soever others
may have suffered by it, eventually benefited him, whose con¬
sent alone had been wanted to carry that treaty into effect. We
now gladly quit the shores of Egypt and its military warfare, to
resume our narrative of naval operations ; and , in particular , to
give some account of the proceedings of the French and their
allies the Spaniards at the opposite extremity of the Mediter¬
ranean.

             BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.

   Very soon after the conclusion of the treaty of Luneville, the
First Consul of France began using every means in his power to
detach from England the few powers that were on friendly
terms with her. With Naples , Buonaparte succeeded ; but,
although by the intrigues of his brother Lucien with the famous
Godoy, the Prince of Peace , Spain was induced , on the 27th of
February , 1801, to declare war against her neighbour , and al¬
though a powerful French army had crossed the Bidassoa,
Portugal remained firm. The subsequent irruption of a Spanish
army into the province of Alentejo , however, altered the tone of
the prince-regent ; and on the 6th of June , at Badajos , the
latter concluded a treaty of peace with Spain, and agreed , not
only to cede to her the conquered province of Alentejo , but to
expel the English from the ports of Portugal . The effect pro¬
duced upon Buonaparte by this separate concession to Spain,
and the measures taken by England to prevent either France or
Spain from reaping any solid advantage from their sinister
attempts upon her ancient ally, we shall advert to hereafter.
   Some time in the month of March , by his secret and corrupt
influence at the court of Madrid , Buonaparte got King Charles
to make over to France , either by sale or hire, six sail of the line
lying in the port of Cadiz ; and which ships were to be there
manned by French crews, and then , as was understood , to co¬
operate with a Spanish naval force, in entering the Tagus and
