 112           BRITISH AND FRANCO
                                -SPANISH FLEETS
                                              .                    1801.

  sacking Lisbon . This was a plan which, as far as respected the
  British property in the port , a French admiral , of whom honour¬
  able mention has already been made in these pages, recom¬
  mended as a feasible enterprise for the Brest fleet, when it
  put to sea in the beginning of the year 1795. “ I propose,”
  says M . Kerguelin , “ to conduct the fleet of the republic to
  Lisbon , to anchor in front of the capital , within musket shot of
  the city and the palace of the king ; to send ahead of the fleet
  a frigate with a flag of truce , announcing that the fleet of the
  republic comes not to do harm to the Portuguese , although the
  allies and slaves of England , but to require that all the British
 storehouses and ships be forthwith delivered up, under a penalty
 of having the city rased to its foundation . This enterprise
 would gain for France 200 millions, in cash or British merchan¬
 dise ; England would receive a terrible shock , which would
 produce bankruptcies and a general consternation ; our fleet,
 without being buffeted about the sea,# would return to Brest,
  loaded with riches and covered with glory ; and France wuld
 once more astonish Europe with a new triumph/ ’f
     We formerly noticed the return to Toulon from Leghorn of
 three ships of Rear -admiral Ganteaume ’s squadron , on account
 of the paucity of hands to work them .J These three ships, the
 Indomptable and Formidable , of 80 guns , Captains Moncousu
 and Lalonde , and Desaix , of 74 guns, Captain Christy -Palliere,
 along with the ex-Venetian 38-gun frigate Muiron, Captain
 Jules -Frangois Martinencq , were placed under the orders of
 Rear -admiral Durand -Linois, with directions to proceed to Cadiz,
 and there effect a junction with Rear-admiral Dumanoir -le-
 Pelley and his six newly-made French sail of the line. These
 nine ships , with a Spanish squadron of six more under Vice-
 admiral don Juan Joaquin de Moreno, were then , as a case
 more urgent than that of despoiling Lisbon, to carry a reinforce¬
 ment to Egypt ; not , we believe, wholly from Toulon, but prin¬
cipally from the Neapolitan ports of Ancona, Manfredonia,
 Brindisi , and Otranto ; at which several ports there were assem¬
bled , in the month of June , as many as 32,000 French troops.
    On the 13th of June Rear -admiral Linois, with his squadron
of three sail of the line and one frigate, having on board a small
detachment of troops, under Brigadier -general Devaux , put to
sea from the road of Toulon, bound to Cadiz ; oft’ which port,
by the last advices, were cruising two British 74s only, and
occasionally but one. On the next day the French admiral
chased away some British frigates , left cruising in the gulf of
Lyons by Rear -admiral Sir John Borlase Warren ; who, with
the Renown and squadron , was then about to enter the har-
   * Alluding to the storm from which the Brest fleet suffered so much i&
January, 1795. See vol. i., p. 236.
  f For the original see Appendix, No. 11.               *
  .f See p, 92,                                   *




                                        H
