1801.            BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                          107

elusion, some account must be given of the British and native
 troops from Bombay , amounting to about 6000, which, according
to the original plan of proceeding , were         to have co-operated
with those disembarked on the shores of the Mediterranean.
     On the 21st of April the British 50-gun ship Leopard , Captain
Thomas Surridge , bearing the flag of Rear -admiral John
 Blankett , anchored in the road of Suez, with two or three
 frigates and sloops, and about the same number of transports.
 On the 22d , at daybreak , an officer and a party of the 86th
 regiment landed from the Leopard , and took possession of the
 town of Suez, which the French garrison had previously evacu¬
 ated . At 8 a . m. the British union jack was hoisted at the flag¬
  staff on shore. In a day or two afterwards the transports dis¬
  embarked their troops ; and on the 14th of May Lieutenant-
'colonel Lloyd, of the 86th regiment landed from the Leopard.
  On the 6th of J une, every thing being in readiness , Lieutenant-
  colonel Lloyd, with his detachment numbering about 320 men,
  set out to march across the desert to Cairo, a distance , by the
  regular route , of about 60 miles, but by the route intended to be
  taken , in order to avoid meeting a superior force of the enemy,
  somewhat more. On the occasion of the departure of the British
  detachment upon this hazardous service, the Leopard fired a
  salute of 11 guns.
      On the 13th the Leopard and vessels in her company sailed
  from Suez, and on the 15th anchored in the bay of Kosseir;
  where were lying the 50-gun ship Romney , Captain Sir Home
  Riggs Popham , and 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Sensible (armed
  en flute, we believe), Captain Robert Sauce , with several trans¬
  ports . These, since the 9th , had landed Major -general Baird,
  with the second division of the Bombay troops : the first division,
  under Lieutenant -colonel Murray , had arrived and disembarked
  since the 14th of May.# Some time between the 10th and 15th
   of June the two divisions set off upon their march across the
   desert , by the valley of Kuittah , and on the 30th arrived at Kene,
   or Kenneh , on the banks of the Nile ; but , owing to the diffi¬
   culty of procuring boats to descend that river, Major -general
   Baird did not effect his junction with Lieutenant -general Hutch¬
   inson until several days after the surrender of Cairo. Lieutenant-
   colonel Lloyd had joined since the 11th or 12th ; but his journey
   had been a most painful and distressing one, 23 of his detach-

   * A contemporary has made a sad jumble of the proceedings of the British
                                                                         78),
 squadron in the Red Sea. According to Captain Brenton (vol. iii ., p.
 Rear-admiral Blankett died as soon as he was joined by Sir Home Popham,
 and Captain Surridge thereupon “ left the direction of the naval forces
 under the able management” of the latter. So far from this having
                                                                    been the
 case, the Rear-admiral died on the 14th of July, when the Leopard and Rom¬
 ney, sailing in company, were about to cast anchor in Mocha road on their
 return to Bombay.
