1801.           BRITISH EXPEDITION TO EGYPT.                   105

Alexandria , and numbering , according to the French accounts,
6000 men, became separated from the 4000 under General
Lagrange , intrenched at El -Aft, and the 5000 under General
Belliard , in garrison at Cairo. If to these numbers , short as
they are of the returns published in the Moniteur , be added , the
loss known to have been already sustained , together with the
several detachments in Upper Egypt , particularly the garrisons
of Salalieh , Belbeis, Suez, Lesbeh, and Bourlos , our previous
enumeration of the French force spread over this country will
not be considered immoderately estimated.
    On the 26th of April, having left Major -general Coote in
command of the army before Alexandria , Major -general Hutchin¬
son arrived at Rosetta , to press in person the operations against
the French in the interior of the country . On the 5th of May
Major - general Hutchinson , with the combined British and
Turks , in number about 8000, marched along the banks of the
Nile towards the position of General Las.range at El -Aft, ac¬
companied on the river by a division of British and Turkish
gun-boats under the command, since the occupation of Rosetta
and the expected arrival of Rear -admiral Ganteaume upon the
coast (when Sir Sidney Smith returned to the Tigre), of Captain
James Stevenson, assisted by Captain John Morrison, Richard
Curry , and James Hillyar.
    On the 7th , having previously destroyed their gun-vessels
with all the provisions and stores on board of them , the French
abandoned El -Aft and retreated towards Rahmanieh . On the
same evening the allied troops entered El -Aft, and on the 9th
advanced to Rahmanieh , where General Lagrange had taken
post, with an apparent intention of making a stout resistance.
At 10 a . m. Captain Curry , with four flats and three armed
launches , commenced an attack upon the French forts at Rah¬
manieh, and continued in action with them until 4 p. m., when
his division was relieved by the Turkish gun -boats . In this
creditable affair the navy sustained a loss of Lieutenant Hobbes
and three seamen killed and seven seamen wounded. During
the same night the French general retreated towards Cairo,
leaving in the fort his sick and wounded, about 110 in number,
under the command of chef de brigade Lacroix. A detachment
of 50 cavalry from Alexandria were taken at the same time that
Rahmanieh surrendered . The possession of this important post
effectually cut off all communication between Alexandria and
the interior of Egypt ; and in gaining it the allied forces suffered
no greater loss than one drummer , four rank and file, and 10
horses killed , and four officers, one sergeant , one drummer , 18
rank and file, and 18 horses wounded.
    Continuing their march towards the capital of Egypt , which
 General Lagrange with his division had entered on the 13th, the
 allied forces, on the 14th, fell in with and captured a French
 armed vessel and 16 djerms , conveying wine, spirits, clothing,
