 110                                       .
                                   .—MEDITER
           BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS                           1801,

  and proportionably contracting the breadth of her frame. The
   ship , thus reduced in length and breadth , was pierced for 15
   guns of a side on the main deck, and 10 on the quarterdeck and
   forecastle , or 50 guns in the whole. But , when ready to be
   fitted for sea, the foremost maindeck port was found too much
’ in the bend of the bow to admit a gun : hence the Egyptienne
  (as, considering her first destination , the ship was appropriately
  named ) received on board 28, instead of 30, long 24-pounders
  for her main deck , 12 long 8-pounders and two 36-pounder brass
  carronades for the quarterdeck , and four long 8-pounders and
  two 36-pounder brass carronades for the forecastle ; total 48
  guns , with a complement , as alleged , of 400, but, we rather
  think , of 450 men and boys.
      Conformably to this arrangement of her guns , the Egyptienne,
  when, about six months after her capture , the British admiralty
  ordered her to be armed , was established with 28 long 24-
  pounders on the main deck , 12 carronades , 24-pounders , and
  two long 9-pounders on the quarterdeck , and four carronades
  and two long guns of the same two calibers on the forecastle,
  total 48 guns ; with a complement , upon the prevalent econo¬
  mical scale of the British navy, of 330 men and boys. A
  contemporary , whose mistakes respecting the armaments of
  ships , English as well as foreign, we are almost tired of cor¬
  recting , says thus of the frigate in question : “ The Egyptienne,
 a frigate of sixteen hundred tons, taken at Alexandria , in Egypt,
 in 1800, carried on her maindeck sixteen long thirty -two pounders
 on each side, and on her quarterdeck and forecastle sixteen forty-
 two pound carronades , and four long twelve-pounders .”#
      As we have done on most other occasions, so we must here,
 give some account of the honours and rewards bestowed upon
 the conquerors . The thanks of parliament were voted to both
commanders -in-chief. Lieutenant -general Hutchinson was made,
 and no one can say undeservedly , first a knight of the bath , and
then a peer of Great Britain ; and Lord Keith was raised from
a peer of Ireland to a peer of Great Britain : not certainly for
any active exertions in bringing the campaign to a close, nor, we
presume , for doing what any clever agent for transports might
have done as well, disembarking the troops ; but as the head of
the naval part of the expedition , without the aid of which, it is
clear, the campaign itself could not have been undertaken.
     We are unable to state what officers of the navy gained steps
in rank ; but undoubtedly those serving on shore with the army,
and on board the flotilla upon the Wile and the neighbouring
lakes , well merited the promotion they may have obtained . The
following is the handsome manner in which the commander -in¬
chief of the army speaks of their exertions : “ The labour and
fatigue of the navy have been continued and excessive ; it has not

                      * Brenton , vol . i., p . 43.
