122           BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.                           1801.

had discontinued the action and made sail for Gibraltar . Such
was the fact . Not a word is there to contradict it either in the
rear-admiral ’s official letter , or in the Caesar’s log ; but there is
ample proof in confirmation of it, as we will now proceed to
show . No time whatever , beyond the day of the month, and
that only by inference, appears in the letter of Sir James Sau-
marez ; but the log of the Caesar says : “ At 12 h. 30 m. made
signal for Hannibal being aground           that is, about half an hour
according to our contemporary , after the Hannibal had “ sur¬
rendered .” “Atlh. 35 m.,” says the flag-ship ’s log, “ action,
ceased ; which, be it observed, is even fifteen minutes later than
the log of the Audacious dates the same incident : whereas the
                             Ferris   fixes   the   time   of   the   Hannibal   ’s
“ Narrative   ” of Captain
surrender at “ nearly two o’clock.”
    A French account now before us also says : “ L’Annibal,
echoue pres du Formidable , essuyant en m£me temps le feu de
la batterie Saint-Jacques et celui du vaisseau frangois, amena
son pavilion a deux heures du soir.”# Of the four logs we have
been able to get a sight of, the only one which notices the sur¬
render of the Hannibal is the Venerable ’s. That says : “ At two,
observed the Hannibal cease firing and hoist the colours re¬
versed .” But there is another witness to the truth of Captain.
 Ferris ’s statement . The Calpe in her log says : “ At half-past
one, the Hannibal grounded under a very heavy battery , and
 was much shattered . At 4, she hauled her colours down, which
the enemy kept again flying. Sent boats to save the people,
 which were all detained . Standing off and on, ships and forts
 firing on us. Half-past 6 bore up for the bay, and found the
squadron at anchor , and the Caesar and Pompee in the mole.”
 The mistake in the Calpe ’s absolute time is of little consequence,
 provided the relative time corresponds ; and that it does tole¬
 rably well. It is clear, also, that the squadron had all anchored
 at Gibraltar when the Calpe returned , and the Caesar and Pom¬
 pee , had even gone into the mole. So much, therefore , for the
 assertion of Captain Brenton , that “ the squadron did not with¬
                                                                well
 draw from action until the Hannibal had surrenderedas
  as for the “ unaccountable error” of Captain Ferris in having,
 in a manner the least offensive that can well be imagined , stated
 the contrary.
     On the following morning , the 7th, Captain Brenton of the
  Caesar, was despatched with a flag of truce , to endeavour to
  negotiate the exchange of Captain Ferris , his officers and men.
  After some correspondence between Sir James and the French
  admiral , the latter permitted Captain Ferris, with all his officers
  and wounded men, to depart on their parole ; and granted the

                  * Victoires et Conquetes , tome xiv., p. 161.
