1801.              SIR JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS.                     113
hour of Valetta , island of Malta , to revictual , preparatory to
his pursuit of M. Ganteaume , of whom he had just received
intelligence . Delayed by head winds, M. Linois was not able,
until towards the end of the month , to double Cape de Gata.
   On the 1st of July the French ships, thep working against a
strong west-north-west wind, were seen from Gibraltar ; where
the only British vessel of war at anchor waS the 14-gun polacre-
sloop Calpe , Captain the Honourable George Heneage Lawrence
Dundas . On the 2d M. Linois captured a small British brig
employed as a packet to Minorca ; and on the 3d, when more
than two thirds through the Straits , the French admiral was so
fortunate as to capture , but not until she had resorted to every
manoeuvre to escape which her skilful commander could devise,
the 14-gun brig-sloop Speedy, Captain Lord Cochrane. Learn¬
ing now that Cadiz was blockaded by a superior force, Rear-
admiral Linois, with his squadron and prizes, bore up for Alge¬
ziras. On the 4th , at about 10 a . m., he rounded Cabrita point in
sight of the Calpe at her anchorage, and at 5 p. m. came to with
his ships in front of the town of Algeziras, still in full view of the
British at the rock.
   At this time the British squadron stationed off Cadiz consisted
of the
Gun-ship
 80     Caesar                ( Rear-admiral (b.) Sir James Saumarez.
                             \ Captain Jahleel Brenton.
      ' Pompee    .    . *          99  Charles Sterling.
        Spencer                     5*  Henry D’Esterre Darby.
 74- I Venerable .                  99  Samuel Hood.
     j Superb . .                   99  Richard  Goodwin Keats,
        Hannibal                    99 Solomon Ferris.
      . Audacious .                 99 Shuldham Peard.
  Frigate Thames , and brig Pasley.
   On the 5th of July , at 2 a . m., Lieutenant Richard Janvarin,
"Who had been despatched     from Gibraltar by Captain Dundas of
4he Calpe , joined the Caesar in a boat, and informed Sir James of
the appearance off the rock of the squadron of M. Linois, endea¬
vouring to get to the westward. The British squadron in Cadiz bay
consisted now of only six sail of the line, the Superb having, since
the 1st of the month, been detached to watch the entrance of the
 Guadalquivir , a river about 18 miles to the northward.
   Sir James and the ships with him immediately tacked off
shore. At daylight another despatch vessel from Gibraltar
boarded the Thames, with intelligence of the French squadron ’s
having put into Algeziras. The frigate was immediately
despatched by the Rear-admiral to recall the Superb , then in
the north by east with her topgallants just above the horizon,
and direct Captain Keats to follow the squadron to Algeziras.
2a ^       . m. the Csesar made   the signal   to prepare   for battle , and
tor anchoring by the stern ; and immediately afterwards bore
away for the gut , with a moderate breeze from the northward
and westward. In the mean time the Superb , to whom at about
      VOL . HI .                        t
