1801.           SIR JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS
                                              .                                     121

on the subject , not having the advantage of professional know¬
ledge , have fallen into errors natural enough to them , but
which prove their incompetency to the task they had under¬
taken . It has indeed been the misfortune of our service, that
its history has generally been written by men, who, however
 qualified by classical education , have wanted those indispensable
requisites which can only be acquired by professional habits,
local knowledge , and constant attention : hence it has arisen
that many important events connected with the navy have been
improperly stated, ” &c.#
    This writer informs us, that the Venerable <l was directed by
the admiral to anchor between the batteries of Algeziras and
 Green Island .”^ Had the “ local knowledge ” of Captain Hood
been of a par with our contemporary ’s, the Venerable would
have bought experience at a dear rate ; but , according to the
letter of Sir James Saumarez , although Captain Hood was to
 lead the squadron , “ it was not intended he should anchor ” at
 all, much less anchor where there was less water than his ship
drew ; nor, as far as we can learn, was any signal to anchor made
until the Csesar herself was compelled to bring up. The latter
 ship is represented to have anchored “ immediately ” after the
Audacious ; whereas there was an interval of at least 25
minutes . The French , indeed, describe the attacking force as
composed of two divisions of three ships each ; and so far they
are right.
    As to the plate given to illustrate the action, it is so full of
mistakes , and, in many parts , so totally at variance with the
letter -press, that we shall pass it by as unworthy of any further
remark . We cannot, however, leave unnoticed the statement,
that , “ at about twelve o’clock, Captain Ferris hauled down his
colours and surrenderednor        the charge against the Hannibal ’s
captain , conveyed in these words : “ Nothing could exceed the
decision and intrepidity of Captain Ferris, although the result
of his manoeuvre was unfortunate : it is, however, due to Sir
James Saumarez to state , that the squadron did not withdraw
from action until the Hannibal had surrendered . A contrary
assertion is made in the narrative of Captain Ferris ; an unac¬
countable error, proving that the most correct officers may some¬
times be deceived, and the more to be lamented in this instance,
as bearing the sanction of an official document.
    Our complaint against captain Ferris is, that his account of
the time, which intervened between the “ ships driving out of
the bay ” and the surrender of the Hannibal , is not very clearly
expressed . The captain might with propriety have stated , that
the Hannibal did not strike her colours until nearly half an hour
a fter Sir James Saumarez , from unavoidable causes undoubtedly,

 * Brenton, vol. i., p. vii.   f Ibid., vol. iii., p. 33.   J Ibid., vol. iii., p. 35.
