120        BRITISH AND FRANCO
                            - SPANISH FLEETS
                                           .                 1801.

had the weather permitted the latter to bestow that fire with
full effect?
   One would suppose it difficult to raise a doubt as to the
gallantry , whatever may have been thought of the prudence, of
the attack upon Algeziras ; yet the French , in their version of
the affair, made it appear one of the most brilliant exploits which
their navy had ever performed. It was no less than that “ three
French sail of the line and a frigate were attacked by six English
sail of the line and a frigate ; that the English were completely
beaten , and took refuge in Gibraltar , leaving in the possession
of the French the Hannibal , of 74 guns ; and that another ship
of the line struck , but was afterwards towed off by a great
number of English gun-boats .”
   Fortunately for the cause of truth , the Spaniards , as well as
the French , had a little self-love to gratify . “ The action,”
says the Madrid Gazette -Extraordinary , “ was very obstinate
and bloody on both sides ; and likewise on the part of our
batteries , which decided the fate of the day .” And, in another
place , “ The fire of our batteries was so hot and well supported,
that the enemy suffered most from them ; and particularly , it is
to that of San-Iago we owe the capture of the English ship ; for,
her bold manoeuvre, of attempting to pass between the French
rear -admiral ’s ship, the Formidable , and the shore, made her
take the ground ; and, notwithstanding the utmost exertion to
get her afloat, it was found impossible to move her : then the
fire from the battery very soon dismasted her, and compelled
her to strike .”
    We must , however, do the French the credit to state , that it
was their soldiers and artillerymen , disembarked from the ships,
that occasioned the Spanish batteries to be so admirably served
as they were towards the middle and latter part of the action
With respect to the supposed striking of the Pompee , it may be
explained by the fact, as noted down in that ship’s log, that her
colours were shot away, but they were quickly rehoisted . We
might be disposed to remark upon the ostentatious manner , in
which the victory of “ three unaided French ships of the line
 over six British, ” was announced at the Paris theatres ; but
that we should perhaps be reminded of what had occurred,
nearly two years before, upon an occasion of much less import
ance , at one of the principal theatres of London.
    Being aware of the relationship which subsisted between a
 contemporary and the distinguished officer who was the flag-
 captain of Sir James Saumarez in this action, we naturally turned
 to our contemporary ’s account, in the expectation of seeing that
 account so fully and accurately drawn up, as to afford some
ground for the assertion, that none but a naval officer can write
 a naval history . For such we take to be the meaning of the
following passage in Captain Brenton ’s Preface : “ Other writers
