 1801.        SIR JAMES SAUMAREZ AT ALGEZIRAS.                  119
  liam Grave), six seamen, and two marines killed , her boatswain
 (George William Forster ), 17 seamen, one boy, and six marines
  wounded, and one master ’s mate (Richard Best ) and seven sea¬
  men missing ; probably drowned in one of her boats . The main¬
  mast had been shot through in five places, and all her other
  masts and yards were more or less injured : several shot had
  also entered her hull . Her two barges, large cutter , launch,
  and jollyboat , had been cut to pieces ; and her small cutter or
  pinnace , as already stated , had been sunk as it lay alongside the
  Hannibal . The Pompee had her master (Robert Roxburgh ),
 one midshipman (Mr. Steward ), 10 seamen, and three marines
 killed , three lieutenants (Richard Cheeseman , Arthur Stapledon,
 and Thomas Innes ), two master ’s mates (Messieurs Curry and
  Hillier), one midshipman (I. Hibberd ), 53 seamen, and 10
 marines wounded. In point of damages , the Pompee was evea
 in a much worse state than the Ceesar, not having a mast , yard,
 spar , shroud , rope, or sail, but which was more or less injured
 by the enemy’s shot : had it not been, indeed, for the aid of
 several small-craft and boats from Gibraltar , the Pompee would
 probably have shared the fate of the Hannibal . The Spencer
 had one first-class volunteer (R . Spencer), and five seamen
 killed , one midshipman (Joseph Chatterton ), 23 seamen, and
 three marines wounded. Her principal damages were confined
 to her rigging and sails. The Venerable had one midshipman
(William Gibbons) and seven seamen killed , two midshipmen
(Silvester Austin and Martin Collins), 20 seamen, and three
 marines wounded. The Hannibal had her captain ’s clerk
(David Lindsey), 68 seamen, one lieutenant of marines (James
 D . Williams), and five private marines killed, one lieutenant
(John Turner ), her master (John Wood ), one midshipman.
 (William Dudgeon ), 44 seamen, one lieutenant of marines
(George Dunford ), and 14 private marines wounded, and six
seamen missing, who had probably gone overboard with one of
the masts . The Audacious had eight seamen killed , and one
lieutenant of marines (Robert I. W . Day ), 25 seamen, and six
private marines wounded : her damages were not material . This
makes the total loss in the British squadron , 121 killed, 240
wounded, and 14 missing.
    The loss incurred by the French and Spaniards amounted,
according to their own published accounts , on the part of the
latter , to 11 men killed, exclusive of several wounded, and on
the part of the former, to 306 killed, including the captains,
Moncousu and Lalonde, besides 280, or rather , if the Madrid
Gazette account is to be relied on, nearly 500 wounded. The
French ships suffered considerably in their masts and hulls ;
and five Spanish gun-boats were sunk , and two materially
damaged . The forts, also, received considerable injury from
the fire of the British ships. How then would it have been,
