116        BRITISH AND FRANCO-SPANISH FLEETS.                 1801.

 got also into action, anchoring within hail of the Caesar, and
rather upon her starboard bow. The Spencer , baffled as much
 as any of her companions and to leeward of the whole of them,
could not get much nearer than was sufficient to expose her to
the heavy fire of the Spanish batteries , from which, towards the
latter part of the action especially , hot shot, as well as shells,
w’ere thrown.
    At a few minutes past 10 a . m. the Hannibal was hailed by
the Caesar, but no person on board the former appears to have
heard distinctly what was said. Soon afterwards a boat with an
officer came on board the Venerable, bearing the rear-admiral ’s
orders , that Captain Ferris should “ go and rake the French
admiral ;” no doubt with the intention of supporting the
 Pompee , who just at that time was in a very critical situation.
    Cutting her cable and casting herself by the spring, the Han¬
nibal immediately made sail to the northward , with what wind
there was, still blowing from the west-north-west . Having
stood , in the direction of Rio Palmenos , into a quarter less six,
the Hannibal tacked for the Formidable ; but about 11 a . m.,
just as she had arrived abreast of the tower of Almirante , and
was in the act of hauling more closely in shore, to cross the hawse
of the French ship, nearly within hail of whom she then was,
 the Hannibal took the ground . In this distressing situation,
the Hannibal with as many of her foremast guns as would bear,
 opened a fire upon the Formidable , and directed the remainder,
with evident effect, upon the tower of Almirante , battery of San-
 lago , and gun-boats . The ship appearing to swing a little , ail
 effort was made , by letting go an anchor and heaving a strain
 upon it, to get her afloat, but without effect. With some diffi¬
cult , owing to the signal -halliards having been shot away, the
 Hannibal apprized the admiral of her situation ; and shortly
afterwards one boat came from the Caesar and another from the
Venerable . Finding that no assistance could be afforded by
them , Captain Ferris sent back the Venerable ’s boat, and sent
the Caesar’s officers and men in one of the Hannibal ’s cutters,
their pinnace having been sunk alongside by a shot.
    The light westerly breeze, by which the Hannibal had so gal¬
lantly steered to her present unfortunate situation , appears to
 have been very partial , as the other British ships all the while
 lay nearly becalmed . Soon after the Hannibal had grounded,
 however, a light breeze sprang up from the north -east . Hoping
 by this means to get further from the reach of the British ships,
 some of whom were observed preparing to take , ad vantage of it
 and approach nearer, M. Linois threw out the signal for his ships
 to cut and run themselves on shore, “ de couper les cables pour
 s’echouer .”* The French ships did so ; but , the wind suddenly
falling , they were a long time in wearing. The Formidable
 brought up again with her larboard broadside to the enemy ; but

              * Victoires et Conquetes, tome xiv ., p. 160.
