126          BRITISH AND FRANCO
                              - SPANISH FLEETS
                                             .                       1801.

Dundas , hired armed brig Louisa, and Portuguese frigate, Car-
lotta , Captaift Crawfurd Duncan.
   As soon as they had got from under the lee of the rock , the
British ships formed in line ahead on the larboard tack , with the
wind from the eastward . At 7 p. m. they wore together , and
stood on the starboard tack , under easy sail, watching the com¬
bined squadron , which , at about 7 h. 45 m. p. m., cleared Cabrita
point ; except the Hannibal , who, having only topmasts for
lower masts , still remained astern , in spite of all the efforts of
the Indienne frigate by whom she was in tow. The frigate and
her charge eventually returned to Algeziras, leaving the follow¬
ing as the force of the combined squadron :
                                 SPANISH.
 Gun-ship
       ( Real-Carlos... ,   Captain Don J. Esquerra,
       I Hermenegildo,        „     Don J. Emparran
   96 San-Fernando,            „•   Don J. Malina.
   80 Argonauta .. .. .       „     Don J. Harrera.
   74 San-Augustin ,           „    Don R. Jopete.
 Frigate, Sabina.

                                  FRENCH.

         ( Formidable .    Captain Amable-Gilles Troude.
         { Indomptable .       „     -       ————
     _ . ( Saint-Antoine . Commod. Julien Le Ray.
         ( Desaix .                    Jean-Anne Christy-Palliere.
  Frigates, Libre and Muiron ; lugger Vautour.
tor

   It appears that it is the invariable custom for a Spanish’
admiral , when in the presence of the enemy, to shift his flag
from a line-of-battle ship to a frigate .* Accordingly , while the
squadron was lying to off Cabrita point, Vice-admiral Moreno
shifted his flag from the Real -Carlos to the Sabina ; and by the
Spanish admiral ’s desire, but with much reluctance on his part,
Rear -admiral Linois quitted the Formidable and repaired on
board the same frigate.
   At 8 p. m., or a little after , the British squadron bore away in
chase ; and, at about 8 h. 40m ., Sir James hailed the Superb,
who was close astern of the Caesar, and directed Captain Keats
to make sail ahead , and attack the sternmost of the enemy’s
ships , none of which were then visible. In an instant all sail
was set upon the Superb ; and , passing the Caesar, she regained
a sight of the hostile squadron . At 10 p. m. the wind freshened,
and the Caesar and Venerable were then the only ships of her
own squadron seen by the Superb . At 11 p. m. the Superb had
so increased her distance , that the Caesar was full three mile&

                * Victoires et Conquetes , tome xiv ., p. 164.
