 1801.   SIR JAMES SAUMAREZ IN THE GUT OF GIBRALTAR
                                                  . 129

considerable distance , could approach within gun-shot . At 8
A. M., just as the mizenmast of the Venerable had shared the fate
of the other masts, the gig of the Ceesar, with Captain Brenton
 on board , reached the ship (over which the stern-chase shot of
 the Formidable were still flying), with discretionary orders to
 Captain Hood, to withdraw his crew and destroy the Venerable,
 should the combined squadron , which appeared so inclined,
1evince an intention of attacking her ; and the Thames had been
 ordered to close for the purpose of receiving the people. Captain
 Hood, however, requested the rear-admiral to depend upon his
 exertions to save the Venerable, notwithstanding her critical and
 almost hopeless situation . Just as the Caesar’s boat had quitted
 the Venerable on her return , the appearance of the Audacious
 and Superb to the southward induced the Spanish admiral to
 haul up for Cadiz, where he and his ships were soon safely
 moored.
      In her smart encounter with a ship so decidedly superior to
 her in force as the formidable, the Venerable had her master
 (John Williams ), 15 seamen, and two marines killed, one lieu¬
 tenant (Thomas Church ), her boatswain (John Snell), two mid¬
 shipmen (George Massey and Charles Pardoe ), 73 seamen, and
 10 marines wounded. The Thames does not appear to have had
 a man hurt ; and we do not believe that any of the Formidable ’s
 shot even struck her. The loss sustained by the Formidable
 herself, according to her captain ’s official report , amounted to
 20 men killed , or mortally wounded, but the remaining wounded
 M . Troude has seemingly omitted to enumerate . The Sabina
 frigate had also one man killed and five wounded ; but whether
 from the fire of the British ships, or of the two unfortunate three-
 deckers that blew up, it is difficult to ascertain.
      The British had now leisure to devote the whole of their
 attention to the only remaining object , the safety of the Vene¬
 rable . Fortunately for her gallant officers and crew, the
 weather continued calm ; and at 2 p. m., by the assistance of the
 Thames who had anchored near, and of the boats of the Caesar
 and Spencer, the Venerable was hove into deep water. The
 Thames then took the dismasted 74 in tow, and stood with
 her towards the flag-ship in the offing. At 6 p. m. the Vene¬
 rable cast off the Thames, and was taken in tow by the Spencer,
 who made sail with her towards the Gut . Having cleared away
 the wreck of her masts, the Venerable now got up a main top-
 gallantmast for a foremast, the driverboom for a mainmast , and
 a studdingsail -boom for a mizenmast. Soon after dark a main
 topgallant sail was set for a foresail, and before daylight on the
    4th a mizen topsail for a mainsail. So that by 8 a . m., the
  .. arable had made herself sufficiently manageable to cast off
     .e ship of the line that was towing her, and take again to the
   ngate . Even this state of comparative seaworthiness had not
    eei1 ac complished without great exertions on the part of her
      vol. m ,                   %
