                                                                             1801.
132            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.


                LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.


    On the 3d of January , the British 38-gun frigate Melpomene,                 the
Captain Sir Charles Hamilton , being off the bar of Senegal ,
latter resolved , with the concurrence of Lieutenant -colonel
                                                                                    to
Frazer , the commandant of the garrison of Goree, to attempt
carry by surprise a French           18-gun     brig-corvette     and    an  armed
schooner at anchor within it ; in order, by their means , as vessels
                                                                                    of
of a less draught of water than the frigate , to get possession
                     commanded          the     entrance     to  the    river,   and
the battery that
eventually of the settlement itself.
    Accordingly , at 9 h. 30 m. p. m., five boats , containing 55
volunteers from the Melpomene , five from the crew of a trans¬
                                                                                  the
port in*company , and Lieutenant Christie and 35 men from
                            96   in    all,  placed       under    the    orders     of
African corps, being
Lieutenant Thomas Dick , assisted by Lieutenant William
Palmer , and by Lieutenant William Vyvian of the marines,
quitted the Melpomene upon the service intrusted to them.
                                                                                   the
Having passed in safety the heavy surf on the bar withdisco¬
flood-tide , also the battery at          the    point  ,  without    being
                                                                                     of
vered, the boats , at 11 h . 15 m., arrived within a few yards
               when  the  latter  ,   by   a   single     discharge     of  her   two
 the brig ;
 bow-guns , killed Lieutenant Palmer and seven men, and sank                        re¬
two of the best boats . Notwithstanding this , the three
                                                                         after  a   20
 maining boats pulled alongside of, boarded , and,
 minutes ’ severe contest , carried           ,   the     French      brig-corvette
  Senegal , of 18 long 8 and 12 pounders (the latter carronades
 probably ) and about 60 men, commanded by Citizen Renou.
     In the mean time the schooner had cut her cable, and run for
  protection nearer the battery ; the fire from which, and from
  some musketry on the southern bank of the river, frustrated
                                                                                  had
  every attempt upon the former , although Lieutenant Dick
                       of the  brig      against     her.     Having     effected    as
  turned the guns
  much as he could, Lieutenant Dick cut the cables of the brig?
  and made sail with her down the river ; but , owing to the ebb¬
  tide ’s having made, and no one on board being acquainted with
  the navigation across the bar, the Senegal grounded . After
                                                                                   and
   several vain attempts to get off the prize, Lieutenant Dick
                      her ;  and   , with    the    three    boats  , succeeded       in
   his party quitted
   making his way to the ship, across a tremendous                surf,   and   under
   a heavy fire of grape -shot and musketry from the adjoining
                                                                                    the
   batteries . The brig afterwards sank up to her gunwales , in
                                                      .    The  loss   sustained     by
   quicksand on which she had grounded
   the British in this spirited ,       although        but  partially     successful
                                                                                     eU'
   affair, amounted to one lieutenant (William Palmer ), one li
   tenant of marines (William Vyvian ), one                midshipman        (Robert
   Main ), six seamen , one marine , and one corporal of the African
                                                                                       &
   corps killed , one master 's mate (John Hendric, ) one surgeon
