1801.                                        .
        SAILING OF SPANISH SQUADRON FROM CADIZ                  123

same privilege to Captain Lord Cochrane and the officers of the
Speedy brig.
     Thus it stands in the first edition of this work , and so we yet
believe the fact to be ; but the brother of the officer who carried
the message, says thus : “ Sir James Saumarez sent his captain
over to Algeziras with a flag of truce to the French admiral pro¬
posing an exchange of prisoners , which M . Linois declined,
alleging that it was not in his power to consent to such a
measure , without first receiving the sanction of the minister of
marine at Paris , to whom he had despatched a courier imme¬
 diately after the termination of the action.”* At all events both.
 Captain Ferris and Lord Cochrane , with their respective officers,
 the sole object , we believe, of Captain Jahleel Brenton ’s mission,
 were in England in the month of August.
     It would be almost superfluous to state the result of the
 court -martial which was afterwards held upon Captain Ferris,
 and the late officers and ship’s company of the Hannibal . The
 court , of which Rear -admiral Holloway was president , sat on
  board the Gladiator , in Portsmouth harbour , on the 1st of
  September . After the most honourable acquittal that a brave
  man could desire, Captain Ferris had his sword returned to him
  by the president , with the following address : “ Captain Ferris,
  I have great pleasure in returning this sword to you, as I feel
  assured , if ever you have occasion to unsheath it again , it will
  be used with the same gallantry which you so nobly displayed
  in defending his majesty ’s ship Hannibal .”
      We formerly mentioned the transfer by Spain to France , for
  immediate employment , of six ships of the line at anchor in
  Cadiz harbour,f On the 13th of June , in the morning , the two
  French 40-gun frigates Libre and Indienne , after a few hours*
  chase by the 74-gun ships Venerable and Superb , the only
   British force then off the port , anchored in the road of Cadiz
   from Brest , having on board Rear -admiral Dumanoir -le-Pelley,
   Commodore Le Ray , and a number of other officers, as well as
   of seamen, for the Franco-Spanish ships equipping in the port.
   The remainder of the crews, not already arrived by these and
   other conveyances , were daily expected from Brest , Lorient, and
   Bochefort.
       The first step taken by Rear -admiral Linois, after getting his
   grounded ships and prize afloat, and which, notwithstanding the
    belief of Sir James Saumarez , that u the whole were rendered
    entirely unserviceable, ” he soon did, was to send an express
    overland to Admirals Massaredo and Dumanoir at Cadiz, im¬
    ploring them to come or send a squadron to his assistance,
    before the British could get their ships repaired for renewing the
    attack ; adding , in his second despatch to the Spanish com¬
    mander-in-chief, “ I have j ust received advice that the enemy

           * Brenton, vol . iii., p. 36.        f Seep . 111.
