 <3801.                     FRENCH ACCOUNT.                         131

    arm ; and frequently at no greater distance than the spunge of*
    the gun . The French captain ordered three round -shot to be put
    into each gun . The Thames cannonaded him astern , but the
    latter ’s stern -chasers replied to her fire . The two other enemy ’s
   ships (now comes the inventive part of the story ) successively
    arrived up ; and , not being able to double the Formidable to
   windward , they took their stations upon her larboard quarter.
    One of the first broadsides of the French ship carried away the
    Venerable ’s mizen topmast , and soon afterwards her mainmast:
   the English vessel bore up ; but Troude followed her in this
   movement to rake her astern , at the same time that he can¬
   nonaded the Caesar , who , finding herself close ahead of the
   Venerable , could not return the fire : not a French shot was
   lost . In this position the Venerable lost her foremast . Troude
   now directed the whole of his fire at the Caesar , whom he closed
   as much as possible . After an engagement of half an hour,
   although the English ship , being able to carry more sail , ran
   past the Formidable and obliged the latter to manoeuvre to keep
   alongside of her opponent , the Caesar abandoned the combat,
   bore up in confusion , hauled on board her larboard tacks , and
  joined the Venerable , to whom the Thames was affording suc¬
  cour . It remained still to fight the Superb , who was on the
  larboard bow of the French ship ; but the English ship bore up,
  passed under the lee of the Formidable out of gun -shot , and
  rejoined the other vessels . At 7 o’clock in the morning Captain
  Troude was master of the field of battle . He got upon deck
  the remainder of his shot , sufficient still for another hour ’s
  action ; refreshed his gallant crew , who had so well seconded
  him , and repaired his rigging : his sails were in tatters , the
  land - wind had ceased , and he found himself becalmed , within
  gun -shot of the English squadron , the boats of which were
  occupied in giving assistance to the Venerable . This ship had
 ft ow lost her mizenmast , and the current drove her         upon the
 coast . At 10 o’clock , the wind having freshened , the Thames
 attempted to take the Venerable in tow ; but not being able to
 get her afloat , she was wrecked between the Isle of Leon and
 the point of San -Roche .”#
     The French government believed , or affected to believe , all
 this fanfaronade , and therefore could do no less than reward the
 formidable ’s commanding officer . This was done forthwith;
Jjad, from a very young capitaine de fregate , M . Amable - Gilles
 troude was promoted to a capitaine de vaisseau , by commission
dated on the 14th of July , 1801 , the very day on which , with
the aid of his pen , if not of his sword , he had added so greatly
t ° his own and his country ’s renown.

           * For the original extract , see Appendix , No . 12.
