 130          BRITISH AND FRANCO
                               - SPANISH FLEETS
                                              .                  1801'.

 officers and crew ; yet a contemporary states that , at sunset on
 the preceding day, which was little more than five hours after
  she lay a dismasted hulk upon the rocks , the Venerable was
  “ in such efficient order as to be fit for action had an enemy
  appeared .”*
     For the service rendered to the country , by the prompt and
  effective manner in which the combined squadron under Vice-
  admiral Moreno and Rear -admiral Linois was chased and
  attacked by the British squadron under Rear -admiral Sir James
  Saumarez, the latter , with the captains , officers, and crews of the
  ships under his orders, received the thanks of parliament ; and
  Sir James himself, for his conspicuous gallantry in going in
  pursuit of a force so decidedly superior, was created a knight of
  the bath , with a pension of 1200/. per annum . The first lieu¬
 tenant of the Csesar, Philip Dumaresq , was made a commander.
 The first lieutenants of the Superb and Venerable , the two ships
 that bore the brunt of the action, were Samuel Jackson and
 James Lillicrap ; and they also received that step in rank which
  was so justly their due.
     The Saint-Antoine, which, on account of the miserable fate
 of the two Spanish three-deckers , was the only trophy carried
 off by the British , became afterwards added to the navy of
 her captors ; but being an old 74 of only 1700 tons, the ship
 never quitted Portsmouth after she arrived there . By way of
 perpetuating an acknowledged error in the official letter of
 Captain Keats to Sir James Saumarez, the Saint-Antoine , both
 in Steel’s lists and in the navy-office books, continued, and in the
 latter still continues to be called the San-Antonio.
    Although from a desire to be impartial we invariably , if in
 our power, consult the accounts on both sides of the question,
 and are frequently enabled to extract , even on the subject of
 British naval history , much useful information from an account
 drawn up by a Frenchman or Spaniard , the best French account
 we can find of the proceedings of the combined squadron under
 Vice-admiral Moreno and Rear -admiral Linois is so amusingly
extravagant , that , if only as a relief to the dry matter -of-fact
detail of these pages, we are induced to subjoin a translated
extract : “ At 4 o’clock in the morning he (Captain Troude)
perceived in his wake four vessels which he knew were enemies :
they were, in fact, a part of the English squadron : the Caesar,
commanded by Admiral Saumarez , the Venerable , Superb,f and
frigate Thames . The brave Troude prepared for action , and
strengthened his lower batteries by men from those of the
quarterdeck and forecastle. He was soon overtaken by the
Venerable and Thames : the first discharged her broadside into
his larboard quarter , and the Formidable bore up to close this
adversary : a most spirited combat ensued, yard-arm and yard-

. * Brenton,roL iii., p. 42.    * f The Spencer is here meant.
