1801.   SIR JAMES SAUMAREZ IN THE GUT OF GIBRALTAR
                                                 . 127

astern , and the Venerable no longer visible. At 11 h. 20ra.
p. m., observing a Spanish three-decker , the Real -Carlos, about
a point before her larboard beam , and a three and a two decker,
the San-Hermenegildo and Saint -Antoine, in a range with and on
the larboard side of the former, the Superb shortened sail ; and,
when about 300 or 360 yards from the Real -Carlos, opened a
fire upon her from her larboard guns . At the third broadside the
Real -Carlos , whose fore topmast had j ust been shot away, was
observed to be on fire. The Superb instantly ceased engaging
the Spanish ship ; and the latter continued her course before the
wind. Shortly afterwards the Real -Carlos came suddenly to
the wind, and then dropped astern in evident confusion, she and,
her two nearest companions firing their guns in all directions.
   The total destruction of her first opponent being now no longer
doubtful , the Superb again made sail, and at 11 h. 50m . p.m.
came up with and brought to action the Saint-Antoine. After
a contest of about 30 minutes, part of which was close and
fought upon a wind, the French 74 ceased firing, and hailed
repeatedly that she surrendered . Shortly afterwards the Caesar
and Venerable came up in succession, and, deceived by the
Saint -Antoine’s broad pendant , which, owing to the halliards
having been shot away and got entangled amongst the rigging*
still remained flying, fired into her ; as did also the Spencer and
Thames . In a few minutes the discovery was made that the
Saint-Antoine had already surrendered , and the firing at her
ceased.
   At about 15 minutes past midnight the Real-Carlos blew up,
hut not until she had fallen on board of, and set in a similar
blaze, the San-Hermenegildo , who, having in the dark mistaken
the Real-Carlos for a foe, had been engaging her ; and who, in
another quarter of an hour, exploded also. Thus , melancholy
to relate , out of 2000 men composing the united crews of these
Spanish first-rates, two officers and 36 men that got on board
the Superb , and 262 who were fortunate enough to reach the
Saint -Antoine and some of the other ships of their squadron,*
Were all that escaped destruction.
   The loss on board the Superb , in her action with the
Saint-Antoine (for in her short one with the Real -Carlos, she
floes not appear to have sustained any), amounted to one lieu¬
tenant (Edmund Waller ) and 14 seamen and marines wounded,
Jflost of them severely. The Saint-Antoine, in crew and super¬
numeraries , had on board 730 men, of whom about 200, in¬
 cluding those saved from one of the two three -deckers , were
Spaniards . The loss on board the Saint -Antoine, except that
t-'Ommodore Le Ray was wounded , has not been enumerated ;
but, from the half an hour ’s close cannonade of so well disci-

              * Victoires et Conquetes , tome xiv ., p. 166.
