 128           BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.                      1801.

  plined a ship as the Superb , it must have been very severe,*
  The latter , accompanied by the Carlotta , Calpe , and Louisa,
  remained with the Saint -Antoine, while the rest of the squadron
  stood on in chase.
     During the latter part of the night it came on to blow very
  hard ; and on the 13th, at 4 a . m., the only ships in company
 with the Csesar were, the Spencer far astern , the Venerable and
 Thames ahead , and the French 80-gun ship Formidable , at some
 distance from and upon the lee bow of the latter , standing
 towards the shoals of Conil, with a light air from off the land.
 Sail was immediately made by the Csesar and her three con¬
 sorts ; but the easterly wind soon afterwards failing, the Vene¬
 rable and Thames , who were nearer in shore, were the only ships
 in a situation to chase with any prospect of success ; and , as the
 Formidable had only jury topmasts , they came up with her fast.
 At 5t a . m. the French ship hoisted her colours, and at 5 h. 15m.
 commenced firing her stern-chase guns at the Venerable ; but
 the latter , for fear of retarding her progress, did not fire in return
until five or six minutes afterwards , when the light and baffling
airs threw the two ships broadside -to, within musket -shot of
each other.
    At 5h . 30 m. the Venerable ’s mizen topmast was shot away ;
and at 5 h. 45 m. the Thames , by signal, hauled up and poured
a raking broadside into the Formidable ; who fired from her
stern -chasers in return , but without effect. At 6 h. 45 m., by
which time the French 80 and British 74 had gradually ap¬
proximated to a pistol-shot distance , the mainmast of the latter
came down by the board . Her standing and running rigging
being also cut to pieces, the Venerable fell from alongside her
opponent . Profiting by the circumstance , the Formidable
continued to stand on ; but owing to the almost calm state of
the weather , increased her distance so slowly, as to give consider¬
able annoyance to the Venerable by the fire from her stern-
chasers . At 7h . 50 m. a . m. the Venerable ’s foremast fell over
her side, and almost at the same instant the ship herself,
driven by the strength of the current , struck upon the rocky
shoals off San-Pedro , situated about 12 miles to the southward
of Cadiz. Having thus effectually rid herself of this her prin¬
cipal opponent , the Formidable continued her course to the
northward , under all the sail she could spread , in the hope to
reach Cadiz before the enemy’s two remaining ] line-of-battle
ships in sight, the nearest of which, the Csesar, was still at a

  * Although when first fitted, and at this time ( 1825), carrying 24-pounders
on her main deck, the Superb mounted only 18-pounders in her action with
the Saint-Antoine , her previous commander, Captain John Sutton , from an
idea that the ship-was crank, having induced the admiralty to issue an order
for the exchange.
   f Misprinted “seven” in the Gazette.
