  124         BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.                1801.

   intends burning us at our anchorage : it is in your power to
   save for the republic three fine ships of the line and a frigate, by
   merely ordering the Cadiz squadron to come and seek us.”
      Even these urgent calls would in all probability have failed in
   their effect, had not Rear -admiral Dumanoir been on the spot to
   unite his solicitations with those of Rear -admiral Linois. Thus
   pressed , Admiral Massaredo , on the afternoon of the 8th,
   ordered Vice-admiral Don Juan Joaquin de Moreno, with five
   Spanish and one Franco -Spanish sail of the line, three frigates,
  and a lugger , to anchor in the outer road ready for a start by
  the land-wind of the next morning. This movement was seen by
  the Superb , then with the Thames and Pasley cruising off the
  port.
      How these vessels happened to be here, when the Superb had
  been ordered to follow the squadron to Algeziras, may require
  some explanation . About three hours after the latter ship, still
  lying nearly becalmed , had lost sight of the rearmost of the
  ships with Sir James , an American vessel from the Mediterranean
  gave information that she had seen a French squadron of three
  sail of the line come out of Algeziras bay, and had left the ships
  well towards the African shore, standing out of the Straits . In¬
  clining to think that the French admiral, if met by Sir James,
  as the American master had no doubt would be the case, would
 run direct for the Mediterranean ; considering that , by the delay
 which had unavoidably happened , the Superb had lost all chance
 of joining the admiral in time to be of any service ; and having
 not the slightest apprehension of the result of a contest at sea
 between three French and six British sail of the line, Captain
 Keats j udged it to be the wisest plan to return off Cadiz, and,
 with his 74, frigate, and brig, watch the motions of the im¬
 measurably superior force at anchor in that port.
     On the 9th , at daylight , the Franco -Spanish squadron put to
 sea, all except the Saint-Antoine 74, which either got aground,
 or, not being able to fetch out, came again to an anchor. The
 remaining five sail of the line, three frigates, and a lugger , made
 sail towards the Gut , preceded by the Superb , Thames , and
 Pasley . Early in the afternoon the brig came crowding into
 Gibraltar with the signal for an enemy flying ; and at 3 p. m.,
while the Spanish squadron was hauling round Cabrita point,
the Superb and Thames , by signal from the Cgesar, came to an
anchor in Gibraltar bay. Shortly afterwards the squadron from
Cadiz was seen from the rock to cast anchor in the road of
Algeziras . On the next morning the San-Antonio, or, as her
recent change of ownership entitled her to be called, Saint-
Antoine , anchored with Rear -admiral Moreno’s squadron.
    That the object of this reinforcement was to conduct in safety
to Cadiz the squadron of M. Linois was well known at the rock ;
and nothing could surpass the exertions of the British officers
and men to get their damaged ships ready for sea. The Pomp6e
