                                               . 125
1801. SAILING OF BRITISH SQUADRON FROM GIBRALTAR

was in too bad a state to leave any hopes that she could be got
ready in time : her men, therefore , were turned over to assist in
the repairs of the other ships. “ The Caesar/ ’ says Captain
Edward Brenton, u lay in the mole, in so shattered a state , that
the admiral gave her up also ; and, hoisting his flag on board
the Audacious , expressed his intention of distributing her men
to the effective ships . Captain (Jahleel ) Brenton requested that
his people might remain on board as long as possible , and, ad¬
dressing them , stated the admiral ’s intentions in case the ship
could not be got ready : they answered , with three cheers, ‘All
hands to work day and night , till she is ready .’ The captain
ordered them to work all day , and watch and watch all night;
by these means they accomplished what has , probably , never
been exceeded . On the 8th they warped her into the mole and
shipped the lower masts ; on the 9th they got their new main¬
 mast in. On the 11th the enemy showed symptoms of sailing,
which only increased , if possible, the energies of the seamen.
 On Sunday the 12th , at dawn of day , the enemy loosed sails;
 the Caesar still refitting in the mole, receiving powder, shot , and
  other stores, and preparing to haul out.
     “ At noon the enemy began to move : the wind was fresh
 from the eastward , and as they cleared the bay , they took up
 stations off Cabrita point, which appeared to be the rendezvous,
  on which they were to form their line of battle . At one o’clock
 the enemy’s squadron was nearly all under way ; the Spanish
 ships Real -Carlos and Hermenegildo , of 112 guns each, off
  Cabrita point : the Caesar was warping out of the mole. The
 day was clear ; the whole population of the rock came out to
 witness the scene ; the line-wall, mole-head , and batteries , were
  crowded from the dock-yard to the ragged staff ; the Caesar’s
 band playing , ‘ Come cheer up my lads, ’tis to glory we steer/
 the military band of the garrison answering with *Britons strike
  home .’ The effect of this scene it is difficult to describe : Eng¬
  lishmen were proud of their country ; and foreigners , who beheld
  the scene, wished to be Englishmen . So general was the en¬
  thusiasm among our gallant countrymen , that even the wounded
  men begged to be taken on board, to share in the honours of the
  approaching conflict.” #
     At 3 p. m., just as, in her way out of the mole she passed
  under the stern of the Audacious , the Caesar rehoisted the flag#of
  Sb James Saumarez , and made the signal for the squadron to
  weigh and prepare for battle . This was promptly done ; and
  the squadron , consisting of the Caesar, Venerable , Superb,
   Spencer, and Audacious of the line, 12-pounder 32-gun frigate
   fhames , Captain Askew Paffard Holies , 14-gun polacre-sloop
  ^alpe , Captain the Honourable George Heneage Laurence
                     * Brenton, vol . iii., p. 39.
