     140          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                        1801.

     The two ships with their heads to the northward , then conti¬
     nued the engagement within pistol-shot distance , until 9 h. 30 m.
     p. m. ; when the Africaine being nearly unrigged , having five
     feet water in the hold, her decks literally encumbered with dead,
     and the greater part of her guns dismounted , struck her colours.
      Her masts were all badly wounded, and , had there been any
      swell, would have fallen over her side. The Phoebe’s masts ‘
      were also much inj ured, and chiefly owed their stability to the
      smoothness of the sea. Her rigging and sails, too, were scarcely
     in better plight than those of the Africaine.
         Although her net complement, including 18 boys, was 261,
     the Phoebe had sailed from Cork seven men short , and since
     manned and sent to Gibraltar , one recaptured brig with seven,
     and one detained brig with eight men ; so that her crew on
     board was reduced to 239. Of this number the Phoebe had
     only one seaman killed , and her first lieutenant (John Wentworth
     Holland ), master (Thomas Griffiths), and 10 seamen wounded.
         The loss on board the Africaine was truly dreadful . The total
      number of persons on board of her were 715 ; of which number
     315 composed the ship’s regular crew, and the 400 were troops
     and artificers of various descriptions . Of her 715 in crew and
     supernumeraries , the Africaine had Commodore Saulnier , one
     brigadier -general, two captains in the army, eight petty -officers,
     three surgeons (actually killed in the cockpit, while dressing the
     wounded !) and 185 seamen, marines, artillerymen, troops, and
     artificers killed , and one general of division (Desforneaux ), one
     general of battalion , one general of cavalry, one aide-de-camp,
     one major of battalion , her first lieutenant , or capitaine de
     fregate (Jean -Jacques Magendie , in the head ), five other lieute¬
     nants , two volunteers , two lieutenants of grenadiers , one lieute¬
     nant of foot, three petty officers, and 125 seamen, marines,
     artillerymen , troops and artificers wounded ; making a total of
     200 killed , and 143 wounded, the greater part of them mortally.
     A return to this effect, signed by Captain Magendie , was
     delivered to Captain Barlow ; but the former stated in the return,
     that it probably fell short of the real loss sustained , especially in
     killed.
        The force of the Phoebe, whose guns were in number 44, has
•*   already appeared .* That of the Africaine consisted , according
     to the return signed by Captain Magendie and subjoined to the
     official letter , of 26 long 18-pounders on the main deck and 18
     long 8-poundersf on the quarterdeck and forecastle : total 44 guns
     also. If her eight 32-pounder carronades gave the Phoebe a slight
     preponderance in broadside weight of metal , the decided superiority
     in number of men, even of her regular crew, gave the Africaine
     a still greater advantage in that very essential point ; an advan-

        * See vol. ii., p. 93, and vol. i., p. 327.
     •* f Misprinted in the London Gazette “ 18 de 9,” instead of “ 18 de 8. *
