 142         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1801.

  Captain Robert Lawrie, were cruising off Punta de Mulas , on
  the north -east coast of the island of Cuba, a convoy of 25
  Spanish vessels known to be richly laden, were seen at an
  anchor in the bay of Levita, protected by three armed galleys,
  or gun-vessels, armed with long 24 and 18 pounders . The two
  captains considering it practicable to capture or destroy this
 convoy by the aid of their boats , the latter under the command
  of Captain Lawrie himself, at about 9 h. 30 m. p. m., proceeded
  to execute the service.
     Soon after midnight the boats arrived within gun-shot of the
  galleys , and were received, quite unexpectedly , with a heavy and
  destructive fire of grape , langridge , and musketry . In spite of
  this opposition, the British gallantly pushed on, and boarded
 several of the vessels ; but from the heavy loss they sustained,
  could only bring off one of the galleys . That loss consisted of
  the first lieutenant of the Andromache (Joseph Taylor ), one
  master ’s mate (William M' Cuin), one midshipman (William
  Winchester , both of the Cleopatra ), and six seamen killed , and
  12 seamen wounded . Some of the boats had also been sunk by
 the enemy’s shot. The loss among the Spaniards on board the
 captured gun-vessel was nine killed and several wounded,
 t On the 3d of April, at daybreak , the British 18-pounder 36-
  gun frigate Trent , Captain Sir Edward Hamilton , while lying at
 an anchor among the rocks off the Isles of Brehat , discovered a
 ship, with French colours flying, under the protection of an armed
 cutter and lugger , making sail with the flood from the anchorage
 of Brehat towards Plampoul . The boats of the frigate, under
 the orders of Lieutenant George Chamberlayne , assisted by
 Lieutenants Robert Scallon and John Bellamy , lieutenant of
 marines Walter Tait , and Mr . Thomas Hoskins the master,
 instantly proceeded to endeavour to secure the ship.
    With the seeming intention of defending what proved to be a
 prize recently made, the French sent many boats from the shore;
and these, asssisted by the lugger , took the ship in tow. The
intrepid advance of the Trent ’s boats , however, caused the
shore-boats and lugger to cast off the ship, and prepare to
defend themselves . A sharp conflict now ensued ; at the end of
which the French lugger and boats , although protected by five
batteries , were subdued and chased upon the rocks . Shortly
afterwards the ship was boarded by the first lieutenant and the
lieutenant of marines ; which latter , however, lost his right leg
on the occasion. This, with two seamen killed , appears to have
been the extent of the loss on the British side. The ship proved
to be an English merchant vessel ; but , as the French had all
quitted her and taken the crew with them , no particulars could
be obtained . Two men were found dead upon her decks , and
several are supposed to have been drowned in attempting to
escape from the British when they boarded.
    On the 19th of April , at 8 h. 30 m. a . m., the British 38-g® 11
