-136        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1801.
 inability to struggle with the waves. The loss on board the
 Santa -Maria, as acknowledged by her officers, amounted to five
 men killed and nine wounded, including her commander, who,
 poor fellow, had both his hands carried away by a grape-shot.
    It took some hours ere the tender , with the help of the
 prize’s anchors and cables (her own having parted in a gale four
 days before), was again got afloat ; and, before that could be
 effected, the 12-pounder , then in a disabled state , was obliged to
 be thrown overboard. The Spanish inhabitants having collected
 along and opened a fire from the shore, and the prize having
 grounded too fast to be got off, Lieutenant Fitton set the Santa-
 Maria on fire ; but not until he had taken out of her what was
 most wanted for his own vessel, and had landed as well the
 living of her crew, for whom, being without a ’tween-decks, he
 had no room, as, from a respect to the scruples even of an
'enemy , the five that were dead. Having thus destroyed a
 Spanish garda -costa of very superior force, the Abergavenny ’s
 tender sailed back to Jamaica , and on the fourth day reached
 Black -River with scarcely a gallon of water on board.
    On the 26th of January , at 8 a . m., in latitude 45° north,
 longitude 12° west, the British 12- pounder 36 -gun frigate
 Oiseau, Captain Samuel Hood Linzee, fell in with and chased
 the French 36-gun frigate Dedaigneuse , bound from Cayenne to
 Rochefort with despatches . The Oiseau continued the pursuit
 alone until noon on the 27th ; when, Cape Finisterre in sight,
 the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigates Sirius and Amethyst,
 Captains Richard King and John Cooke, joined in the chase.
 But so well did the Dedaigneuse maintain her advantage , that
 it was not until 2 a . m. on the 28th , that the Sirius and Oiseau
 got near enough to receive a fire from her stern-chasers.
    After a running fight of 45 minutes , and a loss of “ several ”
 men killed and 17 wounded, among the latter her captain (not
 named in the official letter ) and fifth lieutenant , the French
 frigate , when about two miles from the shore near Cape Belem,
 hauled down her colours. The only British ship struck by the
 shot of the Dedaigneuse was the Sirius ; and she did not have a
 man hurt , but had her rigging and sails a trifle damaged , and
 her main yard and bowsprit slightly wounded. The Dedaign¬
 euse, a fine little frigate of 897 tons, was afterwards added to
 the British navy under the same name as a 12-pounder 36.
    On the 29th of January , at noon, the British 24-gun ship
 Bordelais, Captain Thomas Manby , while cruising to windward,
 of Barbadoes , discovered, in chase of her to windward, two men-1
 of- war brigs and a schooner. The Bordelais immediately short¬
 ened sail to comply with their wishes ; and, at sunset, the French
 national brigs , Curieux , of 18 long 8-pounders and 168 men,
 Captain Ceorges Radelet , and Mutine , of 16 long 6-pounderS
 and 156 men, and the schooner Esperance , of six 4-pounders
 and 52 men, got within gun-shot. At 6 p. m., having wore
