 1801.               PHCEBE AND     AFRICAINE.                   139

     After several attempts to wear In pursuit , the Penguin found
  it impracticable ; and the corvette and her two consorts were
  presently out of sight . Although the action had lasted so long,,
  the very high firing, of the corvette , some of whose missiles were
  iron bars from eight inches to a foot long, occasioned the Pen¬
  guin ’s principal damages to be in her rigging and sails ; and,
* from the same cause, the brig’s loss amounted to only one man
  killed and a few wounded. Having in the course of the night
  repaired her rigging and got up another topmast , the Penguin,
  at daylight on the 19th, again saw her three opponents , and
  chased them into the island of Teneriffe.
      For the sake of Captain Mansel , and the officers and crew of
  the Penguin , we regret not to have succeeded in discovering
  the name and other particulars of the ship, which they had so
  gallantly fought and so fairly beaten . If the vessel was a
  national corvette, she probably was one of those which Buona¬
  parte had sent to Cayenne or the Seychelles with banished per¬
  sons ; but , supposing the ship to have been a privateer , her
  evident size and force, and the knowledge that some of the
  French privateers , cruising at this particular period, were a
  match for a British 28-gun frigate , will prevent that from
  operating as the slightest disparagement , to the Penguin ’s
  action.
      On the 19th of February , at 4 p. m., the British 18-pounder
  36-gun frigate Phcebe, Captain Robert Barlow, being about two
  leagues to the eastward of Gibraltar , beating up for that port
  with a light breeze at west, discovered on the African shore,
  nearly abreast of the fortress of Ceuta, a strange ship under a
   press of sail, steering directly up the Mediterranean . The
  Phoebe, having her head to the northward , immediately tacked
  and stood for the stranger ; who, however, made no alteration in
  her course. At 7 h. 30 m. p. m. the Phcebe, by her superiority
  °f sailing, closed the stranger upon the larboard quarter ; and
  the latter , finding an action inevitable, shortened sail. Having'
  done the same, and being unable from the darkness to discern
  her colours, the Phcebe fired a shot over the strange ship, to
  ttjduce her to bring to. Almost immediately afterwards the
  Prench 40-gun frigate Africaine, Commodore Saulnier , with 400
  troops, six brass field-pieces, several thousand stands of arms,
  and a great quantity of ammunition (but not “ implements of
  agriculture, ” as erroneously stated in the official letter ), which
  she had embarked at Rochefort (and, having sailed with and
  smce parted from the 36-gun frigate Regeneree , similarly
  freighted , was conveying to Egypt ), altered her course to port;
  a£d, as soon as she could bring her broadside to bear , dis-
  charged it at the Phoebe, but with little or no effect.
      Having altered her course so as to keep parallel with her
               an^      quite near to her, the Phoebe poured in a
  we -directed , and, as it proved, most destructive broadside.
