1801.                                   .
                                   -MARIA
                 'S TENDER AND SANTA
        ABERGAVENNY                                            135

beam , on which the gun rested, was found to be badly sprung.
This was irreparable . The vessel’s rigging was decayed , and
he had no cordage ; her sails were split and torn , and he had
neither canvass, nor even sail-twine. Being, however, a man of
resources, Lieutenant Fitton reduced and altered the shape of the
sails, the seamen using for twine what they unravelled from the
remnant pieces. He then rigged the tender as a lugger, and re¬
embarked his men, gun, and the few stores he had left.
   In this ineffective state , the tender bore up for Carthagena ;
her commander intending to coast down the Main to Porto-
Bello , in the hope of being able to capture or cut out some
vessel that might answer to carry his crew and himself to
Jamaica . On the 23d of January , early in the morning, as the
tender was hauling round Cape Rosario, a schooner was dis¬
covered, to which she immediately gave chase. The schooner,,
which was the Spanish garda -costa Santa-Maria , of six (pierced
for 10) long 6-pounders, 10 swivels, and 60 men, commanded by
Don Josef Corei, a few hours only from Carthagena , bore down
to reconnoitre the lugger . The latter having her gun below, and
as many of her men hid from view as the want of a barricade
would permit, the garda -costa readily approached within gun¬
shot . Although he could have no wish to contend with so
powerful an adversary, Lieutenant Fitton could not resist the
opportunity of showing how well his men could handle their
12-pounder . It was soon raised up, and was discharged re¬
peatedly , in quick succession, with evident effect.
    After about 30 minutes’ mutual firing with cannon and
musketry , the Santa-Maria sheered off, and directed her course
for the isle of Varus , evidently with an intent to run on shore.
Her persevering though one gun opponent stuck close to her,
plying her well with shot, great and small ; but the tender was
Enable, as her commander wished, to grapple the schooner,
because the latter kept the weathergage . At length the Santa-
hlaria grounded ; and Lieutenant Fitton , aware that , if the
schooner landed her men in the bushes , no attempt of his people
Would avail, eased off the lugger ’s sheets, and ran her also on
shore, about 10 yards from the Santa -Maria . The musketry of
the latter as she heeled over greatly annoying the tender’s men,
who had no barricades to shelter them, Lieutenant Fitton leaped
overboard ; and , with his sword in his mouth , followed by the
greater part of his crew similarly armed , swam to, boarded , and
after a stout resistance carried, the Spanish schooner.
   In this splendid little affair, the tender lost two seamen killed
und five wounded ; and of her small crew, numbering originally
 hut 45, many were too sick to attend their quarters . Four or
hve, also, who were in the sick list, heedless alike of the doctor’s
mj unctions and their own feeble state , had , when the boarding
call was made, sprung over the side with their comrades ; and
one or two of them nearly jperished, in consequence of their
