*1801.   BORDELAIS WITH CURIEUX AND CONSORTS.                  137

round, the Bordelais was enabled to bring the Curieux to action,
at about 10 yards ’ distance . Scarcely had the Bordelais opened
her heavy metal upon the Curieux, than the latter ’s two consorts
abandoned her. When it is known that the Bordelais was a
ship of 625 tons, mounting twenty-two 32-pounder carronades
and 2 long nines, with a complement of 195 men, the surprise
will be great that the Curieux alone should, for 30 minutes , sus¬
tain an action with her ; and that , too, at a distance so favour¬
able to a carronade -battery.
     On being taken possession of after having hailed that she had
struck , the Curieux ’s deck was found, as might indeed be ex¬
pected , strewed from end to end with the dying and the dead.
The captain had had both his legs shot off, and survived but a
few hours ; and the brig ’s killed and wounded, in the whole,
amounted to about 50. The Bordelais , on the other hand,
escaped with only one man killed , and seven wounded ; inclu¬
ding among the latter Lieutenant Robert Barrie, who did not
quit his quarters , Master’s Mate James Jones , and Midshipman
John Lions.
     It was not in the killed and wounded only, that the French
brig afforded proofs of the obstinacy of her resistance : her hull
had been so pierced with shot, that , in about half an hour after
 she was taken possession of, the Curieux was found to be
 sinking . Already had 120 prisoners been received from her;
 and every exertion was now made to save the wounded . So
 zealous were Lieutenant Archibald Montgomery and his 20 men
 in performing this service, that , at 8 p. m. the vessel foundered
 under them , close alongside of the Bordelais . The floating
 wreck buoyed up all those brave men except two midshipmen,
 Messieurs Spence and Auckland , and five seamen ; who conse¬
 quently perished , with the whole, if not the greater part , of the
 brig ’s wounded.
     Nothing could exceed the gallantry of Captain Radelet , unless
 it was the pusillanimity of his two brother -officers, Captains
 Raybaun and Haymond ; and whose vessels, on account of the
 three hours ’ delay which had taken place in endeavouring to
  save the crew of the prize, in shifting the prisoners, and in re¬
 pairing the Bordelais’ rigging and sails, effected their escape.
  These two French brigs and schooner had been fitted out by
  Victor Hugues at Cayenne , principally to intercept the outward-
  bound West India fleet. It is but fair to mention, that a French
  tc Etat general de la Marine, ” of 1803, does not contain the
  Rames of the two gentlemen represented to have been the com¬
  manders of the Mutine and Esperance . The probability
  therefore is, that they were not officers belonging to the French,
    avy.
      On the 18th of February , at about 2 p. m., latitude 28° 24'
  south, and longitude 18° 17' west, the British 18-gun brig-sloop
   Fenguin (sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two long-sixes),
