 138         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 J 80K

  Captain Robert Mansel, standing to the south-east with a fresh
  breeze at north , discovered in the west-north -west three warlike-
 looking ships apparently in chase of her. At 2 h. 45 ra., finding
 the private signal not answered, the brig, having previously
 shortened sail, cleared for action, to be ready to receive the
 leading ship ; which had edged away towards her , and, showing
  12 ports of a side, appeared to be a corvette of at least 20 guns,
 while her two consorts, apparently armed merchantmen , and
 either her convoy or prizes, kept their wind.
    At 3 h. 45 m. the corvette, as if not liking the Penguin ’s
 appearance , tacked and rejoined her consorts ; whereupon the
 Penguin tacked also, and stood after them. At 5 h. 10 m. p. m.
 the Penguin arrived nearly within gun-shot of the sternmost ship,
 when the corvette , firing a shot, hoisted French colours, as did
 the others . All three ships then formed in line, and bore down
 for the brig ’s larboard quarter . The Penguin again tacked to
 close, and presently afterwards received and returned the fire of
 the three ships as they passed in succession. Being desirous to
 obtain the weathergage , the Penguin stood on ; and at 6 h. 15 m.
 p . m., having got into the wake of the French ships , the brig a
  third time tacked.
     Immediately on this the corvette hauled to windward , and
 her two friends or prizes astern bore away and steered different
 courses : one of these ships , however, soon afterwards hauled up
 again as close as she could lie. In a few minutes the Penguin
 arrived nearly abreast and to leeward of this ship ; when the
 latter , relying upon her weight and size, steered for the British
 brig ’s beam, with the intention of running her down. Two or
 three heavy and well-directed broadsides from the Penguin,
 poured in just as the ship approached near, caused the latter
 to let fly her top-gallant sheets, and haul down the French
 flag.
    Scorning to stay to take possession of so unworthy an antago¬
nist , when a ship more than equal to herself remained to be
subdued , the Penguin stood on close hauled , and at about 7 h.
25 m. observed the corvette upon her larboard and weather
quarter . In five minutes afterwards , j ust as the brig was about
to recommence the engagement , her fore topmast came down;
and , to add to the misfortune, it fell over on the larboard side,
and temporarily disabled the fore yard . Seeing the unmanage¬
able state of her opponent , the French corvette , at 7 h. 45 in.,
bore close down ; and a spirited action ensued, during which,
until towards the latter part when the Penguin managed to get
her starboard broadside to bear, the brig ’s fore topgallant sail
and rigging frequently caught fire from the explosion of her
guns . Notwithstanding this , the Penguin maintained the con¬
test with so much vigour and effect, that , at 8 h. 30 m., the
French ship sheered off’ and hauled to the wind on the larboard
tack.
