1801.               phcebe and afeicaine.                     141’

tage which would have been in the proportion of nearly three to
one, could the whole of the Africaine’s crew and supernume¬
raries , in the event of boarding for instance , have been in a
situation to act. But , as a combat to be decided by great guns
only, an allowance is requisite, and a considerable one too, for
that which a mere confrontation of figures can never explain, the
lumbered state of the French ship ’s decks ; an inconvenience
 which the troops themselves, by their valour, their mistaken
 valour , contributed to increase. Although their musketry could
 be of little or no avail in the dark , yet, upon the same erroneous
 principle that so augmented the loss among the soldiers on board
 one of the British ships at Copenhagen , they considered it as a
 point of honour to remain on deck and be mowed down by
 scores.
      Circumstanced as he was, Commodore Saulnier acted as*wisely
 in endeavouring to avoid a contest , as, when it actually began,
 did the officers, ship’s company, soldiers, and all that were on
 board the Africaine, heroically , in defending their ship until she
 was reduced to a sinking state , and they to half their original
 number ; all by the heavy, the searching, the irresistible broad¬
  sides of the Phcebe.
      With ships so damaged in masts and rigging , and with so
 many prisoners on board, Captain Barlow had still a most
  anxious duty to perform. To increase the difficulties of his
  situation , the westerly breeze freshened. For four days the
  Phcebe and her prize persevered in working to windward ; but
  on the fifth day, having made very slow progress and feeling for
  the sufferings of the wounded, Captain Barlow bore up for
  Minorca . On arriving off the south end of Majorca , the two
   frigates got becalmed ; and it was not until a fortnight after the
   action, that the Phcebe and Africaine dropped their anchors in
   the harbour of Port -Mahon.
       For his gallantry and good conduct in capturing the Africaine,
   Captain Barlow was most deservedly rewarded with the honour
   of knighthood ; and the Phcebe’s first lieutenant , already named,
   was as justly promoted to the rank of commander . Her second
    and third lieutenants were Frederick Bedford and Edmund
    Heywood, and her lieutenant of marines, Thomas Weaver ; of
    all whom, as well as of his officers and crew generally , Captain
    Harlow in his official letter speaks in the highest terms.
       The Africaine, a fine new frigate of 1059 tons, was of course
    pnrchased for the use of the British navy ; and, having the
    ports for the requisite ' umber of guns on the main deck , became
    classed as a 38-gun frigate. Probably because there was an
    Africa already in the British service, the name of the Africaine
    ^as changed to Amelia ; under which name the Phcebe ’s prize
    iQ ng continued to be an active cruiser.

        On the 22d of March , while the British 12-pounder 32-gun
    Irigates Andromache , Captain Israel Pellew , and Cleopatra,
