1801.            CAPTURE OF THE SANS- PAREIL.                   133

 mate (Robert Darling ), 10 seamen, one corporal and four
 privates of marines , and Lieutenant Christie of the African
 corps wounded ; total , 11 killed and 18 wounded.
    On the 6th of January the British 28-gun frigate Mercury,
 Captain Thomas Rogers , cruising in the gulf of Lyons, fell in
 with a convoy of about 20 sail of vessels, bound from Cette to
 Marseilles , under the escort of two or three French gun -boats.
 The weather being nearly calm, Captain Rogers despatched his
boats (but how commanded does not appear in the gazette-
letter ) to attack the convoy ; 15 of which, including two ships
 and four brigs, and all deeply laden with brandy , sugar , corn,
wine, oil, and other merchandise , were brought off with very
little resistance and no loss, the gun-boats having all fled upon
 the Mercury ’s approach.
    On the 20th , the island of Sardinia bearing east-south -east
 distant 40 leagues, and the wind blowing fresh, the Mercury
fell in with, and after a nine hours ’ chase captured , without loss
or resistance , the French 20-gun ship-corvette Sans-Pareille , of
 18 brass 8-pounders and two brass 36-pounder carronades , and
(the London Gazette says, “ fifteen,” but the French captain ’s
deposition in the prize-court) 155 men, commanded by Lieutenant
Gabriel Renaud , from Toulon the day preceding , bound to
Alexandria , with a full cargo of shot, arms , medicines, and sup¬
plies of every kind, for the French army. Although described
as quite a new vessel, and well-found with stores of every
description , the prize does not appear to have been added to
the British navy.
    On the 15th of January , while the 20-gun ship Daphne,
Captain Richard Matson , 18-gun ship-sloops Cyane and Hornet,
Captains Henry Matson and James Nash , and schooner-tender
Carland , were at an anchor in the harbour of the Saintes , a
convoy of French coasters , in charge of an armed schooner, was
observed standing across towards Vieux -Fort , island of Guade¬
loupe. At midnight the Garland schooner, accompanied by
two boats from each of the three ships, under the command of
Lieutenants Kenneth Mackenzie and Francis Peachey , was
despatched to attempt the capture or destruction of the convoy.
The whole of the vessels, however, except one, succeeded in
getting under the guns of Basse-terre . That one, having an¬
chored near Vieux-Fort , was boarded and brought off under a
heavy but apparently harmless cannonade.
   On the 17th in the afternoon, the French schooner Eclair,
°f four long 4-pounders , twenty Impounder brass swivels, and
45 men, the escort of the convoy in question , was observed to
put into Trois-Rivieres, and anchor under the protection of one
Principal battery and two smaller flanking ones. Lieutenants
Mackenzie and Peachey volunteered to attempt cutting her out.
For this purpose the first-named officer, with 25 seamen and
marines, went on board the Garland ; and at 5 a . m. on the
