144        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                            i8oi:

the British navy ; in which, under her French name, she classed
as a 12-pounder 36.
    The British 14-gun brig-sloop Speedy, Captain Lord Cochrane,
during one of her cruises in the Mediterranean , had so annoyed
the Spaniards by cutting up their coasting trade , that the govern¬
ment despatched armed vessels in pursuit of her from several
ports . Early in April one of the seekers of the British brig, the
32-gun xebec Gamo, by means of closed or hanging ports, de¬
 coyed the Speedy within hail, and then , drawing them up, dis¬
 covered her heavy battery . Against a vessel that appeared to
mount 36 guns, and to be numerously manned, the Speedy,
 whose 14 guns were only 4-pounders , resolved not to risk an
 engagement until she had tried the effect of a ruse. To escape
 was out of the question , as the xebec sailed two feet to the
 Speedy ’s one. The Speedy therefore passed for a Danish brig
 of war, and , in addition to the colours at her gaff-end, exhibited
 on the gangway a man dressed in a Danish officer’s uniform ;
 who also, in the short interchange of hailing that ensued, con¬
 versed in Danish , or, which was the same thing , in what passed
 for Danish.
    Not quite satisfied as to the national character of the Speedy,
 the Gamo sent her boat with an officer. The latter , before he
 well got alongside , was informed, kindly informed, that the
 brig had lately quitted one of the Barbary ports ; and he was
at the same time reminded , of what he well knew, that a visit
 would undoubtedly subject the Spanish ship of war to a long
 quarantine . This was enough ; and , after a few mutual saluta¬
 tions and wavings of the hand , the two vessels parted company;
 one glad at having escaped the plague , the other equally glad,
 one might suppose, at having escaped capture . The truth is,
 however, that the Speedy’s officers and crew were all impatience
 to combat their superior foe ; and Lord Cochrane promised
 them , if ever he met her again , as he had no doubt he should , to
 give full scope to their wishes.
    On the 6th of May , at daylight , being close off Barcelona,
 the Speedy descried a sail standing towards "her . Chase was
 given ; but , owing to light winds, it was nearly 9 A. m. before
 the two vessels got within mutual gun-shot. The Speedy soon
 discovered that the armed xebec approaching her was her old
 friend the Gamo. Being then close under the latter ’s lee, the
 former tacked and commenced the action . The Speedy’s fir®
 was promptly returned by her opponent, who, in a little while>
 attempted to board ; but , the instant she heard the command
 given, the brig sheered off. The attempt was again made, and
 again frustrated . At length , after a 45 minutes’ cannonade , d*
 which the Speedy, with all her manoeuvring, could not evade t«e
 heavy broadsides of the Gamo, and had sustained , in c0ljT
 sequence , a loss of three seamen killed and five wounded , Lor
 Cochrane determined to board . With this intent the Speedy
