  1801.                        SPEEDY AND GAMO.                              145
  ran close alongside the Gamo ; and the crew of the British
  vessel, headed by their gallant commander, made a simultaneous
  rush from every part of her upon the decks of the Spaniard.
  For about 10 minutes the contest was desperate , especially in
 the waist ; but the impetuosity of the assault was irresistible:
 the Spanish colours were struck , and the Gamo became the
 prize of the Speedy.
    The Speedy ’s gun-force has already been stated at 14 long
 4-pounders . Her number of men and boys at the commence¬
 ment of the action was 54. Of these the brig lost, in the
 boarding -attack , only one seaman killed , her first lieutenant,
 Richard William Parker (severely, both by musketry and the
 sword ), her boatswain and one seaman wounded ; making , with
 her loss by the cannonade , three killed and eight wounded.
 The Gamo mounted 22 long Spanish 12- pounders on the main
 deck , with eight long eights and two “ heavy carronades, ” pro¬
 bably 24-pounders , on the quarterdeck and forecastle. Her crew
 amounted to 274 officers, seamen, boys, and supernumeraries,
 and 45 marines, total 319 ; of which number she had her com¬
mander , Don Francisco de Torris, the boatswain , and 13 men
killed , and 41 men wounded.
    The Gamo ’s was a force which was enough to alarm, and , in
abler hands , might easily have subdued such a vessel as the
Speedy . A crew of 280 or 300 was the lowest number of men
that a ship, of the evident force and size of the Gamo, could be
supposed to have on board ; and yet Lord Cochrane , at the
head of about 40 men, and , deducting the boys, the helmsman
(who was Mr. James Guthrie , the surgeon), the eight killed and
Wounded, and one or two others , leaped into the midst of them.
He and his 40 brave followers, among whom were Lieutenant
Farker , midshipman the Honourable Archibald Cochrane , and
the boatswain , found 319, or, allowing for some previous loss
and for six or eight boys, 300 armed men to struggle with. But
the British broadsword fell too heavily to be resisted ; and the
Spaniards were compelled to yield to the chivalric valour of their
opponents .* Accustomed as is the British navy to execute
deeds of daring , Lord Cochrane’s achievement has hitherto found
in these pages but three compeers, the Surprise and Hermione,
the Dart and Desiree , and the Viper and Cerbere ; to which let

  * During      the action , and after Lord Cochrane had boarded the Gamo ,
                                                                            he
Practised another ruse. The crew of the Speedy being nearly
                                                                  overpowered
 ~y the great superiority, in point of numbers, of her
                                                       adversary, were once on
the point of giving way, Lord Cochrane, with the greatest coolness,
                                                                         hailed
the Speedy, ordering fifty more men to be sent on board, although,
                                                                         at the
time, his vessel certainly did not contain more than three. The
                                                                      expected
remforcement to their adversaries, cooled the little courage remaining in the
tamo ’s crew, and having already experienced the bold daring of the first
toen, they were by no means anxious to cope with fifty more, and           fifty
                                                                  consequently
surrendered_ Ed.
   VOL. III .                           L
