1801.           CUTTING OUT THE CHEVRETTE.                     149'

Ville-de-Paris , purposely sent by the admiral to take the com¬
mand , proceeded on the enterprise ; but , the boats not pulling
alike , and the leading ones being too zealous to slacken their
efforts, the detachment separated . In consequence of this acci¬
dent some of the boats returned ; while the remainder, having
reached the entrance of Camaret bay , where they expected to
be joined by their companions , lay upon their oars until day¬
break on the 21st . The service being one that required dark¬
ness for its success, the boats now pulled back to their ships ;
but the mischief was done ; they had been discovered from the
Chevrette and the shore, and so much of the plan as contem¬
plated a surprise was defeated.
    As a proof of this, on the same morning , the Chevrette got
under way, and, after running about a mile and a half further
up the bay , moored herself close under some heavy batteries,
one in particular upon a point of land off her larboard and inner
bow. The corvette then took on board a body of soldiers, suffi¬
cient to augment her number of men to 339, had the arms and
ammunition brought upon deck , and loaded her guns almost up
 to their muzzles with grape-shot . The batteries , also, prepared
themselves ; temporary redoubts were thrown up upon the adja¬
cent points, and a gun-vessel, armed with two long 36-pounders,
 was moored as a guard -boat at the entrance of the bay . Having
thus profited by the discovery of the morning, the Chevrette
 displayed , in defiance a large French ensign above an English
 one. This was plainly seen by the three frigates, and served
 but to inspire their crews with increased ardour to engage , and
 with redoubled determination to reverse the position of the
 flags.
     At about 9 h . 30 m. p. m. the boats of the three frigates,
joined by the barge and pinnace of the Robust 74, numbering
      in the whole, and containing between them about 280 officers
  ahd men, still under the command of Lieutenant Losack, pro¬
  ceeded a second time, to attempt the daring service of cutting
  °ut the Chevrette . Shortly afterwards Lieutenant Losack , with
  his own and five other boats , proceeded in chase of a boat from
  fhe shore, supposed to be a look-out boat belonging to the Chev-
  fctte , and therefore proper to be secured. The remainder of the
  boats, as they had been ordered, lay upon their oars or pulled
  gently , awaiting their commanding officer’s return . Lieutenant
  -bosack not returning so soon as expected , the next officer in
  command, Lieutenant Keith Maxwell, of the Beaulieu , consi¬
  dering that the boats had at least six miles to pull , and that the
  b!ght was already far advanced,resolved , notwithstanding that the
  iorce was reduced to more than a third , or to less than 180 men,
   0 Proceed without him . He did so ; and gave orders that,
  while one party was engaged in disarming the enemy ’s crew on
    eck, the smartest topmen of the Beaulieu should fight their way
  ^olt , and cut loose the sails with their sabres ; and that others,
   who were named, should cut the cable : and he appointed one of
