150         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1801.

the ablest seamen in the boats , Henry Wallis , quartermaster of
the Beaulieu , to take charge of the corvette’s helm . Many
other suitable arrangements were made ; and the nine boats , in
high glee, hastened to the attack.
   At about 1 a . m. on the 22d the boats came in sight of the
Chevrette ; who, after hailing , opened a heavy fire of musketry
and grape upon the assailants . This was presently seconded
by a fire of musketry from the shore. In the face of all this,
however, the British pulled undauntedly towards the ship . The
Beaulieu ’s boats under the command of Lieutenant Maxwell,
assisted by Lieutenant James Pasley , and Lieutenant of marines
James Sinclair , boarded the vessel on the starboard bow and
quarter ; the Uranie ’s, under Lieutenant Martin Neville, one of
the Robust ’s, under midshipman Robert Warren , and one of the
Doris ’s, under Lieutenant Walter Burke , on the larboard bow.
The attempt to board was most obstinately resisted by the
Frenchmen , armed with fire-arms, sabres, tomahawks , and pikes;
and who, in their turn , boarded the boats . Notwithstanding this
formidable opposition, and that , in their attempts to overcome it,
the British had lost all their fire-arms, the latter , with their
swords only, effected the boarding . Those who had been
ordered to go aloft, fought their way to their respective stations ;
and , although some were killed , and others desperately wounded,
the remainder gained the corvette ’s yards . Here the seamen
found the footropes strapped up ; but , surmounting every ob¬
stacle , the intrepid fellows quickly performed the service upon
■which they had been ordered . Thus in less than three minutes
after the ship had been boarded , and in the midst of a conflict
against numbers more than trebly superior, down came the
Chevrette ’s three topsails and courses. The cable, in the mean
time , having been cut outside , and a light breeze having sprung
up from the land , the ship began drifting out of the bay.
   No sooner did the Frenchmen see the sails fall, and their ship
under way, than some of them leaped overboard ; while others
dropped their arms , and sprang down the hatchways . The
British thereupon got possession of the quarterdeck and fore¬
castle ; which, although but five minutes had elapsed since the
assault had commenced , were nearly covered with dead bodies.
Those of the corvette ’s crew, that had fled below, still maintained
a smart, fire of musketry from the main deck and up the hatch¬
ways , but were at length overpowered and compelled to submit.
In her way out, during a short interval of calm, the Chevrette
became exposed to a heavy fire of round and grape from the
batteries ; but a light breeze from the north -east soon drove the
ship out of gun-shot . It was at about this time that the six
boats under Lieutenant Losack joined company ; and Lieutenan
Maxwell , of course , was superseded in the command.
   The British had one lieutenant of marines (James Sinclair );
one midshipman (Robert Warren ), seven seamen , and two
marines killed , two lieutenants (Martin Neville and Walter.
