1801.                                       .
        BOATS OF MERCURY AND CORSO AT TREM1TI                  147

   The loss of the British , in the attack upon this Spanish
convoy, consisted of one midshipman (Thomas Taylor ), killed by
a musket -shot in one of the boats , and two lieutenants (Thomas
Foulerton and Thomas Brown Thompson ), seven seamen, and
one marine wounded ; all belonging to the Kangaroo , although,
as Captain Pulling handsomely acknowledges , the Speedy, from
situation and distance , was equally exposed to the enemy’s fire.
At the demolition of the tower of Almanara , however, the Speedy
did not wholly escape, Lord Cochrane himself having received
a bruise, and been a little singed ; as were also two of his
men.
   The British 28-gun frigate Mercury , Captain Thomas Rogers,
having on the 25th of May, while cruising in the Adriatic , cap¬
tured a small vessel just out of Ancona , received intelligence that
the late British bomb-vessel Bull -dog, which, about three
months before, under the command of Captain Barrington
Dacres , had entered the port unapprized of its being in possession
of the French , was lying in the mole, laden with supplies for the
French army in Egypt , and ready for sea. Captain Rogers im¬
mediately made sail for Ancona, with the determination of at¬
tempting to cut out the Bull-dog ; and, soon after dark the same
evening, the Mercury anchored off’ the mole. At 10 h. 30 m.
p. m. the boats of the latter , under the orders of Lieutenant
William Mather , quitted the frigate ; and, at about midnight,
surprised and carried the Bull-dog, without even having been
hailed by the sentinels on the mole, to which, while the ship was
riding with three cables ahead , her stern had been secured by the
two ends of a bower cable. The seamen presently cut all the
cables, and the boats began to tow away their prize ; but the
alarm had now spread , and the British became exposed to a
heavy fire of cannon and musketry from the mole.
   As there was a favourable light breeze, and the sails were set,
the Bull-dog, in rather less than an hour, got without the reach
of the batteries . Unfortunately , however, the wind died away
to a perfect calm, and the current carried the prize along the
coast close to the shore ; from which a crowd of boats, some of
them gun -boats, came out to attack her. Having the hatch¬
ways to guard , to prevent the French crew from rising , and
being without a sufficient force to resist the gun-boats , which
were fast approaching , and had already several times raked the
ship, Lieutenant Mather reluctantly abandoned his prize ; but
n°t until he had made three ineffectual attempts to set her on
fire.
   The loss of the British on this occasion amounted to one
seaman and one marine killed , and four seamen wounded. That
of the French on board the Bull -dog is stated to have been 20
    killed , wounded , and drowned. As soon as she descried the
prize standing out of the mole, the Mercury weighed and steered
towards her ; but the calm so retarded the progress of the
                              l 2
