152         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                        1801.

plunging overboard , sometimes even in a gale of wind, at the
utmost hazard of his own.*
   The Chevrette , when attacked , was bound with a cargo of
stores to Senegal , and thence to the island of Guadeloupe : she
was a similar ship to the Bonne-Citoyenne ; but , owing we
believe, to the probable successful termination of the pending
negotiation between the two countries , more than to any thing
else, the Chevrette was not purchased for the use of the British
navy. Lieutenant Losack , on account of some misunderstanding:
respecting the actual commanding officer at the cutting out of
the corvette , was promoted to the rank of commander . On the
9th of August , however, upon some facts coming to his know
ledge , Admiral Cornwallis ordered a court of inquiry to be held
on board the Mars . The result was, that Lieutenant Keith
Maxwell received from the admiralty immediate promotion to a
commander ’s rank , and from the public at large that share of
credit which, had it not been for the official investigation of his
claims, he might never have obtained.
   On the 27th of July , at 1 a . m., in latitude 43° 34' north , and
longitude 11° 42' west, the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
Immortalite , Captain Henry Hotham , fell in with an enemy’s
cruiser of a very extraordinary appearance , a ship with four
masts ; which the former immediately chased , and at 7h . 30m.
a . m., the 38 - gun frigate Arethusa , Captain       Thomas    Wolley , in
sight , captured . The prize proved to be the Invention , French
privateer , nine days from Bordeaux , on her first cruise, having
only been launched since the beginning of the month.
   The Invention had been designed by her commander , M.
Thibaut , and was peculiar in more respects than her masts , her
length being 147 feet, with only 27 feet in breadth of beam.
Her force consisted of 24 long 6-pounders on a single deck , and
two 12-pounder carronades , either on her poop or topgallant fore¬
castle , with a crew of 210 men and boys. Her four masts were
at nearly equal distances apart , the first and third of the same
height , the second stouter and higher , and the fourth much
smaller . She had four topgallant yards rigged aloft, and was
accounted a good sea-boat and sailer.
   On the 10th of August , while the British 12-pounder 32-gun
frigate. Unicorn , Captain Charles Wemyss , and 16-gun brig-
sloop Atalante , Captain Anselm John Griffiths, were cruising in
Quiberon bay , the six-oared cutter of the latter , with eight men
commanded by Mr. Francis Smith, midshipman , in the face of
a brisk discharge of grape and canister from the French national
lugger Eveille , mounting two long 4-pounders, and four large
swivels, and of a cross-fire from two small batteries on the shore,
pulled up towards , boarded , and carried the vessel, the French
crew deserting her at the moment and escaping to the shore?

                 * Naval Chronicle, vol. vii., pp. 216, 217 .
