1801.                 CUTTING OUT THE CHEVRETTE.
                                                                                     151

Burke , the latter mortally ), one master ’s mate (William Phil¬
                                                                                     and
lips), three midshipmen (Edward Crofton , Edward Byrn ,
                                                                                     one
Robert Finnis ), 42 seamen , and nine marines wounded , and
                                             barge    , which     was   sunk   by    the
marine drowned in the Beaulieu ’s
enemy ’s shot     ;  total , 11  killed  , 57  wounded     ,   and    one   drowned
or missing . The loss sustained by the Chevrette was far
                                                                              heavier.
The corvette had her captain          , two  lieutenants     , three   midshipmen,
                                                                                     one
one lieutenant of troops , and 85 seamen and troops killed ,
lieutenant , four midshipmen , and 57 seamen and troops wounded;
total , 92 killed and 62 wounded.
     It is such daring feats as these that ennoble the character of
                                                                                         as
the British navy ; and long will be remembered , long held up
                                 , the   cutting    out   of   the   Chevrette     .     A
an example for imitation
           the  many     instances      which    this   enterprise      afforded     ,   of
few of
                                                                                         of
individual heroism, have already been recorded in the pages
a naval periodical      work   .   We     have   selected    the   following     :
                                                                                         of
     Lieutenant Sinclair , of the marines , was killed in the act
                                                   of   the    Doris,    who     in    his
defending Mr . Crofton , midshipman
efforts to get on board the corvette was wounded in two places.                         his
 Mr . John Brown , boatswain of the Beaulieu , after forcing
way into the Chevrette        ’s quarter   -gallery   , found    the   door   planked
                                                                                          it
 up, and so securely barricadoed , that all his efforts to force
 were ineffectual . Through the crevices                in the    planks   he     disco¬
 vered a number of men sitting on the cabin deck, armed with
 pikes and pistols ; and with the fire of the latter was frequently
 annoyed while attempting to burst in . He next tried the quarter,
 and after an obstinate resistance gained the taffrail . The officer
                                                                                     up a
 who commanded the party was at this time fighting his way
                                                     ,  while    looking     round        to
 little farther forward . For an instant
 see where he should make          his   push,   Brown     stood    exposed     a  mark
 to the enemy ’s fire ; when, waving his cutlass , he cried, “ Maka
                                                                                        his
 a lane there, ” he gallantly dashed among them, and fought
 Way forward till he         reached     his  proper     station     the  forecastle;
                                                                                        the
 which the men, animated by his example , soon cleared of
                                                   during      the  rest  of  the    con¬
 onemy . Here Mr. Brown remained
                                                                                          to
 test , not only repulsing the French in their frequent attempts
  retake   his post,   but   attending     to   the    orders    from   the    quarter¬
 deck , and assisting in casting the ship and the           making sail, with as
  *nuch coolness as if he had been on board                      Beaulieu.
      Henry Wallis , who, as already stated , had been appointed to
  fake charge of the corvette ’s helm, fought his way to the wheel;
  ^■nd, although severely wounded in the contest and the               bleeding , this
  brave seaman steadily remained at his post, steering
                                                                            Chevrette
  Until beyond the reach of the           batteries  .   Wallis      had  been     seven
          in  the   Beaulieu   , and     was   ever   among       the  foremost        in a
  years
  service of danger . “ If a man had fallen overboard                 he  was    always
  fortunately in the way, and either in the boat or the water:
                                                                                      men
  during the time he belonged to the ship nearly a dozen by
  ' Vere indebted to him for their lives, which he had saved
