1801.              SIBYLLE AND CHIFFONNE.                      143
frigate Sibylle, Captain Charles Adam, observing signals flying
on St .-Anne’s island , one of the Seychelles, hoisted French
colours ; and at 9 a . m., having rounded the island, discovered
in Mahe roads, close in-shore, a frigate with her foremast out,
accompanied by several small-craft. The Sibylle immediately
backed her main topsail, cleared for action, and got springs on
the anchors : she then filled, and set the foresail. At 10 a . m.
the French 36-gun frigate Chiffonne, Captain Pierre Guieysse,
fired a shot and hoisted her colours. At 10 h. 15 m. a . m.,
having passed through a winding and intricate channel formed
by various dangerous shoals, and discoverable only by the change
of colour in the water as seen by a man stationed at the mast¬
head, the Sibylle anchored within about 200 yards of the French
frigate ; not being able to get nearer, on account of a shoal that
lay on the Chiffonne’s larboard or outermost bow.
     At 10 h. 25 m. a . m., having dropped her best bower under
foot, so as to bring her best broadside to bear, and substituted
English for French colours, the Sibylle opened her fire, receiving
in return a fire from the Chiffonne, as well as from a battery
erected in a raking position on the neighbouring shore. The
cannonade continued with tolerable spirit until 10 h. 42 m. a .m.,
■when the Chiffonne struck her flag, cut her cable, and drifted
upon a reef. While an officer and party wrent to take possession,
the Sibylle veered away her cable, so that her broadside might
hear upon the battery , which still continued its fire. No sooner,
however, did a lieutenant and a few of the Sibylle’s men land
upon the beach, than the battery also struck its colours.
     At the surrender of the frigate , a great number of her crew
took to the boats and escaped on shore ; and the men at the
battery also escaped . The latter was found to consist of four of
 the frigate ’s forecastle guns, mounted on a plank platform , de¬
 fended by fascines, and provided with a furnace for heating shot,
 f he Sibylle’s force in guns and men has already appeared .* Of
 the latter , she had only two seamen killed , and one midshipman
 lightly wounded. The Chiffonne appears to have been armed
 fhe same as the generality of French 36-gun frigates, and had a
 implement of 296 men ; of whom the Sibylle’s fire killed 23,
 nnd wounded 30 . About 100, including those stationed in the
 battery, escaped : the remainder were made prisoners.
      Although the Chiffonne was certainly no match for the
 k'bylle, the dangerous circumstances , under which she had been
•^ Pproached and attacked , entitle the officers and crew of the
 British frigate to a considerable share of credit . The Chiffonne,
 U^ith 32 banished Frenchmen on board, had sailed from Nantes
 0n the 14th of April, 1800, and had since, agreeably to her
   refers, landed them upon the Seychelles. The prize was a fine
  ri gate of 945 tons , and was afterwards purchased for the use of


                        * See vol. ii., p. 325.
