148         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1801.

frigate , that the Bull-dog was towed back to her former station
at the mole long before the Mercury could get near her . The
Bull -dog afterwards succeeded in putting to sea, but was taken on
her passage to Egypt by the 24-gun ship Champion , Captain
 Lord William Stuart.
     On the 23d of June , in the morning , the British 18-gun brig-
sloop Corso, Captain William Ricketts , chased among the rocks
in the small islands of Tremiti, lying in the gulf of Venice, and
inhabited by a few renegadoes only, a pirate tartan , the Tigre, of
eight 6 and 12 pounders and a crew of 60 French and Italians.
 Upon the appearance of the Mercury soon afterwards , the pirate
landed the greater part of her crew ; who, with a 4-pounder and
musketry , posted themselves upon a hill to defend their vessel,
 which lay aground close to them with hawsers fast to the shore.
     Being resolved to make an effort to stop the further career of
 this band of robbers , Captain Rogers despatched upon that
 service the boats of the frigate and brig, under the orders of
 Lieutenant William Mather , assisted by Lieutenant Wilson of
 the marines . Notwithstanding that they were exposed to a
 smart fire of cannon and musketry , both from the vessel and the
 hill , the boats gallantly rowed in ; and while Lieutenant Mather
 with the seamen boarded the Tigre, Lieutenant Wilson with the
 marines landed to drive away the banditti from the hill : the
 Mercury and Corso, at the same time overawed the pirates by
 occasionally firing such of their guns as would bear. The
 marines succeeded in their object without the loss of a man, and
 took several prisoners ; and the seamen, with equal good fortune,
 hove the tartan off the rocks and brought her out, together with
 a quantity of plunder , consisting of bales of cotton and other
 goods , which the Tigre had taken from vessels of different nations.
      In the summer of this year , the three British frigates , Doris,
  Captain Charles Brisbane , Beaulieu, Captain Stephen Pointz,
  and Uranie , Captain George Henry Gage , by the orders of
  Admiral Cornwallis, who since the 21st of the preceding Febru¬
  ary had succeeded Earl St .-Vincent (appointed first lord of the
  admiralty ) as commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet, were sta¬
  tioned off the point of St.-Mathieu , to watch the motions of the
  French and Spanish fleets in Brest harbour . In the month of
  July , while the above frigate-squadron was lying at anchor about
  three miles to the south -south -east of St .-Mathieu ’s light¬
  house , and in full view of the combined fleet, the French 20-gun
  ship-corvette Chevrette was disceverred also at an anchor, under
  some batteries in Camaret bay ; a position in which the French
  considered their vessel almost as secure as if she was in the road
   of Brest . It will, nevertheless , not be thought surprising , that
  the British resolved to attempt cutting her out . Accordingly
  on the night of the 20th , the boats of the Beaulieu and Doris
   (the Uranie not then present ) manned entirely by volunteers, and
   placed under the orders of Lieutenant Woodley Losack, of the
