146                                        .
            LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS                 1801.

us now add, as the next in chronological order, the Speedy and
Gamo.
    With so many prisoners in his charge , Lord Cochrane had
still an arduous duty to perform, but his judgment and presence
of mind overcame every difficulty ; and , in the course of a few
days , the Speedy brig and her lofty prize were safe at anchor in
the harbour of Port -Mahon . For the gallantry he had so suc¬
cessfully displayed in capturing the Gamo, Lord Cochrane, as
soon as the account reached England , was promoted to post¬
rank ; and the Speedy’s only lieutenant , Richard William
Parker , was also, we believe, made a commander.
    On the 9th of June , in the morning, the British 18-gun brig-
sloop Kangaroo , Captain George Christopher Pulling , and 14-
gun brig-sloop Speedy , Captain Lord Cochrane , discovered a
Spanish convoy, lying at an anchor under the battery of Oropeso,
a small seaport of Old Castile . The armed vessels protecting it
consisted of a xebec of 20 guns , and three gun-boats , and the
battery was a large square tower, which appeared to mount 12
guns . The two commanders resolved, at once, to attack this
force with their brigs. Accordingly, at noon, the Kangaroo and
Speedy came to an anchor, within half-gun shot of the enemy,
and a brisk cannonade ensued ; but which, by 2 p. m., had con¬
siderably decreased on the part of the vessels and battery.
Encouraged , however, by a felucca of 12 guns and two gun¬
boats that came to their assistance , the Spaniards recommenced
firing, and by 3 h. 30 m. p. m. had their 20-gun xebec and two
of their gun-boats sunk by the fire of the two brigs : in a little
while another of the gun -boats shared the same fate. The tower
and the remaining three gun-boats continued to annoy the brigs
with their shot , until about 6 h. 30 m., when the fire of the tower
slackened . The Kangaroo soon afterwards cutting her cable to
get to a nearer position, the gun -boats fled ; and , by 7 p. m.,
the tower was completely silenced.
    The Kangaroo and Speedy continued until midnight to be
annoyed by a heavy fire of musketry from the shore ; but , in
the mean time, the boats of the two brigs , under the orders of
Lieutenant Thomas Foulerton , first of the Kangaroo , assisted by
Lieutenant Benjamin Warburton , of the Speedy, and by mid¬
shipmen the Honourable Archibald Cochrane, William Dean,
and Thomas Taylor, had succeeded in bringing out three brigs
laden with wine, rice, and bread . On the return of the boats
from this service, Lord Cochrane himself, with his wonted zeal,
took them under his command, and went in-shore again, in the
hope of bringing away more, but found all the remainder either
sunk or driven on the beach . It was fortunate for the tower,
that the ammunition of the two brigs was by this time expended,
or the two enterprising captains would have razed it to its
foundation ; as indeed, only the day previous, they had the
adjacent tower of Almanara , mounting two brass 4-pounders.
