158         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1801.

lord of the admiralty for a post -commission ; to which applica¬
tion the following, as we think , very sensible reply wras trans¬
mitted by Earl St .-Vincent : “ I have read your official letter
with all the attention such a recital merits ; but until the board
receive official information of the force, and the nation to which
the vessel belongs, which the Sylph was engaged with , an ade¬
quate judgment cannot be formed of the merits of the action .” *
The circumstances , stated in the official account of the second
rencontre , very properly removed all doubt as to the ship en¬
gaged having been very superior in force to the Sylph ; and on
the 2d of the following November Captain Dashwood , “ for his
meritorious conduct in the above actions, ” was promoted to post¬
rank . The first lieutenant of the Sylph, upon both these highly
creditable occasions, was Samuel Burgess ; but who, although
highly commended by Captain Dashwood in each of his letters,
remained a lieutenant for 15 years longer.
   On the 13th of September , in the afternoon, the British 18-
gun ship-sloop Lark , Acting -commander lieutenant James John¬
stone, being close off the island of Cuba , fell in with and chased
the Spanish privateer-schooner Esperanza , of one long 8 and two
4 pounders , and 45 men ; which, for shelter , ran within the
Portillo reefs. Lieutenant Johnstone immediately despatched
the Lark ’s yawl and cutter , with 16 men in each, under the
orders of Lieutenant James Pasley , assisted by Mr . M ' Cloud,
midshipman , to attempt to cut her out. At about 10 h. 30 m.
p. m. the two boats found the privateer at anchor , waiting the
attack ; and , on their near approach , received a fire from her
that severely wounded several of the men. In spite of this,
however, the British boarded , and , after a short but severe con¬
test , carried the schooner. In this well-conducted and gallant
boat-attack , the British sustained a loss of one seaman killed,
Mr . M ‘Cloud, and 12 seamen wounded ; within two of half the
partv . The loss on board the Esperanza was represented to
have been 21 killed and six wounded ; including , among the
former, the captain , Josef Callie, and all his officers. Consider¬
ing the unquestionable gallantry of this enterprise , we regret to
see the name of James Pasley in the list of lieutenants of the
present day.
   On the 21st of July , soon after daylight , the island of Cabrera
bearing north -east distant six or seven leagues, the British hired
brig Pasley , mounting fourteen 12-pounder carronades and two
long sixes, with a crew of 54 men and boys, commanded by
Lieutenant William Wooldridge , fell in with a Spanish man-of-
war xebec, of 22 guns ; which at 7 a . m. hailed the Pasley and
desired her to send her boat on board . The reply to this was a
broadside within pistol-shot distance ; and the Pasley continued
to engage her superior opponent until 8 h. 15 m. ; when the

                     * Marshall, vol. ii., p. 454.
