1801.               SYLPH AND FRENCH FRIGATE.                        157

wood’s letter to Admiral Cornwallis on the subject of this
second action : “ Having received certain information since my
return to this station , that the ship, which the Sylph was
engaged with some time since, was the French frigate 1’Artemise,
of 44 guns and 350 men ; so I can with equal truth pronounce
this to be the same, from the many corresponding observations
which I made . She had then 20 men killed and 40 wounded,
and was obliged to return to St.-Andero to refit ; and from the
disordered state which she was in when making off', I have the
strongest reason to suppose she has now met with a similar fate,
particularly as a number of lights and men were seen hanging
over her bows, from which I infer she must have received con¬
siderable damage ; and I think there is every probability of some
of his majesty ’s frigates falling in with her, as I unluckily parted
with the Immortalite a few hours before.” Some additional
information is contained in the following note to a passage of
this letter : “ The French journals of that period also stated , that
the captain was tried by a court-martial , and condemned to be
shot , for his conduct on that occasion ; which sentence Buona¬
parte approved , and ordered to be carried into execution .” *
    We wish it were in our power to adduce some stronger evi¬
dence than that contained in the two extracts above given, as to
the identity of the ship twice so gallantly engaged by the Sylph.
 The old Artemise , it will be recollected , was blown up at the
 battle of the Nile : f consequently this must have been a new
 ship of that name ; and , as the French had very wisely discon¬
 tinued building anymore 12-pounder frigates, the Artemise of
 1801 must have been a 40- gun frigate carrying 18-pounders , and
 mounting in the whole at least 44 guns . Had the improbability
 that such a ship would retreat from an 18-gun brig , or, in an
 action of more than two hours’ continuance , do no more execu¬
 tion than cut away a few ropes, send a shot through a topmast,
 and slightly wound one man, struck the compiler from the
 u French journals ” as forcibly as it has us, he would have
 quoted the passage entire, and have given a name and a date to
 the journal which contained so important an admission in favour
  of .the Sylph ’s commander and crew. Even the name of the
  French captain “ condemned to be shot ” is not given ; and not
  only have we been unable to discover in the Moniteur , or in any
  other French paper , a single paragraph calculated to throw light
  npon the subject , but , out of the many lists of French frigates
  occasionally before us, we have no recollection of the name of
  the Artemise until it occurs in an English account of her destruc¬
  tion in September , 1808.
     On returning to Plymouth after his first action , Captain
  Dash wood wrote an official account of it to Admiral Cornwallis,
   and appears to have made an immediate application to the first

        * Marshall, vol. ij., p. 456.      f See vol. ii., p. 172.
