1801.       PASLEY AND SPANISH XEBEC OF WAR.                 m
xebec ceased her fire, and, taking advantage of the calm which
had followed the heavy firing, pulled away with her sweeps.
The Pasley used her sweeps, but the xebec having more sweeps
and more men, outpulled the British brig , and before night
reached the island of Ivica. In this very creditable affair to the
Pasley , the latter had one seaman killed and two wounded.
   In a few months afterwards an opportunity occurred in which
Lieutenant Wooldridge was more successful . On the 28th of
October , Cape de Gata bearing west-north -west distant 20
leagues , the Pasley fell in with and was chased by the Spanish
privateer polacre-ship Virgen -del-Rosario , of 10 guns (pierced
for 20), eight of them long 12, and two long 24, pounders , with
a crew of 94 men. Being to windward , the Rosario soon neared
the Pasley , and an animated engagement commenced. After
the action had continued about an hour, the Pasley , having had
her gaff and most of the stays and main rigging shot away,
found her opponent ’s guns , upon the whole, much too heavy.
As the readiest mode to reduce this inequality , the Pasley ran
athwart the hawse of the Rosario , and lashed the latter ’s bow¬
sprit to her own capstan . The British crew, in an instant , were
on the Spanish ship’s decks ; and, after a sanguinary hand -to-
hand struggle of about 15 minutes ’duration , carried the Rosario.
   The Pasley ’s loss amounted to her gunner , Mr . James Pooke,
and two seamen killed , her commander (shot through the left
 shoulder ), master (Ambrose Lions, mortally ), first mate (George
 Davie ), and five seamen wounded . The loss on board the
 privateer was very severe : it consisted of her first and second
 captains , second lieutenant , two prize-masters , the gunner,
 and 15 seamen killed , and 13 officers and seamen wounded.
 Considering the great disparity of force between the two vessels,
 this must be pronounced a very gallant affair on the part of the
 Pasley ; and the judgment , promptitude , and valour, displayed
 by Lieutenant Wooldridge on the occasion, gained him not only
 the just applause of his superiors, but that to which he had an
 equal claim, the rank of commander.


            COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS.- WEST INDIES.

   The rupture between England and Denmark and Sweden
was soon followed by the seizure of the colonies of the latter by
the former. On the 20th of March the Swedish island of St .-
Bartholomew surrendered by capitulation to a British naval
and military force, under Rear -admiral John Thomas Duckworth
&nd Lieutenant -general Trigge . On the 24th the Swedish
jsjand of St.-Marlin ; on the 29th the Danish islands of St.-
 Ahomas, St .-John , and their dependencies ; and , on the 31st
     Danish island of Santa -Cruz, all accepted the same terms as
^ .-Bartholomew . On the 16th of April the French garrison
