 156         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1801.

   Seeing the frigate in this apparently disabled state , the Sylph
  made sail in chase ; but , on account of a severe wound in her
  mainmast and a rising sea, the brig was obliged, instead of tack¬
  ing , to wear, which retarded her progress . While the Sylph was
  thus slowly advancing , the frigate swayed up her fore yard,
   wore, and made all sail for the land, but still without hoisting
  any colours. As the brig’s mainmast was every moment ex¬
  pected to go over the side, as she was then making a foot and a
  half of water per hour from shot-hole leaks , and as the stranger
  was evidently a frigate of 14 guns of a side on her main deck,
  Captain Dashwood felt it to be his duty to wear and stand to
  the northward ; having already sustained a loss, by the preceding
  night ’s action, of one seaman killed, and one midshipman (Lionel
  Carey ) and eight seamen wounded, three of them dangerously.
     Before we submit any remarks upon the alleged name and
 force of the Sylph ’s antagonist in this to her very creditable
 action , we will relate another contest in which, about a month
  afterwards , the brig wras engaged almost in the same spot.
     The damages the Sylph had received rendering her return to
 port indispensable , Captain Dashwood was directed by Admiral
  Cornwallis , under whose orders he was cruising, to proceed to
 Plymouth . Having here undergone a complete refit, the Sylph
 sailed to rejoin the commander-in-chief off Ushant , and by the
 latter was ordered to resume her station off the north coast of
 Spain . On the 28th of September , in the afternoon, Cape
 Pinas bearing south distant 42 leagues, the Sylph chased a ship
 in the north -west ; and, although before sunset the discovery
 was made that the stranger was a French frigate of the same
 apparent force as the one which the brig had formerly engaged
 upon this coast, Captain Dashwood gallantly resolved to do his
 utmost to bring her to action.
     Being desirous, as before, to gain the wind of an antagonist so
 decidedly superior, the Sylph made all sail for that purpose ; and
 the French frigate seemed equally determined to frustrate the
attempt . At 7 h. 30 m. p. m., however, after various manoeuvres,
during which the two vessels crossed each other three times, and
exchanged , at a very short distance , as many heavy broadsides,
the Sylph obtained a station within pistol-shot upon the frigate ’s
weather bow. A severe conflict now ensued, and continued
without intermission for two hours and five minutes , when the
frigate wore and made sail on the opposite tack ; leaving the
Sylph with her standing and running rigging cut to pieces, and
main topmast badly wounded, but , on account of the skilful
manner in which the brig was manoeuvred, and the unskilful
manner in which the frigate ’s guns (admitting them to have
been such as supposed) were fought , with so trifling a loss as one
person slightly wounded , Mr. Lionel Carey , who had been
wounded in the former action.
    The following is the concluding passage of Captain Dash-
