1801.                                       .
                             , &C. AT CORUNNA
          BOATS OF THE FISGARD                                   153

which was only a musket -shot distant . To add to the value of
this very gallant little exploit, it was achieved without a single
casualty.
     On the night of the 20th of August Captain Thomas Byam
Martin , cruising off Corunna with the frigates Fisgard , Diamond,
and Boadicea, sent Lieutenant Philip Pipon , with the boats of
the squadron , to attack the Spanish vessels in the port . The
boats immediately pulled for and entered the harbour ; and
Lieutenant Pipon and his party succeeded in boarding and
carrying the Neptuno , a new ship pierced for 20 guns, belonging
to his catholic majesty , a gun-boat mounting one long Spanish
 24-pounder , and a merchant ship ; all moored within the strong
 batteries that protect the port , and lying so near to them, that
 the sentinels on the ramparts challenged the boats ’ crews, and
 opened upon them a heavy fire. Notwithstanding this oppo¬
 sition, the British officers and men, with their accustomed cool¬
 ness and perseverance , proceeded to execute the remainder of
 their task , and brought all three vessels safe out of the harbour
 without sustaining the slightest loss. For his gallantry and
 address on this occasion, Lieutenant Pipon , early in the fol¬
 lowing year, was promoted to the rank of commander.
     On the 2d of September , at 11 h . 30 m. a . m., the British 18-
 gun ship-sloop Victor (sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two
 sixes), Captain George Ralph Collier, being off the Seychelle
 islands , discovered and chased a strange man-of-war brig . At
 5h . 30 m. p. m., proving the better sailer going off the wind,
 the Victor was enabled to bring to close action the French brig-
 corvette Fleche , of 18 long 8-pounders , commanded by Lieu¬
 tenant Jean -Baptiste Bonnavie . The latter ’s 8-pounders being
  no match for the former’s 32-pounder carronades , the Fleche,
  after receiving and returning two broadsides , hauled her wind
  and endeavoured to escape. Having had her driver topping-
  lift, maintopmast -stay , and her principal braces on the starboard
  side shot away, the Victor was unable to wear quick enough to
  check the progress of her opponent ; who, by the time the two
  vessels tacked , at 7 p. m., was half a mile to windward : and,
  even when the Victor had repaired her rigging , the Fleche con¬
  vinced her that , in sailing by the wind, the advantage was the
  reverse of what it had been when going before it.
       In the little interchange of firing which had ensued, the Victor
   had a master ’s mate and one seaman slightly wounded ; with,
   besides damaged rigging and sails, one shot through the fore¬
   cast , and a few in the hull . The Victor continued to pursue
   the Fleche , and during the night was frequently within gun-
   sn°t j but the latter would not allow the British vessel a second
   Lnie to close. The chase continued all day of the 4th . At
   ^. nset the F16che was four or five miles to windward of the
      lc tor, and , by daylight on the 5th , was no longer
                                                                  to be
