160        COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— EAST INDIES.               1801.

evacuated the Dutch island of St .-Eustatia ; which , with the
island of Saba , was taken possession of by the 20-gun ship
Arab , Captain John Perkins , and a small detachment of troops
under Colonel Blunt , of the third regiment of Buffs.

                        COAST OF AFRICA.

   As soon as the British government became apprized of that
article in the treaty of Badajos , by which Portugal agreed to
exclude British shipping from her ports , a force was sent to
occupy the island of Madeira . On the 23d of July a squadron,
anchored in the bay of Funchal , and a detachment of troops
under Colonel Clinton landed and took possession, without
resistance , of the two forts which command the anchorage.
   These prompt measures , on the part of England , induced the
prince-regent to use his most strenuous endeavours to prevent
the First Consul of France , who would not acknowledge himself a
party to the treaty with Spain , from overrunning Portugal with
the powerful army which, under General Leclerc, Buonaparte ’s
brother -in-law, was already upon the frontiers. Before, how¬
ever, matters became ripe enough for action , England and
France had commenced the negotiations which ended in the
treaty of Amiens ; and , on the 29th of September , a treaty of
peace was signed at Madrid between France and Portugal ; by
the fourth article of which the latter ceded to France all that
part of Portuguese Guiana (nearly equal in extent to the whole
of French Guiana ), which extends to the Carapanatuba , a
river that flows into the Amazon at some distance above Fort
Macussa.

                           EAST INDIES.

   On the 21st of June the Dutch island of Ternate , after an
obstinate resistance of 52 days , surrendered by capitulation to
the military and naval forces of the honourable East India
company , under the respective commands of Colonel Burr and
 Captain Hayes.
   Upon the same principle , we believe, that induced them to
occupy the island of Madeira , the British government placed
garrisons in all the colonies or factories of Portugal , in the East
Indies , except Macao.

           PEACE BETWEEN ENGLAND AND FRANCE.

  On the 1st of October was signed in London, by Lord
Hawkesbury , the secretary of state for foreign affairs, on the
part of Great Britain , and by citizen Louis-Guillaume Otto,
commissary for the exchange of French prisoners in England , on
