1801.             SYLPH AND FRENCH FRIGATE.                         155

between wind and water, and her rigging and boats had also
been a good deal cut . The loss on the part of the Fleche , out
of an alleged complement , of 145 (including four lieutenants,
besides her commanding officer), from the number of dead and
wounded reported to have been found on her forecastle , was
supposed to be very severe ; but Captain Bonnavie acknow¬
ledged to having had only four men killed : the wounded he did
not enumerate.
     Like the Chiffonne, the Fleche had brought from Nantes,
about four months back , and since deposited on one of the
Seychelle islands , 35 banished Frenchmen . Some of her men
had been left sick at the Isle of Bourbon ; but , to compensate
                                                                        in
for their loss, 20 of the late Chiffonne ’s crew had assisted
                                                               wholly   at
serving the guns . Had the action been carried on
close quarters , the heavy metal of         the  Victor would   certainly
have rendered her too powerful to be an equal match for the
                                                                        to
Fleche ; but , in that respect , the French brig had managed
give herself the advantage by        keeping    her  adversary  at  long--
shot . Great credit was therefore due to the officers and crew
of the Victor , for their gallantry , skill, and perseverance ; but
 the Fldche was not eventually lost , the French having afterwards
 weighed and , we believe , refitted her.
     On the 31st of July , in the evening, the British 18-gun brig-
 sloop Sylph , Captain Charles Dashwood , cruising off San¬
 tander , or San-Andero , on the north coast of Spain , with a light
                                                                        to
 air from the southward , chased an armed -schooner standing
                                 there was   a possibility of arriving  up
 the north -east ; but , before
 with her, a large frigate , then judged to be Spanish , but after¬
 wards believed to be French , was descried under the land
 advancing towards the brig, and to which frigate the schooner
 fled for refuge.
      Finding it impracticable to gain the wind of the strange
  frigate , whose hull , at sunset , was clearly discernible , the Sylph
                                                                        m.
  shortened sail, hove to, and prepared for battle . At 11 p.
  the frigate arrived within half-gun      shot  ;  when,  having  in  the
  Usual manner ascertained the ship ’s hostile character ,
                                                                 the brig
  opened her fire. Soon afterwards the frigate approached within
  hail , and a spirited cannonade was kept up for one hour and
  20 minutes ; when, having had her sails and almost all her
  running rigging cut to pieces, and one carronade dismounted,
  und having received several shot between wind and water , the
  %lph edged away to repair her damages . Perceiving , however,
  that the frigate either was unable or unwilling to make sail
  ,n pursuit , the Sylph, as soon as she was out of gun -shot,
   flove to.
      On the 1st of August , at daybreak , the Sylph discovered her
   late opponent , with her fore yard upon deck , about seven miles
  ■®ff in the north -west, which was now to windward , the wind
   having shifted to that quarter in a squall during the night.
