154           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1801.

    Judging , from the course which the brig was steering when
 first seen, that her destination was the Seychelle islands , Cap¬
 tain Collier pushed for them ; and , at 3 h. 30 m. p. m., the
 Victor descried her late opponent standing in for the anchorage
of Mahe . The Victor proceeded under easy sail till 7 p. m.,
which was just as it grew dark , and then anchored in 11
fathoms . The ship not having a pilot, and no one on board
being acquainted with the channel , the master , Mr . James
Crawford, though ill of a fever, volunteered to sound it. Ac¬
cordingly , in the course of the night , a boat , in which Mr . James
Middleton , the master ’s mate who had been wounded , also
embarked as a volunteer, proceeded on the service ; and , not¬
withstanding they were repeatedly fired at by a boat from the
French brig, these officers would not desist until they had
completely performed the duty upon which they had been
detached.
    Daylight on the 6th showed the Fltkhe lying at the mouth of
the basin or inner harbour , with springs on her cables, and a
red flag at her fore topgallantmast -head, the signal of defiance,
as afterwards understood . It was not merely the strength of
their position , or the difficulty of approaching it, that had
actuated the French officers to hoist this foolish signal : the
Fleche now mounted the whole of her guns ; which had not, it
appears , been the case in the skirmish of the 2d. Soon after
daylight the Victor weighed and made sail towards the channel;
the narrowness and intricacy of which, added to the unfavour¬
able state of the wind, compelled her to use warps and her
staysails only.
    So fine an opportunity was taken due advantage of by the
F16che, and the Victor became exposed to a raking fire, until,
shoaling her water , the latter , at about 9 p. m., came to with
the best bower. The British sloop soon recommenced warping,
and continued it until llh. 45 m. p. m. ; when, letting go the
small bower with two springs , the Victor brought her broadside
to bear, and instantly commenced firing. Between the two
vessels an incessant cannonade was maintained until 2h . 20 m.
a.   m. on the 7th , when the Fleche was discovered to be sinking.
In a few minutes afterwards the latter cut her cable , cast round,
and grounded at the bow on a coral reef. An officer and party
were sent from the Victor to board her ; and immediately the
French crew commenced setting fire to their vessel. Another
party from the sloop quickly followed the first ; and the British
then took possession and struck the colours of the French brig.
Scarcely , however, had they succeeded in extinguishing the
flames, than the Fleche fell on her larboard bilge into deeper
water , and sank.
   Out of her 120 men and boys, the Victor, in this second and,
for the present , decisive affair, had not a man hurt . This was
rather extraordinary , as several shot had struck her hull , some
