164               STATE OF THE BRITISH NAVY.                           1802.

and the number of seamen and marines voted for the service of the
year , was, 130,000 for the first five lunar months , 88,000 for one
lunar month, and 70,000 for the remaining seven lunar months .*
     Although , in reference to the abstract immediately preceding
it , the abstract for 1802 offers nothing worthy of remark , yet,
as coming the next in succession after the close of a war, it
contains a variety of matter for consideration . The first cir¬
cumstance that strikes a reader conversant with the subject is,
the important variation between the numerical grand -totals , both
line and general, of Abstract No. 10, and of the “ Statement
and Distribution of the Naval British Force, ” as given in Steel ’s
 list for February , 1802. The Abstract ’s line-total , .with the
addition of the two ships remarked upon in the asterisk note be¬
longing to it, is 191, Steel ’s 198 ; the Abstract ’s general total,
with the addition just noticed , 783, Steel ’s 803. Of Steel’s
line-of- battle number , nine will be found in class q, and one in
 class u ; thus reducing it to 188. But Steel has anticipated
 the breaking up of the Warspite 74, Captivity and Eagle 64’s,
 and Panther 60 ; which again augments his number to 192.
 If from the latter be deducted the Prince -Edward , a ship he
 classes as a 60 instead of a 50, we have 191, which, with the
 correction in the note already referred to, is the precise number
 in the Abstract . Having thus explained the difference that
 exists between the line-total in the Abstract , and that in Steel ’s
 February list, we shall have very little difficulty in approxima¬
 ting the two under -line totals ; one of which is 592, the other
  603 . If we deduct from the latter , four fire-vessels, four river-
  barges , and four or five transport -tenders and other small-craft,
  which , for reasons already given, are excluded from the former,t
  the numbers will be equal.
      A test yet remains , more authoritative than Steel , the official
  list or register of the British navy for the 1st of January , 1802.
  There the line-total is 180, the under -line total 665, and the
  grand -total 845. It seldom happens that the official register
   takes any notice of the armees en flute, or reduced ships : con¬
   sequently , they remain, list after list, among their full-armed
   class -mates . If, then , we deduct , as was done in the comparison
   with Steel, the nine ships at q, and the one at u, we bring the
   official line-total to 170. Four line-of-battle ships appear among
   the official “ ship-rigged sloops ;”J two among the “ prison-
   ships ;”§ one among the “ hospital -ships ;”j| seven among the
   “ receiving-ships        and there were seven others which,

   * See Appendix , No . 17.
                                                                            , n
   •j- See note e* to Abstract No . 3, at vol. i., p. 402 .
                                                                             b
   j Sandwich, San-Ysidro, Royal-Oak, and Prudent ; all of which had
 prison-ships.
   $ Sultan and Captivity .                      II Union , afterwards Sussex. ^
   f Royal-William , Cambridge, Grafton, Chichester , Yarmouth, Med
 and Rippon.
