168        AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES.                  1802.

merits, the Bashaw of Tripoli , on the 14th of May , 1801,
caused the flagstaff of the United States in front of the consul ’s
house to be cut down ; the customary mode, with these summary
gentlemen , of promulgating a declaration of war.
    Not to be behindhand with his two brother spoliators to the
westward , the Bey of Tunis made use of a somewhat ludicrous
pretext for levying a contribution upon his “ friends.” On the
night of the 18th of June a fire broke out in the palace , and in
its progress consumed 50,000 stands of arms. On the 20th the
American consul, Mr . William Eaton , having been summoned to
the Bey ’s presence, was told that his government must supply
10,000 stands of arms. “ I have, ” says the Bey, “ proportioned
my loss among my friends, and this falls to you to furnish . Tell
your government to send them without delay .” The consul
made a very proper reply ; and, upon the whole conducted him¬
self with becoming, and, as the result proved, successful firmness.
    Expecting from the tenour of the consular communications
from Algiers , Tripoli, and Tunis , that a rupture with one or
more of them would shortly take place, the government of the
 United States , since the latter end of May , had despatched to
the Mediterranean a squadron of three frigates and a sloop or
 two, just half the force then in commission, under the orders of
 Commodore Dale ; which squadron also carried out presents
 to a tolerably large amount , for such of the regencies as yet
remained at peace.
    On the 2d of July Commodore Dale , with the 44-gun frigates
 President and Philadelphia , 32-gun frigate Essex , and the brig-
 sloop Enterprise , anchored in the bay of Gibraltar ; where were
 also lying, having come in to get a supply of water , a Tripoli¬
tan ship of war, with the high admiral ’s flag on board , carrying
 26 guns , 9 and 6 pounders , and 260 men, and a brig of 16 guns,
 6 -pounders, and 160 men. The commanders of these vessels,
who were now performing quarantine , pretended not to know
that their government had declared war against the United
 States ; but Commodore Dale became assured of the fact from
 a communication with the shore. Hp soon afterwards made sail
 for the coast of Barbary , and in the ‘course of the month showed
 his squadron off Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli in succession. The
 two first of these regencies appear to have lowered their tone a
little on this rather unexpected visit. With Tripoli, however,
no arrangement was effected, and the war went on. After re¬
maining off Tripoli about 18 days , Commodore Dale stood along
the coast to the westward as far as the island of Pidussa , then
steered for Malta to get a supply of water ; and on the 16th
came to an anchor in the harbour of Valetta.
    On the 1st of August the United States ’ schooner Enterprise,
of 14 long 6-pounders and 90 men, commanded by Lieutenant
Andrew Sterrett , being on her way to join Commodore Dale at
Malta , and not far from that island , fell in with a Tripolitan
