  1802.             REVIEW OF ANNUAL ABSTRACTS.                           165

  though in service, some of them since 1800, were not registered
  at the date of the abstract .* Here, at once, is the number re¬
  quired . With respect to the under-line totals , we have merely
bto deduct from the 665, the 67 “ hoys, lighters , and transports, ’'
  and the 10 “ hulks, ” and we have 588, a number which is four
  below the abstract number . This trifling difference is to be
  found, if we could stay to trace it, among the small-craft , several
  of which are included in the abstract , and not registered in the
  official list ; while others , as fire-vessels, river-barges , “ barge-
  magazine, ” “ latteen -settee, ” &c., that assist to swell the latter,
  are not to be found in the former.
      Having thus established the general correctness of the nu¬
  merical totals of Abstract No. 10, and through it, we hope, of
  its nine tabular predecessors, we will, after premising that,
  should any doubt arise respecting the proper classification of a
  ship, a reference to the notes (which, in fact, are the key to the
  abstracts ) may clear up the point , proceed to draw a slight com¬
  parison between the first and last abstracts , the two between
, which an eight years’ war had intervened . In doing this we
  shall confine ourselves to the line-totals , and even then , to the
  cruising totals only. According to the latter , the numerical in¬
  crease is 13 ships ; but the most decided improvement is dis¬
  coverable in the relative tonnages . For instance , the 113 ships
  in No. 1 measured upon an average 1645 tons ; while in the
  126 ships in No. 10 measure 1740 tons. The accession of the
  five ships at B, C, and G, and of 26 out of the 30 at K , L.,
  nnd M, have chiefly contributed to this important augmen¬
  tation.
      The number of line-of-battle ships , added to the British navy
  fi’om the navies of foreign powers, were, French 27, Dutch 17,
  Spanish 5, and Danish 1 ; total 50 :f a number that , besides
   being considerably short of what Steel and other writers have
  recorded, contains a larger proportion of ineffective ships than
  they allow, as the following statement will show:
                                                          FOREIGN BUILT.
                                                                 K,
                                                                     Stationary
                                                           Cruisers. Harbour-
                                                                     Ships , &c.
                                                                 No.    No.
                                                                        18
              No . 1                                                     2
                                                                 _
                                                                         16
 Remaining, of ships captured in the we
 Reduced by the. “ Converted” column.
 Captured, . .                                                            4
 Sold or taken to pieces .              .
 Whole of tllG shine nf iVws lino /ifinfnrc               . ..   30      20


   ~ Athenien , Nassau (late Holstein ) , De -Ruyter , Guelderland, Uy
 Texel ( late Cerberus) , and Utrecht,
   t See Appendix , No . 17.
