1802.                      , TUNIS, AND TRIPOLI.
          TRIBUTE TO ALGIERS                                     167

.vessels, and slaves of their people . The United States of
America, having a considerable Mediterranean commerce at
stake , found it wise to follow the example of the older and
richer states of Europe . It is difficult to say how much this
sop to the three -headed monster annually cost the American re¬
public ; but , in articles of merchandise , timber , cannon , cordage,
money, and now and then a frigate or corvette armed and
 equipped for war, we should consider that the United States did
not pay less to the three regencies than from 100,000 to 150,000
 dollars per annum.
    In the month of October , 1800, the United States ’ 32-gun
frigate George-Washington , Captain William Bainbridge , was
lying at an anchor in the road of Algiers . The dey considered
this as a fine opportunity to get the presents , which he, as well
as the heads of the other regencies, annually made to the grand
seignior, conveyed to Constantinople . The demand for the
American frigate to be sent upon this mission was formally made,
and reluctantly complied with . Laden with presents to the
amount of a million and a half of dollars , encumbered with 100
Turks as passengers , and degraded by carrying the flag of
Algiers at her main topgallantmast -head, the George-Washington
sailed for and arrived at Constantinople . Having there disem¬
barked her live and dead lumber , the American frigate sailed
upon her return , and on the 21st of January 1801, re-anchored
at Algiers.
    The disgraceful use to which an American frigate had thus
 been put “ deeply affected, ” to use the words of Mr . President
Jefferson, “ the sensibility, not only of the president , but of the
people of the United States .” The “ indignity ” was certainly
 calculated to do all this ; but we cannot any where discover that
the Washington was sent “ by force” upon her extraordinary and
 humiliating mission. We think that both Captain Bainbridge
 und the American consul, Mr . Richard O’Brien , made out but a
 poor case to substantiate that fact.
     Whatever feelings the submission of these gentlemen may
have excited in their own country , its effect was a very natural
 one in Algiers and the two neighbouring regencies : they became
niore loud and exorbitant than ever in their demands for money
 and presents . Algiers, however, was partially appeased by the
 seasonable arrival of a ship from America with the arrears of the
 subsidy due to her . But , jealous of the favours shown to the
 :~ey of Algiers , the Bashaw of Tripoli became very outrageous
 *n some of his conferences with the American consul, the
 oashaw says, “ There is no nation I wish to be at peace with
 niore than yours ; but all nations pay me, and so must the
Americans.”— “ Compliments , although acceptable , are of very
  1tie value ; and the heads of the Barbary States know their
  fiends by the value of the presents that they receive from
    em.    To give a practical proof of his estimation of compli-
