170             FRANCE AND SAINT-DOMINGO.                   1802.

Tripolitans . Considering this a good opportunity to negotiate an
exchange with the bey for some Americans whom his cruisers
had taken , the commodore proceeded straight to Tripoli ; and,
arriving off the port on the 3d of September , sent on shore a
message to that effect. The bey said he would not give one
American for all the soldiers ; that only eight of the merchants
were his subjects ; and that he cared very little _about any of
them . He at length , however, agreed to give three Americans
for the 21 soldiers, and three more for the eight merchants.
With this the American commodore was obliged to be satisfied.
Soon afterwards , finding his crew getting very sickly and his
provisions very short , Commodore Dale raised the blockade of
Tripoli, and steered for Gibraltar . During the winter months
the American squadron visited Tripoli only occasionally. In
March , 1802, having had all their arrears of presents paid up,
the regencies of Algiers and Tunis became satisfied with the
United States . Nothing , however, during the whole of this
year , appears to have been done against Tripoli, although the
cruisers of that regency were capturing American vessels when¬
ever they could find them.


             FRENCH EXPEDITION TO ST.- DOMINGO.

   We have already noticed the bustle of preparation going on
in the continental ports, just when a treaty of peace had ap¬
parently set fleets and armies to at least a temporary rest . An
expedition to the island of Saint -Domingo was the plan in agi¬
tation . Previously to any account of occurrences on the shores
of that ill-fated island , we will bestow a glance upon the changes
which the preceding two or three years had effected in a colony
that , when France owned it, was the most profitable of any in
the West Indies.
   Buonaparte , as soon as he had got himself placed at the head
of the French government , sent out to Saint -Domingo an arrete,
containing the programme of a constitution for the government of
the island ; and, by way of gilding the pill , he appointed the
celebrated black General Toussaint-Louverture , commander -in¬
chief of the colonial army ; of which, owing to the unhealthy
state of the island and the impossibility of sending out reinforce¬
ments , a very small portion were natives of France . Before the
close of the year 1799 Toussaint possessed himself of the Spanish
part of the island , including the city of Santo -Domingo . Shortly
afterwards this gifted negro drew up, and finally got adopted , the
plan of a colonial constitution , in which he named himself
governor of the island and president for life, with the right of
appointing his successor. Toussaint probably would not have
ventured to take so bold a step, had he been aware that the
war was so near its close ; he knew that , while it continued , he
