1802.                 WAR WITH TRIPOLI.                        169

polacre -ship , of 14 guns (probably 4-pounders , and it is doubt¬
ful if some were not swivels) and 80 men, commanded by Rais-
Mahomet Sous. An action immediately commenced within
pistol-shot , and continued for nearly two hours , when the Tripo¬
litan colours were either shot away or struck . Elated with their
victory , the American crew gave three cheers, and quitted their
guns . In an instant the corsair rehoisted her flag, and renewed
the action with redoubled vigour, the Tripolitans brandishing
their sabres, and seeming desirous to board the Enterprise . The
crew of the latter , however, having flown back to their guns,
poured into their opponent so destructive a fire, that the barba¬
rians unequivocally hauled down their colours . Lieutenant
Sterrett now ordered the corsair under his lee quarter , and kept
his men at their guns . But the Tripolitan vessel, the instant
 she got to the station to which she had been ordered , poured
 another broadside into the Enterprise , and , hoisting the red or
 bloody flag, made an attempt to board . The Americans were
now most justly incensed against the Mahomedans ; and the
 Enterprise , obtaining a raking position, brought down the corsair’s
 mizenmast , and well riddled her hull . Seeing what was now
 likely to be his fate, the Tripolitan captain implored for quarter ;
 and bending in a supplicating manner over the waist-barricade
 of his vessel, threw his colours into the sea, as the surest indi¬
 cation of his sincerity . The Enterprise immediately ceased her
 fire ; and thus ended an action which had lasted just three hours.
     As a proof no less of the utter incompetency of the Tripoli¬
 tans as men-of-war’s men , as of the skill to which the Ameri¬
 cans had already arrived in the use of their guns , the Enterprise
  did not have a man hurt , and received very little damage in hull
 °r rigging ; while the corsair was greatly shattered in her hull
 and two remaining masts , and sustained , out of her 80 men in
  crew, a loss of 20 killed and 30 wounded , including among the
  latter her captain and first lieutenant.
      Agreeably to the instructions he had received, Lieutenant
  Sterrett ordered the guns , swords, pistols , and ammunition of
  fiis prize, to be thrown overboard , and both her masts to be cut
  away by the board. A spat was then raised to serve for a mast,
  and an old tattered sail hung to it as a flag. In this condition
  the corsair was sent to Tripoli ; and it is related that , on her
  arrival there , the bashaw marked his indignation by ordering the
   wounded captain to be paraded through the streets mounted
  upon an ass, and then to receive 500 bastinadoes . This was
   a fine reward , certainly , for having held out, against a very
   superior antagonist , until nearly two-thirds of his crew were
   killed or disabled.
      On the 21st of August Commodore Dale put to sea from
   Malta with his squadron , and on the 30th captured a Greek ship
    rom Smyrna bound to Tripoli, having on board one officer and
     0 soldiers, 14 merchants , and some women and children , all
