 1801.                 TREATY OF AMIENS.                       161

 the part of France , preliminary articles of peace between the two
 nations . On the 10th, the ratifications were duly exchanged ;
 and , on the 12th, his Britannic Majesty issued a proclamation,
 ordering a cessation of arms by sea and land . According to the
 preliminary articles , five months from the date of the exchange
 of ratifications was the longest period during which hostilities
 could legally exist in the most distant part of the globe.
      In consequence of the proclamation , the British blockading
 squadrons retired from the opposite coast ; at which time, how¬
 ever, the French ports were all alive . In them ships were
 getting ready , and troops embarking , for an expedition to St .-
  Domingo ; where the blacks were in open rebellion against the
 whites . The Dutch and Spanish ports began also to exhibit an
 unusual activity . England , therefore, with a becoming forecast,
 delayed awhile disarming her ships.
      As any treaty of peace to which England is a party , is neces¬
 sarily made up, in a great degree , of colonial cessions , this
 appears the proper head of the work under which to offer the
 few remarks we have to make on the subject . And , although
 the definitive treaty between all the belligerents was not finally
1concluded until the 25th of March , 1802, at Amiens, we shall at
 once state what change it effected, more particularly in the
 colonial property of the different powers.
      Let us first briefly advert to the stipulations which affected
 the European territory of the several belligerents . France got
 back the small islands of Saint -Marcouf . Portugal was to
 remain as before the war, except as to the province which , by
  the treaty of Badajos , she had ceded to Spain.* The republic
  °f the Seven Islands was acknowledged . Egypt and the other
  territories of the Sublime Porte were to be retained in their
  ^tegrity as before the war. For this article there would have
 Leen no occasion, had the British government known , as well as
  Buonaparte did, the issue of the Egyptian campaign . The
  elands of Malta , Goza, and Comino were to be restored to the
  order of St .-John of Jerusalem as before the war ; and the
  British troops were to evacuate those islands within three months
  after the exchange of the ratification . The French troops were
  to evacuate     Naples and the Roman territory ; and the British
 Loops , in like manner , were to evacuate Porto -Ferrajo , as well
   as all the islands and forts which they might occupy in the Medi¬
  terranean or Adriatic . The colonies now demand our attention.
                         NORTH AMERICA.
    Bogland had taken from France the valuable fishery islands
    Saint -Pierre and Miquelon : but France , by the treaty of
   naiens, got them restored to her.

                            * See p. 111.
    vol . hi.                    M
