      166      STATE OF THE BRITISH           NAVY
                                                 .—AMERICA
                                                        , &C. 1802
     The line-of-battle loss, which the British navy sustained in the
     same war, amounts to 20 s>hips ; of which no fewer than three-
*§    fourths were wrecked and accidentally burnt .*'
         It is usual, at the termination of a war, to exhibit , by a few
      figures, the relative gains and losses of the parties that had been
      engaged in it. Accordingly, in December , 1801, a cabinet
      minister laid before the British parliament a statement express¬
      ing that , when the war commenced, the British navy consisted
      of 135, and , when it ended, of 202 ships of the line. But for
      the concurrent testimony of several reporters , one might sup¬
      pose the former number to contain a typographical error, in the
      transposition of the 3 and 5. We have shown, in its proper
      place, the accuracy of the number 153, which appears in the
     line column of the first annual abstract ;T and have just done
      the same, in the fullest manner , respecting the number 191, in
      Abstract No. lO.j The number, which comes nearest to the
      minister ’s number , is to be found in Steel ’s list for November,
      1801 : it wants but two of the amount . Admitting the minister
     to have collected 200 of his 202 line-of-battle ships from Steel ’s
     list (it is evident he did not get them from the official list),
      whence did he obtain the number 35, for the whole of the line-
     of-battle ships possessed by France at the close of the year
      1801 ? At the commencement of the year 1803, we shall show,
     in the clearest manner, that this number scarcely covers half of
     the line-of-battle ships which must have belonged to France at
     the peace of Amiens ; and it already has appeared that , instead
     of 202 ships of the line, 126, or, including those building,
     148,§ was the proper number to be confronted with the French
     number.

                     AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES.

         Although this was a year of peace between England and the
      other great powers, there were still some naval operations of »
      warlike character going on, a summary of which may serve, if
      to do no more, to keep alive the interest in such matters until,
      by the general clash of arms throughout Europe , the annalist
      is again called upon to record events of magnitude and impor¬
     tance;
         It is too well known to be creditable to them , that the formi
     dable Christian powers of Europe have long paid a tribute,
     either in specie or kind , to the regencies of Algiers, Tripoli, an^
     Tunis, to induce these merciless freebooters to abstain from mo¬
     lesting the commerce of the former ; from making prizes of their

        * See Appendix , No . 18.
       f See note * to that abstract, and the same note to Abstract No . 2, vol. i»
     pp . 400, 401.
       t See note * to that abstract, in the Appendix of this volume.
       § Ibid.
