1803.                 INVASION - FLOTILLA.                     179

Rich Owen, and 18-gun brig-sloops Cruiser and Jalouse,
Captain John Hancock and Christopher Strachey , chased the
two French gun-vessels, Inabordable schooner and Commode
brig, each carrying one 18, and three 24 pounder long guns, on
shore upon the east part of Cape Blanc-Nez. As soon as the
flood-tide made, the Cruiser and Jalouse stood in, and , anchoring
with springs, commenced engaging the batteries under which the
gun -vessels had grounded . At the end of an hour ’s mutual
cannonade the batteries were silenced ; and, in the face of a
heavy fire of musketry from the cliffs, by which Mr. Charles
Adams , master ’s mate of the Jalouse , the only person hurt , was
badly wounded, the boats of the three British vessels boarded
and brought off the French brig and schooner.
    On the 1st of August a French armed lugger , which the British
38-gun frigate Hydra , Captain George Mundy , had prevented
from entering the port of Havre , having hauled close to the
beach about two miles to the westward of the river Touque,
Captain Mundy despatched the Hydra ’s boats , under the -orders
of Lieutenant Francis M‘Mahon Tracy, assisted by Messieurs
John Barclay and George French , midshipmen , to endeavour to
bring off or destroy her. On the near approach of the boats the
crew of the lugger , which was the Favori, of four carriage -guns,
commanded by a lieutenant de vaisseau, abandoned her and
retreated to the shore ; where, in concert with a party of military,
they posted themselves behind some sand -banks that lay abreast
and within musket -shot of their vessel. From this position the
French soldiers and sailors kept up a constant fire upon the
people in the boats and on board the Favori ; and received a
return from the British marines, until the lugger , by the exertions
of the prize-master and his men, had gained a safe distance
from the shore. One seaman killed was the extent of the loss
on the British side.
    On the 14th of September , at 8 a . m., the Immortalite frigate,
Jn company with the bomb-vessels, Perseus , Captain John
Methuist , and Explosion , Captain Robert Paul , commenced an
attack upon the batteries that protect the town of Dieppe, also
on 17 gun-vessels building in the port . The firing was con¬
tinued on both sides until 11 h. 30 m. a. m. ; when , the lee-tide
’baking strong , and the town having taken fire badly in one
place, and slightly in two others , the frigate and bomb-vessels
^ ei ghed, and proceeded off St.-Valery en Caux , where six gun¬
boats were constructing . At 3 p. m. the British opened a fire
bpon that place , and continued it for an hour, apparently with
some effect : Captain Owen then retired, with the loss of one
’ban missing and five men wounded.
   On the 13th of September , in the evening, the British 18-
pounder 32-gun frigate Cerberus , Captain William Selby, bear-
*ng the flag of Rear-Admiral Sir James Saumarez , anchored as
c ose the    town of Granville as the tide would admit, having
                                n 2
