1802.                                  .
                               -LOUVERTURE
         BUONAPARTE AND TOUSSAINT          171

should have the protection of the English ; and that the ships of
the latter would prevent those of France from transporting any
troops to recapture the island, or from otherwise molesting him
in his possession.
     As soon as the negotiation between France and England had
assumed a favourable appearance , the ex-proprietors of estates
in Saint -Domingo, strengthened by the whole body of French
merchants , who keenly felt the loss of so fair a portion of their
trade , applied to the first-consul to send out an army and retake
the island . The nation at large seemed to have but one feeling
on the subject ; and Buonaparte , in despite , as he had himself
declared , of his better judgment, * gave orders to equip an ex¬
 pedition suitable to the magnitude of the undertaking . The
 army was to be composed of 21,200 men, under General Leclerc;
 and the fleet to convey them to the Antilles was to consist of 33
 sail of the line, and nearly an equal number of frigates , ship and
 brig corvettes, and flute-transports , under the command of Vice-
 admiral Villaret -Joyeuse.
     Qm the 14th of December , 1801, after a long delay by con¬
 trary winds, a fleet composed of 10 French sail of the line, under
 the commander -in-chief, and of five Spanish , under Vice-admiral
 Gravina , accompanied by six frigates, four corvettes and smaller
 vessels, and two transports , containing altogether 7000 men, set
 sail from the road of Brest . On the morning of the 17th, off
 Belle-Isle , one French sail of the line, one frigate , one corvette*
 and one flute, with 900 men on board , joined from Lorient ; and
 a squadron from Rochefort , under Rear -admiral La Touche-
 Treville, consisting of six sail of the line, six frigates, two
 corvettes , and two despatch -vessels, and having on board 3000
 men, was expected to join , but did not until the combined fleet,
  on the 29th of January , 1802, reached Cape Samana on the
 island of its destination . One 74, the Duquesne , and one
 frigate , the Comelie , having on board 700 men between them,
  had parted company ; which left 10,500 as the number of men
  to be disembarked from the first division of the fleet.
     The following were the dispositions for landing the troops;
  1000, under General Kerverseau , at Santo - Domingo ; 3000,
  under General Boudet , at Port -au-Prince ; 2500 , under General
  Hochambeau , in Mancenille bay, to attack Fort -Dauphin , and,
  on carrying it, to proceed to the mole Saint -Nicolas, there to be
 joined by 4000 men under General Hardy . While the ships
  were proceeding to their assigned points of debarkation , two
  other French squadrons arrived at the rendezvous : one from
   loulon , of four sail of the line and one frigate , under Rear-
  admiral Ganteaume , with 2300 men ; the other from Cadiz, of
  Ihree sail of the line and three frigates, under Rear -admiral
  Linois, with 1500 men on board . In the mean time, the 10,500

            * See O’Meara’s Napoleon in Exile , vol. ii., p. 199.
