1803.    WARLIKE PREPARATIONS ON BOTH SIDES
                                          .                   175
   The number of commissioned officers and masters , belonging
to the British navy at the commencement of the year, was,
          Admirals        .      .    .   .  .    45
          Vice-admirals .        .    .    .      36
          Bear -admirals .       .    .    .      51
               „            superannuated 26
          Post -captains .            .      .   668
              j} 13
         Commanders , or sloop-captains            .    413
              ,,         superannuated 49
         Lieutenants  .       .   .     .          .   2480
         Masters       .      .    .    .          .    529
   And the number of seamen and marines voted for the service
of 1803 was, 50,000 for the first two, 60,000 for the next four,
and 100,000 for the remaining seven lunar months of it.#
    The King of England ’s message to parliament on the 8th of
March , in the impression it made upon the public mind, was
nearly tantamount to a declaration of war ; and preparations for
carrying it on with vigour were immediately commenced in all
the dock-yards of the empire. The state of the British navy, as
it stood on the 1st of January , has already appeared in its proper
place . To the 32 line-of-battle cruisers, then in commission,
were added , before the 1st of May , 20 additional ones ; and, by
the 1st of the following month , the number of ships of the line in
commission was augmented to 60, besides a proportionate num
ber of 50-gun ships , frigates , sloops, and smaller vessels, all
 either at sea or fitting for sea. A great many vessels of every
class, including a large proportion of line-of-battle ships, were
 repairing ; and several frigates, sloops, and schooners, were
 ordered to be constructed with all possible despatch.
    The first-consul of France was not, on his part , inactive. In
 the month of March he gave orders that the port of Flushing
 should be got ready to receive and equip a squadron , to be
 called the “ Squadron of the North, ” and which was to consist
 of ten 74-gun ships from Dutch models. This was probably,
 because they draw less water , in proportion to their rate , than
 the ships of other nations . The ships thus ordered were imme¬
 diately to be laid down, part in Flushing and Ostende , and the
 remainder in ports of France . Gun-vessels and flat-bottomed
 boats were also to be constructed at every convenient spot along
 the shores of the Scheldt , the Weser , and the Elbe ; and a
 quantity of ship-timber, hemp, and other naval stores, to the
  value of 20,000,000 of francs, was ordered to be immediately
  Purchased in Holland . In testimony , also, of his love for the
 naval service, Buonaparte , since the 25th of January , 1802, had
  made his brother Jerome an enseigne de vaisseau.

                       * See Appendix , No . 20.
