 180                              .-—CHANNEL.
          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS                            1803.

  only 16 feet under her keel at low water . In company with the
  Cerberus were the sloops of war, Charwell and Kite , Captains
  Philip Dumaresq and Philip Pipon , Ealing schooner, Lieutenant
  William Archbold , and “ Carteret ” cutter , with whose com¬
 mander ’s name we are unacquainted . As soon as the bomb-
 vessels Sulphur and Terror , Captains Daniel M‘Leod and
  George Nicholas Hardinge , which were hourly expected , should
 arrive, it was intended to bombard the port of Granville , in the
 hope to destroy some of the numerous gun-boats lying within
 the pier.
    At 11 p. m. the Terror came up ; but , having as well as the
 Cerberus grounded at low water, it was not until 2 A. m. on the
  14th, that Captain Hardinge could get to the station assigned
 him . Being then judiciously placed by her commander , the
 Terror commenced throwing shells from her two mortars , and
 received an immediate return from the gun and mortar batteries
 on the heights near the town, also from some guns mounted upon
 the pier, and several gun-vessels stationed at the entrance of the
 harbour . The fire was kept up until after 5 a . m. ; when the
 Terror was recalled, and, weighing, reanchored at a greater dis¬
 tance from the town, with a loss of only two men wounded by
 splinters.
    Shortly afterwards the Sulphur bomb, whose bad sailing had
 prevented her from beating up, arrived and anchored in company
 with the Cerberus and squadron . In the evening both bomb-
 vessels threw a few shells ; but the tide prevented them from
 getting near enough to produce much effect.
    On the 15th, in the morning, all the ships were enabled to
 take capital positions ; and soon after 5 a . m. the bombardment
 recommenced with great spirit and continued until lOh . 30m . a .m;
 when the falling tide rendered it necessary for the British ships
to withdraw from the attack . Although 22 gun-vessels, which
 had hauled out of the pier and formed themselves in a regular
line, had united with the batteries around the port in replying to
 the fire of the British , no loss and very little damage was sus¬
tained by the latter.
    Shortly after getting under sail to remove into deeper water,
the Cerberus grounded upon one of the sand-banks . Nine of the
French gun-boats , perceiving the situation of the British frigate,
attempted to annoy her, and began a heavy cannonade , but were
eventually compelled, by the fire of the Charwell , Kite, bomb-
vessels, and cutters , to retire for shelter into the harbour . After
remaining aground about three hours, the Cerberus floated with
the rising tide . The attack upon the French town and gun"
vessels then ceased ; nor was it known that any material effect
had been produced by it.
   On the 27th of September , in the evening, a division of sloops,
hombs , and smaller vessels, under the orders of Captain Samuel
Jackson of the 16-gun ship-sloop Autumn, anchored off Calais,
