                                                                  W -S




                         WAR OF 1803.



    Scarcely had the embers of the bonfires, lit up in celebration
 of the peace of Amiens, grown cold on the ground , ere the two
 principal parties to the treaty became again involved in war.
 Although the formal declaration , the act of England herself in
 this instance , did not issue until toward the middle of the year,
each nation , with well-grounded forebodings of what was to hap¬
pen , began her preparations at its commencement . So much of
those preparations , as relate to naval concerns, fall properly
within the the scope of this work ; and , as usual , we shall begin
with the abstract , or tabular statement , of the British navy for
the current year .*
    Between that abstract and the preceding one a difference
occurs , as well in one or more of the principal heads , as in the
arrangement of the lower part of the table . A desire to improve
the remaining abstracts of the series has suggested the alteration,
and the necessary explanations on the subject will be found in
the notes which accompany the present year ’s abstract.
    A state of peace having filled the period between this abstract
and the last , no captured column appears ; and the built , pur¬
chased , and wrecked columns exhibit an unusual paucity of
numbers .-f* The decrease observable in many of the totals arises,
partly from the alterations above alluded to, but , in a much
greater degree , from the multiplicity of vessels sold or taken to
pieces since the termination of the war. One fact is remarkable:
the total of line-of-battle ships employable for sea-service falls
short by two, of the corresponding total in the abstract for 1793.
So that , during a period of 10 years, eight of them in war, the
British navy had slightly decreased in ships of the line . If
statesmen and historians have asserted otherwise, it has been
because they drew their comparisons between the wrong totals.
An increase of 11 certainly appears among the permanent har¬
bour -service ships, but it is the sea-service cruisers which consti¬
tute the effective strength of a navy.
  * See Appendix , Annual Abstract, No . 11.
  f See Appendix , No . 19.
