172              FRANCE AND SAINT
                                -DOMINGO
                                       .                          1802.

troops that had arrived in the first division, partly by intrigue
and partly by force, had effected their landing.
    It is foreign to these pages to enter upon the details of the
military operations which, after a brave and protracted resistance
on the part of the indigenes , led to their dispersion or surrender;
 but even this did not take place until the remaining 6900 of the
21,200 French troops ordered upon the expedition arrived at the
island . The black chief, who had exhibited so many traits of
moderation and generalship , after capitulating and being allowed
to return to his home, was suddenly arrested and conveyed on
board the Heros 74, lying off Gonai’ves. On being brought on
board the French ship, this extraordinary man is said to have
uttered these words : “ En me renversant , on n’a abattu que le
tipnc de l’arbre de la liberte des noirs, il repoussera par les
racines parcequ ’elles sont profondes et nombreuses .”
    Having been thus illegally dragged on board the Heros , Tous-
saint was most inhumanly , and contrary to all the assurances
held out to him by General Leclerc, transported to France , to
end his days in a prison. He was shut up in Fort de Joux , and
died six months afterwards in rather a mysterious way. On this
subject the following appears in a work of considerable notoriety:
“ I mentioned Toussaint -Louverture , and observed that , amongst
other calumnies, some of his (Buonaparte ’s) enemies had asserted
that he had caused him to be put to death privately in prison.
‘ It does not deserve an answer, ’ replied Napoleon ; ‘what pos¬
sible interest could I have in putting a negro to death after he
had arrived in France ? Had he died in St.-Domingo, then
indeed something might have been suspected , but , after he had
safely landed in France , what object could have been in
view ?’
   Whatever , in reality , was the mode by which Toussaint ended
his days , the act of forcibly withdrawing him from Saint-Do-
mingo, after he had honourably capitulated , proved in the end as
impolitic as it was cruel . Several enterprising black chiefs still
remained on the island : Clerveaux , Christophe , Paul -Louverture
(nephew to Toussaint ), and Dessalines ; and who, with the whole
of their countrymen , were exasperated at the treachery which had
deprived them of their gallant leader. Part of the French troops
were sent away to aid in subduing the revolted negroes at Gua¬
deloupe ; and, among the remainder , as the summer advanced,
the yellow fever made dreadful ravages.
   About the middle of August accounts reached Saint-Domingo,
of the success of the French at Guadeloupe , and that slavery, in
all its horrors, had been re-established in the colony. This news
spread like wildfire among the negroes at the first-named island,
and operating upon minds already smarting under their own
wrongs, determined them to revolt. The first eruption broke out

            * O’Meara’s Napoleon in Exile , vol . ii ., p. 198.
