 1803.         ADMIRAL CORNWALLIS OFF BREST.                     177
   afterwards ; and, had the declaration bore date in the preceding
    February , no one, acquainted with the avowed intentions of
    Buonaparte , could say it had issued a day too early. Simul¬
   taneously with the order for reprisals against French ships,
   issued one for detaining ships belonging to the Batavian
  republic, Holland being to all intents and purposes a province
   of France.
      Convinced that the peace of the world is generally held by a
   thread , which the caprice of a minister may almost at any time
   break , we shall not puzzle ourselves, or the reader, with endea¬
   vouring to investigate the causes of the war which commenced
   in the year 1803, but shall plunge at once into the details of its
   operations ; such operations at least as lie within our province,
  those in which the navies of the several belligerents take a
  part.
      On the 17th of May, at 7 r . m., Admiral the Honourable
  William Cornwallis, in whose able hands the command of the
  Channel fleet still remained, having his flag on board the Dread¬
  nought 98, sailed from Cawsand bay, with a fleet of 10 sail of
  the line and frigates, to cruise off Ushant and watch the motions
  of the French ships in Brest harbour , five or six only of which
  were in a state to put to sea. Of the remaining 21 ships of the
  line which the port contained, some were fitting, others repairing,
  and three were still upon the stocks, but on the eve of being
 launched . Could, therefore, a greater force than 10 sail of the
  line have been sent to cruise off Brest, it would, in the divided
 state of the French navy, have been wholly unnecessary.
     Owing to the very reduced state of the Batavian navy, which,
 including three or four ships in the ports of Spain, now consisted
 of not more than seven sail of the line and a few frigates in a
 serviceable state , three British ships were all that were required
 in the North Sea. Four or five others were in the Irish Channel;
 about an equal number cruised to the southward of Brest ; and,
 of those remaining in Plymouth and Portsmouth , upwards of 20
 were fitting for sea, as fast as the dearth of seamen, and unfor¬
tunate want of stores, would admit.
     Although the watchfulness of Admiral Cornwallis, who, on
the 9th of July , shifted his flag from the Dreadnought to the
 112 gun-ship Ville-de-Paris , precluded any addition to the Brest
fleet from without the port, two fine ships joined it from within.
Both were launched on the same day, the 15th of August ; one
the Cassard 74, the other, the celebrated three-decker on hand
since the year 1794, and which, under such highly-wrought
feelings, was then ordered to be named the Vengeur , to com¬
memorate the supposed martyrdom of the 74 of that name,
captured and sunk in Lord Howe’s action.*

                        * See vol . i ., p . 174.
  VOL. III.                          N •
