178       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.              1803.

    The summer passed , and the year nearly closed, without any
material change in the relative positions of the Brest and Channel
fleets. On Christmas -day, however, the strong south- west gales,
which , with short intermissions had blown for some weeks, in¬
creased to so alarming a height , that the blockading ships, one
and all, were compelled to retire from the French coast, and
seek safety in Plymouth and other British ports . At this time
lay in the outer road of Brest , ready for sea, the Vengeur three-
decker , bearing the flag of Vice-admiral Laurent-Jean -Fran §ois
Truguet , an 80, with Rear -admiral Ganteaume ’s flag, and six 74s,
attended by about an equal number of frigates and corvettes, but
they made no attempt to sail.
    Before the end of the year there were several other of the
continental ports opening into the ocean, which, besides Brest,
contained French ships of the line, and in sufficient number
when united to excite some attention . At Rochefort had re¬
cently arrived, along with some frigates, two of the nine sail of
the line, already mentioned as at, or coming from, the island of
St.-Domingo when the war broke out. In Ferrol and Corunna
were lying five other of those line-of-battle ships, and a sixth
ship (making the eighth in the whole), the Aigle 74, had put
into Cadiz. To guard all these ports , except the last, was a
part of the duty of the commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet;
and , as soon as practicable , they were watched by British squa¬
drons corresponding in force with the French squadrons within
them.
    Although a single gun-boat is not of a force to excite alarm,
several scores of such vessels, united in a fleet, are sufficiently
formidable to call for the fullest attention of an enemy. With
this view the British government , very soon after war was
 declared , stationed cruisers, commanded by active and expe¬
 rienced officers, in front of all those ports along the Channel
 frontier of France , from Ostende to Cape La Hougue, and thence
 to Granville, at which divisions of gun-vessels were known to be
 constructing or fitting out. Buonaparte ’s plan, for the employ¬
 ment of this apparently insignificant description of force in the
 invasion of England , was not matured until the ensuing year;
 but , in the mean time, considerable activity prevailed among
the different entrepots along the above line of coast. On most
 occasions, when any of the flotilla ventured from under the pro¬
 tection of their batteries , they were met, and either captured or
 driven back , by the blockading force ; and were sometimes
 attacked with success, even when moored, as they considered,
beyond the reach of British enterprise . We mean now to
imbody the most interesting of the skirmishes that ensued*
during the present year, between British cruisers and the French
invasion-flotilla.
    On the 14th of June , in the morning, the British 18-pounder
3b’-gun frigate Immortalite , Captain Edward William Campbell
