 176              BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                     1803.

    In the road of Brest were lying four ships of the line : nine
 others were in the docks, repairing and nearly ready ; and these
 were ordered to be expedited by all possible means. Three
 were on the stocks, nearly finished ; and five lay in the inner
 harbour , waiting their turns to be docked ; making a total of 21
 serviceable line-of-battle ships in the port of Brest . There were
 also, laying up in the harbour , six or eight old and worn-out
 ships, including the Invincible and Terrible three -deckers.
    In the port of Lorient were three ships on the stocks, expected
 to be launched in November ; and two additional ones were
 ordered to be laid down. At Saint-Malo a 74 was ordered to
 be built ; and at Nantes four frigates, exclusive of two Dutch-
 built 74s, intended for the Scheldt squadron . At Bordeaux
 another of the latter was ordered to be built . At Rochefort
three line-of-battle ships were building , and nearly ready : three
 others were now ordered. At Toulon there were eight ships of
the line afloat, two on the stocks nearly finished , and two others
about to be commenced . At Marseilles the last of the 10 Dutch-
built 74s for the Scheldt squadron was ordered to be laid-down.
At Genoa a 74-gun ship and frigate were immediately to be put
in hand , from draughts prepared at Brest .* There wTere also
nine French line-of-battle ships at, or coming from, the island of
St .-Domingo, and one, the Marengo , on her road to the East
Indies ; making a total of 66 ships, including 47 afloat, or soon
expected to be so-T
    If it were not quite clear, from the very nature of these for¬
midable preparations , thus carried on in the midst of peace, that
a renewal of the war with England was contemplated , no doubt
could exist , on a perusal of the instructions which, since early in
February , Buonaparte had drawn up for the guidance of General
Decaen . On the 6th of March this officer sailed from Brest , in
the Marengo 74, for the French settlements in India , of which
he had been appointed governor-general ; and whither the Ma¬
rengo, and the frigates Atalante , Belle-Poule , and Semillante,
and transports Cote-d’Or and Marie-Fran §oise, were carrying,
for the alleged purpose of taking possession of Pondicherry
agreeably to the third article of the treaty of Amiens, about
1350 troops.
   It appears by one or two paragraphs in the document alluded
to,J that the first-consul did not anticipate an actual rupture
before the month of September . War was, however, declared by
England , virtually on the 16th of May , when letters of marque
and general reprisals were ordered , and formally in two days

  * Precis des Evenemens Militaires, &c. par M. Le Comte Mathieu
Dumas , Lieutenant General des armees du Roi. A Paris, 1822 ; tome xi.»
p. 189.
  •j* See p. 166 ; also Appendix , No . 21.
  I For the original of which see Appendix , No . 22.
