  188         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1803.
   letter ), and had on board a crew of only 80 men and boys. The
   prize, a remarkably fast-sailing ship,# was afterwards added to
   the British navy under her French name ; but , getting aground
   soon after she was commissioned, the Mignonne was obliged to
   be laid in the mud in Port -Royal harbour , Jamaica.
      When the Goliath ’s signal was made to chase the Mignonne,
   the Cumberland made the Hercule’s to endeavour to cut off the
   Poursuivante . The Hercule made sail in very light and baffling
   winds, and appears to have brought to to fire her broadside long
  before there was any occasion. Owing to this the Poursuivante,
  untouched by a shot, gained considerably in the chase, although
  the Hercule was evidently the faster sailer . Subsequently the
  Hercule filled and got within gun-shot, and a smart action
  ensued ; but the British 74, owing perhaps to a dread of shoal
  water , managed so badly , that the French frigate effected her
  escape into Cape Nicholas -Mole.
     The Hercule was a good deal damaged in her rigging and
  sails, and had a few men wounded, but none killed . A French
  account erroneously states , that the Hercule had 40 men killed
  and wounded, including among the former her captain . Captain
  Ferris , in fact, was at Jamaica , and the first lieutenant , as we
  have stated , was the acting commander. The Poursuivante had
 her masts, rigging , sails, and hull very much cut up, and lost
 six men killed and 15 wounded. Great credit was due to
  Captain Willaumez , his officers and crew, for the skill and spirit
 which they evinced upon the occasion. The Poursuivante , we
 believe , eventually reached Rochefort ; but , as far as our re¬
 searches go, this powerful frigate never afterwards went to sea.
 Having been built in a Dutch port, and that as long ago as the
 year 1794 or 1795, the Poursuivante , in all probability , was
 found to be rotten and unserviceable.
     On the 30th of June , soon after daylight , as the Cumberland
 and Vanguard 74s, Captains Henry William Bayntun and James
 Walker , were cruising between Jean -Rabel and Cape Nicholas-
 Mole , a large ship was discovered steering down towards the
 last -named port . The two 74s immediately went in chase, and
 soon arrived up, the Vanguard on the starboard beam, and the
 Cumberland on the larboard bow, of the French 40-gun frigate
 Creole, Captain Jean -Marie-Pierre Lebastard.
     After receiving a few shot from the Vanguard , and firing one
in return , the Creole hauled down her colours. The frigate had
quitted Cape-Frangois the preceding day, and had on board
 General Morgan , the second in command at the island, and his
staff, together with 530 troops , but only 150 seamen. Being a
fine large frigate, the Creole was added in her own name to the
38-gun class of the British navy ; but , owing in a great degree
to the insufficient manner in which she was repaired at Port-
  * The Jamaica measurement of the Mignonne was 642 tons, but 500 was
probably nearer the mark. See vol. iii., p. 49.
