1803.             CAPTURE OF THE MINERVE.                     189
Boyal dock-yard , the Creole, commanded by Captain Austin
 Bissell , foundered on her passage to England , and had it not
been for the presence of other ships, would have consigned her
officers and crew to a watery grave.
    On the 2d of July the British 38-gun frigate Minerve, Cap¬
tain Jahleel Brenton , grounded and was captured at the entrance
of the harbour of Cherbourg . The circumstances under which
this happened have been so fully detailed by Captain Brenton ’s
brother , that we cannot do better than transcribe our contempo¬
rary ’s account.
   “ In the evening the Minerve, running close in with Cherbourg
in a thick fog, mistook Fort de la Liberte for Pelee ; and a
number of vessels being seen to the eastward , the pilot assured
the captain he might run amongst them without hesitation . The
helm was accordingly put up for the purpose, when j ust as the
ship was about to open her fire, she grounded , and the fog at
the same time dispersing , discovered her to be in a very perilous
situation . She was on the western Cone Head , about six fur¬
longs from Fort de la Liberte , of 70 guns and 15 mortars ; and
one mile from the isle Pelee , of 100 guns , and 25 mortars , from
both of which a fire almost immediately opened . This hap¬
pened about nine o’clock in the evening. Captain Brenton,
aware that strong and decided measures were necessary , and
that the launch of a frigate was not calculated to carry out a
bower anchor , immediately despatched his boats armed, to cut
out a vessel from under the batteries , of sufficient capacity for
the purpose ; whilst the launch , with her carronade, should be
employed in diverting the fire of two gun-brigs, lying in such a
position ahead of the Minerve, as to annoy her greatly by a
raking fire. The yawl, being the first boat in the water , was
sent under the orders of the Honourable Lieutenant William
Walpole , and the other boats were directed to follow as soon as
ready ; but the gallant officer, to whom the enterprise was in
trusted , found his own boat sufficient. He proceeded under a
heavy fire of round, grape, and musketry , and from her position
close to the batteries , cut out a lugger of 50 tons, laden with
stone for the works, and towed her off to the ship. Before the
tower anchor could be placed in this vessel, it was necessary
to clear her of her cargo , and that this might be done, without
adding to the shoal on which the ship lay, she was veered astern
by the ebb tide to the length of a hawser . Unfortunately , the
^oon shone with great brightness . The enemy’s fire became
v.ery galhng: the more so, as no return could be made but from
the two forecastle guns, those of the main deck having been all
run close forward, for the purpose of lightening the snip abaft,
^here she hung . At 11 p. m. the lugger , being cleared, was
brought under the larboard cathead , to receive the small bower an¬
chor, and during this operation , was so frequently struck by the
gun -brigs, as to keep a carpenter constantly employed in stop-
