                                      ’S SHIPS.
1803. ILL-PROVIDED STATE OF LORD NELSON                        185

 person on board able to assist him. In May, 1803, Captain
 Ryves was promoted to the Gibraltar , and Lord Nelson, we
 believe, named the anchorage Agincourt sound.
    On the 9th of November, having obtained a supply of water
and fresh beef for the squadron , Lord Nelson got under way and
sailed from the Magdalena islands ; but , owing to a continuance
of foul weather, he did not arrive off Toulon until the 23d . Here
the British admiral found the French squadron in the outer
road , to all appearance , just as he had left it a month previous.
On the 24th the Excellent 74, Captain Frank Sotheron, joined
the squadron from England.
   The continuance of gales of wind, with a heavy sea from the
north -west to north -east, and a belief that Spain had at length
settled her neutrality , induced Lord Nelson to take his winter
station off Cape San-Sebastian , keeping frigates off’ Toulon, to
apprize him of the least movement on the part of the French
ships . Of the weak and ill-provided state of several of his
ships, Lord Nelson, in his letters to the admiralty , complained
very bitterly , and, as it appears , not without reason. “ The
Superb, ” says his lordship , “ is in a very weak state , but Keats
is so superior to any difficulties, that I hear but little from her.
The Kent is gone to Malta , fit only for a summer passage.
Every bit of twice-laid stuff belonging to the Canopus is con¬
demned , and all the running rigging in the fleet, except the
Victory ’s. We have fitted the Excellent with new main and
mizen rigging : it was shameful for the dock-yard (Portsmouth)
to send a ship to sea with such rigging.”
   The severity of the weather , coupled with the inefficient state
of his squadron , compelled the British admiral , about the 12th
of December , to enter the bay of Palma ; where the ships re¬
mained until the want of water sent them , on the 21st , a second
time to Agincourt sound. In this commodious harbour , Lord
Nelson and his squadron lay at anchor at the close of the year ;
the port of Toulon, and the force within it, being carefully
Watched by Captain Ross Donnelly, of the Narcissus , with
another frigate or two in company.


           LTGHT   SQUADRONS     AND   SINGLE   SHIPS.


   On the 18th of May the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
Eoris , Captain Richard Henry Pearson , cruising off Ushant , fell
in with and chased the French national lugger Affronteur, of 14
long eights and 92 men, commanded by Lieutenant Morce-
Andre Dutoya . Gaining fast upon the lugger the Doris fired a
shot wide of her, to induce her to shorten sail, but without
effect. To a second shot, discharged this time at her, the
lugger fired a shot in return , and actually maintained a running
fight with the frigate, until the latter ran close alongside . Nor
