1803.            CAPTURE OF THE MIGNONNE.                      187

18 long 12-pounders and 200 men, commanded by Lieutenant
Franqois -Louis Kerimel ; and who persisted so long in his
endeavours to escape, that the Endymion ’s chase-guns killed his
first lieutenant and seven seamen, and wounded nine others.
    When fallen in with, the Bacchante was on her way to Brest
from St .-Domingo , whither she had sailed with despatches about
three months previous. The prize was a remarkably fine cor¬
vette of 642 tons, and became added to the British navy , under
her French name, as a post-ship.
     On the 27th of June , at night , three boats belonging to the
British 38-gun frigate Loire, Captain Frederick Lewis Mait¬
land , cruising off the Isle of Bas, was despatched , under the
 orders of Lieutenants Francis Temple and James Bowen, assisted
 among others by Midshipman Philip Henry Bridges , to attack
the French 10-gun brig Venteux , Lieutenant Gilles-Fran §ois
 Montfort , lying close under the batteries of the island . Owing
 to the heavy rowing of one of the boats , two only could get up.
 These, in the most gallant manner , boarded , and after a severe
 conflict of 10 minutes carried, the French brig ; whose 10 guns
 consisted of four long 18-pounders , and six 36-pounder brass
 carronades . The Venteux was perfectly prepared for the attack,
 and had her deck covered with men. Of these she lost her
 second officer and two seamen killed, her commander , with her
 four remaining officers, and eight seamen, wounded. The
 British loss amounted to the boatswain (Mr. M‘Gwier), four
 seamen, and one marine wounded, two of the seamen danger¬
 ously.
     Even without reckoning the force of the batteries , the capture,
  by two boats ' crews, of a brig armed and manned like the
  Venteux , was a truly gallant exploit ; and Lieutenant Temple,
  the leader of the party , well merited the promotion which he in
  consequence obtained . Mr . Bridges , also, of whose conduct on
  the occasion Lieutenant Temple spoke in the highest terms , was
  made a lieutenant.
     On the 28th of June , as a British squadron , composed of the
  74-gun ships Cumberland , Captain Henry William Bayntun,
  Goliath , Captain Charles Brisbane, arid Hercule , acting captain
  Lieutenant John B. Hills , was cruising off Cape Nicholas- Mole,
  two strange sail were discovered in-shore . These were the
  French 24-pounder 44-gun frigate Poursuivante , Commodore
  Jean -Baptiste -Phillibert Willaumez , and 16-gun ship -corvette
  Mignonne , Captain Jean -Pierre Bargeau , neither of them fully
  aHned or manned , two days from Cayes, bound to the Cape on
  their way to France.
     The Goliath by signal went in chase of the Mignonne ; and,
   carrying up the breeze while the latter lay becalmed close under
  the land, overtook and captured the corvette after the exchange
   of a few harmless shot. The Mignonne had landed six of her
   16 long 12-pounders (described as 18-pounders in the official
