1803.                 LORD NELSON OFF TOULON.                         183

table , and 74s Atlas, Berwick (late British ), Intrepide , Mont-
Blanc , and Scipion ; the two in dock were the late British ships
Hannibal , now Annibal, and Swiftsure ; and those on the stocks,
were the 80s Bucentaure and Neptune , and 74s Boree, Phaeton,
and Pluton , the two 80s, and the last -named 74 nearly ready for
launching.
   At this time nearly the whole of the Mediterranean coast was
subject , more or less, to the sway of France . In Barcelona and
other Spanish ports, French cruisers were allowed to carry in and
sell their prizes, while to a British vessel admittance was prohi¬
bited by an order of the government . Genoa was as much
France as Toulon, and in her dock-yard was constructing a
French 74, to be named, after her, the Genois. Tuscany was
gradually becoming French ; and so was Sardinia, although
under the mask of a rigid neutrality . Except Naples , every
state in the two Sicilies was obedient to the nod of Buonaparte;
who had set his emissaries at work in the Morea, to excite the
Greeks to an insurrection against the Turks , in the hope, by
taking part with the latter , to obtain Egypt as the price of,
what could not fail to be, a successful interference.
   Expecting , probably , that the Victory would not be detained
by Admiral Cornwallis, Lord Nelson continued on board the
Amphion, in preference to removing to a larger ship. Within
forty hours after the Amphion had , as already stated , separated
from the Victory , the latter fell in with the Channel fleet, and,
after a stay of scarcely two hours, was permitted to proceed on
her passage to the Mediterranean . On the 28th of May , in
latitude 45° 40' north , longitude 6° 10' west, Captain Sutton was
fortunate enough to fall in with and capture the French 32-gun
frigate Embuscade (late British Ambuscade *), Captain Jean-
Baptiste -Alexis Fradin , 30 days from Cape-Frantjois, bound to
Rochefort , with not the whole of her guns mounted , and with a
crew of only 187 men.
   On the 12th of June , in the evening, the Victory anchored in
Gibraltar , and departed thence on the afternoon of the 15th. On
the 9th of July , she anchored in the harbour of Valetta , island
of Malta , and quitted it on the 11th ; and on the 30th , at about
4 p. m., a few leagues to the westward of Cape Sicie, the Victory
joined the Mediterranean squadron, then consisting of the Gibral¬
tar, Belleisle, Donegal , Renown, and Monmouth , with the three
frigates , Active, Phoebe, and Amphion . On the same evening,
Lord Nelson shifted his flag to the Victory, taking Captain
 George Murray as his first captain , and Captain Hardy , as his
second, the latter being succeeded in the command of the Am¬
phion by Captain Sutton , late of the Victory . The station off
Gape Sicie had been chosen by the vice-admiral on two accounts;

  * See vol. ii., p. 243 .   The Ambuscade was restored to her rank in the
•British navy.
