186         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1803.

did the Affronteur , even then , give up the contest , until her
captain and eight of her men were killed, and 14 wounded, one
of them mortally . The Doris received some slight damage in
the hull and rigging , and had one man wounded, by the fire of
her puny but resolute antagonist.
    It is hard to draw the line between a resistance that is pru¬
dential , and one which is, as this has been pronounced , “ fraught
with temerity .” Had the lugger shot away the frigate's fore
topmast , and thereby effected her escape, all would have united
in praising the skill and bravery of M . Dutoya and his people.
Had the Affronteur surrendered at the first fire, few would have
admitted that her officers and men deserved to belong to a
national cruiser, even of her small class. At all events , in a
service where so much is to be effected by undauntedness , it is
safer to praise the extreme of that quality , than not to censure
an over-cautious discretion.
   The capture of the Affronteur, it will be observed, took place
on the very day on which the declaration of war issued from St .-
James ’s. This, with the capture of two merchant vessels on the
same or the following day , was made a subject of serious com¬
plaint against England . “ Centre le droit des gens, mais suivant
un usage trop commun de la part de l’Angleterre , les hostilities
precederent la declaration de guerre . On croyait encore a Paris
les negociations en activite lorsqu ’on y apprit , par une depeche
telegraphique du prefet maritime de Brest , que les Anglais
s’etaient empares de deux bhtimens marchands dans la baie
d’Audierne ; le meme jour , ou le lendemain, ils attaquerent les
b &timens de guerre frangais.” * The fact is, so far from the
negotiation being “ in activity, ” Lord Whitworth had obtained
his passports since the 12th of the month , and General
Andreossi had applied for his a week earlier. Moreover, it was
only on the 25th of May that General Mortier , from his head¬
quarters at Coerveden, summoned the Hanoverian electorate to
surrender to his army.
   On the 28th of May the French 36-gun frigate Franchise,
still commanded by Captain Jurien , but with 10 of her guns in
the hold, and a reduced complement of 187 men, was captured
by the 74-gun ship Minotaur , Captain John Charles Moore
Mansfield , and two other 74s, which had chased from the
Channel fleet. The prize was 35 days from Port -au-Prince,
bound to Brest . Being a tolerably fine frigate of 898 tons, the
Franchise was added to the British navy, by the same name, as
a 12-pounder 36.
   On the 25th of June , in latitude 47° 10' north , longitude 20°
west , the British 24-pounder 40-gun frigate Endymion , Captain
the Honourable Charles Paget , tell in with, and after a chase of
eight hours, captured , the French ship-corvette Bacchante , of

              * Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 2.
