182       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                      1803.

of the war, consisted of 10 sail of the line, under the command of
Rear -admiral Sir Richard Bickerton , in the Kent 74. The pro¬
bability that this extensive and important station would soon
become the scene of very active operations, led to the appoint¬
ment of Vice-admiral Lord Nelson to the chief command. His
lordship , accordingly , on the 18th of May , hoisted his flag on
board his old ship the Victory , in Portsmouth harbour . On the
20th , at 5 p. m., accompanied by the 18-pounder 32-gun frigate
Amphion , Captain Thomas Masterman Hardy , the Victory sailed
from Spithead , bound , in the first instance , to the fleet oft’Brest,
to ascertain if her assistance would be required by Admiral
Cornwallis ; in which event she was to remain with the latter,
and the vi<?e-admiral was to proceed to his station in the frigate.
   On the 22d, at 4 r . m., the two ships arrived off the island of
Ushant , the appointed rendezvous ; but a severe gale of wind
had blown the British fleet from its station . After a vain search
for the admiral , both at the rendezvous and nearer to Brest , Lord
Nelson , at 7 h. 30 m. p. m. on the 23d, shifted his flag to the
Amphion , and at 8 p. m., made sail, with a fair wind, leaving the
Victory to follow, in case her services should be dispensed with
by the commander-in-chief of the Channel fleet.
   On the 25th , in the morning , the wind shifted from north -west
to south -west, and blew fresh. The foul wind, with a heavy sea,
continued until the night of the 30th , when a light air sprang up
from the northward . With the aid of this, the Amphion, on the
 morning of the 3d of June , entered the Straits , and at 9 h. 30 m.
p . m. anchored in the bay of Gibraltar .       On the 4th , at 4 a . m.>
the Amphion weighed and made sail. On the 15th, the frigate
reached Malta ; quitted it on the 17th, at 3 a . m., and on the 25th,
arrived off Naples , where his lordship expected to find the
squadron . Sir Richard had , however, since the 4th , sailed for
Toulon ; and thither the Amphion immediately bent her course.
A succession of calms and light winds made it the 8th of July
ere Lord Nelson could reach his old cruising ground , where he
found Sir Richard , with the
Gun-ship
  80 Gibraltar.              Captain George Frederick Ryves.
       Kent               CRear-admiral ( w.) Sir Richard Bickerton, Bart.
                          ( Captain Edward O’Bryen.
  74< Donegal .                     Sir Richard John Strachan, Bart.
       Superb .                     Richard Goodwin Keats.
       Beileisle .                  John Whitby.
      .Renown .                     John Chambers White.
  64 Monmouth                       George Hart.
       Agincourt                    Charles Marsh Schomberg.
  Frigates, Active. Phoebe, and ( now) Amphion.

   The French line-of-battle force in Toulon consisted of seven
ships , nearly ready for sea, under Vice-admiral Rene -Madeleine
La Touche -Treville, two repairing in the arsenal , and five on the
stocks . The ships afloat were the 80s Formidable and Indomp~
