 190           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              1803.

   ping the shot-holes. By midnight all was ready ; a kedge
   anchor had been previously laid out for the purpose of warping
   the lugger , but the moment the hawser became taut , it was shot
   away. Every thing now depended upon the boats , which were
  sent to take the lugger in tow, and succeeded, under a severe
  fire, in gaining their object , and the anchor was let go in a
   proper position. At three o’clock in the morning, the wind had
  entirely subsided, and the captain , almost hopeless of being able
  to save the ship, contemplated the probable necessity of being
  obliged to abandon her . With this view he caused the wounded
  men to be brought up and put into the lugger , destroyed his
  private signals , and prepared fires in the store-rooms, to be
  lighted at the last extremity . A fine breeze, however, springing
  up from the land, as the tide rose, revived the hope of saving the
  ship, and the wounded men were returned to the cockpit . The
  lugger ’s masts were soon after shot away by the guns of the
  batteries , over the gangway of the Minerve. At four, the cap¬
  stan was manned , and many of the crew were killed and
  wounded as they hove at the bars . At five, the ship floated,
  under the most heartfelt cheers of the crew. It was considered
  as a certainty , that in the course of two or three minutes they
 would be out of gun-shot of the batteries , and consequently out
  of danger ; but this pleasing prospect soon vanished . The
  wind again declined into a perfect calm, and the last drain of
 the flood tide carried the now helpless ship into the harbour , and
 laid her upon a broken cone. In this situation she remained
 until the top of high water, when she surrendered , after sustain¬
 ing the fire of the enemy for ten hours, and having eleven men
 killed and sixteen wounded.
      “ Such was the state of her masts that , had there been a mo¬
 derate breeze, they must have gone by the board. She was
 lightened in the course of the day by the French , and got off.
The capture of so fine a frigate at the commencement of the
 war, occasioned great triumph , and was announced in the theatre
at Brussels , by feuonaparte in person ; who, addressing the au¬
dience, stated the circumstance in the following terms : ‘ La
guerre vient de commencer sous les plus heureuse auspices , une
superbe fregate de Tennemi vient de se rendre a deux de nos
chaloupes canonnieres .’ The ship was called the 1Canonniere/
in order to support this despicable falsehood.
     “ Captain Brenton was detained a prisoner in France for two
years and a half ; many of his officers and men died in captivity.
The greater part , suffering a barbarous imprisonment of eleven
years , were not released till the tyrant was defeated on the plains
of Leipsic, in 1814. A British sailor, who had both his legs
shot off while the Minerve lay under the fire of the batteries,
was carried to the cockpit . Waiting for his turn to be dressed,
he heard the cheers of the crew on deck , and eagerly demanded
what they meant . Being told the ship was on the shoal, and
