184        BRITISH AND TRENCH FLEETS
                                   .—MEDITER
                                           .                    1803.
  one, should Spain, as was not thought unlikely , suddenly ally
  herself to France , to prevent the junction of a Spanish fleet from
  the westward ; the other, to be sufficiently to windward to be
  able, if the usual north -easterly gale should shift to north -north¬
  west, or north -north-east, to take shelter under the Hyeres
 islands , or under Cape San-Sebastian.
     Early in the month of August the 80-gun ship Canopus, Rear-
 admiral George Campbell , Captain John Conn, joined the British
  squadron ; and on the 15th of the month the fine 80-gun ship
 Neptune was launched at Toulon. This, in a little while, aug¬
 mented the French force in the road to eight sail of the line;
 while Lord Nelson, having detached the Canopus and Mon¬
 mouth , was. still left with only six, the Victory , Belleisle, Kent,
 Renown, Superb , and Triumph ; the latter recently arrived , and
 commanded by Captain Sir Robert Barlow. A French writer,
 alluding to the British naval force in the Mediterranean at this
 time, says : “ L’amiral Nelson croisait avec dix-huit vaisseaux
 et un nombre correspondant de fregates .”# This must have
 explained to the satisfaction of the French people, why their
 admiral , with only eight sail of the line, made no effort to cap¬
ture or drive away the blockading force.
    His ships being short of water, Lord Nelson, on the 24th of
 October, steered for a newly discovered anchorage among the
 Magdalena islands, on the north coast of Sardinia ; leaving, to
 watch the French force in Toulon, the frigates Seahorse and
 Narcissus . On the 31st, at 6 p. m., after a seven days ’ anxious
 struggle with adverse gales and currents , dark nights and a rocky
 and most intricate passage , the whole squadron , anchored,
without an accident, in Agincourt sound, under the Sardinian
shore ; a noble harbour formed by an indented bay in the
latter , and defended to the northward by the small islands of St .-
Estevan , Spargiotou , Magdalena , and Cibrera.
    This being an anchorage , which according to the declaration
of Lord Nelson, was one of the finest harbours he had ever seen,
wTe feel bound to state how Captain Ryves happened to make
the important discovery. Some time in the year 1802 the 64-
gun ship Agincourt , then commanded by Captain Ryves, was
detached by Sir Richard Bickerton, to proceed to the Magda¬
lena islands , and , if possible, prevent the French taking pos¬
session of them , as, according to intelligence recently received,
they were about to do, notwithstanding the treaty of Amiens.
At this period there did not exist a chart of those islands ; nor
was it known that any ship of war had ever anchored among
them : the Agincourt herself, indeed, was nearly lost in doing
so. No Frenchmen appearing , Captain Ryves spent the week,
he was directed to remain there in making a survey of the
islands j which he performed alone, there not being a single

                * Precis des Evenemens
                                     , tomex., p. 55,
