1803.                    INVASION - FLOTILLA.                     181

 the bomb-vessels to the north -east of the town, and the re¬
 mainder of the squadron abreast of the town and pier-head
 battery . The French immediately opened a fire from all direc¬
 tions, and the first shell fell within a ship’s length of the Autumn
 and burst under water. The vessels being at this time so close
to each other as to be in danger from the enemy’s shells, Captain
Jackson directed them to weigh and reanchor in more open order,
 while he remained with the Autumn in her original station . In
this way the bombardment continued for several hours, with some
 apparent damage to the east end of the town, but with none
 whatever to the British squadron . At length a gale from the
north -east obliged the ships to weigh and stand off; and thus
the action ended .             .                            *
    On the next day, the 28th , a division       of gun-boats  , taking
advantage of the absence of the British squadron , quitted Calais
for Boulogne ; and , although chased and fired at by the 36-gun
frigate Leda, Captain Robert Honyman , they arrived in safety
at their destination . On the 29th , a second division, 25 in
number , attempted to do the same ; and , after a three hours’
cannonade by the Leda, the whole, except the two which ran on
shore and were bilged upon the rocks, succeeded in reaching the
anchorage off the pier of Boulogne ; forming, with those already
there , a force of 55 sail.
    On the 31st of October, at 9 a .m., while the Leda frigate, in
company with the Lark and Harpy sloops of war, were off
Staples , working towards the shore against a strong east-south-
cast wind, a large gun-brig , said to be of 12 long 24-pounders,
"With six schooners and sloops under her convoy, was observed
coming out of the port. Captain Honyman immediately sig¬
nalled the Harpy and Lark to make sail in chase . About this
time, however, the British hired cutter , Admiral-Mitchell , of 12
carronades, 12-pounders , and 35 men and boys, commanded by
■Lieutenant Alexander Shippard , being close off Boulogne, the
Port to which the vessels were steering , gallantly stood after
them ; and, at 10 a . m., brought the gun-brig to action, close
hnder the batteries of Portet . At the end of a two hours and a
half ’s engagement , the cutter drove the gun-brig and one of the
sl° ops on shore.
. The Admiral -Mitchell ’smast and cross-jack yard were wounded
in several places , by a shell which fell on board, and her sails
and rigging were a good deal cut by grape : the cutter had also
2jie carronade dismounted , and was hulled in several places,
•fortunately , however, her loss did not amount to more than two
J^en badly , and two slightly wounded. The strong land -wind
having entirely prevented the small British squadron in the offing
Rom acting, this affair was highly creditable to Lieutenant Ship-
Pard, and the officers and crew of the Admiral-Mitchell . Our
att ^ffii°n is now called to the Mediterranean.
    I he British naval force upon that station, at the breaking out
