  194           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS
                                               .                        1803,
  sixes*), Captain Austen Bissell, was working between the islands
  of Guanda and St.- Domingo, she observed, and immediately
  bore up for, a French brig-corvette, lying at anchor in Leogane
  roads . The latter , which was our old acquaintance the Lodi, now
  reduced in force to 10 guns, 6-pounders , and 61 men, and
 commanded by Lieutenant Pierre -Isaac Taupier, placed springs
 on her cables, and prepared to repel the attack of the British
 vessel. At 3 h. 15m. p. m., having anchored, with a spring on her
 cable, within 30 yards of the Lodi, the Racoon commenced the
 action . After a mutual cannonade of 30 minutes’ duration , the
 French brig cut her cables, and began to make off ; whereupon
 the Racoon cut also, and, following closely, compelled her op¬
ponent , at the end of 10 minutes more, to strike her colours.
The Lodi was nearly unrigged by the Racoon’s well-directed
fire, and sustained a loss of one man killed and 14 wounded.
The Racoon had only one person wounded, master ’s mate Thomas
Grill, whose left arm was carried away by a round shot.
    On the 17th of August , at 1 p. m., the Racoon, cruising off
San -Jago in the island of Cuba , in company with a prize-
schooner , observed an armed brig coming alongshore ; and who,,
soon afterwards , hauled her wind to speak a schooner which had
been avoiding the Racoon since morning. At 3 p. m. the strange
brig and schooner bore up together , under all sail, with a strong
breeze. Captain Bissell stood off until certain of fetching them,
and then made sail in shore. At 4h . 15m . p. m. the brig
hoisted French colours, and fired a gun, still keeping within
half a mile of the shore, under a press of sail. At 4h . 20 m.
 P. m. she fired her broadside at the Racoon , and attempted to
 cross the latter ’s hawse ; but the Racoon, although going eight
 knots through the water, put her helm hard a-port, and fired her
 broadside , which, as the two vessels were nearly on board of each
 other , brought down the French brig’s studding -sails, topsails,
 &c. The latter then luffed up, ran on shore in a small rocky
bay , and struck her colours. To avoid a similar fate, the Racoon
hove in stays , and , on wearing round , discovered the breakers
nearly under her stern. In about half an hour the French brig
rehoisted her colours, and was repeatedly fired upon, in passing,
by the Racoon. Towards sunset the former's mainmast went
 overboard , and the vessel fell on her beam-ends. As the French
brig had landed boats full of armed men, and lined the shore,
and the Racoon was 44 men short of complement, including her
two lieutenants , Captain Bissell felt himself obliged to refuse the
application of the master , Mr. James Thompson, to go, with a
few picked men, and endeavour to bum the vessel. By morning

    * The Racoon’s carronades had originally been 32-pounders (see vol.
p . 369) ; but on March 3, 1800, these were ordered to be exchanged for 24s;
and, on September 14, 1802, the latter were again exchanged for 18s. t)n
this subject see vol. i., p. 403, note Y*,
