   198         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                    1803.
     neglecting to take any kind of weapon in his hand , leaped from
     the boat on board the chasse- maree ; and , running to the
                                                                      side
     close off which the French boat lay, stood, in a menacing
     tude , unarmed as he was, for at least half a minute, until his atti¬
                                                                      four
     companions, with a supply of muskets and ammunition, and
    who could only quit their ticklish boat one at a time, got to
                                                                       his
    assistance . If not astonishment at the sight , it must have been
    a generous impulse , that prevented the Frenchmen from
                                                                   shoot¬
    ing or sabring the brave boatswain ; for they were, it
                                                                   seems,
    near enough to the vessel’s side, to have done even the
                                                                   latter.
    Seeing that Lieutenant Rowed and his four men were deter¬
    mined to defend their prize, the French boat , after a feeble
    attempt to get possession, sheered off, the soldiers in her
    up, for a short time, as they receded from the vessel, keeping
                                                                 an inef¬
    fectual fire of musketry . The battery also opened a fire upon
   the chasse-maree as she was towing off ; but it proved
   harmless with that from the soldiers, both on the beach equallyand in
   the boat.
       The capture of two unarmed chasse- marees (for the mate had
   taken his prize without any difficulty) would, indeed, be a
   trifling occurrence, were it not for the circumstances under which
   one of them had been boarded and brought off;
                                                         circumstances
   that ennoble the act, and rank it above many which are
                                                               blazoned
  in the Gazette , and yield to the parties both praise and
                                                             promotion.’
  The navy-list shows, that Lieutenant Rowed gained no step
                                                                       in
  his profession : indeed it was not, as the same document
                                                                 proves,
  until nearly ten years afterwards , that he was made a
                                                                    com¬
  mander . As to the boatswain , he, it appears, on account of the
  very station he filled, and, by every account , so well filled, wras,
  according to the etiquette of the service, excluded from the
  reward of promotion. It was only, therefore, from the Patriotic
  Fund at Lloyd ’s, that he could receive some testimony of the
  high opinion entertained of his services. Lieutenant
                                                                 Rowed
  himself made the application , founding it on the inability of the
  admiralty , without violating precedent , to provide for the “ poor
 fellow ; and who,” adds his commander, and where was there            a
 better judge ? “ exclusive of his bravery, is a very good cha¬
 racter .” The committee, it is believed, presented Mr . Marks
 with a handsome sum of money. Acts like this of
 Rowed and his four men (the names of all of whomLieutenant  we would
 record , did we know them) deserve to be made public, if only
 for the example they hold out, not of adequate reward
                                                              certainly;
but of the impunity which often accompanies the most
                                                            hazardous
attacks . Let him, therefore, who is disposed to calculate the
chances of personal risk that may attend the enterprise in which
he is called upon to embark , reflect upon the 49 musket -balls
which were aimed at, and yet missed, Lieutenant Rowed and
the four gallant fellows who were on board of this
French chasse-maree.                                          captured
