 200          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1803.
  from the shore on board of the other two vessels. Thus frus¬
  trated in his plan, the lieutenant cut the cable of the vessel, and
  then abandoned her to go to the assistance of his coadjutor in
  the other boat.
     In the mean time Mr. Burstal , with a sergeant of marines and
  five other men, in defiance of a party of 10 soldiers armed with
   muskets and bayonets , had boarded and carried the French
   brig ; but not until the former had killed six of the soldiers,
    hove two overboard, and drove the remainder, with the brig’s
   crew, down her hatchway . Finding that this vessel, besides
   being light and of no value, was also fast aground upon a ridge
   of rocks, Lieutenant Hawkins , who had now joined his com¬
   panion , contented himself with cutting the brig’s cable ; not
   thinking proper, from motives of humanity , to set the vessel on
   fire, as several people were heard below, supposed to be wounded.
   In this very dashing little exploit, Mr. Burstal ’s boat, in board¬
   ing the French brig, had one man killed and two wounded, the
   only loss sustained by the British.
      On the 26th of October the British 18-gun ship-sloop Osprey,
   Captain George Younghusband , being off Trinidad , saw and
   chased a suspicious sail under the land . On arriving within
   four miles of the stranger the Osprey found herself becalmed,
   and at the same time discovered, from the number of sweeps
  rowed by her, that the vessel was a privateer . The Osprey’s
  further progress being checked by the calm, Captain Young-
  husband despatched three boats , under the command of Lieu¬
  tenant Robert Henderson, in the cutter , to attempt the capture
  of the schooner. The unequal speed of the boats being greatly
  in favour of the cutter , Lieutenant Henderson , apprehensive that
  if he waited for his companions the privateer would escape, con¬
  tinued to pull ahead , and at length , with his 17 seamen, in the
  bravest manner, under a heavy fire from the guns and musketry
  of the vessel, boarded and captured the French privateer-
 schooner Ressource , mounting four 4-pounders, with a crew of
 43 men, of whom two were killed and 12 wounded. On board
   he cutter , Lieutenant Henderson and four seamen were wounded,
   ne of the latter dangerously.
     On the 27th of October the British 16- gun ship-sloop Merlin,
 Captain Edward Pelham Brenton, and 14-gun schooner Mil-
 brook , Lieutenant Mauritius Adolphus Newton De Starck , dis¬
 covered the French lugger-privateer Sept-Freres , of two carriage-
 guns and 30 men, commanded by Captain Pollet , endeavouring
to get into Calais. Captain Brenton immediately despatched in
pursuit of her the boats of the Merlin, under the orders of Lieu¬
tenant Henry Clement Thompson, who had already lost an arm
in the service. Finding her retreat effectually cut off by the
British boats, the lugger ran herself on shore about half a mile
to the westward of Gravelines. In the evening the Milbrook
stood in, and anchored within musket -shot of the Sept -Freres ;
