1803.             CAPTURE OF THE MINERVE.                      191

would soon be clear of the forts ; 1Then d—n the legs !'
exclaimed the poor fellow, and taking his knife from his pocket,
he cut the remaining muscles which attached them to him, and
joined in the cheers with the rest of his comrades. When the
ship was taken , he was placed in the boat to be conveyed to the
hospital ; but determined not to outlive the loss of liberty , he
 slacked his tourniquets , and bled to death .”*
    To this account we have only to add, that , among the gun-
vessels which attacked the Minerve in her defenceless situation,
 were the two brigs Chiffon and Terrible , each armed with eight
 or ten heavy long guns . They, in fact, were the “ chaloupes
 canonnieres ” alluded to in the French accounts . In capturing
 the Minerve, the French got back one of their own frigates ; and
 they represent her, truly , we believe, to have mounted , including
 fourteen 32-pounder carronades and six nines on the quarterdeck
 and forecastle, 48 guns.
     In the month of January , 1806, and not before, Captain
 Brenton was released from his captivity in exchange for Captain
 Infernet , of the Intrepide , taken at the battle of Trafalgar . At
 a court -martial subsequently held at Portsmouth , Captain Bren¬
 ton, his officers, and surviving ship’s company, were not only
 most honourably acquitted for the loss of the Minerve, but
  highly praised for their gallant defence of her.
     On the 4th of July , in the evening, the British 38-gun frigate
  Naiad , Captain James Wallis , sent her boats , under the orders
  of Lieutenant William Dean, assisted by Lieutenant John Louis,
  Lieutenant of marines Robert Irwin, and Messieurs Gordon,
  Glenny , and Stewart , midshipmen, to cut out from among the
  rocks and shoals of the Saintes near Brest the French national
  schooner Providence , of two guns and 22 men and boys, Lieu¬
  tenant Martres Preville , on her way from the foundery near
  Nantes to Brest, laden with heavy cannon, 36, 24, and 18
  pounders , and some choice ship-timber . Notwithstanding all
  the difficulties they had to encounter in the rapidity of the tide,
  and the number of rocks and shoals with which the French
  schooner was surrounded and protected , the British boats brought
  her safely off’, without the occurrence of the slightest accident.
      On the afternoon of the 24th of July a heavy squall from the
  land induced the two French 74s in Cape Franqois , the Duquesne,
  Commodore Pierre -Maurice-Julien Querangal , and Duguay-
  Trouin, Captain Claude Touftet, accompanied by the 40-gun
  frigate Guerriere , Captain Louis-Alexis Beaudouin, to put to
  sea, in the hope to be able to effect their escape to Europe . On
  clearing the harbour , the two 74s hauled to the westward , but
  ttot unseen by a part of the British blockading squadron ; which
  then consisted of the four 74-gun ships Bellerophon , Commo¬
  dore John Loring, and Elephant , Theseus , and Vanguard , Cap¬
  tains George Dundas , John Bligh, and James Walker.
                       * Brenton, vol. iii., p. 213.
