196        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1803.

   Having taken possession of the cutter , the Racoon crowded
sail after the schooner, the Jeune -Adele , carrying six small
guns , and 80 troops ; and which vessel, on being approached
within gun-shot and fired at, surrendered without further resist¬
ance. Standing in-shore to rejoin her first prize, the Racoon
soon discovered that the Frenchmen on board, while the latter
was engaging the cutter and schooner, had overpowered the
prize-crew, and run the brig on shore among the rocks . Captain
Bissell, however, got back his officer and men. The loss on
board the cutter and schooner was about 40 in killed and
wounded : that of the Racoon was only one person wounded,
Mr . Thompson , the master , who in the early part of the action
had received a violent contusion, which completely disabled
him.
   On the 14th of August , when in latitude 48° north , longitude
 16° west, on her homeward voyage, the British East -India
■Company’s ship Lord Nelson, Captain Robert Spottiswood, of
26 guns (20 long 18 and six long 12 pounders ), and 102 men
in crew, exclusive of passengers , was fallen in with by the French
ship-privateer Bellone, of 34 guns , including 24 long eights on
her main deck , and 260 men. An action ensued, and lasted an
hour and a half, when the privateer succeeded in carrying her
opponent by boarding , but not until the Bellone had been once
repulsed , and the Indiaman sustained a loss of five men killed
and 31 wounded. Placing an officer and 41 men in charge of
the Lord-Nelson, the Bellone proceeded with her towards
Corunna . On the 20th a British frigate chased the two ships,
and would have retaken the Indiaman , had not the Bellone,
trusting to her great sailing powers, led away the former. The
Lord-Nelson, now alone, was attacked on the 23d by an English
cutter -privateer , of fourteen 6-pounders ; and the latter , highly
to the credit of her officers and crew, maintained a two hours
action before she was beaten off'.
   On the 25th , at 1 p, m., in latitude 46° north , longitude 12
west, the British 18-gun brig-sloop Seagull (sixteen 24-pounder
carronades and two sixes), Captain Henry Burke , discovered
to leeward and chased the Lord-Nelson. At 5 p. m. the latter
hoisted French colours, and fired a gun . At 7 p. m., the Sea¬
gull having got within gun-shot, an action commenced ; which
continued , with very slight intermission, until 6 a . m. on the
26th ; when the brig, having received two shot between wind
and water, had her masts and rigging much wounded and cut
up, and her fore yard shot away in the slings, hauled off to
At 8 h. 30 m., just as the Seagull , having replaced her da maged
rigging , was about to renew the action, a British squadron , °t
four sail of the line, under Captain Sir Edward Pellew , in the
80-gun ship Tonnant , hove in sight . By noon, or a little after,
the Colossus, the advanced ship of Sir Edward ’s squadron, over-
ook. ?jid recaptured the Lord-Nelson . In her two actions, par“
