1803.           BOADICEA AND DUGUAY -TROUIN.
                                                                 193

west to east-north -east; the Duguay -Trouin and Guerriere again
made their appearance , and were now so near as fully to discover
that the largest and weathermost ship was a French 74.
    This would have justified Captain Maitland in discontinuing
the pursuit , except perhaps to watch the enemy ’s motions and
endeavour to ascertain his route . Being aware, however, that
French ships, ships, singly and in small divisions, were coming
from the island of St .-Domingo ; and that they were mostly
armed en flute, and manned with a very sickly, as well as nume¬
 rically inferior crew, Captain Maitland resolved to have some
 stronger proof that the two ships to leeward were not of that
                                                                     2
description. Accordingly the Boadicea stood on ; and at
     M., when passing at the distance of about a quarter of a mile,
 exchanged broadsides with the Duguay -Trouin . The fire from
 the latter , although ineffectual , indicated that the ship was fully
 armed ; and the Boadicea found it necessary to make all sail to
 escape from her opponents so decidedly superior to her . The
 Duguay -Trouin and Guerriere , who was considerably to leeward
 of her consort , immediately wore round in pursuit of the British
 frigate ; but finding , at 2 li. 50 m. p. m., that the Boadicea was
  gaining ground , the French 74 and frigate gave over the chase
  and hauled to the south-east.
     It is stated , in a contemporary work, that the Boadicea brought
  down the Duguay -Trouin ’s foretopsail yard, and sent several
  shot between wind and water ; and that , according to the testi¬
  mony of a prisoner on board the 74, the latter was compelled to
  keep her pumps incessantly going for three days .* With respect
  to the fall of the topsail yard, no notice is taken of it in the
  Doadicea’s log ; and the alleged damage to the hull of the
  Duguay -Trouin rests upon very questionable authority.
     On the 2d of September the latter ship and her consort arrived
  off Cape Prior . Here they fell in with a British squadron
                                                               , under
  Commodore Sir Edward Pellew . The only ship of this squadron,
  m a situation to chase with any effect, was the Culloden 74,
  Captain Barrington Dacres ; and at about 11 h. 50 m. a . m. the
  latter commenced action with the Duguay -Trouin and Guerriere,
   both of whom were well to windward . The French 74, being
   fhe weathermost ship, got first into Corunna , the forts of which
   bred at the Culloden as she approached . With the frigate the
   latter kept up a running fight until 2h . 30 m. p. m. ; when, being
                                                                to haul
   almost in the jaws of the port , the British 74 was obliged
   °ff The Culloden had four men wounded ; and the Guerribre,
   according to the French accounts , six men killed and 15 wounded,
   deluding among the latter her captain and first lieutenant . The
   frigate’s masts and rigging were also much cut.
                                                               18 - gun
    P n the 11th of July , in the forenoon , as the British
  brig-sloop Racoon ( 16 carronades , 18-pounders , and two long
                                 , vol. i., p. 845,
                         # Marshall
     VOL. Ill                          o
