 192         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1803.

      At about 9 p. m., when darkness favoured the manoeuvre, the
  French ships separated , the Duguay -Trouin tacking to the east¬
  ward , while the Duquesne continued her course alongshore to
  the westward . The Elephant being the weathermost of the
  chasing ships, was ordered to tack after the Duguay -Trouin ;
  while the commodore, in the Bellerophon, accompanied by the
   18-pounder 32-gun frigates iEolus and Tartar , Captains Andrew
   Fitzherbert Evans and John Perkins , pursued the Duquesne . At
  about midnight the Theseus and Vanguard joined in the chase.
  On the 25th , at 7 a . m., the Theseus was detached , in conse¬
  quence of a heavy firing being heard to the eastward . At 8 a . m.
  a brigand battery opened a fire upon the Duquesne , which she
  returned . The Vanguard and Tartar , towards noon, were fast
  coming up with the French ship ; and at about 3 h. 30 m. p. m,,
  after an exchange of several shot from bow and stern chasers,
  the Duquesne struck her colours. It appears that the French
  ship sustained no loss ; nor did the British loss amount to more
  than one man killed and one wounded on board the Vanguard.
  The prize, a fine 74 of 1901 tons , was afterwards added to the
  British navy under her French name ; but being, in the following
 year, carelessly run aground on Morant Keys, went to England
  only to be broken up.
     The Elephant was not so fortunate as to make a prize of her
 chase . At daylight , when off Cape Picolet , Captain Dundas
 saw the Duguay -Trouin about a mile from him, and immediately
 wore in pursuit . At 6 a . m. the French 74 opened a fire from
 her stern-chasers, and hulled the British ship two or three times.
 Soon afterwards the Elephant gained a position upon the star¬
 board quarter of the Duguay -Trouin, and there fired into her
 several distant broadsides . About this time the British 18-gun
 ship-sloop Snake , Captain William Roberts , made herself
 known in the north -west quarter ; but the appearance of the
 Guerriere frigate to windward, or some other unexplained cause,
 prevented the Elephant from maintaining her position. The
consequence was, that both the Duguay -Trouin and the Guerriere
 effected their escape. The Elephant had a few shot in her hull,
 and one in her bowsprit, and sustained some slight damage in
 her rigging and sails ; but it does not appear that a single man
 on board of her was hurt.
    The French 74 and frigate steered straight for Europe , and
reached latitude 46° 40' north , longitude 11° 16' west, without any
 occurrence worth notice. On the 29th of August , in the afternoon
when as near as that to the port to which they were bound,
 Ferrol, they fell in with the British 38-gun frigate Boadicea,
Captain John Maitland . The latter immediately made sail in
chase, and before dark ascertained that the strangers were
enemies. On the 31st, at daybreak , the weather being foggy?
the strange ships were not discernible. At 1 h. 30 m. p.
however, the fog having dispersed, and the wind shifted from
