1803.                RACOON AND        MUTINE,                     195

the latter had lost her remaining mast , and lay a perfect wreck,
full of water.
      On this occasion the Racoon sustained neither loss nor damage.
As to the name and force of his opponent , Captain Bissell says,
u I have since learned her name is la Mutine , national brig,
 carrying 18 long 18-pounders , and was full of men from Port -au^
 faix , bound to St .-Jago .” Such a force for a brig has not been
 *uet with. The guns , if 18-pounders , must have been carronades
                                                                        ;
 % as is more probable , were long eights or sixes.
       On the 13th of October , in the afternoon , the Racoon , still
 commanded by the same enterprising officer, while cruising off
 Cumberland harbour in the island of Cuba, observed several
 vessels to windward coming close alongshore , all of which,
 before sunset, hauled in towards the harbour . Having heard of
 fhe evacuation of Port -au-Prince , Captain Bissell anchored in a
 suiall bay, in the expectation of seeing those vessels pass him in
 fhe night . Daylight on the 14th discovered eight or nine sail, a
 few miles to windward , nearly becalmed . The Racoon instantly
  "Weighed    , with a fine land wind, and proceeded in chase . At
  6 h. 30 m. a . m. a brig , a schooner, and a cutter , all apparently
  full of men, hoisted French colours, and fired guns to windward,
  f'he brig attempted to get in-shore of the Racoon , and her two
  consorts, with the assistance of their sweeps and boats, endea¬
  voured to join her. The land breeze, however, carried the Racoon
  Vuthin gun-shot of the brig ; which, after receiving one or two
   broadsides, struck , and proved to be the Petite -Fille , French
  butional gun-brig , having on board 180 troops, including about
   b0 officers of all ranks.
       Scarcely had the Racoon sent an officer and a small party of
   ^en to secure her prize, than the schooner and cutter , having
   £°t nearly within gun-shot , commenced firing. Calms and
   baffling winds prevented the Racoon from getting nearer until
   fb a , m., when the sea-breeze set in. At 11a . m. the two
   Vessels bore up together , evidently with a determination to board
   fhe Racoon, the cutter steering for her bows, and the schooner
   hauling out to pass astern . The British brig shortened sail to
   receive her two opponents , but kept herself under sufficient com¬
   mand to counteract their design . When the assailants had
   drived within pistol-shot , the Racoon fired a broadside at the
   Setter, who speedily returned it with long guns and musketry,
    .he Racoon then wore round and fired her opposite broadside
    ffito the schooner ; and so, alternately , maintaining a running
       ©ht, and preventing either from boarding . This mode of en-
    gugmg las ted more than an hour, both schooner and cutter
    •, ee P^ng up an incessant fire of musketry ; nor was it until she
       sd been literally beaten to a wreck, and had lost many men in
      ? led, that the cutter struck her colours. She proved to be the
        rnelie, a national vessel, carrying four carriage -guns, with many
       Nivels, and upwards of 70 troops.
                                    o2
