  1803. BOATS OF THE BLANCHE IN MANCENILLE BAY.                   203
    the reward usually is, if the affair be represented in its true
    colours to the proper authority . The same officer, who, when
    about to transmit to his government the account of an engage¬
    ment between his ship and another , fears saying too much, les t
    he should be chargeable with egotism, when, in the routine of
    his duty , he has to write about an act performed exclusively by
   his subordinates , enters minutely into the merits of the case,
   points out those who distinguished themselves , and separates,
   as well as he is able, the actual combatants from such as, by
   accident or otherwise, did not partake of the danger ; well
   knowing that , without this act of justice on his part , promotion,
   honours, and other rewards, may light upon the undeserving,
   while he who fought and bled, he who, both planned and
   achieved the enterprise, may find himself passed over and neg¬
   lected.
      The captain of the Blanche had a fine opportunity , without
  detracting from the bravery of one party , to state the good for¬
  tune (call it nothing else) of the other . Here follow his letter
  to the admiralty : “ Having gained intelligence that there was a
  large coppered cutter full of bullocks for the Cape, laying close
  under the guns of Monte-Christi (four 24-pounders and three
  field-pieces), notwithstanding her situation , I was convinced we
  could bring her off; and at two this morning she was masterly
  and gallantly attacked by Lieutenant Lake , in the cutter , and
  Lieutenant Nichols of the marines, in the barge , who cut her
  cut . She is ninety -two tons burthen , coppered close-up and
  fastened , with two 4- pounders , six swivels, and twenty muskets.
  This affair cost me two men killed , and two wounded.”
     The mistatements in this letter , now that the correct details
  arC confronted with them , discover their importance ; and it
 cannot be doubted , that Captain Mudge had a favourite whom
 he was determined to serve, no matter at whose expense. How
 came he not to name Lieutenant Nicolls among the wounded ?
 ^ was not a scratch of his finger nor a graze of his shin, but a
 hole on each side of his body and a ball in his arm, that sent him
 bleeding to the Blanche ’s cockpit . Who would expect that , of
 *he “ two” men wounded, one was a commissioned officer ? In
 every case, except this , the rank , if not the name, of the officer
 *s stated in the official letter ; and , in some letters, the smallest
 hoy in the ship, if he has been wounded ever so slightly , may
hud his name in the returns . The name of Lieutenant “ Nichols,”
however, as the commanding officer of one of the boats (not of
    the barge ”), entitled him, in the estimation of the committee
at Lloyd ’s, to a second best claim upon their bounty ; so
                                                                 that,
'vhen the Patriotic Fund presented Lieutenant Lake , (< for his
gallantry, ” with a sword valued at 50/., they gave Lieutenant
•Nicolls° ue valued at 30/ . Another quarter , equally deceived,
promoted one officer, but , until a subsequent explanation at
 cast, paid no attention to the claims of the other.
