1803.         COMMODORE LORING AT ST.- DOMINGO.               209
tain death that awaited them, either by perishing in the ship, or
 by being massacred , as was the execrable practice, on the shore;
 feeling it to be almost a stigma upon the character of the British
 navy not to make an effort to save human beings, political
 enemies especially, so critically circumstanced , Lieutenant Wil¬
 loughby took upon himself the whole responsibility, and put
back with his launch towards the grounded ship.
    Finding , as he approached the Clorinde, that her side was
 crowded with men ready to spring into the first boat which came
 alongside , and knowing that his people, as well as those who
 entered the launch from the ship, would fall an immediate sacri¬
fice, the lieutenant searched for, and with difficulty procured, a
small punt . In this he embarked , directing the launch to lay off,
and was soon on board the frigate ; which he found heeling
much and beating heavily. Despairing now of saving the ship,
Lieutenant Willoughby yet resolved to put in practice every
resource to save her numerous crew. As the most feasible plan
which suggested itself, the lieutenant represented to General
Lapoype that , as by the terms of the capitulation the French
vessels of war were to haul down their colours    when outside the
harbour , it would not be a greater sacrifice of national honour,
considering the situation of the Clorinde , if he did so imme¬
 diately , and gave the frigate up to him. Lieutenant Willoughby
would then , he said, hoist English colours, wait upon General
Dessalines , and demand , not oply that the British flag should be
respected , but that , if assistance could not be procured from
the shore, and the Clorinde should be lost in the night then fast
approaching , the crew and passengers should be considered as
prisoners to the British , and be protected until the commanding
 officer of the squadron had it in his power to send for them.
    General Lapoype readily assenting to the terms proposed, the
 French flag was hauled down, and replaced by the British flag ;
and Lieutenant Willoughby immediately hailed the Haytian
officer in command of Fort St.-Joseph , and expressed a wish to
wait upon General Dessalines. Permission was granted , and
Lieutenant Willoughby , after experiencing some difficulty in
landing , obtained an interview with the Haytian general ; who
not only received the British lieutenant with great urbanity , but
promised all that he requested . With the assistance thus ob¬
tained , and that of two or three more boats which had just
Joined from the squadron , and favoured by a sudden fall in the
        Lieutenant Willoughby succeeded in heaving the Clorinde
ofl the rocks. Thus , “ to the uncommon exertions and pro¬
fessional abilities, ” as Rear -admiral Duckworth happily expresses
it, of Acting-lieutenant Willoughby , was owing the preservation
ot more than 900 people' s lives, and the acquisition to the
   ntish navy of a frigate which, with her late consort, the
  urvefllante, continued, for many years afterwards , to be one of
  he finest ships of the 38-gun class.
  VOL. HI ,               &P
