204         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1803.

   Between the two attacks upon the Albion, another boat-party
from the Blanche captured , in a very gallant manner, a vessel of
superior force. On the 4th , in the morning, the launch , armed
with a 12-pounder carronade, and manned with 28 men, under
the command of Mr . John Smith , master ’s mate , attacked , and
after an obstinate conflict of 10 minutes boarded and carried, as
she was coming out of the Caracol passage , a French schooner,
mounting one long 8-pounder on a pivot, and manned with 30
men, of whom one was killed and five were wounded . The
launch had one man killed and two wounded. The prize was a
beautiful ballahou -schooner, and had on board a considerable
quantity of dollars.
    In his official letter , announcing the capture of this schooner,
 Captain Mudge says, “ She is one of the finest vessels of her
 class I ever saw, and is fit for his majesty ’s service ;” and, to
 show how ready he was, in some cases, to atone for his apparent
neglect of a young officer, Captain Mudge in a postscript adds,
u I have omitted mentioning the Honourable Frederick Berkley;
 but the onfy apology I can make is saying lie behaved nobly,
and was much to be envied.”
    A day or two after the affair of Mr . Smith , midshipman
Edward Henry a’Court, with a marine and seven seamen, was
despatched from the Blanche in the red cutter , to collect sand
for the use of the ship . Although it had been ordered that
youngsters , sent upon services of this kind , lest their pugnacious
 spirit should lead them into danger, were not to be allowed arms,
 the men in the boat, before they pushed off from the frigate, con¬
 trived to smuggle five or six muskets through the ports . It so
happened that , in the dusk of evening, the boat fell in with a
 schooner , nearly becalmed . The midshipman and his little
 party of sanders unhesitatingly pulled towards her ; and , as she
had the appearance of a privateer , and might open a cannonade
 upon them , Mr . a’Court judiciously kept in her wake . Just as
 the boat had approached the stern of the schooner, a fire of
 musketry from the latter mortally wounded one man, and badly
 wounded another , of the boat-party . Mr. a’Court , nevertheless,
 pulled straight up alongside, and, with the assistance of his five
 remaining hands , boarded and carried a French schooner, bound
 to Cape-Fran §ois, having among her passengers , a detachment
 of between 30 and 40 soldiers, commanded by a colonel, who
 had fought , bled, and distinguished himself, at the battle of
 Arcole . His wound was a fractured scull, and , upon the piece
  of plate that covered the denuded part, and which extended over
 a great portion of one side of his head, was engraven , in large
 characters , the word “ Arcole.”
     When asked how he could surrender to so insignificant a
  force, the French colonel, with a shrug replied , that it was all
  owing to “ le mal de merand         that , had he been on shore, the
 case would have been otherwise . Let that have been as it may>
