1803. BOATS OF BLENHEIM AND DRAKE AT MARTINIQUE
                                              . 205

the conduct of young a’Court evinced unparalleled gallantry , a
considerable degree of judgment , and certainly both the officer
and men in the boat deserved to have their names recorded for
the bravery they had displayed.
    No public mention was made by Captain Mudge of this
affair, which is, we think , entitled to the publicity and the praise
which we have endeavoured to render to a young , enterprising,
and gallant officer.
     On the 14th of November, while the British 74-gun ship
 Blenheim , Captain Thomas Graves, lay at anchor off the Dia¬
 mond Rock , island of Martinique , intelligence reached her that
the French privateer-schooner Harmonie, a vessel the most de¬
 structive to commerce of any in the Caribbean sea, had just put
into the harbour of Marin in the bay of Sainte-Anne. The
 Blenheim immediately weighed, but , having a strong sea-breeze
and lee-current to contend with, did not, until the morning of
the 16th, arrive abreast of Marin . Having reconnoitred the
harbour , the battery on each side of it, and that situated above
the town, Captain Graves resolved to detach 60 seamen under
 Lieutenants Thomas Cole and Thomas Furber , and 60 marines
under Lieutenants George Beatty and Walter S. Boyd, to at¬
tempt cutting out the privateer . The seamen in their boats were
to attack the latter ; while the marines were to endeavour to
 surprise , or in any event to storm, Fort-Dunkirk , a battery of
nine guns, situated on the starboard side of the harbour , and
the possession of which was necessary, to prevent the island
militia from rendezvousing on Marin point, w'hence they could
have much annoyed the British boats on their return.
    Just as the party was about to proceed, the British 14-gun
hrig-sloop Drake , Captain William Ferris, accompanied by the
hired armed cutter Swift, joined the Blenheim . Captain Ferris,
having volunteered , was permitted to take the command of the
expedition , and to add 14 of the Drake ’s seamen to the 60 from
the Blenheim, making a total of 134 seamen and marines,
°fficers included . All things being prepared , the boats with the
seamen, towed by the Drake , and those with the marines, by the
Swift, at 11 p. m., proceeded off the mouth of Marin harbour,
ahout three miles from the entrance to which the privateer lay.
      judiciously timing their departure from the ship, both parties
arrived at the same instant at their respective destinations . The
marines surprised the fort, took 15 prisoners, dismounted and
spiked the guns , among which were six 24-pounders , destroyed
the carriages, and blew up the magazine ; but Lieutenant Beatty
humanely spread the barracks , as, had they been set on fire, a
large and ripe field of canes adjoining would inevitably have
been destroyed.
  , ffhe boats with the seamen passed the battery on the larboard
side of the harbour undiscovered, but the privateer was upon
her guard, and commenced a heavy fire on the British ; who,
