210           COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— WEST INDIES.                  1803.

   Having now no French force to blockade at Cape-Frangois,
Commodore Loring bore up for the mole of Saint -Nicolas , to
treat with M . Noailles, the French general in command there.
On the 2d of December a proposition 'to that effect was made;
but the general declined acceding to the terms, alleging that he
 had provisions for five months , and would not surrender until
the last extremity . The Bellerophon and squadron then pro¬
ceeded with the prizes and prisoners to Jamaica . On the very
 night on which the blockade of the Mole was raised, General
 Noailles , having previously made his arrangements , sailed out of
the port , with his garrison contained in seven small vessels, and
arrived in safety at the island of Cuba . Among the French
“ Victoires    et Conquetes,   ” recorded   in a work bearing   that title,
is an extraordinary one performed by M. Noailles on his short
voyage to Cuba . It seems that “ une corvette anglaise, ” crossed
the path of his brig (on what day or night is not stated ), and
hailed her , to know if General Noailles was on board . The
 French brig concealed her numerous crew, and, hoisting English
colours, declared that she also had been sent to intercept the
general and his garrison . The two vessels then steered in com¬
pany ; and, in the night , General Noailles, at the head of 30
grenadiers , leaped on board of, and after a short resistance
carried , the “ corvette anglaise.” The conqueror proceeded with
his prize to Havana , and died shortly afterwards of the wounds
 he had received in the action. Notwithstanding the grave
 manner in which this story is told , the British navy lost no
 “ corvette,” or even 4-gun schooner, by capture in these seas,
in the year 1803.
    Thus , by the departure of the last European garrison from the
 French part of the island of Saint-Domingo , were the negroes,
 after a long and sanguinary struggle , freed from their invaders.
 A part of the latter had previously escaped to the Spanish part
 of the island ; and Generals Kerverseau and Ferrand , with a few
 troops , still occupied the cities of Santo-Domingo and San-Jago.
 According to a French writer, France , by her expedition to this
island , lost 20 general officers and upwards of 40,000 men.# This
 amount must include colonial troops, and some reinforcements
 which we have not been able to enumerate.

                               EAST INDIES.


   It has already been stated that , on the 6th of March , a small
French squadron , consisting of one 74, three frigates , and two
transports , with a French governor-general and about 1350
troops on bpard, sailed from the road of Brest , bound to the East
Indies , for the alleged purpose of taking possession of Pondi¬
cherry , ceded to France by the treaty of Amiens.-f' On the 28th
                              , tome xiv., p.330.
       * Victoires et Conquetes                        f Seep. 17 6,
