202         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                             1803.

cautiously and silently , towards the French vessel ; the crew of
which , expecting a second attack , had made preparations to
meet it. As soon as the boat arrived within pistol-shot , the
cutter hailed . Replying to the hail with three hearty cheers,
the boat rapidly advanced , receiving in quick succession two
volleys of musketry . The first passed over the heads of the
British ; but the second severely wounded the coxswain, the man
at the bow-oar, and a marine. Before the French cutter could
fire a third time, Lieutenant Nicolls, at the head of his little
party , sprang on board of her. The French captain was at his
post, and discharged his pistol at Lieutenant Nicolls just as the
 latter was within a yard of him. The ball passed round the rim
of the lieutenant ’s belly , and, escaping through his side, lodged
 in the fleshy part of his right arm. Almost at the same moment
a ball , either from the pistol of Lieutenant Nicolls, or from the
 musket of a marine standing near him, killed the French cap¬
 tain . After this the resistance was trifling ; and the surviving
 officers and men of the French cutter were presently driven
 below and subdued , with the loss, besides their captain killed,
 of five men wounded, one of them mortally.
     As yet, not a shot had been fired*from the battery , although
 it was distant scarcely 100 yards from the cutter . Judging that
 the best way to keep the battery quiet would be to maintain the
 appearance of the Albion’s being still in French possession, and
 able to repulse her assailants , Lieutenant Nicolls ordered the
  marines of his party to continue firing their muskets : the sea¬
  men, meanwhile , busied themselves in getting the vessel under
 sail . A spring having been run out from the cutter ’s quarter to
  her cable, and the jib cleared, the cable was cut , and the jib
  hoisted to cast her. At this moment the barge came alongside,
 and Lieutenant Lake took command of the prize. Scarcely had
  he done so, and the musketry by his orders been discontinued,
 when the battery opened a fire of round and grape, which killed
  two of the Blanche ’s people. However, the breeze being fair,
  and blowing moderately strong, the captured eutter , with two
  boats towing her , soon ran out of gun-shot, and without incur¬
  ring any further loss, joined the frigate in the offing.
     Cutting out an armed vessel is usually a desperate service,
  and the prize seldom repays the loss which is sustained in cap¬
  turing her . The spirit engendered by such acts is, however, of
  the noblest , and , in a national point of view, of the most useful
  kind : its emulative influence spreads from man to man, and from
  ship to ship, until the ardour for engaging in services of danger,
  services, the repeated success of which has stamped a lasting-
  character upon the British navy, requires more frequently to be
  checked than to be incited . An attack by boats upon an armed
  sailing vessel, as respects the first foot-hold upon her deck
                       likened to the “ forlorn hope” r
