1803..       COMMODORE HOOD AT SAlNTE -LUCIE.                 207

Bendall Robert Littlehales and Benjamin Hallowell , and some
smaller vessels, having on board a detachment of the British
army under Lieutenant -general Grinfield, anchored in Choc-
bay , Sainte -Lucie, for the purpose of reducing the island.
Before 5 p, m., by the able disposition of Captain Hallowell , the
whole of the troops were disembarked in good order . At 5 h_
30 m. p. m. the French outworks were driven in, and the town
of Castries taken . The commandant of Morne -Fortunee , the
principal fortress of the island, was then summoned to surrender.
Brigadier-general Nogues refusing to do so, the works were
stormed at 4 a . m. on the 22d, and at 4 h. 30 m. were carried,
with a loss to the British army of 20 officers and men killed, and
110 wounded . What was the exact strength of the garrison, or
the loss which the French sustained in resisting the assault , does
Rot appear by the official despatches ; but it is stated , to the
credit of the British , considering the custom on such occasions,
that not a Frenchman was hurt after possession of the place
had been obtained.
    On the third day after effecting this capture , the Centaur,
accompanied by some smaller vessels containing a division of
the troops , sailed from Sainte -Lucie to attack Tobago . On the
31st the expedition arrived off the island , and on the same day
the troops, covered by a heavy fire from the ships of war,
landed without loss. So rapid and so decisive were the move¬
ments of the British , that in the evening General Berthier com¬
manding at Fort -Scarborough proposed a capitulation ; which,
hy half past four the following morning, was acceded to, and the
^land of Tobago again became a colony of Great -Britain.
    Previously to the end of September the Dutch colonies of
 Bemerara , Essequibo , and Berbice, had also changed masters,
with equal facility, and happily without bloodshed . In the river
 Bemerara was captured the Batavian 14-gun corvette Hippo-
menes.
    About the middle of June , which was almost immediately
after the intelligence of the recommencement of hostilities
Cached the island of Jamaica , a squadron of ships sailed from
 Port -Royal , to cruise in the neighbourhood of St .-Domingo, and
co-operate with the Black insurgents in freeing the island of the
small remnant of French whom the scurvy and the yellow fever
“ ad yet spared, and who still retained possession of the line of
posts on the sea-coast. Hitherto their ships had enabled the
  "tench to hold and provision these ; but the British ships soon
  rove away or captured the former, and effectually shut up the
poits against all succours and supplies from Europe or else¬
where.
   By the end of October the only ports remaining in the hands
H ^ Prench , in what was formerly the French part of the
s/n -^aint ^   -Domingo, were Cape-Frangois and the mole of
K™'■ cholas. At the latter port General Noailles commanded.
