1803.    BOATS OF THE BLANCHE IN MANCENILLE          BAY.     201

 and, in the face of a heavy fire opened upon the schooner and
 the boats by some field-pieces brought down to the beach, the
 British totally destroyed the French lugger , without incurring
 any loss, although the Milbrook was several times struck by
 shot.
     On the 3d of November, while the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
 Blanche , Captain Zachary Mudge , was lying at an anchor off
 the entrance of Mancenille bay , island of St.-Domingo, the
 French cutter Albion, armed with two 4-pounders, six swivels,
 and 20 muskets , and manned with 43 officers and men, was dis¬
 covered lying close to the guns of Monte -Christi , waiting to
 carry her cargo, consisting of 52 bullocks , to the relief of the
 garrison of Cape-Fran §ois. As the cutter , notwithstanding her
 proximity to the fort, which mounted four long 24-pounders and
 three field-pieces, appeared to be assailable, Captain Mudge , on
 the same day, despatched the launch , barge , and two cutters,
 "with 63 officers and men, under the command of Lieutenant
 William Braithwaite , to attempt cutting her out. The boats
returned unsuccessful , not owing to any lack of zeal in officers
 or men, but to their having proceeded to the attack in open
 day , with the sea-breeze blowing right into the bay . The bat¬
 tery , in consequence, had begun early to fire at the boats , and
soon convinced Lieutenant Braithwaite that , should he even
succeed in capturing the cutter , it would, in the state of the
'wind, be impossible to get her from the shore without a great
 Sacrifice of lives.
     With more judgment , a night attack was determined upon,
and Lieutenant Edward Nicolls, of the marines, volunteered,
"with one boat, to attempt cutting out the vessel. His offer was
accepted ; and on the evening of the 4th the red cutter , with 13
men, including himself, pushed off from the frigate . A doubt
Respecting the sufficiency of the force, or some other cause,
mduced Captain Mudge to order the barge , with 22 men, under
the orders of Lieutenant the Honourable Warwick Lake , first of
Bi.e Blanche , to follow the red cutter and supersede Lieutenant
Nicolls in the command. The second boat joined the first, and,
as soon as the two arrived abreast of the French cutter , Lieu¬
tenant Nicolls hailed Lieutenant Lake, and pointed her out to
  .lm ; but the latter professed to disbelieve that the vessel in
sight was the Albion : he considered that she lay on the opposite
ar north-east side of the bay , and with the barge proceeded in
that direction ; leaving the red cutter to watch the motions of
AiK- VeSSe ^          -Lieutenant Nicolls still maintained was the
-Albion, the object of their joint search.
    It was now 2h . 30 m. a . m. on the 5th , and the land wind was
    owing fresh out of the bay. An hour or two more, and the
  ay would begin to dawn, and the breeze to slacken , perhaps
    io y to subside . The men in the boat were few, but their
  ear s were stout . In short the red cutter commenced pulling,
