208        COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— WEST INDIES.               1803.

at the former General Rochambeau . Cape-Fran §ois, besides
being blockaded at sea by the British , was invested on land by
the insurgents ; and the French garrison had the additional mis¬
fortune of being reduced to a state bordering on famine.
     Thus situated , General Rochambeau , on the 17th of Novem¬
ber, proposed to Commodore John Loring, the commanding
officer of the British blockading force, to evacuate the Cape,
provided he and his garrison were suffered to go to France on
board one or more of the ships of war in port . Such terms
were of course rejected . The General then concluded a treaty
with Dessalines , by which, in 10 days from the 20th of Novem¬
ber, he was to evacuate the Cape and its dependencies , and to
be allowed, himself, and his troops, and their baggage, to retire
on board the French ships lying in the harbour . By the fifth
 day General Rochambeau had embarked his garrison, and hoped
 to escape the English squadron ; but the latter was too vigilant
 to afford the former even an opportunity of making the attempt.
 On the 30th , the day on which the truce expired, the Negroes
 hoisted their colours upon all the forts, and began to prepare
 for sinking the French ships with red-hot shot, should they any
 longer delay their departure . To know the reason of this delay,
 Captain Loring had sent in Captain Bligh with a flag of truce;
 when, at a meeting between him and Captain Barre , the French
 naval commanding officer, a rough sketch of a capitulation , was
 drawn up and signed, and General Dessalines was induced to
 allow the French ships, with colours hoisted , to sail out of
 the harbour . They were then , after firing each a broadside in
 return to a shot discharged athwart their bows by one of the
  British ships , to haul down the French colours and surrender.
      The 40-gun frigate Surveillante , accompanied by some smaller
 vessels, came out in this manner, and was taken possession of
 by the British ; but the Clorinde, another 40-gun frigate , in her
  way out grounded upon the rocks under Fort St.-Joseph at the
  entrance of the harbour , and beat off her rudder . The frigate,
  in short , was in so desperate a situation , that the British boats,
  which had been detached to assist the French ships in getting
  out of the mole, were returning to the squadron , upon a suppo**
   sition that no efforts of theirs could save the Clorinde. The
  ship , which was thus abandoned to her fate, had on board, besides
  a small crew of from 150 to 200 men, General Lapoype and
  700 French troops , together with several of the officers’ wives,
  their women-servants , and children ; in all full 900 souls.
      Among the boats of the squadron , employed upon the service
  just mentioned, was the launch of the Hercule , manned with
  from 30 to 40 hands , under the command of Acting-lieutenant
   Nisbet Josiah Willoughby . From slow-pulling , or from some other
  unexplained cause, retarded in her progress , the launch was
   among the rearmost of those boats . Anxious to rescue so many
  persons as were evidently on board the Clorinde , from the cer-
