1803.           ADMIRALS RAINIER AND LINOIS.                   213

    The message of the 8th of March , considered every where as
the signal of the approach of war between England and France,
reached Madras on or about the 5th of July . It is probable
that the intelligence was communicated to Admiral Rainier by
the Terpsichore . At all events, in a week or two after the
admiral ’s arrival at Madras , the British ships began taking on
board their war-stores. It was not, however, until the 3d of
September , that the king ’s message of the 16th of May , which,
was tantamount to a declaration of war, reached that settlement;
nor until the 13th of September , that the news of the actual
commencement of war arrived at Fort -tVilliam . The intelli¬
gence had been received at Bombay on the 21st of August;
where, two days afterwards , arrived the board of admiralty ’s
directions for the conduct to be pursued by Vice-admiral Rainier,
and which could not well have reached him at Madras earlier
than the first week in September.
    Rear -admiral Linois, with his squadron , arrived at the Isle of
France on the 16th of August ; and , about the latter end of the
succeeding month , the French 20-gun corvette Berceau, it is
believed, brought out the news of the war. On the 8th of
October (why he deferred sailing till then does not appear ) the
French admiral , having detached the Atalante on a special mis¬
sion to Mascat , a Portuguese settlement in Arabia-Felix , put to
sea with the Marengo , Belle-Poule , Semillante , and Berceau.
The ships retained on board a portion of the troops they had
brought from France , and with which they were now proceeding
to reinforce the garrisons of the Isle of Reunion , or Bourbon , and
°f the city of Batavia , the capital of Java.
    In the early part of his voyage M . Linois had the good for¬
tune to fall in with and capture several richly-laden English
ships ; and, on making Sumatra , he resolved to pay a visit to
the road of Bencoolen , a British settlement upon that island.
 A pilot belonging to the port , mistaking the Marengo for, what
by her colours she appeared , an English man of war, went off to
her, and anchored the French squadron just out of range of a
battery which commanded the road. Meanwhile the merchant
vessels, having discovered the true character of the strange ships,
had cut or slipped and proceeded to Sellabar , a small port about
fwo leagues to the southward of Bencoolen. They were soon
followed by the Semillante and Berceau , but not in time to pre-
 v®nt six of the vessels from being burnt , and two others run on
shore, by their crews. The French burnt the two vessels that
 were aground , also three warehouses filled with spice, rice, and
°puim , and carried off a ship and two brigs, richly laden ; but
 not with entire impunity , as the Semillante had two men killed
 by a shot from the shore. Having performed this exploit , the
   rench squadron set sail, and on or about the 10th of December
anchored in the road of Batavia.
