1804.                  INVASION - FLOTILLA.                     219

moles were constructed , a capacious basin dug , and a bridge
thrown across the river. By means of a dam the waters were
confined, and the vessels kept afloat ; and, to prevent any annoy¬
ance on the part of the British , immense batteries were erected
at all the commanding points . As a still further protection
against a bombardment , a strong line of heavy gun-vessels was
moored across the road ; which, by nature , was difficult of
approach , on account of the numerous shoals and sand-banks in
its vicinity . Vimereux , situated about a league to the north -east
 of Boulogne , was actually formed into a port expressly to receive
 the flotilla ; and the harbour of Ambleteuse was deepened and
 enlarged , to answer the same purpose . A glance at the chart
 of this coast will show how difficult the whole of these ports are
 of access on account of the sands . No vessel, indeed , beyond
 a gun-brig in size, can approach near enough to do any execution.
 The tides, too, which cross each other in an extraordinary
 manner , are very serious obstacles in the way of a bombarding
 force.
      Corresponding exertions were making on the opposite side      of
  the Channel     .  An   immense  number   of small  vessels, armed
  each with one or two heavy long guns, were stationed at the Nore
  and at all the most assailable parts of the English coast ; as
  Were also several large armed ships, mounted with heavy
  carronades , and which ships , although not in a state to go to sea,
  answered perfectly well for floating -batteries . Mortella towers
  were also erected along the coast ; and an immense army, com¬
  posed of regulars , militia, and volunteers * were ready , on the
  first summons , to rush to the point of danger . In mid-channel
   and along the French coast, British cruisers were constantly on
   the watch , ready to blaze away upon the vessels of the flotilla,
   fhe instant they showed themselves outside the sands and
  batteries by which they were protected , The commander -in¬
   chief on the Downs station , Admiral Lord Keith , had this im¬
   portant service under his immediate direction ; and several
   enterprising officers had the command of flying squadrons , that
   cruised close along the French coast.
       On the 20th of February , in the morning , the British hired
   cutter Active, of six small guns ancf about 30 men and boys,
   commanded by Lieutenant John Williams , being off Gravelines,
   discovered, within three quarters of a mile of the shore, 16 sail
   °f French gun -boats and transports running from Ostende
    towards Boulogne . In spite of the great disparity of force,
    Lieutenant Williams gallantly gave chase ; at 10 h. 30 m. a. m.
    commenced a running fight with the flotilla ; and at 11 a . m.
   compelled the outermost vessel, a horse-transport , to haul down
    hd ' colours. The delay in taking possession of the Jeune-
    lsab elle enabled the other vessels to get under the protection of
     he batteries , before the Active could again make sail in pur-
