            COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— EAST INDIES.
                                                              1803.
212

drawn up by Napoleon himself, afford indubitable proofs of his
bad faith towards England , particularly as regarded her Indian
possessions .*
     It was not many hours before the arrival of the Belier , that
 Captain Joseph -Marie Yrignaud , of the Marengo , accompanied
by the French admiral ’s nephew , had paid a visit to Vice-admi¬
ral Rainier , for the purpose of inviting the latter to breakfast on
the following morning with M . Linois. The invitation was
accepted , and the 16-gun ship-sloop Rattlesnake , which had
just joined the squadron , was ordered to be ready to convey
 Vice-admiral Rainier to the anchorage of the Marengo and her
 consorts . But , whether it was owing to the peremptory nature
 of his orders, or that he feared their warlike tenour might
 escape , and he and his ships be detained by the British admiral,
 the French admiral, at midnight , unseen and unheard , slipped
 his cables, and, with the transport -brig Marie -Franqoise , put to
 sea under all sail.
      At daydawn on the 13th, to the surprise of the British,
 nothing was to be seen of M. Linois and his ships, either in the
 road , where he had left his anchors, and even the longboats of
 his ships fast at their grapnels , or as far as the eye could stretch
 in the offing. In the course of the morning the principal part of
 the British squadron got under way and set sail for Madras;
 but the admiral , with the Centurion and one or two of the
 smaller ships, remained at the anchorage . On the same even¬
  ing the French transport ship Cote-d’Or, with 326 troops on
 board , anchored in Pondicherry road ; and , at noon, the Cen¬
  turion and Concorde got under way and anchored close to her.
      On the 15th, at daybreak , the Belle-Poule , who had sepa¬
  rated from her squadron and since been to Madras , appeared off
  the road , in company with the Terpsichore frigate . The latter
  cast anchor ; but the Belle-Poule , after making some signals to
  the transport , stood away to sea. At 11 p. m. the Cote-d’Or
  weighed and dropped out of the road, and in half an hour the
  Terpsichore was under all sail in chase of her. On the 16th, at
   daylight , the Terpsichore hailed the transport , and ordered her
   to return , but the French ship refused . On this the frigate
   tired a few shot, when the Cote -d’Or hauled down her colours,
   and quietly accompanied the Terpsichore back to the anchorage.
   On the 24th , in the forenoon, the French transport was allowed
   to sail, attended by the British frigate Dedaigneuse , to see that
   she went nowhere else but to her alleged destination , the Isle of
   France . On the same day, at 8 p. m., Vice-admiral Rainier
   weighed and steered for Madras , where he arrived on the follow¬
   ing morning. Shortly afterwards the Dedaigneuse also arrived,
   having seen the French transport as far on her way to the Isle
   of France as the latitude of 1° 50' north.

                   * See p. 176, and Appendix , No . 22,
