 220       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                 1804.

      On the 8th of May , at daybreak , the British 18-gun brig-
   sloop Vincejo , Captain John Wesley Wright , ( 18-pounder
   carronades , with a crew on board of 51 effective men and the
   extraordinary number of 24 boys ), having been becalmed close
  to the mouth of the river Morbihan , coast of France , was carried
  by the ebb-tide, in less than an hour , so near to the Teigneuse
  rock, that she was forced to anchor to avoid running upon it.
  Having sounded , the brig weighed and warped herself into the
  fair channel , still baffled in her manoeuvres by a calm and a
  strong tide directly against her . ^While in this situation , sweep¬
  ing with all her strength to get clear of the coast, a flotilla of
  17 armed vessels was rowing towards her from the Morbihan;
  consisting of six brigs, first-class gun -vessels, with three guns,
  one 24 and two 18 pounders , and from sixty to 80 men each;
  six luggers , second class gun-vessels, two guns , 18- pounders,
  with from 40 to 50 men each ; five luggers, third class gun-
  vessels, one brass 36-pounder carronade throwing shells, and
  from 20 to 30 men each ; total , 35 guns (of which 30 were
 long 18 and 24 pounders ), and from 700 to 800 men, commanded
 by Lieutenant Laurent Tourneur.
     By 8 h. 30 m. a . m., having advanced within extreme range,
 the gun-vessels began to open their fire. They continued
 gaining rapidly upon the brig until 9 h. 30 m. ; when they had
 approached so near, that the Vincejo was obliged to sweep her
 broadside to and engage , under the additional disadvantage that
 her few men were fatigued by hard labour at the oar, and divided
 during the action between the larboard guns and the starboard
 sw'eeps. The Vincejo maintained this unequal contest for nearly
 two hours , and that within grape and hailing distance . The
 brig ’s hull , masts , yards , and rigging had at length received
 great damage : three guns were disabled ; and , owing to the
booms having fallen upon the main deck (the brig having a
 quarterdeck like the Port -Mahon ), and the loss, out of
her small effective crew, of two men killed and 12 wounded,
including Captain Wright himself, in the groin (but who would
not quit the deck ), the fire was reduced to one gun in about five
minutes . Thus situated , the Vincejo had no alternative but to
strike her colours.
    The loss sustained by the flotilla could never be ascertained;
but , from the marks of blood on board the brig to which the
prisoners were first carried , and the evident damage done to
several of the vessels, not a doubt was entertained as to its
severity. A highly exaggerated account of this action appears
in a French work, in which the little Vincejo , described as “ une
forte corvette, ” is associated with “ un lougre anglaise, ” and the
French force is reduced to “ quatre canonnieres .”*
    The subsequent mysterious death of Captain Wright in the
Temple at Paris struck all Europe with horror . Although the
                 * Victoires et Conquetes
                                        , tome xvi., p. 33.
