1804.      .PREPARATIONS FOR INVADING ENGLAND ,                 215

   The number of commissioned officers and masters , belonging
to the British navy at the commencement of the year, was,
          Admirals.                                41
          Vice-admirals .       .    .    .        32
          Rear -admirals .      .    .    .    .   50
                 „          superannuated 23
          Post -captains .      .    .    .    .  673
                 »                 „        11
          Commanders , or Sloop-captains       .  409
                 „          superannuated   48
          Lieutenants     .     .    .    .    . 2457
          Masters.                             .  541

And the number of seamen and marines, voted for the year 1804,
was 100,000*
   As soon as the commerce of France began to suffer from the
vigilance and activity of British cruisers, the war acquired among
the French , those especially who were engaged in trade and re¬
sident along the coasts of the Channel, a truly national charac¬
ter. The conduct of some of the king ’s ships, in firing upon
small towns and defenceless places upon the French coast, excited
in the inhabitants a strong feeling of indignation ; and some of
the London journals betrayed a very ill taste when thay extolled
such exploits. It was this hostile spirit against the English that
induced the first-consul, amidst his many plans for a vigorous
prosecution of the war, to prefer that plan which had for its
basis a descent upon the island that held him at defiance ; as if
resolved, by a single campaign , to verify the assertion which he
had publicly made, that England , unsupported , could not with¬
stand the power of France.
   To assemble an army deemed sufficient for the purpose, even
though it should amount to 160,000 men, was not very difficult
in a country that could boast of a population of thirty millions;
Uor, with so much manual strength at command, and such high-
wrought zeal in the cause, was the construction of 2000 prames,
gun-vessels, and flat-bottomed boats, to contain that army, an
inexecutable task . But some doubt existed , even in France,
about the practicability of getting this formidable armament
across the 20 or 30 miles of sea, which so provokingly flowed
hetwixt it and its destined shore. However, as it was with the
reflecting, and not with the labouring , class of society, that any
such doubt existed , the work of preparation still went on, and
that with all the enthusiasm for which the French are so cele¬
brated . Almost every department in the state voted a ship of the
bne, each of the larger villages a frigate , and every commune
Save its prame, gun-vessel, flat-bottomed boat, or peniche . Ves¬
sels for the flotilla were constructing , not only in the great naval

                      * See Appendix , No . 25,
