1803.            ADMIRALS RAINIER AND LINOIS.                     211
 of April , in a violent gale of wind, the Belle -Poule parted com¬
 pany from the squadron : and, although she called at Mada¬
 gascar , this fast-sailing frigate anchored in Pondicherry road on
 the 16th of June , being the 102d day from her quitting Brest.
   The Belle-Poule brought out a French colonel, appointed
lieutenant -governor under M . Decaen ; and who now, in pur¬
suance of his instructions , called upon the commanding officers
of the different factories to restore the settlement agreeably to
the article in the treaty . Owing to the want of orders, or to the
informality of the application , the latter declined giving up their
 charge ; and thus matters remained, when, on the 5th of July,
Vice-admiral Peter Rainier , with the 50-gun ship Centurion,
Captain John Sprat Rainier , 74-gun ship Tremendous , Captain
John Osborn , 6'4-gun ships Trident and Lancaster , Captains
Thomas Surridge and William Fothergill , 44 en-flute Sheerness,
frigates Concorde , Dedaigneuse , and Fox, and ship-sloop Victor,
from Bombay , partly in consequence of information from England
representing that the peace was not very secure, anchored in the
road of Cuddalore , situated about 20 miles to the south -west of
Pondicherry . Consequently , when, on the morning of the 11th
of July , Rear-admiral Liriois, with the Marengo 74, and Atalante
and Semillante frigates, joined the Belle-Poule , Pondicherry and
its dependencies still remained in the hands of the British.
   Aware that his own and General Decaen ’s mission to the East
had an object in view covertly inimical to British interests , the
French admiral could well have dispensed with the presence of
a British squadron ; and yet no sooner had he anchored than he
found himself overlooked by one, consisting of three sail of the
line, a 50, and four or five smaller vessels. Two of the squadron,
the Trident and Victor , at this time lay at anchor in Pondicherry
J'oad ; and the remainder , including the flag-ship, in the road of
Cuddalore . As soon as he observed the French squadron come
to anchor , the British admiral got under way, and advanced
bearer ; and , on being joined by the Trident and Victor, who
had weighed since noon, reanchored at 7 p. m. about midway
between Cuddalore and Pondicherry roads . On the 12th, at
10 a . m., the   French   transport    brig Marie -Francoise   joined
Admiral Linois, and at 6 p. m. the brig-corvette Belier, with
despatches from France . This vessel had quitted Brest ten.
days later than the Marengo , and , it was understood , brought
out the substance of the king of England ’s message to his
parliament of March 8 ; with directions to M . Linois to repair
instantly to the Isle of France , there to get his ships, already
armed and manned on a war establishment , refitted and pro¬
visioned, and expect every day to receive an order to commence
hostilities against the English . This appears to have been the
substance of these despatches , but their full contents have not
 ranspired . The instructions put into the hands of M. Decaen
when he sailed from France , and which appear to have been
                                 p 2
