218       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                 1804.

20 sail under M. Villeneuve approaching from off Rochefort,
would, it was considered, be sufficient to cover the grand flotilla,
 and enable it to fulfil the ultimate object of all the expeditions
 on foot, a disembarkation of its host of troops on the shores of
 England ; and which, it was at last discovered, could not be
 accomplished without the powerful aid of the larger vessels.
 The year 1804, however, was not destined to witness the attempt,
 much less the execution, of this gigantic, and , in the opinion of
 most persons, impracticable undertaking.
     Before we proceed, as is now our intention , to narrate the
 different engagements which, during the present year, ensued
 between the British cruisers and the French flotilla, prepared or
 preparing for the invasion of England , some account of the ves¬
 sels of that flotilla, and of the ports in which they were assem¬
 bling , will free the subject from much of the obscurity that must
 otherwise attend it. The armed vessels of the flotilla were
 divided into five or six classes. It will suffice to describe the
 prame , and the gun-vessel, or canonniere. The prame was a
 remarkably strong-built vessel, measuring in her extreme length
 about 110 French feet, and 25 in breadth , and drawing from
 seven to eight feet water. She was rigged as a ship, and carried
 12 long 24-pounders, with a crew of 38 sailors, and upwards of
 100 soldiers, the majority of them , from daily practice , as useful
 on shipboard as the sailors themselves. Of these prames , or
 corvettes , 20, each with stalls for 50 horses, were ordered to be
 constructed ; but the number was afterwards greatly augmented.
    The first-class gun-vessels, rigged as brigs , were usually
 armed with three long 24-pounders and an 8-inch mortar , and
the second class, with one 24-pounder forward, and a field-piece
 abaft ; some rigged as schooners, and some as luggers . Of
these two classes between 600 and 700 were constructed ; and,
of a smaller and lighter class called “ peniches ” (rigged chiefly
 as schuyts ), about 400 . The gun-vessels, as well as the prames,
were afterwards increased in number ; so that the armed vessels
of the flotilla amounted to 1339, and the transports to 954 ; total
2293 vessels. The naval commander -in-chief of this numerous
flotilla was Vice-admiral Eustache Bruix , having as an assistant,
on account of ill health , Rear -admiral Jean -Raimond Lacrosse,
a brave and intelligent officer, and the same, it will be recollected,
who commanded the Droits -de-l’Homme at the time of her loss.
    The ports of reunion for the flotilla were seven ; Ostende,
Dunkerque , Calais, Ambleteuse , Vimereux, Boulogne, and
Etaples . Boulogne, as being situated directly in front of, and
only about 12 leagues distant from, the lowr land between Dover
cliff and Hastings point, was made the main depot , or capital.
Until the grand project of invasion was thought of, Boulogne
possessed a worthless harbour , formed by the estuary of the
little river Laine, and nearly dry at low water, with only one quay.
In a short time both banks of the river were lined with quays;
