1804. PLAN OF OPERATIONS FOR THE BREST FLEET.                 217

the first-consul’s attention was too much engrossed by the new
dignity he was about to assume, or that he required the presence
 of the fleet to assist in giving eclat to the imposing ceremony,
which, on' the 14th of that same month of May, made him
Emperor of France.
     Even after the bustle of this business was over, the Brest
 ships remained at their moorings until the 25th of July , when,
 encouraged by a fine wind at east -north -east and a thick fog,
 the advanced squadron , of five sail of the line and two or three
 frigates , got under way, and stood for the passage du Raz . A
 sudden return of clear weather , however, enabled the British
 look-out cutter to discover and make a signal of the circum¬
 stance . Immediately Rear -admiral Sir Thomas Graves , com¬
 manding the in-shore squadron , proceeded in chase ; but the
 French ships, in the mean time, had hauled to the wind, and
 were working back to Brest road. No second attempt to escape,
 of which the British outside were aware, was made during the
 remainder of the year ; although , as will presently appear , an
 expedition of the utmost consequence had been designed to quit
  Brest before the end of November.
      The number of ships of the line, at this time ready for sea in
  Brest road, was 22 ; exclusive of the Ocean three -decker , re¬
  pairing in the docks, but expected soon to be afloat, the ship¬
  wrights having been ordered to work at her by torchlight . This
  fleet was now under the command of Vice-admiral Ganteaume,
  A curious circumstance had led to the expulsion of this officer’s
  predecessor . When , in the month of May , the officers of the
  Brest fleet were called upon to put their signatures to a note for
  conferring the imperial dignity upon Napoleon , Vice-admiral
  Truguet , true to his republican principles , refused to sign the
  paper . He wrote to Buonaparte , assigning his reason ; and, to
  show his readiness to perform his duty against the enemies of the
  nation , made use of the following laconic expression : “ Un mot,
  et l’armee est a la voile.” Napoleon, feeling himself personally
  offended, removed the admiral from his command, dismissed
  him from being a member of the council of state , and ordered
  his name to be struck out of the list of the legion of honour.
      The directions given by Napoleon to his minister of marine
  were, that the Brest fleet of 23 (the Ocean included ) sail of the
  line, under Vice-admiral Ganteaume , with from 30,000 to 40,000
   troops on board, under General Augereau , should quit port at
   the first opportunity that might occur in the month of Novem¬
   ber, proceed to Lough-Swilly bay in the north of Ireland , and
   there disembark the men. Should any difficulty arise, the coast
   °f Scotland was to receive the troops. Vice-admiral Ganteaume
   was then to call off the Texel, and, bringing away with him the
   seven Dutch sail of the line and transports with 2500 troops on
    board in that harbour , make his appearance before Boulogne.
    I he 30 sail of the line, by this means assembled , added to the
