   ■
          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS#— CHANNEL.               1804.

 ports and in the small harbours along the coast, but upon the
banks of every river that contained more than three feet of water;
no matter whether that river emptied itself directly into the ocean,
or first united its waters with those of the Seine, the Loire, the
Garonne , or the Rhine . Even Paris became, for a time, a mari¬
time arsenal : two slips were erected there, and many vessels of
the small kind were launched from them . A due share of atten¬
tion was also bestowed upon vessels of a more warlike class. At
Anvers, or Antwerp , on the river Scheldt , for the first time dur¬
ing a great many years, the keels of ships of the line were laid
down. The dock-yards of Brest , Lorient, Rochefort , and Toulon,
also displayed the new-laid keels of several ships of force and
magnitude.
   Our attention must now be directed to what is going on at the
first of the four last-named ports . At the close of the preceding
year , the port of Brest was left, owing to the extreme severity of
the weather , without a blockading force. Before, however, the
new year was many days old, a favourable change enabled Ad¬
miral Cornwallis to regain his station off Ushant , and to assemble,
by the 12th of January , 13 of his ships. Three or four more
subsequently joined . Such had been the exertions in Brest har¬
bour during the winter months , that , by the latter end of April,
17 sail of the line, including two three -deckers, lay at anchor in
the road, ready for sea.
   The first day of the following month gave birth to a set of
directions , framed by Napoleon himself, for the improvement of
his fleet in Brest water . He begins by complaining, that the
enemy should be permitted , with a small number of vessels, to
blockade so considerable a fleet as the one at anchor in that port.
He orders that the ships shall get under way every day, as well
to exercise the crews, as to harass the British , and favour the
passage of the flotilla coming from Audierne ; that 200 soldiers
shall be placed on board each ship of the line ; and who, besides
being exercised at the guns and about the rigging and sails, are
to row in the ship ’s launch . Premiums are to be given to those
who excel in these matters ; and nothing that can excite the
emulation of either soldiers or sailors appears to have been over¬
looked . Every ship of the line is to be provided with a quantity
of 36-pound shells for her lower battery , and the men are to be
taught how to fire them off with effect. The captains are ordered
not to quit their vessels to go on shore, and even the commander
in chief is not allowed to lodge elsewhere than on board his
ship .*
   About ten days after the date of Napoleon ’s directions to the
minister of marine, Vice-admiral Deeres , two sail of the line from
the inner harbour joined themselves to the 17 already at anchor
in the road. It does not appear , however, that any movement
of consequence took place among the ships ; either because
               # Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 195.
