224       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                 1804.

  Sidney Smith ’s squadron consisting, besides the Antelope , of
 the 36-gun frigate Penelope , Captain William Robert Brough¬
  ton, and 32-gun frigate Aimable, Captain William Bolton, hove
  in sight of the two sloops ; and which squadron had weighed
  from the Schonevelde since between 10 and 11 a . m., in conse¬
  quence of an announcement by one of the in-shore ships,
 that the Gallo-Batavian flotilla was making sail from the Inner
  Wieling.
     At about 1 h. 30 m. p. m. the Cruiser came up with, fired at,
  and compelled to strike , one of the rearmost vessels, a schuyt
 mounting one long 36-pounder , and carrying five Dutch seamen
  and 25 French troops . Making the signal for the Rattler to
  take possession, the British brig continued to stand on, in the
 hope to close with one of the prames. Feeling himself, as the
  French accounts state , somewhat nettled at having one of his
 vessels captured by a force so comparatively insignificant, Ad¬
 miral Ver -Huell , took advantage of a slight change of wind in
 his favour, and stood back towards Ostende with all his remain¬
 ing flotilla except eight schuyts , which continued their route
 towards the Inner Wieling . At about 1 h. 45 m. p. m. the Ville-
 d’Anvers fired a shot at the Cruiser, which passed over her, and
 fell close under the bows of the Rattler . Shortly afterwards,
 the wind shifting six points , both sloops fell off in their course,
 and found themselves nearly abreast of the leading prame, and
 upon the lee beam of the flotilla, then crowding sail to get in¬
 shore. At a few minutes before 2 p. m. the Ville-d ’Anvers com¬
 menced a heavy fire upon the Cruiser and Rattler , and several
 of the schooners and schuyts also opened their fire. In a short
 time the two sloops were in the midst of the flotilla, engaging
 on both sides, and frequently assailed by shot and shells from
 the batteries of Blanckenberghe . Notwithstanding all this the
 Cruiser and Rattler gallantly drove on shore the Ville-d ’Anvers
prame , and four of the schooners.
    At 3 h. 45 m. p. m. the Aimable arrived up with, and opened
her fire upon, a portion of the flotilla close under the batteries
of Blanckenberghe . At about 4h . 30m . p. m. the Penelope
and Antelope also got into action, and , by their heavy fire, drove
several other schooners and schuyts on shore. At 7 p. m. the
Aimable found herself near to the grounded prame, and received
from her a very destructive fire ; several artillerymen from the
shore having got on board the Ville-d’Anvers, and replaced her
crew, most of whom had fled upon her first grounding : at which
time, too, her colours were either hauled down or shot away.
At about 7h . 45m . p. m., the tide having fallen and left the
British ships in little more water than they drew, the Antelope
made the signal to discontinue the engagement ; and the
squadron drew off into deeper water . The Gallo -Batavian
flotilla, or what remained of it, took this opportunity of getting
into the basin of Ostende ; whither they were accompanied by
