1804.                     INVASION - FLOTILLA.                              229

port ; and a detached or flying division, of five or six vessels,
under the command of Captain Owen, in the frigate Immor-
talite , generally cruised just out of shell-range of the enemy’s
batteries , anchoring occasionally , as the state of the tide ren¬
dered necessary . It should here be observed, that , in addition
to the batteries , masked as well as open, all along the edge of
the cliff, there were seven or eight forts erected on the sands at
low water ; where also lay ready several mortar -beds, over
which the tide flowed, and to which the mortars were brought
as soon as it left them dry.
   On the 25th of August there were lying in the road of Bou¬
logne, moored in line, 146 French gun-vessels, 62 of them brigs,
or first-class gun-vessels, the remainder chiefly luggers . Of
 these gun-vessels, 45 composed the Havre -division, which, under
Capitaine de vaisseau Fran §ois-Henri -Eugene Daugier,         had
since the 16th entered the road. On the same 25th an unusual
de gree of bustle and activity prevailed in the port,
                                                        on account
of the presence of the French emperor, who had just done pre¬
siding at the grand ceremony of distributing to the troops the
cross of the legion of honour . This imposing spectacle took
place on the 16th of August , the anniversary of the day on which
 “Saint Napoleon ” had usurped in the French calendar the place
of “ Saint Roch .” Upwards of 80,000 men, taken chiefly from
the camps of Boulogne and] Montreuil , were present on the
 occasion.
   To amuse the French emperor, probably , Admiral Bruix , at
about 1 h. 45 m. p. m., ordered a division of gun-vessels, under
 Capitaine de vaisseau Julien Le Ray , to weigh, and , with the
 north -easterly wind then blowing, work up towards Pointe-
 Bombe ; near to which lay the British gun -brig Bruiser , Lieu¬
 tenant Thomas Smithies, or, as the French writers have it, “ une
 grande corvette anglaise a trois mhts, ”* watching their manoeu¬
 vres. In a short time a firing commenced betvveen the parties,
 and soon brought to the spot the Immortalite ; who, at 2 h.
 30 m. p. m. opened her broadside upon the gun-vessels, and re¬
 ceived in return a heavy fire from the batteries , one shot from
 which struck her under the main chains , but did no material
 injury . It now became necessary to haul further from the
 shore ; and the Immortalite , having done so, lay to about three
 niiles off the port.
    Early on the morning of the 26th the Archer and Blood¬
 hound , commanded as "before,t fired at some luggers coming

   * One would hardly suppose this possible , but it is no less true ; and, as a
Proof what strange optics the writer was blessed with, he could not discover
                                                                                 a
single brig in the British squadron : “ Leurs forces se composaient, ” he says,
  de deux vaisseaux de ligne,” ( meaning a 50 arad a frigate,) “ deux fregates
de quarante-quatre, de sept corvettes de guerre d trois mats, de deux lougres , et
  un cutter.”— Precis des Evenemens, tomexi ., p. 45.
   T bee p, 227.
