 1804.                  INVASION - FLOTILLA.                      225
   the division of French gun-vessels which, by the orders of Rear-
   admiral Charles Magon , the commanding officer of the Ostende
   flotilla, had on the preceding evening, as already stated , an¬
   chored to the westward of the lighthouse , and which had sub¬
   sequently gone to the assistance of Rear -admiral Ver- Huell.
      The loss on the part of the British , compared with the vigour
   and duration of the firing, was of no great amount . The Cruiser
   had one seaman killed , and her captain ’s clerk ( George Ellis)
   and three seamen wounded ; the Rattler,two seamen killed and
  three wounded ; the Aimable, one master ’s mate ( Mr. Christie ),
  one midshipman ( Mr. Johnson ), four seamen, and one boy
  hilled , and one lieutenant ( William Mather ), her purser (Wil¬
  liam Shad well) , one midshipman (Mr. Conner) , and 11 seamen
  ■wounded; total , 13 killed and 32 wounded . Besides having
  her rigging and sails a good deal cut, the Cruiser received two
  large shot between wind and water . The Rattler suffered also
   m her rigging and sails ; and the Aimable, in addition to her
  damages aloft, was struck in several parts of her hull . The ac¬
  knowledged loss, on the Gallo- Batavian flotilla, amounted to 18
  hilled and 60 wounded, 29 of the latter and four of the former
  on board the two prames.
      From the sketch here given it now appears , that the Cruiser
  and Rattler , unsupported by any other ships , most gallantly
  attacked , and after a two hours ’ action very nearly discomfited,
  this formidable Gallo- Batavian flotilla. Unfortunately the public
  letter of Commodore Sir Sidney Smith , although it admits that
     Captains Hancock and Mason bore the brunt of the attack,
  and continued it for six hours against a great superiority of fire,”
 Was calculated to convey an impression, the letter in fact ex¬
 pressly states , that the Antelope , Penelope , and Aimable par¬
 ticipated in the action from its commencement. Sir Sidney says,
 / The signal was made to the Cruiser and Rattler for an enemy
 ln the E .S.E . to call their attention from Ostend ; the squadron
 Weighed,” &c. But , in reality , neither of the sloops was in sight
 °f the Antelope for a full hour after she and her companions had
 'Weighed; nor does the log of the Antelope mention their names
Wntil the following entry occurs : “ At 2 observed the
                                                              Rattler
 and Cruiser commence firing on the enemy’s flotilla.” The log
°f the Aimable refers to the first appearance of the two sloops in
nearly the same manner : “ At 2 Cruiser and Rattler brought the
enemy to action, ” &c. And how could the commodore well
nave descried the two sloops earlier than the commencement of
   he afternoon, when the Antelope had been at anchor full
                                                                   six
ie agues (some accounts say nine) from
                                            their anchorage ; at such
a distance , in fact, that it took the Stag , from 9 p. m. on the
   oth to 5h . 30 m. a . m. on the 16th, before her commander could
   eliver his despatches to Sir Sidney ? Moreover, the first signal
n any kind , noticed in the log of the Antelope, is one made at
  p. m., “to engage the enemy .”     Whereas , in proof that much
         JII*                       Q
