1804.                 INVASION- FLOTILLA.                    227

work, to have contributed to mislead the public respecting the
 real merits of the engagement off Boulogne in May, 1804.
    On the 17th, at daybreak , the four gun-brigs, commanded by
 Lieutenant Manderston , having joined , were sent in, under the
direction of Captain Hancock , to see what could be done with
the French prame Vi lle-d1Anvers, aground to the eastward of
 Ostende . The gun -brigs opened their fire, but received from the
numerous train of horse and other artillery assembled along the
beach, as well as from the heavy mortars and pieces of cannon
mounted upon the heights , so heavy a fire in return , that they
 were obliged to desist and haul off. No loss appears to have
been sustained by the gun-brigs ; but the Minx was struck by a
 large shot in the hounds of her mainmast . On the morning of
 the 19th the 16-gun ship-sloops Galgo, Captain Michael Dodd,
and Inspector , Captain Edward James Mitchell , co-operated
 with the gun-brigs in a second attack upon the grounded prame;
 but , protected by the powerful batteries on shore, the Ville- '
 d’Anvers floated with the rising tide and got safe into Ostende.
 Five of the eight grounded schooners and schuyts were also
 floated into the basin.
    Havre , owing to its central position on the French Channel-
coast, was made a temporary depot for the vessels of the flotilla
constructed to the westward, or in the Seine and the rivers flow¬
ing into it. As soon as a sufficient number was assembled , they
wer$ to be convoyed, by prames and gun-brigs, to the grand en¬
trepot at Boulogne. In the month of July a British squadron,
composed chiefly of sloops, bombs, and small-craft, under the
orders of Captain Robert Dudley Oliver, in the 38-gun frigate
Melpomene, was stationed oft’ Havre , to reconnoitre and harass
the port, aud prevent, as well the vessels of the flotilla inside
from escaping , as those on the outside from joining . On the
23d the bomb-vessels bombarded the town, set it on fire, and
 compelled several of the vessels to retire behind the pier and up
the river. The mortar-batteries on shore opened a fire in return,
 which, although continued for some time, inflicted very little
damage and no loss on the British vessels. On the 1st of
 4 ugust a second attack was made, attended with nearly a
similar result.
    On the 19th of July , in the afternoon, the wind, setting in
strong from the north -north -east, made so much sea, that the
 French flotilla in the road of Boulogne became very uneasy. At
nbout 8 p. m. the leeward most brigs began to get under way,
 and work to windward, while some of the luggers ran down
apparently for Etaples , leaving in the road at anchor 45 brigs
and 43 luggers . The British frigate Immortalite , Captain Owen,
with the 38-gun frigate Leda, Captain Robert Honyman , and
several small vessels, was then at anchor about eight leagues to
the westward of the town of Boulogne . The commodore im¬
mediately directed the 18-gun brig-sloop Harpy , Captain
