1804.                  INVASION -FLOTILLA.                       223

communication of intelligence . One vessel took her station
within view of distant signals (flags as large as ensigns, express¬
ing their import , not by colour, but by number and position)
from the commodore’s ship ; and the vessel or vessels close off
the enemy’s port, on having any thing important to communicate,
stretched out to the offing until their signals were seen and
answered by the intermediate cruiser, and then resumed their
station , or otherwise, as circumstances might require.
   On the 15th of May the British force stationed close off the
port of Ostende consisted of the 18-gun brig-sloop Cruiser,
Captain John Hancock , and 16-gun ship-sloop Rattler , Captain
Francis Mason ; who kept up a communication with the
squadron cruising off Calais, by means of three or four gun-
trigs , under the orders of Lieutenant Patrick Manderston , of
the Minx . On the evening of this day 22 one-masted gun-
vessels and one schooner were seen to haul out of the harbour
of Ostende , and to take up an anchorage to the westward of the
lighthouse , within the sand . Captain Hancock immediately
made the signal of recal to the four gun-brigs, then standing
to the westward , and despatched the hired armed cutter Stag,
Lieutenant William Patfull , with the intelligence to the commo¬
dore. Having done this, Captain Hancock , as soon as it grew
 dark , got under way with his two sloops ; and , the better to
prevent the escape of the division of gun-boats outside, which
were commanded by Capitaine de fregate Bernard -Isidore Lam-
bour, reanchored within long range of the batteries at the pier¬
head.
    On the 16th, at daybreak , the four British gun-brigs, being
still in sight , were again recalled ; but , as on the preceding
 evening, they did not see or understand the signal . At 9 h.
 30 m. a . m. the Rattler , who lay a little to the eastward of the
 Cruiser, made the signal , first for five sail, and then for a fleet,
 hi the east-south -east . This was a strong division of the Gallo-
 Latavian or Flushing flotilla, which had sailed from its anchorage
^ the Inner Wieling at daybreak on that morning , under the
command of Rear-admiral Ver-Huell , bound to Ostende , and
 consisted of the two ship-rigged prames ( 12 long 24-pounders
 each ) Ville-d’Anvers, bearing the admiral ’s flag, Lieutenant
 Andre Dutaillis , and Ville-d’Aix, Captain Frangois -Jacques
 Meynne, 19 schooners, and 47 schuyts , in all 68 sail ; mounting
 between them upwards of 100 long 36, 24, and 18 pounders,
 besides lighter pieces on the side, brass carronades , and mortars,
 mid carrying a body of between 4000 and 5000 troops.
    At 10 a . m., which was as early as the tide served, the two
 sloops got under way and began working towards the enemy.
 At about 11 A. m. the wind shifted to the south -west ; which,
 while it favoured the two sloops, headed the flotilla, then nearly
 abreast of Blanckenberghe , and induced the Dutch admiral to
 bear up and put back towards Flushing . At about noon Sir
