 226        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL .                          1804 .

 had been effected two hours before he was in a situation to
 make that signal, Sir Sidney in his letter says : “ Since two
 o’clock (a little earlier than was the case) the sternmost prame
 struck her colours and ran on shore .”
     But there is a more disinterested testimony , in favour of the
 claims of the Cruiser and Rattler , than is to be found in the
 logs of any of the British ships . The French minister of marine,
 Vice-admiral Deeres , under date of May 20, 1804, gives as the
 substance of the report of Rear -admiral Ver-Huell , that an
 English frigate and corvette , or, in other words, that an English
 frigate -built and brig-rigged corvette , who were very near , ma¬
 noeuvred to cut off two of the gun-boats and a transport , &c.
 “ The action during two hours, ” proceeds the account , “ was
 extremely warm : the two enemy’s vessels were disabled and
 retreated .” The rear -admiral goes on to state , that the port of
  Ostende being left open, he steered towards it ; but that Com-
'modore Sir Sidney Smith , “ having assembled his squadron,
 attacked the flotilla within three leagues of Ostende, ” &c. As
 this translation is at complete variance , in some material points,
 with that which appears in the work of a contemporary , we will
  here add the original passages , or so much of them as is neces¬
 sary : “ Une fregate et une corvette anglaise, * qui etaient fort
 pres , manceuvrerent, ” &c. “ Le combat , pendant deux heures,
  fut extremement chaud , les deux batimens ennemis furent desern-
 pares et firent chasses .”f “ Le Commodore Sidney Smith , ayant
  pu reunir sa croisicre, ioignit la flotille gallo-batave a troislieues
  d’Ostende .”
     From the above extracts , it is evident that Rear-admiral Ver-
  Huell considered that he was attacked , and engaged for two
  hours , by the Cruiser and Rattler , before the Antelope , or any
  other ship of Sir Sidney ’s squadron , fired a shot at him ; and
  thus , like an honest man, did he report the fact to the official
  organ of his government . But the appearance of Sir Sidney
  Smith ’s official letter , in the columns of the Moniteur , made
  M . Deeres condemn the haste he had used in publishing the
  report of the Dutch admiral . Instead of the attack having been
  made by two sloops, or, taking the literal translation , by one
  frigate and one sloop, it was here confessedly made by one 50-
  gun ship, three frigates, twro sloops, and two cutters . Accord¬
  ingly M. Dumas , and all the other French historians , reject their
  own official account as too tame and inglorious , and prefer in¬
  corporating in their pages the official account of their enemy-
  This is particularly the case in one work, which, on most other
  occasions, would scorn to glean its materials from any source
  that was not decidedly French .£ We regret that we were so lac
  misled by Sir Sidney’s letter , as, in the former edition of this
   * An English frigate and a cutter. —Brenton , vol. iii., p. 244.
   •jp The two vessels of the enemy were dismasted and sheered off.— lb ., p. 245 .
   J Precis des Evenemens , tome xi., p. 19,
