1804.                   INVASION - FLOTILLA.                             221

affair is still involved in doubt , it is but justice to state , that
Napoleon has strenuously denied having offered any violence to
the person of this gallant British officer.* Among the papers
discovered at Captain Wright ’s death , and restored by the
present French government to Sir Sidney Smith, under whose
auspices, it will be recollected , Captain Wright , when a lieute¬
nant of the Tigre, had greatly distinguished himself, was a narra¬
tive of the circumstances of the Vincejo ’s capture , drawn up for
the needless purpose of j ustifying her officers and crew from the
charge of pusillanimity advanced by the hireling press of France.
To show how differently the actual antagonists of the British
brig thought of her behaviour in the action, we have only to
subjoin the speech of Lieutenant Tourneur upon receiving
Lieutenant Wright ’s sword : “ Monsieur , vous avez noblement
 defendu l’honneur de votre nation , et la reputation de votre
marine. Nous aimons et estimons les braves, et Ton vous traitera,
Vous et votre equipage , avec tous les egards possibles.”
    Having , like a ship-sloop, a detached quarterdeck and fore¬
castle with barricades and portholes, and being on account of the
smallness of her ports and the spaces between them , pierced for
 10 guns of a side on the main deck , the Vincejo appeared to be
 a much more formidable vessel than she really was. In point of
 size, being only 277 tons, she was not much larger than a French
 gun-brig, and , in point of armament , not nearly so effective. All
 this was made known to the commanding officer of the French
 gun-boats , by two deserters from the brig a few days before her
 capture . The surprise is, that a vessel, so poorly armed and
 manned as the Vincejo , should have been sent alone to
 cruise in waters where she’ was so likely to be assailed by a
 tenfold superior force. Captain Wright , it appears , made fre¬
 quent complaints of this nature to Admiral Lord Keith ; but
 the latter took an effectual way of silencing them : he menaced
 the enterprising young officer with his displeasure .*
    The following portion of Captain Wright ’s narrative will show,
 as well the effect produced upon his mind by the statements cir¬
 culated in France to his disadvantage , as the species of daring
  service in which he had employed the Vincejo for some weeks
  previous to her capture ; a capture of the importance of which
 the French government were so fully sensible, that they promoted
  Lieutenant Tourneur on the spot to a capitaine de fregate.
     “ Had it ever occurred to me,” says Captain Wright , “ that
  blame could in any manner attach to my conduct , under the
  closest scrutiny of a court composed of my brother officers,
  tamed for the severity of their criticism on all that concerns the
  honour of the country and the reputation of the navy, and who
  are at least as good judges as the enemy, of the risks that a

         ^
 24* 182G^   eara’s Napoleon in Exile , vol. i., pp. 340, 449 ; andvol . ii. pp,
   t Naval Chronicle, vol. xxxv., p. 450.
