230      BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS
                                .—CHANNEL
                                       .                      1804.
round Cape Grinez, but who kept too close to the shore to be
molested. Towards the afternoon a second division of gun-
vessels, under Capitaine de vaisseau Etienne Pevrieux , and two
sections of Prussian mortar-vessels, got under way, and , when
joined to Captain Le Ray ’s division, which was still manoeuvring
between Vimereux and Ambleteuse , formed a total of 60 brigs,
and upwards of 30 luggers . The French emperor himself, it
appears , was at this time in the road in his barge, attended by
Marshals Soult and Mortier, and Admiral Bruix . At 4 r. m.
the Immortalite , followed by the Harpy , still commanded by
 Captain Hey wood, gun-brig Adder, Lieutenant George Wood,
and hired armed cutter Constitution , commanded by Lieutenant
J . S. A. Dennis, made sail towards the flotilla, and in a quarter
©f an hour afterwards opened her fire ; as did the vessels astern
 of her . The gun-vessels, however, kept near the shore, pur¬
posely to draw the British within reach of the batteries . There
 was no withstanding the temptation , and the Immortalite and
her three companions tacked and stood in, within three quarters
of a mile of the batteries , which kept up an incessant fire.
    As if that were not enough to preserve the gun-vessels from
 capture , the greater part of those in the road weighed and pro¬
 ceeded to their assistance . “ Presque tous les batimens qui se
trouvaient en rade prirent part a ce combat, selon leur position,
 et furent soutenus par le feu des batteries de la cote, quand
l ’ennemi tenta de s’en approcher . Les mortiers a grande portee
 lui firent beaucoup de mal, &c. v#
    At about 5 p. m., while the Constitution with her 12-pounder
 carronades was engaging, in the most gallant manner, a heavy
 gun -brig and two lugger-rigged yachts , painted with white
 bottoms and green sides, and richly gilt, a 13-inch shell fell oil
 board between the companion and skylight , passed through the
 deck , stove a skuttle -butt , and went through the cutter ’s
bottom . The hole being too large to be stopped , and the vessel
filling fast, a signal of distress was hoisted . In a few minutes
the boats of the squadron were alongside, and the whole of the
crew were saved. A shell also fell on board the Harpy , and,
 after killing one of her seamen, lodged in a beam on the main
deck , without doing further harm . The reason given for its not
exploding is a very extraordinary one. According to several
 English accounts , the fusee was actually extinguished by the
blood of the poor man , through whose body the shell had just
passed . The Immortalite was twice struck by shot in the hulk
and had four men slightly wounded. This frigate and her
division, to which the Bruiser gun-brig , commanded as before,
had since joined herself, now hauled off out of gun-shot. Some
of the French vessels were compelled to run on shore on account
of the shot-holes in their hulls ; and such of the remainder,

              * Precis   des Evenemens , tome xi .. p . 47,
