232        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                1804.

  barrels ) and other inflammable matter , was a piece of clockwork,
  the main spring of which, on the withdrawing of a peg placed
   on the outside, would, in a given time (from six to ten minutes),
  draw the trigger of a lock, and explode the vessel. This u cata¬
  maran ” as it was called, had no mast, and was to be towed to
  the spot of its operation. On the opposite end to that to which
  the tow-rope was fixed was a line, with a sort of grappling -iron
  at its extremity , kept afloat by pieces of cork, and intended to
  hook itself to the cable of the object of destruction , and swing
  the coffer alongside.
     The appearance of about 150 vessels, moored in a double line
  outside the pier of Boulogne, offered a fit opportunity for trying
 the effect of these much- vaunted machines . Accordingly on the
  1st of October, in the morning, Admiral Lord Keith , in the
  Monarch 74, with three 64s, two 50s, and several frigates, sloops,
 bombs , gun-brigs, cutters , and fire-vessels, anchored about five
 miles from the French line off Boulogne . In the course of the
 day , the Monarch , accompanied by three frigates and some
 smaller vessels, weighed, and reanchored just out of gun-shot of
 the French batteries and flotilla. This movement, coupled with
 the information previously furnished by spies, left no doubt in
 the minds of the French as to the nature of the attack that was
  about to ensue. Every defensive preparation had already been
  made by Rear - admiral Lacrosse, whose flag was flying on board
 Vhe Ville-de- Mayence prame, stationed in the centre of the line.
 Towards evening the French admiral despatched several gun¬
 boats and armed launches to a distance outside, that they might
 be ready , as well to give notice by signal of the enemy’s approach,
 as, if possible, to grapple and tow away the fire- vessels. On
 shore the batteries were all ready, and bodies of troops, with
 numerous field-pieces , were stationed along the coast.
     On the 2d of October, at about 9 h. 15 m. p. m., the four fire-
 vessels, Amity, Devonshire, Peggy , and Providence , towed by
 armed launches , proceeded upon the service assigned them . In
less than a quarter of an hour their approach was signalled by
 the French videttes ; who, as soon as they found that the fire
they opened was not returned , suspected the nature of the ves¬
sels which, with a strong tide and fair wind, were fast driving
towards them . A scuffle now ensued between the French gun¬
boats and the English launches ; and the latter , having towed
their charges to a proper distance, and ignited the fusees, left the
tide to perform the rest, and rowed back to their ships . As the
fire-vessels approached the left of the French line, a heavy
cannonade commenced, with a view of sinking them , but it
failed in its effect. The Providence , entering among the gun¬
boats , exploded at 10 h . 15 m., between No. 149 and No. 142,
stationed in the second line, wounding two men on board the
latter vessel. The explosion was awfully loud, and created con¬
siderable alarm, as well along the French line, as among the
