1804.                  INVASION - FLOTILLA.                     233

spectators on shore ; but no more mischief appears to have been
done than has just been stated.
  In another 20 minutes the Peggy , passing through a vacant
space left purposely for her, exploded in the rear of the line, with
an effect as slight as the first, merely wounding an officer and
two men. A third fire-vessel, the Devonshire, exploded at about
1 a . m. on the 3d , wounding two men only .     The fourth , which
was the Amity, pointed to the admiral ’s prame ; but the Ville-
de-Mayence, slacking her cables, let the enemy drift harmlessly
by. This vessel, at her explosion, appears to have effected even
less than her three companions.
   Four or five of the catamarans also exploded, the last at about
3 h. 30 m. a . m. ; but only one, and that by an unexpected
occurrence, appears to have caused any destruction to the French.
A British boat, having just done towing a catamaran , was, the
French say, abandoned by her crew, but left with a sail up. If
so, it must have been as a ruse, and the English must have
transported themselves to another boat , as the enemy’s gun-
vessel was approaching . Lord Keith ’s letter containing not a
word of details , the French accounts are all to which we have to
trust . A heavily-armed launch , or peniche, (No. 267, ) ap¬
proached this vacant boat , into which 27 French soldiers and
sailors instantly leaped . Scarcely had the latter made off with
their prize, before the peniche ran foul of the catamaran , and was
instantly blown into the air, with the loss of all her remaining
crew, consisting of her commander and 13 soldiers and sailqrs.
Those left in the captured boat gained the port of Vimereux.
This made the French loss amount , altogether , to 14 killed and
seven wounded . The British had not a man hurt.
   Many were the anathemas hurled against England for the
barbarity of this attack by catamaran , but surely without
reason. Had she not a right to crush , in the ports of its forma¬
tion if she could, the flotilla which, it was publicly declared , had
for its sole object the conveyance of troops for a descent upon
her shores ? What is there, compared with explosion-vessels and
hre-ships, peculiarly gentle in the employment of red-hot balls,
and grape and langridge shot ; or, indeed, in any of the missiles
°r weapons with which war is usually waged ? That the cata¬
maran affair was a silly project was asserted with more reason,
than that it was a cruel or an illegal one. It was a complete
failure, and, like every failure of the kind , conferred additional
strength upon that which it was intended to destroy . Under an
Jdea, for instance , that the British would improve their plans,
and make a second attempt at burning the flotilla, “ une chaine
do barrage ” was constructed , which completely sheltered the
hne of gun-bo'ats at Boulogne from explosion-vessels of every
description.                          .
   On the 8th of October , a division of French lugger -rigged
gun-vessels being perceived from the road of Jersey , creeping
