1804. REAR-ADMIRAL CAMPBELL AND TOULON SHIPS. 237

the reconnoitring ships. Shortly afterwards the French van-
frigate, being on the weather quarter of the Canopus, opened a
fire upon her and the Donegal , which these ships immediately
returned . With so superior a force it was in vain to contend, and
Rear -admiral Campbell directed his little division to make sail.
At 3 h. 30 m. p. m., finding pursuit useless, the French ships
tacked and stood back to their port ; and at 9 h. 30 m. p. m.,
and not before, the Canopus and her two companions joined the
Victory and the fleet.*
    On the 13th of June , in the afternoon, two strange ships
having been signalled as under sail off' the east end of the island
of Porquerolles , Lord Nelson, who, with the in-shore or lee
division, consisting of the Victory, Canopus , Belleisle, Donegal,
and Excellent , lay off the Hyeres , while Sir Richard Bickerton,
with the weather division, also of five sail of the line, cruised
about 20 leagues from the land , ordered the frigates Amazon
and Phcebe, the latter commanded by Captain the Honourable
Thomas Bladen Capel, to proceed in chase. Light winds made
it noon on the following day , the 14th, before the two frigates
reached the entrance of the Grande -Passe ; and soon afterwards,
it being signalled that the strangers were frigates, and known
that batteries were near them , Lord Nelson directed the Excel¬
lent to lend her aid to the Amazon and Phcebe. At 5 p. m. the
two French frigates, Incorruptible and Sirene, and 18-gun brig-
corvette Furet , were seen at anchor under the castle of Porque¬
rolles . At 5 h. 30 m. p. m. one of the forts fired at the Phcebe,
but the shot did not reach her . In another quarter of an hour
both British frigates having cleared for action, anchored with
 springs on their cables , just out of gun-shot of the northmost
 fort . Scarcely had the frigates done this , than the whole French
 fleet in Toulon road was discovered getting under way. The
Amazon and Phcebe immediately reweighed, and stood out to
 sea. The Excellent , having also been recalled by signal, put
 about and rejoined her division ; which, since 4 h. 30 m., had
 bore up, with the wind at west-south -west, under all sail, for
 the Grande -Passe.
    At 5 p. m., or soon after , the Victory and the ships with her,
 observing the French admiral coming out of Toulon with eight
 sail of the line and four frigates , shortened sail and hauled to
 the wind, in line of battle , on the starboard tack . At 8 p. m.
 Cape Side bore from the Victory north -west by west distant
 seven leagues ; and at 1 h. 30 m. a . m. on the 15th, having wore
 and tacked several times, the lee division hove to. At 3 h. 45 m.
A* m. Lord Nelson again made sail , and at noon was only 11
railes to the westward of the north -west end of Porquerolles;
  .* ^ le authors of the quarto “ Life of Nelson, ” by confounding this sortie
■with another that occurred three weeks afterwards, have entangled themselves
and their readers in a labyrinth of mistakes.    See Clarke and M‘Arthur’s
Book, vol. ii., pp. 3G6_7>
