1804.                  INVASION - FLOTILLA.                    231

the batteries had not permitted to be materially damaged , bore
up for the road of Boulogne . On the two succeeding days some
slight skirmishes also took place , but nothing decisive could be
effected on account of the French batteries ; nor was any injury
done to the British vessels, beyond a wound in the BruiserV
bowsprit.
     It is singular that the same French writer, who tells us of the
immense advantage which a host of these gun-vessels derived
from the gun and mortar batteries along the coast , should cite
the engagement or skirmish of the 26th of August , as “ une des
plus fortes epreuves de l’effet reciproque du feu des petits bati-
mens de flotille opposes a une ligne de vaisseaux et fregates
 d’un rang tres -superieur .”# The writer should have stopped
 until a case occurred where a score or so of these gun -vessels,
 having got beyond the reach of their protectors , suddenly found
 themselves, in a fine commanding breeze, close to leeward of a
single British frigate, of the Immortalite for instance . How
many of them , does he think , would escape capture or destruc¬
tion ? None, provided the frigate stayed not to pick up the
 drowning crews of those she crushed by her stem, or sank by her
 broadsides ; and provided those vessels, that hauled down their
 flags to save themselves from the fate of their companions, did
 not treacherously rehoist them, because the frigate was too much
 occupied to send a boat to take possession. None knew this
 better than Napoleon . The affair of the 26th of August , of
 which he had unintentionally been an eye-witness, convinced
 him. He did not say so, it is true : it was not his policy.
 Within the short space of little more than five weeks, the French
 emperor had witnessed, both what the Channel gales and the
  Channel cruisers would do with his flotilla, if it fell in the way
  of either.
     Towards the latter end of the summer a plan was submitted
 to, and received the sanction of the British government , for
  destroying such vessels of the invasion-flotilla, as should moor
  in any of the open roads along the French Channel-coast . This
  desirable object was to be attained chiefly by means of a novel,
  or rather , of a revived species of fire-vessel of a very peculiar
  description . It consisted of a coffer of about 21 feet long, and
  three and a quarter broad , resembling in appearance a log of
 mahogany , except that its extremities were formed like a wedge.
  Its covering was of thick plank , lined with lead , calked and
  tarred . Outside this was a coat of canvass, paid over with hot
  pitch . The vessel weighed, when filled (done of course before
  the covering is wholly put on), about two tons . The contents
  consisted, besides the apparatus , of as much ballast as would
  just keep the upper surface of the deck of the coffer even with
  the water’s edge . Amidst a quantity of powder (about 40

                * Precis ties Ev&nemeas, tome xi ., p. 45.
