238          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                       1804.

 At 5 p. m. the Amazon and Phoebe joined the vice-admiral ; at
 which time the French fleet, counted at 14 sail of ships, was
 standing off and on between Cape Sepet and the last-named
 island . At 6 p. m. the lee divison again hove to fora short time.
  At 7 p. m. the Incorruptible , Sirene, and Furet joined their
  fleet ; which, having effected the apparent object of the sally,
  now stood back into port , and was followed, until well inside of
  Sepet, by Lord Nelson and his division.
     This would have passed off as an occurrence of no moment,
  had not M. La Touche-Treville thought proper to make it the
  subject of an official communication to his -government . He
 admits having sent the two frigates and a brig-corvette to cruise
 in the bay of Hytires ; as well as that he sailed out, with the
 whole of his fleet, to prevent their retreat from being cut off by
 a line-of-battle ship and two frigates detached by Lord Nelson.
  He states truly , that the latter , upon this, recalled his de¬
 tached ships, but most untruly , that the British admiral “ ran
 away .”
     What Lord Nelson thought of the French admiral ’s exploit
 may be gathered from a letter which, on the 18th of June , he
 wrote to Sir John Acton : “ Mons. La Touche came out on the
 14th . I was off*the Hi^res with five ships ; he had eight of
 the line and six frigates . In the evening he stood under Sepet
 again , and , I believe I may call it, we chased him into Toulon
 the morning of the 15th. I am satisfied he meant nothing be¬
 yond a gasconade ; but am confident, when he is ordered for
 any service, that he will risk falling in with us, and the event of
 a battle , to try and accomplish his orders.”* It wras not until
 some weeks after the date of this letter that Lord Nelson saw
 a copy of the official one of M . La Touche.f The statement of
the French admiral gave his lordship much more concern than
it ought to have done ; so much indeed, that he transmitted a
copy of the Victory ’s log to the admiralty . It was sufficient for
M . La Touche that his assertion, taken in a larger sense than he
had probably anticipated , that of having chased the British ad¬
miral with all the latter ’s 10 sail of the line present , gained
credence in a quarter which immediately promoted him from
“ un grand officier de la legion d’honneur,” to “ un grand officier
de l’empire,” and conferred upon him, also, the lucrative ap¬
pointment of “ inspecteur des cotes de la Mediterranee .”
    Napoleon ’s letter , apprizing M. La Touche -Treville of the
manner in which he had rewarded his gallantry , is dated at Mal-
maison, the 2d of July , and contains some important directions
relative to the proceedings of the Toulon fleet. The vice-
admiral is informed, that two battalions of picked troops of the
 ine, consisting of 800 men each, have received orders to embark

 * Clarke and M‘Arthur, vol. ii., p. 372.
 •f For   a transcript of the original letter , see Appendix No . 26.
