 240         BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— MEDITER.                      1804

  So states the letter which M. La Touche-Treville thought it
 worth while to send to his government on so important an
 occasion.
     On the 6th , the French squadron returned to Toulon, and the
 Belleisle and her five highly -honoured companions approached
 near enough to count seven of the ships standing into the har¬
 bour . On the 8th , in the evening, the Belleisle reconnoitred the
 port , and observed 10 sail of the line, six frigates, and one brig,
 at anchor in the road . On the same day, Lord Nelson, with his
 fleet, anchored in a bay in the island of Pulla ; where , he had
 been informed, excellent fresh water could easily be procured.
 “ A very fine watering -place, ” says his lordship in his diary,
 “ found by Captain Hillyar , about five miles to the westward of
 Porto -Torres, with the springs about 200 yards from the beach,
 where 40 casks may be filled at the same time.”
    On the 10th, the Vice-admiral # weighed and put to sea ; but,
having by a severe gale of wind been blown under Cape San-
 Sebastian , was not able, until the 26th , to reconnoitre Toulon.
 In the outer harbour , the Victory counted 20 ship-rigged vessels,
including 10 sail of the line ; and in the inner harbour , fitting,
one sail of the line and one frigate.
    On the 18th of August , in the night , Vice-admiral La Touche-
Treville / lied on board the Bucentaure         and the command of
the fleet, until a successor should be appointed by Buonaparte,
devolved upon Admiral Dumanoir -le-Pelley , whose flag, as
already stated , was flying on board the 80-gun ship Formidable.
The British fleet outside of Toulon, although the Conqueror,
Spencer , and Tigre, had joined , still consisted of only 10 sail of
the line, the Gibraltar , Kent , and Triumph , having parted com¬
pany . Even had Lord Nelson’s force been less, or the blockade
of the port actually raised, the French rear-admiral , as will pre¬
sently appear , had received no orders to quit port.
    In a letter from Napoleon to his minister of marine at Brest,
of date September 29, are contained directions, that Vice-admi¬
ral Villeneuve, then appointed to the command of, and supposed
to have already joined , the Toulon fleet, should quit the road, if
possible , before the 21st of October , having previously received
on board about 6500 troops under General Lauriston . The fleet,
stated to consist of 11 ships of the line and seven or eight
frigates , was to sail out of the Mediterranean , call for the Aigle
at Cadiz, detach two of its fastest sailers, along witlf- four
frigates and two brigs , having on board 1800 troops, to relieve
Senegal , retake Goree , ravage the British settlements on the
coast of Africa, and capture the island of Saint -Helena , wanted
   * Since the first of the month, Lord Nelson had changed his flag from blue
to white , as Sir Richard Bickerton had from white to red.
   •j- “ The French papers say he died in consequence of walking so often up
to the signal-post upon Sepet, to watch us.”—Letter of Lord Nelson, in Clarke
and      Arthur, yoI. ii ., p. 387.
