234      BRITISH AND FRENCH           .—CHANNEL, 1804*
                                  FLEETS
along the coast of Normandy from the southward , the British
18-gun ship-sloop Albacore, Captain Major Jacob Henniker,
slipped and made sail, followed by a gun-brig and cutter ; but
who, missing the sloop in the haze, returned to the anchorage.
Towards evening the Albacore, being near the Grosnez de
Flamanville , compelled five of the luggers to anchor close to the
surf, under the corner of a battery to the southward of Grosnez.
The wind being dead on shore and a lee tide making , the
Albacore lay off until the 9th , at 10 a . m. ; when, with the
assistance of the weather tide , Captain Henniker stood in, under
a heavy fire from the battery and gun-vessels. At 11 a . m. the
Albacore anchored , with springs, close to the gun-vessels, and
within about 200 yards of the surf : the sloop then opened her
fire, and continued it until all five vessels were driven on shore,
and lay broadside to in a heavy surf, which broke with great
violence over them . Their men, in great numbers, landed upon
the beach ; and some were seen bearing the wounded in their
arms. Having , owing to the strength of the wind, dragged her
anchor , the Albacore, at the falling of the tide, slipped and
hauled off, without any loss, but with her hull struck in several
places , her main and maintop masts shot through , and her
rigging of every kind much cut.
    On the 23d of October , at 4 p. m., a division of the French
flotilla, consisting of two prames , one with a commodore’s broad
pendant , and 18 armed schuyts , put to sea from Ostende , and
 steered to the westward, just as the Cruiser , Captain Hancock,
 accompanied by the gun -brigs Blazer, Lieutenant John Hinton,
 Conflict, Lieutenant Charles C. Ormsby , Tigress, Lieutenant
Edward Greensword, and Escort , Lieutenant Joseph Gulston
 Garland , and hired armed cutters Admiral-Mitchell and Griffin,
 Lieutenants Richard Williams and James Dillon, was standing
in to reconnoitre the port . Chase was given, and the headmost
prame, at 5 h. 18 m. p. m., was brought to action by the Cruiser
 and her consorts. The mutual cannonade continued until 6 h.
35 m. p. m. ; when the prame ’s fire, which had been confined to
musketry for the last half hour, entirely ceased . As, however,
the tide was rapidly falling, darkness coming on, and no person
 on board was acquainted with the shoals to the westward of
 Ostende , the Cruiser, then in less than three fathoms ’ water,
 hauled off’and anchored.
    Meantime , in her eagerness to close with the prame, the Con¬
 flict gun-brig had grounded ; and, although the brig was in two
 fathoms ’water, the prame steered safe in-shore of her. As soon
 as the prame had passed 6ut of gun-shot, Lieutenant Ormsby
 commenced lightening his vessel, in the hope to get her off.
 endeavours proving fruitless, the lieutenant and his men quitted
 the Conflict, and pulled for the Cruiser, whose lights were then
 in view. An attempt to bring away the gun -brig was afterwards
 made by the Griffin and Admiral-Mitchell cutters , manned m
