1804.     LORD NELSON AND M. LA TOUCHE
                                     -TREVILLE
                                             .                 239

on board his ships, presumed to be 10 of the line, ready for sea
in the road . If seamen are wanted , the corvettes are to be dis¬
armed, and pressgangs sent to the port of Marseilles . The orders
about the employment of shells for the 36-pounders in the Brest
 fleet are here repeated , with an assurance that , if fired at a
 distance of not more than 200 or 300 toises, they will produce a
 much greater effect upon the hull of a ship than cannon -balls .*
    M . La Touche -Treville is then directed , after having , if
 possible, deceived Lord Nelson as to his destination , to put to
 sea, pass the Straits , sail wide of Ferrol to avoid being seen by
 the blockading squadron , and arrive off Rochefort ; where he
 is to be joined by the six sail of the line, including the new ship
 Achille then expected to be ready , in that port . With his 16
 sail of the line and 11 frigates, the vice-admiral is then to pro¬
 ceed off Boulogne , either doubling Ireland , or otherwise , as
circumstances may warrant . The Brest fleet, composed of 23
 sail of the line, with a strong body of troops on board, is in the
mean time to draw off the attention of Admiral Cornwallis , and
to oblige him to keep close to the coast of Bretagne , to be
ready to intercept it on its supposed route to the westward . The
further destination of M . La Touche-Treville is left to be com¬
municated to him, when he arrives in the neighbourhood of
Boulogne ; which, Napoleon conjectures , will be in the course
of September , admitting the fleet to have sailed from Toulon,
as he trusts it will, about the 28th of July.
    For 16 or 17 days previous to the date last mentioned , a suc¬
cession of heavy gales of wind had rendered it very difficult for
Lord Nelson to keep his station ; especially as scarcely more
than half his ships were in a seaworthy state .f On the 19th of
July the Ambuscade frigate, with eight sail of transports , joining
from England , Lord Nelson wore and stood for the gulf of Palma,
with the double object of unloading the transports and of shel¬
tering the fleet. The station off Toulon, in the mean time, was
left in charge of Captain William Hargood , of the Belleisle,
Laving in company the Fisgard and Niger frigates, the Acheron
bomb-vessel, and two transports.
    On the 2d of August , when the violence of the wind had driven
these ships out of sight of the shore, five French sail of the line
and six frigates , under the orders of Rear -admiral Dumanoir -le-
Pelley , in the Formidable 80, sailed out of Toulon, for the sole
purpose , as alleged, of practising manoeuvres. The division
cruised within six or seven leagues of the port until the 5th,
when the Belleisle and her consorts, making their appearance,
were telegraphed by the signal-posts on Cape Sepet as six sail of
the line, “ six vaisseaux ennemis ;” and the Neptune , of 80 guns,
<f pour rendre lapartie egale, ” went out and joined M , Dumanoir.


   *Precis des Evfenemens, tome xi ., p. 198.
    See p. 214.
