1804.            CUTTING OUT THE CURIEUX.                    245

sently ceased. The British were not long in cutting the cables
of their prize, nor in unfurling her sails ; and, in a very few
minutes, the Curieux , in the hands of her new masters , stood out
of Fort -Royal harbour . A smart fire was successively opened
from Fort Edouard , a battery on Pointe Negro, and another at
Pointe Soloman, but the brig passed clear, and, long before
break of day, was at anchor by the side of the Centaur.
    It was an additional cause of congratulation to the British,
that their loss of men, considering the magnitude of the enter¬
prise, was small, consisting of only nine wounded. Three of
the number , it is true, were officers ; Lieutenant Reynolds , the
gallant leader of the party , his able second, Lieutenant George
Edmund Byron Bettesworth , and Mr . John Tracy , a midship¬
man. The two latter were not badly wounded ; but the first-
named officer had received no fewer than five severe, and, as
they eventually proved, mortal wounds : one of the seamen, also>
 died of his wounds. The loss on the part of the French was
very serious. The Curieux had one midshipman and nine petty
officers, seamen, and marines killed , and 30, including all her
commissioned officers but one midshipman , wounded, many of
 them severely, and some mortally . The French captain had a
 singular escape : after having been knocked down and stunned,
Lie was thrown overboard , but fell on the fluke of the anchor,
 whence he dropped ^into one of the Curieux’s boats which was
alongside, full of water-casks . The only man in the boat imme¬
 diately cut her adrift , and pulled for the shore ; and Captain
 Cordelier, on recovering his senses, was as much chagrined as
Surprised at the novelty of his situation.
    The Curieux had long been at sea, and was considered to be
 one of the best-manned and best-disciplined brigs in the French
 navy . Some of her crew were undoubtedly panic-struck ; but
 the time, and the suddenness of the attack , coupled with its
 resistless impetuosity , may serve in part for their excuse. The
 determined behaviour of the French officers excited the admira¬
 tion of their opponents ; and Lieutenant Louis-Ange Cheminant,
 and Enseigne de vaisseau Jean -Joseph -Maurice Joly (both
 wounded), as likewise was their brave commander , particularly
 distinguished themselves. The conduct of the British upon the
 occasion speaks for itself.
     Commodore Hood, very considerately , despatched the Curieux
 to Fort -Royal as a flag of truce with the wounded Frenchmen ;
  and Vice-admiral Villaret-Joyeuse , the governor-general of the
 !sland , with a proper sense of the act, sent back his acknow¬
  ledgments . Upon her return , the Curieux , under her French
  name, became a British sloop of war, and was given to the
  officer who had headed the party that captured her ; but Cap¬
  tain Reynolds ’s wounds were of too severe a nature to admit of
  his taking the immediate charge of his new command. This
                                                                   j
