1804.               CUTTING OUT THE CURIEUX.                  243

person, when he has landed , has to creep through crannies, and
over dangerous steeps , until he reaches the north -west side,
where the eye is suddenly relieved by a sloping grove of wild
fig-trees.
    In the latter end of the year 1803 the British 74-gun ship
Centaur , Captain Murray Maxwell, bearing the broad pendant
of Commodore Samuel Hood, was cruising off Fort -Royal bay,
to watch the port and intercept the vessels bound in or out of it.
Finding that , as the Diamond had deep water all round, many
vessels escaped capture by running inside of it, Captain Hood
determined to take possession of and fortify the rock ; and make
it a sort of depot , or stationary ship of war, whence boats could
be detached to harass the enemy’s trade . A landing was effected ;
and in the course of the month of January , 1804, with incredible
difficulty, five of the Centaur ’s guns, three long 24 and two 18
pounders , were mounted in different parts of this stupendous
rock . The mode of getting them from the ship to an eminence
 so much higher than her mast-heads was characteristic and
ingenious : a cable was made fast by one end to the ship and by
 the other to the rock, along which passed a traveller , or running
 loop ; to this was suspended the cannon, or whatever else it was
 desirous to remove, and which, by means of suitable tackles,
 was dragged up the acclivity of the cable to the summit of the
rock. “ Were you to see,” sayski writer, who was on the spot,
 tl how, along a dire, and, I had almost said, a perpendicular
 acclivity, the sailors are hanging in clusters , hauling up a four-
  and - twenty pounder by hawsers, you would wonder ; they
  appear like mice hauling a little sausage : scarcely can we hear
 the governor on the top of the rock directing them with his
 trumpet , the Centaur lying close under it, like a cocoa-shell, to
  which the hawsers are affixed.”*
     One of the 24-pounders, fitted upon a circular carriage , com¬
 manded the landing place, and would reach in an eastern
  direction nearly across the bay of Marin . Another was mounted
 u pon the north-east side, and the third 24 about midway up the
  rock. Upon the summit , which commands an immense distance,
  were mounted the two 18-pounders . As soon as these guns were
 all mounted, and a sufficient quantity of powder and shot for
  their use was brought from the Centaur , Lieutenant James
  Wilkes Maurice, of that ship, with the rank of commander, and
  a crew of 120 men and boys, for whom a four months ’ supply of
 provisions and water had also been landed , hoisted his pendant
  °n board the British “ sloop of war ”*f*Diamond-rock.
     On the evening of the 3d of February four boats, containing
  60 seamen and 12 marines, under the orders of Lieutenant
  Robert Carthew Reynolds , of the Centaur , then at her old

  * Naval Chronicle, vol . xii ., p. 206.
  T So registered in the navy-lists.
                                        R2
