 246          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1804,
   gallant young officer, indeed, breathed his last in the early part
   of the ensuing September.
      The following passage occurs in a translated copy (all, we
   believe, that has been published ) of Lieutenant Cheminant ’s
  letter to Governor Villaret : “ I render justice to the English;
   they not only afforded the last military honours to the midship¬
   man Bourgonniere , but they afforded the most particular assist¬
  ance to the wounded, and not the value of a handkerchief was
  taken from the crew.”
      On the 5th of February , at 3 p. m., the British 12-gun
  schooner Eclair (18-pounder carronades ), Lieutenant William
   Carr , while cruising about 68 leagues to the northward of the
  island of Tortola, saw and immediately chased a strange sail to
  the southward . In about half an hour the stranger was disco¬
  vered to be a ship standing .towards the EclairT At 4 p. m.,
  having by the usual mode of signalling ascertained that the
  vessel approaching her was an enemy, the schooner shortened
  sail and cleared for action . At 4h . 30 m. the ship, which from
  subsequent information was the celebrated French privateer
  Grand -Decide , Captain Mathieu Goy, of 22 long 8- pounders,
  and a complement including 80 soldiers, of about 220 men,
  being within musket -shot on the larboard and weather bow of
  the Eclair , hauled up her courses, hove to, and hoisted French
  colours . When within pistol-shot, the Grand -Decide commenced
  the action, by discharging her larboard broadside and a heavy
  fire of musketry , and received in return the larboard broadside
  of the schooner. The Eclair then wore round and fired her
 starboard broadside . In this manner the action continued,
  without intermission on either side, until 5 h. 15 m. p. m. ; when
  the French ship slackened her fire, filled, and bore up, as if
  intending to rake the schooner ; but , instead of doing so, the
  privateer ceased firing, and made all sail to the northward . The
  Eclair instantly filled, and made sail in chase. At 7 p. m. the
  Grand -Decide was getting away fast, and by 8 h. 30 m. had run
 entirely out of sight.
     In this truly gallant exploit, the Eclair , out of her 60 men and
 boys, lost one marine killed and four seamen wounded, and had
 her standing and running rigging cut to pieces, and her barri¬
 cade , masts, and yards much damaged . That a ship so powerful
 in guns and men as the Grand -Decide , should , in a 45 minutes
 engagement , have done no more execution in personnel , is aS
 extraordinary , as that she should have ultimately fled from a
 vessel so much her inferior in guns , complement , and size. 1**
 was, however, established , to the entire satisfaction of Commo¬
 dore Hood, that the privateer was the Grand -Decide from
 Guadaloupe and that she was so armed and manned . Ij ie
 gallantry of Lieutenant Carr in attacking such a vessel, and the
.ability and determination displayed by him, his officers, and crew?
