 244         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1804.
   station off the Diamond , were detached to attempt the capture of
   the French brig-corvette Curieux , Capitaine de fregate Joseph-
   Marie -EmmanueFCordier,of 16 long 6-pounders and (supposed to
   have been about 100, but with only, as admitted ) 70 men, lying
   at anchor close under Fort -Edouard at the entrance of the
   Carenage , Fort -Royal harbour , Martinique , victualled for three
   months , and all ready for a start to sea. Although the sus¬
   picion that an attack might be made by a part of the blockading
  force had led to every commendable precaution to prevent sur¬
  prise ; such as , loading the carriage-guns with grape , and the
  swivels (of which there were eight ) and wall-pieces with musket-
  balls , spreading on the quarterdeck and in the arm-chest the
  muskets , sabres, pistols, tomahawks , and pikes , filling the
  cartouch -boxes, placing , as sentries, one marine at each gang¬
  way-ladder , one at each bow, and two at the stern, tracing up
  the boarding-nettings , and directing a sharp look-out to be kept
  by every officer and man of the watch (28 in number ), yet was
  the Curieux , owing to the vigour of the onset and the hour
  chosen for making the attack , unapprized of her enemy’s
  approach until too late to offer a successful resistance.
     At about three quarters of an hour past midnight , after a hard
 pull of 20 miles, and just as the moon was peeping from behind
  a cloud, the Centaur ’s boats were hailed by the Curieux , and
 then fired into by the sentries, by two of the starboard 6-
 pounders , a swivel, and a wall-piece. The 12 marines returned
 the fire with their muskets , and the boats pulled rapidly on. In
 the midst of a scuffle alongside, the barge pushed for the brig’s
 stem . Here hung a rope-ladder , to which two boats were fast.
 Lieutenant Reynolds , and a seaman named Richard Templeton,
ascended by it to the taffrail, and , in defiance of the swivels and
 wall-pieces mounted at this end of the vessel, were quickly
followed by the rest of the barge ’s crew. In his way up the
ladder , Lieutenant Reynolds , with admirable coolness, cut away
one of the tracing -lines with his sword, whereby the corner of
 the netting fell, and thus enabled the three remaining boats
to board on the brig’s quarter.
     Since the first alarm had been given, all the Curieux ’s officers
and men, headed by their brave commander , had been at their
quarters ; and a sanguinary combat now ensued, in which the
French officers took a much more active part than a portion of
their men. The French , however, were soon overpowered:
some were killed or badly wounded ; others thrown down the
hatchway ; and the remainder , finding themselves abandoned,
retreated to the forecastle. Here a line of pikes stood opposed
to the British ; but all was unavailable . Handspikes and the
butt -ends of muskets became formidable weapons in the hands
of the latter , and soon laid the captain and most of the officers
near hm prostrate on the deck . The majority of the surviving
crew having by this time fled below, all further resistance pro-
