  1804.     COMMODORE DANCE AND ADMIRAL LINOIS.                   249
     also lying to. M. Linois in his letters says, u If the bold front
     put on by the enemy in the daytime had been intended as a ruse
    to conceal his weakness, he would have profited by the darkness
    of the night to endeavour to conceal his escape ; and in that
    case I should have taken advantage of his manoeuvres. But I
    soon became convinced that this security was not feigned ; three
    of his ships constantly kept their lights up, and the fleet con¬
    tinued to lie to, in order of battle , throughout the night . This
    position facilitated my gaining the wind, and enabled me to ob¬
    serve the enemy closely.”*
        Both parties now hoisted their colours. Three of Commodore
    Dance ’s principal ships and the armed brig hoisted blue ensigns ;
    the remainder of the fleet, red ; and the whole of the China
   ships , having been recently painted , cut rather an imposing
   figure. This circumstance, coupled with the information that
   only 23 ships and a brig had quitted Canton, led, as he states,
   M . Linois to believe, that the three supernumerary ships formed
   the escort to the fleet. Admitting this to have been the fact,
   the French admiral was justified in making his advance with
   caution . At 9 a . m., observing that the enemy’s men of war
   did not come down, the Indiamen formed in order of sailing,
   and continued their course under an easy sail upon the starboard
   tack ; whereupon the three French ships and Batavian brig
   filled on the opposite tack , and edged away towards the mer¬
   chant fleet.
       Alp. m., finding that M. Linois intended to cut off his
  rear, Commodore Dance made the signal to tack in succession,
  bear down in line ahead, and engage on arriving abreast of the
  enemy. The manoeuvre was correctly executed, the Royal-
  George leading , followed successively, in close order, by the
  Ganges, Earl - Camden, Warley , Alfred, and others. Thus
  formed, and carrying topgallantsails , the British ships stood
 towards the French ships ; and these, carrying royals, and some
  °f them topgallant studding -sails, were keeping more away to
 facilitate the junction.
      At about 1 h . 15 m. p. m. the French admiral opened his fire
 upon the Royal-George and the ships next astern of her. The
 ftoyal -George returned the fire in a very spirited manner , and
 ' vas ably seconded, as they came up, by the Ganges and Earl-
 pamden . The Warley and Alfred were the next ships that got
 Rito action. The Royal-George was engaged about 40 minutes,
 and fired about eight or nine broadsides ; the Ganges , about 35
 nainutes, and fired seven or eight ; the Earl -Camden, about 25
Uunutes, and may have fired five broadsides ; and the Warley
and Alfred, who came into action nearly together , were engaged
about 15 minutes. After the mutual cannonade had lasted in
this way j ust 43 minutes , the Marengo and her consorts ceased

                      * See Appendix , No . 27.
