250                                          .
              LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS                           1804.

firing, hauled their wind, and stood away under all sail to the
eastward.
    At 2 p. m. the Earl -Camden made the signal for a general
chase , and the Indiamen pursued the French admiral until 4
p. m. ; when, considering the immense property at stake , and
fearing that his charge might be carried too far from the mouth
of the Straits of Malacca , Commodore Dance made the signal
to tack , which was immediately obeyed. At 8 a . m. the British
ships anchored in a situation to enter the Straits in the morning,
 and soon lost sight of the squadron of M . Linois. The follow¬
ing is the French admiral ’s account of the defeat which he ac¬
knowledges to have experienced . “ The headmost enemy’s
 ship , having sustained some damage, bore away ; but , supported
 by those astern , again brought her broadside to bear , and , as
 well as the others, kept up a very spirited fire. The ships which
 had tacked rejoined those which were engaging us, and three of
 the first engaged ships manoeuvred to double our rear, while the
 remainder of the fleet, crowding sail and bearing up, evinced an
 intention to surround us.# By this manoeuvre the enemy would
 have rendered my situation very dangerous . The superiority of
 his force was ascertained , and I had no longer to deliberate upon
 the part I should take to avoid the consequences of an unequal
 engagement : profiting by the smoke, I hauled up to port, and
 steering east-north -east, 1 increased my distance from the enemy,
 who continued the pursuit of the squadron for three hours , dis¬
 charging at it several ineffective broadsides .”*!- ■
     The Boyal -George had one man killed and one wounded, and
 received several shot in the hull , and more in her sails ; compa¬
 ratively trifling casualties, considering that she bore the brunt of
  the action, and was so long engaged . Few shot touched either
  the Ganges or the Earl -Camden ; and no other loss or damage
  appears to have been sustained by the British during this three-
  quarters of an hour ’s partial cannonade . The fire of the Royal-
  George, and the three or four ships in her wake, being chiefly
  directed at the rigging of the French ships, did not, according
  to M. Linois, injure a person on board of them.
      With respect to the armament of the 16 Indiamen thus
  drawn up in line-of-battle , they carried from 30 to 36 guns
  each ; but the strongest of them was not a match for the Semil-
  lante , and some of them would have found it difficult to avoid
   yielding to the Berceau . Some of the ships carried upon the
  main-deck 26 medium 18-pounders, or “ cannonades, ” weighing
   about 28 cwt. and of very little use : guns of this description,

   * We    do not understand     what   is meant   by this , and yet the account
 clearly so states, thus : “ Trois de ceux qui avaient des premiers pris part a
 Taction, manoeuvraientpour nous doubler a l’arribre, tandis que le reste de
 la flotte, se couvrant de voile, et laissant arriver, annon£ait le projet de nous
 .envelopper.”
    f See Appendix , No . 28.
