 248           LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                     1804.
               Hope .                        Jas. Pendergrass,
               Dorsetshire .                 Rob. Hunter Brown,
               Warren- Hastings .            Thomas Larkins,
               Ocean .              ..       Jno. Christ. Lochner,

   also 11 country-ships, one Botany-bay and one
                                                        Portuguese ship,
   and a fast-sailing armed brig, the Ganges , in the
                                                               company’s
   service ; total , 39 ships and one brig.
      On the 14th of February , at 8 a . m., Pulo -Auro in
                                                                sight and
  bearing west- south-west, the Royal-George made the signal
  seeing four strange sail in the south-west. Commodore                 for
                                                                     Dance
  immediately signalled the Alfred, Royal-George, Bombay-
  Castle , and Hope, to go down and examine the strangers :
  Lieutenant Robert Fowler, late commander of the British armed        and
  store-ship Porpoise (wrecked in the preceding August ),
  this time a passenger on board the Earl - Camden,                 and at
                                                           volunteered to
  go in the Ganges brig, on the same service. The
                                                           signals of the
  look-out ships soon apprized the commodore that the
                                                                   strange
  vessels were a French squadron, consisting of a line-of-
  ship , three frigates, and a brig. They were, in fact, the battle
                                                                   74-gun
 ship Marengo, Captain Joseph - Marie Vrignaud , 40-gun
 Belle -Poule , Captain Alain-Adelaide - Marie Bruilhac , frigate
                                                                   36-gun
 frigate Semillante , Captain Leonard- Bernard Motard , 22-gun
 corvette Berceau, Captain Emmanuel Halgan , and the
  16-gun brig-corvette Aventurier , which Rear -admiralBatavian
                                                                    Linois,
 whose flag was on board the Marengo, had borrowed
                                                                 from the
 colonial government at Batavia and commissioned by one of
                                                                       his
 lieutenants . On the 10th of the preceding December, it will be
 remembered the Marengo and her three consorts anchored in
 the road of Batavia.# Thence they sailed on the 28th ,
                                                                   accom¬
 panied by the Aventurier, and stored with six months’
 visions, on purpose to look after the China fleet, of pro¬
                                                                    whose
 strength and time of departure Rear -admiral Linois had, as
                                                                        he
 declares , been duly informed.
     At 1 p. m. the British commodore recalled
and formed the line of battle in close order.the Admiral look-out ships,
                                                                   Linois,
as soon as he could fetch in the wake of the British
                                                             fleet, which
he knew to be that expected from China, put about.
of the latter continued their course under easy sail ; The ships
                                                             and, as the
French were now close astern, Commodore Dance expected
                                                                       his
rear to be attacked , and prepared to support it ; but , at
fall, the French ships, preferring a daylight action,               night¬
                                                            hauled close
to the wind. The Ganges brig was sent to station the
                                                                country-
ships on the lee bow of the armed
so, returned with some volunteers forIndiamen,
                                          the latter.
                                                      and, having done
    The British ships lay to all night , the men at their
At daybreak on the 15th the French , having made a quarters.
of the intermediate time, were about three miles to proper use
                                                              windward,
                               See p. 213.
