1804.    INTENDED CRUISE OF ADMIRAL VILLENEUVE
                                             .                 241

as a depot for the French cruisers and their prizes in that
quarter of the globe ; while, with 10 sail of the line and frigates,
and the remainder of the troops, M. Villeneuve was to steer for
Cayenne. Having there taken on board the celebrated General
Victor Hugues , the French admiral was to proceed off Surinam,
and effect a junction with a squadron of five sail of the line and
four frigates, under Rear -admiral Missiessy, M. Villeneuve’s
successor at Rochefort ; and who, it was supposed, would
already have fulfilled the first part of his mission. This was,
with 3500 men under General Legrange, to proceed to Mar¬
tinique and Guadaloupe ; and, after leaving 1000 men at each
of those islands , to attempt , with the remaining 1500, the
capture of the island of Dominique, and, if possible, of Sainte-
Lucie. Having garrisoned the captured islands, Rear-admiral
Missiessy was to proceed off Surinam , and await the arrival of
Admiral Villeneuve ; who, with his force now augmented to 15
sail of the line, seven or eight frigates, and full 5000 men, was to
possess himself of Surinam, and the other Dutch colonies in this
quarter . That done, the French admiral was to place under
contribution all the British West -India islands , enter the differ¬
ent roadsteds , and capture or burn the vessels lying there;
leaving in the Antilles, purposely to harass British commerce,
the greater part of his corvettes, of which as many as possible
were to quit Toulon with the expedition. He was, next , to leave
1200 men with General Ferrand at the city of Santo-Domingo,
raise the blockade of Ferrol, and, taking out the five ships in
that port, appear off Rochefort with 20 sail of the line. Here
Vice-admiral Villeneuve would receive directions at what point
he was to join Vice-admiral Ganteaume and his 30 sail of the
line,* in order to fulfil the ultimate object in view, the descent
upon England.
   Napoleon, it appears, had wavered in his choice of an admiral
for the Toulon command between MM . Bruix, Villeneuve, and
Hosily. Owing to this or to some other delay, Vice-admiral
Villeneuve did not hoist his flag on board the Bucentaure until
the 6th of November, a few days anterior to which Lord Nelson
had returned to his station from Agincourt sound ; whither,
since the 18th of the preceding month, the want of wood, water,
and provisions, had driven the British fleet. On the night of the
l4th of November Lord Nelson received intelligence of the
seizure of the Spanish frigates, and had , in consequence, a part
^f his attention directed to a squadron of five or six sail of the
Jjne at anchor in Carthagena . On the 25th of December the
Swiftsure joined Lord Nelson ; and on the 31st, in the evening,
the British fleet, owing to the absence of the Superb, reduced
again to 10 sail of the line, besides two frigates and a bomb-
vessel, cruised about six leagues to the southward and eastward

                           * See p. 217.
  VOL. III.                       R
