242         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1804.

of Cape San-Sebastian . The French fleet in the outer road of
Toulon, now increased to 11 sail of the line and seven or eight
frigates , had since the 12th of the month been embarking the
troops allotted for the intended expedition, and was ready for a
start , the moment a fair wind and a clear offing should afford
the opportunity.
    By the Swiftsure, or some small vessel that joined on the
 same day , Lord Nelson received despatches from the admiralty,
respecting the conduct he was to pursue towards the Spaniards.
The despatches were dated September 19, and directed him to
take such measures of precaution only, as might be necessary
for opposing or counteracting any hostile attempts of the Spa¬
niards against the British dominions or trade . He was, how¬
 ever, not to sutler any act of hostility or aggression, with the
 exception of detaining Spanish ships with treasure on board, to
 be committed by his fleet until he received further orders, or
 had obtained positive information from unquestionable authority
 of hostilities having been committed by the Spaniards against
 the English . Additional directions, dated September 25, ordered
 the captains and commanders of the Mediterranean fleet to keep
 a vigilant look-out, and to detain Spanish ships or vessels laden
 with military stores. On November 25, lest any misapprehension
  might arise, further instructions were sent out not to detain, in
 the first instance , any ship belonging to his catholic majesty,
  sailing from a port of Spain, but to require the commander to
  return directly to the port whence he came ; and, only in the
  event of his refusing to comply with such requisition, was the
  admiral to detain and send the vessel to Gibraltar or England :
  he was further directed not to detain any homeward - bound
  Spanish ship of war, unless she should have treasure on board,-
  nor merchant ships of that nation, however laden, on any account
  whatever.

             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.

   At the distance of rather less than a mile from the south-west
end of the island of Martinique , or Pointe du Diamant , and
about six miles south-east from the entrance to the harbour or
bay of Fort -Royal, stands the roche du Diamant , or Diamond
rock , in latitude 14° 24' north , longitude 61° 6' west. In height*
as measured by a quadrant , it is 600 feet ; in circumference
rather less than a mile ; and “ in form very much resembling a
round haystack .” The south side of the rock is inaccessible, d
being a flat steep, like a wall, but sloping a little towards the top*
The east and the south-west sides are also inaccessible : the first
has an overhanging cave about 300 yards high, and the other
several caves of great magnitude . The west side, where breakers
run into the sea, affords the only landing . But even this landing
is not at all times practicable , on account of the surf ; and a
