1804.           HIPPOMENES AND EGYPTIENNE.                      255

frigate Railleuse, # since given or sold to some merchants at
Bordeaux , 857 tons . The Osprey sustained a loss of one man
killed and 16 wounded, and was a good deal damaged in her
sails and rigging . The loss on board the Egyptienne , as after¬
wards ascertained, amounted out of a crew of 248 men and boys,
to eight men killed and 19 wounded ; and the ship herself was
very much cut by shot in hull , masts, sails, and rigging : a proof
that the Osprey ’s carronades had been discharged with quickness
and precision.
   It is exploits like these that afford examples of gallantry in
the true import of the word. Had Captain Younghusband , on
discovering the size and strength of the Egyptienne , forborne to
attack her, no imputation would have rested on his professional
character . But he had a higher sense of the duties of a
British naval commander : he chose to wrestle with his powerful
antagonist ; and so vigorous and effective was his attack , that
nothing but lightness of heel saved the Egyptienne from be¬
coming his prize. In such a creditable encounter we must not
omit to state , that Lieutenant Francis Augustus Collier was
second in command of the Osprey.
   On the 25th , in the forenoon, this same Egyptienne fell in
with the British 14-gun ship-sloop Hippomenes (ten long 12,
and 2 long 8 pounders , and two 24-pounder carronades, all Dutch
caliber ), Captain Conway Shipley , and mistaking her probably,
for the ship she had been so beaten by two days before, crowded
sail to get off. The Hippomenes pursued , and , after an arduous
chase of 54 hours, and a running fight of three hours and 20
minutes more, came up writh and captured , the French ship.
The Egyptienne struck the moment the sloop got fairly along¬
side ; and, owing to her feeble resistance, inflicted no greater
loss on the Hippomenes than slightly wounding one person,
Mr . John Lloyd, a master’s mate.
   The bold front and rational confidence of the Egyptienne in
the beginning of the one action, and her panic-struck behaviour
and hasty flight in that of the other, occasion the principal differ¬
ence in the merits of the two. The conduct of Captain Shipley
was much enhanced by his readiness to do justice to the per¬
formance of his brother-commander of the Osprey, “ whose
gallantry, ” he says, “ astonished them.” It is probable that M.
Blaciard found a difficulty in persuading the merchants of
Bordeaux again to place him in the command of one of their
privateers.
   Being 30 years old and much broken in her sheer, the
Egyptienne was purchased into the British service merely as a
prison-ship. Her name was changed to Antigua ; and she was
stationed at English harbour in the island of that name.
   On the 24th of March the British ship-sloop Wolverine, of 13

                         * See vol. i., p. 381,
