252         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                             1804.

niority of service and absence of convoy, in the chief command
of the fleet intrusted to my care, it has been my good fortune to
have been enabled , by the firmness of those by whom I was
supported , to perform my trust not only with fidelity, but with¬
out loss to my employers. Public opinion and public rewards
have already far outrun my deserts ; and I cannot but be sensible
that the liberal spirit of my generous countrymen has measured
what they are pleased to term their grateful sense of my conduct,
rather by the particular utility of the exploit , than by any indi¬
vidual merit I can claim.” Here is an instance of modesty and
candour, as exemplary as it is rare ; and which sheds an addi¬
tional lustre upon the character of Sir Nathaniel Dance.
    On the 19th of February the British 14-gun brig-sloop Drake,
under the temporary command of Lieutenant William King of
the Centaur , while cruising off the port of Trinite on the north
side of the island of Martinique , discovered in the harbour,
taking in cargoes in defiance of the blockade , two American
brigs and a schooner, moored within pistol-shot of a fort mount¬
ing three French 24-pounders . Being determined to make an
attempt to cut out these vessels, Lieutenant King despatched
the boats of the Drake , under the orders of Lieutenant William
Cumpston , assisted by Mr. William Robson, the master , upon
that service. The three American vessels were gallantly boarded
and taken possession of, in the face of a heavy fire from the fort,
and from two field-pieces ; but , having no wind, Lieutenant
 Cumpston and his party could only succeed in bringing out the
schooner , which was accomplished without loss.
    On the night of the 24th Lieutenant King himself, with 21
seamen and nine marines, landed and spiked the guns at the
fort and the two field-pieces, with the loss of one seaman killed,
 and Lieutenant Cumpston and one seaman slightly wounded.
    On the night of the 4th of March the barge and pinnace of
 the 74-gun ship Blenheim , Captain William Ferris , having on
 board 50 officers and men under the orders of Lieutenant Thomas
 Furber , made a most gallant but unsuccessful attempt to cut
 out the French national schooner Curieuse, lying chain-moored
 close under a fort at the town of St . Pierre. The schooner had
 made very formidable preparations , having rigged out her sweeps
 on each side, traced her boarding -nettings to her lower mast¬
 heads , and there fastened them in the securest manner . Not¬
 withstanding all this , and a heavy fire of great guns and mus¬
 ketry , as well from the schooner herself, as from a party of
 soldiers drawn up on the beach, from the neighbouring forts,
 and from an armed sloop and several smaller vessels, Lieutenant
 Furber and those under him gallantly boarded and carried the
  Curieuse ; but , no sooner were her cables cut, than the schooner,
 held fast by the chain, swang round and grounded upon the
 beach . The severe loss now sustained obliged lieutenant
 Furber to desist from any further attempts ; and the two boats
