  258        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1804.
   south -east with a strong south-west gale, to the astonishment of
   every person on board, the Apollo struck the ground . The ship
   continued striking very heavily, and making much water : in
   about 10 minutes, however, the Apollo beat over the shoal, and
   having lost her rudder , could not be steered . The ship then put
   before the wind, but , from the quantity of water she had made,
   and was still making , with every probability of soon foundering.
   In about five minutes, the Apollo struck the ground again, and
  continued striking with such tremendous shocks , that it was
  feared the ship would instantly go to pieces. The three masts
  were then cut away, and the ship fell on the starboard side with
  her gunwale under water . The violence with which the ship
  struck the ground, and the weight of the guns, those on the
  quarterdeck tearing away the bulwarks , soon made the frigate a
  perfect wreck abaft : only lour or five guns, therefore, could be
  fired to alarm the convoy and give notice of danger.
     Most of the officers and men were entirely naked , the captain
  among the rest ; and who stood upon the cabin skylight grating,
  holding fast by the stump of the mizenmast, and making use of
  every soothing expression which could have been suggested to
  encourage men in so perilous a situation . Daylight , which ap¬
  peared at about 4 h. 30 in., discovered the land , at the distance
  of about 200 yards, a long sandy beach reaching to Cape Mon-
  d^ ;o, three leagues to the southward . At the same time the
  melancholy sight presented itself of between 20 and 30 sail of
  the convoy on shore both to the northward and southward,
  and several of them perfect wrecks . An appearance of the ship’s
 parting occasioned the crew, or the 220 that remained (about 20
 having perished between decks and otherwise), by the captain ’s
 orders to remove to the forepart of the ship ; and, soon after¬
 wards, the Apollo parted at the gangways . Several officers and
 men, who attempted to swim on shore, were drowned. About
 30, however, succeeded in reaching the shore upon planks and
 spars : among them were Lieutenant Edward Harvey , and Mr.
 Callam, master ’s mate . The succeeding night was a dreadful
 one, many old men and boys, including two young midshipmen,
 dying through hunger and fatigue. During the whole of it
 Captain Dixon remained upon the bowsprit.
     We shall give the remainder of the melancholy details in the
 words of one of the officers of the ship : “ Tuesday morning pre¬
 sented us no better prospect of being relieved from the jaws of
 death , the wind blowing stronger , and the sea much more tur¬
bulent . About noon, this day, our drooping spirits were some¬
what raised by seeing Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Callam
hoisting out a boat from one of the merchant ships to come
to the assistance of their distressed shipmates . They several
times attempted to launch her through the surf, but being a very
heavy boat, and the sea on the beach actiug so powerfully
against them, they could not possibly effect it, though assisted
