1804.       COMMODORE DANCE AND ADMIRAL LINOIS.                            251

 indeed , have long since been exploded . Ten 18-pounder car-
 ronades on the quarterdeck made up the 36 guns . Others of
 the ships, and those among ^the largest , mounted long 12 and 6
 pounders . No one of the crews, we believe, exceeded 140 men,
 and that number included Chinese , Lascars, &c. Moreover, in
 fitting the ships, so much more attention had been paid to stow¬
age than to the means of attack and defence, that one and
 sometimes two butts of water were lashed between the guns,
and the decks in general greatly lumbered . Of the force of the
 French ships it will be sufficient to say that the Marengo, Belle-
Poule , and Semillante were armed as Nos. 4, 5, and 7 in the
small table at p. 54 of the first volume. The force of the Ber-
ceau has already appeared, * and that of the brig is too insigni¬
ficant to notice.
    The promptitude and firmness of Commodore Dance and his
brave associates undoubtedly saved from capture a rich and
valuable fleet. The slightest indecision in him or them would
have encouraged the French admiral to persevere in his attack;
and , had he done so, no efforts, however gallant and judicious,
could have prevented a part of the fleet at least from falling into
his hands . It would be uncharitable to call in question the
courage of Rear -admiral Linois : one must therefore suppose
that it was, as he has stated , the warlike appearance of those
16 ships , the regularity of their manoeuvres, and the boldness of
their advance, that led the French admiral to doubt whether a
part of them were not national cruisers ; more especially, as it
was an uncommon occurrence, during a war, for an East -India
fleet to be without the protection of one or more powerful king ’s
ships.
    The commanders, officers, and crews of the respective ships,
that had thus distinguished themselves, were liberally rewarded
by the East -India Company , as well as by the committee for
managing the Patriotic Fund .f Commodore Dance , also, as
he well merited, received from his late majesty the honour of
knighthood . Among the sums of money voted to Sir Nathaniel
were 5000/. by the Bombay Insurance Society ; and the answer
of thanks returned by the commodore contains the following
passage : “ Placed , by the adventitious circumstances of se-

  * See p. 54.
   ■f This truly named “ Patriotic Fund,” originated at a meeting of the sub¬
scribers to Lloyd’s Coffee-house, held on the ‘20th of July, 1803, Brook Wat¬
son, esq. in the chair. The object is explained in the third resolution:
“ That to animate the efforts of our defenders by sea and land, it is expedient
to raise by the patriotism of the community at large, a suitable fund for their
comfort and relief—for the purpose of assuaging the anguish of their wounds,
or palliating in some degree the more weighty misfortune of the loss of limbs
' of alleviating the distresses of the widow and orphan—of smoothing the
Brow of sorrow for the fall of dearest relatives, the props of unhappy indigence
or helpless age—and of granting pecuniary rewards, or honourable badges of
distinction, for successful exertions of valour or merit.”
