1804.                LOSS OF THE APOLLO.                      259

by nearly 100 of the merchant sailors and Portuguese peasants.
Several men went upon rafts this day , made from pieces of the
wreck , but not one soul reached the shore ; the wind having
shifted , and the current setting out , they were all driven to sea;
among whom was our captain , who, about three in the afternoon,
went on the jib -boom with three seamen ; anxious to save the
remainder of the ship’s company , and too sanguine of getting
safe on shore, he ventured upon the spar, saying, on jumping
into the sea, ‘ My lads , I ’ll save you all.’ In a few seconds he
lost his hold of the spar , which he could not regain : he drifted
to sea, and perished . Such was also the fate of the three brave
volunteers who followed his fortune. The loss of our captain,
who, until now, had animated the almost lifeless crews ; as well
as the noble exertions of Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Callam , to
launch the boat , not succeeding , every gleam of hope vanished,
and we looked forward for certain death the ensuing night , not
only from cold, hunger , and fatigue, but the expectation of the
remaining part of the wreck going to pieces every moment. Had
not the Apollo been a new and well-built ship, that small portion
of her could never have resisted the waves and stuck so well
 together , particularly as all the after part from the chess-trees
 was gone, the starboard bow under water, the forecastle deck
 nearly perpendicular , the weight of the guns hanging to the
 larboard bulwark on the inside, and the bower and spare
 anchors on the outside, which it was not prudent to cut away,
 as they afforded resting places to a considerable number of men,
 there being only the fore channels and cathead , where it was
 possible to live in, and about which were stowed upwards of 150
 men : it being impracticable to continue any longer in the head,
 or upon the bowsprit, by reason of the breakers washing com¬
 pletely over those places. The night drawing on, the wind
 increasing , frequent showers of rain, the sea washing over us,
 and looking every instant for the forecastle giving way, when we
 must all have perished together , afforded a spectacle truly de¬
 plorable , the bare recollection of which even now makes me
 shudder . The piercing cries of the people this dismal night , at
 every sea coming over them, which happened every two minutes,
 were pitiful in the extreme ; the water running from the head
 down all over the body, keeping us continually wet. This
 shocking night , the remaining strength of every person was ex¬
 erted for his individual safety . From the crowding so close
  together in so narrow a compass, and the want of something to
  moisten their mouths, several poor wretches were suffocated,
  which frequently reminded me of the black hole, with this only
  difference, that these poor sufferers were confined by strong
  walls, we by water ; the least movement without clinging fast
  would have launched us into eternity . Some unfortunate
  wretches drank salt water, several their own urine, some chewed
  leather , myself and many more chewed lead, from which we
                                   s 2
