256             LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                                   1804.

guns, # Captain Henry Gordon, being in latitude 48° 15' north,
and longitude 23° 15' west, on her way to Newfoundland with
eight merchant vessels under her protection , discovered to the
eastward , which was directly to windward, two large sail bearing
down for the convoy. At 2 h. 30 m. p. m. the strangers were
made out to be vessels of force, and soon afterwards to be
enemies. Finding it to be their intention to cut off the rear of
the convoy, the Wolverine tacked ; and, as she stood on between
the latter and them , signalled the merchantmen to make the
best of their way into port.
    At 4 p. m., having arrived within half gun -shot of the large
vessel, which was the French frigate-privateer Blonde, Captain
Aregnaudeau , of 30 guns, including 24 long 8-pounders on the
main deck , the Wolverine hove to on the starboard tack ; where¬
upon the Blonde hauled her wind, and, after firing her broadside,
wore, with the intention of raking the Wolverine . To frustrate
this manoeuvre, and to maintain her leeward position, which, on
account of the extreme lowness of her ports, and the consequent
necessity of using her weather battery , was more advantageous
to her, the Wolverine, before she discharged a gun, wore also.
The Blonde then hove to on the Wolverine’s larboard beam,
within pistol-shot distance , and commenced a heavy and well-
directed fire with great guns and small arms ; which was
 returned by the British vessel with considerable spirit, although
 one of her two long 18-pounders , in being shifted from the star¬
board to the larboard side, got jammed in the groove, and
 remained utterly useless. In this way the action continued for
 50 minutes ; when, having had her rigging and sails cut to
pieces, her wheel shot away, and her hull low down, so pierced
with shot as to fill the hold with water, the Wolverine hauled
down her colours.
    Out of her complement of 76 men and boys, the Wolverine had
 one midshipman , one boatswain ’s mate, one quartermaster , and
 two seamen killed , and 10 seamen wounded, one of them
mortally . The Blonde, formerly, it is believed, a French
 national “ 24-gun corvette ” of 580 or 600 tons, out of a com¬
plement of 240 men and boys, did not, according to the ad¬
 mission of her officers, sustain any greater loss than her first
 lieutenant mortally , and five of her men slightly wounded . The
 damage done to the Blonde was confined to her rigging and
 sails, and that comparatively trifling.
    In less than a quarter of an hour after the last boat with the
 prisoners had quitted her, the Wolverine gave a heel and went
 down ; thereby affording an irrefragable proof that the ship had
 been defended to the last extremity, and that her officers and
 crew were barely saved, by their surrender , from perishing in the

  * For   the   extraordinary   manner   in which   this   sloop   was fitted , see vol .   >
p. 314.
