1804.                  LOSS OF THE APOLLO.                           257

deep. The long duration of the action was not without its
effect. The second privateer, either from bad sailing or bad
management , could not overtake one of the eight merchant
vessels ; nor could the Blonde withdraw herself in time to do
more than capture two of the number : the remainder effected
their escape.
     A 50 minutes ’ close engagement between two ships so
decidedly unequal in force entitled the weaker, although the
vanquished party , to at least as much praise, as is usually
bestowed upon the victor in a well-matched contest . Had the
Blonde been ‘a national ship, and even worse armed, worse
manned , and worse fought than she was, Captain Gordon and
his first lieutenant would have been promoted for their gallantry,
 and the conduct of all on board the Wolverine been held up as
an example of the devotedness of British seamen in upholding
 the honour of their flag, and in protecting the commercial
interests of their country . But , as it was a privateer , a “ paltry
 privateer, ” in the words of the Annual Register , which had
 captured the king ’s ship, the action of the Wolverine and Blonde
 was considered to be discreditable to the former, and therefore
 not worthy to be recorded in the annals of the British navy. To
 make success the sole criterion of merit is as unjust , as it is dis¬
 couraging : where, then , is the stimulus to persevere in an
 almost hopeless, or even in a barely doubtful cause ; and what
 more can a seaman do, than stand to his gun until his vessel
 sinks under him ?
     This is as the account stands in our first edition ; and,
 although not a line of the details here given is to be found in
  any other publication, we may usefully add the following from
  the work of a contemporary, published since ; and to whom, we
  believe, that information on the subject was granted which was
  refused to us. “ Captain Gordon, though many years a pri¬
  soner, was promoted to the rank of post-captain , and, on his
  return to England , most honourably acquitted by the sentence
  of a court-martial .” * The admiralty list informs us, that Captain
  Gordon was made post on the 8th of April, 1805 : it was this
  lapse of nearly 13 months, and our unacquaintance , for the
  reason already stated , with the requested particulars of his case,
  which occasioned us to suppose that Captain Gordon had not
  been rewarded in the manner he deserved.
      On the 26th of March the British 36-gun frigate Apollo,
   Captain John William Taylor Dixon, and 28-gun frigate Carys-
   fort, Captain Robert Fanshawe , sailed from the Cove of Cork
   with 69 merchant vessels under convoy, bound to the West-
   Indies . On the 2d of April, at 3 a . m., while steering souths
   * Brenton, vol. iii., p. 391. The complement of the Blonde is here
 reduced to “ 180 men but, in confirmation of the accuracy of our account,
 we may state, that the ship was captured by the British a few months after¬
 wards with 240 men on board.
    VOL. III.                         S
