254        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                               1804.

blew up, killing one master ’s mate, three seamen, and one
marine, and mortally wounding Mr. Robson , who expired a few
hours afterwards , and badly wounding several of the small party
belonging to the two boats . In all cases , where a vessel is
abandoned in tins way, treachery should be suspected , and the
magazine be quickly examined . There can be little doubt         that
the fellow who was behind his comrades , had laid the train
which produced the fatal explosion.
    On the 17th of March the British 16-gun brig- sloop Penguin,
Captain George Morris , cruising off Senegal bar, chased and
drove upon it the French privateer -schooner Renommee of 12
long 6-pounders and 87 men, belonging to Senegal . Owing to
the continuance of the surf, no opportunity occurred of making
an attempt to destroy her until the morning of the 24th. At
this time the Renommee had shifted her position , from the efforts
 apparently of two armed schooners, which, since the preceding
 evening, had dropped down to the mouth of the river, and now
 lay within 200 yards of her.
    "Standing as close in as the shoal ness of the water would admit,
 the Penguin opened a fire upon the three vessels ; but , although
 shot were exchanged for an hour and a half, the brig could not
 get near enough to force the two schooners to retire up the river.
 At 10 p. m., therefore , Captain Morris despatched the jollyboat,
 under the command of Lieutenant Charles Williams , with
 directions to endeavour to destroy the grounded before   schooner ; a
  service which was executed in the ablest manner              1 a . m.
  on the 25th , and that without any loss on the part of the British.
     On the 23d of March, the British 18-gun ship-sloop Osprey,
  Captain George Younghusband , cruising on the Windward -island
  station , discovered in the south -west quarter , and immediately
  chased , the French frigate-built privateer Egyptienne , of 36
  guns , Captain Placiard , with three merchant ships under her
  convoy. As soon as the Osprey had arrived within hail , the
  Egyptienne hoisted her colours and fired her broadside . This
  was instantly returned , and the two ships continued in close
  action for one hour and 20 minutes ; at the end of which time
  the Egyptienne ceased firing, and began to make off, and her
   convoy to separate on different courses. To the regret of the
   British officers and crew, it was soon found that the French
   ship, even with her topsails on the cap, outsailed their vessel.
   The Osprey , however, continued the chase, until the Egyptienne
   disappeared in the dark.
      The force of the Osprey consisted of 16 carronades , 32-
   pounders and two sixes, with a complement of 120 men and
   boys : that of the Egyptienne was 36 guns , French 12 and 6
   pounders , with a crew on board of 248 men. The one ship
   measured 386, # and the other, which was formerly the national

                        * See vol. ii., p. 39G,noteY*.
