1804.     THE DRAKE AT THE HAYES
                               , GUADALOUPE.                  253

 got back to the Blenheim, with one seaman, and two marines
 killed , five officers (names not reported ), 11 seamen, and three
 marines wounded, and three seamen missing.
    On the morning of the 13th of March the British 18-pounder
36 -gun frigate Emerald , Captain James O’Brien, observed a
 French privateer-schooner, on account of inability to work up
to St.-Pierre ’s, run in and anchor close under a battery at Seron,
just within the Pearl rock at the western extremity of Marti¬
nique . As the frigate herself, being considerably to leeward,
was unable to reach the spot in time, Captain O’Brien de¬
 spatched the armed sloop Fort -Diamond, with Lieutenant
Thomas Forrest and 30 volunteers, to attempt the service ; and,
in order to take off' the attention of the battery from the move¬
ments of the sloop, he sent in a different direction the frigate’s
 boats , joined by two from the 44-gun ship Pandour , which had
just hove in sight.
    Having reached the anchorage , Lieutenant Forrest dashed in,
and laid the French schooner on board , the crew of which,
amounting to about 60 whites and blacks , after discharging her
broadside and a volley of musketry, fled over the side to the
shore. By the force with which the Fort-Diamond struck the
schooner, the chain, by which the latter had fastened herself to
the shore, was broke, and about 20 feet of it remained hanging
at her bows., The prize proved to be the privateer Mosambique,
armed with ten 18-pounder carronades, commanded by Captain
Vallentes , and fitted for a three months’ cruise. This very
gallant exploit was performed with so trifling a loss, as one
master ’s mate (Mr . Hall ) and one seaman wounded.
    On the 14th of March , in the morning, the British brig-sloop
Drake , still commanded by Lieutenant William King, cruising
off Englishman ’s Head , island of Guadaloupe , fell in with a
French privateer-schooner, and a large ship in company, appa¬
rently her prize, but was unable to overtake either until the ship
ran herself on shore near the batteries of the Hayes . The Drake
now endeavoured to cut off the schooner ; but , having had her
main topmast shot away and her rigging much damaged , was
nnable to effect her object . About this time another ship hove
iu sight in the offing, and appeared to be steering as if alsQ with
the intention to run on shore . Despatching two boats , under
the orders of Mr . Robson the master, to watch the first ship,
now observed to be again afloat, with directions to attack her,
should she endeavour to escape, Lieutenant King made sail after
and recaptured the ship in the offing, an English merchantman,
valuably laden.
   The Drake ’s two boats, meanwhile, pulled in towards the
ship in-shore, the crew of which, except one man who had not
time to effect his escape, abandoned her as the former approached.
Possession of the ship, which had 18 guns mounted and was
very large, was thus easily obtained ; but in half an hour she
