1804.             HIPPOMENES AND BUONAPARTE.                         269
 and master, got back to the Hippomenes . The first
                                                             lieutenant,
  Mr. William Pierce, and the purser , Mr . William Collman,
  with two seamen, were taken prisoners ; and the remainingalong
                                                                      five
  lav dead upon the privateer ’s deck.
     The Hippomenes had been but recently commissioned at the
  Hutch port in which she had surrendered to the British              and
 her complement had been made up, partly of draughts from
                                                                    other
  ships of war, that is, by freeing each of them of a certain
                                                                number
 of skulkers , raw hands , and incorrigible rogues, and
                                                              partly of
 foreign renegadoes, who, tired of the restraints of a prison-ship
 life, gladly “ volunteered 1’ their services to an enemy, from
                                                                  whom
 they meant to escape (and who can blame them ?) the
                                                                     first
 opportunity . Perhaps a portion of the crew consisted of pressed
 men ; but pressed men were to be found on board of every
 m the British navy. Moreover pressed men have proved ship
                                                                   them¬
 selves, on several occasions, among the best men in the ship.
 That they should be so will not appear strange , when it
                                                                        is
 considered that an officer, where he can, presses seamen ; and,
 if he has liberty to take three men out of ten on board a
                                                                    mer¬
 chant vessel, he does not choose the worst. A pressed man or
 a volunteer, if he has the heart of an Englishman , will not
                                                                   suffer
 himself to be bearded by an enemy ; and it is far from impro¬
bable, that the majority of the eight or ten seamen, who
                                                                 accom¬
panied Captain Mackenzie in boarding the privateer, and who
 suffered so heavily owing to the pusillanimity of their shipmates,
were pressed men. Had the dastards but shown
                                                        themselves on
 the brig’s forecastle, the colours, in all probability , would
                                                                    haye
been hauled down ; for it is known that , before the
                                                               boarding
 commenced, the privateer had lost five men killed and 15
 wounded, besides being very considerably damaged in masts,
figging, and hull . It was on this account that the Buonaparte
felt no inclination to renew the combat ; and, in the
                                                               disabled
state of the sloop of war’s rigging , this truly fortunate
soon effected her escape.
                                                               privateer
    It is very common for the captain of a ship, when writing
account of any capture unexpectedly made without a contest ,the        to
anticipate the prowess that would have been displayed by his
men, had the enemy possessed strength or courage enough
put it to the test . Not quite three months before the affair to
                                                                       of
the Buonaparte , the Hippomenes , it will be recollected, had
                                                                     the
singular good fortune to capture , almost without a blow, a
French privateer of 36 guns . Captain Shipley, who then com¬
manded the Hippomenes , wrote thus in his official letter : “ I
feel much pleasure in saying, the officers and men
                                                         behaved
that coolness and intrepidity inherent in Englishmen ; and, with
the enemy allowed them a trial alongside, I am convinced had
superior force would not have availed them much.” The officers       her


                             * See p. 207.
