 264          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                          1804.

 allow her opponent to come up had previously shortened sail,
 hove to. At 9 p. m. the Wilhelmina filled, and, lowering her
 topgallantsails and driver, continued under easy sail, discovering
 the Psyche at intervals through the flashes of lightning , which
.were extremely vivid.
     On the 11th, at 3 h. 30 m. a . m., a heavy squall from the
 north -north -west obliged the Wilhelmina to hand her topgallant-
  sails and lower her topsails, and for the present shut out the
  Psyche from her view. At daylight , however, the latter reap¬
 peared, still in the north -east ; and the British frigate imme¬
 diately tacked , and, with colours flying, stood toward her. The
 gallantry of this step will be better appreciated when it is
 known , that the Wilhelmina mounted only 14 long 9-pounders,
 and one 12-pounder carronade fitted upon trucks and used as a
 shifting gun, on her main deck, and four long 9-pounders (which
 had been left by the Victorious at Madras ) and two sixes on her
 quarterdeck and forecastle, with a complement of 134 men and
 boys, 10 of the men received out of the 50-gun ship Grampus,
 to work the four extra nines        whereas the Psyche , formerly a
 French national frigate, of the class and size of the Railleuse,
 or Egyptienne as subsequently named , mounted 24 long French
  12-pounders on the main deck , and 10 (English , we believe) 18-
 pounder carronades and two French sixes on the quarterdeck
 and forecastle, with a crew of 250 men and boys.
     At 5 h. 30 m. a . m., being on the larboard tack , with the wind
 still from the north -north -west, but moderate, the Wilhelmina
 passed about 50 yards to windward of the Psyche , then , with
  French colours flying, close hauled on the opposite tack . After
  a mutual broadside, accompanied on the part of the French ship
  by a hail to surrender , the Psyche tacked , and the Wilhelmina
  wore ; each ship continuing to fire as her guns could be brought
  to bear . The plan adopted by the Psyche , of pointing every
  alternate gun upon the broadside at her opponent ’s rigging, oc¬
 casioned the Wilhelmina , from the loss of bowlines and braces,
  to come to the wind on the starboard tack with every sail aback.
 While the British ship lay in this unmanageable state , the
  French ship passed under her stern ; and , raking the Wilhel¬
 mina, knocked away the main topmast , badly wounded the
 main yard, and did considerable damage to her rigging and
 sails.
     Having at length paid off and got before the wind, the Wil-
   * A letter from Captain Lambert to Vice-admiral Rainier, giving a short
 account of this action, and copied into all the London papers, contains, in
 the manner of a postscript, the following paragraph: “ N .B. His majesty’s
ship Wilhelmina carries 18 6-pounders and 100 men.” It is probable that this
“ N . B.” was added by the copyist or first publisher, and not by the writer, of
the letter ; for the account in the text is not only taken from one of the
officers who was present in the action, but, with the exception of the f° ur
supernumerary guns, agrees with the navy-office establishment upon all
frigate-flutes of the Wilhelmina ’s class.
