270         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                               1804.

of the Hipporaenes afterwards proved how well they had merited
their captain ’s eulogium ; but as to the men—of them , however,
enough has been said. Captain Paimpeni himself must have
despised the wretches , to whose faint-heartedness he owed the
preservation of his ship ; while the mangled bodies of their late
comrades , still reeking upon his deck , must have taught him
to discriminate between the counterfeit and the genuine British
seaman.
   On the 11th of July , at 10 p. m., three boats of the British
18-pounder 32-gun frigate Narcissus , Captain Ross Donnelly,
three of the 38-gun frigate Seahorse, Captain the Honourable
Courtenay Boyle, and four of the 12-pounder 32-gun frigate
Maidstone , Captain the Honourable George Elliott , under the
orders of Lieutenant John Thompson, first of the Narcissus,
assisted by Lieutenants John Richard Lumley, of the Seahorse,
Ogle Moore, of the Maidstone , and Hyde Parker , of the Nar¬
cissus, put off from the last-named frigate, to make an attack
upon 12 settees, chiefly with cargoes on board, lying at La
Vandour , in the bay of Hyeres, distant between four and five
miles from the ships . The vessels were moored head and stern,
close to the beach , to which also they were completely secured,
and were covered by a battery of three guns.
    In the face of a tremendous fire of grape-shot and musketry,
as well from the settees as from the battery and the houses of
the town, Lieutenant Thompson and his party , about midnight,
succeeded in boarding and setting fire to most of the vessels.
 One only was brought off, and a most costly prize she was ; the
loss on the part of the British amounting to one midshipman
(Th omas Owen Roche), one marine, and two seamen killed , and
one lieutenant (John Richard Lumley ), one master ’s mate
(Robert Mansell ), three midshipmen (Thomas William Be-
dingfield , Thomas Alexander Watt , and John George Victor ),
 15 seamen , and three marines wounded, many of them severely*
The gallantry of attacks like these no one can dispute ; but who
 will say that , had all the 12 settees, instead of one of them , been
 brought off, they would have compensated for the valuable blood
 which had been spilt ? Lieutenant Lumley ’s was a dreadful
wound , and one from which it was next to a miracle that he ever
recovered. His right arm was amputated at the shoulder -joint,
 and a portion of the scapula removed with it.
    On the 12th of July the British 18-pounder 36-gun frigate
 Aigle, Captain George Wolfe, standing in for the Cordouan
lighthouse with a moderate breeze from the north -east, dis¬
 covered a French ship and brig steering to the southward.
 These were the Charente , of 20 long 6-pounders, four swivels,
 and 104 men, commanded by Lieutenant Joseph Samson, a^
 the Joie , of eight “ 12-pounders ” ( if not carronades , more likely
 8-pounders ), two swivels, and 75 men, commanded by Lieu-
 tenant Benjamin Gadobert ; both vessels from Rochefort, bu
