 262         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1804.
 from the boats , and were in possession of the deck . Two were
 going to fall upon the captain at once. I ran up, held them
  back , and then adjured him to accept quarter . With inflexible
 heroism he disdained the gift, kept us at bay, and compelled us
 to kill him. He fell, covered with honourable wounds .”
    Having , in the manner related , possessed themselves of the
 Atalante , the British had another enemy to combat : a sudden
 gale from an adverse quarter frustrated all their attempts to put
 to sea from the road. Captain Hardinge now secured his
 prisoners , stationed his men at the Atalante ’s guns, got the
 powder on deck , and made every arrangement to attack the other
 Dutch brig. The dawn of day , however, showed the latter at
 too great a distance to be approached , especially as the gale had
 not in the least abated . In this perilous state the British re¬
 mained for 48 hours ; during which, two of their boats had
 broken adrift , and two others had swamped alongside of the
 Atalante . At length , the wind again shifting , the Atalante made
 a push to get out ; but the two captains found the navigation so
 diflicult, that it was three days ere they could accomplish their
 object.
    This, in all its bearings , was an exploit worthy of British
 seamen ; and every admirer of meritorious conduct will be
 pleased to learn, that the officer who had so judiciously planned,
 and so gallantly led on to, the attack , together with his brave
 and able second, was immediately promoted. Lieutenant Bluett,
 also, as he well merited, was made a commander . A step to
post -rank is frequently not without its alloy : Captain Hardinge,
no longer qualified to command a sloop, was obliged to quit the
 Scorpion, a fine brig of 384 tons,just launched , to be the captain,
 of a dull , convoy-keeping “ post-ship,” the Proselyte , of 404 tons,
late a Newcastle collier ; a cruiser , which any privateer could
have run from, and any well-manned 18-gun brig, the Scorpion
herself , for instance , have captured.
    The following postscript to the private letter referred to at a
previous page affords a fine specimen of a British officer’s
magnanimity : “ In two days after the captain’s death, ” says
 Captain Hardinge , “ he was buried with all the naval honours
in my power to bestow upon him . During the ceremony of his
interment the English colours disappeared , and the Dutch were
hoisted in their place. All the Dutch prisoners were liberated ;
one of them delivered an eloge upon the hero they had lost, and
we fired three volleys over lnm as he descended into the deep/'
To give to this affair, so honourable to those engaged in it, the
proper finish, Rear -admiral Thornborough sent a flag of truce to
the Batavian Admiral Killkert inside, with the late Captain
Carp ’s servant , and the effects of the deceased, in order that
they might be delivered to his relations.
    On the 3d of April the British hired cutter Swift, of 77 tons*
eight 4-pounders, and 23 men and boys, commanded by
