3804.              WILHELMINA AND PSYCHE.                       267

pursued her route to the road of Madras , where she safely
arrived ; and , as an additional proof of the discomfited state of
the Psyche , the William-Petrie , whose cargo was valued at
40,000/ . sterling , although not wholly out of sight at the com¬
mencement of the action, also arrived in safety at Trincomale.
   Captain Lambert ’s gallantry was rewarded , as it well merited*
by immediate promotion to post-rank ; and he was appointed to
the command of the 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Terpsichore, one
of the British cruisers upon the eastern station . In so credit¬
able an action we are pleased in being able to state , that the two
lieutenants of the Wilhelmina were Geprge Tippet and George
Phillimore , and her master Thomas Curtis.
   From the details already given, it is evident that the character
of this action mainly depends upon the actual , in contradistinction
to the nominal, force of the combatants . For instance , call the
Wilhelmina a British 12-pounder 32-gun frigate, or a frigate
“of 32 guns, ” and you arm her, according to the admiralty -order
fixing her establishment , with 38 guns , including six 24-pounder
carronades , and with a crew of 215 men and boys. Call the
Psyche even “ a large,” or a “ frigate-built ” privateer , and
you will scarcely raise her, in the reader ’s estimation , above the
Bellone, beaten off by the Milbrook , or the Blonde that captured
the Wolverine. Even suppose the reader to rank the “ large
French frigate-built privateer ” with the Egyptienne , beaten off
by the Osprey , and afterwards captured by the Hippomenes, you
bave already made the implied full-armed Wilhelmina more than
a match for her, and have therefore reduced the exploit of a
British frigate far beneath that confessedly performed by a
British sloop. Omit the name of the privateer , lengthen the
duration of the action, and mistate the mode of its termination *
and you convert that which, if not.a conquest , was decidedly a
victory, into a censurable defeat . It is with us an invariable rule*
ttot to state , without showing, that an action is gallant , or an.
officer a “ hero.” Above all things , we avoid making such an
assertion when our own details, few as they may be, prove
directly the reverse. These remarks premised, we subjoin the
account of the Willielmina ’s action, as it stands in the work of a
Contemporary.
   u Captain Henry Lambert commanded the Wilhelmina , of
ffiirty-two guns , an old Dutch -built frigate, without one quality
to recommend her as a ship of war, unless it were that of looking
so unlike one in every respect that the enemy fearlessly ap¬
proached her, and by that means were sometimes captured when
a chase would have ended in disappointment . This ship, in the
Ettonth of April, 1804, fell in, off the east side of Ceylon, with a
large French frigate-built privateer , which she engaged with
 great obstinacy and fury for three hours, when the Frenchman
being much disabled , and the British frigate still more so, they
separated , nor was it in the power of our young hero to renew
