4180.               WILHELMINA AND PSYCHE.                        265

helmina brought her larboard broadside to bear ; and presently
the Psyche evinced an intention to board the British frigate
upon the quarter ; but , on seeing that the latter was prepared to
repel the attempt , the Psyche put her helm a-starboard and
sheered off. A furious connonade was now maintained on both
sides, the yard-arms nearly locking , until the Psyche , ranging
ahead, crossed her opponent ’s bows. In practising this ma¬
noeuvre, the Psyche brought herself in the wind ; but by throw¬
ing her headsails aback , and keeping her after yards square or
shivering, the French ship paid off’: not, however, until the
Wilhelmina , with her starboard guns, had poured in a raking fire
astern . After this the two ships again got parallel to each
other , and again engaged so closely, that the yards were over¬
hanging ; when, at 7 a . m., profiting by her more perfect state
aloft, and her very superior powers of sailing, the Psyche ceased
firing, crowded ail the canvass she could spread, and stood away
to the south -east.
   This being an action during the progress of which the com¬
batants frequently changed positions, the details of it will be
better understood by a reference to the following diagram:



                        \\
                             \
        w           p
        5h . 50m.
                                                        \v
                                                     4-ti-
                                      4^
  »-                                                         M.
                                                        .7 .A,




   Ill calculated , indeed, was the Wilhelmina for a chase, either
from or towards an enemy. Her main topmast was down ; her
bowsprit wounded in two, and her foremast in 10 places ; her
fore and main yards , and her main and mizen masts were also
wounded, and her lower rigging and all her boats more or less
damaged . Her aftermost forecastle bits were shot away, and
her hull was pierced with shot in several places . A Captain
Wright , of the India -service, was on board the Psyche during
the engagement , and subsequently mentioned, that the Wilhel-
mina’s shot, comparatively small as they were, had reduced the
privateer to nearly a sinking state ; the latter , at the close of
the action, having seven feet water in her hold, a circumstance
that sufficiently explains the manner of its termination.
