268          LIGHT SQUADRONSAND SINGLE SHIPS.                       1804.
the action, the enemy having so much the advantage of him in
point of sailing.”*
   On the 21st of June , at noon, the British ship-sloop Hippo¬
menes,t now commanded by Captain Kenneth Mackenzie,
cruising to windward of Antigua , in latitude 18° north , and lon¬
gitude 58° west, with the wind at east, and her head to the
northward , observed in the north -east a brig, which afterwards
proved to be the French privateer Buonaparte , Captain Paim-
peni , of 18 long 8-pounders and 146 men. The peculiar con¬
struction of the Hippomenes, a Dutch -built corvette, had been
taken advantage of in so disguising her appearance , that the
privateer , believing the ship to be an African trader , bore down,
under English colours, to take possession of her. At 1h. 30 m.
p . m. the Buonaparte     shortened    sail , and the Hippomenes   hauled
close to the wind to expedite the meeting. At 1 h. 50m . P. M.
the Hippomenes opened her fire at the privateer, who had now
changed her colours to French . The latter instantly returned
the fire, and a spirited action ensued . In the course of 10 or
12 minutes the Buonaparte ranged up on the weather quarter of
the Hippomenes, and in a little time, becoming unmanageable,
fell on board her opponent , dropping stem-on a little abaft the
latter ’s fore chains. The guns of the Hippomenes, particu¬
larly two carronades on the upper deck , a Dutch 24-pounder
and an English 12, in a very few minutes did serious injury to
the Buonaparte ; while the latter , from her tops, threw stink¬
pots upon the decks of the former, thereby setting her on fire
abaft.
   It was at this crisis that , having to prevent the privateer’s
escape caused her bowsprit to be lashed to his ship’s mainmast,
Captain Mackenzie called to his crew to follow him in boarding,
and secure the victory . He then , followed by his officers, and,
as he thought by at least 50 or 60 of his men, rushed upon the
Buonaparte ’s forecastle. The onset was encouraging : for the
brig ’s crew, with scarcely a show of resistance , retreated abaft
the mainmast. Here the privateer ’s men rallied ; and well they
might rally, for they now saw what a mere handful of enemies
stood upon their deck . The fact is, no more men had followed
Captain Mackenzie and his officers, than made a total of 18
British ; opposed to whom, allowing an ample deduction for
previous loss, were 100 French . The catastrophe may be
summed up in a few words. Captain Mackenzie, his officers,
and the few gallant fellows in company, defended themselves
until five of the party were killed and eight wounded, including
a master ’s mate severely, and the captain in as many as 1^
places ; and who, in endeavouring to regain his ship, fell sense¬
less into her main chains,just a minute or two before the lashing
gave way and the vessels parted . Nine, including the captain

      * Brenton, vol. iii ., p. 344.           f See p. 255.
