1804.             WILHELMINA AND PSYCHE.                       263

Lieutenant William Martin Leake, was fallen in with, engaged,
boarded, and after a stout struggle , and the loss of her commander
and many others of her small crew carried, by the French xebec-
privateer Esperance , of 150 tons, 10 guns (represented , by the
ship that afterwards captured her, as “ 24 and 12 pounders,” .
probably carronades ), and a crew of 54 men, commanded by
Captain Escoffier. The Swift, it appears , was carrying despatches
to Vice-admiral Lord Nelson off Toulon ; but which, we rather
think (for very few, if any particulars have been published ),
were thrown overboard previously to the cutter ’s capture . It
does certainly seem strange , that , in a navy such as that of
England , despatches to a commander -in-chief, upon an important
foreign station , should be forwarded by a vessel not equal in
force to a frigate’s launch , when armed with her carronade and
proper complement of men.
    On the 9th of April, at daylight , in latitude 7° 44' north , and
longitude 84° 30' east, the British armed en flute late 12-pounder
32-gun frigate Wilhelmina , Captain Henry Lambert, steering
west-north -west, with the w'ind at north by east, and accompanied
by the country-ship William-Petrie , laden with government
stores for Trincotnale , and which ship the frigate, being bound
to Madras , had been ordered to protect as far as the courses of
the two remained the same, discovered a sail in the east-south¬
east steering to the eastward . Shortly afterwards the stranger
 wore and stood after the British vessels. Towards noon it fell
calm, and the afternoon and night passed with very little wind,
the stranger , until dark , still in sight . At daylight on the 10th,
the wind then a light breeze from the north-east , and the course
of the frigate and her charge about west half-north , the stranger
 was seen in the east by north, steering to the south-west. In a
little time the latter hauled to the wind on the starboard tack,
and steered directly after the former. Observing that the vessel
 was a ship of force, and suspecting her to be an enemy’s cruiser,
 Captain Lambert directed the master of the William-Petrie , who
 had already arrived at the point for parting company, to alter
 his course after dark , and make the best of his way to the port
 of his destination.
    The jury -rig alone of an armed en flute ship of war is a great
 deception, and it is generally in the power of the captain to give
 a mercantile appearance to the hull of his vessel. This was par¬
 ticularly the case in regard to the Wilhelmina , she being a ship
 of Dutch construction . It was the disguised appearance of the
 Wilhelmina , that induced the stranger , who we may now intro¬
 duce as the French frigate-privateer Psyche , of 36 guns, Captain
 Trogoff, after reconnoitring as she had done, boldly to approach,
 with the determination of attacking the supposed Indiaman.
 At 6 p. m. came on a squall with rain ; through which, in her
 eagerness to close with the latter , the Psyche carried all sail.
 At 6 h. 45 m., it being dark and cloudy, the Wilhelmina , who to
