 266         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                1804.
      Of her 134 men and boys, the Wilhelmina had her boatswain
   and three seamen mortally , and six seamen slightly wounded.
   It may here be remarked , that the additional height given to the
   trucks of the Wilhelmina ’s maindeck carriages, to suit them to
   ports constructed for 12-pounders , was found to increase the
   facility of working the nines ; a circumstance which occasioned
   her inferiority in number of men to be less sensibly felt. With
   respect to the loss on board the Psyche , that ship, according to
  the statement of Captain Wright , had her second captain and
   10 men killed , and her commander (dangerously ) and 32 men
  wounded, 13 of them mortally.
      With such a disparity of force as evidently existed against
  the Wilhelmina , this was an action highly honourable to the
  British ship. It is true that the Wilhelmina ’s opponent was a
  privateer ; but the Psyche , by all accounts , was a better ap¬
  pointed , better manned, and better disciplined ship, than many
  frigates of the same force in the French navy. Commanded by
  no less a man than Captain Jacques Bergeret , already known
  to us as the Virginie’s gallant captain , the Psyche had sailed
 from Madras in the beginning of February , bound to Pondi¬
  cherry on commercial pursuits . Thence she proceeded to the
  Isle of France , and arrived there in May. In June or July news
  of the war reached the island . The Psyche was immediately
 armed and equipped as a ship of war ; but Captain Bergeret,
 preferring employment in the national navy, sent out his ship to
 cruise, under the command of a Captain Trogotf, either the son
 or nephew of the French admiral who commanded the ships at
 Toulon when Lord Hood entered that port in August , 1793;
 Captain Trogotf was considered, in the eastern hemisphere , the
 chief scene of his exploits, to be a brave, skilful, and enterpris¬
 ing officer.
     On the other hand , it was Captain Lambert ’s good fortune to
have been preceded in the command of the Wilhelmina by an
 officer who knew how to appreciate (and how few do) the art of
naval gunnery . Captain James Lind had been indefatigable in
teaching his men to fire with precision ; and the effect of the
skill attained by the latter was visible in the execution they did
to an antagonist , that otherwise, notwithstanding they continued
to display , as no doubt they would, the characteristic bravery of
British seamen, might , by her decided superiority of force, have
ultimately compelled the Wilhelmina to surrender .’'
     After quitting the latter , the Psyche proceeded, with all
haste , pumping day and night , to the Isle of France . There she
arrived in almost a sinking state ; and , judging from the storm of
shot with which their late opponent had assailed them, her
officers publicly declared that the Psyche had “ beaten off” (a
very commodious, and therefore a very frequent expression m
all similar cases) an English “ 44-gun frigate.” As soon as she
had repaired the most important of her damages , the Wilhelmina
