 1804.             LILLY AND DAME- AMBERT.                    271
  last from the Gironde, bound to Bayonne, the brig laden with
   cannon and ordnance stores.
     At 5 p. m. the Aigle closed with the French ship and brig;
   and , from their not having altered their course, and their now
  exchanging signals and shortening sail, Captain Wolfe expected
  that they meant to engage . To the surprise, however, of the
  British , the Charente and Joie, after firing their starboard
  broadsides without effect, ran upon the strand about 10 leagues
  to the southward of Cordouan , and within a stone’s throw of
  each other . The French crews then took to the boats ; but,
  these becoming swamped in the surf, many of the men were
  drowned . The Aigle immediately anchored about a mile from
  the beach, for the purpose of endeavouring to get the two ves¬
  sels afloat ; but the immense surf thrown up in consequence of
  a recent westerly gale rendered fruitless every effort, although
  persevered in for a whole night and part of the next day . Cap¬
  tain Wolfe was therefore obliged to destroy the French ship and
  brig ; a service which was effectually executed , under the per¬
  sonal directions of Mr. Furlonger the master, and Mr . Steel the
 gunner.
     On the 15th of July , at 2h . 30 m. a . m., Cape Roman in the
 United States of America in sight , the French ship-rigged pri¬
 vateer Dame-Ambert , Captain Charles Lamarque (represented
 as a reduced officer of the French navy ), saw and chased a ship
 to leeward. The latter , which was the British 14-gun ship-
 sloop Lilly, Captain William Compton , being equally desirous
 °f a meeting , the two ships by 9 h. 30 m. a . m. were near enough
 for the Dame-Ambert to open her fire. The British ship, how¬
 ever, was compelled to wait until her paltry 12-pounder carro-
 ftades (not equal in effectiveness to 4-pounder long guns ) could
 veach her antagonist . Having disabled the Lilly in sails and
 digging, and considerably weakened her in crew, the Dame-
 Ambert closed, in order to finish the contest by boarding . To
 do this effectually, the Dame-Ambert , who from the entire state
 °f her rigging possessed the facility of manoeuvring as she
Phased , stationed herself in a raking position ; and, having
swept the Lilly’s deck by her guns , lashed the sloop’s bowsprit
t° her taffrail In this state the French privateer made eight
Recessive attempts to board, and was gallantly repulsed in all.
Gn the ninth time, having killed the Lilly’s captain , first lieu¬
tenant, and others of her principal officers, and killed or wounded
the greater part of her remaining crew, the Dame-Ambert , just
two hours and 10 minutes from the commencement of the action,
carried the British vessel.
    the Lilly had been a Bermudian trader , and in the year 1795
Was purchased for the British navy. She measured 200 tons,
Was armed with 14 carronades, 12-pounders, and two long fours,
®|Od had a complement of 80 men and boys. Her exact loss in
      action cannot now be ascertained . Her captain and first
