  280        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                  1804.
   judicious perseverance in resisting the attack of a superior force.
    By conduct so laudable and exemplary , they preserved their
   vessel, and exalted the character of their country ; and the two
   navies must continue to view, with very different feelings, the
   defence of the Centurion in Vizagapatam road.
      An action between the single ships of two nations at peace is
   rare . Still more rare is an action, under similar circumstances,
   between two squadrons . Should the occurrence happen , it is
   usually at night , when the ships find a difficulty in understand¬
   ing each other’s signals ; but , the instant the mistake is dis¬
   covered, the firing ceases, and no breach is made in the amicable
   relations of the two powers. Unfortunately the next action in
   order of date was fought between an English and a Spanish
   squadron , not amidst darkness , but in the open day; not
  through any accident , but under express orders from the govern¬
  ment of one of the combatants ; and, so far from the matter
  being afterwards made up, it led to an almost immediate de¬
  claration of war by the party who had to complain of the
  aggression.
     Without entering into a consideration of the political con¬
  nexion which at this time subsisted between France and Spain,
  it may suffice to state that , towards the latter end of the summer
  of 1804, the British government received intelligence, through
  the officer, Rear -admiral the Honourable Alexander Cochrane, in
  command of the squadron stationed off Ferrol, that an armament
  was fitting out in that port ; that a considerable Spanish force
  was already collected there ; and that French troops were then
  on their march thither , and near at hand . It is true that all this
  was afterwards disproved by the Spanish government ; but such
  proof could have no retroactive effect. Immediately on the
 receipt of Rear - admiral Cochrane’s information, the British
 admiralty despatched a squadron off Cadiz, to intercept and
 detain , by force or otherwise, the four Spanish frigates,
 known to be bound to that port with an immense quantity of
 specie, which they were bringing from Monte-Video, in South
 America.
     On the 3d of October the British squadron sent upon this
 important service, and which consisted of the 44-gun frigate
 Indefatigable , Captain Graham Moore, 18-pounder 32-gun
 frigates Medusa , Captain John Gore, and Amphion, Captain
 Samuel Sutton , and 38-gun frigate Lively, Captain Graham
 Eden Hamond , assembled off Cape Santa-Maria . On the 5th,
at 6 a . m., that cape bearing north -east distant nine leagues, the
Medusa made a signal for four large sail bearing west by south,
the wind at this time being about east-north-east . The squadron
immediately wore, and made sail in chase . At 8 a . m. the
strangers , which were the Spanish 40-gun frigate Medea, Rear-
admiral Don Joseph Bustamente , and 34-gun frigates Fama
(with a broad pendant ), Clara, and Mercedes , formed the line
