1804.      CENTURION WITH MARENGO AND CONSORTS.                     277

 promptly answered the signal, cut her cable, and ran on shore
 but the Princess -Charlotte , Captain John Logan, who lay in¬
 shore of the Centurion, kept at her anchors.
   The flag-ship was suspected to be what she really was, the
 Marengo , Rear-admiral Linois ; and her two consorts were the
 40-gun frigate Atalante , Captain Camiile-Charles-Alexis Gaudin-
 Beauchene , and 36-gun frigate Semillante , commanded as be¬
fore by Captain Motard . It is seven months to a day since we
left Rear-admiral Linois, with a force a trifle greater than that
which he now possessed, running from a fleet of unescorted
Indiamen ; a fleet which he had weighed from Pulo -Auro pur¬
posely to capture , but which, under the able directions of Com¬
modore Nathaniel Dance, put him and his squadron to flight.-f*
The French admiral afterwards proceeded to Batavia ; where, or
on the passage to it, he was joined by the Atalante . Taking
in a supply of provisions, he steered for the Isle of France , and
arrived there on the 2d of April, followed a day or two after¬
wards by two of his frigates , with a valuable prize. Here his
discomfiture by the India fleet gained him the ill- will of General
Decaen , who wrote to his government on the subject , and we
believe, sent his despatches to France by the Berceau. After
waiting two months and a half at the Isle of France , M. Linois
put to sea with the Marengo, Atalante , and Semillante. He
cruised, first, to the southward of Madagascar , anchoring a part
of the time, on account of bad weather, in the bay of Saint-
Augustin : he then moved to a station near the island of Ceylon,
where he took several rich prizes. M. Linois subsequently
entered the bay of Bengal , passed Madras at about 20 leagues*
distance , and visited the roads of Masulipatam and Cosanguay:
thence he swept the coast of Golconda, and arrived on the 15th
of September off Vizagapatam ; not without an object, for he
bad, the day previous, when off Masulipatam , received informa¬
tion from some country-boats, that the British frigate Wilhelmina
had recently sailed from that road, with an Indiaman in com¬
pany , bound to Vizagapatam . It so happened that Vice-admiral
Rainier had substituted the Centurion for the Wilhelmina ; a
difference which the French admiral , to his cost, very soon dis¬
covered.
   At a few minutes past 10 a . m. the Atalante , which was the
headmost ship of the three , was distant from the Centurion
about half a mile, and all three ships now hoisted French
colours. The Centurion immediately cut her cable, and sheeted
home her topsails, which had been previously unfurled . This
brought her broadside to bear ; and the whole of it was im¬
mediately poured into the Atalante , then within the distance of
200 yards : at this time the Marengo and Semillante were
ranging up on the larboard quarter of the Centurion . At 10 h-

  * This ship afterwards got into the surf, and was totally lost.
  t See p. 252.
