1804.                                     .
         CENTURION WITH MARENGO AND CONSORTS                           279

the sheet-anchor , and continued her fire on the Marengo until
the latter was out of gun-shot. By 4 p. m. the Centurion was
again ready for action ; but the French squadron still pursued
its course off-shore, and at sunset was standing before the wind
to the north -east.
   The principal damages of the Centurion have already been
enumerated . Her loss was by no means commensurate : it
amounted to only one man mortally , and nine slightly wounded.
The Marengo suffered a good deal in her masts , yards, and
rigging ; and one shot carried away her fore-cap. Her loss
amounted to two seamen killed , and one enseigne de vaisseau
badly wounded. The Atalante had also two men killed, besides
six wounded, one of them mortally . The Semillante , thanks to
the forbearance of the Princess -Charlotte , had no casualty to
complain of.
    It is difficult to understand what it was that induced M.
Linois to abandon an enterprise of such apparent ease, as the
capture or destruction of a 50-gun ship by a 74 and two frigates.
The rear-admiral ’s official letter , as published in the Moniteur, is
a very lame performance . Such excuses as, the shoalness of the
water , the great force of the battery on shore, the “ extra¬
ordinary ” armament of the Centurion , the distance from a port
in which he could refit, and the rumour that two English line-of-
battle ships had been seen or heard of in the neighbourhood,
could only have suggested themselves to one who felt a little
ashamed at the want of energy he had displayed . The Centurion
for instance, could not have drawn less water than a French
frigate of the class of those with the Marengo ; and the two
frigates , mounting between them upwards of 80 guns , and
manned by at least 600 men, might have laid the Centurion on
board , or compelled her to run on shore. “ La premiere batterie
du fort, ” gravely says the French account, “ n’est que de 8
canons de 32 ou 24. On ignore le nombre de la seconde, 4 pieces
de campagne avaient ete transportees par les troupes sur le
rivage .” The latter were so, and were 12-pounders ; but , as
already related , could not reach the Marengo . Among other
mistakes , M. Linois states the Centurion to have carried “ 26
 canons de 32 a la seconde batterie ;” which, as she mounted
“ 24 (or rather   22 ) canons   de 24 a la premiere   batterie,   ” would,
indeed, have been arming her “ d’une maniere extraordinaire .”
Her second-deck guns were 32-pounder carronades ; and, from
the distance at which the action was fought , Captain Lind
■would have greatly preferred the long 12-pounders for which
they had been substituted.
    A half-laden merchant prize, although an Indiaman , or rather,
as was the case, a country ship, was a sorry recompence for the
 defeat, and a defeat it was, which the French admiral had sus¬
 tained . On the other hand , the officers and crew of the British
 ship gave an honourable proof of what may be done by a
