   276          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                 1804.
     present , but which kept rather aloof during the hoarding -attempt,
     and suffered the loss of half its crew ere it got clear. “ Trois
     furent coulees, une quatrieme prise, et le cinquieme canot, qui
    avait un peu tenu le large , echappa avec la moitie de son monde
    hors de combat.”*
       Whatever were the faults of this enterprise, they existed in
    the plan, not in the execution. The heavy loss sustained by the
    boats prove, that the British had effected as much as flesh and
    blood could effect : they had lost, in killed, wounded, and pri¬
    soners, more than two thirds of their number ; and yet the
    remainder would not yield, but bravely fought their way back to
    their ship. Much do we regret our inability to give a fuller
    account of the various difficulties which Lieutenant Hayman
    and his party had to contend with, in order that we may do justice
   to the memories of the dead, and cheer the feelings of the living,
    among those who, although unsuccessful in their object, so
   nobly maintained the character of British seamen.
       On the 17th of August , in latitude 49° 30' north , longitude
   12° 20' west, the British 38-gun frigate Loire, Captain Frederick
   Lewis Maitland , fell in with the French ship privateer Blonde,
   of Bordeaux , mounting 30 guns, 8-pounders on the main deck,
   with a crew of 240 men ; the same ship that , about five months
   previous, captured the Wolverine. After a 20 hours’ chase,
   including a running fight of a quarter of an hour, during which
   the Loire had one midshipman (Ross Connor) and five men
• wounded , and the Blonde two men killed and five wounded, the
  latter hauled down her colours.
       On the 15th of September, at 6 A, m., the British 50-gun ship
   Centurion, commanded by Lieutenant James Robert Phillips , in
   the absence of Captain James Lind upon service on shore (and
   who was also acting in the absence of the ship’s proper com¬
   manding officer, Captain John Sprat Rainier , dangerously ill),
  while at anchor inVizagapatam road, waiting until two Indiamen
  were loaded and ready to return with her to Madras , perceived
  under the land in the south-west, at a distance of about 12
  miles, three ships coming down before the wind, with all sail set.
  At 9 h. 30 m. a . m. the strangers were made out to be a line-of-
  battle ship and two frigates, the former with a flag at her mizen
  topgallantmast -head. At 9 h. 45 m. the French ships steered di¬
  rectly in for the road, two without any colours, and the third , the
  outermost frigate, with a St.-George’s ensign. The Centurion im¬
  mediately opened a fire at the headmost frigate, to induce her to
  show her colours. Soon afterwards the 74 made signals, which
  were answered by the frigates. This at once pointed out that the
  ships were enemies, and a signal to that effect was made by the
  Centurion to the two Indiamen in company, followed by another,
 directing them to put into a port in view. The Barnaby

                       * Moniteur, March 2, 1805,
