3804.     BOATS OF THE GALATEA AT THE SAINTES.                275

killed , besides Lieutenant Hayman, was the master , and Mr.
Wall , a midshipman ; and among the wounded were several
officers, including Lieutenant Hall of the marines, who lost an
arm and was made prisoner. The number of killed and wounded
together , as reported on the return of the boats, was 44, includ¬
ing Lieutenants Hayman and Hall , but not, as it would appear,
the seven killed and 14 wounded out of the 24 seamen and
marines belonging to the barge . The addition of these makes
the loss of the Galatea , in attempting to cut out the Lilly, 65
in killed and wounded : whereas the French acknowledge a loss
of only four men killed { and , although they do not enumerate
the wounded, name , as among them , Captain Lapointe, com¬
manding the General -Ernouf , and Lieutenant Mouret , com¬
manding the detachment of troops put on board by the com¬
mandant of the garrison.
    The object of the service, upon which the Galatea ’s boats had
been despatched on the evening of the 12th, was laudable ; inas¬
much as it was not only to recapture a ship that belonged to the
 British navy, but to cut short the cruise of a privateer likely to
do a serious injury to British commerce. Nor was the number
of men sent, admitting it to have been each time the same,
inadequate apparently to the purpose in view, that of surprising
 (for their lay the gist of the enterprise ) and capturing the Lilly
 at her anchors in the road . The boats returned without finding
 the vessel. Having hoisted them in, the Galatea should have
 made sail from, not towards, the spot where the privateer lay.
 Instead of this , the frigate hovered off the port all the day, ob¬
 served a second privateer moored along with the first, witnessed,
 and , the French say, felt, the strength of the batteries that pro¬
 tected both privateers ; and yet, in the evening, Captain Heath-
cote , a second time, sends his boats to pass, and , having ac¬
 complished or failed in their main object , to repass, those bat¬
 teries ; batteries , the fire from which the Galatea herself, much
 less her boats, would have been unable to withstand.
    For an enterprise so doubtful in its expediency and so fatal
 in its result, a brief English account would suffice; and none,
 indeed, appears to have been published . The French , on the
 other hand , made public every particular ; every particular , at
 least, which they thought would contribute to aggrandize the
 exploit performed by Lapointe and Lieutenant Mouret. But
 they tell us nothing of any aid afforded by the schooner priva¬
 teer , or by the batteries ; whose united fire, nevertheless, pow¬
 erfully co-operated in repulsing the assailants . That there were
 forts, the account admits, openly, when alluding to the supposed
 effect of some shells thrown at the frigate, and tacitly, when
 dwelling upon the accident which, the French declare, befel
 three of the British boats, in their endeavours to retire. These,
 they state , and positively state , were sunk , with their crews.
 With equal truth the French add, that there was a fifth boat
