274        LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                   1804.
    Having hoisted in her boats, the Galatea , who had dropped
 to leeward during the night , made sail and beat up, to recon¬
 noitre more fully the position of the Lilly. On nearing the
 road, the Galatea discovered the French privateer schooner lying
 close to the ship ; and, as a proof that there were batteries to pro¬
 tect both ship and schooner, the frigate was repeatedly fired at
 with shot and shells, some of the latter bursting at no great
 distance . The Galatea continued turning to windward until
 about 10 p. m., by which time she had nearly weathered the
 Saintes . Having hove to, the frigate hoisted out four boats,
 embarked in them about 90 officers and men, armed the launch
 with an 18-pounder carronade , and then towed the boats within
 three miles north -west of the citadel . Casting themselves off,
•the four boats , under the command of Lieutenant Charles Hay-
 man, first of the Galatea , assisted by several other officers, in¬
  cluding Lieutenant Robert Hall , of the marines, and Mr.
  Michael Birbeck , the master , pulled towards the harbour,
 hoping , under cover of the night , to surprise the object of their
 attack.
    To prevent the possibility of such an occurrence, the Lilly, or
 rather , the General -Ernoufj for that was the ship’s new name,
 had , just as it grew dark , sent one of her boats to row guard at
 the entrance of the road . By this , the ship, the schooner, the
 forts, and the town, became fully apprized of the approach of
 the British ; who, finding no shot fired at them from the bat¬
 teries, no signals of alarm made along the coast, naturally con¬
 cluded that they were unseen . Eager to be the first at the post
 of danger , Lieutenant Hayman in the barge pushed ahead of
 his comrades, and, at a few minutes past 1 a . m. on the 14th,
 got nearly alongside of the Lilly . Then it was that the fire
 began. Heedless of it all, the barge , followed by the other
 boats , was soon in contact with the ship. A dreadful struggle
 ensued . Lieutenant Hayman fell, mortally wounded both by
 musketry and the bayonet ; and, out of 26 or 27 officers ana
 men in the barge , three only, it appears , were left free from
 dangerous wounds. The three remaining boats tried in vain to
 overcome the numerous and still increasing force opposed to
 them . After sustaining nearly an hour ’s fire from great guns
 and musketry , they were compelled to turn their bows to the
 offing, leaving the barge to her fate. But the British were only
 quitting one set of foes to get within the clutches of another.
 The batteries now opened their fire, and a dreadful fire it was.
 The cannonade continued, gradually slackening as the boats
 receded from the shore, until 3 h. 30 m. a . m., when it entirely
 ceased.
    Just as the day dawned, the miserable remnant of the expe¬
 dition reached the frigate. Out of about 90 officers and men,
 who had quitted the Galatea on the preceding night , not
 more than 20 returned in an unwounded state. Among the
