278          LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.              1804.
  10 m. a . m. the Marengo and Semillante opened their fire, which
 the Centurion returned. After the action had continued about a
 quarter of an hour, the Centurion’s colours were shot away, as
 also were those of the Marengo ; but both ensigns were promptly
 replaced . At 10 h. 45 in. a . m. the 74, whose rigging appeared
  much damaged, hauled her wind and stood out, followed by the
  frigates . A battery of three guns at the town, under the com¬
  mand of Colonel Campbell of the 74th regiment, had co-operated
  with the Centurion in resisting the unequal attack.
      Abandoned for the present , the Centurion continued to stand
  in -shore, and, in passing, hailed the Princess - Charlotte , and
  desired her to cut her cable, but without effect. About this time
  Captain Lind joined his ship ; and, finding her rigging and
  sails too much cut to admit of her being worked to advantage,
  anchored at the back of the surf, about a mile and a half to the
  north -east of the town, in six fathoms’ water. Here the Cen¬
  turion , now too distant to be supported by the battery at the
  town , prepared herself for renewing an engagement , which she
  had no means of avoiding, without resorting to an alternative
  not yet in contemplation.
      At 11 h. 15 m. a . m. the Marengo and frigates put about and
  again stood in ; and in another quarter of an hour the 74, after
 having repeatedly tried the range of her guns , dropped anchor
  abreast ofj and about a mile distant from, the Centurion. Having
  clewed up her topsails and furled her courses, the Marengo
 recommenced the cannonade, supported occasionally by the
 Atalante , who kept under sail on the Centurion ’s larboard
  quarter , and lay nearer than the Marengo, and in a much more
 annoying position. The Semillante, meanwhile, was taking pos¬
 session of the Princess -Charlotte . Unambitious of sharing glory
 with the Centurion , the latter had struck her colours without
 firing a shot, although she mounted 24 long 12-pounders, with a
 crew of 71 men, and was a very formidable looking ship of
 610 tons burden . Colonel Campbell had sent to her assistance
 about 50 seapoys ; but the boats saw the shameful occurrence
 in time to save themselves by pulling back to the shore.
     The distance at which the Marengo, doubtless from ignorance
of the bay and dread of grounding , had anchored, was far more
favourable to her than to the Centurion, the latter having, except
a 6-pounder or two, no other long guns than the 24s on her first
or lower deck. In consequence, the Centurion ’s hull , masts,
yards , and rigging, were severely cut by the fire of her two-
assailants : several shot struck her between wind and water, and
one went through the gunner ’s store-room. At length , at about
1 h. 15 m. p. m., a shot from the Marengo cut the cable of the
Centurion ; and , about the same time, the 74 cut or slipped her
cable , hoisted her jib , and, accompanied by the two frigates and
prize, stood away to sea. The Centurion also made some sail;
but , on getting a little further off-shore, brought up again with
