272         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.
                                                               1804.

lieutenant were among; the killed , which , according to the
French accounts , amounted to a great proportion of the crew;
and her badly wounded , on the same authority , were .15 or 16,
including all her remaining officers. The Dame-Ambert had
 been the British packet Marlborough , one of the largest in the
 service, recently captured . She was afterwards refitted at Gua¬
 deloupe, and armed with 16 long French 6-pounders, and a com¬
 plement of 140 men. The French say, that their crew, when
 they fell in with the Lilly ( but this wants confirmation), was
 reduced to 75 men, and that the Dame-Ambert lost in the
 action five men killed and 11 wounded.
      Nothing but the accidental circumstance of the Lilly’s having
 three masts instead of two occasioned her not to be classed as a
 gun-brig ; and truly , if she had been a gun -brig, she would
 have been one of t.he least effective in the service. They all
 carry carronades of an 18-pounder caliber : hers were 12-pound¬
 ers, and those of the old construction , short and badly formed,
  the derision of the merest tyro in naval gunnery . Unfortu¬
  nately , owing to the mortality among the British officers, and
  the stigma that attaches to the capture of a king ’s ship by a
  privateer , no account of this action has been published , except
  in the French papers. It is only to call things by their right
  names , and that which seems a disgrace becomes, in reality , an
  honour . A defeat like the Lilly’s is more creditable than many
  a puffed-up victory, for which chaplets have been worn and
  rewards bestowed . The fact of her having been a sloop of war
  was not lost upon the captors ; and “ une corvette de l’etat”
   occurs in more than one place in the French account of the
   action . The prize was afterwards fitted out as a privateer,
   and named, after the Governor of Guadaloupe , General-
   Ernouf.
       On the 31st of July , at daybreak , the British 18-pounder 32-
   gun frigate Tartar , Captain Keith Maxwell, standing in to lee¬
   ward of the island of Saona, West Indies, discovered from her
   mast -head a small sail, to which she immediately gave chase;
   keeping as close as possible to leeward of the island, in order to
   prevent the latter ’s escape that way, and compel her to make
   the attempt through the passage between Saona and St.-Do-
   mingo, a very narrow and intricate channel          even for small
   vessels. At about 7 a . m. the chase was made out to be a
   schooner, full of men, using her sweeps to escape through the
   before-mentioned channel . By carrying all possible sail, the
    Tartar , at 8 a . m., got within range of shot ; but , owing to the
    short tacks she was obliged to make , could use her guns to very
    little purpose without losing ground in the chase . The schooner,
    therefore , which was the French privateer Hirondelle , Captain
    La Place , of 10 long 4-pounders and 50 men, notwithstanding
    that several of the frigate ’s shot passed over her and through
    her sails, persisted in beating to windward until 10 a . m. ; when,
