1804.     BOATS OF THE GALATEA AT THE SAINTES.                273

having advanced nearly half-way up the channel , she came to an
anchor under a reef of rocks.
    Finding the Tartar to be in six fathoms ’water , without the
possibility of anchoring in safety, or of effectually cannonading
the schooner, Captain Maxwell despatched three boats , under
the command of Lieutenant Henry Mullah , assisted by Lieute¬
nant Nicholas Lockyer and several midshipmen, all volunteers,
to endeavour to bring out the privateer . The instant the boats
put off, the Hirondelle hoisted her colours, fired a gun , and
warped her broadside towards them . As the British advanced,
the privateer opened a fire from her great guns, and , as the boats
drew nearer, from her small arms also. In spite of this , and of
a strong sea-breeze directly on the bows of the boats , Lieutenant
Mullah intrepidly pulled up to the privateer ; and, after a short
but obstinate resistance , boarded and carried her, with the loss
only of one seaman and one marine wounded. The Hirondelle
had nine killed and six wounded, besides three missing, sup¬
posed to have been drowned in attempting to swim on shore.
The number of British in the boats does not appear in the
official letter ; but , admitting they amounted to 50, or even to
60 officers and men, and that they had an 18-pounder carronade
in the launch , still, against a vessel so well armed and prepared,
and under circumstances of weather which, by retarding the
progress of the boats , exposed them the longer to the privateer ’s
fire, the capture of the Hirondelle was highly honourable to the
parties engaged.
    On the 12th of August , at 4h . 30 m. p. m., the British 18-
pounder 32-gun frigate Galatea , Captain Henry Heathcote,
cruising in the neighbourhood of Guadaloupe , ran down the
 channel between that island and the Saintes islands , with the
 intention of attempting to cut out the late British sloop of war
 Lilly, which, it was understood , had gone into the Saintes , to
 repair and refit as a French privateer . At 6 h. 30 m. p. m., ob¬
 serving the Lilly at anchor in the road near the Anse a Mire,
the Galatea hove to, hoisted out her boats , and sent them , in
the evening, manned and armed, to execute the service. The
 boats returned soon after daylight on the 13th, without having
 been able to discover the Lilly ; but the Lilly , and all who were
interested in defending her, had discovered them,and were making
 suitable preparations to resist an attack , should one again be
attempted . An officer and 30 soldiers were added to the Lilly’s
 crew, and a privateer schooner, which happened to be in port,
Was moored athwart the hawse of the ship, in such a manner as
 completely to enfilade the assailants in their approach . So con¬
 fident were the French in the means they had taken to repulse
the British , that the commanding officer on shore gave orders to
the different outposts , and to those in command at the batteries,
not to fire or do any thing to excite a suspicion that they were
aware of the enemy’s approach,
  VOL. III.                      T
