288         COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— WEST INDIES.            1804.

his severe wound, are so extraordinary as to be worthy a recital.
During almost every day of the three weeks and upwards that
the advanced battery was held , Lieutenant Willoughby , with a
recklessness of his person that , as it appears to us, the occasion
did not warrant , used to sit in a chair upon the ramparts or
breastwork of his little battery , exposed to a daily, nay almost
to an hourly , discharge of shot from one or two guns mounted
upon the Dutch fort above. The earth was ploughed up all
around , and one man, we believe, was killed close to the spot,'
but still the table and chair, and the daring young officer who
sat there , remained untouched . On one afternoon Lieutenant
Perrot was induced to seat himself in the chair . Scarcely had
he done so, when a shot came, took off his left arm, badly
wounded the knee upon which it had been resting , and knocked
the table to atoms.
    Notwithstanding the ill success which had attended this, as
Sir John himself not inaptly termed it, “ child of his own brain,”
the addition of the Vanguard ’s seamen and marines, and of a
heavy mortar or two, would have enabled Captain Bligh to cut
off the water from the Dutch garrison, and probably have com¬
pelled the French faction that ruled the island to accede to the
proposed capitulation . The British officers and men behaved
most admirably : and the masterly manner , in which, for so long
a time and under so many privations , Lieutenant Hills and
Willoughby , the latter in particular , maintained their respective
posts , elicited the strong praise of Captain Bligh : who also, in
reference to another officer, says to Sir John Duckworth , “ Mr.
Fitton has throughout shown so much zeal and judgment , that I
should feel most happy if you can consistently give him a com¬
mission appointing him lieutenant of the Gipsy.” This recom¬
mendation was attended to ; and, in a few days after the Gipsy
 anchored at Port -Royal , her commander, although the bearer of
despatches announcing a defeat, received, what years of active
 employment and of hard and responsible service, what more
than one successful case of acknowledged skill and gallantry as
 a commanding officer,* had failed to procure him, his commission
 as a lieutenant.
    On the 25th of April the British 74-gun ship Centaur , Cap¬
 tain Murray Maxwell, bearing the broad pendant of Commo¬
 dore Samuel Hood, accompanied by the three armees en flute or
 reduced 44-gun ships Pandour , Captain John Nash , and Serapis,
 Captain Henry Waring , and reduced 28-gun frigate Alligator,
 Captain Charles Richardson , also the ship-sloop Hippomenes,
 Captain Conway Shipley, brig-sloop Drake , Captain William
 Ferris , and armed schooner Unique, Lieutenant George R*
 Brand , with a fleet of transports having on board nearly 2000
 troops, under Major-general Sir Charles Green, after a passage

                             * See   p , 60,
