 1804.    CAPTURE OF THE SPANISH TREASURE
                                        -SHIPS.               281

of battle ahead , in the following order : Fama , Medea, Mer¬
 cedes, Clara . At 9 h. 5 m. a . m. the Medusa placed herself
within half pistol-shot, on the weather beam of the Fama . Pre¬
sently the Indefatigable took a similar station by the side of the
Medea ; and the Amphion and Lively, as they came up, ranged
alongside the Mercedes and Clara , the Amphion judiciously
running to leeward of her opponent.
   After ineffectually hailing the Medea to shorten sail, the In¬
defatigable fired a shot across her forefoot : on which the
Spanish frigate did as she had been requested . Captain Moore
then sent Lieutenant Thomas Arscott to inform the Spanish com¬
manding officer, that his orders were to detain the squadron, and
that it was his wish to execute those orders without bloodshed,
but that the Spanish admiral ’s determination must be instantly
made . The boat not returning so soon as expected , the Inde¬
fatigable made a signal for her, and, to enforce it, fired a shot
ahead of the Medea . The officer having at length returned with
an unsatisfactory answer, the Indefatigable , at about 9 h. 30 m.
a . m., fired a second shot ahead of the Medea , and bore down
 close upon her weather bow. Immediately the Mercedes fired
 into the Amphion, and in a few seconds afterwards the Medea
 opened her fire upon the Indefatigable . The latter then made
 the signal for close battle ; and it instantly commenced with all
 the animation, on one side at least , which the prospect of such
 trophies could inspire.
    At the end of about nine minutes the Mercedes blew up along¬
side of the Amphion with a tremendous explosion. In a minute
or two afterwards the Fama struck her colours ; but , on the
Medusa ’s ceasing her fire, rehoisted them , and attempted to
make off'. The Medusa immediately bore up under the Spanish
frigate’s stern , and poured in a heavy fire, but the Fama con¬
tinued her course to leeward. Having sustained , during 17
minutes, the Indefatigable ’s heavy broadsides, and finding a new
opponent in the Amphion, who had advanced on her starboard
quarter , the Medea surrendered . In another five minutes the
Clara did the same, and the Lively was left at liberty to aid the
Medusa in the pursuit of the Fama . At about 45 m. past noon
the Lively, being an admirable sailer, got near enough to fire her
bow-guns at the Fama ; and at 1 h. 15 m. p. m. this, the only
remaining Spanish frigate, struck to the two British frigates in
chase of her.
   The force of the Indefatigable has already more than once
appeared ; that of the Lively was the full establishment of a 38,
numbering 46 guns, and the Amphion and Medusa each
mounted 40 guns . The Lively had two men killed and four
wounded ; the Amphion, three men wounded, one or two of them
by the splinters which fell upon her decks when her unfortunate
antagonist blew up. No other loss, and but a very trifling
damage, was sustained by the British ships.
