 1804.            CAPTAIN BLIGH AT CURACOA.                    287
   alongside of her, as a sort of fend - off, two large merchant
   vessels, whose hulls received the greater part of the shot.
      In this way passed a number of successive days, the force of
   the British gradually decreasing , not merely by loss from the
   cannon of the forts and in the different skirmishes, but from
   fatigue and sickness . At length not an officer was left at the
  advanced battery but Lieutenant Willoughby and Midshipman
  Eaton Travers ; and 63 of the men had been obliged to be re¬
  embarked owing to an attack of dysentery : a circumstance not
  to be wondered at considering that both officers and men lay
   upon the ground , without any of those conveniences deemed
  indispensable in the encampment of an army. The force of the
  Dutch too, instead of amounting to only 160 regulars , consisted
  of 250 effective men, besides a body of local militia , and the
  crews of the vessels in the harbour . In addition to all this,
  the Dutch learnt by deserters , nine of whom quitted in one night,
  the weak state of the British force, and that the squadron must
  soon raise the blockade for the want of provisions.
     In this state of things Captain Bligh, on the morning of the
 23d , despatched the Gipsy to apprize Sir John Duckworth of
 his intention, unless any thing favourable should happen , to re¬
 embark his people on the 4th of March . In the course of that
 same 23d, the Dutch received a reinforcement ; and in the evening
 the Pique was obliged to bear up for Jamaica , on account of
 having damaged her rudder.
     Nearly one half, or 30 out of 67, of the Hercule ’s marines
 were Poles , part of the prisoners taken at St .-Domingo ; and
 who, most inconsiderately, had been allowed to enter. On the
 24th these “ volunteers, ” very naturally , evinced so clear an
 intention of going over to the enemy, that they were obliged to
be sent on board their ship with all haste . The re-embarkation
of the whole remaining force could now no longer be delayed ;
 and on the 25th , by 9 p. m., every person was on board an
American schooner and one or two other vessels of a light draught,
except Lieutenant Hills and a small party left to destroy Fort
 Piscadero . At 11 p. m. this was effectually done, and the
lieutenant and his men soon joined their companions afloat.
     The loss of the British , in the different skirmishes that had
taken place, amounted to one midshipman (Joseph Palmer ),
eight seamen, two sergeants and seven privates of marines killed,
and three lieutenants of marines (Messieurs Harwood, Cahuac,
and Perrot , the latter with the loss of an arm), 16 seamen,
two sergeants and 21 privates of marines wounded ; total, 18
killed and 42 wounded. The whole of the guns, that had been
landed from the ships, were also left behind , except, we be¬
lieve, two 3-pounder field-pieces ; but the abandoned guns were
all rendered unserviceable, and the carriages, platforms, 8cc.
destroyed.
    The circumstances, under which Lieutenant Perrot received
