1804.                CAPTURE OF SURINAM.                      289
 of 22 days from Barbadoes , arrived off the island of Surinam ;
when immediate measures were taken to send a division of the
army , of about 700 men, undet the command of Brigadier-
general Maitland , to land at Warapee creek . The direction of
the disembarkation being left to Captain Conway Shipley of
the Hippomenes, the latter , with that sloop, a transport , and
three armed vessels, landed the troops on the night of the 30th,
assisted by Captain Kenneth M‘Kenzie of the brig-sloop Gua-
chapin ; and who, with great zeal, had quitted his sloop 50
leagues to leeward, with all her boats, on finding, from baffling
winds and currents , that she could not get up.
   That no time might be lost, Brigadier -general Hughes , who
had arrived in the Pandour , was ordered to endeavour to gain
possession, on the fallowing night , of Braam ’s point ; and in¬
structions were sent to Captain James O’Brien , of the 36-gun
frigate Emerald , then lying off the bar of Surinam river, to carry
this service, in concert with the brigadier , into execution. The
Emerald lost not a moment, but as the tide flowed, pushed over
the bar, followed by the Pandour and Drake , and anchored
close to a battery of seven 18-pounders . The fort commenced a
brisk fire upon the Emerald ; but , after the ships had anchored,
it was silenced by a few broadsides , without any loss on their
side. In the fort were captured 43 officers and men, three of
whom were wounded. Not being able to approach nearer to the
island in the Centaur , on account of the water she drew, the
general and commodore removed the next morning to the Eme¬
rald , lying at the entrance of the river. Having there sum¬
moned the colony, an answer was received containing a refusal
of the terms . The moment, therefore, that the tide served,
every effort was made to get up the river ; which, from the
shallowness of the water, was very difficult, the Emerald
having passed through the mud in three feet less than she drew.
Owing to the lowness of the tide, it was not until the night
of the 5th of May that the frigate reached a station near to the
fort.
   The officers of engineers having explored the roads through
the woods, close to the 12-gun battery of Frederici, which com¬
municated with Leyden redoubt of the same force, an attack
was made, on the morning of the 30th , by a detachment of
troops under Brigadier -general Hughes , conducted in the boats
by Captain Maxwell, of the Centaur , and Captains Ferris and
Richardson , of the Drake and Alligator . The party landed at
Plantation Resolution ; and, after a tedious march through
woods and swamps, the brigadier and his detachment , accom¬
panied by Captains Maxwell and Ferris, some other officers,
and about 30 seamen, carried the battery of Frederici ; and,
although the enemy blew up the magazine, by which many of
the British suffered on entering the work, the troops and sea¬
men, passing without delay a causeway of 700 yards , in the face
   vol. m .                      u
