286        COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS .— WEST INDIES.               1804.

                                                   stays . At 1
fired only an occasional gun when the ship was in in
p . m. the first division of seamen and marines       the boats
stormed and carried the fort without loss, and struck the Dutch
colours , which the enemy, on retreating , had left flying. By a
rapid movement the British gained the heights , and, with the
loss of only four or five killed and wounded , drove the Dutch
soldiers from the position . This done, the remainder of the
seamen and marines were landed , and the Gipsy schooner
anchored in the cove. Captain Bligh also went on shore ; and,
as there was no anchorage for them , the Theseus and Hercule
continued to stand off and on, but , owing to the wind and current,
found a great difficulty in keeping their stations . During the
night several shot were fired at the ships from Fort Amsterdam ;
but , although two or three went over the Theseus , not one shot
 struck either ship.
    On the morning of the 1st of February two 18-pounder
carronades and a light field-piece were landed from the
Theseus ; and, with great difficulty and some danger , were
dragged four miles to the advanced post at the height . This post
was situated about 800 yards to the westward of the town of
St .-Ann, which it in part overlooked , and was placed under the
command of Lieutenant Willoughby , while the post between
that and the point of disembarkation was commanded by
Lieutenant Hills . On the 2d two long 18-pounders were landed,
and one or both were got to “ Willoughby ’s batteryas           was
also one of the Dutch 12-pounders from Fort Piscadero . But
this was not accomplished without some loss from the heavy
fire kept up by Fort Republique . Four more 18-pounder
carronades and another field-piece or two were landed and
mounted at one or the other of the posts ; and a constant
interchange of firing was kept up between the British and
Dutch batteries . In this firing a French battery , mounted by
some of the guns, and manned by the crews, of the privateers,
also took a part.
    On the evening of the 4th there was a smart skirmish between
the British at the advanced post and the enemy ’s sharpshooters,
in which the latter were repulsed ; and on the morning of the
5th a more serious affair took place between the marines      under
 Lieutenant Nicolls and a force of Dutch and French esti¬
 mated at 500 men. Notwithstanding his numerical inferiority,
 Lieutenant Nicolls, in the most gallant manner, repulsed the
 allied forces ; but , pursuing the enemy too far, not without the
 loss of nearly 20 in killed and wounded , chiefly from the cannon
 of Fort Republique . On the next day, the 6th, the cannonade
 between the forts was resumed ; but Lieutenant Willoughby,
 finding it in vain to present any of his pieces at Fort Republiq ue>
 directed them at the town and at the shipping in the harbour.
 By this means the town was partially set on fire ; and the Hatslaar
 would probably have been destroyed , had not the Dutch placed
