1804.                                          .
        COLONIAL EXP.— CAPTAIN TUCKER AT CURACOA              283

   Many persons, who concurred in the expediency, doubted the
right , of detaining these ships ; and many, again , to whom the
legality of the act appeared clear, were of opinion, that a more
formidable force should have been sent to execute the service, in
order to have justified the Spanish admiral in surrendering with¬
out an appeal to arms.
   The affair naturally created a great stir at Madrid , and on the
 27th of November an order issued to make reprisals on English
property ; but it was not until the 12th of the following month
that the King of Spain issued his formal declaration of war,
 nor until the 11th of January , 1805, that Great Britain directed
letters of marque to be granted against Spanish vessels and
property.
            COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS. — WEST INDIES.

   Viewing the success of Captain Watkins at Cura §oa in Sep¬
tember , 1800,# without apparently taking into consideration , or
attaching the proper weight to, the circumstances out of which
it arose, namely the occupation of the whole west part of the
island by a French republican force of six or seven times the
strength of the Dutch garrison , Rear -admiral Sir John Thomas
Duckworth , the commander-in-chief at Jamaica , flattered him¬
self that he had only to send up a line-of-battle ship or two, and
the inhabitants would again surrender the island to the arms of
his Britannic majesty.
   Nor was the rear-admiral the only British officer who had
taken such an idea into his head, grounded upon the same
partial view of the previous surrender . When , in the middle of
the year 1803, intelligence of the declaration of war against
Holland reached Port -Royal , Jamaica , the 10-gun schooner
Gipsy, Acting-lieutenant Michael Fitton , was despatched to
Curaqoa, to warn any British cruisers that might be lying there,
of what had taken place, in order that they might provide for
their safety. Arriving in the harbour of St .-Ann, the Gipsy
found at anchor there the 18-gun ship-sloop Surinam , Captain
Robert Tucker . To this officer, in as secret a manner as he
could, Lieutenant Fitton communicated the intelligence, and
advised him immediately to get under way. wNo, ” says Cap¬
tain Tucker , “ Pll summon the fiscal to surrender the island to
me.” In vain did the lieutenant represent the folly of such a
proceeding,- in vain did he point to the numerous batteries
around the harbour : Captain Tucker went on shore, and made
his proposal in form. The Dutch authorities had received no
official account of the war ; but they took the captain ’s word,
and not only his word, but his sword, and his ship , and all that
were on board of her. Knowing well what would happen,
Lieutenant Fitton , in the mean time, had weighed and stood
out; and the Gipsy was soon chased off the port by two armed
                            * Seep.60.
