282         LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS.                   1804.

• The Medea was a fine frigate of 1046 tons, and mounted 42
guns , 18-pounders on the main deck, and eights on the quarter¬
deck and forecastle, with a complement of 300 men ; of whom
two were killed and 10 wounded. The three remaining frigates
were each armed similar to the Mahonesa , except perhaps in
having an additional pair of 6-pounders.* The Fama , out of
her 280 men and boys, had 11 killed and 50 wounded ; the
Clara , out of her 300, seven killed and 20 wounded ; and the
Mercedes lost, by the fatal explosion, the whole of her 280 in
crew and passengers , except the second captain and about 40
men, who were taken off the ship’s forecastle after it had sepa¬
rated from the remainder of the hull , and except two passengers,
who happened to be on board the Medea.
    It is therefore quite clear, that the Indefatigable and any two
of her three consorts would have been a match , even in a time of
notorious war, for these four Spanish frigates. As it was, the
latter defended themselves with the characteristic bravery of
Spaniards , notwithstanding that they could have been in no
 state of preparation , and that the melancholy loss of one of their
number so early in the action increased the odds against them.
    Two more circumstances conspired to invest this transaction
with more odium than perhaps would otherwise have attached
 to it. One of those circumstances was the miserable fate of so
 many poor souls at the explosion of the frigate, and the heart¬
 rending misfortune it entailed upon one, in particular , who had
 been a passenger on board . This gentleman , a Captain Alvear,
 of the Spanish navy, with his wife, four amiable daughters , and
 five sons grown up to manhood, had embarked in the Mercedes,
 carrying with him a fortune, estimated at about 30,000/ . ster¬
 ling, the gradual savings of 30 years’ industry as a merchant in
 South America. Not many minutes before the engagement
 began , the captain and his eldest son had gone on board the
 Medea ; and there, in a very little while, did he witness the
catastrophe that hurled his wife, his daughters , and his remain¬
ing sons to destruction , and sent that treasure , which was mere
dross in the comparison, to the bottomless deep.
    The second circumstance alluded to was the tempting nature
of the lading on board these vessels. The cargoes of the three
captured frigates, consisted of Vidona wool, cascarilla , ratinia,
seal-skins, seal-oil, bars of tin, pigs of copper, dollars , and ingots
 of gold, and netted very little short of a million sterling . There¬
fore, as the Mercedes was similarly freighted , the total value of
 what had been shipped on board the squadron probably amounted
to nearly a third of a million more. We must not omit to state,
that the British government restored to Captain Alvear, out of
 the proceeds of the three cargoes, the 30,000/ . sterling, which he
had lost in the Mercedes.

                          * See   vol . i ., p . 358.
