 1804.            CAPTAIN BLIGH AT CURACOA.                      285
 harbour of St .-Ann. Captain Ross having embarked on board
 the Gipsy, was despatched with a flag of truce and a summons
 to the Dutch governor or fiscal, to surrender the island to the
 British . At 9 h . 30 m. a . m. the Gipsy stood out of the harbour,
 with the preconcerted signal flying, announcing that the terms
 had been refused.
    The passage into the harbour is so narrow, that , even with a
 fair wind (and it now blew off the land), a line-of-battle ship can
 with difficulty enter ; and the batteries that command the har¬
 bour and town, including Fort Republique , against which from
 its situation , an attack by storm is impracticable , mounted nearly
 100 pieces of cannon. In the harbour were lying the Dutch 12-
 pounder 36-gun frigate Hatslaar and two French privateers.
 Under these circumstances , no alternative remained but to try the
 effect of a landing . Leaving, therefore, the two frigates , as well
 to blockade the harbour , as to cause a diversion of the enemy’s
 force, Captain Bligh , with the two 74s and schooner, bore up
 for a small cove, which had been pointed out by Mr . Fitton as
 the most eligible spot for effecting a disembai'kation.
    According to a previous arrangement the boats of the squadron,
 containing all the marines of the four ships, 199 in number , and
 a detachment of 406 seamen, had assembled on board the Her-
 cule, and were commanded as follows : the seamen of the
 Theseus , by Lieutenants Edward Henry a’Court and Richard
 Henry Muddle , assisted by six midshipmen ; and her marines
 by Lieutenants Earle Harwood and Bertrand Cahuac . The
 seamen of the Hercule , by Lieutenants John B. Hills and Nisbet
 Josiah Willoughby ; and the marines by Lieutenant Samuel
 Per rot. The seamen of the Blanche , by Lieutenant William
 Woolsey, of the Hercule , in lieu of their proper commanding
 officer, Lieutenant William Braithwaite , who, to his disgrace as
 an officer and a gentleman, was incapacitated from filling his
proper station by habitual drunkenness . The marines of the
 Blanche were commanded by Lieutenant Edward Nicolls, the
 senior marine-officer in the squadron . The seamen of the
 Pique , on account of the sickness of two of her three lieute¬
nants , were commanded by Captain Ross , and her marines by
Lieutenant William Henry Craig ; and the whole detachment
of seamen and marines, numbering 605 officers and men, was
placed under the orders of Captain Dunn , of the Hercule.
    In passing Fort Amsterdam , situated on the south-east side
of the entrance to St.-Ann, the two 74s were fired at, but with¬
out effect, the shot falling short . At 11 h . 30 m. Fort Piscadero,
Counting 10 Dutch 12-pounders, and protecting the intended
point of disembarkation , opened a fire. This was immediately
•returned by the Theseus, within half musket -shot , although the
ship was unable to remain alongside owing to a strong head
wind and lee current . By making short tacks , however, the
-Theseus brought her guns to bear with such effect that the fort
