290                                          .
                            .— COAST OF AFRICA
          COLONIAL EXPEDITIONS                                 1804.

 of five pieces of cannon that bore upon it, carried in a few
 minutes more the redoubt of Leyden.
    Brigadier -general Maitland had come down the river Com-
 mowina , and the ships had all got up near Frederici. By this
 time , too, the troops were advancing , and the enemy’s commu¬
 nications nearly intercepted by the activity of the armed boats
 of the British ; whose provisions, stores , and cannon were
 already prepared for attacking fort New-Amsterdam , mounting
 upwards of 80 guns . Aware of all this, the Batavian command¬
 ant , Lieutenant-colonel Batenburg , on the 5th of May , sent a
 flag of truce ; and shortly after the receipt of it a capitulation
 was signed.
    Commodore Bloys-Van-Treslong , on the British claiming the
surrender of the ships, entered into the terms proposed . He
bad stationed the Proserpine of 32 guns, 18-pounders, near to
fort New-Amsterdam , and had extended a line of defence across
the river, with the Pylades corvette, of 18 guns, at the other
extremity , about a mile above the redoubt Purmurunt : he had
also placed three merchantmen , of from eight to 12 guns , in the
centre , and had employed a schooner of 10 guns to reconnoitre
and cover the shore at Voorburg , should the British troops have
attempted to advance by that side. Besides this force, the
Dutch commodore had seven gun-boats ready to act as occasion
required.
    This important colony was gained, fortunately , with a very
inconsiderable loss on either side. That of the British navy
amounted to one lieutenant (James Edward Smith , first of the
Centaur ), one midshipman (William Shuldham ), one boatswain,
and two seamen killed , and three lieutenants (William King and
Bobert Henderson , both of the Centaur , and George II . Brand,
of the Unique ), and five seamen wounded ; and that of the army,
three privates killed , and 13 officers and privates wounded ; total
of the British loss, eight killed and 21 wounded, and the
greater part owing to the explosion at Frederici . The Dutch
appear to have sustained no other loss than the three men
already mentioned as wounded in the battery at Braam ’s point.
The number of prisoners taken at Surinam, exclusively of staff
and detachments , amounted to 2001 ; and the total number of
pieces of iron and brass ordnance , about half of which were
dismounted , was 282.
    On the 17th of January , late in the evening, a French squa¬
dron commanded by Lieutenant Jean -Michel Mahe , consisting
of the armed ship Oncle-Thomas , of 20 guns , and the schooners
Benommee of 14, Oiseau of 10 guns , and Bosalie, Vigie, ,and
another , of two each, fitted out at Cayenne, and having on board
565 officers, soldiers, and sailors, anchored off the British settle¬
ment of Goree . The officer commanding there , Colonel Fraser,
had at his disposal only 54 white men including officers, and
made the best dispositions in his power for resisting an attack.
