 1804.       AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES.                    291

  On the 18th, at 3 a . m., eight boats from the squadron disem- .
  harked 240 troops upon the rocks to the eastward of the town,
  where the surf happened to be unusually low. An engagement
  immediately ensued ; when, after a loss of 19 men killed and
  wounded on the part of the British (most of whom were in a
  sickly state ), and 75 on the part of the French , Colonel Fraser
  surrendered on a capitulation , and the port was taken possession
  of by the troops and seamen of Lieutenant Mahe.
     The French remained in quiet possession of their conquest
 until the 7th of March , in the morning , when the British 18-
 pounder 36-gun frigate Inconstant , Captain Edward Stirling
  Dickson , accompanied by a store-ship and three transports,
 arrived off the settlement . The appearance of English colours
 on the citadel occasioned Captain Dickson to send Lieutenant
 Charles Pickford on shore in the cutter , to ascertain in whose
 possession the place was. Not having, by 10 p. m., received any
 information , Captain Dickson despatched three boats, manned
 and armed, under Mr . Runciman , midshipman , to cutout a ship
in the harbour . The service was executed , under a heavy fire
from the batteries , which sank one of the boats and wounded
one of the men. The strength of the garrison having by this
means been obtained, the Inconstant weighed and stood to the
westward, to prevent any succours being thrown in from Sene¬
gal . Having, on the following day, been joined by a fourth
merchant ship or transport , the three boats of the latter made
the number sufficient to carry the allotted portion of troops ; and
Captain Dickson commenced preparations to disembark the
men on the following day ; when, at daybreak on the 8th , Eng¬
lish colours were seen flying over French at the fort, the French
garrison having the night previous capitulated with Lieutenant
Pickford . Thus was the settlement of Goree restored, without
the loss of a man, to its former masters.

              AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES.

    From some cause respecting which it would be profitless to
 inquire , these belligerents* remained comparatively inactive until
 the latter months of the year 1803, when an adjustment of some
 differences, which had arisen between the Emperor of Morocco
 and the United States , left Commodore Preble , who now com¬
manded the American squadron , at liberty to direct his whole
 attention to Tripoli. Scarcely , however, had the American com¬
modore put his squadron into motion, ere it met with a very
serious loss.
    On the 31st of October , at 9 a . m., the 44-gun frigate Phila¬
delphia , Captain William Bainbridge , being about five leagues to
the westward of Tripoli, discovered and immediately chased a

                            Seep . 170.
                               TT 2
