 300              BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                   1805.
  was then that the great blow was to be struck . All Napoleon 's
  letters , written at this period, betray his anxiety about M . Gan-
  teaume ’s departure . In one dated “ Au chhteau de Stupinis , le
  21 Avril,” he says to his minister of marine, “ Le non depart de
  Ganteaume me contrarie beaucoupand,             in another dated at
  the same place two days afterwards , wherein he informs M.
  Deeres that he has despatched a courier to Ganteaume , to in¬
  form him that Nelson had gone to Egypt in search of Villeneuve,
  Buonaparte emphatically adds : “ Dieu veuille que mon courrier
  ne le trouve point a Brest ."
     After a vain endeavour , by forging news of disastrous events
  to the English in India , to weaken, by detachments abroad , the
  fleet off Ushant , Napoleon directs that , if Ganteaume cannot put
  to sea before the 20th of May , he is to remain quiet .* The fact
  is, that M . Villeneuve’s stock of provisions was expending fast,
  and a longer delay might throw serious obstacles in the way of
 the expedition . The British blockading fleet still retaining its
 menacing posture , the next plan was, that Vice-admiral Gan¬
 teaume should remove with his fleet to a position outside the
 goulet , between Camaret bay and the east end of Bertheaume
 bay . To prevent the British from paying the spot a visit, when
 thus temptingly occupied, directions were given to strengthen
 the defences along the coast in the neighbourhood . This was so
 expeditiously as well as effectually done, that , by the first week
 in May , upwards of 150 pieces of cannon were mounted on the
 different batteries around Bertheaume and Camaret bays. The
 object of ordering M. Ganteaume to this outer anchorage was
 to facilitate his putting to sea, but , above all, to enable him to
 effect his junction with Vice-admiral Villeneuve ; who, on the
 probability that the former would not be able to quit Brest in
time to meet the latter in the West Indies, had been directed to
hasten to Ferrol . Having there augmented his force to 34 sail
 of the line, Vice-admiral Villeneuve was to take his choice of
four routes for reaching Boulogne. The first two supposed a
junction with the Brest fleet, thus : to appear before Rochefort,
and , joining the five ships there and the one at Lorient, proceed
to Brest , and then with 60 sail of the line enter the Channel;
or, as the Rochefort squadron occupied an equal number of
British ships , letting that remain, proceed straight to M. Gan-
teaume ’s anchorage , and thence to the Channel with 54 sail of
of the line : in either of which cases, it appears , Napoleon de¬
signed that Vice-admiral Ganteaume , although junior to M.
Villeneuve , should assume the command . All this was to be
effected, if possible, without an action ; but , should one be un¬
avoidable , it was to be fought , for obvious reasons, as near as
possible to Brest . The third and fourth routes were, either to
double Ireland , and, calling for the Texel squadron of seven,

            * Precis des Ev&nemens, tome xi., pp. 228—239.
