 298                     BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                    1805.
  combine in their operations with the five French sail of the line
   in that port ; Cadiz is to supply from 12 to 15, and Carthagena
  six. By the fifth article the two high contracting parties
   mutually engage, to augment their fleets by all the ships of the
  line and frigates that may be subsequently constructed , repaired,
  and fitted in their respective ports . The sixth article contains an
  engagement on the part of Napoleon to guarantee to his catholic
  majesty , as well the integrity of his European dominions, as the
  restitution of all colonies that may be taken from him during
  the war ; and that , should the fortune of arms, “ in accordance
  with the justice of the cause which their majesties are defend¬
  ing,” grant success to their armies and fleets, the emperor will
  employ his influence to get Trinidad restored , and also the trea¬
  sure taken out of the four frigates. The seventh article contains
  a mutual undertaking not to make a separate peace ; and the
 eighth provides that the ratifications shall be exchanged within
  a month.* To the treaty a note is appended , signed by the
  Spanish ambassador , Don Frederico Gravina , in which he ex¬
  presses a doubt as to the possibility of collecting a sufficiency of
  sailors for the ships , and, above all, of having ready , by the time
 stated , so many as six millions of rations ,f
     If Napoleon , with his 40 or 45 sail of the line, had calculated
 to create such a diversion of the British fleets, as should give him
 a clear channel for his flotilla to cross, how must his expectations
 have been raised now that he possessed the disposal of upwards
 of 70 sail of the line. It is true that the public lists and jour¬
 nals did show and insist, that the number of commissioned line-
 of-battle ships belonging to England at the time amounted to
  105 ; but , as respects sea-going ships, the fact was not so : the
 British navy could send forth no more than 83 sail of the line,
 and scarcely the whole of them . Buonaparte had constantly a
 Steel ’s list before him, and , with the aid of the information de¬
 rived from his numerous spies, knew , better by far than many in
 England , how to analyze the accounts , and separate the non-
 combatant from the combatant ships . Let it then be kept in
 remembrance , that , at the commencement of the year 1805, the
 British and the Franco-Spanish navies (leaving the Batavian
navy out of the question ) were, as to number of effective line-of-
 battle ships, nearly upon a par . What changes took place in
the relative numbers of these navies before the close of this
-eventful year, we shall now proceed methodically to relate.
     The commencement of the year found Admiral Cornwallis at
his station off' Ushant , with a force not exceeding 11 sail of the
line ; while the French fleet that lay in the road of Brest , ready
for sea, numbered , as has on more than one occasion been shown,
21 sail. On the 3d of February , when the blockading force,
  * They   were   exchanged   on the   18th   qf January.
  + For a copy of this important treaty, see vol. xi., p. 215, of Precis des
Evenemens , &c.
