1805.        LORD GARDNER AND M. GANTEAUME.                      299

by successive arrivals, had been augmented to 16 sail, the de¬
parture of five, under Vice-admiral Sir Robert Calder , to the
station off’ Ferrol and Corunna , left the admiral again, for a
short time, with only 11 sail . The perseverance with which,
during a period of 22 months, including two boisterous winters,
Admiral Cornwallis had maintained the blockade of Brest,
affected his health , and obliged him to suspend his arduous
labours , and seek a few weeks’ relaxation on shore. Accord¬
ingly , on the 20th of March , the Ville-de-Paris anchored at
Spithead , and in the course of the day struck the flag at her
main. The command of the Channel fleet devolved upon
 Admiral Lord Gardner , whose flag was flying on board the Trent
 frigate at Cork . In the mean time the fleet, cruising off Ushant
and numbering 17 sail of the line, had been left in charge of
 Vice-admiral Sir Charles Cotton , in the 112-gun ship San-
 Josef.
     On the 3d of April Admiral Lord Gardner , in the new first-
 rate Hibernia , arrived oft’Ushant , and relieved Sir Charles Cotton
 in the command of the fleet, then consisting of 21 sail of the
 line. On the 11th a gale of wind drove the British fleet fromthe
 French coast . On the 13th, in the afternoon , Lord Gardner,
 with 17 sail, regained his station ; and , the next morning , the
  14th , in consequence of some intelligence received from his look¬
 out frigates , he despatched the Warrior 74 to reconnoitre the
  harbour of Brest . At 5 h. 30 m. p. m. Captain William Bligh
  rejoined , with the signal flying, that the French ships were
  getting under way. Upon this the British ships formed in line
  of battle to be ready to receive them. On the following morn¬
  ing, the 15th, the French van-division, composed of nine sail of
  the line, appeared in sight off the Black Rocks , and was pre¬
  sently joined by the main body , forming a total , as counted , of
  40 sail of vessels, including 21 of the line. This formidable
  fleet had on board 2000 troops, and was provisioned for six
  months . The British admiral , whose force in the course of the
  day amounted to 24 sail of the line, strove his utmost to bring
  the French fleet to action ; but the latter , after manoeuvring for a
   few hours between Bertheaume and Camaret bays returned into
  port.
      Unlike a few former shifts of position and manoeuvres in
   Brest and Bertheaume roads, and which served the double pur¬
   pose of exercising the crews, aud of enabling the Moniteur to
   insert a boastful paragraph , about offering battle to, and chasing
   away , the blockading force, this was a real attempt to put to
   sea. Vice-admiral Villeneuve had sailed from Toulon, and
    Napoleon ’s object now was, that the two fleets should effect
   their junction in the West Indies , and , after ravaging the British
   possessions there , return to the Channel , augmented , by the
    Rochefort squadron on the route, and by the combined squadron
   at Ferrol on appearing oft' that port, to 56 sail of the line. It
