294                                      .
            AMERICA AND THE BARBARY STATES                  1804*

mitted to be made fast to the frigate ’s fore chains, by which the
Intrepid hauled herself alongside.
    Lieutenant Decatur and his party now gallantly sprang on
board , and, rushing upon the alarmed Tripolitans , killed about
20, and quickly subdued the remainder . Having thus , in a
much easier manner than could have been anticipated , got pos¬
session of the Philadelphia , Lieutenant Decatur directed her to
be set on fire ; which w'as done so promptly and effectively, that
the Intrepid herself was nearly involved in the flames. A fine
wind from the land , however, at that moment sprang up ; and
the ketch , profiting by it, soon ran out of the harbour with the
gallant party who had so fully executed the bold and perilous
service intrusted to them . Although , as soon as the Tripolitans
 on shore had ascertained that the Philadelphia was in their
enemy’s possession, the forts and surrounding vessels opened a
fire upon her, the Americans were so fortunate as to escape with
only four men wounded.
    In the course of the summer, at two or three different periods,
the American squadron , assisted by some Neapolitan gun-boats
 and bomb-vessels, bombarded the town and batteries of Tripoli;
 and lieutenant , or rather captain (for he then had been de¬
 servedly promoted ), Decatur , who commanded a gun-boat
 again greatly distinguished himself. “ Captain Decatur, ” says
 Mr . Clark , “ having grappled a Tripolitan boat and boarded her
 with only 15 Americans ; in 10 minutes her decks were cleared,
 and she was captured . Three Americans were wounded . At
 this moment Captain Decatur was informed that the gun-boat,
 commanded by his brother (Lieutenant James Decatur ), had
 captured a boat belonging to the enemy ; but that his brother,
 as he was stepping on board was treacherously shot by the
 Tripolitan commander, who made off with his boat . Captain
 Decatur immediately pursued the murderer , who was retreating
 within the lines ; having succeeded in coming alongside, he
 boarded with only 11 men. A doubtful contest of 20 minutes
 ensued . Decatur immediately attacked the Tripolitan com¬
 mander , who was armed with a spear and cutlass . In parry¬
 ing the Turk ’s spear, Decatur broke his sword close to the hilt,
  and received a slight wound in the right arm and breast ; but,
 having seized the spear, he closed ; and after a violent struggle,
  both fell, Decatur uppermost . The Turk then drew a dagger
  from his belt ; but Decatur caught hold of his arm, drew a
  pistol from his pocket , and shot him.”
     An exploit fully equal to this is recorded of another American
  officer. “ Lieutenant Trippe boarded one of the enemy’s large
  boats , with only a midshipman , Mr. Jonathan Henley , and nine
  men, his boat falling off before any more could join him. He
  was thus left either to perish, or to conquer 36 men with only
  11. Though at first the victory seemed doubtful , yet , in a few
  minutes, the Tripolitans were subdued ; 14 of them were killed,
