1804.                      WAR WITH TRIPOLI.                            293

 In recording the exploits of “ Americans, ” it is but to lop off the
 qualifying adjunct “ adopted, ” and every native reader feels a
 hero’s blood flowing in his veins. On the other hand , should
 disgrace be attached to the deed , Mr . Clark (the American naval
 historian ) and his brother -writers, anticipating the reader’s
 wishes, seldom fail to state , that the parties were not American,
 but British sailors.”*
    We must premise, also, that the only accounts we have to
 refer to are those written by the Americans. The Tripolitans
 have no annalist to compile, no state-historiographer to magnify
 and blazon, the feats performed by themselves ; nor have they
 any acute and patriotic writer, to expose the exaggerations , and
 disprove the mistatements , published by their enemies. With
 such a one-sided case before us we almost fear to proceed ; and
 yet we should be sorry to omit recording, or, by doubting , to
 throw a slight upon, an act of genuine gallantry , achieved by
 Frenchman or American, Christian or Mahomedan.
    Feeling a laudable desire to prevent the Tripolitans from
 making any use of the fine frigate which, by an accident so un¬
 toward , had fallen into their hands , Lieutenant Stephen Decatur,
 of the United States ’ 44-gun frigate Constitution , submitted to
 Commodore Preble a plan for setting fire to and destroying
 the Philadelphia in the harbour of Tripoli. The Commodore at
 first thought the enterprise too hazardous , but at length gave
 his consent. On the 3d of February , having embarked with 70
volunteers , including Lieutenant James Lawrence and Midship¬
 man Charles Morris, on board a Turkish prize ketch , newly
named the Intrepid , Lieutenant Decatur sailed from Syracuse,
accompanied by the 18-gun brig Syren, Lieutenant Charles
Stewart ; whose boats, covered by the brig’s fire, were to co¬
operate in the attack.
    On the 18th, in the evening, the Intrepid and Syren arrived
off the harbour of Tripoli ; but it appears that the two vessels
“ by a change of wind” separated , and that at 8 p. m. the Intre¬
pid entered the harbour alone. The Philadelphia lay within
half gun-shot of the Bashaw ’s castle and principal battery , with
two Tripolitan cruisers at the distance of about 200 yards on her
starboard quarter , and on the same bow a number of gun-boats.
“ All her guns were mounted and loaded .”* At about 11 p.m.,
just as the Intrepid had arrived within 200 yards of the larboard
and outward side of the Philadelphia , the latter hailed and
desired the ketch to anchor on peril of being fired into. The
pilot of the Intrepid , as he had been instructed , and who, we
imagine, was himself a mussulman , answered that they had lost all
their anchors. Upon this the ketch was suffered to advance;
and , so well was the deception kept up, that a rope was per-
  * James’s Naval Occurrences between Great Britain and America, p. 73.
     Clark’s Naval History of the United States, vol. i., p. 153. This wants
confirmation.
