310          BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS
                                     .—CHANNEL
                                             .                                   1805.

instantly , the British cut their cables and made sail, to meet the
Dutch admiral . At 9 h. 15 m. p. m. the Ariadne and one or two
of her nearest companions opened their fire upon the flotilla;
and , notwithstanding the shallowness of the water, the obscurity
of the night , and the incessant cannonade maintained , both by
the prames and gun-vessels, and by the heavy batteries on the
coast , the Ariadne and her consorts succeeded in driving three
or four gun-vessels on shore, and in cutting away the mainmast
and damaging the rigging of the Ville-de-Geneve, the rearmost
prame . With , however, such powerful support from the shore,
and the aid of the long 24-pounders mounted by the prames,
the bulk of the flotilla, at 11 h. 30 m. p. m., came to anchor in
the road of Calais. The only British ship that appears to have
sustained any injury was the Ariadne herself : she had one
 sergeant of marines mortally , one lieutenant of marines danger¬
 ously , and two seamen slightly wounded, and her rigging and
 sails a good deal cut . Some loss must undoubtedly have been
 incurred on the part of the flotilla, especially on board the
 Ville-de-Geneve and stranded gun-vessels, but none has been
recorded.
    The noise of the firing had caused a great bustle among the
 shipping in the Downs ; and, soon after midnight , the 50-gun
 ship Trusty , Captain George Argles , 28-gun frigate Vestal,
 Captain Stephen Thomas Digby , and three ship-sloops, weighed
 and stood across towards Calais. On the 18th, at 4 a . m,, the
 Vestal , outsailing the others, joined the Ariadne and squadron;
 and in half an hour afterwards the British recommenced the
 action with the Dutch flotilla and the batteries in front of Calais.
 After a two hours ’ cannonade , in which the nines of the Vestal
 stood a very poor chance against the 36s and 24s of the forts
 and gun-vessels, the frigate, with a corporal of marines mortally
 wounded , made the signal to discontinue the action ; and, with
 her companions, bore away to the westward , where a spirited
 firing had just commenced, and whither the Trusty and sloops
 had already proceeded.
     Will it be believed that the following passage refers to the
  Vestal and squadron ? “ II y fut attaque le matin, avec aussi
 peu d’effet que la veille, par dix-neuf batimens , dont deux vais-
  seaux de ligne, onze fregates , et six bricks .”* So also it stands,
 merely substituting “ cinq fregates, six grandes corvettes, ” for
“ onze       fregates,   ” in another        French       historical   work .f   These
and other similar statements were no doubt originally framed to
exalt the flotilla in the opinion of the country, or to serve some
such temporary purpose. How careful, then , ought the his¬
torian to be in compiling his materials ; otherwise, he unknovv-

  * Precis     des Evfcnemens   , tome   xii ., p . 44.
  ■f Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi ., p. 77.
