1805.      ADMIRAL CORNWALLIS AND M. GANTEAUME
                                             .                             303

corvette , and two avisos, under Vice-admiral Ganteaume in the
Imperial (late Vengeur , a name that no one in France , consider¬
ing the circumstance out of which it had arisen, could expect
would so soon have been changed ), stood out of the goulet,
and , at about 10 h. 30 m. a . m., anchored in the new position
between Camaret and Bertheaume:

Gun-ship                  Gun-ship                      Gun-ship
                                  ' Batave,                 r Jean-Bart,
 120     Imperial,
      ( Invincible,                 Brave,                    Jupiter,
      ( Republicain,*               Cassard,                  Patriote,
                              74< Conquerant,                 Tourville,
  gQ ( Alexandre,
      ) Foudroyant,                 Diomede,                  Ulysse,
   ^ ( Alliance,                    Eole,                   ~v-
                                                              Veteran,
      ( Aquilon,                  . Impetueux,                Wattigny.
Frigates, Cornbte, Felicite , Indienne , Valeureuse, Volontaire.
Ship-corvette, Diligente , and brig-corvettes Espiegle and Vulcain.

   On the first discovery of the ships in the morning, the Felix
schooner had been sent with the intelligence to the admiral off
 Ushant ; and, on their anchoring , the 36-gun frigate Aigle,
 Captain George Wolfe, who had joined about an hour before,,
was despatched upon the same errand.
   At the time the news reached him, which was soon after noon
on the 21st , Admiral Cornwallis lay with his fleet, numbering
 17 sail of the line, one frigate (exclusive of two others and a
brig-sloop on the look - out in-shore), two cutters , and one
schooner, about three leagues south by west of the island of
Ushant . The British fleet, the names of the whole of the ships
of which, owing to the frequent departures and arrivals of the
preceding 10 days, we are unable to give, hauled to the wind on
the larboard tack , with a moderate breeze at north by east, and
at about 2 h. 30 m. p. m. passed the west end of Ushant within
less than three miles. At 3 h. 30 m., having made Pointe Saint-
Mathieu , the fleet shortened sail, and soon discovered the French
ships, some at an anchor and others under way. The admiral
being desirous himself to reconnoitre the enemy, the Ville-de-
Paris made the signal for the fleet to disregard her motions, and
then stood in towards the Indefatigable and her two consorts.
At 5 p. m. the Ville-de-Paris and in-shore squadron , having a
fair view of the French fleet, shortened sail and counted the
number of vessels ; which was found to correspond with the
number already given, except in the omission of the corvette.
At 5 h. 30 m. p. m. Pointe Saint-Mathieu bearing north only a
mile and a half distant , the Ville-de-Paris wore to rejoin her
fleet. Immediately several shot and shells were fired at her and
the ships in company, both from Pointe Saint -Mathieu and from
the west point of Bertheaume , but without effect. At 6 h. 30 m.

                          * Late     Revolutionnaire,
