1805.                   INVASION-FLOTILLA.                       305

 former, indeed , owing to the close position she took, lost three
 men killed and six wounded. The Montagu had the heel of her
 fore topmast shot away, but does not appear to have sustained
 any loss in men. Of the French ships, the whole of which by
 2 p. m. had reanchored , the Alexandre , who was the Caesar’s
 principal opponent, is represented to have had her mizen top¬
 mast shot away, and , with two or three of the other ships, to
 have sustained some damage in rigging and sails. With respect
 to loss, the French accounts give it in the gross, merely stating,
that about 20 men were placed hors de combat by the fire of the
 British ships.
    Admitting that this was an affair in which the French advanced
squadron alone had retired from the fire of the British , still the
two fleets were wholly in sight of each other, and M. Ganteaume
had but to stand from under the protection of his batteries to
bring on a general action . Considering that he had 21 sail of
the line to oppose to 17, we cannot suppose that the French
admiral would have declined a battle , had he, from the nature of
his orders, been permitted to engage. To know that he was so
restrained , and yet be compelled to keep his orders secret, must,
to a brave officer like Vice-admiral Ganteaume , have been a sorry
compensation for the public obloquy of the transaction , glossed
over even as it was, by imperial command , in the columns of the
Moniteur.
    On every succeeding day, from the 23d to the 30th of August,
some of the French ships got under way and manoeuvred about,
but the Brest fleet made no serious attempt to put to sea.
Matters remained in this inactive state until the 13th of De¬
cember ; when, taking advantage of a brisk gale from the north¬
east and the absence of the blockading fleet, which had retired
into port to victual and refit, a division of the French fleet, con¬
sisting of 11 sail of the line, four frigates, and a corvette, quitted
the anchorage outside the goulet, and put to sea. A succession
of gales of wind, during the few days that remained of the year,
prevented Admiral Cornwallis from regaining his station off
Ushant , and concealed from his knowledge any positive in¬
formation of the sailing of so large a division of the Brest
fle^t.
    As we have done on other occasions, so we shall here, give
some account of the different actions of the year fought between
the British cruisers stationed off the French coast and the
invasion-flotilla. In the course of the spring the corps of Marshal
Davoust , encamped in the neighbourhood of Ostende , proceeded
to join the grand invading army, of which it formed the right
wing. This occasioned a corresponding movement in the Gallo-
Batavian flotilla ; and accordingly the port of Ambleteuse was
fixed upon as the point of rendezvous for the different divisions
stationed at Ostende , Dunkerque , and Calais . Admiral Ver-
Huell , whom, in the preceding spring , we left at Ostende, whither
  vol . in .                      x
