 1805.                 IN    vasion -flotilla.                              309

    The time approaching for concentrating near Boulogne the
 invading flotilla and the army it was to transport , Admiral Ver-
 Huell , about the middle of May, became impatient to quit Dun¬
 kerque with the division of gun-vessels that lay at anchor in the
 road and harbour . The majority of these he had himself, in the
 latter part of April, conducted from Ostende, * and the re¬
 mainder had since arrived, by three or four at a time, as oppor¬
 tunity offered. The right wing of the army, then encamped
 between Ostende and Dunkerque , prepared to march ; and
 Marshal Dav^tust who commanded it, preferring a water-passage,
 embarked with Admiral Ver-Huell . Unfavourable winds pre¬
 vented the latter from weighing ; nor did a change take place
 until towards the middle cf July : in the interim the marshal had
 disembarked , and, with his corps, had marched for Ambleteuse,
 On the 17th of the month , at 6 p. m., a light north -east wind
 enabled the Dutch admiral to put to sea (if keeping close along
 shore can be called so) with the four prames, Ville-d’Aix, Ville-
d ’Anvers, Ville-de-Geneve, and Ville-de-Mayence , and 32 first-
class gun-vessels ; the latter under the command of two captains
 of the Batavian navy, the former of the French capitaine de
fregate Bernard -Isidore Lambour. The admiral with great
judgment , formed his division into two lines, in such a manner
that all the vessels could fire together with ease : two of the
prames were placed in the centre of the outer line, where the
admiral himself commanded, and the other two at the extremi¬
ties , which were the stations assigned to the two Dutch captains.
Several other gun-vessels were at Dunkerque , but they, being
of a smaller class, had retired into the harbour to escape the
fury of the north -west gales. Directions had been left by
Admiral Ver-Huell for these gun-vessels to follow, in two
divisions, as soon as an engagement should be seen to take
place between his division and the enemy.
    Owing to the numerous banks and shoals off Ostende and
Dunkerque , the British squadron in the vicinity, consisting of
the 20-gun ship Ariadne, Captain the Honourable Edward
King, three or four ship-sloops and bombs, and about as many
gun-brigs, was at anchor off Gravelines. Ships loom large in
thick weather. It must have been owing to this, that the
French mistook the Ariadne, a ship not above a third larger
than either of the French prames, for “ un vaisseau rase, ” and
her companions (increased in number as well as size) for “ deux
fregates , trois corvettes a trois mats , et neuf bricks .”f At 6h.
30 m. p. m. the Ariadne and squadron discovered the flotilla,
then just underway ; but the lightness of the wind and the
 slow sailing of the prames so retarded its progress, that its
 course was not clearly ascertained until 7 h. 15 m. p. m.;when,
    * See p. 306.           •J* Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 76.
