1805.                   INVASION- FLOTILLA.                       307

 Boulogne by Rear-admiral Lacrosse (since the death of Admiral
 Bruix , on the 19th of March , the commander-in-chief of the
 French flotilla), succeeded, after a while, in reaching Ambleteuse,
 the port of its destination.
    On the 10th of June , at 7 a . m., a division of the French,
 flotilla, consisting of the two “ corvettes-c.anonnieres ” Foudre,
 Capitaine de vaisseau Jacques -Felix-Emmauuel Hemelin, and
 Audacieuse , Lieutenant Dominique Roquebert , each mounting
  10 guns (four or six long 18-pounders, the remainder brass 36-
 pounder carronades , with upwards of 80 men), four gun-vessels,
 of three long 24-pounders, and an 8-inch mortar each, three
 others of one 24-pounder and a field-piece each, eight others, of
 two 4 or 6 pounders , and 14 transports , in all 31 vessels, sailed
 from the port of Havre bound to Fecamp . By the time they
 had got abreast of Brunevel, the French vessels were chased by
 the British 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Chiffonne, Captain.
 Charles Adam, who, with the ship-sloop Falcon , Captain George
 Sanders , gun-brig Clinker, Lieutenant Nisbet Glen, and the
 Frances hired armed cutter , was cruising off the coast.
    At 9 h. 30 m. a . m. the Chiffonne, then in 10 fathoms’ water,
■considerably ahead of her companions, and close in with the
 flotilla, opened her fire upon the van, where the Foudre had
 stationed herself ; but , in a quarter of an hour, shoaling her water,
the frigate was compelled to haul further off’. At lOh. 30 m.*A. m.
 the frigate, followed by the sloop and gun-brig, recommenced
firing. Shortly afterwards one of the French brigs caught fire,
but succeeded in extinguishing it, and some of the other vessels
ran on shore. Towards noon the Chiffonne, who had bore the
brunt of this attack , again hauled out into deeper water.
Shortly afterwards the van of the French flotilla ran close under
the batteries of Cap-de-Caiset, until joined by the rearmost
vessels, when they again bore up to proceed on their course. At
 1 h. 30 m. p. m. the three British vessels again stood in, and at
2 p. m. recommenced firing. The Falcon presently became
closely engaged with the two sternmost of the French brigs,
one of which was the Audacieuse. As the British passed along
the coast , the forts kept firing shells and shots at them without
the smallest intermission : notwithstanding which the Chiffonne
and Falcon continued the engagement , and at 3 h. 15 m. p. m.
shot away a brig ’s fore topmast and then her mainmast. The
Falcon and Clinker , not sailing by any means equal to the
frigate, gradually dropped astern , and the flotilla sheltered
themselves completely under Fecamp batteries ; but the latter
Aid not until 4 h. 30 m. p. m. cease firing at the Chiffonne.
    Several shot struck the Chiffonne in the hull, one of which
entered between wind and water ; and her rigging was also much
cut . Her loss amounted to two men killed and three wounded.
The Falcon suffered in rigging and sails, and had four men
Wounded; the Clinker, one marine killed and one seaman
                                  x2
