306       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                 1805.

lie had been driven by the squadron of Sir Sidney Smith,*
 succeeded, at length , in reaching Dunkerque ; where a great
portion of the Gallo-Batavian flotilla had now assembled, and
lay watching an opportunity to get to the westward, by departing,
a division at a time, as the readiest mode to avoid discovery and
molestation.
    On the 23d of April, at 9 p. m., favoured by the darkness
and a fresh w'ind from north -east, the first division, consisting of
33 gun-vessels and 19 transports , laden with stores from the
camp at Ostende , weighed from Dunkerque road . The division
passed Gravelines and Calais undiscovered ; when, just before
daybreak on the 24th , the wind shifted to south-east , and then
to south -south -east . Having a change of tide also against
them , the vessels were thrown into disorder . The greater part
of them now steered for an anchorage between the capes Blanez
and Grinez, while eight schuyts , which had kept too long on the
larboard tack , found themselves seven or eight miles from the
shore. In this state the division was gained sight of by a
British squadron , consisting of the 38-gun frigate Leda, Captain
Robert Honyman , sloops Harpy and Railleur , Captains Edmund
Hey wood and Valentine Collard, bomb-vessel Fury , Captain
John Yelland , and eight gun-brigs, the whole, except two of the
latter fwhich were sailing guard off Ambleteuse , at anchor off
Boulogne.
   The two gun -brigs off Ambleteuse , which were the Gallant
and Watchful , Lieutenants Thomas Shirly and James Marshall,
immediately chased north -east by signal, and the remainder of
the squadron weighed and stood in the same direction . At 8
a . m. the above two gun -brigs closed with the eight armed
schuyts , and a smart cannonade commenced between the latter,
aided by the heavy batteries on shore, and the brigs . In a few
minutes four large shot from the batteries struck the Gallant
between wind and water, and compelled her to haul on the star¬
board tack in order to stop the leaks , which were gaining fast.
One schuyt struck to the Watchful . The Railleur , and the gun-
brigs Locust and Starling , Lieutenants John Lake and Charles
Napier , coming up, compelled six others, before 10 a . m., also
to surrender , but not until after a spirited resistance on the part
of the schuyts.
   Early on the morning of the 25th two other schuyts , which
had drifted off the land, were captured by the Archer gun-brig,
Lieutenant William Price , whose one seaman wounded was all
the loss sustained by the British . The eight Gallo-Batavian
schuyts averaged about 75 tons, mounted three guns each,
chiefly long 24-pounders , and carried, altogether , 142 sailors
and soldiers. The remainder of the division, assisted by several
armed launches , containing grapnels and hawsers, sent out from

                            * See p. 224.
