308       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                1805.

wounded by the same shot. The French admit a loss of three
men killed and 12 wounded, including among the latter the
commander of one of the gun-brigs.
    On the 15th of July the British gun-brigs Plumper , Lieutenant
James Henry Garrety , and Teazer, Lieutenant George Lewis
Ker , while cruising off the port of Granville , on the coast of
France , found themselves becalmed , and likely to be carried into
danger by the strength of the tide . They therefore anchored
near the island of Chausey , but , owing to the exigency of the
moment, at too great a distance apart to benefit by any mutual
support , in the event of being attacked before a breeze sprang
up . The critical situation of these brigs being plainly seen from
Granville , which was not four leagues distant , Capitaine de
vaisseau Louis-Leon Jacob , commanding the several divisions of
the flotilla that were assembled between Saint-Malo and Cher¬
bourg , resolved to send some gun-vessels to attempt the capture
of the British vessels.
    Accordingly , on that same evening, as soon as it grew dark,
seven of the largest class of French gun-vessels, armed each
with three long 24-pounders, and an 8-inch howitzer, and amply
supplied with men and musketry , swept out of the port, under
the command of Capitaine de fregate Joseph Collet. On the
 16th , at 2 h. 30 m., they arrived within long range of the nearest
brig , the Plumper , and opened a fire upon her from their heavy
long guns ; taking such a safe position, as they advanced, that
the brig’s 18-pounder carronades could only at intervals be
 brought to bear upon them . In the course of half an hour
 Lieutenant Garrety , who, from the first, had conducted himself
 in the bravest manner, had his arm shot away ; but he continued,
 for some time, to animate his men in repulsing the enemy. At
 length , at the end of an hour ’s cannonade, from which she had
 greatly suffered in hull and crew, the Plumper surrendered.
    Having shifted their prisoners and manned the prize, the
 French rested at an anchor, until the tide turned again in their
 favour at 6 a . m. ; when, accompanied by the Plumper , they
 weighed, and stood for her late consort . At 8h . 45m . a . m. the
 seven French gun-vessels and their prize commenced firing at
 the Teazer ; who, at 9 a . m., cut her cable, and, setting all sail,
 tried to escape. But , the calm continuing , the brig made little
 or no progress ; and her opponents soon surrounded and cap¬
 tured her. The British loss on this occasion has been noticed
 nowhere but in the French accounts . By these it appears that
 the two brigs had, including Lieutenant Garrety , 17 men badly
 wounded, the greater part on board the Plumper ; but , with
 respect to the killed, which probably amounted to four or five,
 no intelligence was obtained . The ioss on board the French
 gun -vessels appears to have amounted to five men wounded,
 including Captain Collet ; who, on the afternoon of the day on
 which he had captured them, entered Granville with his two
 prizes.
