  302                 BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.                        1805.
   a station to the westward of Cape Finisterre , while Admiral
   Cornwallis himself, with the Channel fleet, was to cruise between
   Ushant and Finisterre . By 9 a . m. the admiralty messengers
   were on their way to Portsmouth and Plymouth , and on the
   11th , as already mentioned, Admiral Cornwallis received his
   orders . Such promptitude on the part of the British admiralty
   could not be credited by Napoleon . “ Ce ne que le 20 messi-
   dor ” (July 8), says he, “ que le brick Ie Curieux est arrive en
   Angleterre . L’amiraute n’a pu se decider dans les vingt -quatre
   heures sur' les mouvemens de ses escadres : dans ce cas, il n’est
  pas probable que l’ordre a l’escadre devant Rochefort soit arrive
  en trois jours . Je mets done en fait que cette escadre a leve sa croi-
  siere par des ordres anterieurs a l’arrivee du Curieux a Londres.”*
     On the 20th Vice-admiral Ganteaume received orders to put
  to sea, and endeavour to form a junction , first with the Roche¬
  fort squadron of five sail of the line, off the Lizard, and then
  with M . Villeneuve. On the 29th the news of the latter ’s
  action with Sir Robert Calder reached the Channel fleet, and on
 the 14th of August Sir Robert himself joined the fleet with
 eight sail of the line ; as, on the following day, the 15th, did
 Lord Nelson from his long western cruise, with 11. The de¬
 parture of his lordship on the 16th, with two or three ships,
 left the admiral with a force of 34 sail of the line. On the 17th,
 on intelligence arriving that the Franco -Spanish fleet, numbering
 27 or 28 sail of the line, had been seen off Ferrol , Admiral
 Cornwallis detached to that station Sir Robert Calder , with 18.-f*
 On the 20th the Captain 74, from Plymouth , joined the Channel
 fleet, which then amounted to 17 sail of the line.
     The affair off Cape Finisterre , being considered to have
 entailed an equal loss of ships upon the British and the com¬
 bined fleets, was not allowed to interrupt the grand design, in
 wdnch the latter had been allotted to take so important a part.
 On the 20th of August , a little before the time when, as it was
conjectured , Vice-admiral Villeneuve would be off the port,
Vice-admiral Ganteaume received orders to quit Brest road,
where the fleet had recently been lying, and anchor in Ber-
theaume . On the same day , at about 6 h . 30 m. f . m., the
French advanced squadron began to get under way, but not
unseen by the British 44-gun frigate Indefatigable , Captain John
Tremayne Rodd ; who, accompanied by the 38-gun frigate
Niobe , and two or three smaller vessels, was reconnoitring the
harbour , and for that purpose had taken a station about four
miles south by east of the Black Rocks . On the following
morning , the 21st, at 6 a . m., the whole French fleet, consisting
of the following 21 sail of the line, five frigates, one ship
   * Prdcis des Evenemens, tome xii ., p. 243.
   •f Napoleon either thought, or affected to think, this to be an egregious
folly “ insigne betise ” on the part of Admiral Cornwallis. Precis des
Evbnemens, tome xii ., p. 258.
