312       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                   1805.

32 gun-vessels (a tolerable proof how many had been damaged
 or destroyed ), steered straight for Cape Blanez ; off which, at
some distance , lay the Trusty , Vestal , Ariadne , and about a
dozen sloops and other vessels, of a class the best adapted for
these shallow waters. At 4 p. m. the gun and mortar batteries
on Cape Blanez opened a tremendous fire upon the British ; who
immediately returned it, but to a great disadvantage , the Trusty
having , besides losing the use of her main stay , received a large
shot in her slop-room, which caused a great quantity of water to
rush in, and obliged her to haul off and heave to, to try to stop
the leak . Meanwhile the flotilla proceeded, without much
further annoyance , until offWissant ; where, the shore offering
less resistance , the cannonade recommenced on the part of the
British vessels, among which, by this time, were the Immorta-
lite and a part of the detached squadron from off Boulogne.
Such was the ardour displayed by the Arab to close with the
flotilla, that she found herself within musket -shot of the shore,
in two fathoms ’ water. The brig-sloop Calypso, Captain Mat¬
thew Forster , La Fleche, Captain Thomas White , and two or
three of the gun -brigs , strove to emulate the Arab , and, by their
united exertions, drove on shore, before 7 p.m., six of the gun-
vessels. The bank off Cape Grinez, and the shot and shells
from the right face of its powerful battery , soon compelled the
Arab , Calypso , La Fleche , and gun-vessels to haul off from the
shore . The Calypso had her captain wounded ; and the Arab
had her main topgallantyard shot away, her rigging much cut,
and the head of her mainmast splintered and a part of the top
and crosstrees carried away by a shell. This ship also received
several shot in the hull ; one of which, or the fragment of a shell,
 set fire to her on the poop, but the flames were fortunately extin¬
guished . By some of the other shot that fell on board of her,
the ship had seven men wounded, two of them dangerously.
The Fleche was the closest in shore owing to her light draft of
water , so much so indeed as to render it necessary for the French
at Blanez to depress their guns ; one shot took off the top of a
man ’s hat , shattered a boat under the booms, and went through
the water way on the off side. The Fleche had five men
severely wounded and her running rigging much injured . The
Arab and Calypso rendered themselves conspicuous objects from
the shore, as appears by the following passage in one of the
French accounts : “ Une fregate et un brick, serrant la terre,
s’engagerent de tres -pres .”*
   The Immortalite , followed by the Hebe, had , since 5 p. m., lay
to between the end of the Banc a laine and Cape Grinez ; and
even, when the former found herself in a quarter less four
(scarcely half a fathom more water than she drew), her distance
from the flotilla was too great to do execution. The two frigates

               * Precis   des Evfenemens , tome xii ., p . 45.
