 314        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                  1805.

   brigs , six first-class gun-vessels, brig-rigged, 10 of the second
   class ( two or three brigs, the remainder luggers ), and eight armed
   pinnaces (luggers and schooners), total 26, or rather , according
   to the logs ol the several British ships, 34 sail.
      At this time the British 22-gun ship Champion , Captain
   Robert Howe Bromley , gun-brigs Clinker and Cracker , Lieute¬
   nants NesbitGlen , and William Henry Douglas , and the Francis
   hired armed cutter , lay at anchor at the distance of little more
   than a league north -north -east from the jettees of the harbour.
   The British vessels were soon under .way to attack the flotilla;
   and at 7 a . m., the Champion commenced action with the two
  corvettes , and some of the heaviest of the gun-vessels. The latter
  presently run on shore under the batteries of Seuneville, and the
  remainder of the flotilla hugged the coast so closely, that the
  British vessels, in order to use their carronades with effect, were
  compelled to approach within range of the batteries . The con¬
  sequence was, that they were soon cut up in their hulls, masts,
  and rigging ; but in spite of all the obstacles they had to contend
  with , the Champion and the two brigs, particularly the Cracker,
  compelled the French captain , at about 10h . 30 m. a . m., to shelter
  himself under the batteries of St .-Valery en Caux.
     What with the heavy long guns on board the flotilla, and
  those mounted on the shore, the British vessels were considerable
  sufferers. The Champion had all three masts, particularly her
 foremast , wounded, her rigging and sails much cut , and several
 large shot- holes in her hull , very low down. The Cracker received
 a large shot through her foremast, which left it in a tottering state,
 and had her shrouds and stays cut to pieces. The Clinker also re¬
 ceived some damage and coming out of action , had three feet
 water in the hold. It appears , however,that the Champion was the
 only vessel that sustained any loss : she had two seamen killed,
 her boatswain (severely) and two seamen wounded. The French
 admit that several of their vessels were much damaged , and that
 they lost four men killed and 22 wounded, 11 of them dangerously.
 As soon as it was known that the Champion and her companions
had stood away towards the Downs to refit, M. Hamelin , leaving
 his wounded men and the most damaged of his vessels, set sail
with the remainder , and reached Boulogne without further
interruption.
     The French , as usual, when they came to fight this battle over
again on paper, made it redound greatly to their advantage.
They dignified the Champion and the two gun-brigs by calling
them , “ une fregate et deux corvettes ;” and Captain Hamelin
is represented to have considered the squadron as “ la me me
croisiere ennemie qu’il avait deja combattue, ” although the
latter consisted of two ships and a brig, and one of those ships
double the size and force of the Champion . As in most of the
other accounts , no allusion is made to the land -batteries , or to
the difficulties that the British must have experienced in navi-
