1805,                       INVASION - FLOTILLA.                         313

thereupon hauled off and threw all aback , to wait for the prames;
who were ahead of the French gun-vessels, and with the latter,
warmly engaged , as just related by the Arab, Calypso , and gun-
brigs . Soon after 6 p. m. the Immortalite and Hebe , being
 within about half a mile of the shore, and a quarter of a mile of
 the prames, opened a brisk fire upon the latter ; which they and
the batteries returned with equal spirit, and , as might be ex¬
 pected , with decidedly more effect. Two schooners, however,
 W'ere driven on shore : soon after which, or at about 7 p. m., the
 prames and the remainder of the gun- vessels ran in and anchored
 under the protection of the batteries between the towers             of
 Endreselles and Ambleteuse . At about 7h . 30m . p.m. the
 firing, in which the 12-pounder 36-gun frigate Renommee,
  Captain Sir Thomas Livingstone, baronet , had latterly taken a
 part , wholly ceased ; and the British ships hauled off to repair
 their damages.
     The Immortalite had her foremast, main topmast , and spanker-
  boom shot through , also three of her boats : her rigging and
  sails were much cut ; her hull struck in several places, and the
  muzzles of two carronades shot away. Her loss amounted to
  four men killed and 12 wounded, several of them badly . The
  Hebe had her main topmast and main yard wounded, her rigging
  and sails much injured , and one carronade disabled : she also
  received three bad shot through her hull , and had three men
  wounded, one of them mortally . The Renommee escaped com¬
  paratively unhurt . Captain Owen had gained for the Immor¬
  talite a high character along this part of the French coast. “ Le
   Capitaine Owen, commandant la fregate Flmmortalite , fit admirer
  son audace et sa perseverance sous le feu des batteries de la
  rade .”# By exaggerating tenfold the force of the British , and
  by concealing the injuries done to the vessels of the flotilla, it
  was declared , apparently with reason, that “ l’Amiral Ver-Huell
  s’acquit beaucoup de gloire dans cette journee .” Of the two
  French works usually quoted in these passages , one is written
  by a military officer. The consequence is, that M. le Comte
   B umas has taken care not to overlook the assistance afforded to
  Admiral Ver-Huell by the batteries on shore ; while his contem¬
  porary , in the “ Victories et Conquetes, ” writes as if every shot
  or shell directed at the British came from the flotilla. The
   esprit de corps has been here of use in aiding the development
  of truth.
      Encouraged by the success of the flotilla to the eastward , and
   favoured by foggy weather and a fine south -west wind, Captain
   Hamelin , whom we left at Fecamp with his division of gun-
   vessels, resolved to attempt his passage to Boulogne . Accord¬
   ingly , on the 23d of July , at 5 h. 15 m. a . m., he put to sea with,
   according to the French accounts , the Audacieuse and Foudre

                 * Precis    des   Evenemens   , tome   xii ., p . 47.
