320        BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS
                                   .—CHANNEL
                                           .                  1805.

 known in England has exhibited , in a single act of Napoleon ’s,
  arising out of the circumstances above stated , a most extra¬
 ordinary instance of his transcendent genius. ‘<At the time I
 was writing this passage ” (one in which M. Dupin has given it
  as his opinion that , before any thing could be effected against
  England , the combined fleet must be in possession of the Chan¬
 nel ), u I was unacquainted with a very remarkable fact, which
 deserves a place in history . I am indebted for the knowledge
 of it to the Count Daru , whose able History of Venice we have
 already cited. In 1805 M. Daru was at Boulogne, the intendant
 general of the army . One morning the emperor sent for him into
 his closet. Daru found him transported with rage, striding up
 and down his apartment , and only breaking a sullen silence by
 the abrupt and sudden exclamations —“ What a navy !—what an
 admiral !—what sacrifices lost !—my hopes are frustrated !—this
 Villeneuve ! Instead of being in the Channel he has put into
 Ferrol !—I see it clearly ! he will be blockaded .—Daru , sit down
 there , listen and write.” The emperor had , early that morning,
 received advices of the arrival of Villeneuve in a port of Spain;
 he saw at once that the conquest of England had miscarried;
 that the immense expense of the fleet and the flotilla was lost
 for a long time, perhaps for ever ! Then , in the violence of a
 rage which would scarcely suffer another man to retain his
 senses, he adopted one of the boldest resolutions, traced one of
 the most admirable plans of a campaign, that any conqueror
 could have conceived, even when at leisure and perfectly com¬
 posed. Without hesitating , without stopping , he dictated the
whole plan of the campaign of Austerlitz , the departure of the
different corps of the army , as well from Hanover and Holland,
 as from the western and southern boundaries of France . The
 order of the routes , their duration , the points of convergence and
reunion of the columns ; the attacks by surprise and by open
force, the various movements of the enemy, the whole is provided
for : victory is assured in every one of the hypotheses . Such was
the accuracy of this plan , and the immense foresight it displayed,
that upon a line of march of 200 leagues , lines of operations of
300 leagues in length were conducted according to the original
design, day by day, and league by league , all the way to Munich.
Beycnd that capital the time alone underwent some alteration;
but the points were reached, and the ensemble of the plan
crowned with success. Such , then , was the military talent of
this man, not less terrible to his enemies by the mightiness of
his genius, than to his countrymen by the severity of his des¬
potism .”* The truth of this anecdote is corroborated by the*
author of the Precis des Evenemens , who states , that he himself
also heard it related by the Comte Daru .f

 * For the original passage, see Appendix , No . 35.
 j- Precis des Evenemens, tome xii ., p. 118.
