 316       BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS.— CHANNEL.                 1805.

      The first four grand divisions only had a regular organization:
   each was separated into two portions , called “ escadrillesand
   each of the latter was to embark a division of the army, com¬
   posed of four regiments of the line, and one of light infantry,
   with its cavalry, artillery , and baggage . It would be entering
  too much into detail , to explain all the regulations that contri¬
  buted to perfect the system of this armament : suffice it that
  every thing was adopted which ingenuity could devise and
  ability execute, without much regard to the labour or the
  expense.
     Anxious to have ocular proof of the degree of celerity with
  which the army could be embarked , Napoleon , who arrived at
  Boulogne on the 3d of August , ordered the operation to be
  executed twice in his presence. The result surpassed his belief.
  Although the troops had to march from camps, the extremities
  of which were more than two miles from the point of embark¬
  ation, one hour and a half after the beating of the generate, men
  and horses, all were on board,
     This, as well it might , excited the admiration of the generals
  and other officers present , and all were elated at the prospect it
  held out ; all, save the prime mover himself, and he, although he
  did not appear so, was filled with regret . His fleets were not
 in the Channel , and without them , he knew full well, that his
  plan could not succeed. Could he, by any means, have drawn
  away England ’s ships from England ’s coast, he considered
  England ’s fate as depending upon his nod. “ Je ne sais pas, en
 verite, ” says the French emperor, in one of his letters , of date
 June 9 in this year, to his minister of marine, “ quelle espece de
 precaution elle peut prendre pour la mettre it l’abri de la terrible
 chance qu’elle court . Une nation est bien folle, lorsqu’elle n’a
 point de fortifications, point d’armee de terre, de se mettre dans
 le cas de voir arriver dans son sein une armee de cent mille
 hommes d’elite et aguerris . Voila le chef-d’oeuvre de la flot-
 tille ; elle coute de l’argent , mais il ne faut etre maitre de la mer
 que six heures pour que l’Angleterre cesse d’exijster.”#
     Even admitting that the Channel , Mediterranean , and North
 Sea fleets of England were away, were no other ships to check
 the course of the flotilla ? Let but a breeze have blown from any
point of the compass, and innumerable frigates , heavy frigates
too, sloops, bombs, gun-brigs, and cutters , would soon have been
 on the spot . No shoals or shore-batteries would then have
interposed to prevent the guns of the British from producing
their full effect. The more numerous the French troops, the
greater would have been the slaughter amongst them , the greater
the difficulty for the sailors to manoeuvre the vessels. Confusion
would have ensued ; and the destruction or flight of a part of
the flotilla would, in the end, have compromised the safety of
               * Precis des Evenemens
                                   , tome xi., p. 270.              '
