1805.                    INVASION - FLOTILLA.                              319

than 200,000 men.* It is remarkable , too, that an increase in
the time, during which the Channel was required to be clear of
British ships, accompanies each increase of the army that was to
conquer the country . Thus : the letter says, “ six days, ” the
note, “ fifteen days, ” and O’Meara,-f “ two months .” It is
doubtful , however, if, at the time that the expedition (all except
 the fleet which was to cover it ) was declared to be ready , there
were as many even as 140,000 fighting men in a situation to
 embark.
      Being in the constant habit of perusing , by the aid of inter¬
 preters , the contents of the London newspapers , Napoleon
 must have seen, with a feeling of bitter disappointment , the
 formidable preparations that were making to resist his army
 on its landing : those to obstruct the passage of the flotilla,
 he cared less about , having , as already has appeared , no in¬
 tention to make the attempt unless his fleets were in the tem¬
 porary possession of the Channel . Buonaparte was not the
  first foreigner, who had reckoned too much upon the grumbling
  character of the English : he did not consider that , although
  discontented with their government , they were extremely jealous
  of foreigners. He ought to have known that , in such a case, a
  third party would experience much the same treatment , as pro¬
  verbially follows a similar interference in domestic disagreements:
  the hitherto mutually opposed parties unite, heart and hand , to
  expel the intruder . The treatment which , at a subsequent
  period of his life, Napoleon experienced from the English popu¬
  lace , tended , owing to a misconception on his part , to strengthen
  the opinion he had originally formed of the “ canaille” to aid
  him in conquering their country . There, again, he mistook the
   character of the people. It was not love for his person, which
   collected the crowds that flocked from far and near to gain a
   sight of him : it was curiosity , endemial curiosity, to behold a
   man who had compelled mostmonarchs but their own to succumb
   to him ; who had governed, if not conquered, all Europe , save the
   little insulated spot in whose power he then was. If they forbore
   to upbraid or taunt him, it was because he was their prisoner : if
   they treated him with respect, and even with kindness, it was
   because they felt some degree of awe in the presence of one who
   had been so mighty a potentate , and commiserated his fallen
    greatness.
       Intelligence of the battle between Sir Robert Calder and M.
    Villeneuve reached the French emperor at Boulogne , between
    the 3d and 9th of August , probably about the 8th ; and on the
    11th he became acquainted with the arrival of the combined
    fleet at Ferrol . Buonaparte ’s rage was most violent, but it was
    of short duration . This extraordinary man soon carved out work
    for his army. The intelligent author of a French work now well

   # O ’Meara’s Napoleon in Exile, vol. i., p. 349.   -J*Ibid., vol. ii., p. 878,
