1805.                  INVASION - FLOTILLA.                     311

ingly assists in propagating a falsehood , not merely by the
publicity of his work, but by the sanction of his name.
    Informed of the approach of the Gallo-Batavian flotilla and
of the attack made upon it, Admiral Lacrosse , on the 18th, at
4 a . m., ordered several divisions of gun -vessels to get under way
from the road of Boulogne , in order, by feigning an attack upon
the British vessels at their anchorage , to operate a diversion in
favour of Admiral Ver-Huell . The Immortalite , still commanded
by Captain Owen,* accompanied by the 12-pounder 32-gun
 frigate Hebe, Captain Macajah Malbon , 20-gun ship Arab,
 Captain Keith Maxwell , and the remainder of the detached
squadron , immediately weighed from their station off the port,
and stood to meet the flotilla, many of the brigs of which had
worked up abreast of Vimereux , By the time the Immortalite
 and the leading ships had got within gun-shot , 49 brigs and 64
 luggers were under way, and immediately the batteries and the
 horse-artillery along the shore opened a fire upon the British
 vessels ; but these reserved their fire until they could bestow it
 with more effect. At 4 h. 30 m. a . m., having got within half a
 mile north -west of Vimereux , the Immortalite , Hebe, Arab, and
 a few other of the British vessels, commenced firing upon the
 nearest French brigs ; which latter , in a few minutes , reanchored
 in great confusion, close under the batteries . Without having
 incurred any loss, and no greater damage than a 9-pounder gun
 disabled on board the Arab , the British squadron shortly after¬
 wards reanchored also, about five miles to the north -westward
 of Boulogne , Captain Owen having previously sent one or two
 gun -brigs to look out off Cape Grinez.
    By way of ensuring to Admiral Ver-Huell a safe passage
 during the remainder of his short but somewhat hazardous
 voyage, Marshal Davoust , who had long been waiting for him
 at Calais, had strengthened with men and ammunition all the
 batteries on the coast between Calais and Ambleteuse ; one of
 which only, that on the promontory of Cape Grinez, mounted
 55 pieces of heavy cannon, besides six immense mortars , placed
 on a high platform , and where, from its importance as a point
 of attack , the general of artillery , Lariboissiere, commanded in
 person . This was not all. General Sorbier, commandant of
 artillery , had been ordered with a strong division of flying artil¬
 lery and long-range howitzers , “ des obusiers a longue-portee,”
 to follow the flotilla along the coast, and afford to Admiral Ver-
  Huell the same protection as formerly, when Captain Hancock
 "with the Cruiser and Rattler gave so much annoyance to
                                                                  the
 latter in his voyage from Flushing to Dunkerque .f
     On the 18th at 3 p. m., Admiral Ver-Huell , accompanied in his
 schooner by Marshal Davoust , weighed from the road of Calais,
  and , with his three remaining prames, and 21 out of his original

                   * See p. 229.       f See p . 223.
