1805.                  INVASION- FLOTILLA.                        317

the remainder . Every hour ’s delay would have brought fresh
British vessels to assist in the general overthrow. Admitting,
however, that a considerable portion of the flotilla overcame all
these obstacles, and approached the British shore, was there
nothing further to dread ? Were there really, as Napoleon fan¬
cied, “ no fortifications , no army ”? The invaders would have
made the discovery, to their cost, the moment they arrived within
 shell and shot range . As they advanced nearer they would have
 found the beach already occupied by the van of an army com¬
 posed of soldiers, who, if they had not fought at “ Lodi, at
 Zurich , at Heliopolis, at Hohenlinden , and at Marengo, ” were
 then fighting in England.
      But , in the event of a calm , would he not succeed ? was a
 question frequently asked , as well by those who wished, as those
 who dreaded , the invasion. Calms in the British Channel are
 very uncertain : they seldom continue more than 12 hours, and
 even then may prevail at one part of the coast and not at another.
 Admitting that a calm existed at Boulogne and the adjacent ports,
 some time would elapse ere, under the most favourable circum¬
 stances , the flotilla could make a start . It has done so, and the oars
 begin to move : by this time, a boat from every British ship that
 witnessed the preparation is half across the Channel with the in¬
 telligence, and the vessel herself, if less than a frigate, is sweeping
  with all her strength in the same direction . A fleet of 1200 or 1300
  vessels must be rather awkward to manage ; particularly , when
  assembled together for the first time, and possessed, as these
 variously-constructed gun-vessels necessarily were, of different
  powers of progression. Against the prames sad complaints were
  raised ; and yet , as there were 17 of these vessels, armed each
  with 12 long 24-pounders, and carrying altogether about 2000
  men and 840 horses, they must be waited for. All this would
  create confusion. Cross tides and partial currents would increase
  it . Signals would be necessary : they would, it is more than
  probable , amidst the many repeaters required to transmit them,
  be misunderstood . A part of the fleet stops, or pulls in a dif¬
  ferent direction. -Delay ensues. Presently up springs a breeze;
  and which, in all likelihood, blows either up or down, and not
  across the Channel . In this case the weather wing of the flotilla
  begins first to spread its sails, and, without great care, presses
  upon the centre ; and that , in its turn , upon the lee wing. Mean¬
  while the breeze has not travelled without company, as is evident
  from the number of white patches that now' skirt the windward
  horizon, swelling and gathering at every moment. Of the ope¬
  rations likely to follow, a slight sketch has already been given.
      But , in truth , no attempt would have been made by the flotilla
   to cross over, even were the Channel clear of British fleets, and
   a calm, even a two days’ calm, to prevail ; none whatever, unless
   a powerful French fleet lay off Boulogne, ready to afford its
   protection . In a note dictated by him at his return from Bou-
