326        BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.             1805.

at north -west and north -north -west. Had they been bound to
Naples , the most natural thing for them to have done would have
been to run along their own shore to the eastward , where they
would have ports every 20 leagues of coast to take shelter in.
Thirdly ; they bore away in the evening of the 18th, with a strong
gale at north -west or north-north-west, steering south or south
by west. It blew so hard that the Seahorse went more than 13
knots an hour to get out of their way. Desirable as Sardinia is
for them, they could get it without risking their fleet, although
certainly not so quickly as by attacking Cagliari . However, I
left nothing to chance in that respect , and therefore went off*
Cagliari . Having afterwards gone to Sicily, both to Palermo
and Messina , and thereby given encouragement for a defence,
and knowing all was safe at Naples , I had only the Morea and
Egypt to look to. For, although I knew one of the French ships
was crippled , yet I considered the character of Buonaparte ; and
that the orders given by him on the banks of the Seine would
not take into consideration wind or weather . Nor, indeed, could
the accident of even three or four ships alter , in my opinion, a
destination of importance : therefore such an accident did not
weigh in my mind, and I went first to Morea , and then to
Egypt . The result of my inquiries at Coron and Alexandria
confirms me in my former opinion ; and therefore, my lord, if my
obstinacy or ignorance is so gross, I should be the first to recom¬
mend your superseding me. But , on the contrary , if, as I flatter
myself , it should be found, that my ideas of the probable desti¬
nation of the French fleet were well founded, in the opinion of
his majesty ’s ministers, then I shall hope for the consolation of
having my conduct approved by his majesty ; who will, I am
sure , weigh my whole proceedings in the scale of justice .”*
    On the 27th , in the evening, the British fleet, every ship of
which, since the 21st of January , had remained prepared for bat¬
tle , without a bulkhead up night or day, anchored in Pulla road,
bay of Cagliari , to water. On the 2d of March Lord Nelson,
weighed , but, owing to the severity of the weather , was com¬
pelled to reanchor . The wind shifting in the course of the
night to north -north -east, the fleet reweighed at daylight on the
 3d, and stood to the westward ; but before noon the wind re¬
turned to the north -west, and blew so strong , that the fleet had
again to bear up for Pulla . The morning of the 4th brought a
 return of the north -east wind ; but scarcely had the persevering
admiral taken advantage of it, than it again shifted to the north-
west. Blowing moderately this time, the fleet (some of the ships
having anchored for a few hours in the bay of Rouze) succeeded in
working to the westward of the gulf of Palma ; but , the wind
increasing to a heavy gale, the British were compelled, on the
 evening of the 8th, to run in there for shelter . On the 10th, in.

                * Clarke and M‘Arthur, vol, ii., p. 397.
