330                                           .
                               - SPANISH FLEETS
              BRITISH AND FRANCO                               1805.

le secours de six vaisseaux, un ambassadeur , un homme sense ne
se laisse pas dire de pareilles nigauderies .”#
   On the evening of the 7th a fresh breeze sprang up from the
eastward (and yet at this very time Lord Nelson was plagued
with gales from the westward ), and the French admiral con¬
tinued his course towards the Straits . On the 8th , at day¬
light , Gibraltar appeared in sight ; and at noon the French
fleet, formed in two columns, with the frigates ahead , entered
the gut, causing alarm-guns to be fired from all points of the
rock. At 4 p. m. the French stood into the bay of Cadiz,
driving away Vice-admiral Sir John Orde and his five sail of the
line. Finding the wind to blow strong offshore , M . Villeneuve
anchored his ships , having previously despatched the Hortense
frigate into the harbour , to apprize the Spaniards of his arrival
and quicken their movements. In consequence of this, the
French 74-gun ship Aigle, Captain Pierre-Paul Gourrege , ship-
corvette Torche, and brig-corvette Argus , accompanied by five
out of the following six Spanish sail of the line and one frigate,
having 1600 troops on board, sailed out of the harbour and
anchored in company with the Toulon fleet:
Cun -ship.
         .                   CAdmiral don Frederico Gravina.
   80 5 ArSonau a .          £ Rear-adm. don Antonio Escano.
       CSan-Rafael .           Commod. don Francisco Montez.
   _ . ( Firme .               Captain don Rafael Villavicencio.
      I Terrible.                 „      don Francisco Mondragon.
  ^ ( America.                   „       don -       Darrac.
    ( Espana .                   „      don -        Monios.

   On the 9th , at 2 a . m., the combined French and Spanish
fleet, consisting of 17 sail of the line ( 12 French and five Spa¬
nish), one Spanish , and six French frigates, one ship-corvette,
and three brig-corvettes, got under way, and steered a westerly
course ; leaving the San -Rafael , which had run on shore in
coming out, to follow to the rendezvous at Martinique , as soon
as she could be got off.
   The discreditable practice , adopted by the French emperor's
orders , of altering official despatches for the purposes of decep¬
tion, is nowhere more apparent than in the published correspon¬
dence connected with this expedition . M . Villeneuve is made
to say that he was joined by eight Spanish sail of the line from
Cadiz, thus : “ Peu d’instans apres , un officier espagnol vint
mon bord, et m’annonqa que huit vaisseaux de S. M. C. et une
fregate , sous les ordres de S. E . l’amiral Gravina , allaient
mettre sous voiles ; et avant minuit je les vis sortir successive-
anent du port, et mouiller en dehors/ 'f On the other hand, the

   * Precis des Evfenemens, tome xi ., p. 236.
   f Mon. July 14, 1805.
