1805.                     INVASION- FLOTILLA.                            321

    On the 31st of August Buonaparte became apprized of the
departure of the combined fleet from Ferrol and Corunna, as lie
hoped , for Brest . This reanimated , in some degree, the hopes of
the emperor ; and on the 22d Marshal Berthier , the minister of
marine , by Napoleon ’s directions , writes thus to General Mar-
mont, the commander-in-chief of the army of Holland : “ Je vous
previens, general , que l’escadre de l’empereur est partie du
Ferrol le 26 thermidor ( 14 aout ) avec l’escadre espagnole . Si
ces escadres combinees arrivent dans la Manche , l’empereur
fait de suite 1’expedition d’Angleterre ; mais si, par des circon-
stances de vents contraires, pu enfin, par le peu d’audace de nos
amiraux, # elles ne peuvent se rendre dans la Manche , Fem-
pereur et roi ajournera l’expedition a une autre annee, parce-
qu’elle n’est plus possible.” The marshal then directs the
general to be ready , at a moment ’s notice, to disembark his
troops, estimated at 20,000, and proceed with them to May-
ence, &c.f In about four days after the date of this letter the
fatal news arrives that M. Villeneuve, having quitted Ferrol with
29 sail of the line, had steered for Cadiz instead of the Channel,
where the emperor and his army had been so long anxiously
 expecting him.
    Thus had the crisis arrived for adjourning the expedition
against England to another year. By the end of August , the
 troops that had been encamped at Ostende , Ambleteuse , Bou¬
 logne , and Montreuil , were making forced marches to the banks
of the Rhine . On the 4th of September the emperor quitted
 Boulogne for Paris , having left orders with Rear-admiral La¬
 crosse to send out occasionally a division of gun - boats to
 manoeuvre, and to maintain the utmost discipline and good order
 among the officers and men. The greater part , if not the whole,
of the gun-vessels at all the depots but Boulogne, were, in a
 short time, dismantled and laid up. It was the intention of
 Napoleon to keep a body of troops encamped upon the heights
 of Boulogne, partly , in conjunction with the gun-vessels in the
basin and road, to deceive the British , but chiefly, as it was a
 remarkably healthy spot, to have an army of 30,000 or 40,000
 men ready to act on any emergency. The operations against the
 Temnant of the flotilla were now confined to Boulogne ; and,
 although in September and November two attempts were made
 to destroy the line of gun-vessels at anchor in the road, the

   * This reflection upon the admirals is only to be found in the quotation
from the letter contained in the text of M. Dumas ( tome xii ., p. 122) : it is
wholly omitted in what purports to be the entire copy inserted among the
“ Pieces Justificatifs.” We may conclude from this, that the author made his
extract from the original, without reflecting upon the meaning or tendency of
the passage alluded to, but that, when he, or another for him, came to
transcribe the letters for the Appendix , the discovery was made, and the
offensive words omitted.
   f Prdcis des Evenemens , tome xii ., p. 334.
    VOL . III .                       Y
