1805.        LORD NELSON AND M. V1LLENEUVE.                            329

the westerly and north-west winds, Lord Nelson despatched
some light vessels in advance to Gibraltar and Lisbon. On the
16th, while the fleet was beating hard against a strong westerly-
wind, to get round the southern extremity of Sardinia , and
obtain a glimpse of Toulon, a neutral vessel informed the Levia¬
than that the French fleet had been seen on the 7th off Cape de
 Gata . This was quickly followed by intelligence that M. Vil-
leneuve had passed the Straits on the 8th . The prevalence of
 strong southerly and westerly winds made it the 30th , ere Lord
 Nelson got sight of the rock of Gibraltar, - and about this time
 he heard that M . Villeneuve had been reinforced by some ships
 from Cadiz. There being no possibility of passing the Straits
 with the prevailing wind, and the fleet standing in great need of
 water and provisions, Lord Nelson, on the 4th of May, anchored
 in Mazari bay, on the Barbary shore, to water, and sent the
 Superb to Tetuan for cattle , fruit , and vegetables.
     We will now see what is become of the object of Lord Nel¬
 son’s pursuit ; of that which, as will clearly appear by the fol¬
 lowing letter from his lordship to Captain Ball, at Malta , dated
 April 19, when the fleet was buffeting with head winds, was
 the principal source of his uneasy frame of mind . “ My good
  fortune, my dear Ball, seems flown away. I cannot get a fair
  wind, or even a side wind—dead foul ! dead foul !—but my mind
  is fully made up what to do when I leave the Straits , supposing
  there is no certain information of the enemy’s destination . I
  believe this ill-luck will go near to kill me ; but , as these are
  times for exertion, I must not be cast down, whatever I may
  feel.” In another letter , of the same date , to Lord Melville,
  this extraordinary man writes : “ I am not made to despair;
  what man can do shall be done. I have marked out for myself
  a decided line of conduct , and I shall follow it well up, although
   I have now before me a letter from the physician of the fleet,
   enforcing my return to England before the hot months . There¬
  fore, notwithstanding I shall pursue the enemy to the East or
   West Indies , if I know that to have been their destination , yet,
   if the Mediterranean fleet joins the Channel , I shall request,
   with that order, permission to go on shore.”*
      Returning to M. Villeneuve, while off Carthagena , he sent a
   boat on shore, to offer his services and the protection of his fleet
   to the six Spanish ships ready for sea in the port ; but Rear-
   admiral Salzeco, having been ordered with his squadron on a
   different service, declined the junction . So says M . Villeneuve;
   but the Spanish ambassador at Paris asserted, that the refusal
   to join came from the French admiral . Napoleon denies this
   roundly ; adding , in his usual energetic way : “ Mais que 1’amiraL
   Villeneuve, passant parledetroit etayant des craintes , eut refuse
                  * Clarke   and   M ‘Arthur , vol . ii . , p . 404.
