1805.         LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                    325

     Having sent in all directions to gain information, but without
  effect, Lord Nelson continued his course to the eastward , and at
  3 a . m. on the 29th , rounded the island of Stromboli . As a proof
 that , in his anxiety to overtake the enemy, Lord Nelson had
 passed a sleepless night , the following memorandum appears in
 his diary : “ Stromboli burnt very strongly throughout the night
  of the 28th .” His own persuasion was that the French fleet had
 gone to Egypt ; and thither his lordship hastened , still detaching
 his frigates, as fast as they joined , to gather what tidings they
 could.
     On the 4th of February , the Canopus made the land of Egypt.
 On the 7th, the Tigre was sent into Alexandria ; but the Turks
 had nothing to communicate, and on the following day, the 8th,
 Captain Hallowed rejoined the fleet. Lord Nelson, now half-
 distracted , steered for Malta ; on the 14th, was within 100
 leagues of it ; and in a few days afterwards received from Naples
 intelligence of what had really become of the French fleet. It
 had , on the second day , after quitting Toulon, when crossing the
 gulf of Lyons, encountered a violent gale of wind, which da¬
 maged several of the ships in their masts and rigging , and drove'
 them , on the 20th , with the exception of four, back to their port.
The missing ships were the Indomptable and Cornelie already
 mentioned , and the frigates Hortense and Incorruptible . The
 Cornelie, after sheltering herself at Genoa, reached Toulon on
the 22d, as did the Indomptable in two days afterwards ; but
the Hortense and Incorruptible remained out for six or seven
weeks.
    It was on the 14th of February , when about 100 leagues to the
eastward of Malta , on his return to Sardinia, that Lord Nelson
wrote his celebrated letter to the first lord of the admiralty (Lord
Melville), explaining why he had considered Egypt to be the
destination of the French fleet. “ Feeling as I do,” he says,
u that I am entirely responsible to my king and country for the
whole of my conduct , I find no difficulty at this moment, when I<
am so unhappy at not finding the French fleet, nor having ob¬
tained the smallest information where they are, to lay before you
the whole of the reasons which induced me to pursue the line of
conduct I have done. I have consulted no man, therefore the-
whole blame of ignorance in forming my judgment must rest
with me. I would allow no man to take from me an atom of my
glory had I fallen in with the French fleet, nor do I desire any
man to partake of any of the responsibility . All is mine, right
or wrong : therefore I shall now state my reasons, after seeing
that Sardinia , Naples , and Sicily, were safe, for believing that
Egypt was the destination of the French fleet ; and at this mo- '
ment of sorrow, I still feel that I have acted right . Firstly ; the
wind had blown from north -east to south -east for 14 days before
they sailed : therefore they might , without difficulty, have gone
to the westward. Secondly ; they came out with gentle breezes
