 324         BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISII FLEETS.                  1805.

 Biche and Sardinia ; a passage so narrow that the ships had to
 proceed in line ahead, each , except the Victory who undertook
 to lead the fleet, being guided by the stern-lights of her second
 ahead . At 6 p. m. the Victory was clear , and at 7 p. m. every
 ship in her train . Lord Nelson then despatched the Seahorse
 round the southern extremity of Sardinia , to look into St .-Pietro
 for the French fleet, and to return immediately . At 8 h . 30 m.
 p . m. the fleet , with now only one frigate attending   it , bore away
  along the island of Sardinia . On the following day , the 20th,
  the vice-admiral appointed the Spencer and Leviathan , as the
  two fastest-sailing ships, to be a detached squadron ; directing
  Captain Stopford to keep on the Victory’s weather beam, to be
  ready to act as occasion might require . During the latter part
  of this, and the whole of the succeeding day , the fleet encountered
 very hard gales from south-south-west to south -west ; and, for
 a great part of the time, the ships were under their storm-
 staysails.
    On the 22d, at 10 a . m., the Seahorse rejoined , having, on the
 preceding afternoon, been chased by the French 40-gun frigate
 Cornelie , standing in for Pulla . The gale was so heavy and
 the weather so thick , that the Seahorse could not see the
 anchorage either in that bay or in Cagliari , and, from the same
 cause, lost sight of the French frigate in the night . The Sea¬
 horse , accompanied by the Active, was sent back to Cagliari,
 but no French ships were lying there ; and a message to the
 viceroy and consul at that port, carried by the Active, and for a
 reply to which Lord Nelson waited off*the island of Serpentina,
produced no better intelligence . The Seahorse was then sent
 with despatches to Naples , and the Active directed to cruise for
three days to the eastward , about five or six leagues from Ser¬
pentina , to speak any British ship that might be in search of the
British admiral.
    On the 25th , at noon, Cape Carbonara , island of Sardinia,
bore from the Victory north -north-east half-east distant three
and a half leagues ; and on the next day , the 26th , the 18-
pounder 36-gun frigate Phoebe, Captain the Honourable Thomas
Bladen Capel , joined company . On the 19th, at 4 p. m., when
sailing down the west coast of Corsica with a strong west-north¬
west wind, the Phoebe discovered a disabled line-of-battle ship,
the Indomptable , one of M. Villeneuve’s fleet, standing in for
the land, under courses only, having carried away her topmasts.
The frigate immediately hauled up towards , and at 4 h. 45 m.
passed within hail of, the Indomptable , who had previously
hoisted French colours. Having ascertained that the dismasted
ship was an enemy’s two-decker, bound apparently for Ajaccio
bay , the Phoebe did not , as it appears , make any attempt to
molest her, but bore up for the Magdalena islands , where Captain
Capel expected to find Lord Nelson. It was owing to this cir¬
cuitous route that the frigate was so many days in joining the fleet.
