            BRITISH AND FltANCO- SBANISII FLEETS.
                                                                    1805.
340

vessels, with all the rum and sugar and coffee on board, were in
flames. A French writer confirms the fact ; calling by mistake
the two sloops “ frigates,” and seeming to be unapprized of the
ruse that was practised .*
     On the 30th of J une, when about 20 leagues to the north -east
of the island of Corvo, the northernmost of the Azores, M . Vil-
leneuve was rejoined by his five frigates. On the same day the
 Didon captured and burnt an English privateer , of 14 guns and
49 men. On the 3d of July the fleet recaptured the late Spanish
galleon Matilda , with treasure on board to the estimated value
of from 14 to 15 millions of francs ; and at the same time cap¬
tured the privateer, the Mars, of Liverpool, who had made prize
of the galleon , and was conducting her to an English port. The
 privateer was set on fire, and the galleon taken in tow by the
 Sirene frigate. Nothing further of consequence happened to the
 combined fleet until it arrived off Cape Finisterre on the 9th of
 July ; on which day a violent gale of wind from the north -east
 carried away the main topmast of the Indomptable , and other¬
 wise slightly damaged some of the ships. The wind moderated,
 but continued to blow from the same adverse quarter , until a day
 or two before the 22d ; when, with a favourable change of wind,
  occurred an event, the account of which had best be deferred till
  we have brought up the proceedings of the chasing fleet.
      After quitting Antigua on the 13th of June,f Lord Nelson, still
  with no more than his own discretion for a guide, hastened
  towards Europe , and on the 17th of July came in sight of Cape
  St.-Vincent ; “ making, ” abserves the admiral in his diary, “ our
  whole run from Barbuda , day by day, 3459 miles. Our run
  from Cape St.-Vincent to Barbadoes, ” he adds, “ was 3227
  miles ; so that our run back was only 232 miles more than our
   run out, allowance being made for the difference of the latitudes
   and longitudes of Barbadoes and Barbuda ; average per day 34
   leagues wanting nine miles.” On the following day, the 18th,
    being on his way to Gibraltar for provisions for his fleet, Lord
   Nelson fell in with Vice-admiral Collingwood, with the Dread¬
   nought 98 and two other sail of the line ; but who had not the
    slightest information to communicate beyond what his own
    sagacity , and that was of no common kind, suggested . Vice-
    admiral Collingwood considered the voyage to the West Indies
    in the right point of view, merely as a means of drawing off’ the
    British force from the Channel , to admit of an attack upon
    Ireland ; and, it will be recollected , a disembarkation on Ireland
    was one of the preliminary steps in Napoleon ’s plan .];
       On the 19th.of July the British fleet anchored in Gibraltar
   bay ; and “ on the 20th, ” says Lord Nelson in his diary, “ I went
   * Yictoires et Conquetes, tome xvi ., p. 128.
   f See p. 334.
   j See p. 217 ; also a letter from Vice-admiral Collingwood to Lord Nelson
 on this subject, Appendix , No . 37,
