336         BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.               1805.

to proceed straight to Martinique , and , with the 5100 men on
hoard the combined fleet, capture Sainte-Lucie, if not already
taken by the Rochefort squadron ; leave a garrison there, and,
if necessary , strengthen the garrisons of Dominique , Martinique,
and Guadaloupe , the two latter of which had already , the one
1500, the other 1600 troops . He wras then to wait a month in
the Antilles, in order to afford Vice-admiral Ganteaume an op¬
portunity of joining with his 21 sail of the line ; and, to make
the intervening time pass profitably as well as pleasantly , he
was to do all possible injury to the enemy, “ faire tout le mal
possible a l’ennemi.” The governor-generals of Martinique and
of Guadaloupe , Vice - admiral Villaret Joyeuse and General
Enouf , were to lend their aid, and, if necessary , a portion of
their respective garrisons , towards the fulfilment of this object.
The want of provisions in the fleet, or of unanimity in the
council , or some other unexplained cause, kept M. Villeneuve’s
ships in the harbour of Fort-Royal until the latter end of May;
when two of the 74s moved out to attack the Diamond rock,
which , with its sloop’s company of officers and men, still per¬
sisted to fire at and annoy every French vessel that passed within
range of its heavy cannon.
   The expedition destined to retake this very harassing and not
informidable “ king’s ship, ” consisting of the Pluton and Ber¬
wick 74s, 36-gun frigate Sirene , 16-gun brig-corvette Argus,
Fine armed schooner, and 11 gun-boats , under the orders of
Commodore Cosmao of the Pluton , having on board from 300
to 400 troops of the line commanded by chef d’escadron Boyer.
On the 29th of May, at 5 h. 30m . p.m., the expedition sailed from
Fort -Royal . By the morning of the 30th the ships had not made
much progress ; but on the 31st , at daybreak , they were far to
windward of the rock, and at 7 a . m. bore down towards it.
The Diamond had been block'aded ever since the arrival of the
combined fleet at Martinique : therefore Captain Maurice, when
he saw Commodore Cosmao’s squadron sail out , anticipated its
destination , and prepared accordingly.
   Considering it impossible to defend the lower works against
such a force as was approaching , Captain Maurice abandoned
them, spiking the two guns , drowning the powder, and cutting
away the launch from the landing place. At 8 a . m. the ships
opened their fire ; which was returned by Hood’s battery and
 Fort-Diamond, the one being the 24-pounder about midway
up the rock, the other the two 18-pounders on its summit . The
ships bombarded the rock during the 31st of May and 1st of
June , and until 4h . 30m . p. m. on the 2d ; when Captain
 Maurice , having, as he states , “ but little powder left, and not a
sufficient quantity of ball-cartridges to last until dark, ” threw
out a flag of ti’uce. At 5 p. m, the Fine schooner hoisted a
 similar flag ; and terms honourable to the garrison , which con¬
sisted of 107 officers and men, were agreed to the same evening*
