1805.                                    .
             LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE                           333

fine easterly wind now again springing up, Lord Nelson , at 6
p. m., weighed and stood through the Straits.
    It had been his lordship ’s intention , on the supposition that
the French were bound to Ireland , to have proceeded to a spot
about 50 leagues to the westward of Scilly ; but some intelli¬
gence, of an undoubted character , pointing to the West Indies
as the real destination of the combined fleet, Lord Nelson re¬
solved, at every risk of professional censure, to follow it thither.
That information was derived from Rear -admiral Donald
Campbell (by birth a Scotchman ), of the Portuguese navy, well
known to Lord Nelson, from having previously served under
him, and from having , on a former occasion, rendered some
essential service to the British . For his visit to the Victory,
Rear -admiral Campbell appears to have suffered most severely.
Notwithstanding the rigid secrecy observed by Lord Nelson, the
Spanish naval commander-in-chief at Algeziras got hold of the
circumstance , and made a formal complaint against the rear-
admiral . This brought down the vengeance of the French
ambassador at the court of Portugal , and Rear -admiral Camp¬
 bell was laid upon the shelf.#
    On the 10th, in the evening, the fleet anchored in Lagos bay,
 to clear some transports which had been left there by Sir John
 Orde , when the latter retreated from before M. Villeneuve.
 Having, in the course of the night , by extraordinary exertions,
 completed his ships to five months ’ provisions, Lord Nelson, at
 9 a . m. on the 11th, weighed and sailed out of the bay . The
expected arrival from England of a fleet of transports , with 5000
 troops on board under General Sir James Craig, induced his
 lordship to remain a short time off Cape St.-Vincent ; and on
 the 12th, in the afternoon , the Queen 98, Rear -admiral Knight,
 and Dragon 74, Captain Edward Griffiths, with their valuable
 charge , joined company. In order to afford to the convoy an
 additional protection in its passage through the Straits , Lord
 Nelson detached the Royal-Sovereign ; and , with his remaining
  10 ships of the line and three frigates, namely, the Victory,
 Canopus , Superb, Spencer, Swiftsure, Belleisle, Conqueror,f
 Tigre, and Leviathan , and Amazon, Decade , and Amphion,
 crowded sail to the westward, in chase of an enemy’s fleet
 which, he knew, consisted of 18 ships of the line, and at least
 treble his number of frigates . One of the British ships too,
 the Superb , not having been in a home-port since the 16th of
 January , 1801, was in a very crazy state ; and it was only upon
 the urgent solicitation of Captain Keats , that the Superb was
 allowed to make one in the pursuing fleet.
     Lord Nelson has been accused of rashness , in being so eager
  * Clarke and M*Arthur, vol . ii., p . 40G.
  t For this ship a contemporary has substituted the Excellent , Captain
Frank Sotheron, left by Lord Nelson in Naples bay. See Brenton, vol . iii,,
p. 429.
