1805.         LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                    331

Madrid Gazette , of April 13, gives the correct number of ships,
both French and Spanish , that joined M . Villeneuve ; and so
does Napoleon himself, when writing- confidentially to his
minister of marine : “ II parait que cinq vaisseaux et une fregate
ont rallie Tamiral Villeneuve ; qu’un sixieme avait touche , mais
allait partir .”* And yet no French writer, such is the perma¬
nent inj ury of distorting historical facts, has been able to give a
consistent account of this transaction.
     Scarcely had daylight on the 9th made its appearance , than
the French admiral was constrained to shorten sail for his Spa¬
nish friends ; and, to the additional regret of M. Villeneuve , the
wind, before the close of the day, shifted to the westward . An
alternation of contrary winds and calms, coupled with the in¬
 different sailing of one of the French (the Atlas ) and two or
 three of the Spanish ships, made it the 12th of May before the
 fleet arrived in sight of the island of Martinique . In the course
 of the following day , the 13th, the five Spanish , and 11 of the
  12 French sail of the line , accompanied by the seven frigates
 {one of them Spanish ), one ship-corvette , and three brig-cor¬
 vettes , also by a large store-ship , and the late British ship-sloop
 Cyane , a prize, anchored in the harbour of Fort -Royal , or, as
 named at the commencement of the republican dynasty , Fort-
 de-France , but not without having sustained , in passing , a smart
  cannonade from the Diamond rock .f
      In the course of the same night , it is believed , the twelfth
  French line-of-battle ship (probably , from her acknowledged
  badness of sailing, the Atlas ) anchored with her companions;
  and on the 16th, early in the morning , the Spanish 80-gun ship
  San -Rafael , which had sailed from Cadiz on the 10th of April,
  rounded Pointe -Saline. At 8 a . m. she hoisted a Spanish ensign
  and pendant ; whereupon , by way of decoy, French colours were
  displayed at the flag-staff of the Diamond . At 9 a . m. the
  Spanish ship, having unsuspiciously approached close under the
  lee of the rock, on which English colours had just been substi¬
  tuted for French , received a fire as unexpected as it proved
  annoying . The San -Rafael quickly put her helm up, and,
  returning one ineffectual shot as she wore, hastened out of range,
   as fast as the little wind would permit her ; anchoring , the same
   afternoon , in company with M. Villeneuve ’s fleet.
       A very different story from all this is told in the publication
   which the Moniteur was compelled to insert in the shape of a
   letter from M . Villeneuve , and a translation of which, as of a
   document of undoubted authenticity , went the rounds of the
   English newspapers . “ Le 19 floreal,” says this arrant piece of
   forgery, “ me trouvant a la hauteur prescrite par mes instruc¬
   tions , j ’ai, conformement a leur contenu , remis a l’amiral Gra-

    * Precis des Evfenemens, tome xi., p. 229.
                                                                   -
    T See p. 243.
