 332          BRITISH AND FRANCO- SPANISH FLEETS.                1805.
 Tina ses depeches , et, sur le signal qui en a ete fait, six vaisseaux
  de S. M. C., deux fregates et deux bricks de S. M. I ., se sont
  ranges sous son pavilion ; nous avons ete en vue le reste de la
  soiree, mais le lendemain je n’en ai plus de connaissance, etj ’ai
 lieu de le croire rendre a sa destination . Le 24, au point du
 jour , j ’ai donne dans le canal de Sainte-Lucie, et dans la journee
 je mouillai a la Martinique , avec l’escadre que m’aconfiee S . M.
 et deux vaisseaux et une fregate espagnols .” The number of
 French and Spanish ships that entered Martinique , as counted
 both from the Diamond rock , and the Triton VVest-Indiaman
 which lay in Basse-Terre road, Sainte-Lucie, agrees exactly with
 the statement as we have given it . But , it being p. m. when the
 ships passed , the two accounts are dated , according to log-time,
 on the 14th instead of on the 13th of May . That the last is the
 correct date appears , not only from the above letter (there being
 no interest to deceive in that particular ), but from an entry in
 the role d’equipage of the French ship Formidable , to which we
 have had reference.
    Even French historians were led into error by the Moniteur ’s
 forgeries : “ L ’Amiral Gravina, ” says M. Dumas , “ ne se separa
 point de lui (Villeneuve) pour remplir une mission particuliere,
 et c’est encore un fait que nous devions retablir ; il mouilla a la
 Martinique avec le reste de la flotte combinde et ne la quitta
 point : ceci doit servir d’erratum au premier paragraphe de la
 page 131, ou, trompes par divers rapports officiels, nous avions
 dit que Tamiral Gravina , apres s’etre detache de la flotte com-
 binee pour porter des secours a Porto -Rico et a la Havane, etait
 venu la rejoindre a sa station aux lies du Vent .”* The object
 of all this fraud was evidently to induce the British government
to weaken still more the force in the Channel , by detaching a
greater number of ships to the West Indies ; and that object,
we believe, was partly accomplished.
    Lord Nelson, whom on the 4th of May we left refitting his
fleet in Mazari bay,T was enabled , early on the 5th, by the
emulation and activity of those he commanded, and by a sudden
change of wind to the eastward , to weigh and make sail to the
westward . Such , indeed, was Lord Nelson’s haste to getaway,
that the Superb was recalled from Tetuan , just as the cattle
and other refreshments for the fleet were being brought down to
the beach ; and which, in consequence, the ship was obliged to
leave behind . On the 7th, at 2 p. m., a failure of the breeze
obliged the Victory and some of the other ships to anchor in
Rozia bay , Gibraltar . In the course of the afternoon Rear-
admiral Sir Richard Bickerton , who was to be left as the com¬
manding officer in the Mediterranean , shifted his flag from the
Royal -Sovereign to the Amfitrite (late Spanish ) frigate ; and, a

  * Precis des Evbnemens , tome xii ., p. 417.
  f See p. 329.
