1805.              LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.               335

people who fight, at immense disadvantage , without any adequate
object . My object is partly gained. If we meet them, we shall
find them not less than 18, I rather think 20, sail of the line -
and therefore do not be surprised if I should not fall on them
immediately . We won’t part without a battle . I think they
will be glad to let me alone, if I will let them alone ; which I will
do, either till we approach the shores of Europe , or they give me
an advantage too tempting to be resisted .” # And yet the two
writers , from whose work this extract is taken , seldom indulge
in their own remarks without making a perfect braggadocio of
their hero. Mr . Southey is nearly as bad as Messieurs Clarke
and McArthur. Much, indeed, has the memory of this great
man suffered by the overweening zeal of his biographers.
    On the very day , June 9th , on which Lord Nelson arrived off
the island of Grenada , Napoleon , writing from Milan , says : “ Je
 suis d’opinion, cependant , que Nelson est encore dans les mere
d ’Europe . Le sentiment le plus naturel est qu ’il devrait dtre
rentre en Angleterre pour se ravitailler et verser ses equipages
 sur d’autres batimens ; car ses vaisseaux ont besoin d’entrer dans
 le bassin, et son escadre peut 6tre consideree comme etant en
 tres -mauvaix etat .”t The latter part of this statement was true
 enough , but Napoleon did not seemingly reflect what might be
 done by such a man as Nelson . The velocity, as well as the
 direction, of the British admiral’s movements had quite out¬
 stripped the French emperor’s calculations.
    That M. Villeneuve was not, in reality , with 18 sail of the
 line running from 11, is natural to suppose ; and yet many
 persons, both in France and England , have thought otherwise.
 Nor , indeed, could the French admiral ’s departure from Mar¬
 tinique have had any possible reference to the arrival of the
 British admiral at Barbadoes , owing to the simple fact, that the
 two occurrences took place on the same day . M. Villeneuve’s
 instructions , as well as we can collect what they w'ere from the
 mass of orders and counter-orders which issued on the subject*
 may afford us some clue to the French admiral ’s proceedings.
     In the published correspondence between the Emperor Na¬
 poleon and his minister of maijne , a break occurs of nearly seven
 months , from September 29, 1804, to April 14, 1805. As, in
 the interim , the Toulon fleet had twice sailed, and the last time
 had got fairly to sea, this hiatus happens rather inopportunely.
 Coupling the April and September instructions , however, we
 may gather , that M . Villeneuve was neither to detach ships to
 take St .-Helena , nor, with the aid of the Rochefort squadron*
 himself to capture Surinam and the other Dutch colonies in the
 Antilles     but that , on being joined by the Spaniards , he was

  * Clarke   and    M ‘Arthur   , vol . ii ., p . 413.
  + Precis des Evenemens, tome xi., p. 267.
  4 Seep. 241,
