 1805.          LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                   339
 British colonies (nearly the whole of which, according to a
 French writer, had drawn up the capitulations they meant to
 propose to M. Villeneuve, and counted out the sums of money
 they could afford to pay him for their ransom *), the merchant-
 masters did, most probably , exaggerate the British force under
 Lord Nelson, in the hope to drive the French admiral back to
 Europe . If so, the plan produced its effect ; for, on the 9th or
 10th, all the troops which had been withdrawn from Martinique
 and Guadaloupe were precipitately embarked on board the
 Hortense , Didon, Hermione, and Themis frigates, with orders to
 Captain La-Marre-la- Meillerie, of the Hortense , the senior
 officer, to disembark them at the last -named island, and then to
 rejoin the fleet at the appointed rendezvous.
    That , in acting thus , the French admiral was but obeying his
orders , is to be inferred from the fact, that Napoleon anticipated
 that M . Villeneuve would return straight to Europe on learning
that he was pursued . “ Je hhterai monarrivee (a Boulogne) de
 quelques jours , parce que je pense que Tarrivee de Nelson”
 (whose force he in another place states at “ dix seuls vaisseaux”),
 “ en Amerique, pourrait pousser Villeneuve a partir pour le
Ferrol .f The only act for which Napoleon blamed M , Ville¬
neuve, was for not leaving at Martinique and Guadaloupe
the troops which the fleet had carried out . In his anger, at the
partial failure of his projects , the French emperor did certainly
attribute this omission on the part of M. Villeneuve, to fright,
“ epouvante,” at the rumour of his being pursued; but, at a
 subsequent day, when the thoughts of invading England had
long ceased to agitate his breast , Buonaparte frankly admitted
 that Villeneuve was a brave man.J
    On the 26th of June , when, having executed their mission,
they were returning to the fleet, the Didon, Hermione, Hortense,
and Themis fell in with the Sirtine and her valuable charge ; and
that but a short distance to windward of the spot whence the
latter had made sail 17 days before. Coupling the time
already lost with the time it would still take to get a fleet of dull-
sailing merchantmen so far to windward as Guadaloupe , Captain
La-Marre-la- Meillerie determined to bear up with them for
Porto -Rico. On the following day, the 27th , when about 180
miles to north -east of Barbuda , the British 18-gun ship-sloops,
Kingfisher, Captain Richard William Cribb,and Osprey, Captain
Timothy Clinch , appeared in sight to windward, and were
chased by the French frigates . In making sail to escape, the
two sloops hoisted signals and fired guns, as if to a fleet ahead.
This had the desired effect. The chasing ships immediately
bore up ; and, in a very little time, the whole 15 merchant
  * Victoires et Conquetes, tome xvi., p. 121.
  f Precis des Evenemens , tome xi ., p. 282.
  t See O’Meara’s Napoleon in Exile , vol. i,, p. 57.
                                    z2
