334           BRITISH AND FRANCO
                               -SPANISH                         FLEETS
                                                                     .            1805.

to engage a force nearly double his own ; but it should be re¬
collected , that he fully expected to be joined , on reaching Bar-
badoes, by six sail of the line. During his passage to the West
Indies , Lord Nelson prepared a plan of attack , to be adopted in
case he should overtake the enemy’s fleet. The plan met the
general approval of his officers ; but we cannot discover by it
whether the vice-admiral contemplated a meeting before or after
the expected reinforcement .*
   On the 15th of May the British fleet made Madeira ; and on
the 29th the Amazon was sent on to Barbadoes , to enable Rear-
admiral Cochrane to have his ships ready for the expected junc¬
tion . On the 3d of June Lord Nelson gained , for the first time,
certain intelligence that the combined fleet was in the West
Indies ; and on the 4th he anchored with his squadron in Carlisle
bay . Here he found Rear -admiral Cochrane , with only the
Northumberland and Spartiate 74s, his remaining four ships
having been detained by Rear -admiral Dacres at Jamaica . An
unfounded report , circulated , no doubt , on purpose to mislead,
that the enemy was bound to Tobago and Trinidad , induced the
vice-admiral to receive on board his ships 2000 troops under
General Myers , and to proceed with them , on the morning of
the 5th , towards those two islands . On the 7th , when in the
gulf of Paria , the British discovered that they had been misled;
and , although so far to leeward, the fleet arrived on the 9th , off
Grenada . Here Lord Nelson received accounts that the enemy
had passed the island of Dominique on the 6th , steering to the
northward . Having , on the morning of the 13th, reached
Antigua , the British fleet there disembarked the troops ; and at
noon the same day , taking with him the Spartiate , Captain
Francis Laforey, but leaving the Northumberland to remain as
Rear -admiral Cochrane ’s flag-ship on the station , Lord Nelson,
with 11 sail of the line, stood to the northward ; not absolutely
in pursuit of an enemy, whose force he knew to consist of at
least 18 sail of the line, but in the hope, by a superior know¬
ledge of tactics , to reach the shores of Europe before him.
   In one of those unreserved conversations which he occasionally
held with his captains when visiting him on board the Victory,
Lord Nelson is represented to have said, in reference to the object
wdiich had drawn him so far from his station : “ I am thankful
that the enemy has been driven from the West -India islands with
so little loss to our country ” (alluding to the capture of the
Antigua convoy) ; “ I had made up my mind to great sacrifices,
for I had determined , notwithstanding his vast superiority , to
stop his career, and to put it out of his power to do any further
mischief. Yet do not imagine I am one of those hot-brained

  * That   plan , being   the   work   of   an   acknowledged    proficient   , may   with
propriety be transcribed into these pages.             It will therefore be found at
No. 36 of the Appendix.
