1805.         LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                    337

    In their defence of this extraordinary post , the British sus¬
tained a loss of only two men killed , and one man wounded.
The chef d’escadron Boyer enumerates the loss of the French
troops , “ from a hasty calculation,” at about 50 in killed and
wounded . Captain Maurice considers the loss of the French,
who landed at the foot of the rock, to have amounted to at least
30 men killed and 40 wounded, exclusively of the loss sustained
on board the ships and boats . Three gun-boats and two rowing
boats are stated to have been entirely lost . On his subsequent
trial by court-martial, Captain Maurice was not only most
honourably acquitted for the loss of the Diamond rock, but
highly complimented for his firm and determined behaviour.
     On the 1st of June , while the governor-general, General
Lauriston , Admirals Villeneuve and Gravina , and a number of
other officers, were inspecting the Diamond rock from the con¬
tiguous shore, the French 40-gun frigate Didon, Captain Pierre-
 Bernard Milius, arrived from Guadaloupe ; bringing fresh in¬
 structions from Napoleon , and likewise intelligence that two
 French 74s had arrived at that island as a reinforcement to the
combined fleet. The Didon had sailed from Lorient on the 2d
 of May, with duplicates of the instructions , with which, on the
 day previous, Rear -admiral Magon, with the two new 74-gun
 ships Algesiras , Captain Gabriel-Auguste Brouard,and Achille,
 Captain Gabriel Denieport , had sailed from Rochefort . In
 those instructions Napoleon directs that Vice-admiral Villeneuve,
 and Genera] Lauriston , having now with the 2100 troops com¬
 posing (see p. 336 ) the united garrisons of Martinique and Gua¬
 daloupe , the 3400 carried out by Rear -admiral Missiessy, the
 5100, including Spaniards in the combined fleet, and the 840
 on board Rear-admiral Magon’s two ships, upwards of 11,400
 men, do take kSt.-Vincent , Antigua , Grenada ; “ etpourquoi ne
 prendrait -on pas laBarbade ?” Certainly , there was no reason
why, among the “ ten Windward islands, including Tobago and
Trinidad, ” Barbadoes alone should escape free. Tobago having
 been a French island , was not to be ill-treated , but such of the
other English colonies, as it might not be convenient to retain,
 were to be stripped and pillaged thus : “ II ne faudrait point
 maltraiter Tile de Tobago, parcequ ’elle est frangaise ; mais pour
 les autres colonies anglaises qu’on jugerait devoir abandonner
 apres les avoir occupees, on pourrait en tirer la moitie des noirs,
 lever une contribution sur les habitans , en oter l’artillerie , et
vendre les noirs a la Martinique et a la Guadaloupe .”*
     Having done all this, and waited in the Antilles for the Brest
 fleet 35 days from the day of receiving his despatches , Vice-
 admiral Villeneuve was to proceed straight to Ferrol , to carry into
 effect, in the way already explained,f the ultimate object of the

  * Prdcis des Evbnemens, tome xi., p. 477.
  f See p . 300.
  VOL. Ill ,                         Z
