1805,          LORD NELSON AND M. VILLENEUVE.                         341

on shore for the first time since June 16, 1803, and from having
my foot out of the Victory , two years wanting 10 days.” On
the 2'2d the fleet weighed and stood across to Tetuan to water,
anchoring at 8 p. m. in Mazari bay. On the 24th , at noon, the
fleet again got under way and steered for Ceuta , and remained
during the night in the gut , with variable winds and a thick fog.
On the 25th the 18-gun ship-sloop Termagant , Captain Robert
Pettet , from England , joined , with information that the brig-
sloop Curieux , on her way home with Lord Nelson’s despatches,
had , on the 19th of June, * in latitude 33° 12' north , longitude
58° west, fallen in with the combined fleet, steering , at first,
north by west, but afterwards north-north -west. This intelli¬
gence, stale as it was in being communicated five weeks after it
bore date, was the earliest, of a positive nature , which the vice-
admiral had received.
    After passing the Straits, Lord Nelspn bore away to the west¬
ward, and then proceeded off Cape St .-Vincent , to be ready to
steer more northerly as circumstances might direct . On the 3d
of August the fleet was in latitude 39° north, longitude 16° west,
with light northerly airs. By his acuteness , Lord Nelson , about
this time, extracted from a log-book , found by an American
merchant ship on board a vessel which had been set on fire and
abandoned , but not destroyed , some far from unimportant infor¬
mation . The circumstances , as related by each of Lord Nelson ’s
biographers , are as follows : “ A log-book and a few seamen’s
jackets were found in the cabin, and these were brought to
 Nelson . The log-book closed with these words : ‘ Two large
 vessels in the W.N.W . ;’ and this led him to conclude that the
 vessel had been a Liverpool privateer cruising off the Western
 Islands . But there was in this book a scrap of dirty paper,
 filled with figures. Nelson , immediately upon seeing it, observed
 that the figures were written by a Frenchman ; and, after
 studying this for a while, said, ‘ I can explain the whole. The
jackets are of French manufacture , and prove that the privateer
 was in possession of the enemy. She had been chased and
 taken by the two ships that were seen in the W.N.W . The
 prize-master , going on board in a hurry , forgot to take with him
 his reckoning : there is none in the log-book, and the dirty paper
 contains her work for the number of days since the privateer left
  Corvo, with an unaccounted -for run , which I take to have been,
 the chase, in his endeavour to find out her situation by back-
 reckoning . By some mismanagement I conclude she was run
 on board by one of the enemy’s ships and dismasted . Not liking
 delay (for I am satisfied that those two ships were the advanced
 ones of the French squadron ), and fancying we were close at
  their heels, they set fire to the vessel, and abandoned her in a
                                                                   “ Life of
“ ■* Both Southey in his, and Clarke and M‘ Arthur in their,
Nelson, ” make this the 19th of July ; a serious mistake. See p. 301.
