                               NOTES
                                        TO



               ANNUAL                  ABSTRACTS.


                     NOTE TO ABSTRACT No. 8.
  * The hired vessels numbered about 96. It will here be seen, that the
Victory has quitted her degraded post at a, to resume the rank which, for the
space of 33 years, she had so honourably filled. See note a* to Abstract No. 6.




                      NOTE TO ABSTRACT No. 9.
  * The hired vessels numbered about 104.         In consequence of the mistake
of a unit in the “ Tons,” of classt, not discovered until after Abstract No. 9
was printed, this total exceeds by 1 the corresponding total in Abstract No. 8.




                     NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 10.
   W *. The purchased ship of this class was the Cornwallis, late a teak-
built Indiaman.
* x*. A very ancient class revived. “ Advice boats, so called officially, are
said to have been employed, for the first time, in 1692, before the battle off*
Cape La Hogue, in order to gain intelligence of what was passing at Brest.”
See Derrick, p. 113, note *.
   * As the hired vessels had begun to be discharged, they now numbered
only about 62. This Abstract, having been put to press along with the one
which precedes it, contains the same deficiency of a unit in the “ Tons,” that
is remarked upon in the single note of Abstract No. 9.
   Owing to an inadvertency on our part, two 74s, one of the N, the other of
the O class, that were, late in the year 1801, ordered to be built, have been
left out of the “ ordered” column. The addition of them will make the line
numerical grand total 191, and the general numerical grand total 783.



                    NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 11.
   a With the view to render the remaining Abstracts more perspicuous and
useful, a partial alteration has been made in the manner of heading them.
Instead of being confined to “ Cruisers,” this compartment now extends to
every ship fitted or about to be fitted for sea-service; and lines are drawn to
show the totals, as well of the former, as of the less material portion of the navy.
