  374                             'appendix.

      b This head has also been slightly altered ; and in particular the “ &c ”
   has a different signification from that assigned to it in note J to No. 1
   Abstract. See vol. i., p. 398. It signifies that all the ships and vessels of
   this, as we shall call it, the second compartment, which are not commissioned
  for harbour-service, remain in ordinary until sold or taken to pieces, a period
  which is sometimes extended to several years.
      c The term “ Built” has been substituted for “ Launched,” as being more
  explicit, and contrasting better with “ Purchased.” In the preceding Ab¬
  stracts every ship down this pair of columns formed part of the “ Total of
  Increase,” and having, in the generality of cases, been included among the
  “ Ordered to be built” of an antecedent j ear, became reckoned twice      over.
  To obviate this, a double line now excludes the built ships from the increasej
  and the increase-total, without any other deduction than the decrease-total
  njay require, proves the grand total. For instance, the grand total of N, by
  the’ former method, must have been produced thus : 15 | 26032 (the corres¬
  ponding total in No. 10 Abstract) -fS | 5168= 18 ] 31200—1 J 1743=
  17 | 29457, instead of by simply adding the 2 j 3425.
     ti The “ &c” includes ships converted to sheer-hulks, breakwaters, and
  similar uses.
     e The correction of a mistake of 50 tons in one ship (the Cornwallis, see
  note W* in the preceding page), occasions this total to exceed by that
  amount the corresponding total in the preceding Abstract.
     f See last note.
     s This division of the armies en jlute into “ Troop-ships” and “ Store-
 ships” tends to simplify the arrangement, but it was not adopted in the official
 register until a much later period. There, as elsewhere observed, the reduced
 ships, with few exceptions, ranked, until very recently, along with their full¬
 armed classmates. The lower columns of the first compartment are now no
 longer in blank, the substituted term at the top admitting all ships fitted or
 about to be fitted “ for sea-service.”
     h The addition of the deficient unit remarked upon in notes*1to Nos. 9 and
 10 Abstracts, appears in the excess of this total over its corresponding one in
 the latter.
    1 This is merely a separation from various other classes of such
ships as are so registered in the official list, and might have beenstationary
class from the first. In strictness, the three commissioned harbour-made         a
                                                                           service
ships at T, T, and IV, and all others, which may appear in that column
throughout the series, ought to belong to it : but, as the official list continues
them in their original classes, we have done the same.
    k The “ Small Yachts,” with the exception of the Medina, not being com¬
manded by naval officers, this class has been reduced ; and the one next above
it,now includingthe Medina, will henceforward be denominated“ RoyalYachts.”
   1This being a year of peace, no hired vessels were attached to the navy.
As to the grand total of “ Tons,” see notes e, f, and h.




                   NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 12.
  a It was remarked in note J to No . 2 Abstract, that “ captured
are also purchased from the captors before they can enter the service.”vessels
                                                                          The
union of these two columns under the head of “ Purchased,” subject to the
distinction pointed out, claimsa preference, therefore, over the plan adopted
in the preceding Abstracts. The names of the ships in the second column
will, without the exception formerly requisite, be found in the proper list in
the work ; and where, among the vessels in the first column, a purchased
British merchantman rates above a gun-brig, the circumstance will be
adverted to in a note.
