                                 APPENDIX.                                  371




                             No . 36.   See . p. 334.

                       LORD NELSON ’S PLAN OF ATTACK.


    “ The business of an English commander-in-chief,” says his lordship,
“ being first to bring an enemy’s fleet to battle, on the most advantageous
terms to himself( I mean, that of laying his ships close on board those of the
enemy as expeditiously as possible, and secondly, to continue them there
without separating until the business is decided), I am sensible, beyond this
object, it is not necessaryI should say a word, being fully assured, that the
admirals and captains of the fleet I have the honour to command will,
knowing my precise object, that of a close and decisive battle, supply any
deficiency in my not making signals; which may, if extended beyond these
objects, either be misunderstood, or, if waited for, very probably, from various
causes, be impossible for the commander-in-chief to make. Therefore it will
only be requisite for me to state, in as few words as possible, the various
modes by which it may be necessary for me to obtain my object, on which
depends not only the honour and glory of our country, but possibly its safety,
and, with it, that of all Europe, from French tyranny and oppression.
    “ If the two fleets are both willing to fight, but little manoeuvring is neces¬
sary. The less the better ; a day is soon lost in that business. Therefore I
will only suppose that the enemy’s fleet being to leeward, standing close upon
a wind on the starboard tack, and that I am nearly ahead of them, standing
 on the larboard tack ; of course I should weather them. The weather must
 be supposed to be moderate ; for, if it be a gale of wind, the manoeuvring of
both fleets is but of little avail, and probably no decisive action would take
 place with the whole fleet. Two modes present themselves; one, to stand
 on just out of gun-shot until the van-ship of my line would be abreast of the
 centre-ship of the enemy, then make the signal to wear together, then bear
 up, engage with all our force the six or five van-ships of the enemy, passing
 certainly, if opportunity offered, through their line. This would prevent
 their bearing up, and the action, from the known bravery and conduct of the
 admirals and captains, would certainly be decisive; the second or third rear-
 ships of the enemy would act as they pleased, and our ships would givea good
 account of them, should they persist in mixing with our ships. The other
 mode would be, to stand under an easy but commanding sail, directly for their
 headmost ship, so as to prevent the enemy from knowing whether I should
 pass to leeward or to windward of him. In that situation, I would make the
 signal to engage the enemy to leeward, and to cut through their fleet about
 the sixth ship from the van, passing very close ; they being on a wind, you,
 going large, could cut their line when you please. The van-ships of the
  enemy would, by the time our rear came abreast of the van-ship, be severely
 cut up, and our van could not expect to escape damage. I would then have
  our rear-ship, and every ship in succession, wear, continue the action with
  either the van-ship or second-ship, as it might appear most eligible from her
  crippled state ; and, this mode pursued, I see nothing to prevent the capture
  of the five or six ships of the enemy’s van. The two or three ships of the
  enemy’s rear must either bear up or wear ; and, in either case, although they
  would be in a better plight probably than our two van-ships ( now the rear),
  yet they would be separated and at a distance to leeward, so as to give our
  ships time to refit ; and by that time, I believe, the battle would, from the
 judgment of the admirals and captains, be over with the rest of them. Signals
  from these moments are useless, when every man is disposed to do his duty.
 The great object is, for us to support each other, and to keep close to the
