                   NOTES TO ANNUAL ABSTRACTS.                            375
   b Late the Brave, French privateer; presented by the merchants of
Barbadoes to the British government, and on that account named Barbadoes.
   c These had been British merchant vessels,
   d Also these.
   e The Scorpion; built from the draught of the Cruiser. See vol. ii., p.
396, note Y*. The four British-built vessels, exclusive of these, in the “ Sea-
service” total, are the remnant of eight, built of fir in 1795, measuring about
369 tons each, and now nearly worn out. Considering the fine qualities of
the Cruiser, it is rather surprising that, during six years, three vessels only
should have been built from her draught. These were launched in 1798, and
were not brig, but ship rigged : consequently, they belong to class S. The
Osprey, Snake, and Victor, were, however, found fault with as ships ; and all
others from the same draught were thenceforward constructed as brigs. As a
man of war, a ship has a decided advantage, in action, over a brig. A ship
will lie to more closely, and, if she loses her mizenmast or spanker, has still
a trysail on the mainmast ; whereas, the moment a brig has her gaff or main
boom shot away, she loses the use of her boom mainsail, and is no longer
manageable. It may, however, be said on the behalf of brig-rigged vessels, that
many of their apparent faults arise from an improper mode of handling them.
   f These, also, had been British merchant vessels,
    e The hired vessels numbered about 34.



I

                    NOTES TO ABSTRACT No. 13.
   a The Hibernia ; ordered in 1790, and intended to be of the same tonnage
as the Ville-de-Paris, but afterwards lengthened eleven feet. Began building
November, 1792; launched November 17, 1804.
    b The Namur ; reduced from a 90 to a 74 gun-ship, under the direction of
Mr. Robert Seppings, the master-builder at Chatham. It having occurred
to the philosophic mind of this ingenious architect, that, by not removing the
solid bow in the wake of the second deck, in order to substitute the usual
flimsy fabric, called the beak-head, the ship would acquire additional strength
in that part of her frame, as well as afford some protection to her crew when
going end-on upon an enemy, the circular bow of the Namur was allowed to
remain. The advantages of this important alteration struck every one who
saw the ship when finished; and subsequently, as we shall hereafter have
occasion more fully to relate, every ship in the British navy was ordered to
be constructed with a solid circular bow instead of a beak-head.
    c Had been Indiamen, and were built of teak.
    d The same.
    e The two latest-built frigates of this class were launched in 1786, the
Aquilon of 724, and the Thames of 656 tons. As the ships in general were a
full third smaller than those of any French frigate-class, the class was con¬
sidered not worth keeping up until the year 1804, when some newly-dis¬
covered properties in the Thames at her breaking up caused seven frigates to
be laid down from her draught, one of old oak and named after herself, the
 remainder of fir. This was at a time, too, when scarcelya single 12-pounder
 frigate belonged to the French or any foreign navy. Frigates carrying 18-
 pounders were justly preferred, and, with the French in particular, were
rapidly increasing in number.
    f Had been a British merchant vessel; and so had every one of the 13
 ships next below her in the same column.
     e This will exemplify the exception to the generality of cases adverted to
 in note c to No. 11 Abstract*. According to the method adopted previously
 to the date of the latter, 41 built or launched gun-brigs would have been
