ing the Directors to take steps for carrying out the recommendations contained in Sir Charles Trevelyan's report. The Directors sent back word that they preferred leaving the matter to the Governor General of India; and this drew forth a short and sharp missive, with the signature of Mr. Sidney Herbert, then Secretary of the Board of Control, now Secretary at War, peremptorily desiring the Board to direct the Governor General to take measures for abolishing these duties. In the meantime Mr. Ross, 1310 a well-known civil servant of the Company, who happened to be Lieutenant Governor of the North-west Provinces, had taken upon himself, of his own mere motion, to abolish these tolls in his own government; and in consequence, Sir Charles Metcalfe, then acting as Governor General before the arrival of Lord Auckland, very strongly rebuked Mr. Ross for his presumption, but said he had no alternative but to follow his example, and abolish them in Bengal. The Court of Directors were very angry, but the work was done, and there was no help for it. In spite of all this, however, he found that the transit duties were not abolished in Bombay until 1839, nor in Madras till 1845; and yet the right hon. Gentleman at the head of the Board of Control could quote this as a signal example of good government on the part of the Company. He asked how the House could sufficiently condemn the machinery of a Government which did not abolish so frightful a nuisance till twenty years after it had been pointed out by Mr. Mackenzie, and then took four additional years to abolish it in Bombay, and ten additional years in Madras. The evil was greater than any which Turgot had to deal with in France, and which tasked the genius of Alberoni in Spain; and yet the Court of Directors succeeded for that length of time by mere vis inertiæ in thwarting a reform dictated by the statesmanlike liberality of Lord Ellenborough and Mr. Sidney Herbert; and it was very doubtful if it would have been achieved to this day but for the fortunate insubordination of a self-willed and refractory official. His great ground of objection to the East India Company was, that the direction of our Indian empire was vested in the hands of a private corporation, which had no more interest in the affairs of that empire than the Great Western Railway Company had. The right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Control declared that our Indian empire was an anomaly; but he (Mr. Blackett) denied that it was so unprecedented a case as to be removed from the ordinary rule of political experience. He feared the confession that the present system was an anomaly, was only a confession of cowardice in refusing to grapple thoroughly with the subject; and the right hon. Gentleman, when he made this avowal, only showed, not, indeed, his incompetence, but, at any rate, his reluctance, to rise to the height of the argument, and his 1311 indisposition to grapple with the subject as boldly as it required. If there was an anomaly anywhere, it lay at our own doors, and was to be found in our determination to govern 150,000,000 of Asiatics by a handful of officials, and to persist in administering the affairs of a great empire by the machinery of a joint-stock company. But the greatest anomaly of that government was displayed by the right hon. Gentleman (Sir C. Wood), who could discourse for five hours on a theme that was calculated to swell the heart with the strongest emotions, and coolly tell them at the close that they were going on as well there as they could possibly wish. The speech of the right hon. Baronet was filled with details respecting the good administration of the Company, and with lavish praises of the Directors; but the Directors would prefer a little solid pudding to all this empty praise. The right hon. Baronet had failed to discover any signs of the love and affection which he professed for the Indian Government. He said the Government was working well, but still he proposed to introduce six nominees in that Government. He expressed his approval of the Directors, yet he asked the House to suppress one-half of their number. If there was a statesman who entertained a great dislike for the East India Company, but was restrained by salutary fears from openly attacking it—"willing to wound, but yet afraid to strike"—he could not introduce a measure that was more calculated to unsettle the foundation of that Government. If he had the felicity to agree with the right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Control in the opinion he entertained respecting the Company, he had also the felicity to agree with the Company in its opinion of the Board of Control. They had heard the speech of the hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton, and they had never heard a fuller or more able statement; but he did not say one word in praise of any single alteration that had been recommended by the President of the Board of Control. He did not express any very hearty welcome for the six Government gentlemen who were to be invited to join them, or for the change that would take all the civil patronage from them; he did not express his intention to share in the great suttee which the President of the Board of Control had invited the Directors to celebrate in Leadenhall Street, or offer his thanks for the 4 l. a 1312 week which the right hon. Baronet coolly offered him in return for his patronage. Taking the measure of the President of the Board of Control, and the speech of the hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton, he could not think the two parts of the double government would go on happily together. He agreed with the President of the Board of Control that the Company had too much power; and he said so from the way they had exercised their absolute and undivided power in the department of patronage. He could not help thinking that the hon. Baronet's opinion of the East India Company was, at the bottom, very much the same as his own. On the other hand, he had observed that the hon. Baronet (Sir J. W. Hogg) had not said one word in praise of the Government Bill, and that he did not admit the propriety of one single alteration recommended by the right hon. Gentleman. Now, first, he wished to say a few words as to the constitution of the Board of Directors, who exercised this patronage. If four gentlemen could be pointed out, who, by their eminent services in India, and their high character, were qualified to fill the post of East India Directors with honour, they were Mr. Willoughby, who had been a member of their Council in Bengal; Sir II. Haddock, the hon. Member for Rochester, who had been Deputy Governor of Bengal, and President of the Council; Mr. Millet, who had been a member of the Law Commission and of the Supreme Council; and Mr. Wilberforce Bird, who had been a member of the Supreme Council, five times Deputy Governor of Bengal, and once Governor General. These gentlemen stated before the Select Committee that-they would gladly have placed their services at the disposal of the Company, but that they were deterred from soliciting seats in the Direction by the intolerable humiliation of canvassing such a body as the proprietors. At the last election of a Director, it would have been expected that if anything could have induced them to make a change in their system, they would have done so; but at the last election, a few weeks ago, Mr. Carnac Morris, an East Indian civil servant of thirty years' standing, was rejected in favour of an hon. friend of his (Mr. Blackett), of whom he would be the last person to say anything unkind or disrespectful; but it must be allowed that the result of that election was calculated to show that official services 1313 were not a great recommendation to the favour of the proprietors. Great expectations were held out when the last Charter? was granted as to the mode in which the Indian civil service would be administered. Mr. Macaulay, in 1833, said— One word as to the new arrangement which we propose with respect to patronage. It is intended to introduce the principle of competition in the disposal of writerships, and from this change I cannot but anticipate the happiest results. …It is proposed that for every vacancy in the civil service four candidates shall he named, and the host candidate be selected by examination. We conceive that under this system the persons sent out will be young men above par—young men superior either in talents or in diligence to the mass."—[3 Hansard, xix. 524–25.] He would say nothing respecting the talents or intelligence of the young men that had been sent out, but he would ask, did the House know how the clause on that subject in the Act of Parliament had been carried out? It was deliberately violated year after year for four years; and at length, in 1837, a short Bill was smuggled through Parliament, permitting the Directors to suspend the provisions which they had broken up to that time whenever they found it convenient. It was mainly on the faith of that provision that the Company had obtained a renewal of the last Charter; and it was rumoured, in reference to this important provision and its repeal, that not one single scrap of correspondence existed between the Board of Control and the India House, and it was said that the matter was arranged by private conversation between the Chairman of the East India Company and the President of the Board of Control. The most important point with regard to the exercise of patronage had reference to the promotion of the native Indians. For the purpose of showing the description of office to which the Directors were pledged to introduce Natives of India, he would read an extract from a statement made by the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Edinburgh (Mr. Macaulay). That right hon. Gentleman said, in 1833— There is one part of the Bill on which I feel myself irresistibly compelled to say a few words. I allude to that wise, that beneficent, that noble clause, which enacts that no native of our Indian empire shall, by reason of his colour, his descent, or his religion, be incapable of holding office. At the risk of being called by that nickname which is regarded as being the most opprobrious of all nicknames by men of selfish hearts and contracted minds—at the risk of being called a philosopher— I must say, that to the last day of my life I shall be proud of having been one of those who have 1314 assisted in the framing of the Bill which contains that clause. We are told that the time can never come when the natives of India can be admitted to high civil and military office. We are told that we are bound to confer on our subjects— every benefit which they are capable of enjoying? no—which it is in our power to confer upon them? no—but which we can confer upon them without hazard to our own domination. Against that proposition I solemnly protest, as inconsistent with sound policy and sound morality.…. Are we to keep the people of India ignorant in order that we may keep them submissive? or do we think that we can give them knowledge without awakening ambition? or do we mean to awaken ambition, and to provide it with no legitimate vent? Who will answer any of these questions in the affirmative? Yet one of them must be answered in the affirmative by every one who thinks that we ought permanently to exclude the natives of India from high office."—[3 Hansard, xix. 534–35–36.] —Not from subordinate office, but from high office; and he believed that Lord Glenelg, in answer to a question put to him, stated that there was nothing in the clause alluded to by Mr. Macaulay to prevent a native of India from being made a member of the Supreme Council. Of course he (Mr. Blackett) did not say that Lord Glenelg pledged himself to appoint them to such offices; but the answer given by him showed the spirit in which the House of Commons expected the Court of Directors would act upon that clause. The hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton had charged his hon. Friend 