---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1853/jun/09/government-of-india-adjourned-debate"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1853/jun/09/government-of-india-adjourned-debate"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "251b082e141d2fb2bbf1cfe52400829ff80c83cc1e616ad592817f332368f082"
title: "GOVERNMENT OF INDIA\u2014ADJOURNED DEBATE. (Hansard, 9 June 1853)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA—ADJOURNED DEBATE. (Hansard, 9 June 1853)

# GOVERNMENT OF INDIA—ADJOURNED DEBATE.

HC Deb 09 June 1853 vol 127 cc1300-52 1300

 § Order read for resuming adjourned Debate on Question [3d June], "That leave be given to bring in a Bill to provide for the Government of India;" 

 § Question again proposed. 

 § Debate resumed. 

> MR. BLACKETT
> 
> said, that he felt the disadvantage of following on this occasion the able speech of the hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton (Sir J. W. Hogg), who had accurately described the position of several hon. Members, when he said they had parcelled out among themselves the various counts of the indictment against the East India Company; though he must say that, able as that speech unquestionably was, it had entirely failed to shake the case against the Company which had been made by the hon. Member for Manchester (Mr. Bright), and for Tavistock (Mr. Phillimore). He quite coincided, indeed, in one feeling which was expressed by the hon. Baronet towards the close of his speech—the desire that every possible information should be furnished to the public in connexion with the affairs of India. Having expressed that wish, he (Mr. Blackett) hoped the hon. Baronet would join with him in urging the strong complaints which, he thought, they had a right to make with respect to the very meagre information which Her Majesty's Government had laid before them. The 114th clause of the East India Company's Charter Act provided that the Indian accounts should be laid before Parliament within the first fourteen sitting days after the 1st of May. His hon. Friend the Secretary for the Treasury (Mr. Wilson), however, told him a few nights ago that for many years it had been found impossible to comply with that provision: that was, he admitted that for many years the East India Company had been in the habit of deliberately violating this Act— 

> § SIR CHARLES WOOD
> 
> remarked that 1301 these accounts had been laid upon the table in the present year within the prescribed time. 

> MR. BLACKETT
> 
> said, that he had then great fault to find with his hon. Friend the Secretary for the Treasury, who told him that it was impossible to comply with the provisions of the Charter Act. The hon. Baronet (Sir J. W. Hogg) disclaimed any wish on the part of the East India Company to keep back accounts or documents; but it was nevertheless a fact that certain accounts for the year 1852, to which Mr. Kaye had had access whilst writing his book, had not been laid on the table; and he thought they had a right to complain that the information which was given to the advocate of the Company, was not furnished to the House. Judging, however, from the documents which had been given to Members, the hon. Member for Manchester had not had much encouragement to proceed with his inquiries. It required much charity to suppose that the obscurity and mystification of the voluminous appendix to the second Report was quite unintentional. At page 320, Appendix 2, of the Commons Report of 1852, they had what purported to be the cost of the Indian home establishment. There were eight columns of figures, not one of them added up; the reason for which omission became very plain when they found that the total was 189,477 L. 7 s. 3 d. From page 320 they must go back to page 294 to find the contingent expenses, law charges, and salaries of directors. Then they must go forwards to page 344 for the expenses of the India Board, and to 431 for the item of 4,039L for house dinners and entertainments. He was not, surprised to find this item in such well-chosen obscurity. At page 343 they were promised, according to the index, a statement of Natives as distinguished from the Indo-Britons in the Company's service, but no statement at all of Indo-Britons was given. At page 376 they had what purported to be a classified statement of local officers, covenanted and uncovenanted, in the North-west provinces; they had three tables, and only in the first of them was any distinction attempted; and, as to their salaries, the matter was kept secret by the ingenious device of giving no initial letters significant of the coin to which the numeral referred, till the mention of rupees at the foot of the page let them see that this highly satisfactory account had been kept in two separate currencies. No statement was anywhere given 1302 of the number and pay of the covenanted service. The House would admit that was not very satisfactory. His main objection to the Bill which the right hon. Baronet (Sir C. Wood) had asked leave to introduce, rested upon the strong opinion which he entertained against the East India Company being in any degree retained as an organ for the administration of the affairs of India; and he freely admitted that no objection of a less vital character would have justified the House in the very unusual course of debating a Motion for leave to introduce a Bill. He had listened attentively to the speeches of the right hon. Baronet (Sir C. Wood), and of the hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton (Sir J. W. Hogg), in the hope of learning from them what extraordinary familiarity with the affairs of India the present Parliament was supposed to possess over those which preceded it, that it should be able to legislate upon them without being in possession of that information which every former Parliament had thought necessary. A Committee of that House was appointed as early as 1808, in anticipation of the renewal of the Charter Act, which was to take place in 1813; and in February, 1830, the same course was pursued in anticipation of the renewal in 1833; but, in the present instance, the Committee of each House of Parliament was only nominated in the May of last year, and he confessed he did not know what peculiar resources they possessed to perform a task for which former Parliaments thought five years' and three years' previous inquiry not too much. He was, indeed, well aware of the difficulty into which the Government were driven by the expiration of the Charter Act next April; but he must take leave to remind the House on whose shoulders the blame of this rested:—this difficulty would not have arisen had Sir John Hobhouse, who was President of the Board of Control in 1851, complied with the suggestion of the noble Lord the Member for King's Lynn (Lord Jocelyn), to appoint these Committees in the spring of that year. Sir John Hobhouse stated that he contemplated no change; but the political vicissitudes which had since occurred might have satisfied him that change did not depend solely on his will. He could not leave this part of the subject without noticing the point which had been urged at the beginning of the Session by the noble Lord the Member for the City of London (Lord John Russell), and which had been since repeated by the President of the Board of 1303 Control (Sir Charles Wood), and the hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton (Sir J. W. Hogg), with respect to the great danger that would arise from leaving this question open to agitation, as tending to shake the Company in the eyes of the Natives. He did not see how there would be a greater danger of agitation if they passed a continuance Bill for two or three years, than if they passed this Bill, which Parliament, if it pleased, might alter and remodel next Session. The right hon. Baronet said, indeed, it would shake what he called the "superstitious reverence" which the Natives entertained for the permanence of the English Government in India. After the answer of the right hon. Baronet the President of the Board of Control that night, that he would not lay on the table the information given to him by Lord Dalhousie, it was impossible for the House to calculate the extent of that danger; but he could refer to such authorities as they had, and he asked the right hon. Baronet if much longer deliberations than any which the opponents of this measure now asked for had not frequently taken place on Indian subjects, and that, too, at times when our empire was much more insecure than at present, without the least shock being given to the stability of our rule over that great continent? If the right hon. Baronet would turn to the renewal of the Charter in 1793, and take the years preceding, he would find they had had a Committee on the subject in 1781, Dundas's Bill in 1782, Fox's Bill in 1783, Pitt's Bill in 1784, a Bill to amend Pitt's Bill in 1786, the famous Declaratory Act in 1788, till the Charter was renewed, with, he was proud to say, the opposition of the whole Whig party in 1793. We occupied barely one-sixth of the territory now under our control; the whole strength of the Mahratta empire was watching its opportunity; the Nizam, with a well-officered and well-equipped army, was on one side of us; and Tippoo Saib, with all the power inherited from his father, Hyder Ali, was ready to pounce upon us on the other; and yet there was not the least feeling of fear for our Indian empire. On the next occasion, when the subject was under discussion—previous to the renewal of the Charter in 1813—they had had a stormy and turbulent deliberation of no less a period than three years in a time of no ordinary moment. The French were seeking to re cover their supremacy in India. We had to deal with the gathering germs which afterwards produced the wars with the Mahrat- 1304 tas, the Pindarees, and the Nepaulese; and yet not a finger was raised against our empire in consequence of these debates. Next time—in 1833—we undertook changes greater than any made before, both in the character and position of the Company; we threw open the trade to China, and transformed the entire character of the East India Company—in fact, it was impossible to do anything more likely to excite suspicion in India that we were going to overthrow the Company. At that time there were hostile tribes dwelling in the Punjaub and the Indus; we had also the Russian intrigues, which, whatever they might think of it now, were then considered sufficient to justify the war with Affghanistan; yet no convulsion took place. Only let the House contrast these periods with the circumstances in which the House had now to deal with this question. It was the first and only occasion in which they had not an enemy in India. From the Himalayas to the sea, India Was enclosed in the ring fence of our power, and the magnificent hyperbole of Burke was now but the expression of a literal fact, "that there is not a peasant in the whole Peninsula who eats his rice without the leave of the East India Company." The chieftains of Poonah, who once would have leaped into the saddle at the head of their bands of freebooters to avenge any imaginary insult we might have offered to them, had now fallen into the practices of constitutional governments, and were absolutely presenting their humble petitions to this House, Well, the greater the security and peace which existed throughout India at this moment, the greater the responsibility which rested upon this Government for approaching the consideration of the future government of India with due calmness and after due deliberation. The hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton (Sir J. W. Hogg) had made a great impression on the House by his statement of the valuable exertions of the East India Company and their gallant officers in subduing savage tribes and spreading civilisation in India. He listened to that statement with the greatest respect and attention; but it only proved on the part of the East India Company what might be proved 