ce, the decision of the latter was regularly appealed against, and in most cases reversed; but when they happened to be on the very best terms, the appeal was almost a farce; but in both cases the interests of the country suffered. And this was the government which was to be continued without alteration by the President of the Board of Control. One might go on quoting for ever in reference to the failings of the East India Company, for every part of their administration seemed equally bad. The statements made as to the general ill condition of the Indian population had been disputed; and he would recall to the recollection of the House how, in like manner during the discussions on the Corn Bill, the wretched state of the agricultural labourer in England, living on 7 s. a week, was denied. The fact was, that when men's interests were concerned, it was unsafe to take them as witnesses. But the India Committee had heard witnesses of no other character, and the evidence of Mr. Sullivan was rejected a few months ago because his opinion was known to be adverse to the Company. He had heard of witnesses leaving the Committee with indignation, and with their opinion of public men lowered, because questions which seemed likely to turn against the Company were not put to them. A friend of his engaged in commercial transactions had informed him that money in the limits of the Supreme Court was to be had at 5 or 6 per cent, but that out of those limits, and the moment the Company's jurisdiction began, the interest was 12 or 14 per cent. These were facts, and the right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Control might have made himself acquainted with them if he had liked; but he did not choose to bring forward anything except what was favourable to the East India Company. It was well known that the noble Lord the Member for London determined two years ago to continue the Company without any inquiry at all, and it was only in consequence 1334 of the questions of the noble Lord the Member for King's Lynn (Lord Stanley) that he consented to the appointment of a Committee. It was the fashion to sneer at the hon. Member for Manchester for the pains he had taken to inform himself on this subject, and to look at the hon. Member as a discontented Radical, who sought nothing but the subversion of established authorities. But that was not the light in which the hon. Member was regarded by the late Sir Robert Peel. That statesman knowing the interest and the information acquired on the Indian question by his hon. Friend, had the good sense frequently to consult his hon. Friend; and yet he was excluded from sitting on the Indian Committee. The Members of that Committee were for the most part safe men, on whom the Government could rely. The Bill was not likely to be palatable in India, any more than it was palatable in this country, where of the metropolitan press only two newspapers, the Globe and the Morning Chronicle, approved of it. Ever since the East India Company had become possessed of India, their government had been one continued system of maladministration: and as the noble Lord, on a previous occasion, said that India had been well governed for seventy years, he begged to read the following quotation from Mr. Macaulay, Life of Olive, in reference to Bengal:— The misgovernment of the English was carried to a point such as seemed hardly compatible with the existence of society. They forced the natives to buy dear and sell cheap. They insulted with impunity the tribunals, the police, and the fiscal authorities of the country. Enormous fortunes were thus rapidly accumulated at Calcutta, while 30,000,000 of human beings were reduced to the extremity of wretchedness. They had been accustomed to live under tyranny, but never under tyranny like this. They found the little finger of the Company thicker than Surajah Dowlah's loins. Under their old masters they had at least one resource;— when the evil became insupportable the people rose, and pulled down the Government. But the English Government was not to be so shaken off. That Government, oppressive as the most oppressive form of barbarian despotism, was strong with all the strength of civilisation. It resembled the government of evil genii rather than the government of human tyrants. That was in 1763. Nevertheless, he would presently come to more recent information; and he would read an account which particularly applied to the present day, because the Indian civil service still remained, and India was exploited for the sake of 800 sons, nephews, and relations of the Directors. [The hon. Gentleman 1335 here quoted a passage from Burke, to the effect that the English in India were nothing but a nation of placemen; and that the fundamental principle of the whole of the East India Company's system was monopoly in some sense or other. Referring to later authority, the hon. Member quoted an extract from Kaye's History, in which that writer observed that the servants of the Company for nearly two centuries had regarded the natives of India as so many dark-faced and dark-souled Gentiles, whom it was their mission to overreach in business, and overcome in war.] That was a pretty picture of this paternal Government! There was a circumstance noticed in Mr. Kaye's book which showed the estimation in which the English were held by nations in India not under our rule. That writer stated that there was a race in India who worshipped devils, among whom was an Englishman, and upon his altar they offered spirits and cigars. Mr. Shore, who was referred to as a high authority both by Mr. Mill and Dr. Wilson, writing in 1834, stated that there had been a diminution of the kindly feeling between the natives and the English, and he said that the chief object of the British administration appeared to have been the exaltation of the few upon the depression of the many. The hon. Gentleman quoted from Mr. Shore passages in which the exclusion, as far as possible, of natives from all share in the government, and the idea that the natives were not fit to be trusted, and were almost incapable of performing any but the most inferior duties —an idea arising out of the desire of sending as much money as possible to England, and consequently of not employing natives of respectability, to whom it would be necessary to give a liberal salary, was spoken of, and Mr. Shore said that the reason why the Company kept things so secret was, that they dreaded exposure, well knowing that if the people of England were aware of their proceedings, they would not sanction them for a single day. That was the account Mr. Shore gave some time ago; and as to the present system of the Government, and the necessity of altering that which the right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Control thought such perfection, there was an excellent observation recently made by a very talented writer, Mr. Chapman, who said— The Government of India is like a splendid team, every horse excellent, but altogether so abominably harnessed as to be deprived of half 1336 its strength; insomuch, indeed, as hardly to be able to draw home even the harvest on which it is itself to live. And he said, speaking of the Government of India, after an eloquent passage about its being nothing but paper, paper, paper, which was a check on the improvement of the soil of India— Vast heaps of humanity, festering in compulsory idleness, encumber the soil of India.…Idle India, let alone, may change in time to a mountain of gunpowder, which any wild spark may ignite.…Idle India, set to work, would be our treasure, our glory, our inseparable friend. Several things had been asked, but no answer had ever been made to anything brought forward against the Company. Now, he wanted to know whether Mr. Kaye's book had been paid for directly or indirectly out of the funds of the Company—that was, out of the taxes of the people of India?—for there was a rumour to that effect. There was a gentleman— Mr. Mountstewart Elphinstone—who wrote an excellent history of India. He afterwards wrote a continuation of that history, which lay now in his closet finished, but not published; and what was the reason? He could not vouch for the fact himself; but the reason, as reported, was, that the East India Company having heard that it was not so favourable to them and their views as they could have wished, employed another gentleman (Mr. Thornton), whoso name had never been heard of before, to write a history of India, which was thrown into the market in anticipation of Mr. El-phinstone's work, at the expense of the Company, and to be disseminated throughout England and India to prevent Mr. Elphinstone's history from being read. It was stated that the Company expended 7,000 l.. in disseminating that work, which was so bad that it was now a drug in the market. In consequence of this the public was deprived of the satisfaction of having the continuation of Mr. Elphinstone's work, because he was a poor man, and could not afford to publish his history at a loss. Such was the mode in which the patronage of the Company was distributed, and such was the way in which the money of the natives of India was spent—namely, in getting up and diffusing works at their expense for their calumniation. He might go on to quote instance after instance of the like character, but he would forbear. He thought the House of Commons had never been condemned to hear so low a 1337 tone taken on Indian affairs as that which was taken by the right hon. Gentleman. Nothing was said by the right hon. Gentleman of the 100,000,000 of persons affected by this legislation;—he looked at it as if the only interests concerned were the House of Commons, and the single room of the Board of Control, and as if everything that did not concern these was totally foreign to his office. When he contrasted the speech of the right hon. Gentleman with the high moral tone of Lord Glenelg in 1833, he felt ashamed of the difference. [Sir CHARLES WOOD: I am much obliged to you.] The right hon. Gentleman need not feel under any obligation to him; for the present was an occasion on which he felt bound to state facts, and he could not help contrasting the material tone adopted by the right hon. Gentleman when he addressed the House, with the enlightened spirit which animated Lord Glenelg, whose mind seemed filled with those noble aspirations which sprang from an enlightened Christianity, and who expressed a hope that the gates of that country which had fallen into our hands by the gift of Providence as was said—though he (Mr. Seymour) was afraid not a little by our crimes—would be opened, and the Natives and Englishmen might unite together in exalting those vast seats of civilisation, where the human race might be as happy as they were in the infancy of the world. But the right hon. Gentleman never went through any such question in his speech; and, if time allowed, he (Mr. Seymour) could show that hardly did the right hon. Gentleman observe upon anything that had been said by preceding speakers without misrepresenting it. The case of Mr. Kaye, referred to by his hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, the right hon. Gentleman had totally misrepresented—of course unintentionally, and he seemed disposed to turn everything into a sneer; and, although one hon. Gentleman said his hon. Friend had made up his speech of scraps and patches, taken from magazines and newspapers, yet his hon. Friend had not quoted so many as the right hon. Gentleman; and, moreover, he had always quoted the highest authority, such as Mr. Campbell, Mr. Kaye, Mr. Cameron, the Friend of India, and the evidence taken before the Indian Cotton Committee. As to the state of the law, too, in India, what would be thought of the state of the law in this country if the hon. and learned Member for Southampton could write such a passage as this—that "through the 1338 length and breadth of India those who occupied the judicial bench were tota