

> § MR. BRIGHT
> 
> explained, that he had said he preferred nominees only without elected members; but that it would be unfortunate to have a Council entirely composed of persons who had resided in India. 

> § MR. T. BARING
> 
> was glad to find the hon. Member had discovered that bankers and brewers, "and persons of that sort," were not as bad as he had once supposed them to be. It was gratifying to find that the hon. Member agreed with him in thinking there would be no wisdom in forming an administration from one class. Many persons would hesitate before giving in their adhesion to a government of lawyers; exception might even be taken to a mercantile administration; and, with due deference to the hon. Member for Manchester, he must express a doubt whether a cotton-spinners' administration would obtain general confidence. Persons who served in India for a considerable period usually returned with certain fixed ideas. They might have great knowledge of Indian, matters, but they lacked the knowledge which was essential in such a council—namely, of English affairs and English feelings—and sound sense, which could be acquired only by contact with English society and bodies of intelligent men in this country. If we were about to constitute the East India Company's electoral body, it, doubtless, would be possible to improve it; but, at any rate, it was not swayed by 1323 one political feeling, and was not under the influence of the Crown. The system of canvassing was probably objectionable, and might, perhaps, be discontinued with propriety; but this might be looked upon as certain—that when a man came forward as a candidate for the directorship—however defective his qualifications might be in other respects—his integrity was untainted, and his honour unstained. He was not there either to defend the East India Company, or to bring charges against it. It must be acknowledged that in some respects the country had reason to complain of the Indian Administration. There appeared to have been unnecessary delay in providing a code of laws for India. Then, the judicial administration had not undergone the improvement of which it was susceptible. Public works also should have received greater attention. Still, it must be recollected that these objections were fairly met by the answer, "Look at our revenue." How had the revenue been spent? In war. It could not be said that the Indian wars were always undertaken at the wish of the Company, nor that they would be less frequent if the Company should be deprived of all power and influence. A word with respect to the distribution of patronage. There might be individual cases of abuse; but it was impossible for any one who had sat on the Indian Committee, or read the evidence given before it, to deny that the patronage of the Company generally had been bestowed on a body of men of whom any country might be proud. To his mind the system which produced these men, which placed them in these offices, and which subsequently listened willingly to the severe criticisms which they passed upon it, could not be the worst in the world. No doubt, there were defects in the system. The judicial business was not administered in a way to please an intelligent Englishman; but an intelligent Indian would have little difficulty in pointing out defects in our judicial system, and it might be asked whether the reforms which had been made in our system of justice dated from a very remote period. We complained of anomalies in the Indian Government; but surely a native could easily refer to what he might think anomalies here. Would he not hold up his hands in amazement at our Government of three powers, at the veto which was never used, and the rejection by one branch of the Legislature of a measure which had passed triumphantly through the other? If a Native, struck by these 1324 apparent anomalies, should say to Us, "You must get rid of all these things before you effect any improvement in your laws and the administration of justice," the law reformer would reply, "No; let us apply practical remedies to acknowledged evils—let us reform, not revolutionise—let us satisfy the real wants of the country at the risk of leaving ungratified the ephemeral wishes of a passing agitation." Apply the same rule to India. Improvement was what he desired, but he thought it would be attained with more safety and assurance through the agency of the existing machinery than by commencing operations by revolutionising the whole Government. He felt strongly that the existing machinery was best calculated to develop the resources of India, to improve the condition of the people, and to retain the country in connexion with the British Crown. Among all his differences with the hon. Member for Manchester, there was one point on which he was happy to agree with him—namely, that this was no question between Manchester and Essex, or between the Church and Nonconformity. Let it be hoped also that it would not become a question between parties. The point at issue was one of too great importance to be made a theme of party contention; and if he had on this occasion spoken with more decision than, perhaps, he was justified in doing, it was because he felt strongly on the subject. In listening to the able officers of the Company who had given evidence before the Committee, he had become fully sensible of his own ignorance; but he had derived yet another lesson from the same source—he had learnt the importance of caution in making changes in India, and, above all, the necessity of preserving this great question from the blasting influence of party triumph, for party objects. 