with stating that no native of India had ever been made a judge; but he misunderstood his hon. Friend, for no man in his senses could say that: the question was what kind of judge he was made, and the hon. Baronet had evaded the charges which his hon. Friend made on that point. They were told that 96 per cent of the cases were disposed of by native judges, and that was true; and in the debate in 1851 the hon. Baronet had expressed his pride and satisfaction on the subject; and his pride and satisfaction would be indefinitely increased when he heard the quotation he was about to make from the statement of Colonel Sykes. Colonel Sykes had drawn up a paper on the administration of justice by English and natives, from which it appeared that in the Presidency of Bombay, from 1845 to 1848, the total number of cases decided were 366,968, of which 6½ per cent were decided by European judges, and 93½ by native judges. Of these no less than 663 per cent of the decisions of the European judges were reversed on appeal, and only 5.4 per cent of those of the native judges. In the North-western provinces the total 1315 number of cases was 431,679. The European judges did 5½ per cent of the work, and the natives 94.14; of these there were reversed on appeal from the European judges 79 per cent of the cases appealed against, and from the native judges 27.2 per cent. With regard to the remuneration of the covenanted and uncovenanted service, he found in the appendix to a report of the House of Commons a statement that in all India only 216 natives held office of a value exceeding 360 l. a year, while in the single province of Bengal, it was stated by Mr. Sullivan, a gentleman of the highest probity, that 327 Europeans held offices varying in value from 600 1. to 25,000 l.. a year, Mr. Cameron, in his great work on India, speaking of Clause 87 of the Charter Act, said— The present Charter Act has now been in force for 16 years, or four-fifths of its term, and no single native of India has been appointed to any of the covenanted services; the consequence is that the promise of the Charter Act is regarded by the natives of India as a mockery. It was not so intended by those who framed the Act. It should be recollected that that was not his (Mr. Blackett's) language, and that it was not young India declamation, but the opinion of a man who knew India well, and had known it long. The hon. Baronet said that even though they should admit them to the civil service, they should exclude them from the military service; but great masters of the art of war, like the Duke of Wellington and Sir Charles Napier, held the contrary opinion, and Sir C. Napier liberally promoted Beloochee gentleman to the command of native corps of cavalry, in which he confessed one of his greatest securities rested. But the civil and military services were not the only branches of the covenanted service of India to which the natives wished to obtain access. In 1844 Dwarkanauth Tagore sent over some native young men of ability to be educated in England, so that they might be competent to hold office in India. One of them, Mr. (afterwards Dr.)Chuckerbutty, attained the highest distinction as a medical student in this country; and Mr. Cameron and Sir E. Ryan addressed a letter to the Court of Directors requesting them to nominate him to a situation in the covenanted medical service. One might have supposed, remembering the liberal views of Parliament on this subject, that the Directors would have gladly availed themselves of this loophole to show the natives of India that they were not permanently ex- 1316 cluded from office, when no serious inconvenience could be expected to result from their appointment. The Court of Directors evaded giving a reply to the application to appoint Dr. Chuckerbutty to the covenanted service; but they sent back word that they had appointed him to a situation of equal if not superior value in the uncove-nanted service—showing that nothing but the direct compulsion of Parliament could force them to carry out the solemn trust that had been reposed in them. They were told, as a justification of this conduct, that, after all, the main body of the people was happy, and that it was only the native gentlemen who were excluded from office; but that was exactly the sort of argument which they repeatedly heard when the Catholic disabilities were discussed. The case of a gentleman in Calcutta had been cited, who was disliked by his countrymen because he was selected as the recipient of English patronage. He knew nothing of this unfortunate case of the gentleman in Calcutta—he could not say if he had any scruples to swallow, or antecedents to efface; but he understood that some of the Irish officials were not very popular with their own countrymen, and he did not expect to hear such a circumstance quoted as a reason for excluding Catholics from office. If the people were happy under the Government of India, it would be no reason for excluding the higher classes from office; but he denied they were perfectly happy. The lower classes of Hindoos certainly enjoyed the blessings of equal justice, as between them and the superiors of their own class in the English provinces, and escaped the barbarous mutilations to which they might have been exposed by the Mahomedan law; but he believed the English civil law was at present as vexations in India, on account of its delays, as it was at the time of Warren Hastings. It had been said that the natives of India enjoyed the blessing of being under the protection of English law; but was it no drawback that that law was administered by people differing from them in feeling and in custom? There was more similarity of habit between the Frenchman and the Englishman than between the Englishman and the Hindoo, and the Code Napoleon was in many respects more simple than the English law; but enjoyment of the blessings of that law would scarcely reconcile Englishmen to a Frenchman's rule. We were charged to form India after our own image; and surely we might think of training up 1317 the native youth to something like that spirit of emulation which animated our own Englishmen, But the natives of India had been led to consider themselves excluded from any practical share in the government of the country, and instead of having been trained up to emulate and compete with the Europeans, they were naturally induced to regard them with some degree of jealousy. He would read to the House a statement which was made to the Court of Proprietors by Colonel Sykes on the 25th of April, 1849, which would explain partly how such a feeling on the part of the Natives had originated. Colonel Sykes said— I state honestly and sincerely my conviction that it is most dangerous, with reference to our power and even financial prosperity in India, by our constant appropriations and resumptions of enams and rent-free lands, to lead the people at large to fear that we are really only anxious to make a government of officials on the one hand, and a nation of serfs on the other. Another eminent authority, Sir Thomas Monro, had expressed a similar opinion, and in a letter, bearing date August 12, 1807, he stated that— The strength of the British Government enables it to give to its subjects a degree of protection which those of no native Power enjoy. Its laws and institutions also afford them a security from domestic oppression unknown in those States; but these advantages are dearly bought. They are purchased by the sacrifice of independence, of national character, and of whatever renders a people respectable. The natives of the British provinces may without fear pursue their different occupations and enjoy the fruits of their labour in tranquillity; but none of them can aspire to anything beyond this mere animal state of thriving in peace; none of them can look forward to any share in the legislation or civil or military government of their country. The effect of this state of things is observable in all the British provinces, the inhabitants of which are certainly the most abject race in India. There is, perhaps, no example of any conquest in which the natives have been so completely excluded from all share of the government of their country as in British India. The point to which he particularly wished to call the attention of the House was the manner in which the East India Company had distributed its patronage, because it had in that respect used its own discretion without any limit or control, and it was upon that alone that it could found any claim for a renewal of the confidence which had been reposed in it. He had, he believed, shown that this vast prerogative had been exercised by the Directors in a manner most calculated to benefit their own family connexions, and least calculated to economise the resources of this country, or 1318 to strengthen the attachment of the natives' to the English rule. He had shown, first, by the abolition of the clause in the Charter Act which had reference to competition for writerships, and, secondly, by the system of excluding natives from covenanted office, that they had deliberately betrayed the; trust reposed in them by the Parliament of 1833, and broken the engagement upon; which they permitted the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Edinburgh to ask for a renewal of their last lease of power. He was told the privileges of the Directors were limited by this Bill; but surely it was not enough to withdraw the mere possession of the patronage which they had shown themselves so grossly to have misapplied. Surely it would be intolerable that the administration of the humblest native village should be left to the discretion of men who had shown themselves incapable of distributing a few writerships a year without yielding to such melancholy and humiliating temptations. Those were the main-grounds on which he objected to the Bill. He objected to it because it combined the contradictory disadvantages of precipitancy and delay, and because it continued the system of double government, which, under the pretence of multiplying checks, only succeeded in neutralising responsibility; but most of all did he object to it because it continued the East India Company as the prominent organ of the Government of India. And he would say, in conclusion, be the share of influence which that Company might be permitted to retain great or small, he was convinced that its continuance could only tend to retard progress, to foster nepotism, and to impede the elevation of the Indian races into a community of which England and Englishmen could have any reason to be proud. 