

> § SIR HERBERT MADDOCK
> 
> said, that notwithstanding the arguments which had been urged, and the high authorities that had been cited, he had heard nothing that had shaken the conviction he had formerly expressed, that it would be more advisable to postpone legislation on India, at least until next year, than to pass such a measure as the right hon. Gentleman had proposed. From communications he had had with persons connected with India, especially with the British Association of India in Calcutta, in reference to the appointment of a fit person as their agent to promote their views, he satisfied himself upon this point—that there was no expectation 1325 amongst the intelligent part of the community that there would be another Act passed for India during the present Session. The delay, so far from being dangerous, would have shown the people of India that the Legislature was disposed to proceed in this important matter with due deliberation. He would not, for himself, however, make any objection to the introduction of the Bill proposed by the Government, although he entertained some strong objections to many of its provisions. He was decidedly opposed to the system of a double government; notwithstanding all that he had heard in favour of the system of a double government; he was of opinion that by means of sufficient inquiry and consideration some plan might have been arranged which would have enabled the House to have avoided the necessity of that form of government. This point, however, not having been gained, he was bound to confess that the Bill now proposed to be introduced contained many points of improvement upon the existing system. The principal point which he wished to impress upon the House was, that even though it might be admitted that the name of the East India Company was to be continued, and that the proprietors of the East India Stock were still to be allowed to elect a certain proportion of the Directors, still, it was not proper or just that India should continue to be governed in the name of that Company. Every witness who had been examined on that point before the Committee had expressed himself of opinion that justice should hereafter in India be administered directly in the name of the Crown; and it would not be compatible with such a state of things that the Governor General should carry on the administration in the name of the East India Company. He disapproved of the continuance of the distinction between the civil and military services of the Crown and of the Company. It was true that the military servants of the East India Company received their commission from the Crown; but this was done only for the sake of convenience, in order to fix their relative rank, when serving in the field or at court-martial, with the officers of the Queen's army; and while he admitted that in the military service the rewards were distributed with equal liberality to both services, still in the civil service it had so happened that since the institution of the civil class of the Order of the Bath, only two of its members 1326 had been considered worthy of the consideration of the Crown. Hitherto no evil had resulted from governing the country in the name of the East India Company, in consequence of the absolute ignorance which had prevailed among the Natives of India as to the position and power of that body. There was something of the igno tum in magnifico connected with it. The discussions, however, which had recently taken place had rent asunder the veil which had shielded the real position of the Company from the public eye, and it was not now to be conceived that the people of India, who considered themselves the subjects of the Queen, would in future consent to be in subjection to a Company which possessed no real power. It was now high time, for many reasons, for the Crown to be directly represented in India. Among other reasons, he believed that the fidelity of the troops could not long be relied upon if they were to consider themselves merely as being subjected to the East India Company. The failures in the administration of justice, and in other matters which had been referred to, might, he believed, be attributed at times to the conduct of the Company, and at others to that of the Crown, while some of the most illustrious names connected with India, including those of Cornwallis and Monro, were associated with the greatest failures and errors. The proposal of the right hon. Baronet the President of the Board of Control contemplated the formation of a new Legislative Council in Calcutta, a large proportion of which were to be permanent members. He doubted whether there would be sufficient business of a legislative nature to occupy much of the time of those officers. There was, however, one omission which he hoped to see supplied—no allusion had been made to the employment in that Council of any of the Natives of the country; and he had not the slightest hesitation in saying that if there was any position in which the most distinguished of the Natives could be placed with honour and advantage, it was that of legislating for their fellow-countrymen; and there were many Hindoo and Mussulman gentlemen in Bengal and other parts of India who were fully competent to take part in the discharge of such duties. He regretted to hear so accomplished a classical scholar as the right hon. Baronet speak as he had done in a tone of disparagement of the study of the ancient languages of India. The right hon. Gentleman spoke with apparent triumph of the 1327 Approaching extinction from the literature of the country of the antiquated Sanscrit and Arabic languages. He was surprised to find such an attack coming from so classical a scholar as the right hon. Gentleman. The right hon. Gentleman alluded to the petition which he (Sir H. Maddock) presented some nights ago from the Hindoo inhabitants of Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, which was signed by 4,000 or 5,000 persons. Now, that petition complained of a Court of Calcutta which was composed exclusively of Englishmen, who had no sympathy whatever in point of religion either with Mahomedans or Hindoos; they also complained of the Act of 1850, which they called the Missionary Act, and which they alleged was passed in utter violation of all engagements which had been made with the people of India since the time of Lord Cornwallis to the present day. The object of the Act they asserted to be to encourage converts from the Hindoo religion to Christianity at the expense of the rights of the Hindoos, who continued faithful to their original faith. By the Hindoo law, when a man died intestate the eldest son succeeded to his property, on which was entailed the performance of certain duties of a religious character which he alone could discharge. It was the firm belief of all Hindoos that much of their happiness for the future depended upon the faithful observance of this law. Before this Act of 1850 came into operation, any of the Hindoo relatives would have a share in all other property except this particular kind of property. The Act, however, to which he referred made the convert to Christianity entitled to a share of this ancestral property, the rights and duties pertaining to which he was no longer qualified to perform. This Act had given the greatest dissatisfaction to the natives of India, and they viewed it as a violation of all former engagements entered into with them, and a direct assault on their religion in favour of those who apostatised from it. He heard with regret the right hon. Gentleman give so decided an opinion that the principle of such a system was right, and that the Government should exercise the part of missionaries in proselytising the natives. As he understood the right hon. Gentleman, he bad defended the policy of this measure on the ground that when a Hindoo became a Christian it was right that he should enjoy every advantage he would otherwise have possessed, forgetting that the advantage conferred upon him was only his right 1328 so long as he remained an Hindoo. He asked the House whether it was becoming that a Government so constituted as the Government of India was, should make itself a partisan in legislating upon a subject of this kind? Was it right that the chief Minister of the Crown in India, in his place in that House, should express an opinion confirmatory of the apprehensions of the Hindoos, that this was the first step in their present policy, and that it was probable it would be followed by other steps of a similar character? He most sincerely trusted that the House would consider the question as one apart from all party considerations, and under the sole feeling that it was the duty of this country, to which by the inscrutable decrees of Providence a mighty empire had been given, so to regulate our councils as that they might be best adapted for promoting the benefit, happiness, and prosperity of India. 