

> § MR. T. BARING
> 
> said, that his excuse for rising to trespass upon the attention of the House would be, that it was his wish not to detain them for any long time; for he felt that he had not the power which the hon. and learned Gentleman opposite (Mr. Blackett) seemed to think requisite to enable one to speak upon such a subject-— namely, "to swell the soul, and fire the imagination." As, however, it happened that he occupied the post of Chairman of the Committee which was now sitting upon Indian Affairs, he felt it his duty to offer some observations to the House. In the first place, then, he would state, that though the very last petition presented to that Committee prayed that legislation might 1319 be delayed, he himself was most anxious that no such hesitation should take place. He rejoiced, therefore, to see the Bill introduced, although he must confess he had doubts as to the policy of some of its provisions. Those points, however, would undergo discussion at a later stage, when his doubts would either be removed, or be confirmed and strengthened. He certainly admitted that it would have been desirable that the Committee should have been appointed at an earlier period—if it had been nominated the year previously; but still, with regard to the statement, that because a Committee of Inquiry into Indian Affairs was still sitting, that therefore the House of Commons should adjourn the discussion of any Indian question until the report of that Committee should be agreed upon— such a conclusion appeared to him wholly unjustified by the circumstances of the case. There were quite sufficient data for the House to go upon in discussing the question of the form of government of India; and the Committee would still continue its inquiries into subjects affecting the administrative departments. Delay in legislation seemed to him unnecessary, because, although the Committee would have to continue its labours, still they were in a position to judge of the general nature of the evidence, and, what was of great importance, of showing to the natives of India the anxiety of the House of Commons to inquire into their condition and situation. The danger of delay did not rest upon any letter of Lord Dalhousie's, but was apparent; for it was evident that if they weakened the power of the present Government by delaying the settlement of this question, by hanging up authority in abeyance as it were, and by advertising that there was going to be a new system, they would excite both Englishmen and Indians to agitate for two or three years, in order to determine the character of that new system, and would thus inflict an injury which no subsequent good government could rectify; for it was, in his mind, impossible to inflict a greater curse upon a country than at one and the same time to denounce its government as bad, and to announce its continuance. The announcement that this country was going to support for three years a government which it allowed to be bad, and was then going to introduce a new form of government, could not fail to produce considerable agitation. It was the duty of this country to provide the best possible government for India, but not to continue 1320 for one day longer than was actually necessary a government which had failed in satisfying the expectations which had been formed of it. He could not, then, for these reasons, agree with the opinion that it would be advisable to wait for the report of the Committee, and postpone legislation for India for two or three years. But suppose the government were to be left as at present for three years, what would be the effect upon the existing authorities in India? Would the Governor General take the trouble, or even consider himself justified in making any change, to better a government branded with condemnation? It was sometimes said, why should not nearly everything be endured for the sake of tranquillity in India? But he would ask any hon. Member who entertained such a view, what was the reason of that tranquillity? It was, that from the disposition of the natives of India, and the faithfulness of the 200,000 brave men who served under our banners, there was no danger that any commotion could be apprehended, or, if any such existed, that there could be any fear of checking it; but the House might rely upon it, that because the contentment and fidelity of the people were incontestable, it was no reason why there should be any delay in giving them the best possible government, or for continuing one which was notoriously unfit to rule over the country. Immediate legislation, therefore, appeared to him to be the course that Parliament was in duty and in policy bound to pursue. The hon. Member for Manchester (Mr. Bright) had denied that the British rule in India was an anomaly; but if he had read the whole of the speech from which he quoted, he would have found a long description of anomalies in our proceedings in India. He (Mr. Baring) accepted the illustration. It was perfectly true, as he had stated, that other countries had made conquests; but while the native inhabitants of countries over which other Powers had ruled had become degraded, the natives of India, whatever had been the government, had occupied a position of security and of freedom from intestine dissensions. The hon. Member for Manchester had stated that he had less objection to a double government itself than to the East India Company having any share at all in the government. Well, the institution, he would confess, would not, he believed, have proceeded from Mr. Bentham; but it still had an advantage, and that a great one, which was that of being engrafted in the 1321 minds of the people, and of having, in his opinion, saved the native population from all the horrors of international warfare and dissensions, and also from foreign attack. He wished to see the government of India, not in the hands of the Crown, uncontrolled by some independent and differently elected body—not in the hands of the Crown, as we had seen our colonies and other possessions—but he wished to see by the side of the government of the Crown—because no one could imagine that they could separate the general policy of India from that of England—a government so constituted as to be independent of political influences and associations, and which should not earn its position by political services rendered to one Minister or another. He should wish to see such a state of things that the security and the welfare of India should not be secondary objects, as compared with some ephemeral party triumph. With regard to the education of the natives, he was desirous of promoting any system which would encourage education in India, and was prepared to support every act which had that tendency; but he must say that, looking into the vista of futurity, he could see no prospect of the native population ever being fit to exercise a government of their own, which would afford security from dissension at home and from foreign attack, and that on account of their differing among themselves in such a way that the union of the various tribes would seem to be impossible. On the question of the government of India, he would not confide it to any person in the country itself without his being under the immediate control of the Home Government; for if such were the case, the welfare of the natives would, in his opinion, be jeopardised. As a friend to India, he wished to see a form of government established which, while it exercised all the powers of the Crown, would be still advised and controlled, as controlled it would be, by the moral influence of a body of men well informed as to the state of India, independent in their own position, occupying a station in society, and thoroughly acquainted with the subject, which must exert an influence upon any Minister, and check every attempt to make India the means of obtaining a party triumph. He would ask the House to look at the other colonies, such as Ceylon, the Cape of Good Hope, and Australia, and to remember the party struggles which every colonial question had given rise to; and he would express his hope that India might not, in company with them, become a word 1322 of challenge to be bandied about from one side of the House to the other. He wished to guard against that. He wished to keep India, because he, desired not to see the empire dismembered, the power of England broken, and her influence diminished; for in his heart he believed that our rule tended, not only to the welfare and glory of the British nation, but to the development and expansion of civilisation and freedom throughout the world. Keep India, then—keep it by good government— keep it by guarding it against itself, and those who were dangerous within it. This could be done only by keeping India out of the vortex of party politics, and there were no better means of effecting that object than by governing her by a body acting with the Crown, but whose election was independent of the Crown. He differed in one respect from the hon. Member for Manchester (Mr. Bright); he (Mr. Thomas Baring) believed they could not have a worse Council for India than one composed entirely of men who had spent thirty or forty years of their lives in that part of the world— 