

> MR. DANBY SEYMOUR
> 
> said, that he could not help feeling that from the course adopted with respect to the inquiry and proposed legislation, and from the little attention that had been paid to the various petitions from India, it would be thought throughout that country that sufficient care had not been taken of their interests and happiness by the British Government. In connexion with the question before them, he could not help looking at the composition of the Committee appointed to inquire into the Affairs of India. The Committee consisted of thirty-nine members, of whom thirty-one were either connected with the Government or with the East India Company, while of independent members, not connected with either, there were only eight. They had heard that night what were the views of the Chairman of the Committee with regard to this question; and everybody knew that when the Chairman of a Committee expressed decidedly a particular view, in which he was likely to be supported by a majority of the members, it was quite useless to bring witnesses before that Committee. It was an extraordinary fact, in connexion with the labours of this Committee, that having last year finished the question of the Home Government, it had been opened again, only three weeks ago, by the right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Control. That certainly seemed to indicate that sufficient evidence had not been obtained on the subject of the Home Government; and yet the right 1329 hon. Gentleman brought forward his Bill before the Committee had reported on the subject, and before the evidence had been printed and had been placed in the hands of Members. Was the commonest Railway Bill ever treated with such disrespect? And yet this was a measure of the most transcendent importance, and one likely to influence the welfare of the human race more than any other that could come under the consideration of the House. As to the line of policy which should be pursued in the government of India, he had been able to form a very decided opinion from the opportunity which he had enjoyed of witnessing the beneficial effects produced by the liberal and impartial policy followed in the Russian Asiatic possessions. He had visited those countries while the old system, which we were still determined to pursue, was in existence, and also when the new system was introduced by the most able administrator of the time in Europe ten years ago. The latter had been crowned with the greatest success; and the result had been to increase the Russian influence throughout the whole of Asia. When he first went to the Caucasus, the nations subject to Russia, nearly fifty in number, were treated very much as we treated the people of India. There was the greatest discontent; and it was thought necessary to have a large army to preserve quiet. So careful had been the organisation of conspiracies, that they were prepared to assassinate every Russian officer in the capital; and information of the conspiracy was received the week before, not from any part of the country where it took place, but from St. Petersburgh. Prince Woronzow, who governed the whole of the province there, introduced an enlightened system of treatment, which it was to be hoped our Government would imitate; the excellent effects of this policy were abundantly evident, for the people had become so attached to him, that they would lay down their lives for him. Russia was now seeking to extend its power; and there was not a native of intelligence in India who did not know that he had a great deal more to hope from the policy of Russia than from the present policy of England. In the Russia dependencies, a chief who had sent in his submission but a short time, was invested with the highest offices of the State, and command in the army; and at this time, one of the most distinguished generals on which Russia counted was an Armenian—a man whom we should not 1330 admit to have an ensign's commission. His son might enter the Russian civil service, and might aspire to the highest offices-of the State; everything was open to him; there was no difference of creed, colour, or class; everything was thrown open with a generous policy, very different from ours. When the time came to choose between these two nations—which Sir John Macneil said would go on extending their circles till they must necessarily touch, and the same feeling prevailed throughout Asia, could we doubt which would be the succesful one? He had the strongest conviction on this point; and he knew that it was shared by many distinguished servants of the Company in India. No man could pass through a certain amount of experience and study the character of that people with his eyes open, without arriving at this conclusion. He could not conceive, therefore, a more important subject than, this; and that was the reason why he had deemed it his duty to direct towards it a larger share of his attention. He must say he had never heard such a continuation of misrepresentation from beginning to end in all his life as had fallen from the right hon Gentleman the President of the Board of Control and the hon. Member for Honiton on this subject; and he could not help observing that they were calculated to give a very false impression to the people of England, who, however, he hoped would study the subject for themselves, and not be guided by a Whig Minister whose policy in 1839 had brought neither success nor glory to this country. In answer to the taunt of the hon. Member for Honiton, that they did not consult the papers laid before Parliament, he would answer, in the first place, that with reference to the evidence taken before the Committee, it was evidence taken before a partial tribunal, and was treated in India as a mockery. He would, in the next place, quote from Kaye's History of Affghanistan a passage to prove in what way Indian papers were treated, and to show that no man in his senses could put any confidence in papers that came from the East India Company. Everything that told against their case was suppressed, and therefore he would never consent to consult their papers, but would draw information relative to this great "mystery of iniquity," as he must call it, from every quarter whence he could obtain it. It was well known that Russia and England were very near going to war for the possession of Affghanistan; and 1331 Sir Alexander Burnes was sent there to promote our interests. Dost Mahomed was favourable to the English; and when the Russian embassy came to Cabul, he was not well received, and his mission was notified to Sir Alexander Burnes. Sir Alexander represented Dost Mahomed as favourable to us; and his despatches and Dost Mahomed's letters were transmitted to the East India Company's Government. But they actually cut out everything that told against their case when the Affghan expedition was undertaken. They cut out everything that represented Dost Mahomed as favourable, and all Sir Alexander Barnes's representations against going to war with Affghanistan; and they garbled the evidence in such a way as to make it appear to the House and to the country that they had been forced into the war. It was only from a letter that was got after Sir A. Barnes's death, and a copy of his despatches that were in the hands of his father, and published, that the truth came out. He could not sufficiently express his abhorrence of the men who made these garbled statements, and who wilfully, elaborately, and maliciously bore false witness against their neighbour. The character of Dost Mahomed had been lied away, and the character of Burnes had been lied away. For these reasons he (Mr. Seymour) put no faith in any document sent forth to the world either by the Government or the East India Company. He would now turn to the misrepresentations of the hon. Member for Honiton (Sir J. W. Hogg) in reference to the police. The hon. Baronet had sneered at the hon. Member for Manchester for having read the report of a case of two indigo planters who quarrelled together, and had said it was unfair to represent a common police report as showing the normal state of affairs in Bengal. He (Mr. Seymour) would, however, quote a short extract from a petition of the inhabitants of Calcutta, showing the state of things there, and, though the President of the Board of Control had treated such petitions with con-tempt, yet he could not conceive that three gentlemen of high respectability like Sir Maddock, Sir E. Ryan, and Mr. Cameron, would have taken charge of a petition of this kind unless they believed it contained the truth. The petition stated that the police of the lower provinces totally failed in preventing crime, in apprehending offenders, or protecting life and property, but had become an engine of oppression, 1332 a means of injuring rivals and destroying enemies. The hon. Member for Honiton, who sneered throughout the whole of his speech, taunted the hon. Member for Manchester, also, for not quoting from Mr. Marshman's evidence, instead of from the Friend of India, Now, if the hon. Member for Manchester had quoted from Mr. Marshman's evidence, he would have found in it something better for his purpose than any extract he had read from the Friend of India. Mr. Marshman was asked, "Are dacoities (gangs of robbers) very frequent in Bengal?" His reply was— Very much so; more especially in the districts immediately around the Presidency. There used not to be, and perhaps at the present time there is scarcely, a night in which there are not two, three, or four dacoities perpetrated, and they are almost always committed with impunity. Two or three years ago the magistrates in five or six of the districts around Calcutta were obliged to confess that no man possessed of property to the value of 20 l. or 30 l. could retire to rest with a certainty of not being plundered of it by the dacoits before the morning. There is, therefore, a great insecurity of property, and property is felt to be exceedingly insecure by the natives themselves in the districts around Calcutta. Was this a proper state of things? These occurrences took place, be it observed, in the oldest of their Indian settlements, and this was the state of things which the right hon. Gentleman and the hon. Member for Honiton vaunted so highly. He (Mr. Seymour) had been through almost every district and country from this island to the beginning of Central Asia; and he was not acquainted with any one district where property and life were so insecure as they appeared to be under the Government of India in Bengal, or where criminal justice was so ill administered. He heard the President of the Board of Control deny, that any gentlemen were appointed under twenty-one years of age as judges, and quoted the authority of Sir G. Clerk in support of his denial. When the right hon. Gentleman was making that statement Sir Erskine Perry was sitting under the gallery, and Sir E. Perry sent a message to an hon. Member stating that his experience differed from that of Sir G. Clerk on the point. Upon this subject Mr. Marshman said— That the youth of the magistrates; who are called 'boy magistrates' by the natives, from there being many of them under twenty-five years old, certainly was one cause of the inefficiency of the police in the lower Provinces, and that the natives have not the same confidence in them as they have in men of greater experience. [An Hon. MEMBER said, that the quota- 1333 tion referred to magistrates, and not to judges.] Well, if the hon. Member thought that magistrates might be appointed under twenty-one years of age, he entirely disagreed from him. It was atrocious in India, where the authorities had such enormous power, to place the property of any of Her Majesty's subjects at the control of sons and nephews of directors who had not yet reached the age of discretion. Mr. Marshman again said, that when the sessions judge and the magistrate happened to be at varian