es was to govern India wisely, honestly, and for the benefit of India. The Court of Directors was divided into committees upon different questions, such as the army, the navy, law, and finance, and 1348 not a single paper came home but was submitted to the committee specially appointed to watch and control that branch of government to which it referred. To that system of circumspection he attributed the regularity and order which reigned in India; but this system was to be swept away instead of amended. If he had been asked to suggest a new scheme of government, he should not have taken that course, he should have advised them to give to the Court of Directors more power and more influence. He would have enacted that no Director should be appointed that could not give his whole time to the duties of his office, and that he should possess qualifications only to be acquired by a lengthened residence in India. He would have removed the gross abuse which enabled a clique to elect any one they pleased, bankers and others, who were wholly incompetent for the office; and he would have extended the number of electors, by giving the 500 l. stockholders the power of voting. Changes like these would certainly prove highly beneficial; but the right hon. Gentleman proposed instead to extend the authority of the Board of Control, the said board being generally appointed without any reference to the acquaintance of its members with the affairs of India. The Board of Control had incapacitated the Court of Directors from doing much that they had desired to do for the benefit of the people. Still he said time was wanted to acquire more complete information. India had been made a political football. It had been made use of for political purposes. He could prove that, but for the wars, India would have had a surplus revenue since 1835, and those wars had been undertaken and prosecuted because the Court of Directors had not that check upon the Board of Control which they ought to have had. The Court of Directors were kept in perfect ignorance until the money had been squandered, and they were called on to pay the bills. From the evidence of Mr. Melville, the secretary to the Court, they appeared to have received no information concerning the Affghan war until it was both begun and terminated. Not one of the Directors had approved or given their sanction to the war in Scinde, and that province was conquered and annexed before they knew anything about it. In the third instance, the war in the Punjaub, Lord Hardinge deferred hostilities as long as possible; but they came at last, and the Court of Directors 1349 knew nothing until it was all settled. He wished hon. Gentlemen had the opportunity of reading the secret correspondence of 1833. They would there find some very able papers, making demands on behalf of the proprietors that would have checked and controlled this extravagant expenditure. But the great evil in the management of Indian affairs was secrecy. After giving up the China trade, publicity was assured to the Company. But this Bill would make things worse. It would keep all the means of doing evil, and none of the means correcting the abuses which already existed. By the wars which he had enumerated no less than 26,000,000 l.. of money had been wasted by the Board of Control, over which the Board of Directors had no power whatever, although they were made by the Act of Parliament trustees for the proprietors to see the payment of the dividends. The dividends had been paid by them, although he doubted whether they ought to have been, there being no surplus revenue in consequence of the debt that had been incurred. It was, therefore, clear that the Court of Directors had violated the Act of Parliament in paying the dividends. India had, in fact, been ruined by wars, and it ought not to be permitted to any single man to have the power to involve the country in war. The first Burmese war, under Lord Amherst, cost the Company 13,000,000 l. of money. His hon. Friend near him said all this was the result of a bad system. It was so, and now was the time to correct it. On the 7th of June, 1833, the Court of Directors came to the following resolution: — That this Court desires to express the opinion they have so repeatedly expressed, that some measure of publicity, to be exercised as a rule, not as a privilege, is necessary to preserve to the Directors, in the altered state of things, that degree of independence which they regard as necessary to perform their part in the government of India; and the Court entertain the confident expectation that Parliament will make suitable provision accordingly. Lord Glenelg said, "I agree that should be the case; you have it secured already, and you may rest satisfied." But publicity was not secured. The Secret Committee, consisting of the Chairman, Deputy Chairman, and senior Director, were consulted upon questions of peace and war by the President of the Board of Control; but an oath was administered to them not to divulge to another member of the Court what transpired without permission of the President of the Board of Control, and as he 1350 never gave his permission nothing could be known. The consequence was that the twenty-one other Directors were kept in utter ignorance, and orders were sent out to waste the resources of the Company, contrary, perhaps, to the express advice of the Secret Committee, and without their sanction. How it was the right hon. Gentleman (Sir C. Wood) did not propose to alter such a state of things, was to him quite incomprehensible. It was that system of secrecy which had been the bane and ruin of India. Wars had occurred that had absorbed the revenue, and prevented all beneficial public works—such as the formation of canals, the irrigation of the land, the construction of roads, &c. The capabilities of India had consequently never been brought forth. He contended that no single man —-irresponsible as was the President of the Board of Control—ought ever to have the power of destroying the resources of a great country like India. In India itself the Governor General had to take the advice of every one of his Council, and if they differed from him in opinion they registered the reasons why they differed, to be sent home and judged of here; but if, after hearing all their opinions, the Governor General still entertained the same views, he was at liberty to carry them out upon his own responsibility; and the same system should be established in the Home Government between the President of the Board of Control and the Court of Directors. The President of the Board of Control ought to be the Minister for India. He would raise his position. His emoluments should be equal to those of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. If the Chancellor of the Exchequer were worth a salary of 5,000 l. a year, the President of the Board of Control ought to be worth as much. He would raise his position in the eyes of the world, and make him responsible for his administration, with the Court of Directors as a council and a cheek upon him. He had now stated the principal grounds on which he rested his objection to the whole of these proceedings. They would be doing injustice, not simply to the Court of Directors, but to the people of India, by allowing a system so mismanaged in India to go on without check or control. They had been allowing a debt to be contracted and gradually increased until it had amounted to 35,000,000 l. If they allowed India to be managed by political agency, like other colonies, that 1351 empire would soon be lost to us. It was on that account that he was anxious to remove the abuses now existing, in order that he might preserve India to this country. He would therefore remove such power of abuse, and take the benefit of the Court of Directors as a council, though he might be told that, there being thirty of them, they could not keep a secret. Did they not, he asked, keep a secret of the recall of Lord Ellenborough for a whole year? Did it ever transpire in that year? He denied, then, that this objection would hold. But at the same time he did not want secrecy—he wanted publicity. By publicity many errors would be avoided, and it was only owing to secrecy that the Court of Directors were charged by many intelligent persons with those abuses and negligences which were in truth attributable to the baneful influence of the Board of Control. Where irrigation had been stopped, it was by reason of the conduct pursued by the Board of Control; where the formation of roads and other public works had been interfered with, it was by the authority of the Board of Control, and not by the Government of India. The Court of Directors had been anxious to carry out all those public works. Great undertakings had been stopped by Lord Ellenborough, in order to wage that useless war which was now a millstone around the neck of the country. And now they were about to throw the proprietors into a position of doubt as to whether India could even he kept, and of course, therefore, whether they would or would not lose their dividends: their principal they would get out of the guarantee fund. He said that this was too hasty a measure, and that they were bringing in a Bill ignorant of all the facts charged against them with regard to the administration of justice. He protested against what was to be done to continue the exclusion of natives; the best part of the evidence taken upstairs showed that natives might be, and ought to be, trusted with offices. He thought the measure ought to be opposed in every stage. He thought it was a mad proceeding. He held that natives ought to be heard, and the people of India who complained ought to be heard, and he was confident that, whilst there was no fear from delay, there was great fear from such a crude measure as this.
> 
> After a few words of explanation from Mr. BLACKETT, 