

> § MR. ARCHIBALD HASTIE
> 
> said, that as direct allusion had been made to him for having interrupted the hon. Gentleman, he would say he had done so because be had never heard such a tirade of fault-findings. But all he meant was to ask the hon. Gentleman what be intended to do, or what he wished to recommend, in order that India might be properly governed? Everything it was possible to say against the government of India for the last twenty years had been said, but no remedy had been suggested. As he represented a large manufacturing constituency, be was anxious, before the existing government was withdrawn, to understand the machinery that was to be substituted; but not a word had he heard upon the subject. Hon. Members had read tirades against the Indian Government, which came mainly from disappointed aspirants—some from lawyers, and others from editors of newspapers, who wrote to gain a livelihood; but not a single proof had been given. He was old enough to remember the first throwing open of the trade to India. In the year 1812 he was one among those who were called agitators and discontented, because they wanted to throw open the trade. It was thrown open in 1813, at which period the exports of cotton manufactures to India from this country amounted to only 130,000 l. a year. At present they amounted to upwards of 5,000.000 L. It was said that the East India Company had been the cause of throwing millions out of employment; but the real cause of millions being thrown out of employment was the constituency of the hon. Member for Manchester. They kept a duty on the importation of Indian manufactures into this country of 60 per cent, while they obliged India to receive theirs at 5 per cent. The hon. Member might well tell the House that his constituents were deeply interested in this question: they were interested in underselling the Natives. Dr. Bowring once stated in that House that the effect of throwing open the trade to India had been, that the plains of Dacca were blanched with the bones of the poor handloom weavers. But he had risen mainly to say that before destroying the existing Government, from which the people of India had derived enormous advantages, the House ought to know what was sug- 1344 gested in its stead. Hon. Members opposite proposed nothing. He should be extremely happy to see their plan, and certainly, if he found it better than that of Her Majesty's Government, he would adopt it. 

> MR. HUME
> 
> , like his hon. Friend who had just sat down, wished, before the present Government was destroyed, to see what was to be substituted for it; and he contended also, that the House ought to be informed of the result of the measure of 1833. The question, indeed, was, whether the Government established by the Act of 1833, which vested the management of India in the Company, had produced the results which were expected. Prior to that be did not want to go, because he regarded any observations relating to an earlier period as wholly inapplicable. He believed that much that had been said with regard to the past government of India was true. Much that might have been done had been left undone; but in his opinion much more had been done than some parties were willing to admit. He considered the present attempt to legislate for the government of India, while they were in perfect ignorance of all that had taken place since 1833, was premature and unstatesmanlike. It would have been wiser if they had followed the course pursued in 1831–32–33, and inquired closely into every department connected with the government of India. There ought to have been an inquiry last year and the year before. The Government had been asked twenty times since the Session commenced as to their intentions with respect to India, and until the 1st of June they refused all information, giving only evasive answers. He construed that evasion to mean that they would defer permanent legislation, and merely bring in a continuation Bill to 1854 or 1855, to enable full inquiry to be made by the Committee appointed on the subject. He could hardly believe that the Government had any serious idea of legislating permanently for India. On all other occasions the Government of the day had consulted with the Court of Directors before adopting any measures to be laid be-fore the House; but on this occasion the first communication made to the Court of Directors was only made on the 1st of June. In the letter of that date the Government informed the authorities in Leadenhall-street that it was intended to bring in a Bill entirely to change the nature of the Court of Directors. What the answer of the Court of Directors to that communication had been, 1345 the House did not know, for, departing from the rule which was generally so strictly observed, the Government had neglected, or wilfully refrained, to lay the correspondence on the table of the House. He deprecated strongly the bringing forward a measure of this character suddenly, as though some great emergency had arisen. No paltry parish Bill was ever attempted to be passed through Parliament with such a degree of precipitancy, for a parish would require notices, and here no notice had been given. With regard to that Court he differed very much from some of his hon. Friends, for he had been taught by experience that they had conferred very great benefits on the Natives of India. In former years a good deal was said about the wealth of India, but now nothing was talked about but the misery and wretchedness of the people. The cause of that misery and wretchedness ought to be inquired into, for the purpose of showing whose fault it was. If misery had been caused by misgovernment, time ought to be given to ascertain by whom that misgovernment had been committed—to use a common phrase, to put the saddle on the right horse. He had no hesitation in stating that the Committee appointed to make those inquiries was not a fair and impartial Committee. He would only select one of many instances to prove that assertion. It was his desire that every complaint alleged against the Company's government, either here or in India, should be inquired into; and knowing, as he did, how important it was that the Natives of India should not only be well treated, but satisfied that their complaints were not disregarded, he moved that the parties from Bombay and Madras who had presented petitions to Parliament should be advised that the Committee were ready to receive evidence in support of these various allegations. Out of 17 Members in the Committee, only one supported his Motion. The Committee, it was true, decided that they would hear any evidence that might be adduced on the matters referred to in the petition; but of course one man would not interfere with the facts stated in another man's petition, and these parties were not likely to come forward without being summoned; and as these gentlemen lived in a distant country, that was another ground why there should be no hasty or premature legislation. He was glad to find that the hon. Member for Rochester (Sir H. Maddock) concurred with him in the opinion that the Natives of India would not be satisfied un- 1346 less they were heard; and as that hon. Member had been Deputy Governor of Bengal and President of the Council of India, he could not be supported by any higher authority. He wished to know what emergency had occured to prematurely hurry on this measure. He regretted deeply that Her Majesty's Government should have taken that course, and he still hoped the House would establish its character for fairness, and not allow themselves to be led blindfold into hasty and ill-digested legislation. He had listened to the speech of the right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Control, and it appeared to him to be most laudatory of the Court of Directors, and of the benefits which they had secured for the people of India; and yet the right hon. Gentleman concluded by proposing to destroy the system he so highly approved of. Some hon. Members seemed to desire to place India on the same footing as our other colonies; but no one could have attended to the history of the last twenty years without observing that, whilst in almost every one of our colonies there had been open rebellion in consequence of misgovernment and mismanagement, in India peace and order had been maintained. Was that accident, or was it the result of good management? For his part he attributed it in no small degree to the care and attention of the Court of Directors, and he should be sorry indeed to see the colonial system of government applied to India. One of the greatest faults which could be laid against any administration was charged against the Directors of the East India Company—namely, financial difficulties. But that was one of the great reasons why he was not prepared to legislate; for he was most anxious to inquire how those financial difficulties had arisen, and why the debt had increased 28,000,000 l. since 1833. He believed that an inquiry would establish the fact that the debt had been contracted by the interference of Her Majesty's Government, who had done their best to waste the resources of India. He considered the step they were about to take a most important one, It involved the interests of the country to an incalculable extent, and it touched very intimately the character of that House. Once taken it could not be recalled. We had lost territories of importance before; it was not impossible we might lose them again; and if the same principles of government were applied to India, which had been applied to Canada, the Cape, and other Colonies, he would not give ten years' 1347 purchase for our possession of that country. He believed inquiry would show that all the causes of financial difficulties, all the waste of treasure, and all the abuses so loudly condemned, could be traced to the Board of Control—the same authority to which it was now proposed to transfer the greater part of the government of India, abolishing altogether the check which the Court of Directors at present constituted. The Court of Directors were by law guardians on behalf of the proprietors of India stock, and as one of those proprietors, he said, if India were lost, the revenues of India were lost also, and the Government of England stood pledged to provide by 1874, the repayment of a capital of 12,000,000 l.., towards which 2,000,000 l.. were set aside to accumulate in 1833, and, if he read the Act aright, to provide also for the payment of dividends up to that period. In publications he had seen, it was suggested that the Government should borrow, at 3½ per cent, and pay off the East India proprietors, who were receiving 10½ per cent; but that could not be done. The Act of 1833, in consideration of the Company giving up all its possessions and property to the public, secured not only the repayment of the capital, but the 630,000 l.. which he believed was the amount of the annual dividend. He defied the Government to dispense with the Board of Directors, and, therefore, he was surprised at the proposal to degrade them; for it was a degradation to take away the patronage, which was one of the great objects to induce the Directors to devote themselves to the government of India, and to add 200*. a year to their salaries. He hoped there was not a Director but would spurn such an insult to them—such an insult to the people of India—that they should continue to pay their servants 3,000 l.. or 4,000 l.. a year, and their masters 500 l.. a year. If the right hon. Gentleman had desired to effect a beneficial change in the constitution of the Court, he should have extended the right to vote to all holders of 500 1. of stock. There might have been cases of partiality, favour, and abuse, and probably malversation might have been tolerated by the Court of Directors, but that was not the general rule; and he took it on himself to say the whole tenor of their despatch