lly incompetent to the decent fulfilment of their duties; and, so long as the present system continued, there was no hope of amelioration. Matters must go on from bad to worse, until in the lowest depth there could be no lower bottom still." Yet such was the evidence before the Indian Committee given by Mr. Norton, Vakêel, or Attorney General, of Madras. Mr. Prinsep, himself an East India Director, acknowledged before the Committee that the administration of justice in India admitted and required improvement. "It is impossible to deny," said Mr. Prinsep, "that these complaints have much foundation in fact, and are supported by the general opinion of the Native and European community in India; and yet, to his astonishment, the right hon. Gentleman greatly extolled the statement, and wondered how anybody could, after it, denounce the administration of the law in India. Before the Committee, Sir George Clerk, in giving his evidence, said that the idea of Europeans being corruptible was thought impossible in India; but by the next mail arrived the news that one of the judges of the Sudder Adawlut had been dismissed under very suspicious circumstances, to say the least; and that afforded an example of the way in which the servants in the civil service were treated. However gross might be their delinquencies, they were scarcely ever dismissed the service. The judge to whom he referred was dismissed on the ground of debt; but there was a serious accusation against him, and until it was cleared up it was allowable to suppose there were other grounds of complaint against him. But he was not dismissed altogether; he was removed to another office in the country. He did not think the government of that Company had been a good one. It was stated that the Madras petition was full of inaccuracies; but, supposing it were so, when a complaint of so grave a character was made, a statesman anxious to go to the bottom of the question, instead of turning a deaf ear to the petition, ought to have said something to alleviate the anxious feelings of the Natives of India; he might have said he was well aware of the settlement system in Madras being open to very serious objection, and it would be his earnest wish to do everything for the happiness of the people. That would have removed many an anxious feeling on the part of the Natives. Sir G. Clerk was asked before 1339 the Lords Committee whether it was true that pauperism universally prevailed in the Company's dominions, and his answer was, "only where the ryotwar system prevailed;" but that system prevailed over a district containing 30,000,000 of inhabitants. And Colonel Sykes said the land was over-assessed, and that it was of little or rather of no value at all in Madras. But what must be the state of the people when that was the case? They must be in a degraded state; and when that was so it was impossible to praise the goodness of the Government. The hon. Member for Huntingdon (Mr. Thomas Baring) said that one of the great blessings the people had under the British Government, at least, was the security to life and property; but it appeared that in Madras they had no property, and in Bengal it was not secure. Great credit was taken for the East India Company that nothing besides salt was taxed; but in point of fact the people had nothing else that could be taxed. The hon. Member for Honiton (Sir J. Hogg) objected to quotations from newspapers; but as he had set the example of quoting from the Calcutta Review, he (Mr. D. Seymour) would venture to refer to that publication. He would preface that, however, with a reference to the Cawnpore statistics, issued on the authority of the Government itself, as to the state of the North of India. Now, on the general average there were 7,500,000 acres at 18 s., and 500,000 at 24 s., producing altogether 14,868,588 shillings, for the maintenance of 583,460 persons, besides the cost of cultivation, and that gave only 11. 5 s. 6 d. per head. That was the average in the most favourable district of India, and which was sometimes described as the paradise of the Company's dominions. Mr. Campbell said it was absurd to suppose that the people of India did not want money as well as the people of other countries; adding that they were very fond of rich clothing and ornaments, and that early travellers spoke of the women and children whom they had seen in the villages as adorned with such appendages. But he must touch upon the question of irrigation. He would admit that the Ganges Canal was a great work; but he thought the principle upon which that work was undertaken was false. English capital was required, and he had not the least doubt, that if the system of government at home were simplified, and there was only a controlling power here, the government of India being left to be carried on 1340 there, English capital to a very large amount would find its way to that country, and the aspect of Hindostan would be changed enormously before ten years had passed. He should like to know whether it was or was not the case that two reports which Colonel Cotton had written condemnatory of the Government, had been required to be withdrawn. Here was a very grave imputation upon the Government. It had been continually represented to them, from 1792 down to 1852, that the outlay of a very small amount of money would have executed those works which would have prevented a famine; yet, until a few years ago, they had not been completed. He knew very well what Colonel Cotton thought of that matter. There was another most important subject to be touched on, which was the civil service; and he must say that he thought some attention should have been paid to the Bombay petition. It began with the old complaints about the bad education of the persons engaged in judicial employments—their not being required or expected to prepare themselves for the judicial office by any previous study. They said, that even in cases of extreme misconduct they were exempt from all fear of punishment; that as they were regarded as the privileged governors of the country, the gravest errors were only visited with expostulation, or, at the utmost, with removal from one office to another; and that while the present exclusive system was continued, it would be impossible to secure efficiency in any department'—and so on. These were the hackneyed complaints, so he dismissed them: but they were most important ones; and any person but the right hon. President of the Board of Control, and the hon. Member for Honiton, would consider that they should be entered into fully and seriously, and should not be sneered at and passed over. A well-informed writer in the Calcutta Review, upon this subject, said— Out of an expenditure of 20,000,000 l. sterling, 6,800,000 l. is the annual disbursement for the European agency, civil and military, employed in the Anglo-Indian empire. The 3,500,000 l. civil service the higher classes and more intelligent natives feel would all have flowed into their own hands had the government not been in ours; and accordingly it is this part of our system which excites both most observation and most ill-will among the aspiring. Upon this, let him observe, that people always aspired when they thought they suffered injustice; and he asked the noble Lord the Member for London to compare 1341 the present state of things at this time in India with the condition of this country prior to the passing of the Reform Bill. He would ask the noble Lord whether the Dragoons and the Six Acts, or the Reform Bill, had done the most to quiet this country? The conduct of the Government at that time, which had been so much influenced by the noble Lord, might serve as a model now; and he entreated the chief of the Liberal party, or rather him who had been so (for he thought that it was very much owing to the conduct of the noble Lord that the Liberal party had been much divided), to think of his early life, and to bring in a measure of reform for India such as had proved so eminently successful in this country. They no longer heard complaints that seats in this House were not open to the aspiring. The same writer, who he thought could be no other than Mr. Kaye, from the acquaintance which he displayed with his subject, went on to say— The Natives see 3,500,000 l.. distributed among a class very limited in numbers, not amounting to 2,000 for all India, which enjoys a monopoly of all posts of trust and power, and which, if an average were struck on the total of civil employés, covenanted and uncovenanted, costs the State 1,1501. annually for each man of the favoured body. Each European officer costs a trifle upwards of 412 l.. per annum, not one-fourth the civilian. It is true, by Act of Parliament the highest offices are open to all; but though the law Imperial imposes no disabilities, the law Directorial of patronage is in complete antagonism to the Act of Parliament in this respect; and, practically, a Native cannot hope for anything higher than to be admitted to compete with the European uncovenanted servants for the charges of Amin and Sudder Amin. It was given in evidence also by a Native, the only one who had been examined by the Committee, that, while the covenanted civil servants received pensions, there were none given to native functionaries, many of whose widows and families were in consequence in great distress. He regretted having been obliged to trouble the House with so many extracts; but upon a subject of this nature much must depend upon authorities, and as many had been cited on the other side, he was anxious to show that there were others, equally important, who could be quoted on his side of the question. And when the Government saw such men as Mr. Cameron and the hon. Member for Rochester (Sir H. Maddock) advocating the change which they saw must come, it ought to have some weight with the Government. He believed that 1342 far more than half of those upon the Government benches saw that this was only a temporary measure—that it was intended merely to break the fall of the Directors— and that the policy of the Government was to keep them up as a "buffer" as long as possible. When this measure should be granted, however, public opinion, led by those high moral responsibilities which were being asserted among the nation, and by that acquisition of knowledge which the country were acquiring upon Indian questions, would not permit the Court of Directors to be retained for a much longer period. If these changes, then, were seen, to be inevitable, he asked, would not the agitation go on just as much to get rid of the measure which the right hon. Gentleman was now introducing, as if he had delayed legislation for a year? Had the right hon. Gentleman done that, however, he would have avoided the agitation in England which would infallibly take place until an institution was removed which was thought to be unconstitutional, and until the Ministry which enjoyed the power of governing the Indian empire should be obliged to take upon themselves that responsibility which they had been at so much trouble to evade. [Mr. HASTIE: Hear, hear!] The hon. Member for Paisley had better address the House in support of the views he took; but he assured the hon. Member that no town in Scotland would benefit more from a satisfactory settlement of this question than his own constituents. His constituents, indeed, ought to oblige him to take a greater interest in this question than he seemed willing to do, for a change would be indirectly of great benefit to them. He had endeavoured to show his reasons for differing from the right hon. President of the Board of Control in the opinion that the government of the East India Company had been successful during the last twenty years. He found a Government which had neglected the administration of justice; which had debarred the Natives from employment; which had done its best to prevent the fusion of races which ought to fo