War, Culture and Society, 1750–1850

Series Editors: Rafe Blaufarb (Tallahassee, USA), Alan Forrest (York, UK), and Karen
Hagemann (Chapel Hill, USA)
Editorial Board: Michael Broers (Oxford, UK), Christopher Bayly (Cambridge,
UK), Richard Bessel (York, UK), Sarah Chambers (Minneapolis, USA), Lau-
rent Dubois (Durham, USA), Etienne François (Berlin, Germany), Janet Hartley
(London, UK), Wayne Lee (Chapel Hill, USA), Jane Rendall (York, UK), Reinhard
Stauber (Klagenfurt, Austria)

Titles include:

Richard Bessel, Nicholas Guyatt and Jane Rendall (editors)
WAR, EMPIRE AND SLAVERY, 1770–1830
Eveline G. Bouwers
PUBLIC PANTHEONS IN REVOLUTIONARY EUROPE
Comparing Cultures of Remembrance, c. 1790–1840
Michael Broers, Agustin Guimera and Peter Hick (editors)
THE NAPOLEONIC EMPIRE AND THE NEW EUROPEAN POLITICAL CULTURE
Gavin Daly
THE BRITISH SOLDIER IN THE PENINSULAR WAR
Encounters with Spain and Portugal, 1808–1814
Alan Forrest, Etienne François and Karen Hagemann (editors)
WAR MEMORIES
The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars in Modern European Culture
Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall (editors)
SOLDIERS, CITIZENS AND CIVILIANS
Experiences and Perceptions of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars,
1790–1820
Alan Forrest and Peter H. Wilson (editors)
THE BEE AND THE EAGLE
Napoleonic France and the End of the Holy Roman Empire, 1806
Rasmus Glenthøj and Morten Nordhagen Ottosen
EXPERIENCES OF WAR AND NATIONALITY IN DENMARK AND NORWAY,
1807–1815
Karen Hagemann, Gisela Mettele and Jane Rendall (editors)
GENDER, WAR AND POLITICS
Transatlantic Perspectives, 1755–1830
Leighton James
WITNESSING THE REVOLUTIONARY AND NAPOLEONIC WARS IN GERMAN
CENTRAL EUROPE
Catriona Kennedy
NARRATIVES OF THE REVOLUTIONARY AND NAPOLEONIC WARS
Military and Civilian Experience in Britain and Ireland
Catriona Kennedy, and Matthew McCormack (editors)
SOLDIERING IN BRITAIN AND IRELAND, 1750–1850
Men of Arms
Ralph Kingston
BUREAUCRATS AND BOURGEOIS SOCIETY
Ofﬁce Politics and Individual Credit, France 1789–1848
Mark Lawrence
SPAIN’S FIRST CARLIST WAR, 1833–40
Kevin Linch
BRITAIN AND WELLINGTON’SS ARMY
Recruitment, Society and Tradition, 1807–1815
Pierre Serna, Antonino De Francesco and Judith Miller
REPUBLICS AT WAR, 1776–1840
Revolutions, Conﬂicts and Geopolitics in Europe and the Atlantic World
Marie-Cécile Thoral
FROM VALMY TO WATERLOO
France at War, 1792–1815
Mark Wishon
GERMAN FORCES AND THE BRITISH ARMY
Interactions and Perceptions, 1742–1815
Christine Wright
WELLINGTON’S MEN IN AUSTRALIA
Peninsular War Veterans and the Making of Empire c. 1820–40




War, Culture and Society, 1750–1850
Series Standing Order ISBN 978–0–230–54532–8 hardback
978–0–230–54533–5 paperback
(outside North America only)
You can receive future titles in this series as they are published by placing a
standing order. Please contact your bookseller or, in case of difﬁculty, write to
us at the address below with your name and address, the title of the series and
one of the ISBNs quoted above.
Customer Services Department, Macmillan Distribution Ltd, Houndmills,
Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS, England
Spain’s First Carlist War,
1833–40
Mark Lawrence
Teaching Fellow, Newcastle University, UK
© Mark Lawrence 2014
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2014 978-1-137-40174-8
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency,
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2014 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke,
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
ISBN 978-1-349-48652-6       ISBN 978-1-137-40175-5 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9781137401755
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the
country of origin.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lawrence, Mark, 1978–
   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40 / Mark Lawrence,
   teaching fellow, Newcastle University.
      pages cm. — (War, culture and society, 1750–1850)
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN 978-1-349-48652-6
   1. Spain—History—Carlist War, 1833–1840. I. Title.
   DP219.L39 2014
   946 .072—dc23                             2014022913
Contents


List of Tables                                   vi

Preface                                         vii

Acknowledgements                                viii


1 Introduction, History and Sources               1

2 The First Carlist War: Origins                 21

3 The First Carlist War: Context                 36

4 The Basque Phase, 1833–35                      48

5 The War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36    81

6 Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37            124

7 Carlist Failure, 1837–39                      157

8 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40       190

Conclusions                                     221


Notes                                           225

Sources and Bibliography                        263

Index                                           274




                                   v
Tables


5.1 Eco del Comercio, 7 March 1836: Strength of Cristino
    National Guard at end of 1835                                   96
7.1 Eco del Comercio, 18 January 1839: State of regular Cristino
    and Carlist armies throughout Spain at end of 1838             165
8.1 Eco del Comercio, 11 December 1839: Strength,
    preparedness and distribution of Cristino National Militia
    late 1839                                                      193




                                   vi
Preface

This book originated in my studies of German intellectual history,
in particular of the ‘panentheist’ philosopher, Karl Christian Friedrich
Krause, and the ways he shaped radical free-thinking in nineteenth-
century Spain. Yet the more I began empirical research into Spanish
radicalism, the more I recognised the need for a ‘bottom-up’ study of
the masses and their relationship to radicalism rather than a top-down
study of the elites. Very quickly I realised that ideas exist only in the
‘context of their context’, and that no satisfactory study of ideas could
be sensibly sustained without any empirical study of their reception and
impact. I also discovered that my early interest in Spain’s 1850s and
1860s was being pulled back to the events of Spain’s early nineteenth
century. Time and again I had to explain such events as the failure of
the revolution in 1848 and its success in 1854, the Loja rising, and the
evolution of the Spanish Democrat Party with reference to the chaos
and revolution wrought by the Peninsular War of 1808–14 and hard-
ened by the bloody struggles between Left and Right during 1820–23
and, especially, the First Carlist War of 1833–40.
  I noticed that the First Carlist War was a comparative blind-spot in
the English-language scholarship. Thanks to the feedback I received at
various international conferences, the untiring inspiration and encour-
agement from Professor Charles Esdaile, and the particular interest of
the ‘War, Culture and Society’ editorial board at Palgrave Macmillan,
I was able to produce this monograph.
  I should offer a note of explanation with regard to my use of lan-
guages. A glance at twenty-ﬁrst-century maps of the Basque country,
Catalonia and Galicia will reveal the respective use of Basque, Catalan
and Gallego names for places which, in the nineteenth century, were
generally written in Castilian. Largely for the beneﬁt of my Anglophone
audience, I have used Castilian place names instead of their regional
equivalents (which I use more sparingly). Hence my readers will not
be arrested by the sight of ‘Bilbo’ instead of ‘Bilbao’. Equally, I have
privileged the use of Castilian over Anglicised Spanish place names.
‘Corunna’ and ‘Saragossa’, for example, must look quaint to twenty-ﬁrst
readers who will have at least some familiarity with Spanish geography,
and I think I am not making too many cognitive demands by using
La Coruña and Zaragoza, respectively.

                                   vii
Acknowledgements


There are dozens of people whom I thank for their guidance and support
with this project. Many a chance conversation with a colleague in the
Biblioteca Nacional, with Spanish archivists, even chats with members
of the public have all contributed in their own way. My particular
thanks go to such academics as Roger Hausheer, Jorge Luengo Sánchez,
Rosa María Navarrete, Jordi Roca Vernet, Adrian Shubert, Guy Thomson,
Isabel Burdiel and, especially, Charles Esdaile. I have been fortunate to
have been surrounded by great friends and historians whose research
interests lay outside Spain. They have provided great company and
support, and have shared with me the ups and downs of twenty-ﬁrst
century academia. My particular thanks go to Jon Hogg, Brian Marren,
Rhian Wyn-Williams and Christoph Laucht. I am indebted for the intel-
lectual and moral support of friends and colleagues alike, and of my
Newcastle University students. Needless to say, their support was of a
positive nature and any errors or weaknesses in my script are entirely
my own.
   Above all I thank my wife, Susana, for her unﬂinching love, support
and patience. Life as an academic presents immense challenges as well
as rewards but our team efforts have paid off. Este libro está dedicado a
nuestra hija, Nicole.




                                   viii
1
Introduction, History and Sources




Tragedy invites study, and wars, especially civil wars, are tragic by their
very nature. National, imperial and civil wars dominated Spain dur-
ing the revolutionary and counter-revolutionary turbulence of 1808–48,
pitting Patriots against Frenchmen, americanos against peninsulares, and
Liberals against Carlists. These interminable conﬂicts have shaped works
of ﬁction. Benito Pérez Galdós’s Episodios Nacionales serialised calamities
from the Battle of Trafalgar to the Carlist War and beyond, weaving ﬁc-
tional characters into real historical events in a didactic construction
of national truth. Political elites contested the legitimate nature of the
state but generally had no interest in social change. Instead, they relied
upon a surfeit of army veterans who ‘pronounced’ against governments
in return for pay and promotion, precious commodities in a bankrupt
economy. The predominantly rural masses were integrated into political
programmes as a last resort. Yet the inability of elites to rescue Spain
from its post-imperial crisis condemned their people to two generations
of upheaval and war, to the extent that upheaval has been seen as the
normal, if problematic, functioning of politics. The longest nineteenth-
century Spanish conﬂict, the First Carlist War (1833–40), began with a
dynastic dispute. But it developed into an unlikely agent of modernity
on account of the unequal demands it imposed on the people who, in
response, and for the ﬁrst time in modern Spanish history, found their
own voice, agendas and solutions.
   It is surprising that Spain’s First Carlist War remains Europe’s most
neglected nineteenth-century civil war in the English scholarship. This
lacuna is unworthy of the conﬂict’s importance. It was both the
last great European conﬂict of the pre-industrial age and, before the
nineteenth-century military revolution, an iconic moment in the pan-
European struggle between liberalism and absolutism, and a key stage in

                                    1
2   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the history of modern Spain. Yet, unlike the Peninsular War (1808–14),
the First Carlist War is something of a Cinderella for monographs and
transnational histories alike.1 The conﬂict’s Spanish historiography is far
better, thanks to such scholars as Jordi Canal, Josep Clemente, Alfonso
Bullón de Mendoza, Ramón Urquijo Goitia, Pedro Rújula and the late
Julio Aróstegui, to say nothing of the wealth of local and regional stud-
ies. But it is surprising that even the Spanish historiography was late in
applying modern historical methods to the conﬂict; rather, until the
1970s, the war, like the broader issues of Carlism and Liberalism in
general, was the battleground of ideologically committed panegyrists
and detractors. Antonio Pirala’s exhaustive six-volume study, written
between the 1850s and 1870s, remained authoritative for more than
a century as a consequence. But the Spanish innovation has not yet led
to a monograph of the conﬂict in English. In principle, then, there is a
need for a new study in English which will examine the whole of the
war and integrate the military narrative into wider questions concern-
ing politics and society. This monograph shows how the First Carlist
War created a radical movement within the ranks of Spanish liberalism
which thereafter never ceased to exert pressure on its more moderate
(and distinctly elitist) movement.
   Spain’s Carlist Wars make interesting and exciting reading, especially
the ﬁrst and most prolonged of these civil wars, the First Carlist War
of 1833–40. The background to this conﬂict is extremely complex, but,
in brief, as a result of the Peninsular War (1808–14) Spain had been
plunged into a far-reaching political, social and economic crisis. The
only way forward from this situation was a comprehensive programme
of reform that extended and deepened the changes already made in
the reigns of Charles III (1759–88) and Charles IV (1788–08). Initiated
by the progressive group of liberales that had dominated the Cortes of
Cádiz (1810–14), and picked up in more timid fashion by the counsellors
of Ferdinand VII after 1814, this programme of reform was challenged
by elements in the Church and the nobility who had hoped rather
to ‘colonise’ Ferdinand VII and to make him not only turn back the
clock in respect of the changes made in the period of 1808–14, but
reverse those made in the period of enlightened absolutism as well. For
a long time it seemed that they would ultimately reverse the tide of
reform – the heir to the throne, Ferdinand’s younger brother, Prince
Charles (‘Don Carlos’: hence the word ‘Carlist’) was very much under
their thumb – but the last months of Ferdinand’s life saw a compli-
cated series of events threaten their dominance, and no sooner had he
died than they staged an armed revolt aimed at ensuring their triumph
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   3


by force. This civil war has attracted nothing like the critical attention
lavished upon its iconic successor a century later. In some ways this sit-
uation is surprising, as, for a start, the enduring stereotype of the ‘Two
Spains’ – which for so long was deemed central to understanding mod-
ern Spain – might have seemed an equally compelling paradigm for the
First Carlist War: whereas the Spanish Civil War saw Nationalists and
Republicans ﬁghting for their respectively hegemonic visions of Spain,
the First Carlist War offers a comparable struggle between legitimist
Carlists and modernising Liberals which took twice as long to resolve
as its successor, exacted relatively more casualties and even anticipated
the International Brigades (some 18,000 French, British, Belgian and
Portuguese volunteers for liberty). One major difference lay in the rever-
sal of the term ‘national’. Whereas in the 1830s it was the progressive
Liberal side which was ‘national’, in the 1930s the Francoist coalition,
heirs of the vanquished Carlists, claimed this title. Spanish nationalism
had evolved from Left to Right, from a civic force of nation-building
into a conservative force of National Catholicism.2
   It was a dynastic dispute about who should succeed to the throne in
1833 that provided the trigger for war, but the latter’s roots in reality
stretched far wider. The ﬁrst root was contested legitimacy, which was
no arcane matter but an issue that shaped all sorts of popular militancy.
Spaniards had traditionally held their monarchy in great reverence:
unlike the French and English, they have never killed their king. The
illegitimacy of Napoleon’s seizure of their throne in 1808 in the name
of his brother, Joseph, had been the formal casus belli for the Peninsular
War. But to the question of legitimacy needs to be added the question
of absolutist royal will. In 1789 Ferdinand’s father, Charles IV, had used
a secret session of the Spanish Cortes to issue a decree opening up the
royal succession to female as well as male heirs. This broke with the
Salic Law which the Bourbon victor of the 1701–13 War of the Spanish
Succession, Philip V, had conferred on his new dynasty and which
effectively excluded female heirs from the succession by exhausting
all legitimate male bloodlines to the throne. Any doubts surrounding
the validity of the Salic Law had long remained moot: Ferdinand’s ﬁrst
three marriages bore him either no children or resulted in miscarriages
and infant mortalities, which could only mean that the King’s younger
brother, Don Carlos, would succeed him. But the healthy birth of the
royal daughter, Isabella, born in October 1830, revived the question of
the succession. Don Carlos did not challenge his brother openly, and
much of the running was made by Ferdinand’s wife, María Francisca,
who was at odds with his sister-in-law, Luisa Carlota. Bourbon women
4   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


had always dominated when their menfolk were weak. But now this
tradition was given new form, as the dynastic triumph of the women,
María Cristina and her young daughter Isabella, was countered by the
Carlist faction in sexist propaganda.3 As a leading Carlist propagandist
pronounced, ‘Phillip V knew how nature demands that a man should
command and a woman obey, and that there is barely one out of a
million of the fairer sex ﬁt for something greater than homespinning.’4
Despite this sexism, the war would place women into roles ‘naturally’
reserved for men. Pre-war court politics foreshadowed this. From 1830,
after the birth of Isabella and then a second daughter, it became possi-
ble for the Cristino faction to win the succession. Under pressure from
María Cristina, whom events would throw into the arms of the Lib-
eral reformists, Ferdinand timidly reissued the 1789 decree, now termed
the Pragmatic Sanction, thereby announcing Isabella’s succession to the
throne in the event of his death. Pro-Carlist court pressure succeeded
in prevailing upon Ferdinand brieﬂy to revoke the Sanction.5 But the
Carlist recovery was by no means assured. In 1832 the King lapsed
into what was thought to be terminally poor health, and his powers
were passed to the regency of his wife who presided over a purge of
Carlists from the army and administration. During a brief Indian sum-
mer in the King’s health, three months before his death, the Cristino
faction again secured the King’s approval for the re-abolition of the
Salic Law. Thus, Carlist hopes of a smooth transition were dashed: the
royal will was that the infant Isabella’s minority reign would be exer-
cised by her mother’s regency when the King’s death ﬁnally came in
September 1833.
   Don Carlos, devout and tenacious, refused to recognise the Isabeline
succession: the recent legitimist rising known as the Agraviados had
taught him the wisdom of awaiting events. But he also refused openly
to challenge the King whilst the monarch still lived. This legitimist pro-
priety did not have to matter as such. Early nineteenth century Spain
had been littered with examples of pronunciamientos, or military coups,
being mounted in order to change politics and, in the case of young
Prince Ferdinand and his elderly father, Charles IV, in 1808, even to
force a royal abdication. And Don Carlos suffered no lack of proxies
prepared to do his bidding, including several in some of the highest
positions of authority in the Bourbon state. The purge of these Carlists
during the last months of Ferdinand’s life was explained by Liberal his-
torians with references to the ‘illegitimacy’ of the Carlist dynastic claim.
The dual issue of the secret decree of 1789 and the deﬁnitive expres-
sion of royal will of 1833 supported their case. According to the Liberal
historian, Antonio Pirala, the Cristino case may have been impolitic
                                         Introduction, History and Sources   5


but was by no means illegitimate. Not only had the Cortes effectively
legitimised a female succession as early as 1789, but the Salic Law in
any case was the worst example of ‘foreign despotism’ to contravene
centuries of Spanish tradition, and which had been instigated by the
Bourbons in 1713 solely in order to settle European fears of a formally
integrated Franco-Spanish monarchy.6 One of the ironies of the dynas-
tic dispute was that modernising Liberals invoked medieval Spanish
tradition whereas medievalist Carlists invoked the eighteenth-century
Bourbons, the very dynasty whose enlightened absolutism created the
conditions for nineteenth-century liberalism to emerge.
   Certainly, nineteenth-century Liberals used Spanish tradition in other
contexts for political ends. Most markedly, the 1820s radical-liberals
named their secret society the Comuneros in honour of the 1520s
Comuneros revolt of Castile, the founding myth for Spanish Liber-
als who viewed it as the ﬁrst modern defence of popular sovereignty.
Historicism came easily to nineteenth-century Spanish Liberals, many
of whom (Count Toreno, Agustín de Argüelles and Alcalá Galiano, to
name a few) were themselves historians. But despite their erudition,
their works are unhelpfully partisan and self-exculpatory with regard
to the early nineteenth-century crisis that unleashed the Carlist War.7
This is not only because an equally strong case could be – and was –
made by Carlist historians for Don Carlos’s claim,8 but also because
most nineteenth-century histories lacked the analytical and contextual
rigour demanded by modern scholarship. An adequate understanding
of the background to the First Carlist War needs to integrate archival
research with the advances made in Spanish social history since the
mid-twentieth century.


The First Carlist War: history and sources

Whereas most publications relating to the First Carlist War appeared
during the conﬂict itself and its immediate aftermath, the highest qual-
ity of publications has appeared since the 1970s.9 That said, the most
important single body of work remains Antonio Pirala y Criado’s six
volumes, written over two decades from the 1850s. Pirala was a posi-
tivist progresista (Spanish ‘Whig’) and sometime ﬁction writer who, in
his youth, ﬂirted with democracy in response to failure of the 1848
revolution in Spain. His politics moved to the Right in proportion
to his advancing age and career. But he remained a Liberal, thinking
the Carlists were wrong even though he was objective and unusu-
ally knowledgeable about them. His even-handedness was commended
by the Carlist side. He was bequeathed private Carlist correspondence
6   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


by the Carlist commander-in-chief who, in 1839 made peace, Rafael
Maroto.10 When Pirala, in the 1870s, began his ﬁve-volume Historia
Contemporánea, dealing with the Second Carlist War (1872–76), he was
granted privileged access to Carlist papers.11 Yet Pirala’s prolix narra-
tive means that he was often cited but seldom read. As a positivist
he expressed immutable moral norms and was constrained to give
meaning to the political and social radicalisation unleashed by the
war. In committing details of massacres, violence and riots to paper,
Pirala conforms to a peculiarly nineteenth-century humanitarian liter-
ary model designed to make readers feel part of national suffering.12
Pirala was not the ﬁrst to use this technique. As the historian of
Aragonese Carlism, Pedro Rújula, has pointed out, three Radical-Liberals
who had exercised public roles in Aragón during the war (Francisco
Cabello, Francisco Santa Cruz and Ramón María Temprado) were quick
to write a leftist history of the conﬂict which amassed details of heroism
and massacres in order to cast the Liberal militia as the martyred van-
guards of a civil society whose memory must be avenged not just against
any resurgent Carlists, but also against the conservatives (moderados)
who brutally disbanded the militia whilst these authors were writing
in 1843.13 But Pirala, less radical in his liberalism, provided the clas-
sic nineteenth-century expression of the humanitarian narrative. Yet
he was not without his shortcomings. In particular, he neglected the
Cristino ‘home front’, especially Andalucía where Carlism was admit-
tedly at its weakest, but where so much of the social and political
radicalism was nonetheless produced by the war.
   Pirala’s failure to integrate the Cristino experience of civil war into
the Liberal revolution has still not been fully addressed. At the turn of
the current century Jordi Canal lamented that there was still no reliable
synthesis of the First Carlist War.14 Certainly, no adequate attempt has
been made to undertake this in the English language, but it is interest-
ing to reﬂect upon how even the more sophisticated Spanish scholarship
presents challenges and controversies. The Spanish historiography may
be divided into ﬁve broad categories. The ﬁrst comprised nineteenth-
century dynastic and classical military histories, contemporary (and
generally inferior in quality) to Pirala’s volumes.15 The second comprised
the panegyrics from Franco-era traditionalists who depicted Carlism as
an organic Christian good resisting the onslaught of godless and artiﬁ-
cial Spanish liberalism.16 The First Carlist War was but one protracted
episode in the wider war between Christianity and the Anti-Spain that
was joined in 1808 and won by the crusaders only in 1939. The most
impressive work in this vein was the 30-volume history of traditionalism
                                           Introduction, History and Sources   7


edited by Melchor Ferrer from the 1940s, which was meant to be the
Carlist answer to the Liberal Pirala, but which in fact lacked the lat-
ter’s balance and command of primary sources.17 The third category
comprised the ‘Navarra School’ of Pamplona-based neo-traditionalists,
led by Federico Suárez Verdeguer. These scholars sustained a far more
sophisticated right-wing analysis based on modern empirical research.18
Their contention that Spain remained royalist, or apolitical, throughout
this period rendered Liberalism an artiﬁcial and arrogant innovation.
As the best neo-traditionalist scholar of the First Carlist War, Alfonso
Bullón de Mendoza, put it, the Cristino Liberals were waging war against
their own people.19
   Even though both the traditionalists and neo-traditionalists sympa-
thised with historical Carlism, they were alienated by the leftward shift
of ‘Carlism 1968’, which inspired a new generation of neo-Carlist schol-
arship. The neo-Carlists are the fourth category, and their revisionism
is impossible to understand without reference to the socialist ‘self-
management’ (autogestión) doctrine advocated from the late 1960s by
the Carlist ‘Prince’ Carlos Hugo de Borbón Parma and his followers. The
neo-Carlists resented how the Francoist ‘families’ of neo-traditionalists
and National Catholics had hijacked their movement since 1937 in
the name of the ‘Movement’, and the neo-Carlist movement accord-
ingly faced repression under the last years of the Franco dictatorship.20
Their most strident scholar was Josep Carles Clemente. Clemente argued
that early Carlism was an inchoate social protest against nineteenth-
century oligarchs who were using the Liberal property revolution to
marginalise villagers’ livelihoods and erode the communitarian model
enshrined in the Basque fueros (devolved economic and political pow-
ers under the Spanish crown)21 Carlism predominated in the Basque
country, he explained, because since the eighteenth century landhold-
ing there had become concentrated in fewer, more exploitative, hands,
causing rents to rise whilst agricultural prices remained depressed, and
to varying degrees this class conﬂict pertained elsewhere in Spain.22
Clemente thus turned Marxist social history against its ‘correct’ con-
stituency, representing Carlism as a ‘social dissidence’ springing from
a form of ‘feudal socialism’ under attack from the centralising and
capitalist drive of Spain’s modernising Liberals;23 a neo-Carlist interpre-
tation that was expanded upon by other scholars equally exasperated
by Spain’s oligarchical liberalism.24 But Clemente’s ire targeted not the
Marxists but the traditionalists who had hijacked the true historical
essence of Carlism, or as he complained in the 1977 publication Nosotros
los carlistas: ‘ﬁrst came the volunteers to raise their standard of King and
8   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Fueros, and later came the traditionalists with an agenda of their own,
adding God and Fatherland to our popular movement and turning it
into a political philosophy of traditionalism’.25
   Clemente’s neo-Carlism did not hold the ﬁeld for long, however:
in the early 1990s neo-traditionalism counter-attacked with Alfonso
Bullón de Mendoza’s doctoral thesis, quickly turned into a published
monograph. Bullón de Mendoza found Clemente’s neo-Carlism, along
with conventional Marxist analyses, to be ‘wilful history’ (historia voli-
tiva), left-wing propagandistic distortions foundering upon their lack of
‘objective facts’. Thus, there was not a single coherent Carlist manifesto
offering social justice, and episodes of villagers and combatants assert-
ing their ‘moral economy’ came as much from Liberal as Carlist quarters
(i.e. the side was irrelevant). Meanwhile, the Basque fueros on which
Clemente based part of his argument, were no pre-capitalist model of
social harmony but simply a different model of social exploitation.26
Bullón de Mendoza’s thesis provoked a furious debate with the neo-
Carlists, which was happily sustained more by evidence rather than
assertion. We may add to this by considering how Carlist War newspa-
per extracts qualify Clemente’s ‘social dissidence’ thesis. On one level,
Clemente’s thesis does indeed reﬂect the fears of 1830s Cristino elites
who saw Carlists as reactionary levellers bent on smashing the progress
and hierarchy of respectable society, or, as a moderado newspaper in 1837
put it: ‘Carlism could never be attractive to people who have something
to lose because it is in fact a kind of pure democracy, demagoguery, and
anarchy.’27 This would support the ‘social dissidence’ thesis, until we
ﬁnd that the same Cristino elites also despaired of the excesses made by
the ‘democratic rabble’ on their own side.28 The inference must be that
the First Carlist War should be studied not from the perspective of elite
discourse and ideology but from the perspective of contingency. This
book aims to take this perscpective, using a chronological organisation
to enable the simultaneous analysis of concurrent developments which
shaped the background and the course of the conﬂict. This approach, it
is hoped, will avoid the constrictive, jargon-prone methodologies of so
much of the ideological scholarship.
   A narrative study can make an original contribution for two reasons.
First, the 1990s ‘end of history’ made Clemente’s focus on class conﬂict
seem passé. Second, connected to this, a ﬁfth category of Spanish histo-
riography has emerged which, to a large degree, has liberated itself both
from the ideological hegemony of Marxism on the one hand and the
rebarbative legacy of Francoism on the other. Much of this feat may be
attributed to Jordi Canal’s now standard work, El carlismo (2004). This
                                            Introduction, History and Sources   9


has revised the Marxist and neo-Carlist emphasis on structural causation
by showing the ‘multifaceted’ nature of its militants in different regions,
social contexts and times, distinguishing between Carlists as pragmatists
and Carlism as a creed. It has also rejected the neo-traditionalist ﬁxa-
tion with the ‘Marxist distortion’ of history: in claiming to be apolitical
and interested only in ‘objective’ facts, the Navarra school has failed to
acknowledge its own right-wing political mission (i.e. another politicisa-
tion of history).29 The freer intellectual environment since the Cold War
inspired new research questions, such as what quotidian Carlism meant
in practice.30 This has been answered by outstanding regional research
by such ﬁfth-category scholars as Pedro Rújula and José Ramón Urquijo,
who have shown in the Maestrazgo and the Basque country respectively
that support for Carlism was far more conditional than traditionalists,
neo-traditionalists and even Liberals believed.31
   The sum of Spanish historiography allows two relevant observations
to be made for this volume. First, it lays bare just how few histories of the
First Carlist War beyond travel and campaign narratives are available in
English. Although serious studies have been written, they have discussed
the First Carlist War only as part of either a wider narrative or a particu-
lar interest.32 The best English-language study is by John Coverdale, but
even this covers only one-third of the conﬂict’s span and, more impor-
tantly for this book’s rationale, explains the Carlist side much more than
the Cristino.33
   Second, twentieth-century research into the First Carlist War has
been more interested in the Carlist losers than the Cristino victors.
Nineteenth-century writers often referred to this conﬂict as the ‘seven
years’ war’, arguably a better title as it removes Carlist ownership of
the conﬂict and instead obliges scholars to understand the war’s impact
on the Cristino side. Carlism was both Europe’s most enduring legit-
imism and, paradoxically, a creed of losers, even when it was part of
the winning side in 1939. As a corollary to this, Spain’s Liberal revo-
lution, which was deﬁnitively victorious as a consequence of the First
Carlist War, has been seen as the normal trajectory of Spanish history.
This attitude was internalised by the school of Marxist social history
pioneered in Spain in the 1950s by Miguel Artola-Gallego, which was
morally driven by the need to historicise the Left’s defeat in the recent
Civil War, in other words, to explain the defeat of the ‘normal’ trajec-
tory of history. To this end, these social historians footnoted the military
history of the Cristino side to what they saw as the far more impor-
tant social and political transformation of the hallowed ‘bourgeois’ or
‘liberal’ revolution which Marxism could explain in structural changes
10   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


of the 1830s without having to resort to the contingencies of military
history.34 They found Spain’s 1830s liberal revolution not to have been
arrogant, as the neo-traditionalists held, but timid. The capitalist prop-
erty revolution actually left the old nobility’s socio-economic hegemony
unmolested and frustrated the ‘correct’ emergence of new forces as dur-
ing the French Revolution.35 As such, it is hard to categorise the Artola
school as part of the First Carlist War historiography, as these social his-
torians, with some important exceptions,36 saw the war as a symptom
rather than a cause of social conﬂict. As a result, the Cristino response to
the First Carlist War has not been studied with anything like the degree
of innovation as the Carlism side. Because of this, perhaps, the con-
ﬂict’s collective memory remains weighted towards the smaller Carlist
side, in their victory anthem ‘Oriamendi’ and the recording of colour-
ful village memory (‘Espartero hid in this farmhouse’).37 The relative
dearth of Liberal memory is especially stark when compared with the
1872–76 Second Carlist War, a conﬂict which forged a galaxy of Spanish
intellectuals across the political spectrum in a European context of class
conﬂict.38
   Yet the Cristino side deserves a study of its own in English: it was
both by far the larger side and ultimately victorious. As Cristino Spain
was the government rather than insurgent side, its hundreds of thou-
sands of conscripts had no a priori reason to be ideologically committed
(although interesting exceptions can be seen in the volunteer free corps
and militia) as they were recruited indiscriminately and via the estab-
lished arms of the state.39 Even during the most extreme episodes
(1835–37) of Carlist expeditions and Liberal revolutions, the vast major-
ity of Spanish territory and population remained outside of formal
Carlist control. Thus, the civil war, in all its diverse demands of mobili-
sation, violence, insecurity, militancy and deprivation, impacted on far
more inhabitants in Cristino than Carlist zones of control. Even cities
such as Málaga and Cádiz, hundreds of miles beyond formal front lines,
were affected by the civil war. Given that Cristino Spain’s war with
the Carlists profoundly shaped the 1830s liberal revolution, a narrative
study of the popular impact would seem particularly propitious. A study
of the militancies of combatants and non-combatants would offer schol-
ars a more diverse understanding of the conﬂict, going beyond the
historiographical pitfalls of elitist censure or apology and beyond struc-
tural analyses of the ancien régime. The civil war, after all, left no part
of Spain untouched and over seven years killed 5 per cent of the 1833
population. A new study therefore needs to show how the experience
of warfare shaped the politics and society of 1830s Spain, especially
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   11


the Cristino zone. My approach is no whim: the late Julio Aróstegui
observed that ‘the options for violence by individuals or groups ended
up creating cultures of their own’.40 In this spirit, this book tells an
untold story of how otherwise undistinguished Spaniards who hitherto
had been absent from political history underwent seven years of bru-
tal civil war and revolution and framed this military experience in a
politically meaningful and radical way.
   The state of affairs described above creates virgin territory for new
interpretations and justiﬁes the sources I use for this volume, most
of which logically come from Cristino rather than Carlist quarters.
I defend this stance in part in deference to the fact that Carlist archives
in the Basque country have already been mined by some outstand-
ing researchers,41 and in part because the Carlist sources I do use (the
Gaceta Oﬁcial and published memoirs) reinforce my general approach,
which is to show the impact of the war on Spain as a whole. This ambi-
tious task must inevitably fail to exhaust all sources, and experts will
doubtless be alarmed at omissions. Nonetheless, my combination of
secondary with primary sources must perforce appear selective within
the constraints of a medium-sized monograph. The primary sources
are in three categories, published memoirs, newspapers and unpub-
lished archives. The rationale for using memoirs, from both Carlist and
Cristino authors, is explained by the events described. Cristino news-
papers are particularly valuable, especially the advanced Liberal Eco del
Comercio, because their networks of provincial correspondents reported
on local military developments, and newspapers led the maturing Left
versus Right divide in Liberal politics. My unpublished sources come
from three major archives in Madrid (the Archivo Histórico Nacional,
Real Academia de Historia, Archivo General del Palacio), the munici-
pal archives of Barcelona, Málaga and San Sebastián, and the university
archive of Zaragoza. The unpublished campaign letters of the Cristino
‘Duke of Victory’, General Espartero, complete my Spanish archive base,
whilst some foreign sources (George Borrow, French and British press,
German campaign memoirs) help to internationalise the conﬂict.
   A note of caution is necessary with regard to my use of newspapers
as a primary source. News of atrocities was often embellished in the
telling. The war shattered normal systems of information gathering,
and terriﬁed correspondents often lent credence to the worst rumours of
Carlist atrocities, which subsequently sometimes appeared unsubstanti-
ated in the Cristino press. The press thus contributed to the perceptions
of such atrocities, and the degree of terror depended as much on per-
ception as concrete facts. The hold of ‘Carlist atrocities’ over Cristino
12   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


opinion is explained not only by the events to which they referred
but also by deeper mentalities and traditions through which they were
expressed. Neither the content nor the vocabulary was new, owing to
the trauma of Spain’s recent Peninsular and Royalist Wars. But the
greater duration and irregular quality of the First Carlist War created
a press-driven ‘myth-cycle’ which ﬂourished on patchy knowledge of
the march of events, and reduced strange experiences and inexplica-
ble events to a conspiracy of Carlist ﬁfth-columnists, poisonings, prison
breaks, arms storage in churches and so forth. Confused and poorly
led Cristino conscripts in unfamiliar territory sometimes ﬁred on each
other by mistake, but these shots were reported to have been ﬁred by
‘Carlist’ inhabitants: with dire results. As the war in 1835 expanded
beyond the Basque country, demographic factors increased the scope
both for actual and ‘reported’ atrocities to take place. Cristino atrocities
were often harsher in such irregular areas of Carlist control as north-
ern Castile and, especially, Aragón and Catalonia, precisely because,
in contrast to the Basque country, ‘suspect’ men of military age were
usually encountered inside hostile villages. (The Carlist Basque coun-
try, by contrast, had been thoroughly militarised by mid-war and thus
offered greater resistance to Cristino incursions, and those incursions
that did take place usually encountered few ‘suspect’ combatants as vir-
tually every available man was at the front.) Equally, Carlist raiders into
Cristino territory encountered a vulnerable population disproportion-
ately composed of women and children. Masculine anxieties in a culture
of honour must account for part of the rise in reports in the press of rape
and murder.
   Thus, even though real atrocities took place, it is in fact impossible to
know whether they can really be taken at face value. This uncertainty
can be mitigated in two ways, of a practical and conceptual nature. Prac-
tically, I have endeavoured to substantiate accounts of atrocities and
counter-atrocities, or at least tried to qualify their reporting. Readers
may still feel a humanitarian scepticism at the evidence offered through-
out these chapters, and such a response would ironically match that
of the Cristino Liberals whose politics were radicalised by the need to
combat ‘savage’ Carlists and the backward religiosity and royalism they
represented. Conceptually, then, what matters is not what happened but
what was believed to be happening. Much of the political radicalisation
of Cristino Spain was caused by ‘news’ as much as lived experience. This
news often came from anonymous sources, a routine cause of frustration
for historians interested in the social background of protagonists and
in corroborating facts. Yet anonymity also reveals two types of sources,
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   13


one motivated vindictively and the other ethically; that is to say, either
delation or whistle-blowing. These motives had an intimately violent
dimension that characterised the local experience of civil war. In sum,
the questionable veracity of sources is not the central issue. There was
enough truth in the sources as a whole to unleash violence and polarisa-
tion, plunging Spain into seven long years of civil war. The Carlists were
always the smaller side in this chaos, which means that there is greater
scope to study the impact of the war in Cristino areas of control. Yet the
frequently asymmetrical nature of expeditions, banditry, revolution and
conspiracy undermined Cristino control and gave the war an enduring
dynamic of insecurity. As most of this book studies the insecure Cristino
zone rather than the Carlist heartlands, it is helpful to set the context
by introducing the debates and dimensions of early Carlism.

Early Carlism

Carlism’s ﬁrst ‘safe zone’ was in the Basque country. The Basque coun-
try comprises the three Basque lordships – later provinces – proper,
Alava, Guipúzcoa and Vizcaya, and the ancient autonomous Kingdom
of Navarra. The early attempts of the Viceroy of Navarra to recruit vil-
lagers into Cristino ranks failed miserably, even when service wages were
offered of double, then treble, what the Carlist insurgents promised.42
Coverdale summarised four factors as to why this was so: (1) traditional
society was still economically viable for most of population, hence liber-
alism was seen a threat; (2) natural leadership strata (clergy, landowners)
lived cheek by jowl with peasants and supported the Carlist cause;
(3) the terrain was sufﬁciently abrupt and broken to prevent the use
of cavalry and to facilitate small bands to escape (to change their shirts
and ﬁght another day), whilst the landscape was densely populated
enough to allow regular food and supplies; and (4) the appearance of
the extremely gifted guerrilla leader, Tomás de Zumalacárregui. Other
parts of Spain may have had one, or some of these factors, but not
all four.43 (In the Aragonese Maestrazgo a comparable situation would
pertain only from 1836.44 ) The Basque provinces, like Catalonia, also
had a long-standing tradition of irregular military service (in the Basque
country recruits were called requetés and in Catalonia somatenes). The
Basque Carlist acceptance of war and armed struggle as a legitimate
means to seize power gave the cause its most enduring characteristic,
resurfacing 100 years later in preparation for the Spanish Civil War as
‘a quintessential part of the Carlist way of life’.45 Contemporary writers
noted the independent, agile and hard-drinking (by Spanish standards)
14   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Basque character, believing this to be the result of centuries of autonomy
and hardy geography.46 Recent victories against the French taught
the Basques to feel naturally superior in terms of military prowess.47
Writers of Basque culture have stressed the provinces’ historical pre-
eminence (the three lordships – señoríos – and the Kingdom of Navarra
matched other Spanish kingdoms in longevity). ‘False’ religions had
never penetrated the Basque country, and during the sixteenth cen-
tury the kingdom was rewarded accordingly with the grant of noble
status to all indigenous Basques, which meant that nobility became far
less signiﬁcant as a factor in social differentiation than in the rest of
Spain. This ancient history gave the Basques the conﬁdence to nego-
tiate their Spanishness on their own terms, via their fueros, language,
Catholic piety and the importance of the self-contained homestead – or
caserío (which was handed down in its entirety to a single male heir) –
in family and social relations.48
   The Basque fueros have played a major role in debates about early
Carlism. Marxist historians objectiﬁed the fueros and the local elites
they empowered as a doomed defence of pre-capitalist socio-economic
norms. The popular Catholicism which distinguished pre-capitalist
Basque society, and which was the cause and motive for popular
Carlism, was merged by beneﬁciaries of the fueros into the self-interested
war cry of ‘religion and fueros’, tying their debatable merits to the unim-
peachable merits of religion.49 But it would be superﬁcial to explain
Basque Carlism as a war in defence of the fueros. Whereas Carlist pro-
paganda defended the fueros, it did so in the defensive tone of the
‘ancient constitution’ violated by the pre-war police state (which in
the Basque country intensiﬁed its activities after 1830 whilst relenting
elsewhere in Spain), and by the martial law of Cristino ‘pashas’ once
the war had started.50 In fact early Basque Carlists did not place foral
interests foremost. The Carlists’ second-in-command claimed that the
Basque insurgents of 1833 saw the fueros as secondary to the legitimate
royal succession, and his subaltern, Wilhelm von Rahden, whose for-
eignness made him disinterested, agreed.51 Even though the October
1833 Carlist insurgency in Alava mentioned the fueros, its leader, Valen-
tín Verástegui, had a vested family interest. But the proclamations of
the insurgent king, Don Carlos, were slower to invoke them: not until
September 1834 did he make an explicitly foralist proclamation.52 The
Pretender’s foralism was not proactive but purely in reaction to the fact
that the rest of Spain (which had long been stripped of its fueros) had
failed to rally to his cause. He was forced to rely on the fueros because
no other wing of the Fernandine state, neither the army nor (mostly)
                                          Introduction, History and Sources   15


the Church, defected to the Carlist cause.53 In fact, the fueros grew in
importance only when military victory seemed impossible in the wake
of the failed Royal Expedition, and as Carlist peace feelers voiced a grow-
ing willingness to abandon Don Carlos who, since 1834, had been the
fueros’ champion.
   In sum, the fueros do not by themselves explain the prevalence of
Basque Carlism; yet Basque Carlism is also impossible to understand
without them, not least because their most outspoken defenders were
to be found in Carlist ranks and their most outspoken critics amongst
the Cristino Liberals. This dynamic was especially intense in the Basque
country itself, which entered the war bitterly divided. The port-cities
of Bilbao (Vizcaya) and especially San Sebastián (Guipúzcoa) welcomed
their Cristino garrisons. This was because the Cristino-Liberal policy of
moving the customs frontier from the River Ebro to the actual Spanish
frontier in the Pyrenees promised to achieve by war what frustrated com-
mercial elites had failed to achieve at the foral level for decades.54 Even
in the rural areas satisﬁed with their fueros, local juntas and deputa-
tions were split between supporters of Cristinos and Carlists in 1833.
Cristinos were sidelined and then expelled, but the powers of the fueros
themselves were increasingly curtailed by the Carlist Royal Government
in the name of the war effort. These actions made the government
unpopular, not least because they were frequently carried out by non-
Basque Carlists, ‘Castilian’ refugees from Cristino areas of control whom
Basques suspected of meaning to harm local interests.
   Such Basque versus Castilian friction within Carlism, combined with
the wider Cristino versus Carlist struggle, led some Basque nation-
alists to originate their cause in 1830s Carlism, stressing inchoate
wartime demands for Navarrese independence and the ancient fueros
as a blueprint for modern autonomy. The most vociferous nineteenth-
century example was the French Basque Augustin Chaho, for whom the
First Carlist War was a war between the Basque country and Castile.55
But such teleological nationalism deﬁes scrutiny. The late nineteenth-
century founder of Basque nationalism may have come from Carlist
ancestry, but Sabino Arana rejected Carlism because it sacriﬁced Basque
interests to Spanish dynastic politics.56 However, the link persisted in
the minds of several Basque nationalists. In 1935 Bernardo Estornés
Lasa claimed Carlism’s ﬁrst warlord ‘wanted to proclaim Basque inde-
pendence’, and in more recent years the vandalism inﬂicted upon
the ‘English cemetery’ at San Sebastián by the armed Basque sepa-
ratist organisation, Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), shows a link between
memory and contemporary militancy.57
16   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   In fact Francoism manoeuvred the Carlists – who had already merged
with National and Traditionalist Catholics in 1931 to become the Tradi-
tionalist Communion – into a right-wing coalition of virulent Spanish
unitary nationalism and anti-separatism, the very antithesis of Basque
independence. Whereas Franco rewarded his allied provinces of Navarra
and Alava with limited autonomy, he stripped the Republican provinces
of Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa of theirs. Franco-era Traditionalists lauded
their 1830s Basque forefathers and their fueros as traditionalist models
not for Euzkadi, but for Spain as a whole. Although some complained at
how the ‘ungrateful’ Francoist regime was pushing the Basque language
and fueros into virtual extinction, most stressed their national region-
alism as Spaniards above all else, rejecting regional nationalism.58 That
said, even though Basque Carlists during the First Carlist War were not
ﬁghting for the independence of their homeland in the modern sense,
they certainly formed a caucus, not just against the Cristinos but also
against the non-Basque Carlists (the ‘Castilians’). This Basque–Carlist
cohesiveness was reinforced by priests who were always local as they
had to hear confessions in Euskera. Cloistered clergy, meanwhile, had
comparatively little presence in the Basque country, and those institu-
tions which did exist were disproportionately of the humbler Franciscan
orders; this explains the alliance of the vast majority of Basque religious
with Carlism.59 Thus, even though Carlism was not Basque proto-
nationalism, the Basque Carlists certainly mustered enough identity –
in particular, popular Catholic piety – to separate themselves culturally
and psychologically from the rest of Spain. Evidence of this is the persis-
tent xenophobic term guiri coined by Basque Carlists, an abbreviation
of the Euskera guiristino, or Spanish Cristino name of their enemy, a
term which survived the conﬂict to describe the centralising paramil-
itary police force, the Guardia Civil and, in the twentieth century, even
foreign tourists.
   But the Basque Carlists represented just one part (albeit the biggest
part) of the insurrection. Carlism in the 1830s was Janus-faced. Whereas
in the Basque country Carlism defended a still-viable socially conserva-
tive, stable rural society from the onslaught of liberalism, in the eastern
areas of rural Aragón, Valencia and Catalonia it was a protest vehicle
for peasants whose livelihoods were already being eroded by capital-
ism in nearby urban centres and by the Liberal property revolution.60
These socio-economic issues were the reasons why a second ‘safe zone’
for Carlism was forged in Lower Aragón and adjoining inland areas of
Valencia and the northern extremities of historic Murcia (an area known
as the Maestrazgo). The character of the war was different here. The
                                           Introduction, History and Sources   17


rural population was hostile to the cash economy, whilst recurrent Lib-
eral land reform in the Maestrazgo encroached upon the de facto rather
than de jure property rights in agriculture of ‘tenants’ who were really
common-law smallholders, or peasants. Nonetheless, these regions did
not enjoy the fueros of the Basques either, which meant that the popu-
lation here had perhaps the most to lose and the least to gain from the
war, as even Cristino urban centres in the region had to spend all their
economic gains defending themselves against the impoverished rural
population which joined the Carlist guerrillas. Thus, as Pedro Rújula,
Josep Fontana and Manuel Ardit have explained, this rural economic
stress fuelled such other factors as the local Carlist religious, and the lack
of sound administrative organisation and communication (caused by
adverse terrain), in turning the Maestrazgo Carlist.61 The Carlist insur-
gency gave political expression to recurring rural émeutes in Valencia
caused by a legacy of Spain’s harshest feudal regime.62 The Carlist effort
in the Maestrazgo was led from 1835 by Ramón Cabrera and went
through three incremental stages. During the ﬁrst stage, 1833–35, the
Carlist effort here was dispersed by the Cristinos and conﬁned to rural
guerrilla warfare. The second phase, 1836–37, saw the breakthrough as
Cabrera expanded the boundaries of the Carlist safe zone and turned it
into a military state. The third phase, 1838–39, in contrast to the stagna-
tion in the Carlist Basque country, saw the Maestrazgo reach its apogee
in terms of geography, military victories and recruitment. The August
1839 Peace Treaty in the north orphaned these achievements and sent
Cabrera into exile the following year, ending the First Carlist War.63
   A third Carlist safe zone operated in the Catalan interior adjacent to
the Pyrenees. Economic crisis again explains much of the rural sup-
port for Carlism here, but in contrast to the situation in the Basque
country, the nature of Catalan Carlism was not well understood by
Cristino Liberals at the time. For Espoz y Mina, Captain-General of the
Principality, his Catalan enemies were no social bandits but incorrigible
mountain folk, driven to violence from superstition and lack of civic
education.64 His fellow Liberal, Evaristo de San Miguel, held a vague but
kinder judgement: ‘agricultural improvements’ based on the true ful-
ﬁlment of the Constitution, so he thought, could win over the rural
masses from Carlism.65 It was not until the twentieth century that social
historians probed the economic complexities of Carlism in both the
Maestrazgo and Catalonia. Thus, the threat of Liberal property revolu-
tion in the Maestrazgo, and memories of how this, in the early 1820s,
had threatened common-law ‘ownership’, from 1833 pitted the country-
side against the towns.66 Studies of Catalonia, meanwhile, have shown
18   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


how economic reforms impoverished such declining economic centres
in the hinterland of Liberal Barcelona as Baix Camp and Berguedà, a sit-
uation which, in contrast to their counterparts in Castile and Andalucía,
persuaded many Catalan aristocrats to support Carlism.67 Thus, eco-
nomic factors explain some of the motivations for Carlism: a viable
rural economy in the Basque country, a traumatised economy in the
Maestrazgo and an impoverished rural economy in Catalonia. But the
economic factors cannot be simpliﬁed as a ‘rural–urban divide’, as even
in urban settings artisans threatened by recurrent Liberal abolition of the
guilds and redundant ofﬁceholders (cesantes) could be drawn to Carlism,
whilst, by contrast, villagers who had beneﬁted from the Liberal prop-
erty revolution would correspondingly turn Cristino;68 ﬂight either from
or to the countryside in many cases entrenched a rural (Carlist) ver-
sus urban (Cristino) divide, but as an effect rather than a cause of the
conﬂict. Moreover, as the 1832–33 palace revolution had driven Carlist
conspirators from the court and into the country, regional hierarchies
decided local popular political allegiance. The poorest areas of Spain,
which were in Extremadura and Andalucía, were lost causes for Don
Carlos. Carlist writers explained this by congratulating themselves on
how advanced, rather than backward, areas embraced the legitimate
cause.69 But the bald fact was that any nobles outside of the three heart-
lands pronouncing in favour of Don Carlos would have been banished
from Madrid and had their extensive lands and incomes in the south
seized. The northern nobility, by contrast, had either few or no lands
to lose.70 Economic factors thus explain the structural context, indeed
it would be strange if they did not, given that the Spanish state in 1833
collected in revenues barely more than half what it had at its imperial
peak in 1792.71 But they do not explain everything.
   Further explanation can be sought in the Carlists’ exploitation of
local military traditions, although recent research has shown this to be
more coercive in nature than voluntarist, as was previously assumed.
Both the Basque country and rural Catalonia had strong armed militia
traditions, the requetés originating in Navarra and the somatenes, respec-
tively. These militia, especially the Basque militia, which had employed
irregular resistance against the French during the periods 1793–95 and
1808–13 and against the Liberals during 1820–23, certainly possessed
a psychological ‘DNA’ of popular armed mobilisation. Carlist writers,
especially leftist neo-Carlists attracted to the ‘people’s war’ paradigm,
claimed these mobilisations were voluntary rather than coercive in
nature: ‘Don Carlos’s army was fundamentally popular, nourished by
volunteers . . . although ﬁnes were imposed on families who resisted
                                           Introduction, History and Sources   19


the calls to arms, these acted more as a tax than a ﬁne, and with-
out exception targeted families of Liberal sympathies.’72 But in fact the
Carlists suffered almost as much from draft-dodging and desertion as the
Cristinos, or rather popular Carlism was, at least in part, draft-dodging
and desertion. Even in the case of the Basque country, recent research
shows Carlist insurgent leaders at best tolerating rather than endorsing
the early phenomenon of ‘shirt-changing’ amongst their men.73 Yet for
a long time, shirt-changing, the practice of Carlist insurgents dispersing
in the face of superior Cristino forces, was romanticised as something
nobler than desertion, as a form of voluntarism winked at by other-
wise very authoritarian ofﬁcers. Certainly, geography allowed Carlist
combatants in the Basque country to return to their homesteads rela-
tively easily, concealing their weapons usually in the full knowledge of
civil authorities who not only tolerated but also protected them on the
understanding that they would return to ﬁght the Cristinos as soon as
they could do so with advantage, or at least that they would not cause
trouble with Carlist military authorities. But the consolidation of Carlist
military control in the Basque country diminished this practice, and
even though shirt-changing remained common on expeditions and in
patchy areas of Carlist control, the Basque safe zone, and to a lesser
extent, those in the Maestrazgo and Catalonia, produced predictable
and coercive patterns of conscription into increasingly regular armies.
This militarisation was answered by widespread draft evasion and deser-
tion, not on the scale of Cristino Spain, but signiﬁcant and deleterious
to the war effort nonetheless. Thus, even though the Carlists’ exploita-
tion of local military traditions was more successful, as we shall see, than
that of the Cristinos, it was distinctly qualiﬁed.
   The nature and extent of Carlism beyond the three safe zones diver-
siﬁed still further, and its adherents may be differentiated into Carlists
of conscience (‘civic Carlists’) and of violence (facciosos or ‘insurgents’).
Their geographical distribution was patchy and changing, although sup-
port for Carlism was generally strong in northern Castile, Asturias and
Galicia. Galicia was especially prone to Carlism as its clergy were lease
owners of tiny, subdivided peasant plots (minifundia) in a social geog-
raphy sometimes referred to as ‘Spain’s Ireland’. Several Galician clerics
self-interestedly mobilised their rural dependents against the enemy’s
property revolution.74 In general militant Carlism was dispersed into
the countryside and away from the larger towns. Rural pockets were
often held by ‘insurgents’, but many of these ‘Carlists’ were really ban-
dits looking for political cover or deserters from the Cristino army. Many
more Carlists were peaceful (‘civic Carlists’), and were found, above all,
20   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


amongst the religious but also in other walks of life. Even the largest
Cristino towns contained Carlist sympathisers (and Cristino support-
ers also remained in revolted provinces). Those ﬁnding themselves in
the wrong zone could be subjected to ﬁnancial penalties, imprisonment
and even death, in proportion to the approach of enemy forces, popu-
lar demands for reprisals and the radicalisation of politics produced by
the war.
   In sum, the diverse dimensions of early Carlism present scholars with
a striking paradox, namely that 1830s Carlism was militarily most devel-
oped at a time when its ideology was least cohesive. Early Carlism was
a mix of radical royalists, absolutists and theocrats, prisoners of Spain’s
multiple pasts, and rivals in court and military politics.75 Later civil wars
during the periods 1872–76 and 1936–39 never came close to threat-
ening a Carlist conquest of the state to the extent that 1833–40 did.
Yet Carlist ideology – its traditional culture, intense Catholicism and
espousal of a medievalist decentralised political structure – was more
developed then.76 Thus, events demand greater scrutiny than would
be the case in studies of the later Carlist conﬂicts; they justify this
book’s chronological history approach, liberal with the conﬂict’s ide-
ological background but rigorous with its physical manifestations. This
approach can be justiﬁed by the scale of the conﬂict. The First Carlist
War was the bloodiest civil war in nineteenth-century Europe – by some
measurements bloodier than the Spanish Civil War – with military casu-
alties alone amounting to as much as 2.5 per cent of Spain’s entire
population.77 This notwithstanding, it is the great conﬂict of which
most scholars and students outside of Spain are ignorant. If this vol-
ume makes even the slightest dent on this ignorance, this author will be
satisﬁed.
2
The First Carlist War: Origins




Ferdinand VII described himself as a cork in a bottle of beer: as soon
as that cork was removed, all the troubles of Spain would explode into
the open. He is routinely considered the worst of all Spanish monarchs.
Timid, mediocre and vindictive, his reign compounded such geopoliti-
cal disasters as the Peninsular War and the interconnected loss of Spain’s
mainland American empire. During the Peninsular War (virtually all
of which Ferdinand would sit out in the gilded captivity of France) a
Liberal clique had emerged to dominate the politics of the Spanish Patri-
ots who were ﬁghting against France in the name of the captive King.
This clique, led by such enlightened young nobles as Count Toreno,
Agustín de Argüelles and Martínez de la Rosa, was besieged in Spain’s
most bourgeois port-city, Cádiz, during 1810–12, crucial years in which
the Liberals pointed to the repeated defeats sustained by the Patriot reg-
ular armies in the rest of Spain as evidence of the need for a ‘Great Leap
Forward’ of political reform, the most iconic and advanced of which
was the Constitution of 1812, also known as the Constitution of Cádiz,
which would be adopted as a mascot by Spanish Radicals for much of
the nineteenth century.1 During the whole of the Peninsular War the
French army never conquered Cádiz, but bombarded it from afar on
occasion, and this gave the Patriot Liberals the illusion that they were
sharing the suffering of the rest of Spain.
   The Liberals, resentful of the eighteenth-century militarisation of
Spain’s Bourbon monarchy and resolute in their belief in the rights of
the individual against arbitrary power, cast a suspicious eye towards
Spain’s Bourbon military, even though most members of this had
sided with the Spanish Patriots in 1808 and subsequently took to the
ﬁeld against appalling odds, never abandoning the struggle against
Napoleon.2 The social composition of the ofﬁcer corps was already

                                   21
22   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


changing in response to the demands of the war. The revolution of
1808 saw ofﬁcers from undistinguished social backgrounds rise through
the Patriot ranks, whilst the Patriot provisional government (Junta
Central) embarked upon crash military reforms which were at least
beginning to improve the army’s ﬁghting potential. Yet the Spanish
Liberals divided opinion both inside and outside the military. Liberal
journalists, taking advantage of Cádiz’s ﬁrst (and ﬂeeting) free press,
frequently goaded Bourbon commanders to prove their patriotism in
battle against obvious French superiority on Spain’s high plateaus – with
appalling results. Just as the Carlist War would show, Spanish generals
did not like being second-guessed by civilians. Even though the Spanish
army did eventually prevail, it did so only as a humiliatingly junior
partner under British leadership, ﬁnanced and even clothed by British
subsidies.3 Factionalism, also a dominant feature in the Carlist War,
characterised the Liberals who, from the convocation of the Cortes in
Cádiz in 1810, increasingly dominated the war effort. On the one hand,
the Patriot Liberals championed several military mediocrities, such as
General Ballesteros (who had unsuccessfully challenged the Duke of
Wellington’s appointment in 1812 to the Supreme Command of Allied
Forces), mainly because they proved useful agents in domestic politics.4
On the other hand, the Liberals exaggerated out of all proportion the
effectiveness of the famous guerrilleros, or Patriot guerrilla bands, who
have given the Peninsular War its most enduring image. Viewed by the
Liberals as a useful counterweight to the ‘despotic’ army, the guerrillas
also neatly served the ideological purpose of the ‘people in arms’, literal
embodiments of national sovereignty – though the reality was, in fact,
far more complex.5 Meanwhile the Liberals, especially the more radical
ones, planned to check the Bourbon army with the National Militia, a
part-time citizens’ force organised at local level and in the hands of prop-
erty owners. The National Militia was written into the Constitution, yet
its existence during the Peninsular War was ephemeral: called into being
as late as April 1814, it survived only two weeks in the places where it
had even organised at all before the royalist coup of May rendered all
the reforms of the Liberals null and void. Yet this seed would germinate
during the later Liberal revolutions of 1820–23, and especially during
the Carlist War of 1833–40 when the militia would be dragged as much
into conﬂict in Liberal politics as against the Carlists.
   Given the anti-militarist trajectory of the Liberals, a faction grew
within the army that was hostile to the whole constitutional exper-
iment. Some historians have explained this disaffection in genera-
tional terms, with older ofﬁcers who had established themselves during
                                             The First Carlist War: Origins   23


Bourbon absolutism being more hostile than their younger counter-
parts, whose more progressive outlook had been forged in the war and
revolution of 1808–14.6 But whilst some ofﬁcers were certainly ideolog-
ically opposed to progressive politics, many more, by 1814, had learnt
to become anti-Liberal because of the army’s shabby treatment at the
hands of politicians: this attitude was common to both old and new
ofﬁcers. Army discontent was matched by a growing conservative group
in the Cortes whom the Liberals called the ‘servile ones’ (serviles) who
seconded the Church’s forlorn attempts to save the Inquisition (the
Holy Ofﬁce was abolished in January 1813). Whether the Liberals would
prevail in their reformist mission depended on the nature of the immi-
nent peace over which King Ferdinand – the legitimate monarch in
whose name even the street radicals of Cádiz agitated – would preside.
In December 1813, Napoleon, in a forlorn bid to split the Spanish Patri-
ots from their victorious British alliance, dispossessed his brother of his
now negligible Spanish realm and released Ferdinand back into Spain.
Whilst the Patriots of all political stripes rejected Napoleon’s gambit, the
arrival of Ferdinand on Spanish soil conﬁrmed the Liberals’ worst fears.
   The serviles of the Cortes issued a legitmist ‘Manifesto of the Persians’.
The title refers to the Persians of antiquity who suffered anarchy after
the death of their King; now the Spanish Persians appealed to the
King to end the anarchy visited on Spain by the Constitution of
1812. But this manifesto was not absolutist in tone but traditionalist.
It wanted Ferdinand to overthrow not just the Liberal Constitution
but also the Enlightenment-inspired reforms of the eighteenth cen-
tury from which liberalism had progressed. Such traditionalism meant
restoring the medieval rights of the king, Church and nobility, above
all the Church. Even though the Constitution had reserved a stri-
dently confessional role for the Spanish state, an anomaly in an other-
wise very progressive charter, the traditionalists countered that Spain’s
Catholicism came from God and history, not as a gift from the arrogant
young lawyers of Cádiz. With more reservations the absolutists agreed,
although the absolutist restoration of 1823 would be less clerical than
1814. During the crisis of 1813–14 these nuances on the Right were
shelved by the abolition of the Constitution. For this task, Ferdinand
needed a military coup, just as he had needed one in 1808 to oust his
father from the throne. Most of the army was happy to oblige and to
coalesce around the ‘reaction incarnate’, General Eguía, whose deﬁant
wearing of outmoded wigs seemed to symbolise a desire to return Spain
to the happier times of absolutism. On 4 May 1814, King Ferdinand,
having amassed enough military support to prevail, decreed all acts
24    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


of the Cortes null and void. The Liberals were imprisoned, exiled or
banished from court, and were thus tarred with the same brush as the
afrancesados – the ‘Frenchiﬁed’ servants of the vanquished Bonaparte
regime. Thus ensued six years of what is known to Spanish history as
the Sexenio absolutista, Ferdinand’s absolute rather than traditionalist
(with the exception of reviving the Inquisition) monarchy. The White
atmosphere of May 1814 was described by a Zaragoza diarist:

     11 May: Around 300 men assembled in the centre of the city at
     midnight to smash the tablet (lápida) representing the Constitution,
     throwing its rubble into the Ebro, and leaving in its place vivas to
     Fernando VII.

     12 May: The ‘Great Day’. All householders have been ordered to illu-
     minate their windows for three days in honour of the king’s coup, on
     pain of being considered ‘traitors to the patria’.

     14 May: More than 4,000 copies of the king’s decree sold in one
     day, joy increasing all the more when lists were read out of all the
     imprisonments made in Madrid.7

Yet Ferdinand was unable to restore peace with stability. Instead of liv-
ing up to his wartime propaganda image of a hero of suffering Spain,
martyr and ﬁrst amongst Spaniards, Ferdinand treated his kingdom
as a personal patrimony rather than a sovereign nation, whilst plac-
ing himself in the hands of the Spanish Church far more than his
eighteenth-century predecessors did, thereby storing up false theocratic
expectations for the future.8 No peace dividend eased his lot. The post-
war peace established by the Congress of Vienna saw Spain formally
demoted to second-power status. The future peace of Europe would
be directed by the powerful states of Russia, Austria, Prussia and Great
Britain, and even defeated France would be welcomed back into the fold
in response to renewed turmoil in Spain. Even if Ferdinand had had any
vision of Spain’s place in the new era of peace (and all the evidence sug-
gests that he did not), it is difﬁcult to see how he might have achieved
it. The demographic and economic devastation caused by the Penin-
sular War was compounded by the post-1810 Spanish American revolt,
which ﬁrst reduced, and then curtailed altogether, the remittances of
silver and gold that had funded the eighteenth-century growth in state
power. The consolidation of Spanish American independence between
1810 and 1836 caused great economic loss to Basque exports. It also
disturbed traditional outlets for emigration at a time when the rate of
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   25


Basque population growth was accelerating. This meant that Basque
communities which, in the eighteenth century, would have exported
its surplus manhood to the Americas now faced a bottleneck of impov-
erished and underemployed men of military age who had little lose by
joining Carlist insurrections.9 The ﬁnancial shortfall caused by the loss
of empire, meanwhile, had to be made up by attempts to modernise
methods of raising internal revenue. In 1817 a ﬁscal reform created the
derechos de puertas, which saddled municipalities with a greater burden
of taxation to fund state penury.10 Smugglers and bandits who managed
to dodge provincial revenue guards became as much popular heroes as
saboteurs of the state coffers. Meanwhile, the voided attempts of the
Liberals to substitute state jurisdiction in the countryside for that of
the manor, thereby creating a free market in landownership, were now
revived as a desperate means of raising revenue.11 Attempts to conﬁs-
cate and sell off ecclesiastical and military lands met with the successful
opposition of the Church and nobility. But a portion of lands owned
directly by the Crown, together with some common lands held by
municipalities, were sold off.12 Whilst this measure barely helped the
state’s ﬁnances, it obviously reduced the resources of the municipalities
and squeezed the amount of land available for rent.
   Underlying the economic crisis was what contemporaries identiﬁed
as a moral crisis. Parish priests anathematised the recent ‘atheism’ and
‘Jacobinism’ of the Liberals in equal proportion to what one royal
decree termed the ‘vices introduced during the war’, which ranged from
widespread prostitution to the new practice for women, even respectable
ones, to walk the streets unaccompanied by men.13 This practice would
be compounded during the Carlist War when women entered public
roles in the absence of male heads of family, a handful even becoming
militants and strikers. The rural masses, which during the war had seen
their hopes of owning nationalised land dashed by the Liberals, now
faced similar disappointment as the King kept the land in the hands
of its feudal owners.14 The rural population accordingly took varying
forms of direct action. Where legal appeals for redistribution (reparto)
failed, peasants tore noble insignia from churches, refused feudal dues
and turned ploughshares back into swords.15 The Fernandine regime
responded with the rigours of an absolutist police state, reviving for a
ﬁnal lease of life the Inquisition which, as one Liberal fugitive discov-
ered, kept ‘an active agent in every single village in the realm’.16 The
cities, especially the coastal ports receptive to liberalism, were divided
into police districts answerable to regional captains-general who would
crack down on unrest by closing taverns, establishing curfews and
26   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


monitoring the transit of outsiders.17 The army was thus key to the
Fernandine police state. But soldiers faced arrears in pay, casual bru-
tality at the hands of ofﬁcers and inadequate rations: hardly conditions
propitious to law and order. Meanwhile, despite the coup of 1814, the
army was no monochrome: a Liberal faction remained amongst its ofﬁ-
cers, often now being placed on half-pay or in remote garrisons by a
suspicious King.18 During the autumn and winter of 1819 several such
ofﬁcers were amassing forces around Cádiz as part of Ferdinand’s effort
to dispatch reinforcements for the cause of royalism in Spanish America.
Under the command of Rafael del Riego they would end up marching
not on Mexico, but on Madrid. And they would succeed where previous
Liberal pronunciamientos had failed.
   The ﬁrst of these failures would later end up as the sword-arm
of Spain’s Liberal revolutions during the Royalist and Carlist Wars.
Francisco Espoz y Mina had been the most successful Patriot guerrilla
commander, turning Navarra, a conservative and autonomous region
where socio-economic conditions had generated a uniquely popular
armed mobilisation against the French, into a virtual ﬁefdom (his
French enemies even dubbed him the ‘King of Navarra’). Despite his
later politics, Espoz had been violently at odds with the Liberals dur-
ing the Peninsular War, even allegedly executing by ﬁring squad a copy
of the Constitution of 1812. This anecdote remains apocryphal, but it
would have suited the Navarrese he commanded. Thus, when he hur-
ried to the newly restored court of Ferdinand VII, he expected a reward,
nothing less than the Viceroyalty of Navarra. But the King snubbed
his entreaty, and Espoz returned to his Pamplona garrison and raised
a revolt in the name of the Constitution he had so recently derided.19
When this failed, Espoz escaped retribution by escaping to France (his
idealistic nephew, Xavier Mina, even following through on his uncle’s
pretexts by ﬂeeing via France, the British Isles and the USA to Spain’s
restive Americas where he would die ﬁghting for Mexican indepen-
dence from Spanish absolutism). Ironically, when Espoz ﬁnally became
viceroy, it would be as a Liberal ﬁghting against the Carlist sons of veter-
ans he had once commanded, failing militarily in his advanced middle
age where in his youth he had triumphed. The year 1815 saw another
guerrilla leader, Juan Díaz Porlier, pay the ultimate price for rebellion,
and the following year saw an abortive Republican conspiracy called the
Triangle.20 In 1817 another popular war hero, Luis Roberto de Lacy, was
executed amid much controversy after having tried to raise Barcelona,
whilst in 1819 another commander, Vidal, would meet the same fate.
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   27


These veterans had acted with not insubstantial civilian support, often
networked via powerful Masonic lodges which provided a natural con-
spiratorial environment for progressive elites who liked to exhaust all
options for keeping the people out of politics. Yet their conspiracies
ended in failure. What gave Riego success was Ferdinand’s resolve to
bring metropolitan rule back to Spanish America. The absolutist regime
set great store by pacifying America so that bullion could ﬂow again.
Yet quite apart from the unpromising diplomatic environment, this task
could only be achieved with the dispatch of sufﬁcient troops, itself a
task which was so costly as to be undertaken in circumstances which
virtually guaranteed military rebellion: namely, inadequate and irregu-
lar pay and troop concentrations around the Liberal port of Cádiz which
were slow to disperse due to insufﬁcient trans-Atlantic shipping being
available. Thus, when, late in 1819, the King ordered ten battalions to
the province of Cádiz to await transport on festering hulks to Spanish
America, the stage was set for disgruntled commanders to rally their
equally disgruntled men – whose rallying cry was ‘No America’ – to over-
throw the Restoration regime. Consequently, it was the army in 1820
which was breaking a regime, just as in 1814.
   For several weeks it seemed as though Riego’s revolution would meet
the same fate as that of his predecessors. Marching across Andalucía,
Riego’s army blended Liberal appeals aimed at the urban well-to-do with
populist promises aimed at the masses. The port-city of Algeciras, one of
the ﬁrst urban centres to be taken by Riego’s army, saw its import duties
on foreign goods abolished, the unpopular derechos de puerta tax system
mothballed ‘pending the design of a better system’ and the important
state tobacco monopoly broken up.21 Similar measures were enacted as
other cities fell to the constitutional rebellion in January, February and
March, whilst an open trade in grain imports was proclaimed as means
of staving off recurrent famines.22 Despite these measures, Riego’s ris-
ing soon petered out, as populations failed to rally, horses were hard
to ﬁnd, rains were torrential and soldiers deserted into banditry. Even
those men remaining under Riego’s command had no commissariat
and were thus so reduced by hunger as to make enemies of the rural
Andalucían communities in their path, demanding cash from the gen-
erally cashless villagers, and pillaging when none was forthcoming.23
Other soldiers, like the cash-strapped privates in General Freyre’s army,
feared becoming substitutes for the American expedition and so tried to
demonstrate their indispensability by pronouncing against Riego, com-
mitting atrocities (some 71 deaths and 171 wounded) in the genteel
28    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


streets of Cádiz in the name of the absolute king.24 And if fellow ofﬁ-
cers saw Riego’s men as deserters, so did the civilian population. In a
January 1820 letter to a fellow revolutionary, Riego admitted the lack of
popular support: ‘What guarantees could we give to anyone who joined
us? . . . What help can we expect from the pueblos? Everyone runs for the
hills as soon as they hear the sound of our drums.’25 What saved the
situation were the calculations of commanders elsewhere in Spain who
thought that their careers would be better served by a constitutional
regime. Thus, on 4 March, Ocaña’s garrison pronounced for Riego, and
the Liberal hero of 1812, Ballesteros, followed suit in Madrid, thereby
sealing the fate of absolutism. Crowds sacked the gaols of the Inquisition
and invaded the palace, and the King’s nerve ﬁnally broke on 7 March
1820 when he swore allegiance to the Constitution of 1812.26 A provi-
sional junta staffed by what Ferdinand called his ‘gaolbird’ Liberals came
into being. This junta was soon replaced by the Cortes, whilst those Lib-
eral politicians who had been exiled or imprisoned even claimed six
years’ worth of back pay in a bid to re-establish the continuity with
1814.27
   Even though the army had restored to Spain its ‘liberty’, a crisis
ensued as the resurgent constitutional authorities tried to subordinate
it to civil supremacy. Liberal newspapers noted that, whereas in 1820
the army had been the nation’s liberator, as recently as 1814 it had been
its gaoler.28 As a safeguard, the ‘people-in-arms’ principle now dictated
the creation of the National Militia, a reform which, under the 1810–14
Cortes, had barely left the drawing board. For the time being the mili-
tia was little more than a society for the local well-to-do, enlistment
into its ranks being conditional upon both a literacy test and the ability
to afford the uniform.29 The militia ordinances of 1820 were similar to
those of the later Carlist War, when the citizens’ force was reformed
more cautiously. Zaragoza, a provincial capital with a population of
36,000, was, in April 1820, ordered to create six companies of 144 men
each plus nine ofﬁcers:

     Uniform and turquoise pantaloons, white-metal buttons and black
     boots; ofﬁcers and sergeants longcoat with buttoned lapels, high-
     peaked cap marked with the sign of town and province. Duties to
     include patrols to maintain order, pursue and arrest deserters and
     wrongdoers, whilst militiamen will enjoy fuero militar when active
     in these duties and will thus be bound by army ordinances, and will
     be paid a daily wage of 5 reales for each soldier, 6 for each corporal
     and drummer, and 8 for each sergeant (without bread ration).30
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   29


   Only under duress did the Liberals seriously open its ranks to ple-
beians, and even then on the understanding that they would do the
bidding of their social superiors. From the outset the militia vexed the
regular army, which was set on extracting a reward for having liber-
ated the nation. Militiamen enjoyed the same immunity from civil
jurisdiction (fuero militar) as the army, the only vague and practically
meaningless condition for this privilege being ‘when on active duty’.
Thus, as during the Carlist War, militiamen and ofﬁcers shared similar
facilities enabling them to compete on matters of entitlement and hon-
our. The army reserved the power to force the militia to disband under
a state of siege, but this ‘nuclear option’ only displaced inter-service
rivalry, to the streets, cafes and the Cortes where the Jacobin deputy,
Romero Alpuente, repeatedly called for the army to be replaced by the
militia altogether.31 Radicals like Romero Alpuente were representing
the Radical Patriotic Societies and local militias which increasingly exer-
cised an extra-parliamentary ‘double regime’ in Liberal Spain. Romero
Alpuente owed his radicalism in part to his antimilitarism – the Liberals
saw soldiers as brutish mercenaries lacking in civic nationalism – and
in part to his passion to cut the tax burden, the beneﬁts of which, to
his mind at least, should be used to improve living standards. Many
more civilian Liberals, by contrast, assumed that Spain’s depleted post-
imperial coffers should fund the expansion of state power provided for
by the Constitution. The dissident sevillano utilitarian, José María Blanco
White, criticised this careerism, noting that only Spain’s minority classes
of students, literati, merchants and ofﬁceholders could gain from con-
stitutional rule, and his words were borne out by the empleomanía, or
unrestrained competition for the government posts, unleashed by the
Triennium.32 Whilst many Liberals sincerely believed that expanded
government would eventually reverse Spain’s social crisis, empleomanía,
as in other Hispanic polities, should really be understood as the lad-
der undistinguished place-seekers climbed in order to achieve personal
honour.33
   The regime had to recruit constitutional administrators on a dimin-
ishing budget: the populist suspension of consumption taxes during
the Riego rising had robbed the government of 88 per cent of its pro-
jected revenue for the ﬁrst half of 1820.34 Forced to make economies, the
government ordered the disbandment of Riego’s revolutionary ‘Army
of Andalucía’.35 But Riego’s army resisted dissolution, and forged a
personality cult around its leader. Born in 1784 in Asturias into a typ-
ically minor noble background, Riego was the epitome of the Spanish
careerist ofﬁcer bent on mastering the vicissitudes of politics to advance
30   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


his career. As his career had been doubly marginalised in 1814 due
to both his suspected Liberal sympathies and his lengthy captivity in
France, Riego was now psychologically incapable of merely settling for
the promotion to general which he had gained for reasons of politi-
cal expediency during the Andalucían rising.36 In fact, in September he
entered Madrid amidst a wave of agitation stoked up by the Patriotic
Societies, whose members hoped that the liberator Riego might offer
a better ladder for gaining ofﬁce. Yet September 1820 was no Spanish
Brumaire. Riego was bought off with the Captaincy-General of Galicia
(followed early in 1821 by that of Zaragoza), and his men were sent
home to their villages. These men had hoped to gain from a September
1820 Cortes decree awarding parcels of land to revolutionary veterans,
but local authorities dragged their feet on this measure now that Riego
had been neutralised.37
   This particular wedge driven between the army elite and the rank and
ﬁle was masked by a humiliation of the throne and altar which appeased
Radical-Liberal opinion and added insult to the injury of Ferdinand’s
royal instincts. In the November 1820 ‘Carvajal affair’, the royal will
came second to the oratorical prowess of the most prominent Liberal in
the Cortes, the ‘divine’ Agustín de Argüelles, author of the Constitution
of Cádiz. Like all Liberals, Argüelles wanted to advance the regalism of
the eighteenth century by subordinating Spain’s traditionally powerful
Catholic Church to state power. Whilst parish priests would be left in
their posts and even paid stipends from the public purse, the cloistered
clergy should be defrocked, put to useful work, and their substantial
lands sold off for proﬁtable and productive uses. Thus, when el divino
threatened to raise the streets of the capital if the King did not sign a bill
to cut the cloistered clergy, Ferdinand ominously left the capital for the
sanctuary of El Escorial, where the clerical party of his younger brother,
Don Carlos, was known to hold sway. Having failed to rally support
there, however, the King had no option but to return to Madrid and
sign the bill into law. Now a virtual prisoner of the Constitution, things
took a turn for the worse for the King as some ‘hotheads’ (exaltados), or
‘men of 1820’ (so-called for their desire to make more radical reforms
than the ‘men of 1812’), triumphantly joined the government.38
   Yet this Liberal bipartisanship did not portend stability. The army lost
its revolutionary unity as Riego and his clique gradually dominated the
levers of power whilst the rank and ﬁle went unpaid and unshod. Just
as the Peninsular War had shown (and as the Carlist War would show)
army ofﬁcers tended to see politics in narrow career terms and their
men as pawns to this end; purely military considerations came second.
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   31


As one historian put it with perspicacity, ‘Men who did not want to serve
were led by men who did not know how to serve.’39 And as the Riego
revolution had burdened the state with an excess of political ofﬁcers,
these potentially dangerous men had to be bought off with appoint-
ments which the Constitution had designed for civilians. Much of the
blame for this situation should be laid at the polarisation of Liberal pol-
itics. Certainly, Spanish liberalism was steeped in generational conﬂict,
young Radicals resenting the stranglehold of old conservatives. The men
of 1820 grew so embittered at the older Liberal generation’s stranglehold
on public ofﬁces that they forged pseudo-Republican Comunero clubs
which promoted increasingly violent attacks on the Church and monar-
chy in a bid to win power. The Left-Liberal challenge to the men of 1812
(moderados) in turn divided as the 1820 generation was caught between
the rock of moderado and court disapproval and the hard place of Radical
pressure.40 Anguished by the collapse in April 1821 of a sister revolution
in Italy, the Comuneros launched a press campaign to uncover absolutist
sympathisers and rebellious priests.41 Rightly fearing the growing hos-
tility of the Holy Alliance, the Comuneros also tried to safeguard the
Spanish revolution by internationalising it. They welcomed Italian émi-
grés (the carbonari) into their lodges and militia battalions, whilst one
Cortes deputy, Zorraquín, ‘the foremost revolutionary in Spain’, estab-
lished correspondence clubs in Gerona and Catalan frontier towns with
the aim of enlisting public support for Liberal Spain in the southern
départments of France.42 When, during September 1821, Riego compro-
mised himself in a plot forged by a group of Spanish and international
Republicans, the moderate-Liberal (moderado) government dismissed
him from the Captaincy-General of Aragón.43
   Meanwhile, government attempts to remedy state ﬁnances fell hard-
est on the poor. The unpopular consumption taxes (derechos de puertas)
were re-established. Even though the Argüelles law began evicting
monks and nuns and bringing their property to market, it was the
highest bidder, not the landless labourer, sharecropper, tenant farmer
or demobilised soldier who got possession of the nationalised property.
The rural masses might yet have been appeased by the early 1821 Cortes
decree that tithes for the parish clergy would henceforth be halved.
But the half-tithe was accompanied by other taxes payable in cash, a
massive burden for a rural population still largely unaccustomed to a
cash economy, which, most devastatingly, came at a time of slump in
prices for agricultural goods.44 In fact, at least some foreign observers
singled out the Liberals’ formalisation of cash taxation as the origin
of the collapse of the constitutional regime.45 Even though this policy
32   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


was accompanied by the renewal of the 1811 Cortes decree which abol-
ished feudal jurisdiction in the countryside, in theory obliging manorial
lords to provide legal proofs of landownership and the right to receive
rents from villagers, these crucial conditions were blocked by royal veto,
whilst only a minority of Cortes deputies like Romero Alpuente and
Alvaro Flórez Estrada pressed the matter, seeing reparto as a way of mak-
ing the countryside constitutionalist instead of royalist. When the royal
veto was ﬁnally overcome in May 1823, this was done merely as a for-
lorn attempt to win over the countryside from royalism. The Liberals’
failure to enlist much support beyond the urban clubs and militia does
not mean that the rural masses were apolitical. Attempts by the Liberal
bourgeoisie to advance capitalism were met by a recognisably modern
defence of traditional work practices. Alcoy was the textile capital of
the old Kingdom of Valencia, employing some 40,000 rural outwork-
ers. Thanks to the recent abolition of guilds, textile entrepreneurs were
able to introduce self-acting lathes (selfactinas) as means of employing
fewer workers more productively. The workers’ response was decisive:
some 1,200 of them overwhelmed the local militia, helped themselves to
arms and seized control of the town for four days whilst they painstak-
ingly dismantled all the selfactinas.46 Although the Argüellian Liberals
in the Cortes condemned these attacks on the sacred right of prop-
erty, brushing aside Romero Alpuente’s defence of the workers, similar
episodes happened in centres of Catalan proto-industry amidst the
French invasion of 1823.47
   As rural Spain moved from indifference to outright hostility to con-
stitutional rule, it was clear that it was royalism rather than liberalism
which enjoyed the initiative. This is a matter which divides historians.
Leftist historians hold that the 1820–23 revolution failed because it was
betrayed by its own leaders, the wealthy landowners and bourgeoisie
having hijacked the democratisation process inherent in the Constitu-
tion of Cádiz and steered the ship of state back towards absolutism.48
Rightist historians hold that if the masses remained royalist in 1820,
they were even more fervently so in 1823, as the King abandoned all
remaining pretences of accepting the revolution.49 Since the 1990s other
writers have tried to rescue Spanish history from its ideological parti-
sanship by offering regional, comparative and international studies of
the Triennium in a bid to Europeanise Spain.50 The exaltados certainly
went to great lengths in their attempts to embed the revolution in the
masses. Yet most Liberals, even radical ones, shared a superior disdain
for common Spaniards; and time and again they failed to comprehend
the degree to which they were hated in return. Romero Alpuente had
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   33


co-founded the Radical Comuneros Society, and dominated the impor-
tant 1822 Landaburiana Patriotic Society. But even though both of these
clubs presided over sophisticated and virtually democratic networks
of participation and reward for the urban popular classes, they were
late in addressing the social crisis, and their leadership failed to rally
to match the counter-revolution of 1823.51 Royalist resistance to Lib-
eral rule in the countryside, by contrast, had been coterminous with
the Liberal revolution itself. There were 122 local revolts against Lib-
eral rule between 1820 and 1823.52 Royalist resistance was explained
by Spain’s geographical, social and economic diversity. As would be
seen during the Carlist War, the heartlands of anti-Liberal revolt were
to be found in the countryside rather than the towns, and, broadly,
in increasing proportion the further north and north-east the consti-
tutional authorities tried to impose their regime. The cradle of royalist
resistance was in upland Navarra and the villages and small towns of
the neighbouring Basque provinces, although resistance to the Liberals
also spread to inland Catalonia, Aragón, Galicia and Old Castile. By the
summer of 1823 even Andalucía, New Castile, Extremadura, Murcia
and the Valencian-Catalan coastline – all areas where commercial and
landowning oligarchies had vested interests in making liberalism work –
witnessed violent popular royalism following close on the heels of the
invading French army.
   By the summer of 1822 formal civil war raged in Spain between Lib-
erals and royalists. This ﬁrst modern civil war in Spanish history was
a geographical dress rehearsal for the Carlist War.53 Until the summer
of 1822 moderado-dominated governments had shown restraint towards
royalism in the countryside, releasing scarce monies to fund public
works and buy foodstuffs in the provinces, understanding that hard-
ship was driving peasants affected by necessary Liberal reforms into the
arms of rebellious priests and royalist guerrillas.54 Meanwhile since the
Carvajal affair the King had seemed safely under the Liberals’ thumb,
out of reach of the royalists acting in his name. King Ferdinand was an
inviolable prisoner of the Constitution, relegated like Louis XVI before
him to saying all the right things in public whilst conﬁning his real
thoughts to diplomatic correspondence. Don Carlos and his restive cler-
ical faction, meanwhile, would not move openly against his brother’s
ofﬁcial display of constitutional monarchy. But on 7 July 1822 a royalist
coup attempt in the heart of Madrid transformed the situation. The
Royal Guard rising (which had been ﬁnanced by the French embassy)
was quashed, the defeated royalists taking to the hills to wage guer-
rilla war on a government which, after July, was in the hands of the
34   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Radical Left, or ﬂeeing to France whence many would return the follow-
ing year under French arms.55 The judicial execution of General Elío,
Captain-General of Valencia, who had captained the absolutist coup in
May 1814 and hanged Vidal in 1819, united the new government in a
pact of blood whilst serving notice on those army ofﬁcers who lacked
ideological commitment to exaltismo that it was time to quit.56 Several
ofﬁcers, seeing that the national and international winds were turning
against the revolution, either followed the royalists into exile or defected
to the rebel regency which was proclaimed in Ferdinand’s name at La
Seo de Urgel in August 1822. In turn the Radical regime installed Riego’s
men in civilian governorships, and set about imposing a military dic-
tatorship which foreshadowed the most radical episodes of the Carlist
War a generation later. Although Romero Alpuente’s Comuneros were
far-sighted enough to use this crisis to parcel out some marginal lands
in the antediluvian south, most exaltados did not think beyond using
state terror against royalist villagers.57 The government of Riego’s right-
hand man, Evaristo San Miguel, imposed crippling cash ﬁnes on villages
which failed to resist royalist bands, or even simply failed to show ‘due
respect towards constitutional forces’.58 At the local level, priests and
absolutists were ﬁned, imprisoned, expelled, even killed. Espoz y Mina,
whom the revolution had drawn from his French exile, led a reign of ter-
ror against royalist villagers in the north, destroying the Catalan town
of Castellfullit.59
   If the constitutional army had managed, by the end of 1822, to
crush royalist bands, whether it would stand up to Congress Europe was
another matter. In October 1822, the Great Powers met at Verona to dis-
cuss intervention against Jacobinism in Spain. In the same month the
San Miguel administration formally militarised Liberal society by impos-
ing martial law on the National Militia and calling up some 67,000
men into the army.60 For a generation afterwards the men of 1812
remembered these actions as proof that the exaltados were the ‘real
absolutists’.61 But foreign diplomatic pressure only increased in response
to these measures, which emboldened the timid King to sabotage the
work of his Radical ministers. In February 1823 Ferdinand, seeing that
San Miguel had split the exaltados, exercised one of his remaining pre-
rogatives by dismissing him, surviving the inevitable mob invading the
palace shouting ‘Death to the king!’62 The Radicals retaliated by derogat-
ing the King’s remaining powers, pending the ‘recovery of his health’.
Meanwhile, the Congress of Verona, brushing aside Britain’s absten-
tion, ﬁnally invaded. Louis XVIII was eager both to lance a new boil
of Jacobinism and to revive French prestige in Europe. He sent some
                                            The First Carlist War: Origins   35


into Spain 56,000 French troops, accompanied by some 35,000 Spanish
royalists, with the mission to restore Ferdinand to full powers.63 The
invasion of the ‘One Hundred Thousand Sons of St. Louis’ was astound-
ingly successful: unlike Napoleon’s invasion in 1808, the French met
virtually no popular resistance. The networks of Spanish elites who had
mobilised the people in 1808 could not (or would not) do the same
in 1823. The French invasion even faced little sustained resistance by
either the army or the militia of the Liberal state. Had the army lead-
ership united against the invasion, such was the suffering of their men
that they would likely have turned on their ofﬁcers. The National Militia
either hid its guns, deserted or went openly royalist. Even the artillery
corps, a socially mobile and exclusive part of the army noted for its
liberalism, preferred to spike its guns rather than ﬁre on the French.64
The breach caused by factionalism, an unfair and political promotion
system, and the inability of the constitutional regime to pay or even
clothe its soldiers, had thus rendered the army unﬁt to face a profes-
sional invasion force in 1823 – all this despite the fact that some 88 per
cent of taxes received by the Treasury in February 1822 went to fund
the military.65 By the end of August Cádiz was once again under French
siege, and only some three weeks later this cradle of the Constitution
fell, the Liberals releasing Ferdinand from captivity in the vain hope
that the French might prevail upon him to issue an amnesty.
3
The First Carlist War: Context




The defeat of what historians call the Liberal Triennium strengthened
Spanish royalism, although not in the way that Don Carlos’s faction
demanded. In order to trace how the ‘Carlist’ movement campaigned
not just against the vanquished revolutionaries, but also against the
Ferdinand’s restored absolutism, we must ﬁrst explain how the social cri-
sis undid constitutionalism and bequeathed the conditions for renewed
civil war. The reasons for the constitutional collapse are threefold. The
regime had made itself unpopular with its repeated drive for taxes, con-
scription and the liberal property revolution, which, owing to both elite
disdain for the character and capabilities of the masses and the constant
economic crisis, had generally beneﬁted elite interests at the expense of
commoners. Thus, the Constitution was discredited, and the counter-
revolution vengefully triumphant. A royalist ofﬁcer in Córdoba pro-
claimed: ‘the whole nation has been subverted by secret societies which
have foisted upon us the foul Constitution of 1812, which, in the three
years of its existence, has produced evils which will take three cen-
turies to resolve’.1 This was good propaganda, but the terror royalists
unleashed against local Liberals was even more impressive.2 The other
reasons lay with the Spanish army, where divisions and political unrelia-
bility stretched from top to bottom. Whereas some ofﬁcers (like Manuel
Llauder) had remained royalist throughout the Triennium, many more
(like Vicente Quesada) opportunistically defected to royalism during
1822–23. As the Liberal poet, Manuel José Quintana, who had written
that ‘kings are for the people, not people for the kings’, would soon
note from the cruelty of his internal exile, these latter men vainly hoped
that by changing sides they might retain the careers and honours they
had obtained under the Constitution.3 Other ofﬁcers thought that more

                                   36
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 37


might be gained by defending the revolution. General Zorraquín, the
international revolutionary, died in a skirmish with French troops near
Vic on 26 May 1823.4 The tragically miscast hero of the revolution,
Rafael del Riego, was captured and executed, although not before he
became a left-wing martyr in the process. Corralled by the moderados,
Riego had returned to Madrid in August 1822 as exaltado President
of the Cortes. Having lacked the time and means to gain the respect
of his fellow ofﬁcers, Riego could not but divide army opinion, and
ended up being more admired by civilian Radicals than anyone else.
Other army Liberals played a more ruthless game. Espoz was involved
in skirmishes enough to save his honour, and then led his men into
French captivity, complaining without irony that although the Consti-
tution was great, it was detested by the Spanish people.5 A refugee in
Plymouth, Espoz became a Garibaldesque international celebrity avant
la lettre, local crowds ﬂocking to his public appearances and obliging
the jaded veteran to travel incognito to London; Riego, by contrast, was
publicly garrotted.6 During the decade of reaction that was to follow,
Espoz in exile would reinvent himself as a Radical ‘Great Dictator’, mix-
ing Benthamite with Bonapartist principles, and maintaining an iron
grip on the Spanish Liberals in ﬁrst Britain and then France.7
   But the constitutional collapse of 1823 did not produce the ascen-
dancy of the royalist faction surrounding Don Carlos. It had been
vanquished by Espoz, and remaining royalists who rallied in 1823
necessarily fought as auxiliaries to the French and thus lacked the
independent gravity to sway Ferdinand. What the ‘Carlists’ wanted
(the term ﬁrst appears in ofﬁcial correspondence in 1824) was not the
sort of modern absolute police state which Ferdinand favoured and
which had been common throughout Metternich’s Europe since 1815,
but a full-blooded reactionary policy that would restore the privileged
positions of the Church and nobility, decentralise legislative and juris-
dictional powers, and relegate the monarchy to a medieval coordinating
role. In other words, the Carlists wanted to revise not just the recent
Liberal revolution but the entire eighteenth-century legacy of enlight-
ened absolutism.8 These hopes were dashed during what was called the
‘Ominous Decade’ of 1823–33. The Carlist conception of society was
organic, and in the Basque provinces and Navarra in particular it spoke
out in defence of local traditions and privileges and against the cen-
tralising impulses of Madrid. The strongly Catholic, conservative and
economically stable countryside of upland Navarra made this the nat-
ural refuge for Carlist insurrection. Even so, Carlism during the 1830s
would spread to rural areas outside of its northern heartland. According
38    Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to Charles Henningsen, a British volunteer in Don Carlos’s army who
later fought for the Confederacy, Spanish civil wars were essentially a
conﬂict between Liberal towns and royalist countryside, an observa-
tion shared a century later by the Hispanist, Gerald Brenan, for whom
‘Carlism (was) nothing else than the hostility of a sturdy race of moun-
taineers and farmers to industrial life.’9 In fact, as we shall see, the
urban versus rural divide was at least as much an effect as a cause of
the Carlist War (on account of the displacement of refugees and com-
batants). But certainly, historians have seen the land as the root of
popular fanaticism. Evaristo San Miguel, exiled in 1823 and returned
to Liberal politics during the 1830s civil war, thought that the spread
of Carlism to the eastern Spain could be arrested by equitable agricul-
tural reforms.10 Twentieth-century historians interpreted the endurance
of rural Carlism, not just during the 1830s war but also in a century
of subsequent conﬂagrations, as evidence that Spanish revolutionaries,
unlike their French counterparts, failed to win over popular support.11
   Some 24,000 Liberal families ﬂed Spain, and military tribunals pro-
cessed those who remained. By the time of their dissolution in August
1825, the tribunals had dealt with some 1,094 individuals, rather more
than half of these being charged with political crimes. Whilst around
three-quarters were condemned to punishments of varying severity,
including death (132), the rest were absolved.12 Former constitucional-
istas were condemned to banishment of a minimum of ﬁve leagues
from Madrid.13 The commercial elites of Málaga recorded the repression
unfolding around them:


     5 September 1823: Málaga has been occupied by French and absolutist
     troops who have decreed the establishment of the old system. The
     municipal staff have ﬂed, and the Constitution tablet has been
     smashed to pieces. Ofﬁcial celebrations have been proclaimed, and
     the pre-1820 municipal system reintroduced.
     27 October 1823: Orders have been issued to dismiss all teachers guilty
     of having taught the Constitution, whilst all National Militia arms
     have to be handed in within twenty-four hours.

     18 July 1824: 3 supporters of the Constitution have been executed for
     no other crime than having been found with several proclamations
     against the government.

     22 July 1824: General O’Lawlor has made important arrests of well-
     known malagueño Liberals.
                                            The First Carlist War: Context 39


   15 September 1824: 3 men have been sentenced to death and shot in
   Málaga: Lorenzo González (known as el Pato), Mateo de la Cruz and
   Antonio González; all for the ‘atrocious crime of having destroyed
   the royal tablet’ in the township of Benahavis.14

But even these draconian steps did not satisfy the Carlists. Despite
the execution of some high-proﬁle constitutionalists, and the venge-
ful imprisonment and internal exile of thousands who had not ﬂed,
political, ﬁnancial and diplomatic expediency persuaded Ferdinand to
relent. Although laws were passed making execution the penalty for
acts of ‘rebellion’ – laws which would be used by both sides in the
civil war after Ferdinand’s death – these could be implemented as much
against the Carlists as against the Liberals.15 Moreover, this crackdown
was to be enforced not by the Inquisition, as in 1814, but by Spain’s
ﬁrst centrally organised police force, which the Carlists condemned as
the ‘Frenchiﬁed’ takeover of Spain’s traditional character and an outra-
geous end for the Church’s temporal power, which was now reduced
to watered-down ‘faith councils’ (juntas de la fé).16 All these measures
conﬁrmed the worst fears of the royalists who were now referred to as
the ultras, apostólicos and Carlists. A token political amnesty as early
as 1824 provoked a royalist reaction in the abortive ‘Capapé affair’,
followed a year later by a more serious rising at Brihuega. When, in
1826, Ferdinand agreed to a more substantial amnesty aimed at former
moderados, royalist manifestoes denounced the King as a coward and a
disaster as ruler.17
   As with the Liberal ofﬁcers of 1814, part of this invective was
explained by frustrated careers. Reserve armies of royalist ‘heroes’ sought
ofﬁce and promotion but Ferdinand’s second Restoration found the state
coffers even emptier than in 1814. Once again, the state was virtually
bankrupt. Ferdinand’s default on the debts incurred under the Consti-
tution brought only temporary relief as this action barred Spain from
lucrative British debt markets. Ferdinand’s technocratic Finance Min-
ister, Luis López Ballesteros, managed to source new loans from Paris
and Amsterdam, but only under onerous conditions.18 Spanish America
remained free. Even though penny-packets of troops from Cuba and
San Juan de Ulúa continued to harass Mexico as late as 1829, any last
hopes for restoring metropolitan rule to the American mainland were
ended by the defeat of the last great imperial army at the Battle of
Ayacucho (Peru) in 1824. Moreover, even though Ferdinand ruthlessly
dispossessed Liberal ofﬁcers of their commissions, he did not replace
them with royalists. Rather, the regime maintained a French garrison
40   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


as a Varangian guard, and reduced the Spanish royalist army to a mere
skeleton. Even though the French carbonari had tried to sow discord
amongst the Duke of Angloulême’s troops before their 1823 invasion,
the French garrison – which did not withdraw until 1828 – proved a reli-
able tripwire against renewed revolution and could be counted upon to
stay out of Spanish domestic politics.19 Quite apart from the ire this pro-
voked amongst a population which, a generation earlier, had fought the
French, army elites bristled at the patronage diverted away from Spanish
pretendientes. In July 1824, General Quesada’s troops even skirmished
with the French garrison in Madrid.20 But during 1823, just as 1814, the
army had some grounds for optimism. Whereas constitutional regimes
had tried to subordinate the Spanish military to civilian authorities, only
tacitly accepting the abusive ‘fuero militar’ and grudgingly accepting
the rights of captains-general to declare states of siege, Ferdinand VII,
in 1824, opened up the chances for a military recolonisation of soci-
ety once more. The provincial assemblies and governorships instituted
under the Constitution were abolished, and the captains-general saw
their traditionally extensive police, judicial and administrative pow-
ers restored.21 But, in return, ofﬁcers’ commissions were squeezed and
a French garrison of occupation maintained from the public purse.
This meant that even during the Ominous Decade, around 50 per cent
of state expenditure still went on security, with Spanish forces com-
prising, by 1833, some 50,000 regular troops and 652 generals and
around 100,000 Royalist Volunteers (see below) according to an 1830
estimate.22
   And if army insiders had to endure Fernandine parsimony, things
were far worse for the thousands of ilimitados, cashiered ofﬁcers who
were forced to eke out whatever meagre living they could, sometimes as
‘professional subversives’.23 Several ilimitados, and many more deserters,
turned to brigandage. Brigandage has been asserted to be a ‘natural’ phe-
nomenon in geographically and economically marginal societies like
most of rural Spain.24 But during the Peninsular War it had become
conﬂated with patriotic resistance, and had thus been given political
legitimacy.25 Brigandage peaked in 1822 when unpopular conscrip-
tion and economic reforms drove thousands of men into the hills.
During 1822 two of the south’s most notorious bandits, ‘El Barbudo’
(the Bearded One) and ‘El Tempranillo’ tried to insure their careers by
asserting their royalism. It was a wise calculation, but it yielded very
different results. El Barbudo, a brigand at large in Alicante and Murcia
who had fought the French in the Peninsular War, was hunted down
and hanged.26 By contrast, El Tempranillo, a stronger presence in the
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 41


Andalucían Sierra Morena in command of a sophisticated extortion
network, was not only pardoned by Ferdinand but also given a for-
mal commission to punish other wrongdoers. El Tempranillo proudly
quipped ‘Ferdinand rules in Spain and I rule in the Sierra’; in 1833, at
the age of 27, he was killed by a Liberal bandit.27
   Wrongdoing was honoured by political ﬂags of convenience; during
the Carlist War banditry and Carlism would be, in many ways, indis-
tinguishable when operating behind the front lines. Spaniards since the
Peninsular War had been suffering a collective trauma which made them
materially and psychologically prepared to take to arms: this ‘reserve
army’ of demobilised soldiers, deserters, outraged priests and downtrod-
den peasants could become a potent weapon if they could be harnessed
to a political aim. At ﬁrst it seemed as though the restored absolutist
regime might channel this disaffection. As soon as the military tribunals
were wound up, the reactionary militia force of ‘Royalist Volunteers’
(Voluntarios Realistas), which had come together during the Royalist
War, was formalised by War Minister José de la Cruz, with a dedicated
budget independent of army funding, and no real ‘bottom limit’ on
recruitment. As Cruz remarked, this plebeian force would be instilled
with ‘elements of order and monarchical subordination’ in contrast to
the extinguished National Militia, which ‘seemed set on turning each
town into a state, and each town-hall into a government’.28 Rising in
number from 70,000 in 1825 to a peak of 284,000 in 1832, the Volun-
teers, however, proved to be no Sanfedisti. Like their National Militia
forbears the Volunteers enjoyed both immunity from civil prosecution
and cash remuneration when on service, and got to run all manner
of municipal rackets, whilst terrorising village Liberals. Thus, histori-
ans have labelled the Volunteers fanatical, violent and a ﬁnancial black
hole.29 Ferdinand hoped that they might please the royalists, thwart
the Liberals and check the ‘professional subversives’ in the diminished
regular army. Yet Ferdinand would not concede the Volunteers’ main
demand that they replace the army altogether. Nevertheless, the Volun-
teers blocked Liberal attempts to regain power after 1823. The Liberals’
attempts were organised by Espoz who, from his London exile, directed
doomed but often dramatic Liberal invasions. In 1826 the Bazán expe-
dition to Valencia, learning the lessons of the Royalist War, blanketed
villages with propaganda promising land.30 Liberalism was not just a
creed of desperate exiles. A few months after the Bazán expedition,
Don Carlos’s new bride, María Teresa, the ultra-conservative princess of
the miguelista side in the Portuguese civil war (1826–34), was publicly
insulted by a crowd shouting mueras whilst she toured Madrid.31
42   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   Whilst Liberals attacked Fernandine absolutism from the Left, Carlists
did so from the Right. The rightists’ moment came in the so-called
‘War of the Aggrieved’ of 1826–27, a rising centred in rural Catalonia
(where the rebels were called Malcontents) which was Carlist in all but
name: quite literally, as the rising rallied to its ‘Manifesto of the Fed-
eration of Pure Royalists’ (Maniﬁesto de la Federación de Realistas Puros),
signed in Madrid in November 1826 by anonymous ‘Members of this
Catholic Federation, graced by Heaven and Eternal Blessing’ who explic-
itly called for the replacement of King Ferdinand by Don Carlos. The
authorship of this manifesto remains in doubt, but its spirit is clear. Its
demands for the re-establishment of the Inquisition, banishment of the
amnestied afrancesados, an end to technocratic reforms and the removal
of the constraints on the power of the Royalist Volunteers, all described
the demands of the most reactionary (apostólico, or theocratic) wing of
the Carlist insurrection of 1833.32 The Aggrieved were led by Agustín
Saperes and the smuggler, Josep Bosoms, both ‘heroes’ of 1822–23. Their
followers – whose numbers varied between 20,000 and 30,000 that
summer – comprised unemployed ofﬁcers and men, suborned Catalan
militia (known as somatenes) and Royalist Volunteers, villagers made
desperate by ongoing capitalist reforms in agriculture and several ide-
ologically committed ‘true believers’, most of whom were priests.33 The
Agraviados’ insurrection brieﬂy invaded the Basque provinces, the cradle
of the later Carlist revolt, seizing some Royalist Volunteers arms near
Vitoria.34
   Despite their manifesto, most of the Aggrieved claimed to be ‘lib-
erating’ Ferdinand VII from ‘evil counsellors’, the amnestied courtiers
of moderate-Liberal and afrancesado backgrounds, whilst at local level
manifestoes spoke against economic modernisation. Spain continued
the drive towards a single national market and a cash economy at a time
when crop prices were plummeting: from their peak level of 100 during
the famine year of 1812, agricultural prices plummeted to 63 in 1814,
49 in 1820, 45 in 1826 and to a low of 33 in 1830.35 Catalan parish
priests deﬁed the loyal Fernandine bishops in droves, drawing money
and even weapons from the restored monasteries.36 All bishops except
one stayed loyal for strategic reasons: the cloistered clergy had recovered
their numbers from a low during the Jacobinism of 1823 of 8,000 to a
ﬁgure which would climb to 61,272 by 1833.37 This ecclesiastical recov-
ery had been achieved by Ferdinand’s decision in 1823 to return to the
Church its lands which had been nationalised during the Triennium,
ruining local buyers who had bought into this Liberal revolution and
who got no compensation. (By contrast, notes issued during 1822–23
                                             The First Carlist War: Context 43


by royalist leaders for peasants’ supplies were paid. This made villagers
more willing to support royalist insurrection in 1827 and, especially, in
1833.38 ) But parish priests also justiﬁed their rebellion in spiritual rather
than strategic terms. Liberalism – or rather the progressive and episco-
palian Catholic current they called Jansenism which spawned Spain’s
ﬁrst Liberals – undermined those popular religious practices, such as the
idle saints’ days and the burial of dead inside churches, which deﬁned
cultural life at the local level.
   After a lacklustre start, the rebels made a capital out of Manresa,
whence a royalist newspaper brieﬂy appeared. The rebels took villages,
conveniently discovering amongst local notables ‘Liberals’ whom they
could ransom and rob.39 This conﬂict already showed signs of violent
actions against ‘spies’ and harbingers of ‘melancholic news’, which par-
ticularly damaged a society without railways and telegraphs (this feature
would also characterise the Carlist War).40 But the Agraviados’ domina-
tion of the Catalan countryside was short-lived. Ferdinand sent forth
an army which swept all before it, pacifying the whole region during
September 1827, executing dozens of rebels, and deporting to North
African garrison prisons around 300 combatants who refused the King’s
pardon. Saperes and Bosoms managed to ﬂee to France, although the
latter was lured back to the frontier in February 1828 and given up for
execution.41
   The rising had been launched in Ferdinand’s name, and Liberal histo-
rians have since been routinely perplexed by a legitimist rising against
the legitimate king. In 1823, after all, Ferdinand VII had been restored
to full powers, and wasted no time persecuting his Liberal tormentors
via his Justice Minister, the humble-born Francisco Calomarde – much
derided by contemporaries and historians alike as a base upstart – who
attacked not just the Liberals but also their values when he replaced
‘liberal’ science teaching in colleges and universities with Counter-
Enlightenment theology and bull-ﬁghting.42 But otherwise Ferdinand
would not share power. Rather, through a closed camarilla of favourites,
the King timidly pursued a policy of modernisation which gradually
adopted several of the more conservative, technocratic reforms of the
vanquished Liberals. Thus, all other noble, clerical and popular inter-
ests were to be subordinated to his will, Ferdinand seeing ﬁt, like any
eighteenth-century absolutist before him, to govern in the interests
of the people without having to be accountable to them in any way.
Ferdinand’s gambit reveals that there were not the ‘two Spains’ of pop-
ular legend, but at least three. Whereas the Liberals were certainly the
progressive Left, in that they wanted to advance the eighteenth-century
44   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


enlightened absolutist reforms into the modern realm of national
sovereignty, constitutional monarchy and individual (rather than cor-
porate) rights of property, the Right was divided in two ways. The
absolutist wing, personiﬁed in Ferdinand VII, understood ‘absolutism’
to rest on purely in the powers of the king. The traditionalist, or legit-
imist, wing of the Right, however, wanted to strip the monarch of all the
Bourbon reforms which, since the eighteenth century, had so enhanced
his power, passing onto the Church, nobility and other corporate bod-
ies the ‘absolute’ right to enjoy their traditional privileges.43 In the rural
Basque provinces and especially Navarra, where the fueros were resilient,
the Church popular and arms never more than a few yards away, this
Carlist current could raise an insurrection.44
   Luckily for Ferdinand’s regime, the failure of the Aggrieved meant
that the Carlists, for the time being, were a spent force. Don Carlos
remained loyal in deed if not in conscience.45 Portuguese miguelistas
tried to circulate proclamations aimed at reigniting a fraternal rising
in Spain, but postmasters in Badajoz intercepted these with apparent
ease.46 For the Liberals in exile, however, the failure of the Aggrieved
transformed their invasion schemes from spontaneous ‘heroic gestures’
into properly organised affairs.47 But the Fernandine regime also organ-
ised its repression, at both home and abroad. When in 1828 some
Burgos printers produced the inﬂammatory ‘Tears of Mother Spain’,
a thesis which condemned the entire history of Bourbon absolutism,
and demanded that the ‘deaf king’ reconvene the Cortes (‘for Spaniards
saved the nation on the 2 May 1808’), the government response was
ruthless. The writer and his printers were all gaoled, although not before
several copies of the thesis had circulated.48 Abroad, the Spanish gov-
ernment exploited exiles’ penury to inﬁltrate their networks. Romero
Alpuente was so short of cash that he wittingly maintained a spy for the
Spanish regime as his manservant and tried in vain to extract a subsidy
from Prime Minister Wellington, a man whom, in a previous incarna-
tion, he had excoriated.49 In July 1829, Spain persuaded the Wellington
administration to scrap the exiles’ subsidy.50 This was the nadir of Lib-
eral fortunes. But in 1830, the international situation changed in the
exiles’ favour and against the Carlists. In Britain a Whig ministry came
to power and boosted the long-standing links its Radical wing had cul-
tivated with Spanish Liberal exiles.51 More importantly, in France, the
Orleanists came to power in the Revolution of 1830.
   The centre of Spanish Liberal operations thus shifted to France,
where the revolution of July 1830 initially portended better prospects
of success. In October, Espoz sent one invasion across the Pyrenees in
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 45


coordination with a 400-strong invasion of assorted émigrés and adven-
turers led by the veteran of the lost American wars, General Jerónimo
Valdés, who had resisted coming under Espoz’s direct command. Espoz’s
propaganda appealed to Spaniards to ‘forget the past’, a shrewd choice
of words which might relate either to absolutism or to the disastrous
effects of Liberal rule during the Triennium. But they were defeated by
a 7,000-strong government force under General Llauder. Valdés’ force
was defeated at Vera, and only the swift intervention of Espoz extri-
cated the survivors and brought them back across the frontier.52 Despite
Espoz’s show of contrition, the civilian population did not rally to the
Liberal invasion, and it was small consolation that the Carlists failed
to answer with a rising of their own. But the Carlists were not demor-
alised. Don Carlos was still the heir to the throne and victorious General
Llauder accordingly ingratiated himself with the heir apparent.53 But
the changed international context belied Carlist conﬁdence. Although
Madrid got Paris to seal the border to Spanish émigrés, the Liberal French
regime received Spanish diplomatic recognition in return.54 Moreover,
the Whig administration in Britain, Belgian revolution, Polish rising
and the resilient pedrista side in the Portuguese civil war, combined
with the French Revolution, all had the hallmarks of an emerging
‘Liberal international’ which might sway Spanish affairs. In November
1831, an international force of idealists, led by the Spanish Liberals
Torrijos and Manzanares, invaded southern Spain in a Mazzinian-style
gesture of ‘spontaneous revolution’.55 This attempt also failed, but in
circumstances which made martyrs out of the invaders.
   Despite – or perhaps because of – the changed international scene,
Carlist conspiracies mounted during 1832–33. As Ferdinand’s health
deteriorated, a series of court manoeuvres contrived to put the crown
beyond Don Carlos’s reach. This scenario was caused by the ‘La Granja
affair’ of 1832, a palace revolution which conﬁrmed that María Cristina
would succeed King Ferdinand as regent until their daughter, Princess
Isabella, came of age. Thus, Don Carlos was excluded from what he saw
as his God-given duty to succeed. With the moribund King handing
over the running of the monarchy to his reformist wife, a crackdown on
Carlists ensued. The Royalist Volunteers were opened up to recruits of
non-royalist backgrounds and state power centralised over them. A tech-
nocratic Ministry of Development (an Interior Ministry by another
name) was created with wide-ranging powers against regional Carlists,
and this was reinforced by the 1833 territorial reorganisation of Spain
into 49 similarly sized provinces.56 Manuel Llauder, who so recently
curried favour with Carlists, now established a military dictatorship
46   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


against them. Other Carlist sympathisers who escaped the attention of
the Cristino military, were nonetheless driven to insurrection by eco-
nomic insecurity.57 Despite the government purge, it was clear that the
Carlist faction could not be brought to heel. Rather, the purge forced
the Carlists to contest the Cristino succession from the country rather
than the court. Staring into the abyss, the now uniformly Cristino court
faction tried for a ﬁnal time to persuade Don Carlos to renounce his
claim, a courtier asking him plainly: ‘Do you want a civil war?’58 Don
Carlos replied that it was the Cristino faction which wanted war by
illegitimately revoking his God-given duty to rule. Don Carlos’s hand
was then forced when one of the conspiracies (centred on the Bishop
of León) turned into an abortive rising launched in the prince’s name.
Don Carlos ﬂed to Portugal, where he raised his standard amidst friendly
miguelistas. Exasperated by the news that Carlos would not recognise
the Isabeline succession, the dying King ordered him exiled to Italy.
Carlos prevaricated and reopened the miguelista-agraviado conspiratorial
network which had been dormant since 1827, whilst at the same time
making sure he did not risk re-entering Spain until Fernando was dead
and enough armed Carlist support was forthcoming.59 For his part, the
bishop had his assets seized and was placed in solitary conﬁnement, but
escaped to join his King in Portugal after Ferdinand’s death.
   The Pretender’s ﬂight galvanised rather than stymied Carlist conspir-
acies. Arms were forged in convents and monasteries, illicit deliveries
took place between Portuguese miguelistas and Carlists in northern
Spain, whilst even a prospective ‘pan-legitimist’ uprising planned to
link Marseilles and southern France with northern Spain on the occa-
sion of Ferdinand’s death. Whilst Llauder purged Carlists from the army,
Prime Minister Cea Bermúdez, by contrast, pursued a juste milieu policy,
hoping, like any enlightened technocrat, that the ‘nonsense’ of Carlist
versus Liberal violence would cancel itself out.60 Whilst Llauder’s mil-
itary dictatorship was allowed to run its course, Cea hoped that his
crash reforms in the way the state was organised would suffocate the
warring factions ‘from above’. Cea’s civilian absolutism thus rivalled
the regional dictatorships of the Cristino generals. The February and
November 1833 municipal reforms were carried out by force, reforming
town halls to ensure that they would be under the sway neither of tax-
payers as during the Triennium, nor of local Royalist (Carlist) hierarchies
as during the Ominous Decade. Henceforth, town halls would represent
only ‘respectable’ local interests. (The latter were to be elected only on a
highly restrictive franchise: masters of guilds and members of other cor-
porations became local electors along with an equal number of those
                                           The First Carlist War: Context 47


who paid the highest rates of taxation.61 ) Cea’s moderate reformism
might have worked a decade earlier, but now it was largely irrelevant.
Carlists and Liberals were locked into a ﬁght to the death which was
not just played out on the streets but also at the highest levels of the
state. For Carlists, Cea was a servant of usurpation, and the thin end of
the wedge for godless revolution, and for Liberals, his reforms – and the
associated Royal Statute (see below) – did not go far enough. When Cea,
on 4 November 1833, proclaimed that ‘the principles of government
observed by the late Ferdinand VII will never be changed’, he showed
his fundamental misunderstanding of both sides.62 This popular ten-
sion was described in an 1833 literary journal by the young Romantic
and pessimist, Mariano José de Larra:

  In our vulgar language we are experiencing phrases which have come
  of age and are being spread throughout a whole nation. In political
  vocabulary especially it takes only one word to fall from the lips of
  an orator in his small circle, and a great number of people, anxious
  for words, pick it up, spread it by word of mouth, and with the speed
  of an electric bolt a larger number of living machines repeat and con-
  secrate it, most times without understanding it [Larra’s emphasis], and
  always failing to calculate that it sometimes only takes one word to
  raise a mob, inﬂame passions, and so cause a revolution.63

Meanwhile, Cea’s purging of political factionalism in the army reduced
this force by the time of Ferdinand’s death to the toothless size of
45,000 men. This was certainly too small for a military coup to seize
the state, which was his intention: but it was also too small to crush
the Carlist insurgency that grew in the north upon word of the King’s
death. By 1837, the Cristino army would grow to over 200,000 effec-
tives; but the early months of the civil war would prove the error in
Cea’s strategy.64
4
The Basque Phase, 1833–35




        I believe in the power of Queen Isabella II, creator of Spanish
        felicity, and in María Cristina her mother, our Queen-Regent,
        who gave birth to Ferdinand VII’s daughter in order to con-
        sole us and to condemn the friars. I believe that the mother
        and daughter suffered under the infernal government of
        Calomarde, that the mother was infamously oppressed and her
        honour outraged, that she descended to the dungeons to save
        faithful liberals . . . I believe in pardoning those who have been
        led astray, in the resurrection of our National Congress, in our
        political regeneration.1

This chapter narrates and explains the First Carlist War from the start
of the insurgency in October 1833 to the start of the siege of Bilbao in
May 1835. It shows how the Carlists mobilised the charismatic leader-
ship of Tomás de Zumalacárregui and propitious socio-political factors
in the Basque country to create a Carlist state which expanded in spite of
increasingly desperate Cristino military attempts to vanquish it. It also
introduces the signiﬁcance of Carlist insurgencies in the Maestrazgo and
Catalonia, although these are explored in greater depth in subsequent
chapters. It explains how the cumulative Cristino defeats on the bat-
tleﬁeld were both the cause and consequence of political revolution.
The popular experience of the Cristino war effort created a ‘commu-
nity of sacriﬁce’ amongst both soldiers and militiamen, who gave this
radical political expression through mutiny, defection, atrocities and a
new popular aesthetic of heroic martyrdom. Finally, this chapter also
introduces the fraught international context of this civil war.
   Ferdinand’s death in October 1833 transformed Carlist violence into
formal civil war. Technically the ﬁrst Carlist rising began not in the

                                   48
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   49


Basque country but in Talavera de la Reina (New Castile), an isolated
and ill-fated attempt by a local postmaster in an episode celebrated
by Carlists as evidence that their cause was nationwide, voluntary
and popular.2 This case would be stronger if there were an even pat-
tern of civilian risings, or civilian support for Volunteers, across Spain
matching the activity in the Basque country. Yet this was not the case.
An attempted coup by the Royalist Volunteers at the seat of power
in Madrid failed on the ﬁrst day when the urban masses failed to
rally and the Cristino army seized control of the Volunteers’ artillery.3
Barcelona’s Carlist-ridden Royalist Volunteers were disarmed without
much violence.4 Oviedo’s Volunteers were disarmed during Mass by
troops who seized the weapons the Volunteers had piously left out-
side. Inchoate risings elsewhere did not prevail and failed to match the
conditions in the Basque country.
   But even here the rising had only mixed success. Navarra, where
Carlism was strongest, was actually the slowest to rise, ironically because
popular royalism had always been so dominant here that the local
Royalist Volunteers were barely organised to begin with. The Navarrese
veteran of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, Santos Ladrón de Cegama,
had ﬁrst to raise Carlists in nearby Logroño before striking north. His
capture and execution on 11 October backﬁred on the Cristinos, as hun-
dreds of Navarrese peasants mobilised to avenge this popular royalist.
Meanwhile, the Deputation of Navarra was caught between the Carlist
sympathies of its members and countrymen and the reality of Cristino
military control.5 It prevaricated by refusing to swear allegiance to the
Cristino monarchy until María Cristina had ﬁrst sworn to observe the
fueros, as was indeed constitutionally proper, but which, more impor-
tantly, reﬂected Realpolitik.6 In the rest of the Basque country, the
greater preparedness of the Volunteers gave local Carlists little difﬁ-
culty in mobilising armed forces, most dramatically in Vizcaya, where
the Royalist Volunteers answered the calls of Carlist insurrectionists and
invaded Bilbao, levying punitive taxes on known Liberals. Six weeks’
‘curfew for the rich’ ensued until Cristino troops reoccupied the city on
25 November, after which Bilbao would become a symbol of the Cristino
and Liberal cause, resisting repeated sieges.7 But at the time, this future
was far from certain, and Bilbao’s civil authorities had accordingly tried
to maintain as ‘neutral’ a posture as possible during the Carlist occupa-
tion, keeping few and ‘antiseptic’ minutes of meetings, whilst prudently
funding the Volunteers’ wages at the same time and even arranging
for the chamber of commerce to ‘lend’ the Carlists a cheap loan of
1.8 million reales repayable at 3 per cent interest.8 When the Cristinos
50   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


liberated the city, they exposed this embarrassing accommodation, for
which the Madrid government made the commander of the Cristino
liberation force, General Sarsﬁeld, a boisterous Peninsular War veteran,
responsible, rather than the local authorities. Sarsﬁeld was removed by
the Cristino regime, which had had cause on other occasions to suspect
his loyalty.9 The early loss of Bilbao was a blow for the cause of Carlism,
as most of the Vizcayan volunteers deserted when Bilbao ceased funding
their pay, and would not return to ﬁght until Carlist territorial expan-
sion throughout 1834 subjected them to compulsory enlistment.10 The
burghers of Bilbao, for their part, stiffened their resolve against future
Carlist attempts.
   Risings elsewhere in the Basque country and beyond hardly com-
pensated for this loss. Royalist War veteran Valentín Verástegui raised
a Carlist insurrection in Alava, named himself commander-in-chief,
and invaded Alava’s capital of Vitoria. Here, foral authorities, as at
Bilbao, tried ‘neutrality’, deﬂecting Verástegui’s overtures. Verástegui
prevaricated and set up a rival junta in the name of Carlos V, an omi-
nous move which could only point to the eventual suppression of the
civil authorities.11 But the foral authorities persevered until Sarsﬁeld’s
Cristino division on its way to Bilbao defeated Verástegui’s insurgents
and liberated Vitoria. Unlike Santos Ladrón, Verástegui survived to ﬁght
another day. Looking beyond the Basque country, the internal threat
to Madrid had been quashed, but there remained the prospect of a
descent on the capital from without. The threat came from the aged
priest, Jerónimo Merino, famous guerrilla veteran of the Peninsular and
Royalist Wars and the obvious choice to command the forces of the
Carlist junta of Old Castile which convened in Merino’s old ‘ﬁefdom’,
the heavily churched province of Burgos. Merino’s conservatism posited
the Cristinos as dangerous revolutionaries: ‘Do you believe that the
declared enemies of Ferdinand VII, those who dragged him captive to
Cádiz, and who proscribed faithful royalists, can in any way be trusted
to defend our monarchical institutions and religion?’12 This proclama-
tion appealed to several thousand more in his path during his march
on Madrid, who remembered the disappointment of Liberal rule during
the Triennium and the opportunities offered by royalism in 1823. Some
even included disbanded royalists ﬂeeing from the Cristino capital. But
Merino was swamped with men he was unable to arm or provision,
and soon had to release the married volunteers from his service. Mean-
while, the Carlist junta near Burgos lost conﬁdence in his campaign and
ordered Merino to return to defend Carlism in La Rioja against Sarsﬁeld’s
counter-insurgency. Thus, the ﬁrst ‘March on Madrid’ in the conﬂict
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   51


proved abortive. But its impact was felt inside the capital, where the new
Liberal press decried the subversive opinions and violence of disbanded
Royalist Volunteers, and demanded that the Liberals’ militia of 1820–23
be resurrected.13 Even though fears persisted of a Carlist ‘ﬁfth column’ in
the capital, the immediate danger to Madrid was over. General Sarsﬁeld
marched east from the Portuguese frontier, pursuing Merino’s retreat to
Salamanca and thence to Burgos, near which he clashed with Merino
in an inconclusive foggy battle on 13 November 1833.14 Merino rallied
in northern Castile, reinforced by Colonel Cuevillas, purged Military
Governor of Zaragoza who had raised a guerrilla force in La Rioja. But
Verástegui refused to send him any reinforcements from Alava, and a
Cristino force soon put Merino’s men to ﬂight, leaving the priest with
only Cuevillas and a dozen other followers, little better than fugitives.
Merino and Cuevillas now ﬂed west towards Portugal, avoiding Cristino
security patrols and escaping from a number of ambushes. At the end of
1833, Merino ﬁnally reached northern Portugal and the relative safety
of Don Carlos’s fugitive court and friendly miguelistas.15
   The Carlist insurgency obliged María Cristina to look for political
support amongst the exiled Spanish Left. On 23 October 1833, despite
Cea’s objections, a near-total amnesty was proclaimed for exiled Lib-
erals. Meanwhile, army ofﬁcers whose careers had survived the purges
were rewarded with powers to control, and disband where necessary,
the Royalist Volunteers. At ﬁrst these measures, along with initially suc-
cessful counter-insurgency operations and the onset of the northern
winter, promised an early peace. However, the Carlists had merely dis-
persed – ‘changed their shirts’ – and would return to ﬁght again.16 Given
that the number of rural insurgents was potentially limitless, and given
that the Cristino army was still too small, no end to the conﬂict was
in sight in 1833. A Cristino cordon sanitaire around the Basque coun-
try was spread too thinly and sapped reserves which might have dealt
a decisive counter-insurgency blow. Meanwhile, the process of purg-
ing the Carlist-ridden Volunteers was still not complete. At one end of
Spain, the weeks after the start of the war saw Liberal Cádiz reinforce
its Volunteers against any Carlist attempts, whilst at the other end the
Royalist Volunteers had either gone over to the insurgency or were held
in abeyance by Cristino captains-general reluctant to call them out in
a poisoned and uncertain political climate.17 Into this vacuum stepped
the Cristino army, but this was too small due to Cea’s fears of a coup,
and it had risen to only 60,000 effectives by the end of 1833. Also, a
large part of these were assigned to Extremadura and Portugal as the
‘Army of Observation’, tasked with ﬁghting miguelistas and arresting
52   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


suspect governors of Spanish border garrison towns.18 Admittedly, the
insurgents were also too few, as Don Carlos’s refusal to lead an insur-
rection until his brother died had limited their organisation. But the
regional balance in the Basque country would shift in favour of the
Carlists thanks to the emergence of a charismatic military genius as their
leader.
   Tomás de Zumalacárregui (1788–1835) is central to understand-
ing the Basque phase of the war. Born in Ormáiztegui (Guipúzcoa),
Zumalacárregui was a veteran of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, as
a Patriot and Royalist respectively, and was purged for his Carlism
in 1833. Many of his biographies border on hagiography, detailing
such colourful episodes as his men accepting half-pay without protest,
and a Basque grandmother who offered her last surviving grandson
for service, and then a horse after Zumalacárregui tearfully rejected
her blood sacriﬁce.19 Such miracle stories reveal the imaginative and
ideational world of the Carlists. These stories were probably nonsense,
or grossly distorted, but useful, as in being deprived of the open sup-
port of Rome and almost all of Spain’s bishops, the Carlists rallied to
Zumalacárregui as their own Christian soldier, and even refashioned
their own organic religious iconography around him and subsequent
national models and symbols. Unsurprisingly, most modern histori-
ans have seen through this Romantic haze. His most recent biography
reverts to the Romantic legend, however.20 John Coverdale defended a
contingent interpretation of Zumalacárregui’s motivations: he was apo-
litical, the only books he was known to have read being either military
or religious in nature.21 Zumalacárregui’s importance explains the quan-
tity and diversity of his representations. Within weeks of the ﬁrst rising
in October 1833, Zumalacárregui made himself Carlist Commander-in-
Chief of Navarra, at the head of a growing army of local peasants which
used guerrilla tactics to turn Cristino garrisons and expeditions into a
pale imitation of the French a generation earlier.22 These guerrilla tac-
tics were overborne throughout 1834 by Zumalacárregui’s painstaking
formation of cavalry and artillery units, eroding Cristino superiority
in these arms (and indeed despite the lack of a cavalry tradition in
Navarra).23 Zumalacárregui’s military success earned him full admin-
istrative powers, conferred upon him by Don Carlos’s exiled court in
March 1834. Zumalacárregui thus enjoyed untrammelled power until
the King arrived in the Basque country in July.24
   The ﬁrst stage of Zumalacárregui’s strategy began between the winter
of 1833 and the following summer with the employment of his army
in a guerrilla war of surprise and ambush. During this ﬁrst stage his
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   53


army lacked the strength to wrest Bilbao from its Cristino liberators.
His ﬁrst set-piece battle on 29 December 1833 in La Berrueza valley was
indecisive: Zumalacárregui simply wanted to blood his men against the
superior Cristino forces and disengaged in good time to prepare for his
next operation. This was a raid into the fertile Ribera region of south-
ern Navarra, populated by hostile Castilian-speaking landowners, whose
‘enemy’ produce would feed his guerrillas.25 Zumalacárregui’s second
stage ran from the summer of 1834 until the winter, and involved con-
trolling rural territory and communications. The ensuing third stage
involved taking Cristino forts and fortiﬁed towns.26
   Cristino Spain would never produce a commander to match
Zumalacárregui. Quesada, who had abandoned a lifelong career of royal-
ism in order to escape the Cristino purges, used court pressure to replace
Jerónimo Valdés as Viceroy of Navarra, an old ofﬁce which was inter-
changeable with the new command of the Army of the North. Valdés
was a veteran of the American Wars and Governor of Cartagena (Murcia)
in 1833, but his liberalism was ahead of court politics at the time.
Quesada, by contrast, had absolutist credentials which recommended
him to the Queen-Regent, and, as a ‘pasha’, in January 1834 had dis-
solved a defence junta in Santander which an advanced Liberal had
led against local Carlists.27 His perspicacious ‘State of Navarra’ letter
to María Cristina claimed detailed knowledge of the insurgency and
won him the viceroyalty. As Cristino Viceroy, Quesada acted on his
rightist political instincts by writing to Zumalacárregui, offering him
a post in Burgos in return for his recognition of the Cristino transi-
tion. But Zumalacárregui, in conference with his staff, publicly rejected
Quesada’s overture, thereby reinforcing his own authority and image of
indispensability for the Carlist cause.28 Writers from both sides agreed
that Quesada’s overture was a disastrous own-goal, for in reinforcing
Zumalacárregui’s legitimacy it weakened the Cristino claim they were
ﬁghting outlaws.29 Moreover, Quesada could not parry this blow by suc-
cessful campaigning. Although the new Urban Militia (see below) was
beginning to garrison towns, freeing up the army for mobile operations,
Quesada was deaf to its Liberal-patriotic pull and instead relied on his
army. But the latter waged war ineptly: launching frontal attacks against
mountain positions, losing baggage and communications, and being
outmanoeuvred and outfought by Zumalacárregui’s genius in active
defence.30 A key early Carlist victory occurred at Alsasua in April 1834
when Zumalacárregui routed Quesada’s convoy, cutting Pamplona off
from supplies from Vitoria, and enveloping the Navarrese capital in a
siege which lasted on and off throughout the war.
54   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


  The Liberal press blamed Quesada for his failure and in June 1834 he
was relieved of his command.31 Having conceded that the Carlists could
no longer be crushed by mobile counter-insurgency operations, Quesada
knew that fortiﬁed lines would be the best strategy but protested he
had too few troops to implement this.32 Even though this ‘blockhouse’
counter-insurgency strategy had been successfully pioneered by the
French during the Peninsular War, the Cristinos still lacked the resources
to make it effective, as one of his ofﬁcers complained in response to
the criticism of the Liberal press: ‘let us not fool ourselves . . . many
more troops are needed if we are to crush the hordes infesting these
provinces, just as our commander-in-chief explained when this com-
mand was conferred upon him’.33 Quesada’s strategy avoided expanding
the war effort to the people, in contrast to the doctrine of his leftist
colleagues, Espoz and Jaúregui. Gaspar de Jaúregui (alias ‘El Pastor’),
guerrilla veteran of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars and of Espoz’s
Pyrenean invasion, was amnestied and recalled to his native Guipúzcoa
to lead a local Cristino free corps. Jaúregui was ambitious to replace
Quesada, but Madrid thought him an uncouth parvenu and blocked his
promotion.34 His case was not helped when the French press reported
that he had promised to rid the Basque country of rebels within a
fortnight.35 Quesada’s replacement was actually the Galician Marquess
José Ramón Rodil, the only veteran of Spain’s lost American wars to have
emerged with any credit as a tactician, who, in April 1834, was disengag-
ing from the Quadruple Alliance invasion of Portugal. Unlike in Navarra,
Cristino operations here had been generally bloodless and effective.
Rodil’s force had helped force Dom Miguel renounce the Portuguese
throne (in the 26 May 1834 Treaty of Evora-Monte), even though the
Cristinos’ real prize, Don Carlos, escaped on a Royal Navy ship bound
for an exile in Britain.36 Despite this failure, Rodil’s 12,000 troops, fresh
from Allied victory in Portugal, were the best in the Cristino army.37
Rodil began his command of the Army of the North with speechifying
optimism, scorning the enemy as ‘weak, exhausted and agonised’. Yet
his results proved no better than Quesada’s. Zumalacárregui drew Rodil
into a fruitless summer campaign invading Navarra, managing to entice
the Cristinos away from strategic targets of any real signiﬁcance and
refusing open battle. After weeks suffering ambushes and empty cam-
paigning, which resulted in mass desertion from Cristino ranks, Rodil
had to retire to his fortiﬁed base at Mendavia near Logroño.38
  The only Cristino ofﬁcer to distinguish himself was Baldomero
Espartero, the son of a carter whom the Carlist War elevated from
mere divisional commander to Regent of Spain. Espartero led a clique
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   55


of ‘ayacucho’ ofﬁcers, veterans of the lost American wars who, during
the Carlist War, forged a highly praetorian bond of leftist politics. The
campaigns of both Napoleon and Espartero show how men who fol-
low their leaders on distant campaigns grow very attached to them,
with destabilising consequences for civilian politics, as Espartero, the
‘Spanish Napoleon’ of 1840, would show. But whilst Espartero after the
war would divide Spanish politics, in 1834 his local victories had already
made him the symbol of Cristino hopes. Physically brave, Espartero was
wounded several times throughout the war and even more times had his
horse shot from under him. In February 1834, Espartero was promoted
to major-general, and later to Comandante General of Vizcaya. His hum-
ble background and bravery gave him good qualities for leadership, even
though these made him prone to immodesty. Espartero conﬁded to
his wife that ‘the troops love me like a father . . . they have an enthu-
siasm for me which borders on delirium and I fear that this could end
up harming me’.39 This dramatic irony was condemned as callow self-
aggrandisement by the British consul at Bilbao, who thought Espartero
was deluded in thinking that Zumalacárregui’s forays into Vizcaya were
anything more than a feint:

  (Zumalacárregui) seldom came into Biscay. Apparently convinced of
  the inefﬁcacy of Espartero’s operations, he let him amuse himself by
  running after the Biscay battalions, who were accustomed to lead
  him a dance all round the province; and when his men were totally
  fatigued with four and ﬁve days’ marches, they would make a stand
  upon some hillside, right in his road; then after disputing the ground
  for half an hour or an hour, and causing the loss of some 50 or 100
  men, they would run off, leaving the victorious general to write such
  bulletins as were never equalled . . . the ﬁeld of Burseña (for example)
  was cubierto de cadáveres (covered with corpses). There were plenty of
  spectators, the writer among the number; and yet nobody could ﬁnd
  above 18 dead bodies!40

The Carlist press matched the consul’s parody, punning Espartero’s
name, ‘General Embustero’ (General Fiction).41 But Espartero’s minor
victories at Portugalete, Guernica, Sollube and elsewhere, certainly won
him plaudits from the Liberal press. Unlike Espoz, future Commander
of the Army of the North who professed a particular understanding of
his native Navarra, Espartero claimed no insight into why the Carlists
were ﬁghting. His letters throughout 1834 spoke of the enemy as rabble
or canaille and his dealings with Carlists were as harsh as any Cristino
56   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


commander. Yet Espartero’s humble origins and political exploitation of
victories recommended him to Spain’s Romantic movement, and to left-
ist tributes to the ‘son of the people’, a Spanish George Washington.42
This rhetorical hyperbole was, of course, divorced from military reality,
from the martial law which Espartero, like other Cristino commanders,
imposed on Carlist territory. On 4 May, Espartero threatened ﬁnes for
families of insurgents, that houses locked upon the approach of Cristino
troops anywhere in Vizcaya would be treated as fair game, and also that
all 17 to 40-year-old men capable of bearing arms and who had had their
hair cut (a sign of military service) were to be sent to Bilbao to prove that
they were not Carlist guerrillas. Those who did not convince were to be
expelled from Vizcaya.43 Espartero’s repressive occupation was accom-
panied by the provisional suspension of the Basque fueros, a measure
which included the shifting of the customs frontier from the Ebro to
the Pyrenees, and replacing Navarra’s historic status as a kingdom with
that of a province conforming to the 1833 model. Henceforth, areas that
came under Cristino occupation would be doubly subjected by the state
of war and the emasculation of civil authority.44
   Zumalacárregui matched the Cristinos in ruthlessness as his reach
widened, demanding that local authorities throughout Navarra and
Upper Aragón swear allegiance to Carlos V or face the ultimate penalty.
This radicalisation placed the Deputation of Navarra in a dire posi-
tion. Early in 1834 Zumalacárregui ﬁnally moved against this ‘nest of
traitors’, pointing to its duplicitous care for the preservation of the
fueros on the one hand whilst speaking out against Don Carlos and peti-
tioning Madrid to reconvene the local Cortes on the other.45 By early
1834 binary Carlist and Cristino authorities confronted each other in
the Basque country. The Carlists had formed a ‘Superior Governmen-
tal Junta of Alava’, a ‘War Deputation of Guipúzcoa’, a ‘Governmental
Junta of Navarra’, along with their own Deputation. The Cristinos,
for their part, imposed their own authorities in the same provinces,
although their remit was shrinking beyond fortiﬁed urban centres on
account of Carlist military successes. As each side refused to recog-
nise the other, even a modest incursion imposed double jeopardy in
terms of taxation, conscription and reprisals on local communities
in the armies’ path. Particular stress was placed on the lowest lev-
els of local authority, aldermen and mayors forced to raise exorbitant
sums to fund both armies, and who faced brutal reprisals for hav-
ing been found to have helped the wrong side. Thus, local authorities
increasingly deserted their posts.46 As Zumalacárregui expanded territo-
rial control throughout 1834, local authorities logically became more
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   57


prone to ﬂee before Cristino incursions, compounding Cristino weak-
ness in local intelligence.47 One of the most mobile Cristino tacticians,
General Marcelino Oráa, blamed his defeats at Zubiri and Urdaniz on
the enemy’s superior local intelligence.48 But Carlist domination by no
means ended the strain on local authorities. Zumalacárregui increas-
ingly overrode civil authorities whilst arrogantly rebufﬁng petitions for
alleviation by Carlist juntas and the Deputation. And little relief came
from the arrival of Don Carlos’s court: although Zumalacárregui’s per-
sonal authority was curtailed, the burdens on the civil authorities only
increased.
   But the military–political crisis of 1834 was far worse for the Cristino
side and quickly made the premiership of Cea untenable. Opposition
centred on the Isabelina Society, whose membership ranged from Lib-
erals of radical to moderate opinions and included several ‘pashas’ who
resented Cea’s civilian absolutism. Demands grew for a Liberal regime to
root out Carlists and attract intervention from Britain and France. Bow-
ing to this pressure, in January 1834 María Cristina appointed as Prime
Minister Martínez de la Rosa, an Andalucían patrician of Spain’s ﬁrst and
second Liberal experiments, who promised to restore Spain’s happiness
by marrying ‘order with liberty’.49 One of his ﬁrst moves was to create
the Urban Militia, to be organised at local level under the command
of the reformed town halls. The advanced Liberal newspaper, Eco del
Comercio, hailed this force as the ‘people in arms’ destined to vanquish
the Carlist insurgency.50 The reality in its ﬁrst year of existence was very
different, however. Property owners remembered the royalist proscrip-
tion of 1823 and had no wish to suffer the same now in the event of
a Carlist victory. Cristino captains-general in Andalucía and Valencia
despaired at the middle classes’ reluctance to lead the Militia, and exer-
cised a range of coercion against them as a consequence.51 The Radical
press complained how patriotic economic dependents substituted their
masters in dangerous roles, and how the notables’ listlessness meant
that disbanded Royalist Volunteers were being enrolled in the Liberal
force.52 Alborea (Albacete), for example, was dominated by the Meoro y
Sánchez family, who maintained their grip on local policing when the
Volunteers’ commander, Anacleto, later Governor of the Bishopric of
Almería, handled the Cristino purge by simply abdicating his command
and preparing his nephew to take command of the ‘new’ militia.53
   The Cristino militia was despised by Carlists as a club for playboy
revolutionaries and was routinely the ﬁrst to be subjected to reprisals
whenever urban centres fell into their hands. It was also poorly regarded
by the Cristino army, which resented the militia’s parochial structures
58   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


(including, from 1835, elected ofﬁcers), comparatively good pay and
beneﬁts, and internal restrictions on where and when it might serve.
In return, the urbanos resented army ‘despotism’ and protested the Mili-
tia’s exclusion from an internationally brokered agreement in April 1835
which promised quarter to surrendering soldiers serving in the north.
Ultimately the Cristino army retained the upper hand in this inter-
service rivalry: it could impose a state of siege in response to revolution
or Carlist invasion, subjecting the Militia to martial law or even dis-
banding it altogether. But the Militia grew in power. The revolutionary
summer of 1835 made Militia service more attractive, and as its num-
bers expanded, its control over urban spaces and Liberal pageantry
claimed privileged ownership of Spanish patriotism: time and again this
was turned into a focus for radical political action, massacring clerics
and Carlist prisoners, and in September 1835 leading a Liberal revolu-
tion across Cristino Spain. A generation of historians saw this Militia
radicalism in Marxist class-conﬂict terms.54 But whilst class interests
were not absent, members of the Militia were radicalised more by the
experience of the civil war. Their sacriﬁces for the Cristino cause were
used to justify revolution and even the most extreme atrocities. Cities
like Barcelona were ﬁlling with refugees who had witnessed murders
and wanton destruction. Their arrival provoked demands for revenge
against Carlist sympathisers imprisoned in Cristino gaols, a demand that
became impossible to resist during the revolution of 1835.
   The inter-service rivalry about who was making the biggest sacri-
ﬁces raged as Zumalacárregui tightened his grip on the Basque country
and Carlist risings ﬂared up elsewhere. In 1834 the urbanos defend-
ing Cristino towns in the Basque country, Catalonia, the Maestrazgo
had no doubt that they were the defenders of liberty. During the win-
ter of 1834–35, besieged Pamplona ﬁlled with timorous army ofﬁcers
who avoided rejoining their units by exaggerating or inventing per-
sonal injuries, and often hiding behind the presence of their families.
Pamplona’s militiamen, by contrast, with a great deal more than hon-
our at stake, manned their city’s defence by day and night, often in
conditions of appalling hygiene and hunger.55 Forty miles south of
Pamplona, the besieged Militia garrison of Villafranca was heroically
martyred by defeat. Villafranca was the gateway to the Ribera and a
customs-post before the 1834 Cristino suspension of the fueros, and its
Militia garrison went to the utmost lengths to resist Zumalacárregui’s
siege. The Militia retreated into the defensive redoubt of the village
church. Zumalacárregui burnt down the adjoining buildings and burnt
sacks of chilli at the foot of the church in order to suffocate the defenders
                                               The Basque Phase, 1833–35   59


inside. A truce was brokered to allow the release of the militiamen’s
women and children, but shots were ﬁred during this delicate oper-
ation and Zumalacárregui reacted by beating and feather-tarring the
refugees. Before the surviving defenders choked to death, they stormed
out of the church and charged the Carlist ring. Those militiamen who
were not killed were captured and shot. Heroic Villafranca, and its
heroic refugee women, became Liberal cause célèbres. On 10 December
1834, after the Cristinos had retaken the town, the Cristino government
decided to rebuild the church, and compensate the widows and orphans
(the Queen-Regent, seeing the emerging popular meaning of the war,
prudently made a public donation).56 The martyrdom of Villafranca
was downplayed by Carlist historians who resented the muddying of
Zumalacárregui’s own heroic image.57
   The violent, sudden and unsolicited martyrdom which overtook
overwhelmed Militia detachments and pitiful prisoners of war pro-
voked demands for vengeance. Whilst poorly led Cristino armies were
defeated at every turn, these rural defeats were offset by urban defensive
victories – or by valiant defeats which made martyrs to liberty out of the
armed citizens who suffered them. Vergara (Guipúzcoa) controlled vital
communications with the French border, and its Militia garrison distin-
guished itself resisting a Carlist attack in August. In September, a Carlist
force which struck west into Old Castile was defeated by the outnum-
bered militia garrison of Villarcayo, which fought without outside help
and despite half the town being burnt by the attackers. Thus, whilst the
Cristino army elites failed on campaign, the ‘people’s army’ succeeded
in point defence.58 It would not be long until the militia cashed in these
military honours for a stake in politics. In the early stages this radicalism
amounted to vengeance, targeting Carlists captured on the battleﬁeld,
languishing in prisons, or civic Carlists cloistered in monasteries and
nunneries. But it also targeted Cristino elites who were either callous or
incompetent towards their men. And the militiamen were not the sole
agents of vengeance, as the result of Zumalacárregui’s great victory in
October 1834 at Alegría (Alava) showed. This triumph was prepared by
Zumalacárregui’s expert command of geography. Civilians in his path
were forced either to join his columns or to be corralled under guard
away from roadsides, out of sight of Cristino scouts. Then he ambushed
a superior Cristino force, dividing it into two and defeating both sections
in detail. Some 2,000 surviving Cristino soldiers (twice as many as he
had killed in action) defected to the Carlist side and made no protest
when he had their captured Cristino commander shot.59 As Cristino
revolutions and Carlist expeditions afﬂicted Spain from 1835, civilians,
60   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


too, followed the lead shown by militia and soldiers by making decisions
and acting on them. Episodes like these grew to spawn a Cristino mar-
tyrology that was distinctive in its subaltern and civic qualities, in being
no longer concerned with avenging heroic elites (like Riego in 1823 or
Torrijos in 1831), but about avenging popular grievances. In this regard,
1830s Spain contrasted with comparable ideological struggles in such
other Latin polities as Italy, where both nationalist and ultramontane
martyrologies were crafted to support elite rather than popular aims.60
   This civic martyrology had no equivalent on the Carlist side where
the motives of religion, dynasticism, impoverishment, adventure and
wrongdoing did not naturally lend themselves to progressive, civic
martyrdom, and still less beyond the Basque country, in areas where
wrongdoing and poverty played a larger role in Carlism. Throughout
1834, Cristino counter-insurgency forces in Catalonia had varied success
suppressing Carlist guerrilla bands raised from the traditional somatén.
The war here divided the staunchly Cristino coastal range, inhabited by
an inﬂuential bourgeoisie, from the front-line plateau and mountains of
the Catalan far west, where Cristinos fought Carlist guerrillas. The early
Carlist insurgency was led by the cleric and Royalist War veteran, Benito
Tristany. His opponent, Catalan Captain-General Manuel Llauder, com-
plained of the inextinguishable Carlist conspiratorial networks based
around parish priests and monasteries, but believed he had vanquished
the Carlist somatenes by the summer of 1834.61 But they never lost a
foothold in the mountainous north of the Principality, where a Carlist
rural network was ready to revive the disbanded somatenes for another
insurrection. Meanwhile, army detachments were drawn away from
Catalonia to reinforce the hard-pressed Army of the North, and Llauder
himself left for Madrid where, on 2 November 1834, he became Minis-
ter of War. Thus, the newly constituted Urban Militia was left to defend
itself against resurgent somatenes without much help from the regular
army.62 Outside the Basque provinces, Catalonia and the Maestrazgo,
Carlist risings had a symbiotic relationship with banditry, both feeding
off it and reverting to it when dispersed by Cristino counter-insurgency
actions. Carlist bandits were dangerous not only for operating outside
the norms of war, but also because of their example of ill-gotten gains,
which might encourage Cristino conscripts to desert. In October 1834,
one Cristino military commander in action against Carlist irregulars in
the Maestrazgo was acutely aware of this when he wrote to the War Min-
istry demanding that his troops get proper rations of bread, wine and
meat, ‘as it is most demoralising for them to discover that the facciosos
take and eat what they want’.63
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   61


   Beyond these emerging Carlist safe zones, insurgents were moti-
vated, above all, by adventure and wrongdoing. The mundane case of
‘El Locho’ (Manuel Adame), a pig-rustling day labourer and veteran
of the Peninsular and Royalist Wars, and the main guerrilla plague
of La Mancha in 1834, was not untypical. Other bandits preyed on
Manchegan communities using Carlism as their cover. Their colourful
nomes de guerre (the Palillos brothers, Tercero, Rompe, Ventero, Barba,
Lobito) exempliﬁed the Spanish popular culture of using resonant nick-
names to hide mundane identities. Further south and west, virtually all
insurgents were bandits using Carlism as the ﬂimsiest of political covers.
Extremadura had a long border with restive Portuguese miguelistas, but
Cristino border garrisons prevented any organised Carlist insurgencies
from taking hold and security forces instead had only bandits to sup-
press. Andalucía’s aquiline bandits were already infamous, and attempts
to recruit them met with derision from several quarters. Nonethe-
less, Carlist emissaries were dispatched throughout the war to turn the
bandits, smugglers and deserters of the Serranía de Ronda into a guer-
rilla force.64 Thus, even though organised Carlism outside of its safe
zones could never prevail without outside help, the countryside was
strewn with bandit gangs whose varied motives (desertion, landless-
ness, crime) they often explained by allegiance to Carlism. In short,
Carlism was often a cover for contingent rather than ideological
motives.
   This is not to say that Carlism was nothing more than a ﬂag of
convenience. Civic Carlism in the Cristino zone, especially of priests,
often spilled over into incitement or violence in the face of leftist
provocation. Throughout 1834, Cristino authorities uncovered plots
involving Carlists who had got involved with the new Militia,65 sus-
picious arms caches66 and, especially, hostile clerics. Clerical hostility
included incitement: one cleric brought to trial proclaimed ‘Death to
all negros [pejorative for “Liberal”]! The Holy Spirit speaks through me!’
whilst a Valencian capuchin preached that the Church would resist the
onslaught of the ‘philosophers’ of the century and that the cholera
which appeared between 1832 and 1834 was divine punishment for
Spain’s wickedness. The cleric’s curse probably instilled the fear of God
into his parishioners. The Asiatic cholera epidemic had ravaged the pop-
ulation, with the province of Granada alone registering a grisly toll of
5,293 dead between January and August 1834, notwithstanding munic-
ipal quarantines uselessly designed to contain the ‘miasma’.67 In fact,
the cholera had an even more sinister legacy in the pretext it pro-
vided for Cristino elites to channel the anger of those elements of the
62   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Cristino population who saw the Church as the cause of the war. Inﬂu-
enced by similar phenomena in central Europe and Russia (and the
assaults on the Jesuits during the July 1830 revolution in Paris), Lib-
eral agents in July 1834 spread rumours in Madrid that the cholera
was caused by Jesuits poisoning the wells. The response was horriﬁc.
The militia rallied mobs in a violent assault on Madrid’s convents and
monasteries, massacring seventy-eight Jesuits, Dominicans, Franciscans
and Mercedarians. Whilst Liberal newspapers drew a veil over the whole
affair – ‘a few bad apples’ according to El Eco del Comercio68 – a police
report found the Militia to have been the chief culprits, whilst the addi-
tional participation of some Royal Guards conﬁrmed the suspicion that
the events of 17 July 1834 enjoyed both the foreknowledge and the tacit
backing of the government. Leniency was shown towards those token
culprits arrested, whilst for days afterwards groups of militiamen swag-
gered about the streets ‘boasting of their crimes’ and ‘showing more
pride and haughtiness than the French after Marengo’.69 A savage tra-
dition of anti-clericalism had been born, and generations of clerical
historians would remember 17 July as a day of infamy.
   Although religious personnel in the rest of Cristino Spain were spared
a massacre for the rest of 1834 and the ﬁrst three months of 1835, the
climate of hostility grew in the wake of Madrid. To some degree this
was remarkable, as even though relations between Madrid and the Holy
See deteriorated, culminating with the expulsion of the nuncio in 1835,
all but one of the Spanish bishops obeyed Rome’s orders not to recog-
nise the Carlist insurgency as legitimate. Thus, clerics who joined the
insurgency did so as individuals rather than as an institution, but given
the well-known religious claims of the Carlists, it was understandable
how episodes of anti-clerical violence spiralled at local levels in Cristino
Spain.70 Monks in Huéscar (Granada) were deported after they tried to
evict militiamen who played revolutionary music and adorned their
hats with the green ribbons of the Constitution. Fines were imposed
upon priests who refused to offer blessings to Isabel II during Mass.71
The enemy’s anti-clericalism gave Carlists hope of intervention in their
favour from abroad. One priest whipped up popular Carlism in the
Almanzora river area of Almería – hundreds of miles from the front line –
with the promise that Carlists from Genoa would make landfall.72 In fact
the expedition landed in Catalonia, and comprised mainly Catalan émi-
grés from the transition of 1833 rather than Italians. These went to
ground in the Barceloneta district of Barcelona, troubling the watch-
ful Cristino city authorities who feared a ﬁfth column.73 This was the
ﬁrst and last expedition organised from abroad before the British Navy
                                            The Basque Phase, 1833–35   63


closed off the Mediterranean to all but the most intrepid volunteers for
Carlism.74
   But from the landward side there was one volunteer who would not
be kept out of Spain. Don Carlos’s exodus through Portugal was remark-
able, even more his escape from exile in Britain. Reaching Spanish soil
via the Pyrenees at Urdax in July 1834 – around the same time as the
massacre of his beloved Jesuits in Madrid – Don Carlos ﬁnally gave the
insurrection its natural leader.75 This was a far cry from the months of
exile in Portugal. There the Pretender’s supply trains had been seized
by Rodil’s vanguard and his entourage reduced to scavenging potatoes.
Rodil had almost captured Don Carlos himself, a feat which earned him
Quesada’s incumbency. But this reward backﬁred when news shocked
both Rodil and his government – Don Carlos had reached Spain to pre-
side over the insurgency.76 Some of Madrid’s blindness in this affair may
be attributed to the Cristinos’ poor diplomatic connections resulting
from six years of miguelista control of Lisbon.77 Even though the pedris-
tas captured the Portuguese capital in 1833, the new Cristino legation
in the city had been powerless to inﬂuence Britain’s usual hegemony
in Portugal, in particular the latter’s resolve to undermine the Carlists
by exiling Don Carlos from Iberia, in the same way that the exiling of
Dom Miguel had ended the Portuguese civil war. Upon the Pretender’s
arrival in Britain, the Cristino ambassador in London at last managed
some intercession. Although Foreign Secretary Palmerston protested he
could not hold Don Carlos prisoner, he made the Pretender give his
word that he would not leave Britain, and in any case satisﬁed Cristino
foreign policy by signing the Quadruple Alliance. In the long term this
alliance augured well for Cristino Spain, as it united the constitutional
monarchies of Britain, France, Spain and Portugal in diplomatic sup-
port for Madrid, and was followed by agreements to raise volunteers in
these countries for service in Spain. As this alliance brought Europe’s
two foremost powers to the aid of the Cristinos, an unqualiﬁed Carlist
victory was now highly unlikely. At the heart of the alliance was the
Anglo-French ‘Liberal international’ of Whigs and Orleanists. Whereas
London used this to support a new era of Liberal interventionism in for-
eign policy, Paris used it to help fend off legitimism at home (Orleanist
fears had been evoked by an abortive rising in the Vendée in 1832). But
in the immediate term the alliance fell at the ﬁrst hurdle when Don
Carlos escaped from London, making for Brighton, then Dieppe, Paris
and Bordeaux and Bayonne, and ﬁnally Spain. Don Carlos was himself
amazed, whispering to his companion, Auguet Saint-Sylvain, ‘My good
cousin of the Orleans dynasty is very far from suspecting that I’m going
64   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


through his territories without his permission, to go and tear asunder
at the point of my sword his treaty of the Quadruple Alliance.’78 This
journey would have failed without the protection of Saint-Sylvain, the
French Carlist and private secretary to Don Carlos, who drew ﬁnance,
obtained passports and secured safe houses in France, and consequently
joined the Pretender’s court in Spain.79
   Once on Spanish soil, Sylvain helped the King to forge a central provi-
sional junta out of the several local Carlist juntas and set it to assessing
the economic and military potential of the newly created Carlist zone.80
The King’s mere appearance on Spanish soil galvanised the insurrection
and became the biggest propaganda weapon against both the Quadru-
ple Alliance and the Cristino war effort. In a revealing proclamation,
Don Carlos appealed to conscripts to the Cristino army to defect. Don
Carlos equated the sex of María Cristina with illegitimacy, weakness and
indiscretion, attributing these to the usurping nature of the entire Lib-
eral project.81 This was integral propaganda, but the fact that defectors
from Cristino ranks greatly outnumbered those from the Carlists owed
more to Madrid’s inability to succour its conscripts than to any dynas-
tic attraction. Cristino defection grew during 1834, and even though no
exact numbers exist – the Gaceta Oﬁcial printed the names and units
of defectors for propaganda purposes, but obvious fears of retribution
appear to have limited this practice82 – it is clear that their numbers
peaked during 1835–37, as expeditions tore across Spain and revolu-
tion derailed Cristino military strategy. Both defectors and non-Basque
recruits were called Castilians (castellanos) by the Basque Carlists – who
soon used the term to describe all Carlists who were not from the Basque
country – and by 1835 several battalions described as such had been
formed. The Castilian Carlists occupied an awkward position during the
war: loathed by the Cristinos, they were also treated with suspicion by
the Basque fueristas who saw them as a ‘foreign’ threat to Basque auton-
omy, as non-productive refugees consuming resources and as proxies for
the unpopular Castilian-dominated Carlist Royal Police.83 A diametri-
cally opposed suspicion pertained to the considerably fewer recruits and
defectors from the Basque country who served in Cristino ranks. Espoz
actively recruited deserters and villagers in his native Navarra, even from
French border villages. Their different language, uniform and pay struc-
ture, and, above all, their self-interested bravery in battle (they were
particularly vulnerable to Carlist reprisals), alienated conscripts from the
rest of Spain whose only thought was survival in a strange land.84
   Meanwhile, the arrival of the Pretender on Spanish soil threw Cristino
politics into turmoil. Prime Minister de la Rosa’s refrain that Don Carlos
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   65


was merely ‘one more insurgent’ angered the Army of the North, which
by now thought Madrid was losing all grasp of reality.85 The union of
the Pretender with his commander-in-chief appeared the worst possible
outcome, and the Cristino army responded by waging war more strate-
gically. Serious consideration was given to conducting a scorched earth
policy.86 In a limited form this was carried out: raids routinely destroyed
war-related material which could help the insurgency, from ramparts to
entire arms factories. But this economic war was countered by the Carlist
soldiers’ readiness to use the arms of Cristino prisoners and defectors,
and even to loot their corpses. The ﬁrst and last year of the war when
the Cristino army was adequately supplied was 1833/34, which made it
a cash cow for the scratch Carlist forces. And the Carlists’ resourcefulness
countered the Cristino blockade. Zumalacárregui demanded parsimony
in his soldiers’ use of powder, ordering his men to take only ten
musket cartridges into battle and to ﬁre these only when the enemy
was in sight and range.87 Meanwhile Carlist materiel was improving.
An initial ‘powder scandal’ was gradually overcome when the quality
of powder smuggled from Aragón and France or made in overworked
forges was improved, and the conditions of Carlist armaments work-
ers militarised.88 The father of the Carlist artillery arm was Vicente
Reina, a Cristino defector who was killed in action in July 1835.89
By the end of 1834 the Carlists got to possess their ﬁrst artillery pieces:
three guns (including two captured from defeated Cristinos at Alegría).
Reina expanded this number by building two howitzers, improvising
shells from materials collected from villages. An ironmongers in a forest
near Labayen became the early centre of Carlist mountain-gun making.
An old iron gun with a wide calibre was pressed into service and chris-
tened ‘El Abuelo’ (grandfather) by its Cristino targets on account of its
age, and this name stuck with the Carlists, too.90 Now Zumalacárregui
had sufﬁcient siege and ﬁeld artillery, whilst the travails of ‘El Abuelo’
made the gun as much a propaganda as a military weapon, as it was
transported from burial in a Cantabrian beach and pulled by six-pair
of oxen until it reached Urbasa, where it was secretly reburied. A for-
eign observer noted ‘if the Carlists win, it will be lodged in the Madrid
museum as a memorial of the war’.91
   Carlist military expansion underpinned Zumalacárregui’s authority
in religious, political and economic matters. He embodied the ‘throne
and altar’ reaction of the Carlist movement, combining the role of
Christian soldier with exterminating angel, presiding over his troops’
daily attendance at Mass on the one hand, and endorsing the public
execution of some 70 Cristino captives in reprisal for Madrid’s Jesuits on
66   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the other.92 Zumalacárregui combined austere charisma with discipline,
planning and resourcefulness. He responded to villagers’ complaints
about Cristino raiding parties by arming ﬂying parties tasked with their
protection. He also used draconian punishments when he judged it nec-
essary. In September 1834, he decimated a battalion of his own men
when their timidity spoilt his plan to trick his way into a key forti-
ﬁed village (Echarri-Aranaz) on the Pamplona–Vitoria road (pro-Carlist
sources conceded Zumalacárregui rare emotion when he halted the
executions halfway, tearfully realising the men were ‘his children’).93
Zumalacárregui’s military state was already in place when the King’s
court arrived. It had even established regular ﬁnance from internal
sources: the revenues of customs posts the Carlists were seizing along
the border with France, taxes levied on parish clergy, and ﬁnes imposed
on Cristino sympathisers and hostile settlements. The harvest of 1834,
meanwhile, was abundant without collapsing market prices, owing to
war depredations and Zumalacárregui’s supply needs.94 Expanding ter-
ritorial control allowed battle casualties to be transferred from homes
to Carlist military hospitals; patients in the latter stood better chances
of recovery than Cristino patients did in theirs. Cristino casualties, by
contrast, had to be transferred over exterior lines of communication,
which gave them greater exposure to the Asiatic cholera epidemic and
also absorbed far more manpower – some ten Cristino soldiers to litter
each patient to safety.95
   By the time of his King’s arrival, Zumalacárregui was thus already pre-
siding over an integrated military state. He even kept a platoon-strength
bodyguard who also relayed messages day or night.96 This insurgent
model provided a mystique for Carlist supporters which their Cristino
enemies completely lacked. Cristino commanders, by contrast, cut lum-
bering, conspicuous ﬁgures, which afforded local authorities time to
desert their posts en masse, so as to avoid reprisals from the stronger
Carlists.97 Thus, the Cristinos routinely lacked local intelligence and
liaison networks, and so manoeuvred their men into vulnerable group
formations and corralled them in valleys. Consequently, the Carlists had
little difﬁculty intercepting communications and, unlike their enemy,
faced no shortage of willing spies in the Basque country.98 The effect of
superior local intelligence was plain to see in Carlist victories through-
out 1834. In August, Zumalacárregui defeated a Cristino division at Las
Peñas de San Fausto (Navarra), inﬂicting some 250 fatalities for the
loss of barely more than a dozen of his own. Zumalacárregui seized
the secret codes with which Cristino commanders communicated with
one another yet, remarkably, the defeated general took no measures
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   67


to change them. General Carondelet, who was called embarrassed or
incompetent, knew that Carlist spies were tracking his every move even
without the codes.99 Even worse, the numerical and material superior-
ity which the Cristinos had once enjoyed was now being eroded by
Carlist rearmament and recruitment of conscripts and defectors. The
Carlists formed a battalion of scouts called the Guías de Navarra, com-
prised entirely of Cristino defectors, and their artillery and even cavalry
arms were beginning to match their enemies’. On 4 September at Viana,
Carlist cavalry were decisive in victory for the ﬁrst time.100 For their
part, few Cristino commanders could match the Carlists in mountain
warfare, and ofﬁcers had to wait until late 1834 for a book on the
subject to appear.101 Much depended in the meantime on such resource-
fulness and initiative as the Cristino ﬁeld commanders could muster.
General Oráa, dubbed the ‘grey wolf’ by the Carlists on account of his
complexion and risk-taking with rapid marches,102 was one of the best
hopes the Cristinos had. A native of Beriáin (Pamplona), and Penin-
sular War veteran, Oráa knew local terrain.103 But he was nevertheless
outmanoeuvred and defeated by Zumalacárregui at Los Arcos.
   In November 1834, Cristino fortunes appeared to change with the
appointment to the Command of the Army of the North of the swor-
darm of Liberalism, Espoz y Mina, who replaced the exhausted Rodil.
Espoz’s advanced liberalism had made him one of the last exiles to be
amnestied, and his appointment to the most senior appointment in the
Cristino army divided military opinion far more than Jáuregui’s candi-
dacy. Espoz offered the surrounding Carlists an amnesty or even service
under his command, whilst imposing martial law in Pamplona, includ-
ing a shoot-on-sight curfew after nightfall. Despite Espoz’s recourse to
such illiberal measures, the Liberal press carved out an image of him as
the grand old man of liberty. A Zaragoza newspaper called him a ‘man
of his fatherland (patria)’, in contrast to Zumalacárregui who was merely
a ‘man of his mountains’.104 Espoz certainly had a great reputation,
but this did not bode well as Zumalacárregui had already spent a year
humbling Cristino reputations. A German Carlist compared Espoz to ‘a
well-practised gladiator forced to ﬁght his enemy with a shield instead of
a sword’.105 Yet it was nonetheless remarkable how the Liberal-patriotic
allure of Espoz persisted amongst the Cristino rank and ﬁle despite his
failures. After his death from stomach cancer in December 1836, Espoz’s
mortal remains were carried around Cristino Spain in a revolutionary
ritual of popular liberty. Evidence of the strength of feeling arose when
the Málaga militia rioted at their city’s refusal to pay public homage.106
On paper Espoz found the Army of the North still in a strong state, as it
68   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


included some 23,357 infantry and 1,089 cavalry, but barely more than
half of these were actually available for campaigning. Espoz knew that
they were tired, poorly equipped (they still only had summer uniforms)
and demoralised from previous encounters. However committed Espoz
was to remedying this, he continued the incompatible War Ministry
policy of garrisoning isolated small settlements, diluting his campaign
strength whilst failing even to defend in depth. Most settlements in
Navarra and the Basque provinces proper were unwalled and located in
militarily indefensible valleys, which left ridges and peaks free for Carlist
activities: indeed Cristino attempts at defence in depth had done noth-
ing to break the siege of Pamplona.107 Whilst the Carlists were amassing,
Espoz’s energies were absorbed safeguarding essential relief column sup-
plies for besieged Pamplona. Local Cristino victories at Mendaza and
then Puerta de Arquijas (12–15 December) ensured Pamplona received
supplies safely but barely altered the strategic situation.108 This remained
bleak, as Zumalacárregui’s victory the same month at Las Arquijas
attested.109 Then, inevitably, both sides yielded to the elements, with
a virtual truce over Christmas whilst Spain and the world took stock of
an alarming year of civil war.
   Zumalacárregui retired his army to his stronghold of the Améscoas
valley (Navarra) whilst Espoz had no option but to withdraw Cristino
forces from the countryside. Espoz’s background gave him an advanced
understanding of the war, but his illness usually conﬁned him to
Pamplona, and so he delegated generals to escort convoys into the
city. Espoz’s strategy was to box in Zumalacárregui by arming local
militia units as much as possible. This ran the risk that the inhabi-
tants, especially in the smaller settlements, would turn their arms over
to the Carlists, but Espoz hoped that their initial resistance would
‘soak up’ Carlist forces and free up the Cristino army for a decisive
counteroffensive. This close engagement strategy would turn on the
Cristinos’ clinging on to villages in the valley of Baztán (Navarra),
especially its local capital, Elizondo, as this region controlled access
to French customs revenues and contained valuable arms factories like
Orbaiceta.110 Espoz’s strategy was clearly informed by his ideology, a
form of Bonapartist Liberalism dictating that the people be armed for
authoritarian ends.111 He could claim a common touch (he wrote a
number of key proclamations in Euskera). Like any Bonapartist, Espoz
harmonised Cristino military with civilian administration and proved
tolerant towards civic Carlism, but also intervened ruthlessly when-
ever this turned to violence or reprisals. Thus, when Zumalacárregui
raided the Baztán he imprisoned the wives of absent Cristino soldiers
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   69


and militiamen; Espoz responded in kind with the wife of a Carlist
mayor and several other prominent Carlist women, ransoming them
in a Pamplona prison.112
   Escalating reprisals provoked international interest in the conﬂict and
motivated foreign volunteers. Zumalacárregui assembled a squadron
entitled the Defensores de la Legitimidad, comprising Spanish and
foreign ofﬁcers who served as simple soldiers, and they increased in
number and distinction (research has revealed between 120 and 250
foreign Carlist volunteers, of whom more than a quarter boasted noble
titles).113 It became fashionable for European aristocrats hooked on
the Hispanophile Romanticism of writers like Chateaubriand, Schlegel
and Hugo to assert old-fashioned notions of honour in a continent
which had otherwise lapsed into the juste milieu. French volunteers were
the most numerous; reeling from their recent failure in the Vendée,
Spain’s conﬂict offered legitimists the chance to reignite the cause of
Henri d’Artois and restore honour. Aubert, a French ofﬁcer and fugi-
tive of 1832, ﬂed France under a death sentence to serve under Don
Carlos in Spain, but faced the same sentence once captured by Cristino
forces. Rejecting an invitation to defect and save his life, Aubert died
a Carlist: ‘In France I would have given my life for Henri V; here,
I owe it to Carlos V. Long live the king!’114 Prussians formed the sec-
ond largest contingent of volunteers; their Protestant piety in the service
of the Carlist Catholicism was explained by a pan-European, interde-
nominational defence of legitimacy.115 German conservatives of both
denominations united in pro-Carlism: the ultramontane Rheinlander
Josef Görres shared Protestants’ enthusiasm for Carlism as the organic
Spanish resistance to ‘foreign’ Liberalism.116 The prospect of adventure
lured other young legitimists. The young August Karl von Goeben, full
of a sense of Romantic adventure, followed his countrymen:117

  A royalist in the full sense of the word . . . I imagined those mountains,
  how the Carlists there were struggling against the overwhelming
  might of the revolutionary armies, bowing neither to sword, hunger
  nor death, and I resolved to offer my blood for the cause of legitimate
  monarch.

The Carlists claimed their cause was truly Spanish, unlike the ‘foreign-
ness’ of the Liberals. Yet his knowledge of European divisions inﬂected
Don Carlos’s proclamations against the Quadruple Alliance. The quar-
ter Zumalacárregui offered to Cristino prisoners after his victory at Los
Arcos was used by the King to counter the black legend his cause
70   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


attracted in the foreign press and capitals: ‘Europe does not know us and
yet pronounces without hearing us . . . and offers us nothing but unjust
hatred.’118 As we shall see in Chapter 5, far more foreign volunteers with
far more varied motives would soon join the Cristino side, with the
result that, by the summer of 1835, the expanded Spanish political and
military battleﬁelds were accompanied by an expanded international
civil war of ideologies and volunteers. Contemporaries certainly saw the
war as an international struggle between Liberty and Catholicism, not
unlike their great-grandchildren during the Spanish Civil War a century
later. According to three Aragonese Radicals, ‘the Spanish civil war was
not just a dynastic issue between Isabel II and her uncle, Don Carlos,
nor was it just a contest between despotism and liberty in Spain, but
also between Dom Miguel and María de la Gloria, and Henri V and
Louis-Philippe, between Liberal and Absolutist Europe’.119
   But, as with the Spanish Civil War a hundred years later, international
involvement had a ‘great distorting’ effect. The ﬁrst two years of Cristino
Spain, from the start of the war in October 1833 to the revolution of
the juntas in September 1835, were certainly marked by growing polar-
isation between Left (which tended towards republicanism in extreme
cases) and the Right (which in many cases leaned towards Carlism).
Leftist climates along the Mediterranean littoral (Barcelona, Málaga,
Seville) saw Cristino governors there champion reformist calls whilst
the inverse was true in such conservative cities in the north as Burgos
and Salamanca. But beneath this macropolitical trajectory, several thou-
sand local disputes were given a political dimension by the demands of
war. The Liberal postmaster of Valladolid had his house ransacked and
family abused by Merino’s royalist bands in 1822; in 1833 he faced the
same terror at Merino’s hands in 1833 when he refused to frank Carlist
mail.120 Women from the poor neighbourhoods in the south-west of
Madrid regularly invoked the cry of ‘Long Live Carlos V!’ in a primitive
protest against cholera – from which many of the wealthy classes had
ﬂed – and taxes.121 Journeymen resented master tradesmen who man-
aged to embellish their fortunes with Militia service, whilst unskilled
labourers (such as Madrid builders) jeered passing señoritos in uniform.122
Newspapers reported violence between militiamen and soldiers, which,
though sparked off by rivalry over women, in reality was caused by
resentment between those who had to go to the front and those who
could stay behind.123 The poor Triana neighbourhood of Seville saw riots
in protest against the cost of expanding local Militia forces and against
their insufferable behaviour strutting about in the name of liberty hun-
dreds of miles behind the front line, persecuting those without friends
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   71


in authority. This tense situation was soon made worse by the execu-
tion of a cabal of conspirators led by a purged army ofﬁcer. They failed
to raise Seville for Don Carlos, but not before renewed riots and a pru-
dent decision by the Cristino authorities to execute the conspirators in
secret.124
   Tensions grew between mobilised militiamen and civilian popula-
tions in either front-line or bandit-infested areas. By the summer of
1834, Cuevillas had returned from Portugal and was invading several
rural communities in the province of Logroño, and Cristino mobile
Militia was sent out on a punitive expedition. Unable to catch up
with Cuevillas, the militia nonetheless ﬁned villages which ‘failed to
report’ the transit of Carlists, whilst militiamen were also entitled to
claim ‘expenses’ incurred whilst away on campaign.125 Militiamen sent
on fruitless campaigns to exterminate Carlist bands often vented their
frustrations on civilians. Irregular risings to the south of Madrid that
summer caused a tense atmosphere in Ciempozuelos, where the Urban
Militia rampaged in reprisal for the killing of one of their number in a
tavern. This arrogant paramilitarism was ﬂawed because it tied the exer-
cise of Liberal patriotism on terms favourable to the Militia to the use of
force. To some extent violence against non-combatants was understand-
able in a civil war which was both highly localised and asymmetrical.
But Cristino heavy-handedness often recoiled on the authorities. When
a June 1834 tax riot in Corella (Aragón) was brutally suppressed by
militiamen, the population responded with cries of ‘¡Viva Carlos V!’126
In Novelda (Alicante), local people proclaimed the Pretender in protest
at the continued imprisonment of hundreds of men who, in December
1833, had attempted a Carlist rising. In this case, the Militia likewise
brutally cleared the streets, banishing ﬁve ringleaders, and forbidding
meetings in the open.127 The terrible – and sometimes liberating –
choices that civilian communities were forced to make in this war would
be starkest during the years of ‘deep war’ between 1836 and 1837. In the
meantime, the civilian experience of the war, at the hands of both
Carlist and Cristino forces, created its own community of sacriﬁce which
had a distinctive impact on popular politics. Fundamentally, civilians
under Cristino control resented conscription. The ‘blood tax’ by the end
of 1834 was set at 8,000 reales, a sum beyond the means of all but a
select few, and draftees could not easily escape, as communities had to
provide replacements for any of their number who failed to enlist or
soldiers who subsequently deserted.128
   The blood sacriﬁces demanded by the Cristino regime poisoned the
popular reception of its Liberal project whilst also providing Radicals
72   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


with political oxygen. Popular disaffection was heightened because
Carlist violence obliged Liberals to explain often elite-driven reforms
in the strident language of liberty. In order to rally Spain to reject
Don Carlos, it was necessary to make the cause of the infant Isabella
that of liberty against despotism, constitutional government against
absolutism and civilisation against barbarism. Thus, the government
decision in February 1834 to create the Urban Militia on a very lim-
ited basis was quickly overturned by a press campaign, which saw this
force’s expansion as a tripwire against despotism. By the end of the
year the Militia contained about 200,000 effectives, one-third of whom
were unarmed.129 Political newspapers, which were permitted for the
ﬁrst time since the Triennium, exercised unprecedented importance
in radicalising the politics of the Cristino zone. Strict censorship laws
passed in January and June 1834 would be swept away in the revolu-
tion of 1836.130 The Eco del Comercio was mouthpiece to the Left-Liberals
(known as the exaltados – ‘hotheads’ – and, after 1836, progresistas),
whilst more radical, Republican journals emerged besides. The Right-
Liberals (moderados) were represented by a succession of titles (La Abeja,
El Español, El Castellano, El Correo Nacional, El Piloto). The civil war thus
ushered in a recognisably bipartisan political system. The Carlist press,
by contrast, constrained by territory and prior censorship throughout
the conﬂict, failed to evolve. Its ofﬁcial gazette, of which Metternich
despaired for its inquisitorial, sermon-like quality and blindness to
positive propaganda opportunities, was the Gaceta Oﬁcial.131 Just like
the Liberal press with its correspondence, the Carlist Gaceta ﬂourished
on the correspondence of fellow travellers, especially civic Carlists in
Cristino territory. This led Cristino authorities to destroy as many edi-
tions of the Gaceta as came into their hands.132 Liberal newspapers, by
contrast, due to their sheer quantity, inﬁltrated the Carlist zone and
permeated Cristino territory where they became a vehicle for political
parties and revolution.
   Newspaper opinion was central to pressurising María Cristina into
yielding to progressive reform. In April 1834, the Royal Statute (Estatuto
Real) was ‘granted’ by the Crown to the nation. But the bicameral Cortes
it established was even more restrictive with regards to suffrage than
the French Charte of 1814, and only 27 representatives of the 188-
strong lower house had been deputies during the Triennium, and fewer
still exaltados.133 Much of its conservatism was overruled by liberalising
decrees in 1835 before the Statute itself was abrogated the following
year, but this liberalism had to be wrested from a Queen-Regent who
remained almost absolutist in her political instincts. The war caused
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   73


extra-parliamentary radicalism to re-emerge, the ﬁrst manifestation of
which was the Radical Isabelina Society. Government listlessness in
response to the anti-Jesuit massacres encouraged the Radical Isabelina
Society to act. Meeting in secret on 20 July whilst the cinders of Madrid’s
monasteries were still warm, the society’s leader, the now elderly Romero
Alpuente mobilised a petition of prominent leftists to the Queen-Regent,
saying that the Royal Statute was too restrictive and asking for it to be
replaced by a Constituent Assembly tasked with introducing a version
of the Belgian Constitution. The petitioners threatened street barricades
if these demands were not met. But whereas the government was pre-
pared to overlook anti-clerical violence, the threat to the monarchy
posed by advanced Liberal elites was another matter. The conspiracy
was quickly penetrated, but despite the arrest of Romero Alpuente and
such other Radical elites as the leader of the dissolved Santander junta,
Flórez Estrada, the network was so wide and well connected that only
Eugenio de Aviraneta e Ibargoyen, an experienced Liberal conspirator
and veteran of Spain’s last attempt to reconquer Mexico, was actually
convicted and imprisoned. Aviraneta was the easiest Isabelina leader-
ship scapegoat for the government. But Madrid’s Liberals did not forget
him. Aviraneta was allowed to keep abreast of politics from his prison
cell, a concession which, so Liberal opinion fumed, had to be wrenched
from the Apostolic ‘Junta of Selva’, a group of Carlist political prison-
ers who informally determined which privileges and punishments their
fellow captives might receive.134 The notion of Carlist prisoners running
a prison in the Cristino capital is almost as striking as the subsequent
story of Aviraneta, whom the 1835 revolution would free from captivity
and elevate to the leading counter-espionage role in Liberal politics.
   The Carlist state would also become politically divided, between
theocratic and enlightened absolutist factions, jostling in a notori-
ously Byzantine court. Indeed, Don Carlos’s civilian court faced several
problems improving Zumalacárregui’s military state. Lacking formal
diplomatic recognition, even from sympathetic absolutist powers, the
Carlists lacked predictable foreign ﬁnancial support. The Carlist com-
mander in Catalonia, the ill-fated Count Romagosa, may have managed
to secure a substantial donation from Turin, but British markets were
the most lucrative, and this foremost ally of Cristino Spain blocked
most private Carlist efforts to tap London loan markets. Privately con-
tracted arms shipments frequently failed to reach the Carlists either
because cargoes were impounded in French and British ports or because
they were intercepted by Quadruple Alliance seapower before they could
reach the safety of the Carlist-held coastline.135 Therefore, populations
74   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


under Carlist control had to shoulder the burden, which meant Navarra,
Alava, Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa (in that descending order of magnitude).
A junta collected income from customs posts which the Carlists had
seized along the French frontier, monies were raised from Basque and
Navarrese clergy, especially during Lent (‘a crisis time for the cause of
Isabel II’136 ), titles and ofﬁces were sold, and other income was found
in ﬁnes, both in an ad hoc (i.e. against local Cristino sympathisers) and
organised basis, such as the 20,000 duros ﬁne imposed on Cristino com-
munities that came under Carlist occupation in the Baztán. Don Carlos’s
arrival had brought some new money from international sympathisers,
but also court sinecures who frittered away the budget.137 Nominally, the
Carlist war economy was dwarfed by the economic and demographic
potential of the Cristino zone, even though revolution there meant that
this was not optimised. Carlist geostrategic inferiority could only be
overcome by formal and substantial diplomatic support. And this, in
turn, could only be won by decisive victories on the battleﬁeld to make
foreign powers view the Carlists as a regime in waiting instead of a mere
rural insurgency.
   The year 1835 seemed to promise the Carlists such an outcome.
Bloody three-day actions opened on New Year’s Day at Celandieta and
Ormáiztegui were defensive victories for Zumalacárregui (they were
falsely reported as Cristino victories in San Sebastián where the Mili-
tia had to rescind victory celebrations).138 Zumalacárregui intensiﬁed
pressure on besieged Cristino towns by employing guerrilla forces. The
Cristino army could win few victories, and those it did win were
ineluctably skewed by political and careerist considerations. General
Córdova, whose later leadership of the Army of the North I address
in Chapter 5, felt his role in the victory had been downplayed and
offered Madrid his resignation in protest; Madrid appeased him with
the comandancia of the Basque provinces, replacing the American wars
veteran, Canterac, who was made Captain-General of Madrid. Political
pressure, buoyed by a radicalised press, exhorted Cristino commanders
to win victories no matter what the cost. Zumalacárregui was dislodged
by overwhelming enemy numbers at Orbiso on 17 January 1835, and
this was subsequently celebrated as a Cristino victory, even though
the Cristinos then abandoned their useless territorial gain, allowing
Zumalacárregui to claim the ﬁeld.139 Two weeks later Zumalacárregui
repulsed a Cristino attempt to seize the bridge at Arquijas, in cir-
cumstances which summed up the Cristino quandary: Córdova and
Oráa saw their communications paralysed by Carlist interception, and
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   75


Oráa ended up advancing onto the wrong enemy ﬂank, allowing
Zumalacárregui to defeat both armies in detail.140
   Whilst the Cristino army was bogged down, the Carlists were suc-
cessful in a series of localised offensives to expand their hold on the
Basque country. In the front line was the Baztán, whose hard-pressed
Militia felt abandoned by the Cristino army. Elizondo was terrorised by
artillery bombardment: such was the panic that the town’s women were
allowed to leave to take their chances with the surrounding Carlists.
The town made desperate appeals for reinforcements from Pamplona
but Espoz, conscious of Pamplona’s precarious situation, at ﬁrst rejected
these. Espoz himself begged Madrid for more reinforcements, but those
that arrived were of insufﬁcient quantity and quality.141 War Minister
Llauder, himself so recently a royalist and accustomed to seeing Espoz
as a revolutionary, was reluctant to send him reinforcements, and did
not believe his remark that ‘it did not matter whether Juan or Pedro
are War Minister as I know how to obey’.142 Rather, Llauder was one of
the ﬁrst moderados to utter a preference for an international rather than
national solution to the conﬂict, precisely so as to avoid Espoz’s revo-
lutionism. Espoz would soon have his revenge by publicly condemning
the leftist Cardero rising of January 1835, thereby placing the blame
for its success entirely on Llauder’s shoulders.143 Meanwhile, as besieged
Elizondo began to starve, pressure mounted on Espoz to send a relief
force, which he scraped together by mobilising Pamplona’s militia cav-
alry. But this suffered a reverse at Larráinzar, where Espoz himself was
almost captured by the Carlists after a series of errors which histori-
ans have explained along partisan lines.144 Espoz eventually relieved
Elizondo and made a brutal example of the nearby village of Lekaroz,
which had been a Carlist thorn in the Cristino side of the Baztán cap-
ital, executing three male residents and relenting only when villagers
marked for execution disclosed the whereabouts of three buried Carlist
cannon. Carlists condemned Espoz for repeating his terrorism during
the Triennium at Castellfullit. But to the Carlist cry to avenge Lekaroz,
the Cristinos answered with Villafranca. Espoz defended his ruthless-
ness as stiffening the resolve of front-line Cristino communities and
intimidating other Carlist villages.145
   But a pattern had emerged whereby a Cristino local victory in one area
would be cancelled out by two defeats elsewhere. Whilst Espoz relieved
Elizondo, Zumalacárregui took Los Arcos after a bloody siege involving
artillery which the Cristino garrison – accustomed to seeing the enemy
as insurgents rather than a regular army – assumed the Carlists could not
76   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


have. Unlike at Villafranca, the Cristinos yielded the town, evacuating
safely under cover of night and rainfall. Whilst the Cristino rearguard
fought off Zumalacárregui’s cavalry pursuit, the vanguard faced the
wrath of Espoz, who arrested the ‘cowardly’ garrison commander and
his ofﬁcers.146 Espoz knew that the Carlist ring was tightening on the
sensitive Baztán valley, but his exhortations for a maximum effort
sounded hollow as defeatism swept his ranks. When Zumalacárregui,
on 19 March, made a second attempt at Echarri-Aranaz on the key
Pamplona–Vitoria road, the town yielded after a short bombardment
from El Abuelo, the Cristino ofﬁcers accepting terms to keep their swords
and withdraw to Pamplona, whilst the subaltern ranks (including the
artillery), who were also free to go, chose to serve under the Carlists
rather than their own ofﬁcers. These defectors were amazed to discover
the still shoestring nature of the attack: El Abuelo’s bore had worn out
just as the garrison accepted terms (Carlist soldiers joked that it had gone
quiet due to it being ‘promoted’ to lieutenant-colonel), whilst the par-
simonious Zumalacárregui uncharacteristically bribed the inhabitants
with scarce money in lieu of sustaining a full garrison of occupation.
He had now consolidated his communications between Guipúzcoa and
Navarra; Espoz, by contrast, had to abandon and destroy the nearby
fort at Olazagutía, which had now been rendered indefensible.147 Espoz
thus lost hope in destroying the Carlist army in open battle, and instead
focused on holding fortiﬁed towns, and absorbing virtually all his ener-
gies escorting supply convoys. And when fresh troops became available
for a major offensive in April (see below), they failed to wrest the initia-
tive from the Carlists. For the Carlists, meanwhile, only one prize now
mattered.
   Carlist legend says that Zumalacárregui opposed the decision to
besiege Bilbao. Rather, Vitoria, so Zumalacárregui thought, was an eas-
ier target, whose fall could easily be followed by a general offensive
towards Madrid. As he would be killed during this siege, it was com-
forting for the Carlists to read infallibility – and martyrdom – into their
fallen leader. Certainly, the overruling of Zumalacárregui on the Bilbao
question gave the court a pretext for bringing its commander-in-chief
to heel. But early events also strengthened the court’s case. Bilbao was
blockaded from the land as early as March 1835, and illness and exhaus-
tion forced Espoz to resign his command only weeks later. This deprived
the Cristino cause of an experienced counter-insurgent strategist and
Basque speaker. Also, the Bilbao operation was led by Zumalacárregui’s
second-in-command, the very able Francisco Benito de Eraso, who had
fought Espoz during 1822–23 and again in 1830, and who probed the
                                             The Basque Phase, 1833–35   77


weaknesses in Espoz’s strategy by dispatching guerrillas to harass multi-
ple Cristino fortiﬁed centres simultaneously, always reserving his main
effort for Bilbao. Eraso was aided both by increasing defections from
Cristino ranks (during the ﬁrst ten days of March alone some 76 men
and an ofﬁcer defected) and by crisis within Bilbao. The Basque capital
was in the grip of an economic crisis caused by the inﬂux of refugees,
mainly from the exposed coastal towns of Portugalete, Bermeo and
Lequeitio, and by the paralysis caused by rural Carlism to local eco-
nomic activity.148 The world anticipated some sort of decision at the
Vizacayan capital; Carlists indeed hoped that their capture of this port
would trigger decisive aid from Metternich’s Europe. International inter-
est in Bilbao also magniﬁed reports of atrocities. On one occasion some
37 Cristino soldiers captured by the besiegers outside the city walls were
shot in reprisal for the killing of three wounded Carlists. The Carlists
castrated some of their victims, as if playing out the emasculation trope
of dynastic propaganda.149
   Mounting atrocities like these alarmed European opinion, and caused
the British expert on Spanish affairs, Lord Wellington, to dispatch a
humanitarian mission under the politician and diplomat, Lord Eliot,
and his adjunct, the Peninsular War veteran, Colonel John Gurwood.
The ‘Eliot Treaty’ which resulted from this mission gave quarter to
regular Carlist and Cristino troops who surrendered in the Basque
country, allocating them mutually recognised prisoner-of-war camps, or
‘depots’, from which they were to be exchanged at regular intervals.
Both Zumalacárregui and Cristino War Minister Valdés agreed that the
treaty could be ‘extended if the war reaches other places’, even though
the Cristinos were horriﬁed by this prospect.150 In fact, this humanitar-
ian mission by their Quadruple Alliance ally poisoned Cristino politics,
especially later in the war when pressure grew from some quarters
to extend the treaty to the irregular war raging in Catalonia and the
Maestrazgo. Both Left and Right Liberals protested that the treaty treated
the Carlists as equals, and even worked in their favour as their forces
were numerically inferior. Left Liberals protested that the treaty allowed
the Carlists to exclude militiamen, foreigners and Cristino free corps
from quarter, licensing them in particular to massacre any militiamen
they captured. As one Bilbao Radical complained whilst his city was
under Carlist siege: ‘here is a treaty which carefully excludes the mili-
tia, the very pith of the popular cause . . . The Spanish Generals ought
to have spurned the mere idea of bargaining for their own safety at the
cost of the families who fed, clothed, and paid them.’151 Other Liber-
als in safe urban centres shared the same indignation in the press.152
78   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


The treaty touched a raw nerve in terms of inter-service rivalry, and
the behaviour of Spanish ofﬁcers increased leftist grievances. Episodes
abounded of Cristino ofﬁcers’ callousness towards the Liberals’ Mili-
tia. When the Cristino commander of Ochandiano surrendered his
town to Zumalacárregui, he negotiated the safe handover of his horses
but neglected to negotiate anything for the town’s Militia garrison.153
Episodes likes these fed a popular martyrdom complex and primed the
‘people-in-arms’ to start the revolution of the juntas in 1835. In the
meantime, the Eliot Treaty could not have come at a worse time for
Cristino fortunes, for Valdés signed it only days after having left his
Ministry to replace Espoz in the command of the Army of the North in
order to mount what turned out to be a disastrous offensive.
   On 18 April 1835, the Army of the North mounted the biggest cam-
paign of the war so far, involving some 21,000 Cristino soldiers, which
led on 22 April to the Battle of Améscoas. Valdés’s offensive aimed to
destroy the Carlist army in its ‘den’ of the valley of Améscoas in Navarra,
which Zumalacárregui had developed as a redoubt in the early days of
the insurgency. The army invaded as pincers, one arm led by Valdés
and the other by Córdova from his base at Vitoria. The Cristinos’ 34
battalions vastly outnumbered the 11 which Zumalacárregui had com-
mitted for defence (his main effort was massing against Bilbao) but
the Carlists’ signature tactics of ambush and superior local intelligence
hampered the invaders’ progress. Early success by Córdova’s pincer at
destroying Carlist depots proved a false dawn when his men lost disci-
pline and gorged on the supplies Carlist civilian evacuees had stashed
in oak boughs. Both Cristino armies lost around half their effectives to
desertion during the two-week campaign, and these losses were com-
pounded by suffering as the Cristinos’ ﬂimsy footwear broke on the
notoriously tough limestone terrain and their supplies broke down.
The hunger of Valdés’s men drove most of their effectives away from
the planned route and towards the Carlist capital of Estella instead.
Even though they occupied Estella, their ignorance of local geogra-
phy and a complete breakdown of communications caused the Cristino
columns to ﬁre on each other the whole night before the occupation.
Meanwhile, Zumalacárregui’s rearguard wore out Córdova’s force with
repeated ambushes, especially at night, which meant the Cristino force
which reached Artaza, the gateway to the Améscoas valley, on 22 April,
was hungry, sleep-deprived and diminished. Zumalacárregui issued a
halt order, and repulsed the Cristino attack despite his three-to-one
inferiority, inﬂicting over 700 fatalities. The Cristino line broke and
the demoralised soldiers ﬂed for their lives, vanishing into the hills,
                                              The Basque Phase, 1833–35   79


some ending up being lynched by enraged Basque villagers, and oth-
ers reaching the temporary safety of Estella. The Army of the North
was spent, and even worse it had not even drawn any Carlist battal-
ions away from their offensive against Bilbao.154 As the English Carlist
veteran Henningsen noted:

   The high expectations entertained in both London and Madrid, of
   what Valdés was to do against the faction, were crushed, particularly
   when it was known that Zumalacárregui had overthrown him with
   eleven battalions, having in the provinces twenty-eight under his
   command, if he had chosen to bring them up; but that while he
   effected this, every fortiﬁed place was as strictly blockaded as ever.155

The defeat at the Améscoas valley handed the initiative to the Carlists,
who now embarked upon a general counteroffensive. Espoz’s recent
strategy of mobile warfare to retain as much territory as possible was
now impossible to sustain, and by the end of May Cristino forces were
driven from all of the Basque country outside the fortiﬁed capitals of
Pamplona, Vitoria, San Sebastián and Bilbao. The greatest loss was the
Baztán valley and the huge stretch of sensitive French border it com-
manded. The evacuation of the Baztán was followed by that of all
Cristino fortiﬁed centres in Navarra outside of Pamplona; the Carlists
occupied them and sometimes even did not even bother to harass
the retreating Cristinos. Liberals, especially those enrolled in Elizondo’s
Militia, felt abandoned and fearful of Carlist reprisals: Oráa called an
extra-ordinary session of the Baztán town hall in order to allay their fears
of the army’s retreat. It was to no avail. This episode crystallised an ide-
ological divide between the army and the militia which had, of course,
long distinguished Spanish liberalism but which now, in the context
of brutal civil war, became an anguished question of survival. Unlike
the Militia, which answered to local government, the army followed
a chain of command deaf to local interests. The militia, by contrast,
was a localised force that in the Carlist north made more enemies than
friends. The army’s retreat from the Baztán turned into a rout in wet
weather, with swollen streams hampering the retreat of often barefoot
soldiers. And the situation for the Cristinos elsewhere in the Basque
country was equally grim. In late April, General Iriarte was defeated at
Guernica, losing almost 500 in action and countless others when sol-
diers careered off a bridge into a fast-ﬂowing river. Captured ofﬁcers were
shot in reprisal for a recent Cristino atrocity elsewhere.156 The only ofﬁ-
cer who stemmed the offensive was Espartero, who, at Rentería, halted
80   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Iriarte’s ﬂight and reoccupied Guernica. A grateful government pro-
moted Espartero to Comandante General of the Basque provinces.157 But
the cupboard was bare when compared to the prizes on the Carlist side.
Zumalacárregui took Treviño (an exclave of Castile inside the Basque
country) after an almost bloodless siege. Its demoralised garrison of both
soldiers and Militia was happy to surrender on the Carlists’ word that the
new Eliot Treaty would be binding on both forces. Zumalacárregui now
had truly contiguous territory under his command with all its economic,
demographic and military potential, and he justiﬁed his overlordship
using the language of a Christian soldier.158 He implored his prisoners
to renounce revolution and embrace Catholicism and King Carlos V.
Learning of his commander’s ﬂourish, the pious Don Carlos offered
Zumalacárregui a noble title: Duke of Améscoas, but Zumalacárregui
coyly replied that he would ‘accept this honour once the Carlists are
marching into Cádiz’.159 But despite Zumalacárregui’s plans for Vitoria,
the court had resolved that the path to Spain’s Babylon lay through
Bilbao. Only Bilbao now stood between the status of Carlism as a rural
insurgency and Carlism as a regime-in-waiting.
5
The War Radicalises Cristino Spain,
1835–36




This chapter charts the Carlist recovery from their failure to take Bilbao
(ﬁrst siege) and the death of Zumalacárregui, including Carlist territo-
rial expansion in the Basque country, the Maestrazgo and Catalonia.
It explains how Carlist military success was both a cause and a con-
sequence of the Radical-Liberal revolutions in the Cristino zone of
September 1835. It shows how this leftist shift in politics was fed
by a popular anti-militarism and anti-clericalism, which, with varied
results, forced the hand of the Radical Prime Minister, Mendizábal.
Whilst his anti-clerical reforms solidiﬁed Cristino support at the expense
of provoking support for Carlism, his 100,000-man levy provoked an
expanded pattern of desertion, particularly because of the peculiar sup-
ply problems the Cristino army faced. It shows how the war radicalised
international opinion and led to volunteers enlisting for both sides,
especially the Cristino auxiliaries who helped defeat Bilbao’s second
siege, and explains their impact on Spanish politics and society.
   The Cristino army now abandoned all of the Basque country apart
from San Sebastián, Bilbao and Pamplona, the front line being estab-
lished at Miranda del Ebro. The Carlists thus gained population, money
and other war-ready resources. Eraso already had Bilbao under siege:
now the Carlist cry went up of ‘To Bilbao!’ Eight artillery pieces were
trained on the capital of Vizcaya, and shortages, if not outright hunger,
began to envelop the city. Carlist women followed the besieging army
in the hope of entering Bilbao for plunder.1 Count Mirasol, Cristino mil-
itary governor of the province of Vizcaya, came from second-generation
military aristocracy and was no natural friend of the popular cause. Yet,
on 18 June 1835, he made a stirring speech to the Urban Militia of
Bilbao, telling them they had ‘nothing to learn from the army’. The

                                   81
82   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


walls were breached on 14 June, but the Militia managed to secure the
gap. Even though the Carlists, as always, managed to work miracles with
their limited artillery, two of their guns were so worn that their bores
split. The Carlists were too exhausted to continue the assault on the
night of 14 June, and the Cristino batteries opened up a counter-ﬁre.
Mirasol had scoured the northern front for spare artillery, as far aﬁeld
as San Sebastián. British and French gunboats were also active in the
River Nervión, and the allies accepted Mirasol’s request to strip their
vessels of some of their guns in order to bolster the defences of the city.
Mirasol’s resourcefulness was matched by a chance catastrophe in the
enemy camp. On 18 June, Zumalacárregui was wounded outside the
walls and died a week later.2 Zumalacárregui’s death turned him into
a Carlist legend, at the right hand of such patriotic ﬁgures as Pelayo
and El Cid.3 Carlism was deprived of its ﬁrst and last undisputed leader,
and no sooner had Zumalacárregui died that rumours abounded that he
had been poisoned by Don Carlos’s court.4 It was therefore strange that
early Cristino responses included panic as well as triumphalism. The
consulate at Bayonne repeated ill-digested rumours that the Quadru-
ple Alliance was abandoning plans to reinforce the Cristinos with some
3,000 Polish émigré infantry who had been awaiting embarkation from
Southampton; news of Zumalacárregui’s death, it seemed, convinced
Paris and London that the war would now be short and that interven-
tion was both unnecessary and dangerous in view of renewed legitimist
plots in France.5 In fact, Liberal Polonophilia in the wake of the recent
Russian repression of Poland had exaggerated the real ﬁgure of 500
infantry, and these Poles would still reach Spain as part of the French
Foreign Legion (and they would be joined the following year by three
Polish cavalry squadrons).6 Rumours and half-truths shaped the Carlist
War like no other.
   Cristno spirits were raised when a relief force led by General Manuel
Latre, a veteran of the Riego revolution, forced a gap in the Carlist
siege line. On 26 June, Don Carlos appeared in person before Bilbao,
but this emboldened rather intimidated the defenders. When a particu-
larly savage bombardment on the morning of the 27th opened a breach
in the walls, into it sprang soldiers and the artillerymen of the Urban
Militia, even British Royal Marines, the shock troops of the Quadruple
Alliance, all of whom displayed doggedly high morale, shouting vivas
to Isabel II and liberty.7 Seeing this resolve, on 27 June Eraso made a
plea for the besieged to surrender, promising even to show mercy to
the Militia as the Carlists recently had at Villafranca and Vergara. But
the resolve of the Militia, Quadruple Alliance and even Bilbao women
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   83


who answered the sound of shellﬁre with piano music and dancing,
emboldened Mirasol to reject capitulation.8
   The Carlist siege was formally broken by the arrival, on 30 June, of
a Cristino relief force led by Córdova, acting head of the Army of the
North. The Carlists had ﬁred a total of 1,580 projectiles into Bilbao,
and, in all, more than 200 soldiers and militiamen had been killed or
wounded (no exact ﬁgures exist for civilians).9 On the one hand, the
Carlists had been defeated by the Cristino defence: Bilbao’s Militia had
excelled in urban point defence, giving time for the relief force, and
the propaganda value of the Liberal ‘people in arms’ surged in the wake
of the victory.10 On the other hand, the Carlists also defeated them-
selves via internal dissent. The Carlist court was riven with intrigue and
animosity. Maroto and Eraso disliked each other whilst Villemur, the
French émigré of the 1790s and now Carlist prime minister (‘Universal
Minister’) disliked Zumalacárregui. These court divisions in part resulted
in the Cristino relief force from Portugalete relieving Bilbao. Sturdier
siegeworks and more intense bombardment might have taken the city,
so the Carlists reckoned.
   Meanwhile, the death of Zumalacárregui and the victory at Bilbao
gave the Cristino side the initiative for the ﬁrst time since the Améscoas
offensive. Strategically, the situation showed promise: on 17 March
1835, Madrid had decreed the creation of a Reserve Army comprising
both regular troops and, controversially for the Cristino Left, mobile
militia, to be based in Castile to combat both Carlist incursions from
Navarra and guerrilla activity behind the front line. Valdés’s failure to
lead the lifting of the siege of Bilbao had cost him his job, and on
2 July 1835, he was replaced as commander-in-chief by Luis Fernández
de Córdova.11 A royalist during the Triennium and diplomat during the
Ominous Decade, Córdova’s career was tarnished by a notorious alterca-
tion in 1831 with Prime Minister Calomarde. But Córdova returned to
favour after the transition and became an intimate ally of the Queen-
Regent.12 For the ﬁrst time since the appointment of Espoz the previous
November, the Cristinos had a commander with real vision, albeit a very
different one (Córdova planned a static war of attrition). The Carlists,
by contrast, never found a replacement equal to Zumalacárregui. The
hero’s successor, Vicente González Moreno, was 58 years old – almost
20 years older than Córdova. Moreno’s Ominous Decade had honoured
the Liberal black legend: as Captain-General of Granada he had presided
over the execution of Torrijos. The ‘Hangman of Málaga’ also alienated
his own side: in 1827, he had supported Calomarde’s anti-Carlism and
had timorously ﬂed possible retribution from vengeful Liberals after
84   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


being purged of his captaincy-general in October 1832. Moreno thus
needed some military success to restore Carlist fortunes and silence his
detractors.13
   Moreno advanced the Carlist army to Mendigorría (Navarra), rashly
joining battle with the Cristinos in a tactically weak position, as the
River Arga lay behind his troops with only one bridge allowing for
the contingency of retreat. Thus battle opened on 16 July 1835, and
Córdova won his ﬁrst victory as commander-in-chief, even though his
cavalry failed to exploit this in pursuit. For the ﬁrst time, Carlist casual-
ties (some 2,000 dead) signiﬁcantly exceeded those of the Cristinos, who
lost about half this toll.14 Moreno’s hopes of silencing his critics were
thus dashed. It was suggested that Moreno hoped his reckless deploy-
ment would intimidate an enemy which had been showing every sign
of nerves, and yield the possibility of a general invasion of Castile.15
Don Carlos, who had never forgotten Moreno’s betrayal during the
Agraviados, replaced him with the ambitious Nazario Eguía, who was
of a similar age but was a career ofﬁcer and a better tactician.16
   Even though Córdova was feted in Pamplona as a hero, the strate-
gic situation was not signiﬁcantly changed. Despite Cristino defensive
victories at Bilbao and Mendigorría, the Army of the North remained
chronically undersupplied, only limited help came from outside Spain
and poor conditions made an ideal environment for Radical agitators
to subvert the army. Córdova repeatedly offered his resignation in dis-
gust but Madrid neither called his bluff nor managed to attend to his
needs. The ﬁrst problem was that the granaries and other foodstores
established in northern forts were either abandoned or empty. The sec-
ond problem was the corrupt and chaotic system of private contractors.
The government regularly defaulted on its payments to the contractors,
or asentistas, and these in turn did not supply the army, or at best, supply
would be partial, erratic and unpredictable. The largest contractor of this
chaotic scheme was Agustín Alinary, and as little as 30 per cent of his
contracted supplies actually reached the army. The third problem was
that it proved difﬁcult to surmount this shortfall by living off the land.
Cristino invaders in Navarra seldom found booty as Carlist defenders
were supplied at short range and the Royal Government issued decrees
against the hoarding of foodstuffs (Carlists invading Castile, by con-
trast, could get booty). Córdova thus had to show an administrative
and political acumen beyond his relatively young years. On the one
hand, he coerced Cristino civilian populations in his zone to shoulder
the burden of supply. This won him the loyalty of his soldiers but not of
civilians. For operations either on the actual front or in hostile territory,
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   85


Córdova contracted 1,000 muleteers, of whom some 700 presented for
work (not enough, but a valuable addition nonetheless). But as these
men routinely went unpaid, or were paid only in arrears, most ended
up deserting. Córdova blamed the political leadership for these failings,
and owing to the revolution of the juntas in September 1835, his sup-
ply situation deteriorated still further as Radical juntas exercised their
‘sovereignty’.17
   The everyday life of the Cristino soldier and the ofﬁcer on campaign
was thus precarious in the extreme. Letters to ofﬁcers from loved ones
at best arrived twice per week when soldiers were in garrison, and not at
all when they were on campaign. Relatives might send mail to fortresses
and towns which approximated the soldiers’ whereabouts, but there was
no guarantee that recipients would pass through.18 Billets were dreary
and unwelcoming: Pamplona, Vitoria and even San Sebastián lay under
close blockade. Only Bilbao, with its busy port and entertainments, was
a popular posting, at least for ofﬁcers. But as for the ranks, foreign
observers of both Cristino and Carlist sympathies agreed upon their dire
state. Pro-Carlist Honan remarked: ‘(Cristino conscripts) were chieﬂy
boys from sixteen to twenty years; many of them in tatters, and present-
ing most ungainly specimens. They took all opportunities of deserting,
and some old soldiers escorted them from town to town to prevent it.’19
A British Legion ofﬁcer in San Sebastián, for his part, saw wonders in his
allies’ predicament:20

  The Queen’s recruits are mainly short, poorly clothed and worse fed.
  It is a mystery to me how any man can survive on their fare: meatless
  rations of rice some days, boiled vegetables with an ounce of bacon
  on others, coarse dark bread, no wine, and the meanest serving of
  rough spirits on Sundays.

In fact, this diet compared favourably with that of the civilian popula-
tion: it has been estimated that in 1834 only some 13 per cent of Spain’s
population, some 1,550,000 out of 12,000,000, ate meat as part of their
diet.21 But food supplies were erratic, especially at times of revolution,
which fed a spiral of popular radicalisation, and the war for supplies was
a constant Achilles heel for the Cristinos.
   Meanwhile, politics radicalised in Cristino Spain. A pre-emptive
rightist coup was plotted by Manuel Llauder: the ministerial La Abeja
newspaper, on 18 January 1835, called for a military dictator to come
to power and end the war. Llauder, meanwhile, ordered a levy of 25,000
men into the army and that martial law be imposed on the Urban Militia
86   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to replace troops in fortiﬁed areas.22 This threat spurred a leftist coup
forged by the Isabelina and led by a junior rather than senior ofﬁcer, Lt.
Cayetano Cardero, a man with unlimited reserves of ambition. Such vet-
erans of the 1834 Isabelina as Quiroga and Palarea were to be assigned
to captaincy-generalships, whilst the cry that went up in the centre of
Madrid on 18 January was ‘Down with Llauder!’ Llauder, occupying the
all-powerful War Ministry, had got wind of the plot, including its exact
details, through his ﬂourishing network of spies and informers. But,
refusing to stop a ball being held in honour of the Queen-Regent, he
self-assuredly predicted that the plot would fail. But the Madrid rising of
18 January went far beyond Llauder’s expectations. The Captain-General
of Madrid, Canterac, was drawn into negotiations as a stand-off emerged
outside the Post Ofﬁce on the Puerta del Sol, the centre of the revolt.
Seeing that the militia had gone over to the rebellion, Canterac voiced
an appeal for the rebels to unite behind the Royal Statute, but their
response was ‘Long live liberty!’ Canterac then made an appeal to the
loyalty of a palace regiment, but this was misheard as a Carlist cry.23
A hail of bullets was the response from the rebels, who took little con-
vincing to suspect ofﬁcial collusion with the enemy, and Canterac died
instantly.24 Seeing that they had crossed the Rubicon, Cardero’s men
returned to fortify themselves in the Post Ofﬁce whilst pro-government
troops descended on the centre and opened ﬁre. Several bystanders,
especially the ubiquitous aguadores, or water-sellers, were caught in the
crossﬁre. Madrid, which had already suffered cholera and the anti-
Jesuit massacres, had now become an open battleground between the
ministerial and radical wings of Cristino liberalism.
   Eventually a ‘no-winners-no-losers’ truce was negotiated, and Cardero
was even allowed to send a petition to the nearby Cortes (the former
Radical, Argüelles, contrived to ruin the document by spilling ink over
it). Cardero and his men marched out of Madrid towards Navarra, draw-
ing the cheers of a large part of the population. At Burgos Cardero
was taken aside from his detachment and dispatched to ‘safety’ in
the Balearic Islands. But real damage had been done to the Martínez
de la Rosa government. Whereas Liberal writers explained Cardero’s
actions generously in idealistic terms, conservatives condemned the
moral defeat the rising imposed on lawfulness and respectability, and
the political cover it gave to urban criminality which had been rising
since the anti-clerical massacres of July 1834.25 In any case, such was the
powerlessness of the government that all those soldiers involved were
pardoned, Cardero even being promoted, after which, like Riego before
him, he entered the Cortes; by contrast, his soldiers were sent to the
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   87


front.26 Riding the tiger of army grievances, Cardero went on to become
a darling of the Left, and the nemesis of conservative army elites.
   In the wake of this rising a memorable debate ensued in the Cortes
in which Palarea, a mooted beneﬁciary of the rising, bizarrely attributed
the 18 January events to a Carlist plot, whilst Alcalá Galiano and others
condemned it as showing how honest, liberty-loving soldiers and militi-
amen had been led astray. The rightist Liberal, Fernández de Córdova, by
contrast, was scathing both of Cardero’s careerism and of Llauder’s weak-
ness in allowing the insurgents to march out unpunished. All pointed
the ﬁnger at Manuel Llauder, who had combined Bonapartist vainglory
with shocking timing and incompetence. Llauder was dismissed from
the War Ministry and dispatched with a token decoration to captain the
generals in Catalonia. His replacement was Jerónimo Valdés, a man of
the Left, whose reputation had grown as Captain-General of Valencia,
in which role he had virtually wiped out the insurgency, and who had
acted as temporary Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the North in
April 1835.27 When the speaker of the Cortes on 21 January made a
widely reported speech condemning the heavy-handed treatment of
Liberals across Spain, including their imprisonment in Cartagena for
singing the Riego Hymn, it was clear that the Cardero rising had shifted
Cristino politics to the Left.28
   Madrid remained in a state of heightened tension for months. A riot
on 11 May 1835 provoked by the Eliot Treaty led to rioters surround-
ing the Cortes in protest against Martínez de la Rosa, who narrowly
avoided being lynched by indignant Urban Militia when he alighted
from his coach. The capital was becoming ever more radicalised, as
remaining royalists found that they could not walk the streets in safety.29
Popular royalism had been greatly diminished by the Bourbon feud
which saw Don Carlos rebelling in the north and the emigration of
other family members, leaving María Cristina and her two daughters
alone in the capital to negotiate the leftist shift in Cristino politics.30
Thus, a leftist junior ofﬁcer and his network of Liberal conspirators had
caused the death of Madrid’s captain-general, the humiliation of the War
Minister, an embarrassed debate in the Cortes and a terminally weak-
ened moderado administration that was unable to survive any further
radicalisation.31 For a while it even seemed as though the controversial
question of foreign mediation, in the form of the Eliot Treaty, could be
such a spark. Despite the Francophile de la Rosa’s constant reluctance
to see British-led foreign intervention, the government now sought it,
citing relevant clauses in the Quadruple Alliance which had been signed
the previous April. It was desperately hoped that even the symbolic
88   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


showing of the Royal Navy ﬂag off the northern coast would cow the
rebels, and also that the French would send in an army.32 But Britain
would not move. Westminster knew that greater intervention in Spain
would need another Act of Parliament and that this would be rejected
by a resurgent Tory opposition, in both chambers, which was either neu-
tral or Carlist in sympathy. If the reactionary Northern Powers tried to
put Charles X on the French throne, then Britain would act, but for the
time being Britain thought that the Spanish Liberals could manage by
themselves. The only olive branch was an undertaking not to oppose
a stronger intervention from the French side. But France would only
intervene after a British security guarantee against the Northern Powers,
which was not forthcoming. The absence of an interventionist French
army, which Interior Minister Thiers desired for purely expansionist rea-
sons, fatally weakened the de la Rosa government and strengthened the
hand of the Radicals.33
   Meanwhile, the Cristino home front beyond Madrid underwent radi-
calisation. In March 1835, Málaga saw riots provoked by the supposedly
lenient treatment of a few Carlists behind bars and the militarisation
of the citizens’ force for service in the Serranía de Ronda. The mili-
tary governor and de la Rosa’s relative, Nicolás de Isidro purged the
citizens’ force of troublemakers, only to ﬁnd a trenchant rival in the
civil governor, who publicly sided with the militia. The clash between
the heavy-handed military governor and the more conciliatory civil
governor resulted in a power vacuum which the militia ﬁlled. Fearing
that what had happened in Madrid could follow in Málaga, Isidro tried
to disperse the crowd, only to be thwarted by a local agitator, Miguel
Deomarco (a tinker by trade and progenitor to a Radical dynasty in
Málaga), whose cry of ‘¡Viva la Constitución!’ rallied the militia to defy
martial law. The following day saw a funeral cortège of a dead mili-
tiaman pass by Isidro’s residence, playing the Riego Hymn. An order
the following day prohibiting subversive music and establishing a cur-
few went unheeded, and the situation spiralled quickly out of control.34
When, on 22 March, the militiamen were summoned to hear a War Min-
istry circular about discipline, they broke ranks and marched into the
town square shouting vivas to the Constitution. Three days of stand-
off followed, as rival factions patrolled the streets: the civil power led
by the militia who besieged Isidro’s residence, and the military power,
which had recruited a posse of some wealthy individuals who had ‘a
decided interest in re-establishing order’. Yet on 24 March, it was the
militia which triumphed, as Isidro suffered a negative pronunciamiento in
his ranks and was forced to resign and ﬂee to Granada. The replacement
                                   War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   89


governor did the Radicals’ bidding, presiding over a tablet-laying cer-
emony honouring the Constitution of 1812 and collecting signatures
for a petition to the Queen-Regent protesting the states of siege. The
moderado government was losing control of its rearguard.35
   Málaga, one of the most Liberal cities in the kingdom, had been rad-
icalised by a civil war whose front line lay hundreds of miles away,
and both central and regional authorities were heeding its example.
Ofﬁcers needed special leave to enter Madrid and a mass purge of the
Urban Militia was decreed. Captains-general were empowered to assem-
ble military committees against anyone disturbing the peace and a
crackdown was ordered on La Isabelina and other secret societies. But
central government decrees were countered by a Radical double regime
at local levels. Cristino militiamen cleansed town halls of symbols of
absolutism, especially the ﬂags of the disbanded Royalist Volunteers,
and organised revolutionary symbols in their stead, such as a marble
statue of Riego in Seville and a cenotaph to intimidate priests and pro-
Carlists.36 Civil governors publicly burnt police ﬁles from the Ominous
Decade, channelling revolutionary tension and also removing evidence
of their own collusion with the police state.37 It took little to turn this
atmosphere into violence against both real and imagined Carlist ﬁfth
columnists. In Zaragoza, a Cristino priest led a mob against the pseudo-
Carlist archbishop. The violence intensiﬁed as part of the militia went
over to the assailants, and several clerics were killed. Three clerics were
also killed in Murcia on 6 April 1835.38 More serious violence ﬂared up
again in Zaragoza on the night of 5 July 1835 when some 11 clerics were
killed, and similar killings followed in Barcelona. In both places, the
militia stood by as the mobs burned convents and monasteries, a few
hours later, most actually went over to the side of the assailants.39 The
militia stepped in to halt the riots only at the point when the crowd,
having satiated itself on the Church property, moved on to rob nearby
shops.40 Assaulting the Church was one thing, but property was sacred,
and the ‘safety valve’ of popular anti-clericalism could not be allowed to
recoil on Liberal interests. Drawing on this lesson, the military governor
of Huesca forestalled similar riots in his provincial capital by temporarily
evacuating the nuns from their convents and placing them in asylums
which were protected by militiamen he could trust.41 The Cristino mil-
itary was seeing its supremacy challenged by the rising radicalism of its
Militia rivals. Whereas Zaragoza’s captain-general conﬁded his fears to
paper, noting how ‘popular heroes were being made out of the militia
who committed the most atrocious crimes’,42 violence in other Cristino
cities soon forced the military to more drastic reactions.
90   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   The worst anti-clerical violence struck Catalonia, where mountain
Carlists threatened Cristino garrisons protecting the Catalan coastal
plain. Carlists were blockading the proto-industrial town of Reus and
ambushing its garrison’s supplies and patrols. An ‘exterminating angel’
monk led an ambush in July which left, amongst seven Cristino dead,
a mutilated militiaman who was father of eight children. In response
Reus’s convents went up in ﬂames, whilst Llauder had few troops to
spare outside of Barcelona even to ﬁght the Carlists let alone pacify
the militia on his own side. Even in Barcelona the military authorities
were losing control.43 Monasteries were torched and religious person-
nel killed, often at the hands of what contemporaries called ‘obscene’
women. The defection to Carlism of the Catalan nobility had made
the Principality’s clerics second only to those in the Basque country in
their pro-Carlism, and they were confronted by Cristino Spain’s reddest
city in 1835.44 Barcelona’s new anti-clerical tradition was forged by its
war refugees, nascent proletarian militancy, and even its inauguration
in 1834 of crowd-pulling bullﬁghting in the working-class Barceloneta
district.45 Part of this revolutionism was being channelled in support
of the federal Republican agenda of Xaudaró y Fábregas, editor of El
Catalán and a militia commander known for recruiting citizen-soldiers
who failed to meet supposedly stringent property qualiﬁcations.46 The
ministerial press, by contrast, was relegated to impotent commentary,
complaining how ‘the worst symptom of our situation is the simultane-
ity of the killing of the clerics on the one hand and the, if not universal,
then common indifference with which they were witnessed, heard, and
spoken of on the other’.47 Ambivalence describes attitudes better than
indifference, as Catholics were cowed by the collusion of the author-
ities with the massacre, or, as a young girl later remembered: ‘I recall
the upheaval at home and my family’s despair. As if in a dream I recall
the reddish glow illuminating a high wall overlooking our roof-terrace,
and of the horror etched in my mother’s face as two friars ran for their
lives past our house.’48 An out-of-town lawyer who tried to stop a textile
worker beating a captive priest was told to ‘fuck off!’49 Captain-General
Llauder’s humiliation during the Cardero crisis had weakened the once-
strong relationship he had enjoyed with Barcelona’s dominant business
community and the militia it patronised. His military tribunals failed to
arrest any serious anti-clerical instigators, and his inability to protect the
Church matched the distant Carlists’ inability to rescue it. Barcelona’s
realistic civic authorities conﬁscated the contents of the religious insti-
tutions, boarded their doors and windows, and then abandoned them
to their fate.50 Llauder had not only estranged the bourgeoisie but also
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   91


enraged popular radicalism with his policy of militarising some 40,000
Militia for want of regular troops.51 Whereas members of the Militia
did not object to being sent out of their homes on active patrol, they
did object to garrisoning distant villages and forts surrounded by rural
Carlism, where torture and summary execution often awaited those
citizen-soldiers unlucky enough to be captured alive in ambush.52
   The patricians’ ‘negative pronunciamiento’ against Llauder served
notice on him to leave Barcelona. Leaving for Mataró, Llauder left
power in the hands of his fellow Catalan who became Captain-General,
Pedro Nolasco Bassa y Gerona, and civil governor, Pedro María Pastors.
But hopes of re-establishing normal control were rendered impossible,
because the assault on the convents had unleashed the people not only
against Carlism, but also against the economic liberalism of the Cristino
elites. The eve of the war was also the eve of the modern industrial age
for Barcelona, as José Bonaplata built the country’s ﬁrst steam-powered
cotton mill, known simply as the ‘Steam’ (El Vapor) or the Bonaplata
works. The machines required fewer workers than had been custom-
ary, and even those workers the employers retained were made to do
unpopular piecework, with the measure of cloth per worker being con-
stantly widened for each wage. Meanwhile, the dislocation caused to
agriculture by the war had increased food prices more quickly than
commensurate wage rises.53 But the Bonaplata was well protected: its
owner, José Bonaplata, commanded a militia battalion which had led
the attacks on the Church, and there were middle-class vigilante juntas
besides. The propertied elites also had Captain-General Bassa on their
side, whose ‘restraint’ (moderantismo) was unequivocal. Yet the revo-
lutionaries had not dispersed since their 25 July assault. Whereas the
civil authorities dared not turn the militia against them, Bassa decided
to follow the letter of martial law by marching 1,500 troops down the
Ramblas, rounding up and imprisoning revolutionaries. The revolution-
aries tried to win over Bassa, and when this overture fell on deaf ears,
the civil authorities, on 5 August, implored him to follow Llauder into
ﬂight. But Bassa was adamant: ‘within two hours either I or the people
will have succumbed’.54 The revolutionaries held nothing but contempt
for Bassa, an armchair general who had ‘never even seen a faccioso’, and
the riot that broke out was inevitable. Bassa ﬂed to the near-deserted
Ciudadela, the eighteenth-century fortress overlooking the city, seek-
ing reinforcements in vain, but the mob broke in, cornering Bassa,
shooting him dead and defenestrating his corpse. They then moved on
to the Bonaplata. The militia battalion defending the factory failed to
pacify the revolutionaries with invectives against Don Carlos and the
92   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Church. The anti-clerical massacres may have bound the executioners
together and intimidated the restrained Liberals, but they had failed as
a social prophylaxis against working-class radicalism, for the revolution-
aries killed more than 15 militiamen who were defending the works
whilst they also burned the Bonaplata to the ground. Meanwhile Bassa’s
body was dragged around the city and burnt to ashes in a bonﬁre in La
Rambla.55
   The following day, the civil governor, Pastors, who had survived the
violence, made a show of humility which won over both the anti-clerical
and working-class factions of the Left and halted further fratricidal
killing. Two prisoners were executed in a pathetic resurrection of law-
ful authority, a Carlist cabecilla (Garri) and the Radical instigator of the
Bonaplata attack (Pardinas). Llauder, his nerves wrecked, crossed into
France and exile.56 The militia was expanded from six battalions to 13 in
order to accommodate hungry workers, entrenching popular radicalism
in Barcelona.57 But matters did not rest there. Barcelona’s example was
followed by other Cristino cities threatened by Carlist encroachments.
Tarragona and Valencia, whose hinterlands were invaded by the Carlist
forces of Quílez and Serrador, both saw their prisons invaded by mobs
and several inmates lynched for ‘conspiracy’, whilst the authorities
saved more than a hundred others by hurriedly exiling them to garrison
prisons in Ceuta, North Africa. Equally, Murcia and even Zaragoza, the
latter already an exaltado stronghold saw similar violence. Seven Carlist
prisoners were executed in kangaroo courts, including Don Carlos’s con-
fessor, Blas de Hostalaza.58 The growing violence propelled attempts
ﬁrst by the toothless parliamentary opposition, and then by radicalised
militia in the provinces, to replace the moderado government with a
proactively Liberal and anti-Carlist regime.59
   The Cristino government soon discovered that it was powerless to
arrest this radicalism. A cosmetic cabinet reshufﬂe in July replaced one
restrained (moderado) prime minister with another, Martínez de la Rosa
with Count Toreno, both former Radicals who now shared a grim assess-
ment that popular opinion in the country as a whole had swayed in
favour of Carlism. They may have been right, but this guardedness
was read as defeatism, even as collusion with the enemy, in Radical
circles. On 15 August, Radicals raised the capital’s militia in rebellion,
demanding the imposition of the Constitution of 1812 and the release
from prison of the leader of the Isabelina, Eugenio de Aviraneta e
Ibargoyen.60 But this insurrection was met by a Carlist rising in some
of the poor neighbourhoods of Madrid where artisans and women sus-
tained a low-level urban guerrilla against Militia patrols. Aviraneta had
                                   War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   93


not been the only prisoner running street politics from his prison cell:
the Carlist Junta of Selva had been doing the same. Seizing the chance to
re-establish order, the moderado government mobilised army units and
conservative elements in the Militia to disband three of the capital’s
most radical Militia battalions. The War Ministry then reformed them,
ﬁltering out the Radicals.61 Powerless to resist this purge, the Radicals
replied with a pamphleting campaign. Whereas the Militia was praised
for its sacriﬁces resisting Carlism, the army was scorned as the parasitical
tool of despotism: ‘You are not the people! Nor are you Spaniards! You
don’t belong to or care about our soil and laws at all! It’s a shame you
forget that you clothe and feed yourselves on our blood and sweat!’62
   The government’s success in Madrid encouraged the Interior Min-
istry to issue a triumphalist communiqué the following day (17th),
but this sangfroid proved short-lived. Revolution was sweeping across
all provincial capitals. And gone were the days of popular riots: now
the Radicals were linking the struggle against Carlism to a positive
programme of Liberal renewal. Insurgent juntas frequently restored to
buyers the nationalised property which royalists in 1823 had conﬁs-
cated. They also tried to win over the unpropertied by abolishing the
hated consumption taxes called the derechos de puertas.63 Revolutionar-
ies, meanwhile, attacked not just Carlists but also moderado elites who
attempted resistance. In Tarragona, the governor was killed trying to
escape the revolutionaries by boat.64
   The alarmed Toreno administration reshufﬂed the cabinet again,
but no serious candidates could be made to resist the revolutionary
tide, posts being ﬁlled with the senile and politically innocent. The
ministerial Gaceta de Madrid condemned the revolutionaries as dis-
honourable cowards. But the revolutionaries were no longer leaderless.
Juntas were being formed by exaltado public ﬁgures, including members
(procuradores) of the parliamentary opposition. Even though the gov-
ernment decreed the ‘abolition’ of these juntas, this was vain rhetoric.
The government may have hoped for survival due to the 9 September
1835 proclamation from the Commander of the Army of the North,
Fernández de Córdova, that he would defend the central government.
But Córdova’s attention was absorbed containing a Carlist breakout and
suppressing mutinies in his own ranks, and he could spare only piece-
meal forces under General Latre to shore up the central government.65
At ﬁrst, Latre’s forces were successful pacifying such provincial capitals
as Burgos and Palencia, which were instinctively conservative anyway
and whose militia revolutionaries were not dispersed in the countryside.
Unlike the Carlists, the Radicals centred their militancy in towns, which
94   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


meant that government troops and artillery could easily be concen-
trated against them. But the further south Latre pushed the greater the
degree of revolutionary resistance he encountered. Juntas in Andalucía,
Valencia and Catalonia had won over local regular forces in addition to
the Militia, and some had launched populist manifestoes which went
beyond a mere tax amnesty. The Andalucían revolutionaries convened
their junta at Andújar under the leadership of Count Donadío and
throughout September waged a physical struggle against Madrid, which
they justiﬁed, in part, by sloganeering social justice. Whilst Donadío
let his 4,000-strong revolutionary army behave like ‘anarchists’, cut-
ting all communications between Andalucía and Madrid,66 his future
father-in-law, the procurador Count Navas, rallied Andalucían labourers
with the cry of íViva la República!67 When Latre’s column passed the
Andalucían frontier at Depeñaperros on 17 September, his men defected
to the revolutionaries; only the elite cavalry and artillery stayed loyal to
the government.68
   The juntas have been heralded by leftist writers as evidence of nascent
socialism and federalism. Twentieth-century Andalucían regionalists
saw the Andújar revolution as a vehicle for combating the notorious
abuses of the agricultural proletariat, and a model of regional solidarity
against centralising diktats of Madrid.69 Equally, members from revo-
lutionary juntas in Valencia, Aragón and Catalonia discussed federating
themselves along the historical lines of pre-absolutist Hapsburg model.70
In fact, these later representations overlooked the actual behaviour of
the juntas and how their revolutionary decisions were driven by the
contingencies of the war rather than ideology. The republicanism of
Navas and Donadío was mere rhetoric. When Navas was returned to the
revolutionary Cortes he lost interest in land reform and never bothered
to intervene in debates about widening suffrage.71 Donadío’s radicalism,
meanwhile, was bought off with his marriage into the Navas family and
the military governorship of Málaga.72 The federalism plan was dropped
as soon as the juntas realised that the Toreno government could no
longer use military force against them. Its real rationale, in any, case
was telling. The Captain-General of Valencia brieﬂy captained the con-
federation idea for military rather than political reasons, in protest at the
Cristino government policy of denuding the east of regular troops: ‘The
only sufﬁcient force under my command is the militia.’ Unless excep-
tional rulings applied, the militia answered to local civil authorities, and
the captain-general therefore sensibly subscribed to ‘a type of confed-
eration between the three kingdoms that used to form the Crown of
Aragón’.73
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   95


   Moreover, the devolution of power to juntas did not equate to a
democratisation process in the way that rareﬁed studies of the 1835
juntas have argued.74 For one thing, Spanish liberalism never diverged
from an intolerant inability to admit pluralism – or ‘loyal opposition’ –
which in practice meant the exercise of close clientelist networks of
patronage and punishment and rigged elections.75 Mendizábal grew nos-
talgic for his 12 years in Britain where he had discovered that political
adversaries could yet remain friends because of fair play in politics.76
The revolution of the juntas often impaired the war effort by releas-
ing hitherto repressed networks of corruption and cronyism into public
ofﬁce. The Andújar junta soon found itself ﬁghting, in Málaga, a civil
war inside a civil war. The notorious local extortionist, Cuban-born
Vicente Abello – whose coup during the Peninsular War in 1810 had
ruined Málaga’s defence against the French – mobilised a mob to seize
the local Captaincy-Generalship of Granada. Abello justiﬁed this act by
proclaiming the Constitution of 1812, but this did not convince sub-
ordinate juntas at Jaén and Málaga, which led a tax-strike against him.
Andújar promptly deposed him, but Abello’s mob assaulted a meeting of
Andújar revolutionaries held at Granada’s Chancellery, forcing them to
reinstate him. Abello now emerged as a statesman, having successfully
deﬁed the Liberal ‘Right’ of Andújar whilst also violently suppressing his
own Liberal ‘Left’ once he could safely dispense with it. Half-a-dozen
rioters were exiled to the penal colony at Ceuta and a leading mobster,
the ‘notorious Olmo’, was executed.77
   Even the power struggles of the revolutionary juntas paled in com-
parison to the subaltern ranks of the Cristino army who used the
revolutionary climate to vote with their feet. Ofﬁcial bulletins during
1835 complained about Cristino draftees’ illegal emigration to Portugal
and France, and this exodus peaked during the breakdown in authority
in September.78 Popular pressure at local level often forced revolutionary
authorities in Barcelona to suspend the hated draft, and several other
Cristino authorities followed suit, most completely in the Andalucían
town of Antequera.79 Historians of revolutions in politically undevel-
oped societies have noted how communities ‘import’ slogans devised
by elites (‘republic’, ‘Constitution’ and ‘liberty’) and invest them with
their own meaning.80 The meaning the Cristino rank and ﬁle invested
in the revolution was freedom from abusive military service. Sergeants
occupied a key role in the social history of the Cristino army as they
disciplined, championed or subverted their men. In September 1835,
a squadron of off-duty cavalry led by Sergeant Manuel Vilches staged
a pronuciamiento in Burgos in the name of the Constitution of 1812,
96   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40

Table 5.1 Eco del Comercio, 7 March 1836: Strength of Cristino National Guard
at end of 1835

District                 Mobile              Sedentary              Total

                    Men      Cavalry       Men     Cavalry    Men      Cavalry

New Castile           422         21      29611     1903     30033          1924
Old Castile                               97732     2233     97732          2233
Extremadura         6307        392       30669     1296     37076          2588
Galicia              936                  14945      270     15881           270
Catalonia          10811        112       31096              43987           112
Aragón                                    17911      371     17911           371
Valencia            5686        215       70172     2497     76158          2712
Andalucía                                 29437     3630     29437          3630
Granada                                   39567     2233     39567          2233
Balearic Islands      423                  7512       56      7935            56
Total              25663        740       309052   15409     394717     16149



actually a pretext for the entire squadron to desert.81 A similar attempt
weeks later by infantry sergeants in Soria met with little following,
Comandante General Valdés conﬁding to Espartero that ‘the ambition
of some sergeants created much hot air but fortunately no response’.82
Even the militia, which had expanded to 394,717 men and 16,149 cav-
alry by the end of 1835, shared many of the grievances of the Cristino
army as the war made conditions of service deteriorate (Table 5.1).83
The government divided its membership between privileged volunteers
and a less privileged ‘legal’ category (legales) whose conditions of service
approximated those of the army as they could be ‘legally’ commanded
to campaign against Carlists outside of their home province. Sacedón
(Guadalajara) in October 1835, witnessed legales refusing campaign
orders and rioting against the privileges of the volunteers.84 In fact,
the ‘revolutionary’ juntas of 1835 occupied a middle ground between
the moderado central government and a radicalised Militia and soldiery,
channelling the grievances of the latter in order to get the exaltados into
power.
   For the moderado central government all depended on whether the
Cristino Army of the North would switch its allegiance to the juntas.
The government sensibly did not want a repeat of Latre’s failure and
ordered Córdova to hold the front in Navarra. For their part, those
juntas threatened by Carlist invasions, such as Zaragoza and Barcelona,
lacked conﬁdence in the military ability of their own radicalised Mili-
tia and urged Córdova to send regular reinforcements. Other juntas,
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   97


especially those deeper in the Cristino zone, made explicitly political
pleas. Zaragoza urged the army to disobey Madrid which was ‘the real
enemy’, Granada declared the Queen-Regent a prisoner, Badajoz con-
demned the government as ‘the real anarchists’, issuing it with a 12-day
deadline to resign, whilst Cádiz declared Toreno a traitor.85 Terriﬁed,
Toreno appealed for French help, but the French foreign minister, the
Duc de Broglie, refused. The only concession France could make had
already made. On 28 June 1835, agreement was reached to dispatch
to Spain the 4,100-strong Legión d’Algérie (the early Foreign Legion)
to Catalonia under the command of Colonel Bernelle. Prime Minister
Thiers had wanted to expand this force by some 8,000, increasing French
inﬂuence in Liberal Europe without provoking Metternich (whose pro-
Carlism, Thiers knew, had practical limits) to intervene militarily on
the Carlist side. But the Liberal interventionism of the French king was
restricted in Spanish matters: Louis-Philippe, much to the chagrin of
Liberal Europe, privately held Don Carlos’s claim to the throne to be
stronger than Isabella’s and in any case did not want Spain to become for
France what Italy was for Austria. French foreign policy never managed
to square this circle.86 Thus, by late 1835, the Legion’s Spanish pres-
ence had not expanded beyond six battalions. Nearly all its ofﬁcers were
French, but its rank and ﬁle included many Germans, Italians and Poles,
this last nationality replacing the Spanish battalion which, in Febru-
ary 1834, was disbanded for service in the Cristino army.87 The French
government, which was worried about Spanish revolution infecting its
soldiers, dispatched its Legion to combat positions only, away from the
‘contagion’ of the exaltados.88 But, despite the hopes of several moderados
for formal French assistance against the exaltados, this force would not
leave its quarantine to be drawn into Cristino domestic politics. His last
hope gone, and revolutionary death threats mounting, Toreno resigned
on 14 September and ﬂed into the safety of a French exile.89 His suc-
cessor, exaltado Juan Álvarez Mendizábal, would channel the radicalism
caused by the war. Mendizábal was the favoured candidate of Britain, the
second Quadruple Alliance great power whose auxiliary British Legion
had come to the aid of Cristino Spain in June 1835, around the same
time as the French. The arrival of organised foreign volunteers coincided
with the radicalisation of Cristino politics and had the effect of the pro-
jecting the Spanish Civil War into a world war between Absolutism and
Liberty.
   Exaltados praised the altruism of the foreign auxiliaries but criticised
their governments’ refusal to make open war on the Carlists.90 Even
though the French had a kind of cultural entrée to the Cristinos which
98   Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the culturally more distant British did not at ﬁrst enjoy, exaltados gener-
ally identiﬁed with British liberalism, even when its free-trade mantra
alienated Spain’s ﬂedgling industrialisation. Most moderados, by con-
trast, were drawn to the authoritarian, centralised liberalism of the
July Monarchy, and many also to the prospect of formal French mili-
tary intervention. The Carlists, for their part, ridiculed the auxiliaries as
proof of the Cristinos’ need to use foreign mercenaries to impose liberal-
ism on an unwilling population, and traditionalist historians a century
later excoriated the auxiliaries as the ‘ﬁrst International Brigades’.91
Carlists regularly betrayed xenophobia in their cause. Ramón Cabrera
expressed ‘Spanish pride’ at defeating a succession of Cristino generals
with cosmopolitan surnames (Borso di Carminati, Oráa, Van-Halen and
O’Donnell), taunting the indigenous generals who remained at María
Cristina’s court.92
   Unlike the brigadistas of the Spanish Civil War, the 1830s auxiliaries
failed to disabuse the enemy of this impression of their mediocrity. The
best auxiliaries were Peninsular War veterans like the Irishman Lieu-
tenant Edward Costello, a brilliant recruiter whose return in 1835 to
Vitoria, scene of a bloody battle a generation earlier, evoked poignant
memories bordering on post-traumatic stress for him and his fellow
handful of veterans.93 But most British auxiliaries were new to ﬁght-
ing. The French and Portuguese auxiliaries, by contrast, were more
seasoned, but political divisions in Paris and Lisbon impeded their full
deployment. The British auxiliaries, which also suffered from equivocal
political support, were slow to acclimatise to northern Spain and spent
the ﬁrst months constructing fortiﬁcations.94 They were decimated in
body by typhus (‘Vitoria fever’) during the 1835–36 winter and spring,
and in soul by the virulent attacks of the Tory press, and their tragic
neglect upon their return to Britain after 1837.95 Chronic arrears of pay
persisted even after the war, when British Legion veterans protested
outside the Spanish legation in London, in a series of stand-offs last-
ing until 1843.96 Even when most arrears were ﬁnally settled, several
Spanish veterans lapsed into pauperdom which caught the eye of social
reformers. Henry Mayhew, in his seminal London Labour and the London
Poor, labelled the ‘Spanish Legion men’ as ‘those who will not work’ and
categorised them under ‘Professional Beggars’.97 Ironically, Mayhew’s
sententiousness was anticipated by the Carlists, who reserved particu-
lar scorn for the British auxiliaries as ‘pirates’ and Protestants, recruited
from the taverns and pie-shops of London.98
   This distasteful image has overshadowed the history of the for-
eign auxiliaries. Certainly, many men joined for the basest motives
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   99


of adventure or desperation. As so few auxiliary rank and ﬁle left
memoirs, we must privilege those that have been discovered, such as
that of William Turner, a poverty-stricken volunteer who, after two
years’ service in Spain, returned to England wounded and penniless,
and was later imprisoned for committing acts of fraud.99 Most other
humble biographies are extremely fragmented and yet suggest that
many of the authors’ motives and outcomes were similar.100 Yet two
qualiﬁcations must be made to their mercenary image. Recruits came
mainly from expanding British and Irish cities, and, in the case of
the Glasgow, a particularly strong cohort were weavers proletarianised
by industrialisation.101 It was no small irony that Scottish handloom
weavers and other victims of industrialisation entered Spain alongside
record British cotton imports. The economic grievances of recruits were
championed by their Radical ofﬁcers such as Alexander Somerville, an
Anti-Corn-Law League member who defended his men from Tory-Carlist
insults. Thus, the British auxiliaries were no more scum than the British
army proper which, under Wellington during the Peninsular War, had
defended the old order of ‘physical and intellectual slavery’ whereas
volunteers for Liberal Spain upheld the ‘good of mankind’, an opin-
ion shared by the great utilitarian and pioneering advocate of foreign
intervention in Spain’s civil war, John Stuart Mill.102 This Liberal inter-
nationalism was also held by other prominent ofﬁcers, such as the
journalist, Charles Southwell, who preferred the ‘pseudo-liberalism of
Queen Isabella to the monkish absolutism of Don Carlos’.103 Above all,
the Commander-in-Chief of the ﬁrst British Legion and Radical Mem-
ber of Parliament for the Westminster constituency, General George de
Lacy Evans, linked the cause of British and Spanish radicalism. Evans
was accused by both his Tory opposition at home and the Carlist
enemy abroad of vainglory, greed, and of possessing a self-publicising
Bonaparte complex.104
   In short, European Liberals saw the struggle against Carlism in inter-
national rather than merely Spanish terms. The most inﬂuential auxil-
iary in this regard was Joseph Tánski, a Polish refugee from the Russian
invasion of his homeland in 1831 and an ofﬁcer in the French For-
eign Legion. He left a remarkable account of the political and military
state of the Cristino war effort and a nuanced critique of the Con-
stitution of 1812 beloved of his fellow Spanish Radicals.105 The most
seasoned Liberal internationalists were in the Belgian Auxiliary Legion,
which comprised veterans of the Belgian Revolution and Portuguese
civil war. Portugese civil war veterans used their battle honours to call
themselves the ‘Cazadores de Oporto’ (Hunters of Oporto), making up
100 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


one of the two Belgian formations, even though their ranks contained
many Portuguese and Italian Mazzinian exiles, who were the most rad-
ical Liberal internationalists. The other Belgian formation (which also
contained Portuguese and assorted nationalities) was commanded by
the Genoese Mazzinian who had fought in revolutionary wars in Italy,
Spain and Portugal, Gaetano Borso di Carminati, a Romantic conspirator
who would be executed for his part in the October 1841 rising against
Espartero’s regime.106
   The greatest manpower contribution in proportion to national popu-
lation was made by the Portuguese who, during the winter of 1835–36,
were billeted in Zamora.107 Their legion was distinct as it was for-
mally on loan from the regular Portuguese army, and included a large
minority of pardoned miguelista veterans from the Portuguese civil war.
The Portuguese auxiliaries were thus of the best quality.108 But their
questionable loyalties were complicated by the cinders of civil war in
Portugal, which included resilient miguelismo in northern Portugal on
the one hand, and Radical-Liberal revolution on the other (Radicals
under General Sá da Bandeira seized power in September 1836 but were
defeated by the moderate-Liberal ‘Revolt of the Marshals’ under General
Saldanha the following July). Such domestic uncertainty meant that
the Portuguese were reluctant to deploy their legion too far beyond
their own frontier.109 Thus, the lengthy billeting of Portuguese troops
in Zamora, far behind the nominal front line, was typical of this pol-
icy. General Córdova complained ‘I may have 2,500 Portuguese mouths
to feed but I don’t have 2,500 Portuguese arms.’110 The Portuguese faced
similar supply and remuneration problems as the other auxiliaries. Their
currency had been accepted at an agreed exchange rate, but that winter
the cash-strapped Cristino authorities devalued it in the Spanish favour.
The response was two nights of rioting as the Allies smashed up mar-
ket stalls and Spaniards retaliated with the assassination of a Portuguese
spendthrift. Finding the body of their comrade, the Portuguese ram-
paged through the streets, injuring civilians and looting and destroying
shops. The Cristino commander did not ﬁre on his allies, but restored
calm by circulating news that the Portuguese soldier had been murdered
by a ‘Carlist’.111 But trouble returned in January when Portuguese sol-
diers and Spanish market traders exchanged ﬁre over the price of olives.
Joint Luso-Cristino patrols restored calm, and the Portuguese martial
band was tactfully invited to play patriotic music at a ceremony to
restore a monument to liberty vandalised by royalists in 1823.112
   The foreign auxiliaries were not protected by the Eliot Treaty, and
could expect execution when captured. The Liberal Eco del Comercio
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   101


detailed such outrages as part of a moral campaign to enlist interna-
tional support. Thus, three British artillerymen who, on 13 July 1835,
fell for a Basque ‘honeytrap’ were ambushed and executed.113 The
following winter the bodies of several of their executed compatriots
were left to decompose on the walls of Guevara castle.114 In January
1836, ﬁve British soldiers were captured near Vitoria, and forcibly bap-
tised into Catholicism before being executed humanely and with the
sacraments.115 Whilst auxiliaries who were captured could expect no
mercy, those who defected were welcomed, especially Protestants who
voluntarily converted to Catholicism. In August 1836, the Carlist press
reported that six British defectors were publicly baptised in the presence
of the King at Azpeitia cathedral, and contrasted this serenity with the
atheistic chaos of the revolution in the Cristino zone.116
   This ‘atheistic chaos’ was presided over, since the fall of Toreno, by
Prime Minister Juan Álvarez Mendizábal. His comparatively humble ori-
gins (and Jewish ancestry) are the exception that proves the rule of
Spanish Liberal elites having long-established privileged backgrounds.117
Mendizábal’s cosmopolitan experience in ﬁnance had allowed him to
source vital funds for Espoz’s invasion of 1830 and the cause of Dom
Pedro in the Portuguese civil war.118 His premiership of 1835–36 marked
the peak of British inﬂuence in Cristino Spain, via Ambassador Villiers,
who was so powerful that at times he virtually chaired cabinet meet-
ings. Mendizábal’s background was targeted by the Carlist press which
condemned the usurping Prime Minister as a Wandering Jew merchant
bent on looting the Spanish Church as collateral for international Jewish
ﬁnanciers and their British guardians.119 Mendizábal’s representative
government was attacked by the Carlists, as a ‘repugnant Protestant
innovation’ that distorted 14 centuries of Spanish Catholic monar-
chy, and later, when his rule became more dictatorial, as Robespierre
reborn.120
   Yet Mendizábal’s immediate task was neither to democratise nor
demonise Spain, but to resurrect a working central government which
could both revive the deteriorating war effort and subject the revolution-
ary juntas. This daunting task he approached with the mantra of ‘Liberal
union’, the rallying of all anti-Carlist forces, which he later summarised
as ‘forgetting, respecting, revising, repairing and reforming’.121 Whilst
rejecting, for now, demands to reinstitute the Constitution of 1812,
Mendizábal prorogued the Royal Statute and incorporated the juntas
into provincial deputations along the 1812 model but with different
powers. They were charged with establishing and managing committees
of armament and defence to defend their respective territory against
102 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Carlists.122 The Zaragoza commission tried to suppress Carlist guerrilla
activity by compulsorily purchasing all horses not owned by the army
or militia, banishing gypsies (whose mobile spatial relations, outsider
status and domination of horse-trading made them suspect), and giving
political expression to the army’s martial law.123 This demotion to an
administrative role was resisted by the Andújar junta, which held on to
its ‘sovereignty’ until the Cortes were recalled. In response, the govern-
ment maintained martial law in Madrid and other provincial capitals
and suppressed communications with the revolutionaries. The repeal
of martial law and calling of the Cortes on 28 October made even the
Andalucían Radicals conform to Mendizábal’s suzerainty. His premier-
ship now secure, Mendizábal set out to channel the anti-clericalism of
the revolutionaries to politically useful ends. Already, on 7 July, the
Toreno administration had expelled the Jesuit order for the second
time in Spanish history, conﬁscating its assets to reduce the balloon-
ing National Debt. This legislative anti-clericalism opened two years of
government onslaught on corporate Catholicism which would be scaled
back, but not halted, only when the moderados returned to power in
1837. Mendizábal expanded this anti-clericalism by suppressing all reli-
gious houses containing fewer than 12 inmates and auctioning their
assets. Citizens who had bought Church property during the Triennium,
only to see it conﬁscated in the 1823 counter-revolution, were reunited
with their purchases courtesy of a July 1837 decree.124 The tithe, along
with an extra clerical tax levied in Galicia called the Voto de Santiago,
had long been unpopular, but their abolition became politically impossi-
ble to resist as Carlism spread during 1835.125 These were both abolished
and replaced from 1837 by a smaller tax (culto y clero) collected by the
constitutional municipalities in order to pension off monks and nuns
evicted by the disentailment.126
   Mendizábal did not expect formal French or British intervention and
so pledged to use nationalised property to fund a decisive campaign in
the Basque country.127 The degree to which he channelled revolutionary
anti-Carlism was remarkable. His Liberal union saw an initial ‘patriotic’
ﬂurry of donations to the Cristino war effort: ministers volunteered cuts
to their salaries, ladies’ charity circles made clothing for the front and
Liberal students answered the call to enlist.128 Despite the paternalis-
tic opposition of the moderados, enlistment to the militia was expanded
by removing the requirement that unmarried recruits obtain permis-
sion from their heads of family.129 A freer intellectual environment grew
in proportion to the mendizabalista assault on corporate Catholicism.
Barcelona’s medical academy ruled that suicide victims died ‘insane’ and
                                     War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36    103


thus qualiﬁed for Christian burial. The British Protestant missionary and
know-it-all, George Borrow, set up a Bible Society in the same city.130 The
ﬁrst athenaeum came to Madrid and the Radical government histori-
cised its claim to rule by starting to build a pantheon to the fallen masses
of the Second of May.131 Some Liberals even proposed that conﬁscated
Church property should be leased to the landless, thereby inoculating
the rural masses against Carlism. Flórez Estrada, leader of the dissolved
anti-Carlist junta of Santander in 1834, serialised his ‘social liberal’ trea-
tise, La cuestión social, o sea, origen, latitud y efectos del derecho de propiedad,
which culminated in February 1836, with his proposal to grant landless
labourers smallholdings under 50-year renewable leases.132 But the Lib-
eral union waxed sectarian over the winter of 1835–36, as the exaltado
Militia exercised a double regime targeting moderados as well as Carlists.
Tellingly, in February 1836 the leftist Eco congratulated the Militia for
increasing and popularising its enlistment as a ‘dyke against the machi-
nations of the perverse’.133 By the summer, the march of events would
create a revolutionary dictatorship in the Cristino zone.
   Mendizábal’s most important decree was to conscript 100,000 men
for Córdova’s Army of the North. Three separate rounds of conscrip-
tion, each for 25,000 men, had been enacted since the start of the war,
but Mendizábal’s measure augured the mass militarisation of society.
The 100,000 quinta made all males aged between 18 and 40 liable to
serve, the only free exemptions being disability, unigeniture, ordina-
tion and veteran status. Alternatively, draftees could pay 4,000 reales,
or 1,000 reales and a viable horse, in order to avoid service.134 The net
‘blood tax’ collected by the government was some 25 million reales and
700 horses; this income was in the spirit of Mendizábal’s demand for
‘abundant men and money to end the war soon’.135 But the sums col-
lected made little impression on an annual state deﬁcit of 30 million
reales, which was made acute both by the lapsed customs revenues dur-
ing the revolution (some £500,000 worth of British imports had entered
Spain that summer without suffering any duties) and the expanding
army budget, which had reached some 600 million reales annually.136
Only Mendizábal’s long-standing contacts with the Paris and London
bourses, combined with the structural reforms of the desamortización,
kept the Cristino state liquid, ensuring terms of credit which no other
Spanish prime minister could have achieved.137
   Only about half of Mendizábal’s 100,000 actually made it to the
front, despite draconian regulations making relatives and then town
halls responsible for deserters. In front-line areas many conscripts
defected to the Carlists, especially in La Rioja, Aragón, Castellón de la
104 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Plana, Cuenca, Toledo, and Ciudad Real. Several deserters from Galicia,
Salamanca and Zamora ﬂed to Portugal. Even then, the Commander-
in-Chief of the Army of the North, Córdova, complained bitterly of
the incomprehension of the Madrid regime and of how the radicali-
sation of Liberal politics was making his task harder. Civilian Radicals
turned into armchair generals, criticising Córdova’s inaction in light
of these reinforcements. Yet Córdova complained that the revolution
had sent him conscripts who were worse than useless. They had not
passed any height or health tests, had had little training, and invariably
ended up burdening the hospital system. Municipalities across Cristino
Spain had clearly sent their most destitute and desperate sons. Córdova
was obliged to establish laborious training camps south of the Ebro,
where more conscripts deserted and ended up straining food supplies
(whereas before they had been producers). In any case, Córdova esti-
mated that only some 17,000 actually made it into service after all these
losses.138 In other words, Mendizábal had scored a great political vic-
tory in mobilising his 100,000; military victory, however, patently still
eluded him.
   The march of events at local levels escaped Mendizábal’s attempts to
manage anti-clericalism from the centre. Part of the anti-clerical atmo-
sphere in Cristino Spain may be attributed to episodes of anti-Carlist
hysteria returning with a renewed outbreak of the cholera in July 1835.
The rest was caused by the very real attempts of individual clerics to
ﬁght the Liberal revolution.139 The Cristino authorities sent suspect
monks and priests, especially in the Maestrazgo, into internal exile in
Andalucía, and from November 1835 all new entrants into religious
orders required a certiﬁcate of loyalty to Isabel II signed by the civil
governor.140 The need for deportations was clear after the 10 August
1835 Carlist rising of evicted Dominican friars in Manacor (Mallorca)
who, the Radical press alleged, ‘burnt alive’ militiamen they captured,
and whose ‘lenient’ sentences provoked a revolutionary rising by some
1,400 Militia in Palma demanding ‘a sound example be made of the
guilty to guard against future risings’.141 Other religious were terrorised
by the massacres into ﬂeeing into Carlist zones, where nuns nursed
war casualties, or even leaving into Spain altogether: several were wel-
comed to Buenos Aires where they occupied vacancies in River Plate
monasteries.142 Clerics who remained under Cristino control faced a
bleak future of eviction from disentailed monasteries and subjection to
laic authorities in the meantime, either constitutional or ‘double regime’
in nature. In the former case, the Civil Governor of Pontevedra forced
local nuns to observe night curfews and provide charity relief to war
widows, remarking impudently that the sisters should be content to do
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   105


God’s true work.143 Elsewhere in Galicia (Ribadeo) the double regime
targeted Carlist clerics as militiamen forced civil authorities to close
local monasteries and expel their inmates. Their vigilantism was sup-
ported in the Radical press, which published their complaints of how
the clerical guerrilla captains they had captured had faced no greater
punishment than deportation to their home parishes, or imprisonment
in Vigo castle from which, in one instance, a cleric escaped with ofﬁ-
cial collusion and rejoined the facción.144 The economic power wielded
by the Church in Galicia over rural leaseholders was shrinking the
Cristino safe zone into the port-cities and fortiﬁed centres. Illicit arms
production for the Carlists was widespread, and was concealed from
passing militia patrols.145 When Latre was dispatched to La Coruña to
replace Morillo as Captain-General of Galicia, both men undertook their
journeys under false names and even physical disguises, Latre being con-
vinced that his execution would follow being identiﬁed by any priest in
his path.146
  The growing Carlism of clerics prevented the Cristino authorities
from relying on them as natural guardians of the social order, which
was always the aim of the Liberals, who wanted only to strip the
Church of its political rather than moral power. But the refusal of
many clerics to accept Cristino political legitimacy drove the double
regime to attack their moral authority. In March 1835, the Mayor of
Vera (Almería) prohibited any contact between women and monks of
the nearby monastery at Beruela, citing the scandals the monks had
been causing amongst local women.147 Radicalised Cristino soldiers and
militiamen targeted Church property and symbols. In April 1835, a
Cristino patrol sent out from Pamplona robbed and vandalised a church
at nearby Yanci.148 Cristino army elites worried about the violent and
socially subversive radicalism that led people to invade abandoned and
conﬁscated Church property.149 In a nationalised Dominican convent
in Barcelona several nuns’ tombs were opened and the remains disre-
spectfully scattered.150 During July 1835, mobile militia near Belchite
rebelled against the government when a popular lieutenant (a certain
Blas Pober) was arrested and a Radical demagogue (a certain Urbina) was
found dead in suspicious circumstances. In response the militia refused
to march out against rural Carlists, and sacked a monastery in the name
of the Constitution of 1812.151 In October 1835, mobile militia used
Church icons along the Imperial Canal linking Aragón with Navarra for
target practice, assaulting the chapel on the Marquess Lazán’s estate,
ﬁring their muskets at the altar of the Virgin of Pilar inside, despite the
fact that the Virgin during the Peninsular War had been ‘nationalised’ as
the celestial Captain-General of Patriot Spain.152 In Madrid, authorities
106 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


grew concerned at the growing number of women visiting newly con-
ﬁscated monasteries, hitherto a closed and sexless male world which
was now the haunt of rowdy National Militia musters, and, it was
feared, copulation.153 In Barcelona, the captain-general was forced to
deal with the local authorities’ quandary about the former convent of
San Francisco del Asís. Its premises had ﬁrst been used for cholera vic-
tims, and then as a ‘lock hospital’ for prostitutes whose numbers had
been increasing since the start of the war. But, much to the annoyance
of the captain-general, both male and female prostitutes were still sell-
ing themselves there, undermining the physical and moral condition of
his conscripts154 :

   It has come to my attention that the inmates there, far from being
   cured of the vice of prostitution, have been propagating it amongst
   themselves, drawing to them individuals who have no other business
   being there. They have been engaging in homosexual acts (amance-
   bamientos de un mismo sexo), corrupting those of a youthful or gentle
   disposition.

Centrifugal radicalism impaired Mendizábal’s relations with General
Córdova. By early 1836, the moderados were openly calling Mendizábal
a dictator, forcing a parliamentary vote of no conﬁdence, blocking
attempts to expand the electoral franchise and politicising the tensions
between the Army of the North and Madrid. All this tension caused
Mendizábal many sleepless nights. Aides recounted how he would spend
days without proper sleep, collapsing onto his papers at his desk for
snoozes, or stealing carriage time for sleep during his trips to the
Queen-Regent at El Pardo.155 The British missionary, George Borrow,
who secured a brief interview with Mendizábal, remembered the prime
minister’s remarkable ability to maintain an English-language conversa-
tion without once looking up from a pile of documents at his desk.156
But even Mendizábal’s energies were exhausted by summer 1836, as his
erstwhile exaltado allies refused to serve under the ‘dictator’, the Cortes
was dissolved, and the Carlists expanded their domain over the north
and east of Spain.157 Again, both the cause and effect of this political
disunity was the failure of the Cristino army to arrest the spread of
Carlism. Mendigorría was the last signiﬁcant victory in a long time, as
the Carlists regrouped, tightened their blockade of Cristino towns in the
Basque country and dispatched expeditions deep into Cristino territory.
   In August 1835, the Carlist court launched the ﬁrst major expedition
of the war in a bid to link the Basque country with Carlists in Catalonia.
                                War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   107


Juan Antonio Guergué, a purged colonel of 1833 and prominent ‘brute’
in the theocratic wing of Carlism, on 8 August 1835 led a legion
of just under 3,000 men past Córdova’s covering force and towards
Catalonia. Since the Cristinos had executed Count Romagosa, Catalan
Carlism had been in almost as much disarray as under Llauder’s early
counter-insurgency. Guerrilla bands led by Porredón, Borges, Sobrevías,
Galcerán, Vall, Masgoret, Zorrilla and, above all, Tristany, had kept the
insurgency alive, but Guergué’s expedition aimed to unite the striking
power of these bands and carve out contiguous territory.158 Taking small
towns along the way in Aragón, he intercepted diplomatic correspon-
dence from the Cristino legation in Paris which conﬁrmed Carlist hopes
that the revolution was debilitating the Cristino war effort. Guergué was
welcomed into Huesca on 16 August by local authorities who had tired
of revolution and who implemented Carlist orders to demobilise the
Militia, seize its arms and draft men of military age. Guergué enjoyed
similar success occupying an abandoned Barbastro, where he resurrected
the Royalist Volunteers of 1833 and used them to repulse an attempt by
mobile Militia to recapture the town. Crossing into Catalonia, Guergué
was joined near Tremp on 25 August by Antonio Borges’s force of 500
irregulars and then by the 3,500 Carlists of Jacinto Orteu, landowner
and ex-colonel of the Royalist Volunteers. The next day a Cristino reg-
iment at nearby Orgaña was subverted by conscripts who disarmed the
local militia and defected to Guergué’s Carlists. In two weeks Guergué’s
expedition had traversed Aragón, subverting Cristino populations and
defences at every turn. Major difﬁculties began only as he entered
Catalonia, caused both by his own Navarrese, who complained of inad-
equate food and footwear, and by a stiffening Cristino defence, owed in
part to the unpardonable excesses the revolutionaries had recently car-
ried out. Guergué sent home his troublesome Navarrese, who by now
formed a minority of his force, and concentrated on regrouping the
Catalan guerrillas: by the end of the year these numbered some 22,363
infantry and 395 cavalry.159
   Since the revolutionaries had ousted Captain-General Llauder, neither
Bassa nor Pastors had matched his counter-insurgency zeal. The revo-
lutionary crisis had ended any hopes of regular army reinforcements
creating a mobile reserve. Thus, virtually the entire Carlist offensive
was met by the Militia, ensuring hatred and atrocities on both sides.
When Carlists attacked the village of Camarasa, its 50-strong garrison
of mobile militia fortiﬁed itself in the church, but were soon smoked
out by the outnumbering Carlists and forced to surrender. All were then
executed, most by gruesome beheadings, their corpses being dumped
108 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


into the River Segre weighed down by stones. Residents at nearby set-
tlements for months afterwards avoided the river-water for drinking
and ﬁshing. Such brutality was counterproductive for Carlist campaign-
ing, as news of such outrages only served to embolden the Cristino
defence elsewhere. After Torá, on 8 August 1835, came under Carlist
siege, it resisted against appalling odds, including an all-enveloping
inferno of outlying buildings, set by the Carlists. Concepción Preciado,
wife of a Cristino captain, stepped into the breach brandishing a sabre
and goading the men on. A total of 200 Cristinos had been wounded
and some 70 killed before a relief column ﬁnally arrived to save Torá.
Pastors’s counteroffensive halted the Carlist incursion on his left, retak-
ing Guimerá and establishing a front line from there to the university
town of Cervera and Torá. This protected Barcelona by ensuring Cristino
control of southern, and a large part of central, Catalonia, but it relin-
quished much of the north and all of the far west to the Carlists, who
made a regional capital out of Berga and blockaded remaining Cristino
fortiﬁed centres (Olot’s garrison defected to the Carlists on 28 August).160
Even at his base in Cervera Pastors’s control did not extend far beyond
the town. Cervera, the base of the Aggrieved of 1827–28, had a violent
history of conﬂict between its reactionary ‘town’ and Liberal ‘gown’.161
On 12 October 1835, the Liberal university – whose students, travel-
ling to and from Barcelona, had repeatedly been robbed and attacked by
Guergué’s men – was closed.162 After Pastors repulsed a Carlist breakout
towards San Quintín on 23 October 1835, executing prisoners he had
captured, the Catalan front reached stalemate between a Carlist west
and a Cristino coastal hinterland.163
   Elsewhere the Army of the North came under political pres-
sure to match Mendizábal’s rhetoric with action. The two opposing
commanders-in-chief, Córdova and Eguía, fought a bloody stalemate at
the Carlist capital, Estella. Both sides claimed victory, Córdova because
he managed brieﬂy to occupy the capital on 16 November and Eguía
because he quickly liberated the town. Some residents who had bro-
ken cover by welcoming the Cristino occupation were imprisoned and
ransomed.164 With Cristino forces monetarily spent, Eguía chose to
strike not southwards but northwards, to seize control of the French
frontier and coastal towns garrisoned by Cristinos. The latter objec-
tive, he hoped, would mitigate Quadruple Alliance naval supremacy
by ending the growing Anglo-Cristino naval cooperation in matters of
supplying and fortifying bridgeheads. At the onset of the civil war the
Cristino navy had been small and decrepit. But Madrid acquired for-
eign steamships to sustain the blockade of the Carlist coast, and these
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   109


cooperated with the French and British by transporting men and sup-
plies along the Basque coast; now the Cristino navy would be at full
stretch supplying and defending coastal towns.165 A key target in this
Carlist campaign was therefore San Sebastián, on account of its wealth,
command of the French frontier and its port crammed with Quadru-
ple Alliance vessels. The close blockade had already driven hundreds
of rural refugees into the city and caused a severe shortage of fuel and
food which the shipping bottlenecks had been unable to solve; this was
compounded by the billeting of Cristino troops in private homes. San
Sebastián’s town hall had to counter-license some resident merchants to
whom Carlists had given permits to trade with their zone. These mas-
ters of no-man’s-land brought imported goods to the Carlists in return
for food and fuel for the hungry Cristinos.166
   Carlists began their assault in a swift and devastating conquest of the
fort of Arambarri, adjacent to San Sebastián, wiping out its Asturian
and Andalucían garrison. The Queen-Regent wrote to the city author-
ities, anguished that Arambarri might presage the loss of the city itself,
boosting popular radicalism: ‘it is not just that the faction is embold-
ened insufferably, but also that men may think that my government
has not undertaken precautions in the city’s defence’.167 The loss of
the fort impaired San Sebastián’s deployment of defensive artillery, and
maximised the Carlists’ effectiveness of theirs (only three – but well-
positioned – siege cannon). With the city closely blockaded, the Carlists
turned to securing the French border. In response, French General Arispe
warned the Carlists that if they assaulted the remaining Cristino border
posts, the French army would invade. The French side of the border
had been ﬁlling with refugees, including, ignominiously, the entire
Cristino Provincial Deputation of Guipúzcoa, which timidly feared
Carlist reprisals in the event of San Sebastián’s fall. The French were
afraid the war might spill over the frontier, and whilst they pursued a
hard line with the Carlists, they also ordered all Cristino refugees to
move either deeper into France or back into Spain.168 Sensibly back-
ing down to the threat of formal French intervention, Carlist General
Montenegro decided to assault San Sebastián instead. His close-range,
overnight bombardment of the city began on 6 December. In response,
all remaining 18 to 50-year-old male residents who had not already
enlisted were called into the militia.169 Montenegro hoped that the ﬂight
of city Liberals and the effect of his terror bombardment on refugees
might yield him San Sebastián through a coup from within. But the city
held fast, and the Carlists turned their ﬁre from the city to the forti-
ﬁed ex-convent of San Bartolomé. Concentrated ﬁre forced its Cristino
110 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


garrison to withdraw into the city proper. As the pursuing Carlists occu-
pied the ruins, they burned the wooden bridge linking the remains of
the convent to the rest of the city. Therefore, San Sebastián was closely
blockaded from the landward side, but the offensive lacked the strength
to storm the city. Carlist cannon-bores had become so overworked that
Montenegro was delighted to pose as a humanitarian by agreeing to
a French-brokered ceaseﬁre to evacuate foreign civilian casualties: this
gave him time to repair his guns.170
   Meanwhile, Eguía’s next effort came on the Carlist Left, with the
assault on the fortiﬁed port of Guetaria. At ﬁrst General Córdova, as if
remembering Napoleon’s famous dictum of not interrupting an enemy
making a mistake, indulged Eguía’s strategy. The Carlist drive towards
the coast diverted attention away from the demoralised centre of his
army at Miranda del Ebro. That said, Guetaria commanded a harbour
and a promontory which could shut off most Guipúzcoan cabotage
when emplaced with coastal artillery. The Cristino garrison knew this:
when Carlist guns, on 19 December, opened ﬁre on the town, the
defenders answered with some 13 guns of their own.171 The Carlists
stormed the town, but not before virtually every building in Guetaria
had been destroyed or damaged. They did not remain long in posses-
sion, as Carlists were caught between the pincers of Espartero’s landward
march and amphibious reinforcements from Bilbao.172 Espartero’s troops
included a free corps of Cristino Basque scouts, the chapelgorris, who
were noted for their brutality and who had looted and destroyed ‘Carlist’
churches during their march.173 When they looted a ruined church
in Guetaria, however, Espartero ordered harsh reprisals. He could not
afford to alienate war-ravaged guetarense civilians and accordingly con-
demned ten chapelgorris to death, actually carrying out the sentence on
nine.174 Espartero’s disciplining of anti-Carlist Basque volunteers made
every possible wrong impression with Cristino Radicals who were still
indignant after a publicised exchange of gifts between the Cristino and
Carlist Commanders-in-Chief, and there was even talk of the need for
revolutionary justice against overbearing ofﬁcers. Espartero thought this
interference by civilians the utmost impudence, conﬁding to his wife
that he would: ‘break the heads of those who have asked for mine’.175
   Elsewhere Catalan Carlists were encroaching on the frontier with
France, causing consternation amongst Cristinos and French alike.
Unlike General Arispe in the Basque country, the governor of the border
fortress of Bellagarde appeased the Carlists by promising to permit no
more armed Cristinos into French territory. This overture recoiled on the
French: not only did it recognise the Carlists as legitimate combatants,
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   111


but it also failed to prevent their border violations.176 These were starkest
in the Cerdanya/Cerdagne region of Catalonia, where Cristino loyalties
in the border town of Puigcerdá and the exclave of Llívia invited hostile
Carlist attention. Llívia was separated from Spain proper by two kilo-
metres of French territory through which a ‘neutral road’ ran to the
Franco-Spanish border at Bourg-Madame/Puigcerdá. The Guergué expe-
dition made refugees out of Puigcerdá’s public ofﬁcials.177 Their ﬂight to
France was followed by an attempt by townsfolk who were stopped, dis-
armed and returned by Carlist irregulars operating in French territory.178
The Carlist violation of French territory was repeated on 6 February
1837 when some 200 of them crossed the border in order to loot Llívia.
On the way back along the neutral road French troops arrested the
Carlists and conﬁscated their pillaged goods.179 On occasion Carlist sol-
diers were found 45 miles inside France, and Carlists issued passports
to aid smuggling.180 Border contingencies like these involved France in
local interventions which moulded debates about the extent of French
intervention in the civil war. This section of the border would not sta-
bilise until Puigcerdá decisively defeated the Carlist siege of November
1837.181
  Mendizábal desperately summoned Espoz from his French convales-
cence to captain the generals in Catalonia and arrest the spread of
Carlism. Espoz was a leftist hero, a sop to junta opinion, and he was on
good terms with the French who gladly transferred to him impounded
Carlist arms. On 29 November 1835, he imposed a state of siege on the
Principality, with measures including collective punishment on commu-
nities invaded by Carlists, ranging from summary executions of heads
of households harbouring enemy agents to the conﬁscation of property.
These conditions were so draconian that even his Liberal allies in gov-
ernment resiled from them. Espoz had always seen the Catalan Carlists
as criminals deserving of no better treatment. But the effect of these
measures was to promote reprisals and to terrorise civilians caught in
the war zone.182
  Espoz had used collective punishment in the Royalist War, and it was
more than matched by what Cabrera was doing in the cruellest front,
the Maestrazgo. Cabrera’s eastern Carlists combined ruthlessness with
bravery but without the magnanimity that had characterised many of
Zumalacárregui’s operations. Cabrera established a pattern of attack-
ing small towns which were garrisoned only by a handful of local or
mobile militiamen. During these localised but ferocious sieges, Cabrera’s
Christian soldiers ironically became more prodigious at church-burning
than the mobs of Barcelona. This was because the church steeple was
112 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


usually the ultimate refuge for Cristino militiamen resolved to ﬁght to
the last, and was targeted by Cabrera’s artillery and arson. Cabrera’s
rural terrorism was answered by Cristino municipalities organising fund-
raising not just for the Militia but also local fortiﬁcations and defences,
all in addition to the usual taxes and conscripts levied by the central
government.183 Carlist atrocities provoked reprisals against mountain
villages where, as the Prussian Carlist, von Goeben, recalled, ‘troops
used terror; all inhabitants, it was said, were Carlists and had to be
destroyed, plundered, violated, and their homes burnt down. Several
hundred were forced by the ensuing misery to join the Carlists.’184 The
Cristino counter-insurgency had the effect of merely reshaping rather
than eliminating the nature of the Carlist threat. General Nogueras
mobilised both troops and mobile militia but his expeditions caused
the Carlists to regroup, reducing their ability to terrorise but increasing
their striking power. Thus, the columns of Miralles and Torner linked
with Quílez in Aragón, whilst Cabrera reorganized his and Forcadell’s
men at Beceite, their fortiﬁed headquarters and refuge.185
   The revolution obliged Nogueras to retire to his starting point, and
Cabrera and Forcadell exploited this in an assault on Rubielos (Teruel),
in the nineteenth century a populous town commanding vital transport
links. Its garrison was outnumbered by the Carlists, whose attack on
11 September 1835 resonates both for its representative military details
and its brutal aftermath. Cabrera fought through the town and obliged
the Cristino garrison to withdraw to the highly defensible convent in
the centre. Cabrera tried to force entry using ﬁre and testudo forma-
tions from carts which were armoured and used as battering-rams. He
then seized an adjoining house in an attempt to break into the con-
vent from the side. Desperate, the Cristinos set ﬁre to the house. But the
wind blew the ﬂames into the convent, so the Cristinos, now thirsty and
suffocating in the fumes, hoisted a white ﬂag on Cabrera’s stated guar-
antee of quarter. But when the pitiful survivors descended the convent’s
tower, many were killed outright whilst the rest of the captives were
herded together and marched to a ﬁeld near Nogueruelas where they
were stripped naked (Cabrera needed the uniforms) and forced to run for
their lives. All the men were hunted and killed by the Carlist cavalry, one
corpse registering no fewer than 26 lance wounds.186 The martyrdom
of Nogueruelas outshone Villafranca’s in 1834, and, soon after the war
ended, the public disinterment and reburial of the martyred militiamen
allowed Radicals to capture public memory of the conﬂict.187
   Cabrera’s initiative turned the remote regions of Aragón and Valencia,
centred on the Maestrazgo, into a hybrid of guerrilla insurgency and
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   113


counter-insurgency punctuated by increasing episodes of intense vio-
lence. Whilst there were indeed economic origins for rural Carlism
and urban liberalism, the war distorted these into geographical loy-
alties as civilians sensibly obeyed whichever side was strongest in
their area. Cabrera’s successful military strategy earned him the sobri-
quet ‘Tiger of the Maestrazgo’, whose threat was answered by signal
sacriﬁces from Cristino populations deprived of adequate garrisons.
Requena (Valencia), for example, resisted Cabrera’s siege because its
women and children dug trenches and constructed barricades, max-
imising the defensive power of its outnumbered garrison until a relief
column arrived.188 The revolution of the juntas undermined Cristino
counter-insurgency efforts as militiamen prioritised parochial interests
and soldiers deserted. Nogueras’s minor victory at Orta on 24 September
1835 was important only because it helped to stem the desertion
affecting his ranks. Insufﬁcient Cristino forces encouraged the spiral of
atrocities and reprisals. There was no Eliot Treaty in the east, and prag-
matism overrode any residual compassion. Cristinos were reluctant to
take Carlists prisoner as they had too few forces to guard them sufﬁ-
ciently (on one occasion, some 600 captured Carlists escaped because
the Cristinos had too few cavalry to round them up).189 By the same
token, any acts of mercy which did result from military action usually
had pragmatic motives. On 17 October 1835, Cabrera assaulted Alcanar,
only four miles from the Mediterranean Sea on the Catalan–Valencian
border. There, the tragic routine of an outnumbered Cristino garrison
retiring to the biggest church, defending itself to the last, even throw-
ing beehives at the attackers, repeated itself. Cabrera had wiped out a
scratch Cristino force rushed from the nearby port of Vinaroz which
had tried to relieve Alcanar. The desperation of the besieged women
and children compelled the militiamen to surrender and the town was
sacked.190 Alcanar cut off land communications between revolutionaries
in Barcelona and Valencia. But Cabrera’s dash for the sea was short-lived,
as Anglo-Cristino gunboats repulsed his attempt to seize a nearby port,
and overreach eventually obliged him to evacuate Alcanar.
   Cabrera’s ascendancy was formalised with the 11 November 1835
royal decree making him Commander-in-Chief of Lower Aragón.
Cabrera was still theoretically answerable to the junta at Berga, but in
practice his forces – which at the end of 1835 numbered some 3,416
infantry and 218 cavalry – imposed military rule in territory he com-
manded. Cobblers were forced to produce footwear, Cristino columns –
such as that of Terrer (Zaragoza) on 13 December – were wiped out
and raided for weapons and uniforms, and a factory was constructed to
114 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


turn saltpetre, lead and sulphur into arms.191 In response, the Cristino
counter-insurgency imposed its own state of siege, impounded deliver-
ies of war material to areas where Carlists were known to be operating,
and exploited occasions in which urban and rural geography favoured
the Cristino order of battle. After Terrer Cabrera invaded Castile, but at
Molina de Aragón terrain and cavalry superiority favoured the Cristinos,
and General Palarea won a victory which dispersed the invaders and
silenced his revolutionary critics. Cristino victories were rare that winter,
so Prime Minister Mendizábal tried to consolidate this success by offer-
ing an amnesty to Cabrera’s men. Many accepted but the vast majority
who did used it to ‘change shirts’ and regroup in Aragón.192
   The brutality of the war in both Aragón and Catalonia radicalised
Cristino politics, most violently in Barcelona. The Ciudadela fortress
contained several Carlist prisoners, including the high-proﬁle Colonel
Juan O’Donnell. Civil Governor Pastors knew that O’Donnell was
the target of vengeful radicalism and desperately tried to get him
transported elsewhere, even interceding with the British consul about
possibilities for the evacuation of prisoners by Royal Navy ships.193
Matters were made worse by newspapers’ exaggeration of atrocities com-
mitted by the Carlist defenders of the besieged hill fortress of Hort
(‘news’ reached Barcelona that the Carlists were answering each Cristino
artillery shot by throwing live militia prisoners out of the fortress
windows to their deaths below).194 Cristino spymaster, Eugenio de
Aviraneta, whom Mendizábal had dispatched to Barcelona to work for
the ailing Espoz, was anonymously tipped off that the Carlist prisoners
of the Ciudadela would be massacred.195 On 4 January 1836, Barcelona
revolutionaries allied with sympathetic militiamen and marched on the
lightly defended Ciudadela, proclaiming Liberty and the Constitution
of 1812. Pastors showed physical bravery once again by mediating,
but whilst he spared the Ciudadela’s powder stores from a potentially
catastrophic explosion, he could do nothing for the inmates, who were
all massacred. Carlists turned O’Donnell into a martyr, recording his
last words as ‘Give me a sword! Don’t let me die at the hands of vile
assassins!’196 The massacre was worse than Carlist outrages at Hort.
Although seven Cristino prisoners had indeed been barbarically defen-
estrated, many more victims were Carlists themselves who, after a failed
breakout on 23 January, had desperately tried to escape the siege by low-
ering themselves onto the rocks below. When Hort was ﬁnally taken,
some 104 unmolested Cristino casualties were found whom the Carlists
had abandoned rather than massacred.197
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   115


   Local authorities thought it expedient to excuse the prison mas-
sacre with reference to ‘the inhumane ferocity and cruelty with which
the defenders of the usurpation sacriﬁced at Hort and other parts of
Catalonia a large number of our prisoners’.198 But behind the scenes,
army reinforcements were quietly entering the city, Pastors was deposed
for his temporising and Captain-General Espoz dared to impose a state
of siege. Proclamations of the Constitution of 1812 were forbidden
and the most egregious Radicals in the militia arrested and exiled to
the Canaries. To guard against sedition, prisoners were dispatched, for
the ﬁrst leg of the journey, on Royal Navy rather than Cristino ships.
Amongst the deported was Aviraneta, who was accused of inciting the
massacre with alarmist claims of a Sardinian-led international Carlist
invasion bound for Catalonia.199
   But there were international plots, and Don Carlos was playing to the
international gallery of public opinion when, on 20 February, his man-
ifesto condemned the Liberals as anarchists and foreign revolutionaries
whose barbaric outrages at Barcelona, Zaragoza and elsewhere made
a mockery of the humanitarian intervention of ‘respectable powers’.
True Spaniards would not stomach such ‘democracy’, which amounted
to barbarism.200 His manifesto unwittingly coincided with news of the
execution of Ramón Cabrera’s mother, who had been held hostage by
Cristino forces for almost two years, and this apparently senseless act
of barbarity ricocheted around Europe in support of Don Carlos’s mani-
festo. María Griñó’s iconic end reveals a story of the intimate madness of
revenge, for she was shot in reprisal for Cabrera’s execution of the may-
ors of two villages in contested areas of Teruel province (Valdealgorfa
and Torrecilla), who had given Cristino mobile militiamen intelligence
about local Carlists.201 The mayors’ deaths prompted the Cristino arrest
of Cabrera’s three sisters, two of whom, ironically, were married to mili-
tiamen who appear to have connived at their escape. Tragically, as soon
as Cabrera got news of his sisters’ escape, he avenged his mother by
executing four Cristino hostages of his own, all wives or daughters of
serving Cristino ofﬁcers.202 Such high-proﬁle Cristino victims obscured
countless others known only to their families and, sometimes, the Radi-
cal press. Thus, the ﬁve-year Carlist occupation of the hill settlement of
Alcalá de la Selva (Teruel) began with the dragging out of his home and
public execution of the ‘only liberal in the village’.203
   Such barbarism certainly complicated the task of the Cristino
Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the North, as troops had to be
diverted to the cities and captured Cristinos were even more likely to
116 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


face reprisals from outraged Carlists. Two weeks after the Barcelona mas-
sacre, Córdova began an offensive at the mountain pass of Arlabán
dividing Guipúzcoa from Alava, employing ‘foreign revolutionaries’ –
French and British auxiliaries – in large numbers for the ﬁrst time.
But the Carlists turned the geography, snow and fog to their defensive
advantage, repelling the Cristinos at the cost of only half the enemy’s
600 casualties. Captured British and French auxiliaries were shot, and
retreating French committed reprisals of their own against Carlist pris-
oners whom the Cristinos had handed over to them.204 Arlabán had
been one of the strongest parts of the Carlist defensive line, but
Córdova lacked the intelligence networks needed to have known this
in advance.205 Consequently, he was thrown back onto the defensive,
resorting to the static strategic warfare of the blockhouse system.
   In different conditions Córdova’s static strategy might have been
sounder than Espoz’s war of movement. But the Carlists turned the
enemy’s revolutionary crisis and the porous French border to their
advantage. The Royal Army, with its 16,000 infantry, 1,000 cavalry and
13 artillery pieces, was vastly outnumbered by the Army of the North.206
But superior local intelligence, internal lines of communication and the
distraction provided by the expanding Carlist forces in Catalonia and
Aragón, all allowed the Carlists to wrest the initiative after Arlabán in
a series of victories. On 8 February 1836, the Carlists overwhelmed the
1,300-strong Cristino outpost of Valmaseda, capturing ﬁve swivel-guns,
360 riﬂes, 60,000 bullets and 65 quintals of cod, 800 bread rations, 53
boxes of biscuit and other stores besides. The quarter shown to the garri-
son encouraged the capitulation of nearby Mercadillo three days later.207
Things got worse still for Córdova. Plencia, a coastal town on the west-
ern extremities of the Basque provinces, was taken after a short siege
on 25 February 1836, giving a morale boost to the Carlists, who had
now captured a seaport (albeit a very modest one); another seaport,
Lequeitio, would follow on 12 April. A total of 800 prisoners were taken
at Plencia, including National Guardsmen, the revolutionary rebrand-
ing of the Urban Militia, who were conscripted into Carlist ranks whilst
their ofﬁcers went to depots to await exchange. Some 13 artillery pieces
and other effects were taken as prizes, and a 3,000-real ﬁne (the Cristino
‘blood tax’) was imposed on those refusing to defect to Carlist ranks.208
Apart from a minor cavalry victory at Orduña by General Esparero
(whom Córdova had placed under Lacy Evans’s command in a bid for
more British support), followed by a bloody stalemate at Unza two weeks
later on 19 March, the winter and spring of 1836 had seen the Carlists
steadily undermining the Cristino blockade.209
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   117


   The greatest strategic blow to the Army of the North originated not
at Don Carlos’s court in Durango but in Paris. Since July 1834, the
French had ofﬁcially closed their south-western border to all supplies
destined for the Carlists. But smuggling was a way of life in the Pyrenees,
and it was in part due to this that Zumalacárregui, throughout 1834,
had been able to assemble his army under the noses of the Cristino
forts. That said, the Spanish Liberals knew from bitter experience that
the French police force was the best in Europe, and French protesta-
tions to the contrary cut little ice with Prime Minister Mendizábal, who
scoffed, ‘let them treat the smugglers as they treated me and other Patri-
ots when we tried to cross the Pyrenees in 1830’.210 But worse was to
come. In February 1836, the Broglie government fell and was replaced by
a new administration led by Thiers, which tried to appease Metternich’s
alarm at the internationalisation of the Spanish revolution. Hence, on
26 March 1836, the French government revoked its 3 July 1835 decree,
which had intensiﬁed the embargo on any trade with Carlists on the
Spanish side of the border. French legitimists rejoiced when they heard
that their allies in Spain would not be starved into surrender. Madrid’s
indignation was only partly appeased by French permission for the
transit of Cristino troops and supplies across their territory. This mea-
sure may have allowed Córdova to outﬂank some Carlist positions, but
its advantage paled in comparison to the abandonment of the French
blockade.211
   Córdova was caught in the vice of Radical pressure and Carlist rear-
mament, and whereas the Carlist threat could be evaluated, that of
the revolutionaries could not. In April 1836, as two regiments rose in
a pay revolt in Bilbao, Córdova conﬁded to General Narváez: ‘I fear that
agents of different extreme parties are working my men with sinister
aims, singling out the sergeants and troops who are most vulnerable
to seduction and intrigue.’212 In May 1836, two companies of Mili-
tia rampaged through the village of Arévalo (Soria), some 50 miles
behind the northern front, smashing the windows of ‘Carlist’ inhabi-
tants. Cristino civil authorities were helpless and the militiamen had to
be disarmed at gunpoint by loyal troops.213 Only victory could silence
Córdova’s critics and stem rebellion in the ranks. British auxiliaries
allied with Royal Marines (a new departure for Quadruple Alliance ‘non-
intervention’) and Cristino militiamen in a bloody attempt on 5 May to
relieve besieged San Sebastián. The withering bombardment by Anglo-
Cristino gunboats and the death of the charismatic Carlist commander,
Sagastibelza, sealed the Allied victory, and the siege of San Sebastián
was lifted.214 At the same time, Córdova renewed his offensive against
118 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the heights of Arlabán, even though the same geography, and even
the same snow on the peaks, favoured the defenders once more. The
result was a bloody stalemate, compounded by Cristino casualties from
exposure as men could not light ﬁres lest they reveal their positions,
and instead slept beside each other and mules for warmth. Córdova’s
renewed assault in the same sector of the front was greeted with relief
by the Carlist Royal Government and consternation in Madrid. Eguía
knew that there were more vulnerable sectors of the Carlist front line
(the Baztán, Irurzun, Lecumberri), and he thanked the enemy’s rev-
olutionary crisis for having made Córdova so blind and desperate.
Prime Minister Mendizábal, by contrast, had lost patience with his
commander-in-chief. Córdova’s protestations that the second battle of
Arlabán had actually strengthened the Cristino line around the Basque
country made no impression on the Radicals, who demanded swift
victories.215
  The second battle of Arlabán came in the wake of an irate exchange
of letters between Córdova and Mendizábal, in which the military will
clashed with the political. Both men implied that the other was neglect-
ing to put the interests of the fatherland (patria) ﬁrst, emotive language
in the Liberal revolution, and its use was all the shriller from Mendizábal
because of his cosmopolitan background. He assured his commander-
in-chief that Madrid was doing all it could, decreeing mobilisations,
advancing the revolution and even being aided by a fortuitous cabi-
net change in Portugal – which promised to bring 10,000 auxiliaries to
Córdova’s side – and that all this could come to sound effect if only
the commander-in-chief would show some initiative and achieve vic-
tories. Córdova called Mendizábal’s decrees empty, castles in the air,
and his quest for victories as mistaking cause for effect, of wanting to
reap the harvest of victory without sowing the seeds. Córdova claimed
a detailed understanding of the fundamentally defensive nature of the
war which made no impression on Mendizábal. No Cristino comman-
der could force the Carlists to engage if they did not want to. Finally,
Córdova tendered his resignation, trying to remove the potential polit-
ical threat this posed by reassuring the prime minister of his Liberal
credentials in a manner which nonetheless revealed the powers of his
ofﬁce. Thus Córdova boasted about how many convents he had closed
on his own authority, and stated he was in agreement with the legal
reforms and the sale of nationalised property. Córdova, who claimed to
be non-political, obviously could become political at any moment. The
choice facing the Queen-Regent was obvious: either her prime minis-
ter or commander-in-chief had to go.216 On 4 May 1836, Córdova was
                                  War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   119


summoned to Madrid and a council of war; where his fate and that of
Mendizábal would be decided.217
   The Queen-Regent, who was hardly even liberal, let alone progresista,
in sympathies, seized upon Córdova’s presence in the capital to dis-
miss her Radical prime minster and to call new elections. Córdova had
wrongfooted the Radicals by leaving Espartero in temporary command
in the north, dashing their hopes of animosity between the two men.
Once in Madrid, Córdova petitioned for four things, all of which the
government approved. Firstly he sued for reinforcement. He asked for
whatever troops could be spared from Madrid plus that France be asked
to increase its legion by 4,000 to 6,000 men, the same request to be
made to the British that they might thus reinforce Evans’s strategi-
cally vital position. Secondly, he wanted a Reserve Army to be created
and centred on Burgos. This force should be comprised almost entirely
of National Militia that could be subjected to army command when-
ever necessary.218 Clearly, a more divisive issue for Liberal politics could
scarcely be imagined. Thirdly, he begged for sufﬁcient supplies so that
his army would not starve, beg and riot. And fourthly, Córdova made a
partisan demand which he disguised as a concern for the morale of the
Cristino ‘home front’, namely that the government should refrain from
making a formal request for direct French intervention unless it was
clear that Paris would reply in the afﬁrmative.219 A likely French refusal
would leave Cristino Spain diplomatically stranded and make the posi-
tion of the French Legion untenable. In fact, Córdova was worried that
a refusal would boomerang against the moderados in domestic politics
as it became clear that they did not have the French army as a counter-
revolutionary card to play as a last resort against the exaltados (as the
absolutists had done in 1823). Silence on this matter, by contrast, might
maintain the illusion of the French army’s moderantismo.220
   But the victory of the Queen-Regent and her general was short-lived.
The Cristino army continued to collapse as a cause and consequence
of Carlist expansion, and ousted mendizabalistas began to manipulate
Radicals in the army in order to win back power. The Radical revolu-
tion of August 1836 would be made by junior ofﬁcers and sergeants
against their own leaders, and the Constitution of 1812 they revived
was designed to ensure both a greater degree of civil authority over the
suspect army leadership, and an emasculation of the powers of the trou-
blesome Queen-Regent.221 In the meantime, the removal of Mendizábal
encouraged ofﬁcers to take revenge on the Liberal press for ‘abusing’
its freedom of expression to criticise the army.222 Córdova’s brother, a
colonel based in the capital during the summer of 1836, invaded the
120 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


home of a Radical editor, assaulting him and insulting his wife. A simi-
lar episode almost unfolded at the headquarters of the all-powerful Eco
del Comercio, but a National Militia detachment was on its premises to
face down the indignant ofﬁcers.223 But Córdova’s ascendancy could not
last long. His return to the northern front did nothing to arrest the dete-
rioration of the war effort. On 11 July 1836, Carlists repulsed a British
attempt to evict them from the French frontier at Fuenterrabia, and on
17 July 1836 a Franco-Cristino force of six battalions failed to force the
Carlist-held bridge at Muniáin on the River Ega. In frustration Bernelle’s
legionaries burnt the harvest of local Carlist villagers, which the Carlists
publicised as part of their reactionary Black Legend against the French
Left and with a threat to execute Cristino prisoners if such outrages were
repeated.224
   The Quadruple Alliance had undertaken a greater military burden
because desertion and draft evasion had rendered the Cristino Army
of North unﬁt for further offensive operations. Even defensive troops
increasingly surrendered at the ﬁrst opportunity, many of these defect-
ing to the Carlists. On 10 June, Carlist Commander-in-Chief Eguía
publicised his government’s offer to ‘true Spaniards’ who wished to
defect, including a sliding scale of rewards depending on rank and chat-
tels, and promotions for ofﬁcers who brought numerous defectors with
them. In response the Cristinos imposed drastic measures, including
cash incentives and even promotions to informers betraying plots to
defect, and verbal councils of war imposing the death penalty against
offenders.225 Yet even if such measures stemmed some defection on the
northern front, they could do nothing to reverse the draft-dodging and
desertion that plagued the Cristino safe zone behind the formal front
line. Virtual ‘reserve armies’ of deserters roamed across the country-
side, sometimes securing remote territory against punitive missions of
mobile militia and preying on civilian communities and travellers. The
revolution of 1835–36 may have ‘democratised’ conscription by abolish-
ing exemptions which the nobility traditionally enjoyed (by abolishing
the nobility as a separate legal estate). Yet in their place it formalised
the system of cash payments (‘blood tax’) for exemption.226 And the
vast majority of draftees had neither money nor protection to escape
conscription. As a British pro-Carlist remarked:

   I had no idea of the desolating effects of the repeated quintas, or
   conscriptions, until I had traversed Spain in so many directions, but
   I was not so forcibly struck with them anywhere as in Estremadura,
   where I saw only old men, women or children; the youth having
                                War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   121


  been carried off four times within the last two years, and the land
  being tilled only in the immediate neighbourhood of the villages.227

It was small wonder that conscripts increasingly either absconded or
deserted once they had been pressed into service. Fugitives and desert-
ers, of course, resented state power in principle. But given the tendency
of the Radical-Liberals towards populism, and given that their platform
of autonomous town halls offered certain networks to shield men from
conscription (Militia membership, employment, fraud), Radical-Liberals
were often successful at mobilising a popular hatred of conscription
against the moderados, especially in regions like Andalucía that were
far from the Basque country. Earmarked conscripts without friends in
authority sometimes committed the desperate act of leaving town to
impersonate militiamen in settlements where their anonymity could
make them look convincing, complete with embellished uniforms and
fake moustaches. Local authorities often chose to ignore this tragic cha-
rade, except when this phenomena evolved into further wrongdoing,
such as in Seville, where complaints reached the national press of fake
militia street-rowdies, and in Granada, where a spate of burglaries were
committed by ‘criminals masquerading as militiamen’.228 In 1837, the
Ofﬁce of National Sub-inspector of Militia was set up in order to stamp
out this fraud. In Málaga during the May 1836 elections mendizabal-
ista Liberals conveniently described wrongdoers in nearby Vélez-Málaga
as ‘enemy insurgents’ rather than the deserters and draft-dodgers the
moderado newspaper magnate, Andrés Borrego, believed them to be.
Borrego, whose surname means ‘lamb’ in Spanish, was lampooned in
a charivari involving the symbolic slaughter and skinning of a lamb,
which was then turned into the mascot at the helm of a wagon carrying
copies of Borrego’s offending newspaper that was publicly burnt. Radi-
cal Málaga did not like being reminded that so much of its power rested
on indulging the popular classes’ hatred of military service.229 When the
government, in October 1835, complained of its slowness in drawing up
lists for conscription, Málaga responded by vehemently professing its
patriotism whilst ‘disappearing’ draftees from the lists all the same.230
   Other Andalucían communities also shielded their menfolk as best
they could. Antequera, for example, exaggerated the very modest con-
cessions to anti-militarism imposed by exaltados in 1836 (men’s right
to object to their name being included on a list of potential draftees at
the very moment that the list was compiled) into a vehicle for shielding
virtually all of its menfolk from conscription.231 Vélez-Málaga’s munici-
pality continued to connive in draft-dodging and was ﬁned accordingly
122 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


in early 1838.232 Radical liberalism was more implacably opposed to
Carlism than moderantismo ever was. But leftist mayors maintained a
parochial relationship with the war, especially in parts of Cristino Spain
far from the front line, defending the expansion of their local power-
bases, the militia, but opposing conscription. In some instances, this
anti-militarism bordered on terrorism. In early 1840, the prefect of
Granada toured his restive province and was depressed to discover a
history of wrongdoing which local authorities could not – or would
not – prosecute. In August 1836, the Mayor of Baza had sent militia-
men to seek and murder an unpopular customs guard and war veteran,
Antonio Honorati, whose body was dragged back into Baza bearing both
his assailants’ wounds and older ones inﬂicted by Carlists in Navarra.
The following year, another Cristino soldier was murdered in public
view and his killers went unpunished. Mayors who tried to punish sub-
sequent killings were themselves terrorised and even banished. At the
root of this lawlessness, the prefect held, were the decrepit militia forces
which, in this region, ‘contained simple day-labourers and vicious fel-
lows with no stake in society’, including brigands who (before 1834)
‘belonged to the frenzied royalists who committed outrages in the name
of God and who were now doing the same in the name of Liberty’.233
   Episodes of popular anti-militarism were repeated across dozens of
locations throughout Cristino Spain. By the summer of 1836, these
had been exploited by Radicals to expel the commander-in-chief and
restrain the powers of the Queen-Regent with the Constitution of 1812
during the revolution at La Granja (see Chapter 6). Córdova had just
suppressed a military conspiracy at his base in Logroño in favour of the
Constitution of 1812 (a plot which appeared to be political cover for
mass desertion as the city’s artillery was to be spiked and troops were
to retire to Aragón). Soon after his success, however, news reached him
of the La Granja rising, which had made that Constitution the law of
the land. Córdova saw this as ﬁnal notice to quit. The exit of Córdova
meant the exit of the natural leader of the moderados, in the same way
that the death of Espoz four months later would deprive the progresis-
tas of their hero. The government asked Córdova to recommend his
successor, which he did willingly, recommending Espartero, despite the
latter’s rumoured progresismo. Córdova made his way to France with his
personal escort, refusing to swear allegiance to the Constitution of 1812
whilst not directly disparaging it either. Crossing into France unscathed,
on 25 August 1836 he met the Spanish consul at Bayonne, instructing
him that he should obey the new government, whilst also conferencing
                                 War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36   123


with some exiled Carlists, including Maroto, with whom he would even
strike up a friendship. Córdova’s parleying with the enemy appeared to
conﬁrm Radical accusations that the moderados were a ﬁfth column for
Carlism. In all likelihood, however, Córdova was motivated by humani-
tarian rather than treacherous concerns.234 But whatever the truth of this
matter, the march of events had eclipsed Córdova, his military strategy
and his moderado allies.
6
Deep War Feeds Revolution,
1836–37




This chapter charts ‘deep war’, when the extent of violence, suffering
and civilian casualties reached their peak. It is the geographically most
extensive chapter, detailing the Gómez Expedition of 1836. It explains
how the collapse of the Cristino war effort – pace the Carlists’ third
failed siege of Bilbao – radicalised Liberal politics and disrupted social
and economic relations across Spain, and forged new patterns in their
place which became a focus for Radical political action. It shows how
this radicalisation was caused by suspicion of moderado collusion with
Carlism, by actual or threatened Carlist invasion, and by the interlinked
phenomena of mass desertion and gloriﬁed banditry that this provoked.
It explains the diplomatic crisis into which Cristino Spain was plunged
by the August 1836 revolution at La Granja.
   The cycle of Carlist atrocities and Cristino counter-atrocities mounted
throughout 1836 and provides the crucial context for the La Granja rev-
olution. The Basque theatre had the Eliot Treaty and increasingly formal
(though still porous) front lines, but Catalonia and Aragón witnessed
an increase in military activity without any of the humanitarian pro-
visions of the north. By April 1836 Carlist forces in Catalonia alone
had grown to 13,367 infantry and 218 cavalry, reinforced by troops
from Navarra, and this greater military presence led to a correspond-
ing war for resources. On 10 May, Tristany sacked the town of Caldes,
25 miles north of Barcelona, after it had failed to supply his forces,
destroying all but a handful of its buildings. Mobile Militia chased the
invaders northwards, but not before Tristany’s men had abducted the
wives of several militiamen and pillaged villages in their path. Terroristic
episodes like these were met with harsh countermeasures, targeting not
just the Carlists, but also demoralised Cristino militia garrisons which
were ordered to ﬁght Carlist invaders whenever the latter’s numbers did

                                    124
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   125


not exceed one-half of local available defence forces. Crippling ﬁnes
were to be imposed on local authorities which failed to enforce this
order, whilst a deforestation programme was even ordered in an attempt
to deprive Carlist bands of natural cover.1 Months earlier, the ﬁrst siege
of Gandesa was underway, a town whose siege became legendary in
nineteenth-century Spain on account of its heroic women. On 5 March
1836, Cabrera, Torner, Quílez and El Organista attacked the town. Not
only the local militia but also the civilian population, including women,
rallied to its defence. Luisa Bará honoured the example of Zaragoza’s
Agustina de Aragón by delivering arms and food to the defenders whilst
under ﬁre. Turning to terror to subdue the defenders, Torner seized from
adjoining villages the wives and daughters of militiamen and impris-
oned them. The Cristinos replied by imprisoning powerful men and
women in Gandesa who were related to the besieging Carlists. Gandesa’s
heroism was thus overshadowed by a mundane cycle of reprisals.2
   The war in the east was Cabrera’s war: on 11 April Eguía promoted him
to brigadier, and on 15 August 1836 to major-general.3 On 29 March
1836 Cabrera took Liria, just four hours from Valencia and a wealthy
town in its own right. Some 20 militiamen were killed in the ﬁelds and
streets. Twenty-seven more were captured and led to Chiva where they
were slowly murdered by a gruesome ritual, which included being shot
in the kneecaps at point-blank range before having their genitals sliced
off.4 Castration had been a common ritual in the French Wars of Reli-
gion for emasculating the enemy, feminising bodies in death which in
life had not been ‘truly masculine’.5 Carlists saw their enemy as emascu-
lated by the double usurpation of an illegitimate and female candidate
on the throne. The wives and daughters of the Chiva victims, for their
part, did not submit to the domestic grief traditionally prescribed to
their sex. Rather, they joined militiamen on campaign seeking to exact
vengeance on the perpetrators. Palarea overwhelmed Cabrera’s rear-
guard near Chiva and committed a revenge massacre against captured
Carlists.6 But Torner soon counter-attacked, dispersing Palarea’s men.
Women avenged their men not only by killing Carlists, but also incom-
petent or cowardly ofﬁcers on the Cristino side. When some militiamen
were killed in September 1836 in a skirmish near Alcaraz (Albacete) with
the Carlist irregular, Orejita, their widows went to the Militia captain’s
house and, ﬁnding him absent, burnt it down, killing his wife who was
inside.7
   Catalan communities were thus put in an impossible position. Both
Cristinos and Carlists punished communities severely for helping the
other side. Even though the Cristinos lifted the provincial state of
126 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


siege on 5 November 1836, they also applied the law of 17 April
1821, which exempted charges of ‘conspiracy’ and ‘anti-constitutional
activities’ (activities described as infracción de Constitución) from civil
jurisdiction. Further north in Catalonia, villages were reduced to penury,
something which in itself encouraged villagers to ﬂock to the Carlist
ranks so that they might at least become perpetrators rather than vic-
tims. An economic war ensued. In order to prevent hardship swelling
the ranks of the Cristino Militia, Carlist commanders frequently forced
local landowners under their sway to hire hands in order to starve the
Cristinos of recruits.8 Invasions of Cristino territory were marked by
Carlists’ sacking and pillaging civilian property they did not expect to
hold. Quílez’s guerrillas, who, on 29 June 1836, were repulsed when
they attacked a fortiﬁed church in Alcorisa (Teruel), burnt down 173
neighbouring houses before retreating towards Montalbán. Quílez then
stormed Montalbán after its Cristino militia had murdered two of his
emissaries. Quílez performed a vengeful ruse by burning Montalbán, but
not before granting its inhabitants an hour to ﬂee with as many posses-
sions as they could carry. After burning the town, Quílez’s vanguard
hunted the refugees and robbed them all the same.9 Sometimes even
such acts of total war could appear comparatively merciful. By the onset
of the Maestrazgo winter the Carlists had extended their terror against
remaining Cristino settlements in Teruel province. On 20 October 1836,
some 100 conscripts from Extremadura surrendered the church and
village of Albentosa (Teruel) after brief resistance against the outnumber-
ing guerrilla forces El Royo and Peinado. Evacuation terms were being
discussed when an exterminating angel priest, a certain José Lorente,
who had been attached to a different band, arrived to insist on the
Cristinos’ deaths. Some 73 captives were stripped naked and killed in
the road, including an 11-year-old who had followed his father from
Extremadura, despite desperate pleas for mercy, even offers of ransom,
having been voiced by the local municipality, including priests. Lorente
rejected the ransom, but offered a sadistic compromise: that the people
might ﬁnd replacements for the soldiers’ fate. After the massacre was
over, Lorente robbed the inhabitants of the money they had offered for
ransom all the same.10
   Patrician Liberals unhelpfully condemned the enemy’s barbarity as
the product of an ignorant plebeian rural culture, vulnerable to back-
ward clerics and deprived of productive labour. The rural, asymmetrical
nature of the Carlist insurgency complicated the Cristino counter-
insurgency. The fortiﬁed Carlist hill town of Cantavieja, Cabrera’s
strategically most valuable possession, was thus a rare target for a
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   127


conventional assault. It was known to hold Cristino prisoners as well
as foodstores which could augment meagre Cristino rations at the onset
of the dire regional winter. Evaristo San Miguel, Radical prime minis-
ter during the Triennium and Cristino Captain-General of Aragón since
the La Granja revolution, conquered Cantavieja at the end of October
1836, and the momentum of the offensive persuaded the Carlists to
burn rather than try to defend Beceite, their other fortiﬁed town in the
Maestrazgo. Cantavieja was a boost for revolutionary morale, even if
the foodstores were depleted by corrupt commissaries in the vanguard,
who ended up selling on such delicacies as cinnamon and cocoa at
inﬂated prices.11 Yet San Miguel qualiﬁed his victory address with a grim
prediction for Cristino communities:12

  Cantavieja, hitherto a nest of bandits and false defenders of the
  altar and throne, is now under national occupation . . . Yet, people of
  Aragón, defend yourselves. Dedicate yourselves to this sacred task the
  moment you fall under enemy attack. Defend your homes, which are
  yours after all, along with the fruit of your sweat and toil. Who else
  will care as much about your security and who else is willing to match
  your sacriﬁces?

Civilians were thus on their own, and were exhorted to manage their
own affairs as best they could. Army units were too dispersed, and
even militia garrisons could be overwhelmed in point-defence, often
in circumstances which recoiled on civilians they abandoned. Soneja
(Valencia) during the summer of 1836, for example, saw its militia garri-
son ﬂee the superior forces of El Serrador, but not before it had poisoned
foodstores which it knew the Carlists would seize. El Serrador avenged
the agonies of his men not on the absent militia, but on the inhabitants,
who were ﬁred upon as they ﬂed their burning houses.13 Patrician Lib-
erals who were unable to gain victory over the enemy instead proposed
prophylactic measures to divert listless men from Carlist bands. National
elites, like San Miguel, and the deputy for Alicante, Joaquín Abarques,
shared the vague opinion that ‘agricultural improvements’ could turn
Carlist swords back into ploughshares.14 Abarques became a self-parody
of patrician arrogance when he proposed ‘enlightening’ the insurgent
provinces by sending them copies of the Constitution of 1837.15 Local
elites, like Barcelona’s Council of Armament and Defence, worried about
the inﬂux of refugees who might be blandished into Carlist ﬁfth-column
activities, and prescribed practical measures like putting the idle to
work in nationalised monasteries and convents.16 Such measures were
128 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


either unhelpfully long term in nature or limited to reinforcing control
of urban centres already inside the Cristino zone. But what mattered
most during the middle years of the war was the expansion of the con-
ﬂict, and not just in Catalonia and Aragón, but also across Castile and
even Andalucía, where banditry grew under the banner of Carlism and
expeditions tore across the countryside. Civilians who were neither sol-
diers nor active revolutionary citizens (militiamen) had to forge their
own responses to violence, occupations and counter-occupations in an
insecure environment.
   Popular responses to this security crisis were part and parcel of the
leftist revolution in the Cristino zone. Jacobin politics had overtaken
Madrid in August 1836, and this was soon reﬂected in the ﬁgure of
Antonio Quiroga, who enjoyed even better Radical-Liberal credentials
than San Miguel, taking over the Captaincy-Generalship of Aragón.
The victorious Army of the Centre was stripped of men to help con-
front a Carlist breakout from the northern front (Gómez expedition),
allowing Carlists to regain lost territory. The Carlist breakout tested the
revolutionary Spain of La Granja beyond breaking point.
   Meanwhile, the Queen-Regent’s closure of the Cortes led to insurrec-
tions in Málaga, Granada and Cartagena, the last one being a bloody
exercise in settling scores. When Cartagena’s governor, O’Daly, deported
the miscreants to Ceuta, the prison ships were recalled so the cul-
prits could stand trial and O’Daly was replaced by Count Mirasol, the
hero of Bilbao. The Málaga revolution had heavy republican under-
tones, despite its protestations of loyalty to the Queen-Regent.17 In July
1836, Donadío, now military governor, was assassinated after some
800 troops under his command refused his order to disarm the rad-
icalised Militia and to come to the rescue of the civil governor, José
San Just, who was hiding from enraged militiamen. When San Just
ﬂed to a nearby building, he was shot dead by Carlos Barritaro, a
militiaman who in 1838 became a correspondent in a press campaign
defending the widows of two murdered Radicals against persecution
by moderado authorities. Donadío, meanwhile, disguised himself as a
National Guardsman and tried to ﬂee, only to be executed in a simi-
lar fashion.18 The following day, a quickly assembled junta arranged for
the Constitution of 1812 to be proclaimed in Málaga, and the revolu-
tion spread until the Queen-Regent was physically forced by rebellious
sergeants to sign the Constitution on 13 August 1836. Some 2,000
malagueño militiamen were dispatched to Catalonia to ﬁght Carlists
in the name of the Constitution.19 Málaga’s radicalism expressed one
extreme of the 1836 revolution; the other extreme was the gentlemanly
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   129


stand-off between the pro-Constitution militia and the town hall of
Cáceres (Extremadura), which went the militia’s way without the need
for any violence let alone killing.20
   As the Radical insurrection spread, the patriarch of exaltismo, Evaristo
San Miguel, deﬁed the Istúriz government’s orders to resign his com-
mand of the Army of the Centre and rallied the Zaragoza Militia
to the cause of the Constitution of 1812, keeping loyal government
forces at bay. Santander’s garrison joined the revolution because of pay
and supply grievances.21 Málaga, the cradle of revolution, exercised its
sovereignty by ‘declaring war’ on the pro-moderado French after one of
the latter’s vessels refused to acknowledge salutes from the revolution-
ary authorities.22 For the time being, meanwhile, Madrid stayed loyal.
Cardero had been mooted as leader of a revolutionary pronunciamiento
in the capital, but Quesada showed some timely ruthlessness for which
he would shortly pay with his life. He proclaimed martial law in the
capital, threatening any political activists who disturbed the peace with
the death penalty. But Madrid’s temporary quiescence was overtaken
by the expanding revolution elsewhere, including Cristino Spain’s sec-
ond city, where Captain-General Espoz, though responding admittedly
less quickly than San Miguel had done in Zaragoza, used his revolu-
tionary credentials to win over Barcelona’s powerful popular Radical
movement to his leadership and to the proclamation of the Constitu-
tion of 1812, thereby forestalling the sort of political violence to which
Catalonia’s capital had become accustomed. The welcome bloodless-
ness of Barcelona’s revolution was Espoz’s last service before he ﬁnally
succumbed to his agonising stomach cancer on 24 December 1836.23
   The revolution culminated at La Granja, at the hands of sergeants
posted to the Spanish monarchy’s summer residence at the town of San
Ildefonso, some 80 kilometres north of the capital. Nineteenth-century
writers, for whom the French Revolution was the dominant example
of royal humiliation, were fascinated by María Cristina’s submission
at La Granja, seeing this as the product of conspiracy funded by Rad-
icals, unlike the popular revolution of the juntas the previous year.24
Certainly, structural pay arrears made even the royal bodyguard vulner-
able to agitators, and it was logical for ofﬁcers and sergeants who could
not pay their men to search for political solutions instead. Twentieth-
century writers gave the La Granja revolution secondary importance to
that of the juntas the previous year. Whilst the social signiﬁcance of
lowly sergeants dictating to royalty was noted, writers saw La Granja
as the work of a mendizabalista clique bent on holding on to power
in the face of newer, and often more radical, chaos generated by the
130 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Málaga revolution and the penetration by the Gómez Expedition of the
Cristino ‘home front’.25 During the ﬁrst days of the sergeants’ rising, the
moderado prime minister who had replaced Mendizábal, Istúriz, tried to
win over the rebels, and when this attempt failed, tensions rose further
as the Madrid government declared the Queen-Regent a captive of the
revolutionaries. London and Paris grew alarmed. But whereas the British
backed the revolution to the hilt (an attitude which raised suspicion that
the whole affair was Ambassador Villiers’ doing), France disapproved of
this violent shift to progresismo. But both Quadruple Alliance powers
advised that the Queen-Regent captain the revolution as an act of free
will on her part: otherwise abdication (or worse) could be the alterna-
tive. Villiers was shocked by the apparent leaderlessness of this army
revolution, and the precedent it might set to Europe.26 Franco-British
diplomacy was proving highly prescient. The militiamen who rose in
1835 and the soldiers in 1836 both did so in the name of the con-
stitutional monarchy, but so central had the army’s claims to Spain’s
political future become that it would not hesitate to dispense with any
given monarch in order to recraft the state in its own image, as the
revolution of 1840 would show. The Queen-Regent was defenceless,
and the revolutionaries sent out fraternal calls to other units exhort-
ing them to proclaim the Constitution of 1812 elsewhere in Cristino
Spain. The army and militia in besieged Pamplona united in replac-
ing the city’s elderly governor with a younger leftist.27 Eventually, María
Cristina agreed to reinstate the Constitution of 1812, and the capital’s
revolutionary militia were rearmed and recalled, unpopular ministers
being sacked whilst other diehard moderados fared worse.28
   The revolutionary repression of political adversaries distinguished
1836 from 1835 as it was done by central government rather than
regional juntas. Mob violence certainly featured strongly, perhaps more
strongly, during 1836, too. Captain-General Quesada was lynched by
a Madrid mob led by revolutionary militiamen, his body mutilated
and paraded around the streets. The former moderado Prime Minister,
Istúriz, escaped a similar fate by ﬂeeing in disguise.29 For weeks after-
wards his son went into hiding whilst his wife was forced into house
arrest by demonstrations of rough music.30 In the provinces moderado
governors were often lynched, such as in Figueres or Cartagena, where
the governor was chased upstairs in his house by militiamen and
defenestrated.31
   Gone were the days of ‘Liberal union’. The capital was placed under
a revolutionary state of siege which invaded the homes of its political
opponents. The war had made the regime desperate for money, but it
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   131


was shunned by non-British lending markets. The government decreed
the famous round of nationalisation of ecclesiastical properties (known
in Spanish as desamortización), accompanying this with the abolition
of all remaining noble and clerical distinctions in law by the following
summer. A levy of 50,000 men was ordered, the blood tax for exemption
being lowered to 2,000 per draftee, or 1,500 with a viable horse. This
cheaper tax helped the lower middle-class constituency of progresismo.
Wealthier Liberals, by contrast, tended to support the moderados, and
were collectively subjected to a 200,000,000-reales forced loan (termed a
‘patriotic subscription’), captive subscribers being promised reimburse-
ment in instalments yielding 5 per cent interest. Wealthy individuals
who tried to ﬂee the country without permission were subject to the
decree of 16 September 1836, which conﬁscated their property, this
being made retroactive to emigrants since the victory of the La Granja
revolution on 15 August. Conﬁscation of property had so far happened
only to the Carlist enemy, so sectarian theft was a new departure. But
such was the economic chaos that even Finance Minister Mendizábal
could not prevent Cristino Spain defaulting in November 1836, for the
ﬁrst time, on some of its interest repayments.
   Other solutions conveniently conformed to stated progresista policy,
including the revival of the 1823 municipal legislation, which devolved
wide-ranging local autonomy (and ﬁnancial responsibilities), under-
pinned by voting rights for male householders.32 But this reform was
inoperable for two reasons. First, states of siege grew to combat grow-
ing Carlism, and military law overrode all civil jurisdiction, even in
reformed town halls. Second, the rural insecurity was compounded by
the revolutionary Cortes decree that wealthy notables should quit their
homes for safe urban centres whenever they were threatened by Carlists.
This decree was designed to drain the lake of economic Carlism by
depriving the enemy of loot or hostages for ransom. But in fact it proved
disastrous. It recoiled on poorer citizens who were robbed instead of
their absent social betters. Such citizens were even more likely to take
their chances joining Carlist bands (despite the fact that the families
they left behind faced the full rigour of revolutionary reprisals).33 Third,
the ﬂight of wealthy individuals severely undermined both the prac-
tice of respectable politics and the organisation of the militia. The tragic
Mayor of Urda (Toledo), for example, should have been a Cristino suc-
cess story. He had spent his family fortune to become mayor during the
transition of 1833, but the civil war saw nearby insurgents rally under
the Carlist ﬂag, ravaging local agriculture and forcing the mayor to take
on debts. Failing to negotiate a middle ground between Cristino and
132 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Carlist forces, the mayor’s administration was preyed on by both sides,
as local elections of councillors were dominated by corruption and vio-
lence and the whole administration, including the Militia, collapsed
into decrepitude. In May 1836, a 600-strong force of Carlists sacked
Urda, burnt the militia commander’s home to the ground and raped all
the women they could ﬁnd.34 Urda’s remaining wealthy families were
relieved to follow the revolutionary Cortes’ decree to ﬂee the town for
safer urban centres. The mayor tried to follow them but the Cristino
forces, who had declared a state of siege, ordered him to stay in his post,
also refusing his resignation (and even ﬁning him when he made this
desperate plea). At his wits’ end, the mayor took his own life.35 Whatever
else it was, this era of ‘local democracy’ was no ‘golden age’.36
   The La Granja revolution had a greater impact internationally than
the intervention of foreign auxiliaries discussed in Chapter 5. The
year 1836 was a crisis one for Spanish foreign policy for two reasons:
the La Granja revolution and Madrid’s recognition of the indepen-
dence of the Spanish American republics. Existing studies have stressed
political, cultural and international law factors surrounding this recog-
nition. Politically, the Quadruple Alliance has been viewed as the
subordination of Cristino Spain’s foreign policy to Paris and London,
especially with regard to British pressure for free markets and inde-
pendence recognition.37 Culturally, Madrid’s tardy recognition has been
invoked as Spain’s failure to reinvent itself as a post-imperial state.38
This certainly applied to the Carlists who impotently condemned this
recognition as the bitter harvest of 1820, and of one illegitimate revo-
lution begetting another, to the ruin of Peninsular Spain.39 Finally, the
law of the peoples was being accepted as the natural law base for inter-
national law across the Americas, and Cristino Spain’s honouring of this
integrated it back into the European concert.40
   Whereas links between the Carlists’ war effort and their foreign policy
have been well studied,41 comparatively little has been investigated with
regard to the Cristino Liberals. Yet the very ﬁrst motion passed by the
1836 revolutionary Cortes was to proclaim that Spain would remain a
monarchy. The revolutionaries were right to be worried about European
diplomatic reaction. In September 1836, Tsar Nicholas I, smarting from
a Quadruple Alliance snub regarding his proposed international peace
conference, urged Austria and Prussia to join him in recognising Don
Carlos and withdrawing ambassadors from Paris; Metternich, by con-
trast, urged caution, but agreed this course of action the moment the
Carlists got control of Madrid, whilst in the meantime increasing his
covert help to the Carlists.42 The absolutist powers, Austria and the
                                      Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   133


Italian states in particular, had memories of 1820 which still rankled: for
them the proclamation of the ‘Republican’ Constitution of 1812 proved
little short of a casus belli.43 Russia feared revolutionary Spain would
give strategic depth, and even a battle-hardened army, to a revolution-
ary France bent on tearing up the Vienna settlement.44 The Kingdom
of the Two Sicilies withdrew its skeleton legation from Madrid, whilst a
Spanish merchant at their court who had been acting as a semi-ofﬁcial
ambassador was withdrawn before he could be expelled. A group of 35
Carlists who had seized control of a Cristino ship in the Mediterranean
and sailed it to Naples were welcomed into Neapolitan service. Unof-
ﬁcial Cristino representatives were expelled without regard to rank or
ceremony (Naples, after all, had never recognised the Pragmatic Sanc-
tion of 1830 nor the subsequent accession of María Cristina in the
name of Isabel II), whilst the ministerial Giornale del regno delle due
Sicilie, mouthpiece of the absolutist regime, mounted a sustained cam-
paign of viliﬁcation against Liberal Spain and against the British legation
which was seen as its staunchest defender.45 The Calatrava adminis-
tration responded by expelling such remaining Neapolitan agents as it
could ﬁnd. Yet this was barely more than symbolic: as diplomatic rela-
tions had been broken anyway since 1833, the only Neapolitan agents
who mattered were undercover and protected by powerful friends or
identities. Marquess Grúa, ofﬁcial Neapolitan representative until 1833,
had continued in Madrid ostensibly in the role of court archivist. The
privileged access this commission gave him spared him from revolu-
tionary witch-hunts and equipped him to play a key role in unofﬁcial
diplomatic manoeuvres in 1837 to reach a compromise peace.46
   Meanwhile, serious cracks were appearing in the Quadruple Alliance
itself. Portugal withdrew its legion, citing domestic threats of its own.
France, resentful of Britain’s forward role in the revolution, impressed by
the resignation of the Cristino ambassador to Paris (a move which the
ambassador to Brussels followed)47 and, above all, paralysed by domes-
tic political divisions on Spanish affairs, gave as little support as possible
whilst remaining within the alliance. The French legitimists (dubbed
‘Carlists’, even in France) wanted to support Don Carlos, the govern-
ing party of ‘resistance’ (Guizot, Broglie, Molé) wanted strict neutrality,
and the party of ‘movement’ comprising Republicans and centre-Left
Liberals wanted formal intervention on the side of Spanish liberty.48
Meanwhile, even London’s support could not be taken for granted as
power swayed between the pro-interventionist Palmerston and cautious
Peel. The revolutionary regime thus undertook radical diplomatic mea-
sures. Prime Minister Calatrava concluded a policy, begun in 1835, of
134 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Cristino recognition of the Latin American republics on the American
mainland. Mexico, whose independence had been the bitterest pill for
Spain to swallow and the biggest threat to her remaining possessions
in the Caribbean and Paciﬁc, was recognised in a Treaty of Peace and
Friendship on 28 December 1836, which was ratiﬁed in turn by Mexico
in May 1837, and soon led to an exchange of ministers and commercial
relations.49 Moreover, both the Jackson and Van Buren administrations
of the USA, the rising hemisphere power, supported the Cristino side
for ideological reasons and as a guarantee of continued good diplo-
matic and commercial relations, despite the often pessimistic reports
of US missions to Madrid regarding anarchy and militarisation.50 Yet
this diplomatic sea change in its favour was not immediately appar-
ent to Cristino Spain. Madrid was rightly tormented by the threat that
such remaining Spanish possessions as Cuba might be invaded (Mexico’s
General Santa Anna and President Victoria had recently aborted an inva-
sion of this island), compromising the war effort, or even given up to
Carlist insurrection with outside help. Thus, the peace treaty stipulated
that Mexico would prohibit expeditions being launched from its ports
against Spanish territories and refrain from encouraging agitation for
the liberation of the same.51
   Cristino Spain in 1836 was more worried about Carlist than Bolivarian
subversion of its colonial and ex-colonial relations. During 1836, Don
Carlos’s agents in Rome focused on trying to frustrate the Vatican’s
impending recognition of the former New Spain and putative jewel
in the Pretender’s empire.52 But various schemes also ﬂourished in the
extant colonies, including a bid to raise Cuba for Don Carlos once
Gómez Expedition had been launched in Spain, on another occasion
when Bilbao was under its second siege, and on a third occasion when
the Royal Expedition crossed the Ebro. Conditions were ripe for sub-
version in this colony. Captain-General Tacón, a sexagenarian veteran
of the Spanish American Independence wars and high-handed architect
of administrative and police reforms, countermanded orders from the
revolutionary Cortes in 1836 to hold elections on the island under the
Constitution of 1812. But whilst Tacón’s order held sway in Havana,
Cuba’s second city, Santiago, inspired both by the possibilities of the
Constitution of 1812 and by resentment at the capital’s economic domi-
nance, staged a ‘Liberal’ revolt, which saw the underdeveloped east hold
out for three months against Tacón’s military rule. Tacón’s paciﬁcation
brought him no respite, as news reached him of a mysterious ‘English
agent’ who was en route to the island in a bid to persuade its oligarchs
to become neutral in the civil war raging in the motherland (given
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   135


Cuba’s tax revenues – which accounted for some 15 per cent of Madrid’s
exchequer – ‘neutrality’ objectively meant Carlist53 ). Cuba’s fervent reli-
giosity, so Carlists hoped, could be exploited, especially in the person of
Santiago’s Archbishop, Cirilo Alameda y Brea.54 But Tacón expelled the
archbishop from Cuba. Alameda y Brea made, on 2 January, for Jamaica,
then, early in July, to London.55 After a brief exile the archbishop found
his place at Don Carlos’s side as a spiritual leader of the anti-apostólico
faction.56 Deﬂecting the Carlist threat, the Madrid government lost no
time in seeing off the danger that liberalism would lead to indepen-
dence on the island; a special law was quickly passed by the Cortes
exempting Cuba from constitutional rule and allowing for ‘special laws’
in the colony. This came in spite of a spirited campaign by Radical
progresistas to demand political rights for these colonies and even, on
the margins, to abolish slavery (a proposal which was quickly blocked
due to fears of creating ‘another Haiti’ and, most crucially, depriving
the hard-pressed Spanish exchequer of the tobacco plantations’ vital
revenue).57 The effect of these laws was soon felt. In 1838, the ﬁnancially
starved Madrid government ordered the sale of a round of ecclesiastical
property on Cuba, whilst imposing on both Cuba and Puerto Rico an
extra-ordinary tax of 60 million reales.58
   Given Cristino preoccupations with Cuba, it is surprising that the
most impressive Caribbean impact of Spanish Carlism was not conspir-
atorial in nature, but Romantic, in the inspiration it gave to the cause of
Santo Domingan independence from Haitian rule. The Santo Domingan
‘father of the nation’, Juan Pablo Duarte, had spent the Carlist War
in Catalonia, but in 1838 he left for his native Dominican Republic,
inspired to agitate for his nation’s independence against Haitian rule. He
adapted the Catalan Carlist slogan, Rey, Patria y Fueros to Patria, Fueros y
Libertad. This inspired his Trinitaria secret society, which he founded in
1838 in Santo Domingo, and led to the 1844 declaration of Dominican
independence under a Carlist-inspired slogan.59 The symbol of eman-
cipated, black Haitians exercising sovereignty over whites had terriﬁed
colonial societies, and Duarte was doubtless inﬂuenced by the constant
Carlist allusions to the ‘usurping’ Spanish Liberals as ‘blacks’ (negros).
   The international impact of the civil war may have mattered to the
Jacobin politics of Madrid, but was marginal to the daily experience of
war. The Spanish Left’s greatest ‘export’ since 1812 had been the Con-
stitution of Cádiz, but its domestic reimposition after the La Granja
revolution had rendered it otiose as the army overruled local politicians.
Senior ofﬁcers who, unlike San Miguel, Quiroga and Cardero, were not
part of the victorious revolutionary party had even more reason to use
136 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


high-handed military jurisdiction against troublesome civilian authori-
ties. The revived civil supremacy principles of the Constitution of 1812
had rendered the daily management of military operations difﬁcult.
Troops had to go miles out of their way in desperate pursuit of insurgents
just so they did not ‘invade’ the Captaincy-General of Madrid. Mean-
while, contending civilian authorities, both well-established ones like
intendants, and new constitutional varieties of provincial governors,
prefects, elected local mayors and civil governors, may have been pro-
gressive as far as Liberal politics was concerned but proved detrimental
to strategic operations. This autonomy impeded the commissariat’s task
even more than the inefﬁcient system of private contractors, and pro-
voked sharp inequalities. In Valencia province, for example, Chiva and
Buñol were overburdened with demands for supplies whereas nearby
Utiel and Requena were not, even though all four municipalities were
threatened by Cabrera.60
   The insecurity caused by rural terrorism places a virtual embargo on
travel. Even the royal escort was robbed on one occasion. A govern-
ment report in 1837 blamed the human geography of Andalucía for
the rural insecurity of the south, as labourers traipsing miles between
pueblo, cortijo and ﬁeld were particularly vulnerable targets for bandits.61
But matters were even worse in the pro-Carlist north, where the Protes-
tant missionary, George Borrow, reported ‘almost every road is teeming
with banditti, who under the name of Carlists plunder friend and foe,
and to robbery join cruelty so atrociously horrible that indignation at
the crime is frequently lost in wonder’.62 Muleteers and labourers suf-
fered particularly, as they were often the easiest targets for opportunistic
raiders. Their fates made for grim government reports and press cover-
age. Accounts abound of civilians being preyed upon by Carlists acting
as bandits (or the other way round). A raid near Vendrell (Tarragona) was
typical: ﬁve farm labourers ridden down and a ten-year-old boy mor-
tally wounded.63 A Cristino supply column trapped by Carlist invasion
in the village of Ruidera (New Castile) refused to surrender to the local
Carlist bandits led by the Pallilos brothers but agreed to surrender to
a Carlist expeditionary force of outsiders.64 Agriculture, especially valu-
able and vulnerable livestock husbandry, was badly hit. Daimiel in New
Castile was so terrorised by marauding Carlist bands during the autumn
of 1837 that its farmers left their animals exposed in the ﬁelds to die,
the harvest going uncollected.65 The absence of village menfolk femi-
nised the practice of agriculture, devolving food production to the close
environs of dwellings. The war accounted for much of the general sub-
sistence crisis of 1837, just as the Peninsular War had done with the
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   137


more severe famine of 1811–12.66 It was worsened when the moderado
government of 1837 imposed an extraordinary compulsory purchase of
5,000 horses. This had originally been mooted by the revolutionaries in
February 1837 for the Militia; now the moderados did it for the army,
impairing agriculture whilst also removing the social mobility offered
by Militia membership to peasants with horses.67
   This security crisis meant that villages and small towns in both
Castiles which had no Cristino garrison could be regarded as ‘Carlist’,
either because they were occupied or invaded by bands or because
these bands operated close enough in the vicinity to induce willing or
unwilling ‘geographical loyalty’. At least 24 Carlist bands were known
by Cristino security forces to be plaguing both Castiles in 1836. Their
members came from one or more of the following four categories:
deserters/draft-dodgers, men conscripted by the Carlist bands, crimi-
nals/adventurers and agricultural workers displaced by war-ravaged har-
vests and the Liberal property revolution. The presence of so many rural
poor in Carlist bands, and the fact that these were usually led or men-
tored by reactionary priests, led generations of historians, especially the
Marxists and neo-Carlists of the second half of the twentieth century, to
understand the Carlist war as a conﬂict between a liberal, urban, mod-
ernising bourgeoisie and a backward, traditional, Catholic rural society,
the latter comprising a broad spectrum of threatened livelihoods united
by their false consciousness of throne and altar.68 Yet the twentieth-
century preoccupation with class conﬂict was too self-contained and
hermetic. Castile showed that ‘Carlism’ covered many more categories
than declassés, and in any case the same economic grievance could be a
recruiting sergeant for Cristinism, too. In New Castile, for example, the
naturalised Spaniard and Irish-born veteran of the British Army, Colonel
Jorge Dawson Flinter, beat the Carlists at their own game. Inﬂuenced by
his ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the Spanish American Independence wars,
Flinter created a Cristino counter-guerrilla force of desperate men called
peseteros (they earned one peseta per day) who were armed with nothing
more than shotguns and who fought the Carlists and their support-
ers in a private, asymmetrical fashion.69 Later in the war, the Cristinos
recruited a mounted volunteer guerrilla force in Logroño under Martín
Zurbano Baras (alias Martín Varea), which plundered and terrorised
Carlist villages in the Basque country for pecuniary gain.70
   In effect, the deep war privatised politics, and not just for combatants,
as local communities used the aims of each side in order to protect or
advance their interests. The ﬂight to Valladolid of local village author-
ities drove villagers to seek the protection of rural insurgents, selling
138 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


them arms, sacking the homes of the absent wealthy and proclaiming
Carlos V. When a Cristino counter-insurgency operation at the end of
1837 re-established control, the captain-general showed no compassion
for the villagers’ plight, and imposed crippling ﬁnes on families whose
menfolk had joined the insurgents. The intimate details of ‘wrongdo-
ing’ possessed by the captain-general implies the widespread use of local
informants.71 Sometimes exasperated municipalities protected them-
selves by deﬂecting military oppression back onto the commanders. The
commissariat of a Cristino division quartered in Sarrión (Teruel) refused
to give the municipality a receipt for 3,000 rations commissioner (habiti-
lado de comisario) Castillo demanded as only 2,800 had been produced.
Even worse, the same division returned to Sarrión a few days later. The
Mayor of Sarrión therefore acted fast. He humoured Castillo and man-
aged to get him to sign off the receipts, and not only these but also
some receipts from Cabrera who had plagued the area shortly before
with similar demands. Castillo did not bother to read the small print.
For this mistake a court martial started against Castillo, but before he
could be sentenced, he defected to the Carlists out of embarrassment.72
   The ideologically committed minority despaired at the apolitical prag-
matism of communities at war. A solitary Liberal in Sonseca (Toledo)
complained at how ‘the insurgents are the only people in charge around
here’, conﬁscating the cattle of local Cristinos and abducting the local
mayor for ransom.73 In Méntrida (Toledo), meanwhile, local authority
had passed into the hands of ‘men of no character’ who, so an inves-
tigating judge was appalled to ﬁnd, paid off Carlist irregulars in the
surrounding hills, thereby preserving a modus vivendi.74 Communities in
Toledo which failed to make such accommodations could expect to fare
worse. In March 1837, some 26 irregulars descended on Malpica del Tajo
(Toledo) and might have kept it in their possession, as the few militia-
men who reported for action merely barricaded themselves in the local
castle. Yet the irregulars contented themselves with sacking the house of
the wealthiest Liberal and burning the mayor’s residence to the ground
before moving on.75 The Protestant missionary, George Borrow, was self-
evidently prone to attract hostile Carlist attention. But his account of
León in the summer of 1837 is nonetheless indicative of how nominally
Cristino civilian authorities were powerless in the face of Carlism:76

   I had scarcely been at Leon three days when I . . . had published my
   advertisements as usual, though without very fervent hope of success,
   as Leon is a place where the inhabitants, with very few exceptions, are
   furious Carlists and ignorant and blinded followers of the old Papal
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   139


  Church. It is, moreover, a Bishop’s see, which was once enjoyed by
  the prime councillor of Don Carlos, whose ﬁerce and bigoted spirit
  still seems to pervade the place . . . I had scarcely risen from the bed
  where the fever had cast me, when I found that my servant had
  become alarmed; he informed me that he had seen several soldiers
  in the uniform of Don Carlos knocking at the door of the inn, and
  that they had been making enquiries concerning me. It was indeed a
  singular fact connected with Leon that upwards of ﬁfty of these fel-
  lows, who had on various accounts left the ranks of the pretender,
  were walking about the streets dressed in his livery, and with all the
  conﬁdence which the certainty of the protection of the local authori-
  ties could afford them, should any one be disposed to interrupt them.
  He moreover informed me that the person in whose house we were
  living was a notorious spy to the robbers in the neighbourhood, and
  that unless we took our departure speedily and unexpectedly, we
  should to a certainty be plundered on the road.

The further south and south-west the Carlist bands roamed the more
they encountered Cristino resistance. Don Carlos knew that the north-
west, Asturias and Galicia, offered the best prospects for a new Carlist
safe zone, if they could be reached by an expedition to match the
achievements of Guergué in Catalonia the previous year. The ‘Batanero
raid’ into Castile of some 220 infantry and 52 cavalry during January
and February 1836 had shown promise of what a force more than ten
times that number might achieve. The summer of 1836 posited the
enemy in an even greater revolutionary crisis than during Guergué’s
expedition. The last weeks of Córdova’s command, in July, had been
marked by a serious mutiny of a battalion in Gerona and a general
breakdown in deference as soldiers disobeyed their ofﬁcers, deserted and
defected in increasing numbers. An irate and desperate Córdova pro-
claimed from his headquarters at Pamplona on 6 July 1836 that the
revolutionaries who were rising in the name of liberty and the Constitu-
tion of 1812 were actually treacherous ﬁfth columnists for the Carlists.77
Subjectively, this was arrant nonsense, and enraged Cristino soldiers at
Lerín (Navarra) almost lynched Córdova for this calumny as he ﬂed the
revolution the following month.78 But objectively the ‘Gómez Expe-
dition’ that summer did indeed show a strong military link between
Carlist expansion and revolutionary militancy.
   Miguel Gómez, born in Jaén province in 1796, veteran of the Penin-
sular and Royalist Wars, and purged colonel of 1833, was like a minor
character in a play whose actions reveal the bigger plot. His expedition
140 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


westwards from the Basque country into Old Castile and Asturias began
with not much more than 3,000 men, but, crucially, he picked up more
on the way. High secrecy surrounded the expedition before it began at
ﬁrst light on 26 June 1836. Twenty-ﬁve hours’ march later in blister-
ing sunshine got the expedition to Colina, some nine leagues from the
starting point. A crucial early defensive victory was secured for Gómez
at nearby Baranda when General Tello y López’s Cristino division lost
vital hours discovering the nature of the breakout. By the time Tello
had closed on Gómez on 27 June, the Carlists had had time to choose
their ground. Both sides suffered in the baking heat, and several of Das
Antas’s Portuguese literally died of thirst when pursuing this breakout.
But the Carlists intercepted part of the Cristino supply wagons, which
meant that it was the Cristinos who ran out of water ﬁrst. Tello’s defeat
allowed Gómez to continue the expedition, even though Espartero pur-
sued with forced marches, knowing that he had to deny the Carlists
exploitation of territory because it was marked by ‘weak and abandoned
Cristino garrisons’.79
   Gómez’s remarkable invasion has been analysed in exhaustive detail
elsewhere.80 Its salient feature is a six-month campaign across north-
western, western, southern and eastern Spain, which achieved both
remarkable victories (such as the capture of Córdova) and survived
important defeats (such as Majaceite). The expedition was supported
by a more limited westward raid by Pablo Sanz y Baeza, and another
south by Basilio García, and it was joined across New Castile and
Extremadura by Cabrera’s seasoned forces. Oviedo was twice occupied
by Carlists, ﬁrst by Gómez in July who seized its artillery and small arms,
and hundreds of recruits, before Espartero’s vanguard on 8 July obliged
him to evacuate, and second by Sanz in October who was repulsed by
subaltern revolutionaries who shamed the more cautious army and Mili-
tia ofﬁcers and their declaration of an open city.81 As Espartero drove
Gómez from Oviedo, the Carlists continued westwards into Galicia,
following their King’s instructions. Gómez was aided not just by the
Carlism of clerics, but also by the vicious (or virtuous) cycle of military
paralysis and revolution afﬂicting the Cristino zone. Galicia’s Captain-
General Latre, cowed by his failure against the Andújar revolutionaries
the previous summer, thought the streets of Lugo too dangerous to
leave unguarded and therefore refused to intercept Gómez, conﬁning
himself to ﬁring artillery when the Carlists came into range of the city
walls.82 A political crisis in Portugal withdrew Das Antas’s badly mauled
auxiliaries across the frontier. The provincial committees of armament
and defence came under dictatorial pressure from the army to increase
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   141


their contributions; Córdova increasingly had to intervene personally.
On 9 July, Córdova found time between his endless threats of resigna-
tion to warn Madrid that he had only enough food to supply the Army
of the North until the next day.83 On 17 July, General Espartero, the
only ofﬁcer yet to show any élan against the expedition, wrote to the
government complaining of the state of his men. Two weeks later the
response he received was evasive and rhetorical.84 Meanwhile, Gómez
seized Espartero’s pay-wagon carrying 8,000 reales and attracted volun-
teers from across the generally pro-Carlist north. On 18 July, Gómez
reached the cathedral city of Santiago, and was welcomed with a Mass.
Gómez ordered a mobilisation in Santiago, to be enforced by the usual
draconian penalties, but Espartero’s pursuit evicted him the following
evening, although not before the Carlists had stripped the city of 100
oxen, 350 sacks of powder, 450 of bullets, 2,000 muskets, 3,000 bayonets
and some 350 cartridges.85
   Gómez’s subsequent evacuation of Galicia and invasion of Old Castile
was remarkable, not least because his expedition survived a defeat by
Espartero at the Asturian village of Escaro on 8 August and the loss
of some 500 prisoners. Yet even more remarkable was the fact that a
rural expedition alternating around 6,000 men (some of these being
priests and other itinerants of little military value) seemed not only
unstoppable but also an external factor in Cristino Spain’s revolu-
tionary crisis. Gómez spent the ﬁrst week of August occupying León,
before ﬂeeing before Espartero’s vanguard once again. Soon afterwards,
Espartero himself fell ill from exhaustion, and the counter-insurgency
forces were led, from 23 August, by Alaix.86 As the expedition drew
closer to the Cristino capital, revolutionary opinion turned on War
Minister Rodil. Rodil had presided over an embarrassing defeat of the
Royal Guard, which, despite its better training and artillery, had suffered
demoralisation since the La Granja revolution, symbolised by the revo-
lutionaries’ insistence that the Guard’s standard be emblazoned with
the green ribbons of the Constitution. Local authorities at Guadalajara
ﬂed to Madrid in panic.87 Guadalajara province saw its communities
caught between Carlist violence and ‘revolutionary justice’. Cristino
forces ﬁned municipalities which did not display tablets dedicated to
the Constitution of 1812, and Carlists sacked those that did. A consti-
tutional judge of Riaza (Segovia) on the border of Guadalajara cut an
undigniﬁed ﬁgure by ﬂeeing to La Granja soon after exhorting others
to ﬁght to the end.88 The isolated Guadalajara village of Maranchón
was surrounded by opposing forces but had no particular afﬁliation
of its own. Its villagers decided that the Carlists were stronger, and a
142 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


delegation gave them intelligence about a nearby Cristino unit which
was then subjected to an attack that yielded dozens of prisoners, several
of whom chose to serve under the Carlists. Other communities were
divided between themselves. Almoguera’s (Guadalajara) divisions had
been dormant, but news of both revolution and Carlist invasion radi-
calised local politics. When its Liberal mayor held a banquet to celebrate
the proclamation of the Constitution of 1812, his address was cut short
by one of the musicians in attendance, who lunged forward with a dag-
ger, killing the mayor’s wife instantly and mortally wounding the mayor
(the local surgeon, a civic Carlist, refused to treat him), before snufﬁng
out the candles to assist his escape. The assassin was later caught by
militiamen and executed, but not before he had declared himself ‘glad
to have killed a negro’.89
   Gómez could not seriously consider assaulting Madrid, but it would
have helped Rodil’s career if he had. War Minister Rodil decreed a
strategy which would soon be his undoing. Adopting his tactic of ‘cen-
tralisation’ sustained by parallel lines of deployments and patrols on
the approaches to the capital – ‘defence in depth’ – Rodil certainly
saved the capital, but in a manner of strategic overkill more suited to
his dogged defence of Callao in Peru than against a guerrilla band. His
strategy ceded the initiative to Gómez, deﬂecting him into the surround-
ing areas of Extremadura, New Castile and, eventually, Andalucía, where
he enjoyed a series of embarrassing conquests. Alaix’s campaign troops,
meanwhile, were impeded by the attitude of the local constitutional
authorities, which wanted to stabilise their power by refusing army
demands for supplies and, especially, the mobilisation of local militi-
amen, out of fear that the revolutionary process could be reopened with
unpredictable results. Cristino troops, tired of having to deal with pre-
sumptuous civilians, reverted to imposing states of siege, suspending
constitutional guarantees in the hope that force rather than negotia-
tion would yield more support. This equated the Cristino campaign to
that of Gómez, who was under no such constraints and could offer
civilians either threats or rewards.90 The threat of martial law sup-
plied Alaix’s troops in Cuenca on 11 September with sufﬁcient shoes.91
Cobblers, like telegraphists in later conﬂicts, were artisans whose skill
was so essential that they were targeted by military law. Consequently,
cobblers in revolutionary Málaga faced forced mobilisation on pain of
imprisonment.92
   The disarray of Cristino forces offered the Carlists surprisingly easy
conquests. News reached Gómez that Córdova was lightly garrisoned
(actually, the Cristino garrison would prove larger than Gómez was led
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   143


to believe, containing some 2,000 militiamen, including several who
had evacuated local villages, and some 200 cavalry). Gómez regrouped
with the forces of Cabrera, and Brigadier Santiago Villalobos managed to
breach the city walls, in part thanks to the city’s restive poor neighbour-
hoods of Santa María and San Lorenzo, whose inhabitants welcomed
the Carlist invasion as an emeute. After days of skirmishing, the Militia
retreated and blockaded itself into the last redoubt, the former head-
quarters of the Inquisition, where it surrendered to terms on 1 October,
only for a misunderstanding to break this truce, which was followed
by a deﬁnitive surrender. Moderados attacked the Radicals’ mismanage-
ment of the war effort. Exaggerating the strength of the Cristino garrison
and minimising the Carlist losses (but not by much in either case), El
Español reported that the city’s 3,000-strong Militia surrendered to a
Carlist force less than three times in number, and which had to suffer a
mere four fatal casualties (including Villalobos).93 Gómez had performed
a rare feat: the capture of a Cristino provincial capital, and his insurgent
lifestyle could, for the moment, take pause. Gómez pointedly remained
in Córdova for a week: hasty departure would be seen by all as a sign of
insurgency, and not the actions of a regime-in-waiting. Hence, Gómez
concocted a deliberately elaborate Carlist regime in the city, led by the
Dean of the Cathedral and effectively run by the subaltern crowds,
who now helped themselves to Militia arms, joined Carlist ranks, and
victimised and sometimes killed local Liberals. Several prominent mili-
tiamen were executed to popular applause, along with their commander
and the prefect. Meanwhile, the city’s poor joined the Carlists in their
plunder of local Liberals’ property.94
   It was a week before Alaix’s force could threaten Córdova. Gómez quit
the city, reoccupied it for a night on 11–12 October, but then left it
deﬁnitively in response to the coordinated movements of Alaix and
Rodil. The War Minister had come under intense pressure to abandon
his cautious strategy, but Rodil dared not leave the capital under-
garrisoned. Although Córdova was retaken, Gómez (and the city’s recent
Carlist junta) remained at large in Andalucía. It was small comfort that
Gómez was burdened by Cabrera’s restive contingents who wanted to
withdraw to Aragón, by a growing sick-train and some 300 Cristino pris-
oners from a Málaga regiment defeated at Alcaudete. Gómez parleyed
with Alaix to propose an exchange of prisoners. But Alaix knew that
the sick and wounded prisoners in the enemy’s entourage were the only
burdens obstructing the Carlist general’s progress, and wished to avoid
offending revolutionary opinion by subjecting virgin Andalucía to an
Eliot Treaty-lite.95 Gómez outmanoeuvred Rodil and escaped through
144 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the Sierra Morena towards another valuable target, Almadén, whose
mercury mines had been leased for a Rothschild loan in 1835.96 The
barren sierra treated Gómez’s forces harshly. His 8,000 infantry were
hungry and badly shod, only 400 of his 1,200 cavalry were battle-worthy
and the lower-ranking Cristino prisoners had to be ‘freed’ to fend for
themselves in the wastes.97 But he was still able to take Almadén, a
town of 8,000 inhabitants stretched along an east–west line which
made it hard to defend against a determined attack. In fact, the town’s
modest 50-strong Militia garrison, earlier in the war, had proved hard-
pressed to keep at bay small guerrilla bands. Continued pressure from
Carlist guerrillas and news of the Gómez expedition led to a reinforce-
ment of the militia and the establishment of a serious, though still
modest, army garrison. Despite these measures, Gómez needed only a
few days’ bombardment carried out by two well-positioned mountain
guns to capture the town on 24 October 1836; the Carlists charac-
teristically employing night attacks to secure parts of the town. The
Military Governor of Almadén, Aranguren, surrendered the town after
its general destruction had served as morbid battle honours. Aranguren,
displaying a non-committal rhetorical ability common to Cristino elites,
made a parting plea to Gómez not to destroy the valuable mercury
mines as these would be vital for national prosperity ‘whoever wins
this war’.98
   The occupation of Almadén was the ﬁnal straw for Rodil’s position.
An image appeared in the press lampooning him: showing him wearing
an eyeglass to survey the campaign horizon, whilst Gómez’s expedition
passed between his extended legs.99 Laughter damaged reputations in
cultures of honour and Rodil was sacked both from the Royal Guards
and the War Ministry. Gómez, for his part, evaded capture yet again, and
on 31 October marched into Cáceres (Extremadura), beginning a three-
day occupation of this provincial capital which had been abandoned to
its fate by its civil authorities and Militia.
   Rodil’s shame was the ﬁrst order of business of the unicameral revo-
lutionary Cortes which convened on 24 October 1836. Cristino Spain
been seized by Jacobin politics. Whereas Espoz and Meer, and other
captains-general, used their military authority to impose forced loans,
a civilian police state gripped Madrid. Salustiano de Olózaga, an ambi-
tious lawyer with excellent radical credentials, was made Civil Governor
of Madrid. He used constitutional defence legislation to open corre-
spondence relating to the forthcoming elections and imprison over
500 civic Carlists.100 Quiroga, Captain-General of Granada, wrote to
Mendizábal informing him of his political opponents. This crackdown
                                   Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   145


was followed in other provinces like Badajoz, where some 160 civic
Carlists were imprisoned.101 Priests who refused blessings to the Queen
or who even expressed sorrow for the plight of the religious evicted by
the disentailment laws were arrested by the National Militia.102 Andan,
Civil Governor of Zaragoza, imprisoned priests without due process,
whilst Latre, Captain-General of Galicia, threatened mayors with prison
if they refused to cooperate with his military orders.103 Civic Carlists
faced unprecedented government persecution.104 The non-ministerial
Left also ﬂourished, as several Radical conspiracies and secret societies
were now liberated, to an extent, from police pressure. Secret soci-
eties old and new ﬂourished such as Joven Italia, Leñadores escoceses,
Templarios sublimes, Asociación de Derechos del Hombre and others
besides.105 The government tried to keep control of the revolution via
such symbolic actions as auctioning church bells and treasures and
rejecting or extorting those wealthy rightists in the capital and else-
where who applied for passports for exile in France.106 Yet the years
1835–37 still saw the ministerial Left outﬂanked by republican secret
societies, which regarded Carlism as a mortal threat because of its roy-
alism. The Federation (La Federación) convened a clandestine network
of Radicals in Andalucían provincial capitals under the leadership of a
‘Supreme Federated Regulator’ (Supremo Regulador Federado), who resided
out of harm’s way in Paris.107 By the end of 1837, government spies
had penetrated much of its activities, recording the oaths taken by new
members:

 1. I swear never to respect any class of government, power or authority
    which does not originate in the people.
 2. I swear obedience and submission to the Supreme Federated Reg-
    ulator: likewise to those who conduct work and operations in his
    name, whether from the Central or Departmental sections.
 3. I swear to obey no-one other than those purely of the Federation
    residing in my area.
 4. I swear to observe the greatest discretion in everything I obey, see
    and understand, of the Venerated Federation, and to disclose nei-
    ther the names of fellow federados, nor the location of the Assembly,
    nor the hours it meets.
 5. I swear to offer all manner of services demanded of me, sacriﬁcing
    my life, and all my belongings, so that the regenerating principles
    of Universal Federation may prosper and spread.
 6. I swear to recognise tyrants and all those obeying them as enemies
    of man.
146 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


 7. I swear to consider as a usurpation of the People the power and
    Authority known as Royal.
 8. I swear to work to give liberty to the world and take it out of the
    slavery of being subject to just one person, even if that person’s
    power is restricted.
 9. I swear to obey Federated law, and any amendments and modiﬁca-
    tions agreed by the Assembly.
10. I swear to submit to suffer the penalty which article 84 prescribes
    for perjurers.
       I make a special oath before the Supreme Legislator that I have
    freely and spontaneously sought admission to this sacred place
    without having been prompted or coerced by anyone.108

Outﬂanked on the left, the progresista government tried to capture pub-
lic disaffection by scapegoating Rodil. The Cortes narrowly rejected a
motion to send deputies on permanent mission to the headquarters of
every ﬁeld army (a version of the French Revolutionary représentantes
en mission), but it did decide to send a deputy to interrogate Rodil.109
The Cortes nominated none other than the upstart Cardero, the darling
of the Radicals, who, since his January 1835 rising, had become Cortes
deputy and aide-de-camp to General Espoz, to lead an investigation into
Rodil.
   Rodil was incandescent with rage receiving Cardero, the man whose
entire career had been attributed to his killing of Rodil’s friend and
fellow ayacucho, Canterac. Rodil feared that what had happened to
Canterac, and later to Bassa and Quesada, could happen to him.
On 11 November 1836 Cardero arrived at Rodil’s headquarters at Monte
Rubio, but pointedly did not go to interview him until nightfall, and
only then in secret. This precaution was sensible, for Cristino troops
across Spain were revolting against Rodil, such as at Miajadas (Cáceres),
where troops refused to march against Gómez and instead shouted
‘Death to Rodil!’ On 29 November 1836 a battalion in the Royal Guard
of Infantry launched a revolt which was suppressed when three of
its leaders were executed.110 During the meeting between Rodil and
Cardero, the former was beside himself listening to the tactful preach-
ings of this upstart; he threatened to silence Cardero and to execute him,
before ﬁnally ordering him to leave his presence. With Cardero turned
out, Rodil now had to act fast. He had received the envelope contain-
ing the order for him to resign his command, so before he opened it,
he assembled his staff, got their support, and only then opened the let-
ter in their presence. All being suitably indignant, Rodil nominated an
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   147


acting commander who would do his bidding whilst he left for Madrid
with only a personal guard, ready to defend his honour at the capital.
Reaching Almaráz (Extremadura), a further order came into his hands
ordering him to march directly to Toledo, not Madrid. Rodil, terriﬁed of
being made a sacriﬁce to Radicals, wrote to the Queen-Regent and got
her personal guarantee for his safety and modiﬁed terms. He could now
choose internal exile in Ciudad Rodrigo, Zamora or Segovia. He chose
Ciudad Rodrigo for its proximity to the Portuguese frontier. After cross-
ing into exile, he issued an indignant manifesto protesting the political
interference in army affairs, the underhand behaviour of Cardero, the
Radical government’s failure to supply his army, particularly with shoes,
and its second-guessing of his strategy.111
   Rodil’s exile was a sideshow to the government’s inability to control
its territory. One of the most powerful men in Cristino Spain was the
editor of the Radical Eco del Comercio, Fermín Caballero, now president
of the revolutionary junta of his native Cuenca. Gómez’s interception of
his correspondence revealed intelligence about the identities of Carlists
and Liberals in La Mancha.112 Córdoba was reoccupied, but the Carlist
junta had stripped the city of military supplies, including some 20,000
sorely needed pairs of shoes. Cobblers were forced to make as many
shoes as possible, and ofﬁcers ordered to buy soles and to set their men
to work making sandals. Poor supplies and unreliable communications
complicated the Cristino pursuit of Gómez.113 Such impediment as came
to the Carlists came from within rather than without.
   At Cáceres Gómez ordered Cabrera to retire to Aragón, overriding his
bitter protest at this breaking of an earlier agreement, and at the manner
that the order was delivered (Gómez amassed armed men around him in
the rituals of a pronunciamiento). The King, Gómez said, needed Cabrera
in the east in the wake of the fall of Cantavieja, but he provided his rival
with nothing more than a personal guard of cavalry, and a suggested
route which would suspiciously take him close to Cristino garrisons.
In the end, Cabrera accepted his assumed identity (Llorens, a Valencia
guerrilla subordinate of Quílez), but set out on his own path through
Cristino territory. Despite Gómez’s parsimony, ‘Llorens’ fought a serious
of successful rearguard actions, zigzagged in order to confound pur-
suers, set off a minor panic in the capital between 21 and 25 November
by invading the Tarancón (Cuenca) area and, most impressively, as he
neared the Basque country on 24 November, captured the Bishop of
Pamplona, Andriani, who had played a double game with both sides and
whom the Cristinos had been holding in internal exile. Cabrera escaped
back across the Ebro after losing a battle to the Cristino covering force
148 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


at Rincón de Soto, abandoning stragglers and wounded, but keeping
the bishop. He had ignored Gómez’s instructions to go directly east and
would instead protest before his King at his treatment.114
   Meanwhile, the Cristinos dispatched three divisions towards Andal-
ucía under General Ramón María Narváez. Narváez is a ﬁgure who dom-
inated Spain’s mid-nineteenth century as the cornerstone of moderado
praetorian politics. Of a long-standing, moderately wealthy, Andalucían
military-aristocratic family – highly representative of the military caste –
Narváez’s experience in the Carlist War taught him to deride all civilian
politicians as ‘lawyers’ and to conserve a paternalistic disdain for the
capacities of ordinary people. Leftist historians have seen in Narváez
everything that was wrong with Spain’s praetorian politics, whereas
rightist historians, such as Córdova’s brother in the late nineteenth
century and his hagiographer, Andrés Révész, in the mid-twentieth cen-
tury saw him as a Romantic man of action and a political innocent.115
An innovative recent study by Guy Thomson, by contrast, casts Narváez
as a reﬂexive, proactively conservative strongman of post-Carlist War
moderado politics.116 Perhaps Narváez’s legend will shift, from the man
who, on his deathbed in 1868 was asked to forgive his enemies, only to
reply ‘I have no enemies to forgive for I have had them all shot’, to the
man who, for decades, was the next-door neighbour of Andalucía’s most
proliﬁc Democrat. The Narváez of the Carlist War has been less studied
than the Narváez of mid-century liberalism. The Ominous Decade had
not been kind to Narváez’s career as he refused to compromise his lib-
eralism, but the Carlist War saw him re-enter the army as a captain,
after which his bravery on the battleﬁeld (especially at Mendigorría)
saw him promoted to colonel by the end of 1835.117 In November 1836
he became Commander-in-Chief of the Army Reserve, making him the
moderado rival to the progresista Espartero, whose Army of the North was
stretched containing shorter-range Carlist offensives.118
   Gómez’s march from Cáceres to San Roque, Algeciras and other parts
of the Cádiz province was dictated by the presence of the only serious
Carlist enclave in Andalucía, the Serranía de Ronda, where brigandage
in rugged terrain had ﬂourished under the banner of Carlism. This cor-
ner of Andalucía, an acute triangle between Málaga, the Ronda and
Gibraltar, had long been characterised by conspiracy and wrongdoing.119
The Cristino police state had been watchful of subversive activities:
the secretive travels in the region of a Tangier Jew claiming to seek
Christian baptism, and the incendiary activities of a French agent col-
lecting money for Don Carlos once the war had begun.120 More than any
other location, the Ronda conformed to the wild, Irvingesque image of
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   149


Spain, placing costumbrista outlaws into an international conspiratorial
network. Even before the arrival of the Gómez Expedition reached the
region, the Carlist Royal Government had appointed guerrilla leaders
there. But Navarra was far away and Don Carlos discovered that Carlist
commanders in the Andalucía had a short life expectancy.
   In July 1835 the former royalist colonel, Vicente Mateos, was caught
near Gibraltar with documents incriminating him as Don Carlos’s man
and was imprisoned pending court martial.121 Mateos was executed
amidst the radicalism of the 1835 juntas in retrospective ‘revolution-
ary justice’ for his role in the execution of the Liberal hero, Manzanares,
in the Torrijos expedition of 1831.122 Brigadier Salvador Malavilla was
named Mateos’s successor as Carlist commander in Andalucía. Malavilla
had presided over a plan to raise a loan in Gibraltar to fund the cre-
ation of a proper army. (Seeing the threat of Gibraltar and suspecting
British motives, Narváez, on 22 November 1836, reported the Carlist
deployment of three battalions on the border in the Campo de Gibraltar
as proof of their intent to launder their loot in the British colony.123 )
But when he was arrested and his correspondence uncovered, Malavilla
was executed in Seville (after which the dangerous rank of Carlist
commander in Andalucía passed to Pedro Fermín de Iriberri).124 The
Gibraltar–Serranía de Ronda conspiratorial network proved a potent way
to induce Carlism in a part of Spain which would otherwise have been
entirely lost to the cause of legitimism. May 1836, for example, saw
Seville rocked by a conspiracy led by a group of priests and redun-
dant monks who had hired the allegiance of some tanners, bakers and
sergeants, to spring Carlist prisoners from gaol and seize the city for Don
Carlos. Luckily for the authorities, government spies were active in the
cafés, and arrests were made before the plot was enacted.125 Gibraltar
provided a springboard for cloak-and-dagger smugglers, especially the
mochileros (‘backpackers’) who made the seldom-trodden paths of the
Serranía de Ronda their own, and who, in the context of civil war, could
be recruited to act for Carlist conspiracies.126 The revolutionary authori-
ties knew that Gómez’s invasion could act as a magnet for insurgents in
the Serranía de Ronda and even ﬁfth columnists inside Cristino towns
and cities. In October 1836 the Seville Armament and Defence Commit-
tee warned that gatherings of more than ﬁve people within a league of
known enemy positions would be broken up by bullets, any correspon-
dence with the Carlists pronounced espionage and Seville closed off to
all comers without passports.127
   Narváez’s famous skill for rapid marches inconvenienced Gómez who
wanted to spend more than a few days regrouping in the Serranía. His
150 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


subordinate, General Rivero, detailed the terror Gómez inﬂicted during
his Andalucían campaign. Liberals imprisoned in Córdova were dragged
on a forced march, tied up in villages in the Carlists’ path whilst the
villages themselves were pillaged. Prisoners who could not keep pace
were bayonetted by the wayside. This terror made Andalucía even more
hostile to Carlism than it already was. Estepona’s militiamen circulated
arms to civilians in a successful repulse of 200–300 ‘Carlist scum’ who
had demanded 30,000 reales. The invaders later returned demanding
half this sum, only to be repulsed again. Several British military and
civilians were spectators of an unlikely invasion from the north of San
Roque, on the actual borderline with Gibraltar, on 22 November. With
British help, the Cristinos had reinforced the border with artillery which
harassed the Carlist occupation of San Roque, provoking Gómez into
reprisals including ‘sacking homes, burning others, and smashing the
town’s vats containing wines, olives, oils and spirits, so that the streets
resembled a noxious ﬂood’.128 This sacking of Liberal San Roque con-
trasted with the Carlists’ behaviour in the Serranía where ‘they took
more care of the inhabitants, as they committed nothing like the same
outrages, nor any signiﬁcant inconvenience’.128 But there was no way
back into the friendly Serranía, and whilst Gómez left half his combat-
ants on the border to negotiate their internment (and that of Córdoba’s
fugitive Carlist junta), the other half invaded the nearest Cristino port
of Algeciras. Here the Carlists’ lack of artillery told once more as they
were repulsed by the concentrated ﬁre of a Portuguese frigate, a British
corvette and Cristino coastguard vessels, suffering considerable losses.
The Carlists invaded the Mediterranean on horseback up to bridle-
height in a vain attempt to get near enough to the Quadruple Alliance
naval supremacy to ﬁre their muskets. However, the pursuit of Cristino
forces obliged Gómez to ﬂee Algeciras, but not before he had burnt the
town to the ground.128
   While Gómez was put to ﬂight, the Carlists and their junta of Córdoba
on the Gibraltar frontier were allowed internment in the colony. The
French consul arrived to agree terms, but the internees’ voyage out
of the colony on 23 November was intercepted by the Cristino coast-
guard, the passengers being taken prisoner and sent to Seville for trial.
There they were defended by the local lawyer, moderado provincial
deputy and National Guard battalion commander, Manuel Cortina, and
despite – or because of – his efforts (Cortina had been targeted by local
revolutionaries during riots in July) the Carlists were all deported to
the Philippines.129 The harsh treatment of Córdoba Carlists allowed
Seville’s Radicals to save some face in the context of the moderado rally.
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   151


Cortina had risked provoking anti-militarism by mobilising the militia
for service under Narváez. His decision paid off when Narváez expelled
Gómez from Andalucía as a consequence of the Battle of Majaceite on
23 November 1836.130 The Carlist presence in Andalucía had had the
effect of rallying communities to the less worse option of liberalism and
its defence of the municipal autonomy resurrected under the Consti-
tution of 1812. The militia’s battle honours led the citizenry-in-arms
to assert their social and political demands. When, in early December,
some of Loja’s militia were ordered to mobilise, they refused to do unless
the whole battalion was so ordered, as campaign rations and higher pay
were sorely needed for the men’s families, whose livelihoods had been
disrupted by the war.131
   The revolutionary Cortes, desperate for victories against Gómez,
played two generals against each other by ordering Narváez to relieve
the more sclerotic but senior Alaix at the ‘most opportune moment’.
Yet Alaix’s forced marches had made his worn-out men virtually muti-
nous, and they were in no mood to accept command from a more
ruthless general.132 One lieutenant pronounced ‘now is the time to
march on Madrid!’ and demanded the death of ‘counter-revolutionary’
Narváez. However, Narváez used anti-Carlist rhetoric to regain the ini-
tiative before ordering the execution of 11 of the mutineers.133 But these
measures only bought Narváez time, and he was soon embarrassingly
forced to reinstate Alaix (who was an ally of Espartero and had pro-
nounced against his dismissal). Narváez, meanwhile, was summoned
to Madrid to explain his conduct. Luckily for him, the Cortes was far
more divided about what his fate should be than it had been for Rodil;
Narváez asked to be escorted to Cuenca to answer charges, and the
matter passed.134 The Cabra mutiny was a parable of revolutionary mis-
management of the war. A revolutionary Cortes had not allowed its
ignorance of the march of events to override its deliberations and the
revolt of the lieutenants and sergeants had lost Alaix’s division several
vital hours in its pursuit of Gómez. Even though the Carlist expedition
was defeated at Alcaudete (Jaén) on 29 November, Gómez extricated the
bulk of his force once again and disengaged from Andalucía.135 Over
fewer than four weeks, until 19 December 1836 (when Gómez arrived
at the Basque city of Orduña), the expedition executed a remarkable
withdrawal, traversing Bailén and several smaller places on the route
northwards, ﬁghting battles and skirmishes, and bivouacking across sev-
eral rivers, along the way. Gómez halted in friendly mountains near
Soria to take a counsel of his staff: should they continue the retreat or
rally to launch another invasion from this mountain base? Deciding
152 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


to continue the retreat, the expedition fought its way past a Cristino
covering force in the Ribera, and arrived back in Carlist Spain and
safety. Gómez returned with twice as many men as he had set out with
(his recruits included 1,643 defectors from Cristino ranks).136 But Don
Carlos, in a move which confounded his international sympathisers,
placed Gómez on trial for having disobeyed his orders to concentrate on
Galicia, and for having ‘deceived’ Cabrera and deprived him of forces
which might have stemmed San Miguel’s offensive in the east.137 The
King was blind to the fact the expedition had destabilised Cristino Spain,
deﬂected the enemy’s war effort away from the Basque country, caused
the panic-selling of Cristino bonds in European bourses,138 and embold-
ened the Carlists into thinking that victory was possible.139 International
opinion was dazzled by the Carlist effort, as George Borrow wrote:140

   Gómez has proved himself to be a most extraordinary man, and with
   his small army of Aragonese and Basques has within the last four
   months made the tour of Spain; he has very frequently been hemmed
   in with forces three times the number of his own, in places whence
   escape seemed impossible, but he has always bafﬂed his enemies.

Given Gómez’s impact, it was remarkable that the King sided with
Cabrera and appointed Marshal José Mazarrasa, a hard-bitten apostólico
ﬁercely loyal to the King, to lead an inquiry into Gómez’s conduct and
that of other senior ofﬁcers (Eguía, Villarreal, Elío, Guergué) accused of
being too lenient with Cristino prisoners and ‘ignoring the interests of
the Basque country’.141 Gómez sent the King an indignant letter attack-
ing the whole management of a war which had boxed the Carlists into
the Basque country. But Gómez passed into obscurity; besides, the court
had decided to break the strategic blockade by making a second attempt
at taking Bilbao.142 The court were labouring under the old impression
that the capture of this port would lead to Northern Powers’ recog-
nition, and as such had been blind to the possibilities that Gómez’s
much smaller force had shown. Conditions for a conquest were per-
haps worse in the autumn of 1836 than they had been in the spring
of 1835. Espartero, recovered from his illness brought on by pursuing
Gómez, was named Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the North on
16 September, and his bravery was now matched by greater military
skill born out of experience. The Cristinos had shown themselves to
be effective in point-defence whenever the will to ﬁght existed, and
the location of Bilbao played to Quadruple Alliance naval supremacy
                                    Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   153


and all its morale-boosting possibilities for reinforcement. British Royal
Marine and Legion commanders, Lord John Hay and Lacy Evans respec-
tively, quickly deployed 6,000 of their men to seal the French frontier
to Carlists between Irún and San Sebastián, and Evans sent 150 artillery-
men to bolster Bilbao’s defences. The Córdova legacy of strong defensive
lines around the Carlist Basque country, including ﬂash telegraphs and
mutually defensible forts, had improved Cristino capabilities for active
defence.143
   Bilbao was certainly not a unanimous decision from the Carlist junta
of generals which met to decide the matter at Durango. La Torre urged
a bold breakout invasion south towards Madrid as the best way to
win European recognition and aid and so win the war. But Erro was
resolved, and Lt-General Vicente González Moreno’s even-handed let-
ter on 15 October 1836 swayed the decision. González explained to his
King that Bilbao was the less worse option (‘better’ options, he insisted,
did not exist in civil wars). A strike south, by contrast, would expose
the Basque country to the mercies of the Cristino defensive ring and
so destabilise civilian morale. Moreover, this time the Carlists had more
artillery to use against Bilbao, including some abandoned pieces from
the Peninsular War which had been salvaged and even those 13-inch
shells ﬁred by the British from Pasajes and San Sebastián that had failed
to explode on impact and had been turned in by local peasants.144 Also,
a dispute between Bilbao’s civil and military authorities over the fund-
ing of fortiﬁcations had simmered since the revolution of the juntas,
slowing progress improving the city’s defences.145 The Carlist hold on
Bilbao’s outlying towns and countryside, meanwhile, had strengthened
since 1835 and had emboldened morale against the blockaded Cristinos.
One local soldier made good was ‘generally on duty blockading Bilbao,
and as soon as the cowardly Cristinos withdraw their advanced guard
within the walls for the night, he and half-a-dozen wags will follow
and write some moral or political abuse of the Queen on the town
gates’.146 But Carlist morale was matched by the Cristinos who had for-
tiﬁed the heights and nationalised convents surrounding Bilbao, and
could rely on some 4,300 soldiers and militiamen garrisoning the city
with as many as 86 cannon. When the Carlists launched their assault
on 22 October, the Cristinos were ready for them.147
   The Carlist bombardment was at its most intense on the 24 and
28 October. Women, children and the elderly took to cellars and store
rooms in order to stay out of harm’s way, even though some ten women,
seven children and three elderly were amongst the 79 fatal casualties in
154 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Bilbao that week, whilst dozens more were amongst the total of 307
Cristino wounded. The Carlist projectiles included incendiary ﬁreballs
which had been invented by the French Carlist engineer, Colonel
Lizoire, better known for his braggadocio as ‘Tout-terraser’, whose pro-
jectiles expelled noxious ‘Greek ﬁre’ upon impact.148 Lizoire was joined
by several other European Carlists in the assault on Bilbao, and in being
opposed by European Liberals the struggle for Bilbao became a cru-
cible of the international struggle between Absolutism and Liberalism.149
At one point the Carlists brieﬂy breached the walls, only to be ﬂushed
out by militiamen supported by Bilbao workers. Meanwhile, the morale
of the civilian population was sustained by the erroneous belief that
Gómez had been utterly destroyed somewhere in southern Spain. The
Carlist assault ﬂagged from 29 October and the bitter divisions in the
Carlist court reappeared. Eguía, still rankling from his replacement by
Erro, seized his chance by convincing Don Carlos’s courtiers that he
could take the city within 24 hours, a gambit that won him command
of the besieging troops and the relegation (and subsequent resignation)
of Villarreal.
   Eguía’s conference on 5 November with his artillery generals and engi-
neers resulted in a plan to break the deadlock by assaulting Bilbao’s
adjacent fortiﬁed points and convents which protected its access to
the sea. An unlikely Carlist spy inside Bilbao (an elderly woman) had
disclosed the weakness of the Cristino fort which had been put up at
Mallona on the city’s outskirts. This was taken after a short artillery
bombardment, and was followed up by the capture of a fortiﬁed con-
vent whose surrender gave the Carlists a stranglehold on the city’s river
links to the sea. French residents being evacuated were ﬁred upon by the
Carlists, and, despite the French consul’s protests, Eguía refused them
safe passage. Meanwhile, the Royal Navy commander of the Ringdove
complained to the defending Cristinos of the speed with which the
defenders had surrendered the outlying forts. Eguía in November was
showing promise where his predecessor had failed, as well as a com-
mon touch as he disguised himself as a simple soldier and shared the
violence of the front with his men.150 Time appeared to be on his side:
Carlist espionage revealed to the besiegers that the city was going hun-
gry as food stocks dwindled and the prices of bread, eggs and especially
meat, rose exponentially. A chance shipload of cod had been made to
last and bequeathed Bilbao its signature dish,151 one of two enduring
gastronomic legacies of the First Carlist War.151
   The further Eguía advanced, the stiffer the resistance he encoun-
tered. The Cristino detachment at Luchana withdrew only after it had
                                     Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37   155


exhausted all its ammunition, and even then it redeployed to the
stronger position garrisoned by an Anglo-Cristino force at a place known
as El Desierto, which was strengthened by the gunﬁre of the Royal Navy
brigantines Ringdove and Saracen.152 But Erro was conﬁdent enough with
Eguía’s progress to outline to his King on 17 November elaborate details
of the peace the Carlists would impose on Bilbao. Thus, foreign consuls
in the city representing powers opposed to Don Carlos would be treated
as nothing more than private aliens, a ruinous 12,000,000 reales tax
would be imposed on known Liberal families opposed to Don Carlos,
all nationalised convents and monasteries in the city would be revived
and even put to work ‘imprisoning and correcting those decent women
who had fallen into corrupt and unruly ways and so scandalised the
people’.153 Clearly, the inference between revolution and breakdown of
family morality, which began in the Carlist imagination with the female
usurpation of the throne, was plain to see. Whereas Carlists had the
unimpeachable Virgin Mary as their icon, the Cristinos had the secu-
lar Isabella as theirs. Isabella’s ‘innocence’ and her mother’s worldliness
provoked a veritable avalanche of books, essays and pamphlets debat-
ing the proper role of woman in Liberal society, the vast majority of
which predictably reverted to the traditional feminine values of religion,
morality, self-abnegation and self-control.154
   But in planning the correction of Bilbao’s corrupted women, the Royal
Government was counting its proverbial chickens. Bilbao’s counterbat-
tery was now outgunning the Carlist attackers. The Carlists managed
to take the fortiﬁed ex-convent of San Agustín before being halted by
a Cristino rally in front of Sendeja, where the defenders intimidated
some of the weary Carlist attackers by draping a barricade in front of
the ex-convent with a slogan saying ‘Transit to Death’. Meanwhile,
Carlist logistics were also ﬂagging. Carlist civilians shirked work building
wooden siege-trains with the result that soldiers had to be redeployed
for this task. One ﬁnal Carlist effort to take the fortiﬁed ex-convent of
La Concepción, which was repulsed on 29 November, ﬁnally pushed
the besiegers into exhaustion. The Cristino garrison was now returning
artillery ﬁre at rates twice and then three times that of the Carlists, who
were under orders to conserve their dwindling ammunition. Even worse,
intelligence arrived of Cristino relief forces. After Evans’s British force
was sent by sea from San Sebastián to Portugalete on Bilbao’s extreme
right, Espartero resolved to relieve the city by striking through the area
of the bridge at Luchana, a key location where the Asúa River ﬂowed into
the Nervión. Espartero’s victory here relieved Bilbao on Christmas Day,
restoring Cristino Spain’s fortunes in the wake of the Gómez debacle,
156 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


and turning both himself (ennobled as Count Luchana) and the city
into heroes of Liberal resistance. Cristino casualties during November–
December 1836 exceeded those that of the Carlists: 240 dead and 887
wounded militiamen, 3,700 army dead and wounded (including some
1,000 dead at Luchana), and incalculable civilian casualties. Wide areas
of Bilbao lay in ruins, some 26,000,000-reales worth of damage having
been caused.155
7
Carlist Failure, 1837–39




This chapter explains how Carlist Spain was transformed by the defeat
of the Royal Expedition. The Carlist Basque country was debilitated by
civilian war weariness and army revolts. Popular hatred of ojalateros
(‘would-to-God-ers’, or shirkers) grew on the backs of Basque peas-
antry overburdened by taxes and conscription. War weariness created
factionalism both from within between an ‘enlightened absolutist’
(Marotista) and theocratic absolutist (Apostólico) camp, and even
from without (Muñagorri’s ‘Peace and fueros’ insurgency sponsored by
Madrid). Meanwhile, Cabrera’s military state in the east maintained
its cohesion, defying the Cristino ascendancy elsewhere (as, to a lesser
extent, did the Catalan Carlists). But the strategic situation reverted to
an unsustainable stalemate, renewed minor Carlist expeditions notwith-
standing. The Carlist ‘home front’ in mid-war differed greatly from
that of its enemy. Carlist Spain matched a stultifying social and polit-
ical culture with a generally effective military strategy and order of
battle: the very reverse of the Cristinos. Unlike Cristino Spain, its ter-
ritory was small, restricted to a Basque–Navarrese statelet, and much
more makeshift rural areas of Catalonia, Aragón and Valencia besides.
Although Carlist guerrillas roamed in other areas of Spain, even domi-
nating signiﬁcant geographical spaces, their itinerant nature prevented
them from enforcing anything more than the most rudimentary mil-
itary administration. Thus, the Carlist ‘home front’ entails the Basque
country, and, to a lesser degree, the east. Its study involves three broad
categories, the cultural, the political–economic and the military.
   Culturally, Carlist Spain was characterised by an ofﬁcial puritanism
based on the union of throne and altar. The Vatican never recog-
nised Carlist Spain. Even though most of the cardinals supported such
a policy, Pope Gregory XVI in 1832 had condemned all rebellion

                                   157
158 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


against constituted authority, which meant that Papal recognition of
the Carlists was impossible without either a dynastic reconciliation or
the capture of Madrid. In this respect, the very conservative Pope resem-
bled Chancellor Metternich.1 Yet the lack of formal Papal recognition
did not impede the Carlist mobilisation of Catholicism in its war effort.
On 1 August 1835, the Virgin Mary was proclaimed Generalísima of
Carlist forces, repeating similar anointments by Peninsular War Patriots
and anticipating Franco 100 years later.2 In fact, beyond ofﬁcial puri-
tanism, Carlists exploited the range of popular Catholicism to inspire
Christian soldiery, exculpate exterminating angels or even justify acts
of protest. Faced with the intensely irrational and violent environment
of war, many Carlists relied on the miraculous powers of icons. Hence,
Carlist guerrillas in Aragón turned against their leader, an exterminat-
ing angel priest called Escoriguela, after he discarded a holy cross when
wading across the River Ebro. The weight of the cross almost made him
drown, but this counted as nought to his men who had always kissed the
icon before battle and almost executed the priest for his act of sacrilege.3
  The demands made by the war distorted the public and private
exercise of Catholicism. In April 1836, Don Carlos revived and trans-
formed the Sancti Spiritus University at Oñati (Guipúzcoa), purging
those scholars suspected of the merest whiff of liberalism, replacing
them with theologians of often inferior qualiﬁcations, and forcing staff
to take an oath of allegiance to the King and to uphold the mystery of
the Marian Immaculate Conception. Yet this traditionalist drive failed
as the University had to be used to house armaments, all areas but
the chapel being used for arms storage.4 Ofﬁcial concerns mounted
that total war was eroding popular religiosity and encouraging licence
and blasphemy, and these were answered by punishments targeting
swearing and ‘scandal’.5 Carlist Spain’s greatest female poet, Vicenta
Maturana de Gutiérrez, suffered from the cultural crackdown when,
on 1 May 1838, her ironic lyric poem, Himno a la luna, was banned
from Carlist territory.6 Of greater concern for its pervasiveness was the
growth of extramarital liaisons and the children these produced, bely-
ing the regime’s ofﬁcial piety as expressed in the Gaceta Oﬁcial, and
the cult of the Virgin. A decree was therefore passed on 25 December
1836 allowing soldiers and ofﬁcers to marry, even though these married
men would have to forgo their rights to military pensions. Beyond dog-
matic anti-liberalism, Carlist religion was always a reﬂection of changing
social relationships. Yet both leftist and traditionalist historians have
tended to view Carlist War Catholicism as a constant rather than diverse
and changing, even though the orphaning of the Pretender’s cause by
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   159


the Vatican in fact liberated religious commitment away from political
strategy and enabled it to mean different things to different people.7
   The ofﬁcial culture of Christian soldiering was undermined by a
counter-culture of shirking, which shared some of the features, but not
the extent, of the Cristino zone. The ojalatero phenomenon (‘would-
to-God-er’) showed how shirking military duty was more controversial
for Carlists than for Cristinos.8 Ojalatero became a humorous and offen-
sive term to describe all men of ﬁghting ability in the Carlist camp
who, for whatever reason, were not ﬁghting; after the Royal Expedi-
tion it was used by diehard Carlists to describe the disproportionately
non-Basque peace faction known as the transaccionistas. Often, Basque
women unkindly called wounded men in the rearguard ojalateros. The
moral belligerence of Basque women was matched by Cristino women
only in the embittered front-line areas of the east, as was evident in the
enemy camp by the Eco del Comercio’s attempt to shame men into ﬁght-
ing by sensationalising the story of a young heroine. Eighteen-year-old
Luisa Casiñol disguised herself as a man and enlisted in the Cristino
army in Catalonia, proving herself on the battleﬁeld and becoming
something of a mascot (dubbed ‘Luis’) in the eyes of her comrades,
even after her true sex had been revealed.9 Catalan Cristinos had no
problem with temporal rather than supernatural female icons: their
very battle cry ¡Viva la petita! referred to Princess Isabella.10 As the
ojalatero phenomenon had the potential to damage the war effort, it
was answered by repression from the Carlist Royal Police. Measures
included a ban on all non-combatant males from bearing arms or wear-
ing martial moustaches, dishonouring them in a chauvinistic society.11
Towards the end of the war, the Cristino Basque spymaster, Aviraneta,
turned the ojalatero phenomenon into a propaganda offensive to desta-
bilise the Carlist war effort from within. His ‘Letter from a Basque farmer
to a tinker’ was a pun on the shirkers of the Carlist home front (tinker,
or ‘hojalatero’, is a homophone of ‘ojalatero’). Its content brilliantly
set the Carlist Basques against the Carlist ‘Castilians’.12 Even though
Aviraneta’s impact has been overstated by neo-Carlists keen to stress
the autonomism of nineteenth-century Carlism, it remains the most
effective propaganda campaign of the war.13
   The repressive arm of the Carlist state was the Royal Police. Created
in April 1836, initially with the modest aim of being a royal bodyguard,
it quickly assumed classically nineteenth-century police-state functions
in the face of growing discontent and war-weariness, controlling inter-
nal passports, combatting desertion, supervising local foral elections
and, controversially, superimposing its law-and-order jurisdiction over
160 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


that of the fueros. Above all, it hunted deserters. Soon after its creation
the Royal Police enforced punitive measures enacted by the juntas of
each Basque province and Navarra during the spring and summer of
1836, ﬁning and imprisoning the families of deserters, and its repres-
sion reached a peak during the ﬁrst half of 1837.14 The harshness of
the law of hostages was moderated in March 1837 by the personal
intervention of Don Carlos (only families which had sheltered desert-
ers remained in prison).15 Such was the Royal Police’s unpopularity that
it was disbanded in June 1837 by Prime Minister José de Uranga, a
middle-aged royalist veteran of 1821–23 and 1831 and erstwhile ally of
Zumalacárregui. The King was on expedition, hence technically there
was no longer the need for a royal bodyguard in the Basque coun-
try, but Uranga’s real reasons were telling. If legend is to be believed,
Uranga slept protected by a personal bodyguard of two men inside his
room and another two outside. The Byzantine world of Carlist politics
often saw ministers attend meetings armed, and this friction was largely
caused between the disproportionately Basque apostólico (and fuerista)
and the disproportionately non-Basque enlightened absolutist wings of
Carlism. Since the death of Zumalacárregui Don Carlos had appointed
prime ministers whose centralising measures had alienated apostólicos
and fueristas. One such, Carlos Cruz Mayor, a very capable enlightened
absolutist, was already controversial for having led the ‘Bilbao faction’
blamed for Zumalacárregui’s death. But in April 1836 he alienated the
apostólico faction further by speaking out against peace plans to extend
the fueros beyond the Basque country, and Don Carlos yielded to pres-
sure to replace him with the more tactful Juan Bautista Erro y Azpíroz.16
But Erro, a 62-year-old academic and fugitive from Cristino captivity,
soon alienated the same elements with his zeal to centralise revenue col-
lection, his creation of the Royal Police and the ‘Armamento General’,
the May 1836 decree forbidding private ownership of arms. The deci-
sion to attempt a second siege of Bilbao was largely Erro’s, and its failure
provided Don Carlos with a pretext to sack him.17 Thus Uranga, whose
cabinet included both apostólicos and moderates, trod carefully with the
former. His continuation of the centralisation of his predecessors was
made palatable both by his abolition of the Royal Police – who were
sent to the front to assuage ojalaterismo – and his campaign of lim-
ited offensives against Cristino forts in the Basque country to distract
Cristino forces from the pursuit of the Royal Expedition. In August 1837,
Uranga silenced his critics by taking the important Cristino fortress at
Peñacerrada.18
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   161


   The war forced the Royal Government to impose unprecedented reg-
ulation and taxation upon the Basque population. Money was lacking
and it was only a matter of time before the crushing ﬁnes imposed
on local Liberals, combined with forced loans levied on Carlists (even
on nuns), would run dry, not least because discontent was growing
even within the ranks at the one-third pay given to each soldier and
ofﬁcer. Administrative reforms proved more effective at ﬁnding new
resources: Juntas Generales, it was decreed, should meet every two years
at Guernica, the Carlist Deputation of Vizcaya decreed new levies on
imports, whilst the Guernica junta on 14 July 1835 hit the civil popu-
lation yet again with a new forced loan of 2 million reales to be paid
back at 5 per cent annual interest, and to be guaranteed against all
national assets across Spain. Don Carlos, was less successful, however,
when it came to enlisting international ﬁnancial support for Carlist
Spain. The mooted 125,000,000-franc loan arranged by ﬁnanciers Haber,
Jange and Gower never materialised, nor did other deals, largely because
Don Carlos displayed the rare ability always to pick the wrong argument
at the wrong time. He promised that a future Carlist government would
categorically refuse to honour any foreign creditor who had outstand-
ing debts to the ‘usurping government’. This debacle took the wind out
of the sails of overseas Carlist representatives.19 In the event no real
ﬁnancial help arrived apart from the erratic and varying donations of
European legitimists, despite the varying pledges of ﬁnancial support
made by Prussian, Dutch, Austrian and Italian rulers, so Carlist agents
were forced to tap the vagaries of private lending markets.
   The militarisation of Carlist society proceeded more thoroughly than
in Cristino Spain. The Carlists developed a comparatively more efﬁ-
cient hierarchical organisation of their military. Comandante generales
retained default control of all forces in their province unless a divi-
sion general asked for them.20 Beyond this, the demands of the war
regulated food and production far more than in Cristino Spain. From
28 January 1836 food was rationed: two daily rations of bread and meat
and wine for serving soldiers and workers in arms forges and factories,
and half this quantity for all ‘passive’ classes (such as retired, and other
civilians) except heads of family. The wine ration was harder to pro-
vide in Guipúzcoa and parts of Durango where vines were traditionally
not cultivated, but such was the demand of soldiers for wine, especially
Basque soldiers whose relative lack of sobriety was not satiated by the
abundant but unsatisfying local cider, that the Carlists passed a special
decree reserving all wine in these areas exclusively for soldiers and arms
162 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


workers. Arms workers were given special consideration because of the
vital need for increased output. Output did increase markedly, largely
because of territorial expansion in 1835, but there was an accompanying
rise in explosives-related accidents.21 Otherwise, the Carlists had only
unreliable and intermittent imports from Castile. Alava banned the stor-
ing of grain in order to prioritise military needs; in return a 14 March
1836 decree from Durango treated all food shipments throughout the
Basque country as if they were traversing within a single province (hence
an anti-foral single market), and maximum prices were imposed on
wheat, corn and barley. Thus, the general European grain depression
of the 1830s was distorted in the Basque country into a boom as prices
stayed high.22
   The regulation of the domestic economy was made harsher by the
growing burden of conscription. A decree on 29 January 1836 ordered
all 17-year-olds into the Carlist ranks, imposing a 200 ducados ﬁne on
communities who failed to give up these youngsters within three days.23
Clearly, the early image of hardy Basque volunteers, rising up against
the usurping government in Madrid in defence of throne and altar,
was overborne by the grim demands of total war. This conscription
decree had been preceded by draconian measures targeting desertion.
During November and December 1835, three decrees imposed penal-
ties escalating to the death penalty against deserters. The Carlist state
was thus relying on depressingly modern machinery in order to sustain
the war effort, which contrasted with the timeless religiosity motivat-
ing Carlist villages and combatants. The fact that the Carlist rearguard
still offered a more peaceable and united aspect than the chaos reign-
ing beyond the Cristino lines owed a great deal to the fact that virtually
every available man was at the front, and that Cristino occupation could
realistically threaten any village in the statelet. The taboo of desertion
and draft-dodging thus explained popular anger at ojalateros and further
decrees passed in 1836 tightened up conscription still further, exempt-
ing only the most desperate families (for example, unigeniture with
parents over 60, widowers with dependants under 16).24 The regulation
of the war economy was more consistently applied than in the far larger
Cristino zone. In light of this fact it is remarkable how pre-modern val-
ues of religion and personalities continued to shape Carlist propaganda.
Zumalacárregui was dead but the Royal Government persisted in deploy-
ing the Great Man’s popular resistance motif: the unaltered address of
‘volunteers’ to conscripts, a press publication of an alleged conversation
between a foreign traveller and a belligerent Carlist mother in the Baztán
and the ennoblement of the commoner, Juan Bautista Esaín, dubbed
                                                 Carlist Failure, 1837–39   163


‘Don Carlos’s donkey’, in recognition of his close-run rescue of the King
from Rodil’s forces in September 1834.25
   In the Carlist east, the intangible power of personalities and religion
continued to play a central role as the Carlist state and its civil powers of
regulation were far less developed. Cabrera lacked the Zumalacárregui’s
magnanimity yet his austere charisma commanded the loyalty of his
men. Cabrera was deﬁant: ‘I know the King is being told that I’m not
very pious; this may be true, because I am no saint, and yet I per-
form miracles.’26 As the Carlist north was deteriorating in 1839, Cabrera
inspired his men into victory in battle on his saint’s day, St Raymond’s
Day, the medieval Catalan saint beloved of his men.27 In other words,
the itinerant nature of warfare in the east fostered charismatic rather
than bureaucratic leadership, mobilising religiosity with audacity, just as
during the ﬁrst year of Zumalacárregui’s command in the north. Much
of this was Romantic haze, but this should not discount the impact
of charismatic leadership on Carlist military successes – elements of
nineteenth-century ‘Great Man theory’, rather than twentieth-century
sociology and Marxist social history.
   Meanwhile, both sides recovered, over the winter of 1836–37, from
their respective setbacks of Gómez and Bilbao. A winter ﬂu epidemic
added to the Cristinos’ usual burdens of supply and desertion.28 Statis-
tically, the northern front was as militarised as it would ever be: 30,000
Carlist infantry supported by 1,500 cavalry and 40 artillery pieces and
opposing 59,094 Cristino campaign infantry supported by 2,491 cav-
alry, and a further 23,225 Cristino infantry supported by 293 cavalry on
garrison duty. The Carlists were thus outnumbered, but their traditional
advantage of interior lines of communication was augmented by a ﬂour-
ishing spy network at Bayonne, which had given them advance warning
of Cristino operations during early 1837.29 A major Cristino offensive in
March was turned into a defensive victory at Oriamendi, a mountain
near San Sebastián that gave the Carlist movement its enduring hymn.
   The Carlist victory at Oriamendi on 16 March 1837 was a text-
book example of its superiority in active defence and local initiative in
defence of the Basque homeland. In brief, the pincer action promised
by Sarsﬁeld was thrown into retreat when a forced march by the Carlist
Prince Sebastián threatened his ﬂank, thereby allowing a Carlist counter-
thrust between the forces of Espartero and Evans which defeated both
Cristino commanders in detail. The Cristinos’ losses were more than
400 dead, 900 wounded, and 137 prisoners and several small arms and
artillery pieces captured, whereas the Carlists had 88 dead, 669 wounded
and only a handful of prisoners. This defeat was even harder to bear for
164 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the Cristinos as their offensive had started well, so the Carlist counter-
attack subsequently led to many decorated Cristino ofﬁcers theatrically
forsaking their awards until they regained victory. Evans’s auxiliaries,
for whom Oriamendi was their greatest setback, were singled out for
brutality at the hands of the pursuing Carlists, no quarter being given
to stragglers who failed to keep up with the retreat.30 Only the brief
positioning of a Royal Marines battalion on the road from Oriamendi
prevented a wholesale rout from taking place. Lord John Hay, com-
mander of the British naval squadron stationed at Pasajes which had
disembarked the Marines, had felt obliged to withdraw his men and,
crucially, their artillery, at the ﬁrst available opportunity. He knew that
Tory attacks in the House of Commons and press were mounting against
the Whigs’ forward policy in Spain, and the deployment of regular
British forces some seven miles inland from the coast could hardly be
seen as anything other than formal military intervention.31 The British
Legion’s underperformance at the Battle of Oriamendi provoked an
intense debate in the British parliament.32 The early ground won by the
Cristino offensive, meanwhile, had caused such widespread destruction
in such nearby Carlist settlements as Hernani, much of it malicious,
that even heads of family who had been exempted from conscription
into the Carlist ranks thereafter formed volunteer anti-Cristino guerrilla
units in the area. The retreat of the Cristinos towards Bilbao ensued,
ﬁghting a bloody rearguard action on the way.33
   The Carlist victory did not halt court intrigues. The word ‘transac-
tionist’ (or transaccionista) surfaced as a description of those Carlist
elites who sought some sort of the compromise peace with the Lib-
eral regime in Madrid. In early 1837, this attitude was associated with
Count Casa-Eguía, who, so rumours ran, was conspiring with the French
king, who was exasperated by the cost of fortifying his southern border.
But the transactionist phenomenon still had more than two years to
run before it culminated in the compromise peace accord of Vergara,
and even then the Basque country was divided broadly between pro-
transaccionista Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa and diehard Alava and Navarra.34
These court intrigues impelled Don Carlos to undertake a bold strategic
offensive during the summer of 1837, known as the ‘Royal Expedition’.
   The Carlist capture of the Cristino town of Lerín, lynchpin of the
Ribera, in May 1837, at ﬁrst appeared as a minor victory like any other:
400 Cristino prisoners were taken prisoner and a local judge taken
hostage.35 But this attack was actually the opening feint of the Royal
Expedition. This expedition would last 160 days, traversing Navarra,
Aragón, Catalonia, Valencia, both Castiles, La Mancha and Alava, in
                                                    Carlist Failure, 1837–39   165


total over 2,000 kilometres, four cities, 152 small towns and some 353
villages.36 The summer of 1837 witnessed three interconnected develop-
ments which would seal both the outcome of the war and its legacy.
Cristino Spain moderated its revolutionary Constitution, the Carlists
launched their Expedition as a ‘liberation’ and Cristino Spain was turned
into a praetorian state. We deal with the Constitution of 1837 elsewhere,
but the other two developments bear discussion here. The elevation
by the Cortes of the Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the North,
Baldomero Espartero, to Generalísimo, had both short-term and long-
term consequences. In the short term, Espartero’s overlordship rankled
with his colleagues, in particular the Commander of the Army of the
Centre, Marcelino Oráa. Espartero’s gratuitous failure to acknowledge
Oráa’s victory at Chiva led, in July 1837, to a breakdown of coordina-
tion between the two armies, allowing the Royal Expedition to recover
its fortunes and, indirectly, to inﬂict a serious defeat on the Cristinos at
Herrera.37 It remains moot whether the Cristinos would have handled
the Carlist expedition better had their generals been answerable to the
War Ministry rather than Espartero (Table 7.1).
   The long-term consequences of Espartero’s powers are more poignant,
for they completed the transition to praetorianism, which, apart from a
hiatus during the last quarter of the nineteenth century, would remain
the dominant feature of Spanish politics until the era of Franco. This
transition was not fully understood at ﬁrst for what it was. Espartero,
like Espoz before him, was a man of the Left whose anodyne mantra of
‘Let the national will be fulﬁlled!’ rallied most of both army and Militia
opinion in the ‘peace dividend’ revolution of 1840; only the more rad-
ical wing of the Left noted that the ‘people’s choice’ had in fact turned
into the ‘Spanish Napoleon’. The dominant, pseudo-dictatorial role of
Espartero now became evident when he complained of the publication,

Table 7.1 Eco del Comercio, 18 January 1839: State of regular Cristino and Carlist
armies throughout Spain at end of 1838

                                       Infantry      Cavalry     Artillery pieces

Cristino total, including free corps    213000
Cavalry total, including free corps                   12500
Total artillery                                                         128
Carlist infantry (in 58 battalions)      55000
Customs guards                            4000
Organised cavalry                                      4000
Total artillery                                                          80
166 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


in El Patriota newspaper, of an article criticising Valmaseda’s evacuation.
Espartero called the author an imposter and agent of Don Carlos and
demanded he be punished. The government could not risk displeasing
its hero and two press censors who had let the article through were
replaced.38 Espartero’s power forced newspaper editors to tread carefully.
The wife of the editor of a new leftist satirical journal (La Injusticia)
fawningly asked for the Generalísimo’s endorsement of its mission to
use satire for the service of ‘the happiness of the people and in defence
of their rights’.39 The structural shift towards a praetorianism caused by
the Carlist War was plain for all to see when, in 1843, moderado counter-
revolutionaries violently evicted Espartero and his remaining supporters
from ofﬁce. A parallel praetorianism dominated Carlist politics as a
result of the defeat of the Royal Expedition and its apostólico advocates.
But both Maroto’s military dictatorship in the north and Cabrera’s in
the east were truncated by the Carlist defeats of 1839 and 1840.
   None of this, of course, was the intention of the fateful Carlist
decision to march on Madrid in 1837. Carlist calculations were com-
pelling for four reasons. The ﬁrst two reasons were interconnected:
diplomatic and dynastic. Despite Cristino Spain’s improved diplomatic
links with Britain and the Americas following the La Granja revolu-
tion, the European response had favoured the Carlists. France’s policy
had been equivocal, whereas several absolutist powers had emboldened
their support for Don Carlos to the verge of virtual recognition. Only
Metternich’s caution – and British naval supremacy – prevented the
Italian kingdoms from launching a Sardinian–Neapolitan naval attack
on Valencia in 1837.40 Although short of direct intervention, the ﬁnan-
cial help and illicit arms deliveries to Carlist Spain had grown since La
Granja, and even though the King’s emissaries overseas still felt let down
by the European capitals of the counter-revolution, they had every rea-
son to believe Metternich’s recognition would follow their capture of
Madrid.41 The second reason was dynastic in nature. María Cristina was
more wounded by her humiliation at La Granja the previous August
than most nineteenth-century writers realised. The very real prospect of
violence against her person, and her regal captivity under Calatrava’s
revolutionary dictatorship, had driven the Queen-Regent to correspond
with her brother, Absolute King of Naples, seeking a private release from
Spain via her abdication and exile, and a dynastic resolution to the civil
war via the future marriage of her daughter Isabella with the son of Don
Carlos. Thus, her captaining of Liberal resistance in Madrid in September
1837 was a double game. Ironically, María Cristina’s eventual capitu-
lation at Valencia during the post-war ‘peace dividend’ revolution of
                                               Carlist Failure, 1837–39   167


October 1840 ended a process of her personal fear of Spanish liberalism
that began with the sergeants’ rising at La Granja on 13 August 1836.42
   The third reason was military. The Carlists had proved secure in their
northern heartland, and the Gómez expedition had shown their abil-
ity to destabilise the enemy’s rearguard. Thus, a three-pronged strategy
gave them the initiative: whereas the actual Royal Expedition marched
south-east, a smaller expedition struck south-west, and the bulk of the
Royal Army remained in the Basque country to harass Cristino garrisons
in a series of local offensives. Moreover, the Royal Government had
demanded the removal of as many Carlist forces as possible from the
Basque country, as the local economy was on the point of collapsing
under the ‘total war’ burdens of men, food and munitions.43 March 1837
had seen Navarrese battalions in Estella openly insubordinate for the
ﬁrst time, shouting ‘Death to the ojalateros and the junta! Long live the
people (paisanos)!’, as their pay arrears had made them desperate. They
disbelieved the King’s promise of redress.44 It remains unclear whether
the Expedition’s champions were exaggerating in their warning that the
Basque country could support only 15 more days of operations.45 But
rising interest from some Carlists in quack military solutions to their
strategic blockade (including a British adventurer’s offer to arm cor-
sairs with a prototype torpedo from the Woolwich arsenal) is highly
suggestive.46
   The fourth reason was moralistic in nature. The ‘re-evangelisation’
of revolutionary Spain was Don Carlos’s main strategy, even though,
in measuring his success in the number of Masses held in liberated vil-
lages, he invited criticism from contemporaries and historians.47 Church
ordinations and attendance had collapsed in the wake of two years
of Cristino anti-clericalism. The Carlist press trailed stories of aban-
doned parishes in the wake of the schism with Rome, the powerlessness
of the bishops, the expulsion or imprisonment of priests by Cristino
soldiers and militia, and, above all, the mendizabalista disentailment;
indeed, some 400 parishes closed due to lack of ministers during the
ﬁrst half of 1836 alone.48 Linked to this moralistic reason was the
real hope that Madrid would bloodlessly pronounce in favour of Don
Carlos as soon as his army reached the city walls. A foreign journalist
who had visited Madrid the previous year reckoned that some ‘three-
fourths of the respectable portion of its population are in favour of
Don Carlos’.49
   But the Carlists were not complacently hoping for a spontaneous ﬁfth
column to rise. A clandestine Carlist junta operated from a safe house in
the Calle de Alcalá where a pro-Carlist noble met agents of the absolutist
168 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


powers to advance a dynastic solution to the conﬂict, involving an
honourable exile for the ‘widow of Ferdinand VII’ and a Carlist takeover
humanised by an agreement neither to resurrect the Inquisition nor to
oppose ‘sensible reforms’. These terms were agreed in a private letter
from the Queen-Regent to her brother (Ferdinand II of Naples), which
the unofﬁcial Neapolitan representative carried with him when the rev-
olutionaries deported him.50 All that was needed, it seemed, was the
appearance of the Carlist Royal Army and its welcome into the capital
by a grateful Queen-Regent. Carlist peace terms had certainly improved
since the previous year, when Don Carlos turned away a Cristino delega-
tion by demanding the dismantling of the Quadruple Alliance, refusing
to recognise the constitutional regime in Portugal and tactlessly suggest-
ing that all Spain offer Masses for the Virgin as Generalísima of the Carlist
forces. Delegates Roncali and Zambrano were aristocrats and right-wing
moderados, enemies of the Calatrava revolution, but Don Carlos saw
in these men not two potential counter-revolutionaries (as they would
indeed become in 1844), but two Liberals.51 But even though pro-Carlist
historians sympathised with Don Carlos’s integrity in 1836, they also
criticised the dynastic peace option of 1837 for making the entire Expe-
dition a hostage to the whims of the Queen-Regent, and for distorting
the campaign into an eschatological carnival of religious piety rather
than a ruthless assault on the capital.52
   In retrospect, Don Carlos’s campaign of re-evangelisation is not as
supine as it may seem. Both the Catholic resistance against revolution-
aries during the Vendée during the 1790s and during the twentieth-
century Mexican Cristiada showed a link between religious fervour
and popular resistance, and Don Carlos had been encouraged by the
Church’s policy of excommunicating expropriators and purchasers of
disentailed ecclesiastical property. But the King’s thinking created two
ﬂaws, one of strategy and another of perception. As the expedition was
supposed to be a government-in-waiting, its mobility was burdened by
excessive numbers of non-combatants and shoestring logistics, which
impeded the Carlists’ ability to transport and deploy sufﬁcient artillery
and alienated ‘liberated’ communities more than necessary by forcing
the ‘liberators’ to live off the land.53 The second ﬂaw was far more
profound. Don Carlos believed that the enemy’s will to ﬁght was still
coerced by the ‘usurping’ elites of 1833, and that the war remained
a dynastic dispute. In fact, such had been the wave of revolutionary
change since the start of the civil war that the Bourbon family troubles
had become irrelevant, or at the very least their solution could no longer
be relied upon to create peace. Ironically, the will to exercise absolute
                                               Carlist Failure, 1837–39   169


powers for peace by both Don Carlos and María Cristina proved not only
hollow, but also the last serious attempt by any Spanish monarch to rule
on so important an issue as war and peace; after the Royal Expedition,
the generals, not the monarch, would have the last word. Moreover, reli-
gious fervour outside of the Carlist safe zones was a notoriously useless
ally. Most purchasers of disentailed Church property had, in any case,
been using intermediaries to avoid excommunication, and could thus
claim innocence if they were unlucky enough to come under Carlist
occupation.
   Don Carlos’s pilgrimage of grace was not immediately exposed as
militarily ﬂawed, in large part because of the usual pattern of Cristino
disintegration. The invasion broke through the Cristino covering force
near Estella on 15 May 1837. Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the
North dispatched a pursuing force under General Iribarren, who was
reinforced by 12,000 militiamen mobilised from Huesca and Zaragoza.
But the ﬁrst battle at Huesca on 24 May 1837 was a Carlist victory, as
some 1,000 Cristino soldiers and militiamen were either killed or cap-
tured as the Carlist invaders were skilled at pinning Iribarren amid the
sticky mud along the banks of the swollen River Cinca, forcing him
to retreat. Virtually all the Cristino authorities ﬂed the city, but the
bishop remained to welcome Don Carlos, who stayed for three days
before moving on to take Barbastro, which surrendered without a shot
being ﬁred. Don Carlos heard Mass in this ancient city’s cathedral whilst
the Cristinos tried to regroup. The next Cristino counteroffensive came
from Oráa’s 12,400 infantry, 1,400 cavalry and artillery of the Army of
the Centre. Yet the Carlists had fortiﬁed Barbastro in time for the bat-
tle on 2 June 1837. The Carlists were massively outmatched in artillery,
but they managed to defeat the Cristinos, by again using the geograph-
ical contours of the river bank to their advantage. Barbastro resonated
for being a civil war within a civil war. The thousand-strong Carlist for-
eign legion (comprised of French Foreign Legion defectors and pardoned
miguelistas defecting from the Oporto Hunters54 ) fought its former com-
rades, and the German Carlist, Prince Lichnowsky,55 was saddened to
hear that they killed each other shouting in French and German.56
One of the fratricidal casualties was the French Legion’s commander,
Brigadier Conrad, an Alsatian Napoleonic Wars veteran known for his
common touch and his humanitarian treatment of civilians, whose
death was all the more galling as it came in a forlorn bid to rally the
terriﬁed ﬂight of men who had recently distinguished themselves at
Huesca.57 The Carlist foreign legion, in the thick of the ﬁghting during
this victory, was almost wiped out and was dissolved.58
170 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   Despite these Aragonese victories, the Carlists’ poor logistics, com-
pounded by the large number of non-combatants accompanying the
invasion, made Don Carlos’s progress appear sluggish when compared
with Gómez a year earlier. Some 300 expeditionaries were drowned in
an ill-fated mass crossing of the swollen Cinca.59 The poor agriculture
of Huesca province could not support invasion, and the Carlists made
enemies of the villages in their path. Angüés had tried to ‘welcome’ the
expedition but had been sacked and pillaged by its hungry contingents
all the same. Estopiñan’s villagers, on 6 June, tried to hide its food-
stuffs, but the telltale eggshells in a pantry drove the Carlists to break in
the chicken pens and slaughter the poultry before moving on.60 Pillage
blunted the expeditionaries’ use of Catholic revivalism in order to win
over civilians. But pillage was inevitable for an expedition advancing
on a nutritional shoestring. Poor nutrition also made it hard to recover
from defeats. It was remarkable that the expeditionaries managed to
extricate themselves from a serious defeat by the Captain-General of
Catalonia, Baron Meer, on 12 June 1837; so remarkable that Cristino
Radicals suspected treachery on Meer’s part.61 Ever since riots had swept
Zaragoza and Barcelona in January 1837 Meer had appeared to be more
concerned about subduing radicalism than ﬁghting Carlism.62
   Radicals were exasperated because the expedition had invaded
Catalonia, a province which, beyond its traditionalist far west, had
become virtually diabolical in Carlist eyes. Santpedor, only 45 miles
from Barcelona, saw its outskirts burnt and far worse threatened after
its militia garrison refused to capitulate.63 The expedition traversed
Catalonia, crossing the Ebro at Cherta on 29 June, a busy day marked
by the defeat of a pursuing Portuguese division, a solemn Mass and Te
Deum in the town’s patron saint church of St Martin (and a pillage of its
surroundings), and a personal meeting between the King and Cabrera,
whose forces were now linked with the expedition.64 Reinforced by
Cabrera, other victories followed. Castellón, a Valencian provincial cap-
ital only a few miles from the Mediterranean, had been abandoned
by revolutionary soldiers and militiamen the previous summer, and
subsequently sacked by Cabrera. The Militia had re-formed since and
those citizens who had not ﬂed were resolved not to face the same fate
again. But Castellón fell a second time all the same, and the expedition
got closer to the safe zone of the Maestrazgo.65 The Cristino Army of
the Centre used superior topography and cavalry to defeat the expe-
dition at the Battle of Chiva (Valencia) on 15 July 1837. But Oráa’s
lack of food and water stopped him routing the expedition, which
escaped into Aragón.66 The march into Aragón was punishing for both
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   171


expeditionaries and pursuers, and doubly so for the civilian commu-
nities in the armies’ path, which saw their entire wealth pillaged by
one army, only to end up being occupied by the following army. After a
retreat of some 150 miles, the Carlists, on 24 August 1837, defeated Oráa
at Villar de los Navarros (called the Battle of Herrera), inﬂicting over
2,000 casualties and capturing sorely needed weapons and supplies.67
   No tragedy matched that of the Cristino prisoners taken after this
battle.68 More than half would die over the course of an itinerant captiv-
ity which would stretch over six months before the surviving prisoners
were exchanged. Cabrera was bent on keeping conditions so dire as to
force the prisoners to defect to his ranks. That the Cristino prisoners
refused to do so turned them into patriotic-Liberal heroes of the Cristino
effort. But it also condemned them to the direst excesses of cold, hunger,
disease and mortality. No trial was spared the prisoners: cannibalism,
scavenging, murder, exposure, typhus, forced marches, random execu-
tions. By the time that the survivors had been exchanged in March 1838
they had become martyrs to liberty. The nineteenth-century historian,
Antonio Pirala, published the diary of a captive ofﬁcer (Sub-Lieutenant
Juan Manuel Martín), which resonates for being a rare literary account
of common suffering in Spain’s last great pre-literary conﬂict.69

  25 August 1837 Passing through the village of Blesa the inhabitants
    take pity on us poor prisoners, giving us big servings of bread,
    chocolate, and some shoes.
  1 September 1837 We return from Cantavieja to Villarluengo, we ofﬁ-
    cers staying in the same building as three days before, and the
    men in a convent. For nine days we remain here, sleeping on hard
    ﬂoors and being given nothing more than a hundredweight of bread
    every day.
  10 September 1837 We return to Cantavieja and are housed in the local
    castle for a fortnight, after which we are incarcerated in the local
    prison.
  27 September 1837 The Liberal prefect of Teruel organises a donation
    which sees us receive some shirts, linen and bandages, and later
    some blankets, too. The Carlists abuse us for this.
  15 October 1837 Word spreads that General Oráa is about to lay siege to
    Cantavieja, so the facciosos spirit us off towards Beceite, after which
    we march by day and sleep at different locations each night.
  20 October 1837 We leave Peñaroya for Valderrobles, some ofﬁcers
    remaining behind stricken with typhus. Reaching Valderrobles we
    realise that this disease has spread amongst us and I’m almost at
172 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


    death’s door. I lie delirious and helpless as some Carlists enter my
    room and rob me of everything they can lay their hands on. The
    care of the village doctors saves me from death, but the same cannot
    be said of several other ofﬁcers who succumb.
  1 November 1837 We leave Arnés for Orta, eating nothing more than
    miserable half-rations whenever they are given.
  10 November 1837 We are ordered to leave at 11 o’clock at night,
    without being given any time even to fetch our blankets, the only
    bedding we possess. No beasts of burden were assigned to transport
    the sick. One ofﬁcer, it is said, was too sick to move and was killed
    by the Carlist guards who were responsible for him, and now they
    are wearing his particulars. Also the widow of the ofﬁcer Mediero
    who had tended to her dying husband until the end is robbed and
    raped.
  11 November 1837 Today and last night more than 40 soldiers have
    been shot who were so weakened by hunger that they couldn’t
    keep up.
  12 November 1837 We sick ofﬁcers who were in the hospital at
    Valderrobles leave for Beceite. Early this morning our men arrived
    here. We were horriﬁed to see them, as they look more like ghosts
    than men. They are put to marching ahead of us whilst we are
    roused from our beds to follow them. We are all starved, but the
    road ahead is littered with the corpses of those captives who were
    executed for straggling.
  14 November 1837 The ofﬁcers’ hunger is assuaged somewhat by some
    occasional half-rations. But the men are not given anything, with
    the result that at least 8–10 soldiers are dying each day from the
    combined effects of hunger and cold.
  25 November 1837 Mortality continues. Ofﬁcers receive some 3,000
    reales generously donated by the National Militia garrison of
    Tortosa, which equates to 37 reales for each individual.
  4 December 1837 Horrendous mortality. The men haven’t had bread
    for more than 12 days and are reduced to eating a ration of one
    pound-and-a-half of raw potatoes per day. They are forced to strip
    the rooﬁng which leaves them terribly exposed to the cold. They
    crowd on to the balcony to beg for help from local inhabitants. The
    balcony gives away killing 15 prisoners and leaving several more
    injured.
  8 December 1837 Mortality continues. Another overcrowded ﬂoor
    holding prisoners gives away. More than 50 are killed or injured.
                                              Carlist Failure, 1837–39   173


  10 December 1837 Delivery arrives from Alcañiz of 306 blankets which
    are distributed amongst the men.
  19 December 1837 Constant daily mortality. Word reaches us from
    Cabrera that our exchange is in train, and that Pellicer should give
    us full rations. Nonetheless, we continue to receive only half.
  28 December 1837 No ration whatsoever today. 21 soldiers die. Such is
    the hunger and misery that anyone with even a couple of maravedis
    (ochavo) in his possession risks being murdered just for this puny
    sum. Any soldier ordered to leave for work on fortiﬁcations would
    pick up bones to be ground into bonemeal to be eaten. The corpses
    of dead comrades are hidden away to be picked over and cooked
    at night by lantern light. Such is the state of the unhappy prison-
    ers of Herrera! History teaches us about the sufferings of ancient
    heroes, and about martyrs in Spain’s bloody wars, but can anyone
    have suffered as much as we imprisoned heroes of Espartero?
  29 December 1837 One-ﬁfth rations today. But a subscription arrives
    from Teruel at the invitation of its prefect of some 2,000 reales
    which are distributed amongst both ofﬁcers and men.
  30 December 1837 One-fourth rations. Ofﬁcers from the regiment of
    Badajoz province garrisoning Tortosa send us 2,000 reales which are
    distributed amongst both ofﬁcers and men. Our thanks are eternal
    and our hearts warm to know that we have not been forgotten by
    our comrades.
  31 December 1837 No rations today. Mortality rises to 13. Only 500
    soldiers are left in their depot, which means that around 600 have
    fallen victim to our appalling situation.

Military solutions to this barbarity were virtually impossible. The
Cristino government hoped that the Expedition had denuded the Carlist
north of forces, yet it had also drawn Cristino forces away from the Army
of the North in pursuit (15 battalions, nine cavalry squadrons and sub-
stantial artillery pursuing the 16 battalions and eight squadrons of the
Carlist expedition). Yet the Carlist Royal Army in the Basque country
retained 31 battalions, four squadrons and almost all its ﬁeld artillery,
against which the Cristinos could mount for campaign 28 battalions, 11
squadrons and rather less artillery. The Carlists thus retained defensive
superiority against Espartero’s Army of the North, even while their Expe-
dition was wreaking havoc with Oráa’s Army of the Centre.70 Espartero
was weakened even further when Portuguese politics robbed him of Das
Antas’s Legion, which Lisbon ordered to redeploy from the Navarrese
174 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


Ribera towards Portugal’s frontier. In June 1837, disaffected Portuguese
civil war veterans – one-third of whom were pardoned miguelistas –
revolted, and Lisbon dared not risk them in battle.71 Also, Espartero’s
forces were absorbed by another Carlist expedition, smaller in number
but also more mobile and one that traversed pro-Carlist areas of Old
Castile. Juan Antonio Zaratiegui, a young royalist during the Triennium
and Inspector of Royalist Volunteers in his native Navarra thereafter,
excited exculpatory post-war writings indignant at his ‘scapegoating’ for
the failure of the Royal Expedition.72
   In July 1837, Zaratiegui launched an expedition of some 280 cavalry
and ﬁve infantry battalions imbued with the same religious liberation
ethos as the Royal Expedition. After defeating Das Antas’s Portuguese
on the Ebro, Zaratiegui pushed into Old Castile towards Madrid.73 Most
of the defenders, including the teenage cadets from the military col-
lege, ﬂed to Madrid, even though several college professors offered their
services to the occupying Carlists. News in the capital of Zaratiegui’s
approach caused panic, and a state of siege was imposed on 6 August,
decreeing a wide range of pro-Carlist activities and opinions to be pun-
ishable by martial law. The capital’s Militia came out in a show of force
and was supplemented by the formation of some companies of ‘distin-
guished citizens’ to patrol suspect districts of the capital (although both
Carlist and Peninsular War experience with these units had revealed
them to be ceremonial rather than warlike in their usefulness).74 Key
military facilities in the Carlists’ path, the Military College at Segovia,
the Artillery College at Alcalá and the Engineers School at Guadalajara,
were evacuated to the capital.75 Zaratiegui suffered the usual Carlist vain-
glory at having conquered a substantial city, and began minting coins
embossed with Don Carlos, and publicising his conquest in the language
of the Christian soldier, thanking Divine Providence for triumphing
over the ‘faithless’ anarchy of the Madrid government and all its false
philosophy.76
   Zaratiegui’s victory speech was untimely, as the pursuit of Espartero’s
battle-hardened Army of the North obliged him to abandon Segovia,
although not before he had emptied the city of its volunteers and
artillery, sabotaging those guns that could not be transported. Yet con-
quests like Segovia and others across Old Castile had served the purpose
of destabilising Cristino defences while the main Carlist invasion of
Cabrera and the Royal Expedition approached the capital from the east.
War- and revolution-weary Cristino garrisons had surrendered often
after a symbolic exchange of ﬁre and Zaratiegui got new recruits, both
volunteers and conscripts. Valladolid was occupied in a negotiated,
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   175


almost gentlemanly manner. Its war-weary municipal delegation rode
out to meet Zaratiegui and Liberal members of the local government
resigned and departed whilst pro-Carlist administrators took their place
and awaited Zaratiegui’s instructions. This accommodation spared the
city from pillage and atrocities. The delegation performed this handover
in reverse when the Army of the North arrived to reoccupy the city days
later.77 Some communities, like those on the Ribera del Duero, showed
the same degree of public enthusiasm for the Carlists as they had pre-
viously for the Liberals. Partisan ideology was negligible in this. Rather,
communities were so terriﬁed by the prospect of violent occupations
and counter-occupations that they resolved to ‘manage’ their occupiers
by staging public welcomes which, in reality, kept the soldiers as much
as possible at arm’s length.78 Local authorities across Old Castile dis-
covered their Carlist sympathies. Or rather, perhaps, they rediscovered
them: the Pretender’s ideas of theocratic monarchy were far from being
alien to men who, under Cristino occupation, would opt for moderan-
tismo, but who would also, without much difﬁculty, move from one
camp to another.
   The disarray of the Cristino war effort led Espartero to ride ahead of
his forces to Madrid in order to reassure the Queen-Regent in person.
A spate of military indiscipline in units around the capital was dealt
with in a lenient fashion by Madrid’s military governor, San Miguel,
who admitted that the gravity of the Carlist invasion outweighed the
need to punish indiscipline.79 The main threat came from Don Carlos’s
expedition in the wake of its victory at Herrera. Eventually the Carlists
occupied Arganda and stood before Madrid’s city walls on 10 September
1837. The capital, which had already been placed under a state of siege,
was now in a state of suspended animation. Contemporaries poignantly
associated this crisis with dust being settled: quite literally, as Madrid,
which was already known as the ‘city of dust’, was choked by the dust
thrown up by the demolition of nationalised church property under-
way since the revolution of 1836.80 As the Carlists neared the walls, the
capital fell deathly quiet, with its shops and industry paralysed and the
streets emptied of people apart from the patrols of the National Militia.
Isolated attempts by Carlist agents to whip up a ﬁfth column failed. San
Miguel judiciously sent one general, whose sympathies were suspect,
away from the walls and to the centre of the capital. Now the Radicals
demanded defence à la outrance, but nothing could have been further
from the minds of the well-to-do ‘distinguished citizens’ who were
happy to preside over glittering street patrols by day – especially when
the Queen-Regent came to inspect – but shirked the more dangerous
176 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


night watches.81 Meanwhile, the capital’s underground Carlist junta
made a clever ploy by circulating a promise not to reintroduce the Inqui-
sition or despotism, and suggesting an honourable Italian exile for the
‘widow of Ferdinand VII’ and the marriage of her child Isabella to the
Carlist Crown Prince. Given this tense atmosphere of plots and counter-
plots, it was remarkable how the crisis was defused: not with conquest
or siege, but with the unmolested withdrawal of the Carlist army from
the capital’s walls.82
   In the midst of this crisis, on 15 September 1837, Captain-General
Quiroga seconded the strident revolutionary rhetoric of Governor
Seoane by condemning the Carlists as vainglorious murderers: brave
words given that many on both sides suspected that a negotiated peace
(transacción) would now take place. Even the session of the ‘besieged’
Cristino Cortes was remembered for being quiet and sombre rather than
inﬂamed and belligerent, in stark contrast to the Patriots’ parliament in
Cádiz during the Peninsular War. Admittedly, Carlist takeover was not
the only threat on the deputies’ minds. Espartero had been drawn into a
stand-off with the capital’s revolutionary dictatorship of General Seoane
over the political leadership of the revolution, which, since 18 July 1837,
had seen its Constitution of 1812 moderated by a bicameral legislature
and other brakes on radicalism that were part of the Constitution of
1837.83 A moderado army insurrection in Pozuelo de Aravaca, to the west
of the capital, had Espartero’s blessing and so the Left-Liberal Calatrava
administration fell. Now Seoane’s ‘revolutionary dictatorship’ had lost
its political support. Espartero’s mobile forces overawed Seoane’s gar-
rison largely thanks to the Carlists’ decision to withdraw in the face
of Espartero’s march. This series of events allowed Espartero – and the
army, as opposed to Seoane’s Militia – to be seen as the saviour of the
capital and the Liberal patria.84 Both men were leftists of the ‘Ayacucho’
clan, but Espartero’s victory consolidated all power in his hands.85
   The expedition’s retreat from the capital opened a series of mis-
fortunes for Carlism from which it would never recover. Redeploying
to Alcalá in a bid to fall on Espartero’s ﬂank, the Carlist army then
received an order to retreat further still, causing outrage in the ranks.
Rumours ran that Don Carlos had ordered the retreat to a more salu-
brious location in order to hear Mass. Others asserted that he wanted
to avoid bloodshed. Both probably played contingent roles, and spoke
of Don Carlos’s piety being his worst enemy.86 But the shifting diplo-
matic situation was the main cause. When the Calatrava administration
expelled the Carlist Marquess Grúa, the Carlist agent carried a letter
from the Queen-Regent to her brother, Ferdinand II of Naples, proposing
                                                 Carlist Failure, 1837–39   177


a compromise peace based on Don Carlos’s accession in return for a
general amnesty and the marriage of the infant Isabella to the Pre-
tender’s son. All depended, especially Metternich’s vital approval, on
Don Carlos’s occupation of Madrid. But the downfall in August of the
Radical Calatrava ministry, and the accession of the moderado, Eusebio
Bardají Azara, meant that when the Carlists reached the gates of the
capital on 12 September, the Queen-Regent no longer felt herself to be a
prisoner of the revolution. Hedging her bets even more, María Cristina
sent Espartero a letter begging him urgently to rescue the capital, a let-
ter that the Carlists intercepted, confusing them even further.87 Never
a decisive commander, Don Carlos thus began an initial retreat which
turned into one of general proportions, whilst sheer luck made Espartero
appear the saviour of the capital and the Liberal revolution. Carlist histo-
rians condemned the Queen-Regent’s spite and duplicity, and regretted
that Don Carlos did not force the issue.88 Madrid was now free of exter-
nal threats. Antonio Quiroga made a triumphalist victory declaration
couched in terms of popular defence and rebranding the Queen-Regent
as a constitutional Patriot.89
   The Carlist retreat, meanwhile, was easy prey for Espartero’s van-
guard: hundreds from the Carlist rearguard at Aranzueque were killed
or captured on 19 September. In desperation, the King invited Cabrera
to replace Moreno as the Carlist Commander-in-Chief but Cabrera,
who had wanted a violent pincer attack on the capital, refused due to
thinly disguised disgust at the failure of the King’s leadership. German
Carlists – anticipating the frustration of their great-grandchildren with
Franco’s slow offensive 100 years later – were exasperated with the
absence of the strategic vision worthy of Cabrera. Lichnowsky was baf-
ﬂed: ‘It was as if no-one had given any thought to descending on
Madrid.’90 The artillery expert, Wilhelm von Rahden, did not under-
stand why Carlist victories were squandered with decorations and
festivals of grace instead of a purposeful thrust.91 Now it was too late: the
Expedition was retreating northwards and the initiative was Espartero’s.
Although Espartero could not prevent the Carlist forces of Zaratiegui
and the King regrouping in their retreat, he was ruthless in his pace
and in the way he treated civilian populations in his path, sometimes
promising the death penalty against hoarders of food and drink. The
Castilians had shown little resistance to the Carlists, and Espartero’s
hand was forced by the perennial problem of hunger and insufﬁcient
and inadequate (cardboard-soled) shoes being delivered by asentistas.
On 25 October, despite his victory against the retreating Expedition
at Retuerta two weeks earlier, Espartero offered his resignation in
178 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


frustration at the general neglect of his men. He found time to ask his
wife and friends to send him money on his own authority, giving the
Generalísimo a reputation for paternalism as well as heroism. The imme-
diate crisis passed when Espartero reached Miranda de Ebro on 28 Octo-
ber to ﬁnd that the Expedition had retreated back across the Ebro.92
   In some respects this was a strange victory for Cristino Spain. Despite
all the revolutionary rhetoric of the previous two years concerning the
popular struggle of the Militia and citizens against Carlism, the Expe-
dition had been defeated in a fashion more akin to Early Modern than
Modern warfare: a dynastic misunderstanding, a carnivalesque armed
‘pilgrimage’, a cabinet war across seemingly apathetic civilian popu-
lations. Yet beneath the high politics of Madrid and Estella, the low
politics of desertion, mutiny, even economic militancy had continued
to grow. While the Expedition approached Madrid, the Army of the
North had been paralysed by mutiny. In August 1837, General Ceballos
Escalera, commanding the Cristino lynchpin of Miranda de Ebro, was
lynched by his own regiment, his soldiers subsequently seizing con-
trol of the streets and daring ofﬁcers to come out of hiding. News of
this insurrection quickly spread to Vitoria, the Cristino capital of Alava,
which was blockaded by the Carlists right up to its walls. Whilst its
Cristino citizens dared not leave, a muleteer used to running blockades
by both sides carried the news. In Vitoria, too, the Cristino garrison
lynched its military governor, the elderly Cortes deputy, Cano, the pres-
ident of the Cristino deputation, and the editor of the ofﬁcial provincial
bulletin, all before levying a ﬁne of 40,000 duros against the munici-
pality. This was the downtrodden, brutalised Cristino soldier asserting
his honour in solidarity with his comrades against both Carlists and
against Cristino elites.93 In both cases, the caretaker authorities which
the garrisons permitted to enter the power vacuum were prevented from
taking anything more than token measures against the perpetrators of
the violence.
   The last two-and-a-half years of the war would see a surging popu-
lar radicalism in the Cristino zone that was irrelevant, and ultimately
hostile, to María Cristina’s throne. Even the Carlist zone would reject its
king in a bid to advance the secular rights of Basque autonomy and army
veterans. In other words, the dynastic dispute of 1833, upon which Don
Carlos had made his obsolescent calculations in 1837, had turned into
a war whose meaning was transformed into secular concerns of Cristino
liberty and Basque fueros.
   Don Carlos’s humiliating retreat across the Ebro set in motion the
secularisation of Carlist politics. At ﬁrst, it was the brutish, apostólico
                                               Carlist Failure, 1837–39   179


wing of Carlism which won the argument, and the cabinet posts,
in the wake of the defeat. On 29 October 1837, the so-called Mani-
festo of Arceniega saw apostólicos capture their King and launch public
proclamations describing the Expedition’s failure as the work of the
transaccionistas. Certainly, few Basques were fooled by the King’s procla-
mation at Arceniega that he had ‘returned only momentarily’ and –
bizarrely – that the Royal Expedition was a promising dress rehearsal
for a future offensive of ‘national liberation’ (rather than the conclu-
sive march on Madrid spoken about only weeks earlier).94 Moderates
were purged from the cabinet and many exiled, whilst such apostólicos
as Teijeiro and Guergué took their place and thereafter maintained a
stranglehold on Carlist politics which would antagonise the army under
Maroto and ultimately result in a civil war within the civil war. That
Maroto would win, and thus clear the way for peace, could not have
been predicted by anyone in late 1837, not as Don Carlos gave three
key ministries (State, Finance and War) to the belligerent José Arias
Teijeiro, a Galician of impoverished noble background, Royalist War vet-
eran and subsequent chamberlain to Don Carlos’s household, whose
promotion into the Carlist nobility of service offended both the older
nobility of birthright and such eighteenth-century military nobles as
Maroto.95
   The only strategic achievement of the Royal Expedition was to lurch
Carlism eastwards. The fact that most of the Expedition’s victories had
been won on Aragonese territory consolidated Cabrera’s leadership in
the Maestrazgo and created a functioning and centralised Carlist state
in the region. An offensive which stalemated the Basque country ener-
gised the Carlist Maestrazgo.96 Moreover, the propaganda value of local
Carlist victories (especially at Huesca, Barbastro and Cherta) encouraged
recruitment into Carlist rather than Cristino ranks (and, further, was
stimulated by the Liberals’ property revolution which created insecurity
in the pre-modern landownership rights that dominated Carlist areas
of Aragón).97 The ‘Supreme Royal Governing Junta of Aragón, Valencia
and Murcia’, set up in 1837, gave Cabrera an effective power of veto on
all matters: whereas he could vote on any matters he saw ﬁt, the junta
was forbidden from interfering in any way with military matters. These
arrangements were similar to those of the Junta of Berga in Catalonia,
whose territory was generally coterminous with that of Cabrera’s after
late 1837. All Cabrera would now need was a run of major victories in
order to make his position unassailable. This would come in 1838, and
so change the centre of Carlism’s gravity eastwards from the stalemate
in the north.
180 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   The Carlist domination of the Catalan far west and wide areas of
Aragón repeated the deep war of Cristino areas of Castile. The rav-
ages of Carlist bands forced agriculture and proto-industry into sudden
slumps, and these in turn fed recruitment. Recruitment into the Cristino
National Militia rose from 1837 due to the salary active service offered.
But as mobile Militia were routinely deployed away from their homes,
this opened up local communities to further depredations at the hands
of the Carlists. Equally, precisely in order to prevent hardship swelling
the ranks of the Cristino Militia, Carlist commanders frequently forced
local elites under their sway to hire hands in order to starve the Cristino
of recruits.98 This economic war was enough to give the Carlists domina-
tion of the Catalan countryside in the interior but could not generally
break the Cristino stranglehold on the towns and cities. Thus, it was
not just the lack of an Eliot Treaty in this part of Spain that made the
civil war particularly devastating for civilian lives and livelihoods: it was
also the total economic war which the nature of the combat here made
logical. This feature of Catalan Carlism has been acknowledged but not
adequately contextualised in war by historians.99
   Consequently, war in the east underwent ‘privatisation’ just as in Cas-
tile. The industrious small town of Valls was ruined when local Carlists
set up a toll gate along the main road leading to the town.100 When
Tristany, Catalonia’s principal Carlist guerrilla leader, saw a royal envoy
from the Basque country pay villagers for some supplies, his remark
showed surprise: ‘Well, I simply take the best of what they have and
pay them with my best wishes.’101 In western Catalonia, where Carlist
control by this time was virtually complete, a two-tiered requisitioning
system operated. Families of known royalist or apolitical backgrounds
were compensated in full and those with Liberal backgrounds, generally
with family members serving in the National Militia, were robbed.102
The privatisation of warfare was sometimes mitigated by community
solidarity. In March 1837, the southernmost Carlist guerrilla leader oper-
ating in the east, Forcadell, occupied Orihuela (Alicante), whose inhabi-
tants were divided between Cristino and Carlist sympathisers (including
its virtually Carlist bishop). Orihuela offered a potential civil war within
a civil war which had nonetheless remained peacefully coexistent until
Forcadell’s occupation. Ardent Liberals left for the safety of Cartagena
ahead of the occupation, but even the civic Carlists who remained
protested to Forcadell about one of his captives, a constitutional judge
of nearby Almansa, Juan Pablo Clemente, a popular local ﬁgure whom
Forcadell wanted to execute. But the judge’s extensive friendship circle
prevailed upon Forcadell to revoke the sentence, even while Orihuela
itself turned Carlist, as some 500 draftees previously earmarked for
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   181


Cristino conscription enlisted in Forcadell’s force instead. Civil wars fos-
ter virtuous community cohesion as well as vicious denunciations. The
small towns and villages that comprised most Spanish demography cre-
ated networks of social interaction which at their best forged solidarity
and at their worst terror and denunciation. Forcadell told Clemente: ‘if
I had been in your power I’m sure I would be dead, but I grant you your
freedom in recognition of the good you have done to others’.103
   Local mercies, however, barely altered the general terror of warfare
in a region without the Eliot Treaty. In early February 1837, a Carlist
detachment surprised a platoon-sized detachment of Cristino mobile
militia which had been planning to intercept Carlists at San Pedro de
Torelló. Instead, a rapid deployment of Carlist cavalry surprised the
Cristinos, who ﬂed and barricaded themselves in a house where they
refused to surrender and were instead all burnt alive.104 On 18 February,
a particularly gruesome tragedy overtook a sharpshooter column from
Málaga, that southern bastion of radical liberalism which immortalised
its victims as martyrs to liberty. Tristany surprised the column whose
commander, Colonel Francisco Antonio de Oliver, was cut down after
his men refused to follow his death-or-glory charge against the sur-
rounding Carlists. The prisoners, however, fared even worse. Some
280–300 were executed in cold blood, whilst one of their hapless num-
ber managed to take refuge behind a church altar. Although Tristany’s
men searched the building he managed to escape, naked and starv-
ing, to the Cristino stronghold of Calaf.105 But the terror did not end
there. Calaf soon fell to Tristany, some 70 of its houses being burnt and
several wives of militiamen murdered. Tristany was halted at Solsona,
whose besieged defenders underwent the most signal trials (including
the drinking of urine, whose saltiness was extracted by an apothecarist),
and were indemniﬁed by a special Cortes motion.106
   The passage of the Royal Expedition through Catalonia convinced
the King of the need to regularise the chaotic war in the east, so he
made the controversial appointment on 27 June 1837 of an outsider,
the 34-year-old Guipúzcoan, Antonio Urbiztondo, as the Comandante
General of the Carlist Army of Catalonia. A month later, the town of
Berga fell to the Carlists, and this became the seat of the Junta of Berga,
a civilian council which, like its Maestrazgo counterpart to the south,
could not assert itself against Carlist martial law. Whereas Urbiztondo’s
campaign against Cristino fortiﬁed centres bore fruit in the summer –
Gironella and Ripoll fell soon after Berga – his Basque suppression of
Catalan wrongdoing was a controversial centralisation of power over
the bandit-guerrillas (latrofacciosos) and exterminating angels who had
characterised the Catalan far west hitherto.107 The Royal Government
182 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


agreed that regularisation was necessary. In February 1837, the Carlist
representative in Paris, Pedro Gómez Labrador, made his King aware of
the damage Catalan border violations and terrorism was doing both to
Spain’s richest province and to support for the cause amongst legitimists
in France:108

   The letters of very sensible and royalist people leave no doubt of
   the frightful excesses being committed in Catalonia at the hands
   of guerrillas who call themselves ‘Carlists’, because in reality they
   are nothing more than bandits laying the country waste, rustling
   entire ﬂocks, even those belonging to respected local Carlists, looting
   country houses and farmsteads, levying ruinous contributions, seiz-
   ing hostages amongst those who cannot pay and ransoming them for
   exorbitant sums. Many country houses are now closed and the inhab-
   itants of small villages have ﬂed for the safety of forts and fortiﬁed
   places, preferring to live amongst usurping Liberals than to lay them-
   selves open to the constant robberies and violence of the so-called
   defenders of throne and altar. It is imperative that the strictest orders
   be given to our commanders in Catalonia that they impose military
   discipline on those bands of rogues who are laying to waste the most
   industrious province of Spain.

Urbiztondo’s imposition of military discipline was difﬁcult enough.
A biscuit-store bound for Carlist soldiers protecting the Junta of Berga
was violently robbed en route. Battalion commander, Pau Mañó, had
been conducting a private war abducting and extorting local civilians,
imprisoning them in caves to be ransomed. The money families had to
pay for ransom depleted available resources for the Carlist war effort.
Urbiztondo’s siege of Pont d’Armentera was delayed by his need to dis-
cipline a battalion whose ofﬁcers had absconded to sell looted goods
and whose leaderless men had broken ranks.109 But the opposition
of respectable Catalan Carlists made Urbiztondo’s mission impossible.
When he quartered a new, locally raised battalion from the Mondoñedo
area in the monastery of San Francisco (itself inhabited by only 14 friars
and therefore targeted for dissolution by the Cristinos), the men started
stripping an organ to be melted down to make bullets. The Bishop
of Mondoñedo protested, claiming that Don Carlos never stooped so
low in the Basque country and that there was no Papal approval for
such drastic war measures. Urbiztondo, exasperated by Catalan bandit-
priests, replied that he would strip churches of all metal and ‘even force
the slippers off his Holiness if he thought they were made of lead’.
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   183


But Mondoñedo, despite his episcopacy, was a powerful virtual Carlist
whose hitherto quiet hopes for a Carlist victory would soon explode
into a vehement sermon against the Cristino regime and its ‘war against
religion and its opinion’, turning him into a schismatic like León. Mon-
doñedo’s authority proved greater than Urbiztondo’s and the military
power lost to the religious, the troops being billeted elsewhere.110
   The onward march of the Royal Expedition denuded Urbiztondo of
forces and this soon began to tell as the Cristino counter-insurgency
initiative passed to Cristino Captain-General Meer from August 1837.
Urbiztondo’s defeat at San Juan de las Abadesas forced him to do what
he least desired, order his men to change their shirts and resort to guer-
rilla warfare. He complained to Berga at its deliberate neglect of his men,
who had been reduced to scavenging potatoes, but the junta was con-
temptuous in its reply and had in any case been lobbying Don Carlos
for Urbiztondo’s removal. Intelligence reached Urbiztondo of a plot to
kill him, and the junta got the King to promote Urbiztondo’s subordi-
nate, Benito Tristany, a Catalan exterminating angel, to command the
best local forces (his mountain corps). Finally, on 14 November, Berga
presented Urbiztondo with Don Carlos’s note dismissing him. This pro-
duced a stormy junta session from which the deposed comandante was
lucky to escape to Andorra with his life. He was followed into exile by
the Carlist intendant, whose unpopular policing of Carlist mountain vil-
lages, suppression of desertion and heavy taxation of the clergy had also
subjected him to death threats.111 The Barcelona press rejoiced: ‘Berga
is a veritable Babylon, and Urbiztondo has failed in his mission. We are
doing well, very well.’112
   The Urbiztondo controversy had overshadowed the division of the
Junta of Berga, between an aristocrática faction (Catalan nobility led by
Count Fonollar) and universitaria faction (comprising clerics expelled
from the Cristino-occupied University of Cervera). The clerics were
the most intransigent, but the aristocrats had been happy to fol-
low their lead over Urbiztondo, and to persuade Don Carlos to pro-
vide José Segarra as a more amenable replacement comandante. But
Segarra’s command was marred by a vigorous counter-insurgency by
Cristino Captain-General Meer, who reconquered Ripoll and boxed
the Carlists into unyielding mountain areas. By March 1838, Meer’s
counter-insurgency had borne fruit: the Carlist forces had shrunk from
some 13,000 to 7,000.113 Thus Segarra’s command was exposed as
incompetent, and he was replaced in July 1838 by a greater ﬁgure,
Count España, a legitimist of French origin who had been purged from
Catalonia’s captaincy-general in 1832. The Berga aristocrats hoped that
184 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


‘Count’ España would be their ally, but in fact he silenced them ﬁrst, and
most of their junta members either ﬂed to France or remained to rubber-
stamp military policy. Then España turned against the universitarios, but
not before he had met, and exceeded, their demands for the most dra-
conian military and most reactionary cultural policy.114 In the latter
regard, for example, España showed particular contempt for ‘geographi-
cally Cristino’ priests. The predicament of the Priest of Balsareny showed
the dangers facing clerics near front lines who made accommodations
with the ‘usurping’ Cristinos. Balsareny was strongly garrisoned enough
to make its priest feel safe from Carlist reprisals by both complying with
the Cristino abolition of the tithe (since 1837), and, consequently, refus-
ing to hand over these monies to the Carlists, thereby breaking with
this wartime tradition of covert clerical ﬁnancing of Carlists in front-
line areas. But one day, the priest went to visit a neighbouring priest on
the occasion of a religious feast. The latter had him seized and carried
into Carlist territory where España set him before an ecclesiastical tri-
bunal. On España’s instructions, the local Carlist paper Restaurador spun
this story in a dastardly fashion. The newspaper reported that the priest
had ﬂed Balsareny to reach loyal territory where he altruistically handed
over not only the tithe but also other donations as well. This marked the
man as a true Carlist. España was unmoved by the fact that this made
the poor fellow a marked man, as the Cristinos would doubtless tar-
get him for his ‘betrayal’. But España was unmoved: ‘a revolutionary
cleric is either a madman or a monster who deserves neither pity nor
sympathy’.115
   España’s military ruthlessness carved out for him the title ‘Tiger’ in
the enemy press, a title hitherto used only to describe Cabrera further
south.116 His Catalan soldiers nicknamed him the ‘decapitator’ (Trenca-
caps), and the count was famed for keeping a gallows outside his sleeping
quarters that was always busy hanging some unfortunate victim of his
wrath. España perfected the role of exterminating angel, renaming all
battalions as ‘Catholic and Royal’ (deliberately imitating the counter-
revolutionary Vendée), marrying it – during 1838 at least – with the role
of successful military strategist.117
   Whereas the Carlist east reached its apogee, the cradle of Carlism,
the Basque country, never escaped from the stagnation caused by the
failed Royal Expedition. Nothing more imaginative than yet another
expedition was proposed late in 1837. Even though the expedition led
by Basilio Antonio García on 28 December 1837 succeeded in break-
ing into Castile, it did not alter the Carlists’ stagnation. Furthermore,
weary Cristino civilians proved both far less willing to collaborate with
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   185


yet another Carlist invasion and far more willing to oppose it. Two
graphic episodes illustrate how Cristino citizens had learnt from bitter
years of war to mobilise popular resistance against invasion. García’s
Carlists passed through the eastern Andalucían village of Nerpio on
13 February 1838; the village’s resentful inhabitants were rallied by
the local sheriff and murdered some stragglers who had fallen behind
the invaders’ rearguard. But Basilio, unaware of this atrocity, returned
Nerpio whose inhabitants, fearing the worst, deserted their village en
masse. The Carlists did not suspect anything sinister until the bloodied
clothes and powder of their unfortunate comrades were found in the
loft of the sheriff’s house. Outraged, the expedition burnt the house,
and then the whole village, to the ground. Whilst other villages did
not fare so badly, they nonetheless experienced routine ransacking and
wastage: whatever was not useful to the Carlists was destroyed.118 And
even innocent villages sometimes paid the ultimate price for resistance.
When the expedition swung north into New Castile it made an example
of Calzada de Calatrava. Some 166 of its inhabitants – militiamen and
their women and children – were either burnt or crushed to death after
the church they had fortiﬁed was set on ﬁre, weakening its roof, which
collapsed onto the defenders. This catastrophe was made possible by the
defection to the invaders of the local prior. When Army of the Centre
Commander-in-Chief Narváez arrived to liberate Calzada, he bowed to
popular pressure and had the cleric shot.119
  The Basque war effort never recovered from the defeat of the Royal
Expedition. The Royal Police were gone, but the Royal Police state
remained and became more irksome on a population exhausted by the
war. A law passed on 22 January 1838 banned any interaction by any
persons other than designated men with Cristino prisoners-of-war. This
was very hard on families caught between lines and sides. On 19 Febru-
ary 1838, a quarantine was placed on all foreign and Cristino vessels
trying to enter Carlist ports. The ﬁnancial demands of war were exhaust-
ing even the stoic ability of the Basques to give. Total Carlist tax
revenue raised in Navarra, Guipúzcoa, Vizcaya and Alava in the year
up to November 1838 amounted to some 40,188,886 reales, plus some
3,400,000 reales raised at customs. But this 43,588,886 total fell short
of the 46,355,000 expenditure for the same period, leaving a deﬁcit of
2,766,114 reales. This had to be bridged by yet more indirect taxes, ‘vol-
untary’ contributions from clerics, ﬁnes on Liberals and by grants from
foreign powers whose sympathy was wearing thin. In May, the King
of Sardinia promised some 800,000 francs to Carlist Spain, offering to
increase this donation if Russia, Prussia and Austria followed suit.120 But
186 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the chronic shoestring nature of Carlist ﬁnances gave a keen edge to the
war-weariness and outright conspiracies which grew in the north dur-
ing 1838. Sometimes Don Carlos managed to ride out this disaffection
by judicious changes in policy. In March 1838, the Bishop of León suc-
cessfully prevailed upon his King to dismiss the unpopular José Arias
Teijeiro y Correa (who had always been regarded as a vulgar and brutal
upstart) as his War Minister and to have him replaced by friends of the
popular Prince Sebastián. But other conspiracies, whipping up hatred of
the ojalateros as a convenient vehicle for protest, grew in frequency and,
as the Muñagorri phenomenon would show, began to break with the
Carlist regime.121
   Despite this strategic and political malaise, in early 1838 yet another
expedition invaded Castile, led by one of the most controversial ﬁgures
in Carlist politics. Count Negri was a middle-aged Peninsular and
Royalist War veteran and twice-fugitive from Cristino captivity. His skills
as a courtier won him promotion and the scorn of fellow Carlist diplo-
mats like Marquess Labrador who judged: ‘chamberlains, chaplains and
lawyers should stick to their assigned duties and keep out of the affairs
of military strategy and commanding armies’.122 Negri’s incompetence
in setting out with a badly provisioned force across unyielding rocky ter-
rain led one later, admittedly biased, anti-Marotista (Negri was Maroto’s
protégé) traditionalist to suspect that the whole operation was designed
to sabotage the Carlist cause.123
   Negri’s expedition during early 1838 was poorly provisioned even
from the outset. It marched across the Ebro and around northern Spain,
including a westward march towards Galicia, and then south-east via
Burgo de Osma and Segovia towards La Granja. Strategic assistance came
from Merino in the mountains around Burgos and from Basilio’s expedi-
tion in La Mancha, both of whom diverted Cristino troops. Yet Espartero
was hard on Negri’s heels, not allowing him time to regroup or take
proper rations. Negri’s men went months without pay. A modest victory
at Bendejo strengthened Negri’s hand in negotiating prisoners’ treat-
ment with the enemy, and the Eliot Treaty was agreed to be respected
by both sides during the campaign. Meanwhile, Negri went about the
usual Carlist invasion tactic of setting up improvised Carlist juntas in
the settlements he occupied, disarming the National Militia and taking
on recruits who proved to be more of a burden than anything else. Once
again, some communities ‘managed’ Carlist occupations: for example,
by town-hall delegations riding out to hand over the ‘keys’ to their
towns. Other settlements barricaded themselves in defensible points,
such as the army and militia garrison of Burgo de Osma, which held
out in the town’s fort and cathedral tower. Negri ‘poached’ conscripts
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   187


for his own forces and set up workshops on the approach to Segovia
which employed craftsmen with the loot of surrounding villages to pro-
duce badly needed berets and clothes. Negri took Segovia where, like
Zaratiegui before him, he wooed Catholics by hearing a Palm Sunday
Mass and by issuing a 7 April 1838 proclamation to Castilians asking
them to renounce the usurping Cristinos and to rally to his side in the
name of religion.124
   This was clever propaganda for communities which had faced three
years of drastic secularisation measures tempered only by local inertia
and the incompetence of the Madrid regime. But the time for win-
ning over civilians’ religiosity was over. The latter were exhausted by
repeated demands and outrages from both sides, and were in no mood
to receive Espartero’s reprisals. Espartero, for his part, conducted his
most successful counter-insurgency campaign. Appalling weather and
lack of footwear burdened Negri’s march, his numbers dwindling by the
end of April 1838 to 1,800 infantry and 100 cavalry. Since having been
forced to quit Segovia on 10 April, Negri had not had a moment’s respite,
his forces at one point having to perform a 40-mile forced march. Set-
tlements in his path bolted their doors to his men and increasingly
offered resistance, such as the militiamen and peseteros of Aguilar de
Campo, who barricaded themselves on 25 April 1838, resisting Negri’s
Carlists until Espartero’s vanguard arrived. While Negri extricated his
precious artillery, he was less successful at stopping the desertion of his
men. Finally, on 27 April at Brújula, Espartero routed Negri. Espartero
attributed his triumph to ‘free men’ defeating the forces of despotism.
Even though Negri escaped with his bodyguard, and would ﬁght again
in the defence of Morella, this was the ﬁrst unambiguous defeat of a
Carlist expedition since the Royal Expedition. Cristino military morale,
now virtually personiﬁed by the ﬁgure of Espartero, was recovering.125
So was Cristino military materiel. The 163 higher ofﬁcers, 1,662 ofﬁcers,
23,426 troops, 654 cavalry and over 1,000 artillery ofﬁcers and men
counted by the Carlist Royal Army in the Basque country in September
1838 were outnumbered three times by the Cristino forces in theatre.126
Moreover, the Cristino arms production, hitherto massively dependent
upon French and, especially, British factories, promised to improve
markedly when cannon production from foundries relocated from the
Basque country to Seville ﬁnally got underway in early 1839.127
   The Carlists, by contrast, faced a bleak future. Ever since the defeat of
the Royal Expedition, hostility towards Don Carlos in Carlist ranks had
passed its tipping-point. In particular, the King’s treatment of Prince
Sebastián, the hero of Oriamendi, rankled (a ﬂeeting act of insubordi-
nation had been turned by the apostólicos into grounds for dismissing
188 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


him); equally so did the imprisonments and suspended death sentences
handed down to such popular leaders as Zaratiegui and Elío. The latter
two were championed by a mutiny by troops in the Carlist capital, dur-
ing which demands for their release and the removal of Don Carlos were
uttered. The ringleader, a certain Lieutenant-Colonel Urra, was executed,
but the signs were clear that a civil war was starting to engulf Carlist
ranks from within.128 Manuel Lassala, who, since the July 1836 revolu-
tion had been the secretary to the provincial deputation of Zaragoza,
leading the city’s defence in 1838 against Cabañero’s Carlists, was well
placed to judge the mood of Carlists in the surrounding countryside.129
He observed the growing inﬂuence of Carlist transaccionismo, or maro-
tismo, dynastically loyal enlightened absolutism hostile to the theocratic
‘brutes’, or apostólicos, and Basque fueristas who dominated the ranks
of non-Castilian Carlism. The loose bag of absolutists, foralists and
medievalists of 1833 was splitting into an absolutist and apostólico wing,
with Basque foralists between the two factions. For the moment, the
dynastic loyalty to the person of Don Carlos made both factions priori-
tise the war over their own divisions. But as the compromise peace offers
from the Cristinos improved, Carlism’s last commander-in-chief, the
absolutist, Rafael Maroto, would make peace over the heads of his King
and his theocratic entourage. Don Carlos, after all, had become at best a
mere cipher and at worst the object of ridicule. His time-wasting Masses
during the Royal Expedition, his ﬂat refusal even to consider recognis-
ing Cristino debts and his insistence on sharing the military ‘advice’ he
regularly received from a nun all made the marotista faction see him as
a liability.130 The increasing extremism of the Carlist Royal Government
also sapped the willingness of Basque villagers to sustain the ﬁght. The
prohibition placed on ofﬁcers and men marrying any woman with rel-
atives who were Cristinos was particularly resented, as was the clique
of religious extremists who ‘worked towards’ the King’s poorly articu-
lated will by launching ill-conceived expeditions and leading cultural
crackdowns. Manuel Lassala observed that a growing clamour rose for
moderation on the Carlist side:131

   Don Carlos was too fanatical, bloody and superstitious. True Carlists
   did not volunteer for this, and did not mean to sacriﬁce their lives
   and goods in order to hand over Spain to the hangman and the
   backward times of Philip I. Those were Carlists never worthy of the
   name; no, a thousand times, no! – supposing all Carlists wanted to
   reignite the bonﬁres of the Inquisition is as unjust as supposing that
   all Liberals were partisans of the guillotine and lamp-post lynchings.
                                                Carlist Failure, 1837–39   189


   This grassroots discontent could not fail to play out on the battle-
ﬁeld. The Madrid government, thanks to growing Carlist defection to
the Cristinos and to the cross-border intelligence networks of Spymaster
Aviraneta, was keenly aware of the divisions in Carlist ranks and sought
to exploit them. José Antonio de Muñagorri, a native of Verástegui
(Alava), began the war as the backbone of Carlist war-related industry,
owning six factories in Guipúzcoa and Navarra. He has been repre-
sented as a treacherous buffoon in traditionalist scholarship.132 After
his repeated petitions to the Carlist court for a compromise peace fell
on deaf ears, he emigrated to the French side of the Pyrenees where
he contacted Cristino agents and forged a plan to raise a guerrilla
force of Spanish Basques. By November 1837, Muñagorri had become
a salaried Cristino ofﬁcer, and on 18 April 1838 he raised his standard in
Verástegui calling for peace and fueros (paz y fueros), designed to divide
the fuerista Basques against the transaccionista Castilians. Muñagorri’s
gambit reﬂected the growing willingness of both many fueristas and
many disenchanted absolutists (who would soon be captained by
Maroto) to forge a compromise peace sacriﬁcing Don Carlos in return for
Basque autonomy.133 In fact, Muñagorri’s military operations proved to
be tragicomic, and Cristino generals were so vexed by the desertion his
‘free corps’ attracted from conscripts that they refused to cooperate with
him, and his whole force was interned in France the following year.134
   The sudden Cristino rediscovery of the Basque fueros was as much
for its own security as for the division of the enemy. On 27 May 1838,
the Cristino free corps in Pamplona rose in rebellion, killing General
Sarsﬁeld and Colonel Mendívil, and occupying the city for more than a
month before Espartero’s paciﬁcation action.135 The motives for this ris-
ing betrayed the divided loyalties of Basques serving the Cristino cause:
for its leaders, the Peninsular War guerrilla veteran, Colonel León Iriarte,
and Comandante Pablo Barricart, were motivated by the anti-foralismo
of Madrid, and proclaimed the independence of Navarra.136 But the
fueros were still peripheral to Cristino strategy, whereas for the Carlists,
except in Aragón and the Catalan far west, they were part of its termi-
nal crisis. An unlikely understanding of two Ayacucho veterans, now
opposing one another as rival commanders-in-chief, would soon bring
the war to an end over the heads of crowned princes and even elected
governments.
8
Stalemate and Cristino Victory,
1838–40




The defeat of the Royal Expedition passed the strategic initiative to the
Cristino army. Whilst Espartero’s Army of the North tightened the noose
around the Basque country in the north, Narváez’s Army of Reserve
suppressed both remaining Carlist pockets and radical liberalism in
the south. Cristino tactics, strategy and supplies improved. States of
siege were imposed in a growing number of Cristino provincial capi-
tals, Revolutionary Militia units were purged, militarised or disbanded.
The moderado government (elected in 1837) justiﬁed counter-revolution
in terms of the Carlist threat, eroding constitutional liberties and
governance in order to streamline the war effort. But the progresista
opposition rallied by mobilising disbanded militia, press campaigns and,
above all, their resilient power bases of popularly elected local govern-
ment. They also enlisted the support of the Cristino war hero, General
Espartero. Espartero brokered a victorious peace settlement with his
Carlist opposite number, Rafael Maroto, which outlawed Don Carlos,
allowed Carlists to join Cristino ranks, and promised that the Basque
ancient laws (fueros) would be respected. Rafael Maroto’s command of
the Carlist army from June 1838 excluded the Apostólico faction from
power, culminating in his execution of several of their leading ﬁgures,
and prepared the way for a compromise peace with the Cristinos. The
August 1839 Treaty of Vergara was negotiated by commanders-in-chief
from both sides, demonstrating the degree to which the civil war had
emasculated civilian authority. It orphaned Cabrera’s achievements in
the east, whence the following year he left for exile, ending the First
Carlist War.
   The year 1838 saw the Madrid Cortes conduct debates about how to
end the conﬂict. Whereas moderados proved willing to entertain some
sort of negotiated peace on Cristino dynastic terms – a ‘transaction’ –

                                  190
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   191


progresistas argued that both national honour and revolutionary logic
demanded unconditional victory. Moderado Finance Minister, Alejandro
Mon, complained about San Miguel’s appeal for yet another levy of
100,000 men, as it was clear that the previous batch had largely gone
over to the facciosos. In the end, it was agreed that a quinta of 40,000
men be added to the nominal Cristino strength of 207,000 infantry
and 14,000 cavalry (a number which casualties and desertions in fact
rendered much lower). Progresista San Miguel observed that only a war
to the death could end civil wars, transacción being a canard; he was
answered by Toreno that history proved the opposite. San Miguel coun-
tered that he meant that only Carlist idea could be crushed forever, not
its defenders. The rareﬁed nature of Spanish Cortes debates, involving
Europe’s most elegant political addresses, was almost obscenely divorced
from reality. This was symbolised by Cristino Spain’s last prime minister
to have commanded a civilian power base (juntas, militia), Mendizábal,
who grew tired of the complaints of senior army ofﬁcers in the wake
of the La Granja revolution. His Cortes speech that ‘each ofﬁcer had a
girdle of gold’ which they might divert from their pleasures to pay their
men, following the brazen claim in the same speech that no Cristino
units were owed more than four months’ pay arrears, was met with rage
by the ofﬁcer corps and demands for personal satisfaction.1 Leftist politi-
cians could not see beyond their ingrained anti-militarism: Mendizábal
answered Espartero’s complaints in a tactless fashion, implying soldiers
were little more than beasts of burden (‘mercenaries’, as Argüelles had
slandered them in 1813) and that Espartero’s soldiers had consumed
40,000 rations per day for ten weeks after his relief of Bilbao even as his
army stood idle.2
   With the crucial exception of Espartero, most senior Cristino ofﬁcers
were aligned with the authoritarian moderados, especially as this fac-
tion endorsed the tendency of regional captain-generals, after 1837, to
subordinate National Militia rivals to army power, usually through the
imposition of states of siege. Yet the Liberal parties had limited impact
on the civil war: indeed, despite some consistent constitutional disagree-
ments (suffrage, municipalities, prerogatives of the Crown), the Liberal
parties themselves barely amounted to more than patronage networks
held together by subscriptions to rival newspapers and occasional ral-
lies disguised as banquets, and as such they rode rather than made the
waves of the civil war. Rather, the last three years of the war saw the
militarisation of the politics of both ‘home fronts’, most enduringly
in the victorious side of Cristino Spain, where the years 1837–40 have
been seen as the advent of praetorian politics in Spain.3 On the one
192 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


hand, there was a participatory dimension to praetorianism as soldiers
and – in the case of the underpaid Cristino naval base at Cartagena –
sailors were paid to ‘ﬁx’ election results to favour the moderados (pro-
gresistas during 1835–37 had done the same using militiamen), either
by being unconstitutionally enrolled in the electoral roll, or by being
deployed to exercise a range of ‘moral’ as well as violent pressure. The
phenomenon of soldiers making and breaking elections, which Romero
Alpuente denounced during the Triennium, was repeated during the
Carlist War on a greater scale.4 The praetorian domination of minis-
terial politics turned Spain under Espartero at the end of the war into
the exact opposite of what Cea Bermúdez, Spain’s last civilian absolutist
prime minister at the start of the war, had desired (Table 8.1).
   Whereas the ministerial politicisation of Spain’s hundreds of thou-
sands of serving soldiers was a dramatic consequence of the Carlist War,
its signiﬁcance was pedestrian in comparison to the two other polit-
ical legacies of the conﬂict. The ﬁrst legacy was the rise to power of
a Bonapartist ‘people’s choice’, General Espartero, at the end of the
war, for reasons which were almost entirely to do with the conﬂict
itself rather than structural shifts. The second legacy both accounted for
the ﬁrst (popular support for the ‘peace dividend’ revolution of 1840)
and stood apart, sometimes opposed, to it, namely the radicalisation of
popular, non-ministerial politics (economic militancy and support for
double regime radicalism) which, again, was either caused or at least
shaped by the war. None of this radicalisation assisted the formal war
aims of the Cristino faction, namely the national and international
recognition of the legitimacy of Princess Isabella’s succession and the
regency of her mother, and, as a corollary to this, the institution of a
constitutional civilian rule of law in Spain. Rather seven long years of
war had changed its popular meaning from a dynastic (and consubstan-
tially, religious) dispute, into a war in which hundreds of thousands of
soldiers and militiamen, and hundreds of thousands of civilians besides,
had been schooled by violence into exercising political consciousness
for the ﬁrst time. In the previous chapters we have explored this devel-
opment largely in the context of mobilisations, battles, sieges, invasions
and occupations. But the war also caused, or at least inﬂuenced, social
protests and class struggles in a manner poorly explored by the existing
historiography.
   Some of this radicalisation may be linked to the highbrow concerns
of the Cortes with regard to the virtual bankruptcy caused by the war.
Mon’s despair at the state of Cristino ﬁnances exposed him to ridicule
when he was taken in by a Swiss adventurer that some treasure allegedly
buried in Santiago in 1809 could be unearthed. Excavations were begun,
Table 8.1     Eco del Comercio, 11 December 1839: Strength, preparedness and distribution of Cristino National Militia late 1839

District      Infantry   Cavalry   Artillery   Firemen   Total    Infantry Cavalry   Artillery Firemen   Total    Infantry Cavalry   Artillery Firemen   Total
                                                                  under    under     under     under     under    without without    without without     without
                                                                  arms     arms      arms      arms      arms     arms     arms      arms      arms      arms

New             52632     1267        344          0      54243     25102   1158       343         0      26603    27530     109         1        0       27640
  Castile
Old Castile    154103     1266       499           0     155868     22666   1092       479         0     24207    131467     174        20        0      131661
Aragón          38211      395       527         135      39268     13310    395       519       133     14357     24901       0         8        2       24911
Catalonia       37978      160       834           0      38972     29277    116       749         0     30142      8701      44        85        0        8830
Valencia        58857     1409      2169         118      62553     26859   1317      1720       118     30014     31998      92       149        0       32539
Andalucía       27710     2471       719           0      30900      5822   1283       650         0      7755     21888    1188        69        0       23145
Granada         48195     1199       330        1031      50775     11726    572       274       632     13204     36469     627        56        0       37551
Extremadura     33392      961       163          85      34601      5301    301       141        85      5830     28091     658        22      399       28771
Navarra          1565      196         0           0       1761      1517    196         0         0      1713        48       0         0        0          48
Basque           2508        6       104          43       2661      2302      6        70        42      2420       206       0        34        0         240
  provinces
Galicia        145539      140        158          0     145837     13122    135       141         0      13398   132417       5        16        1      132439
Mallorca        10521       79        499          0      11099      3409     76       353         0       3838     7112       5       146        0        7261
Total          611211     9549      6346        1412     628518   160383    6649      5439      1010     173481   450828    2900       907      402      455037




                                                                                                                                                                   193
194 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


but all that was uncovered were the latrines of the San Roque hospi-
tal, which stank out the unfortunate town.5 Cristino Spain’s foreign
policy during 1838 was dominated by its ﬁnancial crisis. Government
expenditure exceeded receipts by almost double: 838 million reales were
received by the Treasury against outgoings of 1,546 million. Seeing the
ﬁnancial plight, the British minister, Villiers, again pressed a plan which
he had been formulating for four years, namely an Anglo-Spanish free
trade treaty. Britain would lend Spain money in return for the sus-
pension of import duties on cotton. When this proposal reached the
Cortes it was bitterly opposed and defeated, Catalan deputies and sen-
ators leading the resistance.6 Catalonia’s cotton industry was advanced
by Spanish standards but could not possibly hope to compete in a free-
trade environment with that of Britain. Catalan cotton magnates thus
acted as good Spanish nationalists, and a certain strand of Anglophobia
was revived amongst the otherwise generally Anglophile progresistas.
More radical-republican secret societies in Barcelona turned the protec-
tion of ‘national industry’ into doctrine. When, soon after the civil war,
Espartero signed the free trade treaty, the republican ‘Society of Spanish
Regenerators’ alleged that the British want to ‘turn Iberia into a new
India, have no principles beyond their own egotism, and want to keep
us poor and ignorant so that we might work for them as slaves’.7
   An attempt by several moderado Cortes deputies to reintroduce the
tithe in order to assuage the crisis of secular clergy was blocked by
progresista deputies who were undoubtedly expressing the popular will
(which included episodes of popular violence against tithe-proctors,
especially in the Liberal south and east).8 The Count of Ofalia, moderado
prime minister from December 1837 until September 1838, symbolised
the rightward shift in ministerial liberalism, not least for being ‘soft’ on
the Catholic Church.9 But the persistence of tithing was wormwood and
gall to a Cristino population which had come to see the ‘Carlist’ Church
as the source of its suffering. During the revolutionary summer of 1836,
as the Gómez expedition tore into southern Spain, tithe-proctors in the
province of Toledo were jeered at and assaulted, and local authorities
could not (or would not) offer them protection.10 When the central gov-
ernment sent troops, this only served to inﬂame radicalism even further.
Thus, General Peón’s use of force in collecting the culto y clero in the
province of Málaga during the summer of 1838 left bitter memories.11
The following year, citizens in this province mobilised in a mass tithe
strike, which began in Motril (Granada) before spreading to other pueb-
los. Central government despatched an infantry battalion to protect the
proctors but the strike held.12
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   195


   The broadest and deepest networks of popular radicalism had evolved
in Liberal port-cities, in particular, Barcelona, Málaga and Cádiz.13 Meer’s
crackdown on radicalism in Barcelona was mirrored elsewhere on the
Cristino home front in accordance with the moderado election victory
of 1837, by disarming and reforming the militia of Barcelona, Reus
and Tarragona.14 Meer’s successful counter-insurgency against Segarra’s
forces, including his capture of Solsona on 27 July 1838, earned him
political capital to suppress the Radicals.15 The Radical press cast the
moderado Catalan as an honorary member of the ‘Angels of Andalucía’,
the satirical title given to dictatorial captain-generals who imposed mar-
tial law in provincial capitals. Meer imposed a 10,000-reales bond on
all people in Barcelona who could not satisfy the authorities of the
reasons for their stay. The city was full of secret societies and mainly
French expatriate Radicals.16 But the crackdowns by Meer, and other
moderado captain-generals were limited in their effectiveness, for the
progresista press campaign of the late 1830s made heroes out of those
Radicals imprisoned and deported to the garrison colonies in Spanish
North Africa.17
   In Málaga the moderados imposed a state of siege in response to local
authorities’ refusal to cooperate in the judicial investigation into Don-
adío’s and SanJust’s assassinations. Málaga occupied a strategically vital
position: it triangulated Cristino control over the only enduring Carlist
insurgency in Andalucía, the Serranía de Ronda to the west, and its role
as a port grew in importance from 1838 as a series of Carlist prison-
ers’ insurrections in the North African garrison colonies made the city
the staging point for punitive expeditions. Certainly, its importance was
appreciated by allied forces: in October 1836 the commander of a Royal
Navy ship stationed in the port threatened to suspend all British aid
deliveries unless the ‘revolutionary chaos’ came to a halt.18 The risings
of the Militia in 1835 and 1836, as we have seen, started here (whilst
Málaga would either be the ﬁrst, or one of the ﬁrst, provinces to spawn
future revolutions in 1840, 1843, 1854 and 1868).19 Between 1812 and
1835, the name of Málaga’s main square alternated between ‘Royal’ and
‘Constitution’ no fewer than six times. By 1835, the town decided to
save money on stonemasonry by leaving two plaques bearing the alter-
nate names at opposite corners of the square, in the hope that either
might serve the political demands of the day. During the 1836 rev-
olution, however, revolutionaries destroyed the ‘Royal’ plaque and it
was never reinstated.20 Málaga’s radical liberalism can be explained by
several factors. Its modest iron-and-steel industry expanded through-
out the 1830s, to make the city second only to Barcelona in industrial
196 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


importance by 1850, yet with classically Liberal free-trade elites instead
of Catalonia’s protectionists. Málaga, during the Carlist War, was the
only Cristino port to register a positive trade balance with the out-
side world, even though this success was tempered by a deﬁcit in
Spanish cabotage and by rampant smuggling, which was afforded local
protection.21 If statistics could have computed the activity of the so-
called mochileros (‘backpackers’), the smugglers who moved contraband
from Gibraltar via the lawless Serranía de Ronda, then Málaga would
have conformed more closely to the Spanish trade deﬁcit.22
   It is hard to explain much of Málaga’s radicalism because its exas-
perated governors did not risk committing their intelligence to paper.
In March 1838 Captain-General Palarea wrote to Madrid saying that he
was successfully penetrating the ‘juntas and afﬁliations of Andalucía’
but the delicate nature of this task obliged him to keep most details
secret.23 That said, a great part of the radicalism was certainly an expres-
sion of the elaborate local economic interests arising from support for
free trade. In 1837 the Secretary of the Treasury professed his disgust
at the fact that only 5 per cent of the contribution owed by Málaga
to help fund the costs of the central government had so far been paid,
an unpatriotic meanness all the more outrageous because ‘[Málaga] has
swamped the nation with illicit goods which have considerably reduced
tax receipts’.24 Whenever carabineers tried to impound contraband, they
were met with all kinds of resistance. In October 1839, vendors went on
strike in protest at a violent anti-contraband operation in one of the
main shopping streets, which forced the head of carabineers to resign.25
Ofﬁcial protection for contraband was matched by that for political
extremism. The moderado state of siege here was the least effective of
all the provincial capitals. The fact that the Militia used the occasion of
the Queen-Regent’s birthday in 1839 to hold political meetings and to
publish satires which ‘scandalously abused the precious right of the free
press’ suggests that the citizens’ force was not cowed as in other Cristino
cities.26 Military governors frequently resigned, sometimes in response
to death threats,27 and always under the relentless pressure of progresista
newspapers which used Málaga as proof that the moderados were more
interested in persecuting their political enemies hundreds of miles from
the front lines than in vanquishing the mortal enemy of liberalism. The
shabby treatment of the widows of two murdered Radicals underlined
this charge.28 By October 1838, the ‘Widows of Comares’ campaign had
borne fruit as controversy forced the Military Governor of Málaga to end
the transportations of Radicals to African garrison prisons and to return
to liberty all those surviving prisoners.29
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   197


   It was one of the war’s peculiarities that desertion from Cristino ranks,
and subsequent banditry, continued at a high rate even in 1839 when
the Cristino side was in sight of victory.30 Some of this may be explained
by a growing pragmatic indulgence shown by a victorious army, which,
during the revolutions and defeats years earlier, had been prone to more
condign punishment of offenders. Other explanations lie in the pop-
ular anger at the way that Church properties nationalised under the
revolution were not being parcelled out to Cristino veterans, as had
been proposed by some ‘social Liberals’, but were being auctioned off to
local oligarchs to remedy disastrous state ﬁnances. This ‘missed chance’
of popular landownership was explained by Marxists as a failed ‘bour-
geois revolution’. New property owners, who were few, unlike during
the French Revolution, were too weak to advance their ‘historic mission’
of advancing capitalism.31 This ‘failure’ school was partially revised by
post-Cold War scholarship, which presented a more optimistic, but still
mixed, picture of the Liberal property revolution.32 In fact, the 1830s
property revolution was hybrid in nature. Whereas several new buyers
did become property owners for the ﬁrst time, they generally did not
drive radical capitalism but were ‘feudalised’ by the social and cultural
hegemony of the landed nobility, even though the legal separateness of
the nobility had been abolished for good. The undynamic rentier land-
lord with strong contacts with local authorities was the social category
that beneﬁted most.33
   Of course, this property revolution had already been underway in ﬁts
and starts since the 1790s, with Jovellanos’s free-market philosophy,
Godoy’s conﬁscation of a portion of Church property a decade later,
and that of the Liberals in the early 1820s.34 But the greatest nineteenth-
century programme of land nationalisation in Spain happened during
Spain’s greatest civil war, when half-a-million Spaniards were under
arms, and when an 1839 Cortes motion to reward Carlist War veterans
with nationalised land was rejected by Liberal deputies who had spent
six years exhorting ‘the people’ to accept sacriﬁces in the ﬁght against
Carlism.35 Even veterans lucky enough to afford nationalised property
found the auctions rigged in favour of vested interests, as intendants
designated the lands to be offered for auction with the assistance of
local ‘experts’ who were usually the agents of existing landowners. And
the intendants themselves were easily bribed to rig auctions in advance,
despite the theoretical risk of sanctions against such abuses.36 The struc-
tural grievances of Spanish landownership were at their plainest in the
large estates in the south and south-west, which were worked by landless
and (controversially) largely Galician migrant labour, and the wartime
198 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


property revolution energised these like never before. A progresista elec-
tion campaign in Córdova six months after the end of the war went
awry when a hired mob of veterans ended up targeting migrant work-
ers instead of moderados. The veterans were reminded ‘not to hit the
Galicians’, but to attack ‘the fat people’.37
   The consubstantiation of war and revolution provoked economic mil-
itancy across the Cristino ‘home front’. Both desertion and banditry
remained high towards the end of the war as virtual reserve armies of
bandits roamed the Cristino countryside. The generalised states of siege
in Andalucía from 1837 allowed Captain-Generals to make short work
of bandits, especially whenever there was the slightest hint that the
bandits might in fact be ‘Carlists’ as well as mere criminals. Thus, the
Captain-General of Granada in November 1838 was glad to make public
proclamations of the execution of 13 insurgents who had been preying
on rural communities.38 Even though civil authorities were emascu-
lated under states of siege in matters of crime and punishment, by the
following spring the Civil Governor of Granada had concluded that
economic grievances were motivating at least some of this wrongdo-
ing. He parcelled out fallow municipal lands to landless labourers, in a
desperate bid to end the violent lawlessness around Guadix caused by
draft-dodgers and deserters.39
   In Cristino cities Spain’s female tobacco workers gained a reputation
for militancy. Smoking was a key part of Spanish popular culture: a for-
eign traveller was surprised to discover that even women smoked, and
that the only smoke-free places were the Cortes and the judicial bench.40
Spain pioneered cigarettes, displacing snuff and requiring dainty ﬁngers
for production. This changed the sex of the workforce as women work-
ers (known as tabacaleras or cigarreras) vastly outnumbered men workers
by the time of the Carlist War. Tobacco had long been a state monopoly
produced in factories at Madrid, Cádiz, Valencia, Barcelona, La Coruña,
Alicante and – the biggest – in Seville; all of these were in Cristino hands,
and the ﬁnished product reached the front line bearing such images of
Liberal patriotism as Espartero and Princess Isabella. Tobacco for troops
ranked in importance alongside food and munitions, which turned its
production into a patriotic and political matter, even more than it had
already been before the war (when the Jacobin, Romero Alpuente, had
campaigned to remove tax from tobacco).41 The war inﬂected grievances
about conditions and management of the state monopoly. When José
Laﬁta, a Cristino desk ofﬁcer with powerful connections to the govern-
ing moderado party, was appointed director of the Cádiz factory, he was
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   199


lampooned by the opposition Eco because ‘although he is completely
untested commanding men on the ﬁeld of battle, he may nonetheless
prove some use commanding women’.42 One hundred and ﬁfty male
snuffbreakers who had been conscripted into the Cristino army returned
to Seville after the war protesting their patriotic right to regain their
jobs. Insult was added to injury when the government offered them
alternative jobs in public works projects (which had been notorious for
employing Carlist prisoners).43
   The greatest wartime economic militancy came from the strikes and
smuggling of the tobacco women. Demands for increased wartime pro-
duction were worsening their working conditions which, in addition to
an eight-hour day, pensions and free overalls, had included the provi-
sion of crèches and wet nurses.44 On 2 August 1838, after suffering four
months’ pay arrears and deteriorating factory food, all 2,000 Seville taba-
caleras went on indeﬁnite strike. The male minority was co-opted into
joining the women, strike-breakers were barred, and the mayor received
a delegation of 20 tabacaleras. The captain-general, who feared the
impact of tobacco shortages on soldiers’ morale, intervened to source a
Chambers of Commerce loan to pay the backlog of wages. The captain-
general conceded this in bad grace, stressing that so many young men
were spilling their blood for liberty and the crown of Isabella whilst
silently suffering pay arrears (a grating and also inaccurate statement,
as at least one conscripted tobacco worker had recently been executed
for turning his musket on an ofﬁcer in the course of a pay dispute).45
Even though the women failed to get their secondary demands met
(removal of the 3-reales weekly levy for medical and burial insurance,
and the right to hold meetings), this ﬁrst great Seville strike passed
without further incident.46 Four more strikes would ensue in as many
years, the May 1842 strike being the most prolonged.47 In July 1839, the
Madrid tabacaleras launched a strike in protest at the continued humili-
ation of having to undergo a body search at the end of shifts. This time
the factory administrators enlisted 40 militiamen to lock the women in
the building, denying them food until they submitted. The authorities
were right to suspect smuggling, but the women did this via a tun-
nel to a secluded street outside. When this was discovered, two weeks
after the strike, the press condemned this ‘sabotage of the state coffers’
at a time when the war for liberty was still ongoing.48 Not only had
Carlist smuggling across the Pyrenees lengthened the war, but Cristino
civilians were doing the same by exercising their ‘moral economy’: in
October 1839, Málaga’s shop owners closed their premises in protest at
200 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


overzealous carabineers.49 Smuggling had long been a way of life along
Spain’s porous borders and coastline, practised in three ways.50 But the
civil war had politicised it like never before.
   The war also inﬂected Spain’s experience of the European trade slump
of 1839 and the default it made on National Debt interest repayments.51
Spain’s ﬁrst strike movement to be coordinated across industries was
broken by government charges of ‘Carlism’. The Cristino abolition in
1837 of the guild system had advantaged wholesalers, who ratcheted
up prices.52 This was answered in Granada by a movement led by a
certain Julián Malaguilla, silk worker artisan, who rallied 200–300 fel-
low silk workers to halt work and ransack the premises of wholesale
silk merchants who had hiked prices. The Militia was overwhelmed and
the city’s shoemakers joined the strike. Three companies of infantry
had to be drafted in to uphold the state of siege. But the strike held
as workshop masters were sent letters threatening them with 50 lashes
if they did not cease production. The movement collapsed only when
Malaguilla was tricked into arbitration at the city hall. He was arrested
and imprisoned upon charges of ‘Carlism’ (letters were produced show-
ing Malaguilla’s appeal for volunteers to join insurgents in the restive
Serranía de Ronda).53 Madrid itself saw signiﬁcant strike action, and
from very proletarian quarters. The water-bearers (aguadores) of Madrid
were mostly Galician migrants, numbering some 900 in the capital in
1840.54 The luckiest of these water-bearers rented licences from the
municipal authorities to carry drinking water to Madrid’s private houses
and businesses; the less lucky might subcontract these licences or work
in small teams as journeymen for the licensee; whilst the least fortu-
nate would work the streets as water-vendors.55 As municipal licences
were hard to acquire, and as most of the water-bearing labour involved
seasonal migration, the luckiest aguadores had the opportunity to sell
their licences for inﬂated prices. By February 1840, it emerged that a
cadre of aguadores in Madrid was doing precisely that, the money being
found by raising the monthly fee levied on water delivery from 6 to 8
reales per household to 12. When consumers complained to the author-
ities, the municipality arrested some of the ‘usurers’ whilst enforcing a
cut in water levies. The response from the aguadores was to launch a
strike, which resulted in no water being carried anywhere in the capital
for a whole day. Militia were dispatched to force the aguadores back to
work. The authorities’ hard line was welcomed by several of the most
recent migrants, who had run the virtual blockade of Carlist banditry to
reach Madrid and had indebted themselves in order to subcontract the
licence.56
                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   201


   Working-class protest came at a sensitive political time. The moderado
government was accused by Radicals of manipulating elections, and a
month after the aguadores’ strike, Fermín Caballero, editor of the Eco del
Comercio and leader of parliamentary progresistas led Olózaga and other
leftists in a walkout of the Cortes.57 By March 1840, Radical political
meetings were taking place in all the Andalucían provincial capitals, and
delegates were dispatched to Seville to deliberate upon a confederation
along the lines suggested by the martyred Catalan Republican, Xaudaró
y Fábregas.58
   Militancies in Cristino society grew while the most savage ﬁghting
shifted eastwards, away from the stagnation of the Basque country and
towards the Carlist ascendancy in Aragón and the Catalan far west. Such
was the pressure that, in February 1838, San Miguel decided to evacu-
ate the entire population of Gandesa rather than continue to waste lives
and supplies in its defence. Refugee civilians from Gandesa were housed
in Zaragoza and a subscription in their aid was opened in Madrid. The
civilians did not return to their destroyed homes until Cabrera left for
France in 1840.59 This Carlist success emboldened Cabrera to launch an
offensive against Zaragoza. Some 2,200 infantry, and 300 cavalry under
the command of the French Carlist, Lespinace, tried to surprise the city
on 5 March 1838. But Zaragoza resisted thanks to its garrison of National
Militia supported by some regular troops and even civilians armed with
such improvised weapons as burning oil and water in imitation of the
greater sieges of the Peninsular War. Carlist casualties were about 20
times those of the Cristinos, so a special medal was awarded to the city’s
National Militia and a laurel added to its emblem.60 Unlike Córdova
in 1836, Zaragoza in 1838 no longer had enough civilians prepared to
act as a ﬁfth column for the besiegers. The failed plot on 27 February
1834 to raise the city for Don Carlos had been answered by months of
ofﬁcial arrests and imprisonments and unofﬁcial anti-clerical outrages.61
By 1838, its streets were indisputably Cristino.
   Cristino operations in Aragón during 1838 were dominated by
attempts to conquer the virtually impregnable Carlist capital of Morella.
Oráa and San Miguel combined an offensive in July which was under-
supplied in food and artillery. The Carlists rounded up cattle in the
approaches to Morella and burnt the ripe corn harvest (both sides cus-
tomarily burnt crops on land that they did not expect to hold), thereby
burdening the Cristinos’ already shoestring supplies. Moreover, Morella
was constructed like a city-tower, its relief and architecture naturally
favouring the defenders. Between the mid-July start of the offensive and
Oráa’s order on 17 August 1838 to retreat, there were some 22 battles
202 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


and two failed Cristino attempts to storm Morella. Oráa was exhausted
by years of war and had long thought a military solution to the conﬂict
was impossible. Moreover, he had had to detach some forces to aid the
Prefect of Murcia to crush some revolutionary National Militia. An inter-
cepted letter revealed to the Carlists that Oráa’s colleagues thought him
old, vacillating, bereft of his earlier speed and unable to leave anything
to chance.62 Cabrera’s defensive victory was followed with an offen-
sive victory at the Battle of Maella against a division led by one of the
Cristino’s most popular generals, Pardiñas, whose élan contrasted with
Oráa’s circumspection. Yet Cabrera won the battle, killing Pardiñas in
combat and massacring most of the several hundred Cristino prisoners
taken.63
   Cabrera’s ascendancy in the Maestrazgo was secured. At the end of
1838 his army numbered some 15,255 infantry, 1,328 cavalry, and 378
artillerymen with some 40 guns. Moreover, Carlist artillery had been
improved by the Prussian Baron von Rahden, who had voluntarily quit
a post in the Basque provinces to come to the Maestrazgo for this
end. A grateful Cabrera made him comandante general.64 The brutal-
ity of Cabrera’s war effort continued to be a source for consternation for
Cristino Radicals:

   To understand the state of alarm and indignation which Liberals in
   Aragón and Valencia reached in the autumn of 1838, it is not enough
   to read the Madrid newspapers. Rather one has to have lived in those
   provinces in, or near, the Maestrazgo; to have heard the fathers, sons
   and brothers of the executed, to have seen the pathetic refugees lucky
   enough to have reached the safety of a fortress or column; to have
   conversed with the well-to-do who lost all their cattle, homes and
   livelihoods. One has to hear the stories of those who witnessed the
   killings and the threats made by Carlists who had done away with
   the lives of even the most distant relatives of the Liberals. If those
   lucky enough never to have experienced a civil war can understand
   this, they would not consider Cabrera a member of the human
   race.65

Towns and villages were being sacked. When Urrea near Zaragoza was
sacked, the smoke billowing from its ruins was visible in the Aragonese
capital, causing panic. Such brutality was defended on the self-fulﬁlling
grounds that residents were defending their properties by ﬁring on
the invaders from houses. A furious exchange of letters between San
Miguel and Cabrera did nothing to assuage the violence. Cabrera, as
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   203


ever, invoked the execution of his mother as proof that the usurpers had
no lessons to impart on humanitarianism, an attitude which had been
consistently held up in the Carlist press.66 The failed epistolary exchange
took place amidst an escalation of reprisals and counter-reprisals in the
east during late 1838. Oráa’s replacement Commander-in-Chief of the
Army of the Centre, Van-Halen, complained that the Carlists always
retained the upper hand as they could simply rob, kill and snatch
draftees at will. The sovereignty of local municipalities, meanwhile, tied
the hands of Cristino armies and made the ‘nuclear option’ of impos-
ing states of siege necessary not just because of the Carlists but because
of Liberal politics, too. A cycle of riots and assassinations in Valencia
and Zaragoza were directly related to Cabrera’s advances in the sur-
rounding countryside and atrocity stories emanating from them. The
worst ﬁghting and atrocities took place during the Carlist capture of
Caspe. Six Cristinos were shot in cold blood after the town’s capture
on 27 October: three soldiers from the Burgos regiment and three local
militiamen. In reprisal Van-Halen, bowing to the pressure of Cristino
opinion, executed eight Carlist prisoners.67
   Whilst the east went Carlist, Cristino Spain found the threat from the
north far more manageable than during the revolutionary summers of
1835–37. Carlist raids from the provinces during 1838 showed that the
headier days of 1836 and 1837 could no longer be repeated. The elderly
priest Merino, who had been present at the last siege of Bilbao, dur-
ing the Battle of Oriamendi and in the Royal Expedition of Don Carlos,
could not sustain his earlier prowess against stiffened Cristino opposi-
tion. Don Carlos had made him Carlist Captain-General of Old Castile
and the president of its junta, yet Merino’s actions were those of an
insurgent rather than a governor. In 1834 villagers had ﬂocked to him,
but in 1838 he abducted draftees from the countryside around Burgos
and Aranda del Duero and ransomed, even executed, the family mem-
bers of escapees.68 Merino joined forces with Cabrera in a raid during
the summer of 1838 which took Burgo de Osma, threatening Valladolid
on 8 September 1838, whence a prompt campaign by the city’s mobile
militia marched to pursue the Carlist raiders eastwards. Over the fol-
lowing days several villages were invaded. All tailors in Covarrubias
were forced to join the campaign in order to satisfy demands for uni-
forms. Merino was then pursued back across the Ebro. From there,
on the 12 October 1838, Maroto received desperate royal instructions
to order Merino to launch a new raid. But despite the usual speed
and ruthlessness of Merino’s men, they were matched by a Cristino
counter-insurgency equally ruthless with civilians in its path, and which
204 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


defeated Merino, inﬂicting some 800 losses on him. Merino retreated
and never took to the ﬁeld again. After Vergara settlement he joined
the exodus into France where he would become a minor celebrity on
account of his Peninsular War fame and reputation.69 Other minor raids
may have got the royal sanction but barely amounted to more than
organised crime. The raids of Carrión and Cellis are remembered mainly
because of their vindictive atrocities in the village of Villada (Palencia),
whose wealthy residents had recently welcomed a stay by Espartero. The
occupying Carlists imposed ruinous forced contributions on the munici-
pality and even killed the young wife of Lino de Cosío, a wealthy Liberal
landowner, who had only just given birth.70
   The era of Carlist expeditions had passed. The last one, during the
winter of 1839–40, came not from the Basque country (which had
surrendered) but as a desperate move from Cabrera in the east to over-
winter his troops on the food supplies of New Castile.71 It was not only
Carlist exhaustion and demoralisation which ended this offensive strat-
egy but also the decision of the moderado government in early 1838 to
form an established Army of the Reserve in Andalucía, under the com-
mand of General Narváez, who was tasked with both eradicating Carlist
bandit-insurgents and with bringing Radical cities to heel. Lengthy
states of siege were imposed in Málaga, Cádiz, Huelva and Córdova,
whilst Seville was the last provincial capital to follow this example after
a coup attempt in the city by Narváez himself backﬁred in November
1838, sending its instigator into exile in Gibraltar. Narváez had been
locked in rivalry with Espartero, but although he had the support of sev-
eral moderado deputies and ministers in the capital who wanted to see
him replace Espartero, the Queen-Regent, grateful for her rescue from
the Royal Expedition and despite her Generalísimo’s leftist politics, still
trusted Espartero. On 31 October 1838 Espartero wrote her a lengthy
letter that was devastatingly critical of Narváez, and riots followed in
Madrid. Pro-Narváez moderados fought pro-Espartero progresistas as pop-
ular proxies of praetorian politics, and the Radical Eco del Comercio dared
to call its readers ‘to arms, then, against the traitors’. A confused and
sometimes tragicomic few days followed when the new prefect of the
capital, Brigadier Puig, on 8 November 1838, decided to crack down on
the disturbances by ordering the arrest of all men with moustaches who
were not members of the army or Militia. In the end it suited both Lib-
eral factions to describe the disturbances as a Carlist plot, and many
civic Carlists still residing in the capital were arrested, a renewed round
of injustices ensuing only two weeks after the expulsion from the capital
of the wives and children of absent Carlists.72
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   205


   Defeated in the capital, Narváez joined with the former Commander-
in-Chief, Córdova, in seizing control of the Seville’s garrison and Militia,
and proclaiming a junta.73 But the Captain-General of Andalucía, the
Conde de Cleonard, condemned the rising from Cádiz and the Army
of Reserve failed to rally to its commander. Thus Narváez and Córdova
ﬂed into exile, their parliamentary immunity notwithstanding: Narváez
to Gibraltar and thence to France where he sustained a petitioning cam-
paign to the Cortes and his friend and owner of a moderado press empire,
Andrés Borrego.74 Espartero now reigned supreme, and the Army of the
Reserve – Narváez’s power base – was dissolved. Actually the humilia-
tion and banishment of Narváez would prove a pyrrhic victory. The man
from Loja had been made into a man who, like Louis Bonaparte, would
prove to have greater ambitions than careerism and personal rivalry.
   Narváez had been a visible threat to Espartero, but the last years of
the war saw Radical plots ﬂourish from lower ranks. In November 1838,
prisoners at the Spanish North African garrison at Alhucemas rose in
revolt, even though barely more than a quarter of the rebels were actu-
ally Carlists, pressed a claim to being Spanish ﬁrst before Liberal or
Carlist and promised to defend the colony against any Moroccan attack.
A similar Carlist takeover ensued at Melilla, before the insurgents agreed
to a negotiated peace and to being shipped back to the peninsula on
the condition that they would be free.75 A plot to assassinate Espartero
was centred on Manuel García Uzal, a Radical Cortes deputy, newspa-
per correspondent and, since 1835, a captain serving in a battalion of
‘guides’ (a species of elite unit generally associated with scouting activ-
ities), the fact that he was also battalion adjutant making him ideally
placed to radicalise the troops. Uzal forged a strange conspiracy between
his own circle and Carlist ﬁfth columnists (led by a writer called Vicente
Canseco), but the plot was penetrated by Espartero’s intelligence net-
works and its leaders imprisoned.76 A republican conspiracy in the army
just a few months earlier at León had petered out quickly. Its two cabecil-
las, the standard-bearer of an off-duty battalion, Francisco Doti, and a
lieutenant, Joaquín María Guisasola, seized a caravan of rations as bait
for the troops to second their calls of ‘Long Live the Constitution of
1812’ and ‘Long Live the Republic’. Even though this pronunciamiento
attracted a limited following, after three days, most had deserted, before
the 12 remaining revolutionaries were captured by loyal troops. Doti
and Guisasola were executed.77
   The war had created a radical constituency in the army and society
which had digested the constant diet of ‘liberty’ and was expressing
it on its own terms. Both Spains were weary of conﬂict, and despite
206 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


the misﬁred diplomatic venture of the Royal Expedition, various efforts
came from the Cristino side for peace. In January 1839, Eugenio de
Aviraneta designed a plan to abduct Don Carlos via a naval landing
near his lightly guarded winter quarters at Azcoitia, to be launched
on British vessels from Pasajes. Only the reluctance of Lord Hay to
breach British rules of engagement grounded the abduction mission.78
Any effective diplomatic solution to the Spanish problem could only
come via some accord between Europe’s Liberal and absolutist powers.
Palmerston and Metternich were surprised that they saw eye to eye on
this point from 1838. But Metternich’s Europe still saw Liberal Spain as
the revolution incarnate, an attitude that hardened when Spanish emis-
saries with colourful pasts reached Vienna. Manuel Marliani Cassens, a
cosmopolitan, gaditano friend of Mendizábal and protégé of Calatrava,
was made Spanish consul general to France in September 1836.79 He
forged a plan to impress upon Metternich a dynastic end to Spain’s civil
war via the marriage of the young Princess Isabella to an Austrian prince.
But this plan backﬁred on his mission to Vienna when French agents –
wary of the prospect of a Hapsburg on the Spanish throne – destroyed
Marliani’s credentials by reminding the Austrians of his revolutionary
past in Piedmont in 1821. Metternich refused even to see him, and
Marliani was ordered to leave Vienna within 18 hours, after which the
combined pressure of Austria and Sardinia got him sacked as Spanish
consul to Paris. Even though Marliani rebuilt his career in Spain, his
plan for a dynastic solution to the civil war came to nought.80 Equally
there was no diplomatic breakthrough for the Carlists either. The secret
Carlist junta in Madrid had seen its hopes dashed with the failed Royal
Expedition of 1837. In 1838 the Neapolitan foreign minister, the Prince
of Cassaro, suggested to the Carlists that if they descended on either
Zaragoza or Valencia they would be supported by a naval squadron of
Neapolitan volunteers. However, Cassaro’s enthusiasm was not shared
by his King.81
   Carlist diplomacy made desperate pleas for international help to stave
off defeat. But Don Carlos’s plea on 9 March 1839 for more aid from
friendly sovereigns was met by either cool or business-like responses.
Piedmont-Sardinia refused more money, disgruntled at how money sent
hitherto had been spent on maintaining the Carlist army on home
ground – which was now shrinking – rather than marching on Madrid.
Russia and Austria agreed that to send more money would end up
merely postponing eventual Carlist defeat. The only serious offer came
from a minor absolutist power, the Netherlands, which offered money in
return for Don Carlos’s consent to a Dutch conquest of the Philippines
                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   207


in his name. The Cristino garrison was weak, Amsterdam believed, a ﬂeet
could be launched from Java in the Dutch East Indies, and the Dutch
would be repaid by a stake in Philippine customs revenues. Both Don
Carlos and his cabinet quickly rejected this proposal, but it is unclear
whether they did so out of misplaced imperial pride, realism or supe-
rior knowledge of Philippine affairs. In fact, the Spanish presence in the
Philippines during the 1830s was comparatively strong, as Guillermo
Galvey, amateur ethnographer and Cristino Captain-General of the
colony, led a series of expeditions to expand the colonial frontier in the
Cordillera.82 International supporters of Carlism were disenchanted by
more than just the military situation. Even kings and diplomats openly
upbraided the division and misappropriations of the Carlist court.83
Finally, a plan to sail a 1,500-strong Carlist amphibious force from
Bermeo to attack Cádiz during July 1839 foundered ﬁrst on the lack
of ﬁnancial support from Europe’s absolute powers, and then because
of the Treaty of Vergara.84 Carlist hopes of international aid had col-
lapsed, and Cristino Commander-in-Chief of the Army of the Centre,
Van-Halen, ridiculed Carlists hoping against hope as ‘Jews waiting for
the Messiah’.85
   The Treaty of Vergara ended the war on its main front, and this
came about ﬁrst because of the executive power taken by Espartero,
and more fundamentally, the exhaustion and political divisions of the
Carlist Basque country. The growing clamour for peace in the Carlist
zone in 1839 undermined the Royal Government’s attempts to sustain
the war effort. The demographic losses caused by the war and Cristino
occupation forced the Carlist government, in December 1838, to issue
a blanket amnesty allowing émigrés on the French side of the border
to return to their homes. Meanwhile, the screw of conscription was
tightened still further, and a crackdown was announced on the growing
tide of subversive pamphlets which attacked Don Carlos’s advisers in a
thinly veiled critique of the King himself. Most decisively, the Basque
and Navarrese peasantry was seeing itself reduced to below-subsistence
level by the repeated requisitioning by the Carlist army (and, as 1839
progressed, by the invading Cristinos), which Carlist civilian authorities
never managed to control.86
   The ‘man of Vergara’ was Rafael Maroto. Maroto was a middle-
aged Murcian, veteran of the Spanish-American wars and widower
to a Peruvian wife. Purged from the army in 1833 and imprisoned,
he escaped from Cristino captivity to join his King in Portugal early
in 1834. Maroto was the archetypical ‘Castilian’ hated by apostólicos
and Basque fueristas: dynastically loyal to Don Carlos and loyal to
208 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


nothing else in the Basque country besides. Maroto was also enlight-
ened absolutist in his politics, and was therefore a perfect broker for a
‘transacted’ peace: indeed, during 1839 the Marotista and transaccionista
parties in the Basque country became synonymous. Maroto had few
Basque or apostólico friends and his appointment to commander-in-chief
in 1838 was the result of patient networking and military accomplish-
ments. Once appointed, Maroto knew that time was not on the Carlists’
side. No sooner had he regularised the disorderly and parochial fortress
system which defended the Basque country at local levels, than he had
to ﬁght against court intrigues (especially that of a certain Eustaquio
Laso, placed at his side to spy on him). Even worse, Maroto’s Cristino
enemies now had a ﬂourishing spy network of their own, straddling
both sides of the French border.87 And militarily the Cristinos had noth-
ing more to learn from Carlist territory or tactics. Under Espartero’s
leadership they knew the ground and in September 1837 marched on
the Carlist capital of Estella. Hence, any new Carlist offensive had to be
perfectly coordinated in order to avoid catastrophe.
   Maroto understood that the apóstolico ‘universal minister’, Teijeiro,
would exploit any military defeat to oust him, so he focused on reor-
ganising the army and ﬁghting only local battles rather than bold
offensives. Maroto enjoyed exceptionally good relations with Carlist
agents abroad, which allowed him to increase the always haphazard for-
eign subsidies.88 But hostility towards him grew, and Maroto realised
that only the execution of the conspirators could reassert his author-
ity. He prepared his ground by warning the King at Tolosa. Kissing Don
Carlos’s hand, Maroto theatrically quipped that his King had no desire
to kill him. The surprised King replied in the afﬁrmative. Maroto replied
that in that case it was his duty to request royal approval for the exe-
cution of rebellious ofﬁcers. Don Carlos temporised, assuring Maroto
that the conspiracies were no more than hot air, and that he knew
from experience more about these things than his loyal commander-
in-chief. Maroto made his intention clear, and left for his headquarters
at the Carlist capital of Estella. There he found the streets suspiciously
deserted, and those of its war-weary inhabitants and garrison he did
encounter hurled abuse at him from windows and doorways. Maroto
summoned one of the apostólico conspirators, General Carmona, to meet
him at a café. Maroto’s escort arrested Carmona the moment he arrived,
whilst swift arrests ensued of García, Sanz, Guergué and Intendant Uriz.
Two other generals, the Conde de Negri and Silvestre, quickly rallied to
Maroto’s side. All the captives were imprisoned in the town’s fort and
executed by ﬁring squad two days later, each offering ﬁnal indignant
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   209


words foretelling the damage that the execution of loyal ofﬁcers of the
King would do to the Carlist cause.89 However, violence, even projected
assassinations, had long characterised the Byzantine world of Carlist
court politics, and Maroto’s ruthlessness was met as much by relief as
indignation. Only the year before a Carlist princess fundraising at Italian
and German courts had been approached by a Royal Government agent
seeking support for a plan to execute certain Carlist generals.90
   Maroto wanted to kill Balmaseda, too, a particularly efﬁcient guer-
rilla comandante in Aragón who was ﬁercely loyal to the King, but a
signed message arrived from Don Carlos in the nick of time ordering this
man to be spared. Don Carlos, shocked by Maroto’s purge and swayed
by Teijeiro, lost little time in condemning his commander-in-chief as
a traitor and dismissing him from command. Knowing that this would
be his death sentence, Maroto received this dismissal using the familiar
ritual of the pronunciamiento. Gathering his men around him, he read
out the letter in order to provoke their indignation. Having secured
his ofﬁcers’ loyalty, the fate of the Carlist War now basically lay in
Maroto’s hands. Maroto marched on Tolosa and overwhelmed the King
into rescinding his order and sacking Teijeiro and the Bishop of León.
Maroto put his friends in leading positions in the army (Zaratiegui,
Eguía, Villarreal and Elío). The King’s humiliation was almost com-
plete, whilst Maroto’s coup certainly was complete, at least as far as
the provinces were concerned.91 His supporters, Generals Elío, Villarreal,
Eguía and Zaratiegui, quickly occupied leading army posts.
   The Frenchman, Saint-Silvain, stepped in as a go-between between
the chastened court and Maroto, thereby saving himself from the list of
apostólicos Maroto had ordered expelled to France, and allowing Don
Carlos himself to save face.92 Saint-Silvain had been the unimpeach-
able face of French legitimism, and Don Carlos’s most active diplomat
in Spain.93 Don Carlos caved in with understandable meekness, giving
ﬁnal proof, as if any more were needed, that the absolute King was
absolutely helpless in the face of the two main Carlist court factions,
the transaccionista one of which had become triumphant. Teijeiro, who
had been subject to personal attacks in a proclamation Maroto made
to his army, led the ﬂight of elites for France, one step ahead of the
assassins. Carlism’s diplomatic agents endorsed the coup. Even the King
of the Two Scillies had found the machinations of the apostólicos dis-
tasteful. The unofﬁcial Carlist ambassador to Naples, José Alvarez de
Toledo, summed up this mood by declaring that ‘some men at court had
been doing more damage to our cause than Espartero and Van Halen
combined’.94 Maroto marched into Tolosa where Don Carlos reviewed
210 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


his army. The King did not even speak about the events of Estella. The
initiative was now Maroto’s.95
   Meanwhile, Espartero had been pondering the best way to take advan-
tage of the civil war within Carlist ranks. Much might have been
achieved by merely awaiting the enemy’s collapse, as the Carlist war
effort was now grinding to an exhausted halt. Overburdened arms
foundries produced inadequate weaponry: shoddy workmanship and
lack of inspection led to tragedy at the fort of Guardamino on 1 May
1839, when its defending Carlist garrison opened ﬁre on the enemy,
only for the shell to explode in the cannon’s bore, igniting the maga-
zine, which killed most of the fort’s garrison outright.96 On 23 March
1839, Espartero wrote to War Minister Alaix, explaining two possi-
ble ways of ending the war, namely, via either a compromise peace,
or transacción, or a scorched-earth policy to devastate the provinces.
Espartero had no qualms about justifying such a policy for the sake of
national integrity: ‘It is best to amputate a diseased member than let it
infect the whole body.’ He was convinced that the civil war could only
be won in the provinces. He hoped an offensive strategy in the north
would capitalise on Carlism’s internal divisions and win the conﬁdence
of sympathetic European powers. But Alaix’s response was unsatisfying.
Whilst he offered Espartero limited and temporary reinforcements from
Galicia, and authorised him to take any action in the north that he saw
ﬁt, he also stressed the self-serving moderado position: that the north-
ern front would have to take its turn for reinforcements along with the
east.97 Espartero was thus ever more inclined to use his military powers
to search for peace above the heads of the politicians.
   Luckily for Espartero, Maroto wanted the same, but for more desperate
reasons. He marched the Royal Army westwards on the back of military
operations towards Santander, a mundane deployment which, in real-
ity, was cover for interviews with Cristino and Quadruple Alliance (Lord
John Hay of the naval squadron at Pasajes) intermediaries. The road
to the Vergara settlement became easier and more comfortable as these
illicit contacts increased. Cristino military superiority obliged Maroto in
any case to approve increasing parleys with the enemy. He negotiated
the surrender of the fort at Guardamino on 12 May 1839: the magazine
explosion of the 1 May combined with a failure to dig in at the crest
surrounding the fort had made the position poorly defensible. For this
feat Espartero was awarded the title Duke of Victory, and Cristino cel-
ebrations embittered the Carlist press, which was at pains to represent
Guardamino as a truce rather than defeat. Maroto was in an unenvi-
able position: he needed to achieve some signiﬁcant victory both in
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   211


order to stem the growing tide of desertion from Carlist into Cristino
ranks (which had been particularly marked in the lines facing Cristino
Bilbao)98 and to strike a peace from some position of strength. But
the latter was growing more improbable by the day, whilst Espartero’s
encroachments into the Basque–Navarrese heartland heaped suffering
on the already exhausted Carlist home front, which then fed back into
demands for peace.99
   Meanwhile, anti-marotistas may have been cowed but they were not
inactive. Propaganda was spread describing Maroto as a traitor prepared
to sell the King for English gold, and starting rumours that Carlist defec-
tors, contrary to being welcomed into Cristino ranks, were being shot.100
An exchange of letters between the apostólico priest, Juan Echevarría,
and Maroto, revealed a personal antipathy which typiﬁed the mali-
cious gossip that had dominated Carlist court politics over six years.
Maroto, whose impressment into his personal service in 1835 of a cap-
tured adolescent British auxiliary had been the subject of apostólico
gossip and innuendo, now vengefully repaid his tormentors in kind,
waving off Echevarría’s accusations of treason and accusing him of hav-
ing fathered children, and of trying to hide the affair by forcing their
unhappy mother to marry her brother.101 The puritanism of Carlist
political culture was being cast off by its own elites.
   On 9 August, the late Zumalacárregui’s right-hand man, Zaratiegui,
led four battalions in a pro-war pronunciamiento near Pamplona.102 But
this rising was deadlocked: both marotistas and apostólicos competed to
win over the vital legitimacy of Don Carlos, but the King now had grave
doubts about his personal situation in the wake of Maroto’s coup. When
he reviewed some Basque battalions at Elorrio, rather than shouting the
customary ‘Long Live the King’, the men cried ‘Long Live Peace!’103 This
civil war within a civil war was sapping the war effort from within.
General Elío was caught between the Scylla of Cristino invasion and
the Charybdis of the apostólico rising, remarking ‘If I attack the ris-
ing, we are lost, and if I don’t, then I see no hope.’104 This scenario
revived the fortunes of the much-derided Muñagorri who linked up with
Jaúregui on the frontier under the ever-more attractive banner of peace
with fueros without Don Carlos.105 Knowledge was widespread that a
transacción along these lines was the subject of negotiations, especially
at Bayonne.106
   This move towards peace became all the stronger as Espartero’s
summer offensive penetrated ever more into Carlist territory, captur-
ing Estella, impounding villages’ harvests and burning produce that
could not be carried or consumed. This military crisis sharpened the
212 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


political one, and Maroto asked Espartero for a truce, which the latter
refused.107 Meanwhile, Espartero continued invading Navarra, scorching
farmsteads in his wake. Maroto was in an invidious position because of
Espartero’s refusal to agree to a peace which would allow Don Carlos
to participate in the transacción. Espartero was determined that peace
should be brokered by Spaniards alone, and that international medi-
ation should be minimised. Espartero’s attitude hardened when the
French government, in June 1839, launched its proposals for a mediated
peace which were virtually pro-Carlist, and conﬁrmed the long-held
suspicions about King Louis-Philippe’s afﬁliation. Thus both the fueros
and Carlist military commissions and salaries would be respected, whilst
both Don Carlos and María Cristina would be sent into exile, and the
Spanish Bourbon dynasty reunited via the marriage of the Carlist infant
and Isabella. The repeated use of the French raisonnable to describe these
terms stuck in the throats of the Cristinos, and allowed the British to
monopolise the international side of peace-making to which Espartero
did consent.108
   Meanwhile, Espartero maintained the pressure with a calculated,
gradual pace of invasion designed to exact the maximum psychologi-
cal effect on his opponent. Maroto was also under immense pressure
both from the restive Navarrese peasantry and from their King, who
grew suspicious and fearful of his commander-in-chief’s negotiations
and would launch a furious counter-manifesto once the Vergara terms
were proclaimed.109 Both Espartero and Maroto knew that military logic
would dictate peace on Cristino terms. Both men carried out secret nego-
tiations via Bayonne and an elaborate fourfold secret code. Maroto was
desperate to save face by gaining the concession of either a Cristino for-
tiﬁed town (‘victory’) or the marriage of Don Carlos’s son to the young
Isabella (‘honour’). Espartero refused both, but reiterated his promise
not to harm the fueros and his offer of army commissions for Carlist ofﬁ-
cers as long as Don Carlos was either handed over or sent into exile.110
In the end Maroto caved into these terms, but until the last moment
could not actually bring himself to discuss preliminaries at Vergara,
deputising General La Torre to lead the delegation in his stead. What-
ever the anguish of the Carlist high command, the attitude of the Carlist
rank and ﬁle had become both so despondent and enraged with army
elites that a negotiated peace promised to safeguard against something
far worse. When the Carlist generals set out to meet Espartero at Vergara,
they found a group of Guipúzcoan deserters in their path. The desert-
ers damned the generals and detained them. The situation might have
ended disastrously, but the generals convinced the deserters that they
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   213


were on a mission for peace, and Spanish soldiers’ love of peace in 1839
was greater than their contempt for their leaders.111
  Finally, on 29 August 1839, the Vergara settlement was signed. Carlists
were to switch allegiance to Isabel II in return for continued careers for
ofﬁcers and men in the reuniﬁed army if they desired and Espartero
promised to speak in favour of preserving the fueros at the reuniﬁed
Cortes. Anti-marotista Carlists left for French exile. The King reached
exile safely but not all were so fortunate. General Vicente Moreno, the
‘hangman of Málaga’ and one of Maroto’s great enemies, was caught by
Carlist soldiers at Urdax, just one kilometre from the French frontier,
and murdered.112 Ironically for its eponymous peace settlement, Vergara
was the last Carlist fort to surrender to Espartero’s victorious army. Thus,
the Treaty of Vergara (also known as the ‘Embrace of Vergara’ – Abrazo
de Vergara – for the theatrical embrace that Espartero and Maroto gave
each other as a symbol of peace and reconciliation in front of their men)
was the compromise peace that ended the war in the north.113 Thou-
sands of pro-fueros Carlists, almost all from the mooted loser provinces
of Alava and Navarra, rejected the peace and followed their commanders
into French exile. They were right to suspect Maroto’s verbal assurance
from Espartero that a reuniﬁed Spain would ‘respect the fueros’. Near
Elizondo, the Cristino consul at Bayonne reported that four companies
of the ﬁfth battalion of Navarra honoured the passing into exile of their
King with the cry of ‘Death to Maroto, Long Live the King!’114 Risings
continued into 1840, such as the failed attempt of Balmaseda to reignite
the civil war, but the country was exhausted. Foral privileges were
eroded, which was a matter for the Cristino cities as much as the Carlist
countryside. Vitoria saw its lucrative customs frontier redeployed at the
French and coastal frontier to the beneﬁt of Bilbao and San Sebastián.115
  The nineteenth-century Liberal historian, Antonio Pirala, tried to
rehabilitate Maroto, but to no effect: Maroto remained forever tarnished
with treason in both Romantic eyes and those of the theocratic wing of
Carlism.116 Thus, a persistent ‘Vergara literature’ was spawned, repro-
ducing the myth that Carlism was stabbed in the back but undefeated
on the battleﬁeld, the culmination of a betrayal of popular Carlism
that began with the connivers of Don Carlos’s court and ended with
Maroto’s treachery.117 The 1898-generation ‘Great Man’ novelist, Pío
Baroja, called Don Carlos’s climbdown cowardly.118 Maroto died in exile
in Chile, ending his career where he had begun it, having tried to defend
two lost causes of Spanish monarchism.
  Fighting continued in the east, but not even Cabrera’s genius could
hope to withstand the 50,000 battle-hardened Cristino troops bearing
214 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


down on Aragón. Even before the Vergara settlement there were signs
that Carlism was beginning to lose its grip on Catalonia and Aragón.
The year 1839 saw the tide turn even against Count España’s Carlists in
Catalonia. His failure in February 1839 to take the small Cristino town of
Balsareny marked the turn of the tide, and turned the town into a martyr
of Liberal resistance: troops, militia, Belgian and even women volun-
teers had all died in its defence and practically every house had its roofs
blown off by artillery, some 8,000 sacks being ordered after the battle to
provide makeshift shelter. In late May, Carlist fortunes brieﬂy returned
when España successfully besieged Ripoll. Overwhelmed by the odds
facing them, the Cristino governor accepted a negotiated surrender, his
men and arms going into captivity whilst he rejected Carlist guarantees
and shot himself in the head. During the negotiations, Carlist emis-
saries encountered the town’s women and children solemnly gathering
in the beautiful church of San Pedro. The Carlists removed their berets
in respect and let the civilians leave the church so as to avoid being tar-
geted in the event of hostilities restarting. After the takeover, the town
was burnt to the ground, and those buildings which had survived the
ﬂame were blasted into rubble. Even though Ripoll would rise again,
España had achieved what Espoz had done with Castellfullit in 1822.
He ordered a memorial plaque to be constructed in the town’s ruins
saying ‘Here was Ripoll’.119
   España hoped that the downfall of Meer (a victim of the Radical
press campaign), and his replacement as captain-general by Jerónimo
Valdés, might improve matters. But Valdés was both an experienced
counter-insurgent and, crucially, for Radical opinion, politically to the
Left of Meer. When city magnates’ refused him a loan he imprisoned
them for ransom in the Ciudadela, a dictatorial abuse of the state of
siege which nonetheless pleased radical opinion.120 The ﬁnancial statis-
tics certainly justiﬁed his ruthlessness: Catalonia yielded an annual tax
income of 6 million reales whilst military expenditures alone amounted
to 8 million. And yet it was the wealthiest Cristino city. Workers had
tacitly accepted the reintroduction of the machines since the Bonaplata
riots of 1835 because production in general had been booming – as
shown by the more than doubling of raw cotton imports to Barcelona
between 1824 and 1840 – and the capitalist class was awash with cash.121
And, now that peace had broken out in the north, until Valdés could
get reinforcements he was conﬁned to little more than operations of
active defence, such as the bitter battle to resupply Solsona against
Carlist attacks during November 1839.122 Finally, the end of the war in
the north allowed Espartero to reinforce Valdés (only a third of whose
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   215


23,000 troops in Catalonia had so far been available for campaigning)
with the forces of General Antonio Azpiroz (four veteran battalions, one
excellent cavalry squadron, one company of sappers and artillery). These
forces arrived at Lérida on 7 November 1839.123
   España’s notorious theocracy and military discipline had become
objectionable because he had stopped winning battles. España’s strate-
gic defeat revived the Junta of Berga and gave his enemies the chance
to take revenge. España was abducted and forced to appear before the
junta, which dismissed him from his command on 26 October 1839.
España again tried to temporise, this time literally at knifepoint, but it
was to no avail. He pronounced himself happy that his predecessor, José
Segarra, was to be appointed his successor but demanded a chance to
delay handing over his command until he had conversed with Segarra
about conﬁdential military matters which were not appropriate for mere
civilians to hear. The junta was unmoved and España began his forced
journey into exile in Andorra. Although staying at safe houses en route,
travelling by night and undergoing the indignity of being dressed in
peasant clothes, España did not have to endure this humiliation for
long. After crossing the River Segre close to Orgaña España was strangled
by his own escort, and his body dumped in the river.124 His assassins,
who were operating with uncertain connivance of higher authority,
would justify their actions by claiming outrageously that España was a
Mason (i.e. Liberal) and about to turn like Maroto. In reality, the Carlists
knew that once they had bested this fanatical reactionary, they would
have to kill him. Carlos de España, after all, had bloodied Barcelona as
its captain-general during the Ominous Decade, and then subjected the
Carlist war effort in the Principality to the most unforgivingly draco-
nian discipline since. If he lived he could wreak the most abject revenge
upon his enemies, even from exile. Nevertheless, España’s assassination
caused great controversy.125
   The whole of the eastern Carlist zone had been traumatised by the
events in the Basque country. España had never shown much respect
either for the person of Don Carlos or for his Byzantine court. When
desperate diehards in Navarra had suggested placing the Carlist Crown
Prince at the head of the war effort in the east, España’s reply was full of
sententious scorn:126

   Princes, just like all kings, are either too good to be true that we lose
   them, or are so bad because they are worked on by a rabble of ﬂat-
   terers. And do you believe that if our prince came here or to Aragón
   he would not be accompanied by a court worse than Satan’s? Haven’t
216 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


   you seen what’s been happening and it still happening in Navarra?
   Haven’t I told you several times that Navarra on its own is enough to
   lose us this war?

But the reinforcement of enemy troops made the situation bleak, even
for the Tiger of the Maestrazgo. Lord John Hay operated as a conduit for
negotiations between Van-Halen and Cabrera to instate the Eliot Treaty
in this region. Hay had greater obstacles to overcome in committing
Cabrera to the agreement, as the Count of Morella continued to com-
mit atrocities even after his signature had been secured in March 1839.
Cabrera was reeling from the loss of a shipment of arms which he had
procured in Britain. The Cristino coastguard intercepted a British ves-
sel carrying weapons bound for a remote beach under Carlist control,
impounding the cargo in Barcelona. The Cristinos did not know that
these arms were detailed for nothing less than a 22,000-strong expedi-
tion which Cabrera planned to lead against Madrid in the summer.127
Cabrera tried to take this strategic calamity in his stride, reverting to the
mystique of the guerrilla:

   War has secrets which are not explained in books. Any general who
   does not know more than what is written down may make an excel-
   lent writer of military books and lose all battles at the same time.
   In the War of Independence we saw how Blake hardly won a single
   action in spite of being brave and a great tactician . . . Napoleon’s gen-
   erals who came to Spain were the same, and our guerrillas defeated
   them . . . Now all the generals of the Army of the Centre who are ﬁght-
   ing me think they have technical superiority over me, and I don’t
   mean to debate this . . . but war gives results, not theories. I repeat
   that the science of war has its secrets.128

This ‘people’s war’ theme, inherited from the Peninsular War, was
a desperate but logical response to enemy superiority. But people’s
war requires civilian support, and this was ebbing among the war-
weary communities of the east. Cabrera found civilians feared Cristino
strength whereas once they had feared his own. Cabrera ordered that
Segura (Teruel) organise its own Carlist garrison in order to free up his
sorely needed troops for deployment elsewhere. Fearing the wrath of
the Cristinos, its inhabitants declined, so Cabrera tore down Segura’s
impressive church, other public buildings and some 350 houses. A total
of 1,600 inhabitants were thus turned into homeless refugees, seeking
shelter in nearby settlements and the caves of Los Pinares.129
                                  Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   217


   The pressure on Cabrera to agree to a more humanitarian conduct of
the conﬂict grew unbearable once Don Carlos added his name to the
criticism. The King’s censure was wide-ranging, and included criticism
of Cabrera’s zeal in suppressing even the most moderate Liberal tracts
which made it into Carlist territory. Don Carlos did not think it wrong
to censor, only that this was the proper duty of the civilian junta, not
the military. But Don Carlos’s most pressing critique was on humani-
tarian grounds. Finally, early in April, both Cabrera and Van-Halen put
their names to a version of the Eliot Treaty in the eastern zone, Cabrera
signing at his headquarters at Segura on 1 April 1839, whereupon the
emissary took it for Van-Halen’s signature at Lécera on 3 April 1839.
Cabrera had initially been piqued that such an important negotiation
had ﬁrst been opened up only verbally when Van-Halen had despatched
to him a Carlist prisoner as an emissary. The Treaty of Lécera (known by
Carlists as the Treaty of Segura) also excited controversy besides, by civil-
ian politicians and journalists. George Villiers defended Van-Halen’s and
British government policy in this matter from an attack in the House
of Lords by Lord Londonderry on 23 July 1839.130 And the interna-
tional controversy paled in comparison to that raging in the press of
Cristino Spain. In particular, the treaty’s provisions to protect the lives
of captured Carlists who had previously served in Cristino ranks, the
insistence that both able-bodied and wounded prisoners be given treat-
ment equal to those of serving soldiers, and the ban placed on deporting
prisoners overseas all excited the ire of the Liberal press, which pointed
out that these points privileged the Carlists more than the Cristinos.131
Moreover, problems remained as civilians would still be subject to the
rigours and excesses of armies, even though local communities now felt
encouraged to strike bargains with local Carlist forces in order to be able
to work their lands unmolested (deals which local Cristino forces were
obliged to tolerate out of sheer necessity). Also, local commanders were
still prone to ignoring or distorting the provisions. Prisoners numbering
more than 300, for example, were to be left in open towns devoid of
all war-related material and to be quarantined up to a distance of two
leagues’ radius from any troops. The Carlist deputy comandante general
of Aragón interpreted this provision as excluding everyone on pain of
death.132
   Meanwhile, pressure was mounting on Van-Halen to inﬂict a
decisive defeat on Cabrera. Cabrera still dominated large areas of
Aragón,Valencia and Catalonia. Carlist domination included an armed
river and coastal ﬂotilla on the Ebro estuary, the only instance in the
war where Carlist naval power matched that of the enemy.133 Van-Halen
218 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


marched on Segura, but he found the town in ashes as Cabrera had
levelled it rather than spend resources on its defence. A series of engage-
ments in March and April 1839 ﬁnally wore out Van-Halen’s momentum
and he was forced to retreat. This sent shock waves through the Lib-
eral government, which had banked on Segura being an easy victory.
Bowing to the inevitable, Van-Halen offered his resignation, which was
accepted.134 War Minister Alaix replaced him with Nogueras, who was
appointed on 16 April 1839 but whose ill health required the temporary
nomination of General Bartolomé Amor in the interim. On 27 April
1839, War Minister Alaix gave both Amor and Nogueras special instruc-
tions to seek out any offensive opportunity against Cabrera in Aragón
and Valencia, lest the northern side of the Ebro end up turning into
Carlist-dominated territory with all the adverse diplomatic connotations
that would produce. In order to streamline this effort, he instructed
them not to prioritise payments to the unpopular asentistas except in the
case of food deliveries.135 The latter stipulation was a shrewd response to
the renewed crisis of morale in the Army of the Centre, with hunger, lack
of footwear and desertion taking their toll.136
   Banditry and insecurity continued to blunt the by-now nominally
massively superior Cristino forces, some 31,556 infantry and 2,136 cav-
alry in the Army of the Centre in April 1839. Furthermore, this army
was riven with unimaginative and timorous commanders who failed to
progress from the inﬂexible tactics of halting their infantry to ﬁre long-
distance volleys at Carlists, even though rushing the enemy from the
outset would have yielded better results. The army was also chronically
undersized by desertion and overstaffed by ofﬁcers – brigades compris-
ing only 12 companies, each of these commanded by comandantes,
being a common phenomenon.137 In short, the Cristino offensive was
a laborious affair. Thus, the suffering continued to devolve onto civil-
ians. Montalbán (Teruel) had been devastated by Carlists in 1836; now
tragedy overtook it again when its National Militia commander, Jaime
Vicente, requested from Cabrera a temporary truce so that medicines
might replenish the exhausted supplies of the town’s hospital which, as
stipulated by the Treaty of Lécera, was treating both Cristino and Carlist
casualties on an equal basis. Cabrera refused, but suggested the defend-
ers hoist a ﬂag on the roof of the hospital so that the Carlist artillery
would be able to spare it their bombardment. As soon as the ﬂag was
hoisted, Carlist artillery rained down a withering ﬁre on the building.
In one day some 66 shells fell on the building, reducing it to ruins and
killing its inmates, including some 13 of Cabrera’s own men. After 50
days of bombardment, the Cristinos abandoned the town, which had
                                 Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40   219


now been reduced to ruins. Against Cabrera’s terrorism the Cristinos
constructed a narrative of heroic defence, including that of 22-year-
old woman, Manuela Cirugeda, who distinguished herself ﬁghting as
a soldier in the town’s defence.138
   The Cristinos launched assassination attempts against Cabrera, but he
became aware of these plots throughout 1839 and 1840, and took pre-
cautionary measures. No one, except trusted comrades, could get close
to him. He randomly changed his routines, calling on villages for food
and accommodation, in order to either remain anonymous or minimise
the chance of malicious plots coming to fruition. A special police force
was set up to ﬁlter defectors from the Cristinos army for possible assas-
sins and he built up a counter-espionage network which soon foiled
Cristino plots. An elaborate plot involving a poisoned dagger hidden in
the baggage of a ‘Carlist horse-trader’ who claimed to be ﬂeeing Madrid
was thwarted, the unfortunate assassin being caught, tried and decap-
itated. More than ever Cabrera began issuing verbal orders rather than
committing anything to paper, and subordinates obeyed them down the
line of military hierarchy.139 Cabrera imposed a reign of terror against
civilians who threatened to compromise Carlist positions and morale
in any way. In Rossell (Castellón de la Plana) an elderly local notable
with whom Cabrera was billeted pleaded with him to realise that the
Carlist cause was lost. Making an immediate example of this defeatism,
Cabrera marched the old man outside, ordered him to kneel and had
him shot from behind by his escort, Cabrera giving the execution order
himself.140 Any sign of communication with the Cristinos could likewise
spell death for the civilian involved, however innocent and helpless.
A nine-year-old girl from Pobla de Claramunt (Barcelona) who had been
sent to carry chocolates to the fortiﬁed Carlist weapons factory at Forts
del Turó was stopped and searched on her way by some facciosos from
nearby Igualada. In her basket they discovered a letter from her brother,
which conﬁrmed the fall of the Carlist stronghold of Morella. The girl
was executed on the spot.141
   The Treaty of Vergara ended the war on its main front and promised,
ﬁnally, to produce Cristino victory in the east. Cabrera was fortunate
to receive news of the northern ‘treachery’ – the northern Carlists had
tried to ‘prolong their miserable existence by selling out to the revolu-
tionary power’ – in the wake of two local Carlist victories at Carboneras
and Chulilla. His men were thus well-blooded when he summoned a
meeting to give his ofﬁcers the choice of release from service and safe
conduct to their homes, or the strictest discipline and subordination
to continue the ﬁght. Clutching at straws, he thought that the coming
220 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


of winter would buy them time. He promised the most draconian disci-
pline, including the death penalty for anyone even suspected of desiring
transacción with the enemy.142 By giving his ofﬁcers this sole and ﬂeet-
ing opportunity to abandon the Carlist cause, Cabrera showed that he
retained control of the situation. His army, after all, peaked at some
30,000 at the end of 1839, some eight times larger than what he had
found in 1835, whilst he cherished hopes that the diehard apostólico
opponents of Maroto might yet be rallied along the French border for
a fresh attempt to reignite the northern front. But Cabrera would need
to strain every nerve to resist the 50,000-strong army and overwhelm-
ing artillery launched from Zaragoza in October. Moderados accused
Espartero of delaying his descent on the east in order to maximise his
political power, but his gradual rather than rapid offensive still left no
one in doubt as to the hopelessness of the Carlists’ strategic situation.
As we have seen, the immobilisation of Catalan Carlism caused by the
España affair gave Cabrera no relief from the north. Cabrera’s active
defence began well but turned for the worse in mid-December when
he fell gravely ill. In February 1840, the Valencia press reported popular
manifestations in the Maestrazgo willing Cabrera’s recovery, evidence
of resilient morale, perhaps, but also evidence of how personalised the
leadership of the Carlist east remained.143 Whilst Espartero picked off
fortiﬁed points one by one, Cabrera could not even rise from his bed
until May 1840.144
   Cabrera knew that his line could only hold if the war were reignited
in the north. But the French police frustrated most plots and prevented
suspicious Spaniards from concentrating on the border. Despite these
measures, it was remarkable that Balmaseda still managed to invade the
Spanish Basque country in June 1840 with some 510 men and 470 cav-
alry. But this failed to reignite the war. Seeing this, Cabrera, on 5 July
1840, crossed the French frontier at the head of some 4,600 infantry
and 300 cavalry.145 Cristino forces now occupied all national territory.
But the victorious Liberals did not take any chances. The major Carlist
arms foundries at Villarluengo were destroyed in order to dissuade local
Carlists from restarting the war. The First Carlist War was over.146
Conclusions




At the war’s end in 1840, the Catalan priest and ‘common sense’
philosopher, Jaime Balmés, posited an apposite question: ‘if the Carlists
had been nothing more than a gang of thieves and outlaws, why could
the Cristino armies not destroy them?’1 Of course, thieves and outlaws
may have used Carlism as a ﬂag of convenience, but this was largely
outside the safe zones of the Basque country, and to a lesser extent,
Catalonia and the Maestrazgo. But Balmés was correctly parodying the
self-assured arrogance that made Spanish Liberals view opposition to
their transition and regime as a symptom of rural, priest-ridden igno-
rance. The Cristino denigration of their enemy as ‘bandits’, caribes and
facciosos was as facile as the Carlists’ ﬁght against negros and ‘usurpers’.
Yet the fact that Carlist wars would resurface (in 1846, in 1872 and again
in 1936), albeit on nothing like the scale of the ﬁrst war, showed that
there was no peace and reconciliation, and the persistence of belligerent
language represented far deeper tensions.
  For one thing, the peace of 1840 was really no peace at all. Spain
would remain in a revolutionary versus counter-revolutionary crisis
until 1844 at least, when a draconian moderado crackdown and the insti-
tution of the ﬁrst rural gendarmerie (Civil Guard) illegalised most open
recourses to popular radicalism (i.e. deﬁnitively abolishing the veterans’
Militia) while also presiding over the ﬁrst real economic boom of the
nineteenth century. The immediate weeks and months after the con-
ﬂict saw violence persist. The Vergara settlement had positive effects in
Asturias and Galicia where ‘Carlists’ had to revert to banditry and were
therefore targeted by united local communities.2 But it was powerless
in other areas to arrest violence. The area around Ciudad Real (New
Castile) was particularly disﬁgured by conﬂicts between ‘Liberals’ and
‘Carlists’, which quickly turned into a cycle of blood vendettas, in which

                                    221
222 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


women, even pregnant ones, and children, and sometimes whole fami-
lies, were massacred. On 25 August 1839, four days before the northern
peace, families of Carlists began to be held as hostages to be targeted
in reprisals for atrocities from the other side. Gradually this draconian
peace began to work, as villages could see themselves reconnected with
each other and the outside world, and ‘Carlist’ ﬁghters who failed to
submit to the Peace Treaty could now be hunted down as criminals
instead of legitimate enemies. On several occasions local communities,
freed from the fear of organised reprisals, took the initiative in hunting
down their persecutors. But as so many Carlists continued to be active
as brigands beyond the law after the Treaty of Vergara, some unfortu-
nates continued to be held and killed several months after the formal
end of hostilities. Francisco Martín, for example, was the four-year-old
son of a wanted Carlist. He was held hostage and remained in deten-
tion despite the frantic efforts of the residents of his home village of
Fuente el Fresno to retrieve him. On 4 July 1840, the prison comman-
ders ordered a captive to be executed in reprisal for a Carlist outrage and
young Francisco drew the fatal lot. Being led out to face his ﬁring squad,
Francisco was too young to understand the fate that was about to befall
him. He thought the soldiers were going to play with him: ‘Will you buy
me some oranges, and you won’t hurt me, will you soldiers? Nor my
father or mother either?’ The soldiers were beside themselves with grief
about their orders. They temporised frantically, hoping against hope
for their orders to be countermanded, but to no avail. In desperation
they retrieved an orange and threw it in front of the ﬁring squad and
encouraged the boy to fetch it. The soldiers opened ﬁre and Francisco
fell, clasping his stomach wounds before crawling towards the soldiers
pleading ‘Don’t kill me, don’t hurt me.’ Obeying orders the soldiers let
loose a second volley which killed the child outright. The child’s father
later gave himself up and carried on serving in the newly uniﬁed army
under Liberal command. Conditions in Espartero’s army grew so bad
that the man joined a ‘Carlist’ rebellion which killed some ofﬁcers at
Fernán Caballero, a village ten miles away from where his son had been
executed. He was caught and executed by slow strangulation in Madrid
on 9 February 1843. His wife, Francisco’s mother, survived.3
   Perpetrators of terrible atrocities remained at large and were effectively
amnestied by the Vergara settlement. Carlist exterminating angels were
exonerated with the restoration of full diplomatic relations between
the Spanish Church and the Holy See via the Concordat of 1851. José
Lorente, the priest who had ordered the massacre of 73 Cristino prison-
ers by a roadside in October 1836, lived a long and quiet life, and was
                                                           Conclusions   223


still practising in his home parish 30 years later, being paid a stipend
from the Liberal state he had tried to overthrow.4
   But the real legacy of Spain’s bloodiest civil war was embodied in
the thousands of individual anonymous tragedies, beyond the ken of
historians. Often these were given a radical political meaning. Wid-
ows guarded their martyred menfolk’s memory, cherishing images of
Espartero as the people’s war hero, hanging veterans’ militia uniforms
in a pride of place. When militia veterans presided over the 1841
exhumation of the massacred victims of the 1835 Carlist atrocity at
Rubielos, they did so not just to remember these martyrs to liberty,
but also to reafﬁrm the claim of the citizenry-in-arms to a stake in
Spain’s Liberal future.5 The suppression of the militia in 1844 did not
remove it as an actual force. Disbanded veterans retained their own net-
works which sometimes sprang into life during later revolutions. Neither
Cristino militia nor soldiers remained silent about their harsh treatment
imposed upon them as a consequence of the peace treaty, the failure
of land redistribution or even of decent conditions of service in the
peacetime army.
   The Cristino victory was attributed to Espartero, leftist war hero and
‘Duke of Victory’. His success was a cause for both national and sec-
tarian celebration. Whereas his victory parade through Barcelona was
so rapturous that he had to dismount and allow himself to be carried
aloft by the crowd, in Seville, where Espartero’s presence was substituted
by a giant portrait, thousands marched against the moderados and sev-
eral hundred hotheads burnt to the ground the ofﬁce of the rightist El
Conservador newspaper.6 Espartero was leading a groundswell of veter-
ans’ opinions against the socially regressive centralisation of political
power inherent in the moderado abolition of the autonomy of all but
the smallest municipalities. Both militia and army veterans joined this
‘peace dividend’ revolution, and the situation in Granada, where the
army took no time at all in following the lead of the militia, was typical.7
Hopes were brieﬂy raised by the ‘peace dividend’ revolution of October
1840, caused by moderado attempts to abolish municipal autonomy, and
which forced the abdication of that obsolescent symbol of the conﬂict,
María Cristina, and her replacement the following year as sole regent
by the war hero, Baldomero Espartero. The revolution was started by
hundreds of thousands of militia and army veterans, and it was their
common identity as veterans of a struggle for liberty which united
them. Many veterans were swept up in the class conﬂict that reached
an unprecedented scale in Barcelona during 1842 and again in 1843,
and it ended up ousting Espartero from power. The economic tensions
224 Spain’s First Carlist War, 1833–40


behind the conﬂict exploded into violence in city barricades manned by
Carlist War veterans.
   The peace was cruel to the losers, especially in the Basque country
which saw a spike in emigration in the early 1840s, in response to the
stripping away of the economic privileges vested in the fueros, and an
economic slump made worse by the devastation and a triumphalist
esparterista elite. As for the vanquished Basque provinces, the Vergara
settlement did nothing to stop the ongoing concentration of power in
the hands of local elites; in fact, it actually encouraged it. Whilst most of
the fueros were left intact, the deﬁnitive removal of the Spanish customs
frontier to the Pyrenees privileged the liberal, commercial oligarchies
of San Sebastián and Bilbao at the expense of the paternalistic, socially
harmonious Carlist heartland of Vitoria.8 As for returning Carlist sol-
diers, little was done for them. The Basque armaments industry was
prevented from supplying the Liberal army, despite the fact that the
largest factory, that of Eibar, had been longer in Cristino hands during
the previous seven years than in those of the Carlists. Workers made
redundant, along with demobilised Carlist soldiers, were thus driven
to emigrate to Cuba and the River Plate (Montevideo). The winter and
spring of 1841 witnessed a surge in emigration from Spain’s northern
ports, whilst newspapers related depressing coverage of the haemor-
rhage of youth, many of the latter ending up shipwrecked, indentured
or exploited upon arrival in Cuba and Spain’s former colonies.9
   The years 1833–40 had submerged Spain in a collective trauma which
killed between 2 and 4 per cent of the 1833 population, and damaged
the lives of hundreds of thousands of survivors. The signiﬁcance of the
First Carlist War is more than what has traditionally been attributed
to it (namely, praetorianism in Liberal politics, proxy for Liberal revo-
lution and the deﬁance of Europe’s most enduring legitimism). It also
created new patterns of popular politics which owed their origins to
the sacriﬁces of communities (army, militia and civilian) that had been
exposed to the conﬂict. This phenomenon shaped the progresista revolu-
tion of 1840. Above all, the length and scale of the conﬂict proved to be
an enduring motor for Spain’s political modernity and, in particular, a
model for plebeian action in Liberal politics. Thus, this book argues that
the First Carlist War shaped Spain’s post-Napoleonic crisis more than it
was shaped by it.
Notes


1   Introduction, History and Sources
 1. Geoffrey Wawro’s Warfare and Society in Europe, 1792–1914 (London, 1999),
    for example, offers brief analysis of the Peninsular War, the French invasion
    of 1823 and two pages on the Spanish American War of 1898, but nothing
    on the First Carlist War.
 2. José Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa: la idea de España en el siglo XIX (Madrid,
    2001), 22, 366.
 3. Antonio Pirala, Historia de la Guerra civil y de los partidos liberal y carlista (Tomo
    I: desde la Regencia de Urgel hasta la dimisión de Zumalacárregui (Madrid, 1984),
    I, 50–57.
 4. Alfonso Bullón de Mendoza, ‘La primera guerra carlista’ (PhD thesis, E-print
    Biblioteca Universidad Complutense, 2002), 77.
 5. España. Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte. Archivo Histórico
    Nacional, DIVERSOS-TITULOS_FAMILIAS, 3353, Exp. 30: King’s annulment
    of the Pragmatic Sanction.
 6. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 117–127.
 7. Radical-Liberal historians, meanwhile, virtually ignored the dynastic ques-
    tion altogether, casting the war instead as ‘liberty versus the Inquisition’
    (F. Cabello, F. Santa Cruz and R. M. Temprado, Historia de la guerra última
    en Aragón y Valencia (Madrid, 1845), I, 17).
 8. This rests on Don Carlos’s birth, in 1788, one year before the secret Cortes
    decree which had no legitimacy to revoke a God-given birthright.
 9. Jordi Canal, El carlismo (Madrid, 2004), 402–404.
10. Foreword by Julio Aróstegui (i–lxiii) to Pirala, Guerra civil, I, vii–lvii.
11. C. A. M. Hennessey, The Federal Republic in Spain: Pi y Margall and the Federal
    Republican Movement, 1868–1874 (Oxford, 1962), 170.
12. This model is explored in Thomas W. Laqueur, ‘Bodies, Details and the
    Humanitarian Narrative’, in Lynn Hunt (ed.), The New Cultural History
    (California, 1992), 176–204.
13. Pedro Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra última en Aragón y Valencia (escrita por
    F. Cabello, F. Santa Cruz y R. M. Temprado) (Zaragoza, 2006), xxxiv, lxiii–lxx.
14. Canal, El carlismo, 435–436.
15. The most prominent examples were Javier de Burgos, Anales del reinado de
    Isabel II, 6 vols (Madrid, 1850–51), Modesto Lafuente, Historia general de
    España, Vol. 20 (Madrid, 1890), and Ildefonso Antonio Bermejo, La estafeta
    del palacio, Vol. 1 (Madrid, 1872).
16. Especially, Rafael Ciudad Gambra, La primera guerra civil de España (1821–23)
    (Madrid, 1950); Román Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo (Madrid, 1965); Jaime
    del Burgo, Para la historia de la primera guerra carlista: comentarios y acotaciones
    a un manuscrito de la época 1834–1839 (Pamplona, 1981).


                                          225
226 Notes


17. Melchor Ferrer, Domingo Tejera and José F. Acedo, Historia del tradicionalismo
    español, Vols I–XVIII (Madrid, 1941–50); José Ramón Urquijo Goitia, ‘Histo-
    riografía sobre la primera guerra carlista’, in Bulletin d’Histoire Contemporaine
    de l’Espagne, No. 17–18, June–December 1993, 414–415; Canal, El carlismo,
    407–410.
18. Federico Suárez Verdeguer, La crisis política del antiguo régimen en España
    (1800–1840) (Madrid, 1950); José Luis Comellas García-Llera, El trienio
    constitucional (Madrid, 1963); Pedro Pegenaute, Represión política en el reinado
    de Fernando VII: las comisiones militares (1824–1825) (Pamplona, 1974).
19. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 685; Suárez had said the same
    (Suárez, Crisis política del antiguo régimen, 14, 24).
20. Canal, El carlismo, 410.
21. Josep Carles Clemente, Las guerras carlistas (Barcelona, 1982), 84–85; Las
    guerras carlistas (Sarpe, 1986), 109–142.
22. Clemente, Guerras carlistas, 117–118.
23. Clemente was seizing on Karl Marx’s observation that Carlism during its
    Second War (1872–76) was a form of ‘feudal socialism’ (Clemente, Guerras
    carlistas, 219).
24. E.g. José Extramiana, Historia de las guerras carlistas (San Sebastián, 1979), I,
    125–126.
25. Cit. Canal, El carlismo, 410.
26. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 651–664. A study demysti-
    fying the Basque fueros, although not from a neo-traditionalist viewpoint,
    may be found in Coro Rubio Pobes, Revolución y tradición: el país vasco ante
    la revolución liberal y la construcción del estado liberal, 1808–1868 (Madrid,
    1996).
27. El Castellano, 4 March 1837.
28. Another moderado newspaper, for example, complained of how conscripts
    in Málaga province were deserting in the name of liberty and operating as
    bandits in nearby mountains and stealing from local property owners (El
    Español, 21 May 1836; 31 May 1836).
29. Canal, El carlismo, 416–422.
30. Urquijo Goitia, ‘Historiografía sobre la primera guerra carlista’, 437.
31. Pedro Rújula, Contrarrevolución realismo y carlismo en Aragón y el Maestrazgo:
    1820–1840 (Zaragoza, 1998); Urquijo Goitia, ¿Voluntarios o quintos?:
    reclutamiento y deserción el la primera guerra carlista: Violencias fratricidas.
    Carlistas y liberales en el siglo XIX (Pamplona, 2009).
32. Eric Christiansen discussed army politics from the viewpoint of the élites
    (Christiansen, The Origins of Military Power in Spain, 1800–1854 (Oxford,
    1967), 42–107). Edgar Holt’s bold title proves to be little more than a cue to
    discuss court politics and the activities of the British Auxiliary Legion (Holt,
    The Carlist Wars in Spain (London, 1967), 13–193), the latter force being the
    subject of an engaging but old-fashioned study (Edward M. Brett, The British
    Auxiliary Legion in the First Carlist War in Spain, 1835–1838: A Forgotten Army
    (Dublin, 2005), passim) and of a non-academic work comparing British inter-
    vention in Greece, Portugal and Spain (Moises Enrique Rodríguez, Under the
    Flags of Freedom: British Mercenaries in the War of the Two Brothers, the First
    Carlist War, and the Greek War of Independence (1821–1840) (Lanham, 2009).
33. John F. Coverdale, The Basque Phase of Spain’s First Carlist War (Princeton,
    1984).
                                                                        Notes   227


34. Miguel Artola, La burguesía revolucionaria (Madrid, 1974); Carlos Marichal,
    Spain (1834–1844): A New Society (London, 1977); Juan Sisinio Pérez Garzón,
    Milicia Nacional y revolución burguesa: el prototipo madrileño 1808–1874
    (Madrid, 1978); Diego López Garrido, La Guardia Civil y los orígenes del estado
    centralista (Madrid, 1982).
35. Julio Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘La aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la
    guerra’, in Historia de España: La era isabelina y el sexenio democrático (1834–
    1874), XXXIV, begun by Ramón Menéndez Pidal and edited by José María
    Jover Zamora (Madrid, 1981), 75–81.
36. E.g. Manuel Chust, Ciudadanos en armas: la milicia nacional en el Pais
    Valenciano (1834–1840) (Valencia, 1987).
37. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 49; Alberto Risco, Zumalacárregui en campaña.
    Según los documentos conservados por su secretario de estado mayor, don Antonio
    Zaratiegui (Madrid, 1935), 300–301.
38. Extramiana, Guerras carlistas, I, 23–24; Clemente, Guerras carlistas, 219.
39. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 669.
40. Julio Aróstegui, Jordi Canal and Eduardo G. Calleja, Las guerras carlistas:
    hechos, hombres e ideas (Madrid, 2003), 23.
41. Especially, Coverdale, Basque Phase, and Urquijo Goitia, ¿Voluntarios o
    quintos?.
42. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 136–145.
43. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 294–308.
44. Francisco Asín Remírez de Esparza, El carlismo aragonés, 1833–40 (Zaragoza,
    1983), 32–36.
45. Paul Preston, The Spanish Holocaust: Inquisition and Extermination in Twentieth-
    Century Spain (London, 2012), 63–64.
46. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 221–223; Fernando Fernández de Córdova, Mis memorias
    íntimas (Madrid, 1886), I, 376; George de Lacy Evans, Memoranda of the
    Contest in Spain (London, 1840), 11–12.
47. Córdova, Memorias, I, 264.
48. Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa, 329–330; Mark Kurlansky, The Basque History
    of the World (London, 2000); Extramiana, Guerras carlistas, I, 41.
49. Extramiana, Guerras carlistas, 106–121, 154; Juan José Solozábal, El primer
    nacionalismo vasco: industrialismo y conciencia nacional (Tucar Ediciones,
    1975), 290–294.
50. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 22–27, 70–71; Extramiana, Guerras carlistas, 129.
51. J. Antonio Zaratiegui, Vida y hechos de don Tomás de Zumalacárregui (Madrid,
    1845), 11–12; Wilhelm von Rahden, Aus Spaniens Bürgerkrieg (Berlin,
    1851), 34.
52. Ferrer, Tejera and Acedo, Tradicionalismo español, V, 221.
53. Josep Carles Clemente, El carlismo: historia de una disidencia social
    (1833–1976) (Barcelona, 1990), 38.
54. The Ebro frontier beneﬁted the consumer interests of Navarra and Alava
    rather than the producer interests of coastal Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa (Renato
    Barahon Arévalo, Vizcaya on the Eve of Carlism: Politics and Society, 1800–1833
    (Nevada, 1989), 125–26).
55. José Ramón Urquijo Goitia, ‘La primera Guerra carlista desde la ideología
    nacionalista vasca’, in Vasconia, Vol. 26 (1998), 65–110, 70, 109; Marianne
    Heiberg, The Making of the Basque Nation (Cambridge, 1989), 36; Clemente,
    El carlismo, 40–41.
228 Notes


56. Stanley Payne, ‘Catalan and Basque Nationalism’, in Journal of Contemporary
    History, Vol. 6, No. 1, Nationalism and Separatism (1971), 15–51, 37.
57. Canal, El carlismo, 415–416; Brett, British Auxiliary Legion.
58. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 449; Urquijo Goitia, ‘Historiografía sobre la
    primera guerra carlista’, 414–415.
59. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 20–21.
60. Martin Blinkhorn, Carlism and Crisis in Spain, 1931–1939 (Cambridge, 1975),
    6–16.
61. Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra, lxxxvii–lxxxix.
62. Manuel Ardit Lucas, Revolución liberal y revuelta campesina (Barcelona,
    1977), 70.
63. Remírez de Esparza, Carlismo aragonés, 32–36.
64. Miguel Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias del general don Francisco Espoz y Mina
    (Madrid, 1962), II, 324.
65. Evaristo San Miguel, De la guerra civil de España (Madrid, 1836), 86–91.
66. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844) 118–123.
67. Aróstegui, Canal, and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 150–151; Aróstegui Sánchez,
    ‘Aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la guerra’, 104; Marichal, Spain
    (1834–1844), 13.
68. Artola, Burguesía revolucionaria, 90–112.
69. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 18–19, 170. In fact, as we have seen, it was the
    impoverishment on the margins of these advanced areas which led to the
    popularity of Carlism.
70. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 717–718.
71. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 11–21.
72. Evarist Olcina, El carlismo y las autonomías regionales (Madrid, 1974), 61.
73. Urquijo Goitia, ¿Voluntarios o quintos?, 106–108, 117.
74. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 38–39.
75. Aróstegui, Canal and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 15.
76. Alexandra Wilhelmsen, La formación del pensamiento politico del carlismo,
    1810–1875 (Madrid, 1995).
77. Geoffrey Jensen, ‘Counterinsurgency at Home and Abroad’, in Wayne
    H. Bowen and José E. Álvarez (eds.), A Military History of Modern Spain
    (Westport, CT, 2007), 21.


2   The First Carlist War: Origins
 1. Ronald Fraser, Napoleon’s Cursed War: Popular Resistance in the Spanish Penin-
    sular War (London, 2008), 432–481.
 2. Charles J. Esdaile, ‘War and Politics in Spain, 1808–1814’, in The Historical
    Journal, Vol. 31, No. 2 (June 1988), 295–317. The administrative apparatus
    of Bourbon Spain underwent militarisation during the eighteenth century,
    whereby ofﬁces of secretaries of state were increasingly ﬁlled by military men
    and the powers exercised by captains-general in provincial administration
    came to eclipse the respective authority theoretically held by government
    ministers (José Cepeda Gómez, El ejército Español en la política Española (1787–
    1843): conspiraciones y pronunciamientos en los comienzos de la España liberal
    (Madrid, 1990), 144–145).
                                                                       Notes   229


 3. Alicia Laspra, ‘La ayuda británica’, in Antonio Moliner Prada (ed.), La Guerra
    de la Independencia en España (1808–1814) (Barcelona, 2007), 153–182.
 4. Juan Romero Alpuente, Wellington en España y Ballesteros en Ceuta (Cádiz,
    1813), 1–26.
 5. For the best deconstruction of the ‘guerrilla myth’, see Charles J. Esdaile,
    Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain 1808–1814
    (London, 2004). For a less convincing defence of the orthodox ‘people’s war’
    paradigm, see Fraser, Napoleon’s Cursed War.
 6. Cepeda Gómez, El ejército Español en la política española, 304–305.
 7. B.U.Z. Faustino Casamayor, Años políticos e históricos de las cosas más
    particulares ocurridas en la Imperial Augusta y siempre heróica Ciudad de
    Zaragoza, Vol. 31 (1814): May diary entries.
 8. Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa, 349–350.
 9. Coverdale, Basque Phase of the Carlist War, 242, 296; Harold Dana Sims,
    The Expulsion of Mexico’s Spaniards, 1821–1836 (Pittsburgh, 1990); Renato
    Barahon Arévalo, ‘The Origins and Causes of Carlism in Vizcaya, 1759–1833’,
    in Stanley Payne (ed.), Identidad y nacionalismo en la España contemporánea:
    el carlismo (1833–1975) (Madrid, 1996), 21–22; Extramiana, Historia de las
    guerras carlistas, I, 33–35, 52.
10. A.H.N. Consejos, leg. 3781, Vol. I, No. 2: 7 October 1826 recirculation of
    Martin de Garay’s 30 May 1817 tax reforms.
11. The complex jurisdiction and generally low productivity of Spanish agricul-
    ture is a vast question. As Islamic Spain was gradually ‘reconquered’ over
    the course of the Middle Ages, vast swathes of land were given as entail
    (which could be neither bought nor sold) in perpetuity to the victorious
    nobility, Church and military orders. These bodies enjoyed considerable
    degrees of economic and jurisdictional autonomy (fueros) under the Crown,
    and so provoked the ire of eighteenth-century enlightened absolutist monar-
    chs who wanted to establish uniform state control, and whose ministers
    strove to achieve this end. In 1767, Campomanes began a project aimed
    at settling deserted land by establishing nuevas poblaciones under regal juris-
    diction. The following year, Olavide proposed reforms designed to improve
    access to the land, whilst by the 1790s, Jovellanos was urging the proto-
    Liberal need to introduce a free market in land. Even if these reforms
    achieved little in practice, the intellectual argument for ‘disentailment’
    (desamortización) had been largely won by the time the post-1808 Liberals
    set about freeing up property in earnest, most comprehensively during the
    Carlist War.
12. Javier García Fernández, El orígen del municipio constitucional: autonomía y
    centralización en Francia y en España (Madrid, 1983), 304–305.
13. Cit. Juan Francisco Fuentes and Lluís Roura i Aulinas (eds), Sociabilidad y
    liberalismo en la España del siglo XIX (Lleida, 2001), 81.
14. Francisco J. Hernández Montalbán, La abolición de los señoríos en España
    (1811–1837) (Madrid, 1999), 185–199.
15. Miguel Artola, La España de Fernando VII (Madrid, 1999), 425–430.
16. Jules Renouard, Narración de D. Juan Van Halen, Gefe de Estado Mayor de una
    de las divisiones de Mina en 1822 y 1823, ó relación circunstanciada de su cau-
    tividad en los calabozos de la Inquisición, su evasión y su emigración (Paris,
    1828), II, 58.
230 Notes


17. Andrés Sarría Muñoz, Breve historia de Málaga (Málaga, 1995), 74–81;
    Francisco Javier Maestrojuán Catalán, Ciudad de vasallos, Nación de heroes
    (Zaragoza: 1809–1814) (Zaragoza, 2003), 510.
18. José Luis Comellas, Los primeros pronunciamientos en España, 1814–1820
    (Madrid, 1958), 355–368.
19. José María Iribarren, Espoz y Mina: El Liberal (Madrid, 1967), 179–182.
20. María del Pilar Ramos Rodríguez, La conspiración del triángulo (Sevilla, 1970),
    3–19.
21. Alberto Gil Novales (ed.), Rafael del Riego: La revolución de 1820, día a día:
    cartas, escritos y discursos (Prólogo, biografía sucinta, notas y recopilación de
    documentos por Alberto Gil Novales) (Madrid, 1976), 45–46.
22. Nicolás Sánchez-Albornoz, Las crisis de subsistencias de España en el siglo XIX
    (Rosario, 1963), 16–17.
23. T. M. Hughes, Revelations of Spain in 1845 (London, 1845), II, 179.
24. Antonio Moliner Prada, Revolución burguesa y movimiento juntero en España
    (Lleida, 1997), 109–110; Thomas Bunbury, Reminiscences of a Veteran: Being
    Personal and Military Adventures in Portugal, Spain, France, Malta, New South
    Wales, Norfolk Island, New Zealand, Andaman Islands and India (London,
    1861), II, 48–54.
25. Cit. Riego, Revolución de 1820, día a día, 38.
26. The Inquisition had become hated as the agent for the police state. That
    said, as with the storming of the Bastille in 1789, only a handful of political
    prisoners was found, none of whom bore signs of torture (La abolición de la
    Inquisición Española, 85–86).
27. Comellas, Trienio constitucional, 51.
28. Alberto Gil Novales, Las sociedades patrióticas (1820–1823) (Madrid, 1975),
    116–117.
29. Pérez Garzón, Milicia Nacional y revolución burguesa, 97–109.
30. B.U.Z. Casamayor, XXXVII (1820): 21 April 1820 transcription of Junta
    Gubernativa resolution to establish National Militia.
31. Diario de Sesiones de Cortes, No. 69, 11 September 1820, 931; No. 68, 26 April
    1821, 1278–79; No. 30, 24 October 1821, 369–370.
32. Manuel Moreno Alonso, Blanco White: la obsesión de España (Sevilla,
    1998), 470.
33. Victor Uribe Urán, Honorable Lives: Lawyers, Family and Politics in Colombia,
    1750–1850 (Pittsburgh, 2000), 9–31.
34. Jaime Elías Torras, Liberalismo y rebeldía campesina (1820–1823) (Barcelona,
    1976), 149–164.
35. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 22–23.
36. Cepeda Gómez, El ejército Español en la política española, 304–305.
37. Comellas, Trienio constitucional, 83; Isidoro Lara Martín-Portugués, Jaén (1820–
    1823): La lucha por la libertad durante el trienio liberal (Jaén, 1996), 204–205.
38. Gil Novales, Sociedades patrióticas, 574–577.
39. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 38.
40. Raul Pérez López-Portillo, La España de Riego (Madrid, 2005), 303.
41. El Espectador, Spring–Summer 1821.
42. A.G.P. Papeles Reservados de FVII, 67, Palacio, folios 28, 219, 221: post-1823
    government reports on secret societies.
43. El Espectador, 8 September 1821; Florencia Peyrou, El republicanismo popular
    en España 1840–1843 (Cádiz, 2002), 45.
                                                                           Notes   231


44. Torras, Liberalismo y rebeldía, 49–50.
45. In the judgement of the French ambassador after his country’s 1823 inva-
    sion: ‘Taxes paid in kind are nothing at all here: what is a real burden is
    tax paid in cash. One of the greatest errors of the Cortes government was
    to have established this reform: one of the greatest sources of hatred felt by
    the nation towards the government’ (cit. Pérez López-Portillo, La España de
    Riego, 358).
46. El Universal Observador Español, 10 March 1821; Manuel Tuñón de Lara, El
    movimiento obrero en la historia de España (Madrid, 1985), I, 54–55; Julio
    Berenguer Barceló, Historia de Alcoy (Alcoy, 1977), II, 90–96.
47. DSC, No. 12, 9 March 1821, 382.
48. Gil Novales, Sociedades patrióticas, 127.
49. Comellas García-Llera, El trienio constitucional, 43.
50. María Cruz Romeo Mateo, Entre el orden y la revolución: La formación de la
    burguesía liberal en la crisis de la monarquía absoluta (1814–1833) (Alicante,
    1993).
51. Iris M. Zavala, Masones, comuneros y carbonarios (Madrid, 1971), 72–75;
    Antonio Eiras Roel, Sociedades secretas republicanas en el reinado de Isabel II
    (Madrid, 1962), 6.
52. Charles J. Esdaile, Spain in the Liberal Age: From Constitution to Civil War,
    1808–1939 (Oxford, 2000), 55.
53. Gambra Ciudad, Primera guerra civil.
54. Artola, España de Fernando VII, 640–644.
55. Emilio La Parra, Los cien mil hijos de San Luís: El ocaso del primer impulso liberal
    en España (Madrid, 2007), 100–121.
56. Gil Novales, Sociedades patrióticas, 401–402; Christiansen, Origins of Military
    Power, 25.
57. El Espectador, 24 December 1822; 9 January 1823; 14 January 1823; 13 Febru-
    ary 1823.
58. A.H.N. Estado, 125, No. 31: 22 September 1822 resolution published by
    Council of State addressing collaboration between villagers and enemy
    agents.
59. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, 341–345.
60. Comellas, Trienio constitucional, 216.
61. El Mundo: Diario del Pueblo, 20 April 1838.
62. Pérez Garzón, Milicia Nacional, 338; Eiras Roel, Sociedades secretas, 10.
63. Coverdale, Basque Phase of the Carlist War, 118–119.
64. Pedro Rújula, Constitución o Muerte: el trienio liberal y los levantamientos
    realistas en Aragón (1820–1823) (Zaragoza, 2000), 195–204.
65. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 23–28; Lara Martín-Portugués, Jaén
    (1820–1823), 316.




3   The First Carlist War: Context
 1. A.H.N., Diversos (títulos y familia), leg. 3353, doc. 6: 24 July 1823 proclama-
    tion by Antonio Salinas de Orellana, Comandante militar of the province of
    Córdova.
 2. Eco del Comercio, 14 September 1838.
232 Notes


 3. Josep Fontana, De en medio del tiempo: la segunda restauración española,
    1823–1834 (Barcelona, 2006), 50–71; Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa,
    131–132.
 4. Irene Castells, ‘La opinion pública ante la invasion francesa: Cataluña
    (1823)’, in Francisco Fuentes and Roura i Aulinas (eds), Sociabilidad y
    liberalismo, 147–156.
 5. Raymond Carr, Spain (1808–1975) (Oxford, 1982), 141.
 6. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 420; Miguel Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias del general
    Don Francisco Espoz y Mina (Madrid, 1962), II, 117.
 7. Irene Castells, La utopía insurreccional del liberalismo: Torrijos y las conspira-
    ciones liberales de la década ominosa (Barcelona, 1989), 55.
 8. Aróstegui, Canal and Calleja (eds), Las guerras, 37–38; Alvarez Junco, Mater
    Dolorosa, 75.
 9. Comellas, Trienio constitucional, 312; Gerald Brenan, The Spanish Labyrinth
    (Cambridge, 1967), 97.
10. Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra última, lxxxvi–lxxxix.
11. López Garrido, Guardia Civil y los orígenes del estado centralista, 26–27; Victor
    G. Kiernan, The Revolution of 1854 in Spanish History (Oxford, 1966), 3.
12. Pegenaute, Represión política en el reinado de Fernando VII, 84–87.
13. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 38–39.
14. A.M.M. 3/183, Anales de Málaga: 1822–1889 (Recortes de la Unión Mercantil),
    11–14.
15. Fernando Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui (Madrid, 2010), 221.
16. Artola, España de Fernando VII, 865, 922–923.
17. Fontana, De en medio, 165–193.
18. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 24–25.
19. Eiras Roel, Sociedades secretas republicanas, 17–18.
20. A.G.P. C-27, no. 146, Reinados, Fernando VII, 27: 25 July 1824 letter from
    Don Carlos to the King.
21. Garrido, La Guardia Civil y los orígenes del Estado centralista, 48.
22. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 48.
23. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 31.
24. Eric J. Hobsbawm, The Age of Revolution: 1789–1848 (London, 1962), 146–48;
    Primitive Rebels (Manchester, 1974), 13–26.
25. Esdaile, Fighting Napoleon.
26. Torras, Liberalismo y rebeldía, 177–197.
27. Francisco Garrido, Bandidos, bandoleros y contrabandistas en la Serranía de
    Ronda (Málaga, 2001), 69–156.
28. Cit. Fontana, De en medio, 157–158.
29. Fontana, De en medio, 114–117; Pérez Garzón, Milicia Nacional, 344–352.
30. Castells, Utopía insurreccional, 26–53; A.H.N., Estado, leg. 217–212, No. 17:
    9 March 1826 advice from camarilla to King on how to proceed with the
    manifesto of Antonio Fernández Bazán.
31. A.G.P., C-27, No. 181, Reinados, Fernando VII, 27: 26 July 1826 complaint
    from Don Carlos to the King.
32. Maniﬁesto que dirige al pueblo español una federación de realistas puros sobre
    el estado de la nación y sobre la necesidad de elevar al trono al serenísimo
    señor infante Don Carlos (Madrid, 1 November 1826), reproduced at http://
    hispanianova.rediris.es/textos/maniﬁesto1.htm (accessed 20 March 2013).
                                                                        Notes   233


33. Jaime Elías Torras, La guerra de los Agraviados (Barcelona, 1967), 1–40.
34. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 90.
35. Fontana, De en medio, 229–230; Coverdale, Basque Phase of Spain’s First Carlist
    War, 14.
36. Fontana, De en medio, 224–225.
37. Eco del Comercio, 9 March 1837; Fontana, De en medio, 102.
38. Coverdale, Basque Phase of Spain’s First Carlist War, 241.
39. Torras, Agraviados, 98.
40. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 65.
41. Torras, Agraviados, 66–94.
42. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 78–79.
43. Charles J. Esdaile, ‘Enlightened Absolutism versus Theocracy in the Spanish
    Restoration, 1814–1850’, in David Laven and Lucy Riall (eds), Napoleon’s
    Legacy: Problems of Government in Restoration Europe (Oxford, 2000), 65–82.
44. Coverdale, Basque Phase of Spain’s First Carlist War, 11–28, 294–308.
45. Pirala, Guerra Civil, I, 43–48.
46. A.H.N., Estado, leg. 3141, No. 1, docs 1–433: December 1827 letters and
    proclamations of Portuguese miguelistas.
47. Castells, Utopía insurreccional, 26–27.
48. A.H.N., Consejos, leg. 3781, Vol. 1, No. 9: Interior Ministry suppression of
    the 14-page Llanto de la madre España.
49. Pío Baroja y Nessi, Siluetas Románticas (yotras historias de pillos y de extrav-
    agantes) (Madrid, 1934), 78; Romero Alpuente pressurised the inﬂuential
    Hispanophile, Lord Holland, into interceding with Prime Minster Wellington
    on his behalf, but no subsidy was forthcoming (Manuel Moreno Alonso,
    La forja del liberalismo en España: los amigos españoles de Lord Holland, 1793–
    1840 (Madrid, 1997), 394–396). Romero Alpuente’s pamphleteering during
    the Peninsular War had attacked Wellington as a ‘Tory threat’ to Spanish lib-
    erty and Spain’s protected American markets (Romero Alpuente, Wellington
    en España).
50. Castells, Utopía insurreccional, 153.
51. Moreno Alonso, Forja del liberalismo en España.
52. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 154–173.
53. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 127–139.
54. Admittedly, on Madrid’s insistence the Spanish émigrés were cut off both
    from the frontier and ﬁnancial support. But the Cristino transition would
    soon rescue the émigrés and they were even invited to serve in the new
    Foreign Legion. Ironically, during the Carlist War, instead of Spanish Liberals
    going to the Foreign Legion, the Legion would go to Liberal Spain (Pirala,
    Guerra civil, I, 140–143; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II,
    184, 198–204).
55. Iribarren, Espoz y Mina, 374–375.
56. Coverdale, Basque Phase of Spain’s First Carlist War, 103–104; Pirala, Guerra
    civil, I, 252–257; Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa, 358.
57. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 146–148; Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y
    los antecedents de la guerra’, 88; Artola, Burguesía revolucionaria.
58. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 143–145.
59. A.G.P., Caja 28/3, Reinados, FVII, 27: series of letters between Fernando
    VII and Don Carlos.
234 Notes


60. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 175–179; Louis Xavier August de Saint-Sylvain, The
    Career of Don Carlos, since the Death of Ferdinand the Seventh: Being a Chapter
    in the History of Charles the Fifth (London, 1835), 44–46.
61. Fernández, Orígen del municipio constitucional, 311; Pirala, Guerra civil, I,
    168–170.
62. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 219.
63. Cit. Javier Fernández Sebastián and Juan Francisco Fuentes (eds), Diccionario
    político y social del siglo XIX español (Madrid, 2002), 7.
64. Manuel Santirso (ed.), Joseph Tañski: el informe Tañski y la guerra civil carlista
    de 1833–1840 (Ministerio de Defensa, April 2011), 100.


4 The Basque Phase, 1833–35
  1. A.H.N. Diversos, títulos y familias, leg. 3353, exp. 6, doc. 30: 1834 (no exact
     date) oath (credo político) of José Martín, Superintendent-General of Police
     (Superintendencia General de Policía del Reyno).
  2. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 31; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo,
     17.
  3. A.H.N. Estado, leg. 901, doc. 5: 3 February 1834 reminder by War Min-
     istry to Queen-Regent of policy to spare lives of all captured Carlists except
     ringleaders. A total of 73 of these rebels were given death sentences,
     commuted to banishment to the Philippines.
  4. Manuel Llauder, Memorias documentadas del teniente general Don Manuel
     Llauder (Madrid, 1844), 49.
  5. This was the permanent representation of the local Cortes and was, in
     practice, the highest foral jurisdiction in Navarra.
  6. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 136–145.
  7. Eco del Comercio, 28 October 1834; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 195–201.
  8. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 128–129.
  9. Saint-Sylvain, The Career of Don Carlos, 74–75.
 10. Joseba Agirreazkuenaga, ‘From “Coup d’Etat” to Civil War: An Analysis of
     the Carlist “Coup d’Etat” of 1833 in Vasconia and Spain’, in Parliaments,
     Estates & Representation, Vol. 20 (2000), 191–204.
 11. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 221–227.
 12. Galería militar contemporánea, colección de biografías y de retratos de los
     generales que mas celebridad han conseguido en los ejércitos liberal y carlista
     (Madrid, 1846), I, 217–218.
 13. Eco del Comercio, 8 May 1834; 20 May 1834.
 14. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 223–234.
 15. Francisco Melgar, Pequeña historia de las guerras carlistas (Pamplona, 1958),
     86–92; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 209–215; Galería militar contemporánea, I,
     221–222.
 16. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 217–221.
 17. Pérez Garzón, Milicia Nacional, 369–379.
 18. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 110.
 19. Risco, Zumalacárregui en campaña, 42–45; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo.
 20. Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui.
 21. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 142–145.
                                                                           Notes   235


22. Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui, 20–31, 51, 131–142, 181–201.
23. Córdova, Memorias, I, 197.
24. Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la guerra’,
    106.
25. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 227–246.
26. Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la guerra’,
    106.
27. Vicente Fernández Benítez, Burguesía y revolución liberal: Santander, 1812–
    1840 (Santander, 1989), 140–146.
28. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 274–288.
29. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 224–225; Oyarzun,
    Historia del carlismo, 26–27.
30. Córdova, Memorias, I, 260.
31. William Walton, The Revolutions of Spain from 1808 to the end of 1836
    (London, 1837), II, 245–248; Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 40.
32. Risco, Zumalacárregui en campaña, 74.
33. Eco del Comercio, 2 May 1834.
34. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 41; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 298–309;
    Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 224.
35. Le Peuple Souverain: Journal du Midi, 14 February 1834.
36. Melgar, Pequeña historia, 32–34; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 372–380.
37. Galería militar contemporánea, II, 6–7; Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 105.
38. Galería militar contemporánea, II, 11–21.
39. Archivo Espartero: 25 July 1835 letter from Espartero at Logroño to Jacinta
    Espartero.
40. John Francis Bacon, Six Years in Biscay (London, 1838), 168–169.
41. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 15 April 1836.
42. Raúl Martín Arranz, ‘Espartero: ﬁguras de legitimidad’, in José Alvaro Junco
    (ed.), Populismo, caudillaje y discurso demagógico (Madrid, 1987), 101–120; El
    Huracán, 23 July 1840.
43. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 267–273, 310–319, 680–681.
44. Walton, Revolutions of Spain, II, 182; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz
    y Mina, II, 292–295.
45. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 258–266; Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui,
    204–205.
46. Coverdale, Basque Phase, 226–229.
47. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 245–246.
48. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 267–273.
49. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 252–257; Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 52–56; Suárez,
    Crisis política del antiguo régimen, 25.
50. Eco del Comercio, 30 March 1834.
51. Chust, Ciudadadanos en armas, 28–29; Christiansen, Origins of Military
    Power, 58.
52. Eco del Comercio, 21 May 1834.
53. Eco del Comercio, 5 November 1834; 14 April 1841; 8 September 1841.
54. E.g. Pérez Garzón, Milicia Nacional; Artola, Burguesía revolucionaria.
55. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 252–255, 269.
56. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 423–425; Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 269–271;
    Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 246, 314.
236 Notes


57. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 120–121; Oyarzun, Historia del
    carlismo, 37–38.
58. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 393–401.
59. Pirala, Guerra civil, 406–409; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina,
    II, 233.
60. Lucy Riall, ‘Martyr Cults in Nineteenth-Century Italy’, in The Journal of
    Modern History, Vol. 82, No. 2, The Persistence of Religion in Modern Europe
    (June 2010), 255–287.
61. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 249–251.
62. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 319–329; Llauder, Memorias, 52, 64.
63. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167/93: 18 October 1834 letter
    from Juan J. Aguarero to Ministerio de la Guerra.
64. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 341–346; Eco del Comercio, 10 July 1835.
65. Eco del Comercio, 15 August 1834.
66. Eco del Comercio, 19 August 1834.
67. Eco del Comercio, 8 July 1834; Juan Antonio La Comba, Sociedad y política en
    Málaga en la primera mitad del siglo XIX (Málaga, 1989), 37–42.
68. La Abeja, 18 July 1834.
69. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), Caja 3357, leg. 14/2, doc. 5: 26 July 1834
    Madrid police report into massacre of religious on 17 July 1834; A.H.N.,
    Estado, leg. 904, doc. 13: 18 July 1834 ofﬁcial mobilisation of the militia in
    response to previous day’s events.
70. Aróstegui, Canal, and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 61–63.
71. Eco del Comercio, 6 February 1835; 25 October 1834; 18 July 1835.
72. Eco del Comercio, 7 October 1834; 15 October 1834; 25 October 1834.
73. A.H.B. Política y Representaciones, 1834, folios 357–358: 18 October 1834
    town hall report.
74. Antonio Ballesteros y Beretta, Historia de Espana y su inﬂuencia en la historia
    universal (Barcelona, 1934), VII, 498.
75. Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui, 228. Don Carlos had ostentatiously
    presided over the re-establishment of the Jesuit order in 1816 and again in
    1823 (Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa, 475).
76. Gonzalo de Porras y Rodríguez de León, La expedición Rodil y las legiones
    extranjeras en la primera Guerra carlista (Madrid, 2004), 64; Pirala, Guerra
    civil, I, 372–380.
77. Córdova, Memorias, 141.
78. Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 204.
79. Melgar, Pequeña historia, 48–54.
80. Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 234.
81. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 329–340.
82. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 26 January 1836; 1 March 1836; 1 July 1836.
83. Córdova, Memorias, I, 264, 343; José Ramón Urquijo y Goitia, ‘Represión y
    disidencia durante la primera Guerra carlista: la policía carlista’, in Hispania:
    Revista española de historia, Vol. 45, No. 159 (January 1985), 141–143;
    Carlos Dembowski, Dos años en España durante la Guerra civil, 1838–1840
    (Barcelona, 2008), 28.
84. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 296–297.
85. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 226; Oyarzun, Historia del
    carlismo, 32.
                                                                        Notes   237


 86. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 385.
 87. Córdova, Memorias, I, 196–199.
 88. Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui, 249; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 5 July 1836,
 89. Córdova, Memorias, I, 242.
 90. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 130.
 91. Walton, Revolutions of Spain, II, 378.
 92. Canal, El carlismo, 75.
 93. Risco, Zumalacárregui en Campaña, 113–114; Pirala, Guerra civil, I,
     393–401.
 94. Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui, 247; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo,
     33–34.
 95. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 110; Saint-Sylvain, Career of
     Don Carlos, 249; Córdova, Memorias, II, 134–142.
 96. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 409–413.
 97. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 245–246.
 98. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 405–406; Córdova, Memorias, I, 149.
 99. Bacon, Six Years in Biscay, 179; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 383–393.
100. Bellver Amaré, Tomás de Zumalacárregui, 247; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo,
     33–34.
101. Jensen, ‘Counterinsurgency at Home and Abroad’, 22.
102. Córdova, Memorias, I, 180; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 72.
103. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 37; Christiansen, Origins of
     Military Power, 53.
104. Risco, Zumalacárregui en Campaña, 153.
105. Rahden, Aus Spaniens Bürgerkrieg, 123–124.
106. A.M.M. Anales de Málaga: 1822–89 (Recortes de prensa de la Unión
     Mercantil), 7 March 1837, 40.
107. Bacon, Six Years in Biscay, 176–177; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 428–432.
108. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 428–430.
109. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 441–450.
110. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 557–559.
111. Castells, Utopía insurreccional, 120.
112. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 560–562; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 304–307.
113. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 537–541; Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’,
     634–635.
114. Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 263.
115. Melgar, Pequeña historia, 79–85.
116. Virginia Maza Castán, ‘El país que celebraban los cantos orientales: el
     recurso a España en la formulación del discurso politico alemán de las
     primeras décadas del siglo XIX’, in Ayer, Vol. 46 (2002), 220–227.
117. August Karl von Goeben, Vier Jahre in Spanien: Die Carlisten, ihre Erhebung,
     ihr Kampf und ihr Untergang (Hanover, 1841), 1–2.
118. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 541–543.
119. Cabello, Santa Cruz and Temprado, Historia de la guerra última, I, 68.
120. Eco del Comercio, 21 June 1836.
121. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 541–543; Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 61.
122. El Español, 11 September 1836.
123. Eco del Comercio, 17 February 1835; 21 February 1835; 18 May 1835.
238 Notes


124. Eco del Comercio, 17 February 1835; 21 February 1835; 18 May 1835;
     Francisco García Villarrubia, Aproximación al carlismo andaluz en la guerra
     de los siete años, 1833–40 (Madrid, 1979), 35.
125. Eco del Comercio, 5 July 1834.
126. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167/89: 12 June 1834 letter from
     Mayor of Corella to Comandancia de Armas de Tudela; leg. 167/126–128:
     18 August 1834 letters from Superintendente General de policía del reino
     to Captain-General of New Castile relating disorders.
127. Eco del Comercio, 29 July 1834.
128. A.H.N. Estado, leg. 901, doc. 25: 23 December 1834 circular from Consejo
     Supremo de la Guerra to provincial governors regarding expansion of the
     army in 1835.
129. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 451–453.
130. Juan J. Trías and Antonio Elorza, Federalismo y reforma social en España
     (1840–1870) (Madrid, 1975), 95–104.
131. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 533–534.
132. Luis Landa el Busto, Historia de Navarra: una identidad forjada a través de los
     siglos (Pamplona, 2001), 222–223.
133. Isabel Burdiel, La política de los notables: moderados y avanzados durante el del
     Estatuto Real (1834–36) (Valencia, 1987), 94, 164.
134. Pío Baroja y Nessi, Aviraneta, o la vida de un conspirador (Madrid, 1931),
     187–193; Eco del Comercio, 5 August 1834; Alberto Gil Novales, Alberto (ed.),
     Juan Romero Alpuente: historia de la revolución española y otros escritos, 2 vols
     (Madrid, 1989), I, lxix–lxxviii.; Miguel Artola, Partidos y programas politicos,
     1808–1936 (Barcelona, 1979), 220.
135. José Fernández Gaytán, ‘La marina carlista en las guerras civiles del siglo
     XIX’, in Revista de historia naval, Vol. 6, No. 20 (1988), 5–32, 7.
136. Cabello, Santa Cruz, and Temprado, Historia de la guerra última, I, 46, II,
     300.
137. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 486–488.
138. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 488–490.
139. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 490–493.
140. Córdova, Memorias, I, 176–180; Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 265–266.
141. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 497–507; Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos, 273;
     Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 267–268.
142. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 257.
143. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 255–258, 263.
144. Liberal Pirala blamed Jaúregui, whose divisions broke a supporting plan of
     movement leaving Espoz exposed: only Espoz’s hasty forgery of a coun-
     termanding order conveyed to Elío drew one of the Carlist pincers away
     and allowed Espoz to retreat (Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 513–522). Traditional-
     ist Jaime del Burgo claimed that Espoz was himself to blame for his retreat,
     and that only the timely intervention of Oráa and Elío’s delay (which Burgo
     did not explain) enabled the viceroy’s retreat (Burgo, Historia de la primera
     guerra carlista, 135). Such detail interests historians who seek to substan-
     tiate Espoz’s image as the swordarm of Radical liberalism during the ﬁrst
     half of the First Carlist War (Iribarren, Espoz y Mina. A recent account dero-
     manticising Espoz (but which stops short of the Carlist War) is given by
     Charles Esdaile, ‘Prohombres, aventureros y oportunistas: la inﬂuencia del
                                                                        Notes   239


     trayecto personal en los orígenes del liberalismo en España’, in Alda Blanco
     and Guy Thomson (eds), Visiones del liberalismo: política, identidad y cultura
     en la España del siglo XIX (Valencia, 2008), 65–87).
145. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 20 May 1836; Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y
     los antecedents de la guerra’, 109; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 274, 301–303.
146. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 523–527; Córdova, Memorias, I, 176–180.
147. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 534–536.
148. Eco del Comercio, 28 October 1834.
149. Eco del Comercio, 29 October 1834; 29 November 1834.
150. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 578–580.
151. Cit. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 57.
152. The British consul at Bilbao was disparaging: ‘the furious Spanish Liberals
     who have impugned this treaty have done so sitting in safety in their coffee-
     houses, where it is marvellously easy to talk about national honour and so
     forth’ (Bacon, Six Years in Biscay, 195).
153. Bacon, Six Years in Biscay, 205–206; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 603.
154. Córdova, Memorias, I, 192, 204–219; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz
     y Mina, II, 246; Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 537–545.
155. Charles Frederick Henningsen, The Most Striking Events of a Twelvemonth’s
     Campaign with Zumalacarregui in Navarre and the Basque Provinces (London,
     1836), II, 165.
156. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 580–582.
157. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 545–552, 583–584.
158. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 590–594; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 281–284.
159. Pirala, Guerra civil, I, 587–590; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 48.


5 The War Radicalises Cristino Spain, 1835–36
  1. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 7–14.
  2. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 15–17.
  3. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 1 January 1836.
  4. Córdova, Memorias, I, 199, 262; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 50.
  5. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 43–47.
  6. Antonio M. Moral Roncal, Las guerras carlistas (Madrid, 2006), 154;
     Rodríguez, Under the Flags of Freedom, 212; Jean-Charles Jauffret, ‘Le división
     de legion étrangére du Général Bernelle, 1835–1838’, in Revue Historique des
     Armées, Vol. 1 (March 1981), 51–72.
  7. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 21–27.
  8. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 28–31; Gaceta de Madrid, 16 July 1835.
  9. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 36–37.
 10. Córdova, Memorias, I, 240.
 11. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 171–174.
 12. Córdova, Memorias, I, 126–128.
 13. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 186–188.
 14. Córdova, Memorias, I, 176–180, 245–246; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo,
     63–64.
240 Notes


 15. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 188–197.
 16. Córdova, Memorias, I, 278–279.
 17. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 197–201.
 18. Córdova, Memorias, I, 356.
 19. Michael Burke Honan, The Court and Camp of Don Carlos: Being the Results
     of a Late Tour in the Basque Provinces, and Parts of Catalonia, Aragón, Castile,
     and Estramadura (London, 1836), 410.
 20. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 5 August 1836.
 21. Manuel Tuñón de Lara, La España del siglo XIX, 2 vols (Madrid, 2000), I,
     112.
 22. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 87–88; La Abeja, 18 January 1835.
 23. Canterac appealed to the loyal troops of the palace regiment called the
     ‘King’s lieutenant’, or Teniente del Rey – ‘Viva el Teniente del Rey!’ – which
     was misheard as ‘Viva el Rey!’
 24. E.g. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power.
 25. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 88–108; Córdova, Memorias, I, 184–186.
 26. Eco del Comercio, 26 January 1835; Christiansen, Origins of Military Power,
     54; Córdova, Memorias, I, 186.
 27. Córdova, Memorias, I, 201–202.
 28. Diario de Zaragoza, 3 February 1835.
 29. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 12 January 1836; 29 January 1836; 10 June 1836.
 30. Córdova, Memorias, I, 229.
 31. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 109–114; Llauder, Memorias documentadas, 106.
 32. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 114–120.
 33. Roger Bullen, ‘France and the Problem of Intervention in Spain, 1834–
     1836’, in The Historical Journal, Vol. 20, No. 2 (June 1977), 363–393, 383;
     Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 121–123.
 34. A.M.M. 3/183, Anales de Málaga: 1821–81 (Recortes de la prensa de la
     Unión Mercantíl), January–March 1835; Eco del Comercio, 17 February 1835.
 35. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167. doc. 60: account given by
     Fernando Córdova, Civil Governor of Málaga, to the Minsterio de lo
     Interior on the events of 22, 23 and 24 March 1835.
 36. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 20 November 1835; 1 December 1835.
 37. Eco del Comercio, Spring–Summer 1835.
 38. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 123–124.
 39. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), leg. 3601: 8 April 1835 letter from
     Captain-General of Aragón to Ministerio de la Guerra; Pirala, Guerra civil,
     II, 123–130.
 40. José Manuel Cuenca, La iglesia española ante la revolución liberal (Madrid,
     1971), 19–21.
 41. A.H.N. Diversos, (gobierno y política), leg. 167/106: 13 August 1835 let-
     ter from interim military governor, José del Arenal, to captain-general in
     Zaragoza.
 42. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), leg. 3601: 8 April 1835 letter from
     Captain-General of Aragón to Ministerio de la Guerra.
 43. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 50–51.
 44. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 722–723.
 45. Cayetano Barraquer y Roviralta, Los religiosos en Cataluña durante la primera
     mitad del siglo XIX (Barcelona, 1915), II, 409–411.
                                                                         Notes   241


46. Jordi Maluquer de Motes, El socialismo en España, 1833–1868 (Barcelona,
    1977), 117–122; Trías and Elorza, Federalismo y reforma social en España,
    80–82.
47. El Vapor, 10 August 1835.
48. Barraquer y Roviralta, Religiosos en Cataluña, II, 410.
49. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 127–132; Barraquer y Roviralta, Religiosos en Cataluña,
    II, 411.
50. A.H.B. Política y Representaciones: 27 July 1835 town hall circular to district
    mayors.
51. Llauder, Memorias documentadas, 53.
52. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 51–53.
53. Tuñón de Lara, España del siglo XIX, I, 110–111.
54. Eco del Comercio, 12 August 1835.
55. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 132–142.
56. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 143–144.
57. Isabel Burdiel, La política en el reinado de Isabel II (Madrid, 1998), 70.
58. Chust, Ciudadanos en armas, 49.
59. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 144–148.
60. Baroja, Aviraneta, 135–182; Isabel Burdiel and Manuel Pérez Ledesma,
    Liberales, agitadores y conspiradores: biografías heterodoxas del siglo XIX
    (Madrid, 2000), 140.
61. A.H.N. Estado, leg. 902, doc. 17: 26 August 1835 decree from Ministerio de
    Guerra.
62. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), Caja 3359, leg. 19, doc. 49: summer 1835
    proclamation by the ‘masses of Madrid’.
63. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 151–164.
64. Eco del Comercio, 13 August 1835.
65. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 164–167; Córdova, Memorias, I, 304.
66. Córdova, Memorias, I, 315.
67. Miguel Angel Esteban Navarro, La formación del pensamiento político y
    social del radicalismo español (1834–1874) (Zaragoza, 1995), 103–105; Zavala,
    Masones, comuneros, 169.
68. Eco del Comercio, 27 September 1835.
69. La Comba, Sociedad y política en Málaga, 105–109; Eiras Roel, Sociedades
    secretas, 21–29.
70. Burdiel, Política de los notables, 200–211; Maluquer de Motes, Socialismo en
    España, 275–284.
71. Esteban Navarro, Formación del pensamiento, 103–105; Zavala, Masones,
    comuneros, 169.
72. The Times, 11 August 1836.
73. A.H.N. Estado, leg. 902, doc. 19: 25 August 1835 relay by Duque de
    Alhumada to Queen-Regent of complaints of the Captain-General of
    Valencia.
74. For example, Artola, Burguesía revolucionaria; Trías and Elorza, Federalismo y
    reforma social en España.
75. A feature that endured from ‘cacique’ to corportatist politics over the nine-
    teenth and twentieh centuries (Fernando del Rey Reguillo, ‘Antiliberalismo
    y democracia en la España de entreguerras’, in Fernando del Rey Reguillo
    and García Sebastiani (eds), Los desafíos de la libertad: transformación
242 Notes


     y crisis del liberalismo en Europa y América Latina (Madrid, 2008),
     221–244).
 76. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 475–483.
 77. Eco del Comercio, 3 October 1835; Charles J. Esdaile, Outpost of Empire: The
     Napoleonic Occupation of Andalucía, 1810–1812 (Oklahoma, 2012), 36–38;
     Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 162.
 78. Antonio Eiras Roel (ed.), La emigración española a ultramar, 1492–1914
     (Madrid, 1991), 22.
 79. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 27 November 1835; José Jiménez Guerrero, El reclutamiento
     militar en el siglo XIX: las quintas de Málaga (1837–1868) (Málaga, 2001), 53,
     84–85.
 80. Orlando Figes, ‘The Russian Revolution of 1917 and its Language in the
     Village’, in Russian Review, Vol. 56, No. 3 (1997), 323–345.
 81. A.H.N. Diversos, (gobierno y política), leg. 167/18: 11 September 1835
     account by Rafael de Cevallos, commander of the Reserve Army.
 82. A.H.N. Diversos, (títulos y familia), leg. 160: 5 November 1835 request from
     Comandante General de la Provincia de Soria, Valdés, to Espartero for
     reinforcements.
 83. Eco del Comercio, 7 March 1836.
 84. Eco del Comercio, 30 October 1835. Complaints were repeated in the Radical
     press with regard to the two-tier militia system (Eco del Comercio, 16 October
     1836; 24 September 1837).
 85. Eco del Comercio, 22 September 1835; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 168–169.
 86. Peter Janke, Mendizábal y la instauración de la monarquía constitucional en
     España (1790–1853) (Madrid, 1974), 193; Bullen, ‘France and the Problem
     of Intervention in Spain’, 369, 389; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 234–238; Córdova,
     Memorias, I, 296–297; II, 96.
 87. Córdova, Memorias, I, 321.
 88. Alexander Gallardo, ‘Anglo-Spanish Relations during the First Carlist War
     (1833–1839)’ (PhD dissertation, St John’s University, New York, 1977),
     60–100, 140–171.
 89. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), Caja 3359, leg. 19, doc. 56: 14 August
     1835 anonymous tip-off sent to government about plot to assassinate
     Toreno; Eco del Comercio, 22 September 1835.
 90. Cabello, Santa Cruz and Temprado, Historia de la guerra última, II, 308.
 91. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 24 May 1836; 5 July 1836; 20 September 1836; Melgar,
     Pequeña historia, 93–98; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 18.
 92. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 321.
 93. Brett, British Auxiliary Legion, 30–31.
 94. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 238–240.
 95. Brett, British Auxiliary Legion, 61–73; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 27 May 1836.
 96. Brett, British Auxiliary Legion, 38.
 97. Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor (London, 1857), II, 23.
 98. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 30 October 1835; 24 November 1835.
 99. For Turner’s biography, I am indebted to Dr Helen Rogers of Liverpool John
     Moores University who has researched prisoner reclamation at Yarmouth
     Gaol during the 1830s and 1840s (Helen Rogers, ‘Singing in Gaol: Christian
     Instruction and Inmate Culture in the Nineteenth Century’, in Prison Service
     Journal, Vol. 199 (January 2012), 35–43).
                                                                        Notes   243


100. Martin Robson, ‘Strangers, Mercenaries, Heretics, Scoffers, Polluters: Volun-
     teering for the British Auxiliary Legion in Spain, 1835’, in Nir Arielli and
     Bruce Collins (eds), Transnational Soldiers: Foreign Military Enlistment in the
     Modern Era (Palgrave, 2013), 181–201.
101. Robson, ‘Strangers, Mercenaries’, 194–195.
102. Alexander Somerville, History of the British Legion, and War in Spain (London,
     1839), 498.
103. Charles Southwell, The Confessions of a Free-Thinker (London, 1850), 48.
104. Edward M. Spiers, Radical General: Sir George de Lacy Evans, 1787–1870
     (Manchester, 1983), 100–123; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 1 January 1836; 2 August 1836.
105. Santirso (ed.), Joseph Tañski, 29.
106. Rodríguez, Under the Flags of Freedom, 210–212; Guy Thomson, ‘Mazzini and
     Spain, 1820–1872’ (Paper presented at ‘Giuseppe Mazzini and the Global-
     isation of Democratic Nationalism 1805–2005’, British Academy, London,
     7–9 December 2005), 10.
107. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 11 December 1835.
108. Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la guerra’,
     108.
109. Rodríguez, Under the Flags of Freedom, 203–206.
110. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 29 July 1836.
111. Eco del Comercio, 5 December 1835; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 25 December 1835.
112. Eco del Comercio, 28 January 1836; 30 March 1836; Gaceta Oﬁcial,
     1 January 1836.
113. Eco del Comercio, 28 July 1835.
114. Eco del Comercio, 9 February 1836.
115. Eco del Comercio, 26 January 1836.
116. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 16 August 1836.
117. Jesús Cruz, ‘Notability and Revolution: Social Origins of the Political Elite
     in Liberal Spain, 1800–1853’, in Comparative Studies in Society and History,
     Vol. 36, No. 1 (January, 1994), 97–121, 105.
118. Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y Mina, II, 141–145.
119. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 27 October 1835. The Carlist press fanned anti-Semitism,
     especially whilst Mendizábal led the Cristinos (Gaceta Oﬁcial, 18 December
     1835; 29 December 1835; 5 February 1836; 16 February 1836; 23 February
     1836; 5 April 1836; 10 May 1836; 7 June 1836; 8 July 1836).
120. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 18 December 1835; 10 May 1836.
121. Janke, Mendizábal, 169.
122. Córdova, Memorias, II, 3.
123. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 326–327; The Mérida committee was also concerned
     about gypsies and forced them to carry special passes (Eco del Comercio,
     5 April 1836). Suspicion of gyspies was codiﬁed by the paramilitary Civil
     Guard created after the war in 1844 (its article 10 ordered their luggage to
     be checked as routine).
124. Gonzalo Anes and Alvarez de Castrillón (eds), Economía, sociedad, política y
     cultura en la España de Isabel II (Madrid, 2004), 61–63.
125. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), Caja 3359, leg. 19: collection of
     anonymous 1835 proclamations to government demanding half-tithe for
     peasants and lowering of tax burden to fund army.
126. Cuenca, Iglesia española, 29–65.
244 Notes


127. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 347–356.
128. Janke, Mendizábal, 176.
129. Burgos, Anales del reinado de Isabel II, III, 43–44.
130. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 6 September 1836.
131. Jesús Cruz, The Rise of Middle-Class Culture in Nineteenth-Century Spain
     (Louisiana, 2011), 154–158.
132. El Español, 28 February 1836.
133. Eco del Comercio, 14 February 1836.
134. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 150–151.
135. Burdiel and Pérez Ledesma, Liberales, agitadores, 167.
136. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 362–363, 482–486.
137. Córdova, Memorias, II, 29–30; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 141–144.
138. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 370–375; Córdova, Memorias, I, 264–265.
139. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 65.
140. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 10 June 1836; Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’,
     731.
141. Eco del Comercio, 6 November 1835.
142. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 22 April 1836; 26 April 1836.
143. Eco del Comercio, 20 October 1835.
144. Eco del Comercio, 16 December 1835.
145. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 294.
146. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 8 January 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 180–184.
147. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 362–367.
148. Burgo, Primera guerra carlista, 137.
149. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 123–130.
150. A.H.B. Política y Representaciones, 1836, 1D. IV–111: 21 August 1836 letter of
     complaint from town hall authorities.
151. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), leg. 3601: 6 July 1835 letter to Ministerio
     de la Guerra from Colonel Javier Rodríguez de Vera, relating ‘effervescence’
     in population and Urban Militia.
152. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167, doc. 110: 16 October 1835
     complaint from Marqués de Lazán, noble ofﬁceholder of Waterways Main-
     tenance, to Captain-General of Aragón.
153. Janke, Mendizábal, 250–252.
154. A.H.B. Política y Representaciones, 1836, 1D. IV–111: 27 May 1836 report
     from captain-general to civil authorites.
155. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 388–390.
156. George Borrow, The Bible in Spain (London, 1843), 189–192.
157. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 375–388.
158. Bullón de Mendoza, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 278–279.
159. Archivo Espartero: 1 October 1835 letter from General Espartero at Haro
     to his wife; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 191–192; Pirala, Guerra civil, II,
     266–268, 275–283.
160. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 268–283.
161. During the Royalist War of 1820–23, it was the scene of constant skirmishes
     between priest-led townsfolk and Liberal students who found themselves
     effectively besieged on the premises of Catalonia’s only university (El
     Espectador, 9 February 1822). The university was closed down due to the
                                                                        Notes   245


     1823 reaction, and its staff and students purged. It reopened in May 1827
     with the address: ‘far be it for us to indulge in the dangerous novelty of
     thinking’ (cit. Fontana, De en medio del tiempo, 152–153). University teach-
     ing in Castlian was compulsory, an edict which also alienated local Catalans
     (Alvarez Junco, Mater Dolorosa, 79).
162. A.H.B. Política y Representaciones: 12 October 1835 order of the town hall
     of Barcelona.
163. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 283–289.
164. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 240–244.
165. José Fernández Gaytán, ‘La marina liberal en las guerras civiles del siglo
     XIX’, in Revista de Historia Naval, Vol. 5, No. 19 (1987), 29–62.
166. A.M.S.S. Actas del Ayuntamiento (Libro 328), 6–13: 25 September 1835 and
     8 October 1835 decrees.
167. A.M.S.S. Actas del Ayuntamiento (Libro 328), 75, Acta 57: 22 December
     1835 relation of royal correspondence.
168. A.M.S.S. Actas del Ayuntamiento (Libro 328), Acta 73, 5 January 1836 and
     Acta 75, 8 January 1836: correspondence from Madrid and Mayor of St Jean
     de Luz.
169. A.M.S.S. Actas del Ayuntamiento (Libro 328), 46: 26 November 1835 decree.
170. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 247–250.
171. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 8 January 1836.
172. A.M.S.S. Actas del Ayuntamiento (Libro 328), 89, Acta 67: 2 January 1836
     town hall minutes.
173. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 24 November 1835; 27 November 1835; Pirala, Guerra civil,
     II, 423–430.
174. Eco del Comercio, 2 January 1836; a British ofﬁcer later encountered the sister
     of one of the executed men, a market seller in San Sebastián who ‘swore to
     avenge her brother’ (Brett, British Auxiliary Legion, 109).
175. Archivo Espartero: 5 January 1836 letter from Espartero at Vitoria to Jacinta
     Espartero; Córdova, Memorias, I, 385.
176. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 280.
177. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 297–300; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 324.
178. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 25 March 1836.
179. Peter Sahlins, Boundaries: The Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees
     (Berkeley, 1989), 208–209.
180. Gallardo, ‘Anglo-Spanish Relations’, 60–100.
181. Sahlins, Boundaries, 207–208.
182. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 300–303; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 334–335.
183. Cabello, Santa Cruz and Temprado, Historia de la guerra última, I, 20; II, 240.
184. Goeben, Vier Jahre in Spanien, 338.
185. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 311–316.
186. Buenaventura de Córdoba y Miguel, Vida militar y política de Cabrera
     (Madrid, 1844), I, 200–204; Diario de Barcelona, 23 September 1835; Pirala,
     Guerra civil, II, 316–318.
187. Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra última, xxxi.
188. Eco del Comercio, 10 April 1836.
189. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 319–323.
246 Notes


190. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 325–327; El Español, 6 November 1835. Pro-Carlist
     sources claim that Cabrera gave quarter to the defenders after their surren-
     der (Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 143).
191. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 330–334.
192. Córdoba y Miguel, Cabrera, I, 239–242; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 5 April 1836;
     15 March 1836.
193. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 398–401.
194. Eco del Comercio, 13 January 1836.
195. Baroja, Aviraneta, 195–199.
196. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 19 January 1836; 29 January 1836; Albert Balcells, Estudios de
     historia contemporánea: Cataluña contemporánea I (siglo XIX) (Madrid, 1984),
     139.
197. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 401–415.
198. A.H.B. Política y Representaciones: 9 January 1836 letter from Barcelona
     town hall to Queen-Regent concerning events of 4 January 1836.
199. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 410–415, 415–422.
200. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 447–450.
201. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 12 July 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 80–93. The traditionalist,
     Oyarzun, pointed out that the Cristinos issued similar threats to Carlist
     mayors (Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 144).
202. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 97–124.
203. Eco del Comercio, 21 January 1836.
204. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 29 April 1836.
205. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 430–439.
206. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 423–430.
207. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 440–447.
208. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 1 March 1836; 26 April 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 467.
209. Archivo Espartero: 22 March 1836 letter from Espartero at Vitoria to Jacinta
     Espartero; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 450–464.
210. Janke, Mendizábal, 179–181.
211. Córdova, Memorias, I, 389–390; Bullen, ‘France and the Problem of Inter-
     vention in Spain’, 385; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 473–475.
212. R.A.H. Archivo Narváez, 9/7809–4, Caja 1: 22 April 1836 reservadísimo letter
     from Córdova to Narváez.
213. Eco del Comercio, 30 May 1836.
214. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 483–486, 503–505; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo,
     74–75.
215. Córdova, Memorias, I, 348–352, 401–405; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 486–495.
216. Córdova, Memorias, II, 37–53.
217. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 475–483.
218. Córdova, Memorias, II, 116.
219. French intervention was not exclusively a moderado aim: Espartero, who
     was later identiﬁed with the progresistas, had responded to his wife’s hopes
     of the same that ‘it would only take 15,000 French troops to make the
     insurgents disarm and disappear’ (Archivo Espartero: 4 April 1836 letter
     from Espartero at Vitoria to Jacinta Espartero).
220. Isabel Burdiel, Isabel II (Madrid, 2004), 174; Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 495–502;
     Córdova, Memorias, II, 88.
221. Artola, Partidos y programas políticos, 228–229.
                                                                        Notes   247


222. Córdova, Memorias, II, 55–75.
223. Córdova, Memorias, II, 157–163.
224. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 526–530; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 70; Gaceta
     Oﬁcial, 8 December 1835; 26 July 1836; 2 August 1836.
225. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 506–513.
226. Pérez Garzón, Milicia Nacional, xxii.
227. Burke Honan, Court and Camp of Don Carlos, 408.
228. Eco del Comercio, 11 March 1836; 3 May 1836.
229. El Español, 21 May 1836; 31 May 1836.
230. Eco del Comercio, 8 October 1835; 22 October 1835.
231. Jiménez Guerrero, Reclutamiento militar, 53, 84–85.
232. Eco del Comercio, 24 February 1838.
233. A.H.N. Consejos, 12232, doc. 18: 11 March 1840 report by prefect of
     Granada province.
234. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 530–537.


6 Deep War Feeds Revolution, 1836–37
  1. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 30–49.
  2. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 62–80.
  3. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 125–132, 169–171.
  4. Eco del Comercio, 9 April 1836.
  5. Luc Racaut, Hatred in Print: Catholic Propaganda and Protestant Identity during
     the French Wars of Religion (Aldershot, 2002), 81–98.
  6. Eco del Comercio, 12 April 1836.
  7. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 27 September 1836.
  8. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 307–309.
  9. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 2 August 1836.
 10. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 153–156; Eco del Comercio, 5 November 1836.
 11. Cabello, Santa Cruz and Temprado, Historia de la guerra última, I, 137–142;
     Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 160–163.
 12. Cit. Rújula, Contrarrevolución, 240–241.
 13. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 145–147.
 14. San Miguel, Guerra civil de España, 86–91; Marichal, Spain (1833–1844),
     108–109.
 15. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 464–466.
 16. A.H.B.: 22 October 1836 demand from the Junta de Armamento y Defensa
     de Barcelona.
 17. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 384–385.
 18. El Español, 21 July 1836; 31 July 1836.
 19. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 30 August 1836.
 20. A.H.N. Consejos, leg. 12232, no number: 13 August 1836 account by
     Juan Pasalodos y Roldán of Consejo de Real Audiencia de Extremadura
     concerning 1836 revolution in Cáceres.
 21. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 15 July 1836; 19 July 1836; 22 July 1836.
 22. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 27 September 1836.
 23. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 384–404; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias de Espoz y
     Mina, II, 348–352.
248 Notes


 24. Antonio Alcalá Galiano, Memorias de D. Antonio Alcalá Galiano (Madrid,
     1886), II, 55–70; Pirala accepted its conspiratorial nature but denied the
     importance of paid Radicals (Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 405–418).
 25. Baroja y Nessi, Aviraneta, 210. More recent opinion accepts that the rev-
     olution aimed to channel radicalism from the centre, but also that the
     events owed far more to spontaneous improvisation than conspiracy (Juan
     Francisco Fuentes, El ﬁn del antiguo régimen (1808–1868): Política y sociedad
     (Madrid, 2007), 112).
 26. Janke, Mendizábal, 228.
 27. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 49–58.
 28. The best English-language description of the tense atmosphere at La Granja
     remains Holt, Carlist Wars, 147–149.
 29. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 405–418.
 30. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 9 September 1836.
 31. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 13 September 1836.
 32. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 87–90; Chust, Ciudadanos en armas, 91.
 33. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 420–424.
 34. Eco del Comercio, 18 May 1836.
 35. Máximo García López, Diario de un medico con los hechos más notables ocur-
     ridos durante la última guerra civil en las provincias de Toledo y Ciudad Real
     (Madrid, 1847), I, 269–281, 262–264.
 36. Javier García Fernández called the 1836–43 era of local democracy a ‘golden
     age’ (García Fernández, Origen del municipio constitucional, 315–317).
 37. Juan B. Vilar, ‘España en la Europa de los nacionalismos: entre pequeña
     acción y potencia media (1834–1874)’, in Juan Carlos Pereira (ed.), La
     política exterior de España (1800–2003) (Barcelona, 2003), 404–405.
 38. A. Blanco,‘España en la encrucijada ¿Nostalgia imperial o colonialismo
     moderno?’, in Blanco and Thomson (eds), Visiones del liberalismo, 219–230.
 39. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 27 November 1835; 15 April 1836.
 40. Ignacio de la Rasilla del Mora, ‘The Study of International Law in the
     Spanish Short Nineteenth Century (1808–1898)’, in Chicago-Kent Journal
     of International and Comparative Law, Vol. 13, No. 2 (2013), 121–150,
     126–127.
 41. Mariano de la Cámara’s La política exterior del carlismo (1833–1839) (Seville,
     1933) remains unsurpassed.
 42. Philip E. Mosely, ‘Intervention and Nonintervention in Spain, 1838–39’,
     in Journal of Modern History, Vol. 13, No. 2 (June 1941), 195–217; Melgar,
     Pequeña historia, 43.
 43. José Ramón Urquijo Goitia, ‘Los estados italianos y España durante la
     primera guerra carlista’, in Hispania, Vol. 52/3, No. 182 (1992), 947–997,
     982–983.
 44. Mosely, ‘Intervention and Nonintervention in Spain’, 209.
 45. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 655–658.
 46. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 81.
 47. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 20 September 1836.
 48. Cámara, Política exterior del carlismo, 57–58; Jeremy D. Popkin, Press, Rev-
     olution and Social Identities in France, 1830–1835 (Pennsylvania, 2002), 80,
     211.
 49. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 543.
                                                                             Notes   249


50. Gilbert G. Fernández, ‘American Perspectives on the First Carlist War,
    1833–40’, in Consortium on Revolutionary Europe 1750–1850. Selected Papers
    1999. Tallahassee: Institute on Napoleon and the French Revolution,
    Florida State University, 1999. Tables. Notes. pp. xxii, 531, 384–392.
51. Enrique Olavarría y Ferrari and Juan de Dios Arias, ‘México Independiente’,
    in Vicente Riva Palacios (ed.), México á través de los siglos: historia general y
    completa del desenvolvimiento social, político, religioso, militar, artístico, cientí-
    ﬁco y literario de México desde a antigüedad más remota hasta la época actual;
    obra, única en su género (Mexico, 1940), IV, 391–395.
52. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 231.
53. Hugh Thomas, Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom (London, 2001), 123; Marichal,
    Spain (1834–1844), 110–112.
54. Thomas, Cuba, 120–124; Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista,
    184. Rumours of British designs on Cuba were not isolated. Earlier in
    1836, Prime Minister Mendizábal had confronted a Protestant mission-
    ary with suspicions that his Bible Society was trying to turn Cuban
    slaves against their masters (13 February 1836 and 22 March 1836 letters
    from George Borrow to Rev. A Brandram, courtesy of the George Borrow
    Society).
55. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 461–464.
56. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 412; Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y los
    antecedents de la guerra’, 125.
57. Thomas, Cuba, 123; Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 110–112.
58. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 193–195.
59. Juan Isidro Jimenes Grullón, La ideología revolucionaria de Juan Pablo Duarte,
    Archivo General de la Nación, Colección Cuadernos Populares 1 (Santo
    Domingo, 2009), 33.
60. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 164–169.
61. Eco del Comercio, 10 November 1837.
62. 19 August 1837 letter from George Borrow to Rev. A Brandram (courtesy of
    the George Borrow Society).
63. A.H.N. Consejos, 12232, doc. 33: April 1840 report by Audiencia Territorial
    de Cataluña recounting events of 11 May 1838.
64. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 99.
65. Eco del Comercio, 27 November 1837.
66. Janke, Mendizábal, 260; Sánchez-Albornoz, Crisis de subsistencias, 8.
67. Chust, Ciudadanos en armas, 102–103.
68. Aróstegui, Canal and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 144–145.
69. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 172–179. The Carlist press often referred to all
    Cristino soldiers as ‘peseteros’, presumably in order to imply their moral
    and ﬁnancial misery.
70. Mark Lawrence, ‘Poachers turned Gamekeepers: a Study of the Guer-
    rilla Phenomenon in Spain, 1808–1840’, in Small Wars and Insurgencies
    (Abingdon, Oxon, 2014).
71. A.G.P. Caja 28/22, No. 1, Reinados, FVII, 27: supplement to Boletín
    Oﬁcial de Valladolid detailing punishments; Eco del Comercio, 3 February
    1838.
72. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 392–395.
73. Eco del Comercio, 7 July 1837.
250 Notes


 74. A.H.N. Consejos, leg. 12232, doc. 23: 21 June 1837 report by juez de
     primera instancia, Julián Martínez y Yanguas, to Ministerio de Gracia y
     Justicia.
 75. Eco del Comercio, 1 April 1837.
 76. A 5 July 1837 letter from George Borrow to Rev. A Brandram (courtesy of
     the George Borrow Society).
 77. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 521–526.
 78. Córdova, Memorias, II, 530–537; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 72.
 79. Archivo Espartero: 29 June 1836 letter from Espartero at Gayangos
     to Jacinta Espartero; Córdova, Memorias, II, 118–120; Gaceta Oﬁcial,
     19 July 1836.
 80. Alfonso Bullón de Mendoza, La expedición del general Gómez (Madrid, 1984).
 81. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 5 August 1836; Clemente, Guerras carlistas, 98–101; Pirala,
     Guerra civil, III, 184–188.
 82. José Villa-Amil y Castro, Crónica de la provincia de Lugo (Madrid, 1866), 31.
 83. Córdova, Memorias, II, 121–122.
 84. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 206–213.
 85. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 16 August 1836; Clemente, El carlismo, 41.
 86. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 13 September 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 213–223.
 87. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 23 September 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 223–226.
 88. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 353–364.
 89. El Español, 25 August 1836.
 90. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 251–256.
 91. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 228–231.
 92. A.M.M. (1/183): 23 November 1836 proclamation from Governor of
     Málaga.
 93. El Español, 13 October 1836; 14 October 1836.
 94. Eco del Comercio, 12 October 1836; Clemente, El carlismo, 41.
 95. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 248–250.
 96. Holt, Carlist Wars, 76.
 97. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 275–282.
 98. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 256–270.
 99. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 282–284.
100. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 5 July 1836; 19 August 1836; Artola-Gallego (ed.), Memorias
     de Espoz y Mina, II, 205.
101. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 26 August 1836.
102. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 19 August 1836. The name of the Militia changed from the
     Milicia Urbana (1834–35), to the Guardia Nacional (1835–36), before revert-
     ing back to the Milicia Nacional (symbolically the Radical name of the
     Triennium) after the 1836 revolution.
103. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 370–371.
104. Eco del Comercio, 28 October 1836; 3 April 1837.
105. Peyrou, Republicanismo popular en España, 50–51.
106. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 20 September 1836; 23 September 1836; 27 September 1836.
107. Peyrou, El republicanismo popular en España, 50–51.
108. A.G.P. Caja 28/31, No. 1, Reinados, FVII, 27: Muy reservado police report
     dated December 1837.
109. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 4 December 1835; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 291–298.
110. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 425–434.
                                                                        Notes   251


111. José-Ramón Rodil y Gayoso, Maniﬁesto del Marqués del Rodil a la nación
     española: campaña del 21 de septiembre a 13 de noviembre de 1836 (Lisbon,
     1837).
112. R.A.H. 9/4717, Papeles de Fermín Caballero (Papeles inéditos, II, 1830–45):
     27 August 1836 letter from Caballero to Srs. Clemot and Muños (copied
     118–119).
113. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 308–313.
114. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 284–289; Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista,
     767.
115. Córdova, Memorias, II, 280–405; Andrés Révész, Un dictador liberal: Narváez
     (Madrid, 1953).
116. Guy Thomson, The Birth of Modern Politics in Spain: Democracy, Association
     and Revolution, 1854–1875 (London, 2009).
117. Révész, Narváez, 40.
118. Too much can be made of political theory during personal rivalries. Pío
     Baroja y Nessi subscribed to the ‘Great Man’ school that neither Espartero
     nor Narváez had preconceived political ideas, rather their personal rivalry
     meant that ‘the one showed himself white because the other was black’
     (Révész, Narváez, 79).
119. Our understanding promises to be enhanced by a current research project
     (Principal investigator: Alison Sinclair, ‘Wrongdoing in Spain, 1800–
     1936: Realities, Representations and Reactions’) (University of Cambridge,
     2011–14).
120. A.H.N. Diversos, títulos y familias, leg. 3353: 22 October 1832 letter from
     informant, Felipe Santiago Ximénez to Governor of San Ildefonso; A.H.N.
     Diversos, gobierno y política, leg. 167, doc. 57: 5 March 1834 letter from
     Antonio María Alvarez, Governor of Málaga, to captain-general inserting
     alarmist poster publicly displayed by Radicals.
121. Eco del Comercio, 10 July 1835.
122. Carlos Posac Mon, ‘Repercusiones de la primera guerra carlista en Gibraltar
     y el Campo de Gibraltar’, in Almoraima, Vol. 25 (2001), 357–367, 362.
123. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 664–665.
124. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 320–325.
125. Eco del Comercio, 1 May 1836; 2 May 1836; El Español, 15 May 1836.
126. Garrido, Bandidos, 115–125
127. Eco del Comercio, 14 October 1836.
128. R.A.H. Archivo Narváez, 9/7810, Caja 2, doc. 15: November 1836 account
     offered by General Rivero in his operations against Gómez in the Campo
     de Gibraltar.
129. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 320–325; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 12 August 1836.
130. R.A.H. Archivo Narváez, 9/7810, Caja 2: details of the medals awarded to
     Seville National Guardsmen distinguished at 25 November 1836 battle of
     Majaceite; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 325–335.
131. R.A.H. Archivo Narváez, 9/7810, Caja 2, doc. 18: 2–3 December 1836 letters
     from Loja National Militia.
132. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 60–66.
133. R.A.H. Archivo Narváez, 9/7809, Caja 1: 30 November 1836 account of
     mutiny from General Narváez to War Ministry; 9/7811, doc. 32: 21 March
     1850 recollection by Lt. Sebastián Banuchi of events of November 1836.
252 Notes


134. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 335–346; Córdova, Memorias, II, 236–238;
135. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 335–348.
136. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 160–161.
137. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 348–353.
138. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 22 July 1836; 29 July 1836.
139. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 6 September 1836.
140. A 5 December 1836 letter from George Borrow to Rev. A. Brandram
     (courtesy of the George Borrow Society).
141. Fermín de Sojo y Lomba and José de Mazarrasa, El Mariscal Mazarrasa
     (Santander, 1973), 94–98.
142. Córdova, Memorias, I, 164–165.
143. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 483–497.
144. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 497–501; Edward Bell Stephens, The Basque Provinces:
     Their Political State, Scenery and Inhabitants; with Adventures amongst the
     Carlists and Christinos (London, 1837), I, 150–159.
145. Spiers, Radical General, 70.
146. Bell Stephens, Basque Provinces, I, 174.
147. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 502–503; Bell Stephens, Basque Provinces, I, 176.
148. Bell Stephens, Basque Provinces, I, 158, 188.
149. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 504–514.
150. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 514–519; Cristino defenders got to know of this
     and at once intimidated the besiegers by leaving them a mutilated
     Carlist corpse identiﬁed by the sign ‘I am Casa-Eguía’ (Pirala, Guerra civil,
     III, 603).
151. Biscay cod (‘Bacalao a la Vizcaína’) is one gastronomic legacy of the First
     Carlist War. The other is the ‘Desarme’ (‘Disarming’) of Oviedo, a meal
     prepared every 19 October, commemorating the city’s disarming of Sanz’s
     occupying Carlists in 1836 during their siesta produced by copious offerings
     of food and wine.
152. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra civil, 175.
153. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 519–527.
154. Burdiel, Isabel II, 25.
155. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 527–594.



7 Carlist Failure, 1837–39
  1. Cámara, Política exterior del carlismo, 19.
  2. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 150–151.
  3. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 323–326.
  4. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 12 April 1836; Bell Stephens, Basque Provinces, I, 146–147.
  5. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 19 July 1836; Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista,
     828–829.
  6. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 169–174.
  7. Matthew Butler’s research on a comparable yet more explicitly Church ver-
     sus state civil war is highly suggestive (Matthew Butler, Popular Piety and
     Political Identity in Mexico’s Cristero Rebellion: Michoacán, 1927–29 (Oxford,
     2004), 13–26, 106–107).
  8. The term ojalatero is the adjectivised or nominised form of the common
     subjunctive phrase, ¡Ojalá!, meaning ‘hopefully’, ‘God grant’ or ‘I wish it
                                                                         Notes   253


    were’. Its origin probably lies in General Carlos O’Donnell, father of two
    sons who distinguished Isabeline politics, who, before his death during the
    siege of Pamplona in 1835, had the habit of commenting on his comrades’
    near successes in combat preambling with ¡Ojalá! His audience thus coined
    the term ojalatero (Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 260–265).
 9. The young Luisa Casiñol was ‘inspired by the urge to defend the rights
    of the Queen’, and thus joined the sixth company of the ‘Riumbau’
    battalion; she distinguished herself during an action against the Carlists
    near Zaragoza, exhausting all her ammunition (Eco del Comercio, 23
    September 1837).
10. Córdova, Memorias, II, 391.
11. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 19 July 1836.
12. Eugenio de Aviraneta, Memoria dirigida al gobierno español sobre los planes y
    operaciones puestos en ejecución para aniquilar la rebelión en las provincias del
    norte de España (Madrid, 1844), 111–113.
13. Olcina, Carlismo y las autonomías, 130–134; Jesús Etayo Zalduendo, Navarra:
    una soberanía secuestrada: historia y periodismo (1923–1931) (Tafalla, 2004),
    177.
14. Canal, El carlismo, 104.
15. Urquijo y Goitia, ‘Represión y disidencia durante la primera Guerra carlista’,
    131–186; Gaceta Oﬁcial, 19 April 1836; Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra
    carlista, 231–232.
16. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 888–892.
17. Melgar, Pequeña historia, 99–101; Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista,
    223.
18. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 246–255; Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo
    y los antecedents de la guerra’, 121–122; Canal, El carlismo, 98.
19. These included Bishop Abarca (London), Juan Rocaberli de D’amato
    (Netherlands), Count Alcudia (Vienna), Marquess Monasterio (Berlin),
    Marquess Villafranca (St Petersburg) who carried the widest-ranging hopes
    and instructions, and Alvarez de Toledo (Naples), the hardest-working
    emissary (Cámara, Política exterior del carlismo, 22–32).
20. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 444–449.
21. In April 1835, for example, an armaments factory the Carlists had estab-
    lished near Roncesvalles exploded, killing 22 workers (Eco del Comercio,
    8 April 1835).
22. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 15 April 1836; Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 46–47;
    Extramiana, Guerras carlistas, I, 42.
23. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 397–398.
24. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 441–444.
25. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 12 July 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 455–470; Oyarzun,
    Historia del carlismo, 32.
26. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 81.
27. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 332–333.
28. R.A.H. Archivo Narváez, 9/7809, Caja 1: 24 October 1836 annual list of
    losses and desertions from Ejército de operaciones del Norte, división de
    vanguardia.
29. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 25–32.
30. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 181–182; Oyarzun, Historia del
    carlismo, 76–77.
254 Notes


31. Holt, Carlist Wars, 157–159.
32. Canal, El carlismo, 86–87. In general the British Legion’s performance was
    mixed. At the end of the summer of 1836, the unit participated in a few
    skirmishes in Hernani and the areas around Vitoria, and contributed to the
    conquest of the pass of Pasajes and to the maintenance of the fortress of
    Mount Urgull of San Sebastian against the Carlists’ attempts to take the
    city. Likewise, in November of 1836, the unit participated in Espartero’s
    liberation of Bilbao during the siege of the city. In 1837, the British Legion
    suffered a great setback at the Battle of Oriamendi, but later helped to delay
    the advance of the Expedición Real in Navarra.
33. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 32–48.
34. María Teresa Puga and Eusebio Ferrer (eds), Los reyes que nunca reinaron: los
    carlistas. ‘Reyes’ o pretendientes al trono de España (Madrid, 2001), 63.
35. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 75–76.
36. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 270.
37. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 166–176, 672–677.
38. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 504–512.
39. A.H.N. Diversos, títulos y familias, leg. 160: 18 January 1839 letter from
    Josefa Varela to Espartero.
40. Cámara, Política exterior del carlismo, 51.
41. Cámara, Política exterior del carlismo, 34–44.
42. Burdiel, Isabel II, 78–88, 127.
43. José Manuel de Arízaga, Memoria militar y política sobre la guerra de Navarra
    (Madrid, 1840), 86.
44. Baroja y Nessi, Aviraneta, 218–219;
45. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 86–93.
46. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 470–476.
47. Kurlansky, Basque History, 166–167; Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra
    carlista, 212–213; Felix Lichnowsky, Erinnerungen aus den Jahren 1837, 1838
    und 1839 (Frankfurt-am-Main, 1841), I, 134.
48. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 9 August 1836.
49. Burke Honan, Court and Camp of Don Carlos, 389.
50. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 699; Aróstegui, Canal and
    Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 61; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 77–86, 222–226.
51. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 721; Pirala, Guerra civil, III,
    476–483.
52. Moral Roncal, Guerras carlistas, 162–184; Melgar, Pequeña historia, 69–72.
53. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 86–93.
54. Espoz had to disband the Hunters in April 1836 due to excessive defection
    from its ranks to the Carlists (Gaceta Oﬁcial, 22 April 1836).
55. Prussian legitimist who would be killed by leftists during the Frankfurt
    uprising of September 1848 (Hanna Ballin Lewis (ed.), A Year of Revolutions:
    Fanny Lewald’s Recollections of 1848 (London, 1998), 122).
56. Lichnowsky, Erinnerungen, I, 137.
57. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 107; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 78–79.
58. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 94–107; Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista,
    636.
59. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 108–115.
60. Lichnowsky, Erinnerungen, II, 238–245.
                                                                         Notes   255


61. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 115–122.
62. El Constitucional, 7 January 1837; Eiras Roel, Sociedades secretas, 29.
63. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 127–132.
64. Rahden, Spaniens Bürgerkrieg, 20–21; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 132–137.
65. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 9 September 1836; Cabello, Santa Cruz and Temprado, Histo-
    ria de la guerra última, I, 135–136; Córdoba y Miguel, Vida de Cabrera, III, 4–9.
66. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 81.
67. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 154–160.
68. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 144–154; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 81.
69. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 662–672.
70. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 166–176, 672–677.
71. Harold Victor Livermore, A New History of Portugal (Cambridge, 1976), 283;
    Gaceta Oﬁcial, 30 October 1835.
72. Clemente Madrazo Escalera, Un episodio de la guerra civil en el ejécito de Carlos
    V (Paris, 1840), v–xii.
73. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 247; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV,
    177–183.
74. Mark Lawrence, ‘Popular Radicalism in Spain, 1808–1844’ (PhD thesis,
    University of Liverpool, 2008), 18–19; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 214–215.
75. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 191.
76. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 184–192.
77. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 206–207.
78. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 79, 82–83; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 193–199.
79. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 215–218.
80. Janke, Mendizábal, 250–252.
81. El Castellano, 16 September 1837.
82. Aróstegui, Canal and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 61; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV,
    222–226.
83. This charter provided one Cortes representative per 50,000 inhabitants,
    enfranchised all men paying at least 200 reales in annual taxes or receiving
    an annual private income of at least 1,500 reales, which amounted to one
    inhabitant in 48 enjoying full citizenship (whereas under the 1834 Royal
    Statute this ﬁgure had been one in 213) (Vicente Palacio Atard, La España
    del siglo XIX (Madrid, 1978), 200–202).
84. Manuel Espadas Burgos, Baldomero Espartero: un candidato al trono de España
    (Ciudad Real, 1986), 61; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 431–439.
85. Clemente, Guerras carlistas, 111; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 227–228.
86. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 229–230.
87. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 186–187, 235–237, 240–241.
88. Melgar, Pequeña historia, 69–72.
89. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 230–231.
90. Lichnowsky, Erinnerungen, Volume 2, 134.
91. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 212–213.
92. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 232–245.
93. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 440–443.
94. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 105–106.
95. Aróstegui Sánchez, ‘Aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la guerra’,
    121–122; Canal, El carlismo, 98; Saint-Sylvain, Career of Don Carlos,
    293–294.
256 Notes


 96. Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra, lxxv–lxxvi.
 97. Remírez de Esparza, Carlismo aragonés, 46–59; Burgo, Historia de la primera
     guerra carlista, 185–186.
 98. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 307–309.
 99. Aróstegui, Canal and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 150–151.
100. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 310.
101. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 80.
102. Joan-Xavier Quintana i Segalà, ‘Matices de una historia de la
     contrarrevolución’, in Hispania Nova, Revista de Historia Contemporánea,
     Separata, Vol. 9 (2009), 1–19, 17.
103. El Español, 5 April 1837; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 381–388; Bullón de Mendoza,
     Primera guerra carlista, 640–641.
104. Eco del Comercio, 3 March 1837; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 312.
105. Eco del Comercio, 20 March 1837.
106. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 315–318.
107. Canal, El carlismo, 99.
108. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 309–310.
109. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 347, 361–365.
110. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 765; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV,
     348–349.
111. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 283; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV,
     356–360, 369–372.
112. El Constitucional, 2 September 1837.
113. Manuel Santirso Rodríguez, ‘El incierto cenit del carlismo catalán (1837–
     1840)’, in Instituto de Historia Económica y Social Gerónimo de Ustariz,
     Vol. 14–15 (1999), 153–178, 162–163.
114. Canal, El carlismo, 100–104; Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 32–33.
115. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 26–27.
116. Lichnowsky, Erinnerungen, I, 234.
117. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 281.
118. Eco del Comercio, 22 February 1838; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 487–495;
     Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 100.
119. Eco del Comercio, 11 March 1838; 14 March 1838; Oyarzun, Historia del
     carlismo, 112.
120. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 169–180.
121. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 183–184; Pirala, Guerra civil, V,
     180–181.
122. Lichnowsky, Erinnerungen, I, 371–372.
123. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 97–101.
124. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 522–532.
125. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 533–540.
126. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 611–612.
127. Eco del Comercio, 11 January 1841; Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra
     carlista, 182–188.
128. Holt, Carlist Wars, 175; Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 107.
129. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 83.
130. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 575.
131. Manuel Lassala, Historia política del partido carlista, de sus divisiones de su
     gobierno, de sus ideas y del convenio de Vergara (Madrid, 1841), 98.
                                                                         Notes   257


132. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 133–135.
133. Lawrence, ‘Poachers turned Gamekeepers’.
134. Eco del Comercio, 16 October 1838; Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 565–573; V,
     182–186.
135. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 443–445; Córdova, Memorias, I, 253.
136. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 446–447; Colección de documentos oﬁciales y extrao-
     ﬁciales, relativos a asesinatos y tentativas de insurrección, hechas últimamente
     en varios Puntos del reino, y castigos impuestos a sus autores (Madrid, 1838),
     10–16.


8   Stalemate and Cristino Victory, 1838–40
  1. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 432, 464–466.
  2. Janke, Mendizábal, 261.
  3. Christiansen, Origins of Military Power, 67–98. The historian of the Civil
     Guard, Diego López Garrido, judged that ‘praetorianism’ is a misleading
     term because generals merely used their armies as a springboard for political
     power, and were faithful thereafter to the civilian politics of their chosen
     political parties (López Garrido, Guardia Civil, 44).
  4. DSC, No. 69, 11 September 1820, 931, 942. Examples of soldiers intervening
     in elections are legion. The January 1840 elections in Cartagena saw both
     sailors and soldiers hired to vote, whilst in Córdova a cavalry regiment dis-
     tributed proclamations heaping insults upon progresistas (Eco del Comercio,
     17 January 1840).
  5. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 203.
  6. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 227–228.
  7. A.G.P. Caja 28/32, No. 1, Reinados, FVII, 27: undated (1842?) police
     transcription of the manifesto of the Sociedad de Regeneradores Españoles.
  8. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 193–195; Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 135–136.
  9. In this changed climate, the British Protestant missionary was banned
     from selling further copies of the New Testament from his Madrid outlet
     (15 January 1838 letter from George Borrow to Rev. A. Brandram (courtesy
     of the George Borrow Society)).
 10. El Español, 19 August 1836.
 11. A.M.M. 3/183, Anales, 12 August 1836.
 12. Eco del Comercio, 6 November 1839.
 13. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167, No. 3245: 13 December 1837
     summary of reports of 11 December 1837 Radical rising of Cádiz militia and
     its subsequent disbandment by army.
 14. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 11–12.
 15. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 12–14.
 16. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 32–33.
 17. El Eco del Comericio, 8 July 1838; 12 July 1838; 13 July 1838; 15 July 1838;
     22 July 1838; 28 July 1838; 14 March 1839.
 18. Eco del Comercio, 23 October 1836.
 19. Sarría Muñoz, Breve Historia de Málaga, 74–81.
 20. Julián Sesmero Ruiz, Los Barrios de Málaga: Orígenes e historia (Málaga, 1993),
     36–37.
258 Notes


21. La Comba, Sociedad y política en Málaga, 61–64.
22. Garrido, Bandidos, 115–125.
23. A.H.N. Diversos, gobierno y política, leg. 167/75: 28 March 1838 letter from
    Juan Palarea to Ministry of War.
24. El Constitucional, 6 January 1837.
25. A.M.M. 3/183, Anales de Málaga: 1821–1889 (Recortes de prensa de la Unión
    Mercantil), 24–28 October 1839.
26. A.H.N. Diversos, títulos y familia, leg. 3601: 6 May 1839 complaint by
    Captain-General Antonio María Alvarez to Ministry of the Interior.
27. A.H.N. Diversos, gobierno y política, leg. 167/65: 10 October 1838 letter
    from Comandante General of Málaga to Captain-General Juan Palarea
    concerning assassination plot.
28. Mark Lawrence, ‘Las viudas de Comares: un caso de radicalismo popular
    en la Málaga liberal’, in Alda Blanco and Guy Thomson (eds.), Visiones del
    liberalismo: política, identidad y cultura en la España del siglo XIX, (Valencia,
    2008), 87–98.
29. A.H.N. Consejos, leg. 12,232, ex 14: 27 July 1839 letter from regional
    court of Granada to Ministry of Grace and Justice conﬁrming sentence of
    Juan Antonio Escalante and delay in carrying out death sentences of three
    civilians.
30. Bullón de Mendoza, Primera guerra carlista, 235–236; Ana María Guerra
    Martínez, Guerra e indefensión: realidad y utopia en la antigua provincia de
    la Mancha Alta durante la primera guerra civil española (1833–1839) (Murcia,
    1991), 53–54.
31. Antonio Miguel Bernal, La lucha por la tierra en la crisis del antiguo régimen
    (Madrid, 1979), 66–67, 111–115; Miguel Gómez Oliver, La desamortización
    de Mendizábal en Granada (Granada, 1983), 24, 56, 172–174; Marichal, Spain
    (1834–1844), 108–109.
32. Manuel Martín Martínez, Revolución liberal y cambio agrario en la alta
    Andalucía (Granada, 1995), 9–26, 140–143, 243–244.
33. Jorge Luengo Sánchez, El nacimiento de una ciudad progresista: Valladolid
    durante la regencia de Espartero (1840–1843) (Ayuntamiento de Valladolid,
    2005), 63–64.
34. Irene Castells and Antonio Moliner, Crisis del antiguo régimen y revolución
    liberal en España (1789–1845) (Barcelona, 2000), 25.
35. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 139–140.
36. In his study of disentailment in Granada, Miguel Gómez claims he was
    unable to ﬁnd a single case of bribery being punished (Gómez Oliver,
    Desamortización de Mendizábal, 42).
37. El Correo Nacional, 12 December 1840; 15 December 1840.
38. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167, doc. 87: 2 November 1838
    printed proclamation by Captain-General of Granada and Jaén.
39. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167, doc. 82: 1 April 1839 letter
    from Mayor of Guadix to Civil Governor; Martínez Martín, Revolución liberal
    y cambio agrario, 172–181.
40. Hughes, Revelations of Spain in 1845, II, 19–23.
41. José Manuel Rodríguez Gordillo, Un archivo para la historia del tabaco
    (Seville, 1977), 44–45; Romero Alpuente, Historia de la revolución, I, lxix–
    lxxviii.
                                                                       Notes   259


42. Eco del Comercio, 14 January 1840.
43. Eco del Comercio, 16 September 1841.
44. José Pérez Vidal, La industria tabaquera española, a través de las fábricas de
    Sevilla (Madrid, 1966), 13–14.
45. Eco del Comercio, 21 June 1838.
46. Eco del Comercio, 11 August 1838; 14 August 1838; El Mundo,
    11 August 1838.
47. Eco del Comercio, 6 December 1840; 11 December 1840; 17 March 1841;
    21 March 1841; 25 March 1841; 27 August 1842; Marichal, Spain (1834–
    1844), 179.
48. Eco del Comercio, 31 July 1839; 16 August 1839.
49. A.M.M. 3/183, Anales, 24–28 October 1839.
50. Landfalls by ships unloading contraband often with the connivance of cor-
    rupt carabineers; Gibraltar providing a springboard for overland smugglers,
    especially the mochileros (‘backpackers’) with their intimate knowledge of
    the Serranía de Ronda; and (until 1841) the carry-trade from Navarre and
    the Basque provinces, which was permitted by an open customs fron-
    tier on the western Pyrenees with France, coupled with lax state customs
    checks along the Ebro (Garrido, Bandidos, 115–125; Rubio Pobes, Revolución
    y tradición, 93).
51. Roger Magraw, France 1815–1914: The Bourgeois Century (Oxford, 1983), 70;
    Eco del Comercio, 30 June 1840.
52. Marichal, Spain (1834–1844), 108–140.
53. A.H.N., Consejos, leg. 12232, Docs 6, 7: 23 and 25 October 1839 corre-
    spondence of escribano, José María Herreros de Tejada, detailing ‘crimes’ of
    Julián Malaguilla; A.H.N., Consejos, leg. 12232, doc. 15: 2 April 1840 report
    by juzgado de la primera instancia del partido de Ronda conﬁrming ongo-
    ing imprisonment of ‘Carlist’ Malaguilla; El Correo Nacional, 30 October
    1839; 2 November 1839.
54. Anes and de Castrillón, Economía, sociedad, política, 103–107.
55. For a vivid description of Galician water-vendors in Madrid, who deafened
    the streets with the cries of ‘¡agua fresca!’, see Henry David Inglis, Spain in
    1830 (London, 1831), 71–79.
56. Eco del Comercio, 14 February 1840.
57. R.A.H. 9/4714 Papeles de Fermín Caballero, Papeles inéditos, (II) 1830–
    1845: 19 March 1840 resignation of Cortes seat by Fermín Caballero in
    protest at illegal elections.
58. El Correo Nacional, 13 March 1840.
59. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 48–51.
60. Remírez de Esparza, Carlismo aragonés, 66–76; Pirala, Guerra civil, V,
    52–54.
61. Remírez de Esparza, Carlismo aragonés, 37–47.
62. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 64–96.
63. Eco del Comercio, 6 October 1838; Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 97–98; Oyarzun,
    Historia del carlismo, 158–160.
64. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 115–122.
65. Cabello, Santa Cruz and Temprado, Historia de la guerra última, II, 227.
66. Gaceta Oﬁcial, 2 August 1836; Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 105–106, 112–114,
    591–593.
260 Notes


67. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), Caja 3364, leg. 35: 15 November 1838
    press cuttings concerning 6 November 1838 atrocities in Caspe of cabecilla
    José Puyol.
68. Eco del Comercio, 16 April 1838.
69. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 140–149.
70. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 152.
71. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 165–166.
72. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), leg. 2544, Docs 253–298; Pirala, Guerra
    civil, V, 210–222.
73. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), Caja 3364, leg. 35: ofﬁcial com-
    ments on 16 November 1838 reports of El Sevillano newspaper concerning
    Narváez coup.
74. A.H.N. Diversos (títulos y familias), leg. 2544, Docs 253–298: letters from
    Narváez in Gibraltar to Andrés Borrego.
75. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 231–234.
76. Eco del Comercio, 21 April 1838; 22 April 1838; 27 May 1838; 2 November
    1838; El Mundo, 20 April 1838. After a discreet interlude, Uzal began
    corresponding for the Eco once more (Eco del Comercio, 10 January 1840).
77. Eco del Comercio, 1 February 1838; 2 February 1838.
78. Baroja, Aviraneta, 223–227.
79. Janke, Mendizábal, 262.
80. Isabel María Pascual Sastre, La Italia del Risorgimento y la España del sexenio
    democrático (1868–1874) (Madrid, 2001), 122–125; Pirala, Guerra civil, V,
    228–230.
81. Urquijo Goitia, ‘Estados italianos y España durante la primera guerra
    carlista’, 947–997, 960–961.
82. Sinibaldo de Mas y Sanz, Informe sobre el estado las Islas Filipinas (Madrid,
    1842), I, 27–138.
83. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 527–534, 710–711.
84. Fernández Gaytán, ‘Marina carlista’, 6, 5–32.
85. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 293–294.
86. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 522–527.
87. Aviraneta exasperated the hard-pressed Cristino consulate at Bayonne by
    maintaining a network of seven spies of both sexes and on both sides of
    the border who answered to the codes of S, T, U, V, X, Y and Z. The three
    women all worked in hospitality in the ‘conspiratorial capital’ of Bayonne
    (Baroja, Aviraneta, 219–221).
88. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 108–109.
89. Puga and Ferrer, Los reyes que nunca reinaron, 63.
90. Pirala, Guerra civil, IV, 275–277.
91. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 344–358; Holt, Carlist Wars, 184–186; Oyarzun,
    Historia del carlismo, 114–115.
92. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 358–366.
93. Burgo, Historia de la primera guerra carlista, 46–47; Mosely, ‘Intervention and
    Nonintervention in Spain’, 201–202.
94. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 366–369.
95. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 369–374.
96. Archivo Espartero, 13 May 1839: letter from Espartero to Jacinta Espartero;
    Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 378.
                                                                        Notes   261


 97. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 373, 657–661.
 98. Bullón de Mendzoa, ‘Primera guerra carlista’, 232.
 99. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 378–387.
100. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 399–400.
101. Pirala, Guerra civil, II, 245–247; V, 415–416.
102. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 405.
103. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 117.
104. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 407.
105. Eco del Comercio, 16 October 1838; Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 405–418.
106. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 417.
107. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 418–430.
108. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 450–452, 676–677.
109. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 460–463.
110. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 439–445.
111. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 474–481.
112. Oyarzun, Historia del carlismo, 122.
113. Aróstegui, Canal and Calleja, Guerras carlistas, 63.
114. A.H.N. Diversos (gobierno y política), leg. 167, doc. 34: 14 August 1839 report
     by Consul Agustín Fernández de Gambra.
115. Rubio Pobes, Revolución y tradición, 49, 93.
116. Laetitia Blanchard Rubio, ‘La Première guerre carliste ou la guerre de la
     dernière chance: la communauté légitimiste face à son destin’, in Culture
     de Guerre: Représenter et penser l’affrontement (XIX siècle à nos jours). Amnis
     (2011, 10), http://amnis.revues.org/1449; Oyarzun, Historia del Carlismo,
     97–101, 105–123.
117. Urquijo Goitia, ‘Historiografía sobre la primera guerra carlista’, 413; Suárez
     Verdeguer, Crisis política del antiguo régimen, 93–94.
118. Baroja, Aviraneta, 232.
119. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 252–256.
120. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 265.
121. Tuñón de Lara, España del siglo XIX, I, 108, 110–111.
122. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 266–276.
123. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 257–259, 261–267.
124. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 276–286; Canal, El carlismo, 111.
125. For a sympathetic analysis, especially of the rare praise German Carlists
     had for this commander’s imposition of discipline, see Bullón de Mendoza,
     Primera guerra carlista, 286–288.
126. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 256–257.
127. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 539.
128. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 292.
129. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 276–292.
130. Hansard’s Parliamentary Debates: Third Series, Vol. XLIX, 664.
131. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 293–302.
132. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 302.
133. Fernández Gaytán, ‘Marina carlista’, 8–9, 5–32.
134. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 303–307.
135. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 627–630.
136. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 308–310.
137. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 313–315.
262 Notes


138. Eco del Comercio, 13 June 1839; 15 June 1839; Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 311–313.
139. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 316–319.
140. Eco del Comercio, 31 May 1840.
141. Eco del Comercio, 22 June 1840.
142. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 336–338.
143. Clemente, Guerras carlistas, 121.
144. Remírez de Esparza, Carlismo aragonés, 88–94.
145. Remírez de Esparza, Carlismo aragonés, 93.
146. Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra, XLVI.


Conclusions
1. Canal, El carlismo, 115.
2. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 343–344.
3. Pirala, Guerra civil, V, 338–342.
4. Pirala, Guerra civil, III, 153–156.
5. Rújula (ed.), Historia de la guerra última, LX.
6. El Huracán, 21 June 1840; 2 August 1840.
7. A.H.N. Diversos, (gobierno y política), leg. 167, doc. 18: 11 September 1840
   account by José Manuel Arenas, commander of second battalion of Granada
   volunteers, to captain-general.
8. Rubio Pobes, Revolución y tradición, 93–126.
9. Eco del Comercio, 12 February 1841; 3 March 1841; 12 March 1841; 17 March
   1841; 26 March 1841.
Sources and Bibliography


Archives
A.G.P. (Archivo General del Palacio, Madrid)
A.H.B. (Archivo Histórico de Barcelona)
A.H.N. (España. Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte. Archivo Histórico
  Nacional)
A.M.M. (Archivo Municipal de Málaga)
A.M.S.S. (Archivo Municipal de San Sebastián)
Archivo Espartero
B.U.Z. (Biblioteca Universitaria de Zaragoza)
George Borrow Society
R.A.H. (Real Academia de la Historia, Madrid)



Newspapers/pamphlets
Colección de documentos oﬁciales y extraoﬁciales, relativos a asesinatos y tentativas de
  insurrección, hechas últimamente en varios Puntos del reino, y castigos impuestos a
  sus autores (Madrid, 1838)
Diario de Barcelona
Diario de Sesiones de Cortes
Diario de Zaragoza
Eco del Comercio
El Castellano
El Ciudadano por la Constitución
El Constitucional
El Correo Nacional
El Español
El Espectador
El Huracán
El Mundo: Diario del Pueblo
El Piloto
El Procurador General de la Nación y del Rey
El Robespierre Español (Amigo de las Leyes ó Questiones Atrevidas sobre la España)
El Universal
El Universal Observador Español
El Vapor
Gaceta Oﬁcial
Galería militar contemporánea, colección de biografías y de retratos de los generales
  que mas celebridad han conseguido en los ejércitos liberal y carlista, 2 vols (Madrid,
  1846)
Hansard’s Parliamentary Debates


                                         263
264 Sources and Bibliography


La Abeja
Le Peuple Souverain: Journal du Midi
Maniﬁesto que dirige al pueblo español una federación de realistas puros sobre el estado
  de la nación y sobre la necesidad de elevar al trono al serenísimo señor infant Don
  Carlos (Madrid, 1 November 1826)
Semanario Político, Histórico y Literario de la Coruña
The Times


Published primary sources
Alcalá Galiano, Antonio, Memorias de D. Antonio Alcalá Galiano, 2 vols (Madrid,
  1886)
Arízaga, José Manuel de, Memoria militar y política sobre la guerra de Navarra
  (Madrid, 1840)
Artola-Gallego, Miguel (ed.), Memorias del general don Francisco Espoz y Mina, 2
  vols (Madrid, 1962)
Aviraneta, Eugenio de, Memoria dirigida al gobierno español sobre los planes y opera-
  ciones puestos en ejecución para aniquilar la rebelión en las provincias del norte de
  España (Madrid, 1844)
Bacon, John Francis, Six Years in Biscay (London, 1838)
Bell Stephens, Edward, The Basque Provinces: Their Political State, Scenery and Inhab-
  itants; with Adventures Amongst the Carlists and Christinos, 2 vols (London,
  1837)
Borrow, George, The Bible in Spain (London, 1843)
Bunbury, Thomas, Reminiscences of a Veteran: Being Personal and Military Adventures
  in Portugal, Spain, France, Malta, New South Wales, Norfolk Island, New Zealand,
  Andaman Islands and India, 2 vols (London, 1861)
Burke Honan, Michael, The Court and Camp of Don Carlos: Being the Results of
  a Late Tour in the Basque Provinces, and Parts of Catalonia, Aragón, Castile, and
  Estramadura (London, 1836)
Córdoba y Miguel, Buenaventura de, Vida militar y política de Cabrera,
  Vol. I (Madrid, 1844)
Córdova, Fernando Fernández de, Mis memorias íntimas, 2 vols (Madrid, 1886)
Dembowski, Carlos, Dos años en España durante la Guerra civil, 1838–1840
  (Barcelona, 2008)
García López, Máximo, Diario de un medico con los hechos más notables ocur-
  ridos durante la última guerra civil en las provincias de Toledo y Ciudad Real,
  Vol. I (Madrid, 1847)
Goeben, August Karl von, Vier Jahre in Spanien: Die Carlisten, ihre Erhebung, ihr
  Kampf und ihr Untergang (Hanover, 1841)
Henningsen, Charles Frederick, The Most Striking Events of a Twelvemonth’s Cam-
  paign with Zumalacarregui in Navarre and the Basque Provinces, 2 vols (London,
  1836)
Hughes, T. M., Revelations of Spain in 1845, 2 vols (London, 1845)
Inglis, Henry David, Spain in 1830 (London, 1831)
Lacy Evans, George de, Memoranda of the Contest in Spain (London, 1840)
Lassala, Manuel, Historia política del partido carlista, de sus divisiones de su gobierno,
  de sus ideas y del convenio de Vergara (Madrid, 1841)
                                                      Sources and Bibliography    265


Leslie, C., Military Journal of Colonel Leslie of Balquhain (Aberdeen, 1887)
Lichnowsky, Felix, Erinnerungen aus den Jahren 1837, 1838 und 1839 (Frankfurt-
  am-Main, 1841)
Llauder, Manuel, Memorias documentadas del teniente general Don Manuel Llauder
  (Madrid, 1844)
Madrazo Escalera, Clemente, Un episodio de la guerra civil en el ejécito de Carlos
  V (Paris, 1840)
Mas y Sanz, Sinibaldo de, Informe sobre el estado las Islas Filipinas, 2 vols (Madrid,
  1842)
Mayhew, Henry, London Labour and the London Poor, Vol. II (London, 1857)
Rahden, Wilhelm von, Aus Spaniens Bürgerkrieg (Berlin, 1851)
Renouard, Jules, Narración de D. Juan Van Halen, Gefe de Estado Mayor de una de las
  divisiones de Mina en 1822 y 1823, ó relación circunstanciada de su cautividad en
  los calabozos de la Inquisición, su evasión y su emigración, 2 vols (Paris, 1828)
Rodil y Gayoso, José-Ramón, Maniﬁesto del Marqués del Rodil a la nación española:
  campaña del 21 de septiembre a 13 de noviembre de 1836 (Lisbon, 1837)
Romero Alpuente, Juan, Wellington en España y Ballesteros en Ceuta (Cádiz, 1813)
Saint-Sylvain, Louis Xavier August de, The Career of Don Carlos, since the Death of
  Ferdinand the Seventh: Being a Chapter in the History of Charles the Fifth (London,
  1835)
San Miguel, Evaristo, De la guerra civil de España (Madrid, 1836)
Santirso, Manuel (ed.), Joseph Tañski: el informe Tañski y la guerra civil carlista de
  1833–1840 (Ministerio de Defensa, April 2011)
Somerville, Alexander, History of the British Legion, and War in Spain (London,
  1839)
Southwell, Charles, The Confessions of a Free-Thinker (London, 1850)
Villa-Amil y Castro, José, Crónica de la provincia de Lugo (Madrid, 1866)
Walton, William, The Revolutions of Spain from 1808 to the end of 1836, 2 vols
  (London, 1837)
Zaratiegui, J. Antonio, Vida y hechos de don Tomás de Zumalacárregui (Madrid,
  1845)


Published secondary sources
La abolición de la Inquisición Española: Speech read on 2 December 1991, in his
  public reception, by the Hon. Señor D. José Antonio Escudero and reply Hon.
  Señor D. Alfonso García Gallo Diego (Madrid, 1991)
Agirreazkuenaga, Joseba, ‘From “Coup d’Etat” to Civil War: An Analysis of the
  Carlist “Coup d’Etat” of 1833 in Vasconia and Spain’, in Parliaments, Estates &
  Representation Vol. 20 (2000), 191–204
Alvarez Junco, José, Mater Dolorosa: la idea de España en el siglo XIX (Madrid,
  2001)
Alvarez Junco, José (ed.), Populismo, caudillaje y discurso demagógico (Madrid, 1987)
Anes, Gonzalo and de Castrillón, Alvarez (eds), Economía, sociedad, política y
  cultura en la España de Isabel II (Madrid, 2004)
Ardit Lucas, Manuel, Revolución liberal y revuelta campesina (Barcelona, 1977)
Arielli, Nir and Collins, Bruce (eds), Transnational Soldiers: Foreign Military
  Enlistment in the Modern Era (Palgrave, 2013)
266 Sources and Bibliography


Aróstegui, Julio, Canal, Jordi, and Calleja, Eduardo G., Las guerras carlistas: hechos,
  hombres e ideas (Madrid, 2003)
Aróstegui Sánchez, Julio, ‘La aparición del carlismo y los antecedents de la guerra’,
  in Historia de España: La era isabelina y el sexenio democrático (1834–1874),
  XXXIV, begun by Ramón Menéndez Pidal, edited by José María over Zamora
  (Madrid, 1981)
Artola, Miguel, La burguesía revolucionaria (Madrid, 1974)
Artola, Miguel, La España de Fernando VII (Madrid, 1999)
Artola, Miguel, Partidos y programas politicos, 1808–1936 (Barcelona, 1979)
Balcells, Albert, Estudios de historia contemporánea: Cataluña contemporánea I (siglo
  XIX) (Madrid, 1984)
Ballesteros y Beretta, Antonio, Historia de Espana y su inﬂuencia en la historia
  universal, Vol. VII (Barcelona, 1934)
Ballin Lewis, Hanna (ed.), A Year of Revolutions: Fanny Lewald’s Recollections of 1848
  (Oxford, 1998)
Barahon Arévalo, Renato, Vizcaya on the Eve of Carlism: Politics and Society, 1800–
  1833 (Nevada, 1989)
Baroja y Nessi, Pío Aviraneta, o la vida de un conspirador (Madrid, 1931)
Baroja y Nessi, Pío, Siluetas Románticas (y otras historias de pillos y de extravagantes)
  (Madrid, 1934)
Barraquer y Roviralta, Cayetano, Los religiosos en Cataluña durante la primera mitad
  del siglo XIX, 4 vols (Barcelona, 1915)
Bellver Amaré, Fernando, Tomás de Zumalacárregui (Madrid, 2010)
Berenguer Barceló, Julio, Historia de Alcoy, 2 vols (Alcoy, 1977)
Bermejo, Ildefonso Antonio, La estafeta del palacio, Vol. I (Madrid, 1872)
Bernal, Antonio Miguel, La lucha por la tierra en la crisis del antiguo régimen
  (Madrid, 1979)
Blanchard Rubio, Laetitia, ‘La Première guerre carliste ou la guerre de la dernière
  chance: la communauté légitimiste face à son destin’, in Culture de Guerre:
  Représenter et penser l’affrontement (XIX siècle à nos jours). Amnis (2011), 10, http:
  //amnis.revues.org/1449
Blanco, Alda and Thomson, Guy (eds), Visiones del liberalismo: política, identidad y
  cultura en la España del siglo XIX (Valencia, 2008)
Blinkhorn, Martin, Carlism and Crisis in Spain, 1931–1939 (Cambridge, 1975)
Bowen, Wayne H. and Álvarez, José E. (eds), A Military History of Modern Spain
  (Westport, CT, 2007)
Brenan, Gerald, The Spanish Labyrinth (London, 1960)
Brett, Edward M., The British Auxiliary Legion in the First Carlist War in Spain, 1835–
  1838: A Forgotten Army (Dublin, 2005)
Bullen, Roger, ‘France and the Problem of Intervention in Spain, 1834–1836’, in
  The Historical Journal, Vol. 20, No. 2 (June 1977), 363–393
Bullón de Mendoza, Alfonso, La expedición del general Gómez (Madrid, 1984)
Bullón de Mendoza, Alfonso, ‘La primera guerra carlista’ (PhD thesis, E-print
  Biblioteca Universidad Complutense, 2002)
Burdiel, Isabel, Isabel II (Madrid, 2004)
Burdiel, Isabel, La política de los notables: moderados y avanzados durante el régimen
  del Estatuto Real (1834–36) (Valencia, 1987)
Burdiel, Isabel, La política en el reinado de Isabel II (Madrid, 1998)
                                                        Sources and Bibliography   267


Burdiel, Isabel and Pérez Ledesma, Manuel, Liberales, agitadores y conspiradores:
  biografías heterodoxas del siglo XIX (Madrid, 2000)
Burgo, Jaime del, Para la historia de la primera guerra carlista: comentarios y
  acotaciones a un manuscrito de la época 1834–1839 (Pamplona, 1981)
Burgos, Javier de, Anales del reinado de Isabel II, 6 vols (Madrid, 1850–51)
Butler, Matthew, Popular Piety and Political Identity in Mexico’s Cristero Rebellion:
  Michoacán, 1927–29 (Oxford, 2004)
Cabello, Francico, Santa Cruz, F. and Temprado, R. M., Historia de la guerra última
  en Aragón y Valencia, 2 vols (Madrid, 1845)
Cámara, Mariano de la, La política exterior del carlismo (1833–1839) (Seville, 1933)
Canal, Jordi, El carlismo (Madrid, 2004)
Carlos Pereira, Juan (ed.), La política exterior de España (1800–2003) (Barcelona,
  2003)
Carr, Raymond, Spain (1808–1975) (Oxford, 1982)
Castells, Irene, La utopía insurreccional del liberalismo: Torrijos y las conspiraciones
  liberales de la década ominosa (Barcelona, 1989)
Castells, Irene and Moliner, Antonio, Crisis del antiguo régimen y revolución liberal
  en España (1789–1845) (Barcelona, 2000)
Cepeda Gómez, José, El ejército Español en la política española (1789–1843): con-
  spiraciones y pronunciamientos en los comienzos de la España liberal (Madrid,
  1990)
Christiansen, E., The Origins of Military Power in Spain, 1800–1854 (Oxford, 1967)
Chust, Manuel, Ciudadanos en armas: la milicia nacional en el Pais Valenciano
  (1834–1840) (Valencia, 1987).
Clemente, Josep Carles, El carlismo: historia de una disidencia social (1833–1976)
  (Barcelona, 1990)
Clemente, Josep Carles, Las guerras carlistas (Barcelona, 1982)
Clemente, Josep Carles, Las guerras carlistas (Sarpe, 1986)
Comellas García-Llera, José Luis, El trienio constitucional (Madrid, 1963)
Comellas García-Llera, José Luis, Los primeros pronunciamientos en España, 1814–
  1820 (Madrid, 1958)
Coverdale, John F., The Basque Phase of Spain’s First Carlist War (Princeton,
  1984)
Cruz, Jesús, Gentlemen, Bourgeois, Revolutionaries: Political Change and Cultural
  Persistence among the Spanish Dominant Groups (Cambridge, 1996)
Cruz, Jesús, ‘Notability and Revolution: Social Origins of the Political Elite in
  Liberal Spain, 1800–1853’, in Comparative Studies in Society and History, Vol. 36,
  No. 1, (January 1994), 97–121
Cruz, Jesús, The Rise of Middle-Class Culture in Nineteenth-Century Spain (Louisiana,
  2011)
Cuenca, José Manuel, La iglesia española ante la revolución liberal (Madrid,
  1971)
Dana Sims, Harold, The Expulsion of Mexico’s Spaniards, 1821–1836 (Pittsburgh,
  1990)
Eiras Roel, Antonio, Sociedades secretas republicanas en el reinado de Isabel II
  (Madrid, 1962)
Eiras Roel, Antonio (ed.), La emigración española a ultramar, 1492–1914 (Madrid,
  1991)
268 Sources and Bibliography


Esdaile, Charles J., Fighting Napoleon: Guerrillas, Bandits and Adventurers in Spain
  1808–1814 (London, 2004)
Esdaile, Charles J., Outpost of Empire: The Napoleonic Occupation of Andalucía,
  1810–1812 (Oklahoma, 2012)
Esdaile, Charles J., Spain in the Liberal Age: From Constitution to Civil War, 1808–
  1939 (Oxford, 2000)
Esdaile, Charles J., ‘War and Politics in Spain, 1808–1814’, in The Historical
  Journal, Vol. 31, No. 2 (June 1988), 295–317
Espadas Burgos, Manuel, Baldomero Espartero: un candidato al trono de España,
  (Ciudad Real, 1986)
Esteban Navarro, Miguel Angel, La formación del pensamiento político y social del
  radicalismo español (1834–1874) (Zaragoza, 1995)
Etayo Zalduendo, Jesús, Navarra: una soberanía secuestrada: historia y periodismo
  (1923–1931) (Tafalla, 2004)
Extramiana, José, Historia de las guerras carlistas, 2 vols (San Sebastián, 1979)
Fernández Benítez, Vicente, Burguesía y revolución liberal: Santander, 1812–1840
  (Santander, 1989)
Fernández Gaytán, José, ‘La marina carlista en las guerras civiles del siglo XIX’, in
  Revista de historia naval, Vol. 6, No. 20 (1988), 5–32
Fernández Gaytán, José, ‘La marina liberal en las guerras civiles del siglo XIX’, in
  Revista de Historia Naval, Vol. 5, No. 19 (1987), 29–62
Fernández, Gilbert G., ‘American Perspectives on the First Carlist War, 1833–40’,
  in Consortium on Revolutionary Europe, 1750–1850: Selected Papers (1999)
  (Tallahassee, 1999), 384–392
Fernández Sebastián, Javier and Francisco Fuentes, Juan (eds), Diccionario político
  y social del siglo XIX español (Madrid, 2002)
Ferrer, Melchor, Tejera, Domingo and Acedo, José F., Historia del tradicionalismo
  español, Vols I–XVIII (Madrid, 1941–50)
Figes, Orlando, ‘The Russian Revolution of 1917 and its Language in the Village’,
  in Russian Review, Vol. 56, No. 3 (1997), 323–345
Fontana, Josep, De en medio del tiempo: la segunda restauración española, 1823–1834
  (Barcelona, 2006)
Francisco Fuentes, Juan and Roura i Aulinas, Lluís (eds), Sociabilidad y liberalismo
  en la España del siglo XIX (Lleida, 2001)
Fraser, Ronald, Napoleon’s Cursed War: Popular Resistance in the Spanish Peninsular
  War (London, 2008)
Fuentes, Juan Francisco, El ﬁn del antiguo régimen (1808–1868): Política y sociedad
  (Madrid, 2007)
Gallardo, Alexander, ‘Anglo-Spanish Relations during the First Carlist War (1833–
  1839)’ (PhD dissertation, St John’s University, New York, 1977)
Gambra Ciudad, Rafael, La primera guerra civil de España (1821–23) (Madrid,
  1950)
García Fernández, Javier, El orígen del municipio constitucional: autonomía y central-
  ización en Francia y en España (Madrid, 1983)
García Villarrubia, Francisco, Aproximación al carlismo andaluz en la guerra de los
  siete años, 1833–40 (Madrid, 1979)
Garrido, Francisco, Bandidos, bandoleros y contrabandistas en la Serranía de Ronda
  (Málaga, 2001)
                                                        Sources and Bibliography   269


Gil Novales, Alberto (ed.), Juan Romero Alpuente: historia de la revolución española y
   otros escritos, 2 vols (Madrid, 1989)
Gil Novales, Alberto, Las sociedades patrióticas (1820–1823) (Madrid, 1975)
Gil Novales, Alberto (ed.), Rafael del Riego: La revolución de 1820, día a día: cartas,
   escritos y discursos (Prólogo, biografía sucinta, notas y recopilación de documentos
   por Alberto Gil Novales) (Madrid, 1976)
Gómez Oliver, Miguel, La desamortización de Mendizábal en Granada (Granada,
   1983)
Gómez Urdáñez, Gracia, Salustiano de Olózaga: élites políticas en el liberalismo
   español 1805–1843 (Logroño, 1999)
Guerra Martínez, Ana María, Guerra e indefensión: realidad y utopia en la antigua
   provincia de la Mancha Alta durante la primera guerra civil española (1833–1839)
   (Murcia, 1991)
Heiberg, Marianne, The Making of the Basque Nation (Cambridge, 1989)
Hennessey, C. A. M., The Federal Republic in Spain: Pi y Margall and the Federal
   Republican Movement, 1868–1874 (Oxford, 1962)
Hernández Montalbán, Francisco J., La abolición de los señoríos en España
   (1811–1837) (Madrid, 1999)
Hobsbawm, Eric J., Primitive Rebels (Manchester, 1974)
Hobsbawm, Eric J., The Age of Revolution: 1789–1848 (London, 1962)
Holt, Edgar, The Carlist Wars in Spain (London, 1967)
Hunt, Lynn (ed.), The New Cultural History (California, 1992)
Iribarren, José María, Espoz y Mina: el Liberal (Madrid, 1967)
Janke, Peter, Mendizábal y la instauración de la monarquía constitucional en España
   (1790–1853) (Madrid, 1974)
Jauffret, Jean-Charles, ‘Le división de legion étrangére du Général Bernelle,
   1835–1838’, in Revue Historique des Armées, Vol. 1 (March 1981), 51–72
Jimenes Grullón, Juan Isidro, La ideología revolucionaria de Juan Pablo Duarte,
   Archivo General de la Nación, Colección Cuadernos Populares 1 (Santo
   Domingo, 2009)
Jiménez Guerrero, José, El reclutamiento militar en el siglo XIX: las quintas de Málaga
   (1837–1868) (Málaga, 2001)
Kiernan, Victor G., The Revolution of 1854 in Spanish History (Oxford, 1966)
Kurlansky, Mark, The Basque History of the World (London, 2000)
La Comba, Juan Antonio, Sociedad y política en Málaga en la primera mitad del siglo
   XIX (Málaga, 1989)
La Parra, Emilio, Los cien mil hijos de San Luís: El ocaso del primer impulso liberal en
   España (Madrid, 2007)
Lafuente, Modesto, Historia general de España, Vol. XX (Madrid, 1890)
Landa el Busto, Luis, Historia de Navarra: una identidad forjada a través de los siglos
   (Pamplona, 2001)
Laven, David and Riall, Lucy (eds), Napoleon’s Legacy: Problems of Government in
   Restoration Europe (Oxford, 2000)
Lawrence, Mark, ‘Poachers turned Gamekeepers: A Study of the Guerrilla Phe-
   nomenon in Spain, 1808–1840’, in Small Wars and Insurgencies (Abingdon,
   Oxon, 2014)
Lawrence, Mark, ‘Popular Radicalism in Spain, 1808–1844’ (PhD thesis, Univer-
   sity of Liverpool, 2008)
270 Sources and Bibliography


Livermore, Harold Victor, A New History of Portugal (Cambridge, 1976)
López Garrido, Diego, La Guardia Civil y los orígenes del estado centralista (Madrid,
  1982)
Luengo Sánchez, Jorge, El nacimiento de una ciudad progresista: Valladolid durante
  la regencia de Espartero (1840–1843) (Ayuntamiento de Valladolid, 2005)
Maestrojuán Catalán, Francisco Javier, Ciudad de vasallos, Nación de heroes
  (Zaragoza: 1809–1814) (Zaragoza, 2003)
Magraw, Roger, France 1815–1914: The Bourgeois Century (Oxford, 1983)
Maluquer de Motes, Jordi, El socialismo en España, 1833–1868 (Barcelona, 1977)
Marichal, Carlos, Spain (1834–1844): A New Society (London, 1977)
Martín Martínez, Manuel, Revolución liberal y cambio agrario en la alta Andalucía
  (Granada, 1995)
Martín-Portugués, Isidoro Lara, Jaén (1820–1823): La lucha por la libertad durante
  el trienio liberal (Jaén, 1996)
Maza Castán, Virginia, ‘El país que celebraban los cantos orientales: el recurso a
  España en la formulación del discurso politico alemán de las primeras décadas
  del siglo XIX’, in Ayer, Vol. 46 (2002), 220–227
Melgar, Francisco, Pequeña historia de las guerras carlistas (Pamplona, 1958)
Moliner Prada, Antonio (ed.), La Guerra de la Inependencia en España (1808–1814)
  (Barcelona, 2007)
Moliner Prada, Antonio, Revolución burguesa y movimiento juntero en España
  (Lleida, 1997)
Moral Roncal, Antonio M., Las guerras carlistas (Madrid, 2006)
Moreno Alonso, Manuel, Blanco White: la obsesión de España (Seville, 1998)
Moreno Alonso, Manuel, La forja del liberalismo en España: los amigos españoles de
  Lord Holland, 1793–1840 (Madrid, 1997)
Mosely, Philip E., ‘Intervention and Nonintervention in Spain, 1838–39’, in
  Journal of Modern History, Vol. 13, No. 2 (June 1941), 195–217
Olcina, Evarist, El carlismo y las autonomías regionales (Madrid, 1974)
Oyarzun, Román, Historia del carlismo (Madrid, 1965)
Pascual Sastre, Isabel María, La Italia del Risorgimento y la España del sexenio
  democrático (1868–1874) (Madrid, 2001)
Payne, Stanley, ‘Catalan and Basque Nationalism’, in Journal of Contemporary
  History, Vol. 6, No. 1, Nationalism and Separatism (1971), 15–51
Payne, Stanley (ed.), Identidad y nacionalismo en la España contemporánea: el
  carlismo (1833–1975) (Madrid, 1996)
Pegenaute, Pedro, Represión política en el reinado de Fernando VII: las comisiones
  militares (1824–1825) (Pamplona, 1974)
Pérez Garzón, Juan Sisinio, Milicia Nacional y revolución burguesa: el prototipo
  madrileño 1808–1874 (Madrid, 1978)
Pérez López-Portillo, Raul, La España de Riego (Madrid, 2005)
Pérez Vidal, José, La industria tabaquera española, a través de las fábricas de Sevilla
  (Madrid, 1966)
Peyrou, Florencia, El republicanismo popular en España, 1840–1843 (Cádiz,
  2002)
Pirala, Antonio, Historia de la guerra civil y de los partidos liberal y carlista, 6 vols
  (Madrid, 1984)
Popkin, Jeremy D., Press, Revolution and Social Identities in France, 1830–1835
  (Pennsylvania, 2002)
                                                           Sources and Bibliography     271


Porras y Rodríguez de León, Gonzalo de, La expedición Rodil y las legiones
  extranjeras en la primera Guerra carlista (Madrid, 2004)
Posac Mon, Carlos, ‘Repercusiones de la primera guerra carlista en Gibraltar y el
  Campo de Gibraltar’, in Almoraima, Vol. 25 (2001), 357–367
Preston, Paul, The Spanish Holocaust: Inquisition and Extermination in Twentieth-
  Century Spain (London, 2012)
Puga, María Teresa and Ferrer, Eusebio (eds), Los reyes que nunca reinaron: los
  carlistas. ‘Reyes’ o pretendientes al trono de España (Madrid, 2001)
Quintana i Segalà, Joan-Xavier, ‘Matices de una historia de la contrarrevolución’,
  in Hispania Nova, Revista de Historia Contemporánea, Vol. 9 (2009), 1–19
Racaut, Luc, Hatred in Print: Catholic Propaganda and Protestant Identity during the
  French Wars of Religion (Aldershot, 2002)
Ramos Rodríguez, María del Pilar, La conspiración del triángulo (Sevilla, 1970)
Rasilla del Mora, Ignacio de la, ‘The Study of International Law in the Spanish
  Short Nineteenth Century (1808–1898)’, in Chicago-Kent Journal of International
  and Comparative Law, Vol. 13, No. 2 (2013), 121–150
Remírez de Esparza, Francisco Asín, El carlismo aragonés, 1833–40 (Zaragoza, 1983)
Révész, Andrés, Un dictador liberal: Narváez (Madrid, 1953)
Rey Reguillo, Fernando del and García Sebastiani, Marcela (eds), Los desafíos de la
  libertad: transformación y crisis del liberalismo en Europa y América Latina (Madrid,
  2008)
Riall, Lucy, ‘Martyr Cults in Nineteenth-Century Italy’, in The Journal of Modern
  History, Vol. 82, No. 2, The Persistence of Religion in Modern Europe (June
  2010), 255–287
Risco, Alberto P., Zumalacárregui en campaña. Según los documentos conservados por
  su secretario de estado mayor, don Antonio Zaratiegui (Madrid, 1935)
Riva Palacios, Vicente (ed.), México á través de los siglos: historia general y completa
  del desenvolvimiento social, político, religioso, militar, artístico, cientíﬁco y literario
  de México desde a antigüedad más remota hasta la época actual; obra, única en su
  género, Vol. IV (Mexico, 1940)
Rodríguez, Moises Enrique, Under the Flags of Freedom: British Mercenaries in the
  War of the Two Brothers, the First Carlist War, and the Greek War of Independence
  (1821–1840) (Lanham, 2009)
Rodríguez Gordillo, José Manuel, Un archivo para la historia del tabaco (Seville,
  1977)
Rogers, Helen, ‘Singing in Gaol: Christian Instruction and Inmate Culture in
  the Nineteenth Century’, in Prison Service Journal, Vol. 199 (January 2012),
  35–43
Romeo Mateo, María Cruz, Entre el orden y la revolución: La formación de la
  burguesía liberal en la crisis de la monarquía absoluta (1814–1833) (Alicante,
  1993)
Roura i Aulinas, Lluís and Castells, Irene (eds), Revolución y democracia: el
  jacobinismo europeo (Madrid, 1995)
Rubio Pobes, Coro, Revolución y tradición: el país vasco ante la revolución liberal y la
  construcción del estado liberal, 1808–1868 (Madrid, 1996)
Rújula, Pedro, Constitución o Muerte: el trienio liberal y los levantamientos realistas
  en Aragón (1820–1823) (Zaragoza, 2000)
Rújula, Pedro, Contrarrevolución realismo y carlismo en Aragón y el Maestrazgo: 1820–
  1840 (Zaragoza, 1998)
272 Sources and Bibliography


Rújula, Pedro (ed.), Historia de la guerra última en Aragón y Valencia (escrita por
  F. Cabello, F. Santa Cruz y R. M. Temprado) (Zaragoza, 2006)
Sahlins, Peter, Boundaries: The Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees (Berkeley,
  1989)
Sánchez-Albornoz, Nicolás, Las crisis de subsistencias de España en el siglo XIX
  (Rosario, 1963)
Santirso Rodríguez, Manuel, ‘El incierto cenit del carlismo catalán (1837–1840)’,
  in Instituto de Historia Económica y Social Gerónimo de Ustariz, Vol. 14–15 (1999),
  153–178
Sarría Muñoz, Andrés, Breve historia de Málaga (Málaga, 1995)
Sesmero Ruiz, Julián, Los Barrios de Málaga: Orígenes e historia (Málaga, 1993)
Sojo y Lomba, Fermín de and Mazarrasa, José de, El Mariscal Mazarrasa
  (Santander, 1973)
Solozábal, Juan José, El primer nacionalismo vasco: industrialismo y conciencia
  nacional (Madrid, 1975)
Spiers, Edward M., Radical General: Sir George de Lacy Evans, 1787–1870
  (Manchester, 1983)
Suárez Verdeguer, Federico, Las Cortes de Cádiz (Madrid, 2002)
Suárez Verdeguer, Federico, La crisis política del antiguo regimen en España (1800–
  1840) (Madrid, 1950)
Thomas, Hugh, Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom (London, 2001)
Thomson, Guy, ‘Mazzini and Spain, 1820–1872’ (Paper presented at ‘Giuseppe
  Mazzini and the Globalisation of Democratic Nationalism 1805–2005’, British
  Academy, London, 7–9 December 2005)
Thomson, Guy, The Birth of Modern Politics in Spain: Democracy, Association and
  Revolution, 1854–1875 (London, 2009).
Torras, Jaime Elías, La guerra de los Agraviados (Barcelona, 1967)
Torras, Jaime Elías, Liberalismo y rebeldía campesina (1820–1823) (Barcelona, 1976)
Trías, Juan J. and Elorza, Antonio, Federalismo y reforma social en España (1840–
  1870) (Madrid, 1975)
Tuñón de Lara, Manuel, El movimiento obrero en la historia de España, 2 vols
  (Madrid, 1985)
Tuñón de Lara, Manuel, La España del siglo XIX, 2 vols (Madrid, 2000)
Uribe Urán, Victor, Honorable Lives: Lawyers, Family and Politics in Colombia, 1750–
  1850 (Pittsburgh, 2000)
Urquijo Goitia, José Ramón, ‘Historiografía sobre la primera guerra carlista’,
  in Bulletin d’Histoire Contemporaine de l’Espagne, Vols 17–18 (June–December
  1993), pp. 412–444
Urquijo Goitia, José Ramón, ‘La primera Guerra carlista desde la ideología
  nacionalista vasca’, in Vasconia, Vol. 26 (1998), 65–110
Urquijo Goitia, José Ramón, ‘Los estados italianos y España durante la primera
  guerra carlista’, in Hispania, Vol. 52/3, No. 182 (1992), 947–997
Urquijo Goitia, José Ramón, ‘Represión y disidencia durante la primera Guerra
  carlista: la policía carlista’, in Hispania: Revista española de historia, Vol. 45,
  No. 159 (January 1985), 141–143
Urquijo Goitia, José Ramón, ¿Voluntarios o quintos?: reclutamiento y deserción el la
  primera guerra carlista: Violencias fratricidas. Carlistas y liberales en el siglo XIX
  (Pamplona, 2009)
                                                   Sources and Bibliography   273


Palacio Atard, Vicente, La España del siglo XIX (Madrid, 1978)
Wawro, Geoffrey, Warfare and Society in Europe, 1792–1914 (London, 1999)
Wilhelmsen, Alexandra, La formación del pensamiento politico del carlismo, 1810–
  1875 (Madrid, 1995)
Zavala, Iris M., Masones, comuneros y carbonarios (Madrid, 1971)
Index


Abello, Vicente, 95                         artillery, 35, 49, 65, 75–6, 81–2, 94,
absolutism, 1–5, 20, 23–8, 31–2, 34,             109–10, 112, 140–1, 150, 153–5,
     36, 38, 41–6, 72–3, 97, 132–3,              163–5, 168–9, 201–2, 214–15, 220
     154, 166–7, 188–9, 206, 208            Artola-Gallego, Miguel, 9, 228, 232,
Abuelo, El, 65, 76                               233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239,
Acedo, José F., 226, 227                         243, 244, 245, 247, 250
afrancesado, 24, 42                         Asociación de Derechos del Hombre
Agirreazkuenaga, Joseba, 234                     (secret society), 145
                                            assassinations, 195, 203, 209
Agraviados, 4, 42–3, 84
                                            Aviraneta, Eugenio de, 73, 92, 114,
agriculture, 7, 17, 31, 38, 42, 91, 94,
                                                 115, 159, 189, 206, 253, 260
     127, 131, 136–7, 170, 180
                                            ayacucho, 55, 146, 176, 189
Alaix (War Minister), 141–3, 151,
     210, 218
                                            Bacon, John Francis, 235, 237, 239
Alcalá Galiano, Antonio, 5, 87, 248
                                            Baeza, Pablo Sanz y, 140, 208
Alinary, Agustín, 84                        Balcells, Albert, 246
Alsatian Napoleonic Wars, 169               Ballesteros, Luis López (General), 22,
Alvarez Junco, José, 225, 227, 229,              28, 39
     232, 233, 236                          Ballesteros y Beretta, Antonio, 236
Amor, Bartolomé, 218                        Ballin Lewis, Hanna, 254
Andalucían rising, 29–30                    Balmaseda, 209, 213, 220
Anes, Gonzalo, 243, 259                     Balmés, Jaime, 221
Angels of Andalucía, 195                    banditry, 13, 27, 41, 60, 124, 128, 197,
Anglo-Cristino forces, 108, 113,                 198, 200, 218, 221
     117, 155                               Barahon Arévalo, Renato, 227, 229
anti-Carlism, 92, 101, 103–4, 110, 151      Baras, Martín Zurbano, 137
anti-clerical violence, 62, 73, 90          barbarism, 72, 115–16
anti-militarism, 81, 121–2, 151, 191        Baroja y Nessi, Pío, 233, 238, 248,
                                                 251, 254
anti-Semitism, 102, 243
                                            Barraquer y Roviralta, Cayetano,
Arana, Sabino, 15
                                                 240, 241
Ardit Lucas, Manuel, 228
                                            Barritaro, Carlos, 128
Arielli, Nir, 243                           Basque Carlists, 14–16, 64
aristocrats, 18, 69, 168, 183               Basque fueros, 7–8, 14, 56, 178, 189
Arízaga, José Manuel de, 254                  and religion, 14
Armamento General, 160                      Battle of Améscoas, 78
Army of the North, 53–5, 60, 65, 67,        Battle of Ayacucho, 39
     74, 78–9, 83–4, 87, 93, 96, 103–4,     Battle of Chiva, 170
     106, 108, 115–17, 141, 148, 152,       Battle of Herrera, 171
     165, 169, 173–5, 178, 190              Battle of Maella, 202
Aróstegui Sánchez, Julio, 227, 228,         Battle of Majaceite, 151
     233, 235, 239, 243, 249, 253, 255      Battle of Oriamendi, 164, 203


                                          274
                                                                      Index   275


Battle of Trafalgar, 1                    Calleja, Eduardo G., 227, 228, 232,
Belgian Revolution, 45, 99                     236, 249, 254, 255, 256, 261
Bell Stephens, Edward, 252                Cámara, Mariano de la, 248, 252,
Bellver Amaré, Fernando, 232, 234,             253, 254
     235, 236, 237                        Canal, Jordi, 2, 6, 8, 225, 227, 228,
Berenguer Barceló, Julio, 231                  237, 253, 254, 255, 256, 261
Bermejo, Ildefonso Antonio, 225           cannibalism, 171–3
Bermúdez, Cea, 46, 192                    Canterac, 74, 86, 146
Bernal, Antonio Miguel, 258               ‘Capapé affair,’ 39
black legend, 69, 83, 120                 Cardero rising, 75, 87
Blanchard Rubio, Laetitia, 261            Carlists
Blanco, Alda, 29, 239, 248, 258             artillery, 65, 202, 218
Blinkhorn, Martin, 228                      bands, 71, 125, 127, 131, 136–7,
blood tax, 71, 103, 116, 120, 131                139, 180
border violations, 111, 182                 expeditions, 10, 59, 151, 157, 204
Borrego, Andrés, 121, 205                   guerrillas, 17, 56, 60, 144, 157–8
Borrow, George, 11, 103, 106, 136,          insurrection, 25, 37, 42, 49–50, 134
     138, 152, 244, 249, 250, 252, 257      invasion, 58, 96, 115, 124, 136,
Bosoms, Josep, 42                                142–3, 174–5, 185–6
Bowen, Wayne H., 228                        movement, 36, 65, 163
Brenan, Gerald, 38, 232                     Papal recognition, 158
Brett, Edward M., 226, 228, 242, 245        press, 55, 72, 101, 167, 203, 210
British army, 99, 137                       prisoners, 58, 73, 92, 114, 116, 149,
British auxiliaries, 98–9, 116–17                195, 199, 203
British Legion, 85, 97–9, 164               reprisals, 64, 79, 109, 184
brutality, 26, 108, 110, 114, 164, 202      rising, 48, 58, 60, 71, 92, 104
Bullen, Roger, 240, 242, 246                Royal Government, 15, 84, 118,
bull-ﬁghting, 43, 90                             149, 155, 161–2, 167, 181, 188,
Bullón de Mendoza, Alfonso, 2, 7, 8,             207, 209
     225, 226, 227, 228, 234, 237, 240,     Royal Police, 64, 159–60, 185
     244, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255,     siege, 77, 82–3, 108, 111
     256, 258, 261                          threat, 112, 117, 135, 190
Bunbury, Thomas, 230                        victory, 53, 57, 63, 163–4, 169, 183
Burdiel, Isabel, 238, 241, 244, 246,        violence, 48–9, 72, 141
     252, 254                               zone, 10, 64, 72, 104, 178, 207, 215
Burgo, Jaime del, 225, 238                Carlos, Don
Burgos, Javier de, 225, 244                 anti-apostólico faction, 135
Burke Honan, Michael, 240, 247, 254         foreign consuls, 155
Butler, Matthew, 252                        as fueros’ champion, 15
Byzantine court, 73, 160, 209               incendiary activities, 148
                                            international plots, 115
Caballero, Fermín, 147, 201, 222            monkish absolutism, 99
Cabello, Francisco, 6, 225, 237, 238,       Moreno’s betrayal, 84
   242, 245, 247, 255, 259                  nature of army, 18
Cabra mutiny, 151                           obsolescent calculations, 178
Cabrera, Ramón, 17, 98, 111–15,             occupation of Madrid, 177
   125–6, 136, 138, 157, 163,               outright conspiracies, 186
   179–80, 201–4, 216–20                    pilgrimage of grace, 169
276 Index


Carlos, Don – continued                     Comuneros, 5, 31, 33, 34
  proclamations against the                 conﬁscation of property, 111, 131
       Quadruple Alliance, 14, 64, 69       conscription, 19, 36, 40, 56, 71, 103,
  re-evangelisation campaign, 168                120–2, 157, 162, 164, 181, 207
  Royal Expedition, 164, 187–8, 203         conspiracy, 12–13, 26, 73, 92, 122,
  royalist faction, 33, 36–7                     126, 129, 148–9, 205
  Sancti Spiritus University at Oñati,      conspirators, 18, 71, 87, 208
       revival and transformation, 158      Constitution of 1812, 21, 23, 26, 28,
  Teresa, Maria, as new bride, 41                36, 89, 92, 95, 99, 101, 105,
  Urbiztondo’s removal, 183                      114–15, 119, 122, 129–30, 133–4,
  Zumalacárregui and, 73                         136, 139, 141–2, 151, 176, 205
Carlos V, 50, 56, 69–71, 80, 138, 206       consumption taxes, 29, 31, 93
Carlos Pereira, Juan, 248                   Córdoba y Miguel, Buenaventura de,
Carr, Raymond, 232                               245, 246, 255
Casiñol, Luisa, 159                         Córdova, Fernando Fernández de, 227
Castells, Irene, 232, 233, 237, 258         Cortes decree, 30–2, 131–2
castration, 125                             Coverdale, John F., 9, 13, 52, 226, 227,
casualties, 3, 20, 66, 84, 104, 110, 114,        228, 229, 231, 233, 234, 235
     116, 118, 124, 143, 153, 156, 169,     Cristina, María
     171, 191, 201, 218                       Constitution of 1812,
Catalonia rising, 42–3                             reinstating, 130
Catholicism, 3, 14, 20, 23, 69–70, 80,        de la Rosa as prime minister, 57
     101–2, 158
                                              family members, emigration of, 87
cavalry, 13, 52, 67–8, 75–6, 82, 84,
                                              foreign mercenaries, 98
     94–6, 107, 112–14, 116, 124, 139,
                                              Liberal revolution, 177, 223
     144, 147, 163, 165, 169, 173, 181,
                                              Neapolitan service, 133
     187, 215, 220
                                              newspaper opinion on, 72
Cepeda Gómez, José, 228, 229, 230
                                              palace revolution (La Granja), 45,
Christiansen, E., 226, 230, 231, 232,
                                                   129, 166
     235, 237, 239, 240, 251, 257
                                              popular royalism, 49
Christian soldier, 52, 65, 80, 174
Church property, 89, 102–3, 105, 169,         rural insurgencies, 51
     175, 197                                 secular concerns, 178
  auctioning, 102, 145                        sexist propaganda, 44, 153
Chust, Manuel, 227, 235, 241, 249             Viceroy, Quesada, 53
Civic Carlism, 61, 68                       Cristinos
civil authorities, 19, 49–50, 57, 91, 94,     army, 19, 47, 49, 51, 54, 57–9, 64–5,
     105, 117, 144, 198                            67–8, 74–5, 81, 95–7, 105–6,
civilian communities, 71, 120, 171                 119–20, 159, 170, 190, 199
class conﬂict, 7, 8, 10, 58, 137, 223         blockade, 65, 116
Clemente, Josep Carles, 2, 7, 226,            commanders, 56, 66–7, 74, 163
     227, 250                                 counter-insurgency, 60, 112–14,
Clemente, Juan Pablo, 180–1                        138, 183, 203–4
collective punishment, 111                    defence, 83, 107–8, 174
Collins, Bruce, 243                           elites, 8, 59, 61, 91, 144, 178
Comellas García-Llera, José Luis, 231         garrisons, 15, 52, 75, 90, 110,
common-law ‘ownership,’ 17                         112–13, 137, 140, 142–3, 147,
common sufferings, Cristino                        155, 167, 174, 178, 207
     prisoners, 171–3                         incursions, 12, 57
                                                                       Index   277


  militia, 57, 89, 112, 117, 124, 126,     early Carlism
       180, 223. see also Cristino,          Basque fueros’ role, 14–15
       army; Cristino, commanders            economic complexities, 17–18
  ofﬁcers, 54, 76, 78, 115, 164,             feudal socialism, 7
       189, 191                              militarisation, 19
  politics, 64, 77, 87, 97, 114              socio-economic issues, 16–17
  populations, 61–2, 107, 113, 194         Eco del Comercio (Liberal newspaper),
  prisoners, 65, 69, 114, 120, 127,             11, 57, 62, 72, 96, 100, 120, 147,
       143–4, 152, 164, 171, 185,               159, 165, 193, 201, 204
       202, 222                            economic crisis, 2, 17, 25, 36, 77
  soldiers, 59, 66, 68, 77–8, 105, 139,    economic militancy, 178, 192, 198–9
       167, 169                            Eguía, Nazario, 84, 108, 110, 118, 120,
  troops, 49, 56, 77, 109, 117, 142,            125, 152, 154–5, 209
       146, 186, 213–14                    Eiras Roel, Antonio, 231, 232, 241,
  victories, 68, 74, 114                        242, 255
  zone, 11, 13, 61, 72, 74, 81, 97, 101,   Eliot Treaty, 77–8, 80, 87, 100, 113,
       103, 128, 140, 159, 162, 178             124, 143, 180–1, 186, 216, 217
                                           Elorza, Antonio, 238, 241
Crown of Aragón, 94
                                           Embrace of Vergara, see Treaty of
Cruz, Jesús, 243, 244
                                                Vergara
Cuenca, José Manuel, 104, 240, 243
                                           empleomanía, 29
Cuevillas (Colonel), 51, 71
                                           enemy’s property revolution, 19
cult of the Virgin, 158
                                           enlightened absolutism, 2, 5, 37, 44,
customs                                         73, 157, 160, 188, 208
  frontier, 15, 56, 213, 224               Enlightenment theology, 43
  revenues, 68, 103, 207                   epidemic, 61, 66, 163
cycle of reprisals, 125                    Erro y Azpíroz, 153–5, 160
                                           Esdaile, Charles J., 228, 229, 231, 232,
Dana Sims, Harold, 229                          233, 238, 242
death penalty, 120, 129, 162, 177, 220     Espadas Burgos, Manuel, 255
de Castrillón, Alvarez, 243, 259           España (Count), 183–4, 214–15, 220
                                           Espartero, Baldomero
de Cegama, Santos Ladrón, 49–50
                                             Bilbao victory, 155
de Cleonard, Conde, 205
                                             Carlist expedition, impact on, 173–8
defectors, 64–5, 67, 76, 101, 120, 152,
                                             civilian interference, 110
     169, 211, 219
                                             consequences, long-term power,
de Gutiérrez, Vicenta Maturana, 158
                                                  165–6
de la Gloria, María, 70
                                             counter-insurgency campaign, 187
del Riego, Rafael, 26, 37                    Cristino victory, 223
Dembowski, Carlos, 236                       as General of Basque provinces, 80
de Muñagorri, José Antonio, 157, 186,        Gómez’s evacuation, 140–1
     189, 211                                military powers, 210–13
de Oliver, Francisco Antonio                 Narváez vs, 204–5
     (Colonel), 181                          October 1841 rising against, 100
de Osma, Burgo, 186, 203                     peace settlement with Carlists, 190
desamortización, 103, 131                    repressive occupation, 56
despotism, 5, 58, 70, 72, 93, 176, 187       as ‘Spanish Napoleon,’ 55
Doti, Francisco, 205                         Treaty of Vergara, 207
double regime, 29, 89, 103–5, 192          Esteban Navarro, Miguel Angel, 241
278 Index


Etayo Zalduendo, Jesús, 253              García, Basilio Antonio, 140, 184–5,
European Liberals, 99, 154                   205, 208
Euskadi Ta Askatasuna (ETA), 15          García Fernández, Javier, 229, 248
exaltados, 30, 32, 34, 72, 96–8,         García López, Máximo, 248
     119, 121                            García Sebastiani, Marcela, 241
Extramiana, José, 226, 227, 229, 253     García Villarrubia, Francisco, 238
                                         Garrido, Francisco, 232, 251, 258, 259
‘faith councils’ (juntas de la fé), 39   General Embustero, see Espartero,
federalism, 94                               Baldomero
Federation (secret society), 145–6       Gil Novales, Alberto, 230, 231, 238
Ferdinand II (Naples), 168, 176          Goeben, August Karl von, 69, 112,
Fernández, Gilbert G., 249                   237, 245
Fernández Benítez, Vicente, 235          Gómez, Miguel, 139–55, 170
Fernández Gaytán, José, 238, 245,          expedition, 124, 128, 130, 134, 139,
     260, 261                                   144, 149, 167, 194
Fernández Sebastián, Javier, 234         Gómez Oliver, Miguel, 258
Ferrer, Eusebio, 254, 260                Gómez Urdáñez, Gracia, 57
Ferrer, Melchor, 7, 227                  ‘Great Man theory,’ 163
ﬁfth column, 12, 51, 62, 89, 123, 127,   green ribbons (Constitution of 1812),
     139, 149, 167, 175, 201, 205            62, 141
Figes, Orlando, 242                      Guergué, Juan Antonio, 107–8, 111,
ﬁnancial support, 73, 161, 207               139, 152, 179, 208
Fontana, Josep, 17, 232, 233, 245        Guerra Martínez, Ana María, 258
food supplies, 85, 104, 204              guerrillas, 13, 22, 26, 33, 50–5, 92,
foralist proclamation, 14                    105, 107, 112, 126, 137, 142, 144,
Forcadell, 112, 180–1                        147, 149, 181, 189, 209, 216
forced loans, 144, 161                   Guías de Navarra, 67
foreign auxiliaries, 97–8, 100–1, 132    Guisasola, Joaquín María, 205
foreign policy, Spain, 63, 132, 194      gypsies, suspicion of, 102, 243
foreign volunteers, 69–70, 97
fortiﬁed centres (Cristino), 77, 79,     Haitian rule, 135
     105, 108, 181                       Hangman of Málaga, 83, 213
Francisco Fuentes, Juan, 229, 232,       Hay, Lord John, 153, 164, 206,
     234, 248                                210, 216
Franco-Spanish monarchy, 5               Heiberg, Marianne, 227
Fraser, Ronald, 228, 229                 Hennessey, C. A. M., 225
free corps, 10, 54, 77, 110, 165, 189    Henningsen, Charles Frederick, 38,
free-trade, 98, 194, 196                     79, 239
French army, 21, 33, 40, 88, 109, 119    Hernández Montalbán,
French government, 97, 117, 212              Francisco J., 229
French Revolution, 10, 45, 129,          Himno a la luna (poem), 158
     146, 197                            Historia Contemporánea, 6
French Wars of Religion, 125             Hobsbawm, Eric J., 232
Fuentes, Juan Francisco, 229, 232,       Holt, Edgar, 226, 248, 250, 254,
     234, 248                                256, 260
                                         Holy Alliance, 31
Gaceta Oﬁcial, 11, 64, 72, 158           homosexuality, 106
Gallardo, Alexander, 242, 245            Hughes, T. M., 230, 258
Gambra Ciudad, Rafael, 231               Hunt, Lynn, 225
                                                                       Index   279


ilimitados, 47                            Latre, Manuel (General), 82, 93–4, 96,
imports, 27, 99, 103, 161–2, 214               105, 140, 145
imprisonments, 20, 24, 39, 71, 87,        Laven, David, 233
     105, 142, 167, 188, 201              Lawrence, Mark, 249, 255, 257, 258
industrialisation, 98–9                   Leñadores escoceses (secret
infantry, 68, 82, 96, 107, 113, 116,           society), 145
     124, 139, 144, 146, 163, 169, 174,   lending markets, 131, 161
     187, 191, 193, 194, 200–2,           Leslie, C., 265
     218, 220                             levies, 161, 200
Inglis, Henry David, 259                  liberalism, 2, 7, 41, 43, 67–9, 154
the Inquisition, 23–5, 28, 39, 42, 143,   liberal property revolution, 7, 16–18,
     168, 176, 188                             36, 137, 197
insecurity, 10, 13, 46, 131, 136,         liberal revolution, 6, 9–10, 22, 26, 33,
     179, 218                                  37, 42, 58, 81, 100, 104, 118,
internal exile, 36, 39, 104, 147               177, 225
inter-service rivalry, 29, 58, 78         Liberal society, 34, 155
Iriarte (General), 79–80                  ‘Liberal union.’, 101, 130
Iribarren, José María, 169, 230, 231,     Lichnowsky, Felix, 254, 255, 256
     233, 238                             Livermore, Harold Victor, 255
Isabella II (Queen), 48, 133              Lizoire (Colonel), 154
                                          Llauder, Manuel, 36, 45, 46, 60, 75,
Janke, Peter, 242, 243, 244, 246, 248,         85, 86, 87, 90, 91, 92, 107, 234,
     249, 255, 257, 260                        236, 240, 241
Jansenism, 43                             London Labour and the London Poor
                                               (Mayhew), 98
Jauffret, Jean-Charles, 239
                                          López Garrido, Diego, 227, 232, 257
Jesuits, 62–3, 65
                                          Louis-Philippe (King), 70, 97, 212
Jimenes Grullón, Juan Isidro, 249
                                          Luengo Sánchez, Jorge, 258
Jiménez Guerrero, José, 242, 247
Joven Italia (secret society), 145
                                          Madrazo Escalera, Clemente, 255
juntas, 15, 39, 57, 64, 70, 78, 85, 91,
                                          Madrid rising, 86–7
     93–6, 101, 113, 129–30, 149,
                                          Maestrazgo Carlist, 17, 60
     160–1, 186, 191, 196
                                          Maestrojuán Catalán, Francisco
                                             Javier, 230
Kiernan, Victor G., 232                   Magraw, Roger, 259
Kurlansky, Mark, 227, 254                 Maluquer de Motes, Jordi, 241
                                          Manifesto of Arceniega, 179
Labrador, Marquess, 186                   Mañó, Pau, 182
La Comba, Juan Antonio, 236,              march of events, 12, 103–4, 123, 151
    241, 258                              March on Madrid, 50, 151, 166, 179
Lacy Evans, George de, 99, 116, 153,      Marichal, Carlos, 227, 228, 232, 235,
    227, 243                                 237, 244, 247, 248, 249, 253, 256,
Lafuente, Modesto, 225                       257, 258, 259
La Granja revolution, 124, 127, 129,      Marliani Cassens, Manuel, 206
    131–2, 135, 141, 166, 191             Maroto, Rafael, 6, 83, 123, 166, 179,
La Parra, Emilio, 231                        186, 188–90, 203, 207–13,
Lassala, Manuel, 188, 256                    215, 220
Landa el Busto, Luis, 238                 martial law, 14, 34, 56, 58, 67, 85, 88,
La Torre (General), 153, 212                 91, 102, 129, 142, 174, 181, 195
280 Index


Martín Martínez, Manuel, 258             Morena, Sierra, 41, 144
Martín-Portugués, Isidoro Lara, 230      Moreno, Vicente González, 83, 153
Marxism, 7–9, 14, 58, 137, 163, 197      Moreno Alonso, Manuel, 230, 233
massacre, 6, 62–3, 73, 77, 86, 90, 92,   Mosely, Philip E., 248, 260
    104, 114–16, 125–6, 222–3            municipalities, 25, 102, 104, 112, 136,
Mas y Sanz, Sinibaldo de, 260               138, 141, 191, 203, 223
Mateos, Vicente, 149
Mayhew, Henry, 98, 242                   Narváez, Ramón María (General), 117,
Maza Castán, Virginia, 237                   148–9, 151, 185, 190, 204–5
Mazarrasa, José de, 152, 252             National Catholicism, 3
Meer, Baron, 144, 170, 183, 195, 214     National Guardsmen, 116
Melgar, Francisco, 234, 235, 236, 237,   National Militia, 22, 28, 34–5, 38, 41,
    242, 248, 253, 254, 255                  106, 119–20, 145, 175, 180, 186,
Merino, Jerónimo, 50–1, 70, 186,             191, 201–2, 218
    203–4                                Navarra School, 7, 9
Metternich (Chancellor), 37, 72, 77,     negotiations, 86, 211–12, 214, 216
    97, 117, 132, 158, 166, 177, 206     neo-Carlism, 7–9, 18, 137, 159
middle-class, 91, 131                    Nicholas I, Tsar, 132
Miguel, Dom, 54, 63, 70
Miguel, Evaristo San, 34, 38, 127, 129
                                         occupation of Alcalá de la Selva, 115
military governors, 51, 81, 88–9, 94,
                                         occupation of Almadén, 144
    128, 144, 175, 178, 196
                                         occupation of Madrid, 177
military success, Carlists, 56, 81,
                                         occupation of San Roque, 150
    84, 163
                                         ojalatero, 157, 159, 162, 167, 186
Mill, John Stuart, 99
mobile militia, 71, 83, 105, 107,        Olcina, Evarist, 228, 253
    111–12, 115, 120, 124, 180–1, 203    oligarchical liberalism, 7
moderados (conservatives)                Ominous Decade (1823–33), 37, 40,
 agriculture, impairment, 137                 46, 83, 89, 148, 215
 anti-clericalism, 102                   Oráa, Marcelino (General), 57, 67,
 Calatrava revolution, 168                    74–5, 79, 98, 165, 169–71, 173,
 Carlist insurgency, 195                      201–3
 domestic politics, 119                  outlaws, 53, 149, 221
 earmarked conscripts, 121               Oyarzun, Román, 225, 227, 228, 234,
 Espartero, accusing, 220, 223                235, 236, 237, 239, 242, 244, 246,
 Espoz’s revolutionism, 37, 75                247, 249, 250, 253, 254, 255, 256,
 formal French assistance, 97–8               257, 259, 260, 261
 generational conﬂict, 31
 Liberal militia against, 6              partisanship, 5, 30, 32, 72, 75, 119,
 Mendizabal, political disunity              175, 188
       with, 106                         Pascual Sastre, Isabel María, 260
 peace negotiations with Cristino        pashas, 14, 57
       dynasty, 190–2                    Pastors, Pedro María, 91–2, 107–8,
 radical accusations, 122–3, 143             114–15
 ‘Widows of Comares’ campaign, 196       Payne, Stanley, 228, 229
Moliner Prada, Antonio, 229, 230         ‘peace dividend,’ 165, 166, 192, 223
monasteries, 42, 46, 59–60, 62, 73,      Peace Treaty 1839, 17, 134, 222–3
    89–90, 104–6, 127, 155               peasantry, 157, 207, 212
Moral Roncal, Antonio M., 239, 254       Pegenaute, Pedro, 226, 232
                                                                        Index   281


Peninsular War (1808–14)                    progresista, 5, 72, 119, 122, 131, 135,
  Abello’s mob, 95                               146, 148, 190–2, 194–6, 198, 201,
  assault on Bilbao, 153                         204, 224
  famine of 1811–12, 137                    pronunciamiento, 4, 26, 88, 91, 129,
  First Carlist War, comparison with, 2          147, 205, 209, 211
  foreign intervention, 99                  Protestants, 69, 98, 101, 103, 136, 138
  greater sieges, 201                       Puga, María Teresa, 254, 260
  nationalisation of , Marquess Lazán
       Chapel, 106                          Quadruple Alliance, 54, 63–4, 69, 73,
  Patriot Liberals, 21–2, 26, 40,               77, 82, 87, 97, 108–9, 117, 120,
       174, 176                                 130, 132–3, 150, 152, 168, 210
  ‘people’s war’ theme, 216                 Queen-Regent, 48, 53, 59, 72–3, 83,
  post-1810 Spanish American                    86, 89, 97, 106, 109, 118–19, 122,
       revolt, 24                               128, 130, 147, 166, 168, 175–7,
  veterans, 50, 67, 77, 98                      196, 204
‘people’s war’, 18, 216                     Quesada, Vicente (General), 36, 40,
Pérez Garzón, Juan Sisinio, 227, 230,           53–4, 63, 129, 130, 146
     231, 232, 234, 235, 247                Quintana, Manuel José, 36
Pérez Ledesma, Manuel, 241, 244             Quintana i Segalà, Joan-Xavier, 256
Pérez López-Portillo, Raul, 230, 231        quotidian Carlism, 9
Pérez Vidal, José, 259
perpetrators, 125–6, 178, 222               Radical Isabelina Society, 73
Peyrou, Florencia, 230, 250                 radical liberalism, 122, 181, 190, 195
Phillip V, 4                                Radical-Liberal revolution, 81, 100
Pirala, Antonio, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 213, 225,   Radical Patriotic Societies, 29
     227, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237,     Radical press, 57, 104–5, 115, 195, 214
     238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244,     Rahden, Wilhelm von, 14, 177, 202,
     245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251,          227, 237, 255
     252, 253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 259,     Ramos Rodríguez, María del Pilar, 230
     260, 261, 262                          Rasilla del Mora, Ignacio de la, 248
political radicalisation, 12, 20, 56, 85,   ration, 28, 161, 172–3
     87–8, 97, 104, 124, 192                St Raymond’s Day, 163
Pope Gregory XVI, 157                       re-evangelisation (Don Carlos’s
Popkin, Jeremy D., 248                           campaign), 167–8
Porras y Rodríguez de León, Gonzalo         refugees, 15, 38, 58–9, 64, 77, 90, 109,
     de, 236                                     111, 126–7, 202, 216
Portuguese civil war (1826–34), 41, 45,     Reina, Vicente, 65
     63, 99–101, 174                        religious personnel, 62, 90
Posac Mon, Carlos, 251                      Remírez de Esparza, Francisco Asín,
praetorian politics, 148, 191, 204               227, 228, 256, 259, 262
Preston, Paul, 227                          Renouard, Jules, 229
priests, 16, 25, 30–1, 33–4, 41–3, 60–2,    requetés, 13, 18
     89, 104, 126, 137, 141, 145, 149,      Reserve Army, 41, 83, 119
     167, 182, 184                          Restaurador (Carlist paper), 184
private contractors, 84, 136                Révész, Andrés, 148, 251
pro-Carlists, 4, 66, 85, 89, 120, 136,      Revolution of 1830, 44
     141, 167–8, 174–5, 212                 revolutionary justice, 141, 149
professional subversives, 40–1              Rey Reguillo, Fernando del, 241
progresismo, 122, 130–1                     Riall, Lucy, 233, 236
282 Index


Riego revolution/rising, 27, 29, 31, 82   Sebastián (Prince), 163, 186–7
riots, 6, 70–1, 88, 89, 93, 150, 170,     second battle of Arlabán, 118
     203, 204, 214                        secularisation, 178, 187
Risco, Alberto P., 227, 234, 235, 237     security crisis, 128, 137
Riva Palacios, Vicente, 249               Sesmero Ruiz, Julián, 257
Rivero (General), 150                     Seville Armament and Defence
Rodil, José Ramón (War Minister), 54,          Committee, 149
     63, 67, 141–4, 146–7, 151, 163       siege of Bilbao, 48, 83, 124, 160, 203
Rodil y Gayoso, José-Ramón, 251           sister revolution (Italy), 31
Rodríguez Gordillo, José Manuel, 258      smuggling, 111, 117, 196, 199–200
Rodríguez, Moises Enrique, 226,           ‘social dissidence’ thesis, 7–8
     239, 243                             social exploitation, 8
Rogers, Helen, 242                        social justice, 8, 94
Romeo Mateo, María Cruz, 231              social relations, 14, 158
Romero Alpuente, Juan, 29, 32, 34, 44,    Sojo y Lomba, Fermín de, 252
     73, 192, 198, 229, 233, 258          Solozábal, Juan José, 227
Roura i Aulinas, Lluís, 229, 232          somatenes, 13, 18, 42, 60
Royal Guard rising, 33                    Somerville, Alexander, 99, 243
Royalist Volunteers, 40–2, 45, 49, 51,    Southwell, Charles, 99, 243
     57, 89, 107, 174                     Spanish America, 24, 26–7, 39, 132,
Royalist War, 12, 49, 50, 52, 54,              134, 137, 207
     61, 139                              Spanish American independence, 24,
Royal Navy, 54, 88, 114–15,                    132, 134, 137, 207
     154–5, 195                           Spanish Civil War, 3, 13, 38, 70, 97–8
Royal Police (Carlist), 159–60, 185       Spanish George Washington, see
Royal Statute, 47, 72–3                        Espartero, Baldomero
Rubio Pobes, Coro, 226, 259, 261          Spanish liberalism, 2, 6, 31, 79,
Rújula, Pedro, 2, 6, 9, 17, 187, 225,          95, 167
     226, 228, 231, 232, 245, 247,        Spanish Philippines, 150, 206–7
     256, 262                             Spanish revolution, 31, 38, 97, 117
rural Carlism, 38, 77, 91, 113            Spiers, Edward M., 243, 252
rural insurgency, 51, 74, 80, 137         Suárez Verdeguer, Federico, 7, 226, 261
rural terrorism, 112, 136                 Supreme Federated Regulator, 145

Sahlins, Peter, 245                       taxation, 25, 31, 47, 56, 161, 183
Saint-Sylvain, Auguet, 63–4               Teijeiro, José Arias, 179, 186, 208–9
Saint-Sylvain, Louis Xavier August de,    Tejera, Domingo, 226, 227
     63, 64, 234, 235, 236, 237,          Templarios sublimes (secret
     238, 255                                  society), 145
San Miguel, Evaristo, 17, 34, 38, 127,    Temprado, R. M., 6, 225, 237, 238,
     128, 129, 135, 152, 175, 191, 201,        242, 245, 247, 255, 259
     202, 228, 247                        territorial expansion, 81, 162
Santa Cruz, F. 6, 225, 237, 238, 242,     theocratic absolutism, 157
     245, 247, 255, 259                   Thomas, Hugh, 249
Sánchez-Albornoz, Nicolás, 249            Thomson, Guy, 148, 239, 243,
Santirso Rodríguez, Manuel, 256                251, 258
Saperes, Agustín, 42–3                    Tiger of the Maestrazgo, see Cabrera,
Sarría Muñoz, Andrés, 230, 257                 Ramón
Sarsﬁeld (General), 50–1, 163, 189        Torras, Jaime Elías, 230, 231, 232, 233
                                                                      Index   283


transactionists, 164, 190                 Vilches, Manuel, 95
Treaty of Evora-Monte, 54                 Villa-Amil y Castro, José, 250
Treaty of Lécera, 217, 218                Villalobos, Santiago, 143
Treaty of Peace and Friendship, 134       von Rahden, Wilhelm, 14, 177, 202
Treaty of Vergara, 190, 207, 213,
     219, 222                             Walton, William, 235, 237
Trías, Juan J. 238, 241                   War of the Aggrieved (1826–27), 42
the Triennium, 29, 32, 36, 42, 45–6,      war economy, 74, 162
     50, 72, 75, 83, 102, 127, 174, 192   War of Independence, 216
Tristany, Benito, 60, 107, 124,           War Ministry, 60, 68, 86–7, 93, 165
     180–1, 183                           water-vendors, 200
Tuñón de Lara, Manuel, 231, 240,          Wawro, Geoffrey, 225
     241, 261                             Whig administration (Britain), 45
Turner, William, 99                       Widows of Comares, campaign, 196
                                          Wilhelmsen, Alexandra, 228
Urban Militia, 53, 57, 60, 71–2, 81–2,    women’s role in society, 3–4, 155, 159,
    87, 89, 116                               198–9
Urbiztondo, Antonio, 181–3                working-class, 90, 92, 201
Uribe Urán, Victor, 230
Urquijo Goitia, José Ramón, 2, 226,       Zaratiegui, J. Antonio, 174, 175, 177,
    227, 228, 248, 260, 261                   187, 188, 209, 211, 227
Urra (Lieutenant-Colonel), 188            Zavala, Iris M., 231, 241
                                          Zorraquín (General), 37
Valdés, Jerónimo (General), 45, 53,       de Zumalacárregui, Tomás
    77–9, 83, 87, 96, 214                   Bilbao operation, 76–80
Van-Halen, 98, 203, 207, 216–18             charismatic leadership, 48
Verástegui, Valentín, 14, 50–1, 189         death of, 81–3, 160, 162–3
Vergara settlement, 204, 210, 213,          guerrilla forces, 74
    214, 221–2, 224                         role in Basque phase of war, 52–9,
  see also Treaty of Vergara                     65–9
