

In  the  mean  time  much  opposition  was  experienced  by  the  Resident 
at  Hyderabad.  The  Ameers  manifested  the  utmost  repugnance  to  admit 
the  pecuniary  claims  of  Shah  Suja,  and  pleaded  that  the  Shah  had 
already  granted  them  releases*  written  on  the  Koran  from  all  tributary 

*  Shah  Suja-ool-molk  to  Murad  Ali  Khan. 

As  the  slaves  of  the  presence  are  now  about  to  proceed  to  conquer  Khorassan  and  Iran, 
I  have  entered  into  the  following  Treaty,  which  I  swear  by  God  and  the  Koran  to  abide  by. 
I  will  not  remain  above  fifty  days  at  Shikarpore,  and  will  encamp  on  the  Baghi  Shahee.  At 
the  close  of  the  above  period,  the  slaves  of  the  presence  will  move  into  Candahar,  and  I 
bestow  Sindh  and  Shikarpore  and  their  dependencies  on  you  and  your  heirs  and  successors 
in  the  same  manner  that  you  now  hold  them.  They  shall  be  your  territories  and  property. 
There  shall  be  no  oppression  of  the  smallest  degree,  and,  besides  that,  the  royal  favor  will 
be  greatly  extended  towards  you,  so  that  all  the  world  may  know  it.  This  Treaty  is  vouch- 
safed on  the  Koran  for  your  perfect  satisfaction. 

Written  the  1th  of  Mohurrum,  1209  Hegira. 

(The  King's  Sign  Manual). 

N.  B. — The  following  remark  is  written  in  the  hand-writing  of  the  King  himself: — 
"  This  treaty  is  confirmed  by  the  Koran.     The  royal  slaves  have  bestowed  of  their  own 

free  will  and  pleasure  the  country  of  Sindh  and  Shikarpore  as  a  jaghire  on  Meer  Murad 

Ali  Khan." 

Shah  Suja-ool-moolk  to  the  Ameers  Noor  Mahomed  and  Xusteer  Mahomed. 
I  hereby,  in  the  name  of  God  and  by  the  sacred  Koran,  make  this  agreement,  by  whioh 
I  bestow  on  you  the  country  of  Sindh  and  Shikarpore,  and  all  their  depnedencies,  u  a 
jaghire,  which  you  are  to  enjoy  and  hold  generation  after  generation.  The  said  country  will 
remain  with  you  for  the  future,  and  no  sort  of  oppression,  however  small,  shall  be  attempt- 
ed  or  practised.     The  friends  and  enemies  of  the  King  shall  be  considered  your  friends 


O  I'K  KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

sindh.  payments.  Sobdar  Khan  was  throughout  friendly  in  his  bearing,  but 
the  other  Ameers,  more  particularly  Noor  Mahomed  and  Nusseer  Khan, 
acted  with  deep  duplicity.  While  professing  a  strong  desire  for  cordial 
friendship,  they  were  holding  secret  intercourse  with  Persia.  They 
threatened  in  a  most  insolent  manner  to  oppose  the  passage  of  Shah 
Suja,  permitted  the  Resident  to  be  insulted  and  stoned,  gave  secret 
orders  that  no  assistance  should  be  rendered  to  the  British  force  from 
Bombay,  and  tampered  with  the  Nawab  of  Bhawulpore  to  seduce 
him  from  the  alliance  which  he  had  just  concluded  with  the  British 
Government.  The  paramount  importance,  however,  of  hastening  the 
completion  of  the  measures  for  the  occupation  of  Afghanistan  induced 
the  British  Government  to  abate  its  demand,  provided  they  could  secure 
the  passage  of  troops.  The  Resident  therefore  offered  to  the  Ameers 
a  Treaty  framed  on  the  principle  of  establishing  the  distinct  independ- 
ence of  each  of  them  and  stationing  a  British  force,  to  be  subsidized, 
in  the  country,  with  the  exemption  of  Meer  Sobdar  Khan  from  all 
payment  on  account  of  the  expenses  of  that  force.  The  Treaty  was 
rejected  by  the  Ameers,  and  every*  appearance  of  open  hostility  was 
exhibited.  Preparations  were  made  to  attack  their  capital,  when  the 
Ameers  assented  to  the  demands  made  on  them  and  signed  the  Treaty. 
But  as  a  punishment  for  their  hostility,  a  new  condition  was  insisted  on, 
that  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad,  with  the  exception  of  Sobdar  Khan, 
should  pay  seven  lakhs  of  Rupees  each,  being  twenty-one  lakhs  in  all, 
to  Shah  Suja,  as  the  condition  of  their*  exemption  from  further  claims. 