


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS.  3 

Mahomed  the  Chief  Meer,  his  brother  Nusseer  Khan,  and  their  two  Sixnii. 
cousins,  Sobdar  son  of  Futteh  Ali,  and  Meer  Mahomed  son  of  Gholam 
Ali.  In  1840  Noor  Mahomed  died,  leaving  two  sons,  Shadad  and  Hus- 
sein Ali,  under  the  guardianship  of  their  uncle  Nusseer  Khan.  These 
were  the  heads  of  the  Hyderabad  family  at  the  time  of  the  annexation  of 
Sindh  in  1843 — Nusseer  Khan,  Sobdar,  Meer  Mahomed,  Shadad  and  Hus- 
sein Ali  between  whom  Noor  Mahomed  had  divided  his  possessions  by  will. 

In  Upper  Sindh  and  Meerpore  the  government  remained  undivided 
in  the  hands  of  single  Chiefs.  Meer  Sohrab  bequeathed  his  territory  to 
his  son  Meer  Roostum  in  1830.  Meer  Thara  had  been  succeeded  the 
previous  year  in  Meerpore  by  his  son  Sher  Mahomed.  These  two 
Chiefs  remained  in  power  till  the  annexation. 

The  connection  of  the  British  Government  was  naturally  more  in- 
timate with  the  Hyderabad  family,  who  governed  the  lower  valley  of  the 
Indus,  than  with  the  more  remote  branches  of  Kheirpore  and  Meerpore. 
After  his  accession,  Gholam  Ali  deputed  an  Agent  to  Bombay,  in  1803, 
to  apologise  for  the  expulsion  of  the  British  Agency  by  his  late  brother. 
Friendly  relations,  however,  were  not  at  once  established  in  consequence 
of  the  evasion  of  the  demand  of  the  British  Government  for  compensa- 
tion. But  in  1808,  when  the  British  Government  were  concerting  mea- 
sures against  the  threatened  invasion  of  the  French  and  the  Persians  by 
way  of  Afghanistan,  it  was  deemed  expedient  to  waive  the  demand. 
Captain  Seton  was  sent  as  envoy  to  Sindh  on  the  part  of  the  Bombay 
government.     He  concluded  an  offensive  and  defensive  Treaty*  of  seven 

*  Translate  of  a  Deed  of  Agreement  sealed  and  delivered  by  Meer  Gholam  Ali, 
Hakim  of  Sindh,  to  Captain  David  Seton  at  Hyderabad,  the  18th  July  1808. 

This  Agreement  has  been  drawn  up  in  consequence  of  Captain  David  Seton,  on  the 
part  of  the  Honourable  Jonathan  Duncan,  Esq.,  Governor  of  Bombay,  having  arrived  at 
Hyderabad,  and  having  formed  a  firm  alliance  between  the  government  of  Sindh  and  the 
Honourable  Company,  and  the  Honourable  Governor  aforesaid. 

Article  1. 

That  a  firm  alliance  shall  exist  between  the  two  States,  and  the  friends  of  one  the 

friends  of  the  other,  and  the  enemies  of  one  the  enemies  of  the  other;  and  this  shall  remain 

for  ever. 

Article  2. 

When  the  assistance  of  troops  is  required  by  either  of  the  parties,  it  shall  be  granted 
when  asked. 


4  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  Articles  with  Gholam  Shah.  The  Supreme  Government,  however,  re- 
fused to  ratify  it,  as  it  committed  them  to  too  close  a  connection  with 
Sindh,  and  they  sent  an  envoy  of  their  own,  Mr.  N.  H.  Smith,  to  make 
new  negotiations.  A  Treaty  of  four  Articles  (No.  IV.)  was  concluded, 
on  22nd  August  1809,  with  the  then  surviving  brothers  of  the  Hydera- 
bad family.  This  Treaty  provided  for  the  exclusion  of  the  French  from 
Sindh,  and  the  mutual  despatch  of  vakeels  by  the  British  Government 
and  the  government  of  Sindh.  In  1820  another  Treaty  (No.  V.)  was 
concluded  with  the  two  surviving  brothers,  Kurm  Ali  and  Murad  Ali, 
by  which  they  agreed  to  exclude  Europeans  and  Americans  from  their 
territories,  and  to  prevent  inroads  into  the  British  dominions.  The  sub- 
jects of  the  two  governments  were  to  be  permitted  to  reside  in  each 
other's  territories  on  condition  of  orderly  and  peaceable  conduct. 