

In  August  1842  Sir  C.  Napier  was  appointed  to  the  military 
command  in  Sindh  and  Belochistan,  and  invested  with  authority  over 
all  civil  and  political  officers  in  these  territories.     Besides  the  suspicion 

VOL.    VII.  c 


10  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   St'NNUDS. 

SINDH.  of  the  fidelity  of  the  Ameers,  there  were  other  circumstances  arising  out 
of  a  misunderstanding  of  those  Articles  of  the  Treaty  relating  to  trade 
which  called  for  a  revision  of  the  engagements.  The  most  important 
discussion  related  to  the  interpretation  of  the  11th  Article.  The  Ameers 
insisted  that  the  Article  exempted  only  foreign  boats  from  duty  on  the 
Indus,  while  the  British  Government  maintained  that  all  boats,  as  well 
those  of  Sindh  as  of  other  States,  were  entitled  to  pass  duty  free.  The 
objects  which,  under  the  instructions  of  government,  were  to  be  kept 
in  view  in  any  new  engagement  with  the  Ameers  were  the  free  navi- 
gation of  the  Indus,  the  cession  of  territory  in  exchange  for  tribute,  the 
establishment  of  a  uniform  currency  in  Sindh,  and  the  cession  of  terri- 
tory to  the  Nawab  of  Bhawulpore,  who  throughout  the  disasters  in 
Afghanistan  had  remained  faithful  to  his  engagements.  A  draft  Treaty 
embodying  these  demands  was  offered  to  the  Ameers  towards  the  close 
of  1842.  Naturally  enough  the  most  serious  remonstrances  were  made 
against  the  measures  which  government  proposed  to  force  on  them. 
There  seemed  no  hope  of  an  amicable  settlement.  The  British  troops 
were  advancing  to  enforce  the  demands,  and  on  9th  February  1843  the 
Ameers  intimated  their  willingness  to  subscribe  the  Treaty  if  Roostum 
Ali  Khan,  of  Kheirpore,  were  restored  to  his  rights  of  which  he  hud 
been  deprived  by  his  younger  brother  Ali  Murad. 

Meer  Sohrab,  of  Kheirpore,  had  retired  from  public  life  in  1811, 
and  abdicated  in  favour  of  his  son  Meer  Roostum  Ali.  But  by  his  will, 
which  he  made  in  1829,  he  divided  his  territory  among  his  sons  in  four 
shares,  of.  which  Meer  Roostum,  as  the  successor  to  the  "  Turban"  or 
government,  held  two,  and  Mobarik  Ali  and  Ali  Murad  were  to  receive 
one  each.  Ali  Murad,  who  was  an  infant  at  the  time  of  his  father's 
death,  and  was  committed  to  the  care  of  Mobarik  Ali,  always  believed 
himself  to  have  been  defrauded  by  his  guardian.  However  this  may 
be,  he  received*  from  the  British  Government  in  1838  a  separate  gua- 
rantee for  the  States  he  held  in  Kheirpore.  Mobarik  Ali  died  in  1839, 
but  the  dispute  was  inherited  by  his  son  Nusseer  Khan,  with  whom  Meer 
Roostum  Ali  sided.  In  September  1842  the  brothers  met  in  battle. 
Roostum  and  Nusseer  Khan  were  defeated,  and  signed  the  Nownahar 