

*  See  above,  page. 7. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


11 


Treaty,*  by  which  they  assigned  nine  villages  to  Ali  Murad,  seven  of  which 
belonged  to  Meer  Roostum  and  two  to  Nusseer  Khan.  When  Sir  C.  Napier 
arrived  in  Upper  Siudh,  Ali  Murad  complained  to  him  that  his  brother 
Roostum  was  endeavouring  to  secure  the  succession  to  the  Turban  to  one 
of  his  own  sons  to  the  prejudice  of  Ali  Murad's  right.     Sir  C.  Napier 


sin  mi. 


*  Translation  of  the  Treaty  made  between  Meer  Roostum  Kuan,  Talpore,  and  Mker 
Am  Murad  Khan,  Talpore,  as  written  on  the  Koran,  which  was  produced  by  Ali 
Murad  to  the  Commission  in  1850. 

In  the  name  of  the  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate  God. 

May  the  God  of  the  Universe  be  praised  ! 

Meer  Saheb  Meer  Roostum  Khan,  Talpore,  made  peace  and  bound  himself  by  promise 
with  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan,  Talpore,  to  this  effect,  that  as  a  dispute  arose  between  Meer 
Ali  Murad  Khan  and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  on  the  subject  of  the  boundary  of  Soondurbealy, 
in  which  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  was  proved  to  have  encroached,  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan 
having  expended  lakhs  of  Rupees  came  to  fight  with  Meer  Nusseer  Khan.  In  the  mean 
time,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  disturbances,  and  considering  the  expense  in  cash  and 
jaghires  which  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan  has  incurred  on  account  of  his  army,  I  give  over  the 
villages  of  Khanwahun,  Abayanee,  Bucha,  Daree,  Ghurukna  the  villages  Rayna  and  Paleeja, 
with  my  free  will,  and  that  of  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  to  Ali  Murad  Khan,  that  he  may  enjoy 
them  from  the  commencement  of  the  season  Khureef  1253,  and  I  (Meer  Roostum)  will 
depute  a  vakeel  to  get  this  Treaty  sanctioned  by  the  British  Authorities.  I  will  never 
cause  any  molestation  against  the  said  villages;  neither  my  sons  nor  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  nor 
his  relations,  will  raise  any  claims  to  this  country.  If  they  attempt  to  do  so  they  are  false ; 
and  as  regards  the  villages  of  Pupurlooee,  Obree,  and  Shah  Bella,  Mahomed  Obag  and 
Mahlanee,  which  are  the  right  of  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan,  although  they  were  in  the  posses- 
sion of  Meer  Mobarik  Khan,  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan  has  got  them  back  through  the  British 
Government ;  neither  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  nor  his  children  are  to  set  forth  their  claims  to 
the  said  villages,  or  apply  to  the  British  Government  for  them.  If  they  attempt  to  do  so, 
they  are  false,  and  I,  together  with  my  sons,  shall  take  part  with  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan, 
as  he  is  in  the  right,  and  the  boundary  of  Soondurbealy,  as  may  be  settled  by  the  Ameers, 
I  will  give  into  the  possession  of  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan.  There  is  no  difference  in  this 
Treaty,  nor  will  any  be  made.     God  is  witness. 