

The  violence  and  tyranny  of  Sirferaz  Khan  and  his  successors,  who 
from  jealousy  put  to  death  three  of  the  Chiefs  of  the  Talpore  tribe,  led  to 
the  overthrow  of  the  Kalora  dynasty.  The  Talpores  are  a  Beloch  tribe, 
VOL.   VII.  b 


2  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNTJDS. 

SINDH.  whose  Chiefs  had  long  held  the  first  place  in  the  service  of  the  rulers  of 
Sindh.  To  avenge  the  death  of  their  Chiefs  the  Talpores  rose,  and, 
headed  by  Meer  Futteh  Ali  Khan,  Talpore,  expelled  the  Kalora  ruler 
Abd-ool-Nubbi.  This  revolution  took  place  in  the  year  1786.  The 
measures  which  Futteh  Ali  Khan  took  to  establish  his  authority  alarmed 
his  relatives,  Meer  Sohrab  and  Meer  Thara,  who  fled,  seized  on  Kheir- 
pore  and  Shah-bunder,  and  renounced  the  authority  of  their  kinsman. 
Meer  Futteh  AH  Khan  was  never  again  able  to  extend  his  authority  over 
the  whole  province,  which  henceforth  remained  divided  into  three  sepa- 
rate principalities,  viz.,  Hyderabad  or  Lower  Sindh  under  Futteh  Ali 
Khan,  Kheirpore  or  Upper  Sindh  under  Meer  Sohrab,  and  Meerpore 
under  Meer  Thara.  In  Hyderabad,  Futteh  Ali  divided  his  power  with 
his  three  brothers  Gholam  Ali,  Kurm  Ali,  and  Murad  Ali,  and  from 
their  real  or  apparent  unanimity  the  brothers  received  the  appellation  of 
the  Char  Yar  or  four  friends. 

In  1799  the  commercial  intercourse  between  the  British  Govern- 
ment and  Sindh  was  revived,  and  Futteh  Ali  Khan  issued  an  order 
(No.  III.)  granting  certain  privileges  in  favour  of  English  trade.  But 
the  advantages  of  this  trade  were  over-rated.  The  promises  of  the 
Ameers  were  insincere,  the  representative  of  the  British  Government  was 
rudely  compelled  to  withdraw,  and  the  influence  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment in  Sindh  was  at  an  end.  This  arrogant  and  insulting  behaviour  of 
the  Ameers  was  attributed  to  remonstrances  from  Zeman  Shah  and 
rumours  of  the  growing  power  of  the  British  Government  consequent  on 
the  fall  of  Tippoo  Sultan. 

Futteh  Ali  died  in  1801,  leaving  half  his  territory  to  his  brother, 
Gholam  Ali,  and  the  remainder  in  equal  shares  to  the  other  two  brothers, 
with  corresponding  obligations  for  paying  the  expenses  of  the  State  and 
the  annual  tribute  of  thirteen  lakhs  to  Cabool.  In  this  arrangement 
Sobdar,  the  son  of  Futteh  Ali,  received  no  share  of  power.  Gholam  Ali 
died  in  1811,  and  his  son  Meer  Mahomed  was  also  excluded  from  power, 
which  was  divided  between  the  two  surviving  brothers,  Kurm  Ali  and 
Murad  Ali.  The  former  died  childless  in  1828,  leaving  Murad  Ali  sole 
ruler  of  Lower  Sindh.  He  died  in  1835,  leaving  two  sons,  Noor  Maho- 
med and  Nusseer  Khan.  From  this  time  till  1840  the  government  at 
Hyderabad  was  divided  among  the  four  sons  of  the  u  Char  Yar,"  Noor 