


6  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

S1NDH.  The  4th  Article  of  the  tripartite  Treaty*  between  the  British  Gov- 

ernment, Runjeet  Sing,  and  Shah  Suja,  bound  Shah  Suja  to  abide  by 
whatever  the  British  Government  should  settle  regarding  Shikarpore  and 
the  territory  of  Sindh  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Indus,  and  the  16th  Article 
provided  that  he  should  relinquish  all  claims  to  supremacy  over  Sindh 
and  to  arrears  of  tribute  on  the  condition  of  the  payment  by  the  Ameers 
of  such  a  sum  as  the  British  Government  might  determine,  of  which 
fifteen  lakhs  were  to  be  paid  to  Runjeet  Sing.  In  consideration  of  the 
advantages  to  be  secured  to  the  Ameers  by  the  cessation  of  their  depend- 
ence on  Cabool  and  of  all  tributary  claims,  they  were  to  be  required  to 
assist  in  the  passage  of  the  British  armies  to  Afghanistan,  to  permit 
the  temporary  occupation  of  Shikarpore,  and  as  much  territory  as  would 
form  a  secure  basis  for  the  intended  military  operations,  and  to  suspend 
-  that  Article  of  the  Treaty  of  1832  which  prohibited  the  transport  of 
military  stores  by  the  Indus.  The  Ameers  were  at  the  same  time  told 
that  any  engagement  on  their  part  with  the  Shah  of  Persia  would  be 
considered  as  indicative  of  hostile  feelings  towards  the  British  Govern- 
ment. The  Resident  in  Sindh  was  also  empowered,  in  the  event  of  the 
British  policy  being  opposed  by  the  leading  Ameers,  to  place  at  the  head 
of  the  administration  any  member  of  the  family  whose  disposition  might 
be  friendly  and  who  might  have  sufficient  influence  in  the  country  to 
recommend  him. 

With  exception  of  Sobdar  Khan,  the  Ameers  of  the  Hyderabad 
family  manifested  the  strongest  disinclination  to  comply  with  the  de- 
mands made  on  them.  Less  difficulty  was  found  with  the  Kheirpore 
family.  Mobarik  Khan,  indeed,  and  a  small  party  attached  to  him,  were 
subservient  to  the  counsels  of  their  relatives  at  Hyderabad.  But  Meer 
Roostum  Ali  Khan,  who  had  long  manifested  a  desire  for  a  treaty  with 
the  British  Government,  by  which  he  should  be  recognized  as  independ- 
ent of  Hyderabad,  entered  willingly  into  the  British  policy.  A  Treaty 
(No.  XI.)  similar  to  that  made  in  the  same  year  with  the  Nawab 
of  Bhawulporef  was  concluded  with  him  on  24th  December  1838,  by 
which  his  territory  was  taken  under  British  protection;  he  acknowledged 
the  British  supremacy,  engaged  to  abstain  from  political  intercourse  with 

*  See  Vol.  II.,  page  251.  f  See  Vol.  II.,  page  367. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  STJNNUDS.  7 

other  States,  was  guaranteed  in  the  independent  administration  of  his  sindh. 
territory,  and  engaged  to  assist  in  the  passage  of  troops  through  his  ~ 
territory,  and  to  cede  temporarily  the  fortress  of  Bukker  as  a  depdt  for 
treasure  and  munitions  of  war.  Subsidiary  agreements  were  at  the 
same  time  given  to  the  other  Ameers  of  the  Kheirpore  family,  Mobarik 
Khan,  Mahomed  Khan,  and  Ali  Murad  Khan.  It  was  at  first  intended  to 
exclude  Mobarik  Khan  from  these  arrangements  in  consequence  of  his 
avowed  opposition  to  the  British  Government,  but  at  the  request  of 
Roostum  Ali  Khan,  a  guarantee  was  given  to  Mobarik  Khan  as  well 
as  to  the  other  Ameers. 