

While  these  events  were  occurring  at  Hyderabad,  the  reserve  force 
from  Bombay  was  fired  on  while  approaching  Kurrachee,  and  their 
landing  was  opposed.     Fire  was,  therefore,   opened  on  the  fort,  the  sea- 


and  enemies.  Should  you  require  any  assistance  in  the  way  of  troops  on  account  of  Sindh 
and  Shikarpore,  it  shall  be  afforded  from  the  royal  army  agreeably  to  your  wishes.  The 
slaves  of  the  presence  have  no  sort  of  claim  or  pretensions  on  Sindh  or  Shikarpore  and  their 
dependencies,  nor  will  any  be  made.  The  Treaty  which  the  fortunate  slaves  wrote  with 
the  royal  hand- writing  on  the  sacred  Koran,  in  the  name  of  Murad  Ali  Khan,  of  blessed 
memory,  is  renewed,  as  well  as  what  is  herein  stated  to  you,  and  not  a  hair  breadth's  differ- 
ence shall  occur  in  it.  The  royal  favour  and  approbation  shall  be  bestowed  and  showered  on 
you  beyond  that  shown  to  the  other  well-wishers  of  the  King. 

(Signed  by  the  King's  Sign  Manual  in  red  ink.) 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNTJDS.  9 

face  of  which  was  levelled  with  the  ground.     The  fort  was  taken,  and     sindh. 
the  Governor  of  the  town  was  required   (No.  XII.)  to  give  over  mili-  " 
tary  occupation  of  it  to  the  British  Government. 

The  Treaty  which  had  been  concluded  between  the  Resident  and 
the  Ameers  was  not  confirmed  in  its  entirety  by  government.  Several 
modifications  were  made  in  it,  and  it  was  reduced  from  23  to  14  Articles, 
and  the  revised  Treaty  (No.  XIII.)  signed  by  the  Governor  General 
was  offered  separately  for  the  acceptance  of  the  four  Ameers.  After 
some  demur  the  Ameers  signed  it,  being  chiefly  induced  to  do  so  by 
the  example  of  Meer  Sobdar  Khan. 

In  the  mean  time  Sher  Mahomed  Khan,  of  Meerpore",  also  expressed 
a  wish  to  enter  into  a  Treaty  with  the  British  Government.  His  ob- 
ject was  to  obtain  the  same  terms  as  had  been  granted  to  Sobdar  Khan 
of  Hyderabad,  that  is  to  say,  exemption  from  all  payments  towards 
the  subsidiary  force.  Government,  however,  refused  to  treat  with  him  on 
such  terms,  and  required  a  payment  of  half  a  lakh  a  year.  To  this  the  Ameer 
assented,  and  a  Treaty  (No.  XIV.)  was  concluded  with  him  in  June  1841. 

Delay  and  difficulty  soon  began  to  be  felt  in  realizing  the  tribute 
from  the  Ameers,  and  Lord  Ellenborough,  deeming  the  demand  of  pecu- 
niary tribute  from  Native  States  to  be  a  constant  cause  of  misunder- 
standing, resolved  to  commute  it,  whenever  possible,  to  a  cession  of  land. 
In  pursuance  of-' this  policy,  negotiations  were  opened  with  the  Ameers 
for  the  cession  of  Shikarpore  in  lieu  of  the  tribute.  Meer  Nusseer 
Khan  of  Hyderabad  readily  offered  to  cede  his  own  share  of  Shikar- 
pore and  that  of  his  late  brother  Noor  Mahomed  on  condition  of  being 
allowed  to  retain  the  nominal  sovereignty.  The  negotiations  were  nearly 
concluded,  when  the  first  news  of  the  disasters  at  Cabool  arrived  and 
produced  an  entire  change  of  feeling  in  the  Ameers,  and  induced  them 
to  break  off  the  discussion.  Meer  Roostum  Ali  of  Kheirpore  and 
Nusseer  Khan  of  Hyderabad  also  began  to  intrigue  for  the  expulsion 
of  the  British  forces  from  Sindh.  They  were  therefore  distinctly  warned 
that  on  the  day  on  which  infidelity  to  their  engagements  might  be 
proved,  their  territories  would  pass  from  them. 