

On  4th  April  1832  the  first  Treaty  (No.  VI.)  was  concluded  with 
the  Kheirpore  family.  Its  provisions  were  chiefly  of  a  commercial 
nature,  Meer  Boostum  agreeing  to  throw  open  the  navigation  of  the 
Indus'*  on  the  same  condition  as  might  be  settled  with  the  Hyderabad 
Ameers.     The  terms   with   the   Hyderabad  Ameers    (No.   VII.)   were 

Aeticle  3. 
That  the  disaffected  of  one  government  shall  not  he  protected  hy  the  other. 

Aeticle  4. 
That  when  the  servants  of  the  Sindh  government  shall  wish  to  purchase  warlike  stores 
in  any  of  the  ports  helonging  to  the  Honourable  Company,  they  shall  he  permitted  to  do 
so,  and  be  assisted  in  their  purchases,  and  on  paying  their  value  be  allowed  to  depart. 

Aeticle  5. 
That  an  Agent  on  the  part  of  the  Honourable  Company,  for  the  increase  of  friendship 
and  good-will,  shall  reside  at  the  Court  of  the  Meer  of  Sindh. 

Aeticle  6. 
The  claims  on  account  of  former  loss  in  the  time  of  Mr.  Crow  shall  be  dropped, 

Aeticle  7. 
That  a  British  factory  in  the  town  of  Tatta  only,  on  the  same  footing  as  in  the  time 
of  the  Caloree,  shall,  after  the  full  satisfaction,  perfect  confidence,  and  with  the  leave  of 
this  government,  be  established. 

And  through  the  blessing  of  God  there  shall  be  no  deviation  from  this  firm  alliance. 
Dated  1st  Jemmadee-ool-Sany  1223,  or  2Uh  July  1808. 

*  Regarding  trade  on  the  Indus  see  Treaties  with  Runjeet   Sing  and  tbe  Nawab  of 
Bhawulporc,  Vol.  II.,  pages  231  and  355. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  5 

concluded  on  20th  and  22nd  April  1832,  and  provided  for  the  passage  of     sixnn. 

traders  by  the  rivers  and  roads  in  Sindh,  subject  to  fixed  duties,  on  con- 

dition  that  no  armed  vessels  or  military  stores  should  be  conveyed  by 
these  routes,  and  that  English  merchants  should  not  settle  in  Sindh,  but 
leave  the  country  as  soon  as  their  business  should  be  transacted.  In 
1834  this  Treaty  was  modified  by  another  (No.  VIII.),  which  substituted 
for  a  duty  on  goods  a  toll  of  Rupees  570  between  the  sea  and  Roopur, 
of  which  Rupees  240  were  to  be  paid  to  the  Sindh  Ameers,  and  the 
remainder  to  Bhawulpore  and  Runjeet  Sing,  and  provided  that  bulk 
broken  in  the  voyage  should  be  charged  with  the  local  duties  levied  by 
the  respective  governments  within  whose  territories  the  goods  were 
sold. 

The  later  Treaties  with  the  Ameers  of  Sindh  were  more  of  a  poli- 
tical nature,  arising  out  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  British  Govern- 
ment to  re-establish  Shah  Suja  in  Cabool,  to  which  it  is  necessary  more 
particularly  to  advert. 

In  1836  Runjeet  Sing  put  forward  claims  to  a  tribute  of  twelve  lakhs 
of  Rupees  from  Sindh  and  threatened  the  invasion  of  Shikarpore,  but 
the  British  Government  induced  him  to  abstain  from  hostilities,  and 
offered  to  the  Ameers  of  Sindh  to  mediate  a  settlement  of  Runjeet 
Sing's  claims  on  condition  of  their  granting  certain  concessions  in  favour 
of  trade  on  the  Indus,  receiving  a  British  Agent  at  Hyderabad,  and  con- 
ducting all  their  relations  with  Lahore  through  the  British  Government. 
A  provisional  engagement  (No.  IX.)  was  concluded  with  the  Hyderabad 
Ameers  for  opening  the  trade  on  the  Indus  and  stationing  a  British 
Agent  at  Shikarpore.     Great  repugnance,  however,  was  shown  to  the 
reception  of  a   British   Agent   at   Hyderabad.     Noor  Mahomed  Khan 
asserted  that  he  was  too  weak  to  accept  such  a  measure  which  was  op- 
posed to  the  feelings  of  his  family  and  the  whole  Talpore  tribe.     But 
as  concession  on  this  point  was  made  the  essential  preliminary  condition 
of  the   British  mediation  with  Runjeet  Sing,  the  Ameer  at  last  con- 
sented, and  a  Treaty  (No.  X.)  was  concluded,  on  the  20th  April  1838, 
with  Noor  Mahomed  Khan.     Separate  agreements   to  the  same  effect 
were  given  at  the  request  of  Noor  Mahomed  to  the  other  Ameers,  Nusseer 
Khan    and    Sobdar  Khan,  the   object  of  this  being  to   secure  Noor 
Mahomed  Khan  in  the  position  of  head  of  the  Hyderabad  family. 