


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   STJNNUDS.  17 

his  trade,  as  it  will  be  an  advantage  to  the  government;   but  no  other     sixnir. 
Englishman  shall  have  a  house  or  any  encouragement.     And  as  it  is  very       w     L~ 
necessary  that  I  should  encourage  and  please  the  English,  I  hereby  order 
that  an  entire  compliance  may  be  shown  to  this  without  demanding  any 
new  order  every  year. 


No.  2.— -Translation  of  Gholam  Shah,  Prince  of  Sindh's  Perwannnh,  for  the 
Honourable  Company's  customs,  privileges,  &c,  at  Sindh,  dated  22nd 
September  1758. 

To  all  Fuqueers  (a  term  for  the  Scroys,  or  people  of  the  Prince's  caste, 
inhabitants  of  the  upper  part  of  the  country),  Diredars,  Muttaseddees 
that  are  at  present  or  shall  in  future  come  into  offices  of  the  customs, 
whether  under  the  sovereign  power,  or  farmed  out  at  the  Dirt  or  (Tatta 
custom-house),  Laree-bunder,  Aurunga-bunder,  Garranchere  Darajah,  Cha- 
vatra  Massotie  Nakass,  Barbundie,  Galabajar  (or  grain  custom-house), 
Agur,  Guzer  Rajah  Gunt,  Johibar,  Sarkar  Cachlon  Charcarhallow  (names 
of  countries),  Sarkar  Nassepore,  Holcandy,  Sarkar  Soviston,  Coodabage 
Ruree,  and  all  other  places  within  my  dominions :  Know  ye  (or  observe) 
that  the  wealthy,  true,  faithful,  and  friendly  Mr.  Sumption,  English 
Agent  here,  has  made  application  or  requested  that  the  honourable,  great, 
noble,  and  highly  esteemed  English  Company  of  India  and  Bombay 
may,  on  whatever  trade  or  merchandize  they  transact  goods,  import  or 
export,  buy  or  sell,  pay  only  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  customs  on 
the  valuation  of  the  real  price  of  the  place,  which  I  have  condescended 
to  and  hereby  grant;  furthermore,  that  the  gomastah  (or  agent)  for 
the  said  Honourable  Company  of  India  may  have  the  privilege,  on  whatever 
goods  he  imports  from  abroad,  and  chooses  to  export  up  the  country  to 
Coodabad  Ruree,  Multon,  &c,  to  receive  a  putta  (or  permit),  and  what- 
ever goods  he  may  purchase  there  or  above,  to  pay  only  the  above- 
mentioned  customs;  and  of  the  Lauvasma  (or  customary  charges)  on 
the  putta  goods,  such  as  Rawdarree,  Deradarre,  Munket,  Nut,  Furhutt, 
Nungana,  Dusturehoy  Duana,  Moota,  at  Coodabad,  Circarwarry,  Donnee, 
and  other  Nosem  Kalsay  Duanna  Pescharry,  Joab  Khanna,  &c,  the 
half  only  of  what  paid  by  the  Company  of  Multon  merchants,  which 

VOL.    VII.  d 


18  TREATIES,    EX<;  \'.l  Ml  \TS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

sin  nil.      is  rot[iiiro(l   to  be  duly  observed,  and  at  any  place,  or  wherever  there 


go,  I.  be  not  a  settled  custom  on  the  Multon  merchants,  the  half  only  of 
what  is  paid  by  others,  the  greatest  or  principal  merchants,  and  at  your 
peril  not  to  ask,  demand,  or  receive  more ;  and  if  the  aforesaid  Agent 
should  purchase,  bring  down,  and  export  out  of  the  country,  from  Tatta, 
hing,  indigo,  or  any  other  goods  which  he  may  not  formerly  have 
dealt  in,  or  hath  a  settled  custom  for,  to  receive  only  the  above-men- 
tioned customs  and  rates  by  the  Custom-master,  Duanna,  &c,  as  aforesaid, 
and  more  (on  no  terms)  to  ask  or  demand.  And  furthermore,  if  the 
above  said  gomastah  or  agent  should,  in  any  part  within  the  extent  of 
my  dominions,  of  himself  extract  or  purchase  from  others  saltpetre, 
the  customs  on  the  true  valuation,  at  the  price  of  the  place,  with  all 
customary  charges  included,  I  have  settled  and  affixed  thereon,  viz.,  in 
whatever  place,  within  my  government  or  dominions,  that  he  may  ex- 
tract or  purchase,  to  receive  on  it,  in  that  place  only,  the  above  said  cus- 
tom of  one  and  a  half  per  cent. ;  and  that  my  Muttaseddees,  Custom- 
masters,  Diredars,  Radawrs,  Guzervans  do  not,  on  any  pretence  of  cus- 
toms or  customary  rights,  customs  on  boats,  Moressor  or  Misseree  on 
ditto  boats,  Chitts,  or  other  usual  customs,  in  no  place  within  my  terri- 
tories, give  any  impediment  to  them ;  but  the  above  said  gomastah  may, 
without  trouble  and  in  a  satisfactory  manner,  carry  on  and  transact  his 
business  without  molestation ;  and  that  no  other  person  may  be  permit- 
ted to  export  the  aforesaid  commodity,  and  that  whatever  goods  he  may 
import  here  and  not  meet  a  sale  for,  if  he,  sooner  or  later,  first  or  last, 
export  them  again,  by  no  means  to  demand  any  customs,  charges,  &c, 
or  give  any  impediment  to  their  exportation. 