

And  at  the  time  of  their  ship's  arrival  at  any  of  my  bunders  (or 
ports),  if  they  should  purchase  provisions  for  the  English  and  lasears 
of  their  ships,  such  as  bullocks,  cows,  goats,  sheep,  or  other  necessaries, 
at  Tatta,  or  from  out  of  the  country,  and  export  in  ships,  on  no  terms 
to  ask,  demand,  receive,  or  give  the  least  trouble  concerning  customs 
thereon.  Furthermore,  for  customs  or  other  customary  dues  on  the  Eng- 
lish garden,  which  they  may  keep  for  their  pleasure,  to  give  no  trouble, 
or  make  any  demands  thereon,  nor  let  their  gardener  be  subject  to  be 
pressed  or  molested  on  any  occasion,  as  you  are  to  observe  I  hereby 
exempt   them   therefrom;    and   the    chests  of   wearing   clothes    of  the 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS.  19 

English,  and  other  necessaries  they  may  bring*  or  carry  with  them,  you     SIN  oil. 
are  on  no  terms  to  give  them  trouble  about  opening,  or  demand  the  sight       £  ,.  j . 
of,  on  any  pretence  whatever. 

And  for  customs  of  Moree,  Misseree,  &c,  on  their  boat  they  may 
hire  or  keep  to  go  to  and  fro  m,  not  to  ask  or  make  any  demand  on ;  and 
on  their  servants,  and  those  under  their  protection,  by  no  means  to  re- 
ceive or  give  them  any  trouble,  on  account  of  head-money,  or  other  dues 
of  any  kind,  received  from  my  subjects,  or  for  any  other  new  customs  or 
demands  that  may  arise  or  be  collected  in  my  country. 

And  for  any  Nirkana  (customs  on  rice)  or  leave  of  carrying  to  their 
house  of  grain,  sold  in  Tatta  or  Nungana,  on  cotton  imported  from 
abroad,  to  make  no  demand  or  give  any  trouble  thereon ;  and  for  Nun- 
gana on  ghee  and  oil,  agreeable  to  the  custom  of  maund,  for  a  dubber,  to 
make  account  as  usual  and  receive  the  customary  dues ;  and  whether  it 
is  put  in  small  buttaroes  or  larger  jocks,  or  in  other  vessels  (larger  or 
smaller)  to  make  account  on  the  customs  of  maunds,  eight  maunds  per 
dubber ;  and  on  the  Lauvasma,  or  customs  on  the  sale  of  elephants' 
teeth,  to  receive,  when  sold,  the  usual  custom  of  nine  per  cent,  paid  by 
the  buyer  and  no  more. 

And  if  the  aforesaid  gomastah  (or  agent)  should,  at  Tatta  or 
Aurunga-bunder,  choose  to  buy  or  build  a  house  for  a  factory,  do  you 
give  him  all  the  assistance,  to  the  utmost  of  your  power,  to  assist  and 
forward  him  therein,  and  at  the  least  expense,  that  they  may  settle  in 
my  country,  in  a  strong  secure  factory,  to  their  satisfaction,  so  as  to 
trade  with  spirit  and  without  apprehension,  to  the  increase  of  revenues  and 
advantage  of  my  country ;  and  that  no  other  Englishmen  be  permitted 
those  favours;  and  that  they  may  at  pleasure,  and  without  control, 
receive  the  customary  dues  and  privileges  of  their  factories.  As  the  bestow- 
ing favours  and  continuing  friendship  with  the  English  is  desirable  in 
my  presence,  therefore  insist  that  due  regard  (in  every  respect)  be  paid 
to  the  above  Sunnud,  and  no  demand  made  for  new  ones. 