


22  TREATIES,   EXC;  \c i:\ll NTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

SIN  PH.     trade,  as  it  will  be  an  advantage  to  the  government;  but  no  other  nation 

i  &  II.    that  wear  hats  shall  have  permission  for  it]  and  as  it  is  very  necessary 

that  I  should  encourage  and  please  the  English,  I  hereby  order  that  an 

entire  compliance  may  be  shown  to  this  without  demanding  any  new 

order  every  year. 


No.  II. 
Three  Perwannahs  from  the  Prince  of  Sindh,  1761. 

A  Teewannah  granted  by  Gholam  Sitah,  Prince  of  Sindh,  on  the  22nd 

April  1761. 

Be  it  known  to  all  Fuqueers,  Governors,  or  other  officers,  who  now 
are  or  hereafter  may  be  in  authority  in  the  department  of  customs  or 
farms  at  Tatta,  Shah-bunder,  Aurunga-bunder,  Carrachere  or  Darajah, 
the  customs  on  cattle,  &c,  called  Nekass,  package,  grain,  Bazar  customs 
on  leather,  and  the  Grott  Chuabar,  the  Sircar  of  Cachlon  and  Charcar- 
hallow,  the  Sircar  of  Nasseepore,  &c.  Holcandy,  the  Sircar  of  Sevastan, 
Coodabad  Kuree,  and  all  other  places  within  our  dominions,  that  the 
noble  Mr.  Erskine,  an  Englishman,  and  Resident  for  affairs  of  the  potent, 
magnificent,  and  Honourable  English  Company  in  Sindh,  being  come 
to  our  court  for  the  more  firmly  establishing  the  factory  of  his  superiors, 
has  requested,  and  we  have,  on  account  of  the  strict  friendship  subsisting 
between  us  and  the  said  Honourable  Company,  granted,  and  do  hereby 
particularly  order  that  besides  the  English,  no  other  Europeans  shall 
either  import  or  export  goods  or  merchandize,  or  come  and  go  upon 
that  account  within  the  dominions  of  Sindh,  or  the  Soubah  of  Tatta 
and  Buchor,  or  any  other  of  the  bunders  under  our  authority. 

Whatever  goods  or  merchandize  belonging  to  the  said  factory  ov 
its  dependants  shall  be  imported  at  any  of  the  bunders  are  to  be 
exempted  from  paying  any  import  customs,  agreeable  to  our  former 
grants,  and  therefore  none  are  to  be  demanded.  If  they  cany  goods 
either  from  the  Bunders  to  Tatta,  up-country,  on  paying  the  customs 
they  did  formerly,  certificates  must  be  given  them,  and  nothing  further 
is  to  be  demanded,  on  any  account,  that  they  may  cany  on  their  trade 


TREATIES,,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  1:> 

with  case  and  satisfaction.  Whatever  goods  they  may  export  from  any  si \ mi. 
of  the  bunders  are  to  pay  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  agreeably  to  our  No  jL 
former  perwannah;  or  if  goods  are  purchased  by  them  and  exported 
from  Tatta,  they  are  to  pay  such  customs  as  were  before  usual,  and 
nothing  further  is  to  be  demanded.  No  other  merchant  but  the  aforesaid 
Resident  is  to  purchase  for  exportation  any  of  the  saltpetre  that  may  be 
produced  in  Scindy,  or  within  our  dominions ;  or  if  the}*  purchase  and 
export  this  article  they  shall  be  punished  in  such  a  manner  as  shall 
deter  them  for  ever  again  interfering  in  that  trade.  Whatever  saltpetre 
the  aforesaid  Company's  Resident  shall  either  extract  in  any  part  of  our 
dominions,  or  purchase  of  other  merchants,  and  refine,  the  custom 
farmers,  at  such  places,  shall  receive  the  customs  thereon  as  formerly, 
that  the  said  Company's  dependants  may  carry  on  this  trade  to  their 
satisfaction.  If  they  dispatch  their  own  dingeys,  gallivats,  or  other 
vessels  to  the  Bar,  after  proper  precautions,  permissions  shall  be  granted, 
and  they  meet  with  no  impediment,  which  is  to  be  strictly  observed ;  or 
if  their  said  vessels  are  sent  up  and  down  the  river  on  their  factory 
business,  and  passing  under  Shah  Gurh,  or  by  the  guard-vessels,  &c,  on 
permission  granted,  they  are  not  to  be  stopped,  that  they  may  come 
and  go  without  trouble.  Should  it  happen,  which  God  forbid,  that 
any  of  their  ships,  gallivats,  boats,  &c,  should  run  ashore,  or  be  wrecked, 
either  on  our  bars,  coasts,  or  without  our  rivers,  our  officers  in  such 
places  are  to  assist  them ;  and  whatever  effects  may  be  saved,  belonging 
to  such  vessels,  wdiether  rigging,  necessaries  belonging  to  the  crew,  or 
other  goods,  are  to  be  delivered,  to  the  smallest  item,  to  the  Resident 
aforesaid,  he  paying  reasonably  for  the  labour  and  pains  of  those  who 
may  assist  in  saving  them.  Should  the  aforesaid  Resident  choose  to 
build  a  brick  house  at  Shah-bunder,  or  make  a  garden  for  his  recreation, 
on  any  spot  of  ground  he  may  like,  he  is  to  receive  all  the  assistance 
possible  for  doing  it  quickly ;  and  whatever  former  Sunnuds  the}'  have 
received  are  to  remain  in  full  force,  and  not  to  be  objected  to  or  disputed 
on  any  account.  It  being  our  pleasure  to  satisfy  the  said  Honourable 
English  Company,  therefore  the  above  must  be  strictly  observed,  and 
no  new  perwannahs  demanded. 