

Baled  the  \§th  of  Ramzan  1174,  or  %»«d  of  April  17«".I. 


No.  II. 


24  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

STXDH.      Pkrwannah   granted  by  Gholam    Shah,  Prince    of   Sindh,   on  the  23rd   of 

April  1761. 

Be  it  known  to  the  officers  of  the  customs,  or  farmers  of  the 
revenues  appertaining"  to  the  zemindaree  of  Shah-bunder  and  Cach- 
rawly  that  at  this  time  Mr.  Erskine,  Resident  for  the  Honourable  English 
Company  in  Sindh,  has  requested  that  all  their  vessels  might  be  exempted 
from  paying  the  Moree  of  Rupees  25  on  each  vessel,  formerly  paid  the 
Imaum ;  and  we,  being  willing  to  grant  his  request,  do  therefore  exempt 
all  their  vessels- from  paying  the  said  Moree  of  Rupees  25  on  each  vessel, 
and  now  order  you  not  to  demand  the  same ;  but  if  more  than  the  sum 
of  Rupees  25  was  formerly  paid  for  each  vessel,  the  overplus  is  to 
be  recovered. 

Let  this  be  strictly  observed. 

Dated  the  Yith  of  Ramzan  1174,  or  the  23rd  of  April  a.  d.  1761. 


Pebwannah  granted    by  Gholam:  Shah,   Prince  of    Sindh,  on  the  22nd  of 

April  1761. 

Be  it  known  to  all  Fuqueers,  Governors,  and  other  officers  who  now 
are,  or  hereafter  may  be,  employed  or  concerned  either,  in  the  collecting 
or  farming  the  customs  from  the  sea  to  Raree,  and  all  other  places 
within  our  dominions,  that  Mr.  Erskine,  Resident  of  the  Honourable 
English  Company's  factory  in  Sindh,  and  their  other  servants  and  depend- 
ants, send  boats  and  camels  up  and  down  in  our  dominions,  with  trade 
and  merchandize :  You  are,  therefore,  on  seeing  this  perwannah,  not  to 
demand  the  usual  charges  of  Moree,  Misree,  or  Goozurbanee,  or  Sooze, 
and  employ  them  on  our  business  on  any  pretence  whatever;  nor  is 
any  person  belonging  to  us,  on  any  of  the  above  accounts,  to  impede 
or  otherwise  stop  or  hinder  boats  or  camels  belonging  to  them,  that 
they  may  carry  on  their  business  without  difficulty,  and  make  the  customs 
increase. 

Let  this  be  most  punctually  observed,  and  no  person  offer  to 
dispute  it. 

Bated  the  \Qth  of  Ramzan  1174,  or  the  22nd  of  April  a.  d.  1761. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


25 


No.  III. 


SINDII. 


Signature 

Signature 

No.  III. 

of  the  private 
Secretary. 

of  the  public 
Secretary. 

Seal  of  Mcer 
Futtch  Ali 

Khan. 

Signature 

Signature 

of  the 

of  the 

Moonshee. 

Accountant. 

The  Collectors  and  farmers,  at  this  period  and  hereafter,  of   the 
town  of  Kurrachee,  will  understand  that  at  this  time  N.  Crow,  English- 
man,  vakeel   of  the   asylum   of  valor,   wisdom,   and  intelligence,  the 
Honourable  Jonathan  Duncan,  Governor  of  Bombay  and  Surat,  on  the 
part  of  the  exalted,  noble,  powerful,  renowned  English  Company  Baha- 
door,  has  arrived  at  our  presence  and  requested  the  establishment  of  a 
commercial  factory  in  the  town  of  Kurrachee,  and  the  adjustment  of 
customs  on  merchandize,  export  and  import  to  and  from  foreign  ports, 
and  purchases  and  sales  in  the  territories  of  Sindh,  and  other  exportations 
and  importations.     For  the  sake,   therefore,   of    the  friendship   of   the 
English  Company,  one-third  in  the  articles  of  customs  only  shall  be 
remitted  in  the  collections  of  duties  on  the  trade  of  the  English  factory, 
and  all  the  fees  levied  as  usual  with  the  other  merchants.     It  is  com- 
manded that  you  forego,  then,  in   levying  duties  on  the  trade  of  the 
English  factory,  one-third  in  the  article  of  customs  only,  collecting  all 
the  regulated  fees,  as  usual,  amongst  the  merchants,  in  order  that  the 
agents  of  the  English  may  with  confidence  labour  to  increase  our  cus- 
toms and  their  own  trade.     On  account  of  weight  or  measure  of  their 
goods,  or  the  inspection  of  trunks  of  the  Resident's  baggage,  no  molesta- 
tion must  be  offered,  but  his  invoice  and  word  be  taken.     The  duties  on 
provisions  and  articles  of  consumption  of  the  English  and  the  crews  of 
their  ships,  and  the  fee  of  Moree  on  their  ships,  vessels,  and  dingeys,  to 
be   regulated  by  the  custom  in  use  amongst  other  merchants.     If  by 
vol.  vii.  e 