

Baled  at  Ahmedalad,  in  Sind/i,  IWt  Maharim,  1172  of  the 
Hegira,  or  Sejrtemher  22nd,  1758. 


20  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SINDII.      No.  3.— Lbtteb  from  Gholam  Shah,  Prince  of  Sindh,  to  Mb.  Eobebt  Sumption 


No,  l  dated  11th  December  1758. 

I  now  inform  you  that  I  am  arrived  with  all  my  forces  in  the  fort 
of  Shah-bunder,  and  have  determined  to  collect  no  customs  (not  even  a 
single  pice)  on  the  goods  that  any  King's  merchants  may  bring  to  Shah- 
bunder,  but  on  all  exported  from  hence  they  are  to  pay  the  usual  customs. 
You  may  be  sure  of  this  my  determination,  and  import  goods  from  any 
parts  to  trade  here. 

I  hope  you  will  soon  send  your  man  here  to  choose  a  place  for  build- 
ing a  house  or  factory. 


No.  4. — Obdeb  from  Gholam  Shah,  Prince  of  Sindh,  to  his  Metah  Coostamdas, 
dated  18th  December  1758,  and  attested  under  the  Codjee's  Seal. 

You  are  hereby  ordered  not  to  demand  any  customs  on  the  goods 
which  Mr.  Sumption  may  import,  and  likewise  to  let  him  have  any 
place  which  he  may  choose  for  building  a  factory  on.  Give  him  all  the 
assistance  in  your  power,  and  be  a  friend  to  him,  that  he  may  think 
himself  at  liberty  in  carrying  on  his  trade  for  the  good  of  the  port. 


No.  5. — Copy  (attested  under  Codjee  Mahomed  Yaya's  Seal)  of  the  Perwannah 
from  Gholam  Shah  Abassie,  dated  18th  Maharim,  or  22nd  September  1758. 

Be  it  known  to  all  commanders,  officers,  farmers,  and  inhabitants 
of  Durat  Laree-bunder,  Aurunga-bunder,  Garranchere  Darajah,  Cha- 
vatra  Massotie,  Nakass,  Barbundie,  Galabajar,  Goozer  Rajah  Gunt, 
Johibar,  Sarkar  Chachlon  Charcarhallow,  Sarkar  Nassepore,  Holcandy, 
Sarkar  Soviston,  Coodabage,  Sarkar  Lorah,  &c,  places  belonging  to 
Sarkar,  that  Mr.  Sumption,  gomastah,  or  agent,  did,  for  and  in  behalf 
of  the  Governor  belonging  to  the  English  Company  of  India  and 
Bombay,  inform  here  that  on  all  the  goods  he  purchases  and  sells  for 
the  Honourable  Company  he  pays  no  more  than  one  and  a  half  per 
cent,  customs  on  the  market  price,  which  I  hereby  confirm,  and  order 
that  no  more  than  that  custom  may  be  received  of  him  as  usual ;  but 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  21 

on  all  Europe  goods  which  may  be  sent  from  Bombay  here  and  hence     SINDH. 


to  Coodabage,  Laree,  Multon,  &c,  or  any  brought  from  thence,  they  No.  L 
are  to  pay  on  the  same  half  of  what  customs  and  charges  (such  as 
passports,  convoy,  lodging,  duan  towff,  canah,  choukey,  &c.,)  the  Mul- 
ton  merchants  pay ;  and  should  there  be  such  goods  as  the  Multuny 
never  carry,  and  it  be  impossible  to  know  the  customs  and  charges  on 
them,  they  (the  English)  are  to  pay  half  of  what  any  of  the  consider- 
able merchants  pay  on  the  same,  but  nobody  is  to  demand  any  thing 
more;  and  the  same  customs,  &c,  as  are  above  mentioned  they  are  to 
pay  on  the  hing,  indigo,  &c,  goods  which  they  never  bought  before ; 
and  they  are  also  to  pay  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  customs  on  the  salt- 
petre, be  it  bought  by  themselves  or  by  anybody  for  them  in  Sircar's 
place  or  anywhere  else ;  but  no  officers,  farmers,  &c,  are  to  demand  any 
thing  more  from  them,  but  let  them  carry  on  their  trade  unmolested ; 
and  the  above-mentioned  goods  nobody  else  shall  have  liberty  to  buy. 
And  I  further  order  that  should  their  goods  not  be  disposed  of  and  they 
want  to  carry  them  back,  no  custom  shall  be  demanded  on  them,  nor  on 
any  provisions  which  they  may  provide  at  Tatta,  &c,  places,  to  send 
on  board  their  ships  for  their  maintenance.  They  are  also  not  to  demand 
anything  for  their  gardens,  nor  in  any  shape  molest  their  gardeners, 
boats,  vessels,  &c,  conveyances,  or  send  them  on  any  Sircar's  business ; 
and  it  is  also  ordered  that  their  chests  of  linen  may  not  be  opened,  or 
the  least  hindrance  shown  them  in  passing  and  repassing,  it  being  con- 
trary to  our  rules ;  and  in  short,  no  one  must  presume  to  make  any  new 
customs  to  their  prejudice,  by  any  former  rules  or  rates,  or  in  any  shape 
put  any  affront  on  them  and  their  people.  They  have  also  free  liberty 
to  provide  any  sort  of  grain,  and  sell  the  same  and  any  Europe  goods 
at  any  rate  they  please.  The  customs  on  the  dubbers  of  ghee,  oil,  &c, 
as  also  on  the  chests  and  pots  of  goods,  are  to  be  charged  conformable 
to  the  weight  they  put  on  each  dubber,  chest,  or  pot,  without  weighing 
them  again ;  the  customs  on  elephants'  teeth  are  to  be  received  on  the 
amount  of  sale,  when  sold,  at  the  same  rate  as  was  usual  in  the  time  of 
the  Prince  Mahomed  Murad;  and  should  the  Governor  either  buy  or 
build  a  house  for  a  factory  at  Aurunga-bunder  or  at  Tatta,  my  said 
people  are  to  give  him  all  the  assistance,  that  it  may  cost  him  a  reason- 
able price;    and  he  is  to  have  all  encouragement  for  carrying  on  his         > 