

After  the  conquest  the  deposed  Ameers  were  removed  from  Sindh 
and  pensions  were  granted  them  by  the  British  Government.  With  the 
exception  of  Sher  Mahomed,  of  Meerpore,  all  are  dead ;  but  their  descend- 
ants continue  to  receive  liberal  pensions.  Most  of  the  members  of  the 
Talpore  family  have  been  permitted  to  return  to  Sindh.  The  pensions 
at  present  drawn  by  the  different  members  of  the  family  amount  to 

Rupees,  viz. : — 

Kupees. 

The  Hyderabad  family     ...  ...  ...     1,73,013 

The  Kheirpore  family     ...  ...  ...     1,79,540 

The  Meerpore  family    ...  ...  ...       60,200 

Total  ...     4,12,753 


No.  I. 
Pebwannahs,  &c.,  from  the  Pbince  of  Sindh  in  1758. 

No.   1  .—Copt  (attested  by  Codjee    Mahomed  Yaya)  of  the  Perwannah  from 
Gholam  Shah  Abassie,  dated  the  22nd  September  1758. 

Be  it  known  to  all  commanders,  officers,  fuqueers,  farmers,  and  inha- 
bitants of  Durat,  Laree-bunder,  Aurunga-bunder,  Garranchere  Darajah, 
Chavatra  Massotic,  Nakass,  Barbundie,  Galabajar,  Agur,  Goozer  Rajah 
Gunt,  Johibar,  Sarkar  Chachagom,  Charcarhallow,  Nassepore,  Holcandy, 
Sarkar  Soviston,  Coodabage,  Sarkar  Nohorey  Abey,  &c,  places  belong- 
ing to  Sircar,  that  Mr.  Sumption,  gomastah  belonging  to  the  Honour- 
able  English   Company,   informed   me   here   that   on   all  the  goods  he 


No.   I. 


16  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

STXDH.  purchases  and  sends  for  the  Honourable  Company  to  Bombay  he  pays  no 
more  than  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  customs  on  the  market  price,  which 
I  hereby  confirm,  and  order  that  no  more  than  that  custom  may  be 
received  of  him  as  usual,  but  on  all  Europe  goods  which  shall  be  sent 
from  Bombay  for  Coodabage,  Laree,  Multon,  &c,  half  of  what  customs, 
&c.,  charges  (such  as  passports,  convoy,  lodging,  Duan  Towff,  Canah,  &c.,) 
the  Multon  merchants  pay;  and  should  there  be  such  goods  as  the 
Multuny  never  cany,  and  be  it  possible  to  know  the  customs  and 
charges  on  them,  they  (the  English)  are  to  pay  half  of  what  any  of  the 
considerable  merchants  used  to  pay  on  the  same ;  but  nobody  is  to  de- 
mand any  thing  more.  And  the  same  customs,  &c,  as  are  above 
mentioned  they  are  to  pay  on  the  hing,  indigo,  &c,  goods  which  they 
never  bought  before ;  and  they  are  also  to  pay  one  and  a  half  per  cent, 
customs  on  the  saltpetre,  be  it  bought  by  themselves  or  by  anybody 
for  them  in  the  Sircar's  place,  or  anywhere  else ;  but  no  officers,  farmers, 
&c.,  are  to  demand  any  thing  more  from  them,  but  let  them  carry  on  their 
trade  unmolested.  And  I  further  order  that  should  their  goods  not  be 
disposed  of  and  they  want  to  carry  them  back,  no  customs  shall  be  de- 
manded thereon,  nor  on  any  provisions  which  Mr.  Sumption  shall  send 
from  any  place  on  board  their  ships  for  their  maintenance.  They  are 
also  not  to  demand  any  thing  for  their  gardens,  nor  in  any  shape  molest 
their  gardeners,  boats,  vessels,  &c,  or  send  them  on  any  Sircar's  busi- 
ness ;  and  it  is  also  ordered  that  their  chests  of  linen  may  not  be  opened, 
or  the  least  hindrance  shown  them  in  passing  and  repassing,  it  being 
contrary  to  our  rules ;  and  in  short,  no  one  shall  presume  to  make  any 
new  customs  to  their  prejudice,  or  in  any  shape  put  any  affront  on  them 
or  their  people.  Thej  have  also  free  liberty  to  provide  any  sort  of  grain, 
and  sell  the  same  and  any  European  goods  at  any  rate  they  please. 
The  customs  on  the  dubbers  of  ghee,  oil,  &c,  as  also  on  the  chests  and 
pots  of  goods,  are  to  be  charged  conformable  to  the  weight  they  put 
on  each  dubber,  chest,  or  pot,  without  weighing  them  again ;  and  the 
customs  on  the  elephants'  teeth  are  to  be  received  on  the  amount  of  sale 
when  they  are  sold.  And  should  Mr.  Sumption  either  buy  or  build  a 
house  or  warehouse  at  Aurunga  Bunder  or  at  Tatta,  my  said  people  are 
to  give  him  all  the  assistance  they  can,  that  it  may  cost  him  only  a 
reasonable  price,  and  he  is  to  have  all  the  encouragement  for  carrying  on 