


26  TREATIES,    EXli.WIEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

sixdh.  accident  any  ship  or  dingey  belonging  to  the  English  coming  or  going 
No.  III.  with  cargo  to  or  from  Sindh  should  be  stranded  or  sunk  on  the  coast  of 
Kurrachee,  the  best  assistance  is  to  be  rendered  towards  recovering  her, 
and  she  must  without  hesitation  be  delivered  up,  the  English  Resident  dis- 
charging the  expense  of  labourers.  The  dependants  of  the  Resident  are 
not  to  be  pressed  on  government  service,  nor  compelled  to  purchase 
government  property.  A  spot  of  ground  for  a  country  house  to  the 
English  factory,  and  four  beegahs  of  ground  for  a  garden,  outside  of  the 
fort  of  Kurrachee,  are  given  to  the  Resident  with  exemption  from  land 
or  fee  tax,  and  it  is  commanded  that  they  be  delivered  to  him  where- 
ever  he  may  prefer,  there  being  no  inhabitants  nor  claims  of  possessions ; 
towards  building  the  house  you  will  afford  assistance,  the  English  Resi- 
dent paying  the  expences.  Maistre  Suchanund,  Collector  for  the  time 
being,  will  levy  customs  on  the  merchandize  of  the  English  and  the  im- 
portations of  their  ships  according  to  the  above  written,  the  garden  ex- 
cepted, and  all  other  fees  he  will  remember  agreeably  to  the  purport  of 
this,  which  is  peremptory. 

Dated  16th  Rubbee-ool-Awul  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  1214  the  \%th 
of  August  1799  of  the  Christian  era. 

It  is  repeated  that  the  customs  and  fees  are  to  be  levied  in  cor- 
respondence with  the  established  rates  of  import  underneath  detailed. 
Customs  and  fees  on  all  exportations  and  importations  by  sea : — 

Customs. 

Rupees  3  and  \  per  cent,  on  the  market  price  of  imports ;  Rupees  2 
per  cent,  on  the  amount  purchase  of  exports  (one-third  excused  in  this 
article  of  customs  only). 

Luwazime  Gutree  Rupees  18  on  every  bale  of  Tatta  piece  goods 
exported. 

Moree  upon  vessels  of  all  burdens;  Rupees  2-375  arriving, 
Rupees  2-1*75  departing. 

Khirwara  upon  wheat,  rice,  jowaree;  Rupees  2-2  the  Rhinwar 
imported  or  exported ;  upon  barley  and  paddy  Rupee  1-1 ;  the  Rhinwar 
upon  white  grain  Rupee  1-3. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  27 

Fees.  EKHDH. 

Moajdurea  one  pice  upon  every  Rupee  in  the  amount  of  customs.  **  IU- 

Foujdaree  Rupee  1  qr.  2  rs.  4  per  cent,  in  the  amount  purchase. 
Customs  and  fees  on  all  importations  and  exportations  by  land. 
Customs  and  fees  upon  all  dealings  with  the  Putan  merchants. 

Customs. 
Rupees  3-1  per  cent,  upon  sales  and  purchases  (not  excused). 

Fees. 

Booratun  Rupee  1  per  cent,  upon  sales  and  purchases ;  Moajdurea 

1  pice  on  every  Rupee  amount  customs;  nut  2  pice  and  \  on  every 
camel  load. 

Customs  of  Kurrachee  upon  all  dealings  of  other  merchants  Ru- 
pees 4  and  \  per  cent,  on  all ;  value  of  imports  above  Rupees  4,  3  pice 
on  every  Rupee ;  value  below  that  sum,  Rupees  2  per  cent,  on  the  market 
price  of  exports. 