


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  STJNNUDS.  13 

resignation  was  made  after  Meer  Roostum  had  taken  from  AH  Murad  an     siNDH. 
engagement*  securing  a  provision  for  himself,  his  sons,  and  his  nephews.  ~ 
When  Sir  C.  Napier  heard  of  the  resignation,  he  asked  an  interview  with 

gift.  If  any  one  advances  a  claim,  lie  is  a  liar.  The  administration  of  affairs,  the  control 
of  the  army,  the  negotiations  with  the  English,  all  now  depend  on  the  will  of  Meer  Ali 
Murad  Khan.  In  this  compact  the  oath  of  the  Koran  is  used ;  there  shall  not  be  the 
variation  of  a  hair's  hreadth.  God  is  a  sufficient  witness.  Written  on  the  17th  Tekiad  1258 
A.  h. (December  20th,  1842)  ;  1st,  Pergunnahs  Kholiara  Chehoor,  Alleearcea,  and  Kuhtera; 
2nd,  Pergunnahs  Nowshera  Praze ;  3rd,  ditto  Kundbarra,  with  Cherporo  and  Laharce ; 
4th,  Sud  Kokun ;  5th,  ditto  Meerporc,  Manhilas,  and  Kunoorkce;  6th,  sandy  territory  in 
Rene  and  Nara;  7th,  forts  Shahgurh,  Sirdashgurh,  and  other  forts;  8th,  Pergunnahs 
Obara,  Khcirpore,  Hurkee;  9th,  ditto  Imamwahj  10th,  ditto  Bahoonuck  and  Burah;  11th, 
one-third  of  Subzul  and  Pergunnah  Moozucka ;  12th,  Pergunnah  Shikarpore  Mor  Ah ;  13th, 
ditto  Roopa;  14th,  ditto  Bulbudka;  15th,  ditto  Chuck  Moozargah;  16th,  ditto  Kushmoor. 

*  I,  Meer  Ali  Murad,  Talpore,  requested  Meer  Eoostum  Khan,  on  account  of  his  old  age 
and  weakly  state,  to  abdicate  the  Turban  in  my  favour  and  give  over  in  writing  all  the 
country;  that  I  would  be  responsible  in  every  way  to  the  British  Government.  The  Meer 
consented  to  abdicate  the  Turban  and  to  give  over  in  writing  the  whole  country  and  also 
the  fortresses,  but  he  required  that  I  would  agree  to  four  Articles,  after  which  he  would 
give  over  to  me  in  writing  the  whole  country.     These  Articles  are  as  follows  : — 

Article  1. 

That  the  country  north  of  Eoree,  according  to  the  proclamation,  belongs  to  the  British. 

Abticle  2. 

The  country  belonging  to  the  sons  of  Meer  Mobarik  Khan. 

Article  3. 

The  country  belonging  to  the  sons  of  Meer  Eoostum  Khan. 

Article  4. 

My  (that  is,  Meer  Eoostum's)  expenses. 

I  consented  to  the  above  Articles,  taking  upon  myself  the  wholo  responsibility.  I  do 
now  declare,  giving  the  same  in  writing,  that  if  the  British  Government  remonstrate  with 
Meer  Eoostum  Khan  and  demand  why  he  made  over  the  country  north  of  Eoree  to  Meer 
Ali  Murad,  I  will  be  answerable  and  satisfy  the  English  Government.  If  they  demand  the 
country,  I  will  give  it  up,  but  I  will  not  allow  Meer  Eoostum  Khan  to  suffer  one  word 
of  annoyance.  To  the  sons  of  Meer  Eoostum  Khan,  whom  I  look  upon  as  my  own  brothers, 
I  will  restore  their  jaghires  ;  I  will  in  no  way  depart  from  this.  To  take  one  span  of  their 
lands  is  unlawful.  I  have  no  claim  whatsoever  to  their  jaghires ;  it  is  their  right,  and 
their  right  they  shall  receive.  The  country  belonging  to  the  sons  of  Meer  Mobarik  Khan 
should  I  not  take,  the  British  Government  will.  I  will,  therefore,  now  appropriate  their 
country,  which  I  will  afterwards  make  over  to  them.  I  have  no  claim  whatever  on  their 
country ;  one  single  span  of  their  country  in  my  possession  would  be  unlawful;  the  country 