


14  TKKATIE8,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  Meer  Roostum.  Bat  the  Ameer  did  not  wait  for  it.  He  fled  to  the 
desert,  and  Ali  Murad  was  recognised  by  Sir  C.  Napier  as  Chief  of 
Kheirpore.  It  was  for  the  restoration  of  Meer  Roostum  to  the  rights 
of  which  he  had  been  thus  deprived,  involuntarily  as  was  afterwards 
proved,  that  the  Ameers  stipulated  as  the  condition  of  their  signing  the 
proposed  Treaty.  Major  Outram,  the  British  Commissioner,  had  no 
power  to  re-open  this  subject.  At  last,  on  14th  February,  the  Ameers, 
except  Nusseer  Khan  of  Kheirpore,  signed  the  Treaty  (No.  XV.)  leaving 
Meer  Roostum's  rights  to  future  investigation.  Next  day  the  residence 
of  Major  Outram  was  attacked  by  8,000  of  the  troops  of  the  Ameers. 
After  a  most  gallant  defence  the  escort  made  their  way  to  the  main 
army.  The  battles  of  Mianee  and  Dubba  subjected  the  whole  of  Sindh 
to  the  British  Government,  with  the  exception  of  the  possessions  of  Ali 
Murad,  who  was  established  as  Chief  of  Kheirpore  in  the  territories 
which  belonged  to  Meer  Roostum,  both  by  inheritance  and  in  right  of  the 
Turban,  as  well  as  in  the  lands  of  which  he  himself  stood  rightfully 
possessed  at  the  time  of  the  conquest. 

As  all  the  territory  of  Sindh,  with  the  exception  of  the  portion  to 
be  continued  to  Ali  Murad,  was  confiscated  by  the  British  Government, 
it  of  course  became  Ali  Murad's  interest  to  establish  his  right  to  as  large 
a  portion  of  the  lands  of  Kheirpore  as  possible.  To  effect  this  he 
attempted  to  alter  that  clause  of  the  Treaty  of  Nownahar,  which  con- 
ferred on  him  two  villages  belonging  to  Nusseer  Khan,  in  such  a  manner 
as  to   secure   for  himself  large   districts   of  the   same  name  instead  of 

is  their  right,  and  their  right  they  shall  receive.  As  for  Meer  Roostum  Khan,  his  family, 
servants,  male  and  female  slaves,  I  will  provide  for  all  either  in  land  or  in  money ;  nothing 
shall  be  deficient.  I  will  serve  him  as  he  wishes.  These  Articles  I  have  written  out  in  the 
form  of  a  Treaty  that  hereafter  they  may  remain  as  proof,  and  that  no  differences  may  occur, 
God  is  my  witness. 

Bated  the  \§th  Zilcadah  1258,  A.  D.  19/7*  December  1842. 

Postscript — Meer  lloostum  Khan  to  retain  possession  of  Kheirpore  for  life. 

Dated  as  above.  Confirmed. 


Meer  Ali 

Murad's 

Seal. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  15 

insignificant  villages.  In  doing  so  the  leaf  of  the  Koran  on  which  the  SIN  ML 
Treaty  was  written  became  spoiled.  The  leaf  was  therefore  extracted  No7lT 
and  the  Treaty  was  written  on  a  fresh  leaf  in  such  a  way  as  to  suit  Ali 
Murad's  purpose.  This  fraud  was  clearly  established  by  a  Commission, 
which  met  in  1850  to  investigate  the  matter,  and  as  a  punishment  for  it 
Ali  Murad  was  degraded  from  the  rank  of  Rais  of  Kheirpore,  and 
deprived  of  all  his  territories,  except  those  which  he  inherited  under  his 
father's  will.  The  revenue  of  his  present  possessions  is  estimated  at 
Rupees  3,50,000.  He  enjoys  first  class  jurisdiction,  having  power  to  try 
for  capital  offences  any  persons  except  British  subjects. 