


Roostum 
Fuqueer, 
Talpore. 


Meer  Ali 

Akbar  Khan, 

Talpore- 


Meer 

Nusseer  Khan, 

Talpore. 


Bated  9th  Shaban  1258- 


12  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SI'NNUDS. 

SINDH.  replied  that  by  Treaty  the  chieftaincy  belonged  to  Meer  Roostum  for  life, 
but  that  at  his  death  it  would  be  transferred  to  Ali  Murad.  With  this 
assurance  Ali  Murad  seemed  satisfied,  and  from  that  day  he  attached 
himself  firmly  to  the  British  interests.  When  the  British  army  was 
advancing  to  enforce  the  demands  contained  in  the  draft  Treaty,  Meer 
Roostum  offered  to  come  into  Sir  C.  Napier's  camp  and  to  put  himself 
under  his  protection.  He  was  told  he  should  rather  seek  the  protection 
of  Ali  Murad.  He  did  so,  and  shortly  afterwards  it  was  reported  that 
he  had  resigned  the  Turban  to  his  younger  brother,  and  that  he  had 
written  the  resignation*  in  the  most  solemn  manner  in  the  Koran.     The 


Corr  of  the  Treaty  of  Nownahar  written  on  the  leaf  said  to  have  heen  extracted  from 

the  Koran. 

Translation. 
In  the  name  of  the  Most  Merciful  and  Compassionate  God. 

May  the  God  of  the  Universe  be  praised  ! 

Meer  Saheb  Meer  Eoostum  Khan,  Talporc,  made  peace  and  hound  himself  by  promise 
with  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan,  Talpore,  to  this  effect,  that  as  a  dispute  arose  between  Meer 
Ali  Murad  Khan  and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  on  the  subject  of  the  boundary  of  Soondur- 
bealy,  in  which  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  was  proved  to  have  encroached,  Meer  Ali  Murad 
Khan  having  expended  lakhs  of  Rupees  came  to  fight  with  Meer  Nusseer  Khan.  In  the 
mean  time,  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  disturbances,  &c,  considering  the  expense  in  cash  and 
jaghires  which  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan  has  incurred  on  account  of  his  army,  I  gave  over 
the  villages  of  Khanwahun,  Abayanee,  Bucha,  Darce,  Ghurukna,  the  villages  Rayna  and 
Paleeja,  with  my  free  will,  and  the  village  Dadloo,  and  pergunnah(rt)  Mathela  with  my  own 
free  will  and  that  of  Meer  Nusseer  Khan. 

(a)  The  word  "  deh"  appears  hero  to  have  been  altered  to  "  Pergunnah,"  and  in  attempt- 
ing to  make  "  bu-mirzee"  into  "  Mehurkee,"  the  papers  seem  to  have  been  spoiled. 

*  Praise  bo  to  God  and  blessings  on  the  prophet  and  his  family  ! 

Meer  Roostum  Khan,  Talpore,  has  made  a  compact,  and  formed  a  Treaty  with  Meer 
Ali  Murad  Khan,  Talpore,  to  the  following  effect : — At  this  time  during  the  supremacy  of 
the  powerful  and  exalted  English  Government,  and  from  the  autumn  of  1253,  I  Meer 
Roostum  Khan,  of  my  own  freo  will  and  pleasure,  according  to  the  rule  and  custom  of  die 
Chiefs  of  Hyderabad,  present  to  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan  (who  is  worthy  of  the  Chiefship) 
the  Turban  of  the  Chiefship  and  brotherhood,  with  the  control  of  the  whole  of  my  country, 
with  the  (sur  shemeari)  capitation  tax,  (meer  luchurce)  river  dues,  and  (jayeya)  tax  on 
others  than  Mahomedans,  and  farms,  and  tolls,  and  fisheries,  as  specified  below,  so  that  during 
my  life-time,  having  occupied  the  seat  of  Chiefship,  he  may  take  into  his  entire  possession 
the  countries  specified  below.  No  one  of  my  sons  or  nephews  has  or  shall  have  claim  or  entry 
in  this  same  Turban  and  this  same  country,  which  I  of  my  free  will  and  pleasure  bestow  in 