

(These  are  the  rates  on  all  articles,  but  grain,  excused) . 

Fees. 

Booratun  Rupee  1  per  cent,  on  the  market  price  of  all  imports  or 
exports. 

Nut  1  anna  and  ^  on  every  camel-load  of  grain  coming  or  going; 

2  pice  and   \   on  every  camel-load  of  other  goods    coming   or  going; 
Moajdurea  1  pice  on  every  Rupee  amount  customs. 

Dhurtoya  1  seer  and  ^  and  2  annas'  weight  on  each  Rhinwar  of 
grain  if  brought  from  the  country  and  immediately  laden  on  boats; 
Choongee  24  seers  on  each  Rhinwar,  in  the  same  circumstances. 

Rates. 

Rates  of  duty  on  distinct  articles. 

Upon  every  camel-load  of  indigo  brought  from  Khorassan  to  be 
exported,  if  large,  Rupees  22,  if  small,  Rupees  15. 


18 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


> in  dm.  Upon  assafu)tida  brought  from  Khorassan  to  be  exported,  Rupees  14 

No  IIL      P61"  8  maunds. 

Upon  all  articles  besides  those  brought  from  up  the  country  and 
immediately  exported,  Rupees  2  per  cent,  (not  excused). 

Fees. 

Upon  lead  and  iron,  if  purchased  in  Kurrachee  and  sent  abroad,  a 
fee  to  the  Collector  of  Rupee  1  on  each  maund  of  lead,  and  on  each 
maund  of  iron  annas  8. 


Signature 

of  the  Private 

Secretary. 

Signature 

of  the  Public 

Secretary. 

Seal  of  Meer 

Futteh 
Ali  Khan. 

Signature 

of  the 
Moonshee. 

Signature 

of  the 

Accountant. 

The  Jaghiredars,  Patels,  Magistrates,  Collectors,  and  Farmers,  at 
this  period  and  hereafter,  of  the  city  of  Tatta  and  of  Shah-bunder  in 
Sindh  and  in  Lar,  the  dominions  of  the  State,  will  understand  that  at 
this  time  N.  Crow,  Englishman,  vakeel  of  the  asylum  of  valor,  wis- 
dom, dignity,  and  intelligence,  the  Honourable  Jonathan  Duncan,  Gov- 
ernor of  Bombay  and  Surat,  on  the  part  of  the  noble,  powerful,  exalted, 
magnificent  Company  Bahadoor,  the  seat  of  splendor,  strength,  and  excel- 
lence, has  reached  our  presence  and  requested  an  adjustment  and  settle- 
ment of  affairs  of  commerce  for  the  factory  of  his  patrons.  Intent, 
therefore,  upon  maintaining  the  friendship  of  the  above-mentioned  illus- 
trious Company,  we  have  directed  an  arrangement  for  the  collection  of 


No.  III. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  2'.) 

customs  upon  merchandize,  export  and  import,  to  and  from  foreign  coun-  SINDH. 
tries  and  ports,  and  sales  and  purchases  in  the  dependencies  of  Sindh 
under  our  sovereignty.  It  is  commanded  that  the  collection  of  customs 
upon  goods  of  commerce,  export  and  import,  to  and  from  other  countries 
and  ports,  and  purchases  and  sales  in  the  territories  of  our  government, 
be  made  according  to  the  duties  subjoined,  as  in  the  time  of  the  deceased 
Prince  Gholam  Shah  Ruthora,  and  no  further  exaction  be  exercised, 
aud  besides  the  English  Resident  no  other  person  of  the  European  nations 
shall  be  allowed  to  pass,  repass,  or  trade.  On  the  article  of  saltpetre, 
liquid  and  crystallized,  whenever  in  the  territories  of  the  State  the 
English  may  choose  to  manufacture  it,  the  customs  are  to  be  collected 
the  same  as  during  the  reign  of  Meer  Gholam  Shah  Ruthora;  four 
beegahs  of  garden  ground  to  be  exempted  from  land  or  fee  tax.  Also 
the  dulol,  moody,  washerman,  miller,  carpenter,  bricklayer,  and  shroif, 
dependent  on  the  factory,  are,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  aforemen- 
tioned reign,  to  be  considered  privileged,  and  not  to  be  pressed  on  gov- 
ernment service,  nor  compelled  to  purchase  government  property,  that 
the  agents  of  the  English  may  with  confidence  and  tranquillity  be  in- 
dustrious in  the  increase  of  their  trade  and  our  customs.  On  account  of 
weight  or  measure  of  goods  and  the  inspection  of  trunks  and  the  Resi- 
dent's clothes  and  baggage,  no  molestation  shall  be  offered,  but  his  in- 
voice and  word  be  accepted ;  towards  the  building  of  any  new  factory  of 
the  English,  every  assistance  must  be  given,  and  the  hire  of  the  labourers 
be  paid  by  the  English  agent.  In  respect  to  demands  on  articles  of 
consumption  and  apparel  of  the  English  and  the  crews  of  their  ships, 
and  the  fee  Moree  on  ships,  boats  and  dingeys,  the  rules  of  Meer  Gholam 
Shah's  reign  are  to  be  observed.  If  by  accident  any  ship  or  boat  or 
dingey,  belonging  to  the  English,  coming  or  going  with  goods  to  or 
from  the  factory  in  Sindh,  should  either,  on  the  sea  coast  or  in  the 
river  be  stranded  or  sunk,  every  assistance  towards  recovering  her  must 
be  given  that  she  may  be  returned,  and  all  expenses  of  labour  must  be 
discharged  by  the  Resident  of  the  English.  On  whatever  goods  of  the 
English  factory,  from  their  countries,  which  not  finding  sale  may  be 
returned,  the  customs  are  to  be  regulated  by  the  usage  in  force  in  the 
time  of  Gholam  Shah  Ruthora;  no  variation  nor  condition  must  be 
adopted. 