


SINDH.  Article  2. 

No.  V.  Mutual   intercourse  by   means  of    vakeels   shall   always    continue 

between  the  two  governments. 

Article  3. 

The  Ameers  of  Sindh  engage  not  to  permit  any  European  or  American 
to  settle  in  their  dominions.  If  any  of  the  subjects  of  either  of  the 
two  States  should  establish  their  residence  in  the  dominions  of  the  other, 
and  should  conduct  themselves  in  an  orderly  and  peaceable  manner  in 
the  territory  to  which  they  may  emigrate,  they  will  be  allowed  to  remain 
in  that  situation ;  but  if  such  fugitives  shall  be  guilty  of  any  disturb- 
ance or  commotion,  it  will  be  incumbent  on  the  local  authority  to  take 
the  offenders   into  custody,  and  punish   or   compel   them   to  quit  the 

country. 

Article  4. 

The  Ameers  of  Sindh  engage  to  restrain  the  depredations  of  the 
Khoosas,  and  all  other  tribes  and  individuals  within  their  limits,  and  to 
prevent  the  occurrence  of  any  inroad  into  the  British  dominions. 


Seal  of  the 
Honourable  East 
India  Company. 


Bomlay,  9t/i  November  1820.  (Signed)       M.  Elphinstone. 

In  the  name  of  the  Merciful  God.  This  is  the  Treaty  which  I,  Meer 
Ismael  Shah,  vakeel  of  Shah  Meer  Kureem  Ali  Khan  Rookn-ood-dowla 
and  Meer  Shah  Murad  Ali  Khan  Ameer-ood-dowla,  concluded  with 
Mr.  Elphinstone,  Governor  of  the  populous  port  of  Bombay,  on  Thursday, 
in  the  month  of  Suffer  1236  Hegira.  If  it  pleases  God,  there  will  be 
no  difference  to  a  hair's  breadth. 


Seal  of 
Ismael  Shah. 


Note. — The  foregoing  Treaty  was  approved  by  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment on  the  10th  February  1821. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    STJNNUDS. 


37 


No.  VI. 

Teeaty  with  Meee  Roostum  Khan,  Chief  of  Kheibpobe. 

A  Treaty,  consisting  of  four  Articles,  having  been  concluded  on 
the  2nd  Zeekad  1247  a.  h.,  corresponding  with  the  4th  April  1832, 
between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  Meer  Rooshim  Khan, 
Talpore,  Bahadoor,  Chief  of  Kheirpore,  in  Sindh,  through  the  agency  of 
Lieutenant  Colonel  Henry  Pottinger,  envoy  on  the  part  of  the  British 
Government,  acting  under  the  authority  vested  in  him  by  the  Right 
Honourable  Lord  William  Cavendish  Bentinck,  g.  c.  b.  and  g.  c.  h., 
Governor  General  of  the  British  possessions  in  India,  this  engagement 
has  been  given  in  writing  at  Simla,  this  day  the  19th  June  1832,  both 
in  English  and  Persian,  in  token  of  the  perfect  confirmation  and  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  obligations  which  it  contains  in  the  manner  following  : — 

Article  1. 
There  shall  be  eternal  friendship  between  the  two  States. 

Article  2. 
The  two  contracting  powers  mutually  bind  themselves  from  genera- 
tion to  generation  never  to  look  with  the  eye  of  covetousness  on  the 