

possessions  of  each  other. 

Article  3. 

The  British  Government  having  requested  the  use   of  the  river 

Indus  and  the  roads  of  Sindh  for  the  merchants  of  Hindoostan,  &c,  the 

government  of   Kheirpore  agrees  to  grant  the  same  within  its    own 

boundaries,  on  whatever  terms  may  be  settled  with  the  government  of 

Hyderabad,  namely,  Meer  Murad  Ali  Khan,  Talpore. 

Article  4. 
The  government  of  Kheirpore  agrees  to  furnish  a  written  statement 
of  just  and  reasonable  duties  to  be  levied  on  all  goods  passing  under  this 
Treaty,  and  further  promises  that  traders  shall  suffer  no  let  or  hindrance 
in  transacting  their  business. 


SINDH. 
No.  VL 


Honourable 

Company's 

Seal. 


(Signed.)     W.  C.  Bentinck. 


Governor 
General  's 
Seal. 


38  Tl!  KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  No.   VII. 

No.  VII.  Treaty  with  the  government  of  Hyderabad,  in  Sindh. 

A  Treaty,  consisting  of  seven  Articles,  having-  been  concluded  on  the 
18th  Zechy  1247  a.  h.,  corresponding  with  20th  April  1832,  between 
the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  His  Highness  Meer  Murad 
Ali  Khan,  Talpore,  Bahadoor,  ruler  of  Hyderabad,  in  Sindh,  through  the 
agency  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Henry  Pottinger,  envoy  on  the  part  of 
the  British  Government,  acting  under  the  authority  vested  in  him  by 
the  Right  Honourable  Lord  William  Cavendish  Bentinck,  g.  c.  b.  and 
G.  c.  h.,  Governor  General  of  the  British  possessions  in  India,  this  en- 
gagement has  been  given  in  writing,  at  Simla,  this  day  the  19th  June 
1832,  both  in  English  and  Persian,  in  token  of  the.  perfect  confirmation 
and  acknowledgment  of  the  obligations  which  it  contains,  in  the  manner 

following  :— 

Article  1. 

That  the  friendship  provided  for  in  former  Treaties  between  the 

British  Government  and  that  of  Sindh  remain  unimpaired  and  binding, 

and  that  this  stipulation  has  received  additional  efficacy   through  the 

medium  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Pottinger,  Envoy,  &c,  so  that  the  firm, 

connecting  and  close  alliance  now  formed  between  the  said  States  shall 

descend  to  the  children  and  successors  of  the  house  of  the  above-named 

Meer  Murad  Ali  Khan,  principal  after  principal,  from  generation  to 

generation. 

Article  2. 

That  the  two  contracting  powers  bind  themselves  never  to  look 
with  the  eye  of  covetousness  on  the  possessions  of  each  other. 

Article  3. 

That  the  British  Government  has  requested  a  passage  for  the  mer- 
chants and  traders  of  Hindoostan  by  the  river  and  roads  of  Sindh,  by 
which  they  may  transport  their  goods  and  merchandize  from  one  country 
to  another,  and  the  said  government  of  Hyderabad  hereby  acquiesces  in 
the  same  request  on  the  three  following  conditions  : — 