

Customs  upon  goods  imported,  which  may  afterwards  he  sent  from  the 
factory  by  land  or  water  to  Tatta. 

Tatta  Rupees  11  annas  7  on  boat-loads  above  100  maunds;  Tatta 
annas  2  per  maund  land  carriage.  Upon  grain  purchased  in  Rakrala 
and  sent  to  Tatta,  20  pice  per  Rhinwar  of  the  first  sort,  and  5  pice  on  the 
second  sort,  and  Pymany  1  Tryah  on  each  Rhinwar. 

Customs  of  the  zemindaree  of  Shah-bunder,  according  to  the  ancient 
rule  in  the  time  of  Jam  Dussir  as  above  mentioned ;  Tatta  Rupee  1 
and  i  per  cent,  on  all  exports  according  to  the  English  invoice,  and 
annas  12  on  imports. 

Luwazimeh  Munzillana,  each  boat  Tatta  Rupees  24,  and  1  quarter 
1  anna  per  maund  land  carriage;  ivory  sent  up  the  country  to 
Naseerpore  and  Hutty  Kandy,  annas  10  per  cent.  Tatta  Rupees  valuation. 
The  Canoongo  customs  of   Rakrala,  according  to  the  present  usage. 

Luwazimeh  ivory,  Tatta  Rupee  1  and  ^  upon  80  Rhinwars,  exported 
or  imported,  of  8  maunds'  weight,  or  else  Rupees  100  per  value  each 
Rhinwar. 

Luwazimeh  Mulsulmany,  £  an  anna  each  Rhinwar. 

As  all  the  established  rates  of  the  reign  of  Meer  Gholam  Shah 
Ruthora  are  not  to  be  found,  the  customs  to  be  collected  in  all  places  in 
Sindh  and  Far,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  State,  must  be  conformable 


No.  III. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS.  33 

to  the  copy  of  a  perwannah  of  that  time  in  their  (the  English)  posses-      BINDH. 
sion,  namely,  Tatta  Rupee  1  and  \  per  cent,  customs  and  half  the  usual 
fees.     Maitre  Chundy  Ram,  Custom-master  of  Tatta  and  Shah-bunder, 
and  Far  Umul  and  Nan  Umul,  Collectors  of  Sindh  and  Lar,  will  act  con- 
formably to  this  without  deviation  or  contradiction. 

Dated  list  of  Rulba-ool-Awul  in  the  year  of  the  Ilegira  1214,  or  the 
23rd  of  August  of  the  Christian  era. 


By  imperial  command  the  purport  of  this  Sunnud  is  to  be  observed 
from  the  date  thereof. 


Seal  of  the 

Prince   Meer 

Futteh  Ali  Khan. 


Smaller  Seal 
of  the  Prince. 


The  collectors  and  farmers,  at  the  present  time  and  hereafter,  of 
the  town  of  Kurrachee,  will  understand  that  Mr.  Crow,  Englishman, 
vakeel  of  the  asylum  of  valour,  wisdom,  and  intelligence,  the  Honour- 
able Jonathan  Duncan,  Governor  of  Bombay  and  Surat,  on  the  part  of 
the  exalted,  renowned,  and  powerful  English  East  India  Company,  has 
had  the  honour  of  rendering  himself  at  our  presence,  and  having  by  his 
fidelity,  attention,  and  attachment  cemented  the  union  and  friendship  of 
the  two  governments,  we  have  therefore,  out  of  our  gracious  favour  and 
particular  regard  to  the  satisfaction  and  convenience  of  the  illustrious 
Company  above  mentioned,  resolved  to  remit  one-third  of  the  fee  of 
Foujdaree,  which  is  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  all  mer- 
chandize, and  entirely  to  excuse  the  fee  of  moajdurea,  and  likewise  the 
fee  of  moree  on  all  dingeys  and  ships,  for  two  importations  of  the  same 
vessel  in  one  year :  you  are  by  this  writing  instructed  of  our  having 
granted  these  exemptions,  and  ordered  to  consider  them  in  effect  from 
the  date  of  this  Sunnud,  and  to  act  conformably. 