


Article  1. 
In  lieu  of    a  duty   on   goods   proceeding  up    or  down  the   river 
Indus,    in    virtue    of    the   5th    Article   of    the    perpetual    Treaty     of 

VOL.    VII.  0 


M  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  Hyderabad,  there  shall  be  levied  on  the  rivers,  between  the  sea  and 
No.  VIII.  Roopur,  a  toll  on  each  boat  of  Tatta  Rupees  19  per  Tatta  khurrar, 
of  which  amount  Rupees  8  shall  be  receivable  by  the  governments  of 
Hyderabad  and  Kheirpore,  and  Rupees  11  by  the  other  States  possessing 
dominions  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers,  namely,  His  Highness  Bhawul 
Khan,  Maharajah  Runjeet  Sing,  and  the  Honourable  the  East  India 
Company. 

Article  2. 

To  obviate  any  cause  whatever  of  trouble  or  inconvenience  to 
traders  and  merchants  during  their  progress,  and  also  to  prevent 
disputes  and  doubts,  and  consequent  altercation  and  delay,  touching 
the  size  of  boats,  the  toll  is  fixed  on  30  Tatta  khurrars.  Be  a  boat 
large  or  small,  she  will  pay  toll  according  to  this,  and  whether  she 
measures  5  khurrars  or  100  khurrars,  she  will  be  reckoned  as  one  of  30. 

Article  3. 

The  portion  of  the  toll  above  described,  appertaining  to  Sindh, 
and  amounting  to  Tatta  Rupees  240  on  each  boat,  shall  be  levied  at  the 
bunder  or  port  of  the  mouth  of  the  river  where  the  cargoes  are  trans- 
ferred from  the  river  to  the  sea  boats,  and  vice  versa,  and  divided  as  the 
governments  of  Hyderabad  and  Kheirpore  may  think  best. 

Article  4. 

For  the  purpose  of  assisting  in  the  realization  of  the  toll  due  to 
Sindh,  also  in  the  speedy  and  satisfactory  adjustment  of  disputes 
which  may  happen  to  occur  amongst  the  merchants,  boatmen,  and  others 
on  the  questions  of  hire,  &c,  as  well  as  with  a  view  to  the  preservation 
and  augmentation  of  the  amicable  relations  which  happily  subsist  be- 
tween the  States,  it  is  settled  that  a  British  Agent  (who  shall  not  be  an 
European  gentleman),  under  the  authority  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Henry 
Pottinger,  Agent  to  the  Governor  General  of  India  for  the  affairs  of 
Sindh,  shall  reside  at  the  bunder  or  port  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 
where  cargoes  are  transferred  from  one  description  of  boat  to  another ; 
and  the  British  Government  binds  itself  that  the  said  Agent  shall  neither 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  43 

engage  in  trade,  nor  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  fiscal  or  any  other  SINDH. 
affairs  of  the  Sindh  government.  It  is  further  settled  that,  when  occa-  No.  VIII. 
sion  connected  with  this  Treaty  may  render  it  advisable,  the  Governor 
General's  Agent  for  the  affairs  of  Sindh  shall  have  the  power  of  deputing 
one  of  his  Assistants  to  the  above-described  bunder  or  port,  to  settle 
any  discussions  that  may  have  arisen ;  after  doing  which  he  is  to  return 
to  Bhooj. 