

Customs  upon  burned  and  lacquered  ware,  as  trays,  boxes,  &c,  Tatta 
Rupee  1J  per  cent,  valuation. 

Imports  upon  dried  and  green  fruits,  vegetables,  pickles,  &c,  half 
the  usual  rates  paid  by  the  subjects  of  the  country. 

On  hay  purchased,  Rupee  1  Chutney  per  16  bundles;  Rupee  1  upon 
eight  loads  of  wood ;  Rupee  1  soortee  upon  6  maunds  chunam ;  and 
annas  2  per  maund  on  lime  burnt  at  home. 

Gum  produced  in  the  garden  to  be  sold  to  the  Ziccadur  on  the 
same  terms  as  by  the  husbandmen. 

Customs  upon  timber  used  in  building  to  be  half  what  is  established ; 
Chobar  and  Rumbeybuney  fees  Tatta  Rupee  1  upon  every  .boat-load 
of  goods  coming  and  going,  and  Noree  upon  every  hired  boat  according 
to  custom. 

Dutolles  upon  jukt  goods  annas  12  Chutney  per  cent. 

Roosum  Canoongo  fees  : — Water  carriage  from  500  to  2,000  maunds, 
Tatta  Rupees  4;  from  300  to  500  maunds,  Rupees  3  ;  from  100  to  300 
maunds.  Rupees  2  and  \;  Thokas,  Barbundy,  and  Chobar,  according  to  the 
rules  in  force  during  the  time  of  Gholam  Shah,  upon  all  amounts  under 
Rupees  100,  Chutney  pice  3  per  Rupee,  Goozur  Swijee.  The  writer  who 
could  have  given  information  on  this  head  is  dead.  The  customs  of  Meer 
Gholam  Shah  Ruthora  to  be  levied,  besides  which,  the  fee  of  equipment 
upon  goods  that  formerly  the  Nukeemys  used  to  receive  as  a  kind  of 
charity  from  the  English  factory  in  the  time  of  the  Collectorship  of 
Chundy  Ram  is  now  comprised  in  the  revenues  of  government  and  is 
at  its  disposal. 

Account  of  customs  at  Shah-bunder,  in  the  pergunnah  of  Rukahi, 
according  to  the  usage  in  the  time  of  Gholam  Shah  Ruthora,  as  by  copy 
of  the  established  rates  signed  and  sealed  by  Sheikh  Beg  Mahomed  and 
Ensur  Doss,  former  Ziccadurs. 


32  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDII.  Imports  from  sea  which  in   the  time  of  Mahomed  Murad-ul  Khan 

No.  ill.      were  subjected  to  customs  and  excused  by  Meer  Gholam  Shah,  are  now 
likewise  excused. 

Articles  of  Tatta  exported  from  Shah-bunder  to  pay  Tatta  annas  7 
and  £  per  cent,  on  the  invoice  purchase  turned  into  Chutney  Rupees. 
Grain  and  ghee  purchased  in  the  pergunnah  of  Rakrata  and  exported 
to  pay  Tatta  Rupee  1  and  \  per  cent. 

On  articles  brought  from  up  the  country  through  Tatta,  according 
to  the  amount  settled  there,  Tatta  Rupee  1  per  cent,  when  exported. 
Luwazimeh  Pymany  1  Tryah  upon  each  Rhinwar ;  ubwant  ivory  Tatta 
annas  12  upon  80  Rhinwar,'  ubwant  Mulsulmany  Tatta  anna  1  each 
Rhinwar;  Tatta  annas  11  on  every  bundle  of  hides  exported. 

Luwazimeh  Choongee  1  Nud  on  every  100  maunds  of  Chunnea  ex- 
ported, annas  12  per  cent,  on  the  sale  of  ivory  valued  in  Tatta  Rupees. 