

Article  1. 

It  is  inserted  in  the  5th  Article  of  the  Perpetual  Treaty  that  the 
government  of  Hyderabad  will  furnish  the  British  Government  with  a 
statement  of  duties,  &c,  and  after  that  the  officers  of  the  British  Gov- 
ernment who  are  versed  in  affairs  of  traffic  will  examine  the  said  state- 
ment. Should  the  statement  seem  to  them  to  be  fair  and  equitable  and 
agreeable  to  custom,  it  will  be  brought  into  operation  and  will  be  con- 
firmed ;  but  should  it  appear  too  high,-  His  Highness  Meer  Murad  Ali 
Khan,  on  hearing  from  the  British  Government  to  this  effect  through 
Colonel  Pottinger,  will  reduce  the  said  duties. 

Article  2. 

It  is  as  clear  as  noonday  that  the  punishment  and  suppression  of 
the  plunderers  of  Parkhur,  the  Thull,  &c,  is  not  to  be  effected  by  any 
one  government,  and  as  this  measure  is  incumbent  on  and  becoming  the 
States  as  tending  to  secure  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  their  respective 
subjects  and  countries,  it  is  hereby  stipulated  that  on  the  commencement 
of  the  ensuing  rainy  season,  and  of  which  Meer  Murad  Ali  Khan  shall 
,  give  due  notice,  the  British,  Sindh,  and  Jodhpore  governments  shall 
direct  their  joint  and  simultaneous  efforts  to  the  above  object. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


11 


Article  3. 


SIN  I) H. 


The  governments  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  of  No».  VII& 
Kheirpore,  namely,  Meer  Roostum,  have  provided,  in  a  Treaty  concluded  ***** 
between  the  States,  that  whatever  may  be  settled  regarding  the  opening 
of  the  Indus  at  Hyderabad  shall  be  binding  on  the  said  contracting 
powers.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  copies  of  the  Treaty  should  be 
sent  by  the  British  and  Hyderabad  governments  to  Meer  lloostum 
Khan  for  his  satisfaction  and  guidance. 


Honourable 

Company's 

Seal. 


(Signed) 


W.  C.  Bentinck. 


Governor 

General's 

Seal. 


No.  VIII. 

Commebcial  Teeaty  between  the  Honoubable  the  East  India  Company  and  tho 
government  of  Hyderabad,  in  Sindh,  dated  2nd  Jnly  lti'3-i. 

Whereas  in  the  1st  Article  of  the  Supplemental  Treaty  concluded 
between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  the  government  of 
Hyderabad  on  the  22nd  day  of  April  1832,  corresponding  with  the  20th 
of  Zeekad  1247  Hegira,  it  was  stipulated  that  the  government  of 
Hyderabad  was  to  furnish  the  British  Government  with  a  statement  of 
duties,  &c,  and  "  after  that  the  officers  of  the  British  Government  who 
are  versed  in  affairs  of  traffic  shall  have  examined  the  same  statement, 
should  the  statement  seem  to  them  to  be  fair  and  equitable  and  agreeable 
to  custom,  it  will  be  brought  into  operation  and  will  be  confirmed ;  but 
should  it  appear  too  high,  His  Highness  Meer  Murad  AH  Khan,  on 
hearing  from  the  British  Government  to  this  effect,  through  Colonel 
Pottinger,  will  reduce  the  said  duties."  Now,  according  to  the  terms  of 
the  above  stipulation,  the  contracting  States  having  made  due  inquiry, 
hereby  enter  into  the  following  agreement  : — 