


30  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

BINDH.  Account  of  duties  on  all  goods  at  Tatta,  agreeably  to  the  usage  in 

K „  1  ii  the  reign  of  Meer  Gholam  Shah  Ruthora,  according  to  the  report  of 
established  imposts,  signed  by  Sheikh  Beg  Mahomed  and  Ensur  Doss, 
former  Collectors  at  that  place. 

Munzillanes  from  500  to  200  maunds*  weight  of  goods  brought 
from  Shah-bunder  to  Tatta  Ghaut,  Tatta  Rupees  106;  from  300  to  600 
maunds,  Tatta  Rupees  81 ;  from  100  to  300  maunds,  Tatta  Rupees  56, 
under  100  maunds  5  annas  per  maund  if  brought  by  water,  and  2  annas 
per  maund  if  by  land.  Koot,  assafoetida,  shawls,  and  northern  piece 
goods,  imported  or  exported,  Rupee  1  and  \  Tatta  price  on  the  valuation 
in  Chutney  Rupees. 

Woollens  brought  from  Shah-bunder  to  pay  8  annas  per  maund. 

On  purchases  of  piece  goods  in  Tatta  sent  to  Shah-bunder  or  any  of 
the  dependencies  of  Sindh,  the  customs  to  be  according  to  the  usage  of 
Gholam  Shah  Ruthora,  or  by  the  collections  of  Sheikh  Hussein  Zaradar, 
and  fees  of  appraisement  agreeably  to  the  custom  of  other  merchants.     . 

Customs  of  the  mint  on  stamping  copper  coins,  Rupees  6  Chutney 
per  maund. 

On  the  valuation  of  ivoiy  in  Chutney  Rtipees,  9  Tatta  Rupees  per 
cent,  to  be  collected  from  the  purchaser. 

Customs  upon  grain  of  the  first  sort,  12  annas  per  Rhinwar,  and 
Wukia  Nigarie,  12  annas  per  300  Rhinwars;  on  the  second  sort,  6  annas 
per  Rhinwar,  and  Wukia  Nigarie  12  annas  per  300  Rhinwars;  grain  pur- 
chased in  Tatta  and  exported,  Tatta  Rupees  3  duty  upon  each  Rhinwar, 
and  the  fee  of  bales,  Rupees  2  and  \,  and  Choongee  from  each  Rhinwar 
3  Togas. 

Fees  of  permission  to  purchase  grain  and  to  export  it  to  Shah-bun- 
der, Tatta  Rupee  1  and  \  per  Rhinwar  on  the  first  sort,  and  12  annas 
per  Rhinwar  on  the  second  sort. 

Chitty,  Seelamuty,  and  Manzillanee  fees  of  passing  and  shipping,  ac- 
cording to  the  practice  in  force  among  other  merchants ;  small  grain  ex- 
ported to  Shah-bunder  to  pay  Rupees  4  Chutney  per  cent,  valuation. 

Customs  upon  imported  goods  to  be  levied  from  the  English  at 
Rupee  1  and  \  Chutney  per  cent,  on  the  valuation. 

Customs  upon  saltpetre,  liquid  and  crystallized,  Rupee  1  and  \  Tatta 
per  cent,  valuation. 


TllEATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  31 

Fees  on  boats  laden  with  goods   brought   from   abroad,  at  Tatta     SINDH. 
Rupee  1  and  38  pice  in  full.  NoTiIl 

Moree  upon  hired  boats  to  be  levied  from  the  owners,  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  country,  and  Tatta  Rupee  1  upon  those  the  property 
of  the  English. 

Customs  upon  camels,  horses,  oxen,  and  other  animals,  Rupees  5 
annas  12  per  cent,  valuation  in  full  of  all  fees. 