

1st. — That  no  person  shall  bring  any  description  of  military  stores 
by  the  above  river  or  roads. 

2nd. — That  no  armed  vessels  or  boats  shall  come  by  the  said  river. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


39 


3rd. — That  no  English  merchants  shall  be  allowed  to  settle  in  Sindh,  SINDH. 
but  shall  come  as  occasion  requires,  and  having  stopped  to  transact  their  No.  VII. 
business,  shall  return  to  India. 

Article  4. 

When  merchants  shall  determine  on  visiting  Sindh,  they  shall  ob- 
tain a  passport  to  do  so  from  the  British  Government,  and  due  intima- 
tion of  the  granting  of  such  passports  shall  be  made  to  the  said 
government  of  Hyderabad  by  the  Resident  in  Kutch,  or  other  officer  of 
the  said  British  Government. 

Article  5. 

That  the  government  of  Hyderabad  having  fixed  certain  proper  and 
moderate  duties  to  be  levied  on  merchandize  and  goods  proceeding  by 
the  aforesaid  routes  shall  adhere  to  that  scale,  and  not  arbitrarily  and 
despotically  either  increase  or  lessen  the  same,  so  that  the  affairs  of  mer- 
chants and  traders  may  be  carried  on  without  stop  or  interruption,  and 
the  custom-house  officers  and  farmers  of  revenue  of  the  Sindh  govern- 
ment are  to  be  specially  directed  to  see  that  they  do  not  delay  the  said 
merchants  on  pretence  of  awaiting  for  fresh  orders  from  the  govern- 
ment, or  in  the  collection  of  the  duties,  and  the  said  government  is  to 
promulgate  a  Tariff  or  Table  of  Duties  leviable  on  each  kind  of  goods, 
as  the  case  may  be. 

Article  6. 

That  whatever  portions  of  former  Treaties  entered  into  between  the 
two  States  have  not  been  altered  and  modified  by  the  present  one  remain 
firm  and  unaltered,  as  well  as  those  stipulations  now  concluded,  and 
by  the  blessing  of  God  no  deviation  from  them  shall  ever  happen. 


Article  7. 
That  the  friendly  intercourse  between  the  two  States  shall  be  kept 
up  by  the  despatch  of  vakeels  whenever  the  transaction  of  business,  or 
the  increase  of  the  relations  of  friendship,  may  render  it  desirable. 


Honourable 

Company's 

Seal. 


(Signed) 


W.  C.  Bentinck. 


Governor 

General's 

Seal. 


40  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  Supplemental  to  the  Treaty  with  the  government  of  Hyderabad,  in  Sindh. 

No.  VI l.  The  following  Articles  of  engagement  having  been  agreed  on  and 

settled  on  the  22nd  April  1832  between  the  Honourable  East  India 
Company  and  His  Highness  Meer  Murad  Ali  Khan,  Talpore,  Bahadoor, 
ruler  of  Hyderabad,  in  Sindh,  as  supplemental  to  the  Treaty  concluded, 
on  the  20th  April  1832,  through  the  agency  of  Lieutenant  Colonel 
Henry  Pottinger,  envoy  on  the  part  of  the  said  Honourable  East  India 
Company,  under  full  power  and  authority  vested  in  him  by  the  Right 
Honourable  Lord  William  Cavendish  Bentinck,  g.  c.  b.  and  g.  c.  h., 
Governor  General  of  the  British  possessions  in  India,  this  engagement 
has  been  given  in  writing,  at  Simla,  this  day  the  19th  June  1832,  both 
in  English  and  Persian,  in  token  of  the  perfect  confirmation  and  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  obligations  which  it  contains,  in  the  manner 
following : — 