

VOL.  VII.  f 


34 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


SINDH.  Two-thirds  of  the  fee  of  the  Foujdaree  and  two-thirds  of  the  Customs 

Nos#  hi      according"  to  our  former  Sunnud,  you  will  not  fail  to  recover  and  to 
&  IV.       cany  to  account. 

Bated  the  17  th  of  Lechjde  1214  of  the  TIegira,  or  12th  of  April  1800 
of  the  Christian  era. 


Issued  from  the  presence. 


Seal  of  the 

Prince   Meer 

Futteh  Ali  Khan. 


The  killedars  and  officers  of  the  town  of  Kurrachee  will  under- 
stand that  Mr.  Crow,  Englishman,  being  ranked  by  us  amongst  our 
sincere  and  faithful  adherents,  therefore,  out  of  regard  to  him  and  respect 
to  his  patrons,  we  hereby  direct  that  if  he  pass  in  or  out  of  the  gates  of 
the  fort  with  arms,  you  do  not  on  that  account  offer  him  any  moles- 
tation or  hindrance,  but  in  all  your  behaviour  observe  kindness  and 
cordiality ;  you  will  consider  this  command  peremptory. 

Bated  the  \§th  of  LecJcgde,  or  the  14<th  of  April  1800. 


No.  IV. 
Teeaty  with  the  Ameees  of  Sindh,  August  22nd,  1809. 


Seal  of 

His  Highness 

Meer  Grholam  Ali. 


Article  1. 

There  shall  be  eternal  friendship  between  the  British  Government 
and  that  of  Sindh,  namely,  Meer  Gholam  Ali,  Meer  Kurreem  Ali,  and 
Meer  Murad  Ali. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  35 

Article  2.  SINDH. 


Enmity  shall  never  appear  between  the  two  States.  Nob.  IV  &  V. 

Article  3. 

The  mutual  despatch  of  the  vakeels  of  both  governments,  namely, 
the  British  Government  and  Sindhian  government,  shall  always  continue. 

Article  4. 

The  government  of  Sindh  will  not  allow  the  establishment  of  the 
tribe  of  the  French  in  Sindh. 

Written  on  the  \§th  of  the  month  of  Rujeeb-ool-Moorujub,  in  the 
year  of  the  Ilegira   1224,  corresponding  with  the  22nd  of  Angnst  1809. 

(Signed)         Minto. 

Ratified  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  at  Fort 
St.  George,  the  16th  of  November  1809. 


Seal. 


(Signed)         N.  B.  Edmonstone, 

Secretary. 


No.  V. 

Teeaty  between  the  Honoubable  East  India  Company  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
Ameees  of  Sindh  on  the  other,  November  9th,  1820. 

The  British  Government  and  the  government  of  Sindh  having  in 
view  to  guard  against  the  occurrence  of  frontier  disputes,  and  to  strengthen 
the  friendship  already  subsisting  between  the  two  States,  Meer  Ismael 
Shah  was  invested  with  full  power  to  treat  with  the  Honourable  the 
Governor  of  Bombay,  and  the  following  Articles  were  agreed  on  between 
the  two  parties  : — 

Article  1. 

There  shall  be  perpetual  friendship  between  the  British  Government 
one  the  one  hand  and  Meer  Kurreem  Ali  and  Meer  Murad  Ali  on 
the  other. 


36 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 