

Having  entered  into  a  Treaty  with  your  Highness  in  all  honesty 
and  good  faith,  I  should  be  sorry  to  find  any  part  of  the  written  agree- 
ment between  us  so  worded  as  to  leave  either  your  successors  or  mine 
under  the  supposition  that  we  concluded  our  compact  in  a  spirit,  on  the 
one  side  or  the  other,  of  any  thing  like  jealousy  or  distrust. 

The  mention,  however,  of  a  previous  written  agreement,  in  every 
instance,  as  to  the  temporary  character  of  the  occasional  occupation  of 
Sindh  by  the  English,  is  calculated  to  convey  this  unpleasant  idea. 

I  have  therefore  struck  it  out ;  and  in  place  of  inserting  a  sentence 
which  casts  a  doubt  on  the  sincerity  of  our  intentions,  I  address  you 
this  friendly  letter,  as  a  lasting  assurance  of  the  plain  meaning  and 
purpose  of  the  words  of  the  separate  Article,  namely,  that  the  British 
shall  avail  themselves  of  the  fort  of  Bukker,  the  citadel  of  their  ally 
the  Meer  of  Kheirpore,  only  during  actual  war  and  periods  of  preparing 
for  war  like  the  present. 

I  trust  that  this  mode  of  re-assuring  your  Highness  will  have  the 
double  effect  of  setting  your  mind  at  ease  and  of  putting  you  in  posses- 
sion of  a  written  testimony  to  my  intentions,  such  as  may  remain 
among  your  records  in  pledge  of  the  sincerity  of  the  British  Government. 

I  have,  &c, 
(Signed)         Auckland. 


54  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  Agreement  with  Meeb  Mobabik  Khan,  of  Kheibpobe. 

Ho.  XI.  Whereas  Treaties  of  firm  friendship  and   sincere   amity  have  long 

been  established  between  the  government  of  the  East  India  Company 
and  that  of  Kheirpore,  in  Sindh,  at  the  present  time,  agreeably  to  the 
request  and  desire  of  His  Highness  Meer  Roostum  Khan,  Talpore,  and 
for  the  satisfaction  of  His  Highness  Meer  Mobarik  Khan,  Talpore, 
the  following  additional  agreement  has  been  made  through  the  agency 
of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Sir  Alexander  Burnes,  Knight,  envoy  on  the 
part  of  the  Governor  General,  in  virtue  of  full  powers  vested  in  him  by 
the  Right  Honourable  George  Lord  Auckland,  g.  c.  b.,  Governor  General 
of  India,  &c,  &c,  &c. 

The  East  India  Company  hereby  agrees  never  to  covet  one  rea  of 
the  revenue  of  the  share  of  Sindh  in  possession  of  Meer  Mobarik 
Khan,  nor  to  interfere  in  its  internal  management. 

The  said  Company  further  agrees  to  preserve  the  same  friendly 
relation  towards  the  said  Meer  Mobarik  Khan  and  his  descendants 
that  it  does  towards  Meer  Roostum  Khan,  in  conformity  with  the  terms 
of  the  Treaty  now  made  with  His  Highness  Meer  Roostum  Khan. 

Done  at  Kheirpore,  this  28th  day  of  December  1838,  corresponding 
with  the  llth  day  of  Saval  1254  a.  h. 