

(Signed)         A.  Burnes. 

Ratified  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General,  Camp 
Dunowla,  on  the  16th  of  January  1839. 

(Signed)         H.  Torrens, 
Ofg.  Secy,  to  the  Govt,  of  India, 
with  the  Governor  General. 

The  same  to  Meer  Mahomed  Khan  and  Meer  Ali  Murad  Khan. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  55 

No.    XII.  SINDH. 

Agreement  for  the  surrender  of  Kurrachee,  February  7th,  1839.  No,  XII. 

Hassel  Ben  Butcha  Khan,  Subadar  in  the  employ  of  the  Governor 
of  the  fort  and  town  of  Kurrachee,  and  late  Commandant  of  the  fort  on 
the  point  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  has  been  this  third  day  of 
February  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty-nine  sent  on  board 
Her  Britannic  Majesty's  Ship  Welles  ley  by  the  said  Governor  (Khyer 
Mahomed)  with  full  powers  to  treat  with  the  British  Authorities  for  the 
surrender  of  the  said  fort  and  town  of  Kurrachee,  accompanied  by  Synah 
Khan,  in  the  service  of  Meer  Noor  Mahomed,  who  had  been  sent  for 
the  same  purpose  by  Ali  B-akhi  to  treat  on  the  part  of  the  civil  govern- 
ment of  the  town. 

It  is,  therefore,  this  day  agreed  by  the  said  Hassel  Ben  Butcha 
Khan  and  Synah  Khan,  in  the  name  of  the  said  two  Governors  on  the 
one  part,  and  by  His  Excellency  Rear  Admiral  Sir  Frederick  Lewis 
Maitland,  k.  c.  b.,  Commander-in-Chief  of  Her  Britannic  Majesty's 
naval  forces  in  the  East  Indies,  and  Brigadier  Thomas  Valiant,  k.  h., 
Commanding  the  British  reserve  Military  force  in  Sindh,  in  the  name 
and  on  behalf  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Company,  on  the  other  part. 

Article  1. 
That  the  full  possession  of  the  fort  and  town  of  Kurrachee  shall  be 
this  day  given  up  by  the  aforesaid  Governor  to  the  British  forces. 

Article  2. 
That  the  British  land  forces  under  the  command  of  the  said  Briga- 
dier Valiant  shall  this  day,  or  as  soon  after  as  the  Brigadier  may  deem 
it  convenient,  be  allowed  to  encamp  near  the  town,  and  that  such  boats 
shall  be  supplied  by  the  native  government  as  may  be  required  by  the 
British  army,  upon  payment  of  the  usual  boat  hire  for  them,  as  also  such 
camels  and  other  means  of  conveyance  as  may  be  hereafter  necessary, 
upon  the  like  terms ;  as  well  as  that  all  kinds  of  provisions  and  other 
supplies  shall  be  furnished  for  the  use  of  the  said  British  forces  as  they 
may  stand  in  need  of  and  require,  the  same  being  paid  for  at  the  usual 
rates  of  the  country. 


56  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  In  consequence  of  the  fulfilment  of  these  terms,  the  British  officers 

No.  XII.  before  mentioned  agree,  in  the  name  of  the  Honourable  East  India  Com- 
pany, that  the  persons  and  property  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  fort  and 
town  of  Kurrachee  shall  be  held  sacred,  and  that  they  shall  be  at  liberty 
to  carry  on  their  business  as  heretofore ;  that  their  trading  vessels  shall 
be  allowed  to  enter  the  port,  and  trade  as  usual  without  the  slightest 
interruption ;  and  further  that  the  civil  government  of  Kurrachee  shall 
be  carried  on  by  the  Authorities  of  the  place. 