

Article  5. 

For  the  more  perfect  fulfilment  of  this  Treaty,  it  is  hereby  dis- 
tinctly stipulated  that  should  any  portion,  however  small  or  great,  or 
of  whatever  description,  of  the  merchandize  or  goods  on  board  any 
boat  passing  up  or  down  the  river,  be  landed  for  sale  by  a  merchant  or 
merchants,  such  portion  of  merchandize  or  goods,  whatever  may  be  its 
quantity  or  quality,  shall  instantly  become  subject  to  the  existing  local 
duties,  as  levied  by  the  respective  governments  within  their  own  terri- 
tories ;  the  purpose  of  the  toll  agreed  to  by  this  Treaty  being  not  to 
supersede  or  set  aside  the  established  dues  of  the  different  States,  but  to 
repay  the  expense  to  which  the  governments  will  necessarily  be  sub- 
jected in  affording  the  customary  protection  to  the  trade  in  transit  on 
the  river.  It  will  be  perfectly  understood  from  this  5th  Article  that  the 
governments  have  no  claim  to  duties  on  merchandize  merely  passing  up 
or  down  the  river,  and  that  the  toll  is  all  that  is  to  be  demanded ;  but 
should  any  portion,  however  small  or  large,  of  goods  be  landed  and 
sold,  then  the  usual  duties  will  be  levied. 

Written  on  the  2nd  day  of  July  1834,  corresponding  with  the  Ikth 
of  Suffer  1250  a.  h. 

(Signed)         W.  C.  Bentinck, 
Frederick  Adam, 
W.  Morison, 
Ed.  Ironside. 

Ratified  by  the  Governor  General  in  Council  at  Ootacamund  on 
2nd  September  1834. 

(Signed)         W.  H.  Macnaghten, 

Secy,  to  Govt,  of  India. 


II 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNTTDS. 


BINDH.  No.  IX. 

Ho.  IX.  Commebctal  Abticles  entered  into  with  the  government  of  Hyderabad,  in  Sindh, 
by  Colonel  Henby  Pottingeb,  Agent  to  the  Governor  General  for  the  affairs 
of  Sindh,  in  virtue  of  authority  vested  in  him  by  the  Eight  Honoubable 
Lobd  Auckland,  g.  c.  b.,  Governor  General  of  India  in  Council. 


Proposal  1st. 

The  coast  of  Sindh  has  no  hills, 
and  is  so  low  and  level  that  it  is 
very  difficult  and  even  sometimes 
impossible  to  discover  the  proper 
entrance  to  the  mouths  of  the  river. 
Permission  is  therefore  reqtiested  to 
lay  down  buoys  in  the  water,  and 
to  erect  wooden  land-marks  on  the 
shore  at  the  proper  spots,  which 
buoys  and  marks  can  be  changed 
when  alterations  take  place  in  the 
river. 

Proposal  2nd. 

Cases  will  sometimes  occur,  not- 
withstanding these  precautions,  in 
which  from  foul  winds  or  storms 
vessels  intending  to  come  into  the 
river  will  not  be  able  to  do  so,  and 
they  must  in  that  event  seek  for 
shelter  in  any  port  they  can  reach. 
The  examination  of  the  whole  of 
the  coasts  and  harbours  of  Kutch 
and  Sindh  from  Mandavee  to  Kur- 
rachee  has  therefore  been  ordered, 
and  His  Highness  is  requested  to 
instruct  his  officers  to  this  effect. 
Vessels  of  war  will  not  be  employ- 
ed on  this  duty,  and  when  the  har- 
bour of  Kurraehee  is  to  be  examined, 