

Article  10. 

This  Treaty  of  nine  Articles  having  been  concluded,  and  signed  and 
sealed  by  Lieutenant  Colonel  Sir  A.  Burnes,  Knight,  Envoy  on  the  part 
of  the  Right  Honourable  George  Lord  Auckland,  g.  c.  b.,  Governor 
General  of  India,  and  Meer  Roostum  Khan,  on  the  part  of  himself. 


52  Ti: KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.      Chief  of  Kheirpore,  the  ratification  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Gov- 
No.  XI.       emor  General  shall  he  exchanged  within  forty-five  days  from  the  present 
date. 

Done  at  Kheirpore  this  2,4th  day  of  December  1838,  corresponding 
with  the  6th  day  of  Shaval  a.  h.  1254. 

(Signed)         Alex.  Burnes, 

Envoy  to  Khelat. 

Ratified  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General  of  India  in 
Camp  Bhagapoorana  on  the  10th  January  1839. 

(Signed)         H.  Torrens, 
Offg.  Secy,  to  the  Govt,  of  India, 

with  the  Governor  General. 


Separate  Article. 

Since  the  British  Government  has  taken  upon  itself  the  respon- 
sibility of  protecting  the  State  of  Kheirpore  from  all  enemies,  now  and 
hereafter,  and  neither  coveted  any  portion  of  its  possessions  nor  fortresses 
on  this  side  or  that  side  of  the  Indus,  it  is  hereby  agreed  upon  by  Meer 
Roostum  Khan,  his  heirs  and  successors,  that  if  the  Governor  General, 
in  time  of  war,  should  seek  to  occupy  the  fortress  of  Bukker  as  a 
depot  for  treasure  and  munitions,  the  Ameer  shall  not  object  to  it. 

This  separate  Article  having  been  concluded,  signed  and  sealed  by 
Lieutenant  Colonel  Sir  Alexander  Burnes,  Knight,  envoy  on  the  part 
of  the  Right  Honourable  George  Lord  Auckland,  g.  c.  b.,  Governor 
General  of  India,  and  Meer  Roostum  Khan,  on  the  part  of  himself, 
Chief  of  Kheirpore,  the  ratification  by  the  Right  Plonourable  the 
Governor  General  shall  be  exchanged  within  forty-five  days  from  the 
present  date. 

Lone  at  Kheirpore  this  Z&th  day  of  December  1838,  corresponding 
with  the  6th  day  of  Shaval  a.  h.  1254. 

(Signed)        A.  Burnes, 

Envoy  to  Kheirpore. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  53 

The  Goveenob  Genebal  to  Meek  Roostum  Khan,  of  Kheibpobe,  Camp  Bhaga-      SINDH. 
poorana,  10th  January  1839.  ~    77j~ 

The  judicious  mediation  of  your  friend  Sir  A.  Burnes,  the  highly 
esteemed  and  able  Agent  of  my  government  now  with  you,  has  by  the 
blessing  of  God  brought  about  the  establishing  of  our  mutual  good 
understanding  by  Treaty  on  a  firm  and  lasting  basis. 

The  support  afforded  to  you  by  the  guarantee  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment will,  I  am  well  assured,  prove  a  source  of  future  strength,  and,  if  it 
be  God's  will,  of  continued  prosperity,  to  your  country ;  and  I  am  glad 
to  acknowledge  the  advantages  which  I  hope  to  derive  from  your  alliance 
and  support  in  the  warlike  operations  which  I  am  about  to  undertake. 