

In  witness  whereof  we  have,  this  third  day  of  February  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  thirty-nine,  set  our  hands  hereunto,  on  board  Her 
Britannic  Majesty's  Ship  Wellesley,  off  Kurrachee. 

(Signed)         Fred.  Lewis  Maitland, 

Rear  Admiral  and  Commander-in-Chief 
of  II.  B.  31.  Naval  Forces  in  India. 

(Signed)         T.  Valiant, 

Brigadier  Commanding  Reserve 

Force  in  India. 
The  X  mark  of  Hassel  Ben  Butcha. 
The  X  mark  of  Synah  Khan. 

We,  whose  signatures  are  hereunto  attached,  ratify  the  above  as  the 
acts  of  our  servants,  in  which  we  fully  concur. 

The  X  mark  of  Khyer  Mahomed. 
The  X  mark  of  Ali  Rakhi. 

Witness,  this  1th  day  of  February  1839. 

(Signed)         J.  Gray, 
Her  Majesty's  \Wi  Regiment. 

(Signed)         T.  Postans,  Lieut., 

Interpreter  to  Reserve  Force. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  57 

No.    XIII.  SINDH. 

Tbeaty  between  the  Beitish  Govebnment  and  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad,  viz.,     No.  XIII. 
Meee  Noob    Mahomed  Khan,  Meee  Nusseeb  Mahomed  Khan,  Meeb 
Meee  Mahomed  Khan,  and  Meee  Sobdae  Khan,  1839. 

Whereas  Treaties  of  friendship  and  amity  have  from  time  to  time 
been  entered  into  between  the  British  Government  and  the  Ameers 
of  Sindh ;  and  whereas  circumstances  have  lately  occurred  which  render 
it  necessary  to  revise  those  Treaties ;  and  a  separate  Treaty  has  already 
been  concluded  between  the  British  Government  and  Meer  Roostum 
Khan  of  Kheirpore ;  the  following  Articles  have  been  agreed  upon  by  the 
contracting  parties  : — 

Article  1. 

There  shall  be  lasting  friendship,  alliance,  and  unity  of  interest 
between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  the  Ameers  of  Hyde- 
rabad, Meer  Noor  Mahomed  Khan,  Meer  Nusseer  Mahomed  Khan, 
Meer  Meer  Mahomed  Khan,  and  Meer  Sobdar  Khan. 

Article  2. 

A  British  force  shall  be  maintained  in  Sindh  and  stationed  at 
Tatta,  or  such  other  place  westward  of  the  river  Indus  as  the  Governor 
General  of  India  may  select.  The  Governor  General  will  decide  upon 
the  strength  of  this  force,  which  it  is  not  intended  shall  exceed  5,000 
fighting  men. 

Article  3. 

Meer  Noor  Mahomed  Khan,  Meer  Nusseer  Mahomed  Khan,  and 
Meer  Meer  Mahomed  Khan  bind  themselves  to  pay  severally  the  sum 
of  one  lakh  of  Rupees,  being  three  lakhs  of  Rupees  altogether  of  the 
Company's  currency,  or  of  that  called  Bakkroo,  or  Timooree,  in  part  pay- 
ment of  the  expense  of  the  British  force  every  year.  Meer  Sobdar 
Khan  is  exempted  from  all  contribution  to  the  expense  of  this  force. 

Article  4. 
The  British  Government  takes  upon  itself  the  protection  of  the 
territories  now  possessed  by  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  from  all  foreign 
aggression. 

vol.  vli.  * 