


58  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

sindh.  Article  5. 

No.  XIII.  The  four  Ameers,  party  to  this  Treaty,  shall  remain  absolute  rulers 

in  their  respective  principalities;  and  the  jurisdiction  of  the  British 
Government  shall  not  be  introduced  into  their  territories.  The  officers 
of  the  British  Government  will  not  listen  to  or  encourage  complaints 
against  the  Ameers  from  their  subjects. 

Article  6. 

The  four  Ameers,  being  confirmed  in  their  present  possessions  by  the 
preceding  Article,  will  refer  to  the  Resident  in  Sindh  any  complaint  of 
aggression  which  one  of  them  may  have  to  make  against  another ;  and 
the  Resident,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Governor  General,  will  endeavour 
to  mediate  between  them  and  settle  their  differences. 

Article  7. 

In  case  of  aggressions  by  the  subjects  of  one  Ameer  on  the  ter- 
ritories of  another,  and  of  the  Ameer  by  whose  subjects  such  aggressions 
are  made  declaring  his  inability  to  prevent  them  in  consequence  of  the 
offending  parties  being  in  rebellion  to  his  authority,  on  a  representation 
of  the  circumstances  being  made  to  the  Governor  General  by  the  Resi- 
dent, the  Governor  General  will,  if  he  sees  fit,  order  such  assistance  to  be 
afforded  as  may  be  requisite  to  bring  the  offenders  to  punishment. 

Article  8. 

The  Ameers  of  Sindh  will  not  enter  into  any  negotiation  with  any 
foreign  Chief  or  State  without  the  knowledge  and  sanction  of  the  Bri- 
tish Government;  their  amicable  correspondence  with  friends  and  rela- 
tions may  continue. 

Article  9. 

The  Ameers  of  Sindh  will  act  in  subordinate  co-operation  with 
the  British  Government  for  purposes  of  defence,  and  shall  furnish  for 
the  service  of  the  British  Government  a  body  of  8,000  troops,  horse 
and  foot,  whenever  required ;  these  troops,  when  employed  with  the  Bri- 
tish forces,  will  be  under  the  orders  and  control  of  the  commanding 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  59 

officer  of  the  British  forces.     The  Sindh  contingent  troops,  if  employed     SINDH. 


under  British  officers  beyond  the  Sindh  frontier,  will  be  paid  by  the  Bri-     No.  XIII. 
tish  Government. 

Article  10. 

The  Bakkroo  or  Timooree  Rupee  current  in  Sindh  and  the  Honourable 
Company's  Rupee  being  of  equal  value,  the  currency  of  the  latter  coin 
shall  be  admitted  in  the  Sindh  territories.  If  the  officers  of  the  British 
Government  establish  a  mint  within  the  territories  of  the  Ameers,  parties 
to  this  Treaty,  and  there  coin  the  Bakkroo  or  Timooree  Rupee,  the  Ameers 
shall  be  entitled,  after  the  close  of  the  present  military  operations  in 
Afghanistan,  to  a  seignorage  on  the  coinage  according  to  the  customs 
of  the  country. 