


Proposal  10th. 

The  general  superintendence  of 
a  British  officer  seems  to  the  Gov- 
ernor General  and  to  Colonel 
Pottinger  to  be  almost  indispensable 
to  give  effect  to  the  views  of  the 
British  Government,  to  the  cordial 
aid  and  union  of  that  of  Sindh, 
and  to  the  prevention  of  disputes, 
correspondence,  &c. 


Answer  10th. 

This  proposition  is  already  met 
by  the  perpetual  Treaty.  A  gen- 
tleman may  come  whenever  it  is 
expedient  and  stay  two  or  three 
months.  To  this  no  objection  will 
be  offered. 


Proposal  11th. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
governments  must  not  be  deterred 
from  commencing  on  some  of  these 


Answer  11th. 

No  difficulty  can  possibly  exist 
where  the  friendship  is  sincere. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  49 

arrangements  by  the  apparent  diffi-  SIN  nil. 

culty  of  effecting  them.     Every  im-  ~~ ^     T^T 

portant  matter    looks     difficult  at  4,  x. 

first,  but  all  obstacles  give  way  to 
exertion  and  encouragement  in  the 
course  of  time. 

Dated  at  Hyderabad  on  the  \%th  of  Shalan  1252  Ilegira,  or  28M 
of  November  1836. 


No.  X. 

Teeaty  between  the  Honoueable  East  India  Company  and  the  Ameebs  of  Sindh, 
concluded  by  Colonel  Henry  Pottingeb,  Agent  to  the  Governor  General  for 
Sindh,  on  the  one  part,  and  their  Highnesses  Meer  Noor  Mahomed  Khan  and 
Meer  Nusseer  Mahomed  Nusseer  Khan  on  the  other,  April  20th,  1838. 

Article  1. 

In  consideration  of  the  long  friendship  which  has  subsisted  between 
the  British  Government  and  the  Ameers  of  Sindh,  the  Governor  General 
in  Council  engages  to  use  his  good  offices  to  adjust  the  present  differences 
which  are  understood  to  subsist  between  the  Ameers  of  Sindh  and 
Maharajah  Runjeet  Sing,  so  that  peace  and  friendship  may  be  established 
between  the  two  States. 

Article  2. 

In  order  to  secure  and  improve  the  relations  of  amity  and  peace 
which  have  so  long  subsisted  between  the  Sindh  State  and  the  British 
Government,  it  is  agreed  that  an  accredited  British  minister  shall  reside 
at  the  Court  of  Hyderabad,  and  that  the  Ameers  of  Sindh  shall  also  be 
at  liberty  to  depute  a  vakeel  to  reside  at  the  Court  of  the  British  Gov- 
ernment ;  and  that  the  British  minister  shall  be  empowered  to  change 
his  ordinary  place  of  residence  as  may  from  time  to  time  seem  expedient, 
and  be  attended  by  such  an  escort  as  may  be  deemed  suitable  by  his 
government. 

Ratified  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General,  at  Simla, 

this  20th  day  of  April  1838. 

(Signed)         Auckland. 

vol.  vii.  h 


50  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.  No.  XI. 

No.  XI.      Xekaty  between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  His  Highness 