

Meek  Koostum  Khan,  of  Kheibpobb. 

Article  1. 
There  shall  be  perpetual  friendship,  alliance,  and  unity  of  interests 
between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  Meer  Roostum  Khan, 
Talpore,  and  his  heirs  and  successors,  from  generation  to  generation, 
and  the  friends  and  enemies  of  one  party  shall  be  the  friends  and  enemies 
of  both. 

Article  2. 

The  British  Government  engages  to  protect  the  principality  and 
territory  of  Kheirpore. 

Article  3. 

Meer  Roostum  Khan  and  his  heirs  and  successors  will  act  in 
subordinate  co-operation  with  the  British  Government,  and  acknowledge 
its  supremacy,  and  not  have  any  connexion  with  any  other  Chiefs  and 
States. 

Article  4. 

The  Ameer,  and  his  heirs  and  successors,  will  not  enter  into  nego- 
tiation with  any  Chief  or  State  without  the  knowledge  and  sanction  of 
the  British  Government;  but  the  usual  amicable  correspondence  with 
friends  and  relations  shall  continue. 

Article  5. 

The  Ameer,  and  his  heirs  and  successors,  will  not  commit  aggressions 
on  any  one.  If  by  accident  any  dispute  arise  with  any  one,  the  settle- 
ment of  it  shall  be  submitted  to  the  arbitration  and  award  of  the  British 
Government. 

Article  6. 
The  Ameer  will  furnish  troops  according  to  his  means  at  the  requi- 
sition of  the  British  Government,  and  render  it  all  and  every  necessary 
aid  and  assistance  throughout  his  territory  during  the  continuance  of 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS.  51 

war,  and  approve  of  all  the  defensive  preparations  which  it  may  make     SINDH. 
while  the  peace  and  security  of  the  countries  on  the  other  side  of  the      No  XL 
Indus  may  be  threatened.     But  the  British  Government  will  not  covet 
a  dam  or  deram  of  the  territories  enjoyed  by  His   Highness  and  his 
heirs,  nor  the  fortresses  on  this  bank  or  that  bank  of  the  river  Indus. 

Article  7. 

The  Ameer,  and  his  heirs  and  successors,  shall  be  absolute  rulers  of 
their  country,  and  the  British  jurisdiction  shall  not  be  introduced  into 
that  principality,  nor  will  any  of  the  Baloches  servants,  dependants, 
relatives,  or  subjects  of  the  Ameer  be  listened  to  should  they  complain 
against  the  said  Ameer. 

Article  8. 

In  order  to  improve,  by  every  means  possible,  the  growing  inter- 
course by  the  river  Indus,  Meer  Roostum  Khan  promises  all  co-operation 
with  the  other  powers  in  any  measures  which  may  be  hereafter  thought 
necessary  for  extending  and  facilitating  the  commerce  and  navigation  of 
the  Indus. 

Article  9. 

In  order  to  further  secure  the  relations  of  amity  and  peace  which 
have  so  long  subsisted  between  the  Kheirpore  State  and  the  British 
Government,  it  is  agreed  that  an  accredited  British  minister  shall  reside 
at  the  Court  of  Kheirpore,  and  that  the  Ameer  shall  also  be  at  liberty 
to  depute  an  Agent  to  reside  at  the  Court  of  the  British  Government, 
and  the  British  minister  shall  be  empowered  to  change  his  ordinary  place 
of  residence  as  may  from  time  to  time  seem  expedient,  and  be  attended 
by  such  an  escort  as  may  be  deemed  suitable  by  his  government. 