

Article  10. 

The  Bakkroo  or  Timooree  Rupee  current  in  Sindh  and  the 
Honourable  Company's  Rupee  being  of  equal  value,  the  currency  of  the 
latter  coin  shall  be  admitted  into  the  Ameer's  territory. 

Article  11. 

No  toll  will  be  levied  on  trading  boats  passing  up  or  down  the 
River  Indus  from  the  sea  to  the  northernmost  point  of  that  stream 
within  the  territories  of  the  Ameer. 

Article  12. 

But  any  merchandize  landed  from  boats  on  their  passage  up  or 
down  the  river  and  sold  shall  be  subject  to  the  usual  duties  of  the 
country,  provided  always  that  goods  sold  in  a  British  camp  or  canton- 
ment shall  be  exempt  from  the  payment  of  duty. 

Article  13. 

Goods  of  all  kinds  may  be  brought  by  merchants  and  others  to  the 
mouths  of  the  Indus  (Gorabaree)  at  the  proper  season,  and  kept  there 
at  the  pleasure  of  the  owners  till  the  best  season  of  the  year  for  sending 
them  up  the  river ;  but  should  any  merchant  land  and  sell  any  part 
of  his  merchandize  either  at  Gorabaree  or  anywhere  else,  except  at 
the  British  cantonment,  such  merchant  shall  pay  the  usual  duty. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  63 

Article  14.  SINDH. 

The  provisions  of  this  Treaty  agreed  upon  by  the  Governor  General     N<»-  X*V 


of  India  on  the  one  part  and  Meer  Sher  Mahomed  Khan  on  the  other 
part  shall  be  binding  for  ever  on  all  succeeding  governments  of  India, 
and  on  the  heirs  and  successors  of  the  said  Ameer  in  perpetxuty. 

(Signed)         Auckland. 

Bated  the  11th  Rulbee-ool-awul  1257  a.  h..}  corresponding  with  18M 
June  1841  a.  d. 

Ratified  and  signed  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General 
"of  India,  at  Fort  William  in  Bengal,  on  the  16th  August  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  forty-one. 

(Signed)       T.  H.  Maddock, 

Secy,  to  the  Govt,  of  India. 


No.  XV. 

Dbaft  of  a  Tbeaty  between  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  and  the  British 

Government. 

Article  1. 

The  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  are  relieved  from  the  payment  of  all 
tribute  to  the  British  Government,  which,  under  existing  engagements, 
would  become  due  after  the  1st  of  January  1843. 

Article  2. 

The  only  coin  legally  current  in  the  dominions  of  the  Ameers 
of  Hyderabad  after  the  1st  of  January  1845  shall  be  the  Company's 
Rupee  and  the  Rupee  hereinafter  mentioned. 

Article  3. 
The  British   Government  will  coin  for  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad 
such  number  of  Rupees  as  they   may  require   from   time  to  time,  such 
Rupees  bearing  on  one  side  the  effigy  of  the  Sovereign  of  England, 


&xv. 


64  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

SINDH.      with   such   inscription   as  the  British   Government  may  from  time  to 
No.  XV.     time  adopt,  and  on  the  reverse  such  inscription  or  device  as  the  Ameers 
may  prefer. 