

Whereas  a  Treaty  of  lasting  friendship  has  been  concluded  between  the  British  Gov- 
ernment and  His  Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-inoolk,  and  Mehrab  Khan,  the  Chief  of  Khelat,  as 
well  as  his  predecessors  have  always  paid  homage  to  the  Royal  House  of  the  Suddozycs ; 
therefore,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Shah,  the  under-mentioned  Articles  have  been 
agreed  upon  by  Mehrab  Khan  and  his  descendants  from  generation  to  generation.  As  long 
as  the  Khan  performs  good  service,  the  following  Articles  will  be  fulfilled  and  preserved : — 

Aeticle  1. 
As  Nusseer  Khan  and  his  descendants,  as  well  as  his  tribe  and  sons,  held  possession  of 
the  country  of  Khelat,  Kutchee,  Khorstan,  Mckran,  Kedge,  Bela,  and  the  port  of  Soumeeanee 
in  the  time  of  the  lamented  Ahmed  Shah  Dooranec,  they  will  in  future  be  masters  of  their 
country  in  the  same  manner. 


72  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

KHELAT.  preceded  him,  and  on  his  way  was  waylaid  by  a  party  appointed  by 
Moolla  Hossein  and  robbed  of  the  draft  Treaty  which  the  Khan  had 
signed.  The  belief  that  this  was  done  at  the  instigation  of  the  Khan 
was  studiously  impressed  on  the  British  Government,  and  the  Khan 
himself  was  prevented  from  going  to   Quetta  by  Moolla  Hossein,  who 

Article  2. 

The  English  Government  will  never  interfere  between  the  Khan,  his  dependants  and 
subjects,  particularly  lend  no  assistance  to  Shah  Newaz.  Futteh  Khan  and  the  descendants 
of  the  Mahabutzye  branch  of  the  family,  but  always  exert  itself  to  put  away  evil  from  his 
house.  In  case  of  His  Majesty  the  Shah's  displeasure  with  the  Khan  of  Khelat,  the  English 
Government  will  exert  itself  to  the  utmost  to  remove  the  same  in  a  manner  which  may 
be  agreeable  to  the  Shah  and  according  to  the  rights  of  the  Khan. 

Abticle  3. 

As  long  as  the  British  army  continues  in  the  country  of  Khorasan,  the  British  Govern- 
ment agrees  to  pay  to  Mehrab  Khan  the  sum  of  oue  and  a  half  lakh  of  Company's  Rupees 
from  the  date  of  this  engagement,  by  half-yearly  instalments. 

Article  4. 
In  return  for  this  sum  the  Khan,  while  he  pays  homage  to  the  Shah  and  continues  in 
friendship  with  the  British  nation,  agrees  to  use  his  best  endeavours  to  procure  supplies, 
carriage,  and  guards  to  protect  provisions  and  stores  going  and  coining  from  Shikarpore  by 
the  route  of  ltozan,  Dadur,  the  Pass  of  Bolan,  through  Shamal,  to  Koochlak  from  one 
frontier  to  another. 

Article  5. 

All  provisions  and  carriage  which  may  be  obtained  through  the  means  of  the  Khan, 
the  price  of  the  same  is  to  be  paid  without  hesitation. 

Article  6. 

As  much  as  Mehrab  shows  his  friendship  to  the  British  Government  by  service  and 
fidelity  to  the  Suddozye  family,  so  much  the  friendship  will  be  increased  between  him  and 
the  British  Government,  and  on  this  he  should  have  the  fullest  reliance  and  confidence. 