

This  agreement  having  been  concluded,  signed,  and  sealed,  by  Lieutenant  Colonel  Sir  A. 
Burnes,  Knight,  envoy  on  the  part  of  the  Right  Honourable  George  Lord  Auckland,  a.  c  B., 
Governor  General  of  India,  and  Mehrab  Khan,  of  Khelat,  on  the  part  of  himself,  the 
same  shall  be  duly  ratified  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General. 

Done  at  Khelat  the  2&th  day  of  March  a.  d.,  1839  corresponding  with  the  \2th  day  of 
Mohurrum  a.  h.  1255. 

(Signed)        A.  Burnes, 

Envoy  to  Khelat. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNIJDS.  73 

frightened  him  into  the  belief  that  the  British  intended  to  make  him  a    KHELAT. 
prisoner.     The  proofs  of  the  Khan's  hostility  were  now  apparently  com-  ~ 
plete,  and  it   was  resolved  to  punish  him  when  a  fitting   opportunity 
occurred. 

When  General  Wiltshire's  brigade  was  returning  from  Cabool  in 
1839,  a  detachment  was  sent  to  Khelat  to  punish  the  Khan.  The  town 
was  taken  by  storm  on  the  13th  of  November.  Mehrab  Khan  fell  in  the 
assault,  and  his  son  Hossein  Khan  fled.  From  the  papers  discovered  in 
the  fort,  the  treachery  of  Moolla  Hossein  was  fully  proved.  He  was 
therefore  made  a  prisoner.  In  attendance  on  the  British  army  was  one 
Shah  Newaz  Khan,  a  youth  of  fourteen,  descended  in  the  direct  male 
line  from  Mahabut  Khan,  who  had  been  deposed  by  Ahmed  Shah.  This 
youth,  and  his  brother  Futteh  Khan,  had  been  imprisoned  by  Mehrab  Khan, 
but  had  effected  their  escape.  Shah  Newaz  Khan  was  set  up  by  the  Bri- 
tish Government  as  Khan  of  Khelat,  but  the  provinces  of  Sarawun  and 
Kutch  Gundava  were  annexed  to  the  dominions  of  the  king  of  Cabool. 

Shortly  after  the  accession  of  Shah  Newaz  Khan,  a  revolution 
broke  out,  headed  by  Mehrab  Khan's  son,  who  had  assumed  the  name  of 
Nusseer  Khan.  Shah  Newaz  was  deposed,  the  British  representative  at 
Khelat  was  murdered,  and  there  was  open  war  between  Nusseer  Khan 
and  the  British  Government.  As  the  only  means  of  quieting  the  coun- 
try and  doing  tardy  justice  to  the  memory  of  the  unfortunate  Mehrab 
Khan,  the  British  Government  reversed  its  policy,  established  Nusseer 
Khan  in  power,  and  restored  to  him  the  districts  which  had  been  annexed 
to  Cabool.  A  Treaty  (No.  XVI.)  was  concluded  with  him  on  6th 
October  1841. 

After  the  withdrawal  of  the  British  armies  from  Cabool,  this  Treaty, 
by  which  Khelat  was  acknowledged  to  be  a  dependency  of  Cabool,  became 
a  dead  letter.  In  1842  a  proposal  was  made  to  conclude  a  Supplementary 
Treaty,  by  which  pecuniary  aid  should  be  substituted  for  military  support 
to  the  Khan;  but  this  suggestion  was  not  acted  upon.  In  1854,  however, 
when  war  between  England  and  Russia  was  threatened,  and  it  became  of 
importance  to  strengthen  British  influence  on  the  western  frontier,  a  new 
Treaty  (No.  XVII.)  was  concluded  with  the  Khan,  which  abrogated  the# 
Treaty  of  1841,  renewed  the  obligations  of  the  Khan  to  oppose  all  the 
enemies   of    the   British  Government,   to   act  in  subordination  to  the 