

Article  11. 

No  toll  will  be  levied  on  trading-boats  passing  up  or  down  the 
river  Indus,  from  the  sea  to  the  northernmost  point  of  that  stream, 
within  the  territories  of  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad. 

Article  12. 

But  any  merchandize  landed  from  such  boats  on  their  passage  up  or 
down  the  river  and  sold  shall  be  subject  to  the  usual  duties  of  the 
country ;  provided  always  that  goods  sold  in  a  British  camp  or  canton- 
ment shall  be  exempt  from  the  payment  of  duty. 

Article  13. 
Goods  of  all  kinds  may  be  brought  by  merchants  and  others  to  the 
mouths  of  the  Indus  (Gorabaree)  at  the  proper  season,  and  kept  there  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  owners  till  the  best  period  of  the  year  for  sending 
them  up  the  river ;  but  should  any  merchant  land  and  sell  any  part  of 
his  merchandize,  either  at  Gorabaree  or  anywhere  else  (except  at  the 
British  cantonment),  such  merchant  shall  pay  the  usual  duties  upon  them. 

Article  14. 
The  provisions  of  this  Treaty  agreed  upon  by  the  Governor  General 
of  India  on  the  one  part,  and  the  Ameers  Meer  Noor  Mahomed  Khan, 
Meer  Nusseer  Mahomed  Khan,  Meer  Meer  Mahomed  Khan,  and  Meer 


00  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNTTDS. 

SINDH.      Sobdar  Khan  on  the  other  part,  shall  be  binding  for  ever  on  all  suc- 
Nos.  XIII    ceeding  governments  of  India,  and  on  the  heirs  and  successors  of  the 

&  XIV.  said  Ameers  in  perpetuity ;  all  former  Treaties  between  the  contracting 
parties  not  rescinded  by  the  provisions  of  this  engagement  remaining 
in  force. 

This  Treaty,  consisting  of  fourteen  Articles,  having  been  signed  in 
quadruplicate  by  the  Eight  Honourable  George  Lord  Auckland,  g.  c.  b., 
Governor  General  of  India,  at  Bussee,  on  the  11th  day  of  March  1839, 
one  of  these  four  documents  will  be  separately  granted,  through  Colonel 
H.  Pottinger,  Resident,  Hyderabad,  the  negotiator  of  the  Treaties,  to 
each  of  the  four  Ameers,  on  his  delivering  a  counterpart  engagement, 
under  his  seal  and  signature,  to  the  British  Resident  in  Sindh,  Colonel 
H.  Pottinger. 

Bated  ihe  Wth  March  1839.  (Signed)         Auckland. 


No.  XIV. 

Treaty  of  fourteen  Articles  between  the  British  Government  and  the  Ameer 
of  Meerpore,  Meer  Sher  Mahomed  Khan. 

Whereas  Treaties  of  amity  and  friendship  have  been  concluded 
between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  the  Ameers  of  Hy- 
derabad, a  separate  Treaty  on  the  same  principle  is  now  entered  into 
between  that  power  and  His  Highness  Meer  Sher  Mahomed  Khan 
of  Meerpore,  and  the  following  Articles  have  been  agreed  upon  by  the 
contracting  parties  :— 

Article  1. 

That  there  shall  be  lasting  friendship,  alliance,  and  unity  of  inter- 
ests between  the  Honourable  East  India  Company  and  the  Ameer  of 
Meerpore,  Meer  Sher  Mahomed  Khan. 