

Article  4. 

Such  Rupees  so  to  be  coined  for  the  Ameers  shall  contain  the  same 
quantity  of  silver  and  of  the  same  fineness  as  the  Company's  Rupees ; 
and  for  every  Rupee  so  coined  the  Ameers  shall  deliver  to  the  officers  of 
the  British  Government,  who  may  hereafter  be  from  time  to  time  ap- 
pointed to  receive  the  same,  a  quantity  of  silver  equal  to  that  contained 
in  such  Rupee,  and  of  equal  fineness,  or  approved  bills  of  equal  value ; 
and  such  Rupees  so  coined  for  the  Ameers  shall  be  delivered  to  them 
within  four  months  after  the  receipt,  by  the  appointed  Officer,  of  the 
silver  equivalent  thereto,  or  within  four  months  after  the  payment  of  the 
approved  bills  for  the  amount,  without  any  charge  for  the  coinage,  which 
charge  will  be  wholly  borne  by  the  British  Government. 

Article  5. 

The  Ameers,  in  consideration  of  the  above  engagement,  renounce 
the  privilege  of  coining  money,  and  will  not  exercise  the  same,  from  the 
date  of  the  signature  of  this  Treaty. 

Article  6. 

With  a  view  to  the  necessary  provision  of  wood  for  the  use  of 
steamers  navigating  the  Indus  and  the  rivers  communicating  therewith, 
the  British  Government  shall  have  the  right  to  fell  wood  within  one 
•  hundred  yards  of  both  banks  of  the  Indus  within  the  territories  of  the 
Ameers ;  but  the  British  Government,  being  unwilling  to  exercise  such 
right  in  a  manner  inconvenient  or  disagreeable  to  the  Ameers,  will  exer- 
cise it  only  under  the  direction  of  British  officers,  and  will  refrain  from 
all  exercise  thereof,  so  long  as  the  Ameers  shall  provide,  at  the  places  to 
be  named,  such  a  quantity  of  wood  fit  for  the  purpose  of  fuel  at  the  price 
of  the  as  the 

officers  of  the  British  Government  may  from  time  to  time  require. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  05 

Article  7.  SINDH. 

The  following  places  and  districts  are  ceded  in  perpetuity  to  the  No.  XV. 
British  Government :  Kurrachee  and  Tatta,  with  such  arrondissement  as 
may  be  deemed  necessary  by  Major  General  Sir  Charles  Napier ;  and, 
moreover,  the  right  of  free  passage  over  the  territories  of  the  Ameers 
between  Kurrachee  and  Tatta  along  such  line,  and  within  such  limits  on 
either  side  thereof  as  Major  General  Sir  Charles  Napier  may  prefer; 
and  within  such  limits  the  officers  of  the  British  Government  shall  alone 
have  jurisdiction. 

Article  8. 

All  the  rights  and  interests  of  the  Ameers,  or  of  any  one  of  them, 
in  Subzulkote,  and  in  all  the  territory  intervening  between  the  present 
frontier  of  Bhawulpore  and  the  town  of  Roree,  are  ceded  in  perpetuity  to 
His  Highness  the  Nawab  of  Bhawulpore,  the  ever  faithful  ally  and 
friend  of  the  British  Government. 