

Article  2. 

Meer  Sher  Mahomed  Khan  binds  himself  to  pay  every  year  the 
sum  of  half  a  lakh  of  Rupees  (50,000)  of  the  Company's  currency  in 
part  payment  of  the  expense  of  the  British  force  stationed  in  Sindh, 
viz.,  on  the  1st  of  February  of  each  year. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  61 

Article  3.  sindh. 


The  British  Government  takes  upon  itself  the  protection  of  the     No.  XIV. 
territory  now  possessed  by  the  Ameer  of   Meerpore  from   all   foreign 
aggression. 

Article  4. 

Meer  Slier  Mahomed  Khan  shall  remain  sole  ruler  in  his  princi- 
pality, and  the  jurisdiction  of  the  British  Government  shall  not  be  in- 
troduced into  his  territory ;  the  officers  of  the  British  Government  will 
not  listen  to  or  encourage  complaints  against  the  Ameer  from  his 
subjects. 

Article  5. 

The  Ameer  being  confirmed  in  his  present  undisputed  possessions 
by  the  preceding  Article  will  refer  to  the  British  representative  in 
Sindh  any  complaint  of  aggression  which  he  may  make  against  any  of 
the  other  Ameers;  and  the  Political  Agent,  with  the  sanction  of  the 
Governor  General,  will  endeavour  to  mediate  between  them  and  settle 
their  differences. 

Article  6. 

The  territories  at  present  disputed  between  Meer  Sher  Mahomed 
Khan  and  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  shall  be  submitted  to  the  decision 
of  arbitrators  appointed  by  both  parties  and  an  umpire  appointed  by 
the  Political  Agent. 

Article  7. 

In  case  of  aggression  by  the  subjects  of  one  Ameer  on  the  ter- 
ritories of  another,  and  of  the  Ameer  by  whose  subjects  such  aggressions 
are  made  declaring  his  inability  to  prevent  them,  in  consequence  of  the 
offending  parties  being  in  rebellion  to  his  authority,  on  a  representation 
of  the  circumstances  being  made  to  the  Governor  General  by  the  Politi- 
cal Agent,  the  Governor  General  will,  if  he  sees  fit,  order  such  assistance 
to  be  afforded  as  may  be  requisite  to  bring  the  offenders  to  punishment. 

Article  8. 
The  Ameer  will  not  enter  into  any  negotiation  with  any  foreign  Chief 
or  State  without  the  knowledge  and  sanction  of  the  British  Government ; 
his  amicable  correspondence  with  his  friends  and  relations  may  continue. 


62  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

sindh.  Article  9. 


No.  XIV.  r^  Ameer  will  act  in  subordinate   co-operation  with  the  British 

Government  for  the  purposes  of  defence,  and  shall  furnish  for  the  ser- 
vice of  the  British  Government  a  proportional  quota  of  troops  to  that 
supplied  by  other  Ameers  whenever  required.  These  troops,  when  em- 
ployed with  British  forces,  will  be  under  the  orders  and  control  of  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  British  forces  ;  the  Ameer's  troops,  if  employed 
beyond  the  Sindh  frontier,  will  be  paid  by  the  British  Government. 