

ARTICLE  3.  8IWDH. 

The  Commissioner  appointed  by  Major  General  Sir  Charles  Napier     *••**- 
for  the  execution  of  this  Treaty  and  of  the  Treaty  to  be  eondnded  with 
the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  shall  appropriate  the  surplus  tribute,  tarn 
which  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  will  be  relieved  by  that  Treaty  (of 
which  an  account  will  be  rendered  to  the  Ameers  of  Kheirpore),  or 
of  equal  value  in  lien  thereof,  first,  to  the  indemnifieation  of 
of  Kheirpore,  other  than  Meer  Boostnm  Khan  and  Meer  Ni 
as  may  make  cessions  of  territory  under  tins  Treaty,  and  then,  for  the 
benefit  of  Meer  Boostnm  Khan  and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  in  proportion 
to  the  annual  value  of  the  cessions  made  by  them  respectively  under  this 
Treaty. 

Article  1. 

The  Ameers  of  Kheirpore  having,  by  the  Treaty  eondnded  on  the 
llth  December  1S38,  agreed,  "in  order  to  improve  by  every  means 
possible  the  growing  intercourse  by  the  river  Indus,  to  anord  all  co-oper- 
ation with  the  other  powers  in  any  measures  which  may  heteaflet  be 
thought  necessary  for  extending  and  facilitating  the  commerce  and 
navigation  of  the  Indus,"  and  the  Ameers  of  Hyderabad  having  since, 
by  a  Treaty  concluded  in  1S39,  agreed  "that  no  toll  shall  be  levied  on 
trading  boats  passing  up  and  down  the  river  Indus  from  the  sea  to  the 
northernmost  point  of  that  stream  within  then*  territories,  with  the 
proviso  that  any  merchandize  landed  from  such  boats  on  their  passage 
up  or  down  the  river  and  sold  shall  be  subject  to  the  usual  duties  of  the 
country,  except  goods  sold  in  a  British  camp  or  cantonment^  which  goods 
shall  be  exempt  from  the  payment  of  duty,0  the  Aimm-ra  of  Kheirpore 
now  agree  to  abide  by  and  observe  the  above  provision,  in  the  same 
man-Mr  and  as  fully  as  if  ibe  same  were  inserted  in  the  Treaty  eon- 
eluded  by  them  in  1S3S. 

Article  5. 

The  only  coin  legally  current  in  the  dominions  of  the  Ameers  of 
Kheirpore  after  the  1st  January  1845  shall  be  the  Company's  Rupee  and 
the  Rupee  hereinafter  mentioned. 


68  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

sindh.  Article  6. 

No.  XV.  The  British  Government  will  coin  for  the  Ameers  of  Kheirpore  such 

number  of  Rupees  as  they  may  require  from  time  to  time,  such  Rupees 
bearing  on  one  side  the  effigy  of  the  Sovereign  of  England,  with  such 
inscription  as  the  British  Government  may  from  time  to  time  adopt,  and 
on  the  reverse  such  inscription  or  device  as  the  Ameers  may  prefer. 

Article  7. 

Such  Rupees,  so  to  be  coined  for  the  Ameers,  shall  contain  the  same 
quantity  of  silver  and  of  the  same  fineness  as  the  Company's  Rupees  j 
and  for  every  Rupee  so  coined,  the  Ameers  shall  deliver  to  the  officers  of 
the  British  Government,  who  may  hereafter  be  from  time  to  time 
appointed  to  receive  the  same,  a  quantity  of  silver  equal  to  that  con- 
tained in  such  Rupee  and  of  equal  fineness,  or  approved  bills  of  equal 
value ;  and  such  Rupees,  so  coined  for  the  Ameers,  shall  be  delivered  over 
to  them  within  four  months  after  the  receipt,  by  the  appointed  officer,  of 
the  silver  equivalent  thereto,  or  within  four  months  after  the  payment 
of  the  approved  bills  for  the  amount,  without  any  charge  for  the  coinage, 
which  charge  will  be  wholly  borne  by  the  British  Government. 