

Article  8. 

The  Ameers,  in  consideration  of  the  above  engagement,  renounce 
the  privilege  of  coining  money,  and  will  not  exercise  the  same,  from  the 
date  of  the  signature  of  this  Treaty. 

Article  9. 

With  a  view  to  the  necessary  provision  of  wood  for  the  use  of 
steamers  navigating  the  Indus  and  the  rivers  communicating  therewith, 
the  British  Government  shall  have  the  right  to  fell  wood  within  100 
yards  of  both  banks  of  the  Indus  within  the  territories  of  the  Ameers ; 
but  the  British  Government,  being  unwilling  to  exercise  such  right  in 
a  manner  inconvenient  or  disagreeable  to  the  Ameers,  will  exercise  it 
only  under  the  direction  of  British  officers,  and  will  refrain  from  all 
exercise  thereof  so  long  as  the  Ameers  shall  provide,  at  the  places  to  be 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  69 

named,  such  quantity  of  wood  fit  for  the  purposes  of  fuel  at  the  price     SINDH. 
of  the  as  the  officers  of  the  British     No.  xv. 

Government  may  from  time  to  time  require. 

Article  10. 

The  British  Government  renounces  every  claim  heretofore  made 
upon  the  late  Meer  Mobarik  Khan,  or  upon  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  or 
the  other  sons  of  the  late  Meer  Mobarik  Khan,  on  account  of  nuzzer- 
ana,  in  the  name  of  the  late  Shah  Suja,  or  on  account  of  annual  tribute, 
and  the  arrears  thereof  and  the  interest  thereon,  on  its  own  behalf. 

Simla,  November  &th}  1842. 


KHELAT. 

The  territory  belonging  to  the  Brahui  Khans  of  Khelat  extends 
from  the  Mekran  coast  to  a  distance  of  about  400  miles  north,  and  about 
the  same  distance  from  the  Sindh  frontier  to  the  west  of  the  provinces 
of  Punjgoor  and  Kedge.  The  allegiance  of  the  outlying  provinces  to  the 
Khan  is,  however,  little  more  than  nominal,  and  their  Chiefs  omit  no 
opportunity  of  asserting  their  independence.  The  first  Khan  of  any  note 
was  Abdullah  Khan,  who,  at  the  commencement  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
affected  to  be  independent  of  the  Delhi  empire  and  reduced  several 
provinces  to  his  rule.  During  the  reign  of  his  son  Mahabut  Khan 
occurred  the  invasion  of  India  by  Nadir  Shah  and  the  annexation  of  the 
whole  of  the  territories  west  of  the  Indus  to  his  dominions.  On  the  dis- 
memberment of  the  Persian  empire  after  the  death  of  Nadir  Shah,  Khelat 
formed  part  of  the  territories  over  which  Ahmed  Shah  Abdali  established 
his  supremacy.  Mahabut  Khan,  who  was  unpopular  with  his  Chiefs, 
was  deposed  by  Ahmed  Shah,  and  his  younger  brother  Nusseer  Khan 
was  appointed  to  rule  in  his  stead.  From  this  time  the  power  continued 
with  the  younger  branch  of  the  family  till  the  foolish  attempt  which  the 
British  Government  made  after  the  Afghan  war  to  change  the  succession. 