

Nusseer  Khan  is  by  far  the  most  distinguished  of  the  Khans  of 
Khelat.  His  rule  was  vigorous.  His  policy  of  uniting  the  Beloch 
tribes  so  consolidated  his  power,  that  he  found  himself  strong  enough  to 
rebel  against  Ahmed  Shah,  who  ceded  to  him  the  districts  of  Shawl  and 
Mustung.  In  the  west  his  dominions  were  extended  by  the  conquest 
of  Punjgoor  and  Kedge.  He  was  succeeded  in  1795  by  his  son  Mali, 
mood  Khan,  and  he,  in  1819,  by  his  son  Mehrab  Khan,  in  whose  time  the 
political  connection  of  the  British  Government  with  Khelat  commenced. 

From  the  time  of  Nusseer  Khan  the  Chiefs  of  Khelat  remained 
faithful  in  their  allegiance  to  Cabool.  In  their  internal  government 
they  acted  in  concert  with  the  Chiefs  of  Sarawun  and  Jalawun,  who  held 
the  position  of  hereditary  counsellors.  The  office  of  minister  was  also 
hereditary.      Mehrab   Khan  was  a  well-meaning  but  weak   ruler.     He 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNTTDS.  71 

disgusted  his  Chiefs  by  surrendering1  himself  to  the  influence  of  one  KHELAT. 
Daood  Mahomed,  a  man  of  low  extraction,  for  whom  he  sacrificed  the  " 
hereditary  minister  Futteh  Mahomed.  Daood  Mahomed,  however,  was 
killed  by  Futteh  Mahomed's  son,  Naib  Moolla  Hossein,  who  was  res- 
tored to  the  hereditary  office,  but  who  never  forgave  the  injury  done  to 
his  father.  To  the  treacherous  revenge  of  Moolla  Hossein  are  attribut- 
able all  the  misfortunes  which  subsequently  overtook  Mehrab  Khan. 

On  the  failure  of  Shah  Suja's  first  attempt  to  recover  his  dominions 
in  1833,  the  ex-king  found  refuge  for  a  short  time  at  Khelat  before  his 
return  to  his  exile  at  Loodhiana.  When  the  expedition  of  1838  for  the 
restoration  of  the  Shah  was  determined  on,  a  British  officer,  Lieutenant 
Leech,  was  sent  to  Khelat  to  secure  the  co-operation  of  Mehrab  Khan, 
through  whose  territories  the  armies  had  to  march.  Moolla  Hossein, 
however,  contrived  to  create  a  dislike  between  the  Khan  and  Lieutenant 
Leech,  and  the  latter  left  without  attaining  his  object.  The  treacherous 
minister  further  caused  it  to  be  believed  that  the  Khan  had  seized  stores 
of  grain  which  had  been  collected  for  the  British  troops,  and  he  wrote 
orders  in  the  Khan's  name,  but  without  his  knowledge,  inciting  the  tribes 
to  rise  and  harrass  the  British  army  on  its  line  of  march.  Sir  Alexander 
Burnes  was  deputed  to  Khelat  to  allay  the  supposed  hostility  of  the 
Khan  and  to  negotiate  a  Treaty*  with  him.  The  Treaty  was  signed 
contrary  to  the  secret  wishes  of  Moolla  Hossein,  and  the  Khan  agreed  to 
proceed  to  Quetta  to  pay  his  respects  to  Shah  Suja.     Sir  A.  Burnes 


*  Abticles  of  an  Engagement  concluded  between  the  British  Government  and  Mehbab 
Khan,  the  Chief  of  Khelat. 