

Article  9. 
To  the  Meer  Sobdar  Khan,  who  has  constantly  evinced  fidelity  to 
his  engagements  and  attachment  to  the  British  Government,  is  ceded 
territory  producing  half  a  lakh  of  annual  revenue,  such  cession  being 
made  in  consideration  of  the  loss  he  will  sustain  by  the  transfer  of  Kurra- 
chee to  the  British  Government,  and  as  a  reward  for  his  good  conduct. 

Article  10. 
The  Commissioner  appointed  by  Major  General  Sir  Charles  Napier 
for  the  execution  of  this  Treaty  will,  after  hearing  the  several  Ameers, 
finally  decide  what  lands  shall  be  made  over*  to   Meer   Sobdar   Khan,   in 
pursuance  of  the  above  Article,  by  the  other  Ameers. 

Article  11. 

Inasmuch  as  the  territories  to  be  ceded  by  the  several  Ameers, 

under  the  provisions  of  this   Treaty,  differ  in   annual   value,   and  the 

amount  of  the  tribute  now  payable  by  the  several  Ameers  is  not  altogether 

the  same,  the  Commissioner  appointed  by  Major  General  Sir  Charles 

vor..  vn.  * 


TULiTTBS,   ESCACEWOTS.   A3TO   «\XSID6. 

SPTDH-     Napier  shall  hear  the  several  Ameefs  as  to  the  annual  rahse  of  the  lands 


xt  *o  ceHed,  and snail  ih<  ln>  wnat  payments  ot  Boaff,  or  won  cesmms  ot 
hmd  m  hen  thutmC  AaD  he  made  hy  the  Amimi  >,  who  shall  nab  no  ces- 
aanof  lands,  or  cBiiiwhm  of  lands  of  inferior  value,  to  such  as  shall 
make  sneh  cessions  of  higher  value  under  thk  Treaty,  that  so  the  value 
of  the  cessions  made  hy  the  ameul  Amu,m  (always  cicrptiHg  Meer 
shafl  he  as  nearly  eosssaensante  as  possible  with  the  tri- 
te the  payment  of  which  each  was  before  liable. 

Aomli 

The  remainder  of  the  tribute  now  payable  whieh  shall  not  be  ah- 

the  nuling  of  such  i  onus  mi  slam  \,  or  lands  yielding  an  an- 

me  of  equal  amount,  shall  he  at   the  disposal   of  the  British 

hut  the  British  Government  will  retain  no  portion  thereof 

.:>.  _: 

Simi*,  AWemier  l/i,  1S42. 


Dsaft  of  Tsn&rv  between  the  British  Cwuitat  and  the  Ameer*  of  Kkeirpore. 

ArncLE  1. 
The  pergunnah  of  Bhocng  Bhara,  and  the  third  part  of  die  dktriet 
of  Suhndkote,  and  the  villages  of  Gotkee,  Maladee,  Chaonga,  Dadoola, 
and  Unexpose,  and  all  the  territories  of  the  Ameers  of  Kheirpore,  or 
any  of  them  mtervening  between  the  present  A— i«inn«  of  His  High- 
ness the  Xawab  of  Bhawulpore  and  the  town  and  dktriet  of  Boree,  are 
ceded  in  perpctuiti  to  Hk  Highness  the  Xawab. 

Asncjjt  2. 

The  town  of  Snkknr,  with  such  arrondksement  as  shall  he  deemed 
hy  Major  General  Sir  Charles  Napier,  and  the  islands  of 

mi  the  town  of  Boree,  with  such 
he  eVassedmaoaaryhy  Major  General  Sir  Charles 
Napier,  are  ceded  in  perpetuity  to  the  British  Government. 


TREATIES,    EXGAGEMESTS,  AMD  SCMTCnS.  (7 