


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  83 

Now  the  line  of  coast  from  the  Hubb  River  to  Khos  Kulmut  or  its      BEYLA 
vicinity,  a  distance  of  240  measured  miles,  being  within  the  territory     OB  LUS- 
of  Jam  Meer  Khan,  Chief  of  Lus  Beyla,  the  undersigned,  Major  F.  J.     No.  XIX. 
Goldsmid,  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government,  and  with   the  know- 
ledge and  consent  of  its  firm  ally,  Khodadad  Khan,  ruler  of  the  sovereign 
State  of  Khelat,  hereby  makes  agreement  with  Jam  Meer  Khan  afore- 
said  for  the  construction,  maintenance,  and  protection  of  the  line  of 
Telegraph  between  the  above-mentioned  places. 

The  detailed  agreement  is  as  follows  :— 

Article  1. 

The  materials  for  the  line  may  be  landed  on  any  part  of  the  coast 
between  the  Hubb  River  and  Khos  Kulmut,  and  all  reasonable  assistance 
will  be  rendered  by  the  local  authorities  in  ensuring  its  security  and 
facilitating  its  construction,  due  payment  being  made  for  labour  or 
articles  supplied. 

Article  2. 

There  will  be  two  Telegraph  stations  erected  for  the  residence  and 
office  of  signallers,  one  at  Soumeeanee  and  one  at  Ormara. 

Article  3. 
All  individuals  authoritatively  employed  in  the  construction,  main- 
tenance, or  use  of  the  line  aforesaid  shall  receive  such  protection  and 
assistance  from  the  local  authorities  as  will  enable  them  to  prosecute 
their  work  without  let  or  hindrance,  due  payment  to  be  made  for  labour 
or  articles  supplied. 

Article  4. 

A  sum  of  Rupees  10,000*  yearly  shall  be  paid  by  the  Political 
Agent  at  Khelat  to  the  Jam  of  Beyla,  on  the  understanding  that  he 


*  The  amount  of  yearly  payment  must  depend  on  further  reference  as  to  the  actual 
work  required.  But  the  undersigned  is  of  opinion  that  the  full  sum  may  be  double  that 
fixed  for  the  pay  of  a  watching  establishment  here  entered.  For  instance,  supposing  such 
establishment  to  be  Rupees  330  per  mensem,  the  yearly  amount  would  be  Rupees  3,960, 
of  which  the  double  would  be  Rupees  7,020.  This  would  be  estimated  in  round  numbers  at 
Rupees  8,000. 


84  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

BEYLA     keeps  up  an  establishment  of  not  less  than        men,  on  salaries  of  Rupees 
ob  LUS.  per  mensem  in  the  aggregate,  for  the  due  protection  of  the  line,  and 

No.  XIX.     rendering  such  assistance  as  from  time  to  time  may  be  required  by  the 
Telegraph  employes  stationed  on  the  coast. 

Article  5. 

Should  it  be  authoritatively  reported  at  any  time  that  the  said 
establishment  is  insufficient,  and  such  injury  be  done  to  the  line  as  would 
lead  to  the  belief  that  due  care  was  not  exercised  in  its  protection,  the 
Political  Agent,  Khelat,  will  be  empowered  to  call  upon  the  Jam  of 
Beyla  to  make  such  additional  payment  as  will  not  exceed  in  the  whole 
the  amount  of  full  yearly  subsidy. 