

Article  6. 

The  annual  payment  to  the  Jam  will  commence  from  the  date  that 
five  miles  of  Telegraph  wire  may  be  reported  set  up ;  all  intermediate 
payment  being  made  according  to  labour  or  articles  supplied  as  previously 
provided. 

Article  7. 

Complaints  against  individuals  in  the  employ  of  the  Telegraph  De- 
partment not  capable  of  satisfactory  adjustment  will  be  referred  to  the 
Political  Agent  at  Khelat.  Any  cases  of  urgency,  whether  in  the  nature 
of  a  complaint  or  otherwise  affecting  such  persons,  may  be  referred  to  the 
Magistrate  or  Commandant  of  Police  at  Kurrachee  as  exceptional,  should 
occasion  require. 

Article  8. 

Continued  obstruction  or  injury  to  the  line  may  cause  revocation 
of  this  agreement  on  the  part  of  government  at  any  time. 

The  agreement  made  between  the  parties  hereto  as  above  defined  is 
to  be  considered  dependent  for  completion  and  effect  upon  the  approval 
of  the  Bombay  Government. 


Approved  by  the  Governor  General  of  India  in  Council  on  19th 
August  1862. 


KEDGE.  KEDGE. 


This  is  the  most  western  of  the  provinces  which  are  tributary  to 
Khelat.  Although  often  overrun  hy  armies  from  Khelat,  its  subjection 
has  been  more  nominal  than  real.  The  present  Naib  of  Kedge  is  Fuqueer 
Noor  Mahomed,  of  the  Bezunjo  tribe.  In  1862  an  engagement 
(No.  XX.)  was  made  with  him,  by  which  he  agreed  for  an  annual  subsidy 
to  protect  the  Mekran  Telegraph  which  passes  through  his  territories. 
The  subsidy  granted  is  Rupees  6,000,  of  which  Rupees  1,000  are  paid 
to  the  Chief  of  Pusnee. 


No.  XX. 

Abstract  Translation  of  an  Ageeement  passed,  under  date  the  24th  January  1862, 
by  Fuqtjeeb  Mahomed  Bezunjo,  Naib  of  Kedge,  to  Ma  joe  F.  J.  Goldsmid, 
Assistant  Commissioner  in  Sindh,  on  behalf  of  the  British  Government. 

Under  instructions  from  His  Highness  the  Khan  of  Khelat,  Fuqueer 
Mahomed  Bezunjo  has  presented  himself  before  Major  F.  J.  Goldsmid, 
Assistant  Commissioner  in  Sindh,  and  learnt  all  the  arrangements  con- 
templated for  the  establishment  of  the  proposed  line  of  Telegraph.  He 
states  in  the  presence  of  that  officer  and  Rais  Rahmutoollah  Khan, 
Agent  of  His  Highness,  that  if  the  British  Government  intend  to  set 
the  Electric  Telegraph  on  the  Mekran  coast,  he  will  use  his  best  endeavours 
to  protect  and  maintain  it  from  Kalmut-bunder  to  Gwadur-bunder, 
and  will  provide  the  men  required  for  that  purpose.  For  this  service  he 
shall  receive  through  the  Political  Agent,  Khelat,  and  with  the  consent 
of  the  Khan,  the  sum  assigned  and  deemed  proper  by  the  British  Gov- 
ernment. He  will  also  lend  assistance  to  the  due  establishment  of  the 
Electric  Telegraph  by  protecting  the  materials  and  stores  in  such  manner 
that  there  shall  be  no  obstruction  to  the  work.  It  is  understood  that 
all  articles  supplied  to  the  persons  connected  with  the  Telegraph  shall  be 
duly  paid  for  by  the  receivers. 