


No.  XX. 


86  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

KEDOE.  Provided  always  that  his  responsibility  in  the  above  matter  depends 


No.  XX.      on  his  holding  the  office  of  Naib  of  Kedge. 

Signed  in  the  presence  of  Major  F.  J.  Goldsmid,  Assistant  Com- 
missioner in  Sindh,  and  in  the  presence  of  Rais  Rahmutoollah,  Agent  of 
His  Highness  the  Khan,  under  date  the  24th  January  1862. 


Note  written  before  Fuqueer  Mahomed,  of  Kedge,  and  signed  by  Rais  Eahmut- 
oollah  Khan  on  the  1st  February  1862. 

The  word  "  Gwadur-bunder"  shall   be  understood  to   comprise  all 
lands  within  the  recognized  boundary  of  Gwadur. 


Approved  by  the  Governor  General  of  India  in  Council  on  19th 
August  1862. 


PERSIA. 

It  was  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  during  the  reign 
of  Shah  Abbas  the  Great,  that  the  English  first  established  commercial 
settlements  in  Persia.  Two  enterprizing  Englishmen,  Sir  Anthony 
Sherley  and  his  brother,  with  a  few  followers,  had  made  their  way  to 
the  court  of  Persia,  where  they  met  with  a  distinguished  reception. 
Sir  Anthony  returned  as  envoy  from  Shah  Abbas  to  establish  an  alliance 
with  the  Christian  monarchs  of  Europe  for  the  destruction  of  the  Turks 
and  with  a  grant*  permitting  all   Christian  merchants  to  trade  freely 

*  Copy  of  an  English  translation  of  the  grant  obtained  by  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  from  Shall, 
Abbas  for  all  Christians  to  trade  and  traffick  in  Persia. 

Our  absolute  commanndement,  will,  and  pleasure  is  that  our  countries  and  dominions 
shall  be  from  this  day  open  to  all  Christian  people  and  to  their  religion  ;  and  in  such  sort, 
that  none  of  ours,  of  any  condition,  shall  presume  to  give  them  any  evil  word.  And,  be- 
cause of  the  amitie  now  ioyned  with  the  princes  that  professe  Christ,  I  do  give  this  pattent 
for  all  Christian  marchants  to  repaire  and  traffick  in  and  through  our  dominions  without 
disturbances  or  molestations  of  any  duke,  prince,  governor,  or  captaine,  or  any,  of  whatsoever 
office  or  qualitie,  of  ours ;  but  that  all  merchandize  that  they  shall  bring  shall  be  so 
priviledged,  that  none  of  any  dignitie  or  authoritie  shall  have  power  to  looke  unto  it, 
neyther  to  make  inquisition  after,  or  stay,  for  any  use  or  person,  the  value  of  one  asper ; 
neyther  shall  our  religious  men,  or  whatsoever  sort  they  be,  dare  disturbe  them,  or  speake 
in  matters  of  their  faith  ;  neyther  shall  any  of  our  justices  have  power  over  their  persons 
or  goodes  for  any  cause  or  act  whatsoever. 

If  by  chaunce  a  marchant  shall  die,  none  shall  touch  any  thing  that  belongeth  unto 
him ;  but  if  the  marchant  have  a  companion,  he  shall  have  power  to  take  possession  of 
those  goodes.  But  if  (by  any  occasion)  he  be  alone,  onely  with  his  servants,  the  governor, 
or  whomsoever  shall  be  required  by  him  in  his  sickness,  shall  be  answearable  for  all  such  goodes 
unto  any  of  his  nation  which  shall  come  to  require  them.  But  if  he  die  suddainly,  and 
have  neyther  companion  nor  servant,  nor  time  to  recommende  to  any  what  he  woulde  have 
done,  then  the  governor  of  that  place  shall  sende  the  goodes  to  the  next  marchant  of  his  na- 
tion which  shall  be  abiding  in  any  parts  of  our  dominions. 