

And  those  within  our  kingdomes  and  provinces  having  power  over  our  tolles  and  customes 
shall  receive  nothing,  nor  dare  to  speake  for  any  receipt  from  any  Christian  marchant. 

And  if  any  such  Christian  shall  give  credite  to  any  of  our  subiectes  (of  any  condition 
whatsoever)  he  shall,  by  thi3  pattent  of  ours,  have  authoritie  to  require  any  caddie,  or  gover- 
nor, to  do  him  justice,  and  thereupon,  at  the  instant  of  his  demaunde,  shall  cause  him  to  be 
satisfied. 


88  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,  with  Persia.  Under  the  patronage  of  Shah  Abbas,  the  English,  the 
French,  and  the  Dutch  had  established  factories  at  Gombroon,  to  which 
place  the  Persian  monarch  afterwards  gave  the  name  of  Bunder  Abbas 
or  the  Port  of  Abbas,  by  which  it  is  now  known.  Shah  Abbas,  how- 
ever, had  less  toleration  for  the  Portuguese,  who,  in  1507,  under  Albu- 
querque, had  conquered  and  occupied  the  island  of  Hormuz,  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  not  far  from  Gombroon,  and  he  resolved 
on  their  expulsion.  He  was  joined  in  this  enterprise  by  the  English, 
then  at  war  with  Portugal,  with  whom  in  1622  he  entered  into  an 
engagement*  granting  them  half  the  plunder  of  the  island  and  half 
the  future  customs  of  Gombroon  and  Hormuz.  The  Portuguese  were 
driven  out,  but  the  promises  of  the  king  of  Persia  to  the  English  were 
not  kept.  The  factory  at  Gombroon  was  maintained  through  many  losses 
and  disasters  till  1761,  when  it  was  withdrawn  in  consequence  of  the 
oppressions  of  the  provincial  Governor  of  Lar. 

Neyther  shall  any  governor,  or  justice,  of  what  qualitie  soever  he  be,  dare  take  any 
rewarde  of  him,  which  shall  be  to  his  expense ;  for  our  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  they  shall  be 
used  in  all  our  dominions  to  their  owne  full  content,  and  that  our  kingdoraes  and  countries 
shall  be  free  unto  them. 

That  none  shall  presume  to  aske  them  for  what  occasion  they  are  heere. 

And  although  it  hath  bin  a  continuall  and  unchaungeable  nse  in  our  dominions  every 
yeere  to  renue  all  pattents,  this  pattent,  notwithstanding,  shall  be  of  full  effect  and  force  for 
ever,  without  any  renuing,  for  me  and  my  successors,  not  to  be  chaunged. 

*  The  following  is  the  substance  of the  Articles  of  Agreement  as  given  in  Fryer's  Travels, 

Chapter  XII. 

First. — Stipulating  that  the  Persian  soldiers  should  not  meddle  with  the  spoils  before 
"  the  English  mariners  were  satisfied,  [which  were  such  of  all  sorts  of  jewels,  gold  and 
"  silver,  that  they  refused  to  carry  off  any  more.] 

"  Secondly. — That  Bunder  Abassi,  now  Gombroon,  should  yearly  divide  half  the  cus- 
"  toms  between  the  English  and  Persians,  and  that  whatever  English  ship  should  enter  the 
♦f  port  should  be  free  from  any  manner  of  tribute. 