

Article  10. 
That  His  Highness  the  Khan  of  Khelat,  with  the  view  of  accel- 
erating the  erection  of  the  Electric  Telegraph,  agrees  that  the  English 
Government  may  subsidize  and  make  their  own  arrangements  with  the 
tribes  (his  subjects)  in  Mekran. 

It  being  understood  that  the  above  shall  not  include  any  cession  of 
Khelat  territory  without  his  (the  Khan's)  consent,  and  that,  should 
offices  or  buildings  be  erected,  their  sites  shall  always  be  considered  as 
belonging  to  the  Khelat  government. 

On  the  part  of  the  British  Government, 
Jacobabad,  Upper  Sindh  j  ")  (Signed)         M.  Green,  Major, 


The  23rd  March  1863.       j  Actg.  Political  Agent  at  Khelat. 


Seal. 

VOL.    VII. 


(Signed)     Khodadad  Khan, 

Ruler  of  Khelat. 


BEYLA    on    LUS. 
BEYLA 

ok  LUS.  Tire  province  of  Lus  is  said  to  have  been  granted  to  an  ancestor  of 

No  XIX  the  Jam  of  Beyla  by  Abdulla  Khan,  of  Khelat,  as  a  reward  for  services 
in  the  field.  The  conditions  of  the  tenure  were  that  the  Jam  should 
acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  the  Khan  and  maintain  a  body  of  troops 
for  service  when  required.  On  the  death  of  Abdulla  Khan,  the  grant 
was  confirmed  by  Mahabut  Khan  to  Jam  Ali,  from  whom  the  present 
Chief,  Jam  Meer  Khan,  is  regularly  descended. 

The  present  Jam  succeeded  his  father  Jam  Meer  Ali  about  the  year 
1830.  Of  late  years  he  has  been  endeavouring  to  throw  off  allegiance 
to  Khelat  and  make  himself  independent.  The  population  of  his 
territories  is  estimated  to  be  about  25,000  souls,  and  the  revenues  about 
Rupees  25,000  from  sea-customs  and  Rupees  10,000  from  an  assessment 
on  cultivated  lands. 

In  December  1861  an  agreement  (No.  XIX.)  was  made  with  Jam 
Meer  Khan  for  the  protection  of  that  portion  of  the  Mekran  Telegraph 
which  traverses  Lus,  in  consideration  of  a  subsidy  of  Rupees  10,000 
a  year,  which  was  afterwards  increased  to  Rupees  15,000. 


No.  XIX. 

Translation  of  Agbeement  with  the  Jam  of  Beyla,  dated  the  21st  December  1861 . 

Whereas  it  is  in  contemplation  to  carry  on,  as  far  as  India,  the  com- 
munication now  opened  between  Great  Britain  and  other  high  States  of 
Europe  and  Asia  by  continuing  the  line  of  Electric  Telegraph  from 
Constantinople  and  Bagdad,  through  Persia  and  Belochistan,  to  Kurra- 
chee,  and  whereas  in  the  prosecution  of  this  scheme  of  universal  benefit, 
it  has  become  necessary  to  take  measures  for  the  security  and  protection 
of  the  said  contemplated  line,  the  high  government  of  Bombay  have 
deputed  Major  F.  J.  Goldsmid  for  the  special  purpose  of  entering  into 
such  negotiations  with  the  several  Chiefs  holding  territory  between  Kur- 
rachee  and  Gwadur  as  may  be  deemed  necessary  for  the  due  furtherance 
of  the  aforesaid  undertaking. 