

Treaty  entered  into  between  the  Government  of  India  and  Meeb  Ncsseeb  Khan,     No-  XVI. 

Chief  of  Khelat. 

Whereas  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  son  of  Mehrab  Khan,  deceased, 
having  tendered  his  allegiance  and  submission,  the  British  Government 
and  His  Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk  recognise  him,  the  said  Nusseer 
Khan,  and  his  descendants  as  Chief  of  the  principality  of  Khelati-Nusseer 
on  the  following  terms  : — 

Article  1. 

Meer  Nusseer  Khan  acknowledges  himself  and  his  descendants  the 
vassals  of  the  king  of  Cabool,  in  like  manner  as  his  ancestors  were  for- 
merly the  vassals  of  His  Majesty's  ancestors. 


Article  2. 

Of  the  tracts  of  country  resumed  on  the  death  of  Meer  Mehrab 
Khan,  namely,  Cutchee,  Moostung,  and  Shawl,  the  two  first  will  be 
restored  to  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  and  his  descendants  through  the  kindness 
of  His  Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk. 

Article  3. 

Should  it  be  deemed  necessary  to  station  troops,  whether  belonging 
to  the  Honourable' Company  or  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk,  in  any  part  of  the 
territory  of  Khelat,  they  shall  occupy  such  positions  as  may  be  thought 
advisable. 

Article  4. 
Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  his  heirs  and  successors,  will  always  be  guided 
by  the  advice  of  the  British  officer  residing  at  his  Durbar. 

Article  5. 

The  passage  of  merchants  and  others  into  Afghanistan  from  the 
river  Indus  on  the  one  side,  and  from  the  sea-port  of  Soumeeanee  on  the 
other,  shall  be  protected  by  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  as  far  as  practicable,  nor 


76 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


KHELAT.    will  any  aggression  be  practised  on  such  persons,  or  any  undue  exactions 
N     XV1       made   beyond   an  equitable  toU  to  bfl  &wd    by    the    British    Government 
and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan. 

Article  6. 

Meer  Nusseer  Khan  binds  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  not  to 
hold  any  political  communication  or  enter  into  any  negotiations  with 
foreign  powers  without  the  consent  of  the  British  Government  and  of 
His  Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk,  and  in  all  cases  to  act  in  subordi- 
nate co-operation  with  the  governments  of  British  India  and  of  the  Shah  ; 
but  the  usual  amicable  correspondence  with  neighbours  to  continue  as 
heretofore. 

Article  7. 

In  case  of  an  attack  on  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  by  an  open  enemy,  or 
of  any  difference  arising  between  him  and  any  foreign  power,  the  British 
Government  will  afford  him  assistance  or  good  offices  as  it  may  judge 
to  be  necessary  or  proper  for  the  maintenance  of  his  rights. 


Article  8. 

Meer  Nusseer  Khan  will  make  due  provision  for  the  support  of 
Shah  Newaz  Khan,  either  by  pension  to  be  paid  through  the  British  Gov- 
ernment, on  condition  of  that  Chief  residing  within  the  British  territory, 
or  by  grant  of  estates  within  Khelat  possessions,  as  %  may  hereafter  be 
decided  by  the  British  Government. 