

Done  at  Khelat  this  6th  day  of  October  a.  d.  1841,  corresponding 
with  the  20th  Shaban  a.  h.  1257.  •    • 


Seal. 


(Signed) 


Meer  Nusseer 
Khan. 


Seal. 


(Sigued)     Auckland. 


Ratified  and  signed  by  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General 
of  India  in  Council,  at  Fort  William  in  Bengal,  this  10th  day  of 
January  1842. 

(Signed)         T.  H.  Maddock, 

Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India, 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  77 

No.    XVII.  KHELAT. 


Treaty  between  the  British  Government  and  Nusseer  Kuan,  Chief  of  Khelat,     No-  XVIL 
concluded  on   the  part  of  the  British  Government  by  Major  John  Jacob, 
c.   b.,  in  virtue  of  full  powers  granted  by  the  Most  Noble  the  Marquis  of 
Dalhousie,  k.   t.,  &c,  Governor  General  of  India,  and  by   Meer  Ndsseer 
Khan,  Chief  of  Khelat. 

Whereas  the  course  of  events  has  made  it  expedient  that  a  new 
agreement  should  be  concluded  between  the  British  Government  and 
Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  Chief  of  Khelat,  the  following  Articles  have  been 
agreed  on  between  the  said  government  and  His  Highness  : — 

Article  1. 

The  Treaty  concluded  by  Major  Outram  between  the  British  Gov- 
ernment and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  Chief  of  Khelat,  on  the  6th  October 
1841,  is  hereby  annulled. 

Article  2. 

There  shall  be  perpetual  friendship  between  the  British  Government 
and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  Chief  of  Khelat,  his  heirs  and  successors. 

Article  3. 

Meer  Nusseer  Khan  binds  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  to  oppose 
to  the  utmost  all  the  enemies  of  the  British  Government,  in  all  cases 
to  act  in  subordinate  co-operation  with  that  government,  and  to  enter 
into  no  negotiation  with  other  States  without  its  consent,  the  usual 
friendly  correspondence  with  neighbours  being  continued  as  before. 

Article  4. 
Should  it  be  deemed  necessary  to  station  British  troops  in  any  part 
of  the  territory  of  Khelat,   they  shall  occupy  such  positions  as  may  be 
thought  advisable  by  the  British  Authorities. 

Article  5. 
Meer  Nusseer  Khan  binds  himself,  his  heirs  and  successors,  to  pre- 
vent all  plundering  or  other  outrage  by  his  subjects  within  or   near 
British  territory ;  to  protect  the  passage  of  merchants  to  and  fro  between 
the  British  dominions  and  Afghanistan,  whether  by  way  of  Siudh  or  by 


78  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 

KHELAT.    the  sea-port  of  Soumeeanee,  or  other  sea-ports  of  Mekran,  and  to  permit 
No.  XVII.    no  exactions  to  be  made  beyond  an  equitable  duty  to  be  fixed  by  the 

British  Government  and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  and  the  amount   to   be 

shown  in  the  Schedule  annexed  to  this  Treaty. 

Article  6. 

To  aid  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  his  heirs  and  successors,  in  the  fulfilment 
of  these  obligations,  and  on  condition  of  a  faithful  performance  of  them 
year  by  yeai',  the  British  Government  binds  itself  to  pay  to  Meer  Nusseer 
Khan,  his  heirs  and  successors,  an  annual  subsidy  of  fifty  thousand 
(50,000)  Company's  Rupees. 