

VOL.    VII.  ^ 


74  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

KHELAT.  British  Government,  to  enter  into  no  negotiations  with  other  States  with- 
""  out  its  consent,  and  to  receive  British  troops  into  his  country  if  such  a 
measure  should  be  deemed  necessary.  By  this  Treaty  also  the  British 
Government  granted  to  the  Khan  an  annual  subsidy  of  Rupees  50,000, 
on  condition  of  his  preventing  his  subjects  from  committing  outrages 
within  or  near  British  territory,  of  his  protecting  merchants,  and  per- 
mitting no  exactions  on  trade  beyond  certain  specified  duties. 

Nusseer  Khan  died  in  1857.  It  was  afterwards  discovered  that  he 
had  been  poisoned.  There  were  three  claimants  for  the  succession,  Azim 
Khan,  brother  of  Mehrab  Khan ;  his  son,  of  the  same  name ;  and  Kho- 
dadad  Khan,  half-brother  of  the  late  Chief.  The  last,  an  imbecile  youth, 
was  elected  by  the  Chiefs,  with  whom,  however,  he  soon  embroiled  him- 
self. He  also  had  to  contend  against  the  pretensions  of  Futteh  Khan,  the 
brother  of  our  nominee  Shah  Newaz  Khan,  who  was  supported  by  Azad 
Khan,  of  Kharan.  But  for  the  countenance  and  support  of  the  British 
Government,  he  could  not  have  maintained  himself  in  power  for  many 
days.  In  1859  the  British  Government  gave  the  Khan  Rupees  50,000, 
in  addition  to  the  subsidy  paid  under  the  Treaty,  to  enable  him  to 
strengthen  his  hands  and  meet  the  cost  of  reducing  the  rebellious  tribe 
of  Murrees,  who  harrassed  the  British  frontier.  This  additional  grant 
was  paid  for  four  successive  years,  but  very  little  good  resulted  from  it. 
The  leading  Chiefs  of  Khelat  conspired  against  Khodadad  Khan,  and,  on 
17th  March  1863,  proclaimed  his  cousin,  Sherdil  Khan,  as  their  ruler. 
The  town  and  fort  of  Khelat  were  surrendered  to  the  rebels  without  a 
show  of  defence.  Sherdil  Khan  was  murdered  in  May  1864,  and 
Khodadad  Khan  was  re-elected  Chief  of  the  State.  He  has  been  recog- 
nized by  the  British  Government  as  Khan  of  Khelat,  and  the  payment  of 
the  subsidy  of  Rupees  50,000,  under  the  Treaty  of  1854,  which  had  been 
suspended  during  the  disturbances  in  the  country,  has  been  revived. 

In  1863  a  convention  (No.  XVIII.)  was  made  with  Khodadad  Khan, 
by  which  he  engaged  to  secure  the  protection  of  the  Mekran  telegraph 
within  the  territories  of  his  feudatory  Chiefs  in  consideration  of  a  sub- 
sidy of  Rupees  5,000  a  year  to  be  paid  to  the  Chiefs,  and  authorized  the 
British  Government  to  make  their  own  arrangements  for  subsidizing  his 
feudatories.  During  the  revolution  in  Khelat  this  convention  was  de- 
clared to  be  in  abeyance. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS.  75 

No.   XVI.  KHELAT. 