

Article  7. 

If  during  any  year  the  conditions  above  mentioned  shall  not  be 
faithfully  performed  by  the  said  Meer  Nusseer  Khan,  his  heirs  and 
successors,  then  the  annual  subsidy  of  fifty  thousand  (50,000)  Company's 
Rupees  will  not  be  paid  by  the  British  Government. 

Done  at  Mustoong  this  fourteenth  day  of  May  one  thousand  eight 

hundred  and  fifty-four. 

(Signed)         John  Jacob,  Major, 

Mustoong,       ">  Political  Superintendent  and  Commandant 


,} 


l&lh  May  1854.  )  on  the  frontier  of  Upper  Sindh. 


Schedule  showing  amount  of  duty  to  be  levied  on  merchandize  passing  through 
the  dominions  of  the  Khan  of  Khelat  referred  to  in  Article  V.  of  this 
Treaty. 

On  each  camel-load,  without  respect  to  value,  from  the  northern  fron- 
tier to  the  sea,  either  to  Kurrachee  or  other  port,  Company's  Rupees  6, 

On  each  camel,  as  above,  from  the  northern  frontier  to  Shikarpore, 
Company's  Rupees  5. 

The  same  duties  to  be  levied  on  merchandize  passing  in  the  contrary 
direction  from  the  sea,  or  from  Sindh  to  the  Khelat  territory. 

(Signed)         John  Jacob,  Major, 
Political  Superintendent  and  Commandant 
on  the  frontier  of  Upper  Sindh. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  79 

The  foregoing  Articles  of  Treaty  having  been  concluded  between  the    KHELAT. 
British  Government  and  the  Khan  of  Khelat,  and  signed  and  sealed  by    Nog.  XVII 
Major  John  Jacob,  c.  b.]  on  the  one  part,  and  Meer  Nusseer  Khan  on     AXVin. 
the  other,  at  Mustoong,  on  the  14th  May  a.  d.  1854,  corresponding 
with  16th  Shaban  a.  h.  1270,  a  copy  of  the  same  will  be  delivered  to 
His  Highness,  duly  ratified  by  the  Governor  General  in  Council,  within 
two  months  from  this  date. 

(Signed)  Dalhousie. 

„  J.  Dorin. 

„  J.  Low. 

„  J.  P.  Grant. 

„  B.  Peacock. 

Ratified  by  the  Most  Noble  the  Governor  General  in  Council,  Fort 
William,  this  2nd  day  of  June  1854. 

(Signed)         G.  F.  Edmonstone, 

Secretary  to  the  Government  of  India. 


No.  XVIII. 

Convention  between  the  British  Govebnment  and  His  Highness  Khodadad 
Khan,  Khan  of  Khelat  and  Belochistan,  for  the  extension  of  the  Electric 
Telegraph  through  such  portions  of  the  dominions  of  His  Highness  in 
Mekran  as  lie  between  the  western  boundary  of  the  province  under  the 
feudatory  rule  of  the  Jam  of  Beyla  and  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  terri- 
tory of  Gwadur. 

Article  1. 
That  His  Highness  the  Khan  of  Khelat  shall  afford  protection  to 
the  line  of  telegraph  and  to  the  persons  employed  in  its  construction 
and  maintenance  through  the  tract  of  the  country  lying  between  the 
western  boundary  of  the  province  under  the  rule  of  the  Jam  of  Beyla 
and  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  Gwadur  territory. 