


80  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnfds. 

kiiklat.  Article  2. 

No.  XVIII.  That  the  British  Government  shall  be  at  liberty  to  erect  stations 

in  such  parts  of  the  said  country  as  they  may  deem  most  convenient  for 

telegraph  purposes. 

Article  3. 
That  the  material  of  the  telegraph  may  be  landed,  free  of  duty, 
wherever  the  British  Government  may  think  most  convenient  on  His 
Highnesses  coast. 

Article  4. 

That  the  cost  of  material,  labour,  landing  charges,  housing,  provi- 
sions, &c,  shall  be  borne  by  the  British  Government,  who  will  also  make 
any  arrangements  they  may  consider  most  convenient  regarding  their 
own  supplies,  labour,  &c,  His  Highness  the  Khan  undertaking  that 
no  impediment  shall  be  thrown  in  their  way,  but  that,  on  the  contrary, 
every  protection  and  assistance  shall  be  afforded  on  his  part. 

Article  5. 

That  for  the  protection  of  the  line  and  those  employed  upon  it,  the 
British  Government  will  agree  to  pay  the  annual  sum  of  Rupees  five 
thousand  (5,000),  and  His  Highness  the  Khan  of  Khelat  is  not  to  be 
called  upon  to  go  to  any  further  expense  than  the  above  sum. 

Article  6. 

That  His  Highness  the  Khan  shall  give  notice  through  the  Political 
Agent  to  the  British  Government  of  the  proportions  of  the  sum  above 
mentioned  which  he  may  wish  to  be  paid  to  the  various  Chiefs  to  whom 
he  will  entrust  the  conservation  of  the  line,  it  being  understood  that  the 
whole  sum  paid  by  the  British  Government  for  that  purpose  will  be 
expended  amongst  the  Chiefs  and  people  through  whose  country  the 
line  passes.'  On  receipt  of  His  Highnesses  wishes  in  this  respect,  the  sums 
will  be  paid  to  the  named  parties  through  the  Political  Agent  or  other 
officer  appointed  by  the  British  Government. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  81 

Article  7.  khelat. 

That  annual  payment  will  commence  from  the  date  that  the  Tele-  No.  XVIII. 
graph  officers  may  report  that  50  miles  of  the  line  have  been  erected, 
and  that  its  conservation  is  complete  for  that  distance. 

Article  8. 
That  any  disagreement  between  the  Telegraph  officials  and  the  sub- 
jects of  His  Highness  the  Khan  of  Khelat  shall  be  referred  to  the  Political 
Agent  at  Khelat  if  it  cannot  be  satisfactorily  settled  on  the  spot  by  the 
Telegraph  officers  in  communication  with  the  Agent  of  His  Highness. 

Article  9. 
Continued  obstruction  or  injury  to  the  line  may  cause  revocation  of 
this  agreement  at  any  time  on  the  part  of  the  British  Government. 

(Signed)         M.  Green,  Major, 
Camp  Kushmore,  "I  Actg.  Political  Agent  at  the  Court  of 


a 


The  20th  Feb.  1863.  J  His  Highness  the  Khan  of  Khelat. 


Additional  Clause  (X.)  of  a  Convention  with  His  Highness  the  Khan  of 
Khelat,  for  the  passage  of  the  Electric  Telegraph  through  his  Mekran  territory. 