


92  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

[A.  should  invade  India,  and  to  prevent  the  French  from  settling  or  re- 
siding in  Persia,  while,  in  the  event  of  war  between  the  Afghans 
or  the  French  and  Persia,  the  English  were  to  assist  the  king  with 
military  stores.  By  the  commercial  Treaty  (No.  XXIV.)  all  the  pri- 
vileges of  the  old  factories  were  restored,  several  more  were  granted, 
and  the  duties  to  be  collected  from  purchasers  of  staples  were  reduced 
to  1  per  cent. 

In  1805,  during  the  war  between  Persia  and  Russia,  which  originated 
in  the  invasion  of  Georgia,  the  king  of  Persia,  having  suffered  severe  re- 
verses, and  being  threatened  with  the  vengeance  of  Russia  for  the  treacher- 
ous murder  of  the  Russian  General,  threw  himself  on  the  support  of 
Napoleon,  who  was  then  at  the  height  of  his  power,  and  made  overtures 
for  a  union  of  political  interests  with  France.     He  bitterly  resented  the 
interpretation  which  the  British  Government  put  upon  the  Treaty  of  1801 
and  their  refusal  to  give  him  the  assistance   against  Russia  which  he 
claimed  under  that  Treaty,  and  in  consideration  of  which  he  had  offered, 
through  his  ambassador  Aga  Mahomed  Nubbee  Khan,  to  relinquish  the 
French  alliance.    The  proposals  of  the  French  were  that  they  should  compel 
the  Russians  to  restore  the  provinces  wrested  from  Persia,  and  that  they 
should  furnish  the  king  with  military  stores  and  officers  to  organize  his 
army  on  the  European  system,  while  the  king  on  his  part  was  to  declare  im- 
mediate war  with  the  English,  to  invade  India  by  way  of  Afghanistan,  and 
to  permit  a  French  army  to  invade  India  through  his  territories.     These 
negotiations  were  frustrated  by   the  peace  concluded  at  Tilsit  between 
Napoleon  and  the  emperor  Alexander,  but  they  had  the  effect  of  rousing 
the  British  Government  to  efforts  for  the  recovery  of  their  lost  ascend- 
ancy at  the  Court  of  Teheran  and  the  protection  of  their  Indian  empire 
by  binding  the  western  frontier  States  in  a  chain  of  friendly  alliance. 
Missions   were   sent  to   the  Ameers  of  Sindh,   Runjeet  Sing,  and  the 
Court  of  Cabool,  and  Sir  John  Malcolm  was  again  accredited  as  envoy 
to  Persia.     Unfortunately,  however,  without  previous  concert  with  the 
Indian  Government,  and  in  ignorance  of  the  measures  concerted  by  them, 
Sir  Harford  Jones  was  at  the  same  time  deputed  direct  from  England  as 
plenipotentiary  on  the  part   of  the   crown.     This  event  led  to  unseemly 
complications,  which  had  the  effect  of  rendering  both  governments  ridi- 
culous in  the  eyes  of  the  Persians. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  93 

Sir  John  .Malcolm  was  instructed,  in  the  event  of  Sir  Harford  Jones     PERSIA. 