

Mahomed  Shah  died  in  August  1848  and  was  succeeded  by  his 
eldest  son  Naseer-ood-deen,  the  present  king.  On  the  death  of  Yar 
Mahomed  Khan,  of  Herat,  in  1851,  his  son  Syud  Mahomed  Khan  suc- 
ceeded him.  Feeling  himself  insecure  in  power,  and  being  threatened 
by  the  Ameer  of  Cabool  and  by  Kohundil  Khan  from  Candahar,  Syud 
Mahomed  Khan  made  overtures  to  Persia,  and  a  force  was  despatched 
by  the  Shah  nominally  to  reduce  the  Turkomans,  but  in  reality  to 
occupy  Herat.  The  British  envoy  at  Teheran  remonstrated  and  re- 
quired from  the  Persian  government  explicit  assurances  of  the  course 
they  meant  to  adopt.  On  25th  January  1853  the  Persian  government 
signed  an  Agreement  (No.  XXXV.)  not  to  send  troops  to  Herat  unless 
it  should  be  attacked  by  a  foreign  force,  and  not  to  interfere  further  in 
its  affairs  than  had  been  done  in  the  life-time  of  Yar  Mahomed.  This 
interference  with  their  ambitious  projects  greatly  irritated  the  Persian 
court,  who  showed  their  annoyance  by  a  series  of  vexatious  slights,  which 
destroyed  all  cordiality  of  intercourse  with  the  British  envoy,  and  even- 
tually caused  a  new  rupture.  In  1854  Mirza  Hashim  Khan,  who  had 
been  discharged  from  the  Shah's  service,  was  appointed  to  be  agent  at 
Shiraz  for  the  British  mission.  The  Persian  government  objected  to 
the  appointment,  and  threatened  to  imprison  him  if  he  should  proceed 
on  his  duty.  They  next  seized  and  imprisoned  his  wife.  As  all  redress 
was  persistently  refused,  the  envoy  at  Teheran  struck  his  flag  on  the 
20th  November  and  withdrew  from  the  Persian  dominions.  An  official 
notification  was  issued  by  the  Persian  government  justifying  their  pro- 
ceedings, and  insinuating  that  the  interest  of  the  British  envoy  in 
the  case  sprang  from  an  intrigue  with  the  wife  of  Mirza  Hashim.  In 
the  mean  time  Mahomed  Yusoof,  grandson  of  Feroze  one  of  the  brothers 
of  Shah  Suja,  had  put  Syud  Mahomed  Khan,  the  ruler  of  Herat,  to 
death,  and  had  applied  to  the  Shah  of  Persia  for  assistance.  A  force  was 
sent,  in  December  1855,  in  violation  of  the  agreement  which  had  been 
made  by  the  Persian  government.  Mahomed  Yusoof  was  taken  prisoner, 
and  Herat  was  captured  on  26th  October  1856.  Every  effort  having 
failed  to  induce  the  Persian   government  to  adjust  the  quarrel  and  to 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNl'DS.  99 

apologize  for  the  insults  to  the  British  mission,  a  force  was  despatched  PERSIA, 
from  Bombay  to  occupy  the  island  of  Kharack,  and  war  was  formally  No.  xxi. 
declared  on  1st  November  1856.  After  a  brief  campaign,  hostilities  were 
terminated  by  the  Treaty  of  Paris  (No.  XXXVI.)  concluded  on  4th 
March  1857.  This  Treaty  revived  none  of  the  earlier  Treaties  cancelled 
by  the  war  except  the  Convention  of  August  1851  for  the  suppression 
of  slavery  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  which  by  the  13th  Article  is  renewed 
till  August  1872,  and  for  such  time  afterwards  as  neither  of  the  con- 
tracting parties  by  a  formal  declaration  annul  it. 