

Futteh  Ali  Shah  died  in  October  1834.  His  son  Abbas  Mirza  died 
the  preceding  year.  By  the  influence  of  Russia  and  England,  Mahomed 
Shah,  son  of  Abbas  Mirza,  was  placed  on  the  throne,  notwithstanding  the 
opposition  of  many  princes  of  the  royal  blood.  After  the  pacification  of 
Europe  in  1815,  and  the  removal  of  those  dangers  which  had  given  such 
exaggerated  importance  to  the  Persian  alliance,  no  steps  were  taken  to 
maintain  the  influence  in  Persian  counsels  which  had  been  secured  to  the 
British  Government  by  the  Treaty  of  Teheran  in  1814.  On  the  contrary, 
much  was  done  to  dishearten  the  Shah  and  impress  him  with  the  belief 
that  the  preservation  of  the  integrity  of  his  empire  was  a  matter  of  in- 
difference to  England.  Not  the  least  offensive  part  of  the  change  in 
policy  was  the  transfer,  in  1823,  of  the  relations  with  Persia  to  the  gov- 
ernment of  India,  and  the  substitution  of  an  envoy  of  the  Governor 
General  for  the  plenipotentiary  of  the  crown.  This  change  was  accepted 
most  reluctantly  by  the  Shah,  who  believed  that  it  was  not  only  deroga- 
tory to  his  dignity,  but  dangerous  to  his  power.  The  conflict  between 
the  crown  and  the  Indian  Government  regarding  the  mission  in  ISO 9 
had  lowered  his  respect  for  the  latter,  and,  moreover,  he  believed  that  the 
operations  which  the  Indian  Government  undertook  in  the  year  1819 
against  the  pirates  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  would  have  ended  in  aggressions 
on  his  government,  but  for  the  control  of  the  English  ministry.     So 


96  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,  little  care  was  taken  to  cultivate  relations  with  Persia,  that,  after  the 
peace  of  Turkornanehai  and  the  abrogation  of  the  subsidy  agreement  of 
1814,  a  measure  to  which  the  Shah  agreed  only  under  the  pressure  of 
pecuniary  embarrassments  caused  by  the  payment  of  indemnity  to 
Russia,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  influence  of  the  British  Gov- 
ernment at  Teheran  should  have  declined  before  that  of  Russia.  The 
Shah  for  some  years  continued  to  urge  the  necessity  of  revising  the 
Treaty  of  1814,  and  of  substituting  for  the  abrogated  Articles  a 
general  stipulation  of  protection  which  would  at  least  evidence  the 
wish  of  the  British  Government  that  the  independence  of  Persia 
should  be  preserved.  No  steps,  however,  were  taken  to  meet  the 
expectations  of  the  Shah,  and  when  at  last,  after  long  delay,  the  British 
Government,  in  1833,  authorized  their  representative  in  Persia  to 
enter  on  negotiations  for  a  revision  of  the  Treaty,  their  ascendancy 
had  given  place  entirely  to  that  of  Russia.  The  negotiations  were  pro- 
tracted till  the  year  1837,  but  led  to  no  result.  For  a  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury, indeed,  British  merchants  in  Persia  had  not  even  the  protection  of 
a  commercial  Treaty  or  any  other  security  for  trade  than  that  which  the 
general  friendly  relations  of  Britain  with  Persia  afforded  them,  save  a 
Firman  (No.  XXIX.)  abolishing  export  duty  on  horses,  and  another 
(No.  XXX.)  granted  in  1836,  permitting  British  merchants  to  trade  on 
payment  of  the  same  duties  as  those  paid  by  Russian  merchants.  The 
preamble  of  the  Treaty  of  1814  provided  that  a  commercial  Treaty  should 
be  afterwards  concluded ;  this,  however,  was  never  done,  and  the  Persian 
government  maintained  that  the  commercial  Treaty  concluded  by  Sir 
John  Malcolm  was  abrogated  by  the  later  Treaty  of  1814.  The  British 
representatives,  Mr.  Ellis  and  Mr.  Morrier,  had,  in  1814,  addressed  an 
official  note  to  the  Shah,  proposing  that  commerce  should  remain  on  the 
footing  of  the  Treaty  of  1800,  but  this  proposal  was  never  accepted. 
Matters  remained  in  this  unsatisfactory  state  till  1841,  when  a  com- 
mercial Treaty  (No.  XXXI.)  was  concluded,  which  put  the  trade  of 
Bfitain  and  Persia  on  the  same  footing  as  that  of  the  most  favoured 
nations,  and  provided  for  the  establishment  of  commercial  Agencies  in 
the  two  countries.  In  1844  a  Firman  (No.  XXXII.)  was  obtained, 
prescribing  the  procedure  to  be  followed  for  the  protection  of  merchants 
in  cases  of  bankruptcy  and  insolvency. 