

Aga  Mahomed  Khan,  who  for  many  years  had  ruled  over  a  consi- 
derable province  of  the  Persian  empire,  but  who  was  not  acknowledged 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  91 

as  independent  sovereign  till  1795,  was  scarcely  established  in  power  PERSIA, 
when  he  found  himself  involved  in  a  war  with  Russia.  Taking  advantage 
of  the  distracted  state  of  Persia,  Heraclius,  the  Wullee  of  Georgia,  had,  in 
1783,  transferred  his  allegiance  from  Persia  to  Catherine  the  Second,  who 
received  him  under  her  protection  and  guaranteed  the  integrity  of  his 
possessions.  In  1795  Aga  Mahomed  Khan  resolved  to  punish  the 
Georgians  for  their  defection,  and  marching  upon  the  country  with  a 
rapidity  which  prevented  the  Wullee  from  receiving  support  from  Rus- 
sia, he  ordered  a  general  massacre  of  the  inhabitants,  sparing  the  young 
and  beautiful,  whom  he  carried  off  into  captivity.  Persia  was  instantly 
invaded  by  a  Russian  army,  who  soon  gained  important  successes  and 
were  advancing  on  Teheran,  when  their  progress  was  stopped,  and  they 
were  recalled  by  the  death  of  the  empress  in  1796. 

In  the  following  year  Aga  Mahomed  Khan  was  murdered.  He  was 
one  of  the  most  prudent  and  able  kings  who  ever  ruled  in  Persia.  He 
was  succeeded  by  his  nephew  Futteh  Ali  Khan,  during  whose  rule  com- 
menced that  closer  connection  between  the  British  Government  and  Per- 
sia which  had  its  origin  in  the  fear  of  an  Afghan  invasion  of  India,  the 
designs  of  the  French  on  the  British  dominions  in  the  east,  and  the  com- 
petition ef  European  powers  for  influence  at  Teheran. 

From  the  success  which  had  attended  the  invasion  of  India  by 
Nadir  Shah  and  Ahmed  Shah  Abdali,  it  was  believed  that  the  plains  of 
India  were  exposed  to  be  periodically  ravaged  by  any  ambitious  ruler  in 
Afghanistan.  In  1796  Zeman  Shah,  grandson  of  Ahmed  Shah  Abdali, 
advanced  to  Lahore  with  the  professed  purpose  of  restoring  the  House 
of  Timour  from  the  domination  of  the  Mahrattas.  Disturbances  in  his 
own  dominions  recalled  him  in  the  following  year ;  but  this  invasion  and 
rumours  of  renewed  preparations,  coupled  with  the  apprehension  of  an 
invasion  of  India  by  the  French,  and  the  deputation  of  a  secret  embassy 
by  Napoleon  to  establish  his  influence  at  Teheran,  forced  the  British 
Government  to  measures  for  the  security  of  their  Indian  possessions. 
Captain  Malcolm  was  accordingly  deputed  as  envoy  to  Persia  to  negoti- 
ate a  political  and  commercial  alliance.  He  concluded  two  Treaties 
in  1801  with  the  Persian  minister,  which  the  king  ratified  by  prefixing 
his  Firman.  By  the  terms  of  the  political  Treaty  (No.  XXIII.)  the  king 
of  Persia  engaged  to  lay  waste  the  country  of  the  Afghans  if  ever  they 