

Throughout  the  long  reign  of  Futteh  Ali  Shah,  the  Persian  empire 
enjoyed  rest  from  internal  revolution,  but  it  suffered  severely  from  pro- 
tracted war  with  Russia.  The  provinces  of  Georgia,  Mingrelia,  Daghis- 
tan,  Sherwan,  Karabagh,  and  Talish  were  successively  severed  from  it,  and 
only  the  good  offices  of  the  British  Government  arrested  the  further  ad- 
vance of  the  Russian  arms.  In  October  1813  peace  was  concluded  at 
Goolistan,  and  a  Treaty  was  drawn  up,  indicating  generally  the  boundary 
between  the  Russian  and  Persian  empires,  but  leaving  its  exact  direction 
to  be  afterwards  settled  by  Commissioners.  For  some  years  thereafter 
there  was  nominal  peace,  but  in  the  adjustment  of  the  boundaries  many 
difficulties  and  disputes  arose.  The  Russians  occupied  and  refused  to 
evacuate  the  district  of  Gokcha,  which  the  Persians  claimed  as  theirs. 
Hostilities  were  renewed  in  1826,  the  first  attack  being  made  by  Abbas 
Mirza,  the  prince  royal  of  Persia.  At  the  commencement  of  the  war,  the 
Persians  claimed  from  the  British  Government  the  assistance  in  money  or 
troops  stipulated  for  in  the  4th  Article  of  the  definitive  Treaty  of  1814. 
After  enquiry,  however,  assistance  was  refused,  on  the  ground  that  actual 
hostilities  had  been  provoked  by  aggression  on  the  part  of  Persia,  but 
for  which  the  disputes  might  have  been  adjusted  by  negotiation — a  de- 
cision of  course  unsatisfactory  to  the  king  of  Persia,  who  argued  that  the 


*  This  Treaty,  although  never  formally  ratified  hy  His  Majesty's  government,  is 
inserted  in  this  collection  because  it  is  referred  to  in  the  Treaty  of  1814,  and  the  scope  of 
the  later  Treaty  cannot  be  fully  understood  without  comparison  with  it. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDg.  95 

Russian  occupation  of  Gokcha  was  an  aggression  on  his  dominions.  In  PERSIA, 
the  course  of  the  war  the  Persians  sustained  severe  losses,  but  at  lensrth 
through  the  mediation  of  the  British  envoy,  a  Treaty  of  peace  was  con_ 
eluded  at  Turkomanchai,  on  23rd  February  1828,  by  which  the  Persian 
government  ceded  to  Russia  the  provinces  of  Erivan  and  Nukshivan,  and 
agreed  to  pay  indemnification  for  the  expenses  of  the  war.  The  em. 
peror  of  Russia  engaged  to  recognize  Abbas  Mirza,  the  king's  eldest  son, 
as  heir  and  successor  to  the  throne  of  Persia. 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  negotiation,  opportunity  was  taken  by  the 
British  envoy  to  purchase  the  abrogation  (No.  XXVIII.)  of  the  3rd 
and  4th  Articles  of  the  Treaty  of  1814  by  a  payment  of  2,00,000  Tomans, 
or  one  year's  subsidy.  These  Articles  had  been  found  exceedingly  onerou8 
and  inconvenient,  and  productive  only  of  collision  with  the  Persian  gov- 
ernment. By  the  cancelling  of  the  3rd  and  4th  Articles  of  the  Treaty, 
the  6th  and  7th  Articles  also  were  virtually  abrogated. 