


arriving  at  Bombay  on  his  way  to  Persia  before  him,  to  proceed  as  envoy 
to  Baghdad  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  an  alliance  with  the  Pacha 
and  the  petty  Chiefs  in  Arabia,  leaving  Sir  H.  Jones  to  conduct  the 
negotiations  at  Teheran ;  but  the  paramount  importance  of  recovering  a 
footing  in  Persia  was  to  over-rule  all  other  considerations,  and  Sir 
J.  Malcolm  was  to  proceed  on  his  mission  to  Persia  without  delay  if  he 
should  find  himself  the  first  in  the  field.  Sir  John  arrived  in  Persia 
first,  while  the  king  was  still  trusting  to  the  liberal  promises  with  which 
the  French  amused  him.  Considering  the  dignity  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment iusulted  by  an  attempt,  which  he  attributed  to  the  influence  of  the 
French  embassy,  to  exclude  him  from  the  royal  presence  and  draw  him 
into  negotiations  with  subordinate  officials  at  Shiraz,  he  concluded  that 
there  was  no  hope  of  a  friendly  alliance.  He  therefore  abruptly  quitted 
the  country,  and,  proceeding  to  Calcutta,  induced  Lord  Minto  to  prepare 
for  the  occupation  of  the  island  of  Kharack  in  the  Persian  Gulf  as  a 
position  from  which  the  British  Government  could  either  negotiate  with 
dignity  or  act  with  effect  if  war  should  be  declared.  The  instructions 
given  to  Sir  Harford  Jones  were  that  he  should  remain  at  Bombay  till 
the  issue  of  Sir  John  Malcolm's  mission  was  known,  but  that  he  should 
proceed  to  Persia  at  once  in  the  event  either  of  Sir  J.  Malcolm  being 
obliged  to  leave  without  attaining  his  object,  or  of  his  succeeding  in 
concluding  a  preliminary  Treaty.  On  Sir  John  Malcolm's  return,  there- 
fore, he  set  out  for  Teheran.  Further  instructions  to  suspend  his  mission 
reached  him  too  late.  He  arrived  at  Teheran  when  the  king  had  lost 
all  faith  in  the  professions  of  the  French,  which,  in  consequence  of  the 
peace  with  Russia  and  reverses  in  Europe,  they  were  no  longer  able  to 
fulfil,  and  he  therefore  found  no  difficulty  in  concluding  a  preliminary 
Treaty  (No.  XXV.).  By  this  Treaty,  which  was  concluded  on  the  12th 
and  exchanged  on  the  15th  March  1809,  all  Treaties  contracted  by 
the  king  with  European  powers  were  annulled,  the  king  engaged  to 
prevent  the  passage  of  European  armies  through  his  dominions  to- 
wards India,  and  the  English  were  to  assist  him  with  troops  or  a 
subsidy  if  any  European  forces  should  invade  his  territories,  and  to 
take  no  part  except  as  mediators  in  any  war  between  Persia  and 
Afghanistan. 


M  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNTJDS. 

PERSIA.  The  validity  of  this  Treaty,  subject  to  such  modifications  as  might 

afterwards  be  agreed  upon,  was  recognised  by  Lord  Minto,  who,  however, 
suspended  the  functions  of  Sir  H.  Jones,  directed  him  to  withdraw  from 
Persia,  and  again  sent  Sir  John  Malcolm  as  envoy  to  the  king  for  the 
purpose  of  concerting  further  arrangements.  Meanwhile  Sir  H.  Jones 
had  received  orders  from  England  to  remain  at  Teheran  till  the  arrival  of 
another  plenipotentiary,  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  whose  powers  superseded  those 
both  of  Sir  H.  Jones  and  Sir  J.  Malcolm.  •  A  definitive  Treaty* 
(No.  XXVI.)  based  on  the  preliminary  Treaty  of  1809  was  concluded  by 
Sir  Gore  Ouseley  on  14th  March  1812,  but  some  of  the  stipulations 
were  altered  in  England,  and  it  was  not  till  1814  that  the  terms  of  the 
Treaty  (No.  XXVII.)  were  finally  adjusted. 