

Shah  Tamasp  was  permitted  to  enjoy  his  nominal  sovereignty  only 
two  years,  when  he  was  dethroned  by  Nadir  Kooli,  who,  with  affected 
reluctance,  accepted  the  crown.  Under  Nadir  Shah  the  Persian  empire 
recovered  for    a  time  its   former   glory.     He   not  only   recovered   the 

VOL.   VII.  » 


90  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,  provinces  conquered  by  the  Turks  and  the  Russians,  but  reduced  Sindh, 
Candahar,  Cabool,  Balkh,  and  the  whole  country  between  the  Oxus  and 
the  Caspian  Sea,  carried  his  arms  to  Delhi,  gave  up  the  capital  of  the 
Moghuls  to  plunder  and  massacre,  and  compelled  the  emperor  of  Delhi 
to  cede  to  him  all  his  possessions  west  of  the  Indus. 

Nadir  Shah  was  murdered  in  1747.  "Within  a  few  years  after  his 
death  the  mighty  empire  which  he  had  re-created  was  dismembered. 
Ahmed  Khan  Abdali  proclaimed  himself  king  of  the  Afghans,  took 
Candahar  and  Herat,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  an  empire  which  he 
extended  by  conquests  more  brilliant  than  those  of  Nadir  Shah.  The 
province  of  Khorassan  was  all  that  was  left  to  Shah  Rokh,  the  blinded 
grandson  of  Nadir  Shah.  This  was  guaranteed  in  his  independent  pos- 
session by  Ahmed  Khan,  but  was  soon  broken  up  into  a  number  of  in- 
dependent principalities.  The  southern  and  western  provinces  of  Lar, 
Fars,  Irak,  Azerbijan,  and  Mazenderan  were  subdued  by  Kureem  Khan 
of  the  tribe  of  Zund,  and  a  prince  of  the  Suffavean  house  named  Shah 
Ismael,  a  son  of  the  sister  of  Shah  Hossein,  was  set  up  as  king.  He 
was,  however,  a  mere  puppet,  and  was  at  last  cast  into  prison,  while  the 
reins  of  government  were  held  by  Kureem  Khan  alone.  Kureem  Khan 
was  a  just  and  enlightened  ruler.  He  took  great  pains  to  extend  and 
encourage  commerce,  and,  during  his  reign,  the  English,  who  had  aban- 
doned Gombroon,  obtained,  in  1763,  a  Firman  (No.  XXI.)  for  a  factory 
at  Bushire  and  the  trade  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 

Kureem  Khan  died  in  1779  after  a  vigorous  rule  of  twenty-six 
years.  His  death  was  the  signal  for  fresh  revolutions  marked  by  the 
most  atrocious  cruelties,  in  the  course  of  which  the  four  surviving  sons  of 
Kureem  Khan  were  savagely  mutilated,  and  which  ended  in  1795  in  the 
elevation  of  Aga  Mahomed  Khan  of  the  Kujur  tribe,  the  founder  of  the 
present  dynasty,  to  the  throne  of  Persia.  In  1788,  during  the  brief  rule 
of  Jaffir  Khan,  nephew  of  Kureem  Khan,  and  the  last  representative  but 
one  of  the  Zund  family,  the  English,  who,  during  the  revolution,  had 
been  subjected  to  many  oppressive  exactions,  obtained  through  the  Chief 
of  their  factory  at  Bussora  another  Firman  (No.  XXII.)  for  unrestricted 
trade  in  the  Persian  dominions. 