

In  1861  proposals  were  made  for  a  convention  between  the  Indian 
and  Persian  governments  for  the  construction  of  a  line  of  telegraph 
from  the  Turkish  frontier  through  Persia  to  Bunder  Abbas,  to  form  part 
of  a  telegraph  line  from  England  to  India.  After  some  negotiations, 
however,  the  Persian  government,  on  25th  April  1862,  declined  the  terms 
offered.  The  route  through  Persia  was  therefore  abandoned,  and  the 
Turkish  and  Indian  lines  of  telegraph  were  connected  by  a  sub-marine 
cable  in  the  Persian  Gulf.  The  Shah  afterwards  decided  on  constructing 
an  alternative  line  at  his  own  cost  from  Khanakeen,  on  the  Turkish  fron- 
tier, through  Teheran,  Ispahan,  and  Shiraz,  to  meet  the  other  line  at 
Bushire,  and  for  this  purpose  he  concluded  an  engagement  (No.  XXXVII.) 
in  December  1863,  to  place  the  construction  and  working  of  the  line  for 
a  time  under  the  superintendence  of  an  English  Engineer  officer,  to  pur- 
chase the  materials  from  the  British  Government,  and  to  allow  the  Bri- 
tish Government  the  use  of  the  line  on  payment  of  specified  charges. 


No.  XXI. 

Articles    of   Agbeement    made  with   Siiaik   Sadoon,   of   Bushire,   the    12th 

April  1763. 

Article  1. 

No  customs  or  duties  to  be  collected  on  goods  imported  or  exported 
by  the  English;  and,  in  like  manner,  only  three  per  cent,  to  be  token 
from  the  merchants  who  buy  or  sell  to  the  English. 


100  treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds. 

peksia.  Article  2. 


No  XXI.  The  importation  and  sale  of  woollen  goods  to  be  solely  in  the  hands 

of  the  English  ;  and  if  any  person  whatever  attempts  to  bring  woollen 
goods  clandestinely,  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  English  to  seize  them. 
This  Article  to  take  place  in  four  months  from  the  date  hereof. 

Aeticle  3. 

No  European  nation  whatever  is  to  be  permitted  to  settle  at  Bushire 
so  long  as  the  English  continue  a  factory  here. 

Article  4. 

The  brokers,  linguists,  servants,  and  others  of  the  English  are  to 
be  entirely  under  the  protection  and  government  of  the  English  ;  nor  is 
the  Shaik,  or  his  people,  in  any  shape  to  molest  them,  or  interfere  in 
their  affairs. 

Article  5. 

In  case  any  of  the  inhabitants  become  truly  indebted  to  the  English 
and  refuse  payment,  the  Shaik  shall  oblige  them  to  give  the  English 
satisfaction. 

Article  6. 

The  English  to  have  such  a  spot  of  ground  as  they  may  pitch  upon 
for  erecting  a  factory,  and  proper  conveniences  for  carrying  on  their 
commerce  to  be  built  at  the  Shaikhs  expense.     They  are  to  hoist  their 
•     colours  upon  it,  and  have  twenty-one  guns  for  saluting. 

Article  7. 

A  proper  spot  of  ground  to  be  allotted  the  English  for  a  garden 
and  another  for  a  burying  ground. 