

Thirdly.  —That  it  should  be  lawful  for  them  to  transport  twenty  horses,  of  which  num. 
"  ber  two  might  be  mares,  yearly. 

'  •  Provided  first. — That  the  English  should  keep  two  men  of  war  constantly  to  defend  the 
Gulf;    and 

"Secondly.—  That  they  should  deliver  the  Portugal's  forts  into  the  Persians'  hands,  in 
"  doing  which  the  English  should  always  be  esteemed  the  emperor's  friends ;  and 

"  Lastly. — Should  have  the  first  seat  in  the  Council,  and  their  Agents  be  looked  on 
"  with  equal  grace  to  their  prime  nobility." 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   STINNUDS.  89 

The  death  of  Shah  Abbas  in  1628  was  followed  by  the  rapid  full 
of  the  Suffaveau  dynasty.  Four  weak  princes  of  that  house  successively 
ascended  the  throne  of  Persia.  During  their  reign  the  Turks  severed 
from  the  Persian  empire  some  of  the  best  of  the  western  provinces,  the 
Arab  ruler  of  Muscat  possessed  himself  of  the  islands  in  the  Persian 
Gulf,  the  Afghans  of  the  Abdali  tribe  made  themselves  independent  in 
Herat  and  the  Ghiljies  in  Candahar,  and  in  1722,  within  a  century  after 
the  death  of  Shah  Abbas,  Ispahan  was  besieged  by  Mahmood  of  Can- 
dahar, to  whom  Shah  Hossein  formally  resigned  his  crown. 

The  Afghan  dynasty  ras  short-lived.  Mahmood  died  in  a  state  of 
raving  madness  in  1725.  His  cousin  and  only  successor  Ashraf  was 
slain  in  1730  while  fleeing  in  the  desert  before  his  conqueror  Nadir 
Kooli  Khan,  the  notorious  Nadir  Shah.  After  the  abdication  of  Shah 
Hossein,  his  son  Tamasp  had  assumed  the  name  and  state  of  king,  and 
was  unceasing  in  his  feeble  efforts  to  recover  the  crown.  He  entered 
into  a  Treaty  with  Russia,  ceding  all  the  possessions  of  Persia  on  the 
Caspian  Sea  on  condition  of  the  emperor  expelling  the  Afghans  and 
placing  him  on  the  throne,  and  with  the  same  view  he  entered  into 
negotiations  with  the  Turks,  who  were  extending  their  conquests  in  the 
north  and  west.  "Without  much  consideration,  however,  for  Tamasp  and 
his  pretensions,  the  courts  of  St.  Petersburg  and  Constantinople  concluded 
a  Treaty  in  1725,  by  which  they  partitioned  Persia  between  themselves. 
It  was  entirely  to  the  energy  and  talents  of  Nadir  Kooli  Khan,  who  had 
acquired  a  great  reputation  for  courage  and  enterprise,  that  Tamasp  was 
indebted  for  the  recovery  of  his  fortunes.  Nadir  Kooli  was  put  in  com- 
mand of  Tamasp's  small  army  in  1727.  He  compelled  the  whole  of 
Khorassan  to  acknowledge  the  son  of  Shah  Hossein,  and  by  the  close 
of  the  year  1730  the  foreign  Afghan  rulers  were  expelled  from  Persia, 
most  of  their  followers  were  put  to  the  sword,  and  the  Suffaveau  dynasty 
was  once  more  represented  on  the  throne  in  the  person  of  Shah  Tamasp, 
who  granted  to  Nadir  Kooli,  as  a  reward  for  his  services,  tin-  provinces 
of  Khorassan,  Mazenderan,  Seistan,  and  Kerman. 