


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  97 

In  1848,  when  the  British  Government  were  making  strenuous  PERSIA, 
exertions  to  suppress  the  traffic  in  African  slaves,  an  engagement 
(No.  XXXIII.)  was  obtained  from  the  Shah  to  prohibit  the  importation 
of  slaves  into  Persia  by  sea.  The  priests  were  greatly  averse  to  the 
abolition  of  slave  traffic,  and  the  Shah  did  not  feel  himself  strong  enough 
to  brave  their  opposition  and  to  absolutely  and  explicitly  prohibit  the 
importation  of  slaves  into  his  dominions ;  but  he  virtually  did  so  by 
forbidding  importation  by  sea,  as  the  route  by  land  is  not  prac- 
ticable. In  1851  a  Convention  (No.  XXXIV.)  was  concluded  for  the 
search  and  seizure  of  Persian  vessels  suspected  of  being  engaged  in  the 
slave  trade. 

The  reconquest  of  Afghanistan  was  always  a  favorite  dream  of  the 
Kujur  dynasty,  who  conceived  that  their  rights  of  sovereignty  over  that 
country  were  as  complete  as  in  the  days  of  the  Suffavean  kings.  The 
first  use  which  the  Russians  made  of  their  ascendancy  after  the  peace  of 
1828  was  to  encourage  Futteh  Ali  Shah  in  his  ambition  for  eastern  con- 
quests as  an  off-set  for  the  cessions  on  his  north-western  frontier,  and  as  a 
means  of  indirectly  establishing  their  own  influence  as  far  as  the  Indus. 
Futteh  Ali  Shah  projected  two  unsuccessful  expeditions  against  Afghan- 
istan and  the  city  of  Herat,  which  is  the  key  to  the  country.  His  son 
Mahomed  Shah,  who  was  ever  a  friend  of  Russia  and  an  enemy  to 
British  interests,  revived  the  project,  and  with  a  large  force  laid  siege 
to  Herat  on  23rd  November  1837.  He  was  aware  and  had  been  warned 
that  any  hostile  movement  against  Herat  would  be  viewed  with  dis- 
satisfaction by  the  British  Government.  Confident,  however,  in  the 
support  of  Russia,  he  rejected  all  offers  for  the  settlement  of  his  disputes 
with  Shah  Kamran  of  Herat  by  friendly  mediation,  and  treated  the 
British  mission  with  a  marked  discourtesy,  which  compelled  the  envoy 
to  lower  his  flag  and  declare  the  alliance  with  Persia  at  an  end.  To  force 
the  Shah  to  renounce  his  ambitious  projects,  a  demonstration  was  made 
in  the  Persian  Gulf  by  the  occupation  of  the  island  of  Kharack.  This 
had  the  effect  of  forcing  him  to  withdraw  his  troops  from  Herat 
after  a  memorable  siege  of  ten  months,  in  which  all  his  efforts 
to  take  the  city  were  defeated  by  the  energy  and  ability  of  Eldred  Pottin- 
ger,  a  young  English  officer  of  Artillery.  On  the  withdrawal  of  the 
British  armies  from  Afghanistan,  Shah  Kamran  was  deposed  and  mur- 
VOL.   vii.  o 


98  TKKATIKS,    KX<;A(.  i:\ik\ts,    AN' I)   SIN'N'IDS. 

PERSIA,     dered  by  his  vizier  Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  who  in  words  professed  himself 
~  to  be  a  dependant  of  the  Shah  of  Persia,  but  maintained  himself   in 
real  independence. 