

The  house  that  formerly  belonged  to  the  English  Company  at 
Schyrash  I  now  re-deliver  to  them,  with  the  garden  and  water  thereto 
belonging. 


Articles  desired  by  the  KnAN. 

That  the  English,  according  to  what  was  formerly  customary,  shall 
purchase  from  the  Persia  merchants  such  goods  as  will  answer  for  send- 
ing to  England  or  India,  provided  they  and  the  Persians  shall  agree  on 
reasonable  prices  for  the  same,  and  not  export  from  Persia  the  whole 
amount  of  their  sales  in  ready  money,  as  this  will  impoverish  the  king- 
dom and  in  the  end  prejudice  trade  in  general. 

That  the  English,  wherever  they  are  settled,  shall  not  maltreat  the 
Mussulmen.  4 


104  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  What  goods  are  imported  by   the  English  into  Persia,  they  shall 

Nns.  XXI     give  the  preference  in  sale  of  them  to  the  principal  merchants  and  men 
&XX1I.      of  credit. 

The  English  shall  not  give  protection  to  any  of  the  king's  rebelli- 
ous subjects,  nor  carry  them  out  of  the  kingdom,  but  deliver  any  up 
that  may  desert  to  them,  who  shall  not  be  punished  for  the  first  or 
second  offence. 

The  English  shall  at  no  time,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  assist  the 
king's  enemies. 

All  our  Governors  of  provinces,  sea-ports,  and  other  towns  are 
ordered  to  pay  a  strict  obedience  to  these  our  orders,  on  pain  of  incurring 
our  displeasure,  and  of  being  punished  for  their  disobedience  or  neglect. 

Bated  in  Scliyrash,  the  23rd  of  Seerhoja  1176,  or  the  2nd  of 
July  1763. 


No.  XXII. 
Tbanslate  of  a  Fieman  from  Jaffie  Khan. 

In  the  name  of  the  Almighty  and  Glorious  God ! 

This  is  exalted  Firmana. 

After  Compliments. — And  as  we  are  always  desirous  that  the  mer- 
chants and  Coflas,  who  have  occasion  to  pass  backwards  and  forwards  in 
our  dominions,  should  do  so  in  safety,  that  they  should  sleep  in  the 
cradle  of  security  and  confidence,  and  that  they  should  transact  all  their 
business  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  without  trouble  or  vexation : — 

Therefore  the  high,  exalted  Firmana  has  been  issued  forth,  con- 
taining the  strictest  mandates  to  all  Governors  and  Commanders  of  our 
towns  and  castles,  to  all  our  Sirdars,  and  to  all  Kiotdars,  who  receive 
customs  on  the  roads,  that  they  do  show  every  favour  to  all  persons 
employed  by  the  English  nation  in  our  dominions  for  the  purpose  of 
merchandize,  whether  it  be  for  importation  or  exportation,  and  that  they 
be  constantly  vigilant  in  protecting  them,  and  moreover  that  these  our 
above-mentioned  servants,  upon  no  account  or  pretence  whatsoever, 
require  any  customs,  presents,  or  money  from  the  Agents  of  the  English 
nation,  but  that  it  may  so  happen  that  from  a  confidence  in  us,  and 
from  a  full  persuasion  of  not  receiving  any  insult  or  vexation,  they,  the 