

Firman. 
In  the  name  of  the  beloved  and  Great  God  ! 


The  King  of 
Persia's  Seal. 


The  earth  is  the  Lord's.  Our  august  commands  are  issued,  that 
the  high  in  rank,  the  exalted  in  station,  the  great  rulers,  officers,  and 
writers  of  the  ports,  sea-coasts,  and  islands  of  the  provinces  of  Fars 
and  Khoozistaun,  do  consider  themselves  as  particularly  honoured  and 
advanced  by  the  royal  favour ;  and  whereas,  at  this  period,  the  found- 
ations of  union  and  friendship  have  been  cemented,  and  the  habits  of 
amity  and  intercourse  have  been  increased  between  the  ministers  of 
the  Persian  State,  of  eternal  duration,  and  the  ministers  of  the  high 
government  of  the  refulgent  sun  of  the  sky  of  royalty,  greatness,  and 
eminence,  the  sovereign  of  the  countries  of  England  and  India;  and 
as  various  engagements  and  Treaties,  calculated  for  duration  and  per- 
manence, and  for  mutual  good  understanding,  have  been  contracted, 
therefore  this  command,  from  the  Palace  of  Glory,  requiring  obedience, 
has  been  proclaimed,  that  you,  high  in  rank,  do  cheerfully  comply  and 
execute  the  clear  sense  and  meaning  of  what  has  been  established ;  and 
should  ever  any  person  of  the  French  nation  attempt  to  pass  your  ports 
or  boundaries,  or  desire  to  establish  themselves  either  on  the  shores  or 
frontiers,  you  are  to  take  means  to  expel  and  extirpate  them,  and  never 
to  allow  them  to  obtain  a  footing  in  any  place,  and  you  are  at  full 
liberty  and  authorized  to  disgrace  and  slay  them.  You  are  to  look  upon 
it  as  your  duty  to  aid  and  act  in  a  friendly  manner  to  all  traders, 
merchants,  and  men  of  rank  of  the  English  nation;  all  such  you  are 
to  consider  as  possessing  the  favour  of  the  king ;  and  you  must  act  in 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


107 


conformity  to  the  conditions  of  the  annexed  Treaty  that  has  been  con-     PERSIA. 


eluded  between  the  trustworthy  of  the  high  State,  the  bracelet  of  the  No.  XX  m. 
graceful   government,   Hajee   Ibraheim  Khan,   and  the   high  in  rank, 
Captain  John  Malcolm.     View  this  as  an  obligation. 

Bated  the  Yhtli  of  Shaban,  in  the  year  of  the  Ilegira  1215,  corres- 
ponding with  the         •  of  January  a.  d.  1801. 

Sealed,  in  the  usual  form,  on  the  back  of  the  Firman,  by  the  fol- 
lowing ministers : — 


Seal  of 

Hajee  Ibraheim 

Khan. 


Seal  of  Mirza 
Shuffee. 


Seal  of 

Mirza  Rezak 

Kouli. 


Seal  of 

Mirza  Assud 

Ooollah. 


Seal  of 
Mirza  Eeezy. 


Seal  of 
Mirza  Ahmud. 


Seal  of  Mirza 
Fuzullah. 


108  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

l'KKMA.  Treaty  annexed. 

I     will.  Preamble. — Praise  be  unto  God,  who  said,  u  Oh  you  who  believe  per- 