

No  customs  shall  be  charged  the  English  on  any  goods  imported 
or  exported  by  them  at  Bushire,  or  any  other  port  in  the  Gulf  of 
Persia,  on  condition  that  at  no  time  they  import  or  export  other  persons' 
goods  in  their  names.  They  may  also  send  their  goods,  customs  free, 
all  over  the  kingdom  of  Persia ;  and  on  what  goods  they  sell  at  Bushire, 
or  elsewhere,  the  Shaik,  or  Governor,  shall  only  charge  the  merchants 
an  export  duty  of  three  per  cent. 

No  other  European  nation,  or  other  persons,  shall  import  any 
woollen  goods  to  any  port  on  the  Persian  shore  in  the  Gulf,  but  the 
English  Company  only ;  and  should  any  one  attempt  to  do  it  clandes- 
tinely, their  goods  shall  be  seized  and  confiscated. 

Should  any  of  the  Persian  merchants,  or  others,  become  truly  in- 
debted to  the  English,  the  Shaik,  or  Governor  of  the  place,  shall  oblige 
them  to  pay  it ;  but  should  he  fail  in  his  duty  herein,  the  English  Chief 
may  do  his  own  justice  and  act  as  he  pleases  with  the  debtors  to 
recover  what  owed  him  or  them. 

In  all  the  kingdom  of  Persia  the  English  may  sell  their  goods  to, 
and  buy  from,  whomever  they  judge  proper;  nor  shall  the  Governor, 
or  Shaik,  of  any  ports  or  places,  prevent  their  importing  or  exporting 
any  goods  whatever. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  103 

When  any  English  ship  or  ships  arrive  at  any  ports  in  the  Gulf  of    PERSIA. 


Persia,  no  merchants  shall  purchase   from  them  clandestinely,  but  with     No.  XXI. 
the  consent  and  knowledge  of  the  English  Chief  there  resident. 

Should  any  English  ship  or  vessel  be  drove  on  shore,  unfortunately 
wrecked,  or  otherwise  lost  in  any  part  of  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  the 
Shaiks,  or  Governors  of  the  adjacent  places,  shall  not  claim  any  share  of 
the  said  wrecks,  but  shall  assist  the  English,  all  in  their  power,  in  saving 
the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  vessel  or  cargo. 

The  English,  and  all  those  under  their  protection,  in  any  part  of 
the  kingdom  of  Persia,  shall  have  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion, 
without  molestation  from  any  one. 

Should  soldiers,  sailors,  or  slaves  desert  from  the  English  in  any 
part  of  Persia,  they  shall  not  be  protected  or  encouraged,  but,  bond  fide, 
delivered  up,  but  not  be  punished  for  the  first  or  second  offence. 

Wherever  the  English  may  have  a  factory  in  Persia,  their  linguist, 
brokers,  and  all  other  their  servants,  shall  be  exempt  from  all  taxes  and 
impositions  whatever,  and  under  their  own  command  and  justice,  without 
any  one  interfering  therein. 

Wherever  the  English  are,  they  shall  have  a  spot  of  ground  allotted 
them  for  a  burying  ground ;  and  if  they  want  a  spot  for  a  garden,  if  the 
king's  property,  it  shall  be  given  them  gratis ;  if  belonging  to  any  pri- 
vate person,  they  must  pay  a  reasonable  price  for  it. 