

exalted  to  majesty  by  the  heavens  in  this  globe,  a  shade  from  the  shade 

of  the  Most  High,  a  khooroo,  whose  saddle  is  the  moon  and  whose  stirrup 

is   the  new  moon,   a  prince   of  great  rank,   before  whom  the  sun  is 

concealed. 

(Arabic  Verse.) 

"  Thy  benevolence  is  universally  dispensed ;  everywhere  drops  are 
scattered.  Thy  kindness  shadows  cities;  may  God  fix  firm  the  basis  of 
thy  dominion,  and  may  God  fix  and  extend  thy  power  over  the  servants 
of  the  Almighty  V  And  the  high  in  dignity,  the  great  and  able  in 
power,  the  adorner  of  those  acquainted  with  manners,  Captain  John 
Malcolm,  (delegated  from  the  sublime  quarter  of  the  high  in  power,  seated 
on  a  throne,  the  asylum  of  the  world,  the  chief  jewel  in  the  crown  of 
royalty  and  sovereignty,  the  anchor  of  the  vessel  of  victory  and  fortune, 
the  ship  on  the  sea  of  glory  and  empire,  the  blazing  sun  in  the  sky  of 
greatness  and  glory,  lord  of  the  countries  of  England  and  India,  may 
God  strengthen  his  territories  and  establish  his  glory  and  commands 
upon  the  seas ! ),  in  the  manner  explained  in  his  credentials,  which  are 
sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  most  powerful  and  most  glorious,  possessing 
fortune,  the  origin  of  rank,  splendour,  and  nobility,  the  ornament  of  the 
world,  the  completer  of  the  works '  of  mankind,  the  Governor  General 
of  India. 

This  Treaty  between  these  two  great  States  shall  be  binding  on  race 
after  race,  and  the  two  governments  must  ever,  while  the  world  exists, 
act  in  conformity  to  what  is  now  settled. 


Article  1. 

As  long  as  the  sun,  illuminating  the  circle  of  the  two  great  con- 
tracting powers,  shines  on  their  sovereign  dominions  and  bestows  light 
on  the  whole  world,  the  beautiful  image  of  excellent  union  shall  remain 
fixed  on  the  mirror  of  duration  and  perpetuity,  the  thread  of  shameful 


110  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     enmity  and  distance  shall  be  cut,  conditions  of  mutual  aid  and  assistance 
No.  xxill.    between  the  two  States  shall  be  instituted,  and  all  causes  of  hatred  and 
hostility  shall  be  banished. 

Article  2. 

If  the  king  of  the  Afghans  should  ever  show  a  resolution  to  invade 
India,  which  is  subject  to  the  government  of  the  monarch  (above  men- 
tioned), the  prince  of  high  rank,  the  king  of  England,  an  army  overthrow- 
ing mountains,  furnished  with  all  warlike  stores,  shall  be  appointed  from 
the  State  of  the  conspicuous  and  exalted,  high  and  fixed  in  power  (the 
king  of  Persia),  to  lay  waste  and  desolate  the  Afghan  dominions,  and 
every  exertion  shall  be  employed  to  ruin  and  humble  the  above- 
mentioned  nation. 

Article  3. 

Should  it  happen  that  the  king  of  the  Afghans  ever  becomes  desir- 
ous of  opening  the  gates  of  peace  and  friendship  with  the  government 
of  the  king  (of  Persia),  who  is  in  rank  like  Solomon,  in  dignity  like 
Jumsheed,  the  shade  of  God !  who  has  bestowed  his  mercy  and  kindness 
on  the  earth ;  when  negotiations  are  opened  for  an  amicable  adjustment, 
it  shall  be  stipulated  in  the  peace  concluded  that  the  king  of  the 
Afghans,  or  his  armies,  shall  abandon  all  design  of  attack  on  the  terri- 
tories subject  to  the  government  of  the  king  above  mentioned,  who  is 
worthy  of  royalty,  the  king  of  England. 