

be  exposed  to  our  royal  anger,  which  is  like  fire,  and  let  them  view  this 

as  an  obligation. 

Bated  in   the   month  of  Shaban,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  1215, 
corresponding  with  the  month  of  January  a.  d.  1801. 

Sealed,  in  the  usual  form,  on  the  back  of  the  Firman,  by  the  follow- 
ing ministers : — 


Seal  of 
Mirza  bhuffee. 


Seal  of 

Mirza  Reza 

Kouli. 


Seal  of  Mirza 
Assudoollah. 


Seal  of 
Mirza  Keezy. 


Seal  of 
Mirza  Ahmad. 


Seal  of 

Mirza  Moortiza 

Kouli. 


Seal  of  Mirza 
Fuzullah. 


Seal  of 
Mirza  Yoosuf. 


VOL.    VII. 


Ill  TREATIKS,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  Treaty  annexed. 

No.  XXIV.  Preamble. — Praise  be  to  God,  who  has  said,  "  perform  your  cove- 

nant, for  the  performance  of  your  covenant  shall  be  enquired  into  here- 
after." 

As  establishing  the  obligations  of  friendship  between  all  mankind  is 
a  charge  from  the  Almighty,  and  is  a  most  laudable  and  excellent  insti- 
tution, and  as  the  Creator  is  pleased,  and  the  happiness  and  tranquillity 
of  His  creatures  consulted  by  it,  therefore,  at  this  happy  period  of  auspi- 
cious aspect,  a  Treaty  has  been  concluded  between  the  high  in  dignity, 
the  exalted  in  station,  attended  by  fortune,  of  great  and  splendid  power, 
the  greatest  among  the  high  viziers,  in  whom  confidence  is  placed,  the 
faithful  of  the  powerful  government,  the  adorned  with  greatness,  power, 
glory,  splendour,  and  fortune,  Hajee  Ibraheim  Khan,  on  being  granted 
leave  and  vested  with  authority  from  the  port  of  the  high  king,  whose 
Court  is  like  that  of  Solomon's,  the  asylum  of  the  world,  the  sign  of  the 
power  of  God,  the  jewel  in  the  ring  of  kings,  the  ornament  in  the  cheek 
of  the  eternal  empire,  the  grace  of  the  beauty  of  sovereignty  and  royalty, 
the  king  of  the  universe,  like  Caherman,  the  mansion  of  mercy  and  jus- 
tice, the  phoenix  of  good  fortune,  the  eminence  of  never-fading  pros- 
perity, the  king  powerful  as  Alexander,  who  has  no  equal  among  the 
princes,  exalted  to  majesty  by  the  heavens  in  this  globe,  a  shade  from 
the  shade  of  the  Most  High,  a  Khooroo,  whose  saddle  is  the  moon  and 
whose  stirrup  is  the  new  moon,  a  prince  of  great  rank,  before  whom  the 
sun  is  concealed. 

(Arabic  Verse.) 

"  Thy  benevolence  is  universally  dispensed,  everywhere  drops  are 
"  scattered.  Thy  kindness  shadows  cities  ;  may  God  fix  firm  the  basis 
"  of  the  dominion  V  And  the  high  in  dignity,  the  great  and  able  in 
power,  the  adorner  of  those  acquainted  with  manners,  Captain  John 
Malcolm  (delegated  from  the  sublime  quarter  of  the  high  in  power, 
seated  on  a  throne,  the  asylum  of  the  world,  the  chief  jewel  in  the  crown 
of  royalty  and  sovereignty,  the  anchor  of  the  vessel  of  victory  and  for- 
tune, the  ship  on  the  sea  of  glory  and  empire,  the  blazing  sun  in  the 
sky  of  greatness  and  glory,  Lord  of  the  countries  of  England  and  India, 
may  God  strengthen  his  territories  and  establish  his  glory  and  command 
upon  the  seas),  in  the  manner  explained  in  his   credentials,   which    are 