

Article  8. 

The  English,  and  those  under  their  pro  tection,  not  to  be  impeded 
in  their  religion. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  101 

Article  9.  PERSIA. 

Soldiers,  sailors,  servants,  slaves,  and  others  belonging  to  the  Eng-     No.  XXI. 
lish,  who  may  desert,  are  not  to  be  protected  or  entertained  by  the  Shaik 
or  his  people,  but,  bond  fide,  secured  and  returned. 

Article  10. 

In  case  any  English  ships  sell  to  or  buy  from  the  country  merchants 
apart  from  the  factory,  a  due  account  thereof  is  to  be  rendered  to  the 
English  Chief  for  the  time  being,  for  which  purpose  one  of  his  people 
is  to  attend  at  the  weight  and  delivery  of  all  goods  so  sold,  which  is  to 
be  done  at  the  public  Custom  House. 

Article  11. 

If  through  any  accident  an  English  vessel  should  be  drove  on  shore 
in  the  country  belonging  to  the  Shaik,  they  shall  not  in  any  respect  be 
plundered ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  Shaik  shall  afford  the  English  all 
the  assistance  in  his  power  for  saving  them  and  their  effects,  the  English 
paying  them  for  their  trouble. 

Article  12. 

The  Shaik  shall  not  permit  his  subjects  to  purchase  any  goods  from 
English  vessels  in  the  road,  but  only  on  shore. 


The 
Seal  of  Shaik 
Sadoon. 


Eoyal  Grant  from  Karem  Kuan,  King  of  Persia,  1763. 

The  Great  God  having,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  given  victory  unto 
Karem  Khan,  and  made  him  Chief  Governor  of  all  the  kingdoms  of 
Persia,  and  established  under  him  the  peace  and  tranquillity  of  the  said 
kingdoms,  by  means  of  his  victorious  sword,  he  is  desirous  that  the  said 


102  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     kingdoms  should  flourish  and  re-obtain  their  ancient  grandeur  by  the  in- 
No.  XXI.     crease  of  trade  and  commerce,  as  well  as  by  a  due  execution  of  justice. 

Having  been  informed  that  the  Right  Worshipful  William  Andrew 
Price,  Esq.,  Governor  General  for  the  English  nation  in  the  Gulf  of 
Persia,  is  arrived  with  power  to  settle  a  factory  at  Bushire,  and  has  left 
Mr.  Benjamin  Jervis,  Resident,  who,  by  directions  from  the  said  Gov- 
ernor General,  has  sent  unto  me  Mr.  Thomas  Durnford  and  Stephen 
Hermit,  linguist,  to  obtain  a  grant  of  their  ancient  privileges  in  these 
kingdoms,  I  do,  of  my  free  will  and  great  friendship  for  the  English 
nation,  grant  unto  the  said  Governor  General,  in  behalf  of  his  king  and 
Company,  the  following  privileges,  which  shall  be  inviolably  observed 
and  held  sacred  in  good  faith  : — 

That  the  English  Company  may  have  as  much  ground,  and  in  any  part 
of  Bushire,  they  choose  to  build  a  factory  on,  or  at  any  other  port  in  the 
Gulf.  They  may  have  as  many  cannon  mounted  on  it  as  they  choose, 
but  not  to  be  larger  than  six  pounds  bore ;  and  they  may  build  factory 
houses  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom  they  choose. 