

Article  4. 

Should  ever  any  king  of  the  Afghans  or  any  person  of  the  French 
nation  commence  war  and  hostilities  with  the  powerful  of  the  ever- 
enduring  State  (of  the  king  of  Persia),  the  rulers  of  the  government 
of  the  king  (of  England),  whose  Court  is  like  heaven,  and  who  has 
been  before  mentioned,  shall  (on  such  event)  send  as  many  cannon  and 
warlike  stores  as  possible,  with  necessary  apparatus,  attendants,  and 
inspectors,  and  such  supply  shall  be  delivered  over  at  one  of  the  ports 
of  Persia,  whose  boundaries  are  conspicuous,  to  the  officers  of  the  high 
in  dignity,  the  king  of  Persia. 


TKEATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


HI 


Article  5. 


PERRrA. 


Should  it  ever  occur  that  an  army  of  the  French  nation,  actuated  No.  XXIII. 
by  design  and  deceit,  attempts  to  settle  with  a  view  of  establishing* 
themselves  on  any  of  the  islands  or  shores  of  Persia,  a  conjunct  force 
shall  be  appointed  by  the  two  high  contracting  States  to  act  in  co-oper- 
ation for  their  expulsion  and  extirpation,  and  to  destroy  and  put  an  end 
to  the  foundation  of  their  treason.  It  is  a  condition,  if  such  event  hap- 
pens, and  the  conquering  troops  (of  Persia)  march,  that  the  officers  of 
the  government  of  the  king  (of  England) ,  who  is  powerful  as  the  heavens 
and  as  before  mentioned,  shall  load,  transport,  and  deliver  (for  their 
service)  as  great  a  quantity  of  necessaries,  stores,  and  provisions  as 
they  possibly  can.  And  if  ever  any  of  the  great  men  of  the  French 
nation  express  a  wish  or  desire  to  obtain  a  place  of  residence  or  dwelling 
on  any  of  the  islands  or  shores  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia,  that  they 
may  there  raise  the  standard  of  abode  or  settlement,  such  request  or 
representation  shall  not  be  consented  unto  by  the  high  in  rank  of  the 
State  encompassed  with  justice  (the  government  of  Persia),  and  leave  for 
their  residing  in  such  a  place  shall  not  be  granted. 

"While  time  endures,  and  while  the  world  exists,  the  contents  of 
this  exalted  Treaty  shall  remain  an  admired  picture  in  the  mirror  of 
duration  and  perpetuity,  and  submission  to  the  fair  image  on  this  con- 
spicuous page  shall  be  everlasting. 


Seal  of 

Hajee  Ibraheim 

Khan. 


Seal  of 

Captain  John 

Malcolm. 


(Signed)         John  Malcolm,  Envoy. 


V 


112  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  No.  XXIV. 

No.  XXIV.  Tbanslation  of  a  Firman  from  Fcttbh  Am  Shah,  king  of  Persia,  and  of  an 
annexed  Treaty  concluded  by  Hajee  Ibbaheim  Khan,  Prime  Minister  on  the 
part  of  the  king  of  Persia,  by  whom  he  was  fully  empowered,  and  by  Captain 
John  Malcolm,  on  the  part  of  the  English  government,  by  virtue  of  powers 
delegated  to  him  for  that  purpose  by  the  Most  Noble  the  Mabquis  Welleslet, 
k.  p.,  Governor  General  of  India,  &c,  &c. 