


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNITDS. 


101 


English,  may  be  induced  to  pass  backwards  and  forwards  and  to  trade 
in  our  dominions.  And  whenever  they  shall  have  disposed  of  the  goods 
and  merchandize  which  they  may  import  for  sale,  they  shall  have  full 
liberty  to  make  their  returns  according  to  their  own  wishes. 

And  it  is  therefore  necessary  that  our  most  honoured  friend,  the 
English  Balios  at  Bussora,  should  perfectly  understand  that  in  this  way 
our  favour  is  equal  in  magnitude  to  whatever  he  can  hope  or  desire,  and 
it  is  moreover  necessaiy  that  in  order  to  make  trial  thereof  he  should 
encourage  his  nation  to  trade  into  Persia,  and  he  has  again  our  word 
that  they  shall  do  so  in  the  fullest  and  most  perfect  security. 

Again,  whatever  goods  or  merchandize  the  English  nation  shall 
import  for  sale,  there  shall  be  no  restrictions  put  upon  the  sale  thereof, 
but  after  their  Agents  shall  have  completed  the  sales  and  fulfilled  the 
design  of  their  journey,  they  shall  have  every  protection  granted  them 
on  their  return,  and  again  upon  our  royal  word  there  shall  be  no  imposi- 
tions laid  upon  them ;  for  if  ever,  heretofore,  there  has  been  any  imposi- 
tions or  vexations  practised  upon  the  English  nation  in  Persia,  it  is  our 
will  that  from  this  day  they  be  abolished  and  forgotten. 

And  being  persuaded  of  the  sincerity  of  our  most  honoured  friend 
the  Balios,  we  accept  of  his  offer  of  services  and  request  of  him  to 
purchase  immediately  such  rarities  as  are  procurable  at  Bussora,  favour- 
ing us  at  the  same  time  with  the  amount  cost  thereof,  in  order  that 
we  may  order  the  same  to  be  repaid  to  the  person  who  shall  be  sent 
with  them. 

Let  our  friend,  therefore,  on  all  occasions  rest  satisfied  of  our  favour 
and  protection.  Let  him  on  all  occasions  make  known  to  us  his  wishes 
and  wants,  and  let  the  above  for  ever  remain  a  compact  between  us. 

Written  on  the  eighth  of  the  second  month  of  Rabua,  in  the  year 
of  Hijree  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  two,  ansioering  the  \%th 
January  1788. 


PERSIA. 
No.  XXII, 


The  refuge 
of  supplicants, 
Jaffir,  the  son 

of  Mahomed 
Saduck. 


VOL.   VII. 


10(J  IKKATIKS,     KN..MI  Ml  NTS,    AND    .SINXCDS. 

I'KliMA.  NO.    XXIII. 

No.  XXIII.  Tbanslation  of  a  Firman  from  Fctteh  Ali  Shah,  King  of  Persia,  and  of  an 
annexed  Treaty  concluded  by  Hajee  Ibeaheim  Khan,  Prime  Minister  on 
the  part  of  the  King  of  Persia,  by  'whom  he  was  fully  empowered,  and  by 
Captain  John  Malcolm,  on  the  part  of  the  English  government,  by  virtue  of 
powers  delegated  to  him  for  that  purpose  by  the  Most  Noble  the  Makquis 
Wellesley,  k.  p.,  Governor  General  of  India,  &c,  &c,  &c. 