


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  123 

the  last  Article,  or   pay  an  annual   subsidy  of  two  hundred   thousand     PERSIA. 

Tomans  for  the  support  of  a  Persian  army,  so  long"  as  a  war  in  the    jjo.  xxvi. 

supposed  case  shall  continue  and  until  Persia  shall  make  peace  with  such 

nation.     England  shall  fulfil  her  engagement  to  Persia  on  this  head; 

and  should  the  English  make  peace  with  the  European  nation  at  war 

with  Persia,  even  then,  so  long  as  such  war  shall  continue,  the  English 

government  shall  furnish  officers,  &c,  &c,  for  the  purpose  of  drilling 

and   disciplining   the  Persian  army,  should   they  be  required.     Should 

Persia  make  peace  with  the  supposed  power  and  still  require  the  aid 

of  officers,  &c,  for  the  above  purpose,  the  English  government  shall 

afford  them  if  they  can  conveniently  spare  them. 

Article  4. 

Since  it  is  the  custom  of  Persia  to  pay  her  troops  six  months  in 
advance,  the  English  ambassador  shall  do  all  in  his  power  to  pay  the 
subsidy  granted  in  lieu  of  troops  in  as  early  instalments  as  may  be 
convenient  and  practicable. 

Article  5. 

Should  the  Afghans  be  at  war  with  the  British  nation,  His  Persian 
Majesty  engages  to  send  an  army  against  them  in  such  manner  and 
of  such  force  as  may  be  concerted  with  the  English  Government.  The 
expenses  of  such  an  army  shall  be  defrayed  by  the  British  Government 
in  such  manner  as  may  be  agreed  on  at  the  period  of  its  being  required. 

Article  6. 

If  war  shall  be  declared  between  the  Persians  and  the  Afghans,  the 
English  Government  shall  not  interfere  with  either  party,  unless  their 
mediation  to  effect  a  peace  shall  be  solicited  by  both  States. 

Article  7. 

Should  the  king  of  Persia  form  magazines  of  materials  for  ship- 
building on  the  coasts  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  resolve  to  establish 
a  naval  force,  the  king  of  England  shall  grant  permission  to  naval 
officers,  seamen,  shipwrights,  carpenters,  &c,  to  proceed  to  Persia  from 
London  and  Bombay  and  to  enter  the  service  of  the  king  of  Persia. 


IU 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SL'NNUDS. 


PERSIA.     The  pay  of  such  officers,  artificers,  &c,  shall  be  given  by  His  Persian 

No.  XXVI.    Majesty    at  the   rates  which    may  be   agreed  on  with   the    English 

ambassador. 

Article  8. 

Should  any  Persian  subject  of  distinction  showing  signs  of  hostility 
and  rebellion  take  refuge  in  the  British  territories,  the  English  Govern- 
ment shall,  on  intimation  from  the  Persian  government,  turn  him  out  of 
their  country,  or  if  he  refuse  to  leave  it,  shall  seize  and  send  him  to 
Persia.  Previously  to  the  arrival  of  such  fugitive  in  the  English  terri- 
tory, should  the  Governor  of  the  district  to  which  he  may  direct  his 
flight  receive  intelligence  of  the  wishes  of  the  Persian  government  respect- 
ing him,  he  shall  refuse  him  admission ;  after  such  prohibition,  should 
such  person  persist  in  his  resolution,  the  said  Governor  shall  cause  him  to 