


Article  12. 

The  intention  of  this  Treaty  and  the  respective  wishes  of  the  high 
contracting  powers  are  to  afford  mutual  assistance,  and  thereby  strengthen, 
consolidate,  and  extend  their  power  and  dominions  for  the  purpose  of 


120 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIA,  defeating  the  aggressions  of  their  enemies.  As  the  sincere  desire  of 
No.  XXVI.  ^s  Britannic  Majesty  particularly  is  to  strengthen  and  consolidate  the 
Persian  government,  so  as  to  prevent  foreign  nations  from  invading 
Persia,  and  by  his  assistance  to  raise  her  political  consequence  and 
to  increase  her  territory,  the  English  Government  will  not  interfere  in 
any  quarrels  which  may  hereafter  arise  between  the  Princes,  Noblemen,  or 
great  Chiefs  of  Persia,  until  the  king  then  reigning  shall  require  their 
assistance ;  and  if  one  of  the  contending  parties  should  offer  a  province 
of  Persia  with  a  view  of  obtaining  assistance,  the  English  Government 
shall  not  agree  to  such  a  proposal,  nor  by  accepting  it  possess  themselves 
of  such  part  of  Persia. 

The  Articles  are  thus  auspiciously  concluded. 

This  happy  and  fortunate  Treaty,  it  is  hoped,  will  for  ever  continue 
in  force,  and  produce  the  fairest  and  most  beneficial  results. 

"We,  the  undersigned  plenipotentiaries  of  the  high,  contracting 
powers,  having  concluded  this  auspicious  Treaty  in  the  true  spirit  of 
amity  and  sincerity  in  the  twelve  foregoing  Articles,  have  hereunto  set 
our  hands  and  seals,  in  the  royal  city  of  Teheran,  this  fourteenth  day  of 
March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  twelve, 
corresponding  with  the  twenty-ninth  of  Safer-ol-Mazafer,  in  the  year  of 
the  Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty-seven. 


On  the  Persian  leaf. 


(Sd.)  Mohammed     (Sd.)  Mohammed  Hossein.    (Sd.)  Gore  Ouseley. 
Sheffee. 

On  the  English  leaf. 


Gore  Ouseley.        Mohammed  Hossein.         Mohammed  Sheffee. 


&  XXVII. 


TREATIES^    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  127 

Form  of  His  Majesty  Futteh  Ali  Shah's  ratification  of  the  definitive  Treaty     PERSIA. 

with  England.  N<*.XXVI 

This  auspicious  definitive  Treaty  which  the  three  plenipotentiaries  of 
the  two  high  States  have  drawn  up  Avith  the  hand  of  sincerity  and  truth; 
and  the  contents  and  meaning  of  which  the  splendid  and  glorious  mind 
of  the  king  like  the  sun  has  illuminated  with  its  rays,  has  now  re- 
ceived the  splendour  of  his  ratification.  Please  God;  the  all-perfect  pro- 
tector, the  following  Articles  will  for  ever  be  preserved  from  langour  in 
the  execution  of  them. 


Form  of  His  Eoyal  Highness  Abbas  Mibza's  ratification  of  the  definitive 

Treaty  with  England. 

His  high  and  potent  Majesty,  the  asylum  of  the  world;  having  been 
pleased  to  nominate  me  the  slave  of  the  threshold  of  created  beings' 
asylum  heir  apparent  to  his  throne;  in  obedience  to  His  Majesty's  com- 
mands; (the  shade  of  God  to  whom  my  life  is  a  ready  sacrifice);  I  have 
agreed  to  this  same  arrangement;  and  from  this  period  to  the  end  of 
time  hold  myself  and  my  heirs,  generation  after  generation;  bound  to 
respect  and  hold  sacred  the  terms  and  the  Articles  comprised  in  this 
happy  Treaty  concluded  between  the  two  great  States ;  and  by  the  grace 
of  God  this  alliance  with  Great  Britain  shall  be  binding  and  durable  for 
ever.  Please  the  Almighty;  our  defender  during  the  lapse  of  ages, 
nothing  shall  intervene  that  may  militate  against  it. 