


118  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     bearing  His  Majesty's  credential  letter,  and  charged  with  full  powers 


No.  XXV.-  naunited  with  the  Great  Seal  of  England  empowering  him  to  strengthen 
the  friendship  and  consolidate  the  strict  union  subsisting  between  the 
high  States  of  England  and  Persia.  His  Majesty  the  king  of  Persia, 
(titles)  therefore,  by  a  special  Firman  delivered  to  the  said  ambassador, 
has  appointed  the  most  excellent  and  noble  Lords,  Mirza  Mahomed 
Sheffee,  qualified  with  the  title  of  Moatemmed-ed-dowlah,  his  first  vizier, 
and  Hajee  Mahomed  Hossein  Khan,  qualified  with  the  title  of  Ameen- 
ed-dowlah,  one  of  the  ministers  of  Record,  to  be  his  plenipotentiaries 
to  confer  and  discuss  with  the  aforesaid  ambassador  of  His  Britannic 
Majesty  all  matters  and  affairs  touching  the  formation  and  consolidation 
of  friendship,  alliance,  and  strict  union  between  the  two  high  States,  and 
to  arrange  and  finally  conclude  the  same  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of 
both  kingdoms.  In  consequence  whereof,  after  divers  meetings  and  dis- 
cussions, the  aforesaid  plenipotentiaries  have  resolved  that  the  following 
Articles  are  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  both  the  high  States,  and 
hereafter  to  be  accordingly  for  ever  observed : — 

Article  1. 

That  as  some  time  will  be  required  to  arrange  and  form  a  definite 
Treaty  of  alliance  and  friendship  between  the  two  high  States,  and  as  the 
circumstances  of  the  world  make  it  necessary  for  something  to  be  done 
without  loss  of  time,  it  is  agreed  these  Articles,  which  are  to  be  regarded 
as  preliminary,  shall  become  a  basis  for  establishing  a  sincere  and  ever- 
lasting definitive  Treaty  of  strict-friendship  and  union.  And  it  is  agreed 
that  the  said  definitive  Treaty,  precisely  expressing  the  wishes  and  obli- 
gations of  each  party,  shall  be  signed  and  sealed  by  the  said  plenipoten- 
tiaries and  afterwards  become  binding  on  both  the  high  contracting 
parties. 

Article  2. 

It  is  agreed  that  the  preliminary  Articles  formed  with  the  hand  of 
truth  and  sincerity  shall  not  be  changed  or  altered,  but  there  shall  arise 
from  them  a  daily  increase  of  friendship,  which  shall  last  for  ever 
between  the  two  most  serene  kings,  their  heirs,  successors,  their  subjects, 
dominions,  provinces,  and  countries. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  119 

Article  3.  Persia. 


His  Majesty  the  king  of  Persia  judges  it  necessary  to  declare  that    No.  XXV. 

from  the  date  of  these  preliminary  Articles,  every  Treaty  or  agreement  he 

may  have  made  with  any  one  of  the  powers  of  Europe  becomes  null  and 

void,  and  that  he  will  not  permit  any  European  force  whatever  to  pass 