


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  115 

sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  most  powerful  and  most  glorious,  possessing-     PERSIA, 
fortune,  the  origin  of  rank,  splendour,  and  nobility,  the  ornament  of  the  ~$0  XXIV 
world,  the  completer  of  the  works  of  mankind,  the   Governor  General  of 
India.     This  Treaty  between  these  two  great  powers  shall  be  binding  on 
race  after  race,  and  the  two  governments  must    ever,  while  the  world 
oxists,  act  in  conformity  to  what  is  now  settled. 

Article  1. 

The  merchants  of  the  high  contracting  States  are  to  travel  and 
carry  on  their  affairs  in  the  territories  of  both  nations  in  full  security 
and  confidence,  and  the  rulers  and  governors  of  all  cities  are  to  consider 
it  their  duty  to  protect  from  injury  their  cattle  and  goods. 

Article  2. 

The  traders  and  merchants  of  the  kingdom  of  England  or  Hindoos- 
tan  that  are  in  the  service  of  the  English  Government  shall  be  per- 
mitted to  settle  in  any  of  the  sea-ports  or  cities  of  the  boundless  empire 
of  Persia  (which  may  God  preserve  from  calamity)  that  they  prefer ;  and 
no  government  duties,  taxes,  or  requisitions  shall  ever  be  collected  on 
any  goods  that  are  the  actual  property  of  either  of  the  governments;  the 
usual  duties  on  such  to  be  taken  from  purchasers. 

Article  3. 

Should  it  happen  that  either  the  persons  or  property  (of  merchants) 
are  injured  or  lost  by  thieves  or  robbers,  the  utmost  exertions  shall  be 
made  to  punish  the  delinquents  and  recover  the  property.  And  if  any 
merchant  or  trader  of  Persia  evades  or  delays  the  payment  of  a  debt  to 
the  English  Government,  the  latter  are  authorized  to  use  every  possible 
mode  for  the  recovery  of  their  demands,  taking  care  to  do  so  in  com- 
munication and  with  the  knowledge  of  the  ruler  or  governor  of  the 
place,  who  is  to  consider  it  as  his  duty  to  grant,  on  such  occasion,  every 
aid  in  his  power.  And  should  any  merchants  of  Persia  be  in  India,  at- 
tending to  their  mercantile  concerns,  the  officers  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment are  not  to  prevent  them  carrying  on  their  affairs,  but  to  aid  and 


116  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     favour  them,  and  the  above-mentioned  merchants  are  to  recover  their 
No.  xxiv.    debts  and  demands  in  the  mode  prescribed  by  the  customs  and  laws  of 
the  English  Government. 

Article  4. 
If  any  person  in  the  empire  of  Persia  die  indebted  to  the.  English 
Government,  the  ruler  of  the  place  must  exert  his  power  to  have  such 
demand  satisfied  before  those  of  any  other  creditor  whatever.  The  ser- 
vants of  the  English  Government,  resident  in  Persia,  are  permitted  to 
hire  as  many  domestic  natives  of  that  country  as  are  necessary  for  the 
transaction  of  their  affairs ;  and  they  are  authorized  to  punish  such,  in 
cases  of  misconduct,  in  the  manner  they  judge  most  expedient,  provided 
such  punishment  does  not  extend  to  life  or  limb;  in  such  cases  the 
punishment  to  be  inflicted  by  the  ruler  or  governor  of  the  place. 