


Article  5. 

The  English  are  at  liberty  to  build  houses  and  mansions  in  any  of 
the  ports  or  cities  of  Persia  that  they  choose,  and  they  may  sell  or  rent 
all  such  houses  or  mansions  at  pleasure.  And  should  ever  a  ship,  be- 
longing to  the  English  Government,  be  in  a  damaged  state  in  any  of  the 
ports  of  Persia,  or  one  of  Persia  be  in  that  condition  in  an  English  har- 
bour, the  Chiefs  and  rulers  of  the  ports  and  harbours  of  the  respective 
nations  are  to  consider  it  as  their  duty  to  give  every  aid  to  refit  and  re- 
pair vessels  so  situated.  And  if  it  happens  that  any  of  the  vessels  of 
either  nation  are  sunk  or  shipwrecked  in  or  near  the  ports  or  shores  of 
either  country,  on  such  occasions  whatever  part  of  the  property  is  re- 
covered shall  be  restored  to  their  owners  or  their  heirs,  and  a  just  hire  is 
to  be  allowed  by  the  owners  to  those  who  recover  it. 


Final  Article. 
Whenever  any  native  of  England  or  India,  in  the  service  of  the 
English  Government,  resident  in  Persia,  wishes  to  leave  that  country,  he 
is  to  suffer  obstruction  from  no  person,  but  to  be  at  full  liberty  to  do  so, 
and  to  carry  with  him  his  property. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


117 


The  Articles  of  the  Treaty  between  the  two  States  are  fixed  and  deter- 
mined.    That  person  who  turns  from  God  turns  from  his  own  soul. 


Seal  of 

Hajee  Ibraheim 

Khan. 


Seal  of 

Captain  John 

Malcolm. 


(Signed)         John  Malcolm,  Emmy. 


Additional  Article. 

It  is  further  written  in  sincerity  that  on  iron,  lead,  steel,  broad 
cloth,  and  purpetts  that  are  exclusively  the  property  of  the  English 
government,  no  duties  whatever  shall  be  taken  from  the  sellers ;  a  duty 
not  exceeding  one  per  cent,  to  be  levied  upon  the  purchasers.  And  the 
duties,  imports,  and  customs,  which  are  at  this  period  established  in  Persia 
and  India  (on  other  goods)  are  to  remain  fixed  and  not  to  be  increased. 

The  high  in  rank  Hajee  Kulleel  Khan  Mullick-oo-Tijjar  is  charged 
and  entrusted  with  the  arrangement  and  settlement  of  the  remaining 
points  relative  to  commerce. 


Seal  of 

Hajee  Ibraheim 

Khan. 


Seal  of 

Captain  John 

Malcolm. 


(Signed)         John  Malcolm,  Envoy. 


PERSIA. 

Nos.  XXIV 
&XXV. 


No.  XXV. 

In  the  name  of  Him  who  is  ever  necessary,  who  is  all  sufficient,  who  is  everlasting, 
and  who  is  the  only  Protector. 

In  these  times  distinguished  by  felicity,  the  excellent  ambassador 
Sir  Harford  Jones,  Baronet,  Member  of  the  Honourable  Imperial  Otto- 
man Order  of  the  Crescent,  has  arrived  at  the  royal  city  of  Teheran  in 
quality  of  ambassador  from  His  Majesty  the  king  of  England  (titles), 