

through  Persia,    either  towards  India,  or  towards  the  ports  of  that 

country. 

Article  4. 

In  case  any  European  forces  have  invaded  or  shall  invade  the  terri- 
tories of  His  Majesty  the  king  of  Persia,  His  Britannic  Majesty  will 
afford  to  His  Majesty  the  king  of  Persia  a  force,  or,  in  lieu  of  it,  a  sub- 
sidy with  warlike  ammunition,  such  as  guns,  muskets,  &c,  and  officers 
to  the  amount  that  may  be  to  the  advantage  of  both  parties  for  the 
expulsion  of  the  force  so  invading,  and  the  number  of  these  forces,  or 
the  amount  of  the  subsidy,  ammunition,  &c,  shall  be  hereafter  regulated 
in  the  definitive  Treaty.  In  case  His  Majesty  the  king  of  England 
should  make  peace  with  such  European  power,  His  Britannic  Majesty 
shall  use  his  utmost  endeavours  to  negociate  and  procure  a  peace  between 
His  Persian  Majesty  and  such  power.  But  if,  which  God  forbid,  His 
Britannic  Majesty's  efforts  for  this  purpose  should  fail  of  success,  then 
the  forces  or  subsidy,  according  to  the  amount  mentioned  in  the  definitive 
Treaty,  shall  still  continue  in  the  service  of  the  king  of  Persia  as  long  as 
the  said  European  forces  shall  remain  in  the  territories  of  His  Persian 
Majesty,  or  until  peace  is  concluded  between  His  Persian  Majesty  and 
the  said  European  power.  And  it  is  further  agreed  that  in  case  the 
dominions  of  His  Britannic  Majesty  in  India  are  attacked  or  invaded  by 
the  Afghans  or  any  other  power,  His  Majesty  the  king  of  Persia  shall 
afford  a  force  for  the  protection  of  the  said  dominions  according  to  the 
stipulations  contained  in  the  definitive  Treaty. 

Article  5. 
If  a  detachment  of  British  troops  has  arrived  from  India  in  the  Gulf 
of  Persia,  and  by  the  consent  of  His  Persian  Majesty  landed  on  the  Island 
of  Carrack,  or  at  any  of  the  Persian  ports,  they  shall  not  in  any  manner 
possess  themselves  of  such  places,  and  from  the  date  of  these  preliminary 
Articles,  the  said  detachment  shall  be  at  the  disposal  of  His  Majesty  the 
king  of  Persia,  the  amount  of  which  shall  be  settled  in  the  definitive  Treaty. 


120  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SVNNUDS. 

Mm.  Article  6. 

No.  x.\  v.  But  if  the  said  troops  remain  by  the  desire  of  His  Majesty  the  king 

of  Persia  either  at  Carrack  or  any  other  port  in  the  Gulf  of  Persia,  they 
shall  be  treated  by  the  Governor  there  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  and 
orders  shall  be  given  to  all  the  Governors  of  Faristan  that  whatever  quantity 
of  provisions,  &c.,  may  be  necessary,  shall,  on  being  paid  for,  be  furnished 
to  the  said  troops  at  the  fair  prices  of  the  day. 


Article  7. 

In  case  war  takes  place  between  His  Persian  Majesty  and  the 
Afghans,  His  Majesty  the  king  of  Great  Britain  shall  not  take  any  part 
therein,  unless  it  be  at  the  desire  of  both  parties,  to  afford  his  mediation 
for  peace. 