

At  this  time  the  high  in  dignity  and  loyal  well-wisher  (titles)  His 
Excellency  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  Baronet,  appointed  by  His  Britannic  Majesty 
ambassador  extraordinary  to  this  Court,  has  arrived  invested  with  full 
powers  to  conclude  a  definitive  Treaty  between  the  two  illustrious 
monarchs. 

The  plenipotentiaries  of  this  Court,  in  conjunction  with  His  Excel- 
lency Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  Baronet,  having  consulted  on  the  terms  most 
vol.  vn.  r 


122  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PEKSIA.     advisable  for  this  alliance,  have  comprised  them  in  the  twelve  adjoining 
No  XXVI.   Articles.     What  relates  to  commerce,  trade,  and   other  affairs  will  be 
drawn  up  and  concluded  in  a  separate  commercial  Treaty : — 

Article  1. 
The  Persian  government  judge  it  incumbent  on  them,  after  the  con- 
clusion of  this  definitive  Treaty,  to  declare  all  alliances  formerly  contracted 
with  European  States  null  and  void,  and  hold  themselves  bound  not  to 
allow  any  European  army  to  enter  the  Persian  territory,  nor  to  proceed 
towards  India,  nor  to  any  of  the  ports  of  that  country,  and  also  engage 
not  to  allow  any  individuals  of  such  European  nations  whatever  to  enter 
Persia.  Should  any  of  the  European  powers  wish  to  invade  India  by 
the  road  of  Kharizen,  Taturistan,  Bokhara,  Samarkand,  or  other  routes, 
His  Persian  Majesty  engages  to  induce  the  kings  and  governors  of  those 
countries  to  oppose  such  invasion,  as  much  as  is  in  his  power,  either  by 
the  fear  of  his  arms  or  by  conciliatory  measures. 

Article  2. 

In  case  of  any  European  nation  invading  Persia,  should  the  Persian 
government  request  the  assistance  of  the  English,  the  Governor  General 
of  India,  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain,  shall  comply  with  the  wish  of 
the  Persian  government  in  sending  from  India  the  force  required,  if 
possible  and  convenient ;  if,  however,  the  state  of  affairs  in  India  prevent 
the  possibility  of  sending  troops,  the  English  Government  shall  pay 
annually  the  sum  of  two  hundred  thousand  Tomans  so  long  as  the  war 
with  such  nation  shall  continue;  and  since  the  payment  of  the  above 
subsidy  will  be  made  solely  for  the  purpose  of  raising  and  disciplining 
an  army,  it  is  agreed  that  the  British  ambassador  shall  see  and  be 
satisfied  of  its  being  duly  applied  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  assigned. 

Article  3. 

Should  any  European  power  engaged  in  war  with  Persia  make 
peace  with  England,  His  Britannic  Majesty  engages  to  use  his  best 
endeavours  to  bring  Persia  and  such  European  power  to  a  friendly  under- 
standing; if,  however,  His  Majesty's  cordial  interference  shall  fail  of 
success,  England  shall  still  furnish  an  army  from  India,  as  specified  in 