

Article  8.   . 

It  is  acknowledged  the  intent  and  meaning  of  these  preliminary 
Articles  are  defensive.  And  it  is  likewise  agreed  that  as  long  as  these 
preliminary  Articles  remain  in  force,  His  Majesty  the  king  of  Persia  shall 
not  enter  into  any  engagements  inimical  to  His  Britannic  Majesty  or 
pregnant  with  injury  or  disadvantage  to  the  British  territories  in  India. 

This  Treaty  is  concluded  by  both  parties  in  the  hope  of  its  being 
everlasting,  and  that  it  may  be  productive  of  the  most  beautiful  fruits  of 
friendship  between  the  two  most  serene  kings. 

In  witness  whereof  we,  the  said  plenipotentiaries,  have  hereunto  set 
our  hands  and  seals,  in  the  royal  city  of  Teheran,  this  twelfth  day  of 
March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  nine, 
answering  to  the  25th  of  Moharem-il-Haram,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira 
one  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty-four. 


Mahomed  Sheffee. 


Mahomed  Hossein. 


Harford  Jones. 


L.  S. 


L.  S. 


L.  S. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


121 


Fobm  of  His  Majesty  Futteh  Ali  Shah's  ratification  of  the  preliminary  Treaty 

with  England. 

This  auspicious  and  noble  document  is  the  preliminary  Treaty  which 
was  concluded  between  the  ministers  of  the  two  great  States  and  sent 
(to  England)  by  the  high  in  family  Mirza  Abul  Hossein  Khan.  At 
present  our  sincere  well-wisher  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  Baronet,  ambassador 
extraordinary  from  that  great  State  (England),  has  brought  a  copy  of  the 
said  Treaty  ratified  by,  and  sealed  with  the  seal,  resplendent  like  the  sun, 
of  our  brother  the  pearl  of  royalty,  in  dignity  above  the  planets,  the  king 
of  England  and  Hindoostan,  and  presented  it  to  our  auspicious  view. 
We  also  by  these  presents  have  ratified  and  approved  of  the  said  prelimi- 
nary Treaty  and  have  affixed  our  prosperous  seal  to  the  same ;  and  the 
Articles  agreed  to  therein  are  of  that  nature  which  will  be  fully  explained 
in  the  definitive  Treaty. 


PERSIA. 

Nos.  XXV 
&  XXVI. 


No.  XXVI. 

Pbaise  be  to  God,  the  All-perfect  and  All-sufficient. 

These  happy  leaves  are  a  nosegay  plucked  from  the  thornless  garden 
of  concord  and  tied  by  the  hands  of  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  two 
great  States  in  the  form  of  a  definitive  Treaty,  in  which  the  Articles  of 
friendship  and  amity  are  blended. 

Previously  to  this  period,  the  high  in  station,  Sir  Harford  Jones, 
Baronet,  envoy  extraordinary  from  the  English  Government,  came  to 
this  Court  to  form  an  amicable  alliance,  and  in  conjunction  with  the 
plenipotentiaries  of  Persia,  their  Excellencies  (titles)  Mirza  Mahomed 
Sheffee  and  Hajee  Mahomed  Hossein  Khan  concluded  a  preliminary 
Treaty,  the  particulars  of  which  were  to  be  detailed  and  arranged  in  a 
definitive  Treaty. 