


No.  XXVII. 
Praise  be  to  God,  the  All-perfect  and  All-sufficient. 

These  happy  leaves  are  a  nosegay  plucked  from  the  thornless  garden 
of  concord  and  tied  by  the  hands  of  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  two 
great  States  in  the  form  of  a  definitive  Treaty,  in  which  the  Articles  of 
friendship  and  amity  are  blended. 

Previously  to  this  period,  the  high  in  station,  Sir  Harford  Jones, 
Baronet,  envoy  extraordinary  from  the  English  Government,  came  to  this 
Court  to  form  an  amicable  alliance,  and  in  conjunction  with  the  plenipo- 


128  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

MBSIA.     tentiaries  of  Persia,  their  Excellencies  (titles)  Mirza  Mohammed  Sheffee 


n  ..  xxvn.  ;lll('  Hajee  Mohammed  Booooni  Khan  oo&ehided  a  preliminary  Treaty,  the 
particulars  of  which  were  to  be  detailed  and  arranged  in  a  definitive 
Treaty,  and  the  above-mentioned  Treaty,  according*  to  its  Articles,  was 
ratified  by  the  British  Government. 

Afterwards,  when  His  Excellency  Sir  Gore  Ouseley,  ambassador 
extraordinary  from  His  Britannic  Majesty,  arrived  at  this  exalted  and 
illustrious  Court  for  the  purpose  of  completing*  the  relations  of  amity 
between  the  two  States,  and  was  invested  with  full  powers  by  his 
own  government  to  arrange  all  the  important  affairs  of  friendship,  the 
ministers  of  this  virtuous  State,  with  the  advice  and  approbation  of  the 
above-mentioned  ambassador,  concluded  a  definitive  Treaty  consisting  of 
fixed  Articles  and  stipulations. 

That  Treaty  having  been  submitted  to  the  British  Government, 
certain  changes  in  its  Articles  and  provisions  consistent  with  friendship 
appeared  necessary,  and  Henry  Ellis,  Esq.,  was  accordingly  dispatched  to 
this  Court  in  charge  of  a  letter  explanatory  of  the  above-mentioned 
alterations.  Therefore  their  Excellencies  Mirza  Mohammed  ShefFee,  Prime 
Minister  (titles),  Mirza  Buzurk  Caimaian  (titles),  and  Mirza  Abdul 
Wahab,  Principal  Secretary  of  State,  were  duly  appointed  and  invested 
with  full  powers  to  negotiate  with  the  plenipotentiaries  of  His  Majesty, 
James  Morier,  Esq.,  recently  appointed  minister  at  this  Court,  and  the 
above-mentioned  Henry  Ellis,  Esq.  These  plenipotentiaries  having  con- 
sulted on  the  terms  most  advisable  for  this  alliance,  have  comprised  them 
in  eleven  Articles.  What  relates  to  commerce,  trade,  and  other  affairs 
will  be  drawn  up  and  concluded  in  a  separate  commercial  Treaty. 


Article  1. 

The  Persian  government  judge  it  incumbent  on  them,  after  the 
conclusion  of  this  definitive  Treaty,  to  declare  all  alliances  contracted  with 
European  nations  in  a  state  of  hostility  with  Great  Britain  null  and 
void,  and  hold  themselves  bound  not  to  allow  any  European  army  to 
enter  the  Persian  territory,  nor  to  proceed  towards  India,  nor  to  any  of 
the  ports  of  that  country,  and  also  engage  not  to  allow  any  individuals  of 
such  European  nations  entertaining  a  design  of  invading  India,  or  being 