

Article  15. 

Should  there  be  any  discrepancy  between  the  entry  in  the  duftur 
and  the  bond  itself,  and  the  Dewan  Khaneh  have  erroneously  made  the 
registry,  it  (the  Dewan  Khaneh)  shall  make  good  the  debts  of  the 
insolvent. 

Article  16. 

Those  reckoned  fraudulent  bankrupts  are  of  the  following  descrip- 
tion : — 1st,  those  who  cannot  establish  their  insolvency  nor  give  a 
public  account  of  the  money  and  effects  they  have  received  from  others ; 
Znd,  those  who,  whether  secretly  or  openly,  convey  merchandize  to 
their  homes ;  3rd,  those  who,  aware  of  their  insolvency,  shall,  after 
the  same  having  become  apparent,  make  gifts  with  a  view  to  securing 
to  themselves  (lit.  eating  up)  the  property  of  their  creditors;  ^th, 
those  who  shall  again  sell  or  give  in  pledge  immoveable  property  already 
sold  to  or  in  pledge  with  others ;  §th,  those  who  shall  sell  or  give  in 
pledge  religious  endowments  (*-a^  Jl-*). 

Article  17. 

His  Majesty  the  king  has  abolished  all  places  of  asylum  in  the 
homes  of  individuals,  except  in  certain  mosques  and  sanctified  places, 
such  as  the  houses  of  well  known   (Oolumas)  priests  and  the  king's 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  143 

palaces,  which,  from  olden  time,  have  been  places  of  refuge ;    and  has     PERSIA. 


commanded  that  none  of  the  subjects  of  this  government  (the  Persian)    No.  XXXII. 
shall  admit  into  their  houses  delinquents,  such  as  thieves,  bankrupts,  and 
others.     Whoever  shall  disobey  these  royal  orders  shall  subject  himself 
to  punishment. 

Article  18. 

Since,  for  the  transaction  of  mercantile  affairs  a  (Mullick-oo-Tijjar), 
or  Chief  of  merchants,  is  in  every  place  necessary,  accordingly  the 
ministers  of  the  Persian  government  will  appoint  a  Mullick-oo-Tijjar  in 
every  place  in  Persia  where  extended  commerce  is  carried  on ;  and  more- 
over, when  the  business  of  British  merchants  shall  be  transacted  in  the 
Dewan  Khaneh,  it  (the  Dewan  Khaneh)  shall  arrange  and  settle  the 
same  in  the  presence  of  a  delegate  from  the  mission  or  consulate ;  and 
so,  in  like  manner,  the  distraint  of  the  property  of  a  bankrupt  or  of  the 
effects  of  a  deceased  debtor,  in  cases  connected  with  foreign  subjects, 
shall  be  made  in  the  presence  of  a  delegate  from  the  British  Authorities. 
The  British  Agents  shall  demand  (the  amount  of)  the  claims  of  (due  to 
the)  bankrupts  from  his  debtors,  being  natives  of  the  country,  in  the 
same  manner  as  if  the  debtors  were  themselves  subjects  of  the  British 
Government. 

Reverting  to  Article  5,  treating  of  immoveable  property.  In  Persia 
there  are  three  descriptions  of  persons  holding  villages  :  1st,  the  king ; 
2nd,  the  landed  proprietor  (Malik) ;  3rd,  the  inhabitants.  Should  the 
Malik  (desire  to)  place  his  village  in  pledge,  he  shall,  in  order  to  obviate 
discussion,  first  obtain  the  permission  of  the  king's  government  and  of 
the  inhabitants. 