

The  envoy,  considering  this  document  as  a  ratification  on  the  subject 
of  the  two  Articles,  will  know  that  it  is  liable  to  no  further  comment 
from  the  ministers  of  the  Shah's  Court. 

Sealed  by  H.  R,  H.  Abbas  Mirza. 


134  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNTJDS. 

PERSIA.     TbanslatioN  of  a  Fibman  from  His  Majesty  the  Shah  to  Colonel  Macdonald, 
Km  XXVIII  British  Envoy  in  Persia. 

&  XXIX.  Apter  Compliments. — Let  it  be  known  to  Colonel  Macdonald,  the 

English  envoy  exalted  by  our  munificence,  that  our  noble  son  having 
represented  to  us  his  having  recently  come  to  an  arrangement  relative 
to  the  two  Articles  of  the  Treaty  with  England,  we  have  ordered  that 
what  has  been  executed  by  our  son  touching  this  transaction,  in  confor- 
mity with  the  Firman  of  full  powers  granted  him  by  us,  be  confirmed 
by  our  royal  ratification  and  consent,  and  we  duly  appreciate  the  exer- 
tions of  your  Excellency  during  the  last  year,  which  have  obtained  you 
the  good-will  of  the  Shah. 

Regarding  the  crore  of  Tomans  required  for  the  redemption  of 
Khore,  agreeably  to  what  has  been  laid  before  us,  His  Royal  Highness 
Abbas  Mirza  has  directed  the  payment  of  4,00,000  Tomans  by  Maho- 
med Mirza,  and  we  have  besides  instructed  the  remaining  1,00,000 
Tomans  to  be  delivered  to  Mirza  Abul  Hossein  Khan,  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  for  the  purpose  of  being  transmitted  to  you. 

Your  Excellency  will  therefore,  conceiving  this  Firman  as  your 
security,  become  responsible  for  the  payment  of  the  above  sum,  which 
will  be  afterwards  repaid  to  you  by  the  Lord  of  Exalted  Rank  Mirza  Abul 
Hossein  Khan ;  also  make  known  to  us  all  your  wishes. 

Sealed  by  H.  H.  Futteh  Ali  Shah. 


No.  XXIX. 

Tbanslation  of  a  Fibman  from  His  Majesty  Futteh  Ali  Shah  of  Persia,  to 
His  Eoyal  Highness  Hossein  Ali  Mibza,  Governor  General  of  Fars. 

This  auspicious  Firman  is  issued  to  inform  our  beloved  and  renowned 
son,  Hossein  Ali  Mirza,  the  Governor  General  of  Fars,  that  the  British 
Agent  at  the  Court  has  represented  to  our  ministers  that  the  officers  of 
the  customs  of  Fars  and  the  ports  have  commenced  to  exact  a  duty  on 
horses  purchased  in  Persia  by  British  subjects  for  exportation  to  their 
own  country.  According  to  his  statement  this  regulation  did  not 
formerly  exist ;  and  in  consideration  of  the  friendship  between  the  two 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNXJDS. 


135 


States,  which  has  rendered  their  interests  inseparable,  it  is  our  wish  in     PERSIA. 


every  respect  to  cultivate  the  present  alliance ;  therefore  our  beloved  son    j$oa  xxix 
is  ordered  to   give  instructions,  both  with  regard  to  horses  and  other      &  XXX. 
property  and  goods  belonging  to  British  subjects,  that  no  duties  shall 
in  future  be   levied  on  them,  excepting  such  as  long-established  usages 
authorize. 