

&  XXXII.    unto  our  hands  and  seals,  at  the  capital  city  of  Teheran,  this*  twenty-eighth 

day  of  October,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 

forty-one,  corresponding  to  the  twelfth  day  of  the  month  Ramzan,  in 

the  year  of  the  Hegira  1257. 

(Signed)        John  McNeill. 

Sealed  by  Mieza  Abul  Hossein  Khan, 

Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs. 


No.  XXXII. 

Tbanslation  of  a  Firman  relating  to  bankruptcies,  issued  by  the  Persian  govern- 
ment for  the  protection  of  British  merchants  at  the  instance  of  Colonel 
Sheil,  Her  Majesty's  Charge  d'Affaires  at  Teheran,  dated  Jummadee-ool-Awul 
1260  Hegira,. corresponding  with  May  and  June  1844. 

This,  that  the  high  in  rank  (with  other  usual  titles)  Hossein  Khan, 
Adjutant  Bashee,  Governor  of  the  province  of  Yezd,  honoured  and  exalted 
by  the  increasing  favor  of  His  Majesty,  may  know  that  the  ministers  of 
the  British  Government  having,  from  a  high  sense  of  justice,  certified 
that,  with  reference  to  the  property  remaining  with  bankrupts  and  insol- 
vents, to  be  proportionately  distributed  and  divided  among  their  creditors, 
the  subjects  of  the  exalted  Persian  and  British  Governments,  the  de- 
pendants of  that  government  (British),  shall  not  on  this  head  receive 
the  slightest  favour  or  distinction ;  and  having  at  the  present  time  re- 
quested, through  the  medium  of  their  Charge  d'  Affaires,  His  Excellency 
Colonel  Sheil,  that  suitable  regulations  comprehended  in  certain  Articles, 
not  incompatible  with  the  religion  of  Islam,  should  be  passed  for  the 
protection  of  merchants,  the  dependants  of  the  British  Government, 
from  all  kinds  of  deceptions,  frauds,  and  evil  designs  on  the  part  of  the 
insolvent  and  fraudulent  bankrupt,  and  His  Persian  Majesty  being  ear- 
nestly desirous  that  foreign  nations  and  merchants,  the  subjects  of  other 
States  in  the  protected  territories  of  the  Shah  in  Shah,  should  be  secured 
from  every  evil  design  of  the  insolvent  and  fraudulent  bankrupt,  accord- 
ingly these  commercial  regulations,  which  have  been  arranged  between 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  139 

the  ministers  of  the  Persian  government  and  His  Excellency  Colonel     PERSIA. 
Sheil,  the  British  Charge  d' Affaires,  and  have   received  the  auspicious   No  xxxil. 
approval  and  approbation  of  His  Majesty,  are  written  and  detailed  for 
the  information  of  that  high  in  rank,  &c.  (Hossein  Khan)   in  the  body 
of  this  document. 

Article  1. 

All  deeds  of  purchase  and  sale,  bonds,  &c,  shall  henceforth  be 
registered  in  the  respectable  (Dewan  Khaneh)  Courts  of  Equity  in  the 
special  dufturs  (records),  which  are  returned  by  the  Governor  of  each 
province,  sealed  with  the  Government  Seal;  in  the  said  dufturs  all 
claims  should,  according  to  their  respective  dates  and  numbers,  be  entered. 
The  dates  and  numbers  of  the  dufturs  (entries)  should  also  be  inscribed 
on  the  face  of  the  agreement.  The  pages  of  the  dufturs  should  be 
numbered,  and  should  contain  no  emendations  or  erasures. 