

You  are  enjoined  to  pay  the  fullest  attention  to  the  purport  of  this 
Firman,  and  not  only  to  prevent  the  subjects  of  the  British  Government 
from  suffering  any  injustice  or  molestation,  but  to  extend  them  every 
protection  and  indulgence. 


Seal  of  His 

Majesty  Futteh 

Ali  Shah. 


(True  Translation) 

(Signed)         George  Willock. 
Baled  Zilkad  1238,  corresponding  with  July  and  August  1823. 


No.  XXX. 


Seal  of 

Mohammed 

Shah. 


"Whereas  the  relations  of  friendship  and  amity  between  the  powerful 
and  dignified  governments  of  Persia  and  England  are  fixed  upon  the  most 
perfect  and  firm  basis,  and  whereas  it  is  agreeable  to  the  exalted  character 
of  His  Majesty  that  this  friendship  and  amity  should  daily  increase,  and 
that  mutual  advantage  should  thence  result,  therefore,  in  the  present 
auspicious  year,  and  henceforth  according  to  this  gracious  proclamation, 


136  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     we  grant  liberty  and  permission  to  the  merchants  of  the  British  nation 

So*.  XXX    that  having  brought  their  merchandize  to  the  territorial  possessions  of 

&  XXXI.     Persia,  they  may  dispose  of  the  same  in  perfect  security  and  confidence, 

and  that  they  shall  pay  to  the  officers  of  government  the  same  public 

dues  upon  their  goods  as   are   paid  by   the  merchants  of  the  Russian 

government. 

In  the  month  of  Mohurrum,  in  the  year  of  the  Hegira  1252,    May 
a.  d.  1836. 

Witnesses'  Seals  follow. 


No.  XXXI. 
Commercial  Tbeaty  concluded  with  the  Shah  of  Persia  in  1841. 

Preamble. — Whereas  by  the  benign  favour  of  the  one  Almighty  God, 
whose  bounties  are  infinite,  from  the  day  on  which  the  Treaty  of  friend- 
ship and  attachment  was  concluded  between  the  glorious  States  of  Great 
Britain  and  Persia,  the  renowned  and  just  Sovereigns  of  the  two  ever- 
lasting States  have  day  by  day  and  at  all  times  attended  to  and  observed 
the  whole  of  its  Articles  and  stipulations,  and  have  caused  the  subjects  of 
both  governments  to  enjoy  all  its  benefits  and  advantages  except  the 
Treaty  of  commerce,  which,  in  the  preamble  of  the  Treaty  of  the  year  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  fourteen,  the  two  governments  engaged  to 
conclude,  and  which  up  to  this  time,  for  certain  reasons,  has  been  post- 
poned and  left  unfinished,  therefore  in  this  fortunate  year,  that  all  the 
stipulations  of  the  auspicious  Treaty  may  be  fulfilled,  His  Majesty  the 
Shah  of  Persia  has  appointed  His  Excellency  Hajee  Mirza  Abul  Hos- 
sein  Khan,  His  Majesty's  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs,  to  be  his 
sole  plenipotentiary,  and  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  and  Sovereign  of  India,  has  appointed  Sir  John  McNeill,  Knight, 
Grand  Cross  of  the  Most  Honourable  Order  of  the  Bath,  Her  Majesty's 
Envoy  Extraordinary  and  Minister  Plenipotentiary  to  the  Court  of  Per- 
sia, to  be  her  sole  plenipotentiary,  and  the  said  plenipotentiaries  having 
concluded  a  commercial  Treaty  in  these  two  Articles,  have   annexed  and 