

Article  2. 

Agreements  which  have  been  rendered  valid  by  registry  in  the 
large  duftur  should  be  again  separately  written  in  the  Dewan  Khaneh 
in  alphabetical  order,  together  with  the  names  of  the  contracting  parties, 
and  a  numerical  list  of  the  large  dufturs  be  framed. 

Article  3. 

Should  there  exist  in  one  spot  two  bonds  in  the  shape  of  claims  for 
money,  which  have  been  duly  registered  in  the  Dewan  Khaneh,  that 
whose  entry  in  the  Dewan  Khaneh  shall  bear  the  older  date  shall  be 
first  executed.  This  condition  not  to  supersede  those  regulations  rela- 
tive to  the  proportional  division  of  property  which  are  to  have  effect  at 
the  period  of  bankruptcy. 

Article  4. 

The  registry  of  agreements  is  not  essential,  but  bonds  which,  ac- 
cording to  regulation,  have  been  rendered  valid  by  registry  in  the  De- 
wan Khaneh,  shall  especially  be  held  of  greater  validity  over  external 
bonds   (contracted  independently),  which  shall  not  be  executed  until  the 


14,0  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     execution  of   those  bonds    which  have    been  duly  registered  in    the 
No  XXXII    Dewan  Khaneh  shall  have  taken  place ;  such  independently  contracted 
bonds   may    be   brought    to    and    registered   in  the   Dewan    Khaneh 
during  the  space  of  one  year. 

Article  5. 

Whoever  shall  (desire  to)  sell  or  place  in  pledge  his  immoveable  pro- 
perty, shall  give  into  the  hands  of  the  purchaser  a  deed  of  sale  or  (iS's^O 
transfer  ;  should  he  not  pay  the  money  at  the  time  agreed  upon,  he  shall 
cause  it  to  be  put  up  to  sale,  and  the  Dewan  Khaneh,  previous  to  regis- 
tering and  rendering  valid  such  agreement  of  purchase  or  sale,  shall 
ascertain  that  its  deed  of  sale  or  transfer  has  been  delivered  into  the 
hands  of  the  purchaser,  and  that  the  said  real  estate  has  not  been  sold 
nor  given  in  pledge  or  security  to  some  other  person. 


Article  6. 

The  payment  of  the  money  of  a  bond  shall  not  be  (considered) 
proved  until  both  creditor  and  debtor  shall  have  attached  their  seals  and 
signatures  to  the  bond  that  the  whole  of  the  money  has  been  received ; 
otherwise,  at  the  time  of  emergency,  it  will  be  necessary  to  establish  the 
settlement  of  the  debt  by  producing  evidence  and  making  affidavit. 

Article  7. 

On  the  death  of  a  debtor,  the  creditors  shall  have  the  right  of 
claiming  their  money  from  the  heirs  of  the  deceased  previous  to  the 
maturity  of  the  bond  or  promissory  note,  and  the  heirs  to  the  property 
of  the  deceased  shall  satisfy  those  claims. 

Article  8. 

Every  trader  and  merchant  who  shall  appear  insolvent  shall  make 
affidavit  that  he  has  not  secreted  any  of  his  property,  and  shall  estab- 
lish (prove)  his  insolvency ;  so,  also,  his  partners  and  agents  shall  take 
oath  that  they  have  not  secreted  any  of  his  property. 