

Article  5. 

Should  the  Persian  government  wish  to  introduce  European  dis- 
cipline among  their  troops,  they  are  at  liberty  to  employ  European  officers 
for  that  purpose,  provided  the  said  officers  do  not  belong  to  nations  in  a 
state  of  war  or  enmity  with  Great  Britain. 


Article  6. 

Should  any  European  power  be  engaged  in  war  with  Persia  when  at 
peace  with  England,  His  Britannic  Majesty  engages  to  use  his  best 
endeavours  to  bring  Persia  and  such  European  power  to  a  friendly  under- 
standing. If,  however,  His  Majesty's  cordial  interference  should  fail 
of  success,  England  shall  still,  if  required,  in  conformity  with  the  stipu- 
lations in  the  preceding  Articles,  send  a  force  from  India,  or,  in  lieu 
thereof,  pay  an  annual  subsidy  of  two  hundred  thousand  Tomans  for 
the  support  of  a  Persian  army  so  long  as  a  war  in  the  supposed  case 
shall  continue  and  until  Persia  shall  make  peace  with  such  nation. 


Article  7. 

Since  it  is  the  custom  of  Persia  to  pay  the  troops  six  months  in 
advance,  the  English  minister  at  that  Court  shall  do  all  in  his  power  to 
pay  the  subsidy  in  as  early  instalments  as  may  be  convenient. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  131 

Article  8.  PERSIA. 

Should  the  Afghans  be  at  war  with  the  British  nation,  His  Persian  No.  XXVII. 
Majesty  engages  to  send  an  army  against  them  in  such  force  and  in 
such  manner  as  may  be  concerted  with  the  English  Government.  The 
expense  of  such  an  army  shall  be  defrayed  by  the  British  Government 
in  such  manner  as  may  be  agreed  upon  at  the  period  of  its  being 
required. 

Article  9. 

If  war  should  be  declared  between  the  Afghans  and  Persians,  the 
English  Government  shall  not  interfere  with  either  party  unless  their 
mediation  to  effect  -a  peace  shall  be  solicited  by  both  parties. 

Article  10. 

Should  any  Persian  subject  of  distinction  showing  signs  of  hostility 
and  rebellion  take  refuge  in  the  British  dominions,  the  English 
Government  shall,  on  intimation  from  the  Persian  government,  turn  him 
out  of  their  country,  or,  if  he  refuse  to  leave  it,  shall  seize  and  send  him 
to  Persia. 

Previously  to  the  arrival  of  such  fugitive  in  the  English  territory, 
should  the  Governor  of  the  district  to  which  he  may  direct  his  flight 
receive  intelligence  of  the  wishes  of  the  Persian  government  respecting 
him,  he  shall  refuse  him  admission.  After  such  prohibition,  should  such 
person  persist  in  his  resolution,  the  said  Governor  shall  cause  him  to  be 
seized  and  sent  to  Persia,  it  being  understood  that  the  aforesaid  obliga- 
tions are  reciprocal  between  the  contracting  parties. 

Article  11. 

Should  His  Persian  Majesty  require  assistance  from  the  English 
Government  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  they  shall,  if  convenient  and  practicable, 
assist  him  with  ships  of  war  and  troops.  The  expenses  of  such  expedi- 
tion shall  be  accounted  for  and  defrayed  by  the  Persian  government,  and 
the  above  ships  shall  anchor  in  such  ports  as  shall  be  pointed  out  by  the 
Persian  government,  and  not  at  other  harbours  without  permission,  except 
from  absolute  necessity. 