


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  129 

at  enmity  with  Great  Britain  whatever,  to  enter  Persia.     Should  any  of    PERSIA. 


the  European  powers  wish  to  invade  India  by  the  road  of  Kharizen,  Tatur-    No.  XXVII. 
istan,  Bokhara,  Samarkand,  or  other  routes,  His  Persian  Majesty  engages 
to    induce  the  kings  and  governors  of  those  countries  to  oppose  such 
invasion,  as  much  as  is  in  his  power,  either  by  the  fear  of  his  arms  or  by 
conciliatory  measures. 

Article  2. 

It  is  agreed  that  these  Articles  formed  with  the  hand  of  truth  and 
sincerity  shall  not  be  changed  or  altered,  but  there  shall  arise  from  them 
a  daily  increase  of  friendship  which  shall  last  for  ever  between  the  two 
most  serene  kings,  their  heirs,  successors,  their  subjects,  and  their 
respective  kingdoms,  dominions,  provinces  and  countries;  and  His 
Britannic  Majesty  further  engages  not  to  interfere  in  any  dispute  which 
may  hereafter  arise  between  the  Princes,  Noblemen,  and  great  Chiefs  of 
Persia,  and  if  one  of  the  contending  parties  should  even  offer  a  province 
of  Persia  with  a  view  of  obtaining  assistance,  the  English  Government 
shall  not  agree  to  such  a  proposal,  nor  by  adopting  it  possess  themselves 
of  such  part  of  Persia. 

Article  3. 

The  purpose  of  this  Treaty  is  strictly  defensive,  and  the  object  is 
that,  from  their  mutual  assistance,  both  States  should  derive  stability  and 
strength,  and  this  Treaty  has  only  been  concluded  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
pelling the  aggression  of  enemies ;  and  the  purport  of  the  word  aggres- 
sion in  this  Treaty  is  an  attack  upon  the  territories  of  another  State. 
The  limits  of  the  territories  of  the  two  States  of  Russia  and  Persia  shall 
be  determined  according  to  the  admission  of  Great  Britain,  Persia,  and 
Russia. 

Article  4. 
It  having  been  agreed  by  an  Article  in  the  preliminary  Treaty  con- 
cluded between  the  high  contracting  parties  that  in  case  of  any  European 
nation  invading  Persia,  should  the  Persian  government  require  the 
assistance  of  the  English,  the  Governor  General  of  India,  on  the  part 
of  Great  Britain,  shall  comply  with  the  wish  of  the  Persian  government 

VOL.    VII.  a 


ISO  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   STNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     by  sending  from  India  the  force  required,  with  officers,  ammunition,  and 


No.  XXVII.  warlike  stores,  or,  in  lieu  thereof,  the  English  Government  shall  pay  an 
annual  subsidy,  the  amount  of  which  shall  be  regulated  in  a  definitive 
Treaty  to  be  concluded  between  the  high  contracting  parties;  it  is 
hereby  provided  that  the  amount  of  the  said  subsidy  shall  be  two  hundred 
thousand  (2,00,000)  Tomans  annually.  It  is  further  agreed  that  the  said 
subsidy  shall  not  be  paid  in  case  the  war  with  such  European  nation 
shall  have  been  produced  by  an  aggression  on  the  part  of  Persia;  and 
since  the  payment  of  the  subsidy  will  be  made  solely  for  the  purpose  of 
raising  and  disciplining  an  army,  it  is  agreed  that  the  English  minis- 
ter shall  be  satisfied  of  its  being  duly  applied  to  the  purpose  for  which 
it  is  assigned. 