


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  137 

united  it  to  the  original  Treaty  that  by  the  aid  of  God  it  may  henceforth     PERSIA. 


be  observed  between  the  two  governments  and  be  a  source  of  advantage    No.  XXXI. 
to  the  subjects  of  both. 

Article  1. 
The  merchants  of  the  two  mighty  States  are  reciprocally  permitted 
and  allowed  to  carry  into  each  other's  territories  their  goods  and  manu- 
factures of  every  description,  and  to  sell  or  exchange  them  in  any  part  of 
their  respective  countries,  and  on  the  goods  which  they  import  or  export 
custom  duties  shall  be  levied,  that  is  to  say,  on  entering  the  country  the 
same  amount  of  custom  duties  shall  be  levied  once  for  all  that  is  levied 
on  merchandize  imported  by  the  merchants  of  the  most  favoured  Euro- 
pean nations,  and  at  the  time  of  going  out  of  the  country  the  same 
amount  of  custom  duties  which  is  levied  on  the  merchandize  of  mer- 
chants of  the  most  favoured  European  nations  shall  be  levied  from  the 
merchants,  subjects  of  the  high  contracting  parties,  and  except  this  no 
claim  shall  be  made  upon  the  merchants  of  the  two  States  in  each  other's 
dominions  on  any  pretext  or  under  any  denomination,  and  the  merchants 
or  persons  connected  with  or  dependant  upon  the  high  contracting  parties, 
in  each  other's  dominions  mutually,  shall  receive  the  same  aid  and  support 
and  the  same  respect  which  is  received  by  the  subjects  of  the  most 
favoured  nations. 

Article  2. 

As  it  is  necessary,  for  the  purpose  of  attending  to  the  affairs  of  the 
merchants  of  the  two  parties  respectively,  that  from  both  governments  • 
commercial  Agents  should  be  appointed  to  reside  in  stated  places,  it  is 
therefore  arranged  that  two  commercial  Agents  on  the  part  of  the  British 
Government  shall  reside,  one  in  the  capital  and  one  in  Tabreez,  and  in 
those  places  only,  and  on  this  condition,  that  he  who  shall  reside  at 
Tabreez,  and  he  alone,  shall  be  honoured  with  the  privileges  of  Consul 
General;  and  as  for  a  series  of  years  a  Resident  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment has  resided  at  Bushire,  the  Persian  government  grants  permis- 
sion that  the  said  Resident  shall  reside  there  as  heretofore ;  and  in  like 
manner  two  commercial  Agents  shall  reside  on  the  part  of  the  Persian 
government,  one  in  the  capital  London,  and  one  in  the  port  of  Bombay, 
and  shall  enjoy  the  same  rank  and  privileges  which  the  commercial  Agents 
of  the  British  Government  shall  enjoy  in  Persia. 

VOL.    VII.  t 


138  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS. 

TERSIA.  This  commercial  Treaty  we,  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  high  con- 


No*.  XXXI  tracting  parties,  have  agreed  to,  and  in  witness  thereof  have  set  there- 