


132 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIA.  A  definitive  Treaty  between  the  two  States  having  formerly  been 

N«.  XXVII  prepared,  consisting  of  12  Articles,  and  certain  changes  not  inconsistent 
&  XXVIII.  with  friendship  having  appeared  necessary,  we,  the  plenipotentiaries  of 
the  two  States  comprising  the  said  Treaty  in  11  Articles,  have  hereunto 
set  our  hands  and  seals,  in  the  royal  city  of  Teheran,  this  twenty-fifth  day 
of  November,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and 
fourteen,  corresponding  with  the  twelfth  Zialhajeh,  in  the  year  of  the 
Hegira  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty-nine. 


James  Morier. 


Abdul  Wahab. 


ISASI. 


Mohammed  Sheffee. 


Henry  Ellis. 


No.  XXVIII. 

Tbanslation  of  a  Bond  granted  by  Abbas  Mibza,  Prince  Boyal  of  Persia,  to 
Lieutenant  Colonel  Macdonald,  British  Envoy. 

Be  it  known  to  Colonel  Macdonald,  British  envoy  at  our  Court, 
that  we,  the  heir  apparent  to  the  Persian  throne,  in  virtue  of  the  full 
powers  vested  in  us  by  the  Shah,  in  all  matters  touching  the  foreign 
relations  of  this  kingdom,  do  hereby  pledge  our  solemn  word  and 
promise  that  if  the  British  Government  will  assist  us  with  the  sum  of 
two  hundred  thousand  Tomans  (2,00,000)  towards  the  liquidation  of 
the  indemnity  due  by  us  to  Russia,  we  will  expunge,  and  hereafter 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   STJNNtTDS.  133 

consider  as  annulled,  the  3rd  and  4th  Articles  of  the  definitive  Treaty     PERSIA. 


between  the  two  States,  concluded  by  Mr.  Ellis,  and  obtain  the  royal  No.  XXVIII. 
sanction  to  the  same. 

This  paper  bears  the  Seal  of  His  Royal  Highness  Abbas  Mirza 
and  that  of  his  Persian  Majesty's  minister  the  Kaim  Mukam. 

Bated  in  the  month  of  Shaban,  or  March  1828. 


Ruckum  of  His  Royal  Highness  the  heir  apparent,  ratifying  the  abrogation  of  the 
Articles  3   and  4  of  the  Treaty  with  England. 

Relative  to  the  Articles  3  and  4  of  the  Treaty  between  England  and 
Persia,  which  was  concluded  by  Mr.  Ellis,  in  the  month  Zihija  a.  h.  1229, 
agreeably  to  the  engagements  entered  into  with  your  Excellency,  that 
in  consequence  of  the  sum  of  2,00,000  Tomans,  the  currency  of  the  coun- 
try, presented  as  an  aid  to  Persia  in  consideration  of  the  losses  she  has 
sustained  in  the  war  with  Russia,  we,  the  heir  apparent,  vested  with  full 
powers  in  all  matters  connected  with  the  politics  of  this  nation,  have 
agreed  that  the  said  two  Articles  shall  be  expunged,  and  have  delivered  a 
bond  to  your  Excellency,  which  is  already  in  your  hands. 

In  the  month  of  Zikeyda  a.  h.  1243,  on  our  going  to  wait  upon 
His  Majesty  at  Teheran,  in  conformity  with  the  note  addressed  to  your 
Excellency  by  Mirza  Abul  Hossein  Khan,  the  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  we  were  appointed  sole  Agent  in  this  matter  by  His  Majesty  with 
unlimited  authority ;  therefore,  as  the  government  of  England,  through 
the  medium  of  Colonel  Macdonald,  have  afforded  us  the  assistance  of 
2,00,000  Tomans,  we,  the  representative  of  the  king,  have  on  this 
day,  the  14th  of  the  month  Suffer,  and  the  24th  of  the  Christian  month 
August,  annulled  the  two  obnoxious  Articles  of  our  propitious  Treaty. 