


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunntjds.  141 

Article  9.  Persia. 


Such  bankrupt  shall  not  be  at  liberty  until  he  shall  have  afforded  No.  XXXII. 
bail  for  his  appearance,  and  the  magistrate  shall  distrain  the  effects  of 
the  bankrupt,  and  those  of  his  children  and  women ;  but  in  the  event  of 
its  being  proved  that  he  has  become  owner  of  such  property  subsequent 
to  his  insolvency,  whatever  belonging  to  his  relatives,  and  in  which  the 
bankrupt  has  no  concern  whatever,  which  has  reached  them  as  inheri- 
tance, or  as  the  product  of  a  separate  trade  or  profession,  or  which  has 
passed  away  to  the  husbands  as  the  dowries  of  the  daughters,  shall  be 
free  from  distraint. 

Article  10. 

If  the  bankruptcy  has  been  caused  by  accidental  fire  or  shipwreck, 
proven,  or  by  robbery  by  enemies,  then  in  that  case  bail  shall  not  be 
required. 

Article  11. 

The  punishment  of  the  fraudulent  bankrupt  shall  be  the  same  as 
that  (laid  down)  for  the  thief  and  liar,  and  the  authority  to  mitigate 
punishment  in  certain  exceptions  shall  rest  with  the  king  only.  The 
fraudulent  bankrupt  shall  be  imprisoned  during  the  period  of  investiga- 
tion, and  shall  not  (be  permitted)  to  hold  communication  with  any  one, 
even  his  own  governors.  All  his  property  shall  be  distrained,  and  he  may 
not  a  second  time  engage  in  trade,  nor  be  (a  Mabashir  Kar)  an  agent  in 
business.  Similar  punishment  shall  be  inflicted  upon  his  accomplices,  and 
those  persons  who  may  have  secreted  his  property. 

Article  12. 

Agreements  entered  into  by  an  insolvent  after  his  insolvency  has 
appeared  and  been  proven  shall  be  null  and  void ;  and  in  like  manner,  all 
deeds  of  gift  drawn  out  after  his  insolvency  shall  be  null  and  void. 

Article  13. 

The  division  of  the  property  of  a  bankrupt  among  his  creditors 
shall  take  place  after  the  lapse  of  four  months.  If  the  effects  of  the 
bankrupt  are  of  a  kind  (liable)  to  be  speedily  injured  or  destroyed,  such 


1  1:1  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,  as  cattle,  articles  of  food,  &c.,  they  shall,  without  delay,  be  turned  into 
N  \\\il  money«  Merchandize  which,  after  the  publication  of  his  insolvency, 
may  be  sent  to  the  bankrupt,  shall  be  distrained  in  the  Custom  House 
and  sent  to  the  Dewan  Khaneh,  and,  in  like  manner,  letters  of  whatever 
kind  to  the  address  of  the  bankrupt,  indicative  of  absence  of  the  truth 
of  his  insolvency,  shall  be  taken  to  the  Dewan  Khaneh. 

Aeticle  14, 

The  bankrupt  not  having  satisfied  all  claims  against  him  shall  still 
be  considered  a  debtor.  His  creditors  shall,  of  their  own  accord,  allow 
him  time  on  account  of  the  remainder  of  their  claims,  and  in  the  interim 
whatever  he  may  obtain  or  become  heir  to  shall  be  given  up  in  payment 
of  his  debts. 