

Translated  into  Persian  by 

(Signed)         William  Taylour  Thomson. 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  155 

No.   XXXVI.  PERSIA. 


Treaty  of  Peace  between  Heb  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  No.  XXXVI. 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  and  His  Majesty  the  Shah  of  Persia. 

Signed,  in  the  English  and  Persian  languages,  at  Paris,  March  Mh,  1857. 


[Ratifications  exchanged  at  Bagdad,  May  2nd,  1857.] 


In  the  name  of  God,  the  Almighty,  the  All-Merciful. 

Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  and  His  Majesty,  whose  standard  is  the  Sun,  the  sacred, 
the  august,  the  great  monarch,  the  absolute  king  of  kings  of  all  the 
States  of  Persia,  being  both  equally  and  sincerely  animated  by  a  de- 
sire to  put  a  stop  to  the  evils  of  a  war,  which  is  contrary  to  their 
friendly  wishes  and  dispositions,  and  to  re-establish  on  a  solid  basis  the 
relations  of  amity  which  had  so  long  existed  between  the  two  exalted 
States  by  means  of  a  peace  calculated  for  their  mutual  advantage  and 
benefit,  have  appointed  as  their  plenipotentiaries  for  carrying  into 
effect  this  desired  object  the  following,  that  is  to  say  : — 

Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  the  Right  Honourable  Henry  Richard  Charles,  Baron 
Cowley,  a  Peer  of  the  United  Kingdom,  a  Member  of  Her  Majesty's 
Most  Honourable  Privy  Council,  Knight  Grand  Cross  of  the  Most 
Honourable  Order  of  the  Bath,  Her  Majesty's  ambassador  extraor- 
dinary and  plenipotentiary  to  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  the  French, 
&c.,  &c,  &c. 

And  His  Majesty  the  Shah  of  Persia,  His  Excellency  the  abode 
of  greatness,  the  favourite  of  the  king,  Ferokh  Khan,  Ameen-ool- 
Moolk,  the  great  ambassador  of  the  mighty  State  of  Persia,  the 
possessor  of  the  royal  portrait  and  of  the  blue  cordon,  the  bearer 
of  the  diamond-studded  girdle,  &c,  &c,  &c. 

Who,  having  exhibited  and  exchanged  their  full  powers,  and  found 

them  to  be  in  due   form,  have  agreed  upon  and  concluded  the  following 

Articles  : — 

Article  1. 

From  the  day  of  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  of  the  present 

Treaty    there  shall   be  perpetual    peace   and    friendship  between    Her 


15G  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 

Persia.     Majesty   the    Queen  of    tin1  (Tufted  Kingdom  of  Great   Britain  and 
No.  XXXVI.  Ireland   on    the    one    part   and  His    Majesty   the  Shah    of  Persia    on 
the  other,  as  likewise    between  their  respective   successors,   dominions, 
and  subjects. 

Article  2. 

Peace  being  happily  concluded  between  their  said  Majesties,  it  is 
hereby  agreed  that  the  forces  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  shall  evacuate 
the  Persian  territory,  subject  to  conditions  and  stipulations  hereafter 
specified. 