

This  agreement  of  the  right  of  search,  and  the  appointment  of  the 
Persian  government  officers  to  be  on  board  the  British  cruizers,  will 
come  in  force  on  the  1st  of  Rubbee-ool-Awul  1268  (January  1st,  1852). 

From  the  date  of  this  document  to  the  above  date  there  is  no 
right  of  search. 

The  Articles  written  in  this  document  have  from  first  to  last  been 
agreed  to  by  both  parties,  and  confirmed  by  the  ministers  of  both  gov- 
ernments, and  nothing  is  to  be  done  in  contravention  thereof. 

Written  in  the  month  of  Shuwal  1267,  August  1851. 

Done  in  duplicate,  signed  and 
sealed  by  Mirza  Tukee  Khan, 
Ameer-e-Nizam  of  the  Persian 
government.     Date  as  above.  Justin  Sheil, 

Her   Britannic    Majesty's    Minister 
Plenipotentiary  and  Envoy  Extraor- 
dinary at  the  Court  of  Persia. 


No.  XXXV. 

Engagement  of  the  Persian  government  regarding  Herat. 

Translation* 

15th  Kebbel-oo-Sanee  1269,  (January  25th,  1853.) 
The  Persian  government  engages  not  to  send  troops  on  any  account 
to  the  territory  of  Herat,  excepting  when  troops  from  without  attack 
that  place,  that  is  to  say,  troops  from  the  direction  of  Cabool,  or  from 

*  This  translation  was  made  in  1857  from  the  original  Persian,  as  some  douht  was 
raised  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  translation  made  in  1853, 


150  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.     Candahar,  or  from  other  foreign  territory ;  and  in  case  of  troops  being 

No.  XXXV.    despatched  under  such  circumstances,  the  Persian  government  binds  itself 

that  they  shall  not  enter  the  city  of  Herat,  and  that  immediately  on  the 

retreat  of  the  foreign  troops  to  their  own  country,  the  Persian  force  shall 

forthwith  return  to  the  Persian  soil  without  delay. 

The  Persian  government  also  engages  to  abstain  from  all  inter- 
ference whatsoever  in  the  internal  affairs  of  Herat,  likewise  in  (regard 
to)  occupation  or  taking  possession,  or  assuming  the  sovereignty  or 
government,  except  that  the  same  amount  of  interference  which  took 
place  between  the  two  in  the  time  of  the  late  Zuheer-ood-Dowlah,  Yar 
Mahomed  Khan,  is  to  exist  as  formerly.  The  Persian  government,  there- 
fore, engages  to  address  a  letter  to  Syed  Mahomed  Khan,  acquainting 
him  with  these  conditions,  and  to  forward  it  to  him  (by  a  person)  accom- 
panied by  some  one  belonging  to  the  English  mission,  who  may  be  in 
Meshed. 

The  Persian  government  also  engages  to  relinquish  all  claim  or  pre- 
tension to  the  coinage  of  money  and  to  the  f '  Khootbeh,"  or  t  o  any  other 
mark  whatever  of  subjection  or  of  allegiance  on  the  part  of  the  people  of 
Herat  to  Persia.  But  if,  as  in  the  time  of  the  late  Kamran  and  in  that 
of  the  late  Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  they  should,  of  their  own  accord,  send 
an  offering  in  money  and  strike  it  in  the  Shah's  name,  Persia  will  receive 
it  without  making  any  objection.  This  condition  will  also  be  imme- 
diately communicated  to  Syed  Mahomed  Khan.  They  also  engage  to 
recal  Abbas  Koolee  Khan,  Peeseean,  after  four  months  from  the  date  of 
his  arrival,  so  that  he  may  not  reside  there  permanently ;  and  hereafter 
no  permanent  agent  will  be  placed  in  Herat,  but  intercourse  will  be 
maintained  as  in  the  time  of  Yar  Mahomed  Khan.  Neither  will  they 
maintain  a  permanent  agent  on  the  part  of  Herat  in  Teheran.  There 
will  be  the  same  relations  and  privileges  which  existed  in  Kamran's 
time,  and  in  that  of  the  late  Yar  Mahomed  Khan.  For  instance,  if  at 
any  time  it  should  be  necessary  for  the  punishment  of  the  Toorkomans, 
or  in  case  of  disturbance  or  rebellion  in  the  Shah's  dominions,  that  the 
•  Persian  government  should  receive  assistance  from  the  Heratees,  similar 
to  that  afforded  by  the  late  Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  they  may,  as  formerly, 
render  assistance  of  their  own  accord  and  free  will,  but  not  of  a  per- 
manent nature. 