

Written  in  the  month  of  Bejjeb  1264. 

Translated  by 

(Signed)         Joseph  Reed. 


Translation  of  a  Firman  issued  by  His  Majesty  the  Shah  to  Mirza   Nebbe 
Khan,  Governor  of  Ispahan  and  Persian  Arabia. 

To  the  high  in  rank,  the  superior  of  Generals,  the  esteemed  of  the 
sovereign,  Mirza  Nebbee  Khan,  Chief  of  the  Civil  Law  Court  and 
Governor  of  Ispahan  and  Arabia,  who  has  been  honoured  by  the  favour  of 
the  pure  mind  of  the  king  of  kings,  be  it  known  that  at  this  time  the 
high  in  rank,  the  noble  and  exalted,  possessed  of  dignity,  the  pillar  of 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  147 

Christian  nobles,  the   cream  of  the  great  men  of  Christendom,  the  un-     PERSIA. 


doubted  well-wisher  of  the  State,  Colonel  Farrant,  Charge  d' Affaires  of  n0s.  XXXIII 
the  exalted  English  Government,  who  enjoys  the  unbounded  favour  of  &  XXXIV. 
His  Majesty  the  Shah,  whose  resplendent  mind  is  desirous  to  gratify  him, 
made  a  friendly  request  on  the  part  of  the  ministers  of  that  exalted 
government  from  the  ministers  of  His  Majesty  the  Shah,  &c.,  &c.,  that 
with  a  view  to  preserve  the  existing  friendship  between  the  two  exalted 
States,  a  decree  should  be  issued  from  the  source  of  magnificence  (the 
Shah)  that  hereafter  the  importation  of  the  negro  tribes  by  sea  should 
be  forbidden,  and  this  traffic  be  abolished. 

In  consequence  of  this,  it  is  ordered  and  ordained  that  that  high  in 
rank  after  perusing  this  Firman,  which  is  equal  to  a  decree  of  fate,  it  will  be 
incumbent  on  him  to  issue  positive  and  strict  injunctions  to  the  whole  of 
the  dealers  in  slaves  who  trade  by  sea,  that  henceforth  by  sea  alone  the 
importation  and  exportation  of  negroes  into  the  Persian  dominions  is 
entirely  forbidden,  but  not  by  land.  Not  a  single  individual  will  be 
permitted  to  bring  negroes  by  sea  without  being  subjected  to  severe 
punishment. 

That  high  in  rank  must  in  this  matter  give  peremptory  orders 
throughout  his  government  and  not  be  remiss. 

Written,  in  the  month  of  Rejjeb  1264,  June  1848. 


No.  XXXIV. 

Convention  concluded  between  Colonel  Sheil  and  Ameek-e-Nizam  for  the 
detention  and  search  of  Persian  vessels  by  British  and  East  India  Company's 
cruizers. 

The  Persian  government  agrees  that  the  ships  of  war  of  the 
British  Government  and  of  the  East  India  Company  shall,  in  order  to 
prevent  the  chance  of  negro  slaves,  male  and  female,  being  imported,  be 
permitted  for  the  period  of  eleven  years  to  search  Persian  merchant 
vessels  in  the  manner  detailed  in  this  document,  with  the  exception  of 
Persian  government  vessels,  not  being  vessels  the  property  of  merchants, 
or  the    property  of  Persian  subjects;    with  those  government   vessels 