

That  the  Persian  ministers  never  had,  nor  will  ever  have,  any  idea 
of  taking  possession,  assuming  the  sovereignty,  or  governing  either 
Herat  or  the  Herat  territory,  or  its  people,  and  will  not  interfere  in  any 
manner  whatsoever  in  the  internal  affairs  of  Herat,  so  that  they  may  be 
independent  in  their  country  and  their  own  affairs,  without  the  inter- 
ference of  any  one  belonging  either  to  this  government  or  to  the  Afghans 
of  Cabool  and  Candahar,  or  other  foreigners.  They  will  not  in  any  manner 
agree  that  the  Khootbeh  (prayer  in  the  Shah's  name)  should  be  recited  in 
the  name  of  His  Majesty  (the  Shah).  "With  regard  to  the  coinage  also, 
solely  to  secure  your  independence,  my  son,  they  will  never  consent  that 
the  current  coin  should  be  struck  in  the  name  of  His  Majesty  (the  Shah) . 
But  if,  as  in  the  times  of  the  late  Kamran  and  the  late  Yar  Mahomed 
Khan,  you  should  desire  to  send  a  sum  of  money  as  an  offering,  and 
that  money  should  be  struck  in  His  Majesty's  name,  the  Persian  minis- 
ters will  not  object  to  it  and  it  will  be  received.  If  at  any  time  it  should 
be  necessary  that  the  people  of  Herat  should  give  assistance  to  Persia 
in  order  to  punish  the  Toorkomans,  or  when  there  is  a  disturbance  or 
rebellion  in  the  Persian  territory,  they  may  of  their  own  free  will,  as  was 
formerly  done  in  the  time  of  the  late  Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  send  assist- 
ance in  men,  but  not  as  a  permanent  force.  Yes,  that  which  His 
Majesty  the  Shah  considers  imperative  on  him,  on  account  of  the 
services  rendered  by  the  late  Zuheer-ood-Dowlah  is,  that  if  any  foreign 
.  troops,  Afghan  or  other,  should  invade  Herat,  the  ministers  of  this  ever- 
enduring  State  shall  despatch  troops  to  the  aid  of  Heratees,  to  join  the 
Herat  troops  outside  of  the  town  of  Herat,  and  when  the  foreign  troops 
have  been  expelled  from  the  Herat  soil,  to  return  immediately  to  the 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  153 

Persian  territory.      No  doubt  after  you  have  become  acquainted  with  the     PERSIA, 
real  sentiments  of  the   (Persian)  ministers,  you  will  act  in  conformity  No.  XXXV, 
with  them. 

Translated  by 

(Signed)         William  Taylour  Thomson. 


Fibman  of  the  Shah  to  Syed  Mahomed  Khan,  ltuler  of  Herat. 

Translation. 

January  29th  1853. 

Let  the  high  in  rank,  &c,  Zuheer-ood-Dowlah,  Syed  Mahomed 
Khan,  feel  assured  of  our  royal  favour,  and  know  that  the  engagement 
given  by  the  ministers  of  this  government,  with  regard  to  Herat,  and 
to  acquire  independence  for  him,  is  as  His  Excellency  the  Sadr  Azim 
has  written  to  him.  No  doubt  he,  Syed  Mahomed  Khan,  will  be  made 
acquainted  with  it,  and  will  act  in  conformity  with  it.  Let  him  know 
that  he  enjoys  the  highest  favour  of  our  royal  person,  and  represent  his 
prayers  to  us. 