


1-48  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA,     there  is  to  be  no  interference  whatever.     The  Persian  government  agrees 
No.  XXXIV.  tnat  m   n0  manner  whatever  shall  any  negro  slaves  be  imported  in  the 
vessels  of  the  Persian  government. 

The  Agreement  is  this — 
First. — That  in  giving  this  permission  to  search  mercantile  ves- 
sels and  those  of  subjects,  the  search  shall  from  the  first  to  the  last  be 
effected  with  the  co-operation,  intervention,  and  knowledge  of  Persian 
officers,  who  are  to  be  on  board  vessels  of  the  English  Government. 

Second. — The  merchant  vessels  shall  not  be  detained  longer  than 
is  necessary  to  effect  the  search  for  slaves.  If  slaves  should  be  found 
in  any  of  those  vessels,  the  British  Authorities  are  to  take  possession  of 
them,  and  to  carry  them  away,  without  detaining  or  causing  them  (that 
is,  the  people  of  the  ship  importing  slaves)  any  other  damage  besides 
that  of  depriving  them  of  the  slaves.  The  vessel  itself  in  which  the 
slaves  have  been  imported  shall,  by  the  co-operation  and  knowledge  of 
the  officers  of  the  Persian  government,  who  are  on  board  of  the  British 
cruizers,  be  delivered  to  the  authorities  of  the  Persian  ports,  who  are 
there  on  the  part  of  the  Persian  government ;  and  the  authorities  of  this 
(the  Persian)  government  are  to  punish  and  fine,  in  a  manner  suitable  to 
the  crime  he  has  committed,  the  owner  of  that  slaving  vessel  who  has 
acted  in  contravention  of  the  commands  of  His  Majesty  the  king  of 
Persia  by  importing  slaves. 

The  British  ships  of  war  are  not  in  any  manner  to  interfere  with  the 
Persian  trading  vessels  without  the  co-operation  of  the  Persian  gov- 
ernment officers ;  but  the  Persian  government  officers  must  not  on  their 
part  be  remiss  in  the  duty  committed  to  them. 

This  convention  is  to  be  in  force  for  a  period  of  eleven  years,  and 
after  these  eleven  years  have  expired,  and  the  stipulated  period  has 
elapsed,  if  the  Persian  vessels  shall  be  interfered  with  for  even  a  single 
day  beyond  the  eleven  years,  it  will  be  opposed  to  the  course  of  friend- 
ship with  the  Persian  government  and  to  the  maintenance  of  her 
rights,  and  this  government  will  make  a  demand  for  satisfaction. 

If  the  slaves  who  have  been  heretofore  in  Persia,  and  are  now  there, 
should,  from  the  present  date  and  henceforward,  wish  to  proceed  by  sea 
on  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  or  to  India,  or  travel  by  sea,  they  must,  with 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNTIDS.  149 

the  knowledge  of  the  British  Resident  in  Bushire,  procure   a  passport     PERSIA. 


from  the  officer  at  the  head  of  the  Persian  Passport  Office  in  Bushire,  Nos.  XXXVI 
and  no  exception  shall  hereafter  be  taken  to  any  slave  holding  a  passport.     &  XXXV. 
The  passport  (regulation)   obtained  with  the  knowledge  of  the  British 
Resident  at  Bushire,  is,  like  the  other  stipulations  written  above,  to  be 
for  a  period  of  eleven  years. 