

Article  3. 

The  high  contracting  parties  stipulate  that  all  prisoners  taken 
during  the  war  by  either  belligerent  shall  be  immediately  liberated. 

Article  4. 

His  Majesty  the  Shah  of  Persia  engages,  immediately  on  the  ex- 
change of  the  ratifications  of  this  Treaty,  to  publish  a  full  and  com- 
plete amnesty,  absolving  all  Persian  subjects  who  may  have  in  any 
way  been  compromised  by  their  intercourse  with  the  British  forces 
during  the  war  from  any  responsibility  for  their  conduct  in  that  res- 
pect, so  that  no  persons,  of  whatever  degree,  shall  be  exposed  to  vexa- 
tion, persecution,  or  punishment   on  that  account. 

Article  5. 

His  Majesty  the  Shah  of  Persia  engages  further  to  take  imme- 
diate measures  for  withdrawing  from  the  territory  and  city  of  Herat, 
and  from  every  other  part  of  Afghanistan,  the  Persian  troops  and 
authorities  now  stationed  therein;  such  withdrawal  to  be  effected 
within  three  months  from  the  date  of  the  exchange  of  the  ratifica- 
tions of  this  Treaty. 

Article  6. 

His  Majesty  the  Shah  of  Persia  agrees  to  relinquish  all  claims 
to  sovereignty  over  the  territory  and  city  of  Herat  and  the  countries  of 
Afghanistan,  and  never  to  demand  from  the  Chiefs  of   Herat,  or  of  the 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  157 

countries  of  Afghanistan,  any  marks  of  obedience,  such  as  the  coinage,     PERSIA. 


or  "  Khootbeh,"  or  tribute.  No.  XXXVI. 

His  Majesty  further  engages  to  abstain  hereafter  from  all  inter- 
ference with  the  internal  affairs  of  Afghanistan.  His  Majesty  pro- 
mises to  recognize  the  independence  of  Herat  and  of  the  whole  of 
Afghanistan,  and  never  to  attempt  to  interfere  with  the  independence 
of  those  States. 

In  case  of  differences  arising  between  the  government  of  Persia 
and  the  countries  of  Herat  and  Afghanistan,  the  Persian  govern- 
ment engages  to  refer  them  for  adjustment  to  the  friendly  offices 
of  the  British  Government,  and  not  to  take  up  arms  unless  those 
friendly  offices  fail  of  effect. 

The  British  Government,  on  their  part,  engage  at  all  times  to 
exert  their  influence  with  the  States  of  Afghanistan,  to  prevent 
any  cause  of  umbrage  being  given  by  them,  or  by  any  of  them,  to 
the  Persian  government;  and  the  British  Government,  when  appealed 
to  by  the  Persian  government,  in  the  event  of  difficulties  arising, 
will  use  their  best  endeavours  to  compose  such  differences  in  a  manner 
just  and  honourable  to  Persia. 

Article  7. 

In  case  of  any  violation  of  the  Persian  frontier  by  any  of  the 
States  referred  to  above,  the  Persian  government  shall  have  the 
right,  if  due  satisfaction  is  not  given,  to  undertake  military  operations 
for  the  repression  and  punishment  of  the  aggressors ;  but  it  is  distinctly 
understood  and  agreed  to  that  any  military  force  of  the  Shah  which 
may  cross  the  frontier  for  the  above  mentioned  purpose  shall  retire 
within  its  own  territory  as  soon  as  its  object  is  accomplished,  and 
that  the  exercise  of  the  above-mentioned  right  is  not  to  be  made  a 
pretext  for  the  permanent  occupation  by  Persia,  or  for  the  annex- 
ation to  the  Persian  dominions,  of  any  town  or  portion  of  the  said 
States. 