

Translated  by 

(Signed)         William  Taylour  Thomson. 


Lieutenant  Colonel  Sheil  to  Syed  Mahomed  Khan,  Ruler  of  Herat. 

Your  Excellency  has  no  doubt  heard  of  the  anxiety  testified  many 
years  ago  by  the  government  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  Great 
Britain  for  the  maintenance  of  the  independence  of  Herat.  Although 
circumstances  have  withdrawn  Her  Majesty's  government  of  late  from 
any  direct  connection  with  Afghanistan,  they  have  not  ceased  to  take  a 
warm  interest  in  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  Herat,  and  in  the  pre- 
servation of  its  independence  under  Afghan  rule.  They  have  watched 
with  solicitude  during  the  last  year  and  a  half,  since  your  Excellency's 
accession  to  the  government  of  that  country,  the  progress  of  events  in 

VOL.   VII.  w 


154  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  Herat,  and  the  issue  has  been  that  they  have  felt  themselves  called  on  to 
No.  XXXV.  require  an  explanation  from  the  Persian  ministers  for  their  share  in 
certain  proceedings  connected  with  your  Excellency's  territory,  and  to 
claim  from  them  assurances  for  the  maintenance  of  that  territory  inde- 
pendent of  Persian  rule.  The  discussions  which  followed  terminated 
in  certain  engagements  concluded  by  this  government,  and  which  I 
deem  it  my  duty  to  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  your  Excellency.  They 
are  contained  in  the  three  enclosed  papers  which  are  copies  of  the  origi- 
nals, consisting  of  a  document  sealed  by  the  Prime  Minister  of  Persia, 
a  letter  from  the  Prime  Minister  to  your  Excellency,  and  a  Firman  from 
the  Shah  to  your  address,  ratifying  the  engagements  of  the  Sadr  Azim. 

These  documents  sufficiently  explain  the  views  of  Great  Britain, 
which,  briefly  stated,  are  a  determination  that  Herat  shall  remain  in 
Afghan  hands  and  in  independence. 

I  sincerely  trust  that  the  time  has  arrived  when  you  will  cease  to 
require  aid  from  the  government  of  this  country,  and  that  hencefor- 
ward your  Excellency  will  be  able  alone  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  your 
country.  Your  Excellency  may  be  assured  that  the  ruler  who  seeks 
foreign  aid  loses  the  respect  and  the  loyalty  of  his  subjects,  and  that 
there  is  only  one  termination  to  repeated  applications  for  foreign  succour. 
The  good- will  of  your  subjects  is  your  surest  safeguard.  By  upright,  just, 
and  impartial  government,  by  cultivating  Afghan  national  feeling,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  of  your  ability  to  maintain  your  position  against  all 
intruders,  in  the  same  manner  that  your  Excellency's  father,  the  late 
Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  accomplished  with  such  brilliant  success. 

My  messenger,  who  will  deliver  this  communication,  will  await  your 
Excellency's  convenience  to  return  with  an  answer  in  acknowledgment 
of  its  receipt. 