

It  is  necessary  that  the  high  in  rank  before  mentioned  should  make 
known  and  publish  the  above-written  details  in  the  Dewan  Khanehs  of 
the  province  of  Yezd  according  to  these  instructions,  and  strictly  warn 
the  authorities  and  executives  of  the  Dewan  Khanehs  of  the  province 
alluded  to,  to  act  up  to  the  commands  conveyed  in  this  august  docu- 
ment, nor  in  any  way  swerve  from  or  disobey  them.  Let  them  consider 
the  same  their  bounden  duty. 

Written  in  the  month  of  Jemmadee-ool-Awul,  in  the  year  of  the 
Ilegira  1260. 


1  1  I  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  No.   XXXIII. 


No.  XXXIII.  Enqagemeht  prohibiting  the  importation  of   African  slaves  into  Persia  by  sea. 
Libutbnant  Colonel  Farrant  to  Hajee  Mirza  Aghassee,  June  12th,  1848. 

With  regard  to  the  abolition  of  the  traffic  in  negroes  (slaves)  by 
sea,  it  is  a  long  time  since  it  was  promised,  and  your  Excellency  recently 
informed  me  yourself  that  the  discussions  on  this  subject  were  nearly 
brought  to  a  conclusion,  and  that,  please  God,  it  would  be  completed  in 
a  few  days ;  but  as  yet  it  has  not  been  finished. 

If  the  Persian  government  had  appreciated  my  representations  on 
this  subject,  the  prohibition  would  ere  this  have  been  sanctioned ;  but  as 
this  has  not  been  the  case,  I  am  now  obliged  to  demand  a  clear  and 
decisive  answer  on  this  subject,  as  to  whether  the  Persian  government 
will  issue  an  order  prohibiting  the  importation  of  negroes  by  sea 
or  not. 

If  it  be  the  intention  of  the  Persian  government  to  issue  this  order, 
I  request  to  be  made  acquainted  with  it  to-day ;  and  if  it  is  not  their 
intention  to  do  so,  an  immediate  and  explicit  answer  is  necessary  to  enable 
me  to  forward  it  for  the  information  of  my  government,  and  that  your 
Excellency,  after  all  your  promises,  should  no  longer  evade  giving  me 
a  decided  answer  on  this  subject. 

The  British  Government  are  very  anxious  to  know  the  determination 
of  the  Persian  government,  and  I  therefore  request  your  Excellency  will 
be  good  enough  to  send  me  a  positive  answer,  as  my  government  will 
not  consent  to  any  further  delay  on  my  part  in  this  matter. 

Translated  by 

(Signed)         Joseph  Reed. 


Translation  of  an  Autograph  Note  from  His  Majesty  the  Shah  to  Hajee  Mirza 
Aghassee,  June  12th,  1848,  Eejjeb  10th,  1261. 

Your  Excellency  the  Hajee,  let  them  not  bring  any  negroes  by  sea, 
let  them  be  brought  by  land.  Purely  for  the  sake  of  Farrant  Sahib 
(Lieutenant  Colonel  Farrant),  with  whom  I  am  much  pleased,  I  have 
consented  to  this.  On  this  subject  write  to  the  Governors  of  Fars.and 
Arabia  (Persian  Arabia) . 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  145 