

Solely  on  account  of  the  goodness  of  Farrant*   I   have   consented,     PERSIA, 
otherwise  some  trifling  discussions  still  exist  between  us  and  the  English  No.  XXXIII. 
Government. 

Translated  by 

(Signed)         Joseph  Reed. 


Hajee  Mibza  Aghassee  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  Faebant,  12th  June  1848. 

Translation. 

Your  communication  regarding  negroes  has  been  received  and  its 
contents  fully  understood. 

With  a  view  to  the  request  made  by  you,  my  sincere  and  esteemed 
friend,  and  solely  on  account  of  the  sincere  friendship  and  good  feelings 
I  entertain  towards  you,  I  did  not  consider  it  proper  to  withhold  or  delay 
the  fulfilment  of  your  desire,  and  exerted  my  endeavours  to  preserve  the 
existing  friendship  between  the  two  exalted  governments  of  Persia  and 
England  by  laying  your  request  in  detail  at  a  most  fortunate  time  before 
His  Majesty,  &c,  &c,  the  Shah;  may  his  dominion  and  sovereignty  be 
everlasting  ! 

An  imperative  order  has  been  issued  which  evinces  the  exceedingly 
great  favour  entertained  towards  you,  my  honoured  friend,  by  His  Majesty, 
&c,  &c,  the  Shah,  which  is  evident  will  always  increase.  The  importa- 
tion of  slaves  by  sea  alone  is  forbidden,  and  imperative  orders  will  be 
issued  to  the  Governors  of  Fars  and  Arabia  that  hereafter  strict  prohibi- 
tion should  be  observed  that  no  negroes  should  be  either  imported  or 
exported  except  by  land. 

This  affair,  in  fulfilment  of  the  request  of  that  esteemed  friend,  has, 
thank  God,  been  concluded  through  the  countless  favour  of  His  Majesty, 
&c,  &c,  &c,  the  Shah,  towards  you,  and  by  my  exertions. 

But  the  Persian  ministers  in  equal  proportion  require  that,  by  the 

true  friendship  of  the  ministers  of  the  British  Government,  when  they 

make  a  request  it  will  also  be  acceded  to. 

Translated  by 

(Signed)         Joseph  Reed. 

*  Thus  in  the  original. 
VOL.    VII.  U 


14<$  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.     Translation  of  a  Fibman  issued  by  His  Majesty  the  Shah  to  Hossein  Khan, 

Governor  of  Fars. 


No.  XXXIII. 


To  the  high  in  rank,  the  pillar  of  nobility,  &c,  &c,  Hossein  Khan, 
the  Controller  of  State  affairs  and  Governor  of  Fars,  who  has  been  exalted 
and  supported  by  the  distinguished  favours  of  His  Majesty,  &c.,  &cc.} 
the  Shah,  be  it  known — 

That  it  is  a  long  time  since  a  request  for  the  abolition  of  the  im- 
portation of  negroes  by  sea  was  made  on  the  part  of  the  ministers  of 
the  British  Government  to  the  ministers  and  authorities  of  this  kingdom, 
but  their  request  during  this  long  period  has  not  obtained  an  answer  or 
(our)  consent. 

But  in  consequence  of  the  favour  entertained  by  our  august  sover- 
eign, &c,  &c,  towards  the  high  in  rank,  the  sincere  well-wisher  of  the 
State,  the  chosen  among  Christian  nobles,  &c,  &c,  Colonel  Farrant, 
Charge*  d' Affaires  of  the  English  Government,  on  account  of  his 
respectful  conduct  and  manner  of  proceeding  which  have  been  made 
manifest,  and  purely  for  the  regard  we  entertain  for  him,  we  have  accepted 
and  complied  with  his  request,  and  we  have  ordained  that  hencefor- 
ward that  high  in  rank  shall  warn  all  merchants  and  persons  passing  to 
and  fro  to  discontinue  to  bring  negroes  by  sea ;  and  that  they  shall  not 
export  or  import  negroes  except  by  land,  which  is  by  no  means  forbidden. 
That  high  in  rank  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  orders 
contained  in  this  communication. 