


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS.  151 

The   Persian    government    further    engages,     unconditionally    and     PERSIA. 


without  exception,  to  release  and  set  free  all  the  Chiefs  of  Herat  who  are  ^o.  XXXV. 
in  Meshed  or  in  Teheran  or  in  any  other  part  of  Persia,  and  not  to 
receive  any  offenders,  prisoners,  or  suspected  persons  whatsoever  from 
Syed  Mahomed  Khan,  with  the  exception  of  such  persons  as,  having 
been  banished  by  Syed  Mahomed  Khan  from  Herat,  may  come  here  and 
themselves  desire  to  remain,  or  to  enter  the  service.  These  will  be  treated 
with  kindness  and  favour  as  formerly.  Distinct  orders  will  be  issued 
immediately  to  the  Prince  Governor  of  Khorassan  to  carry  out  these 
engagements. 

The  above  six  engagements  on  the  part  of  the  Persian  govern- 
ment are  to  be  observed  and  to  have  effect ;  and  the  Persian  ministers, 
notwithstanding  the  rights  which  they  possess  in  Herat,  solely  out  of 
friendship,  and  to  satisfy  the  English  Government,  have  entered  into 
these  engagements  with  the  English  Government  so  long  as  there  is  no 
interference  whatsoever  on  its  part  in  the  internal  affairs  of  Herat  and 
its  dependencies ;  otherwise  these  engagements  will  be  null  and  void,  and 
as  if  they  never  had  existed  or  been  written.  And  if  any  foreign  (State), 
either  Afghan  or  other,  should  desire  to  interfere  with  or  encroach  upon 
the  territory  of  Herat  or  its  dependencies,  and  the  Persian  ministers 
should  make  the  request,  the  British  Government  are  not  to  be  remiss  in 
restraining  them  and  in  giving  their  friendly  advice,  so  that  Herat  may 
remain  in  its  own  state  of  independence. 

Seal  and  autograph  of  the  Sadr  Azim. 

Translated  by 
(Signed)         Ronald  F.  Thomson. 


The  Sadb  Azim  to  Syed  Mahomed  Khan,  Kuler  of  Herat. 

Translation. 

January  26th  1853. 

The  Persian  ministers,  from  the  time  when  they  began  to  give  aid 
and  assistance  to  you,  my  son,  had  no  intention  of  taking  possession  or 


252  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

TERSIA.     assuming  sovereignty  over  Herat ;  nay,  they  were  desirous  that  it  should 


Na  XXXV.  remain  in  a  state  of  independence,  and  be  preserved  from  the  attacks  and 
invasions  of  foreigners.  They  had  no  views  of  acquisition  on  the  Herat 
soil,  or  of  raising  contributions  from  Herat  or  the  people  of  Herat,  and 
these  circumstances  were  made  known  to  the  Mufti  (lately  Political  Agent 
from  the  Governor  of  Herat  to  the  Shah)  when  he  was  here.  Now,  when 
their  intentions  have,  thank  God,  been  accomplished,  it  is  necessary  that 
I  should  inform  you,  my  son,  of  the  Articles  and  engagements  which  the 
(Persian)  ministers  have  imposed  upon  themselves.  They  are  to  the  fol- 
lowing effect : — 