


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  161 

Courts  of  Great  Britain  and  Persia.     This  agreement  to  have  the  same     PERSIA, 
force  and  value  as  if  inserted  in  the  Treaty  of  peace  concluded  this  day  ^o.  XXXVL 
between  the  undersigned  : — 

The  Sadr  Azim  shall  write,  in  the  Shah's  name,  a  letter  to 
Mr.  Murray,  expressing  his  regret  at  having  uttered  and  given  currency 
to  the  offensive  imputations  upon  the  honour  of  Her  Majesty's  Minister, 
requesting  to  withdraw  his  own  letter  of  the  19th  of  November,  and  the 
two  letters  of  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  of  the  26th  of  November, 
one  of  which  contains  a  rescript  from  the  Shah,  respecting  the  imputation 
upon  Mr.  Murray,  and  declaring,  in  the  same  letter,  that  no  such  further 
rescript  from  the  Shah  as  that  inclosed  herewith  in  copy  was  communi- 
cated, directly  or  indirectly,  to  any  of  the  foreign  missions  at  Teheran. 

A  copy  of  this  letter  shall  be  communicated  officially  by  the  Sadr 
Azim  to  each  of  the  foreign  missions  at  Teheran,  and  the  substance  of 
it  shall  be  made  public  in  that  capital. 

The  original  letter  shall  be  conveyed  to  Mr.  Murray  at  Bagdad  by 
the  hands  of  some  high  Persian  officer,  and  shall  be  accompanied  by  an 
invitation  to  Mr.  Murray,  in  the  Shah's  name,  to  return  with  the  mis- 
sion to  Teheran,  on  His  Majesty's  assurance  that  he  will  be  received  with 
all  the  honours  and  consideration  due  to  the  representative  of  the 
British  Government ;  another  person  of  suitable  rank  being  sent  to  con- 
duct him  as  Mehmandar  on  his  journey  through  Persia. 

Mr.  Murray,  on  approaching  the  capital,  shall  be  received  by  per- 
sons of  high  rank  deputed  to  escort  him  to  his  residence  in  the  town. 
Immediately  on  his  arrival  there,  the  Sadr  Azim  shall  go  in  State  to  the 
British  mission,  and  renew  friendly  relations  with  Mr.  Murray,  leaving 
the  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  to  accompany  him  to  the 
royal  palace,  the  Sadr  Azim  receiving  Mr.  Murray  and  conducting  him 
to  the  presence  of  the  Shah. 

The  Sadr  Azim  shall  visit  the  mission  at  noon  on  the  following 
day,  which  visit  Mr.  Murray  will  return,  at  latest,  on  the  following  day 
before  noon. 

Bone  at  Paris,  this  fourth  day  of  the  month  of  March,  in  the  year 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  ffty-seven. 

(Signed)         Cowley. 

Ferokh  (in  Persian). 
VOL.    VII.  x 


1G2  TllEATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  Annex  to  the  preceding  Note. 

No.  XXXVL  

The  Shah  to  the  Sadr  Azim,  December  1855. 

Translation. 

Last  night  we  read  the  paper  written  by  the  English  Minister 
Plenipotentiary,  and  were  much  surprised  at  the  rude,  unmeaning-,  dis- 
gusting, and  insolent  tone  and  purport.  The  letter  which  he  before 
•  wrote  was  also  impertinent.  We  have  also  heard  that  in  his  own  house 
he  is  constantly  speaking  disrespectfully  of  us  and  of  you,  but  we  never 
believed ;  now,  however,  he  has  introduced  it  in  an  official  letter.  We 
are  therefore  convinced  that  this  man,  Mr.  Murray,  is  stupid,  ignorant, 
and  insane,  who  has  the  audacity  and  impudence  to  insult  even  kings  ! 
From  the  time  of  Shah  Sultan  Hossein  (when  Persia  was  in  its  most 
disorganised  state,  and  during  the  last  fourteen  years  of  his  life,  when 
by  serious  illness  he  was  incapacitated  for  business)  up  to  the  present 
time,  no  disrespect  towards  the  sovereign  has  been  tolerated,  either  from 
the  government  or  its  Agent.  What  has  happened  now  that  this 
foolish  Minister  Plenipotentiary  acts  with  such  temerity  ?  It  appears 
that  our  friendly  missions  are  not  acquainted  with  the  wording  of  that 
document ;  give  it  now  to  Mirza  Abbas  and  Mirza  Malcum,  that  they 
may  take  and  duly  explain  it  to  the  French  Minister  and  Hyder  Effendi, 
that  they  may  see  how  improperly  he  has  written.  Since  last  night  till 
now  our  time  has  been  passed  in  vexation.  We  now  command  you,  in 
order  that  you  may  yourself  know,  and  also  acquaint  the  missions,  that 
until  the  Queen  of  England  herself  makes  us  a  suitable  apology  for  the 
insolence  of  her  envoy,  we  will  never  receive  back  this  her  foolish  Minis- 
ter, who  is  a  simpleton,  nor  accept  from  her  government  any  other 
Minister. 