

Article  11. 

The  above  ten  Articles  shall  remain  always  in  force  so  long  as  the 
sovereignty  of  Herat  is  vested  in  the  family  of  Shah  Kamran. 

Done  and  concluded  at  Herat  the  day  and  year  above  written, 

(Signed)         E.  D'Arcy  Todd, 

Envoy  to  Iierat. 


Eatiiied  by  the  Governor  General  of  India  on  16th  March  1840. 


PART   II. 

TREATIES,  ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS 


RELATING   TO 


TURKISH  ARABIA  AND  THE  PERSIAN  GULF. 


TURKISH  ARABIA. 


The  relations  of  the  British  Government  with  the  Pashas  or  temporary- 
governors  of  Bagdad  are  regulated  more  by  the  requirements  of  Euro- 
pean than  of  Indian  diplomacy,  and  by  the  obligations  recorded  in  the 
Treaties  between  Great  Britain  and  Turkey,  which  are  beyond  the 
scope  of  this  collection.  But  in  connection  with  the  early  trade  in  the 
Persian  Gulf,  direct  intercourse  was  for  many  years  maintained  with  the 
governors  of  Turkish  Arabia  without  much  consideration  of  their  re- 
lation to  Constantinople.  In  the  year  1639  there  seems  to  have  been  an 
English  factory  at  Bussora  subordinate  to  the  factory  at  Gombroon  and 
protected  by  firmans.  In  1728  Mr.  French,  the  Agent  at  Bussora,  obtained 
a  firman  conferring  on  the  Agent  power  to  try  the  servants  of  the  factory 
who  were  guilty  of  crime,  and  providing  for  the  adjustment  of  claims  on 
the  people  of  the  country;  and  in  1731  he  obtained  another  firman, 
fixing  three  per  cent,  as  the  duty  to  be  taken  on  English  goods  at  the  port 
of  Bussora.  But  the  first  firman  on  record  is  one  granted  in  1759 
(No.  XL.)  by  the  Pasha.  The  factory  at  Bussora  was  never  recognized 
by  the  Sublime  Porte  till  1764,  in  which  year  the  ambassador  at  Con- 
stantinople, with  much  difficulty,  obtained  a  Consulary  Birat  (No.  XLI.) 
as  the  only  efficacious  means  of  protecting  English  commerce  and  the 
property  of  English  subjects  at  Bussora. 

In  1765  it  was  proposed  permanently  to  appoint  an  Agent  at 
Bagdad,  but  the  proposal  was  disapproved  by  the  Court  of  Directors. 
In  1783,  however,  a  native  Agent  was  appointed,  and  in  1798  a  Resident, 


174  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    iUNNUDS. 

TURKISH  whose  chief  duty  was  to  transmit  intelligence  overland  between  India 
AKAB1A.  an(j  England,  and  to  watch  and  report  on  the  proceedings  of  the  French 
emissaries  in  connection  with  Napoleon's  projected  invasion  of  India  by  way 
of  Egypt  and  the  lied  Sea.  In  1802,  on  the  death  of  Soleiman  Pasha, 
who  had  governed  Bagdad  for  twenty  years,  and  the  appointment  of  his 
son-in-law  Ali  Pasha  to  succeed  him,  Lord  Elgin,  Her  Majesty's  Ambassa- 
dor at  Constantinople,  took  the  opportunity  to  procure  a  Consulary  Birat 
(No.  XLII.)  for  the  Resident  at  Bagdad,  whose  appointment  had  till 
then  never  been  sanctioned  by  the  Sultan. 