


(In  the  handwriting  of   the  Persian   Minister  for  Foreign    Affairs.) 

The  Persian  government  accepts  this  engagement.  If  the  English 
government  desires  it,  the  construction  of  the  line  of  Telegraph  will  be 
commenced  in  conformity  with  the  above  stipulation. 


Approved   and  accepted    by    Her  Majesty's  government    on   6th 
February  1863. 


HERAT. 

When  the  Dourani  empire  created  by  Ahmed  Shah  Abdali  was 
lost  by  his  grandsons  and  parcelled  out  among  the  Barukzye  brothers, 
Shah  Kamran  managed  to  maintain  a  precarious  footing  at  Herat.  He 
was  the  son  of  Mahmood,  and,  therefore,  nephew  of  Zeman  Shah,  Shah 
Suja-ool-moolk,  and  Feroze-ood-deen,  and  the  last  remaining  representa- 
tive of  the  Suddozye  princes  in  Afghanistan.  Herat  was  all  that 
remained  to  him  of  the  empire  of  his  family.  Dost  Mahomed  was 
supreme  at  Cabool  and  Ghuzni ;  his  half-brother  Kohundil  Khan  ruled 
conjointly  with  his  brothers  in  virtual  independence  at  Candahar,  while 
other  districts  had  fallen  to  other  sons  of  Poinda  Khan,  Barukzye. 
Kamran  was  a  man  of  evil  passions,  cruel,  and  dissipated,  and  was 
entirely  ruled  by  his  minister  Yar  Mahomed  Khan  Alakozye,  a  man  able 
but  more  infamous  than  himself,  who  had  risen  to  eminence  by  the 
murder  of  the  other  Chiefs. 

On  23rd  November  1837,  Mahomed  Shah,  king  of  Persia,  laid 
siege  to  Herat  in  pursuance  of  his  ambitious  policy*  for  the  re-conquest 
of  Afghanistan.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Herat  sustained  the 
memorable  ten  months'  siege,  and  all  the  efforts  of  the  Persian  king  to 
capture  it,  aided  by  the  advice  and  direction  of  Russian  officers,  were 
defeated.  To  check  these  aggressive  measures  on  the  part  of  Persia  and 
Russia,  the  British  Government  in  India  determinedf  to  interpose  a 
friendly  power  in  Afghanistan  between  their  frontier  and  Persia  by 
re-establishing  the  Suddozye  dynasty  at  Cabool  in  the  person  of  Shah 
Suja,  and  maintaining  the  independence  of  Herat  as  a  separate  State. 
The  tripartite  Treaty  between  the  British  Government,  Runjeet  Sing, 
and  Shah  Suja  contained  a  clause  guaranteeing  the  integrity  of  Herat, 
and  on  the  entry  of  the  British  troops  into  Afghanistan,  Eldred  Pot- 
tinger,  through  whose  military  talents  and  energy  the  efforts  of  the  king 
of  Persia  to  take  Herat  had  been  defeated,  was  appointed  Political  Agent. 

*  See  above,  page  97.  +  See  Vol.  II.,  page  426. 


1GG  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

HERAT.  Yar  Mahomed,  however,  chafed  under  the  restrictions  which  the  British 
mission  placed  on  his  tyranny,  more  particularly  on  his  traffic  in  slaves. 
He  made  secret  overtures  to  Persia  and  to  the  Candahar  Sirdars,  who  had 
taken  refuge  in  Persia,  for  a  league  to  expel  Shah  Suja  and  the  British 
from  Cabool.  Another  Agent,  Major  D'Arcy  Todd,  was  sent  to  Herat 
in  ]  839,  under  instructions  from  the  envoy  at  Cabool  to  negotiate  an 
alliance  with  Shah  Kamran.  On  9th  June  1839  Articles  (No.  XXXVIII.) 
were  given  to  Yar  Mahomed,  acknowledging  him  as  minister  of  Herat 
and  the  channel  of  all  communications  with  Shah  Kamran;  and  on  30th 
August,  a  Treaty  (No.  XXXIX.)  of  perpetual  peace  and  friendship  was 
concluded,  the  terms  of  which  were  that  the  British  Government  should 
abstain  from  interference  in  the  internal  administration  of  Herat,  and 
assist  the  Shah  with  money  and  officers  against  all  foreign  encroach- 
ment ;  and  that  the  Shah  should  prohibit  the  sale  of  his  subjects  into 
slavery ;  should  refrain  from  entering  into  hostilities  or  political  cor- 
respondence with  any  foreign  power  except  with  the  consent  of  the 
British  Government,  to  whose  arbitration  all  disputes  with  Shah  Suja 
were  to  be  referred ;  should  employ  no  Europeans  except  subjects  of  Great 
Britain ;  and  should  facilitate  trade. 