

♦ 

Article  13. 
The  high  contracting  parties  hereby  renew  the  agreement  entered 
into  by  them  in  the  month  of  August  1851  (Shawal  1267)  for  the  sup- 
pression of  the  slave  trade  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  engage  further 
that  the  said  agreement  shall  continue  in  force  after  the  date  at  which 
it  expires,  that  is,  after  the  month  of  August  1862,  for  the  further  space 
of  ten  years,  and  for  so  long  afterwards  as  neither  of  the  high  contract- 
ing parties  shall,  by  a  formal  declaration,  annul  it ;  such  declaration 
not  to  take  effect  until  one  year  after  it  is  made. 

Article  14. 

Immediately  on  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  of  this  Treaty, 
the  British  troops  will  desist  from  all  acts  of  hostility  against  Persia, 
and  the  British  Government  engages  further  that,  as  soon  as  the  sti- 
pulations in  regard  to  the  evacuation  by  the  Persian  troops  of  Herat 


160  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS. 

PEKSIA.  and  the  Afghan  territories,  as  well  as  in  regard  to  the  reception  of 
No.  xxxvi.  tll('  British  mission  at  Ifehersn,  shall  have  been  carried  into  full  effect, 
the  British  troops  shall,  without  delay,  he  withdrawn  from  all  ports, 
places,  and  islands  belonging  to  Persia;  but  the  British  Government 
engages  that,  during  this  interval,  nothing  shall  be  designedly  done  by 
the  Commander  of  the  British  troops  to  weaken  the  allegiance  of  the 
Persian  subjects  towards  the  Shah,  which  allegiance  it  is,  on  the  con- 
trary, their  earnest  desire  to  confirm ;  and  further,  the  British  Govern- 
ment engages  that,  as  far  as  possible,  the  subjects  of  Persia  shall  be 
secured  against  inconvenience  from  the  presence  of  the  British  troops, 
and  that  all  supplies  which  may  be  required  for  the  use  of  those  troops, 
and  which  the  Persian  government  engages  to  direct  its  authorities  to 
assist  them  in  procuring,  shall  be  paid  for,  at  the  fair  market-price,  by 
the  British  Commissariat  immediately  on  delivery. 

Article  15. 

The  present  Treaty  shall  be  ratified,  and  the  ratifications  exchanged 
at  Bagdad  in  the  space  of  three  months,  or  sooner,  if  possible. 

In  witness  whereof  the  respective  plenipotentiaries  have  signed  the 
same,  and  have  affixed  thereto  the  seal  of  their  arms. 

Bone  at  Paris,  in  quadruplicate,  this  fourth  day  of  the  month  of 

March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  ffly- 

seven. 

(Signed)         Cowley. 

Ferokh  (in  Persian.) 


Separate  Note  referred  to  in  Article  X.  of  the  foregoing  Treaty. 
(Signed  in  the  English  and  Persian  languages.) 
The  undersigned,  Her  Britannic  Majesty's  ambassador  extraor- 
dinary and  plenipotentiary  to  the  emperor  of  the  French,  and  His  Per- 
sian Majesty's  ambassador  extraordinary  and  plenipotentiary  to  His 
said  Imperial  Majesty,  being  duly  authorized  by  their  respective  gov- 
ernments, hereby  agree  that  the  following  ceremonial  shall  take  place  for 
the  re-establishment  of  diplomatic  and  friendly  relations  between   the 