

Article  3. 

The  vizier  engages  not  to  act  in  any  matter  contrary  to  the  wishes 
and  advice  of  the  British  Political  Officer  at  Herat,  and  will  be  guided 
in  all  that  concerns  the  welfare  of  the  two  States  by  the  counsel  of  the 
above-mentioned  officer ;  and  should  the  British  Agent  interfere  in  the 
affairs  of  Herat  without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  vizier,  he  shall 
be  considered  as  endeavouring  to  disturb  the  friendship  between  the  two 
States. 

Article  4. 

That  the  British  Agent  at  Herat  shall  not,  without  the  consent  of 
the  vizier,  entertain  as  servants  a  greater  number  than  one  hundred  of  the 
people  of  Afghanistan,  and  of  these  hundred  persons  there  shall  be  none 
of  the  vizier's  relations,  unless  permission  to  entertain  them  be  obtained 
from  Yar  Mahomed. 

Article  5. 

As  the  government  of  Herat  is  vested  in  the  person  and  descendants 
of  Shah  Kamran,  so  is  the  office  of  vizier  recognized  in  the  person  and 
descendants  [of  Yar  Mahomed  Khan  as  long  as  they  shall  be  worthy  of 
the  trust;  and,  in  the  event  of  their  being  unfit  for  the  office,  a  subsistence 
shall  be  provided  for  them  by  the  British  Government  to  place  them 
above  want  and  distress. 


Sealed  by- 
Major  E.  D'A.  Todd 
and  Nujeeb  Oollah 
Khan. 


VOL,  VII. 


170*  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

HERAT.  No.*  XXXIX. 


N  XXXIX  Tktmty  of  friendship  and  alliance  between  the  Honourable  East  IndtA  Company 
and  His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  of  Herat,  concluded  on  the  thirteenth, 
day  of  August  1839,  corresponding  with  the  second  day  of  Jemmadee-oos-sani 
1255  a.  H.,  by  Major  E.  D'Arcy  Todd,  envoy  from  the  Governor  General 
of  India  on  the  one  part,  and  His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  for  himself,  his 
heirs  and  successors,  on  the  other. 


Article  1.  ... 

There  shall  be  perpetual  peace  and  friendship  between  the  British. 
Government  and  His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran,  his  heirs  and  successors. 


Article  2. 

The  British  Government  recognises  the  government  of  Herat,  as: 
at  present  constituted,  as  being  vested  in  His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran, 
his  heirs  and  successors,  and  the  British  Government  engages  not  to 
interfere  in  any  way  with  the  internal  administration  of  His  Majesty's, 
dominions. 

Article  3. 

With  a  view  to  strengthen  and  perpetuate  the  concord  subsisting 
between  the  British  Government  and  Shah  Kamran,  an  accredited 
British  Agent  shall  always  reside  at  the  Court  of  His  Majesty ;  in  like 
manner,  should  His  Majesty  see  fit,  he  will  depute  an  accredited  Agent 
to  reside  at  the  Durbar  of  the  Governor  General. 


Article  4. 

The  British  Government  undertakes  to  provide  His  Majesty  Shah 
Kamran  with  loans  of  money,  with  officers,  and  with  all  other  means 
that  may  be  found  necessary  for  the  protection  of  His  Majesty's  person 
and  country,  and  to  assist  in  the  defence  of  His  Majesty's  rights  and 
interests  against  all  foreign  encroachment  to  the  utmost  of  its  ability. 