


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUD3'.  171 

•Article  5.      ■  HERAT. 


"With  a  view  to  enable  the  British  Government  efficiently  to  fulfil  No.  XXXIX. 
the  obligation  contained  in  the  preceding*  Article,  and  to  obviate  all 
just  ground  of  complaint  on  the  part  of  other  powers,  His  Majesty  Shah 
Kamran  agrees  to  prohibit  for  ever  the  practice  of  kidnapping  or  seizing 
human  beings  for  the  purpose  of  selling  them  into  slavery  by  any  of 
His  Majesty's  subjects  ;  and  should  there  be  any  persons  now  in  a  state 
of  bondage  within  the  limits  of  His  Majesty's  authority,  who  may  have 
been  enslaved  in  the  manner  above  mentioned,  His  Majesty  engages  to 
exert  his  utmost  endeavours  to  procure  the  liberation  of  such  persons. 

Article  6.  "  , 

His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  engages  to  co-operate  with  the  British 
Government  and  with  His  Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk  to  the  utmost 
of  his  ability  in  preserving  the  integrity  of  their  respective  dominions 
against  the  encroachment  of  all  foreign  powers,  but  at  the  same  time 
His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  binds  himself  to  refrain  from  entering  into 
hostilities  with  any  foreign  power  without  the  advice  and  consent  of  the 
British  Government  and  His  Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk. 

Article  7. 

His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  agrees  on  his  part  that,  should  any 
dispute  arise  between  himself  and  His  Majesty  Shah  .Suja-ool-moolk 
as  to  the  boundaries  of  their  respective  territories  or  with  regard  to  any 
other  matter,  the  said  dispute  shall  be  referred  to  the  arbitration  and 
decision  of  the  British  Government,  and  the  British  Government  further 
undertakes  to  use  its  best  endeavours  for  the  accommodation  of  all  sub- 
sisting differences,  or  of  such  as  may  hereafter  arise  between  His  Majesty 
Shah  Kamran  and  other  powers. 

Article  8. 

His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  agrees  to  refrain  from  entering  into 
any  correspondence  with  foreign  powers  without  the  knowledge  and 
consent  of  the  British  representative  residing  at  his  Court. 


172  treaties,  engagements,  and  sl.'nnuds. 

iierat.  Article  9. 


No.  XXXIX.  In  acknowledgment  of  the  steady   support  and  friendship  of  the 

British  Government,  whose  interests  are  identical  with  those  of  the 
Afghan  nation,  His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  will  never  take  individuals 
of  any  European  nation  (Ahli  Furung)  other  than  those  belonging  to 
Great  Britain  (Inglees)  into  his  service,  nor  will  he  permit  such  Europeans 
to  reside  in  his  country. 

Article  10. 

His  Majesty  Shah  Kamran  will  remove  all  unnecessary  obstacles  to 
the  freedom  of  commerce,  and  will  adopt  such  arrangements  for  increas- 
ing the  facilities  of  traders  as  may  appear  to  His  Majesty,  with  the 
counsel  of  the  British  representative  at  his  Court,  to  be  expedient. 