


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  163 

NO.    XXXVII.  PERSIA. 


Engagement  entered  into  by  the  Persian  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  for  the  N°,  XXXVII 
construction  of  a  line  of  Telegraph  from  Khanakeen  to  Bushire. 


Article  1. 

The  Persian  government  considers  it  necessary  to  construct  a 
line  of  Telegraph  without  delay  from  Khanakeen  to  the  capital,  Teheran, 
and  from  Teheran  to  the  port  of  Bushire ;  and  they  agree  that,  whenever 
the  English  government  may  require  to  communicate  by  the  said  Tele- 
graph, they  are  to  be  at  liberty  to  do  so  through  the  Persian  Telegraph 
officers  in  the  way  they  may  desire,  paying  for  the  same  at  rates  to  be 
specified  hereafter. 

Article  2. 

The  Persian  government  will  assign  a  sum  sufficient  for  the 
construction  of  this  Telegraph,  and  for  the  purchase  of  such  materials  as 
are  not  procurable  in  Persia,  or  can  be  better  obtained  in  Europe. 


Article  3. 

The  Persian  government  engages  to  purchase  from  the  English 
government  all  the  materials  which  are  better  procurable  in  Europe,  and 
the  English  government  agrees  to  supply  such  materials  at  moderate 
prices. 

Article  4-. 

In  order  that  the  said  line  of  Telegraph  may  be  well  constructed 
and  officially  worked,  the  Persian  government  agrees  to  place  it  under 
the  superintendence  of  an  English  Engineer  Officer,  who  is  to  be  paid  by 
the  English  government,  and  they  further  agree  to  fix  a  period  during 
which  instruction  may  be  given  and  the  line  may  be  brought  into  good 
working  order;  and  His  Royal  Highness  the  Itizad-oo-Sultaneh,  the 
Minister  of  Public  Instruction,  and  His  Excellency  the  Amin-ed-Dowleh 
will  have  cognizance  of  the  aforesaid  officer's  proceedings. 


164>  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIA.  Article  5. 


No.  XXXVII.  The  said  officer  will  be  fully  empowered  to  call  upon  the  Persian 

authorities  to  supply  any  materials  he  may  consider  requisite  for  this 
work,  and  the  Persian  authorities  will  make  no  alteration  in  his  requisi- 
tions unless  it  should  be  impossible  to  obtain  the  thing  required.  But  a 
Persian  officer  will  accompany  him  everywhere,  so  that  he  may  be 
informed  of  what  is  done,  and  of  the  prices  of  the  materials ;  and  the 
accounts  will  be  audited  by  the  above-mentioned  Prince  and  by  the 
Amin-ed-Dowleh  every  three  months,  when  a  report  will  be  drawn  up 
and  printed  in  the  Teheran  Gazette. 

Article  6. 

In  order  to  increase  the  friendship  between  the  two  governments, 
and  to  promote  the  above  undertaking,  the  English  government  engages 
to  purchase  in  England,  at  reasonable  rates,  with  the  approval  of  the 
Persian  Minister  Plenipotentiary,  the  materials  required  for  this  work, 
and  to  convey  them  to  the  Persian  frontier,  and  to  receive  from  the 
Persian  government  the  price  paid  for  the  above  articles  by  five  instal- 
ments in  five  years  after  they  are  delivered  on  the  frontier  of  Persia. 