

Within  a  few  weeks  after  the  Treaty  was  signed,  Yar  Mahomed  was 
detected  in  renewed  intrigues,  offering  to  put  Herat  under  the  protection 
of  Persia  and  urging  the  Shah  to  join  in  a  league  for  the  expulsion  of 
the  English  from  Afghanistan.  His  insolent  treatment  of  the  mission 
compelled  Major  Todd  to  withdraw  and  to  suspend  the  subsidy  of 
Rupees  25,000  a  month  which  was  paid  to  Herat.  The  envoy  at  Cabool 
earnestly  urged  the  advance  of  a  force  to  punish  the  vizier  for  his 
treachery,  but  this  did  not  meet  Lord  Auckland's  views,  who  disavowed 
Major  Todd's  proceedings.  Shortly  afterwards  those  disasters  occurred 
at  Cabool  which  ended  in  the  evacuation  of  Afghanistan.  No  sooner 
was  Yar  Mahomed  relieved  of  all  apprehension  of  the  interference  of  the 
British  Government,  than  he  strangled  his  sovereign  Shah  Kamran, 
usurped  the  government  of  Herat,  and  professed  himself  a  dependant  of 
Persia.     This  was  in  1842. 

The  policy  of  Yar  Mahomed  was  to  maintain  himself  in  real  inde- 
pendence, while  soothing  the  Shah  of  Persia  by  empty  acknowledgments 
of  allegiance.     On  his  death  in  1851  his  son   Syud  Mahomed  Khan 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  167 

succeeded  him.  This  Chief  was  deposed  in  1855  by  Mahomed  Yusoof,  HERAT, 
grandson  of  Feroze  and  grandnephew  of  Shah  Zeman,  Shah  Suja,  and 
Shah  Mahmood,  in  whose  person  the  Suddozye  family  was  once  more 
restored  in  Herat.  At  this  time  Dost  Mahomed,  the  Ameer  of  Cabool, 
having  quarrelled  with  his  brothers,  took  possession  of  Khelat-i-Ghilzie, 
and  soon  afterwards,  on  6th  January  1856,  possessed  himself  of  Candahar 
His  ambition,  however,  was  directed  to  the  reduction  of  Herat,  which  he 
always  considered  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  Afghan  dominions. 
Dreading  the  advance  of  Dost  Mahomed,  the  new  ruler  Mahomed  Yusoof 
threw  himself  on  the  support  of  Persia,  declared  himself  to  be  a  vassal 
of  the  Shah,  and  offered  to  issue  coin  and  have  prayers  read  in  the  Shah's 
name. 

On  the  advance  of  the  Persian  army,  whose  assistance  he  had  invited, 
Mahomed  Yusoof,  being  now  threatened  both  from  east  and  west  with 
the  loss  of  his  independence,  hoisted  the  British  flag  at  Herat  and 
declared  himself  a  subject  of  the  British  Government.  This  proceeding 
was  repudiated  by  Lord  Canning  in  the  name  of  the  Queen's  govern- 
ment as  a  presumptuous  and  dishonest  act.  Mahomed  Yusoof  was  soon 
after  deposed  by  a  faction  in  Herat  headed  by  Isa  Khan,  and  sent  a  pri- 
soner to  the  Persian  camp.  The  aggression  of  Persia  on  Herat,  coupled 
with  the  insults  which  had  been  offered  to  the  British  mission  at  Teheran, 
led  to  the  declaration  of  war  between  England  and  Persia  in  1856. 
Measures  were  immediately  taken'35'  to  subsidize  Dost  Mahomed  and  to 
encourage  him  to  advance  against  the  Persians.  Assistance  in  money 
was  also  sent  to  Isa  Khan  at  Herat,  but  before  it  reached  him  he  had 
been  compelled  to  surrender  to  the  Persians,  who  took  possession  of  the 
city  on  25th  October  1856  and  created  him  vizier  of  the  province  on 
behalf  of  the  Shah.  He  was  murdered  within  a  few  weeks  by  a  party 
of  Persian  soldiers. 