

Article  8. 

The  Persian  government  engages  to  set  at  liberty  without  ransom, 
immediately  after  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  of  this  Treaty,    all 


158  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SIINNUDS. 

PERSIA,  prisoners  taken  during  the  operations  of  the  Persian  troops  in  Afghan- 
r»  xxxvi  '>t;m-  and  ;l"  At^-liaiis  who  may  be  detained  either  as  hostages  or  as 
captives  on  political  grounds  in  any  part  of  the  Persian  dominions  shall, 
in  like  manner,  be  set  free ;  provided  that  the  Afghans,  on  their  part, 
set  at  liberty,  without  ransom,  the  Persian  prisoners  and  captives  who 
are  in  the  power  of  the  Afghans. 

Commissioners  on  the  part  of  the  two  contracting  powers  shall,  if 
necessary,  be  named  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this  Article, 


Article  9. 

The  high  contracting  parties  engage  that,  in  the  establishment 
and  recognition  of  Consuls-General,  Consuls,  Vice-Consuls,  and  Consular 
Agents,  each  shall  be  placed  in  the  dominions  of  the  other  on  the  footing 
of  the  most  favoured  nation ;  and  that  the  treatment  of  their  respective 
subjects  and  their  trade  shall  also,  in  every  respect,  be  placed  on  the 
footing  of  the  treatment  of  the  subjects  and  commerce  of  the  most 
favoured  nation. 

Article  10. 

Immediately  after  the  ratifications  of  this  Treaty  have  been  ex- 
changed, the  British  mission  shall  return  to  Teheran,  when  the  Persian 
government  agrees  to  receive  it  with  the  apologies  and  ceremonies  speci- 
fied in  the  separate  note  signed  this  day  by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the 
high  contracting  parties. 

Article  11. 

The  Persian  government  engages,  within  three  months  after  the 
return  of  the  British  mission  to  Teheran,  to  appoint  a  Commissioner,  who, 
in  conjunction  with  a  Commissioner  to  be  appointed  by  the  British  Gov- 
ernment, shall  examine  into  and  decide  upon  the  pecuniary  claims  of  all 
British  subjects  upon  the  government  of  Persia,  and  shall  pay  such  of 
those  claims  as  may  be  pronounced  just,  either  in  one  sum  or  by  instal- 
ments, within  a  period  not  exceeding  one  year  from  the  date  of  the  award 
of  the  Commissioners,  and  the  same  Commissioners  shall  examine  into  and 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND  SUNNUDS.  159 

decide  upon  the  claims  on  the  Persian  government  of  all  Persian  subjects,     PERSIA. 


or  the  subjects  of  other  powers,  who,  up  to  the  period  of  the  departure  No.  XXXVI. 
of  the  British  mission  from  Teheran,  were  under  British  protection,  which 
they  have  not  since  renounced. 

Article  12. 

Saving-  the  provisions  in  the  latter  part  of  the  preceding  Article, 
the  British  Government  will  renounce  the  right  of  protecting  hereafter 
any  Persian  subject  not  actually  in  the  employment  of  the  British  mis- 
sion, or  of  British  Consuls- General,  Consuls,  Vice-Consuls,  or  Consular 
Agents,  provided  that  no  such  right  is  accorded  to  or  exercised  by  any 
other  foreign  powers ;  but  in  this,  as  in  all  other  respects,  the  British 
Government  requires,  and  the  Persian  government  engages,  that  the 
same  privileges  and  immunities  shall  in  Persia  be  conferred  upon  and 
shall  be  enjoyed  by  the  British  Government,  its  servants  and  its  sub- 
jects, and  that  the  same  respect  and  consideration  shall  be  shown  for 
them,  and  shall  be  enjoyed  by  them,  as  are  conferred  upon  and  enjoyed 
by  and  shown  to  the  most  favoured  foreign  government,  its  servants 
and  its  subjects. 