

By  the  Treaty  of  Paris  concluded  between  England  and  Persia  on 
4-th  March  1857,  the  Persians  were  required  to  evacuate  Herat.  Before 
they  withdrew  they  installed  Sultan  Ahmed  Khan,  better  known  by  the 
name  of  Sultan  Jan,  as  ruler  of  Herat,  and  the  British  Government  did 
not  refuse  to  recognize  him  as  de  facto  ruler.     This  Chief  was  a  nephew 

*  bee  Vol.  II.,  page  431.    * 


168  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

HERAT,  and  son-in-law  of  Dost  Mahomed.  On  the  occupation  of  Candahar 
No.XXXVIII.  by  the  Ameer,  he  had  fled  to  Persia,  where  he  was  well  received.  He  was 
supposed  to  be  unfriendly  to  the  British  Government,  and  although 
relieved  of  the  presence  of  a  Persian  army,  he  observed  all  the  outward 
forms  of  dependence  on  the  Shah.  In  consequence  of  a  quarrel  with 
Mahomed  Shureef  Khan,  the  Governor  of  Furrah,  one  of  Dost  Maho- 
med's sons,  Sultan  Jan  made  an  expedition  against  Furrah,  which 
surrendered  to  him  on  30th  March  1862.  The  Ameer  of  Cabool  imme- 
diately collected  his  forces  to  resent  this  aggression.  He  retook  Furrah 
on  29th  June,  and  on  28th  of  July  laid  siege  to  Herat.  After  a  siege  of 
ten  months,  during  which  Sultan  Jan  died,  the  Ameer  took  Herat  by 
storm  on  27th  May  1863.  He  died  eleven  days  afterwards,  and  was 
succeeded  in  the  government  of  Cabool  by  his  son  Sher  Ali  Khan,  who 
placed  his  own  son  Mahomed  Yakoob  Khan  in  charge  of  the  captured 
city.     Herat  has  thus  been  again  annexed  to  the  Afghan  dominions. 


No.  XXXVIII. 


Tbanslation  of  a  Memorandum  of  certain  wishes  and  expectations  of  Viziee  Yab 
Mahomed  Khan  agreed  to  at  Candahar,  on  the  9th  of  June  1839,  between 
Majoe  Todd,  with  the  sanction  of  the  envoy  and  minister  at  the  Court  of  His 
Majesty  Shah  Suja-ool-moolk,  on  the  part  of  the  Eight  Honourable  the 
Govebnob  Genebal,  and  Nujeeb  Oollah  Khan,  envoy  from  Herat,  on  the 
part  of  Vizieb  Yab  Mahomed  Khan. 


Article  1. 

That  the  high  in  rank,  &c,  Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  vizier  of  His 
Majesty  Shah  Kamran  of  Herat,  shall  henceforth  be  recognized  as  the 
vakeel  or  medium  of  communication  between  the  British  and  Herat 
atithorities,  and  whoever  shall  disregard  the  vizier's  authority  in  this 
respect  shall  be  considered  as  having  acted  contrary  to  the  laws  of 
friendship  and  the  Treaty  of  amity. 


treaties,  engagements,  and  sunnuds.  169 

Article  8. 


HERAT. 


Whatever  sums  may  be  expended  at  Herat  by  the  British  Govern-  N0.XXXVIII. 
ment  in  restoring  the  prosperity  of  the  country  or  for  other  purposes 
shall  be  paid  in  the  first  instance  to  the  vizier  Yar  Mahomed  Khan,  who 
engages  not  to  disburse  the  sum  except  in  the  presence,  or  with  the 
consent  and  advice,  of  the  British  Political  Officer  at  Herat. 