

Be  it  therefore  known  that  we,  by  virtue  of  authority  granted  us  by 
royal  letters  patent  under  the  great  Seal  of  Great  Britain,  and  conform- 
able to  an  Imperial  Birat  granted  by  the  emperor's  Sublime  Porte  and 
the  Sultan  Mustafa,  son  of  Sultan  Ahmed,  always  victorious :  By  these 
presents  we  declare  and  acknowledge  the  illustrious  Mr.  Robert  Garden, 
the  present  Agent  of  the  said  Honourable  Company  (or  also  their  future 
Agents) ,  and  whoever  be  Agent  in  future  and  whoever  be  British  Consul 
for  transacting  their  affairs  in  the  city  of  Bussora,  or  other  places  thereto, 
belonging,  or  dependent  thereon,  granting,  however,  to  the  said 
Mr.  Robert  Garden,  or  even  to  any  who  shall  be  Agent  in  future,  full  and 
ample  power  in  all  things  belonging  to  his  charge,  and  in  this  respect 
we  order  all  His  Britannic  Majesty's  subjects  to  acknowledge  him  in 
quality  of  British  Consul,  praying   their  Excellencies  the    Honourable 


ISO  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUDS. 

TURK  IS  II  Pasha  and  other  Officers,  Ministers,  and  Magistrates  of  the  Ottoman 
ARABIA.    Empire,  to  whom  these  presents  shall  be  shown,  to  suffer  them  freely  to 
No9.  XLI     enjoy  and  amply  and  peaceably  to  enjoy  their  Consulship,  and  to  aid 
&  XLH.      them  with  their  assistance,  protection,  and  favour,  whenever  their  occa- 
sions lead  them  to  have  recourse  to  them,  conformable  to  the  good  and 
ancient  friendship  subsisting  between  the  Crown  of  Great  Britain  and 
the  Sublime  Porte  and  conformable  to  the  sacred  capitulations. 

In  faith  of  which  we  have  signed  these  presents  with  our  own 
hands  and  have  caused  it  to  be  countersigned  by  our  chief  Secretary, 
applying  thereto  the  royal  Seal  of  our  embassy. 

Done  in  our  palace  of  Pera  at  Constantinople  this  29tk  August  1764. 


No.  XLII. 

Translation  of  an  Imperial  Ottoman  Diploma<  granted  to  Habford  Jones,  Esq., 
British  Consul  of  Bagdad  and  the  environs. 

At  the  request  of  Lord  Elgin,  English  Ambassador  to  the  Sublime 
Porte,  in  a  memorandum  given  to  us  by  him,  to  wit,  that  in  consequence 
of  the  capitulations,  the  English  Minister  having  named  Consuls  at  the 
ports  of  Aleppo,  Alexandria,  Tripoli  of  Syria,  Algiers,  Tripoli  of  Barbary, 
Tunis,  Scio,  Smyrna,  Egypt,  and  other  ports  requiring  custom  houses, 
and  wishing  shortly  to  change  or  replace  them  by  others,  and  having  for 
the  present  assigned  and  established  as  Consul  in  the  city  of  Bagdad  and 
its  environs,  Harford  Jones,  Esq.,  a  British  subject,  and  residing  in  the 
said  city  of  Bagdad,  in  order  to  protect  the  affairs  of  British  merchants 
established  there,  or  of  travellers,  we  have  given  him  our  Imperial  Birat 
in  conformity  with  the  requisitions  of  the  said  capitulations,  confirming 
and  ordaining  the  said  Harford  Jones,  Esq.,  as  Consul  in  the  said  city  of 
Bagdad,  that  in  conformity  with  the  said  capitulations  the  affairs  of 
merchants  and  travellers  under  the  protection  of  the  British  flag  in  this 
country,  in  cases  of  difficulty  arising,  should  be  referred  to  him,  and  that 
the  departure  of  all  vessels  should  take  place  only  under  his  cognizance, 
and  that  no  public  servants  under  his  orders  should  be  molested  under  the 