


L.  Signandi. 
Mohurum  1173. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  177 

No.    XLI.  TURKISH 

Literal  translate   of  the   Imperial  Firman   constituting  Eobeet  Gabden,  Esq., 

Consul  in  Bussora,  issued  on  the  27th  day  of  the  month  Suffer  in  the  year  of     No.  XLI. 
the  Hegira  1178. 

(Signed)        Samuel  Manesty, 

Resident. 

In  these  times  the  English  ambassador  residing  at  our  Court,  Henry 
Nevile,  Esq.,  has  presented  to  us  a  formal  memorial  to  the  following  effect, 
that  the  English  Envoys  at  Aleppo,  Alexandria,  Tripoli  in  Syria,  the 
Grecian  Islands,  Tunis,  Tripoli  in  Barbary,  Scio,  Smyrna,  and  Egypt,  and 
all  the  other  considerable  towns  having  scales  or  ports  in  our  dominions, 
may  have  the  power  of  appointing  Consuls  of  their  own  nation ;  and,  in 
the  event  of  their  choosing  to  change  any  of  them  and  appoint  others 
in  their  room,  that  no  person  may  be  permitted  to  interfere  or  to  pre- 
vent such  an  arrangement.  Now,  be  it  known  that  former  agreements 
have  established  this.  Moreover,  it  appears  that  before  the  present  period 
the  East  India  Company  had  sent  a  person  to  Bussora,  by  name  William 
Shaw,  Esq.,  to  represent  them  and  superintend  their  affairs,  who  was 
not  possessed  of  any  Consulary  Birat ;  but  upon  the  expiration  of  his 
period  of  service  and  his  removal,  they  appointed  in  his  room  the  bearer 
of  these  royal  letters,  Robert  Garden,  Esq.,  who  was  also  furnished 
with  a  Commission  from  the  Company.  Now,  according  to  the  tenor  or 
former  engagements,  as  well  as  in  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  the 
ambassador,  it  became  proper  and  necessary  to  deliver  the  Birat  in  ques- 
tion into  his  hands.  We  have  accordingly  consigned  to  him  our  royal 
diploma. 

According  to  what  we  have  written,  the  aforesaid  Robert  Garden, 
Esq.,  is  constituted  British  Consul,  under  the  regulations  to  be  here 
explained  by  us,  as  well  in  regard  to  his  latitude  of  action,  as  the  conduct 
to  be  observed  towards  him. 

1st. — He  is  nominated  and  appointed  Consul  in  Bussora. 

2nd. — He  shall .  have  full  and  sole  power  of  taking  cognizance  of 
all  affairs  concerning  those  of  the  nation  to  which  he  belongs,  such  as 
captains  of  ships,  merchants,  and  also  all  who  may  be  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  English  flag ;  all  matters  relating  to  the  above  are  to  be 
under  his  peculiar  care. 

VOL.    VII.  z 


17^  TREATIES,    EMiUlKMKXTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

'1VRKIMI  Without  his  express  written  order,  no  English  vessel  shall  be  per- 

ARABIA.     mittod  to  come  to  Uussora. 

jjo.  XLI.  The  servants  of  the  Consul  shall  not  be  subject  to  the  poll  tax  or 

'  any  other  species  of  tax  or  tribute.  Their  butchers  shall  not  pay  any 
duty,  and,  in  fine,  the  aforesaid  description  of  persons  must  be  protected 
from  any  kind  of  contribution. 