

With  respect,  however,  to  the  overplus  of  customs  taken  from 
Mr.  Sturmey  and  the  goods  lost  to  Mr.  Scoododa,  we  have  made  investi- 
gation and  discovered  that  the  circumstances  occurred  by  chance  and  not 
from  premeditation ;  we  have  consequently  returned  them  to  the  Drago- 
man above  mentioned,  as  we  cannot  consent  to  any  conduct  towards  the 
British  Government  contrary  to  Treaty  and  covenant — our  friendship  for 
them  being  of  ancient  date — and  also  in  compliance  with  the  engage- 
ments of  our  predecessors  up  to  the  present  date. 

In  conformity,  therefore,  with  the  firm  and  lasting  alliance  formed 
between  the  Imperial  and  British  Governments  with  a  view  to  confirm 
and  secure  the  foundation  of  that  faithful  alliance  and  to  strengthen  the 
bonds  of  the  immutable  and  important  union  set  forth  in  the  Imperial 
Treaties  and  royal  edicts  which  are  in  their  possession,  and  in  conformity 
with  ancient  rule  and  former  precedent,  we  have  agreed  to  the  observance 
of  all  the  stipulations  above  mentioned,  and  have  sealed  this  instrument 
as  a  proof  of  our  consent,  and  delivered  the  same  into  the  hands  of  the 
Dragoman  aforesaid. 

Be  you  therefore  informed  of  this  and  consider  it  as  fully  efficient. 


Seal 

of  Daood 

Pasha. 


]88  Tit  KATIES,    EXOVtil  M  l.KTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

n-KKisii  No.  XL VII. 

ARABIA.   Tbanslation  of  a  Boyoorooldi  from  His   Highness  Hajbe  Ali  Reza,  Pasha  of 
No.  XLVII.  Bagdad,  Aleppo,  Diarbekir,  and  Mousul,   to   the  Political  Agent  at  Bussora, 

dated  the  27th  ltubee-oos-saneo  a.  h.  1247,  or  2nd  October  a.  d.  1831. 


To  the  spiritual  leader  of  Islam,  the  Lieutenant  (of  the  Qadhee  of 
Constantinople)  at  Bussora,  to  His  Excellency  the  Muftee  Effendi  of 
Bussora,  whose  piety  and  excellence  be  increased,  to  the  Chief  of  the 
exalted  Ministry  and  Government  the  Motusullim  Aga,  be  his  rank  and 
station  increased,  and  to  the  elders  and  men  of  weight  of  the  Council 
and  country,  whose  dignity  be  magnified.  In  reference  to  all  affairs 
supervening  at  Bussora,  and  relating  to  the  excellent  Resident  of 
England,  the  high  and  exalted  Mr.  Taylor,  Balios  Beg  residing  with  our 
eternal  government,  and  in  observance  of  his  rights  and  those  of  his 
agents,  interpreters,  and  all  his  proteges  and  dependants,  and  of  all 
the  subjects  of  his  government,  and  the  merchants  and  ships  arriving 
from  Hindoostan,  according  to  the  stipulations  and  Treaties  which  have 
been  arranged  and  ratified  with  our  exalted  State :  as  they  have  been  held 
in  times  preceding,  to  which  we  adhere,  and  for  which  we  even  exceed 
the  former  regard  out  of  a  wish  to  protect  their  rights ;  so  you  also  the 
Nayeb  Effendi,  and  Muftee  Effendi,  and  Motusullim  Aga,  and  Ayan 
(inferior  ministers)  will  in  likewise  deport  yourselves  towards,  and  protect 
the  rights  and  regard  the  just  claims  of  the  dignified  Mr.  Taylor,  Beg, 
his  agents,  interpreters,  proteges,  and  dependants,  and  the  subjects  of 
the  government  arriving  from  Hindoostan,  and  their  ships  and  merchants, 
and  all  others  soever,  conformably  to  what  we  have  promulgated  in  this 
our  Boyoorooldi,  which  you  will  on  no  account  infringe :  and  thus  be  it 
known  unto  you. 