

In  the  event  of  their  purchasing  male  and  female  slaves,  they  shall 
also  be  exempted  from  the  above-mentioned  duties. 

No  person  shall  interfere  in  respect  to  their  furniture,  their  eatables 
or  drinkables,  for  these  have  been  privileges  of  old  standing ;  such  articles 
too  shall  be  free  from  customs. 

No  person  shall  dare  to  imprison  or  put  in  fetters  the  Ambassador, 
the  Consul,  or  their  Agents,  neither  shall  they  seal  up  their  houses ;  and 
{should  the  Consuls  where  they  reside  have  with  them  a  military  detach- 
ment, and  wish  to  place  them  in  separate  houses,  let  none  molest  them 
for  so  doing. 

We  repeat  that  their  male  and  female  servants  are  to  be  exempted 
from  taxes,  as  are  their  butchers  from  duties,  all  which  exemptions  are 
of  old. 

In  the  event  of  the  Consul  conceiving  himself  aggrieved,  or  any  per- 
son having  cause  of  complaint  against  him,  we,  in  conformity  to  former 
agreements,  hereby  order  that  the  matter  shall  be  referred  to  our  Court 
for  decision,  and  that  you  shall  not  hear  the  discussion  elsewhere. 

Should  the  aforesaid  Consul  happen  to  travel,  in  whatever  part  he 
may  choose  to  visit,  either  by  sea  or  land,  he,  his  suite,  servants,  cattle, 
and  goods  shall  be  sacred  from  any  harm,  aiid  upon  his  return,  should  he, 
from  not  being  provided  with  a  stock  of  necessaries,  wish  to  make  requi- 
site daily  purchases  on  the  road,  let  none  refuse  to  supply  him,  or  dare 
to  engage  in  disputes  with.  him. 

In  places  where  danger  may  be  apprehended,  they  shall  be  permitted 
.to  wear  the  turban  and  the  sword,  to  ride  on  horseback,  to  carry  the  bow, 
spear,  and  all  the  appurtenances  of  war,  and  whatever  Cathies  or  others 
should  see  them  so  provided,  they  are  not  to  molest  them. 

But  should  they  exceed  the  bounds  of  these  agreements,  privileges 
and  concessions,  you  are  to  check  and  prevent  them,  for  such  salutary 
restraint  and  observance  of  good  order  is  necessary. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  179 

To  all  future  times  these  regulations  and  instructions  shall  be  valid,    TURKISH 
for  we  will  not  suffer  the  least  infringement  thereof,  nor  shall  we  sane-     ARABIA. 


tion  any  excess.  No.  xlt. 


Birat  or  Consular  Commission. 

We,  the  Right  Honourable  Henry  Grenville,  Ambassador  to  His 
Majesty  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  at  the  Ottoman  Porte,  &c,  &c. 
To  all  whom  these  presents  may  concern  greeting. 


L.  S. 


H.  Grenville. 


Having  judged  it  very  proper  and  necessary  to  grant  this  present 
for  the  service  of  the  Honourable  English  United  East  India  Company, 
as  also  for  the  better  security  and  prosperity  of  their  affairs  in  trade  at 
Bussora,  and  also  when  in  the  Ottoman  dominions,  as  also  to  secure  and 
assure  a  protection  to  all  persons  in  the  respective  Residencies  of  their 
Agents  and  Ministers,  that  from  thenceforth  there  be  established  a 
Consul  with  ample  and  full  power  over  all  belonging  to  his  charge  to 
execute  the  above-mentioned. 