


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


181 


pretext  of  tribute,  or  certain  regulations  entitled  Kharatz,  neither  of  others  TURK  IS  H 
named  Avariz,  nor  of  such  as  is  levied  by  ships  called  Cassab  Akeessi,  or  ARABIA, 
other  arbitrary  impositions  called  Tekialifi  Orfye ;  that  no  one  shall  exact  No.  XLll. 
the  Kharatz  nor  other  dues  for  male  and  female  slaves  in  his  service,  and 
that  no  person  shall  interfere  nor  obstruct  the  domestic  affairs  of  the 
said  Consul,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  shall  be  free  from  all  impositions 
according  to  the  prevailing  customs,  neither  shall  they  be  subject  to  the 
customs  or  excise  duties ;  that  the  Consul  being  established  by  the  British 
Ministers  is  not  subject  to  imprisonment;  that  his  house  cannot  be 
closed  or  searched,  or  have  any  body  of  troops  lodged  therein;  that 
assistants  and  slaves  belonging  to  him  shall  be  free  and  exempt  from 
Kharatz  and  Avariz,  Cassab  Akeessi,  and  from  all  Tekialifi  Orfye ;  that 
any  complaint  made  by  any  person  against  him  shall  be  referred  to  us 
and  cannot  be  disposed  of  by  any  other  means ;  that  should  the  said 
Consul  find  it  necessary  to  travel  into  any  part  of  the  country,  either  by 
land  or  by  sea,  at  any  stations  or  ports  he  may  arrive  at,  no  one  shall 
molest  him  or  his  servants,  or  cattle,  or  baggage,  guides,  or  any  thing 
connected  with  him ;  that  any  captain  of  country  vessels  on  being  paid 
shall  be  compelled  to  carry  his  provisions  according  to  the  prevailing 
regulations,  and  that  no  one  shall  seek  pretext  for  disputes  against  him ; 
and  that  in  dangerous  parts  of  the  country  he  be  allowed  to  wear  a 
white  turban,  sabre,  bow,  or  other  warlike  instruments. 

That  all  judges  and  commandants  or  others  shall  not  molest  him, 
but  shall  assist  and  protect  him,  and  shall  prevent  any  one  from  throwing 
.obstacles  in  his  way,  and  always  behave  towards  him  in  conformity  with 
the  capitulations,  and  that  no  one  shall  presume  to  oppose,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  shall  give  every  credence  to  this  decree,  given  under  our  most 
respectable  and  noble  Seal. 

Given  under  our  hand  this  7  th  day  of  the  moon  of  Rejib  1217,  that 
is  to  say,  2nd  November  1802,  at  our  city  of  Constantinople. 


182  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

TURKISH  No.  XLIII. 

ARABIA.     Tjitbbat,  Tiunslation  of  the  Turkish  note  delivered  in  by  the  Eesident  to  the 
\  Kill.  Pasha  ns  the  terms  on  which  the  reconciliation  was  to  be  effected,  to  the  con- 

tents of  which  the  Pasha  signified  his  unqualified  assent. 


Article  1. 

The  Pasha  must  renounce  all  species  of  authority  or  command  in 
any  shape  over  the  Resident,  as  such  is  neither  warranted  either  by  usage 
or  the  treaties. 