

Article  2. 

The  Pasha  shall  never,  on  any  pretext  whatever,  interfere  in  any 
manner  with  the  affairs  and  arrangement  of  the  Resident  respecting  his 
establishment,  his  customs  and  rights,  his  beating  drums,  &c,  &c,  and 
there  shall  be,  on  no  account,  objections  made  to  any  of  the  Resident's 
orders,  as  such  matters  in  no  way  concern  the  Pasha,  nor  come  under 
his  cognizance ;  particularly  there  shall  be  no  objection  made  to  the  cele- 
bration of  His  Britannic  Majesty's  birth-day  in  the  most  public  manner, 
with  all  the  necessary  ceremonies.  In  a  word,  there  shall  be  no  species 
of  objection  or  interference  in  any  of  the  Resident's  states  and 
ceremonies. 

Article  3. 

The  Pasha  shall  never  prohibit  the  customary  interchange  of  visits 
between  the  great  officers  of  the  Turkish  Government  and  the  Resident. 


Article  4. 

The  Resident  has  never,  nor  will  ever,  show  the  least  disposition  to 
any  undue  interference  in  the  Pasha's  affairs  or  government,  and  will 
show  every  readiness  to  comply  with  the  Pasha's  wishes,  provided  they 
do  not  interfere  or  are  not  contrary  to  any  of  the  Articles  of  this  Treaty, 
or  the  interests  of  the  British  Government ;  and  so  it  is  agreed  for  the 
benefit  of  both  parties. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  183 

Article  5.  Turkish 

Whenever  the  Pasha  shall  have  any  business  with  the  Resident,  he    ******- 
shall  make  it  known  to  him  by  one  of  his  own  confidential  men  of  Nos' XLm 
rank;   also  should  the  Resident  ever  have  any  important  business,  and     &  XL1V 
demand  confidential  persons  on  the  part  of  the  Pasha  to  converse  with, 
there  shall  be  no  objections  made  to  it,  and  the  person  required  shall  be 
immediately   sent;    the   benefits   arising   from  this   Article   are  clearly 
reciprocal. 

Article  6. 

There  shall  be  no  equivocation  in  any  of  these  Articles.  Should  any 
doubts  hereafter  arise  relative  to  any  particulars  contained  in  the  Articles 
(especially  Article  2),  the  explanation  of  it  shall  be  in  favour  of  the 
Resident. 


No.  XLIV. 

Decbee  of  the  Pasha  of  Bagdad  in  1812  for  preventing  the  desertion  of   sailors 

at  Bussora. 

It  is  declared  that  the  sailors  and  those  who  work  on  board  the 
cruizers  and  merchant  ships  of  the  British  Government,  sometimes  by 
drunkenness  or  other  offences,  incur  the  displeasure  of  their  captains, 
and  become  liable  to  just  and  necessary  punishment  and  correction  ;  and 
moreover,  be  it  known  that  should  the  sailors  or  workmen  aforesaid,  in 
order  to  escape  such  chastisement,  take  refuge  with,  and  expect  protection 
from,  either  yourself  or  the  head  captain  of  Shutel  Arab  (vulgarly  called 
the  captain  Pasha)  you  shall  by  no  means  afford  them  protection,  but 
deliver  them  up  to  the  Agent  at  Bussora  of  the  esteemed  Resident  of 
the  British  Government  at  Bagdad,  in  which  intention  this  order  has 
been  written,  decreed,  and  transmitted.  When  this  shall  reach  you  by 
the  power  of  the  Most  High,  you  will  immediately  regulate  your  conduct 
and  act  by  the  decree  contained  in  it. 