

In  1835  the  Political  Agent  in  Turkish  Arabia,  who  had  hitherto 
teen  under  the  Bombay  Government,  was  put  directly  under  the  control 
of  the  Supreme  Government.  In  1841  consular  powers  were  conferred 
on  the  Agent  by  Her  Majesty 's  Government. 

The  measures  which  the  British  Government  adopted  for  the  sup- 
pression of  the  slave  trade  in  the  Persian  Gulf  could  not  be  made 
effectual  so  long  as  the  Turkish  ports  remained  open  to  vessels  engaged 
in  the  traffic.  In  1847,  therefore,  Her  Majesty's  Minister  at  Constanti- 
nople obtained  from  the  Sultan  a  firman  (No.  XLIX.)  which  was  supple- 
mented by  vizierial  instructions  to  Nejib  Pasha,  then  governor  of  Bagdad. 
These  documents  authorized  the  confiscation  of  Turkish  vessels  engaged 
in  slave  traffic,  the  exclusion  of  Arab  and  Persian  slavers  from  Turkish 
ports  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  the  delivery  of  liberated  slaves  to  British 
vessels  to  be  carried  back  to  their  native  country. 

In  October  1863  an  engagement  (No.  L.)  was  made  with  the  Sub- 
lime Porte  for  the  continuation  of  lines  of  telegraph  from  Bagdad  to 
Bussora  and  from  Bagdad  to  Kanakeen,  in  order  to  meet  the  Indian 
telegraph  by  way  of  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  line  through  Persia  to 
the  Turkish  frontier. 

The  present  governor  of  Bagdad  is  Manick  Pasha. 


No.  XL. 


176  TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 

TURKISH  No.  XL. 

ARABIA^  Tbanslate  of  Soleiman  Pasha's  general  Firman. 

To  the  chief  of  the  Siads,  Zous,  and  Freeholders,  our  Aga,  the 
Motusullim  of  Bussora,  for  the  time  being  (whose  state  God  increase), 
be  it  known  unto  you  that  my  commands  are  as  follows  : — In  the  city 
of  our  great  Sultan  called  Bussora,  there  is  an  English  Balios,  or  chief 
of  the  merchants,  &c,  his  nation  being  in  peace  with  our  high  Porte 
(whose  grandeur  God  continue  everlastingly) ;  therefore,  there  in  his  hands 
the  high  and  respectable  capitulations  of  our  lofty  Porte,  to  which  all 
submission  must  be  paid,  and  it  behoves  all  men  to  obey  the  orders 
therein  contained.  Therefore,  in  the  manner  that  it  is  commanded  and 
ordered  in  said  high  capitulations,  article  by  article,  whether  regarding 
the  customs  and  all  things  relative  thereto,  or  whether  regarding  other 
matters,  or  whether  the  respecting,  favouring,  assisting,  and  protecting 
the  said  English  Balios  and  his  effects  agreeable  to  the  said  high  capi- 
tulations, you  must,  as  ordered  by  our  Great  Sultan,  in  all  things  conform 
and  pay  obedience  thereto,  and  you  must  not  in  any  the  least  respect 
depart  from,  or  act  contrary  to,  said  respected  capitulations ;  and  this  our 
Booyooroldi  or  order  I  send  you  for  this  purpose.  When  it  arrives  you 
be  it  known  unto  you  that  it  is  by  us  directed  that,  conformable  to  the 
said  high  capitulations,  which  are  the  commands  of  our  great  Sultan, 
the  English  Balios  you  are  to  aid,  assist,  and  protect,  and  in  all  other 
respects  you  are  to  pay  obedience  thereto,  and  from  the  letter  of  the 
said  high  capitulations  you  must  not  in  any  respect  depart,  and  agree- 
able to  this  our  order  or  Booyooroldi  you  are  commanded  to  act. 