

Article  5. 

Bills  of  Exchange  shall  not  be  taken  from  their  shroffs  by  force; 
nor  money  from  their  dependants  or  proteges  by  compulsion,  nor  shall 
temporary  or  arbitrary  taxes  of  any  kind  ever  be  levied  on  their  landed 
or  other  property  contrary  to  their  due  right  and  custom. 

Article  6. 

No  tax,  except  one  previously  well  defined  and  arranged,  shall  be  levied 
on  boats  the  property  of  British  subjects  and  proteges ;  such,  for  instance, 
as  pass  between  Bussora  and  Bagdad ;  nor  shall  their  boats  be  seized  for 
the  public  service;  nor  shall  the  property  of  merchants  being  British 
subjects  or  porteges  arriving  at  Bagdad,  otherwise  than  as  is  usual  on 
the  arrival  of  the  same  at  Bussora,,  enter  the  custom  house  contrary  to 
stipulation  and  covenant. 

vol.  vn.  2  a 


No.  XL VI. 


ISfi  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

Ti'KKlSH  Article  7. 

Should  British  subjects  and  proteges  lose  any  property  in  the  town 


ARAH1A. 


No  XLVI.  or  on  pUDijc  ToadS)  and  by  theft  or  plunder,  every  exertion  shall  promptly 
be  made  to  recover  the  same. 

Article  8. 

Should  any  dependant  of  the  government  suffer  from  any  of  our 
subjects'  offence  or  injury,  the  injured  individual  shall  receive  immediate 
satisfaction  and  reparation. 

Article  9. 

In  commercial  dealings  goods  having  been  bought  shall  not  be 
returned  except  on  legal  and  just  plea  \  and  commercial  disputes  shall  be 
adjusted  by  an  assembly  of  merchants  according  to  mercantile  usage. 

Article  10. 

Should  British  or  Indian  seaman  desert,  they  shall  not  be  forced  to 
become  converts  to  Islam,  and  in  case  of  their  willing  conversion,  they 
shall  be  subsequently  delivered  up  to  their  duty  in  order  to  prevent  any 
detriment  to  the  interests  of  the  ship. 

Article  11. 

A  spot  shall  be  assigned  on  lease  to  the  Resident  for  a  house  and 
garden  wherever  he  may  point  out. 

Article  12. 

The  proven  claims  of  British  proteges  to  be  enforced  on  whomso- 
ever of  our  subjects  it  may  be,  without  the  smallest  loss  or  injury  to  the 
claimants. 

We  have  considered  and  fully  comprehended  these  demands,  in  like 
manner  also  as  we  are  convinced  of  the  very  great  and  faithful  regard  of 
His  Imperial  Highness  for  the  English  nation;  with  regard,  therefore,  to 
such  part  of  them  as  are  contained  in  those  Imperial  Treaties  and  royal 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  187 

decrees  which   are   in  their  hands,  it  has  even  been  fulfilled  to   them    TURKISH 
hitherto,  and  we  shall  continue  likewise  to  observe  it  in  time  to  come,     ARABIA, 
and  this  too,  in  due  consideration  of  the  fulness  of  that  valued  friendship   No .  XL VI. 
and  the  abundance  of  ancient  and  lasting  unanimity  which  has  existed 
between  the  two  States  in  ages  past. 