

On  the  rupture  between  England  and  Turkey  in  1807,  Soleiman 
Pasha,  who  had  succeeded  to  the  government  of  Bagdad  on  the  murder 
of  his  uncle  Ali  Pasha,  took  the  Residents  at  Bussora  and  Bagdad  under 
his  protection  and  persuaded  them  not  to  withdraw  from  the  country. 
But  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1809,  he,  for  some  reasons  unknown, 
committed  himself  to  a  series  of  indignities  and  insults  towards  the 
Resident  at  Bagdad,  which  compelled  the  latter  to  withdraw.  Friendly 
intercourse  was  not  renewed  till,  on  the  remonstrance  of  the  Bombay 
Government,  the  Pasha,  on  25th  January  1810,  subscribed  certain  con- 
ations (No.  XLIII.)  binding  himself  never  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of 
the  Residency  and  to  restore  the  former  privileges  of  the  Resident. 

The  Bagdad  and  Bussora  Residencies  were  amalgamated  in  1810 ; 
and  in  1812  the  designation  of  Resident  was  changed  to  that  of  Political 
Agent  in  Turkish  Arabia.  Two  decrees  were  obtained  from  the  Pasha  in 
1812,  one  (No.  XLIV.)  for  preventing  the  desertion  of  sailors  and 
workmen  from  British  ships  at  Bussora,  and  the  other  (No.  XLV.)  for 
the  restoration  of  natives  of  India  carried  off  to  Bussora  as  slaves. 

Soleiman  Pasha  was  deposed  from  office  by  order  from  Constantinople. 
Refusing  to  obey,  he  was  defeated  in  battle  and  slain  on  5th  October 
1810.  His  successor  Abdoola  Pasha  was  put  to  death  by  the  Montafik 
Arabs  in  1813,  and  Syud  Beg  was  proclaimed  Pasha.  On  receiving  an 
order  from  Constantinople  deposing  him  from  office,  he  rebelled,  but  was 
defeated  and  put  to  death,,  and  succeeded  in  the  government  by  Daood 
Effendi.  The  conduct  of  this  Pasha  towards  the  Political  Agent  was  so 
insulting  and  overbearing,  that  it  was  impossible,  to  land  goods  at 
Bussora,  or  to  recover  debts  from  native  dealers,  without  an  unseemly 
quarrel.     In  1821  he  besieged  the  Residency.     He  afterwards  removed 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS.  175 

the  restrictions  on  the  movements  of  the  Political  Agent  and  permitted  TURKISH- 
him  to  withdraw  from  the  country.  The  establishments  at  Bussora  ARABIA, 
were  withdrawn.  Friendly  relations  with  the  Pasha  were  broken  off, 
and  not  renewed  till  the  Pasha  agreed  (No.  XLVI.)  to  restore  the  former 
tariff,  to  repay  all  he  had  levied  in  excess  of  it,  and  the  value  of  all  goods 
injured  or  destroyed,  and  to  treat  future  Agents  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment and  all  travellers  with  respect. 

On  12th  June  1831  Daood  Pasha  was  removed  from  office  and 
Hajee  Reza  Pasha  was  appointed  in  his  stead.  On  his  accession  he 
issued  a  Booyooroldi  or  order  (No.  XLVII.)  confirming  the  privileges 
enjoyed  by  British  subjects.  In  1834  a  scheme  was  formed  for  overland 
communication  between  India  and  England  by  the  Persian  Gulf  and 
Turkish  Arabia.  Two  steamers  were  sent  out  from  England  to  open  the 
route  and  navigate  the  Euphrates.  A  firman  (No.  XLVIII.)  was  granted 
by  the  Sultan  of  Turkey  for  the  protection  of  the  steamers. 