


1S1 


TURKISH 
ARABIA. 

Nob-XLV 
&  XL VI 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 

No.  XLV. 


Decree  of  the  Pasha  of  Bagdad   in  1812  for  the  restoration  of  natives  of  India 
brought  to  Bussora  as  slaves. 

It  is  declared  that,  in  consideration  of  the  amicable  relations  sub- 
sisting between  the  sublime  government  of  perpetual  strength  and 
internal  stability  (i.  e.}  the  Porte)  and  the  British  Government,  whose 
friendship  it  behoves  us  -to  cultivate,  should  the  captain  or  crew  of  ships 
trading  on  the  seas,  whether  belonging  to  Bussora  or  Muscat,  steal 
and  bring  subjects  of  the  aforesaid  government  in  India,  either  males 
or  females,  natives  of  India,  for  sale  at  Bussora  in  the  manner  of  negro 
male  and  female  slaves,  and  the  Agent  of  the  esteemed  Resident  at 
Bagdad  for  the  British  Government  established  at  Bussora  prove  that 
the  aforesaid  male  and  female  slaves  are  not  negroes,  but  natives  of 
India,  who  have  been  kidnapped,  they  shall  be  taken  from  the  hands 
of  the  thieves  and  despoilers  and  delivered  up  into  his  hands,  and  for 
carefully  establishing  this  clear  law  in  the  government  this  order  is 
written,  decreed,  and  transmitted  with  the  power  of  the  Most  High. 
When  this  shall  reach  you,  you  will  immediately  regulate  your  actions 
and  conduct  by  the  Articles  contained  in  it. 


No.  XLVI. 

Translate  of  a  letter  from  His  Highness  the  Pasha  of  Bagdad  to  the  Political 

Agent  at  Bussora. 

After  Compliments. — The  Dragoman  of  the  English  nation  has 
arrived  here,  bearing  a  sealed  despatch  from  the  government  and  a  letter 
from  yourself  containing  the  following  demands  : — 


Article  1. 

A  compliance  with  all  stipulations  contained  in  the  Imperial  Treaties 
and  regal  firmans,  ancient  or  recent. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  185 


Article  2.  Turkish 

ARABIA. 


The  restitution  of  whatever  was  taken  from  Mr.  Sturmey  above  the 
proper  rate  of  customs,  and  of  such  property  of  Mr.  Scoododa  as  was 
damaged  or  lost. 

Article  3. 

Whatever  may  be  deemed  to  constitute  the  complete  safety  in  every 
respect  of  the  life,  property,  and  honour  of  all  agents  or  vakeels  of  the 
government,  of  their  protected  dependants  and  subjects,  together  with  an 
attentive  regard  for  their  views,  wishes,  a  due  estimation  and  honouring 
of  them,  and  an  admission  of  their  rights  to  grant  asylum,  and  all  other 
claims  according  to  their  ancient  rights  and  customs ;  and  that  they  may 
entertain  as  many  servants  as  they  see  necessity  for. 

Article  4. 

Should  hereafter  an  agent,  not  an  Englishman,  be  established  at 
Bagdad,  he  shall  unquestionably  meet  with  every  proper  honour  and  con- 
sideration as  it  is  due  to  his  station. 