

You,  therefore,  who  are  the  Valee  of  aforenamed,  will  act  conformably 
(hereto),  and  beware  of  transgressing  (these  orders). 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


191 


Tbanslation  of  a  communication  made  by  the  Porte  to  Her  Majesty's  Embassy. 

A  vizierial  letter,  dated  the  10th  September,  (27th  January  1847), 
has  been  addressed  to  the  Valee  of  Bagdad  as  follows  : — 

An  Imperial  Firman  just  issued  concerning  the  prohibition  to  the 
exportation  of  black  slaves  from  Africa  to  America  and  other  places  is 
herewith  transmitted  to  your  Excellency,  and  it  is  the  supreme  command 
of  His  Majesty  that  you  should  be  careful  to  enforce  the  orders  contained 
in  it. 

Without  entering  into  unnecessary  details  (on  the  subject)  with  your 
Excellency  it  is  necessary  to  observe  that,  as  the  publication  of  this  Impe- 
rial Firman  will  not  be  without  its  objections,  you  should  keep  it  by  you, 
and,  without  any  reference  whatever  thereto,  duly  issue  the  orders  con- 
tained in  it  to  the  Authorities  of  such  places  as  may  be  requisite. 

His  Majesty  has  moreover  ordered  that  towards  next  spring  some 
vessels  of  the  imperial  fleet  should  be  sent  (God  willing)  to  superintend 
the  full  execution  of  this  interdiction,  as  well  as  to  promote  the  welfare 
of  those  coasts  as  heretofore;  and  whereas  it  would  be  productive  of  loss 
to  some  of  His  Majesty's  subjects  ignorant  in  the  beginning  if  the  pro- 
hibition of  the  execution  thereof  were  to  be  enforced  contemporaneously 
with  its  promulgation :  the  publication  of  these  orders  are  to  be  made  by 
you  on  the  receipt  of  this  despatch.  You  will  also  make  known  that 
they  are  to  be  in  full  vigour  four  months  after  the  date  hereof,  that  is, 
after  the  10th  of  Suffer  (27th  January  1847),  and  that  the  slaves  which 
may  be  on  board  any  merchant  vessels  under  the  Ottoman  Flag,  which 
shall  have  dared  to  act  in  contravention  thereof,  after  the  expiration  of 
the  aforesaid  period,  and  which  having  escaped  the  vigilance  of  the 
Authorities  on  their  passage  may  enter  any  of  the  Turkish  ports,  shall 
be  taken  possession  of  and  detained. 

You  will  also  adopt  suitable  measures  for  sending  back  to  the  place 
from  which  they  may  have  been  kidnapped,  the  slaves  arriving  in  any  of 
His  Majesty's  ports. 


TURKISH 
ARABIA. 

No.  XLIX. 


192  TH  KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNTTDS. 

TURKISH    Copik  Officibllb  d'une  lettre  addressee  par  le  Grand   Vizier  an  Pasha  de 
ARABIA.  Bagdad  en  date  Cth  Avril  1847. 


No.  XLIX.  Traduction. 

J'ai  informe,  V.  Excellence  par  une  depeche  que  je  vous  ai  ecrite 
dernierement  relativement  a  la  defense  aux  batimens  sous  pavilion 
Ottoman  de  faire  le  commerce  des  esclaves  avec  les  cotes  d'Afrique  qu'en 
consequence  des  ordres  prohibitifs  qui  out  ete  donnes  a  cet  effet,  les 
batimens  Ottomans  qui  apres  ^expiration  du  terme  qui  a  ete  fixe  aurons 
l'audace  de  contrevenir  a  ces  ordres,  et  qui  auront  6te  arretes  pour  cela, 
seront  confisqu^s  avec  les  esclaves  qu'il  y  aura  a  bord,  mais  prevenir  les 
mal-entendues  et  la  confusion  a  cet  egard,  je  veux  donner  sur  cette 
question  les  eclaircissemens  suivans. 