

Votre  Excellence  sait  qu'il  y  a  dans  ces  environs  la  des  Gouvernements 
et  des  Imams  independants,  et  cela  dtant,  les  chatimens  dont  il  s'agit,  ne 
peuvent  pas  etre  appliques  a  leurs  batimens.  II  faudra  done  se  borner 
a  Tegard  de  ces  batimens  a  leur  defendre  de  transporter  et  d'introduire 
des  esclaves  dans  les  ports  de  la  S.  P.  qui  sont  dans  le  Golfe  Persique 
et  s'ils  en  viennent  Votre  Excellence  aura  seulement  a  les  renvoyer  et  a 
les  eloigner.  Ainsi  V.  E.  voudra  bien  donner  aux  autorites  competentes 
les  ordres  necessaires  daus  le  sens  au  dessus  explique. 

20  ReM-al-Akhir  1263. 


Translation. — Instructions  to  Nejib,  Pasha  of  Bagdad,  about  the  African  Slaves. 

As  your  Excellency  well  knows,  I  have  stated  in  the  despatch  I 
wrote  to  you,  in  consequence  of  the  firman  issued  for  the  purpose  of 
prohibiting  the  transport  of  black  slaves  from  Africa  to  America  and 
other  places,  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  measures  for  sending  back 
conveniently  to  the  places  whence  they  had  been  kidnapped,  those  slaves 
who  shall  come  to  any  port  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  in  vessels  under 
the  flag  of  the  Sublime  Porte. 

But  on  thinking  again  on  this  matter,  we  found  that  this  plan  is 
not  quite  exempt  from  inconvenience,  for  it  is  not  improbable  that  the 
slaves  shoidd  fall,  while  on  their  way  home,  into  the  hands  of  people 
dealing  in  slaves,  and  experience  again  all  sorts  of  misery. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


193 


&  L. 


Now  the  slaves  who  shall  have  been  liberated  from  the  hands  of  TURKISH 
the  merchants  are  naturally  become  thus  free,  and  they  may,  of  course,  ARABIA. 
act  as  they  like.  Such  of  them,  then,  as  will  not  return,  but  choose  to  Noa.  XLIX 
remain,  cannot  be  forced  to  go,  and  they  must  be  allowed  to  stay  where 
they  please. 

But  humanity  requires  that  measures  should  be  taken  to  send  safely 
to  the  place  of  their  destination  those  who  wish  to  return,  and,  therefore, 
it  has  been  thought  expedient,  and  the  Sultan  has  given  orders  to  that 
effect,  that  those  among  them  who  wish  to  return  should  be  consigned 
to  the  British  Authorities  in  those  environs,  put  on  board  the  British 
men  of  war,  or  on  board  other  vessels  which  shall  be  assigned  by  the 
English,  and  sent  away. 

This  matter  has  been  talked  of  with  the  British  embassy,  and  your 
Excellency  will  therefore  talk  about  it  with  the  British  Consul  at 
Bagdad,  and  send  the  analagous  instructions  to  the  competent  Authori- 
ties ;  and  as  to  those  among  the  slaves  that  have  been  captured,  who  may 
wish  to  remain  in  this  country,  your  Excellency  will  take  care  to  furnish 
them  with  a  Tezkere,  that  they  may  not  be  molested  by  any  body  what- 
ever after  that. 