

vol.  vn.  2  e 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SlTNNUDS. 


I'KliSIAN 
QULF. 

Muscat. 


Iii  1815  the  Imam  entered  into  a  Treaty*  (No.  LVI.)  prohibiting, 
from  1st  January  1847,  the  export  of  slaves  from  his  African  dominions 
and  their  importation  from  any  part  of  Africa  into  his  dominions  in  Asia, 
and  agreeing  to  use  his  influence  with  the  Chiefs  of  Arabia,  the  Red  Sea, 
and  the  Persian  Gulf  to  put  a  stop  to  the  slave  trade.  The  Treaty,  how- 
ever, did  not  prohibit  the  transport  of  slaves  from  one  port  in  his 
African  possessions  to  another.  In  consenting  to  this  Treaty  the  Imam 
requested  that  three  additional  Articles  f  might  be  added,  prohibiting 
the  search  of  his  vessels  in  the  limits  within  which  the  transport 
of  slaves  was  allowed  under  the  Treaty,  and  of  his  vessels  coming  from 
the  Arabian  and  Red  Seas  to  Africa,  and  stipulating  that,  if  slaves 
were  stolen  from  the  Zanzibar  territories,  the  Imam  should  not  be 
held  responsible.  These  Articles  appear  never  to  have  been  formally 
agreed  to ;  but  the  Imam  was  informed,  in  the  name  of  Her  Majesty's 
Government,  that  British  ships  of  war  would  search  only  such  vessels 
under  the  flag  of  the  Imam  as  might  reasonably  be  suspected  of  being 
engaged  in  slave  trade ;  that,  therefore,  the  description  of  vessels 
mentioned  in  the  Articles  would  not  be  searched  unless  there  should  be 
good  ground  for  suspecting  them  to  be  so  engaged ;  but,  at  all  events, 


*  An  Act  of  Parliament,  11  and  12  Vic,  Chap.  128,  was  passed  to  give  effect  to  this 
Treaty.  See  Appendix. 

t  Additional  Articles  to  the  Agreement  concluded  on  the  2nd  October  1845,  corre- 
sponding to  the  29th  Ram/an  1261  Hegira,  according  to  the  wish  of  His  Highness 
the  Imam  of  Muscat. 

Article  1. 

That  no  vessels  belonging  to  His  Highness  Syud  Saeed  bin  Sultan,  the  Imam  of 
Muscat,  or  belonging  to  his  subjects,  be  searched  by  English  Men-of- War  between  the 
boundary  of  Lamoo  to  the  north  and  Kitwar  to  the  south,  mentioned  in  the  Treaty  con- 
cluded on  the  2nd  October  1845,  corresponding  with  the  29th  Ramzan  1261. 

Article  2. 
It  may  perhaps  be  reported  to  them  (the  British  Government)  that    an   individual  has 
stolen  slaves  from  the  territories  of  Syud  Saeed,  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  which  are  in  Africa ; 
unless  this  be  proved,  His  Highness  Syud  Saeed,  the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  shall  not  be  called 
to  account  for  it. 

Article  3. 

It  is  known  that  the  vessel  belonging  to  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  and  those 
belonging  to  his  subjects  coming  from  the  Arabian  and  Red  Seas  do  not  bring  slaves  from 
those  parts  to  the  territories  of  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  which  are  in  Africa  ;  accordingly 
English  Men-of-War  shall  not  search  nor  trouble  them. 