


TURKISH 
ARABIA. 

No.  L. 


Article  11.  Article  11. 

Les    deux     Gouvernements     se  The  two  governments  reserve  to 

reservent    d'arreter  et   de  conclure  themselves  the  right  to  determine 

une  Convention  Telegraphique  sur  on    and    conclude    a    Telegraphic 

les  basses  de  l'Acte   de  Bruxelles,  Convention  on  the  basis  of  the  Act 

*  On  9th  December  1863  an  additional  Article  was  added  to  the  Protocol,  stipulating 
that,  instead  of  dividing  the  traffic  equally  between  the  Bussora  and  Khanakeen  lines, 
messages  should  be  forwarded  indifferently  by  either  line,  and  that  payment  should  be  cal- 
culated on  the  mean  between  375  and  89  miles,  the  distances  between  Bagdad  and  Bussora 
and  Bagdad  and  Khanakeen  respectively,  so  long  as  both  lines  are  kept  in  efficient  working 
order. 


198 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


TURKISH    qui  constituc  la  Loi  Internationale 
ARABIA,    deg  Signes  Electriques. 


No.  L. 


En  foi  de  quoi,  Y  Ambassadeur  de 
Sa  Majeste  Britannique  et  le  Minis- 
tre  des  Affaires  Etrangeres  de  Sa 
Majeste  Imp^riale  le  Sultan  ont 
signes  le  present  Protocole,  en  double 
expedition,  et  y  ont  appose*  le  sceau 
de  leurs  armes. 


of  Brussels,  which  constitutes  the 
International  Law  of  Lines  of 
Electric  Telegraphs. 

In  faith  of  which  the  Ambassa- 
dor of  Her  Britannic  Majesty  and 
the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  of 
His  Imperial  Majesty  the  Sultan 
have  signed  the  present  Protocol 
in  duplicate  and  have  annexed 
their  Seals. 


Fait  a  la  Sublime  Porte,  le  vingt         Bone  at   the   Sublime  Porte  the 
dtt  mois  d'Ociobre,  de  Van  mil  huit     20th  day  of  October  1863. 
cent  soiaante  trots. 


Poce  Sib  Henex  Bulweb. 


L.  S. 


E.  M.  Erskine. 


Foe  Sie  Heney  Bulwee. 


L.  S. 


E.  M.  Erskine. 


L.  S. 


All 


L.  S. 


All 


L.  S. 


All 


PERSIAN  GULF. 

Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  Bombay  Government,  No.  XXI.  of 

new  Series. 

Those  portions  of  the  coasts  of  the  Persian  Gulf  which  are  not 
occupied  by  tribes  having  treaty  relations  with  the  British  Government 
are  either  under  the  dominion  of  Turkey  or  Persia.  The  Turkish 
suzerainty  is  acknowledged  on  the  southern  shore  from  the  Shat-el-Arab 
to  a  point  nearly  opposite  Demam,  a  small  portion  nearest  the  Shat-el-Arab 
being  directly  under  the  Pasha  of  Baghdad,  and  the  rest  being  occupied 
by  Arab  Chiefs,  who  acknowledge  dependence  on  the  Turkish  Government. 
The  northern  shore  nearest  the  Shat-el-Arab  is  held  by  Arab  Chiefs  owing 
allegiance  to  Persia,  and  the  coast  eastward  to  a  point  nearly  opposite  to 
the  western  extremity  of  the  Island  of  Kishm  is  governed  directly  by 
officers  of  the  Shah  of  Persia. 

MUSCAT. 