


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  189 

No.    XLVIII.  TURKISH 

Translate  of  an  Imperial  Firman  of  protection  for  the  English  Steam  "Vessels     ARABIA- 
destined  to  navigate  the  River  Euphrates,  dated  29th  December  1834.  No.  XLVIII. 

To  their  Excellencies  the  Viziers,  Pashas  of  three  tails,  to  the  illus- 
trious Miri  Mirans,  Pashas  of  two  tails,  to  the  learned  Judges,  to  the 
Wainadas,  Captains  of  Ports,  and  other  Magistrates  of  places  situated  on 
both  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  health. 

On  receiving  the  imperial  command,  you  will  know  as  follows: — The 
Ambassador  Extraordinary  and  Plenipotentiary  of  Great  Britain  at 
Constantinople,  Lord  Ponsonby,  one  of  the  most  illustrious  personages 
among  the  Christian  nations,  has  presented  at  our  Sublime  Porte  an 
official  note,  by  which  he  intimates  that  the  British  Government  requires 
permission  to  cause  to  navigate  by  turns  two  steam  boats  on  the  river 
Euphrates,  which  flows  at  a  small  distance  from  the  city  of  Bagdad,  for 
the  purposes  of  facilitating  commerce. 

We  in  consequence  issued  to  our  very  illustrious  governor  of 
Bagdad  and  Bussora,  Ali  Reza  Pasha,  an  order  to  furnish  our  Sublime 
Porte  with  information  of  the  proposed  navigation. 

Although  the  answer  of  the  Pasha  had  not  arrived,  the  Ambassador 
made  representations  on  this  point,  informing  our  Sublime  Porte  the 
British  Government  awaited  our  reply. 

For  this  reason  we  have  and  do  permit  two  steam  boats  to  navigate 
the  Euphrates  by  turns,  and  this  navigation  is  to  continue  as  long  as, 
conformably  to  what  has  been  represented  to  us,  it  may  prove  useful  to 
the  two  powers,  and  no  inconvenience  result  therefrom,  and  it  is  to  this 
purpose  that  an  official  rule  has  been  transmitted  to  the  British 
Ambassador. 

A  firman  couched  in  the  same  terms  has  been  addressed  to  the 
Pasha  of  Bagdad  and  Bussora. 


190  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND    SUNNUD9. 

v 

TURKISH  No.  XLIX. 

ARABIA 

_  Tbanslation  of  an  Imperial  Firman  addressed  to  the  Valee  of  Bagdad,  dated 
No.  XLIX.  in  the  beginning  of  Suffer  1263,  or  end  of  January  1847,  communicated  the 

23rd  January  1847. 

To  the  Valee  of  Bagdad, — Ordained  (that)  whereas,  although  special 
conventions  have  been  entered  into  between  the  British  Government 
and  certain  rulers  in  Africa  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  exportation 
of  black  slaves  from  that  country  to  (the  ports  of)  America  and  to  other 
places,  certain  merchant  ships  contrive  to  kidnap  slaves  from  the  African 
coasts,  and  continue  to  transport  them  to  other  places,  owing  to  which 
the  provisions  of  the  aforesaid  convention  cannot  be  carried  into  execution  ; 
a  request  has  been  therefore  lately  made  on  the  part  of  the  British  Gov- 
ernment that  the  necessary  measures  should  be  adopted  in  this  matter 
by  my  Sublime  Porte  with  reference  to  those  places;  and  whereas  the 
inhuman  and  barbarous  treatment  adopted  with  regard  to  kidnapped  slaves 
in  the  places  to  which  they  are  transported  is  not  like  unto  (that  adopted 
towards)  slaves  coming  to  these  places,  and  that  the  prevention  thereof 
would  be  both  just  and  commiserate  :  It  is  therefore  my  supreme  and 
imperial  will  that  the  slave  trade  carried  on  on  the  aforesaid  coast  by  the 
merchant  vessels  under  my  imperial  flag  be  henceforward  entirely  pro- 
hibited, that  any  (vessels)  acting  in  contravention  to  this  prohibition 
and  captured  by  the  ships  of  my  imperial  fleet  which  by  the 
grace  of  God  are  to  be  sent  into  those  waters,  or  taken  by  the  British 
ships  of  war  cruizing  in  those  parts  and  delivered  up  by  them  to  the 
Authorities  of  my  royal  ports  in  the  Gulf  of  Bussora,  be  taken  possession 
of  by  my  Sublime  Porte,  and  that  the  captains  thereof  be  punished; 
that  those  whom  it  may  concern  be  peremptorily  warned  thereof,  and 
that  the  utmost  care  and  attention  be  paid  to  the  full  and  perpetual 
observance  of  the  present  prohibition,  and  to  the  punishment  of  those 
acting  in  contravention  thereto  as  aforesaid. 