

Towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  Muscat  Arabs  having 
driven  the  Persians  from  Oman,  established  their  ascendancy  in  the 
Persian  Gulf,  and  gained  a  footing  in  Zanzibar  aud  several  other  parts 
on  the  African  coast.  The  Persians  regained  their  supremacy  for  a  short 
time  in  the  reign  of  Nadir  Shah,  but  during  the  weakness  and  distrac- 
tions in  Persia  which  followed  Nadir  Shah's  death,  Ahmed  bin  Saeed,  the 
Arab  Governor  of  Sohar,  drove  the  Persians  out  of  Muscat  and  con- 
temptuously rejected  the  claims  of  the  Shah  to  tribute.  He  was  elected 
Imam.  He  was  succeeded  in  the  government  of  Muscat  by  his  second 
son,  Syud  Sultan,  who  usurped  the  rights  of  his  elder  brother.  It  was 
in  1798,  during  the  rule  of  this  Chief,  that  the  first  Treaty  (No.  LI.) 
with  Muscat  was  negociated  by  Mehendi  AH  Khan,  the  Company's  Agent 
at  Bushire,  with  a  view  to  exclude  from  Muscat  all  prejudicial  influence 
of  the  French  with  whom  Syud  Sultan  was  brought  in  contact  through 
his  trade  with  the  Mauritius.  When  Sir  John  Malcolm  visited  Muscat  on 
his  first  mission  to  Persia,  he  formed  another  engagement  (No.  LII.) 
with  Syud  Sultan,  stipulating  for  the  strict  observance  of  the  previous 
Treaty  and  for  the  residence  of  an  English  gentleman  in  an  official 
capacity  at  Muscat. 


200 


TKEATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

Muscat. 


Syud  Sultan  was  killed  on  14th  November  1803  in  battle  with  his 
enemies  the  Uttoobees  and  Joasmees.  The  rights  of  his  two  young  sons 
were  disputed  by  their  uncle  Syud  Ghes  of  Sohar,  who  aimed  at  usurping 
the  government  of  Muscat.  To  oppose  their  uncle's  pretensions  the  two 
youths  put  themselves  in  the  hands  of  their  cousin  Syud  Budr  bin 
Halol,  who  called  in  the  Wahabees,  and  with  their  help  defeated  Syud 
Ghes  and  recovered  Bundur  Abbass  and  Hormus,  which  had  been  seized 
by  the  Shaikh  of  Kishm.  The  weakness  resulting  from  this  disputed 
succession  gave  the  Wahabees  a  footing  in  Muscat,  which  they  have  never 
wholly  lost.  This  sect  adopted  strict  and  puritanical  doctrines.  They 
denied  divine  honours  to  Mahomed,  abhorred  and  destroyed  all  holy 
tombs,  abstained  from  the  use  of  tobacco,  and  waged  war  against  all 
Mahomedans  who  did  not  accept  their  peculiar  views.  Their  doctrines 
spread  with  amazing  rapidity.  In  1800  they  made  their  first  appearance 
in  Oman.  They  reduced  all  the  sea  coast  of  the  Persian  Gulf  from 
Bussora  to  Debaye,  released  the  Chiefs  of  Zaheera  and  Sohar  from 
allegiance  to  Muscat,  and  forced  Syud  Sultan  to  beg  for  a  three  years' 
truce,  which  they  broke  soon  after.  They  would  probably  have 
conquered  all  Oman  if  they  had  not  been  stopped  by  the  assassination 
of  their  Chief. 