

The  Wahabees  reached  the  height  of  their  power  shortly  after  the 
accession  of  Syud  Saeed,  the  second  son  of  Syud  Sultan,  who  succeeded 
Budr  bin  Halol  in  1807.  This  Chief,  to  whom  the  religious  title  of  Imam 
was  not  conceded  by  the  Arabs,  although  he  is  generally  so  styled,  ruled 
for  fifty  years,  during  which  time  he  cultivated  a  close  intercourse  with 
the  British  Government.  In  1808  the  Imam,  smarting  under  the  insults 
of  the  Wahabees,  whose  agents  were  forcibly  converting  his  subjects 
in  his  very  capital,  roused  the  Arab  tribes  in  Oman  to  a  combination 
against  them.  If  Muscat  had  fallen  under  the  Wahabees,  the  Imam 
would  have  been  drawn  into  the  general  system  of  piracy  which  the 
Wahabees  encouraged,  and  would  have  been  converted  from  a  friend  into 
a  dangerous  enemy.  The  British  Government,  therefore,  resolved  to 
support  him.  An  armament  was  accordingly  sent  towards  the  close  of 
1809,  which  destroyed  the  piratical  boats  at  Ras-ool-Khyma,  Linga,  and 
Luft,  and  bombarded  and  took  Shinas.  No  arrangements,  however,  were 
made   permanently  to    secure   the   advantages    then  obtained.     Piracy 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  201 

was  soon  renewed,  and  another  expedition  had  to  be  sent  against  the  pirates     PERSIAN 
in  1819,  in  which  also  the  Imam  co-operated.      With  these  exceptions,       GULF. 
till   the  year   1822,    when  a  Treaty  (No.  MIL)  was  concluded  for  the      Muscat. 
suppression  of  slavery,  there  is  nothing  requiring  special   notice  in  the 
intercourse  between  the  British  Government  and  Syud  Saeed,  who  was 
chiefly  occupied  in  wars  with  his   rivals,  the  Joasmees,  and  in  fruitless 
attempts  to  possess  himself  of  the  Island  of  Bahrein. 

The  Treaty  of  1822  aimed  at  the  suppression  of  the  foreign  slave 
trade  with  Christian  nations  only,  and  not  of  the  trade  with  Mahomedan 
countries  and  within  the  Muscat  dominions,  except  in  cases  of  kidnap- 
ping ;  and  the  permission  given  under  the  Treaty  to  British  cruizers  to 
seize  slave  ships  east  of  the  line  defined  in  the  Treaty,  applied  to  His 
Majesty's  ships  only,  and  not  to  vessels  of  the  Indian  Navy.  In  1839, 
however,  a  Treaty  of  commerce  (No.  LIV.)  was  concluded  with  the  Imam 
by  Her  Majesty's  plenipotentiary  at  Muscat,  by  the  fifteenth  Article 
of  which  the  Imam  confirmed  the  Treaty  of  1822  for  the  suppression 
of  slave  trade  with  Christiau  countries,  and  conceded  power  of  search 
and  seizure  to  vessels  of  the  East  India  Company;  and  on  17th  De- 
cember of  the  same  year  he  agreed  with  the  Resident  in  the  Persian 
Gulf  to  add  three  additional  Articles  (No.  LV.)  to  the  Treaty  of  1822, 
authorizing  the  right  of  search  and  extending  the  boundary  laid  down 
in  the  Treaty  of  1822  from  Diu  head  to  Passein,  the  eastern  boundary  of 
the  Muscat  possessions  on  the  Mekran  coast,  so  as  to  include  the  coasts 
of  Kattywar,  Kutch,  Kurrachee,  and  upwards  of  four  degrees  westward 
in  the  limits  within  which  his  subjects  were  forbidden  to  engage  in  the 
slave  trade.  In  the  fourth  Article  of  the  Arabic  version  of  the  Treaty  of 
1822  no  mention  was  made  of  the  obligation  of  the  Imam  or  his 
authorities  to  assist  in  the  apprehension  of  British  subjects  engaged  in 
the  slave  trade,  although  this  obligation  was  distinctly  specified  in  the 
English  version.  The  Imam  was  urged  to  have  the  omission  rectified 
by  an  addition  to  the  Arabic  text.  He  was,  however,  averse  to  any  altera- 
tion being  made  in  the  Treaty;  but  in  a  separate  letter,  dated  18th 
August  1845,  he  bound  himself,  his  heirs,  and  authorities  to  afford  assist- 
ance, when  required  by  persons  authorized  to  demand  it,  in  the  appre- 
hension of  British  subjects  engaged  in  slave  trade. 