

In  1865  a  Convention  (No.  LX.)  was  made  with  the  Imam  for  the 
extension  of  the  Electric  Telegraph  through  his  Dominions  in  Arabia 
and  Mekran. 


vessels  of  war.  He  should  further  promise  to  protect  all  the  boundaries  of  the  above- 
mentioned  places  from  all  interference  and  intrusion  of  strangers,  whether  in  an  amicable 
or  hostile  manner.  He  should  not  at  any  time  allow  any  ship,  bughla,  or  other  vessels  of 
war,  or  any  hostile  person  armed  or  otherwise,  Arab  or  foreign,  to  approach  or  get  a  footing 
at  Bunder  Abbas  or  the  Persian  territory  with  hostile  intentions  or  other  prctexcs. 

Article  14. 
The  Imam  of  Muscat,  notwithstanding  these  conditions,  has  not  the  right  of  letting 
Bunder  Abbas  and  the  above  said  places  to  any  foreigner  or  others.     He  can  only  himself 
hold  them,  appointing  one  of  his  relatives  for  the  management  thereof,  who  would  act  in 
accordance  with  these  conditions. 

Article  15. 
It  is  reported  by  Persian  merchants  that  formerly  an  Indian,  the  Contractor  of  Cus- 
toms at  Muscat,  had  deputed  an  Agent  at  Bunder  Abbas,  and  there  received  the  Muscat 
duty  for  goods  sent  from  Bunder  Abbas  to  India  and  other  places,  whereas  no  such  rules 
exist  in  any  country  as  charging  the  duty  of  one  place,  where  the  goods  are  not  being  sent, 
in  another.  As  this  proceeding  is  against  rules  and  customs,  the  Imam  should  prevent  the 
occurrence  thereof  hereafter,  and  should  only  levy  6uch  export  and  import  duty  as  the 
late  Sheikh  Saif  used  to  do,  and  no  more. 

Article  16. 
The  merchandize  detained  on  the  Island  of  Kishm  should  be  brought  to  Bunder  Ab- 
bas and  distributed  to  their  respective  consigners  there  through  Hajee  Abd-el  Mahomed, 
the  Melek-el  Toojjar  of  Bushire,  and  their  receipts  taken  and  sent  to  Tehran. 


*  See  below,  Zanzibar. 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS.  207 

Sohar. — The  present  ruling1  family   of   Muscat  are,   as  has  been     PERSIAN 

already  noted,  descended  from  Ahmed  bin  Saeed,  the  Governor  of  Sohar, GULP. 

who,  in  1730,  expelled  the  Persians  and  became  the  first  Imam  of  Muscat. 
Muscat.  Syud  Ghes,  of  Sohar,  who  had  attempted  to  supplant  his 
nephew  Syud  Saeed  in  the  government  of  Muscat,  was  killed  in  1808, 
and  his  family  were  deprived  of  their  patrimony.  In  1830,  however, 
his  grandson  Syud  Hamood  bin  Azan,  the  cousin  of  Syud  Saeed, 
taking  advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  latter  at  Zanzibar,  regained 
possession  of  Sohar  and  compelled  the  Imam  to  restore  to  him  also 
other  districts  on  payment  of  tribute.  His  popularity  in  Oman  was 
great,  and,  but  for  the  intervention  of  the  British  Government,  he  would 
have  succeeded  in  dismembering  the  Muscat  possessions.  In  1839 
a  reconciliation  was  effected  between  Syud  Saeed  and  Syud  Hamood 
through  the  mediation  of  the  Resident  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  an 
engagement  (No.  LXI.)  was  mediated  between  them,  by  which  they 
engaged  to  abstain  from  aggressions  on  each  other,  and  to  admit  free 
intercourse  and  trade  between  their  respective  possessions.  The  Imam 
also  bound  himself  to  support  the  Chief  of  Sohar  when  attacked  by 
his  enemies. 