

Article  1. 

The  Cowlnamah  entered  into  by  the  Imam  of  Oman  with  Mehedy 
Ally  Khan  Bahadoor  remains  fixed  and  in  full  force. 


Article  2. 

As  improper  reports  of  a  tendency  to  interrupt  the  existing  harmony 
and  create  misunderstanding  between  the  States  have  gone  abroad,  and 
have  been  communicated  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor  General, 
the  Earl  of  Mornington,  k.  p.  ;  with  a  view  to  prevent  such  evils  in 
future,  we,  actuated  by  sentiments  of  reciprocal  friendship,  agree  that 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


211 


an  English  gentleman  of  respectability,  on  the  part  of  the  Honourable  PERSIAN 
Company,  shall  always  reside  at  the  port  of  Muscat,  and  be  an  Agent  gulf. 
through  whom  all  intercourse  between  the  States  shall  be  conducted,  in 
order  that  the  actions  of  each  government  may  be  fairly  and  justly 
stated,  and  that  no  opportunity  may  be  offered  to  designing  men,  who 
are  ever  eager  to  promote  dissensions,  and  that  the  friendship  of  the 
two  States  may  remain  unshook  till  the  end  of  time,  and  till  the  sun 
and  moon  have  finished  their  revolving  career. 


L.  S. 


Sealed  in  my  presence. 

(Signed)  John  Malcolm, 

Envoi/. 


Approved  by  the  Governor  General  in  Council  on  26th  April  1800. 


No.  LIII. 


Translation. 


Nos.  LII 
&  LIII. 

Muscat. 


In  the  name  of  the  Most  High  God !  In  the  name  of  the  Most  High  God  ! 


Particulars  of  the  requisitions  which 
were  made  by  Captain  Moresby,  Com- 
mander of  the  Ship  "Meani,"  who 
arrived  at  the  port  of  Muscat  on  the 
9th  of  the  sacred  (month  of)  Zilhujjah 
1237  (27th  August  1822)  from  the 
Island  of  Mauritius,  on  the  part  of 
the  Governor  Sir  Bobert  Farquhar 
Bahadoor. 


Answers  to  the  requisitions  which  were 
made  by  Captain  Morseby  on  the  part 
of  the  Governor  Sir  Eobert  Farquhar 
Bahadoor,  may  his  glory  be  eternal ! 
which  (requisitions)  are  mentioned  on 
the  back  of  this  paper. 


Article  1. 

That  you  (the  Imam)  instruct 
all  the  Officers  in  your  dominions 
to  prevent  the  subjects  from  selling 
slaves  to  Christians  of  all  nations. 


Article  1. 

That  we  did  write  last  season  to 
all  our  Officers  to  prohibit  the  sale 
of  slaves  to  all  the  Christian  nations, 
and  we  will  send  further  instruc- 
tions to  them  on  the  subject. 


•:  i  z 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  L11I. 

Muscat. 


Article  2. 

That  you  do  issue  orders  to  all 
your  Officers,  who  are  on  your  part 
throughout  your  dominions,  as  well 
in  Zanzibar  as  in  other  places,  to 
the  effect  that  if  they  discover  per- 
sons on  board  any  Arab  vessel  buy- 
ing slaves  for  the  purpose  of  taking 
them  to  Christian  countries,  they 
(the  Officers)  should  seize  such 
vessel  with  all  that  she  may  contain, 
and  should  send  to  you  the  Na- 
khoda  (i.  e.,  the  Commander)  and 
the  crew  in  order  that  you  may 
punish  them. 