


*  Translated  purport  of  an  Order  from  His  Royal  Highness  Tamasp  Mieza  Moayed- 
ed-Dowlah,  dated  Shaban  1272  H.,  A.  r>.  1855. 

By  order  and  permission  of  the  ministers  of  the  exalted  government  of  Persia  and 
on  the  following  conditions,  we  entrust  the  government  of  Bunder  Abbas,  the  Islands  of 
Kishm  and  Hormuz,  and  the  districts  of  Ossein,  Tazyan,  Shemie,  Minah,  Khameer,  and 
Biyahan,  and  all  their  dependencies  that  are  all  the  very  territories  of  the  exalted  govern- 
ment, to  His  Highness  Syud  Saeed  Khan,  the  Imam  of  Muscat  and  Oman.  His 
H  ighness  should  act  according  to  these  conditions  and  not  avoid  any  of  them  : — 

Aeticle  1. 
That  the  Chief  of  Bunder  Abbas  should  be  a  dependent  of  the  Persian  government, 
and  give  a  writing  to  that  effect  to  the  ministers  of  that  government,  and,  like  all  other 
Chiefs  in  Fare,  must  obey  the  Governor  General  of  Pars. 

Aeticle  2. 
That  His  Highness  should  remit  with  a  confidential  man  of  his,  in  four  instalments, 
the  annual  sum,  as  herein  detailed,  of  sixteen"  thousand  Tomans  on  account  of  the  revenue, 
peslikush,  and  present  for  Bunder  Abbas,  getting  a  receipt  for  the  same  from  the  Go- 
vernor General  of  Fare. 


Total  16,000  Tomans 


fRevenue  

J  Peshkush  for  Prime  Minister 

Ditto     for  Governor  General  of  Fare 
(.Present  for  Shoja-cl-Moolk    


12,500  Tomans. 
2,000     ditto. 
1,000    ditto. 
500    ditto. 


Aeticle  3. 


That  His  Highness  should  cause  the  ditch  that  is  now  being  dug  around  the  fort  of 
Bunder  Abbas,  to  be  filled  in,  and  it  should  never  be  re-dug  again. 

Aeticle  4. 
That  until  twenty  years  the  Imam  of  Muscat  and  his  son  will  have  the  right  of 
the  government  of  Bunder  Abbas,  and  after  the  expiration  of  twenty  years,  they  will 
have  to  repair  the  place  and  make  it  over  to  the  Persian  government.  Should  the  minis- 
ters of  the  exalted  government  then  again  wish  to  grant  the  government  of  Bunder 
Abbas  to  the  Imam  and  his  sons,  they  will,  through  friendship,  do  so  under  a  new  Firman 
and  instructions,  otherwise  they  can  occupy  the  place  and  depute  another  Chief  there. 

Aeticle  5. 

That  they  should  always  fly  the  Persian  flag  at  Bunder  Abbas,   and  there  will  always 

be  a  few  Persians  there  to  take  care  of  the  flag.     A  Taskarachee  also  will  be  appointed  and 

sent  to  remain  permanently  at  Bunder  Abbas.     Every  respect  due  to  the  Persian  flag 

should  be  brought  into  effect.     There  will  be  a  monthly  courier  sent  to  Bunder  Abbas  to 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 


205 


In  1854  the  Imam  ceded  (No.  LVIIL)   to  the  British  Crown  the    PERSIAN 
Kooria  Mooria  Islands  on  the  south  coast  of  Arabia.     The  islands  are      GULF, 
valuable  only  for  the  guano  deposits  which  are  found  on  them.  Muscat. 