


take  newspapers  and  to  look  after  the  flag  and  its  attendants.  On  all  festivals  and  on  the 
anniversary  of  the  Shah's  birthday  a  salute  should  bo  fired.  The  usual  morning  and  even- 
ing guns  will  also  be  fired. 

Aeticle  6. 

The  Chief  of  Bunder  Abbas  should  in  no  respect  annoy  or  oppress  the  subjects  and 
inhabitants  of  that  place  who  have  for  some  years  past  served  the  Persian  government, 
but  on  the  contrary  he  must  take  great  care  of  them. 

Aeticle  7. 
The  Chief  of  Bunder  Abbas  should  not  interfere  with  any   other  places  than  those 
that  have  been  since  the  time  of  the  late  Fath  Ali  Shah  and  are  at  present  under  his 
authority. 

Aeticle  8. 

Should  at  any  time  the  Governor  General  of  Fars  or  Governor  of  Laristan  desire  to 
go  for  recreation  or  sport  to  Bunder  Abbas,  the  Chief,  like  other  Chiefs,  should  pay  the 
necessary  respect  of  receiving  and  every  due  attention. 

Aeticle  9. 
In  the  event  of  the  Governor  General  of  Fars  or  Governor  of  Kerman  requiring,  in 
certain  emergent  cases,  to  send  troops  to  Cutch,  Mckran,  or  Beloochistan,  the  Chief  of 
Bunder  Abbas,  like  those  of  other  places,  should  not  fail  in  attending  to  his  wants,  giving 
provisions  and  guides,  paying  the  necessary  respect  on  their  departure,  and  doing  all  like 
services. 

Aeticle  10. 

In  case  the  Governor  General  of  Fars  finding  any  fault  in  the  Chief  of  Bunder  Abbas, 
the  Imam  immediately,  on  its  being  brought  to  his  notice,  should,  without  any  excuse,  dis- 
charge the  Chief  and  depute  another  whom  he  may  deem  fit,  and  who  would  be  obedient 
to  the  Governor  General  of  Fars. 

Aeticle  11. 

Should  any  of  the  subjects  of  Laristan,  Sabaa,  and  other  districts  of  Fars,  or  of  any 
of  the  districts  of  Kerman,  emigrate  to  Bunder  Abbas,  on  notice  being  given  by  the  Chief 
of  such  district,  the  Chief  of  Bunder  Abbas  should  return  them  to  their  places. 

Aeticle  12. 
These  conditions  have  been  made  with  the  present  living  Imam  Syud  Saeed  Khan 
and  his  sons.     But  should  at  any  time  an  usurper  get  into  possession  of  Muscat,  the  minis- 
ters of  the  Persian   government  will  not  be  bound  to  any  of  these  conditions. 

Aeticle  13. 

As  long  as  Bunder  Abbas,  the  above-mentioned  two  Islands,  Shernil,  Minab,  and  their 

dependencies  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Imam  of  Muscat,  he  should  not  allow  any  Officers  of 

foreign  governments  to  go  there.     He  should  also  promise  to  protect  those  places  by  land 

and  sea,  providing  for  every  port  having  an  anchorage  some  ships,  bughlas,  and  other 


206 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


PBR6IAH 

.il'LF. 

JJUM\tt. 


Syud  Saeed  died  in  1856.  In  1844  he  had  intimated  his  desire  to 
appoint  his  sons  Syud  Khalid  and  Syud  Thowaynee  as  his  successors  in 
his  African  and  Asiatic  dominions  respectively,  and  had  appointed  them 
his  deputies.  Syud  Thowaynee  accordingly  succeeded  to  the  govern- 
ment of  Muscat  on  his  father's  death.  In  virtue  of  his  succession  to  the 
Chiefship  of  Oman,  he  claimed  also  feudal  supremacy  over  Zanzibar*  and 
prepared  to  establish  his  claim  by  force  of  arms.  The  dispute  was  sub- 
mitted to  the  arbitration  of  Lord  Canning,  who  decided  (No.  LIX.)  that 
Zanzibar  should  be  independent  of  Muscat,  but  should  pay  an  annual 
subsidy  of  40,000  crowns. 