


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   STJNNUDS. 


209 


Article  2. 
From  the  recital  of  the  said  Nawab  my  heart  has  Income  disposed 
to  an  increase  of  the  friendship  with  that  State,  and  from  this  day  forth 
the  friend  of  that  Sircar  is  the  friend  of  this,  and  the  friend  of  this 
Sircar  is  to  be  the  friend  of  that  \  and,  in  like  manner,  the  enemy  of  that 
Sircar  is  the  enemy  of  this,  and  the  enemy  of  this  is  to  be  the  enemy 
of  that. 

Article  3. 

Whereas  frequent  applications  have  been  made,  and  are  still  making-, 
by  the  French  and  Dutch  people  for  a  Factory,  i.  <?.,  to  seat  themselves 
in  either  at  Muscat  or  Goombroon,  or  at  the  other  ports  of  this  Sircar, 
it  is  therefore  written  that,  whilst  warfare  shall  continue  between  the 
English  Company  and  them,  never  shall,  from  respect  to  the  Company's 
friendship,  be  given  to  them  throughout  all  my  territories  a  place  to 
fix  or  seat  themselves  in,  nor  shall  they  get  even  ground  to  stand  upon 
within  this  State. 

Article  4. 

As  there  is  a  person  of  the  French  nation,  who  has  been  for  these 
several  years  in  my  service,  and  who  hath  now  gone  in  command  of  one 
of  my  vessels  to  the  Mauritius,  I  shall,  immediately  on  his  return, 
dismiss  him  from  my  service  and  expel  him. 


PERSIAN 
GULF. 

No.  LI. 

Muscat. 


Article  5. 

In  the  event  of  any  French  vessel  coming  to  water  at  Muscat, 
she  shall  not  be  allowed  to  enter  the  cove  into  which  the  English  vessels 
are  admitted,  but  remain  without ;  and  in  case  of  hostilities  ensuing  here 
between  the  French  and  English  ships,  the  force  of  this  State  by  land 
and  by  sea,  and  my  people,  shall  take  part  in  hostility  with  the  English, 
but  on  the  high  seas  I  am  not  to  interfere. 


Article  6. 

On  the  occurrence  of  any  shipwreck  of  a  vessel  or  vessels  apper- 
taining to  the  English,  there  shall  certainly  be  aid  and  comfort  afforded 
on  the  part  of  this  government,  nor  shall  the  property  be  seized  on. 

VOL.    VII.  2  (I 


i\0 


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


PERSIAN 
GULP. 

Noa.LI 
&  LIL 

Muscat. 


Article  7. 
In  the  port  of  Abassy  (Goombroon)  whenever  the  English  shall  be 
disposed  to  establish  a  Factory,'  I  have  no  objection  to  their  fortifying 
the  same  and  mounting  guns  thereon,  as  many  as  they  list,  and  to 
forty  or  fifty  English  gentlemen  residing  there,  with  seven  or  eight 
hundred  English  Sepoys,  and  for  the  rest,  the  rate  of  duties  on  goods 
on  buying  and  selling  will  be  on  the  same  footing  as  at  Bussora  and 
Abushehr. 


Bated  1st  of  Jemmadee-nl-Awul  1213,  Hegira,  or  12M  of  October 


1798. 


L.    S. 

No.  LIL 

L.  S. 

An  Agreement  entered  into  by  the  Imam  of  the  State  of  Oman  with  Captain 
John  Malcolm  Bahadoor,  Envoy  from  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor 
General,  dated  the  21st  of  Shaban  1213  Hegira,  or  18th  January  1800. 