


TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND    SUNNUDS. 


203 


that,  if  they  should  be  searched  and  found  not  to  be  so  engaged,  that    PERSIAN 
fact  would  be  ascertained  in   a  very  short  space  of  time,    and    they      OULF. 
would  not  be  prevented  for  more  than  a  quarter  or  half  an  hour  from      Muscat. 
continuing  their  voyage. 

In  consequence  of  some  discussion  regarding  the  right  of  the  Imam 
to  duty  on  goods  transhipped  in  his  ports,  he  issued  Rules  (No.  LVII.) 
in  1846  for  the  levy  of  full  duty  of  5  per  cent,  on  goods  transhipped, 
but  exempting  from  duty  ships  putting  into  his  harbours  from 
stress  of  weather  and  all  stores  of  the  British  Government  landed  at  his 
ports. 

During  the  later  years  of  his  rule  the  affairs  of  Syud  Saeed  in  his 
Asiatic  dominions  fell  into  much  confusion,  owing,  in  a  considerable 
degree,  to  his  prolonged  residence  at  Zanzibar,  which,  in  1840,  he  made 
the  permanent  seat  of  his  government,  and  the  incapacity  of  the 
Agents  whom  he  left  at  Muscat,  and  latterly  of  his  son  Syud  Thowaynee. 
On  more  than  one  occasion  his  power  was  saved  only  by  the  intervention 
of  the  British  Government.  The  Wahabees  forced  him  in  1833  to  pay 
them  a  tribute  of  5,000  crowns  a  year,  and  to  renew  the  obligation 
in  1845,  raising  the  tribute  to  20,000  crowns,  12,000  being  for  Muscat, 
and  8,000  for  Sohar.  About  the  same  time  also  he  got  into  trouble 
with  Persia  regarding  bis  possessions  on  the  Mekran  coast.  Besides 
his  possessions  on  the  Arabian  and  African  coasts,  the  Imam  holds 
the  Islands  of  Hormus  and  Kishm  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  is 
acknowledged  as  feudal  lord  by  the  Arabs  on  the  Mekran  coast 
between  Jask  and  Passein.  He  holds  Bunder  Abbass  and  its  depend- 
encies on  rent  from  Persia.  He  also  holds  the  ports  of  Gwadur  and 
Charbar,  his  rights  to  which,  according  to  tradition,  were  derived  from  the 
Khan  of  Khelat.  In  1846  Hussein  Khan,  the  Persian  Governor  of 
Fars,  despatched  a  force  against  Bunder  Abbas  with  the  view  of  extorting 
a  large  sum  of  money  from  Sheikh  Seif  bin  Subhan,  the  Imam's 
deputy  and  Governor.  The  Imam  threatened  to  retaliate  by  destroying 
Bushire.  It  was  not  till  a  change  of  ministry  took  place  on  the  death  of 
Mahomed  Shah  that  redress  was  granted  to  the  Imam.  In  1853  the 
Shah  of  Persia  resumed  possession  of  Bunder  Abbass  and  its  dependen- 
cies: but  he  restored  them  to  the  Imam  in  1856  on  much  less  advant- 


204 


I  i; KATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNTTDS. 


PERSIAN  ageous  terms*  than  formerly.  The  rent  was  raised  from  6,000  to 
GULF-  16,000  Tomans  a  year,  and  the  Islands  of  Hormus  and  Kishm,  the 
Muscat.      Imam's  hereditary  possessions,  were  ceded  to  Persia. 