


"Written  by  Abdul  Kahir  bin 
Syud  Mahomed  bin  Syud  Majid  by 
order  of  his  master,  who  commands 
his  obedience,  Saeed  bin  Syud 
Sultan  Imam  Ahmed  bin  Saeed 
Al  Boo  Saeedee. 

Written  on  the  22nd  Zilhujjah 
1237,  9th  September  1822. 


No.  LIII. 


Muscat. 


*  Here  is  omitted  four  months. 


21G  TREATIES,    ENGAGEMENTS,    AND   SUNNUDS. 

PERSIAN     Translation  of  the  annexed  letter,  dated  18th  August  1845,  from  His  Highness 
GULF.  the  Imam  of  Muscat  to  Captain  Hamebton,  relative  to  the  fourth  Article  of 

the  Treaty  concluded  on  the  10th  September  1822  by  Captain  Mokesby  with 
His  Highness  the  Imam  of  Muscat. 


Nos.  LI  II 
&LIV. 


H  M  ■  ■'• 


After  Compliments. — Your  excellent  letter  has  reached,  and  your 
friend  understood  its  contents ;  you  mention  that  you  have  received  a 
letter  from  the  mighty  government,  containing  orders  to  you  to  bring  to 
our  notice  that,  in  the  fourth  Article  of  the  Treaty  we  concluded  with 
Captain  Moresby  in  the  year  1822,  it  is  mentioned  in  the  English  version 
that  it  is  incumbent  on  us,  and  our  heirs  and  Governors,  to  assist  in 
apprehending  English  subjects  engaged  in  the  slave  trade,  but  that  such 
is  not  mentioned  in  the  Arabic  version  of  the  Treaty,  and  my  friend  (you) 
considering  it  not  necessary  to  alter  the  Treaty,  nevertheless  we  con- 
sider it  incumbent  on  us,  our  heirs  and  Governors,  that  we  should  assist 
to  apprehend  English  subjects  who  may  be  engaged  in  the  slave  trade. 
Therefore  whoever  may  be  accredited  from  the  government,  and  require 
assistance  from  us,  shall  receive  it  accordingly.  "Whatever  you  may  re- 
quire let  us  know,  and  peace  be  on  you. 

Dated  4>t/i  Shaban  1241,  \Wi  August  1845. 


No.  LIV. 

Tbeaty  of  Commerce  between  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  and  His  Highness  Sultan  Seid  Saeed  bin 
Sultan,  Imam  of  Muscat. 

Preamble.— Her  Majesty  the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  and 
its  dependencies,  being  desirous  to  confirm  and  strengthen  the  good 
understanding  which  now  subsists  between  them,  and  to  promote  by 
means  of  a  convention  the  commercial  intercourse  between  their  respective 
subjects ;  and  His  Highness  the  Sultan  of  Muscat  being,  moreover, 
desirous  to  record  in  a  more  formal  manner  the  engagements  entered 
into  by  His  Highness  on  the  10th  of  September  1822,  for  the  perpetual 
abolition  of  the  slave  trade  between  the  dominions  of  His  Highness 


TREATIES,   ENGAGEMENTS,   AND   SUNNUDS. 


217 


and  all  Christian  nations,  they  have  accordingly  appointed  as  the 
Plenipotentiaries,  that  is  to  say,  Robert  Cogan,  Esq.,  a  Captain  in  the 
Naval  Service  of  the  East  India  Company,  on  behalf  of  Her  Majesty 
the  Queen  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  &c,  &c, 
and  Hasin  bin  Ebrehim,  and  Ali  bin  Naser  on  behalf  of  His  Highness 
the  Sultan  of  Muscat,  &c,  &c,  who  having  communicated  their  full 
powers  found  to  be  in  due  and  proper  form,  have  agreed  upon  and 
conclude  the  following  Articles  : — ■ 